A Defence of Poetry
Author: Cornwall, Barry.
Publication info: Essays and Tales in Prose . 2 v. Boston: Ticknor, Reed, and Fields, 1853.

A Defence Of Poetry [in, Essays And Tales In Prose. By Barry Cornwall. In Two Volumes ...]
[Page ]
A DEFENCE OF POETRY. The advocates of Utility have long been in the habit of decrying Poetry, and have lately renewed their attacks on it with increased bitterness and vehemence. They have discovered, it seems, not only that it is of no earthly use, but that it actually does a great deal of mischief, induces us to disregard truth and admire falsehood, to indulge in exaggerated sentiment, and to weaken the authority of reason over passion and imagination. As to its positive evils, we believe we need not concern ourselves much: but there are many people who really seem to think that it must be acknowledged that poetry is of no use; and consequently that, if at all to be tolerated in an industrious community, it ought to meet with no encouragement, and be treated with no respect. The short answer to this is, to ask what is here meant by ‘being of use,’and whether anything that gives pleasure may not properly. be called useful? Unless we are to stop at the mere necessaries of life, it would be difficult to dispute this; and, after all, if life itself was not a pleasure , the utility even of its necessaries might very well be questioned. Even the rigorous definition of the proper object of all
[Page 174]
virtuous exertion, according to the utilitarians themselves — viz. the greatest happiness of the greatest number—obviously involves the consideration of pleasure and enjoyment, and makes this enjoyment, as indeed it truly is, the measure and test of utility. In what sense, then, can it be said that poetry is of no use to mankind, if it is admitted that it affords the most intense delight to great multitudes among them, and has always been recognised as a copious and certain source of enjoyment, in all conditions of life, and all stages of society? The only replication must be, that the pleasures it brings are accompanied by greater pains, or that the pursuit of them leads to the neglect of higher duties, or, what is the same thing, to the exclusion of still greater pleasures. We do not think, however, that this can be even plausibly pretended; and we do not observe that the champions of utility have ever seriously taken that ground. The truth is, that their irreverence to the Muses is much more a matter of habit and feeling with them than of reasoning; and though attired occasionally in logical forms, proceeds in the main from mere prejudice and ignorance.
It frequently happens that circumstances direct the mind to the contemplation of truth in opposite directions. The faculties of men are practically developed in the exercise of their various pursuits, and the whole force of their intellect is generally exhausted in limited and particular investigations; and this necessarily detracts from their power of judging of arts and sciences alien to their own. It is thus that the great value placed on mathematical studies becomes not unfrequently a subject of doubts to a theologian or a moralist;
[Page 175]
while the excellence of poetry or art is questioned in its turn, by the utilitarian or the legislator.
In all probability, it is with the mind as with the body; some limbs or sinews are occasionally kept in severe exercise, to the neglect of the rest; and the consequence is, that the one set gains strength and flourishes, while the other has a tendency to weaken or decay. Thus the Reason of some men is cultivated, to the utter extinction of the Imagination; though it is but fair to suppose that the latter faculty was bestowed upon us for some use or purpose , equally with the former—the only question is, how to employ it profitably.
The motives which tempt a mere reasoner, a mathematician, or political economist, to abase the character of poetry, are, it must be allowed, as obvious as those which induce a writer of verse to exalt it. There is no sympathy with its pleasures in the one, while there is an over-wrought and interested admiration in the other. The former cannot be said, indeed, to be absolutely without the faculty of imagination, but it may be averred that he possesses it in a latent or undeveloped state; and we suspect that he cannot thoroughly understand the operations of a power which he himself has never individually felt. He sees only the ultimate consequence, without witnessing or experiencing the progress of the idea in the mind. He perceives what the imagination has produced, but is unable to judge of the impulse, or to speculate, otherwise than imperfectly, upon what it may produce hereafter.
Leaving the question, however, as to what this faculty may cause to be produced, or what a great poet
[Page 176]
may do, who shall task his powers to the uttermost, or wait patiently and sincerely for the illuminations of his imagination, it is enough to affirm that it exists . It is a POWER (and no mean one) not to be despised or neglected, but to be cherished and used like any other power, for purposes beneficial to mankind. The most inveterate utilitarian would hesitate, we apprehend, to yield up any one nerve or fibre of the human frame, however useless it might, at first sight, appear to him to be. He would calculate wisely on the chance of its becoming at one time or other serviceable, and would be not without some misgivings as to the fallibility of his own particular opinions. Why then should the imagination (a subject at least as mysterious and important) be entitled to less consideration than a nerve or a sinew? ‘It is a folly,’ as Montaigne thinks, ‘to measure truth or error by our own capacity;’ and we think so too.
As, therefore, the imagination is an existing power, —as it has given birth to numerous works, some of which have had a prodigious effect upon the habits of thinking and even upon the moral conduct of men,— it is not the part of a philosopher (however little he may be under its influence) to despise it. It is to be used or misused, but not neglected nor contemned; for it can no more be extinguished than the mind of man. Ethical and political philosophy and mathematics are now held to be the master sciences; and unquestionably they are most important ones. But there are other arts and sciences nearly as important, some of which are connected or collateral with those now mentioned, and some which may be said to be
[Page 177]
altogether independent of them. Amongst the first or collateral arts, must undoubtedly be reckoned Poetry . It is, in the words of the great philosopher, ‘subservient to the Imagination, as Logique is to the Understanding;’ 1 and its office , ‘(if a man weigh well the matter) is no other than to apply and commend the dictates of Reason to the Imagination, for the better moving of the Appetite and the Will .’ Being an ally of reason and logic, therefore, as Lord Bacon says, it should not be treated as a foe, nor despised as a thing insignificant.
If man were merely an intellectual being, subject only to be influenced by pure reason, there might be some ground, perhaps, for maintaining that poetry was, strictly speaking, useless. A code of laws might then probably be framed, excluding this delightful art from the commonwealth of letters, and substituting we know not what intellectual pleasure in lieu of it. But this most certainly neither is, nor can ever be, our condition. We are not Houyhnhnms, but men; and we must seek the gratification, as well as guard against the abuse, of all the faculties with which we are actually gifted. In the formation of a system, a wise man will consider what has been, as well as what may be; for wisdom is little else than a synonyme for experience, and the future must always be built up from the past. It is desirable, therefore, to consider not only the value of the qualities with which we propose to endow any creature, but also the capacity of the creature to receive them. What should we think if some philosopher from the Ottomaques, or some follower of Brahma, should
[Page 178]
come hither, and insist—the one, that it would be more nutritious, the other, that it would be more virtuous, if we were for the future to feed upon pipe-clay mixed with oxyd of iron? 2 We should scarcely respect even the zeal of one of our Christian missionaries, were he to attempt to extend the benefit of the Scriptures to any of the tribe of Simiæ , the Chimpansé, or the Pongo. It is true, that there is not so great a distinction amongst men as between men and mere animals; yet the difference between the white race and the other varieties of the human species, is greater than can be accounted for by climate or accident. Nay, amongst ourselves distinctions are very obvious. We are not all mathematicians, or philosophers, or moralists, or poets. The human mind has certain defects, (so called,) and is liable to extraordinary changes. Its transitions, from vice to virtue, from equanimity to despair, have astonished all but the most profound philosophers. It is, in truth, made up of good and evil impulses; of faculties which employ themselves in poetry and prose,—in other words, of Imagination and Reason , &c.; it is full of affections, of passions, of powers, infirmities, and errors of all sorts, which are to be combated with and directed , but can never be altogether extirpated. It has its springs and movements which obey the warnings of reason, and others which are subject to the ‘skiey influences’ of poetry; and these act sometimes independently, sometimes in unison with each other. The object of Logic (which is the voice of reason) is to act for good purposes upon the intellect. The end of Poetry
[Page 179]
is, ‘ to fill the Imagination with observations and resemblances, which MAY SECOND REASON , and not oppress and betray it ; for these abuses of arts come in but ex obliquo , for prevention, not for practice.’ 3 All this being the case, it seems that all speculations for putting down poetry must necessarily be vain and useless. They are formed, perhaps, for man as he ought to be; but certainly not for man as he is. They are, in short, like that Dream of Plato, which has remained a dream and nothing more for the space of two thousand years. That celebrated Greek denied admittance to a poet in his ideal republic; and his republic has remained ideal.
In addition to all this, it may be further argued, that there are certain gradations in society which require different employments. There are the rude, the civilized, and the luxurious or refined. The human mind in one state cannot digest what it is eager for in another. In rude society the mechanic and agriculturist are the most important characters. Afterwards, the legislator and the moralist insist upon precedence; and, finally, the poet is elevated into renown. If, after all, it be asked, what is the important science? the answer is, probably— all . It is not sufficient to say, in opposition to the claims of the poet, that the state of refinement is the most unnatural, or that poetry is a luxury and a delusion only, and consequently little better than a vice. For luxury is bad only, in so far as it injures the moral constitution of a people. Poetry, perhaps, may be considered as a luxury—we shall not dispute about terms; but so are all the products of all the arts and
[Page 180]
sciences. Our very houses are a great luxury, and all that they contain—and most of our food and our dress also. There is not a single comfort that we enjoy which is not liable to this imputation. We have all something beyond what absolute necessity requires.
                                         —‘Our basest beggars
Are in the poorest things superflous.’
But shall we therefore abandon every luxury, every comfort? There is, we think, at least as much of vice and folly, in spurning at the beneficence of Nature, as in receiving the gifts which she bestows on us, readily, and using them with discretion.
Poetry, then, is not to be reprehended as a pernicious delusion, till it is proved that its general purposes are bad; and certainly, this is not generally true, but the reverse, inasmuch as it exhibits for the most part a high standard of perfection, and puts forward illustrious examples of worth and courage. And yet these, although they soar perhaps a little beyond the level of ordinary minds, do not rise above some instances of excellence which the history of the world has afforded. We read of no one, in tragedy or epic, who has surpassed Epaminondas, Phocion, or Aristides,—Cymon, or Brutus, or Timoleon,—Socrates or Solomon,— Alfred, Shakspere, Bacon, Sir Philip Sidney, or Bayard, in their several ways, for virtue or intellect, or noble disinterested heroism. It may be asserted, indeed, after all, that poetry is no more a fiction, than are certain maxims of law and state, which have been engrafted on the severest and most practical of the sciences, in order the better to enforce or illustrate
[Page 181]
some of their most important doctrines. Nor is it more a delusion—even when it holds up a picture of ideal excellence—than any prose Atlantis or Utopia, which has been devised, not only to increase our admiration of virtue, but for practical and direct imitation. Nay, might not the same charge be brought against any scheme of moral and political good, which might be drawn out for the benefit of mankind at the present moment—a state of things desirable, it may be, for a moralist or a legislator, but as utterly unadapted, in its whole extent , as poetry itself, to the passions and affections of human nature? Doubtless such a scheme would contain in it many elements of wisdom; much of what is good, and much of what is prudent; and so also does poetry. But there is probably another aspect to the science, as well as to the art; in which some blemishes may be detected, and some maxims, which, when reduced to practice, might put to confusion the supporters of the theory.
It is not often that the mind addicts itself, for any length of time, to a pursuit that is wholly useless. The cultivation bestowed so generally, and so unsparingly, upon the reasoning faculties, forbids such a supposition; and the experience of the world contradicts it. In poetry, more particularly, such a charge seems altogether presumptuous, considering the character and fortunes of many of those who have been professors of that art. Is it reasonable to think that Chaucer, and Shakspere, and Milton, (the last a legislator and politician,) should have cast away their lives, and expended such treasures of intellect upon an art that
[Page 182]
was properly the subject of contempt? 4 Could they, who saw the faults and follies of all the world beside, discern none in themselves? Did they feel that their pursuits were nugatory—their talents misdirected— their lives useless? Or, was it, indeed, that these great men were really admirers , as well as professors of their art,—not following it from necessity, or the love of gain, but from motives as pure, and an ambition as lofty, as ever stimulated the legislator or the moralist? This, in fact, was the case. They were disciples of the Muses in their youth, and followed the profession which they had adopted from manhood to the grave. There is not one of them who has not left on record his reverence for poetry. There is not one who has not been the free champion of his art, as well as the disinterested friend of man; bequeathing to posterity his labors and his fame, and reaping, in return, its gratitude—for learned precepts, for brilliant models; for wisdom fashioned in a thousand shapes, and applicable to all uses; for moral axioms and witty sayings; for characters full of exemplary virtue ; for
[Page 183]
fiction full of truth; in a word, for images at once instructive and beautiful, which leave their outlines indelibly upon the memory, when the bare precept or abstract truth would have vanished and been forgotten.
Precept is assuredly not the only way by which knowledge may be communicated; nor is it always the best. It may be communicated by example— often more effectually, and sometimes where precept will not operate. The folly of ambition and jealousy may surely be seen, not without advantage, in the dramas of Shakspere. The double lesson which is taught by Lear , the beautiful fidelity of Imogen , the hate and prodigality of Timon , are truths from which we derive something. In these, and similar stories, we see the effect , a material part of instruction, where practical wisdom is to be inculcated, and one which mere precept unfortunately wants. Besides, after all, precept is only secondary knowledge, being itself derived from facts. It is only the inference which the observation of man has deduced from certain established premises—and why may it not be equally, or even more beneficial, to go at once to the fountain- head of knowledge,—to the fact, or to a true representation of the fact,—instead of contenting one's self with the wisdom which has been distilled and extracted, perhaps discolored, by other minds? Again, there is a large class of persons, who will read a poem or go to a play, but who will not sit down to the perusal of a dry essay, or examine the merits of a logical argument, respecting some metaphysical or moral question. The mere desire of acquiring knowledge, influences but a very limited portion of mankind; the
[Page 184]
desire to arrive at moral truth operates, we fear, upon even a less number; and where these impulses are wanting, something, we suspect, must be held out to allure the understanding to its own improvement,— something, in which there shall be sufficient of information to render the acquisition gratifying to the vanity, and enough of pleasure to satisfy the senses.
In history, the object is to teach through experience and example. But is not this also the case with fiction and poetry? If it be replied here, that the two latter are illusory, we may retort the question of—Is history much less so? What history, in fact, is there, which is not replete with partiality, and in other respects erroneous? This must necessarily be the case, and to a much greater extent than we can possibly be aware of. In the first place, it is a work composed either by a person, who is himself living amongst, and tainted by the prejudices of the age, or else by one who writes at a distant date, when he is without ocular proof or oral testimony, and is left to guess between the jarring or imperfect accounts of partial contemporaries. In order to there being a perfect historian, there must be an eye-witness, and an impartial man; and no person, with such qualities united, has hitherto appeared. It is curious, and a little instructive too, in this view of the subject, to see how so able a man as Hume could rail, in his private letters, at the partiality and deficiency of historians, and afterwards write such an account as he has written of the degenerate house of Stuart. The truth is, that there is often as much of fiction in history as in poetry, without the sincerity of the fiction being apparent. It has been said, to be sure, that the characters of the
[Page 185]
former are ‘real,’ and therefore ‘ instructive ,’ while those of the latter afford merely amusement. But are the characters of history sufficiently perfect to tempt us to imitation? We fear not. Neither is the moral effect (except in very rare instances) so obvious as in the latter case, where the cause and the consequence, the ‘bane and the antidote,’ are both before us, displaying, for our edification, the natural progress of individual history,—the temptation, the crime, and the punishment. Fiction, it is true, is, (as its name imports,) in a certain sense, less ‘real’ than history; that is to say, it goes more beyond common every-day facts; and it is not without intention that it does so. It is like a lofty mark, which we cannot strike without discipline and exercise. Were it easy to touch, and only of the ordinary height, its object would altogether be lost.
Poetry, so far as it enervates the mind, is assuredly injurious. But it generally stimulates the mind; and whether it stimulates it to good or ill, must depend upon the individual qualities of the poets themselves. It may be argued, indeed, that there is no need of any impulse; but we suspect that the moral, like the physical constitution, requires stimulants at least as often as sedatives. That these stimulants almost invariably impel the mind to error, (for something like this is asserted,) is a maxim founded upon partial instances and replete with untruth. We deny that it is so. In fact, so far as we can recollect instances of poetry having been brought in to participate with politics, there have always been two bands of partisans, as well as two sides, to the question at issue. If there has been a phalanx of rhymers on the one side, there has always been a battalion of poets on the
[Page 186]
other. Some of the greatest names in our literature shine equally as patriots and poets, and most of them have belonged to writers who have done what they could to discountenance hypocrisy and ward off oppression, whether on the part of the king or of the aristocracy. Let us recollect the characters of only three great men amongst our poets, Milton, Marvell, and Pope, and hasten to rescind so unqualified and unjust a judgment.
If poetry be bad and useless in its principle, it must necessarily have been so always; for it is not subject to change, being founded on certain established principles which are beyond the influence of fashion and caprice. In that event, the great works of Shakspere must be set down as useless and bad, as well as all the parables of the Bible; all fiction, all dialogue, (except such as has actually occurred,) all illustration, all the satires of Juvenal and Pope, of Cowper and others, against vice and folly; many of the didactic writings of the poets, and all fables, even the most moral. So it appears to those who are merely logicians, and on whom an image makes less impression than an axiom. They deny the utility of poetry, by asserting that whatever of good it has produced, might have been produced equally well or better in prose. 5 But this
[Page 187]
never has been done hitherto; and it is by no means clear that the mind which has thrown out certain ideas in poetry, could have done as much in prose; for the impulse, which occasioned it so to shape those ideas, would have been wanting. There are certain minds which naturally exercise themselves in poetry, and delight in it, and can only get at their best ideas by means of imagery and association, as others do by calm meditation or methodical inference. So also there seem to be corresponding intellects, which can only perceive the beauty of truth and virtue, or feel the wretchedness of guilt, when their imaginations had been roused by the power of poetry, or wrought upon by the stimulating example of fiction.
Considered even as an unobjectionable amusement , poetry keeps up our intercourse with hope and pleasure; it brightens the spirits and improves and enlarges the heart. Though pent up in smoky rooms, and tasked to irksome employments, we yet live out of doors with the poets, among leaves and flowers, and balmy winds and azure skies. We wander through trackless woods, beneath oaks and branching elms, ‘star proof.’ We lie down by sparkling fountains, and listen to the voice of murmuring rivers, and forget our cares and ills, the pains of sickness, and poverty, and neglect, in the unchequered beauty of a delightful dream.
Neither is the relapse hurtful; for our visions are never (in the injurious sense) delusions. We do not
[Page 188]
believe in the actual existence of the things which pass thus soothingly across the surface of our imagination. We feel that they are resemblances, not falsehoods; and these are just sufficient to abstract us awhile from the realities, to which we return refreshed by an excursion into the wilderness of thought; not fatigued and disappointed, as we might have been, had we reckoned upon the permanency of the delight. They form, in fact, a wholesome cessation from our reasoning habits, like sleep, or a quiet landscape; but enjoyed when sleep will not come to us, and when there is no beauty of landscape actually near, to relieve the fatigue of our brain, or induce pleasurable and gentle emotions.
But poetry has been always something more than a mere amusement. It was through the channels of poetry that much of our knowledge originally came; and, as Sir Philip Sidney has said, ‘they go very near to ungratefulness, who seek to deface that, which in the noblest nations and languages that are known, hath been the first light-giver to ignorance, and first nurse, whose milk, by little and little, enabled them to feed on tougher knowledge.’ It was the habit of association, which forms the principal part of the complex faculty of the imagination, that may be said to have led to various discoveries in science, and to have furnished Bacon with his luminous illustrations in philosophy. These advantages must not be forgotten: neither must the good effect of poetry upon the memory be passed over; the more especially as Mr. Bentham himself has afforded us some evidence on that point. We cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of republishing the poetry of so formidable a coadjutor who has practically testified
[Page 189]
to the ‘utility’ of verse, by actually composing three couplets; for the purpose, as he states, of ‘ lodging more effectually in the memory certain points on which the whole fabric of morals and legislation may seem to rest .’ 6
There is one more point which we would fain remark upon, before we quit this part of the subject. It is said that, in the pursuit of the severer Sciences, certain ‘ ideas ’ may at least be gained to recompense the student for his labors; while it is insinuated, that no such compensation is yielded to the follower of Poetry. We must deny this altogether. It is as much an ‘idea,’ and an idea as valuable, to gain a knowledge of the movements of the human mind,—to see how it is affected by certain causes, and how it adapts itself to various contingencies,
[Page 190]
—to contemplate it when under extraordinary depression, or when lifted to a state of perilous excitement, —as to calculate the expense of provisions, the progress of population, the advantages of a division of labor, or the possible benefit (or otherwise) of certain political institutions. The object of poetry, as well as of prose, is to spread abroad the knowledge of our age, to transmit the accumulated wisdom of foregone ages to the world around us, and to the times which are to come. They are not two combatants in one arena, with weapons necessarily opposed to each other, in order to secure self-preservation, or some definite reward, which cannot be shared between them. They were both born and brought to light to dispel ignorance, and contend with tyranny and abuse,—to stand up, hand in hand, true champions and assertors of ‘ the Right ,’ for the glory of truth and knowledge, and the undoubted benefit of all the human race.
Notwithstanding these things, and notwithstanding all that has been felt and expressed on behalf of this eminent art, we are now called upon to despise it! The world has lasted six thousand years: it has had, amongst its millions and millions of generations, some few who have soared above the rest, and become marks for the admiration of their fellows,—whose object has been undeniably good, and whose prodigious intellect is beyond question greater than that of any writer of our existing time. These men have hitherto been held to be the benefactors of mankind. They have led them into the temple of philosophy, and there given them wholesome instruction. They have directed them to the exercise of every virtue; and such as have obeyed their
[Page 191]
high lessoning have themselves become good and distinguished. They have held before these their followers the mirror of truth (of ‘truth severe, in fairy fiction dressed’)—have placed before them illustrious examples. They have incited them to gallant deeds—have given them delight in peaceful times and have soothed them in times of pain and sorrow. And now we are told that all this is nothing, or worse than nothing,— and by whom? By those who maintain that knowledge and moral training are the only true blessings of mankind.
There is assuredly much of what is vicious, and more of what is ridiculous, in the world; and all that is decidedly bad should, of course, be amended. But whether it be well to make a wreck of all that has so long been valuable and graceful, in order to insure a certain portion of doubtful good, is at least worthy of consideration. The question is—whether Poetry and Art, whether all that touches our sympathies and operates upon our affections, should be rooted up and exterminated, like some long established evil, or widespread disease? For our own parts, we think not . We think that they should be permitted to remain; or rather, that they will and must remain, and flourish, in despite of all prophecies and opinions to the contrary. Can it, in truth, be ever otherwise, so long as hope and ambition, our love of the beautiful, and our sense of the sublime, remain integral portions of our nature?
We owe something, surely, to our Imagination, which has yielded us such frequent delight, as well as to our reason; and we owe yet more to the grand
[Page 192]
and lofty spirits who have trod the earth before us, and have died, leaving behind them the imperishable records of their glory. Those immortal writings, dictated by the imagination of poets in their happiest hours, bear upon them the impress of an amazing intellect. They bring forward, for our instruction, all the varieties of man, setting forth, in the colors of truth, his virtues and vices, his strength, his weakness, his obduracy, his pity, his inconsistencies, and follies of a hundred hues, which are nowhere else so completely marshalled and portrayed,—and to show which, and the consequences of which, equally well, the whole region of literature may be traversed, and all the stores of history and philosophy ransacked and compared in vain. And is all this of so little value, that to have done it should entitle the doer to the contempt of his fellows? Is it indeed a fact, that Shakspere and Homer, that Chaucer, Dante, Milton, and the rest, have lived for no purpose but to be an idle sound? Was all their wisdom, all their wit, indeed empty, contemptible, and useless? Are the great moral pictures of Macbeth and Othello, of Satan, and Timon, and Lear, and all that illustrious array of characters, nothing —but only shadowy and unprofitable illusions? Is there nothing real in their texture— nothing of what is good or useful in their histories? Is the philosophic vein of Hamlet worn out or become base? And has his intellectual stature shrunk and fallen below that of every puny logician? Or, is it not, after all, that the opposing ideas of the utilitarians on these points are themselves groundless and illusory,
[Page 193]
—as inimical to true reason as the most extravagant and distorted metaphors of the tawdry rhetorician, and as difficult to be reduced to practice as the wildest dreams of the poet?
1828.
NOTES
1 Lord Bacon's Instauratio Magna, lib. vi. c. 3.
2 Humboldt, Tab. Phys. des Régions Equatoriales.
3 Lord Bacon's De Augmentis Scientiarum.
4 Who can forget the brilliant testimony of Swift? ‘Not Empire, to the rising sun, By valor, conduct, fortune won; Not greatest wisdom in debates, Or framing laws for ruling states, Such heavenly influence require As how to strike the Muse's lyre.’ And by whom is this uttered?—by the sternest, severest, most sarcastic of all modern writers—by the bitter satirist, the cunning politician, the worldly, ambitious, scoffing Dean of St. Patrick's.
5 The converse of this proposition is frequently true. ‘Even our Saviour could as well have given the moral commonplaces of uncharitableness and humbleness, as the divine narration of Lazarus and Dives; or of disobedience and mercy, as the heavenly discourse of the lost child and gracious father; but that his thorough-searching wisdom knew that the estate of Dives burning in hell, and of Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, would more constantly, as it were, inhabit both the memory and the judgment’—Sir P. Sidney's Defence of Poesy.
6 In Mr. Bentham's valuable book on Morals and Legislation, under chapter IV., which bears the title of ‘Value of a Lot of Pleasure or Pain, how to be measured,’ he says, that to a person considered by himself, the value of pleasure or pain, considered by itself, must be measured according to—1st, Its intensity; 2d, Its duration; 3d, Its certainty or uncertainty; 4th, Its propinquity or remoteness. And in a subsequent edition he adds the following note:—‘Not long after the publication of the first edition, the following memoriter verses were framed, in the view of odging more effectually in the memory these points on which the whole fabric of morals and legislation may seem to rest:— Intense, long, certain, speedy, fruitful, pure, Such marks in pleasures and in pains endure. Such pleasures seek, if private be thy end: If it be public, wide let them extend. Such pains avoid, whichever be thy view: If pains must come, let them extend to few.’ Edit. 1823, p. 49.
$$$
