A Deptford Poet
Author: Arnold, Matthew.
Publication info: The Pall Mall Gazette : An Evening Newspaper and Review; London [London]. 01 Jan 1875: [1] p.

A Deptford Poet [in, The Pall Mall Gazette: An Evening Newspaper and Review. Volume XXI (June 25 1875)]
[Page 2]
A DEPTFORD POET . 1 The right function of poetry is to animate, to console, to rejoice—in one word, to strengthen . This function modern poetry seldom fulfils. It has thought, fancy, ingenuity; it often makes us admire its author's powers, sometimes interests us, sometimes instructs us, occasionally puzzles us; but it in general leaves our poor humanity as rueful and broken-backed, to say the very least, as it found it. Mr. O'Conor's poetry has many deficiencies; he is, we believe, an Irish working man settled at Deptford. Many a pupil teacher might correct his grammar for him, might perhaps even correct his spelling. But his volume—which we opened, we confess, with the sense of dejected weariness with which after long experience one opens new volumes of verse—his volume has gaiety, tune, pathos; it invigorates. We will try to give a specimen or two which may make the readers of the Pall Mall Gazette share our feelings.
We are told that Mr. O'Conor's songs are sung by Irish workmen, and we are not surprised at it. He is best when his themes are Irish, drawn from his native country and his intimate experience. He is weakest when he is most general. Yet even in his treatment of general and hackneyed topics there frequently breaks out a spirit and a vigorous freshness. Song has often been addressed as The Poet's Love ; but this title to a poem does not lead us to expect a strain so enlivening as what follows:—
'Tis often and often I wonder
Why Song came my poor lot to share.
Tis said, ere her harp she here carried
She could have been much better married.
Ah! I and my attic are bare.
Save a Christ and a small bust of Dante,
A Sèvres vase full of dead flowers,
A couch with a many-patch'd quilt on,
A Bible, a Shakspeare, a Milton—
With these I pass many sweet hours.
And then there's the lord of the attic;
Ne'er mind what the exquisite say!
The time was, a stranger was sadness—
The time was, the morn brought him gladness—
The time was, his heart was more gay!
The “Sèvres vase” would probably make but a poor figure at the sale of Mr. Gladstone's collection, yet it has a worth of its own notwithstanding.
Ireland, however, “Ireland of the streams,” is the inspirer of what is best in Mr. O'Conor's volume. Ireland, Australia, America—the cabin at home and the emigrant's encampment across the sea—what a world of passion and sentiment for Irish hearts is in those words and images? Mr. O'Conor gives a voice finely to it in his Backwoods Song:—
We camp beneath the tall pines,
We're trappers true and tried;
From early dawn till shadows fall,
O'er hills and dales we ride.
At evening in the clearing
Dear Ireland's hills we see,
Where freedom fell through striking well.
For God and Country.
The shades of night are falling.
Light to shade fail to bind
The broken-hearted exile
From the land he left behind.
But a truce to grief! Let's pledge
Every home and altar free !
And be our boast, our backwoods toast:
For God and Country !
For God and Country!
For God and Country!
Boys, be our toast and proudest boast,
For God and Country!
Sometimes the emigrant's strain is milder and more pensive:—
Here, while the waves around us play,
On memory's wings we'll hie away
To her encircled in the fold
Of ocean—home of hearts still bold!
∗   ∗   ∗   ∗   ∗
You upland heights, now saffron-hued,
Have seen my youthful idol wooed.
That elm-tree huge, which time made less,
Has heard the fondly whisper'd yes .
Glint still the shadows where, at rest,
Cairn Mor shows golden-topp'd his crest?
Is Galtee Dhu as bleak and bare,
Old time, as when we wander'd there?
'Tis morning. O'er sweet Funcheon, hark,
On freshen'd pinion soars the lark!
By Leabeac Callagh, weird and lone,
The mavis too with merry tone
Flies sunward till in heaven's blue
Mavis and lark are lost to view.
I stand by Glentworth's abbey hoar
And long for wings like them to soar.
Humour is mixed with tenderness in these recollections of home and kindred. The Vanithee , or good old housewife, of his native Ireland evokes from the unforgetting exile the following pleasant strain in her honour:—
[Page 3]
Let some go praise our maidens fair—
To me a jewel rich and rare,
A gem, a priceless gem to me,
Is Ireland's pride, the Vanithee,
When winter nights were cold and long,
Who cheer'd our hearts with jest and song
Till laughter shook the old roof tree?
Oh, who but Ireland's Vanithee!
Who oft on feast of Hallowe'en
Made glad the heart of each colleen,
And burn'd the nuts? He'll cross the sea ,
And She'll get wed , said Vanithee.
'Twas sad from Erin's hills to part;
But oh, what mostly broke my heart
And made it grieve to exiled be
Was parting with the Vanithee.
She's dear to me, and, by the day!
You may believe the words I say:—
Were I a king, a queen should be
My dear old, brave old Vanithee.
Come, fill we to the brim each cup,
And froth it up, boys, froth it up!
Here's Ireland, o'er the deep blue sea!
Here's Ireland's pride, the Vanithee!
So sings the emigrant with his eyes cast back towards his home; and the old people at home, in their turn, look sadly over towards America and Australia, which have taken from them so much that they love:—
Mavrone ! there's nought of joy for me,
With care I'm growing old.
To me 'tis winter since the day,
Bound for the North Americay,
My Johnny cross'd the big salt sea
To win both fame and gold.
Oh, he was plazing to the sight!
His arm was strong! his eye was bright!
Ullulu! ulla ullala !
My heart's broke since Johnny went away.
[Page 4]
More cheerily and firmly, as befits his sex, speaks the emigrant's father:—
What though the memory brings us pain?
John's letters I will read again,
The boy is well! thank God for that!
And “Mary has grown strong and fat
Since coming to Australia;”
And “Little Bob”—our John's first son—
“Can ride a horse and fire a gun
Here in this great Australia.”
But what gets over me, old dame,
John's staying there I hold to blame—
It must be an un-English clime,
Else why do they in summer time
Have winter in Australia?
Give me the holly on the wall.
The mistletoe hung in the hall,
The snow four feet upon the moor,
'The welcome greeting at the door—
A fig for all Australia!
With pipe and ale at ingle-side.
Give me our homes at Christmas-side,
England and not Australia!
Give me the land our fathers trod,
The land that's bless'd by freedom's God,
The home no tyrant can enslave,
The soil that's bred the true and brave,
Whose sons have made Australia!
After all, truth and nature here get the better of our poet's Hibernian animosities. The land “whose sons have made Australia” is and can be no other than the whole United Kingdom, the common birthplace of this one great nation. In some mournful lines at the end of his book Mr. O'Conor lets us see that the course of his patriotism in the narrower sense, his exclusively Irish patriotism, has by no means run smooth:—
I sang the yearnings of the soul the soulless among,
Who, when wassail made them frantic, made the night air ring
With the thrilling songs and ballads 'twas my gift to sing.
Ah, they wore their setters gaily, those centuried slaves,
Though vowing to their tyrant-lords woe and bloody graves,
When inspired by song and tabor they would shout To arms !
And make the night air hideous with their bootless alarms!
The vulgar Irish insurrectionist could hardly be better hit off. But we prefer to dwell, not on the “bootless alarms” of Irish nationalism, “inspired by song and tabor,” but on that which in the Irish race for ever charms and interests us. What treasures of passion and tenderness are in this people; what natural music, what lyrical force, what gaiety! Young, rich, fortunate, riding in the park, dining at Maidenhead, finishing the day with three balls, a human being has no great merit, one would think, in being happy; and yet how many of us with these advantages only succeed in boring and being bored, and in feeling “the mortal coldness of the soul like death itself come down!” But here is a poor Irishman with a soul for refinement and delight, whose lot is to work with his hands down at Deptford, with frail health, work uncertain, and a wife and children to maintain; yet he manages to feel and to illustrate the truth of Schiller's excellent saying that “all art is dedicated to joy! ” We understand that Mr. O'Conor is candidate for a humble place as school-board visitor in his neighbourhood. We wish him success, and perhaps the London School Board might act wisely in occasionally setting at their Mrs. Markses a sympathetic poet instead of a Cerberus. However, in affording places for its writers of song, the world is not often happy, and we are not sanguine about placing Mr. O'Conor; but the readers of the Pall Mall Gazette will, we hope, not a few of them, give five shillings for his book.
NOTES
1 “Songs of a Life,” &c. By Charles P. O'Conor. (Printed at the Kentish Mercury office, Blackheath-road, Greenwich. 1875.)
$$$
