A Discourse, delivered to the Students ... (1782)
Author: Reynolds, Joshua.
Publication info: A Discourse, Delivered To the Students Of the Royal Academy ; London  : 28 p. London (1783)

A Discourse, delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy ... December 10, 1782, by the President
[Page ]
A DISCOURSE, &c. GENTLEMEN ,
The highest ambition of every Artist is to be thought a Man of Genius. As long as this flattering quality is joined to his name, he can bear with patience the imputation of carelessness, incorrectness, or defects of whatever kind.
So far indeed is the presence of Genius from implying an absence of faults, that they are considered by many as inseparable companions. Some go such lengths as
[Page 6]
to take indications from them, and not only excuse faults on account of Genius, but they presume Genius from the existence of certain faults.
It is certainly true, that a work may justly claim the character of Genius though full of errors; and it is equally true, that it may be faultless, and yet not exhibit the least spark of Genius. This naturally suggests an enquiry, a desire at least of enquiring, what qualities of a work and of a workman may justly intitle a Painter to that character?
I have in a former discourse 1 endeavoured to impress you with a fixed opinion, that a comprehensive and critical knowledge of the works of nature is the only source of Beauty and Grandeur. But when we speak to Painters we must always consider this rule, and all rules, with a reference to the mechanical practice of their own particular Art. It is not properly in the learning, the taste, and the dignity of the ideas, that Genius appears as belonging to a Painter. There is a Genius particular and appropriated in his own trade, (as I may call it) distinguished from all others. For that power, which enables the Artist to conceive his subject with dignity, may be said
[Page 7]
to belong to general education; and is as much the Genius of a Poet, or the professor of any other liberal Art, or even of a good Critic in any of those arts, as of a Painter. Whatever sublime ideas may fill his mind, he is a Painter only as he can put in practice what he knows, and communicate those ideas by visible representation.
If my expression can convey my idea, I wish to distinguish excellence of this kind by calling it the Genius of mechanical performance. This Genius consists, I conceive, in the power of expressing that which employs your pencil, whatever it may be, as a whole ; so as that the general effect and power of the whole may take possession of the mind, and for a while suspend the consideration of the subordinate and particular beauties or defects.
The advantage of this method of considering objects, is what I wish now more particularly to enforce. At the same time I do not forget, that a Painter must have the power of contracting as well as dilating his sight; because, he that does not at all express particulars, expresses nothing; yet it is certain, that a nice discrimination of minute circumstances, and a punctilious delineation of them, whatever excellence it may have, (and I do not
[Page 8]
mean to detract from it) never did confer on the Artist the character of Genius.
Besides those minute differences in things which are frequently not observed at all, and when they are make little impression, there are in all considerable objects great characteristic distinctions, which press strongly on the senses, and therefore fix the imagination.
These are by no means, as some people think, an aggregate of all the small discriminating particulars; nor will such an accumulation of particulars ever express them. These answer to what I have heard great lawyers call the leading points in a case, or the leading cases relative to these points.
The detail of particulars, which does not assist the expression of the main characteristic, is worse than useless, it is mischievous, as it dissipates the attention, and draws it from the principal point. It may be remarked, that the impression which is left on our mind, even of things which are familiar to us, is seldom more than their general effect; beyond which we do not look in recognising such objects.
[Page 9]
To express this in Painting, is to express what is congenial and natural to the mind of man, and what gives him by reflexion his own mode of conceiving. The other presupposes nicety and research , which are only the business of the curious and attentive, and therefore does not speak to the general sense of the whole species; in which common, and, as I may so call it, mother tongue, every thing grand and comprehensive must be uttered.
I do not mean to prescribe what degree of attention ought to be paid to the minute parts; this it is hard to settle. We are sure that it is expressing the general effect of the whole which can give to objects their true and touching character; and wherever this is observed, whatever is neglected, we acknowledge the hand of a Master. We may even go farther and observe, that when the general effect only is presented to us by a skillful hand, it appears to express that object in a more lively manner than the minutest resemblance would do.
These observations may lead to very deep questions, which I do not mean here to discuss; among others, it may lead to an enquiry, Why we are not always pleased with the most absolute possible resemblance of an imitation to its original object? Cases may exist in which such
[Page 10]
a resemblance may be even disagreeable. I shall only observe that the effect of figures in Wax-work, though certainly a more exact representation than can be given by Painting or Sculpture, is a sufficient proof that the pleasure we receive from imitation is not increased merely in proportion as it approaches to minute and detailed reality; we are pleased, on the contrary, by seeing ends answered by seeming inadequate means.
To express protuberance by actual relief, to express the softness of flesh by the softness of wax, seems rude and inartificial, and creates no grateful surprize. But to express distances on a plain surface, softness by hard bodies, and particular colouring by materials which are not singly of that colour, produces that magic which is the pride and triumph of art.
Carry this principle a step further. Suppose the effect of imitation to be fully compassed by means still more inadequate; let the power of a few well-chosen strokes, which supersede labour by judgment and direction, produce a complete impression of all that the mind demands in an object; we are charmed with such an unexpected happiness, and begin to be tired with the superfluous
[Page 11]
diligence, which in vain sollicits an appetite already satiated.
The properties of all objects, as far as a Painter is concerned with them, are, the outline or drawing, the colour, and the light and shade. The drawing gives the form, the colour its visible quality, and the light and shade its solidity.
Excellence in any one of these parts of art will never be acquired by an Artist, unless he has the habit of looking upon objects at large, and observing the effect which they have on the eye when it is dilated, and employed upon the whole, without seeing any one of the parts distinctly. It is by this that we obtain the ruling characteristic, and that we learn to imitate it by short and dexterous methods. I do not mean by dexterity a trick or mechanical habit, formed by guess, and established by custom; but that science, which, by a profound knowledge of ends and means, discovers the shortest and surest way to its own purpose.
If we examine with a critical view the manner of those Artists whom we consider as patterns, we shall find that their great same does not proceed from their works being
[Page 12]
more highly finished, or from a more minute attention to details, but from that enlarged comprehension which fees the whole object at once, and that energy of art which gives its characteristic effect by adequate expression.
Raffaelle and Titian are two names which stand the highest in our art; one for Drawing, the other for Painting. The most considerable and the most esteemed works of Raffaelle are the Cartoons, and his Fresco works in the Vatican; those, as we all know, are far from being minutely finished; his principal care and attention seems to be fixed upon the adjustment of the whole, whether it was the general composition, or the composition of each individual figure; for every figure may be said to be a lesser whole, though in regard to the general work to which it belongs, it is but a part; the same may be said of the head, of the hands, or feet. Though he possessed this art of seeing and comprehending the whole, as far as form is concerned, he did not exert the same faculty in regard to the general effect, which is presented to the eye by colour, and light, and shade. Of this the deficiency of his oil pictures, where this excellence is more expected than in Fresco, is a sufficient proof.
[Page 13]
It is to Titian we must turn our eyes to find excellence with regard to colour, and light and shade, in the highest degree. He was both the first and the greatest master of this Art. By a few strokes he knew how to mark the general image and character of whatever object he attempted, and produced, by this alone, a truer representation than his master Giam: Bellino, or any of his predecessors, who finished every hair. His great care was to express the general colour, to preserve the masses of light and shade, and to give by opposition the idea of that solidity which is inseparable from natural objects. When those are preserved, though with nothing more, the work will have in a proper place its compleat effect; but where any of these are wanting, however minutely laboured the picture may be in the detail, the whole will have a false and even an unfinished appearance, at whatever distance, or in whatever light, it can be shewn.
It is vain to attend to the variation of tints, if, in that attention, the general hue of flesh is lost; or to finish ever so minutely the parts, if the masses are not observed, or the whole not well put together.
Vasari seems to have no great disposition to favour the Venetian Painters, yet he every where justly commends
[Page 14]
il modo di fare, la maniera, la bella pratica ; that is, the admirable manner and practice of that school. On Titian, in particular, he bestows the epithets of giudicioso bello, e stupendo .
This manner was then new to the world, but that unshaken truth on which it is founded, has fixed it as a model to all succeeding Painters; and those who will examine into the artisice, will find it to consist in the power of generalising, and in the shortness and simplicity of the means.
Many Artists, as Vasari likewise observes, have ignorantly imagined they are imitating the manner of Titian when they leave their colours rough and neglect the detail; but, not possessing the principles on which he wrought, they have produced what he calls goffe pitture , absurd foolish pictures; for such will always be the consequence of affecting dexterity without science, without selection, and without fixed principles.
Raffaelle and Titian seemed to look at nature for different purposes; they both had the power of extending their view to the whole; but one looked only for the general effect as produced by form, the other as by colour.
[Page 15]
We cannot entirely refuse to Titian the merit of attending to the general form of his object, as well as colour; but his deficiency lay, a deficiency at least when he is compared with Raffaelle, in not possessing the power, like him, of correcting the form of his model by any general idea of beauty in his own mind. Of this his St. Sebastian is a particular instance. This figure appears to be a most exact representation both of the form and of the colour of the model, which he then happened to have before him; it has all the force of nature, and the colouring is flesh itself; but, unluckily, the model was of a bad form, especially the legs. Titian has with as much care preserved these defects, as he has imitated the beauty and brilliancy of the colouring. In his colouring he was large and general, as in his design he was minute and partial; in the one he was a Genius, in the other not much above a copier. I do not, however, speak now of all his pictures; instances enough may be produced in his works, where those observations on his defects could not with any propriety be applied; but it is in the manner , or language, as it may be called, in which Titian, and others of that school, express themselves, that their chief excellence lies. This manner is in reality, in Painting, what language is in Poetry; we are all sensible how differently the imagination is affected by the same sentiment
[Page 16]
expressed in different words, and how mean or how grand the same object appears when presented to us by different Painters. Whether it is the human figure, an animal, or even inanimate objects, there is nothing, however unpromising in appearance, but what may be raised into dignity, convey sentiment, and produce emotion, in the hands of a Painter of genius. What was said of Virgil, that he threw even the dung about the ground with an air of dignity, may be applied to Titian. Whatever he touched, howeyer naturally mean and habitually familiar, by a kind of magic he invested with grandeur and importance.
I must here observe, that I am not recommending a neglect of the detail; indeed it would be difficult, if not impossible, to prescribe certain bounds, and tell how far, or when it is to be observed or neglected; much must, at last, be left to the taste and judgment of the Artist. I am well aware how a judicious detail will sometimes give the force of truth to the work, and consequently interest the spectator. 2 I only wish to impress on your minds the true distinction between essential and subordinate powers, and shew what qualities in the art claim your chief attention, and what may, with the least injury to your reputation,
[Page 17]
be neglected; something, perhaps, always must be neglected; the lesser ought then to give way to the greater, and since every work can have but a limited time allotted to it, for even supposing a whole life to be employed about one picture, it is still limited; it appears more reasonable to employ that time to the best advantage, in contriving various methods of composing the work; of trying different effects of light and shade; and employing the labour of correction, in heightening by a judicious adjustment of the parts the effects of the whole, than that the time should be taken up in minutely finishing those parts.
But there is another kind of high finishing which may safely be condemned, as it seems to counteract its own purpose; that is, when the artist, to avoid that hardness which proceeds from the outline cutting against the ground, softens and blends the colours to excess; this is what the ignorant call high finishing, but which tends to destroy the brilliancy of colour, and the true effect of representation, which consists very much in preserving the same proportion of sharpness and bluntness which is in natural objects. This extreme softning, instead of producing the effect of softness, gives the appearance of ivory, or some other hard substance, highly polished.
[Page 18]
The portraits of Cornelius Johnson appear to have this defect, and consequently want that suppleness which is the characteristic of flesh; whereas, in the works of Vandyke we may observe that true mixture of softness and hardness perfectly observed. The same defect is in the manner of Vanderwerf, in opposition to that of Teniers; and such we may add is the manner of Raffelle in his oil pictures, in comparison with that of Titian.
The name which Raffaelle has so justly maintained as the first of Painters, we may venture to say was not acquired by this laborious attention. His apology may be made by saying that it was the manner of his country; but if he had expressed his ideas with the facility and eloquence, as it may be called, of Titian, his works would certainly not have been less excellent; and that praise, which ages and nations have poured out upon his works, for possessing Genius in the higher attainments of art, would have been extended to them all.
Those who are not conversant in works of art, are often surprized at the high value set by connoisseurs on drawings which appear careless, and in every respect unfinished; but they are truly valuable, and their value arises from this, that they give the idea of a whole, and
[Page 19]
this whole is often expressed by a dexterous facility which indicates the true power of a Painter, even though roughly exerted; whether it consists in the general composition, or the general form of each figure, or in the turn of the attitude which bestows grace and elegance. All this we may see fully exemplified in the very skilful drawings of Parmegiano and Corregio. On whatever account we value these drawings, it is certainly not for high finishing, or a minute attention to particulars.
Excellence in every part, and in every province of our art, from the highest stile of history down to the resemblances of still-life, will depend on this power of extending the attention at once to the whole, without which the greatest diligence is vain.
I wish you to bear in mind, that when I speak of a whole , I do not mean simply an whole as belonging to composition, but an whole with respect to the general style of colouring; an whole with regard to the light and shade; an whole of every thing which may separately become the main purpose of a Painter.
[Page 20]
I remember a Landscape-Painter in Rome, who was known by the name of Studio, from his patience in high finishing, in which he thought the whole excellence of art consisted; so that he once endeavoured, as he said, to represent every individual leaf on a tree. This picture I never saw, but I am very sure that an artist, who looked only at the general character of the species, the order of the branches, and the masses of the foliage, would in a few minutes produce a more true resemblance of trees, than this Painter in as many months.
A Landscape-Painter certainly ought to study anatomically (if I may use the expression) all the objects which he paints; but when he is to turn his studies to use, his skill, as a man of Genius, will be displayed in shewing the general effect, preserving the same degree of hardness and softness as the objects have in nature; for he applies himself to the imagination, not to the curiosity, and works not for the Virtuoso or the Naturalist, but for the common observer of life and nature. When he knows his subject, he will know not only what to describe, but what to omit; and this skill in leaving out, in all things, is a great part of knowledge and wisdom.
[Page 21]
The same excellence of manner which Titian displayed in History or Portrait-painting, is equally conspicuous in his Landscapes, whether they are professedly such, or serve only as back-grounds. One of the most eminent of this latter kind is to be found in the picture of St. Pietro Murtire. The large trees, which are here introduced, are plainly distinguished from each other by the different manner with which the branches shoot from their trunks, as well as by their different foliage; and the weeds in the fore-ground are varied in the same manner, just as much as variety requires, and no more. When Algerotti, speaking of this picture, praises it for the minute discriminations of the leaves and plants, even, as he says, to excite the admiration of a Botanist, his intention was undoubtedly to give praise even at the expence of truth; for he must have known, that this is not the character of the picture; but Connoisseurs will always find in pictures what they think they ought to find; he was not aware that he was giving a deseription injurious to the reputation of Titian.
Such accounts may be very hurtful to young artists, who never have had an opportunity of seeing the
[Page 22]
work described; and they may possibly conclude, that this great Artist acquired the name of the Divine Titian from his eminent attention to such trifling circumstances, which, in reality, would not raise him above the level of the most ordinary Painter.
We may extend these observations even to what seems to have but a single, and that an individual, object. The excellence of Portrait-painting, and we may add even the likeness, the character, and countenance, as I have observed in another place, depends more upon the general effect exhibited by the painter, than the exact expression of the peculiarities, or minute discriminations of the parts. The chief attention of the artist is therefore imployed in planting the features in their proper places, which so much contributes to giving the effect and true impression of the whole. The very peculiarities may be reduced to classes and general descriptions, and there are therefore large ideas to be found even in this contracted subject. He may afterwards labour single features to what degree he thinks proper, but let him not forget continually to examine, whether in finishing the parts he is not destroying the general effect.
[Page 23]
It were certainly a thing to be wished, that all excellence were applied to illustrate subjects that were interesting and worthy of being commemorated; whereas, of half the pictures that are in the world, the subject can be valued only as an occasion which sets the artist to work; and yet, the high value we set on such pictures, without considering, or perhaps without knowing the subject, shews how much our attention is engaged by the art alone.
Perhaps nothing that we can say will so clearly shew the advantage and excellence of this faculty, as that it confers the character of Genius on works that pretend to no other merit; in which is neither expression, character, or dignity, and where none are interested in the subject. We cannot refuse the character of Genius to the marriage of Paulo Veronese, without opposing the general sense of mankind, (great authorities have called it the Triumph of Painting) or, to the altar of St. Augustine at Antwerp, by Rubens, which equally deserves the same title, and for the same reason. Neither of those pictures have any interesting story to support them. That of Paulo Veronese is only a representation of a great concourse of people at a dinner; and the subject of Rubens, if it may be called
[Page 24]
a subject where nothing is doing, is an assembly of various. Saints that lived in different ages. The whole excellence of those pictures consists in mechanical dexterity, working however under the influence of this comprehensive faculty which I have so often mentioned.
It is by this, and this alone, that the mechanical power is ennobled and raised much above its natural rank. And it appears to me, that with propriety it acquires this character, as an instance of that superiority with which mind predominates over matter, by contracting into one whole what nature has made many.
The great advantage of this idea of a whole is, that a greater quantity of truth may be said to be contained and expressed in a few lines or touches, than in the most laborious finishing the parts where this is not regarded. It is upon this foundation that it stands; and the justness of the observation would be confirmed by the ignorant in art, if it were possible to take their opinions unseduced by some false idea of what they imagine they ought to see in a Picture. As it is an art, they think they ought to be pleased in proportion as they see that art ostentatiously displayed; they will, from this supposition, prefer neatness, high-finishing,
[Page 25]
and gaudy colouring, to the truth, simplicity, and unity of nature. Perhaps too, the totally ignorant beholder, like the ignorant artist, cannot comprehend a whole nor even what it means. But if false notions do not anticipate their perceptions, they who are capable of observation, and who, pretending to no skill, look only strait forward, will praise and condemn in proportion as the Painter has succeeded in the effect of the whole. Here general satisfaction or general dislike, though perhaps despised by the Painter as proceeding from the ignorance of the principles of art, yet may help to regulate his conduct, and bring back his attention to that which ought to be his principal object, and from which he has deviated for the sake of minuter beauties.
An instance of this right judgment I once saw in a child, in going through a gallery where there were many portraits of the last age, which, though neatly put out of hand, were very ill put together. The child paid no attention to the neat finishing, or naturalness of any bit of drapery, but appeared to observe only the ungracefulness of the figures, and put herself in the posture of every figure which she saw in a forced aukward attitude. The censure of nature, uninformed, fastened upon
[Page 26]
the greatest fault that could be in a picture, because it related to the character and management of the whole.
I should be sorry, if what has been said should be understood to have any tendency to encourage that carelessness which leaves works in an unfinished state. I commend nothing for the want of exactness; I mean to point to that kind of exactness which is the best, and which is alone truly to be so esteemed.
So far is my disquisition from giving countenance to idleness, that there is nothing in our art which enforces such continual exertion and circumspection. It requires much study and much practice; it requires the Painter's whole attention; whereas the parts may be finished by nice touches, while his mind is engaged on other matters; he may even hear a play or a novel read without much disturbance. The artist, who flatters his own indolence, will continually find himself evading this laborious attention, and applying his thoughts to the case and laziness of finishing the parts.
No work can be too much finished, provided the diligence employed be directed to its proper object; but I
[Page 27]
have observed, that an excessive labour in the detail has, nine times in ten, been pernicious to the general effect, even when it has been the work of great masters. It indicates a bad choice, which is an ill setting out in any undertaking.
To give a right direction to your industry has been my principal purpose in this discourse. It is this, which I am confident often makes the difference between two Students of equal capacities, and of equal industry. Whilst the one is employing his labour on minute objects of little consequence, the other is acquiring the art, and perfecting the habit, of seeing nature in an extensive view, in its proper proportions, and its due subordination of parts.
Before I conclude, I must make one observation sufficiently connected with the present subject.
The same extension of mind which gives the excellence of Genius to the theory and mechanical practice of the art, will direct him likewise in the method of study, and give him the superiority over those who narrowly follow a more confined track of partial imitation. Whoever, in
[Page 28]
order to finish his education, should travel to Italy, and spend his whole time there only in copying pictures measuring statues or buildings, (though these things are not to be neglected) would return with little improvement. He that imitates the Iliad, says Dr. Young, is not imitating Homer. It is not by laying up in the memory the particular details of any of the great works of art that any man becomes a great artist, if he stops without making himself master of the general principles on which these works are conducted. If he even hopes to rival those whom he admires, he must consider their works as the means of teaching him the true art of seeing nature. When this is acquired, he then may be said to have appropriated their powers, or at least the foundation of their powers, to himself; the rest must depend upon his own industry and application. The great business of study is to form a mind , adapted and adequate to all times and all occasions, to which all nature is then laid open, and which may be said to possess the key of her inexhaustible riches.
THE END.
NOTES
1 Discourse III.
2 See Discourse III, page 105.
$$$
