A Discourse, delivered to the Students ... (1790)
Author: Reynolds, Joshua.
Publication info: A Discourse, Delivered To the Students Of the Royal Academy ; London  : 35 p. London (1791)

A Discourse, delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy ... Dec. 10, 1790. By the President
[Page ]
A DISCOURSE, &c. GENTLEMEN,
The intimate connection which I have had with the Royal Academy ever since its establishment, the social duties in which we have all mutually engaged for so many years, make any profession of attachment to this Institution, on my part, altogether superfluous; the influence of habit alone in such a connection would naturally have produced it.
Among men united in the same body, and engaged in the same pursuit, along with permanent friendship, occasional differences will arise. In these disputes men are naturally too favourable to themselves, and think perhaps too hardly of their antagonists. But composed and constituted as we are, those little contentions will be lost to others, and they ought certainly to be lost amongst ourselves, in mutual esteem for talents and acquirements:
[Page 2]
every controversy ought to be, and I am persuaded, will be, sunk in our zeal for the perfection of our common Art.
In parting with the Academy, I shall remember with pride, affection, and gratitude, the support with which I have almost uniformly been honoured from the commencement of our intercourse. I shall leave you, Gentlemen, with unaffected cordial wishes for your future concord, and with a well-founded hope, that in that concord, the auspicious and not obscure origin of our Academy may be forgotten in the splendor of your succeeding prospects.
My age, and my infirmities still more than my age, make it probable that this will be the last time I shall have the honour of addressing you from this place. Excluded as I am, Spatiis iniquis , from indulging my imagination with a distant and forward perspective of life, I may be excused if I turn my eyes back on the way which I have passed.
We may assume to ourselves, I should hope, the credit of having endeavoured, at least, to fill with propriety, that middle station which we hold in the general connection
[Page 3]
of things. Our predecessors have laboured for our advantage, we labour for our successors; and though we have done no more in this mutual intercourse and reciprocation of benefits, than has been effected by other societies, formed in this nation for the advancement of useful and ornamental knowledge, yet there is one circumstance which appears to me to give us an higher claim than the credit of merely doing our duty. What I at present allude to, is the honour of having been, some of us, the first contrivers, and all of us the promoters and supporters of the annual Exhibition. This scheme must of course have originated from Artists already in possession of the favour of the public, as it would not have been so much in the power of others to have excited their curiosity. It must be remembered, that for the sake of bringing forward into notice concealed merit, they incurred the risk of producing rivals to themselves, they voluntarily entered the lists, and ran the race a second time for the prize which they had already won.
When we take a review of the several departments of the Institution, I think we may safely congratulate ourselves on our good fortune of having hitherto seen the chairs of our professors filled with men of distinguished abilities, and who have so well acquitted themselves of
[Page 4]
their duty in their several departments. I look upon it to be of importance, that none of them should be ever left unfilled; a neglect to provide for qualified persons, is to produce a neglect of qualifications.
In this honourable rank of Professors, I have not presumed to class myself, though in the Discourses which I have had the honour of delivering from this place, I may in one respect be considered as a volunteer, in another view it seems as if I was involuntarily pressed into this service.
If prizes were to be given, it appeared not only proper, but almost indispensibly necessary, that something should be said by the President on the delivery of those prizes; and the President for his own credit would wish to say something more than mere words of compliment, which by being frequently repeated, would soon become flat and uninteresting, and by being given to many, would at last become a distinction to none: I thought, therefore, if I were to preface this compliment with some instructive observations on the Art, when we crowned merit in the Artists whom we rewarded, we might do something to animate, and to guide them in their future attempts.
[Page 5]
I Am truly sensible how unequal I have been to the expression of my own ideas. To develope the latent excellencies, and draw out the interior principles of our art, requires more skill and practice in writing, than is likely to be possessed by a man perpetually occupied in the use of the pencil and the pallet. It is for that reason, perhaps, that the sister Art has had the advantage of better criticism. Poets are naturally writers of prose. They may be said to be practising only an inferior department of their own art, when they are explaining and expatiating upon its most refined principles.
But still such difficulties ought not to deter Artists who are not prevented by other engagements from putting their thoughts in order as well as they can, and from giving to the public the result of their experience. The knowledge which an Artist has of his subject will more than compensate for any want of elegance in the manner of treating it, or even of perspicuity, which is still more essential; and I am convinced that one short essay written by a Painter, will contribute more to advance the theory of our art, than a thousand volumes such as we sometimes see, the purpose of which appears to be rather to display the refinement of the Author's own conceptions of impossible practice, than to convey useful knowledge
[Page 6]
or instruction of any kind whatever. An Artist knows what is, and what is not, within the province of his art to perform, and is not likely to be for ever teazing the poor Student with the beauties of mixed passions, or to perplex him with an imaginary union of excellencies incompatible with each other.
To this work, however, I could not be said to come totally unprovided with materials. I had seen much, and I had thought much upon what I had seen; I had something of an habit of investigation, and a disposition to reduce all, that I observed and felt in my own mind, to method and system; but never having seen what I myself knew, distinctly placed before me on paper, I knew nothing correctly.
To put those ideas into something like order was, to my inexperience, no easy task. The composition, the ponere totum even of a single Discourse, as well as of a single statue, was the most difficult part, as perhaps it is of every other art, and most requires the hand of a master.
For the manner, whatever deficiency there was, I might reasonably expect indulgence, but I thought it
[Page 7]
indispensibly necessary well to consider the opinions which were to be given out from this place, and under the sanction of a Royal Academy; I therefore examined not only my own opinions, but likewise the opinions of others. I found in the course of this research, many precepts and rules established in our art, which did not seem to me altogether reconcileable with each other, yet each seemed in itself to have the same claim of being supported by truth and nature; and this claim, irreconcileable as they may be thought, they do in reality alike possess.
To clear away those difficulties, and reconcile those contrary opinions, it became necessary to distinguish the greater truth, as it may be called, from the lesser truth; the larger and more liberal idea of nature from the more narrow and confined; that which addresses itself to the imagination, from that which is solely addressed to the eye. In consequence of this discrimination, the different branches of our art, to which those different truths were referred, were perceived to make so wide a separation, and put on so new an appearance as if they had scarce proceeded from the same general stock. The different rules and regulations, which presided over each department of art, followed of course: every
[Page 8]
mode of excellence, from the grand stile of the Roman and Florentine schools down to the lowest rank of still life, had its due weight and value; fitted some class or other; and nothing was thrown away. By this disposition of our art into classes, that perplexity and confusion, which I apprehend every Artist has at some time experienced from the variety of stiles, the variety of excellence with which he is surrounded, is, I should hope, in some measure removed, and the Student better enabled to judge for himself, what peculiarly belongs to his own particular pursuit.
In reviewing my Discourses, it is no small satisfaction to be assured that I have, in no part of them, lent my assistance to foster newly-batched unfledged opinions, or endeavoured to support paradoxes, however tempting may have been their novelty, or however ingenious I might, for the minute, fancy them to be, nor I hope shall I any where be found to have imposed on the minds of young Students declamation for argument, a smooth period for a sound precept. I have pursued a plain and honest method ; I have taken up the art simply as I found it exemplified in the practice of the most approved Painters. That approbation which the world has uniformly given, I have endeavoured to justify by such
[Page 9]
proofs as questions of this kind will admit, by the analogy which Painting holds with the sister Arts, and consequently by the common congeniality which they all bear to our nature. And though in what has been done, no new discovery is pretended, I may still flatter myself, that from the discoveries which others have made by their own intuitive good sense and native rectitude of judgment, I have succeeded in establishing the rules and principles of our Art on a more firm and lasting foundation than they had formerly been placed.
Without wishing to divert the Student from the practice of his Art to speculative theory, to make him a mere Connoisseur instead of a Painter, I cannot but remark, that he will certainly find his account in considering once for all, on what ground the fabric of our Art is built.
Uncertain , confused, or erroneous opinions are not only detrimental to an Artist in their immediate operation, but may possibly have very serious consequences; affect his conduct, and give the peculiar character (as it may be called) to his taste, and to his pursuits, through his whole life.
[Page 10]
I Was acquainted at Rome, in the early part of my life, with a Student of the French Academy, who appeared to me to possess all the qualities to make a great Artist, if he had suffered his taste and feelings, and I may add even his prejudices, to have fair play. He saw and felt the excellencies of the great works of Art with which we were surrounded, but lamented that there was not to be found that Nature which is so admirable in the inferior schools, and he supposed with Felibien, Du Piles, and other Theorists, that such an union of different excellencies would be the perfection of Art. He was not aware, that the narrow idea of Nature of which he lamented the absence, in the works of those great Artists, would have destroyed the grandeur of general ideas which he admired, and which was indeed the cause of his admiration. My opinions being then confused and unsettled, I was in danger of being borne down by this kind of plausible reason, though I remember I then had a dawning of suspicion that it was not sound doctrine; and at the same time I was unwilling obstinately to refuse assent to what I was unable to confute.
That the young Artist may not be seduced from the right path, by following what, at first view, he may think the light of Reason, and which is indeed Reason
[Page 11]
in part, but not in the whole, has been much the object of those Discourses.
I Have taken every opportunity of recommending a rational method of study as of the last importance. The great, I may say the sole use of an Academy is to put, and for some time to keep, Students in that course; that too much indulgence may not be given to peculiarity, nor a young man taught to believe, that what is generally good for others is not good for him.
I Have strongly inculcated in my former Discourses, as I do in this my last, the wisdom and necessity of previously obtaining the appropriated instruments of the Art, in a first correct design, and a plain manly colouring, before any thing more is attempted. But by this I would not wish to cramp and fetter the mind, or discourage those who follow (as most of us may at one time have followed) the suggestion of a strong inclination: something must be conceded to great and irresistible impulses: perhaps every Student must not be strictly bound to general methods, if they strongly thwart the peculiar turn of his own mind. I must confess, that it is not absolutely of much consequence whether he proceeds in the general method of seeking first to acquire
[Page 12]
mechanical accuracy, before he attempts poetical flights, provided he diligently studies to attain the full perfection of the style he pursues; whether like Parmegiano, he endeavours at grace and grandeur of manner before he has learned correctness of drawing, if like him he feels his own wants, and will labour, as that eminent Artist did, to supply those wants; whether he starts from the East or from the West, if he relaxes in no exertion to arrive ultimately at the same goal. The first public work of Parmegiano is the St. Eustachius, in the church of St. Petronius in Bologna, and done when he was a boy; and one of the last of his works is the Moses breaking the tables, in Parma. In the former there is certainly something of grandeur in the outline, and in the conception of the figure, which discovers the dawnings of future greatness, of a young mind impregnated with the sublimity of Michael Angelo, whose stile he here attempts to imitate, though he could not then draw the human figure with any common degree of correctness. But this same Parmegiano, when in his more mature age he painted the Moses, had so completely supplied his first defects, that we are at a loss which to admire most, the correctness of drawing, or the grandeur of the conception. As a confirmation of its great excellence, and of the impression which it leaves on the minds of elegant spectators,
[Page 13]
our great Lyric Poet, when he conceived that sublime idea of the indignant Welch Bard, acknowledged that though many years had intervened, he had warmed his imagination with the remembrance of this noble figure of Parmegiano.
When we consider that Michael Angelo was the great archetype to whom Parmegiano was indebted for that grandeur which we find in his works, and from whom all his contemporaries and successors have derived, whatever they have possessed, of the dignified and the majestic; that he was the bright luminary, from whom Painting has borrowed a new lustre; that under his hands it assumed a new appearance, and is become another and superior art; I may be excused if I take this opportunity, as I have hitherto taken every occasion, to turn your attention to this exalted Founder and Father of modern Art, of which he was not only the inventor, but which he, by the divine energy of his own mind, carried at once to its highest point of possible perfection.
The sudden maturity to which Michael Angelo brought our Art, and the comparative feebleness of his followers and imitators, might perhaps be reasonably, at least plausibly explained, if we had time for such an examination.
[Page 14]
At present I shall only observe, that the subordinate parts of our Art, and perhaps of other Arts, expand themselves by a flow and progressive growth, but those which depend on a native vigour of imagination generally burst forth at once in fullness of beauty. Of this Homer probably, and Shakspear, more assuredly are signal examples. Michael Angelo possessed the poetical part to a most eminent degree; and the same daring spirit, which urged him first to explore the unknown regions of the imagination, delighted with the novelty, and animated by the success of his discoveries, could not have failed to stimulate and impel him forward in his career beyond those limits which his followers, destitute of the same incentives, had not strength to pass.
To distinguish between correctness of drawing, and that part which respects the imagination, we may say the one approaches to the mechanical (which in its way too may make just pretensions to genius) and the other to the poetical. To encourage a solid and vigorous course of study, it may not be amiss to suggest that perhaps a confidence in the mechanic produces boldness in the poetic. He that is sure of the goodness of his ship and tackle puts out fearlesly from the shore; and he who knows, that his hand can execute whatever his
[Page 15]
fancy can suggest, sports with more freedom in embodying the visionary forms of his own creation. I will not say Michael Angelo was eminently poetical, only because he was greatly mechanical; but I am sure that mechanic excellence invigorated and emboldened his mind to carry Painting into the regions of Poetry, and to emulate that Art in its most adventurous flights.
Michael Angelo equally possessed both qualifications. Yet of the former there were certainly great examples to be sound in Ancient Sculpture, and particularly in the fragment known by the name of the Torso of Michael Angelo; but of that grandeur of character, air, and attitude, which he threw into all his figures, and which so well corresponds with the grandeur of his outline, there was no example; they could therefore proceed only from the most poetical and sublime imagination.
It is impossible not to express some surprise, that the race of Painters, who preceded Michael Angelo, men of acknowledged great abilities, should never have thought of transferring a little of that grandeur of outline which they could not but see and admire in Ancient Sculpture, into their own works; but they appear to have considered
[Page 16]
Sculpture as the later schools of Artists look at the inventions of Michael Angelo, as something to be admired, but with which they have nothing to do. Quod super nos, nihil ad nos .—The Artists of that age, even Raphael himself, seemed to be going on very contentedly in the dry manner of Pietro Perugino, and if Michael Angelo had never appeared, the Art might still have continued in the same stile.
Besides Rome and Florence, where the grandeur of this stile was first displayed, it was on this foundation that the Caracci built the truly great Academical Bolognian School, of which the first stone was laid by Pellegrino Tibaldé. He first introduced this stile amongst them; and many instances might be given in which he appears to have possessed as by inheritance, the true, genuine, noble and elevated mind of Michael Angelo. Though we cannot venture to speak of him with the same sondness as his countrymen, and call him, as the Caracci did, Nostro Michael Angelo reformato , yet he has a right to be considered amongst the first and greatest of his followers: there are certainly many drawings and inventions of his, of which Michael Angelo himself might not disdain to be supposed the Author, or that they should be, as in fact they often are, mistaken for his. I
[Page 17]
will mention one particular instance, because it is found in a book which is in every young Artist's hands— Bishop's Antient Statues. He there has introduced a print, representing Polyphemus, from a drawing of Tibaldi, and has inscribed it with the name of Michael Angelo, to whom he has also in the same book attributed a Sybil of Raphael. Both these figures, it is true, are professedly in Michael Angelo's stile and spirit, and even worthy of his hand. But we know that the former is painted in the Institute a Bologna by Tibaldi, and the other in the Pace by Raphael.
The Caracci, it is acknowledged, adopted the mechanical part with sufficient success. But the divine part which addresses itself to the imagination as possessed by Michael Angelo or Tibaldi, was beyond their grasp: they formed, however, a most respectable school, a stile more on the level, and calculated to please a greater number; and if excellence of this kind is to be valued according to the number, rather than the weight and quality of admirers, it would assume even an higher rank in Art. The same may be, in some sort, said of the Venetian Painters. They certainly much advanced the dignity of their stile by adding to their fascinating powers of colouring something of the strength of Michael Angelo;
[Page 18]
at the same time it may still be a doubt how far their ornamental elegance would be an advantageous addition to his grandeur. But if there is any manner of Painting which may be said to unite kindly with his stile, it is that of Titian. His handling, the manner in which his colours are left on the canvas, appears to proceed (as far as that goes) from a congenial mind, equally disdainful of vulgar criticism.
Michael Angelo's strength thus qualified, and made more palatable to the general taste, reminds me of an observation which I heard 1 a learned critic make, when it was incidentally remarked, that our translation of Homer, however excellent, did not convey the character, nor had the grand air of the original. He replied, that if Pope had not cloathed the naked majesty of Homer with the graces and elegancies of modern fashions, though the real dignity of Homer was degraded by such a dress, his translation would not have met with such a favourable reception, and he must have been contented with fewer readers.
Many of the Flemish Painters, who studied at Rome, in that great æra of our Art, such as Francis Floris,
[Page 19]
Hemskerk, Michael Coxis, Jerom Cock, and others, returned to their own country, with as much of this grandeur as they could carry. But like seeds, falling on a soil not prepared or adapted to their nature, the manner of Michael Angelo thrived but little with them; perhaps, however, they contributed to prepare the way for that free, unconstrained, and liberal outline, which was afterwards introduced by Rubens, through the medium of the Venetian Painters.
This grandeur of stile has been in different degrees disseminated all over Europe. Some caught it by living at the time, and coming into contact with the original author, whilst others received it at second hand; and being every where adopted, it has totally changed the whole taste and stile of design, if there could be said to be any stile before his time. Our art, in consequence, now assumes a rank to which it could never have dared to aspire, if Michael Angelo had not discovered to the world the hidden powers which it possessed. Without his assistance we never could have been convinced, that Painting was capable of producing an adequate representation of the persons and actions of the heroes of the Iliad.
[Page 20]
I Would ask any man qualified to judge of such works, whether he can look with indifference at the personification of the Supreme Being in the centre of the Capella Sestina, or the figures of the Sybils which surround that chapel, to which we may add the statue of Moses; and whether the same sensations are not excited by those works, as what he may remember to have felt from the most sublime passages of Homer? I mention those figures more particularly, as they come nearer to a comparison with his Jupiter, his demi-gods, and heroes; those Sybils and Prophets being a kind of intermediate beings between Men and Angels. Though instances may be produced in the works of other Painters, which may justly stand in competition with those I have mentioned, such as the Isaiah, and the Vision of Ezekiel, by Raphael, the St. Mark of Frate Bartolomeo, and many others; yet these, it must be allowed, are inventions so much in Michael Angelo's manner of thinking, that they may be truly considered as so many rays, which discover manifestly the center from whence they emanated.
The sublime in Painting, as in Poetry, so overpowers, and takes such a possession of the whole mind, that no room is left for attention to minute criticism. The
[Page 21]
little elegancies of art in the presence of these great ideas thus greatly expressed, lose all their value, and are, for the instant at least, felt to be unworthy of our notice. The correct judgment, the purity of taste, which characterise Raphael; the exquisite grace of Corregio and Parmegiano, all disappear before them.
That Michael Angelo was capricious in his inventions, cannot be denied; and this may make some circumspection necessary in studying his works; for though they appear to become him, an imitation of them is always dangerous, and will prove sometimes ridiculous. “In that dread circle none durst tread but he.” To me, I confess, his caprice does not lower the estimation of his genius, even though it is sometimes, I acknowledge, carried to the extreme: and however those eccentric excursions are considered, we must at the same time recollect, that those faults, if they are faults, are such as never could occur to a mean and vulgar mind; that they flowed from the same source which produced his greatest beauties, and were therefore such as none but himself was capable of committing; they were the powerful impulses of a mind unused to subjection of any kind, and too high to be controled by cold criticism.
[Page 22]
Many see his daring extravagance, who can see nothing else. A young Artist finds the works of Michael Angelo so totally different from those of his own master, or of those with whom he is surrounded, that he may be easily persuaded to abandon and neglect studying a stile, which appears to him wild, mysterious, and above his comprehension, and which he therefore feels no disposition to admire; a good disposition, which he concludes that he should naturally have, if the stile deserved it. It is necessary therefore that Students should be prepared for the disappointment which they may experience at their first setting out; and they must be cautioned, that probably they will not, at first sight, approve.
It must be remembered, that as this great stile itself is artificial in the highest degree, it presupposes in the Spectator, a cultivated and prepared artificial state of mind. It is an absurdity therefore to suppose we are born with this taste, though we are with the seeds of it, which by the heat and kindly influence of his genius, may be ripened in us.
A 2 LATE Philosopher and Critic has observed, speaking of taste, that we are on no account to expect that fine
[Page 23]
things should descend to us ,—our taste, if possible, must be made to ascend to them. The same learned Writer recommends to us even to feign a relish, till we find a relish come; and feel, that what began in fiction, terminates in reality . If there be in our Art, any thing of that agreement or compact, such as I apprehend there is in. Music, with which the Critic is necessarily required previously to be acquainted, in order to form a correct judgment; the comparison with this Art will illustrate what I have said on these points, and tend to shew the probability, we may say the certainty, that men are not born with a relish for those Arts in their most refined state, which as they cannot understand, they cannot be impressed with their effects. This great stile of Michael Angelo is as far removed from the simple representation of the common objects of nature, as the most refined Italian music is, from the inartificial notes of nature, from whence they both profess to originate. But, without such a supposed compact, we may be very confident that the highest state of refinement in either of those Arts will not be relished without a long and industrious attention.
In pursuing this great Art, it must be acknowledged that we labour under greater difficulties than those who
[Page 24]
were born in the age of its discovery, and whose minds from their infancy were habituated to this stile, who learnt it as language, as their mother tongue. They had no mean taste to unlearn; they needed no persuasive discourse to allure them to a favourable reception of it, no abstruse investigation of its principles to convince them of the great latent truths on which it is sounded. We are constrained, in these later days, to have recourse to a sort of Grammar and Dictionary, as the only means of recovering a dead language. It was by them learnt by rote, and perhaps better learnt that way than by precept.
The stile of Michael Angelo, which I have compared to language, and which may, poetically speaking, be called the language of the Gods, now no longer exists, as it did in the fifteenth century, yet with the aid of diligence, we may in a great measure supply the deficiency which I mentioned, of not having his works so perpetually before our eyes; by having recourse to casts from his models and designs in Sculpture; to drawings or even copies of those drawings; to prints, which however ill executed, still convey something by which this taste may be formed; and a relish may be fixed and established in our minds for this grand stile
[Page 25]
of invention. Some examples of this kind we have in the Academy; and I sincerely wish there were more, that the younger Students might, in their first nourishment, imbibe this taste; whilst others, though settled in the practice of the common-place stile of Painting, might infuse, by this means, a grandeur into their works.
I Shall now make some remarks on the course which I think most proper to be pursued in such a study. I wish you not to go so much to the derivative streams, as to the fountain head; though the copies are not to be neglected; because they may give you hints in what manner you may copy, and how the genius of one man may be made to fit the peculiar manner of another.
To recover this lost taste, I would recommend young Artists to study the works of Michael Angelo, as he himself did the works of the ancient Sculptors; he began, when a child, a copy of a mutilated Satyr's head, and finished in his model what was wanting in the original. In the same manner, the first exercise that I would recommend to the young Artist when he first attempts invention, is to select every figure, if possible, from the inventions of Michael Angelo. If such borrowed figures will not bend to his purpose, and he is constrained to make a
[Page 26]
change or supply a figure himself, that figure will necessarily be in the same stile with the rest, and his taste will by this means be naturally initiated, and nursed in the lap of grandeur. He will sooner perceive what constitutes this grand stile by one practical trial than by a thousand speculations, and he will in some sort procure to himself that advantage which in these later ages has been denied him; the advantage of having the greatest of Artists for his master and instructor.
The next lesson should be, to change the purpose of the figures without changing the attitude, as Tintoret has done with the Sampson of Michael Angelo. Instead of the figure which Sampson bestrides, he has placed an eagle under him, and instead of the jaw-bone, thunder and lightening in his right hand, and it becomes a Jupiter. Titian, in the same manner, has taken the figure which represents God dividing the light from the darkness in the vault of the Capella Sestina, and has introduced it in the famour battle of Cadore, so much celebrated by Vasari, and extraordinary as it may seem, it is here converted to a General, falling from his horse. A real judge who should look at this picture, would immediately pronounce the attitude of that figure to be in a greater stile than any other figure
[Page 27]
of the composition. These two instances may be sufficient, though many more might be given in their works, as well as in those of other great Artists.
When the Student has been habituated to this grand conception of the Art, when the relish for this stile is established, makes a part of himself, and is woven into his mind, he will, by this time, have got a power of selecting from whatever occurs in nature that is grand, and corresponds with that taste which he has now acquired, and will pass over whatever is commonplace and insipid. He may then bring to the mart such works of his own proper invention as may enrich and increase the general stock of invention in our Art.
I Am confident of the truth and propriety of the advice which I have recommended; at the same time I am aware how much by this advice, I have laid myself open to the farcasms of those critics who imagine our Art to be a matter of inspiration. But I should be sorry it should appear even to myself that I wanted that courage which I have recommended to the Students in another way: equal courage perhaps is required in the adviser and the advised; they both must equally
[Page 28]
dare and bid defiance to narrow criticism and vulgar opinion.
That the Art has been in a gradual state of decline, from the age of Michael Angelo to the present, must be acknowledged; and we may reasonably impute this declension to the same cause to which the ancient Critics and Philosophers have imputed the corruption of eloquence. Indeed the same causes are likely at all times and in all ages to produce the same effects: indolence —not taking the same pains—desiring to find a shorter way—is the general imputed cause. The words of Petronius 3 are very remarkable. After opposing the natural chaste beauty of the eloquence of former ages to the strained inflated stile then in fashion, “neither,” says he, “has the art of Painting had a better fate, after the boldness of the Egyptians had found out a compendious way to execute so great an art.”
By compendious , I understand him to mean a mode of Painting, such as has infected the stile of the later Painters of Italy and France; common-place without thought, and with as little trouble, working as by a
[Page 29]
receipt, in contradistinction from that stile for which even a relish cannot be acquired without care and long attention, and most certainly the power of executing, not without the most laborious application.
I Have endeavoured to stimulate the ambition of Artists to tread in this great path of glory, and, as well as I can, have pointed out the track which leads to it, and have at the same time told them the price at which it may be obtained. It is an ancient saying, that labour is the price which the Gods have set upon every thing valuable.
The great Artist, who has been so much the subject of the present Discourse, was distinguished even from his infancy for his indefatigable diligence; and this was continued through his whole life, till prevented by extreme old age. The poorest of men, as he observed himself, did not labour from necessity, more, than he did from choice. Indeed, from all the circumstances related of his life, he appears not to have had the least conception that his art was to be acquired by any other means than by great labour; and yet he, of all men that ever lived, might make the greatest pretensions to the efficacy of native genius and inspiration. I can
[Page 30]
have no doubt that he would have thought it no disgrace to have it said of him, as he himself said of Raphael, 4 that he did not posses his art from nature, but by long study. He was conscious that the great excellence to which he arrived was gained by dint of labour, and was unwilling to have it thought that any transcendant skill, however natural its effects might seem, could be purchased at a cheaper price than he had paid for it. This seems to have been the true drift of his observation. We cannot suppose it made with any intention of depreciating the genius of Raphael, of whom he always spoke, as Condivi says, with the greatest respect: though they were rivals, no such illiberality existed between them; and Raphael on his part entertained the greatest veneration for Michael Angelo, as appears from the speech which is recorded of him, that he congratulated himself, and thanked God that he was born in the same age.
If the high esteem and veneration in which Michael Angelo has been held by all nations and in all ages, should be put to the account of prejudice, it must still be granted that those prejudices could not have been
[Page 31]
entertained without a cause: the ground of our prejudice then becomes the source of our admiration. But from whatever it proceeds, or whatever it is called, it will not, I hope, be thought presumptuous in me to appear in the train, I cannot say of his imitators, but of his admirers. I have taken another course, one more suited to my abilities, and to the taste of the times in which I live. Yet however unequal I feel myself to that attempt, were I now to begin the world again, I would tread in the steps of that great master: to kiss the hem of his garment; to catch the slightest of his perfections, would be glory and distinction enough for an ambitious man.
I feel a self-congratulation in knowing myself capable of such sensations as he intended to excite. I reflect not without vanity, that these Discourses bear testimony of my admiration of that truly divine man, and I should desire that the last words which I should pronounce in this Academy, and from this place, might be the name of— Michael Angelo.
FINIS.
NOTES
1 Dr. Johnson.
2 James Harris, Esq.
3 Pictura quoque non alium exitum fecit postquam Ægyptiorum audacia tam magnæ artis compendiariam invenit.
4 “Che Raffaello non ebbe quest' arte da natura ma per lungo studio.”
$$$
