A Discourse, delivered to the Students ... (1786)
Author: Reynolds, Joshua.
Publication info: A Discourse, Delivered To the Students Of the Royal Academy ; London  : 34 p. London (1786)

 A Discourse, delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy ... December 11, 1786, by the President
[Page ]
A DISCOURSE, &c. GENTLEMEN,
To discover beauties, or to point out faults, in the works of celebrated Masters, and to compare the conduct of one Artist with another, is certainly no mean or inconsiderable part of criticism; but this is still no more than to know the art through the Artist. This test of investigation must have two capital defects, it must be narrow, and it must be uncertain. To enlarge the boundaries of the Art of Painting, as well as to fix its principles, it will be necessary, that, that art, and those principles should be considered in their correspondence with the principles of the other arts, which like this, address themselves primarily and principally to the imagination. When those connected, and kindred principles are brought together to be compared, another comparison will grow out of this, that is, the comparison of them all, with those of human nature, from whence arts
[Page 2]
derive their materials, upon which they are to produce their effects.
When this comparison of art with art, and of all arts, with the nature of man, is once made with success, our guiding lines are as well ascertained and established, as they can be in matters of this description.
This , as it is the highest stile of criticism, is at the same time the soundest; as it refers to the eternal and immutable nature of things.
You are not to imagine that I mean to open to you at large, or to recommend to your research the whole of this vast field of Science. It is certainly much above my faculties to reach it; and though it may not be above yours, to comprehend it fully, if it were fully and properly brought before you, yet, perhaps the most perfect criticism requires habits of speculation and abstraction, not so consistent with the employment which ought to occupy, and the habits of mind which ought to prevail in a practical Artist. I only point out to you these things, that when you do criticise, (as all who work on a plan, will criticise more or less) it may be done on the foundation of true principles; and that though you may not always
[Page 3]
travel a great way, the way that you do travel, may be in the right road.
I observe, as a fundamental ground, common to all the Arts with which we have any thing to do in this discourse, that they address themselves only to two faculties of the mind, its imagination and its sensibility.
All Theories which attempt to direct, or to controll the Art, upon any principles falsely called rational, which we form to ourselves upon a supposition of what ought in reason to be the object or means of Art, independent of their known first effect on the imagination, must be false and delusive. For though it may appear bold to say it, the imagination is here the residence of truth. If the imagination is affected, the conclusion is fairly drawn. If it be not affected, the reasoning is erroneous, because the end is not obtained; the effect itself being the test, and the only test of the truth and efficacy of the means.
There is in the commerce of life, as in Art, a sagacity which is far from being contradictory to right reason, and is superior to any occasional exercise of that faculty, which supersedes it; does not wait for the slow progress of deduction, but goes at once, by what appears
[Page 4]
a kind of intuition, to the conclusion. A man endowed with this faculty, feels and acknowledges the truth, though it is not always in his power, perhaps, to give a reason for it; because he cannot recollect and bring present before him all the materials that gave birth to his opinion; for very many and very intricate considerations, may unite to form the principle, even of small and minute parts, involved in, or dependent on, a great system of things: but the right impression still remain fixed in his mind.
This impression, is the result of the accumulated experience of our whole life, and has been collected we do not always know how, or when. But this mass of collective observation, however acquired, ought to prevail over that reason, which however powerfully exerted on any particular occasion, will probably comprehend but a partial view of the subject; and our conduct in life as well as in the Arts, is, or ought to be, generally governed by this habitual reason, and it is our happiness we are enabled to draw on such funds. If we were obliged to enter into a theoretical deliberation on every occasion, before we act, life would be at a stand, and Art would be impracticable.
[Page 5]
It appears to me therefore, that our first thoughts, that is, the effect which any thing produces on our minds on its first appearance, is never to be forgot; and it demands for that reason, because it is the first, to be laid up with care. If this be not done, the Artist may happen to impose on himself by partial reasoning, by a cold consideration of those animated first thoughts which proceeded, not perhaps from caprice or rashness (as he may afterwards conceit) but from the fullness of his mind, enriched with all the copious stores of various inventions that he had ever seen, or had ever passed in his thoughts. These ideas are infused into his design, without any conscious effort; but, if he be not on his guard, he may reconsider and correct them, till the whole matter is reduced to a common-place invention.
This is sometimes the effect of what I mean to caution you against; that is to say, an unsounded distrust of the imagination and feeling, in favour of narrow, partial, confined, argumentative Theories, and of principles that seem to apply to the design in hand, without considering those general impressions on the fancy in which real principles of sound reason , and of much more weight and importance, are involved, and, as it were, lye hid, under the appearance of a sort of vulgar sentiment.
[Page 6]
Reason , without doubt, must ultimately determine every thing; at this minute it is required to inform us when that very reason is to give way to feeling.
Though I have often spoke of that mean conception of our art which confines it to mere imitation, I must add, that it may be narrowed to such a mere matter of experiment, as to exclude from it the application of science, which alone gives dignity and compass to any art. But to find proper foundations for Science, is neither to narrow or to vulgarise it; and this is sufficiently exemplified in the success of experimental Philosophy. It is the false system of reasoning, grounded on a partial view of things, against which I would most cordially guard you. And I do it the rather, because those narrow Theories, so coincident with the poorest and most miserable practice, and which are adopted to give it countenance, have not had their origin in the poorest minds, but in the mistakes, or possibly in the mistaken interpretations of great and commanding authorities. We are not therefore in this case misled by feelings, but by false speculation.
When such a man as Plato speaks of Painting as only an imitative art, and that our pleasure proceeds from observing
[Page 7]
and acknowledging the truth of the imitation, I think he misleads us by a partial Theory. It is in this poor, partial, and so far, false view of the art, that Cardinal Bembo has chosen to distinguish even Raphael himself, whom our adulation honours with the name of Divine.
The same sentiment is adopted by Pope in his Epitaph on Sir Godfrey Kneller, and he turns the Panegyrick solely on imitation, as it is a sort of deception.
I shall not think my time misemployed, if by any means I may contribute to confirm your opinion of what ought to be the object of your pursuit; because, though the best critics must always have exploded this strange Idea, yet I know that there is a disposition towards a perpetual recurrence to it, on account of its simplicity and superficial plausibility.
For which reason I shall beg leave to lay before you a few thoughts on this subject; to throw out some hints that may lead your minds to an opinion, (which I take to be the truth) that Painting is not only, not to be considered as an imitation, operating by deception, but that
[Page 8]
it is, and ought to be in many points of view, and strictly speaking, no imitation at all of external nature.
Perhaps it ought to be as far removed from the vulgar Idea of Imitation, as the refined civilized state in which we live, is removed from a gross state of nature; and those who have not cultivated their imagination, which the majority of mankind certainly have not, may be said, (in regard to arts) to continue in this state of nature. Such men will always prefer imitation, to that excellence which is addressed to another faculty that they do not possess; but these are not the persons to whom a Painter is to look, any more than a judge of morals and manners, ought to refer controverted points upon those subjects, to the opinions of people taken from the banks of the Ohio, or from New Holland.
It is the lowest stile only of arts, whether of Painting, Poetry, or Music, that may be said, in the vulgar sense, to be naturally pleasing.
The higher efforts of those arts, we know by experience do not affect minds wholly uncultivated. This refined taste is the consequence of education and habit; we
[Page 9]
are born only with a capacity of entertaining this refinement, as we are born with a disposition to receive and obey all the rules and regulations of society; and so far it may be said to be natural to us, and no farther.
What has been said, may shew the Artist how necessary it is, when he looks about him for the advice and criticism of his friends, to make some distinction of the character, taste, experience, and observation in this Art, of those, from whom it is received.
An ignorant uneducated man may, like Apelles's critic, be a competent judge of the truth of the representation of a sandal; or to go somewhat higher, like Moliere's old woman, may decide upon what is nature, in regard to comic humour: but a Critic in the higher stile of Art, requires the same refined taste, as that which directed the Artist in his work.
And to illustrate this principle by a parallel from other Arts, I shall now produce some instances to shew that they, as well as our own Art, renounce the narrow idea of nature, and the narrow theories derived from that mistaken principle, and apply to that reason only which informs
[Page 10]
us, not what imitation is, a natural representation of a given object, but what it is natural for the imagination to be delighted with. And perhaps there is no better way of getting at this knowledge, than by this kind of analogy: Each art will corroborate and mutually reflect the truth on the other. Such a kind of juxta-position may likewise have this use, that whilst the Artist is amusing himself in the contemplation of other Arts, he may habitually transfer the principles of those Arts to that which he prosesses, which ought to be always present to his mind, and to which every thing is to be referred.
So far is Art from being derived from, or having any immediate intercourse with particular nature as its model, that there are many Arts that set out with a prosessed deviation from it.
This is certainly not so exactly true in regard to Painting and Sculpture. Our elements are laid in gross common nature, an exact imitation of what is before us. But when we advance to the higher state, we consider this power of imitation, though first in the order of acquisition, as by no means the highest in the scale of perfection.
[Page 11]
Poetry addresses itself to the same faculties and the same dispositions as Painting, though by different means. The object of both is to accommodate itself to all the natural propensities and inclinations of the mind.
The very existence of Poetry depends on the licence it assumes of deviating from actual nature, in order to gratify natural propensities by other means, which are found by experience full as capable of affording such gratification. It sets out with a language to the highest degree artificial, a construction of measured words, such as never is, nor ever was used by man. Let this measure be what it will, whether hexameter or any other metre used in Latin or Greek, or Rhyme, or Blank Verse varied with pauses and accents, in modern languages, they are all equally removed from nature, and equally a violation of common speech. When this artificial mode has been established as the vehicle of sentiment, there is another principle in the human mind, to which the work must be referred, which still renders it more artificial, carries it still further from common nature, and deviates only to render it more perfect. That principle is the sense of congruity, coherence, and consistency, which is a real existing
[Page 12]
principle in man; and it must be gratified. Therefore having once adopted a stile and a measure not found in common discourse, it is required that the sentiments must themselves be, in the same proportion, elevated above common nature, from the necessity of there being an agreement of the parts among themselves, that one uniform whole may be produced.
To correspond therefore with this general system of deviation from nature, the manner in which Poetry is offered to the ear, the tone in which it is recited, should be as far removed from the tone of conversation, as the words of which that Poetry is composed.
This naturally suggests the idea of modulating the voice by art, which I suppose may be considered as accomplished to the highest degree of excellence in the recitative of the Opera, as we may conjecture it was in the chorus that attended the antient drama.
And , though the most violent passions, the highest distress, even death itself, is expressed in singing or recitative, I would not admit as sound criticism the condemnation
[Page 13]
of such exhibitions on account of their being unnatural.
If it is natural for our sense, and our imagination, to be delighted with singing, with instrumental music, with poetry, and with graceful action taken separately, (none of them being in the vulgar sense natural, even in that separate state,) it is conformable to experience, and therefore agreeable to reason, as connected with, and referred to experience, that we should also be delighted with this union of music, poetry, and graceful action, joined to every circumstance of pomp and magnificence calculated to strike the senses of the spectator.
Shall reason stand in the way and tell us, we ought not to like what we know we do like, and prevent us from feeling the full effect of this complicated exertion of art? This is what I would understand by poets and painters being allowed to dare every thing; for what can be more daring, than accomplishing the purpose and end of art, by a complication of means, none of which have their archetypes in actual nature.
[Page 14]
So far therefore is servile imitation from being necessary. Whatever is familiar, or in any way reminds us of what we see and hear every day, perhaps, does not belong to the higher provinces of art, either in poetry or painting.
The mind is to be transported, as Shakspeare expresses it, beyond the ignorant present , to ages past. Another, and a higher order of beings is supposed, and to those beings, every thing which is introduced into the work must correspond. Of this conduct, under these circumstances, the Roman and Florentine schools afford sufficient examples. Their style by this means is raised and elevated above all others, and, by the same means, the compass of art itself is enlarged.
We often see grave and great subjects attempted by artists of another school; who, though excellent in the lower class of art, proceeding on the same principles, and not recollecting, or not knowing, that they were to address themselves to another faculty of the mind, have become perfectly ridiculous.
The picture which I have at present in my thoughts, is, a sacrifice of Iphigenia, painted by Jean Steen, a painter
[Page 15]
whom I have formerly had occasion to speak of with the highest approbation; and even in this picture, the subject of which is by no means adapted to his genius, there is nature and expression; but it is such expression, and the countenances are so familiar, and consequently so vulgar, and the whole accompanied with such finery of silks and velvet, that one would be almost tempted to doubt, whether the artist did not purposely intend to burlesque his subject.
Instances of the same kind we frequently see in poetry. Parts of Hobbes's translation of Homer are remembered and repeated merely for the familiarity and meanness of their phraseology, so ill corresponding to the ideas which ought to have been expressed, and, as I conceive, to the style of the original.
We may proceed in the same manner through the comparatively inferior branches of art. There are in works of that class, the same distinction of a higher and a lower style; and they take their rank and degree in proportion as they depart, more, or less, from common nature, and make it an object of their attention to strike the imagination of the spectator by ways belonging specially
[Page 16]
to art, unobserved, untaught, out of the schools of its practice.
If our judgment is to be directed by the narrow, vulgar, untaught or rather ill-taught reason, we must prefer a portrait by Denner, or any high finisher, to those of Titian or Vandyke; and a landskip of Vanderhyde, to those of Titian or Rubens; for they are certainly a more exact representation of nature.
If we suppose a view of nature represented with all the truth of the camera obscura , and the same scene represented by a great Artist, how little and mean will the one appear in comparison of the other, where no superiority is supposed from the choice of the subjects. The scene shall be the same, the difference only will be in the manner in which it is presented to the eye. With what additional superiority then will the same Artist appear when he has the power of selecting his materials as well as elevating his stile.
Like Nicolas Poussin, he transports us to the environs of antient Rome, with all the objects which a literary education makes so precious and interesting to man: or
[Page 17]
like Sebastian Bourdon, when he leads us to the dark antiquity of the Pyramids of Egypt; or, like Claude Lorrain, when he conducts us to the tranquility of Arcadian scenes, and fairy land.
Like the history Painter, a painter of landskips in this stile and with this conduct, sends the imagination back into antiquity; and, like the Poet, he makes the elements sympathise with his subject: Whether the clouds roll in volumes like those of Titian or Salvator Rosa, or like Claude, are gilded with the setting sun; whether the mountains have sudden and bold projections, or are gently sloped; whether the branches of his trees shoot out abruptly in right angles from their trunk, or follow each other with only a gentle inclination.
All these circumstances contribute to the general character of the work, whether it be of the elegant, or of the more sublime kind.
If we add to this, the powerful materials of lightness and darkness, over which the Artist has complete dominion, to vary and dispose them as he pleases, to diminish, or increase
[Page 18]
them as will best suit his purpose, and correspond to the general idea of his work.
A landskip thus conducted, under the influence of a Poetical mind, will have the same superiority over the more ordinary and common views, as Milton's Allegro and Penseroso have over a cold prosaic narration or description; and such a Picture would make a more forcible impression on the mind than the real scenes, were they presented before us.
If we look abroad to other Arts, we may observe the same distinction, the same division into two classes, each of them acting under the influence of two different principles, in which the one follows nature, the other varies it, and sometimes departs from it.
The Theatre, which is said to hold the mirror up to nature , comprehends both those Ideas.
The lower kind of Comedy, or Farce, like the inferior style of Painting, the more naturally it is represented, the better; but the higher, appears to me to aim no more at
[Page 19]
imitation, so far as it belongs to any thing like deception; or have any expectation that the spectators should think the events there represented, are really passing before them, than Raffaelle in his Cartoons, or Poussin in his Sacraments, expected you were to believe, even for a moment, that what they exhibited were real figures.
For want of this distinction, the world is filled with false criticism. Raffaelle is praised for naturalness and deception, which he certainly has not accomplished, and as certainly never intended; and our late great actor, Garrick, has been as ignorantly praised by his friend Fielding; who doubtless imagined he had hit upon an ingenious device, by introducing in one of his Novels, (otherwise a work of the highest merit,) an ignorant man, mistaking Garrick's representation of a scene in Hamlet, for reality.
A very little reflection will convince us, that there is not one circumstance in the whole scene that is of the nature of deception. The merit and excellence of Shakespear, and of Garrick, when they were engaged in such scenes, is of a different and much higher kind.
[Page 20]
But what adds to the falsity of this intended compliment, is, that the best stage representation, appears even more unnatural to a person of such a character, who is supposed never to have seen a play before, than it does to those who have had a habit of allowing for those necessary deviations from nature which the Art requires.
In Theatric representation, great allowances must be made for the place in which the exhibition is represented; for the surrounding company, the lighted candles, for the scenes visibly shifted in your sight; and for the language of blank verse, which changes the common English, and which English itself must appear surprising in Hamlet, and all the court and natives of Demark.
These allowances are made, but their being made, puts an end to all manner of deception; and farther, we know that the more low, illiterate, and vulgar any person is, the less he will be disposed to make these allowances, and of course to be deceived by any imitation; the things in which the trespass against nature and common probability is made in favour of the Theatre, being quite within the sphere of such uninformed men.
[Page 21]
Though I have no intention of entering into all the circumstances of unnaturalness in Theatrical representations, I must observe, that even the expression of violent passion, will not be always the most excellent in proportion as it is the most natural, so great terror and disagreeable sensations may be communicated to the audience, that the balance would be destroyed by which pleasure is preserved, and holds its predominancy in the mind: violent distortion of action, harsh screamings of the voice, however great the occasion, or however natural on such occasion, are therefore not admissible in the Theatric Art. Many of these allowed deviations from nature arise from the necessity which there is, that every thing should be raised and enlarged beyond its natural state, that the full effect may come home to the spectator, which otherwise would be lost in the comparatively extensive space of the Theatre. Hence the deliberate and stately step, the studied grace of action which seems to enlarge the dimensions of the Actor, and alone to fill the stage. All this unnaturalness, ridiculous and affected as it would appear in a private room, is right and proper in its place.
And here I must observe, and I believe it may be considered as a general rule, that no Art can be engrafted with
[Page 22]
success on another art. For though they all profess the same origin, and to proceed from the same stock, yet each has its own peculiar modes both of imitating nature, and of deviating from it, each for the accomplishment of its own particular purpose. These deviations, more especially, will not bear transplantation to another soil.
If a Painter should endeavour to copy the Theatrical pomp and parade of dress and attitude, instead of that simplicity, which is not a greater beauty in life, than it is in Painting, we should condemn such Pictures as painted in the meanest stile.
So also Gardening, as far as Gardening is an Art, or entitled to that appellation, is a deviation from nature; for if the true taste consists, as many hold, in banishing every appearance of Art, or any traces of the footsteps of man, it would then be no longer a Garden.
Even though we define it, “Nature to advantage dress'd,” and in some sense it is such, and much more beautiful and commodious for the recreation of man; it is however, when so dress'd, no longer a subject for the pencil of a Landskip Painter, as all Landskip Painters
[Page 23]
know, who love to have recourse to Nature herself, and to dress her according to the principles of his own Art, which are far different from those of Gardening, even when conducted according to the most approved principles, and such as a Landskip Painter himself would adopt in the disposition of his own grounds, for his own private satisfaction.
I have brought together as many instances as appear necessary, to make out the several points which I wished to suggest to your consideration in this Discourse; that your own thoughts may lead you farther in the use that may be made of the analogy of the Arts, and of the restraint which a full understanding of the diversity of many of their principles ought to impose, on the employment of that analogy.
The great end of all those arts, is, to make an impression on the imagination and the feeling. The imitation of nature frequently does this. Sometimes it fails, and something else succeeds. I think therefore the true test of all the arts, is not solely what is a true copy of nature, but whether it answers the end of art, which is to produce a pleasing effect upon the mind.
[Page 24]
It remains only to speak a few words of Architecture, which does not come under the denomination of an imitative art. It applies itself, like Music (and I believe we may add Poetry) directly to the imagination, without the intervention of any kind of imitation.
There is in Architecture, as in Painting, an inferior branch of art, in which the imagination appears to have no concern. It does not however acquire the name of a polite and liberal art, from its usefulness, or administering to our wants or necessities; but, from some higher principle, we are sure in the hands of a man of genius it is capable of inspiring sentiment, and of filling the mind with great and sublime ideas.
It may be worth the attention of Artists, to consider what materials are in their hands, that may contribute to this end; and whether this art has it not in its power to address itself to the imagination with effect, by more ways than are generally employed by Architects.
To pass over the effect that is produced by that general symmetry and proportion, by which, the eye is delighted as the ear is with Music, Architecture certainly
[Page 25]
possesses many principles in common with Poetry and Painting.
Amongst those which may be reckoned as the first, is, that of affecting the imagination by means of association of ideas. Thus, for instance, as we have naturally a veneration for antiquity, whatever building brings to our remembrance antient customs and manners, such as the Castles of the Barons of antient Chivalry, is sure to give this delight. Hence it is that Towers and battlements 1 are so often selected by the Painter and the Poet, to make a part of the composition of their ideal Landskip; and it is from hence in a great degree, that in buildings of Vanbrugh, who was a Poet as well as an Architect, there is a greater display of imagination, than we shall find perhaps in any other; and this is the ground of the effect which we feel in many of his works, notwithstanding the faults with which many of them are justly charged. For this purpose, Vanbrugh appears to have had recourse to some principles of the Gothic Architecture; which, though not so antient as the Grecian, is more so to our imagination,
[Page 26]
with which the Artist is more concerned than with absolute truth.
The Barbaric splendor of those Asiatic Buildings, which are now publishing by a member of this Academy 2 , may possibly, in the same manner, furnish an Architect, not with models to copy, but with hints of composition and general effect which would not otherwise have occurred.
It is, I know, a delicate and hazardous thing, (and as such I have already pointed it out) to carry the principles of one art to another, or even to reconcile in one object, the various modes of the same Art, when they proceed on different principles. The sound rules of the Grecian Architecture are not to be lightly sacrificed. A deviation from them, or even an addition to them, is like a deviation, or addition to, or from the Rules of other Arts, fit only for a great mind, which is thoroughly conversant in the nature of man, as well as a complete master of all combinations in his own Art.
It may not be amiss for the Architect to take advantage sometimes (of what I am sure the Painter ought always to
[Page 27]
have his Eyes open to) I mean the use of accidents, and to follow when they lead, and to improve them, rather than always to trust to a plan. It often happens that additions have been made to houses, at various times, for use or pleasure. As such buildings depart from regularity, they now and then acquire something of scenery by this accident, which I should think might not unsuccessfully be adopted by an Architect, in an original plan, if it does not too much interfere with convenience. Variety and intricacy is a beauty and excellence in every other of the Arts which address the imagination, and why not in Architecture?
The forms and turnings of the streets of London, and other old Towns, are produced by accident, without any original plan or design, but they are not always the less pleasant to the walker, or spectator, on that account. On the contrary, if the City had been built on the regular plan of Sir Christopher Wren, the effect might have been, as we know it is in some new parts of the Town, rather unpleasing: the uniformity might have produced weariness, and a slight degree of disgust.
[Page 28]
I can pretend to no skill in the detail of Architecture. I judge now of the Art, merely as a Painter. When I speak of Vanbrugh, I mean to speak of him in the language of our Art. To speak then of Vanbrugh in the language of a Painter, he had originality of invention, he understood light and shadow, and had great skill in composition. To support his principal object, he produced his second and third groups or masses, He perfectly understood in his Art what is the most difficult in ours; the conduct of the Back-ground, by which the design and invention is set off to the greatest advantage. What the back-ground is, in Painting, in Architecture is the real ground on which the building is erected; and no Architect took greater care, that his work should not appear crude and hard. That is, it did not abruptly start out of the ground without expectation or preparation.
This is a Tribute, which a Painter owes to an Architect who composed like a Painter; and was defrauded of the due reward of his merit, by the Wits of his time, who did not understand the principles of Composition in Poetry better than he; and who knew little, or nothing, of what he understood perfectly, the general ruling principles of Architecture and Painting.
[Page 29]
His fate was that of the great Perrault; both were the objects of the petulent sarcasms of factious men of Letters; and both have left some of the fairest ornaments, which to this day decorate their several countries; the facade of the Louvre, Blenheim, and Castle Howard.
Upon the whole, it seems to me, that the object and intention of all the Arts, is to supply the natural imperfection of things, and often to gratify the mind by realising, and embodying, what never existed but in the imagination.
It is allowed on all hands, that facts, and events, however they may bind the Historian, have no dominion over the Poet or the Painter. With us, History is made to bend and conform to this great Idea of Art. And why? Because these Arts, in their highest province, are not addressed to the gross senses, but to the desires of the mind, to that spark of divinity which we have within, impatient of being circumscribed and pent up by the world which is about us.
[Page 30]
Just so much as our Art has of this, just so much of dignity, I had almost said of divinity, it exhibits; and those of our Artists who possessed this mark of distinction in the highest degree, acquired from thence the glorious appellation of Divine.
THE END.
NOTES
1 Towers and Battlements it sees Bosom'd high in tusted trees. Milton L'allegro.
2 Mr. Hodges.
$$$
