A Discourse, delivered to the Students ... (1788)
Author: Reynolds, Joshua.
Publication info: A Discourse, Delivered To the Students Of the Royal Academy ; London  : 30 p. London (1789)

A Discourse, delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy ... Dec 10th, 1788, by the President
[Page ]
A DISCOURSE, &c. GENTLEMEN,
In the study of our Art, as in the study of all Arts, something is the result of our own observation of Nature, something, (and that is not little) the effect of the example of those who have studied the same nature before us, and who have cultivated before us the same Art, with diligence and success. The less we confine ourselves in the choice of those examples, the more advantage we shall derive from them; and the nearer we shall bring our performances to a correspondence with nature, and the great general rules of Art. When we draw our examples, from remote and revered antiquity, (with some advantage undoubtedly in that selection) we subject ourselves to some inconveniencies. We may suffer ourselves to be too much led away by great names, and be too much subdued by overbearing authority. Our learning, in that case, is not so much an exercise of our judgment
[Page 2]
as a proof of our docility. We find ourselves, perhaps, too much overshadowed; and the character of our pursuits is rather distinguished by the tameness of the follower, than animated by the spirit of emulation. It is sometimes of service, that our examples should be near us; and such as raise a reverence, sufficient to indace us carefully to observe them, yet not so great as to prevent us from engaging with them in something like a generous contention.
We have lately lost Mr. Gainsborough, one of the greatest ornaments of our Academy. It is not our business here, to make panegyrics on the living, or even on the dead, who were of our body The praise of the former might bear the appearance of adulation; and the latter of untimely justice; perhaps of envy to those whom we have still the happiness to enjoy, by an oblique suggestion of invidious comparisons. In discoursing therefore on the talents of the late Mr. Gainsborough, my object is, not so much to praise or to blame him, as to draw from his excellencies and defects, matter of instruction to the Students in our Academy. If ever this nation should produce genius sufficient to acquire to us the honourable distinction of an English School; the name of Gainsborough will be transmitted to posterity, in the history of the Art, among the very first of that
[Page 3]
rising name. That our reputation in the Arts is now only rising, must be acknowledged; and we must expect our advances to be attended with old prejudices, as adversaries, and not as supporters; standing in this respect in a very different situation from the late artists of the Roman School, to whose reputation ancient prejudices have certainly contributed: the way was prepared for them, and they may be said rather to have lived in the reputation of their country, than to have contributed to it; whilst whatever celebrity is obtained by English Artists, can arise only from the operation of a fair and true comparison. And when they communicate to their country a share of their reputation, it is a portion of fame not borrowed from others, but solely acquired by their own labour and talents. As Italy has undoubtedly a prescriptive right to an admiration bordering on prejudice, as a soil peculiarly adapted, congenial, and, we may add, destined to the production of men of great genius in our Art, we may not unreasonably suspect that a portion of the great fame of some of their late artists has been owing to the general readiness and disposition of mankind, to acquiesce in their original prepossessions in favour of the productions of the Roman School.
[Page 4]
On this ground, however unsafe, I will venture to prophecy, that two of the last distinguished Painters of that country, I mean Pompeio Battoni, and Rafaelle Mengs, however great their names may at present sound in our ears, will very soon fall into the rank of Imperiale, Sebastian Concha, Placido Constanza, Massuccio, and the rest of their immediate predecessors, whose names, though equally renowned in their lifetime, are now fallen into what is little short of total oblivion. I do not say that those painters were not superior to the artist I allude to, and whose loss we lament, in a certain routine of practice, which, to the eyes of common observers, has the air of a learned composition, and bears a sort of superficial resemblance to the manner of the great men who went before them. I know this perfectly well, but I know likewise, that a man, looking for real and lasting reputation, must unlearn much of the common-place method, so observable in the works of the artists whom I have named. For my own part, I confess, I take more interest in, and am more captivated with, the powerful impression of nature, which Gainsborough exhibited in his portraits, and in his landskips, and the interesting simplicity and elegance of his little ordinary beggar children, than with any of the works of that School, since the time of Andrea Sacchi, or perhaps, we
[Page 5]
may say of Carlo Maratti, two painters who may truly be said to be Ultimi Romanorum.
I am well aware how much I lay myself open to the censure and ridicule of the academical professors of other nations, in preferring the humble attempts of Gainsborough to the works of those regular graduates in the great historical stile. But we have the sanction of all mankind in preferring genius in a lower rank of art, to feebleness and insipidity in the highest.
It would not be to the present purpose, even if I had the means and materials, which I have not, to enter into the private life of Mr. Gainsborough. The history of his gradual advancement, and the means by which he acquired such excellence in his art, would come nearer to our purpose and wishes, if it were by any means attainable; but the flow progress of advancement is in general, imperceptible to the man himself who makes it; it is the consequence of an accumulation of various ideas, which his mind has received, he does not, perhaps, know how or when. Sometimes indeed it happens, that he may be able to mark the time, when from the sight of a picture, a passage in an author, or a hint in conversation, he has received, as it were, some new
[Page 6]
and guiding light, something like inspiration, by which his mind has been expanded, and is morally sure that his whole life and conduct has been affected by that accidental circumstance. Such interesting accounts we may however sometimes obtain from a man, who has acquired an uncommon habit of self-examination, and has attended to the progress of his own improvement.
It may not be improper to make mention of some of the customs and habits of this extraordinary man; points which come more within the reach of an observer; I however mean such only as are connected with his art, and indeed were, as I apprehend, the causes of his arriving to that high degree of excellence, which we see and acknowledge in his works. Of these causes we must state, as the fundamental, the love which he had to his art; to which, indeed, his whole mind appears to have been devoted, and to which every thing he saw was referred; and this we may fairly conclude from various circumstances of his life which were known to his intimate friends. Among others he had a habit of continually remarking to those who happened to be about him, whatever peculiarity of countenance, whatever accidental combination of figures, or happy effects of light and shadow occurred in prospects, in the sky, in walking the streets, or in company.
[Page 7]
If, in his walks, he found a character that he liked, and whose attendance was to be obtained, he ordered him to his house; and from the fields he brought into his painting-room, stumps of trees, weeds, and animals of various kinds, and designed them, not from memory, but immediately from the objects. He even framed a kind of models of landskips, on his table, composed of broken stones, dryed herbs, and pieces of looking glass, which he magnified and improved into rocks, trees, and water. How far this latter practice may be useful in giving hints, the professors of landskip can best determine. Like every other technical practice, it seems to me wholly to depend on the general talent of him who uses it. Such methods may be nothing better than contemptible and mischievous trifling; or they may be aids. I think upon the whole, unless we constantly refer to real nature, that practice may be more likely to do harm than good. I mention it only, as it shews the solicitude and extreme activity which he had about every thing that related to his art; that he wished to have his objects embodied as it were, and distinctly before him, that he neglected nothing which could keep his faculties in exercise, and derived hints from every sort of combination.
[Page 8]
We must not forget, whilst we are on this subject, to make some remarks on his custom of painting by night, which confirms what I have already mentioned, his great affection to his art; since he could not amuse himself in the evenings, by any other means so agreeable to himself. I am indeed much inclined to believe that it is a practice very advantageous and improving to an artist; for by this means he will acquire a new and a higher perception of what is great and beautiful in Nature. By candle-light, objects not only appear more beautiful, but from their being in a greater breadth of light and shadow, as well as having a greater breadth and uniformity of colour, nature appears to me in a higher stile; and even the flesh seems to take a higher and richer tone of colour. Judgment is to direct us in the use to be made of this method of study; but the method itself is (I am very sure of it) advantageous. I have often imagined that the two great colourists, Titian and Corregio, (though I do not know that they painted by night) formed their high ideas of colouring from the effects of objects by this artificial light: but I am more assured, that whoever attentively studies, the first and best manner of Guercino, will be convinced that he either painted by this light, or formed his manner on this conception.
[Page 9]
Another practice Gainsborough had, which is worth mentioning, as it is certainly worthy of imitation; I mean his manner of forming all the parts of his picture together; the whole going on at the same time, in the same manner as nature creates her works. Though this method is not uncommon to those who have been regularly educated, yet probably it was suggested to him, by his own natural sagacity. That this custom is not universal appears from the practice of the painter whom I just now mentioned, Pompeio Batoni, who finished his historical pictures part after part; and in his portraits completely finished one feature before he proceeded to another. The consequence was, as might be expected; the countenance was never well expressed; and, as the painters say, the whole not well put together.
The first thing required to excel in our Art, or I believe in any art, is, not only a love for it, but even an enthusiastic ambition to excel in it. This never fails of success proportioned to the natural abilities with which the artist has been endowed by Providence. Of Gainsborough, we certainly know, that his passion was not the acquirement of riches, but excellence in his art; and to enjoy that honourable fame which is sure to attend it.—That he felt this ruling passion strong in death,
[Page 10]
I am myself a witness. A few days before he died he wrote me a letter, to express his acknowledgements for the good opinion I entertained of his abilities, and the manner in which (he had been informed) I always spoke of him, and desired he might see me, once more, before he died. I am aware how flattering it is to myself to be thus connected with the dying testimony which this excellent painter bore to his art. But I cannot prevail on myself to suppress that I was not connected with him by any habits of familiarity; if any little jealousies had subsisted between us they were forgotten, in those moments of sincerity; and he turned towards me as one, who was engrossed by the same pursuits, and who deserved his good opinion, by being sensible of his excellence. Without entering into a detail of what passed at this last interview, the impression of it upon my mind was, that his regret at losing life, was principally the regret of leaving his art; and more especially as he now began, he said, to see what his deficiencies were; which, he said, he flattered himself in his last works were supplied.
When such a man as Gainsborough arrives to great same, without the assistance of an academical education, without travelling to Italy, or any of those preparatory studies which have been so often recommended, he is produced
[Page 11]
as an instance, how little such studies are necessary; since so great excellence may be acquired without them. This is an inference not warranted by the success of any individual; and I trust it will not be thought that I wish to make this use of it.
It must be remembered that the style and department of art which Gainsborough chose, and in which he so much excelled, did not require that he should go out of his own country for the objects of his study; they were every where about him; he found them in the streets, and in the fields; and from the models thus accidentally found, he selected with great judgment, such as suited his purpose. As his studies were directed to the living world principally, he did not pay a general attention to the works of the various masters, though they are, in my opinion, always of great use, even when the character of our subject requires us to depart from some of their principles. It cannot be denied that the department of the art which he professed may exist with great effect without them; that in such subjects, and in the manner that belongs to them, they are supplied, and more than supplied, by natural sagacity, and a minute observation of particular nature. If Gainsborough did not look at nature, with a poet's eye, it must be acknowledged
[Page 12]
that he saw her with the eye of a painter; and gave a faithful, if not a poetical representation of what he had before him.
Though he did not much attend to the works of the great historical painters of former ages, yet he was well aware, that the language of the art, the art of imitation, must be learned somewhere; and as he knew that he could not learn it in an equal degree from his cotemporaries, he very judiciously applied himself to the Flemish School; who are undoubtedly the greatest masters of one necessary branch of art; and he did not need to go out of his own country for examples of that school: From that he learnt the harmony of colouring, the management and disposition of light and shadow, and every means which the masters of it practised to ornament, and give splendor to their works. And to satisfy himself as well as others, how well he knew the mechanism and artifice which they employed to bring out that tone of colour, which we so much admire in their works, he occasionally made copies from Rubens, Teniers, and Vandyck, which it would be no disgrace to the most accurate connoisseur to mistake, at the first sight, for the Works of those masters. What he be thus learned, he applied to the originals of nature,
[Page 13]
which he saw with his own eyes; and imitated, not in the manner of those masters, but in his own.
Whether he most excelled in portraits, landskips, or fancy pictures, it is difficult to determine: whether his portraits were most admirable for exact truth of resemblance, or his landskips for the portrait-like representation of nature, such as we see in the works of Rubens, Rysdale, and others of those Schools. In his fancy pictures, when he had fixed on his object of imitation, whether it was the mean and vulgar form of a wood-cutter, or a child of an interesting character, as he did not attempt to raise the one, so neither did he lose any of the natural grace and elegance of the other; such a grace, and such an elegance as are more frequently found in cottages than in courts. This excellence was his own, the result of his particular observation and taste; for this he was certainly not indebted to the Flemish School; nor indeed to any School; for his grace was not academical, or antique, but selected by himself from the great school of nature; and there are yet a thousand modes of grace, which are neither theirs nor his, but lie open in the multiplied scenes and figures of life, to be brought out by skilful and faithful observers.
[Page 14]
Upon the whole, we may justly say, that whatever he attempted he carried to a high degree of excellence. It is to the credit of his good sense and judgment that he never did attempt that stile of historical painting, for which his previous studies had made no preparation.
And here it naturally occurs to oppose the sensible conduct of Gainsborough in this respect, to that of our late excellent Hogarth, who, with all his extraordinary talents, was not blessed with this knowledge of his own deficiency; or of the bounds which were set to the extent of his own powers. After this admirable artist had spent the greatest part of his life, in an active, busy, and we may add, successful attention to the ridicule of life; after he had invented a new species of dramatic painting, in which probably he will never be equalled, and had stored his mind with such infinite materials to explain and illustrate the domestic and familiar scenes of common life, which were generally (and ought to have been always) the subject of his pencil; he very imprudently, or rather presumptuously, attempted the great historical style; for which his previous habits had by no means prepared him: he was indeed so entirely unacquainted with the principles of this style, that he was not even
[Page 15]
aware, that any artificial preparation was at all necessary. It is to be regretted, that any part of the life of such a genius should be fruitlessly employed. Let his failure teach us not to indulge ourselves in the vain imagination, that by a momentary resolution we can give either dexterity to the hand, or a new habit to the mind.
I have however little doubt, but that the same sagacity, which enabled those two extraordinary men, to discover the true object, and the peculiar excellence of that branch of art which they cultivated, would have been equally effectual in discovering the principles of the higher style; if they had investigated those principles with the same eager industry, which they exerted in their own department. As Gainsborough never attempted the heroic stile, so neither did he destroy the character and uniformity of his own stile, by the idle affectation of introducing mythological learning in any of his pictures. Of this boyish folly, we see instances enough, even in the works of great painters. When the Dutch School attempt this poetry of our art in their landskips, their performances are beneath criticism; they become only an object of laughter. This practice is hardly excuseable, even in
[Page 16]
Claude Lorrain, who had shewn more discretion if he had never meddled with such subjects.
Our late ingenious acadamician Wilson, has I fear, been guilty, like many of his predecessors, of introducing gods and goddesses, ideal beings, into scenes which were by no means prepared to receive such personages. His landskips were, in reality too near common nature to admit supernatural objects. In consequence of this mistake, in a very admirable picture of a storm, which I have seen of his hand, many figures are introduced in the fore ground, some in apparent distress, and some struck dead, as a spectator would naturally suppose, by the lightning; had not the painter, injudiciously (as I think) rather chosen that their death should be imputed to a little Apollo, who appears in the sky, with his bent bow, and that those figures should be considered as the children of Niobe.
To manage a subject of this kind, a peculiar stile of art is required; and it can only be done without impropriety, or even without ridicule, when we adapt the character of the landskip, and that too, in all its parts, to the historical or poetical representation. This is a very
[Page 17]
difficult adventure, and it requires a mind, thrown back two thousand years, and as it were naturalized in antiquity, like that of Nicolo Poussin, to atchieve it. In the picture alluded to, the first idea that presents itself, is that of Wonder, at seeing a figure in so uncommon a situation as that of the Apollo is placed, for the clouds on which he kneels, have not the appearance of being able to support him; they have neither the substance nor the form, fit for the receptacle of a human figure, and they do not possess in any respect that romantic character which is appropriated to such a subject, and which alone can harmonize with poetical stories.
It appears to me, that such conduct is no less absurd than if a plain man, giving a relation of a real distress, occasioned by an inundation, accompanied with thunder and lightening, should, instead of simply relating the event, take it into his head, in order to give a grace to his narration, to talk of Jupiter and his thunder-bolts, or any other figurative idea; an intermixture which (though in poetry, with its proper preparations and accompaniments, it might be managed with effect) yet in the instance before us would counteract the purpose of the narrator, and instead of being interesting, would be only ridiculous.
[Page 18]
The Dutch and Flemish style of landskip, not even excepting those of Rubens, is unfit for poetical subjects; but to explain in what this inaptitude consists, or to point out all the circumstances that give nobleness, grandeur, and the poetic character to stile, in landskip, would require a long discourse of itself; and the end would be then perhaps but imperfectly attained. The painter who is ambitious of this perilous excellence, must catch his inspiration from those who have cultivated with success the poetry, as it may be called, of the art, and they are few indeed.
I cannot quit this subject without mentioning two examples which occur to me at present, in which the poetical stile of landskip may be seen happily executed; the one is Jacob's dream by Salvator Rosa, and the other the journey of the arc, by Sebastian Bourdon. With whatever dignity those histories are presented to us in the language of Scripture, this stile of painting possesses the same power of inspiring sentiments of grandeur and sublimity, and is able to communicate them to subjects which appear by no means adapted to receive them.—A ladder against the sky has no very promising appearance of possessing a capacity to excite any heroic ideas; and the arc, in the hands of a second-rate master, would have
[Page 19]
little more effect than a common waggon on the highway; yet those subjects are so poetically treated throughout, the parts have been such a correspondence with each other, and the whole and every part of the scene is so visionary, that it is impossible to look at them, without feeling, in some measure, the enthusiasm which seems to have inspired the painters.
By continual contemplation of such works, a sense of the higher excellencies of art will by degrees dawn on the imagination; at every review that sense will become more and more assured, until we come to enjoy a sober certainty of the real existence (if I may so express myself) of those almost ideal beauties; and the artist will then find no difficulty of fixing in his mind the principles by which the impression is produced; which he will feel and practice, though they are perhaps too delicate and refined, and too peculiar to the imitative art, to be conveyed to the mind by any other means.
To return to Gainsborough: the peculiarity of his manner, or stile, or we may call it the language in which he expressed his ideas, has been considered by many, as his greatest defect. But without altogether wishing to enter into the discussion whether a defect or not, intermixed
[Page 20]
as it was, with great beauties, of some of which it was probably the cause, it becomes a proper subject of criticism and discussion to a painter.
A novelty and peculiarity of manner, as it is often a cause of our approbation, so likewise it is often a ground of censure; as being contrary to the practice of other painters, in whose manner we have been initiated, and in whose favour we have perhaps been prepossessed from our infancy; for, fond as we are of novelty, we are upon the whole creatures of habit. However, it is certain, that all those odd scratches and marks, which, on a close examination, are so observable in Gainsborough's pictures, and which even to experienced painters appear rather the effect of accident than design; this chaos, this uncouth and shapeless appearance, at a certain distance, by a kind of magic, assumes form; and all the parts seem to drop into their proper places; so that we can hardly refuse acknowledging the full effect of diligence, under the appearance of chance and hasty negligence. That Gainsborough himself considered this peculiarity in his manner and the power it possesses of exciting surprise, as a beauty in his works, I think may be inferred from the eager desire, which we know, he always expressed that his pictures, at the exhibition, should be seen near, as well as at a distance.
[Page 21]
The slightness which we see in his best works, cannot always be imputed to negligence. However they may appear to superficial observers, painters know very well that a steady attention to the general effect, takes up more time, and is much more laborious to the mind, than any mode of high finishing or smoothness, without such attention. His handling, the manner of leaving the colours, or in other words, the methods he used for producing the effect, had very much the appearance of the work of an artist who had never learnt from others the usual and regular practice belonging to the art; but still like a man of strong intuitive perception of what was required, he found out a way of his own to accomplish his purpose.
It is no disgrace to the genius of Gainsborough, to compare him to such men as we sometimes meet with, whose natural eloquence appears even in speaking a language, which they can scarce be said to understand, and who, without knowing the appropriate expression of almost any one idea, contrive to communicate the lively and forcible impressions of an energetic mind.
I think some apology may reasonably be made for his manner, without violating truth, or running
[Page 22]
any risk of poisoning the minds of the younger students, by propagating false criticism, for the sake of raising the character of a favorite artist. It must be allowed that this hatching manner of Gainsborough, did very much contribute to the lightness of effect which is so eminent a beauty in his pictures; as on the contrary, much smoothness, and uniting the colours, is apt to produce heaviness. Every artist must have remarked, how often that lightness of hand, which was in his dead-colour, or first painting, escaped in the finishing, when he had determined the parts with more precision; and another loss he often experiences, which is of greater consequence; whilst he is employed in the detail, the effect of the whole together, is either forgot or neglected. The likeness of a portrait, for instance, consists more in preserving the general effect of the countenance, than in the most minute finishing of the features, or any of the particular parts. Now Gainsborough's portraits were often little more, in regard to finishing, or determining the forms of the features, than what generally attends a dead colour; but as he was always attentive to the general effect, or whole together, I have often imagined that this unfinished manner, contributed even to that striking resemblance for which his portraits are so remarkable. Though this
[Page 23]
opinion may be considered as fanciful, yet I think a plausible reason may be given, why such a mode of painting should have such an effect. It is presupposed that in this undetermined manner, there is the general effect; enough to remind the spectator of the original; the imagination supplies the rest, and perhaps more satisfactory to himself if not more exactly than the artist, with all his care, could have possibly done. At the same time it must be acknowledged there is one evil attending this mode; that if the portrait were seen, previous to any knowledge of the original, different people would form different ideas, and all would be disappointed at not finding the original correspond to their own conception; under the great latitude which indistinctness gives to the imagination, to assume almost what character or form it pleases.
Every artist has some favorite part on which he fixes his attention, and which he pursues with such eagerness, that it absorbs every other consideration; and he often falls into the opposite error of that which he would avoid, which is always ready to receive him. Now Gainsborough having truly a painter's eye for colouring, cultivated those effects of the art which proceed from colours, and sometimes appears to be indifferent to or to
[Page 24]
neglect other excellencies. Whatever defects are acknowledged, let him still experience from us the same candour that we so freely give upon similar occasions to the ancient masters; let us not encourage that fastidious disposition, which is discontented with every thing short of perfection, and unreasonably require, as we sometimes do, a union of excellencies, not perhaps quite compatible with each other.—We may, on this ground, say even of the divine Raffaele, that he might have finished his picture as highly and as correctly as was his custom, without heaviness of manner; and that Poussine might have preserved all his precision without hardness or dryness.
To shew the difficulty of uniting solidity with lightness of manner, we may produce a picture of Rubens in the Church of S. Judule, at Brussels, as an example; the subject is, Christ's charge to Peter ; which, as it is the highest, and smoothest, finished picture I remember to have seen of that master, so it is by far the heaviest; and if I had found it in any other place, I should have suspected it to be a copy; for painters know very well, that it is principally by this air of facility, or the want of it, that originals are distinguished from copies.—A
[Page 25]
lightness of effect, produced by colour, and that produced by facility of handling, are generally united; a copy may preserve something of the one, it is true, but hardly ever of the other; a connoisseur therefore finds it often necessary to look carefully into the picture before he determines on its originality.
Gainsborough possessed this quality of lightness of manner and effect, I think, to an unexampled excellence; but, it must be acknowledged, at the same time, that the sacrifice which he made to this ornament of our art, was too great; it was in reality, preferring the lesser excellencies to the greater. To conclude. However, we may apologize for the deficiencies of Gainsborough , (I mean particularly his want of precision and finishing) who so ingeniously contrived to cover his defects by his beauties; and who cultivated that department of art, where such defects are more easily excused; you are to remember, that no apology can be made for this deficiency, in that stile which this academy teaches, and which ought to be the object of your pursuit; it will be necessary for you, in the first place, never to lose sight of the great rules and principles of the art, as they are collected from the full body of the best
[Page 26]
general practices, and the most constant and uniform experience; this must be the ground work of all your studies; afterwards you may profit, as in this case I wish you to profit, by the peculiar experience, and personal talents of artists living and dead; you may derive lights, and catch hints from their practice; but the moment you turn them into models, you shall infinitely below them; you may be corrupted by excellencies, not so much belonging to the art as personal and appropriated to the artist, and you become bad copies of good painters, instead of excellent imitators of the great universal truth of things.
FINIS.
$$$
