Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2007 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/fulltrueaccountoOOdavirich 



EARL LAVENDER 



lo 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 



PERFERVID : The Career of Ninian Jamieson. 
with 23 Original Illustrations by Harry 
FURNISS, post 8vo, 2nd Edition, 2s. 6d, 

THE GREAT MEN, and A Practical Novelist, 
Illustrated by E. J. Ellis. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. 

BAPTIST LAKE. Crown 8vo, buckram, 3s. 6d. 

IN A MUSIC HALL, And other Poems. Crown 
Svo, 5s. 

WARD & DOWNEY, Ltd., LONDON. 



A FULL AND TRUE 
ACCOUNT OF THE 
WONDERFUL 
MISSION OF EARL 
LAVENDER, WHICH 
LASTED ONE NIGHT 
AND ONE DAY : 
WITH A HISTORY 
OF THE PURSUIT OF 
EARL LAVENDER 
AND LORD 
BRUMM BY MRS 
SCAMLER AND 
MAUD EMBLEM. 

BY 

JOHN DAVIDSON. 



WITH A FRONTISPIECE 

BY 

AUBREY BEARDSLEY. 



LONDON: 12 YORK 
BUILDINGS, ADELPHI 
WARD & DOWNEY, 
LIMITED. 

1895 



Though our eyes turn ever wavewardy 
Where our sun is well-nigh set ; 

Though our Century totters graveward. 
We may laugh a little yet. 

Oh I our age-end style perplexes 
All our elders time has tamed ; 

On our sleeves we wear our sexes, 
Our diseases^ unashamed. 

Have we lost the mood romantic 
That was once our right by birth ? 

Lo I the greenest girl is frantic 
With the woe of all the earth I 

But we know a British rumour , 
And we think it whispers well: 

' We would ventilate our humour 
In the very jaws of Hell' 

Though our thoughts turn ever Doomwards, 
Though our sun is well-nigh set. 

Though our Century totters tombwards. 
We may laugh a little yet. 






\ 
A 



' / undertake 
. . . to make a boke 
Which stant between ernes t and game J 
GOWER. ' Confessio Amantis.' Bk. viii. 



w;272392 



NOTE 

It has been maintained that the so-called 
Ddcadence is factitious, and exists only 
in the fancies of a few, who are misled 
mainly by the moribund condition of the 
nineteenth century, now well advanced in 
its last decade. It is true that definite 
periods do not usually end with chrono- 
logical parallelism so pat to the neces- 
sities of competitive examinees. On the 
other hand, there may be in the recrud- 
escence of Flagellation, as recorded in this 
* full and true account,' an indication of a 
critical turn in the history of the world. Ac- 
complished stages in the development of 



viii Note 

peoples have again and again been accom- 
panied by the formation of Societies for the 
practice of scourging. The first appearance 
of Flagellants, which took place in the begin- 
ning of the thirteenth century, was synchron- 
ous with the signature of Magna Charta ; 
and their reorganisation some fifty years 
later occurred at the same time as the over- 
throw of the Saracen Empire. In the middle 
of the fourteenth century, when the Flagel- 
lants overran Germany for the first time, 
Rienzi was Tribune of Rome. The revival of 
the sect in 14 14 came with the martyrdom 
of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, and with 
the session of the Council of Constance, 
which deposed two Popes. In the sixteenth 
century Catherine de Medici, during the 
overthrow of Protestantism in France, or- 
ganised whipping parties among the court 
dames, in which she herself co-operated. 



Note ix 

Lastly, a procession of Flagellants marched 
through Lisbon in 1820, the year of the 
suppression of the Spanish Inquisition, 
and a year of revolution in both the old 
and the new worlds. The Flagellant 
Society to which the Lady of the Veil 
introduced Earl Lavender may therefore 
be taken as a sign of the times — a sign of 
an age of effete ideals. At least, the ex- 
istence of such a sect among the wealthy 
classes is a proof of the existence of wide- 
spread contempt of the great commonplaces- 
of life — love, marriage, and the rearing of 
children. In this some will not be slow to 
detect the results of long-continued leisure 
and luxury ; and, indeed, when a class is 
exempt for generations from suffering and 
toil — the lot prepared for the race from 
the beginning — it is not to be wondered 
at, that men and women, forced by cir- 



X Note 

cumstances into an unnatural life of ease, 
should rebel against everything natural. 
What seems to deserve some commen- 
dation in these modern Flagellants, who 
are now introduced to the public for the 
first time in an episode in this veracious 
history, is the cheerful decorum of their 
whole procedure : they are not bigots — 
only unfortunate people with no vital 
interest in life, ignorant of what to do 
with their health and strength. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER I 

PAGE 
HOW THEY DINED IN THE STRAND, . . . I 



CHAPTER II 

HOW THEY DINED IN FLEET STREET, ... 21 

CHAPTER III 

HOW EARL LAVENDER ADDRESSED THE GUILD OF 
PROSEMEN, AND HOW RORISON DEFENDED HIM- 
SELF UNNECESSARILY, .... 45 

CHAPTER IV 

OF THE FIRST MEETING BETWEEN MRS SCAMLER AND 
MAUD EMBLEM, AND HOW THEY SUPPED TO- 
GETHER, AND WHAT MRS SCAMLER SAID, . . 59 

CHAPTER V 

HOW THEY SUPPED IN PICCADILLY CIRCUS, . . 92 

CHAPTER VI 

A SOMEWHAT SURPRISING CHAPTER, . . .121 



xii Contents 



CHAPTER VII 

PAGE 
WHAT ELSE MRS SCAMLER SAID TO MAUD EMBLEM, I44 



CHAPTER VIII 

HOW THEY CHASED EACH OTHER IN HANSOM CABS, . 168 

CHAPTER IX 

EARL LAVENDER'S EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY, . . 188 

CHAPTER X 

HOW THEY ALL FOREGATHERED IN EPPING FOREST, . 206 

CHAPTER XI 

OF THE 'RAZOR AND HEN,' AND HOW THEY DANCED ON 

THE GREEN, ...... 235 

CHAPTER XII 

HOW MRS SCAMLER THOUGHT SHE WAS DEAD ; WITH 

OTHER MATTERS, . ... 253 

CHAPTER XIII 

HOW THEY ALL ENDED WHERE THEY BEGAN, . . 274 



Earl Lavender 

CHAPTER I 

HOW THEY DINED IN THE STRAND 

* I SHOULD like to know very much why 
you came here/ said a middle-aged man to 
his younger companion in a restaurant in 
the Strand. 

It was the evening of a June day, and 
the restaurant, although not crowded, was 
close and hot. The speaker and his com- 
panion sat side by side at a table opposite 
the door, in order to encounter whatever 
air might be going. They were at the 
back of the room, which was so long and 
narrow that the view of the Strand by the 
open door had the strangeness of a scene 
observed through an archway. 



2 Earl Lavender 

* Why come here ? ' repeated the middle- 
aged man. * A hot, stuffy, Httle hole.* 

* But clean,' said the young man. ' You 
will soon know the reason. Waiter, cold 
roast for two, and two pints of bitter.' 

The middle-aged man grew pale, and 
uttered a half-articulate * What 1 ' 

* Yes, it has come to this,' said the other, 
laying two half-crowns on the table. 

The middle-aged man stared at the coins ; 
a helpless smile overspread his broad, good- 
humoured face ; he bowed his head and 
muttered, * Cold roast ! ' 

'With cabinet-pudding to follow,' added 
his companion. 

' Cabinet-pudding ! ' exclaimed the middle- 
aged man, starting to his feet, and sitting 
down immediately in mingled protest, chagrin 
and resignation. 

* Two roast beefs, one and eightpence ; 
two breads, twopence ; two beers, eight- 
pence ; two puddings, eightpence ; three 
and twopence in all,' said the younger man 
calmly. 

* Leaving one and tenpence,' groaned the 



Earl Lavender 3 

other. *And I've got accustomed to bene- 
dictine and a partaga after dinner/ 

* Benedictine, ninepence each ; leaves four- 
pence. We must have twopenny cigars.* 

* Never ! * cried the middle-aged man. 
'We shall have ninepenny cigars and twos 
of whisky.* 

' It's all the same to me/ said the other. 
* Comrade/ continued the younger man, 
'you seem put out. I like our impecuniosity.' 

* You're young, and like anything new. 
It's change you want. I'm middle-aged, and 
there's nothing staler to me than change. 
Constant comfort and little luxuries as regu- 
lar as the clock are fresher than change.' 

The other made no reply, and they were 
soon discussing the cold roast with very 
good appetites. Through the open door 
they watched the cabs and 'buses and 
the crowd of walkers, like objects in a 
peep-show. They were in good physical 
condition ; the rapid passage of the ever- 
changing throng across their narrow field 
of vision was pleasing to their eyes, and 
the hum and tramp and muffled roar soothed 



4 Earl Lavender 

them like a lullaby. The falsely-blamed 
cabinet-pudding was cordially forgiven, and 
the last drop of beer had a vinous flavour. 

' Where shall we smoke ? ' said the elder 
of the two, setting down his pewter pot with 
a faint sigh. 

* In a public - house/ replied the other. 
* We can't get twos of whisky anywhere 
else.' 

The middle-aged man acquiesced in silence. 

' Ha ! ' he whispered suddenly, clutching his 
companion's arm ; * you've given the waiter 
fourpence. We can't have ninepenny cigars 
now.' 

* Neither we can. What's to be done ? ' 

' I'm afraid we must have threes of whisky,. 

and be content with sixpenny cigars.' 
' Then we can stay where we are.' 
' And now,' said the middle-aged man, 

when their cigars were lit, * what do you 

propose to do ? ' 

* I propose that we dedicate ourselves ta 
chance.' 

' Have you no friends in London } ' 
' None. Have you "i ' 



Earl Lavender 5 

* None. But how shall we dedicate our- 
selves to chance ? ' 

' We have practically done so by spending 
our last penny; but let us accept our fate 
with thorough goodwill, and look upon our 
destitution as the very highest compliment 
Providence could have paid us. It shall now 
appear of what stuff we are made.' 

' Yes,' said the middle-aged man slowly, 
' I said Providence,' continued the younger 
man, 'but I really mean Evolution. Some 
years ago I thought of coming to London 
without a penny, and seeing what would 
happen, but the idea gradually dropped into 
the background. Now I find myself exactly 
in the predicament into which I once thought 
of volunteering.' 

* Ah ! ' interrupted the middle-aged man, 
* I, too, have sometimes found myself in cir- 
cumstances which I had imagined years be- 
fore.' 

* Of course,' said the other. * I therefore 
understand, since it has come about without 
my will, that it is lawful for me to make the 
experiment.' 



6 Earl Lavender 

* To dedicate yourself to chance ? ' 
*That was my phrase; but you mustn't 

misapprehend me. I am gradually leading 
up to a revelation which it is now time for 
me to make. Chance is only the operation 
of undetected laws, or the elasticity of laws 
already known. Do not suppose that in this 
dedication I am doing anything extravagant. 
I recognise the facts of the case, and shall 
proceed with a perfect reliance on Evolution.* 

* And you wish me to accompany you — 
relying on Evolution ? ' 

' I shall be very glad if you will.' 

* How old are you "i ' asked the middle- 
aged man. • 

* Twenty-five. And you?' 

' Forty. We got on beautifully while 
we had money. Are our ages suitable for 
roughing it together ? ' 

* Ah ! Have you any strong convictions ? 
Are you what is called religiously inclined ? ' 

^ Not specially ; but I can understand how 
people go over to the Church of Rome, for 
example.' 

' Then you will be able to understand me,' 



Earl Lavender 7 

said the young man. * I am of a religious 
temperament, and Evolution is my religion. 
What others mean by Evolution I don't 
know ; I have never read anything about 
it, although Ihave looked through a good 
many books in my time. But one day three 
years ago, as I was passing along the main 
street of our town to play in a county 
match, I heard one man say to another, 
very earnestly, — '' Evolution is more than 
a theory ; it is a religion." The remark 
arrested me. I brooded over it all after- 
noon ; I couldn't score for thinking of it. 
I knew, of course, and attached a kind of 
meaning to such phrases as *!the missing 
link" and "the survival of the fittest," and 
I succeeded in thinking out for myself a 
sort of dogma of Evolution.' 

* You may be said to have " got Evolu- 
tion " in this sudden way, just as people talk 
'about ''getting religion."* 

* Precisely. I was converted. Sometimes 
I can dogmatise about Evolution, and some- 
times I can't; but since my conversion I 
have lived an evolutionary life — consciously, 



8 Earl Lavender 

that is. We cannot help being Evolutionists, 
just as we cannot help being human ; but we 
may rebel against and sneer at Evolution 
in the same way as degraded or powerful 
intellects mock at humanity; or, through 
ignorance, we may thwart the intention of 
Evolution with regard to ourselves. Now, 
for three years, I have subordinated my will 
to the evolutionar}^ will, with the result that 
I have been perfectly happy. Happy, in- 
deed, seems to me too weak a word to 
describe the serenity of my mind, and the 
delight which I feel in every member of 
my body. I am thorougly convinced that 
I am quite fit, and that I shall survive — 
why, there is no saying how long I may 
survive, if, as I shrewdly suspect, I am the 
fittest.' 

' The fittest ? ' 

* Yes ; not among the fittest only, but the 
very fittest human male at present breathing.* 

A smile betrayed the middle-aged man's 
amusement ; but as his companion was speak- 
ing ingenuously, he quickly resumed his 
gravity. 



Earl Lavender 9 

* What makes you think that you are the 
fittest ? ' asked the middle-aged man. 

' It is not quite easy to tell ; but the feel- 
ing of superiority to other people which is 
constant with me, and of equality with every- 
thing — with the universe, in fact — leads me 
to cherish this high opinion of myself. The 
equal of the universe : I am, as it were, one 
side of an equation, of which the universe 
is the other.' 

' I see.' 

' Yes. Now I have two immediate objects 
in view. The first is to devote myself to 
the evolutionary life more thoroughly than I 
have yet done — to think, speak, do nothing 
but what is evolutionary. Hitherto I have 
been little more than a passive Evolutionist. 
Henceforth I shall be the active agent, the 
apostle of Evolution. I shall give Evolu- 
tion ample opportunity to vindicate my fit- 
ness, and that as publicly as possible in order 
to convert others.* 

' How will you give Evolution ample op- 
portunity to vindicate your fitness ? ' asked 
the middle-aged man. 



lO Earl Lavender 

* You shall see that to-night. My second 
object is to find the fittest woman, and mate 
with her. This is a more complicated matter 
than you may think. It may seem to you 
a very simple thing to give the world proof 
of my supreme fitness, and then advertise in 
The Times for the fittest woman. It is really 
a simple plan, and might be very successful. 
We could make a lottery of it, each applicant 
paying five pounds, and the whole sum sub- 
scribed becoming the dowery of the chosen 
one. If five hundred thousand women 
applied, which is not an over-estimate I 
think, that would give a portion of two 
and a half millions — not too much for the 
fittest woman, especially as it would all be 
spent in the promulgation of Evolution. 
But, as I said, there is a difficulty — of 
which I may tell you hereafter.* 

' Have you nothing left to pawn ? ' asked the 
middle-aged man very ruefully, having paid 
little attention to his companion's last speech. 

'Nothing.' 

' Well, I think you might have been more 
careful with the money.' 



Earl Lavender 1 1 

'My friend, you are too irritable. Let 
us review the situation. A week ago — is it 
a week ago ? ' 

' Yes ; a day more in fact.' 

' Eight days ago you and I met each other 
in the smoking-room of the Great British 
Railway Hotel. There was nobody in the 
room but ourselves, and we got into conver- 
sation. Without telling each other plainly — 
we tried rather to hide it from each other, 
and so betrayed the fact that we had both, 
to put it shortly, run away ; you at forty, 
I at twenty-five. It was plain also that we 
had both run away precipitately, for we had 
practically no luggage. Neither of us, of 
course, had travelled by the Great British 
Railway. You had arrived at Waterloo, 
I at Liverpool Street, and each had 
selected the Great British Hotel for a hid- 
ing place as being both out of the way, and 
near at hand. That evening we went out 
together, and you had your pocket picked. 
You asked me for the loan of a few pounds, 
which I promptly refused, for I had already 
made up my mind to become destitute as 



1 2 Earl Lavender 

soon as possible, and had also thought of 
you as a companion in the experiment. In- 
deed, if you consider it, I had no choice in 
the matter. Evolution, by driving you away 
from your friends with but a scanty supply 
of money, and bringing you to the Great 
British Hotel, threw you at my head as 
it were. I had forty pounds. We have 
smoked and drunk and eaten them with 
much pleasure and profit in eight days ; 
also our watches, chains, rings and studs, 
and now, with our bodies in capital tune, 
and our minds quite free — mine, at least, 
almost quite free from care, we may, con- 
fident in the power of Evolution to protect 
the fit, go forth into the streets to-night, 
homeless and penniless.' 

* Why not start in the morning instead ? 
Let us have one more comfortable sleep in 
the hotel, one more good breakfast, and 
then, hey for broken victuals and a bed 
in Leicester Square.' 

* Spoken like a man ! But, my friend, 
you misunderstand the matter entirely. We 
are not going to live on broken victuals. 



Earl Lavender 1 3 

and sleep under bridges. But first of all 
make up your mind that we cannot return 
to the hotel. Our deposit there is exhausted, 
and they wouldn't take us in without an- 
other payment in advance, for you recollect 
we have no luggage. Besides, they begin 
to suspect us. We both came to the hotel 
on the same day, and both gave the name 
of **J. Smith." Strangers to each other at 
first, we suddenly struck up a great intimacy. 
You see, they are bound to be suspicious, 
and perhaps would not readmit us even 
with a fresh deposit. We can't go back 
to the hotel.' 

'We can at least return for the under- 
clothing and night-shirts we bought.' 

' And what should we do with them "i ' 

' Take them with us of course.' 

' Under our arms ? Do you think Evolu- 
tion would help men who went about with 
brown paper parcels ? ' 

' We could leave them in the left luggage 
office.' 

' You forget ; we haven't twopence to pay 
for the ticket' 



1 4 Earl L avender 

The middle-aged man groaned. 

* There's nothing but beggary and bridges 
for it then/ he said. 

'Again you mistake. If I am, as I have 
every right to suspect, the fittest human 
being at present breathing, nothing will be 
allowed to betide me likely to interfere with 
my superb condition ; and you, as the com- 
panion provided for me, will share in my 
good fortune. Plenty of the best food and 
drink, comfortable beds, clothes, and changes 
of linen when we need them will be pro- 
vided for us, or there is no truth in Evolu- 
tion.' 

' But can't you get some money ? Can't 
you write your friends for money ? ' 

' Can't you ? ' 

* No ; not yet, at least,' replied the elder of 
the two. * My whole life has been dislo- 
cated, and I can't make up my mind to any- 
thing.' 

' I sympathise with you from my heart,' 
said his companion. ' I have noticed that 
you often fall silent, while a sombre look 
steals into your face. You suffer much ; I 



Earl Lavender 1 5 

can see it; and I admire the pluck with 
which you sustain your grief.' 

* At my age,' replied the other pathetically, 
* eating and drinking are of great con- 
sequence. Although I have always lived 
well enough, I have never had such exquisite 
fare and such variety as during the past 
week ; it was that that kept me from brood- 
ing. But now that we are destitute I am 
afraid I shall give way.' 

* Banish the fear. Sadness and repining 
are most unevolutionary. If you are fit, you 
will be cheerful, no matter what happens. 
Come, my friend, put a better face on it. 
Let us go out into the Strand.' 

* I'll be as cheerful as I can.' 

'Well resolved. You shall be my first 
disciple. We go forth to-night to conquer 
the world for Evolution.' 

The destitute pair walked in the direction 
of Charing Cross— the younger, in undis- 
turbed serenity ; the elder, resigned and 
somewhat awestruck by the absolute mood 
of his companion. As they passed along the 
street nothing could be detected in their 



1 6 Earl Lavender, 

appearance differing from that of other well- 
dressed men. Tall, dark, with well-marked, 
regular features, and a small moustache — one 
looked like a young man about town ; while 
the other, who was plump, clean-shaven, and 
with a ruddy complexion, might have passed 
for a well-to-do merchant. The contrast 
between their commonplace look and their 
extraordinary mission struck the younger man, 
and he remarked on it to his companion. 

' Yes,' was the reply ; ' we certainly don't 
looktlike apostles, and Tm very sure I don't 
feel like one.' 

* The feeling will come ; it requires to be 
evolved,' rejoined the other. *And now, 
since we are fairly started, it becomes us to 
have names. I suppose that neither of us 
is really called "J. Smith," and as we have 
apparently reason to conceal our true names 
we must choose others. What do you say } 
Can you suggest names ? ' 

* Since it is a mission we are on,' replied 
the middle-aged man, * should we not call 
ourselves saint something or other. All the 
great missionaries were saints.' 



Earl Lavenaer 1 7 

* There is a deal in what you say/ rejoined 
the younger man. ' But you must remember 
the saints you refer to were not canonised 
in their Hfetime ; besides Evolution can hardly 
be expected to borrow a title from Roman 
Catholicism. You are, however, on the 
right tack ; our names must be symbolic of 
our mission. It seems to me that we must 
in some way indicate that we are the men of 
the future, yet taking along with us all that 
is sane from the past. How would it do 
were I to call myself Lord of the Future ? ' 

' It wouldn't do,' said his companion. 

' I daresay not ; it is indeed too naked a 
revelation. We must get a velvet glove for 
the hand of iron, I have it ! I shall call 
myself Earl de I'Avenir.' 

'Earl de Lavender? queried the middle- 
aged man. What has that to do with it ? ' 

* De Lavender ! ' cried the other. * Your 
mistake is the fiat of Evolution ; I accept the 
name. Have we not ' Birdcage Walk ' from 
bocage, and * sparrowgrass ' from asparagus? 
Why not then Lavender from Pavenir? 
Thanks, friend ; the more I consider it the 

B 



1 8 Earl Lavender, 

more symbolic it appears. As tavenir is 
wrapped up and concealed in my new name 
of Lavender, so the future is wrapped up in 
me. Then the English meaning of the word ! 
The sweet herb housewives use in linen- 
presses. I shall be the sweetener of the age. 
See you ; I have not mistaken my mission ; 
everything points out my destiny. Earl 
Lavender ! I am to be called Earl Lavender/ 

* Why Earl? ^ 

* Because it is the finest of titles, and 
signifies that we shall carry with us into 
the future all that was highest and noblest 
in the past. And now for your name. Have 
you thought of one ? ' 

' Must I call myself after a plant too ? ' 

* It is not by any means necessary ; but 
why do you ask ? ' 

* Because I should like to be called Plan- 
tagenet.' 

* Plantagenet ? But it is antique, and has 
no prophecy in it that I can see.' 

* Can't you work a prophecy out of it ? ' 

*■ Wisely said ; we must evolve a prophetic 
meaning ; to that end it was suggested to 



Earl Lavender 19 

you. And I have it at once. Plantagenet — 
planta genista — I remember from the school 
history, is the plant broom. You are, there- 
fore, to be called Broom, and to indicate the 
part you are to play in our mission, you shall 
use the epithet new — Mr New Broom, Ha ! ' 

* But why am I to be called only mister, 
while you take the title of earl ? ' 

' Because you are to be my henchman. I 
can't say I like mister though. You may 
call yourself New Broom, Esq., or Sir New 
Broom ; the henchman of an earl may very 
well be a knight.' 

* I see,' said the middle-aged man slowly, 
* But don't you think that New Broom, like 
Lord of the Future, betrays its meaning too 
nakedly ? ' 

* Right again,' replied he, who will hence- 
forth be called Earl Lavender. * And again 
Evolution comes promptly to my aid. You 
shall be called Mr Brumm.' 

' Why not Lord Brumm ? ' 

* The henchman of an earl could hardly 
be a peer. But no matter. Lord Brumm 
you shall be ; to reject any suggestion what- 



20 Earl Lavender 

ever, might be to go in the very teeth of 
Evolution.' 

It was in this way that Lord Brumm 
— to give the middle-aged man his easily- 
acquired title — not being a person of much 
resource, fell quietly into the extravagant 
humour of his companion. 



CHAPTER I I 

HOW THEY DINED IN FLEET STREET 

By the time Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm had chosen these names, they 
found themselves entering Trafalgar Square. 
Here Earl Lavender began to look about 
him, and to move with hesitation. 

^ I will not disguise from you, good 
Brougham,' he said at length, leaning against 
a lamp-post, 'that I am waiting for an in- 
dication.' ' 

' An indication of what ? ' 

' Of our next proceeding.' 

* Possibly I can supply the indication.' 

* Why should you doubt it ? An indica- 
tion may come from anybody and anything. 
Evolution knows not the insignificant.' 

' Well, then, my lord,' rejoined Brumm, 
* I and my stomach are strongly of opinion 



22 Earl Lavender 

that they have had only half a dinner, which 
seems to me to indicate that we ought to go 
somewhere and eat something. Whatever 
else may be fit or unfit about me, I have 
always had, and have now, a very fit appetite. 
The cold roast and cabinet-pudding were 
only a whet.' 

* That is the indication ; there can be no 
doubt of it,' said Earl Lavender ; * especially 
as it involves our first practical assay in the 
evolutionary life ; and, to confess the truth, 
I am myself still very hungry. We must 
decide,' continued Earl Lavender, as they 
turned again into the Strand, * which restau- 
rant we shall honour.' 

* The best in the Strand, I say.' 

* Say rather the best restaurant for our 
purpose, and that I imagine will be found in 
Fleet Street. I understand there are res- 
taurants in Fleet Street frequented by jour- 
nalists. It behoves us, then, to make our 
first public demonstration of the evolutionary 
life in one of these old - fashioned eating- 
houses, the resort of editors, leader-writers 
and newsmongers, and the haunt of the 



Earl Lavender 23 

ghosts of the literary men of the eighteenth 
century. I do not mean that we are to 
angle for a report of our proceedings in to- 
morrow's paper, but our conduct and our 
words cannot fail to have a lasting effect on 
the pressmen who shall behold and hear 
them, and who, influenced by our sayings 
and doings, shall, in their writings, directly 
or indirectly, disseminate our doctrine. Now, 
as you are better acquainted with London 
than I am, can you lead the way to such a 
restaurant ? ' 

* I can,' said Brumm, stepping out 
briskly. * I can take you to an eating-house 
where you will get the best steak in England/ 

' What is it called ? ' 

*It is the old *Xap-and-Bells" in Dead- 
man's Alley, that opens on the left a little 
before you come to Ludgate Hill.' 

* Admirable ! I have never been there ; 
but I have often heard of it as a house much 
used by journalists.' 

Earl Lavender and his henchman walked 
as rapidly as the crowded state of the streets 
would permit, and scon arrived at Deadman's 



24 Earl Lavender 

Alley. They at once entered the room on the 
ground floor of the '* Cap-and- Bells," where 
Brumm ordered two steaks, and two pints 
of the old ale for which the inn was famous. 
He was in a considerable fright immediately 
after he had done so, remembering that as he 
had given the order he was directly respon- 
sible for the payment ; but Earl Lavender, 
noticing his anxiety and understanding its 
cause, comforted him. 

' Fear not, good Brumm,' he said ; 
* Evolution will protect its own.' 

The cheerful confidence of Earl Lavender's 
words, and the engaging candour and serenity 
which marked his whole expression reassured 
Brumm in a way incomprehensible to 
himself, and he began to prattle, as grown 
men whose minds are not quite infinite 
sometimes will. He praised the time-worn 
tables and boxes, the fresh sawdust on the 
floor, the big buxom fireplace, and the picture 
of Goldsmith which hung in a recess. He 
remarked on the ponderous figure and grave 
expression of the head waiter, and derived 
much satisfaction from the agility and alert 



Earl Lave7ider 25 

looks of his assistant. The old ale he found 
a thought too sweet, but with such body and 
such a rich nut-brown hue! He whispered 
to Earl Lavender to note how sleek and 
solid two old gentlemen were who had just 
finished their steaks, and were waiting placidly 
for the stewed cheese. He got quite excited 
over their splendid condition. 

* That s what English feeding can do,' he 
said. ' ril be bound these old fellows have 
dined here every day of their lives for the 
last twenty years. It was chops and steaks 
and beef-steak puddings that matured these 
smooth, pink cheeks and heaving shoulders. 
Their hair's white, and they are over sixty 
both of them ; but they've never known 
indigestion. They'll go on dining here for 
another twenty years, and eat a steak with- 
out the least suspicion that it will be their 
last the very day they die. Such men 
stop simply ; they can't be said to die. I 
wonder now if they're journalists. They 
don't look like journalists; they're not 
worried enough. No, they must be bank 
cashiers, or tailors and clothiers with old 



26 Earl Lavender 

established shops, or perhaps chemists and 
druggists/ 

How long Lord Brumm would have 
gone on in this strain it is impossible to say. 
Just when he had made up his mind that 
the two old gentlemen were chemists and 
druggists, because they were so neat and 
clean and medicinal-looking, the ponderous 
head waiter brought in the steaks, with 
dimpled, mealy potatoes bursting from their 
jackets, and great hunks of household bread 
with a burnt crust half an inch deep. Earl 
Lavender, who had listened smilingly to his 
henchman's unexpected eloquence, admitted 
that the old fellows were passably fit in body ; 
but as for their minds he was quite certain 
they hadn't any left. 

'You will find, Brumm,' said Earl 
Lavender, * that one of two things must be 
sacrificed by every man who lives to be over 
sixty — the mind, or the liver. I'll guarantee 
that these old boys, however philosophical or 
poetical they may have been in their young 
days, could no more secrete thought now than 
a statue of Cybele could suckle the Found- 



Earl Lavender 27 

ling Hospital ; but for the due distillation of 
a healthy supply of bile I doubt not it would 
be difficult to beat them. Bile or thought, 
good Brumm, at your grand climacteric 
you must dispense for good with the one or 
the other/ 

*God send it to be thought then! But 
I fear very much that it will be my liver 
that will fail me, because I have had already 
some fits of indigestion. But don't tell me 
of such things just now. Here is the finest 
steak in England, and I am as hungry as 
if I hadn't eaten to-day.' 

Hardly had they begun to their second 
dinner, when a tall young gentleman, look- 
ing very fresh and pleasant, sauntered into 
the room, and sat down at the same table 
with Earl Lavender and his henchman. 
This young gentleman had a round face, 
a short nose, large grey eyes, a low, broad 
brow over which his brown hair fell grace- 
fully, and a mouth which seemed always 
about to burst into joyful speech. His 
frock - coat was fashionably cut, his scarf 
was of a very special pattern, and he had 



28 Earl Lavender 

a mauve flower in his buttonhole. Lord 
Brumm smiled to him as soon as he 
sat down, and intimated tentatively his 
opinion of the weather. The eloquent- 
mouthed young gentleman, speaking with 
something of a drawl, but in very musical 
tones, thought on the whole that the weather 
was pretty much of the kind Lord Brumm 
had hinted at. He then ordered a steak, 
but the steaks were done. 

* How's that ? ' asked they oung gentleman. 

'It's half-past eight, sir,' replied the pon- 
derous waiter in a ridiculously small voice, 
but with an accent and an air which said 
as plain as words that he was master of his 
subject ; and that steaks, as a rule, were * off' 
by eight o'clock, and sometimes as soon as 
half-past seven ; and that he, the ponderous 
waiter, wondered very much at the eloquent- 
mouthed young gentleman expecting 
steaks at that time of night in the *Cap- 
and-Bells ; ' and that, as for Earl Lavender 
and Lord Brumm, considering when 
they came in, they might think themselves 
very lucky in having found steaks still *on.' 



Earl Lavender 29 

The young gentleman accepted the im- 
plied reproof, and resigning himself to the 
inevitable, ordered a chop and kidneys, 
with a tankard of stout-and-bitter. 

* Don't you like the old ale ? ' asked Lord 
Brumm. 

* As I find it too heavy,' replied the young 
gentleman, *even with a steak, you can 
hardly expect me to drink it with a chop. 
But,' he added, with a bright smile, as if 
suddenly recollecting himself, *if it will be 
of any service to you I shall countermand 
my order. Probably it offends you that 
anyone should drink anything but old 
ale.?' 

' By no means — not at all,' said Lord 
Brumm, astonished and flurried by the 
excessive courtesy of the young gentleman. 
* Indeed I think I shall have a drop of 
stout in my tankard.' 

*You mustn't — you mustn't,' said the 
young gentleman. * Stout is worse than 
thunder for old ale.' 

* Do you tell me so ? ' cried Lord 
Brumm, very much impressed by the 



30 Earl Lavender 

elegance and easy air of superiority which 
characterised the young gentleman. 

*Are you going upstairs?' drawled the 
new-comer. 

* Upstairs ? ' echoed Lord Brumm, 

* Yes. The Guild of Prosemen.' 

* What is the Guild of Prosemen 1 ' 

* Oh ! ' said the young gentleman, * I 
thought I had seen you at a former 
meeting.' 

* Of the Guild of Prosemen ! ' exclaimed 
Lord Brumm. ' Do I look like a Prose- 
man?' 

* My dear sir ! ' cried the young gentle- 
man, deprecating the personal remark, * I 
thought you had once accompanied a member 
of the Guild. Members bring their friends 
sometimes.' 

*No; I have never been,' said Lord 
Brumm. 

' Would you like to attend a meeting ? ' 

* I should like it very much,' said Lord 
Brumm. 

*Then come with me to-night.' 

'We shall be delighted,' said Earl 



Earl Lavender 31 

Lavender, bowing and smiling to the young 
gentleman, who returned his salute very 
graciously. 

* My friend here,' continued Earl Lavender, 
*is Lord Brumm, and I am the Earl of 
Lavender. How shall we address you ? ' 

* I am called Hubert Ware,' said the young 
gentleman, dwelling with fondness on each 
syllable of his name, and not in the least dis- 
concerted by the titles of his chance acquaint- 
ances. 

*The Guild of Prosemen,' said Earl 
Lavender, ' consists of a set of literary men, 
I suppose?' 

'Yes,' replied Hubert Ware; *they may 
be called literary men.' 

* Many of them possibly engaged on daily 
and weekly papers } ' 

* All of them, more or less.' 

*This is very fortunate,' said Earl Lavender. 
* Or rather I should say, this is exactly as I 
expected. You must know, Mr Ware, that 
Lord Brumm and I have started to-night 
upon a great mission. It is our purpose to 
convert the world to Evolution, not so much 



32 Earl Lavender 

by word of mouth as by living the evolu- 
tionary life. Knowing ** The Cap-and-Bells " 
by repute, we came here trusting to find an 
assembly of journalists who should be deeply 
impressed by witnessing our first deeds as 
active Evolutionists ; for we intend to offer in 
our persons a demonstration of the survival 
of the fittest' 

The young gentleman, half of whose creed 
was coolness and self-possession, overcome in 
spite of himself by the extraordinary nature 
of the announcement he had just heard, 
opened his round eyes very wide, while his 
eloquent lips parted in a puzzled smile. 

* The faith of my friend and first disciple/ 
continued Earl Lavender, *is yet feeble, and 
I expect, when he found this room almost 
empty, he began to doubt the power of Evolu- 
tion ; indeed, I myself was somewhat per- 
plexed by the absence of journalists. Now, 
however, the most unbelieving must be con- 
vinced, because not only are there journalists 
here, but a special conclave has been provided 
to be the first recipients of my message. 
And this assembly must not be set down to 



Earl Lavender 2>Z 

chance ; it is here awaiting me by the direct 
operation of an undiscovered evolutionary 
law.' 

Hubert Ware, having speedily regained 
his self-possession, and having formed his 
own opinion as to the state of Earl 
Lavender s mind, declared that he had not 
the least doubt of the truth of what he had 
just heard. 

* I am very glad to find you so receptive,' 
said Earl Lavender. * It augurs well for the 
success of my mission that the first two men 
to whom I explain it are at once persuaded 
of its truth. How will it be received by the 
Guild of Prosemen, do you think ? ' 

* It will have, I should say, rather a dubious 
reception from them. They are, individually, 
charming fellows ; but in the lump, and as a 
body corporate, they are not charming.' 

' Are you a Proseman ? ' 

* I believe I am generally regarded as be- 
longing to the Guild.' 

* Then you are soiling your own nest.' 
Hubert Ware raised his eyebrows at the 

directness of the charge ; but he took it in 

c 



34 Earl Lavender 

good part and replied with even more than 
his usual courtesy of manner that he himself, 
although in the Guild, was not of it, and that 
he attended the meetings only occasionally 
on the chance of seeing another Proseman, 
in whose company he found considerable 
pleasure, and who, like himself, was a black 
sheep in the fold. 

' This friend of mine,' he continued, * is a 
strange man, who lives somewhere in the 
northern wilds of London, supporting himself 
nobody exactly knows how, and appearing at 
uncertain intervals in Fleet Street and Picca- 
dilly. He is a Scotchman, and a very 
special blend of the shrewdness, simplicity 
and fervour which characterise his race. He 
possesses the gift, unusual even in an 
Englishman, of recognising merit in others, 
and expresses his admiration sincerely, and 
without flattery, expecting no return. He 
admires some things in me, and it is really to 
see me that he comes to the meetings of the 
Guild of Prosemen. I expect to find him 
upstairs to-night.' 

*And the other members.'^' said Earl 



Eai^l L avender 3 5 

Lavender, much pleased with the frank 
egotism of Hubert Ware. 

' There are one or two besides my friend 
and me who hardly ever attend the meet- 
ings. 1 don't know them intimately, but I 
gather from that fact that they must have 
many ^ujperior qualities, in their own opinions 
at any rate. As for the others, why, you 
will see them when we go upstairs.' 

When Hubert Ware had discussed his 
chop and kidneys, Earl Lavender said, — 

* Gentlemen,' including with a glance and 
a wave of his hand the waiters and the two 
sleek old fellows who were finishing the 
toddy with which they had washed down 
the stewed cheese, ' gentlemen, you have to- 
night assisted at the making of history. 
What you have seen appears to be an event 
which occurs a hundred times a day in the 
*' Cap-and- Bells " — two men eating steaks and 
drinking old ale. Yet there can be no doubt 
that from this simple act a new epoch dates. 
Believing firmly in our own fitness and in 
the power of Evolution, Lord Brumm and 
myself entered here and gave our order 



36 Earl Lavendei" 

without a penny in our pockets. We had 
scarcely begun upon the steaks when Evolu- 
tion manifested itself in the person of Mr 
Hubert Ware, providing in him a means 
of defraying the cost of our refreshment. 
Other penniless people have dared to dine 
in restaurants, but we are the first to chal- 
lenge Evolution in that way to a direct justi- 
fication of the law of the survival of the 
fittest. Gentlemen, you may congratulate 
yourselves on seeing, and on having lived 
to see, the first day of the year one of 
the Evolutionary Era.' 

No sooner had Earl Lavender concluded 
his astonishing address than the two old 
gentlemen simultaneously shouted, — 

' Waiter ! ' 

When the ponderous waiter, confused 
rather than impressed by what he had heard, 
attended to the call, both the old gentlemen 
again simultaneously said, in a whisper over- 
heard by Earl Lavender, — 

* That man's mad ; ' and one of them 
added, * Tell his keeper to take him away ; 
he's not safe/ 



Earl L avender 3 7 

Gentlemen,' said Earl Lavender, with 
perfect complacence, * it becomes you to 
make a charge of madness against me. I 
told my friend Lord Brumm a little ago 
that you have no minds, and I am convinced 
of it. As you are possibly unaware of the 
fact, I may as well explain to you how you 
have arrived at this not altogether unenviable 
condition. In your youth, I judge from the 
contour of your heads that you thought and 
imagined as much as the average young 
man ; but since the strongest convictions you 
ever entertained were that money makes the 
mare to go, and that cakes and ale are good, 
you gradually ceased to think until your 
minds stopped working altogether, and as 
your brains grew atrophied your livers in- 
creased in power. Now, I suppose, you 
have digestive apparatuses unmatched in 
proficiency, while your heads, instead of 
blossoming like an evergreen in a bowpot, 
have changed into cinerary urns, containing 
the ashes of your thought and fancy, and 
rudely carved with half-intelligible hiero- 
glyphics concerning religion and morality, 



SS Earl Lavender 

and copy-book mottoes for the conduct of 
life. You are perfect types ; I recognise 
that, and would not have you other than you 
are. I merely wish to let you know that I 
understand you thoroughly, and to give you 
the means when you come to die of consoling 
yourselves with the reflection that you were 
understood and pardoned by at least one 
fellow-creature. Most men I have been told 
die miserable because they think everybody 
has misunderstood them. Rejoice, therefore, 
for that lot cannot now be yours.' 

' Waiter,' cried the two old fellows as 
soon as Earl Lavender had concluded, ' the 
bill.' 

They paid the score in silence, seized 
their hats and umbrellas, and rose, in a body 
as it were, to overwhelm Earl Lavender, 
Having crossed the room to the table at 
which he sat, they opened their mouths and 
closed them with a parched sound, while 
Earl Lavender smiled encouragingly. 

* Sir ! ' they at last managed to ejaculate, 
looking towards each other for support. 

* How — ' continued one of them ; but, 



Earl Lavender 39 

finding himself unaccompanied, he stopped 
as if he had been shot. 

' I know what you would say,' said Earl 
Lavender blandly. * You are astonished at 
the accurate knowledge of your characters 
which I, an utter stranger, have shown ; but 
you must know that to one who is in all pro- 
bability the fittest human being at present 
breathing, such a display of intuition is a 
mere bagatelle.' 

' Sir ! ' thundered the two old fellows with 
starting eyes, the foam flying from their 
mouths, and their umbrellas beating the 
ground like the tails of enraged animals. 
* Sir ! ' Then, in a burst of pathos, reproach, 
anger and pride, helping themselves on to 
the points of their toes with their umbrellas, 
and appealing to the ceiling with their hats, 
they exclaimed together, ' We are twins ! 
We—' 

Either they felt that the statement of their 
relationship was in itself sufficient to over- 
whelm Earl Lavender, or that they were not 
about to say the same thing, or else they had 
nothing further to add, for they came down on 



40 Earl Lavender 

their heels with a jerk, and their mouths 
closed tightly on the word * we.' 

* Ah ! * said Earl Lavender ; * I under- 
stand you more fully now. When in a 
double birth both children live, it is almost 
invariably the case that they grow up next 
door to idiots. Twins always rank low in 
the scale of fitness ; I am amazed that you 
have survived so long ; it is only to be 
accounted for by the total decay of intellect.' 

* Sir ! ' again thundered the two old fellows, 
outraged beyond endurance, raising the 
sawdust as they smote the floor with their 
umbrellas, and looking to everybody for 
sympathy and finding none — even the waiters 
were laughing. * Sir, you—' 

But they could get no further. Crimson 
with inarticulate indignation, they stuck on 
their hats with a helpless flourish, tucked 
their umbrellas under their arms, and strutted 
to the door. There they shook the sawdust 
from their feet, and left the * Cap-and- Bells' 
with their minds made up never to return. 

The bar of the *Cap-and-Bells ' was opposite 
the door of the dining-room, and the barmaid, 



Earl Lavender 



on hearing the loud and angry voices of the 
aged twins, had summoned the proprietor. 
He emerged from his office just as the two 
old fellows were leaving in wrath, and re- 
cognising them for regular customers, he 
asked the waiter what was the matter. 

* Well, sir,' said the ponderous waiter, 
opening his ponderous jaws and emitting 
his ludicrously thin voice, which he accom- 
panied with a sheepish smile, ' I dunno who 
was to blame.' 

* Blame ! What do you mean by blame } ' 
asked the proprietor. 

* Ain't there somebody to blame .'* ' said 
the ponderous waiter, still smiling coyly, and 
appealing to his agile assistant. 

' I shouldn't say as 'ow there was anybody 
to blame, sir,' said the second waiter, who 
spoke with great rapidity, and with a meek 
but effusive manner, as if he were apologising 
for the world at large. * This 'ere gent 
allowed as 'e was a sort a conjury-ledgery- 
man, up in tellin' fort'nes, an' gettin' other 
people to pay for 'im. An' the twins makes 
out in a manner sauty-waussy — which 'as 



42 Earl Lavender 

always puzzled me as bein' more proper to 
potatoes except it be a pig's whisper, as Pat 
says — that Vs mad ; which e, earin', gives 
'em a sample of 'is conkology, an' tells 'em 
wot 'e thinks of 'em, which wasn't much, an' 
quite right too; but them twins couldn't 
stand bein' told as 'ow their livers was over- 
grow'd and their 'eads was dustbins, so they 
ups an' says, **Sir!" they says, a-stampin' 
with their mushes, an* fearin' no foe, ' Sir ! ' 
They says it four times, an' this gent 'e 
always rubs in the pickle, till at last they 
gives It 'im *ot, an', tells 'im plump an' plain 
as 'ow they was twins, they was, an' no more 
bones about it. ** So much the worse for 
you," says this gent, a-surprisin' of us all, an' 
the coolest I ever see. " But I wouldn't 
change you, not me," says 'e. ** Twins an' 
idiots you was born, an' twins an' idiots you 
will be, s'elp me bob !" 'e says. Then they 
hollers " Sir ! " again, and grows very red in 
the face, an' tries to use bad langwidge, but 
it won't come ; so they busts up, an' you saw 
'em go, sir.' 

Mine host looked from the assistant waiter 



Earl Lmmider 43 

to Earl Lavender, and from Earl Lavender 
to the assistant waiter. 

* I confess/ he said, ' the matter is not 
quite clear to me,' 

' No,' said Earl Lavender ; 'this amusing 
young man has considerable inventive and 
dramatic gifts, but clearness is not his forte. 
I like him, though. You're very entertain- 
ing,' he cried to the assistant waiter, nod- 
ding to him, and contemplating him with 
much interest. The assistant waiter, all 
unconscious of his merit, blushed and hid 
behind the broad figure of his chief. * It 
can be stated very simply,' continued Earl 
Lavender, addressing the proprietor of the 
' Cap-and- Bells.' ' Those two charming John 
Bulls who have just gone received with 
some scorn an important announcement 
which I made, and as I intend to insist upon 
the most courteous toleration from all who 
are unable to give credence to my message, 
I felt called upon to rebuke them. It was 
hardly a rebuke either. I merely pointed 
out to them that they were no longer able 
to perform the function of thinking beings, 



44 Earl Lavender 

rather to show them by what means they 
might excuse themselves than by way of 
reprimand. And now,' turning to Hubert 
Ware, * I think we ought to visit the Guild 
of Prosemen.' 

The proprietor of the * Cap-and-Bells/ quite 
in the dark, with a dry 'good evening, 
gentlemen,' returned to his office ; and as 
soon as he had gone, Hubert Ware paid for 
the three dinners, having enjoyed himself so 
much that he felt quite willing to pay for 
thirty. Then this pleasant young gentleman 
led the way to the upper room in which the 
Guild of Prosemen held their sessions. 



CHAPTER I I I 

HOW EARL LAVENDER ADDRESSED THE GUILD OF 
PROSEMEN, AND HOW RORISON DEFENDED 
HIMSELF UNNECESSARILY 

When they entered the Prosemen's chamber 
in the * Cap-and- Bells/ Hubert Ware's friend, 
the Scotch Proseman, was sitting in the 
centre of a semi-circle composed of nine or 
ten men of various ages and British nation- 
alities. Hubert shook hands with the Scot, 
but did not introduce his new acquaintances. 
Seats were appropriated and whiskies 
ordered, and then the business of the even- 
ing, which had been interrupted by the en- 
trance of the new-comers, was decorously 
resumed. This was the discussion of some 
details regarding the publication of a joint- 
book by the Guild of Prosemen. As soon 

45 



46 Earl Lavender 

as it was concluded, Earl Lavender rose to 
speak. 

* Gentlemen/ he began ; but Hubert Ware 
interrupted him, and gravely introduced him 
to the Guild of Prosemen as his friend the 
Earl of Lavender. 

'The noble Earl/ he said, 'has a most 
important communication to make, for which 
I crave your best attention.' 

* Gentlemen,' resumed Earl Lavender, 
bowing to the astounded Prosemen,* I ex- 
pected — you must allow me to say, I ex- 
pected to find a more intelligent audience. 
By ** more intelligent," I mean a more open- 
minded audience, an audience less occupied 
with their own affairs. I heard you were 
journalists, and had pictured you to myself 
as a species apart, a sensitised, spiritualised 
order of beings whose minds would be, as it 
were, deflected and agitated, not only by the 
faintest rumours of mere news, but by the 
approach of even the most insignificant 
change in the intellectual magnetism of the 
world. Instead of this I find an assembly 
so deeply engaged in an attempt to further 



Earl Lavender 47 

their own interests as to be almost entirely 
unimpressed by my entrance. And yet, 
gentlemen, in me you behold the fittest 
human being at present breathing, a man 
evolved for the purpose of changing the 
mental attitude of the world. To-night 
I enter upon my mission, and came here, 
accompanied by my henchman and first 
disciple, Lord Brumm, to give my first 
practical demonstration of the working 
of the law of the survival of the fittest. 
Mr Hubert Ware, my second disciple, 
will bear witness to the success of the 
experiment, for it was he whom Evolution 
provided to pay for the steaks and ale.' 

'Yes,' said Hubert gravely, *I had that 
great honour.' 

' Again I say,' continued Earl Lavender, 
' that your appearance and proceedings have 
been very disappointing, and yet it behoves 
me to declare my mission to you, for out of 
the unfit, Evolution may perhaps most con- 
veniently provide testimony to the fitness of 
the fit — of the fittest. Know, then, that I 
wish the dogma of Evolution to permeate 



48 Earl Lavender 

your writings. I shall give you a watchword, 
and you may think out a whole system for 
yourselves. I understand that is always the 
way with new systems, the founder has an 
idea, and makes a few remarks, which his 
followers work up. My idea you know ; I 
have already made several remarks, and I 
shall now give you a watchword, "The fit 
shall survive, and Earl Lavender is the 
fittest." This you may use for a battle 
cry. It is customary, I understand, on the 
promulgation of a new system, for the 
prophet or founder to prescribe rules of 
conduct. In this matter I propose to give 
my followers ample liberty, only exacting 
from journalists and authors constant al- 
lusion and reference to me and my 
mission.' 

Earl Lavender abruptly ended in a dead 
silence. The bulk of the Prosemen smiled 
tolerantly, but none of them seemed dis- 
posed to venture on a remark, as the titles 
of their visitors and Earl Lavender's un- 
embarrassed delivery and vigorous address 
had somewhat perplexed them. 



Earl Lavender 49 

*Very noble!' whispered Hubert Ware 
in Earl Lavender s ear. 

The Scot, in a tumult of delight, cried across 
the room, — 

* I wish I had imagined you ! Are you 
real flesh and blood ? or did you imagine 
him, Ware? or is he imagining himself? ' 

* I am being evolved,' said Earl Lavender- 
* There is no such thing as imagination. 
Evolution is all and in all. But what 
reply have the Guild of Prosemen to make 
to my appeal ? ' 

As might have been expected, the Scot, 
full of Bannockburn, as all Scots become 
as soon as they cross the Border, and not 
untinctured with the white wine of his 
country, got upon his feet before anybody 
else the moment Earl Lavender requested a 
definite reply. 

* My lord,' he began, * I will answer you 
categorically. But first, let me tell you I am 
peculiarly qualified to give an impartial reply 
to your animadversions, being well-known 
for the lukewarmth of my allegiance to the 
Guild, as a very irregular attendant at their 

D 



50 Earl Lavender 

meetings, as one who seldom reads any 
prose, and as a non-contributor to their book. 
But my main qualification is that I am a 
Scotchman. As all Englishmen and Irish- 
men know well, every Scot is vain, shrewd, 
pragmatical, supercilious ; profuse in his 
admiration when pleased, and blind to in- 
feriority in the things and people he likes ; 
indifferent to hostile opinion though re- 
senting its expression ; demanding more 
than his fair share of elbow-room ; always 
thrusting himself forward and willing to 
accept responsibility of any kind. He 
never forgets Bannockburn ; and remembers 
Homildon Hill, Flodden Field, Pinkie 
Cleugh, and the many defeats the Scots 
sustained at the hands of the English as 
even more marvellous proofs of the great- 
ness of his race than the few victories they 
obtained over their old hereditary enemies. 
That a mere handful of people in a narrow 
strip of land, penned up between the High- 
landers on the north and the English 
Borderers on the south, should have retained 
a separate existence after so many over- 



Earl Lavender 51 

whelming disasters, each sufficient in itself 
to have brought into lasting subjection a 
much more extensive and more populous 
territory, is probably as remarkable a testi- 
mony to the fitness of the Scot as he 
himself thinks it is. In his conceit he re- 
gards himself as superior to all other 
Europeans, the representative, wherever he 
goes, of the only unconquered country be- 
tween the Atlantic and the Ural mountains. 
He knows now that he is a northern 
Englishman and is proud of it ; but he is 
prouder of the strange history which has 
specialised him as the hardiest and intensest 
member of the great family whose heritage 
is the seas and the continents. He is 
jealous of his name, and although he prays 
for the time when man to man the warl' 
o'er shall brithers be for a' that, he means 
to retain all his idiosyncrasies as long as 
he can. Not a pleasant person, the Scot, 
you think ; and I admit that he would in- 
deed be quite insufferable if it were not 
for two things, the abiding reverence for 
capacity in any race and any individual 



5 2 Earl L avender 

which makes Boswell tolerable, and raises 
him in that respect to the level of Carlyle ; 
and the deep sense of humour which in 
Carlyle atones for his barbarous self-worship 
and ruthless spite at humanity, and the 
lack of which kept Boswell remorseless in 
his folly. This digression, my lord, I felt 
called upon to make in order to explain 
to you how impossible it is, do what he 
may, and however much it may pain him, 
for a Scot to hold any other than a mean 
opinion of all other peoples. But if I follow 
this question further, I shall only involve 
myself in digression after digression ; and 
so to the point. Briefly then, and in the 
first place, you are to understand that we 
are much more intelligent than we look. 
Secondly and lastly, we are not disposed 
to permeate our writings with this new 
doctrine of Evolution until we know more 
about it.' 

The murmurs and exclamations excited by 
the Scot's uncalled for apologia pro vita sua 
increased in volume towards its conclusion, 
and when he resumed his seat clamour filled 



Earl Lavender 53 

the room. It was fully a minute before the 
noise subsided, and then a handsome Irish 
Proseman, who had been foremost in de- 
manding order, moved that no notice should 
be taken either of Earl Lavender's address, 
or of the reply of Rorison, the vain Scotch- 
man/ 

' Rorison ! ' said Earl Lavender in an under- 
tone to Hubert Ware. *A very suitable 
name for so unkempt an individual.* 

*Yes,' said Hubert; 'he is rather dusty 
and heathery.' 

In appearance Rorison was pretty much 
the Englishman's typical Scot ; short and 
broad, with high cheek bones, rough red 
hair and beard, deep-set blue eyes, a nose 
somewhat in the air, and a big mouth. 

* Mr Rorison,' said Earl Lavender, resent- 
ing the marked appearance and individuality 
of the man, * as I am the founder of the 
Evolutionary system — ' 

* Order, order ! ' from all the Prosemen. 

' I demand to be heard,' cried Earl Laven- 
der, rising to his feet, unruffled but firm. 
The cries of order continued however ; 



54 Earl Lavender 

and Hubert Ware, whispering to Earl Laven- 
der that he must bide his time, as it was 
quite evident that the evolutionary moment 
had passed, persuaded his new friend to sit 
down again. 

* It seems to me,' said a deep- voiced Prose- 
man when quiet was again restored, * that we 
ought to indicate by a resolution of some 
kind our displeasure at what has just taken 
place. Rorison at all events should be cen- 
sured.' 

* No,' said a tall English Proseman, ' let us 
proceed as if nothing had happened. The 
episode is past' 

* I move,' said the handsome Irish Prose- 
man, *that the episode did not take place.' 

This proposal, charmingly Hibernian, hav- 
ing been adopted with laughter and applause, 
the Prosemen proceeded to the reading of 
what each considered the best paragraph he 
had written since their last meeting. But 
before they began the waiter was summoned 
to replenish the glasses. As the Prosemen 
were about to give their orders an idea 
occurred to Earl Lavender. 



Earl Lavender 55 

* Gentlemen/ he said, * we must have 
champagne to-night. Waiter, a magnum of 
Mumm.' 

The waiter, who attended to the Prose- 
men's chamber, had not seen or heard any- 
thing of Earl Lavender's conduct in the 
dining-room, and although somewhat sur- 
prised at his order, was about to execute it, 
when Hubert Ware bade him wait. 

* My lord,' said Ware aside to Earl Laven- 
der, 'is it a circumstance that I have barely 
five shillings left ? ' 

'Not at all,' replied Earl Lavender. * I 
beg you not to pay any more money for me 
to-night. Evolution is my banker. All 
right, waiter.' 

Here, however, another difficulty arose. 
It was one of the bye-laws of the Guild of 
Prosemen that every man should pay his 
own shot. 

* Individually, of course, we are million- 
aires,' said the Proseman with the deep voice. 
' In our corporate capacity we are paupers, 
and as we never treat, we make it a rule 
never to be treated.' 



5 6 Earl L avender 

'But, gentlemen/ said Earl Lavender, 
' this is a very special occasion. To-night 
marks the beginning of a new epoch. Be- 
sides, there has been some friction. You 
have proved to be in a less prepared mood 
for the reception of my doctrine than I 
anticipated, and have resented my criticism 
and plain-dealing. Champagne is the best 
liniment for abrasions of the spirit. Waiter, 
bring the Mumm.' 

As no further opposition was made, the 
champagne was brought, and forthwith all 
the Prosemen who were prepared read or 
recited their paragraphs in turn — charming 
paragraphs, eloquent paragraphs, critical, 
poetical, philosophical paragraphs, all of 
them interesting, all of them well-written. 

The prose being done. Earl Lavender rose 
at once and addressed the Guild of Prosemen 
for the second time. 

*Very admirable, indeed, gentlemen,' he 
said ; * but all this random writing must end. 
With unerring intuition, as becomes the 
fittest of created beings, I perceive that the 
final cause of your existence is to become my 



Earl Lavender 57 

disciples. I ask you to set your intended 
book aside, and to write evolutionary prose 
celebrating me and — * 

At this point the murmurs with which 
Earl Lavender's attempt at a second speech 
had been accompanied burst into a shout. 
Most of the Prosemen stood up and shook 
their fists, despatching with one voice but 
quite good-humouredly him and his mission 
to the nether regions. 

Earl Lavender folded his arms and smiled 
at them. He then petitioned for a further 
hearing, but as the gesticulation and outcry 
increased, he touched Lord Brumm on 
the shoulder, and crying in a voice heard 
above the din : * In spite of yourselves, you 
must help me and my cause, for you will 
have to pay for the champagne,' he left the 
room followed by his quaking henchman. 

The waiter who had brought the magnum 
of Mumm stopped the pair at the door of 
the inn and asked who was to pay. 

* The Guild of Prosemen are defraying the 
entertainment of their guests,' answered Earl 
Lavender. 



5 8 Earl L avender 

' Hansom ! ' he cried ; and bundling the 
utterly demoralised Brumm into a cab, he 
bade the driver take them to Piccadilly 
Circus. 



CHAPTER IV 

OF THE FIRST MEETING BETWEEN MRS SCAMLER 
AND MAUD EMBLEM, AND HOW THEY SUPPED 
TOGETHER, AND WHAT MRS SCAMLER SAID 

Hardly had Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm left the * Cap - and - Bells ' when a 
young lady entered the dining-room. The 
sawdust of the old inn was seldom trodden 
by feminine feet. In winter, city gentlemen 
and journalists sometimes brought their 
wives, or sisters, or sweethearts, to taste the 
great steak-pudding which the proprietor cut 
up every Saturday in presence of his cus- 
tomers ; and in summer, a fair American or 
other gentle tourist would come and gaze at 
the picture of Goldsmith and the old fire- 
place, and wonder at the solid Londoners, 
the slabs of beef they ate, and the tankards 

S9 



6o Earl Lavender 

of beer they drank. But although the pon- 
derous waiter was thus not altogether unused 
to the appearance of the fair sex in the 
dining-room of the * Cap-and-Bells/ he was 
astonished beyond measure to behold a lady 
cross his threshold at eleven o'clock at night. 
His first impulse was to warn her away ; 
but dull as his apprehension was, he saw 
clearly that this was not only a respectable 
young person, but one of unusual grace and 
beauty. Of middle height, and about twenty 
years of age, she had, besides the graceful 
bearing common to well-shaped women, that 
ease and nobility of carriage which, in the 
new generation, begins to approve the 
physical training of girls. Sweetness, cheer- 
fulness and dignity mingled in her expression. 
Her face, retaining still much of the round- 
ness of girlhood, promised to be a perfect 
oval. Her complexion was pure red and 
white ; her eyes were large and black, and 
her dark crisp hair was divided plainly in the 
centre, and coiled behind. As a crown to 
her many perfections, this handsome and 
beautiful girl possessed a low, rich voice, 



Earl Lavender 6 1 

which made a pleasant impression even on 
the dull waiter when she asked him if at 
that moment there were two gentlemen in 
the ' Cap-and- Bells,' * one tall and young with 
a dark moustache, and rather striking in 
appearance ; and the other stout and much 
older.' 

* Two gentlemen, lady,' said the ponderous 
waiter in his ridiculously thin voice, * No ; 
not at this identical moment. But the twins 
were here.' 

* Oh ! they're not twins,' said the young 
lady, smiling frankly. 

The waiter didn't remember another pair 
of gentlemen, but he referred to his assistant. 

' It wouldn't be c'rrect,' said that effusive 
and apologetic young man, * to say as there 
was two gents 'ere like them two o' yours, 
lady ; but there was three that come near it. 
Mr Ware, 'as dines 'ere often, 'ad two friends 
with 'im, but it weren't 'im ; 'e ain't neither 
stout nor dark. But 'is friends was stout 
and dark, an* 'e 'ad stout and bitter, as 'e 
always do 'ave. An' they was particular 
strikin' ; an' a moustache one of 'em 'ad : 



62 Earl Lavender 

a sort o' patter cove 'e were, like them niggers 
wot talks straight on round the clock, with 
umberellies as big as 'ole women a-smashin' 
of the table at the alls. 'E did give it them 
unfort'nit twins. 'E came it over 'em in a 
style, as you might say, two undered words a 
minute at the school o' short'and. Oh ! 'e's 
a dook, an' 'e's gone, miss. Both gone. 
'Ansom.' 

* Did you hear what direction they 
gave the driver?' asked the young lady 
eagerly. 

' No, miss. Upstairs may 'ave 'eard. 'E 
saw 'em off.' 

* Oh ! could you find out for me ? ' 

The agile assistant sprang to the foot of 
the stairs, and cried up at the pitch of his 
voice, — 

*Hi, there! William!' 

* I 'ear you, George,' replied William from 
the bar. 

* Oh, you're there, are you ? ' said George 
turning round. * Why didn't you say so 
before, an' not 'ave me shoutin' up one 
chimney an' down another. Where did 



Earl Lavender, 63 

them two blokes go as made the twins sit 
up?' 

' Dunno/ 

**E dunno, miss; 'e didn't 'ear,' explained 
the agile assistant, rushing into the dining- 
room. * You see, these sort o' hintertainin' 
coves, when they leaves one place an' takes an 
'ansom to another, don't let the street know 
where they're goin'. There's coppers an' 
lamp-posts about, an' there ain't no need to 
be familiar.' 

The young lady looked as if the waiter's 
last remark expressed her own sentiments at 
that particular instant She only said, how- 
ever, — 

' I am too tired to do any more to-night,' 
and selecting a comfortable corner right 
below the picture of Goldsmith, she sank 
down on the worn seat and leant her arms 
on the table. * Waiter,' she said, 'could I 
have something to eat here ?' 

* Well, I don't know, miss,' said the waiter 
rubbing his ponderous chin, and ready on 
the emergence of the least difficulty to refer 
to his assistant ; * something light, now }' 



64 Earl Lavende7' 

' I think rm hungry enough to eat a chop/ 
said the young lady. 

* Chops are off, ma'am/ replied the waiter 
promptly, removing his hand from his chin, 
and sticking it in his side. 

He liked to talk of things he knew about. 
' Well then, a steak ? ' suggested the young 
lady. 

* Steaks off since seven-thirty,' said the 
waiter, with increased confidence, rejoiced 
at the turn the conversation had taken. 

* What can you give me, then ? ' 

* Tripe, ma'am ; tripe and onions/ 

' Tripe,' said the young lady thoughtfully. 
* I never ate tripe, but I've often heard of it. 
I suppose people do eat it, waiter ."* There's 
no mystery about it ? ' 

* Oh, no, ma'am ; no mystery about tripe.' 
' Is it good?' 

' Good ! ' exclaimed the head waiter, en- 
chanted to find himself still master of the 
subject, and quite excited with the brilliancy 
of his own replies. ' I ain't an authority, 
you know, on tripe in general, but the tripe 
we serve here twice a week, ma'am, is as 



Earl Lavender 65 

good as the steaks, and they're the best in 
London.' 

*Oh,' said the young lady, 'please bring 
me some then, and a glass of claret' 

The assistant conveyed the young lady's 
order to the proper quarter, and the head 
waiter retired to his stance near the door. 
His musings there were speedily disturbed 
by a tap on the shoulder, and, looking round, 
to his unbounded amazement he found him- 
self confronted by another lady — a matronly- 
looking person clad in black silk with black 
feathers in her bonnet. She had touched 
the waiter with her gold eye-glasses very 
gingerly, as if that optical instrument had 
also been a magical one, with the power 
when forcibly applied of turning waiters into 
stone ; and when she had attracted the atten- 
tion of the ponderous head at the ' Cap-and- 
Bells ' she settled her pince-nez on the bridge 
of her comely nose, with a loving care which 
showed that she knew perfectly well how 
their gold rims and dazzling pebbles would 
light up her shrewd, merry face. 

'Oh, Mr Waiter!' she said, 'has Mr 

B 



(>6 Earl Lavender 

Gurdon of Nettleby - Kingscroft been 
here ? ' 

* Mr who ? ' queried the head waiter more 
shrilly than usual, making the matronly lady 
start and look him all over, wondering 
apparently if his voice had issued from a 
watch-pocket or a buttonhole. 

* Mr Gurdon of Nettleby-Kingscroft,' she 
repeated. 

But the head waiter had already signalled 
to his assistant, and that young man at once 
took up his parable. 

* Mr Gurdon of Nettleby - Kingscroft, 
ma'am,' he said, exhibiting much excite- 
ment, and consequently speaking in a more 
apologetic style than ever. *A middling- 
sized gent ; fills 'is skin an' 'is clothes well ; 
eats and drinks 'earty, an' goes about with 
a tall young straight-tipper who lays it off 
sizable — ' 

*Jillikins!' interposed the head waiter. 

* You don't mean to say she's after these 
rum coves too ? ' 

' I know'd it,' chuckled the assistant. 

* Double-barrelled breach o' promise case.' 



Earl Lavender 67 

* How dare you ! ' cried the matronly lady. 
' How dare you ! I demand to know where 
Mr Gurdon is.' 

* We can't tell you, ma'am,' said the head 
waiter, again able to speak to the point. 
* He left here about quarter an hour ago 
in a hansom, and that's all we know.' 

* How disappointing ! ' said the lady 
with a sigh. ' I'm too tired to do any 
more to-night. Can I have something to 
eat?' 

' Certainly, ma'am. Tripe and onions.' 

* Oh, I love tripe and onions ! Give me 
some, and a pot of porter.' 

The matronly lady then looked about 
her, and regarding the beautiful girl in the 
corner with a favourable eye, pulled off 
her gloves and sat down close beside her 
without more ado. 

' I have just heard what you said,' re- 
marked the young lady ; * and do you know, 
I think we are searching for the same 
gentlemen.' 

*No!' exclaimed the other. * But, of 
course, nothing could be likelier. Eligible 



68 Earl Lavender 

men won't marry now; they simply won't 
do it, that's all that's about it.' 

The beautiful girl blushed a fiery-red and 
made play with her napkin. 

' My dear, I mean no offence,' said the 
matronly lady. * But when a woman comes 
alone to London hunting a man it isn't her 
father or her brother she's after, nor her 
husband either. Husbands never run away 
of themselves. They're driven away, and 
the wives don't follow them. It's when 
they're engaged, and the marriage-day is 
just at hand, that the men cut and run, 
and the women chase them. Its fang-de- 
seeaycle that does it, my dear, and education, 
and reading French. When I was younger, 
I got a dozen offers every spring, until I 
married the late Mr Seamier. Then, after 
he died I was caught up in the very apex 
of education, and my offers dropped off — 
except on one day when I had several hun- 
dred, as I'll tell you about — to one or two 
in the season, like leaves in the forest, my 
dear, when autumn, etc., — Byron, you know. 
But it wasn't because autumn had blown 



Earl Lavender 69 

with me. But, my dear, here am I talk- 
ing to you as if I'd known you all my life, 
and you may be, for anything — my dear, 
here's the tripe! And you're taking tripe 
too! Now, we must be better acquainted. 
By-the-bye, do you know Mr Gurdon ? ' 
The young lady did not know Mr Gurdon. 
' Well, my dear, he is a very remarkable 
man,' said the relict of the late Mr Seamier. 
*When Mr Seamier died he left me very 
comfortable, I must say that. Two hun- 
dred a year in the — what's the per cents. ? — I 
never know now, but it's not so much as it 
was, though of course we have the consola- 
tion of knowing that it's for the good of the 
country, and when duty calls and can't be 
avoided there's no use grumbling — and five 
hundred pounds his life was insured for. 
Having nothing to do, no relations, no 
children — except an uncle who died in Aus- 
tralia, poor man, when I was a girl — I gave 
myself up to the wave of educational excite- 
ment that swept over the land. I bought 
a cyclopaedia, and took in the Womans 
Educator, and studied everything, my dear — 



70 Earl Lave7ider 

at first : things I'd never heard of before and 
don't remember the names of now. But I 
soon settled down to drawing and French 
exclusively ; and the progress I made was 
surprising. It was model drawing that I 
liked best. I hadn't a comb — or cone, is it ? 
— yes, cone ; so I placed a bandbox in posi- 
tions that you wouldn't have imagined it 
possible, and couldn't have known from the 
drawings that it was a bandbox. There was 
no difficulty I didn't master. And the same 
with French. Masculine, feminine — beau^ 
belle, doo, dela ; singular, plural — cheval, 
chevox ; to be or not to be — eightur, avoir ; 
and so on — parlez vozis, porky, parsk, and all 
without a master.' 

Here Mrs Seamier who had been nibbling 
a little during her communicative monologue, 
took a long breath and a sip of porter, and 
gave herself up to the enjoyment of her 
supper. With a pleasant smile on her 
comely face she ate steadily for fully three 
minutes. Her companion, wondering much, 
and vastly amused at the talkative widow, 
was also busy with her knife and fork. 



Earl Lavendei' 7 1 

* Well, as I was saying/ resumed Mrs 
Seamier, having taken another sip of porter, 
' Mr Gurdon, whom you don't know, is a very 
remarkable man. But I didn't make his 
acquaintance until I had given up French 
and model drawing. I couldn't describe to 
you the effect of my studies on the inha- 
bitants of Nettleby-Kingscroft. The very 
milkman spoke in awestruck whispers, and 
made his pony walk when he came within a 
hundred yards of my door. My popularity 
and fame were beyond anything — for a time, 
only for a time. Just when I was beginning 
to reap the reward of my arduous labours — a 
teapot ! I could draw a teapot with ease, and 
could read short sentences, made up of the 
words I knew at sight, just like English — 
the tide turned against me, and a deputation 
came, informal, of the chemist's, the school- 
master's, and the butcher's wife — wives 
should it be ? — and invited me pointedly 
to attend the Dorcas meetings. You could 
have knocked me down with a feather. But 
I plucked up heart and told them no, I was 
going to be an artist and a linguist. There 



72 Earl Lavender 

was all the late Mr Scamler's clothes they 
could have, and I would subscribe a guinea a 
year, but attend their scandalous meetings I 
would not, for I'm sure it was better to be 
studying French and model drawing. But 
the butcher's wife, a very vulgar woman, said 
to me, — ** Mrs Seamier," she said, ^' do you 
study French, ma'am?" ''I do, indeed," I 
said; **two hours a day." "Then, ma am," 
she says, ** we call upon you to give it up." 
" Give it up ! '* I said. *' Why should I give 
up what your daughter does ? " for I knew 
her daughter learnt French at school. "' Be- 
cause, ma'am," she said, **it can't be for no 
good end, and if it were people wouldn't 
believe it. My daughter learns French at 
school. But what for? Because it's an 
accomplishment that all girls have. They 
take it like the measles and the chickenpox ; 
but do you suppose they go on having it 
after they're done school ? No ; and if 
a grown woman takes the measles, it's bad 
on her; and if a widow takes to learning 
French we know what that means." '* It's a 
very immoral language," said the school- 



Earl L avender 7 3 

masters wife, for she hadn't paid the 
butcher's bill for six months, as I happened 
to know. ''Shocking," said the chemist's 
wife. "" I knew a woman who read French, 
and she ran away from her husband, and 
died of consumption. For it's in the lan- 
guage. My husband says its rotten and 
corrupt, and he ought to know, being a 
chemist by examination. Mrs Seamier, you 
need a pill or a draught or something, for 
I declare you look quite dissolute already." 
And me only beginning irregular verbs ! But 
I was so taken aback that I didn't know 
what to say. So I gave them a glass of 
sherry and a biscuit, and told them I would 
think of it. And they pressed my hand very 
hard at leaving, and sighed, and looked up, 
and the schoolmaster's wife used her handky. 
I was in a fine taking, I can tell you, and 
went to my Womans Educators, and ex- 
amined the French language ; and, do you 
know, it seemed to have a wicked look 
about it. Then I went to my glass, and 
as sure as anything, I was pale and had 
black rings under my eyes. Well, the up- 



74 Earl Lavender 

shot of it was that I came to the conclusion 
there was no use sacrificing my health and 
putting all the neighbours against me for the 
sake of a rotten language. I hid away the 
Educators there and then, for I meant to 
stop the model drawing too, as I saw quite 
well it would only lead to worse disputes 
when I came to study the nude, and sent out 
the servant for a Family Herald Supplementy 
and the peace of mind I had was wonderful/ 

After another interval, in which Mrs 
Seamier proved herself to be so capable and 
resolute a trencherwoman, that she had 
finished her supper before her companion 
was half done, the story of Mr Gurdon was 
continued. 

* But you mustn^t imagine I went to their 
Dorcas meetings,' said Mrs Seamier, laying 
her left hand on the table and pointing at 
nothing with her forefinger. ' I said to my- 
self, ** Thus far and no further. You gave up 
French and model drawing to oblige your 
neighbours ; but, mark me, Mrs Seamier, you 
keep yourself to yourself, pay your rent and 
taxes, give twenty pounds a year to the poor. 



Earl Lavender 75 

visit a little without becoming too intimate, 
and you'll be happy and contented." But I 
wasn't happy and contented, for I had no- 
thing to do. I didn't need to work for a 
living, which might have been better for me. 
A greengrocer's now, or stationery and toys, 
I could have done ; and it might, I say, have 
been better ; but there I was, free and in- 
dependent, with a vote at school board and 
county council elections, and so, my dear, I 
made up my mind to marry again. Oh ! I 
was very cautious. I formed a plan — you'll 
never guess the plan I formed.' 

The young lady was sure she couldn't. 

* I advertised in two London papers for 
a board - and - lodger/ said Mrs Seamier 
radiantly, as if she were the first widow in 
the world who had ever thought of such a 
thing. ' One was for a bachelor and the 
other was for a widower. I remember the 
very words of them, for I gave them much 
thought, and they occupied me agreeably for 
two or three days during the time I used 
to spend on my French and model drawing. 
The bachelor one was : — ** Pleasant home 



7 6 Earl L avender 

for young gentleman ; twenty-five to thirty. 
Short distance from Virginia Water. Widow 
lady of independent means. Apply Mrs S., 
Viewfield, Nettleby-Kingscroft, Bucks." I 
thought, you see, that I might prefer some- 
body ten years younger than myself for a 
change. I had married Mr Seamier for a 
comfortable home, you know, and I saw no 
reason why I shouldn't, if I chose, please 
my eye though I broke my heart, as they 
say. And this was the widower one : — 
"Widower can have a comfortable home 
in house of widow of independent means. 
Apply Mrs S., Viewfield, Nettleby-Kings- 
croft, Bucks. Reading-room, library, chess 
club, fishing club, etc." Very artful, both 
of them, weren't they.^^ I put the widower 
one in a Tory paper and the bachelor one 
in a Radical, so that they mightn't clash. 
That very afternoon — I shall laugh on my 
death-bed when I think of it — you would 
have thought there was a race meeting at 
Nettleby-Kingscroft. They came on their 
feet, they came in cabs, they came on horse- 
back, some of them, right on from 2 p.m. 



Earl Lavender 77 

till nearly midnight. I had three bottles of 
port and four of sherry, and a pound cake 
and a tin of biscuits, but what was that 
among a crowd of majors, captains, ex- 
M.P.'s, lawyers, bankers, doctors, parsons, 
most of them from London, and seven of 
them borrowed half-crowns. By five o'clock 
I had beer and bread and cheese set out 
in every room in the house except my own, 
and men smoking pipes and cigars and 
chaffing each other ; but they were very 
solemn to me, and asked me what I meant 
by such an advertisement, and what were 
my means any way — a paltry two hundred 
a year (they knew it all from the publican) 
— I ought to be ashamed of myself, they 
said, and they wouldn't have me though I 
was to die the day after ; but that was 
well on in the night when they were all 
tipsy. At first they were very civil, and 
told me all about themselves, one after the 
other, and never said a w^ord about board 
and lodging, but would I have them, yes 
or no, as they were in a hurry, and had 
expectations, and would settle another two 



78 Earl Lavender 

hundred, and one of them — I forgot — in the 
afternoon, with a squint and a sausage 
nose, had a most important engagement in 
Boulogne that very night, would I get fifty 
pounds and come away at once ; and when 
I wouldn't he ran off damning and slam- 
ming the door. But at last a man with a 
laughing face and a shabby coat, seeing me 
like to cry with vexation, says, pulling the 
Tory and Radical papers out of his pocket, 
** Madam, you see these advertisements — 
widow of independent means " — very em- 
phatical — "wants both a young gentleman 
and a widower. Every one of us has seen 
both these papers, and we know, madam, 
that it's a husband you want, bless your 
simple little heart. And we jump into a 
train, and we call at the public-house, and 
find out what you are, and look daggers and 
run over each other on the road, and half 
the blacklegs and adventurers in London are 
come or coming, ma'am." And I was in such 
a taking ! And the crowd outside ! Boys 
and men ; and all the women made errands 
past my house. So I just shut myself up in 



Earl Lavender 79 

my room, and sent my maid for the con- 
stable and it took him half an hour to clear 
out the last of them. In the morning two of 
them were found asleep in the lane ; and 
the tumblers and glasses they broke, and a 
mirror, and the carpets and cushions and 
table covers all dribbled and stained and 
singed with vestas and cigars like sack- 
cloth and ashes — it cost me ten pounds 
besides the wine and beer and bread and 
cheese. But next morning I did laugh ; I 
laughed for a week, and I always laugh 
when I think of it.' 

At this point in her story the laughter 
which had been flooding Mrs Scamler's 
voice for some time gurgled out in a most 
delightful stream, and set her young com- 
panion off too ; and they laughed together 
very heartily. 

*And do you know it wasn't done,' con- 
tinued Mrs Seamier, when her laughter had 
subsided. ' Men called for two or three 
days after, but I didn't let them in except 
one that came all the way from York with 
his last shilling in his pocket and his last 



8o Earl Lavender 

cough in his lungs you would have said. 
I put him in the kitchen, and he fell asleep 
at the fire, and snored and coughed all even- 
ing ; and when my maid poked him up with 
the broom he only muttered, ''It was a very 
pleasant, comfortable home ; odd, though, to 
sleep at the kitchen fire ; he would have liked 
a bedroom to himself." The poor creature 
thought I kept a free hospital for inscrut- 
ables. I sent him back next day, and a 
lawyer wrote me for twenty pounds ; but 
I took no notice of it. And the letters I 
got with every post for a fortnight ! Threat- 
ening, imploring, cudgelling — such passionate 
letters, too ! With bits of Shakespeare and 
Byron, My Lady and My Queen, Some Day, 
I know not when or how, and Love me Little 
Love me Long. And they had all made 
a vow when they were boys to marry a 
widow of independent means. Half of 
them gave me just two days to answer. 
They had a revolver, and would hold it 
at their temples for forty-eight hours — 
with their elbows on the mante^oiece, doubt- 
less, for nobody could keep the po; ]tion with- 



Earl Lavender 8 1 

out some support — and if no answer came 
my blood will be on your head. But I had 
seen the kind of gentleman and it didn't 
trouble me. Well, my dear, I became a 
terror to the village. People got out of 
my w^ay in the street. The butchers, the 
chemist's, and the schoolmaster's wife — 
wives, I mean (and yet they might as well 
be one woman for their brains are all cut 
to the same shape, and the butcher and 
the chemist and the schoolmaster wouldn't 
much mind, I think) — held me up as an ex- 
ample of the dreadful effect of the French 
language, and frightened their children with 
Mrs Seamier. Everybody eyed me ; I saw 
them ; and I believe they would have burned 
me alive if they could. But to, confess the 
truth, I rather liked it, and next month I 
put in an advertisement again — a horse of 
quite another colour, although why an ad- 
vertisement should be called a horse I can't 
make out, or anything else, not the advertise- 
ment but the horse. I remember it quite 
well, for it took me a whole day to compose 
it, and ', went: — "Single gentleman can 

F 



8 2 Earl Lavender 

have board and lodging in a villa in one 
of the most delightful parts of England, 
within easy distance of London. Very 
moderate to a permanency. Apply S., 
office of this paper.' Three out of the 
applications pleased me, and the first I 
wrote to was Mr Gurdon, so I didn't see 
the other two. I was at the window 
when he came in at the garden gate, and 
I thought I had never seen such a nice- 
looking, middle-aged gentleman before, and 
not very* middle-aged either. Not too tall, 
and not too short — a fine, fresh, stout, 
clean-looking, well-set-up man in his prime ; 
and I tell you I thought to myself **this 
is the very man for a decent widow to 
marry." So I went and lay down on the 
couch in the drawing-room with a shawl 
round my shoulders. I didn't want to 
seem too well and hearty you know, for 
they say men like women to be just a little 
delicate — which, goodness knows, I never 
was, and can't understand it. And the 
first words he says after bidding me good- 
day, quite cheerful like, but slow and em- 



Earl Lavender 83 

phatical, ** Madam, I am a mahoganist.'' 
Don't you know? Neither did I then. 
It means a woman-hater/ 

* Oh ! misogynist/ said the young lady. 

* Yes, misogynist. Misogyner, misogynist. 
But perhaps it is not an adjective — if so, 
incomparable. I always have it wrong. 
Misogynist, mahoganist — it got mixed up 
in my mind with Mahomet — which I cant 
make out as he wasn't one — and a side- 
board, very big and gloomy that used to sit 
in my father's dining-room. But its root's 
guinea, a woman. Misogynist. I under- 
stand it quite well, my dear, although I 
make a mistake sometimes in pronunciation, 
having got all my learning without a master. 
** Madam," he says, "I am a mahoganist." 
'* Indeed, sir," I said, thinking it was his 
business. ''Would you go into the city 
every day, then?" "No, madam," he said, 
rather wondering at me, ** I would not go 
into the city." Then I guessed it was his 
religion, and told him there was none of 
them in the village. **Oh," he cries, still 
wondering at me. Seeing I was wrong 



84 Earl Lavender 

again, and not to be beaten, I asked him if 
he suffered much, and there was a very 
good doctor in the neighbourhood. Then 
he burst out laughing, and begged my 
pardon, and told me that mahoganist meant 
a woman-hater. I thought to myself ** may- 
be you do," but I said nothing, and we 
made a bargain. But the rules that he 
laid down were dreadful. He wasn't to 
see me except once a week, when — ' 

* Now, then, ladies,' said the head waiter 
shrilly, but with great self-possession, being 
again master of his subject, *five minutes 
to twelve.' 

* Goodness gracious me, Mr Waiter,' 
cried Mrs Seamier, ' is it that time al- 
ready ? And does Mr Gurdon come here 
every day ? ' 

* He never was here before, ma'am,' re- 
plied the head waiter hesitatingly, and with 
a half turn towards his assistant. 

* No, 'e never was 'ere before,' said the 
assistant. * But 'e may come back again.' 

* By-the-bye,* said the young lady, ' you 
said that these gentlemen went away to- 



Earl Lavender 85 

gether, and that they had been dining with 
somebody.* 

* Yes, ma'am ; with Mr Ware/ 

' Do you know where Mr Ware lives ? ' 
' No, ma'am ; but 'e's — per'aps 'e's comin' 
downstairs now. Guild o' Prosemen to-night, 
an' 'e's a Prosemen, 'e is.' 

But only four Prosemen had remained 
till closing time. Mr Ware, they told the 
assistant waiter, who intercepted them on 
their way out, had left with Mr Rorison 
shortly after Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm. The four Prosemen, on learning 
that two ladies wanted Mr Ware's address, 
were sorry they didn't know it ; they thought 
it was in the Temple. 

* To-morrow or next day,' said the effusive 
and agile, but always apologetic, assistant, 
returning to the ladies who had risen, and 
were quite ready to go, ' Mr Ware is sure 
to dine 'ere, ladies, on a steak or a chop. 
Three or four times a week 'e comes, which 
don't mean that 'e lives in Islington or 
Nottin-gill, ma'am, although the twins do 
live in Pentonville.* 



86 Earl Lavender 

* Well, now, Mr Waiter — Mr Waiter, 
junior/ said Mrs Seamier, touching one of 
the buttons of the assistant's coat with her 
magic eye-glasses delicately, so as not to 
harm him, *when Mr Ware comes, will 
you tell him that two ladies would like to 
see him about the gentlemen who dined with 
him to-day ? He won't have forgotten/ 

' That 'e won't, ma'am ; and neither will 
the twins.' 

*And here,' said Mrs Seamier, taking a 
somewhat battered, silver-filagree card-case 
and a gold pencil from a very capacious 
pocket, *is my address: *'Mrs Seamier, 
Pilkington's Private Hotel, Guelph Crescent, 
W.C." But if the two gentlemen return, 
you mustn't on any account tell them that 
we were here,' continued Mrs Seamier, 
when she had written the address. ' Find 
out where they're living — they must be 
living somewhere. In fact, follow them, 
and don't lose sight of them until you 
have sent for us and we have come to 
take charge of them.' 

* Impossible, ma'am,' said the head waiter, 



Earl Lavender 87 

with some asperity. 'His duties are here; 
he ain't a detective/ 

* If I thought,' said Mrs Seamier, with 
amazing force, ' if I thought he was a detec- 
tive, I would denounce him. Detectives — 
my dear, I shall tell you of a detective ; it 
belongs to what I was saying about Mr 
Gurdon. Then, perhaps, Mr Waiter, since 
the young man's duties are so onerous,' con- 
tinued Mrs Seamier, winningly, * you could 
undertake it yourself. Mr Waiter, junior, 
does all the work, and your position being 
ornamental, and honourable too — no doubt 
of it, sir — not to say honorary, and quite 
as onerous when properly understood, you 
wouldn't, I should think, be greatly missed.' 

A reply embodying the full strength and 
weight of the ponderous head's astonish- 
ment and indignation would have been be- 
yond the scope of his vocabulary and the 
pitch of his voice. Happily he was spared 
the necessity of attempting the impossible 
by the entrance of the proprietor, who super- 
intended in person the shutting up of the 
' Cap-and- Bells.' 



88 Earl Lavender 

*Ohr exclaimed Mrs Seamier, perceiving 
that this was a person in authority, 'I have 
just been asking your waiters, who are very 
attentive and obliging, and if they should 
ever want a character I shall be very glad, 
to do me a favour, but they are not inclined 
to help me. I have been proposing that the 
young man — I should prefer the young man, 
but the old one would do — to — well, you 
see, it would have to be some way like this. 
He could have a telegram ready written — and 
stamped — in his pocket. ** Seamier, Pilking- 
ton's, Guelph Crescent, W.C." — one, two, 
three, four, five — " found sixty-three Appleby 
Street, Pilkington Square, Hampstead, N." 
— six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, 
thirteen, fourteen : sevenpence that would be, 
and as long an address as he would be likely 
to have to wire, unless there were three 
figures, or it was N.W. — but perhaps that's 
only one, W. or N.W. — I never knew — we 
could make it eightpence. He could give 
it to a policeman to take to the nearest tele- 
graph office without taking his eye off the 
door of the house for a single instant, and 



Earl Lavender 89 

if they left before we arrived, then he 
would follow them, and leave word — he 
would need several telegrams — ' 

Here Mrs Scamler's plan became so in- 
volved that she was brought to a standstill ; 
and the proprietor, who had kept his counten- 
ance wonderfully, asked her, without making 
the slightest reference to her proposal, and 
in a very affable manner, if she would walk 
or take a cab home. 

' Oh, yes, certainly, please/ said Mrs 
Seamier, by which she was understood to 
assent to the latter alternative. 

The young lady, who had never before 
been so amazed at, amused by, and ashamed 
for a member of her own sex, or of the other 
for that matter, in the whole twenty years of 
her life, and who had been quite unable to 
get a word in edgeways since they rose to 
go, now held out her hand to Mrs Seamier 
to say good-night. 

*Oh, no, not yet,' said the loquacious 
widow. ' We must go together, and I shall 
drop you at your address. Consider, my 
dear. We must arrange to see each other 



90 Earl Lavender 

to-morrow. I must tell you about Mr 
Gurdon, and you must tell me about your 
gentleman, and how we both knew to come 
to the " Cap-and- Bells " for them. Why, its 
the most wonderful thing in the world ! And 
we must arrange our future proceedings. 
Good-night, Mr Waiter; good-night, Mr 
Junior. And Mr Proprietor, it would 
perhaps be better, when these two gentle- 
men come, to arrest them. You could 
easily find some excuse. It would do 
quite well, wouldn't it, to accuse them of 
passing false coin ? What's your address, 
my dear ? ' 

* Great British Hotel,' said the young 
lady. 

* We want to go,' said Mrs Seamier, 
for by this time they had reached the door 
of the tavern, and a cab was waiting; *we 
want to go to Pilkington's, Guelph Cres- 
cent, and the Great British Hotel, and 
you're to go to the nearest first.' 

When they had entered the cab, Mrs 
Seamier thrust her head out of the window 
and waved her hand to the proprietor. 



Earl Lavender 91 

* Or the junior could put spoons in their 
top-coat pockets/ she cried. * Or simply — ' 
but the noise of the wheels drowned her 
last suggestion. 



CHAPTER V 

HOW THEY SUPPED IN PICCADILLY CIRCUS 

Not much time is spent in driving from 
Fleet Street to Piccadilly Circus even at 
eleven o'clock at night, if you get out 
of the crowded Strand at once and go 
by the Embankment, as the cabman did 
who drove Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm after their first and triumph- 
ant demonstration of the law of the sur- 
vival of the fittest in the * Cap-and- Bells.' 
Short as was the journey, however, before 
they had gone half-way. Lord Brumm 
had recovered from the state of collapse 
to which the arbitrary conduct of his 
companion had reduced him. To thrust 
his umbrella through the valve in the 

top of the cab, and shout — * Stop ! stop ! ' 

92 



Earl Lavender 93 

in a frenzied manner was the first use to 
which he put his restored faculties. 

' What is it ? ' asked Earl Lavender. 

' Yes, sir 1 ' queried the cabman hoarsely. 

' I want to get out,' replied Lord Brumm 
to the cabman. 'We must get out,' he 
declared hotly to Earl Lavender. ' And 
apologise — apologise to a cabman! Oh, 
the row there'll be! But if we get out at 
once and say we've just discovered we've 
no money, we may get over it.' 

As he said this Lord Brumm burst 
open the door in eager haste ; but Earl 
Lavender, pulling him back by the coat- 
tails, and bidding the driver go on, pro- 
ceeded to reason with his henchman. 

' I am disappointed, good Brumm/ 
he said, ' that you should continue to doubt 
the power of Evolution after what you have 
seen to-night. 

' I don't doubt it,' said Brumm, in a 
harassed way. * I don't doubt it for one 
moment, when there's a necessity in the 
case, like food and drink. But we could 
have walked, you see ; and I'll be hanged 



94 Earl Lavender 

if I can understand how it concerns Evolu- 
tion to get us out of a mere scrape.' 

* Out of all kinds of scrapes, my dear 
Brumm, Evolution has the power to de- 
liver us. There is no conceivable scrape 
which is not a link in the great chain — 
in Chance, which is the empirical name for 
Evolution, and bears the same relation to it 
that alchemy bears to chemistry, and astro- 
logy to astronomy. And the last little 
scrape of all, death, is simply the charm- 
ing means Evolution takes to get us out 
of the great big scrape, life. You will 
never be happy, my dear friend, until 
you submit to the Evolutionary will. If 
it were not so amusing, nothing would 
be more insufferable than the unanimity 
and persistency with which all men and 
kindreds and nations shout up into space, 
'* What a scrape weVe in!" It is the first 
thing the child says in its inarticulate 
way with the first breath of air it is able 
to employ. " Oh, what a scrape to be sure ! " 
And it is the last thing the man feels on 
his death-bed. And you will find that all 



Earl Lavender 95 

the books and newspapers and music in 
the world are only expositions and sermons 
and fugues and variations on the one theme. 
**Oh, what a scrape!" Now, it is my mis- 
sion to change the world^s tune. I mean to 
teach it that scrape, luck, chance, is^law, is 
Evolution, is the soul of the universe ; and 
having brought man's will into accord with 
the Evolutionary will, in a very short time it 
will come about that children will laugh 
with their first breath, as much as to say, 
** What a delightful thing it is to come into 
the world." And on their death-beds men 
will cry, *' How refreshing and noble it is 
to pass away," while all the books and 
newspapers and music of the world will 
cease to be a mere complaint, will cease 
— altogether, the books and newspapers, 
perhaps, and only glad music remain. 
And this change we are to bring about, 
good Brumm, by the simple method 
which we have inaugurated to-night.' 

Lord Brumm did not catch the whole 
of this harangue, and what he did hear 
seemed to him nonsense; but Earl 



96 Earl Lavender 

Lavender's assured tone, and the radiant 
confidence of his expression, quieted his 
fears once more, much to his own amaze- 
ment ; and when they drew up on the 
north side of Piccadilly Circus, opposite 
the entrance to the Caf6 Benvenuto, he 
stepped out of the cab, feeling as little 
anxiety as Earl Lavender himself about 
the payment of the fare.' 

* I think we should go in here,' he said in 
a thoroughly Evolutionary style, which de- 
lighted his companion. 'It's nearly three 
hours since we ate anything.' 

*An admirable proposal,' assented Earl 
Lavender. 

Having told the cabman to w^ait, they 
entered the Grecian saloon of the Cafe 
Benvenuto and sat down at a table. Lord 
Brumm felt some trepidation when he 
found himself in a beautiful white temple in 
the midst of a small crowd of men and 
women, mostly in evening dress, and saw, br 
thought he saw, 'ready money and plenty 
of it while it lasts ' in the cut of their clothes 
and the expression of their faces. His 



Earl Lavender 97 

sudden Evolutionary heat began to cool, and 
he suggested in an undertone that they 
should content themselves with a modest 
snack. But Earl Lavender, having ordered 
the * Theatre Supper ' at five shillings a head, 
reproached his henchman for his inconstancy, 
and assured him that Evolution would help 
only those who reposed unwavering faith in 
its power and gave it continual exercise in 
vindicating their fitness. 

* Nothing grieves Evolution more, my dear 
Brumm,' he said, ' than half belief. We 
must not proceed on the assumption that it 
is easier for Evolution to provide the cost of 
a dish of macaroni than that of a supper of 
four courses. Evolution is on its trial, and 
will display its power cheerfully on our be- 
half in any matter and to any extent, or I 
am very much mistaken. Above all, good 
Brumm, be happy and regardless of ex- 
pense, for to be worried and economical ill 
becomes the apostles of that power which 
wasted countless ages in fashioning in- 
dolently one little world.' 

* Well, well,' said Lord Brumm rest- 

G 



98 Earl Lavender 

lessly, * Sufficient unto the day is the Evil- 
ution thereof. We shall have one good 
supper though we sleep in prison for it/ 

'There is no chance of that/ said Earl 
Lavender. *We shall sleep to-night in as 
good beds as there are in London. But you 
mustn't pun, Brumm, Puns are produced 
only in vacant minds. Keep high thoughts 
and visions of delightful things before you 
and you won't pun.' 

* I seldom do,' retorted Lord Brumm. 
' That one slipped out before I noticed. 
Evolution must have sent it.' 

'As a punishment then,' rejoined Earl 
Lavender. 

' Oh, oh ! ' exclaimed Lord Brumm. 

'What is it?' 

' Pun-ishment, the most ancient pun in the 
language.' 

' It is the observer of the pun that makes 
it, my dear Brumm. Of course, when the 
word is distorted, as in Evil-ution, the most 
preoccupied notice it, but in this instance 
which you try to fasten upon me the crime is 
yours. There is nothing more contrary to 



Earl Lavender 99 

the Evolutionary will than puns. Bloodshed 
and desolation follow in their wake. Their 
English heyday, which was in the reign of 
James I., caused the great civil war; in 
France they flourished most rankly under 
Louis XV., and produced the French Re- 
volution. I have considered puns, and apart 
altogether from their hateful effect, as shown 
in history, it is certain that they are quite 
unevolutionary, because I, the fittest of men, 
am unable to make them. You will consult 
your own welfare, and that of the nation, 
Brougham, by refraining in future.' 

' Not the least agreeable feature of the 
** Theatre Supper "at the Caf6 Benvenuto,' 
continued Earl Lavender as the waiter 
brought the first dish, * seems to be the ex- 
pedition with which it is served.' 

* Yes,' said Lord Brumm ; ' you see, all 
these people must have supper before twelve 
o'clock. Dinners and luncheons in foreign 
cockney restaurants are often very carelessly 
served — with Evolutionary indolence, in fact, 
but when they are tied to time these moosoos 
can skip.' 



lOO Earl Lavender 

' I am delighted to find you applying 
the Evolutionary idea for yourself, good 
Brumm, even although your interpretation 
is mistaken, for I can assure you there 
is nothing Evolutionary in the tardy service 
of a dinner. There are times and seasons 
when Evolution is eager in its haste, and it 
seems to me that here and now a most signal 
illustration is provided of its passionate de- 
sire to vindicate my fitness/ 

' What do you mean ? ' asked Lord 
Brumm. * Everybody else is being at- 
tended to as promptly as you.' 

* You are wide of the mark, Brumm,' 
replied Earl Lavender. * Unless my wits 
have deserted me entirely, Evolution has 
brought together on the very first day of the 
evolutionary epoch the fittest man and the 
fittest woman. At the second table on my 
left there sits alone a female figure of match- 
less grace and majesty. She is veiled, only 
her chin and mouth being visible ; but if I 
have any intuition at all, her face is the most 
beautiful ever seen, and she is the sweetest 
and strongest among the daughters of men. 



Earl L avender i o i 

She is veiled as a sign that I must not claim 
her yet, but we shall see her again, or it may 
be that she herself will lay claim to me, and 
that to-night.' 

* Evolution forbid ! ' exclaimed Lord 
Brumm. 

' Why ? ' queried Earl Lavender. 

* Because I hate women.' 

* Nothing could be more unevolutionary,' 
said Earl Lavender gravely. 'There is 
some mystery here ; you have not the 
temperament of a woman-hater. What do 
you mean ? ' 

* I mean what I say. Women are by 
nature unjust, unfaithful, hard-hearted, wrong- 
headed, perverse, hypocritical, unintelligent, 
uninteresting, uncompanionable — in every 
respect inferior to men, and unchangeable 
in their inferiority.' 

' Here's an indictment ! ' said Earl Lavender, 
laughing. 

* And,' continued Lord Brumm, rejoicing 
in his new-found energy, 'if there were 
any truth in this Evolutionary nonsense — ' 

' Pause there,' said Earl Lavender at once. 



I02 Earl Lavender 

in a low voice, that trembled with fury. 
* Withdraw and apologise. It is not from 
you that I shall hear Evolution slighted. 
Apologise.* 

' But, my lord — ' began Lord Brumm, 
paling a little. 

* No excuse, no explanation ! Apologise. 
You have thrown in your lot with me, and 
however accidental your aspersion of Evolu- 
tion may have been, I require an instant 
apology. Apologise.* 

* This is just a little too much,' said Lord 
Brumm testily. 

*Very well, sir,' rejoined Earl Lavender, 
rising and seizing his hat, * I go. A rene- 
gade already ! But I am glad that your un- 
fitness has been proved before I had com- 
mitted myself further in your company.' 

* Stop ! ' cried Lord Brumm, quaking at 
the idea of being left alone in his penniless 
plight to face the waiter and the cabman. ' I 
am very sorry. I beg your pardon. I beg 
Evolution's pardon.' 

* And will never offend again ? ' said Earl 
Lavender, taking off his hat. 



Earl L avender 103 

'And will never offend again/ repeated 
Lord Brumm. 

'Then/ said Earl Lavender, resuming his 
seat, 'the circumstance is forgiven and for- 
gotten. Pursue/ he continued, with an im- 
mediate and full return of his gracious manner, 
'pursue the discussion.' 

'Well, my lord/ rejoined Lord Brumm, 
nothing loth, for he was now on his own sub- 
ject, and was glad to forget his disagreement 
with Earl Lavender, 'it seems to me that, 
woman being undoubtedly a most inferior 
creature, Evolution — with all due reverence 
— should have by this time provided some 
other means for the continuance of the race, 
and should have allowed man, the fittest, to 
survive alone.* 

'Your premises granted,' replied Earl 
Lavender, ' you do indeed deal a telling blow 
at Evolution. But I cannot believe you are 
in earnest in asserting the inferiority of 
woman; she is different from man, but not 
inferior. The fact that woman has survived, 
and is now triumphing over the oppression 
and slavery of which she was so long the 



104 Earl Lavender 

patient victim, is, in my eyes, not only a proof 
of her fitness, but a proof of the truth of 
Evolution/ 

* My lord, I have been married twice,' said 
Lord Brumm solemnly. 

'That is your mystery, is it! You'll be 
married a third time, man, before you know 
where you are.' At which assurance Lord 
Brumm blushed scarlet, and looked very 
uneasy. * And you are generalising from an 
experience of only two women ! Come, good 
Brumm, you must revise all your opinions 
from your new point of view.' 

* Not from my own experience alone,' 
argued Lord Brumm ; ' from biography, 
history and fiction.' 

*A1I three admirable on any established 
basis, but impossible authorities in the dis- 
cussion of Evolution, my best of Brumms ; 
because it is the purpose of Evolution to 
re-write everything. Understand me. You 
might as well admit the doctrine of Pytha- 
goras concerning the soul and Mohammed's 
idea of heaven as necessary data for the dis- 
cussion of an Eight Hours Bill, as refer to 



Earl Lavender 105 

any existing literature, system or creed in 
arguing the question of Evolution. The 
opinions of all writers are based hitherto on 
their own experience and the experience of 
other writers. Consider it very carefully. 
In the whole history of the world, we have 
had recorded hitherto only the experience 
and opinions of a few hundred people — of a 
few hundred out of thousands of millions, 
and all of them disposed more or less by 
education to ratify the conclusions of their 
predecessors. 

' All existing literature, philosophy and re- 
ligion are as relevant to the needs of man- 
kind as the opinion regarding opium of the 
Yogi, who lives on the top of Mount Everest, 
would be to the subject of agricultural de- 
pression in England. Under the Evolution- 
ary system, experience and opinion must be 
gathered from the entire world, and before a 
harvest sufficient to make one little chapter 
of the Evolutionary Bible can be reaped, 
many decades must pass, many hundreds of 
years perhaps ; for not until Evolution has 
been universally accepted, can we have a 



io6 Earl Lavender 

universally accepted opinion on any subject, 
even the simplest, such as the roasting of 
eggs. Thus, you see, Evolution overthrows 
all systems, all creeds, and cancels all litera- 
ture. But in this transition period, this 
night-time of history, Evolution has not been 
unmindful of the world's wants. I, the 
fittest human being that ever walked beneath 
the moon, have been sent into the world, fur- 
nished with unerring intuition, as a guide to 
the people, and have to-night begun my 
apostolate triumphantly, as you yourself have 
witnessed.' 

During this deliverance Earl Lavender 
had kept his eye fixed on the Veiled Lady, 
and in his own mind, although his words 
were heard only by Lord Brumm, she was 
his true audience. As a matter of fact, he 
had no listener at all, for Lord Brumm s 
attention was so engrossed by the manoeuvres 
of their waiter, that Earl Lavender's words 
fell on his hearing like water through a sieve. 

The rapidly served supper had been as 
rapidly disposed of during the quarrel and 
discussion ; and the waiter, a baboon-faced 



Earl Lavender 107 

person of dubious nationality, now moved 
stealthily about the table at which Earl 
Lavender and Lord Brumm sat. He 
had his bill-book in his hand, with the bill 
made out, and tapped it expressively with 
his pencil every few instants. He frowned, 
muttered, and gnashed his teeth ; or charged 
the table, bill in hand, only to relent and 
circle his prey as if he had not yet hypnotised 
them to the paying point. Lord Brumm 
had never seen an uglier waiter, or one of 
stranger behaviour. He felt quite faint 
when he thought of what would happen on 
the presentation of the bill ; but having that 
species of courage which faces the worst as 
soon as it is inevitable, he suggested at the 
pause in Earl Lavender's remarks that it 
was time to go. 

The waiter, divining the purport of Lord 
Brumm's words, struck in at once with his 
bill. 

Earl Lavender read it aloud. 'Two 
suppers, ten shillings. Wine, eleven shill- 
ings, A guinea.' He then looked up at the 
waiter and smiled. 



I d8 Earl L avender 

* I vait/ said the waiter fiercely. * It is 
now quarter of tvelfe. Vun, dwo, oader 
supper, not yet avhile, I vait, regard/ 

* Are you French ? ' asked Earl Lavender, 
amused by this specimen of foreign-waiter's 
English — a patois of which he had had but 
little experience, but by which even the most 
experienced can seldom distinguish nation- 
ality. Many of the foreign waiters in London 
pick up their English chiefly in the society of 
each other: French, German, Italian and 
Swiss, they have among them produced a 
syntax, vocabulary and pronunciation con- 
sisting almost exclusively of mistakes, which 
bear the impress of the genius of one or 
other, and sometimes of all, of their native 
tongues. 

* Are you French ? ' asked Earl Lavender, 
much interested in the baboon-like waiter 
and his hybrid speech. 

*That makes nothing,' replied the waiter 
more fiercely than before. 'Ze tabble, I 
vait, regard.' 

Following with his eyes the gesture which 
accompanied 'regard,' Earl Lavender per- 



Earl Lavender 109 

ceived that the waiter meant him to take note 
of the stream of people who were entering 
the room hurriedly and filling up every 
seat. 

' Oh ! ' he said, ' I understand. You wish 
us to give place to others. And indeed, it is 
time we did, for it may require several nights 
of very brisk custom to repay you the price 
of our supper.' 

' Ze bill, sir,* said the waiter, tapping with 
his pencil. 

' Have you not understood 1 ' asked Earl 
Lavender in mild astonishment. ' You are 
to pay the bill out of your own pocket since 
Evolution has seen fit to provide no other 
means.' 

'Sacrdf cried the waiter. **Afe you ze 
bayment made, pardon, quick, vun, dwo, oader 
supper. 'Immel! ze time vly, beoble vait, 
I vait, ze tabble, vill you den yourself dwo 
oader suppers take tvice "i heh ! heh ! ' 

' Explain to him, Brumm,' said Earl 
Lavender, rising. 

' We have no money, waiter,' said 
Lord Brumm, who was ghastly pale, and 



no Earl Lavender 

covered with perspiration. ' Understand ? 
We — have — no — money/ 

* Vat you say ? Mein Gott ! ' shrieked the 
waiter, drawing all eyes on himself. *You 
eat, you drink, you talk, and you zit, zit, zit, 
and go not avay upon nothing I bresent, 
and afe no monney ! Ach ! roppers ! Bonne 
mere I tventy-vun shilling lost dead, and ze 
provitable tip, tip, tip. Jean ' — this to the 
commissionaire, a burly young Soudanese 
veteran who had just entered — ' vetch ze 
boleece.' 

' Stop ! ' said the superintendent of the 
room, interfering unwillingly, and only at 
the last moment, between the waiter and 
his prey. * Gentlemen, what is the 
matter ? ' 

Instead of replying immediately, Earl 
Lavender motioned the commissionaire and 
the waiter, who intercepted his view, to stand 
aside. This they did mechanically ; where- 
upon Earl Lavender delivered a short address 
sitting in his chair, and seen by everybody 
in the room, those nearest him remaining 
seated, while the others arranged themselves 



Earl Lavender 1 1 1 

gallery-wise, standing up, according to dis- 
tance, on the floor or the chairs. 

* Ladies and gentlemen,' said Earl Lavender 
in his clear, musical voice, ' the ready inclina- 
tion you show to attend to my message is 
very gratifying, but that hardly decreases the 
difficulty I find in making myself understood, 
for even my disciple here, Lord Brumm, fails, 
except in snatches, to grasp my meaning. 
Unaccustomed, as I imagine you all are, with 
one transcendent exception, to any effort of 
real thought, I cannot expect to find you 
more receptive than my last audience, which 
consisted of authors — men in the habit of at 
least trying to think. I may, however, remind 
you that in certain spheres of knowledge 
Evolution has already been recognised and 
welcomed as an iconoclast. This you must 
all have gathered from the newspapers and 
ordinary conversation, as I myself have done. 
It has remained for me, however, to discover 
and teach Evolution as a religion which shall 
remould all our ideas, all our customs, all our 
habits ; and you will at once understand that 
a better missionary could not have been 



112 Earl Lavender 

chosen when I inform you that I am the 
fittest of human beings. Instead of writing 
a book, or dehvering a series of lectures 
in St James's Hall, I have adopted, as in 
Evolution bound, a new method of promul- 
gating the new system. In my own person 
and that of Lord Brumm I am illustrating 
the doctrine of the survival of the fittest. 
Without money we enter a restaurant, and 
eat and drink of the best, trusting to Evolu- 
tion to defray the expense. No propaganda 
could be simpler or more efficacious. Twice 
to-night Evolution has vindicated our fitness, 
providing in the * Cap-and- Bells ' the price of 
steaks and ale and of a magnum of Mumm. 
I have perfect confidence that a third miracle 
will now be performed ; for these are Evolu- 
tionary miracles, ladies and gentlemen, and 
the only kind possible in the nineteenth 
century.' 

The distinct, authoritative utterance, and 
the calm, smiling face of Earl Lavender 
produced such an effect that for a few 
seconds after he had concluded perfect 
silence reigned. Then laughter rose and 



Earl L avender 113 

swelled and filled the room ; people began 
to chatter, and many plied their knives and 
forks again, although still keeping a watchful 
eye on the scene in progress. 

* Boleece ! ' cried the baboon-faced waiter, 
blue with anger. * You lose me my situacion. 
You no know what all you do. But you 
sail soof-soof-soofer. You sail in ze mill 
wheel hum for free six weeks like ze busy 
leetle basso in ze song, and 'afe a deal of ze 
blank to sleeb, heh ! heh ! ' 

The superintendent, perplexed but self- 
possessed, .bidding the waiter be quiet, 
appealed to Lord Brumm. 

* The joke has gone far enough,' he said. 
* Your friend is evidently prepared to carry 
it on, but I think you hardly seem to be of 
his mind in the matter.' 

' We have no money,' said the miserable 
Brumm inertly. 

' I'll take your watches, then,' said the 
superintendent. 

Lord Brumm shook his head and threw 
open his coat. 

' Well,' said the superintendent, feeling 

H 



114 Earl L avender 

that they were not common sharpers, * if you 
will leave your names and addresses, and an 
acknowledgment of the debt, you may 
go. 

*To our names,' said Earl Lavender, 
pleasantly, 'you are welcome. I am the 
Earl of Lavender, and this is Lord Brumm. 
And also to our address, which, in the 
meantime, is London. But from to-night 
forward we shall never pay for anything. 
In the economic, as in all spheres. Evolution 
spells change.' 

The superintendent looked carefully at the 
nails of his own right hand, then he nodded 
to the Soudanese veteran. There was again 
silence in the room, and all eyes were fixed 
on Earl Lavender. But just as the com- 
missionaire turned towards the door, the 
Veiled Lady rose and advanced to the table 
at which Earl Lavender sat. 

' Wait a little,' she said in a harp-like 
voice, calling after the commissionaire, who 
came back at once. ' How much is it ? ' she 
asked of the superintendent. 

The superintendent pointed to the bill. 



Earl Lavender 115 

' One pound one/ she said, stooping over 
the table and opening her purse. 

The baboon-faced waiter immediately held 
out his hand, and the Veiled Lady placed in 
it a sovereign and half-a-crown. 

* I zank you,' he said, pocketing the coins 
greedily, and without making that feeble 
appearance of searching for change, the 
usual ceremony accompanying the acceptance 
of a tip which is not paid separately. ' I 
zank you, but I zink I would afe him in ze 
mill wheel much more hum.' 

When the bill was paid. Earl Lavender 
rose and made a deep bow to the Veiled Lady, 
who acknowledged it with a slight inclina- 
tion. He then offered her his arm, which, 
after a moment's hesitation, she took. He 
conducted her to the door of the saloon, and 
there he faced the people again. 

' Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, * when ' 
I consider the tremendous issues involved in 
the episode you have witnessed to-night, I 
confess that, in spite of my desire to take 
things as they come, I am amazed at your 
callousness. Had I risen in a crowded meet- 



1 1 6 Earl Lavender 

ing of Parliament and introduced a bill for 
the compulsory emigration of the inhabitants 
of Great Britain, and the peopling of Scot- 
land and England with Hibernian and 
American-Irish, my reception would have 
been of a very warm nature. And yet, I 
assure you, what you have heard and seen in 
this place to-night, is the beginning of a 
change in polity, creed and conduct, to which 
the racial rearrangement I have suggested 
would be but as a pyrotechnic display at 
Sydenham to the fires of Doomsday. It 
fills me indeed with consternation to see you 
sitting here eating and drinking, laughing 
and talking, thoughtless and secure at the 
very moment when a lever has been put to 
the world which shall shift its orbit. Not 
that I would have you gloomy ; not that I 
would have you what is called serious : 
seriousness, as it is commonly understood, is 
no part of the radiant Evolutionary life ; but 
I should like to see you interested and ex- 
cited. Doubtless you have often said to 
yourselves, — '' We recognise the change going 
on about us : Society is being re-edified on a 



Earl Lavender 117 

new plan ? " But I tell you dilapidation did 
not cease with the walls, and while you are 
busy with your new social structure, a mine 
is laid under the ancient foundations on 
which you build. Be warned in time ; leave 
your patchwork and start afresh. You are 
erecting your new marble on an old ground- 
work of brick. Get down to the solid rock 
once more, I beseech you. Take example 
by me. Not in parliaments, or cathedrals, 
or colleges, but in taverns and restaurants 
is the new doctrine preached ; and its 
veracity is attested not by banners and 
trumpets and embattled hosts, but by a 
simple miracle which lay to my hand — to 
wit, the being publicly provided for at the 
expense of others — that is, by Evolution. 
Although I bid you take example by me, 
I do not ask for slavish imitation. That 
would be impossible were you to attempt 
it, for Evolution permits the course I follow 
only to the fittest of mortals and his chosen 
disciple. But I say again, take example 
by me. Although you cannot be the fittest, 
you may be fit enough. Make clean sheets 



1 1 8 Earl Lavender 

of your minds ; and in place of all old 
ideas inscribe this alone, — " The fit shall 
survive, and Earl Lavender is the fittest." 
You may also, in many ways, invite Evolu- 
tion to vindicate your fitness. Those of 
you who are wealthy, might easily bestow 
your goods upon the poor, and begin life 
anew. Those of you who have no means, 
but whose ambition it is to be rich, could 
abandon that ambition at once, and spend 
the remainder of your days in beggary, or 
in some precarious occupation such as that 
of vending bootlaces and collar studs in 
Fleet Street and the Strand. You see, with 
a little ingenuity, you could devise many 
means of challenging Evolution. Above all, 
be thoughtful, be cheerful, be serene. 
Good-night.' 

He had his hand on the door when he 
suddenly remembered the lady. 

* I forgot to invite your attention,' he said, 
again addressing his silent and astounded 
audience, 'to the most signal testimony to the 
truth of my mission. My mission is twofold ; 
to be the first and greatest exemplar of the 



Earl L avender 119 

Evolutionary life, and to find and mate with 
the fittest woman. On this the very first day 
of the Evolutionary era my triumph is com- 
plete. I have lived the Evolutionary life 
without a hitch, and have found before the 
new era is many hours old the woman whom 
Evolution appoints. I may, indeed, without 
vanity, ask you to rejoice with me, and com- 
mand you in the name of Evolution to be- 
come my disciples on the instant. Fully per- 
suaded that you are all convinced of the 
truth of my mission, I invite you to signify 
your conversion by giving three cheers for 
Earl Lavender. Lord Brumm will lead the 
cheering.* 

' Lord Brumm will be damned first/ 
said that wretched man under his breath. 

But his services were not required. Many 
of those in the room were actors and music- 
hall artistes. They had all doubtless formed 
their own opinions as to the condition of Earl 
Lavender's wits ; but recognising that he was 
dowered with a full share of the gifts and 
graces which they themselves most wished to 
possess, they burst into a shout of genuine 



1 20 Earl Lavender 

admiration, again and again repeated and 
joined in by almost everybody in the 
room. 

Earl Lavender, having bowed his acknow- 
ledgments, left the caf6 with the lady on his 
arm, and followed by Lord Brumm, the 
extent of whose disgust was to be measured 
only by the extent of his astonishment. 



CHAPTER VI 

A SOMEWHAT SURPRISING CHAPTER 

The cabman was having a hot altercation 
with a policeman when Earl Lavender and 
his companions left the Caf6 Benvenuto. 
An oft-renewed altercation it had been, for 
the cabman had repeatedly taken his stand 
opposite the door; whenever, indeed, the 
approach to the restaurant was unoccupied 
by arrivals or departures : only to be warned 
away by the watchful constable. Both his 
patience and the policeman's were exhausted, 
and the latter was declaring that he believed 
the cabman had no engagement at all at the 
very moment his fare reappeared. 

* Here ; take my number,' cried the cab- 
man triumphantly to his tormentor ; * Fifteen 
million three hundred and thirty-nine thou- 

121 



122 Earl L avender 

sand five hundred and sixty-two and a half. 
I got no fare, haven't I ? Oh, no ; I'm one 
o' these wealthy private cabs that sneaks a 
livin' from the miserable toffs wot runs the 
'ansoms. D'ye see my armorial bearin's, 
stoopid ? Can't yer read Latin ? Vidget 
incendiary Virtus and a Venux above a B. 
This yer's Lord Basinghoume's cab, and 
pretty sweetly I pay for it, I can tell 
you.' 

The policeman grinned but made no 
reply. 

' Where to, sir ? ' asked the cabman. 

The Veiled Lady, who sat between Earl 
Lavender and Lord Brumm, replied, — 

'Trallidge's Hotel' 

' Move on there,' shouted the policeman, 
adding in an aside to the Soudanese com- 
missionaire, * incendiary vegetable or what- 
ever you call yourself.* 

Rookwood Square, one side of which is 
occupied by Trallidge's is not far from 
Piccadilly Circus, and in less than five 
minutes the party arrived. The lady paid 
the fare, and the three entered the hotel. 



Earl Lavender 123 

In the hall Lord Brumm rebelled. He 
had heard of Trallidge's, and so, indeed, for 
the matter of that, had Earl Lavender. It 
had a very dubious reputation. No specific 
charge was ever brought against it, but ordin- 
ary people looked mighty knowing when it 
was mentioned. 

' I'm not going to stay here,' said Lord 
Brumm ; ' I have still some character to 
lose if you haven't.' 

* What's the matter 1 ' said Earl Lavender. 

* How do I know? ' retorted Lord Brumm ; 
*but you surely can't be ignorant of the 
ill-name this place has. We may all be 
arrested in the night and appear in to-morrow's 
evening papers among a herd of German Jews 
and Jewesses, needy swells and commercial 
travellers — *' Raid on a West-end Night- 
house," or something of that kind.' 

The Lady of the Veil, who had vanished on 
entering the hotel, now reappeared from the 
clerk's office. She overheard the last of 
Lord jBrumm's remarks, [and, raising one 
hand to stay Earl Lavender's answer, beck- 
oned a stalwart porter with the other. She 



124 Earl L avender 

then led the way to a stair which went down 
to the kitchen department. Earl Lavender 
followed closely, and so did Lord Brumm, 
for behind him came the stalwart porter smil- 
ing sardonically. Pursuing a passage in the 
sunk flat, the Lady of the Veil brought them 
to a second stair, very broad and well lit, at 
the foot of which they found themselves in 
a large room floored with cedar, hung with 
tapestry, and furnished with rugs, couches 
and cushions. A small fountain gurgled 
and lisped in a marble basin, and several 
doors admitted muflled sounds of music 
and conversation. Four men and four 
women, stately in figure, and with grave, 
pleasant faces, were the inmates of this 
room ; they were dressed in loose flowing 
robes, and from the books in their hands, 
or laid open on the couches, it was plain 
that they had been reading before the new 
arrivals disturbed their studies. Too amazed 
to speak or think, Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm stared about them, while the 
Veiled Lady, having dismissed the porter, 
conversed in whispers with the occupants of 



Earl Lavender 125 

the room. Shortly the four men approached 
Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm, and led 
them towards one of the doors. Earl Lav- 
ender, submitting to the Evolutionary will, 
remained passive in the hands of the pair 
who had laid hold on him ; but Lord Brumm 
was at first inclined to resent interference 
with his liberty. However, the powerful 
grasp which his captors laid upon him at 
his first struggle taught him to abandon all 
attempts at resistance. 

They were conducted along a lofty 
carpeted passage to a room much larger 
than that they had left, which was also 
hung with tapestry and furnished with rugs, 
cushions and couches. In it a performance 
was going on which froze Lord Brumm 
with terror, and excited a very lively interest 
in the mind of Earl Lavender. 

On the couches sat several middle-aged 
men and women, whose countenances, like 
those of the inmates of the first room, wore an 
agreeable expression of thoughtful gravity. 
These were superintending the operations 
•of men and women of almost all ages, 



126 Earl L avender 

who entered sometimes in pairs and some- 
times in groups. There were three couples 
present when Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm were led in ; and two of the men 
and one of the women were being soundly 
flogged by the other three. The chas- 
tisers counted the lashes aloud, and in each 
case twelve were administered. As soon as 
the punishment had been inflicted, the seem- 
ing culprits gathered their robes about them, 
received the whips, which were of knotted 
cords, from the hands of those who had 
wielded them, and the punishers became 
the punished. Then the couples, having been 
thus reciprocally lashed, laid their whips 
on one of the couches, and tripped out of 
the room, dancing to a measure which was 
clearly heard, and evidently proceeded from 
a band of music in a neighbouring apart- 
ment. 

Having tarried in this room for a minute 
or two, their captors led Earl Lavender 
and Lord Brumm along another passage 
to the toilet department of the Under- 
ground City. Here they were laved in 



Earl Lavender 127 

warm water, then plunged into snow arti- 
ficially prepared, and finally drenched in a 
shower bath of attar of roses. Robes 
similar to those worn by the other dwellers 
in the Underground World were given them, 
and they were taken back to the Whipping 
Room. Four couples were engaged in the 
extraordinary ceremony of this apartment 
when they re-entered it. As there could be 
no mistake about the actuality and severity 
of the chastisement, Lord Brumm, at 
the sight of two tall young women armed 
with whips, who rose from a couch to greet 
him and Earl Lavender, cried, — 

' No, no ! I won't have it, I — ' 

He got no further with his protest, for 
he was instantly gagged, his hands and feet 
tied, and his robe thrown from his shoulders. 
Then one of the young women, an athletic 
girl of about twenty, with a laughing face 
and a roguish eye, laid twelve lashes on 
his broad back with the heartiest goodwill. 

In the meantime Earl Lavender, with- 
out waiting for instructions, bared his 
shoulders as he had seen the others do, 



128 Earl L avender 

clasped his hands on his breast and stood 
stock-still. The second woman, who pos- 
sessed great beauty, and seemed to be about 
twenty-five years of age, at once inflicted 
with sufficient vigour a dozen lashes and 
one to the bargain. Earl Lavender winced 
at the first and second lash, and at the third 
he moved a step forward, but he took the 
rest of his punishment without a motion. 
His fair chastiser approved of his conduct 
with a charming smile, and having handed 
him the whip, exposed her own back. Lightly 
Earl Lavender brought down the scourge. 
How could he score the soft white shoulders 
of this beautiful woman ! But she turned to 
him with a mortified look, and said, — 

' You are unworthy of my friendship if you 
spare me. Put forth your strength, or I will 
leave you.' 

Convinced of the lady's sincerity. Earl 
Lavender then laid on lustily, and was as- 
tonished to find, when he gave himself to 
it, what enjoyable work it was. 

Although, while in his company before, the 
Veiled Lady had not uncovered her face 



Earl L avender 129 

for an instant, Earl Lavender had no diffi- 
culty in recognising her as the robed 
beauty with whom he had just exchanged 
whippings. It was the individuality of her 
carriage, along with her unusual height, 
which betrayed her. All her motions were 
rapid, graceful and full of precision without 
being precise ; and when she was at rest 
her stillness was like that of a statue — of 
Galatea wakening into life. Had any 
doubt remained in Earl Lavenders mind 
as to her indentity the sound of the harp- 
like voice in which she had bidden him put 
forth his strength would have dispelled it. 

* Come,' she said, when she had covered 
her shoulders. 

He took the hand she offered, and they left 
the Whipping Room, moving in time to the 
music, which sounded from the apartment 
they were about to enter. On the threshold 
he looked back to see how it fared with 
Lord Brumm. His henchman had been un- 
bound, and was just beginning to repay his 
chastiser, the roguish-looking girl, who had 
thrashed him mercilessly ; and Earl Lavender, 



1 30 Earl Lavender 

catching his eye, bowed and smiled to signify 
his approbation. 

In the apartment from which the music 
came, a vast hall with pillars supporting a 
lofty roof, no light burned, but floods of the 
richest colour streamed in from lamps with- 
out through many Gothic windows filled with 
stained glass. The musicians, a hundred 
men and women, old and young, sat in a 
minstrels' gallery of carved oak, playing on 
all kinds of stringed instruments, on wind 
instruments of wood, with triangles, drums 
and cymbals. On the shining marble floor, 
dyed by the lamp-beams, a multitude of all 
ages moved to the slow measure, dancing in 
groups or couples ; and every now and again 
a few of the musicians would leave the 
gallery, their places being taken by some of 
the dancers. An expression of radiant 
seriousness, as far removed from solemnity 
as from ordinary mirth, sat on the faces of 
all the dancers. Earl Lavender glanced 
quickly at his companion, and beheld in her 
the same high look. He touched her waist, 
and they joined the dance. For more than 



Earl L avender 131 

an hour, steeped in colour and sound, they 
circled among the pillars of the vast hall, 
unwearied, silent, without need to speak a 
word. Then the lady led the way to 
an ante-room where many couples re- 
clined on couches conversing in under- 
tones. 

' Let us rest and talk a little/ she said. 

* Lady/ said Earl Lavender, reclining 
opposite his companions, for the couches 
were arranged in pairs facing each other, 
with a little space between. ' Lady,' he 
said, 'since I became aware that I am the 
fittest of men, and knew that it is incumbent 
on me to find and wed the fittest woman, my 
imagination has figured many ideals, but not 
my most exquisite dream approached the 
reality. Most beautiful, most graceful, most 
lofty-spirited and fittest of women, let us go 
at once to the proper authority and be 
married according to the form of this 
subterranean land — if there be any form 
that is to say.' 

The Lady of the Veil give him a piercing 
glance, and said coldly, — 



132 Earl Lavender 

* There is no marriage, nor giving in 
marriage here/ 

* Then let us return to the upper world,* 
rejoined Earl Lavender, * for it becomes us 
to be married immediately/ 

* I shall never marry,' said the lady. * But 
why do you keep up this foolish fantasy with 
me?' 

* Foolish fantasy ! * cried Earl Lavender, 
starting to his feet. * Foolish fantasy ! Ah,' 
he continued more quietly, resuming his 
couch, * you naturally wish to try me ; I may 
have to pass through many ordeals before 
Evolution will permit our union. Your in- 
difference is only apparent I am sure. Being 
the fittest of women, you must love me as I 
love you. And thus I pass at once the first 
ordeal. Lady, nothing you can do or say will 
persuade me that you do not love me, and 
are not as eager for our union as I am. 
Think what it means — the union of the fittest 
man and the fittest woman. Think of the 
ecstasy and glory of it — the need of it ; the 
world waits for this event — has waited since 
its creation. The haste which Evolution has 



Earl Lavender 133 

shown in bringing us together on the very 
first day of the new era points to the pro- 
priety of a speedy consummation. If we may 
not marry here, let us fly at once. Come, lady.* 

The lady surveyed him long before she 
spoke, gradually hiding with the deep fringe 
of her eyelashes the look of pity that dawned 
out of the blank amazement in her eyes. 

* You do not ask,' she said at length, 
making no reference to his appeal and wish- 
ing to occupy his thoughts with something 
else, ' for any explanation of the manners 
and customs of the underground world.' 

' I am no longer interested,' he said. ' I 
was at first astonished, but I am now ab- 
sorbed entirely by my love for you, and my 
desire to fulfil at once the intention of 
Evolution. If there be another ordeal, 
submit me to it without further delay, oh, 
fittest among women ! ' 

*I am not the fittest among women,' re- 
joined the lady, with some resentment. 
* There are present here to-night many 
lovelier, handsomer, stronger, warmer- 
hearted, better - educated women than I 



134 Earl Lavender 

am. Although you are mad, I beg you 
not to be foolish.' 

* Ah ! ' exclaimed Earl Lavender, a look 
of pain crossing his face. * Now, indeed, 
you put me to the test. But although 
at this moment you were to become old 
and shrivelled, weak and rheumatic, I 
should still maintain that you are the 
fittest of women, confident that the first 
kiss of love would restore you to youth 
and grace like the bewitched lady in the 
ballad. Were you to ransack the harems 
of the East, the palaces of Russia, the 
homes of the English nobility, and place 
before me the choice beauties of the world, 
I should still select you, for I can trust 
Evolution and read the signs provided. 
The moment I saw you sitting veiled in 
the Caf6 Benvenuto, I said to Lord 
Brumm, '* Behold the fittest among 
women!" And you, dear lady, whispered 
within yourself, I am certain, ** Behold the 
man of men ! " You see with what ease 
I pass this second ordeal. The third has 
no terrors for me. You accuse me coldly 



Earl Lavender 1 3 5 

of being mad. I am as astonished that 
you make the accusation as I would have 
been had the twins not made it. I am 
not mad, and I know, although you act 
well, you are only pretending to think 
me insane. Some sterner ordeal, lady!' 
Again the lady looked long at him 
through her eyelashes before replying. 

* I shall devise an ordeal,' she said 
suddenly, as if ending a debate in her 
own mind. * But tell me in the mean- 
time what you think of the new stimulant.' 

' The new stimulant ? * 

* Yes ; whipping. Examine yourself. 
Has the intoxication worn off yet?' 

* No,' answered Earl Lavender; *the 
exalted mood continues. Was it the 
whipping? — Yes, I believe it was the 
whipping that roused all my senses.' 

' Not all your senses,' rejoined the 
lady ; ' it sets the soul more broad awake 
than wine. Wine rouses the lower nature 
also, and the soul, only half-enlightened, 
continues still surrounded by the fleshly 
dream, which is the body. The scourge 



136 Earl Lavender 

frees the soul and quells the body. You 
must have been drunk with wine when 
you came here, or you would not have 
talked to me of love.' 

* How is this?' began Earl Lavender, 
remembering some old passages in his 
reading, wherein whipping is said to rouse 
the animal passions ; but the lady inter- 
rupted him. 

* I anticipate your objection,' she said. 
' Many novices make it, coming here for 
the first time full-fed and wine-flushed. 
If the body is already over-stimulated with 
food and drink, the effect of a moderate 
whipping is to intensify the existing excite- 
ment. Had you drunk much to-night ? ' 

* Not very much,' said Earl Lavender. 
* A little whisky, a little beer, and a fair 
quantity of champagne.' 

*Ah!* exclaimed the lady sitting up, 
' And your companion. Did he drink as 
much ? ' 

X 'Yes; but that is not much. We had 
no port nor liqueurs.' 

* Let us find your friend,' said the lady. 



Earl Lavender 137 

They returned to the Dancing Hall 
and searched the eddying throng that now 
seemed to cover its vast floor; but Lord 
Brumm was not there. Before with- 
drawing they turned round on the thres- 
hold of the Whipping Room and watched 
the dancers. Their robes, arms, faces, 
hair, and twinkling feet, and the floor and 
the pillars of the hall were all embroidered 
and enamelled with rich hues and set with 
many-coloured jewels from the stained and 
warmly-lit windows. The slow, searching 
music of strings : and wood-pipes seemed 
always about to open up some new secret 
of joy, but the cymbals and drums and 
triangles were unable to reveal it. 

' Why have they no trumpets } ' whis- 
pered Earl Lavender. 'The music aches 
to burst bounds and soar.' 

* This music and this dance,' replied the 
lady, 'go on in this room endlessly. In 
the underground world we know neither 
night nor day. New-comers take the places 
continually of the players and the dancers 
who withdraw. The music itself is un- 



138 Earl L avender 

resolved. Listen attentively, and it seems 
a softly-wailing question which haunts and 
troubles forever all who hear it. An 
answer, an illusive answer comes only in 
dancing to it. To play it is exquisite pain. 
See how often the players are changed. 
Watch their sad faces.* 

Earl Lavender looked and sighed. 

* And what may this mean ? ' he said. 
* This must be some great allegory.' 

* Seek for no meaning in it ; it has none. 
What meaning is there in pain and plea- 
sure ? They are twins ; that is all w^e 
know. Seek no meaning in anything 
you see here. Images, ideas, flashes of 
purpose will peer out in all our ways 
and deeds, but there is no intention here 
below. Is there any intention anywhere?' 

' Intention,' cried Earl Lavender aloud, 
startling the dancers near him. * Inten- 
tion is another name for Evolution; the 
great purpose that is in the universe. 
Ho ! all ye sad-souled players,' he called 
out, ascending the steps of the minstrels' 
gallery, 'and you self-deceived dancers! 'Is 



Ea rl L avender 139 

it purpose or is it meaning you cannot 
find? Behold in me the purpose of the 
ages, Earl Lavender, the fittest of men.' 

He was not permitted to say more. 
Five of the dancers, joined by the Lady 
of the Veil, seized him and led him along 
a passage he had not yet traversed to a 
lofty room which bore some resemblance 
to a court of justice. On a platform sat 
three reverend-looking men ; before them 
a table covered with books and scrolls. 
He who occupied the middle seat was 
clad in a white robe ; his co-mates, in 
red and blue respectively. Opposite the 
platform, and occupying more than half 
of the room, was a gallery which speedily 
filled on the entrance of Earl Lavender 
and those who accompanied him. 

* Judgment, oh, sages!' said the Lady 
of the Veil. 

'And again judgment, oh, sages!' cried 
another voice. 

Looking behind him. Earl Lavender 
beheld Lord Brumm, also conducted by 
six denizens of the Underworld, including 



140 Earl Lavender 

the roguish damsel who had whipped 
him. Earl Lavender's henchman pre- 
sented a very woebegone appearance. 
His robe was torn from his shoulders, 
and his hair tumbled. He was gagged, 
and his hands tied behind his back ; tears 
stood in his eyes. 

* Why, what have you done, my good 
Brumm ? * asked Earl . Lavender. 

'Silence/ said the white-robed sage in a 
stern voice. 

Earl Lavender bowed in submission to 
the sage's decision, and he and Lord 
Brumm were placed at the bar. 

In reply to a sign from the white-robed 
sage, the Lady of the Veil, making a 
profound obeisance^ addressed the court. 

* Oh, sages,' she said, * of what the second 
misdemeanant is accused I cannot tell, but 
in charging the first, I must speak to the 
presence of both in this city. I saw these 
men in the Cafd Benvenuto, where I tasted 
a little macaroni after a railway journey 
of six hours. He, against whom I bear 
witness, seemed to me worthy of admis- 



Earl L avender 141 

sion to the Underworld, and in accord- 
ance with our established custom, I brought 
him along with me ; his comrade was 
apparently undetachable. Just now, as we 
passed through the Hall of Dancing, he 
ascended the steps of the gallery and 
cried aloud — I remember his exact words,-— 
*' Intention is another name for Evolu- 
tion ; the great purpose that is in the 
universe. Ho! all ye sad-souled players, 
and you self-deceived dancers ! Is it pur- 
pose, is it meaning you cannot find? Be- 
hold in me the purpose of the ages. 
Earl Lavender, the fittest of men." Be- 
fore he could proceed further, we seized 
him and brought him hither.' 

* Has she spoken truly in all points so 
far as you know.^^* asked the white-robed 
sage of those who had brought Earl Laven- 
der before the judgment-seat. The dancers 
acquiesced silently in the lady s deposition. 

When the sages had consulted together in 
whispers, their spokesman announced that 
they intended to proceed with the second 
case before sentencing Earl Lavender. 



142 Earl Lavefider 

'Oh, sages/ at once began the roguish 
damsel, making her obeisance, ' you have 
heard already how this misdemeanant ob- 
tained entrance to the Underworld. Judg- 
ing from his appearance and disinclination 
to be whipped, I thought him more fitted 
for the Hall of Fancy than for the Hall 
of Dancing. There he behaved well, and 
appeared to enjoy everything that was said. 
His conduct, however, became foolish dur- 
ing the narration of a love story. He cast 
what are called sheep's eyes at me, and 
furtively kissed my hand. I promptly re- 
vealed his crime, and we brought him hither. 
When we seized him he struggled and 
bellowed, afraid of another whipping, where- 
upon we gagged and bound him. 

* Has she spoken truly in all points so 
far as you know?* asked the white-robed 
sage of the roguish girl's companions. They 
bowed an affirmative. 

After a second whispered consultation, 
the white-robed sage announced the de- 
cision of the court, which was the same in 
both cases, viz., — that Earl Lavender and 



Earl Lavender 143 

Lord Brumm should be taken at once 
to the dormitory, put to bed, and in the 
morning expelled from the underground 
city. 

'Well, what did I tell you?' said Earl 
Lavender, when he and Lord Brumm, 
hurried away before either could attempt 
a reply, had been locked into a spacious 
double-bedded apartment, one of a suite 
which formed the men's dormitory. * Here 
are the best beds in London, and changes of 
linen hanging ready aired.' 

Lord Brumm only groaned in reply. 



CHAPTER VII 

WHAT ELSE MRS SCAMLER SAID TO MAUD 
EMBLEM 

Mrs Scamler rose betimes, and having 
breakfasted heartily on tea and eggs and 
bacon, took a penny 'bus to the Great British 
Hotel. There she found herself in a diffi- 
culty, for she had left her new acquaintance 
the night before without learning her name. 

' I have come to see a young lady/ she 
said to the hotel porter. * Tall, dark, hand- 
some, with a fine complexion. She is alone, 
and is in London on the same kind of 
errand as myself, which you would be sur- 
prised if I were to tell you, but I won't.' 

The hotel porter, a decorative official 

with an attachment of trifling duties, smiled 

superciliously and looked towards the clerk, 

144 



Earl L avender 145 

to whom Mrs Seamier straightway addressed 
herself. 

* What a nice glass case they keep you 
in/ she said to the modish clerk. 

Mrs Seamier was, as a rule, in high spirits, 
but in the mornings, and immediately after 
breakfast, at which she always emptied a 
teapot to her own share, she would have 
addressed personalities to a judge on the 
bench. 

' Madam!* exclaimed the clerk reproachfully. 

He was a tall, important young man, and, 
rising in his box, he looked down on Mrs 
Seamier from a great height. But Mrs 
Seamier leaned her laughing face through 
the open portiere, tapped the second lowest 
button on the clerk's waistcoat with her 
gold-rimmed eyeglasses, and said, — 

*Oh! do sit down. I can't talk to you 
away up there.' 

Down sat the clerk at the magical touch, 
not dismayed but certainly perplexed. He 
knew the kind of woman who is easily 
familiar, and how to deal with her, but 
Mrs Seamier was a species apart. . 

K 



146 Earl Lavender 

* I have just told him^ said Mrs Seamier, 
donning her glasses and looking round at 
the porter, ' that I am in a difficulty. I 
want to see a very attractive young lady 
who lives here just now, but whose name 
I don't know. She must have an extra- 
ordinary history, because we are in London 
on the same sort of errand, and I am at 
least double her age. What is her name or 
the number of her room, do you know ? ' 

* I cannot help you,' said the clerk solemnly. 

* An extraordinary history is not necessarily 
a mark of identification.' 

' No,' rejoined Mrs Seamier in some doubt 
as to the clerk's exact meaning. * Ah ! yes, 
well,' she continued in a moment as buoyant 
as ever. * She is alone, you understand ; 
nobody with her at all. She expects me, 
and I'll tell you how she's dressed.' 

Mrs Seamier went into a minute descrip- 
tion, and the clerk knew whom she meant 
before she had completed it. 

* No. 135,' he said, hardly above his breath. 

* No. 135/ echoed Mrs Seamier jubilantly. 

* Here is my card, porter. Take it to No. 135.' 



Earl Lavender 147 

Bearing cards was not one of the duties 
attached to the porter's decorative existence, 
but with the aid of a boy in buttons Mrs 
Seamier was soon introduced to her com- 
panion of the previous night. 

*Well, my dear, still at breakfast,' she 
cried, *and I finished mine more than half 
an hour ago/ 

*Hush!* exclaimed the young lady. 

They were in the table d'hote room, and 
Mrs Seamier s loud address had drawn all 
eyes towards them. 

* Not so loud ? Well, my dear, I am 
so glad to see you again,* said Mrs 
Seamier, seating herself at the table where 
the young lady breakfasted alone. * Now, 
where was I ^ ' she continued more quietly. 
*We have no time to lose, and have so 
much to say to each other you know. I had 
just told you of the arrival of Mr Gurdon 
at my house in Nettleby-Kingscroft. Yes. 
Well, he was so difficult. The rules he laid 
down quite dispelled me. He had a bed- 
room and a sitting-room on the same floor, 
and he wasn't to see either me or the ser- 



148 Earl Lavender 

vant from week's end to week's end. He 
wasn't even to hear us on his flat. He 
wasn't to be knocked in the morning ; he 
wasn't to be knocked at any time, and if he 
caught the glimpse of a skirt he would leave 
without warning. He was one of those 
mahoganists that no compromise is nothing 
to. He was at that time a mahoganist to 
the bitter end, and to such an extent of 
bitterness that he couldn't endure the sound 
of a woman's voice however harsh it might 
be. In the morning he got up at half-past 
seven, and went for a walk wet or dry. 
Breakfast, luncheon, tea, dinner, walking, 
reading, eating with a regularity that was 
awful to think of, and nobody molesting him, 
he began to be easier in his mind, and sent 
me notes to take tea with him — he would 
put them inside the account-book and leave 
it on the tray at lunch when he had finished 
and gone to his bedroom or for a walk to 
let the servant clear away — if I wouldn't 
speak. And I didn't ; I never opened my 
lips, but poured out his tea, and drank one 
little cup myself without as much as a smile. 



Earl Lavender 149 

French irregular verbs was nothing to it. 
My dear, I believe I would have succeeded 
on the stage, the gravity of my countenance 
at those silent teas, and the apparent ease 
with which I maintained a look of profound 
wisdom were something superhuman. But 
I suffered for it. I have seen me reduced 
to such a state of feebleness after half an 
hour of tea and silence with Mr Gurdon, me 
acting terribly all the time to appear natural, 
that I have had to take a glass of brandy 
and eat a slice of cold beef to sustain my 
flagging energies till dinner time, talking all 
the time to the servant. But I had deter- 
mined to marry Mr Gurdon, and there was 
no torture I wouldn't cotton to. Well, I had 
my reward. On the seventh time that I 
poured out his tea, he spoke. You won't 
guess what he said ? ' 

* No, unless he offered you marriage.' 

* Oh, my dear, he was far too much of a 
mahoganist to do that in a hurry. No. 
He said, '* Mrs Seamier, are you partial to 
cleanliness?" **Dear me, Mr Gurdon," I 
answered, *'is there a smudge on your tea- 



1 50 Earl Lavender 

cup?'* "No, ma'am/' he replied; and he 
added with a sigh, ** I wish there was." 
'* Lord bless me, Mr Gurdon," I said, " I 
can tell the servant to blacklead her thumb." 
** Madam," he replied, in a sorrowful way, 
'*if this house were not so clean, if you were 
not so clean, with your magnificent gift of 
silence — but, it is not to be thought of." At 
that moment I excelled all my efforts in 
every line in which I have displayed my 
talents. My heart was thumping at such 
a rate that it nearly blasted me, and sent my 
ribs flying like curb stones in a quarry, and 
my head was bursting like a pot with too 
much rice in it, but I held my tongue ; I 
didn't say a word. Pale as ashes, I rose 
from the table and left the room. In five 
minutes my plan was formed. The very 
next time Mr Gurdon asked me to pour 
out his tea I put on a soiled cap, rubbed 
a smut over the dimple in my left cheek, 
and sat down with the utmost non-challenge, 
that I was a wonder to myself. I caught 
his eye watching me, but I drank my tea as 
innocent as a child looking out of window, 



Earl Lavender 151 

and seeming to wonder if the rain would go 
off and I could go out to play. I saw he 
was gratified ; he looked quite cheerful, ^but 
he said nothing. Next time he asked for 
my company — now, my dear, I wish you 
particularly to observe my method : Oh, 
woman, in our hours of ease, you know 
age cannot wither her venerable shade nor 
A custom's tale that is told — I was as fresh 
and clean as if I had come out of a bandbox, 
to all outward appearance — and actually, my 
dear, I saw he was troubled, yet my gravity 
and innocence were as marvellous as ever. 
But when I was giving him his second cup 
of tea, I put out my boot to press the coal 
down in the fire, and a change came over 
his face immediately. My white stocking — 
that afternoon clean on, and bought the 
day before — had a little ragged hole in it 
which I made with a skewer, and the ser- 
vant had given my instep a dust with the 
blacking-brush. Well, when he saw it, his 
face brightened up and he nearly spoke. 
Next time there wasn't a speck about me. 
He looked at my hands and face, and I 



152 Earl L avender 

showed him my ankles. He made some ex- 
cuse to rise, and I believe he examined my 
ears. I never saw a man in such a state. 
He took only one cup of tea; for the first 
time banged out of the room, leaving me 
there, and didn't ask to see me again for a 
fortnight. Then, when the invitation came, I 
entered upon the scene with my hair in some 
slight disorder — but really quite becoming 
— a button off my bodice, and a soiled collar, 
His eyes sparkled ; he drank three cups of 
tea hard after each other, and then said, — 
** Madam, I trust — indeed, I believe that 
you are not a scourer?" "Lord bless me, 
Mr Gurdon," I said, ** I wouldn't be such 
a thing for all the world." " I am very glad 
to hear it, ma'am," says he, and not another 
word passed his lips that day. You can 
imagine how keen I was to know why he 
delighted in dirt, and after three or four 
more appearances of mine, always with an 
untidy beauty spot of some kind, he told 
me. '* Madam," he said, '* I congratulate 
you that you are not fanatically clean ; I 
congratulate you that you are not a scourer. 



Earl Lavender 153 

Were there more women like you in the 
world there would be fewer mahoganists." 
**Lord bless me, Mr Gurdon," I said; ''if 
the world's to be saved by sluts, why its 
saved already." '' I doubt it," he said, quite 
serious ; *' I doubt it, madam, I have 
been married twice to scourers." " Oh, 
Mr Gurdon, how dreadful ! " I says, all of a 
tremble ; meaning how dreadful it was to 
be a man's third wife, but he took me to 
mean how dreadful it was to be married 
twice to scourers. **You may well say 
dreadful," he replied. ''My first wife, Mrs 
Seamier, lived to clean. The forefinger of 
her right hand was polished like bone with 
rubbing it along ledges and chair-backs in 
search of dust. Her servants seldom en- 
dured her beyond a fortnight. She swept 
and dusted and scrubbed, and made them 
sweep and dust and scrub from morning to 
night, and dreamt of nothing but sweeping 
and dusting and scrubbing. She would 
mutter in her sleep, — 'There's a cobweb 
inside that egg, Jane; I'm sure of it.' She 
would dust a thing twenty times a day, and 



1 54 Earl Lavender 

exclaim and sigh and look for sympathy. 
And she was a fairly intelligent woman, Mrs 
Seamier, remember; knew a little of most 
things, and had once read a lot ; but she 
had taken to dusting as a man takes to 
dram-drinking. She ruined her body and 
soul with it ; didn't even read the news- 
papers, and died after we had been married 
three years. She was almost the death of 
me too. I was worn to a skeleton, and 
the only thing that gave me a desire for 
life was that she left me a decent little 
income."' 

'What a selfish creature Mr Gurdon 
must be ! ' exclaimed the young lady. 

' Lord bless me, no,' said Mrs Seamier. 
* He's the best middle-aged gentleman I 
ever met. His second wife was a widow 
— with means. He had known her for 
years, and admired her untidiness hugely 
— in the tempestuous petticoat — how does 
it go? — that doth denote — the outside of 
the platter was full of rottenness and dead 
men's bones — you know ; but within — why 
she was a sort of literary lady, he told me, 



Earl Lavender 155 

and wrote stories in a weekly paper with 
her hair coming down, and ink and dirty 
nails all over her person, for her first husband 
had been a nincompoop : so she married 
Mr Gurdon, and immediately she took to 
dusting. No more stories, no more un- 
tidiness and comfort, but sighing and scour- 
ing, and seeing spots in sun, moon and 
stars, pots, pans, plates, chairs, tables, all 
round the dark terrestrial ball. Mr Gurdon 
pined away. It became plain to him that 
it was the effect of himself to make women 
dust — such a clean, spick-and-span gentle- 
man who couldn't get dirty if he wanted 
to. He exposulated ; but she was bound 
to dust or die, she said. So, he cried, '' Die 
and be — " He did, my dear; and she 
stopped dusting and died, and he inherited 
her money. Then he came to me, a con- 
firmed mahoganist, and I angled for him 
so well, my dear, pretending silence and 
untidiness, that at last he offered me mar- 
riage in the bluntest manner, and I named 
the day just as bluntly. " My dear Mrs 
Seamier," he said, **will you marry me 



156 Earl Lavender 

with a black on your nose ? " '* Lord bless 
me, yes, Mr Gurdon," I replied ; " on Tues- 
day week, and you shall put the black on 
yourself, my dear/' *' Shall I?" he cried, 
as beaming as a waiter you give a shilling. 
''That will be the true marriage ceremony. 
Remember, when I put the black on your 
nose we are man and wife; the ring and 
the priest are mere falals after that." You 
can imagine how I hurried on everything — 
silently, and always with a dirty spot some- 
where or other, and a hole in my stock- 
ing or a torn handkerchief, for I saw a 
lot of Mr Gurdon and he watched me 
closely. The tension was terrible, but I 
endured to the end, and on the Mon- 
day night Mr Gurdon went to the hotel, 
as it would never have done for us 
both to go to church from the same 
house. Well, on Tuesday morning, I was 
sitting waiting with a beautiful little bit of 
soot on a handkerchief for him to dab on 
my nose — he was to come at ten and then 
go back to the hotel and drive to church 
for half-past — when in comes a waiter with 



Earl L avender 157 

the news that Mr Gurdon hadn^t been seen 
since eleven o'clock the night before. But 
your breakfast's done, my dear, and you 
seem fidgety, so I'll just hurry and be done, 
too. He hadn't been seen at Nettleby- 
Kingscroft Station ; but at a village, three 
miles away, he had jumped into a London 
train. So instead of a wedding I began 
a hunt — without a tear, my dear, almost 
without a sigh ; for what I want is to be 
occupied, and I really am enjoying myself. 
I put on this dress, and got myself up as 
he would love to see me — a little dash of 
untidiness, a little speck of dirt, and set 
off in pursuit. I arrived at Waterloo 
Station, and drove straight to Pilkington's, 
where I was known. I have been searching 
Lpndon ever since — restaurants, hotels, 
lodging-houses — ' 

* Did you inquire at this hotel } ' asked 
the young lady. 

* No, my dear, I omitted it, forgot all about 
it, it lies so out of the way, until you men- 
tioned it last night.' 

* If you had come here any time before 



1 58 Earl Lavender 

yesterday you would have found Mr 
Gurdon/ 

* Lord bless me, you don't say so ! How 
did you find it out ? * 

* I have an interest in his companion/ re- 
joined the young lady, speaking carefully, 
'and came to London yesterday morning to 
see him. I asked a cabman at Liverpool 
Street to take me to a good, quiet hotel, and 
he drove me here. Just as the cab drew up, 
I saw my friend and the gentleman I suppose 
to be Mr Gurdon leaving. My first thought 
was to follow them, but instead, I inquired of 
the porter if they were staying here, and he 
said they were, which set my mind at rest.' 

' And have you seen them again "i ' 

* No ; I find they have not returned yet. 
Do you think they will come back ? ' 

' I have a presentiment they won't,' said 
Mrs Seamier. 

*And so had I yesterday. They were 
generally in the habit of lunching here. 
Now, they didn't do so yesterday, and I 
thought at once they had left for good. I 
was so sure of it, that in the afternoon I went 



Earl Lavender 1 59 

out to search for them. They had never 
dined in the hotel, so in Holborn, in Oxford 
Street, in Regent Street, in the Strand — ' 

* Just what I did daily ! ' 

' I went into every decent-looking restau- 
rant, and looked about for them. When 
anyone spoke to me, I said I was searching 
for some friends, and was not quite certain 
which restaurant they had chosen. At last 
I came to a pleasant little place in the Strand, 
where I summoned up courage to describe 
my friend to a waiter. He said he had 
noticed such a gentleman, but that he was 
not alone. He had noticed him because, al- 
though quite cheerful, he seemed down on his 
luck, and had discussed expenses very care- 
fully with his companion. I questioned him 
closely, and as he hesitated in his answers, I 
told him not to be afraid, and stirred up his 
courage with half-a-crown. He had watched 
them go westward, talking earnestly, and then 
had seen them returning on the other side, 
and he guessed from the business-like way in 
which they walked, and the unsatisfied looks 
they had cast at the joints and fowls as they 



i6o Earl Lavender 

left his restaurant, that their minds were made 
up to spend their last shilling on something 
more to eat, perhaps in some beef shop about 
Ludgate Circus. I went into every restaurant 
and eating-house on the way to Ludgate 
Circus, asking for those I sought, having got 
a description of Mr Gurdon from the waiter, 
and arrived at the " Cap-and- Bells " only a 
few minutes after they had left in a cab.* 

* And I know the rest ! ' cried Mrs Seamier. 
* Most extraordinary, my dear. I followed 
almost the same plan. Only I started with a 
detective. Oh, I was to tell you about that ! 
Well, I made an appointment with a private 
detective at Pilkington^s, and told him plainly, 
as I have told you, all about Mr Gurdon. 
He ruminated, and said he would require 
ten shillings a day, and ten shillings ex- 
penses. An expensive-looking man he was. 
His clothes were expensive, and his jewel- 
lery, and so was his nose, my dear ; but 
his eyes were piercing. I gave him a pound, 
and he went away without a word, leaving 
me at peace with the world, for I had great 
hopes of him, and his name was William 



Earl Lavender 1 6 1 

Wellington. Next day he came back with 
a blue note-book full of stuff, which he read 
me, about public - houses, betting clubs, 
supper clubs, billiards and baccarat, and 
was out of pocket ten shillings in drinks 
and tips expended in acquiring information, 
which I paid him, and asked him what it 
was all about. He said it was a problem 
which he was solving on his own lines, 
and didn't want no interference. Well, I 
trusted him still, and gave him another 
pound, and he came back next day and 
said he was still at sea. He had been to 
more clubs and public-houses, and had a 
black eye, for which he wanted five shillings. 
I began to see his little game, so I asked 
him sternly if he had heard anything at all 
about Mr Gurdon, and he said he was on 
his tracks, but I assumed a sort of black- 
cap expression of face, and kept him to 
the point, yes or no, had he or had he not 
heard anything of Mr Gurdon. ** No ; he 
couldn't exactly — " ''Quite so," says I; 
'' and I want to tell you, Mr William Well- 
ington, that Mr Gurdon wouldn't go to no 

L 



1 62 Earl Lavender 

such places as these, and I believe you are 
simply spending my money on your own 
guilty pleasures." *' Guilty pleasures ! " he 
echoes, making a note of it very fierce. 
** YouVe heard of an action of damages 
for libel, I suppose?" *'Yes, I have," says 
I. *' And youve heard of imprisonment for 
obtaining money under false pretences." 
Seeing me so sharp with him, he changed 
his tune, and he asks me quite sorrowful 
and huffed, — " Where are the documents in 
the case ? Where's the mystery of it ? 
A gent goes away the night before his 
wedding, and can't be heard of. But there 
ain't no mystery in that. Haven't you got 
a will, or a nannygram, or some kind of 
blooming puzzle — something to give a man 
a start. There ain't no glory in finding 
a man that's run away, unless he's run away 
for something. Where's your clue.'* All 
the detectives I ever read about get a clue, 
and all they have to do is just to follow 
it like the cove did in the labyrinth ; they 
can't go wrong. Here you have a man 
that vanishes ; but why did he vanish ? 



Earl L avende r 163 

that's what I want to know. Did a former 
wife turn up hearing of his marriage, or 
somebody that knows of a murder or 
robbery he did ? Tell me that, and I'll 
find the man." '^ Mr William Wellington," 
I said, '' I have told you that Mr Gurdon's 
wives can't turn up till Doomsday, and then 
there'll be a pulling of caps who'll have 
him ! Gabriel can give the scourers their 
own tombstones to wash and scrub, and 
see who'll be done first, and they'll sniff 
disdainfully at me, his third ; but I'll just 
tuck up my shroud and waltz in through 
the golden gate while their backs are turned 
with the best of middle-aged angels, for the 
last shall be first ; and as for murders and 
robberies, you might as well accuse the 
babe unblessed, unhonoured and unhung." 
He looked at me with his eyes starting, 
and said nothing ; and then I was struck 
all of a heap with an idea. **A clue!" I 
cried. "Is it a clue you want ? Then 
I'll tell you. It's a deputation — an in- 
formal deputation that did it — the butcher's, 
the chemist's and the schoolmaster's wife ; 



164 Earl Lavender 

they must have gone to him as soon as 
he went to the hotel and told him how I 
studied the French language and model 
drawing. He's such a fine old-fashioned, 
middle-aged gentleman, that the very notion 
of the French language would turn his 
stomach ; and to think of taking to his 
bosom a woman that had gone as far as 
them dissolute, irregular verbs of her own 
head, and all without a master, was more 
than he could stand. He thinks Tm fang- 
de-seeaycky poor dear Mr Gurdon ! — and 
I shouldn't wonder if they told him I would 
insist on his getting up on the parlour 
table when I came to study the nude in 
my model drawing. Oh ! the vile creatures ! 
There's a clue, Mr Wellington! Go and 
follow it!" When he found words, which 
he was some time in doing, he said he could 
see no clue in that. *^ A piece of nonsense," 
he said. '' Who ever heard of a deputation 
being a clue, and of a man running away 
because his wife learned French? I never 
even read of such a thing. Give me a 
forged cheque, or a blood-stained weapon, 



Earl Lavender 165 

or a servant girl that's made a slip, or a 
paper about the length of the shadow of 
an old tree that isn't there, and I'll work 
it out — robbery, murder, suicide, sudden 
death or hidden treasure ; but don't insult 
me with gibberish about deputations and 
learning French." '' Mr Wellington," I said, 
putting on my black-cap expression, ^^ are 
you a detective ? " " Am I a detective ? " 
he cries with a hollow laugh. ''What have 
you paid me two pound ten for '^. " ** Ay," 
says I; ''for what?" looking him through 
and through. " For larks, and drinks, and 
bets. You're no more a detective than I 
am, William Wellington. You're a leather 
merchant's clerk or a draper's assistant, and 
your head's been turned with reading stories." 
I consider it was very daring of me to say 
that, because I didn't know ; but I was 
right, and he gave me back six and five- 
pence ha'penny, and begged me not to 
split on him, and scuttled away as pale's 
his shirt — was once. Then I took up my 
case myself, and worked it out just as you 
did with a difference. At first I thought of 



1 66 Earl Lavender 

going through the streets like the heathen 
lady that married Thomas a Becket's father, 
and calling out, — " Walter Gurdon ! Walter 
Gurdon ! " until I found him ; but the streets 
of London must have been different then, 
for it's quite certain I would have been 
run in, so I simply went from restaurant 
to restaurant, and asked plump and plain 
if Mr Gurdon of Nettleby-Kingscroft was 
here, and nobody knew anything about him 
until I came to the '*Cap-and-Bells" and 
found you. And now, my dear, we must 
start again in search of our gentlemen.' 

* Yes, and we must go through the eating- 
houses as before. I'll tell you what, Mrs 
Seamier, we'll part company outside, you one 
way and I another, and at eight o'clock to- 
night meet again in the '*Cap-and- Bells" 
with or without — our gentlemen.' 

' Now, see what it is to be young and 
have a head. That's a most capital idea. 
But if a telegram should come to Pilkington's? ' 

' I think,' said the young lady, ' you 
needn't concern yourself about that, because 
you remember you left no money.' 



Earl Lavender 167 

' Neither I did. Why, what was I dream- 
ing about ? ' 

Now the young lady's plan was devised 
for the purpose of getting rid of Mrs Seamier, 
in order that she might go at once to the 
* Cap-and- Bells' and resume her inquiry 
where she had left it off, without the encum- 
brance of the loquacious widow. 



CHAPTER VII I 

HOW THEY CHASED EACH OTHER IN HANSOM 
CABS 

The morning was well advanced before 
Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm were 
despatched into the upper air. The digni- 
fied old man who escorted them explained 
that by the laws of the Underworld they 
might return if they chose, one more visit at 
least being always permitted to those who 
inadvertently or in a moment of passion com- 
mitted a minor offence. 

* What,' asked Earl Lavender, ' is done in 
the case of a second offence ? ' 

*The offender is ignominiously ejected 
never to be readmitted.' 

* Ignominously ? ' 

* Yes ; he is stripped to his shirt and thrust 

i68 



Earl Lavender 169 

into the streets at noon, thus experiencing 
actually one of the commonest and most dis- 
tressing of nightmares.' 

Earl Lavender made no reply, and he 
and Lord Brumm, having left Rookv^ood 
Square, entered Piccadilly by Rookwood 
Mews. 

* Let us breakfast,' said Earl Lavender, 
* at the '' Cap-and-Bells." ' 

They went arm-in-arm by St James's 
Street, Pall Mall, the Strand and Fleet 
Street to Deadman's Alley, and kept up a 
conversation all the way. 

* Since the porter of the Underworld de- 
scribed the sentence for a second offence I 
have been thinking, good Brumm,' said 
Earl Lavender, *that such a punishment 
should have no terrors for a true Evolu- 
tionist.' 

Lord Brumm groaned. 

' Come, come, you must be cheerful,' said 
Earl Lavender. ' To be cheerful and pleas- 
ant is the whole duty of man. To be peni- 
tent, to be afraid and suspicious, to doubt 
actual humanity, and believe in impossible 



1 70 Earl Lavender 

divinity is no part of Evolution. Be happy ; 
that is the new gospel. Arise and be happy. 
Do not say if I were this, if I were that, if I 
had this, if I had that, then were I fortunate 
and blessed, but be happy now at once. I 
see,' cried Earl Lavender, clutching Lord 
Brumm's arm, and summoning up with a 
lordly gesture the vision he described, * I 
see the entire world happy by simply being 
so. It is a mere matter of mood, and when 
all people say, " Misery is past, let us arise 
and be happy," then we have the Evolution- 
ary Era, and the Survival of the Fittest.' 

' How can I be happy?' exclaimed Lord 
Brumm plaintively. 

' I know your difficulty,' replied Earl 
Lavender. ' To be happy suddenly is a 
greater feat than a death-bed conversion. It 
is so easy, so hereditary to believe in some- 
thing not ourselves. Belief in self is happi- 
ness. The power of conception is a 
sponge ; in most men every pore of it is 
choked and foul. The average mind is a 
dirty sponge in a bathroom ; it must be 
wrung out, washed clean, and kept in run- 



Earl Lavender 171 

ning water — that is, Evolution must pour 
continuously through it, so that it may 
remain itself, and be no more a nauseous 
congestion. Your mind is being wrung 
out, good Brumm ; you will soon be happy. 
But I was talking of something else. Yes ; 
this punishment of being set adrift at noon 
in one's shirt attracts me. I should like to 
incur it, for I should at once fling off my 
shirt and walk through the streets a mother- 
naked man. Unless I am greatly mistaken, 
the matchless symmetry of my figure, and 
the beauty and perfection of my face and 
person, would bewitch all beholders. It must 
be done ; this will be the great test of my 
fitness, and of the truth of my mission. If 
I succeed in walking unmolested from St 
Paul's to Westminster at noon clad only in 
my native fitness, I shall practically have 
accomplished my mission. Yes, and if no 
occasion arises I shall do it on my 
own initiative. You shall accompany me, 
Brumm. You might, perhaps, take off 
some of your clothes — not to countenance 
me but to show your sympathy. Your 



172 Earl L avender 

figure begins to hang forward, you know ; 
you could hardly appear in the garb of an 
athlete. However, if you choose to risk it, I 
have over estimated myself much more than 
is likely if my supreme fitness failed to pro- 
tect us both.' 

It took some time before Lord Brumm 
could furnish a reply. This crowning ex- 
travagance of Earl Lavender's stirred his 
sluggish mind, and a dim joke struggled to 
the surface. 

* I would strip too,' he said at last. 
' Bravo ! ' cried Earl Lavender. 

* But I would wear a board back and front, 
and be your sandwichman.' 

' A brilliant idea ! On one board you could 
have, " Behold the Purpose of the Ages," 
and on the other, *' The Fit shall survive, 
and Earl Lavender is the fittest." Oh, it is 
a noble suggestion! Brumm, you are in- 
valuable. Last night we performed wonders ; 
to-day the whole world shall ring with our 
deeds. After breakfast we shall arrange our 
march from St Paul's to Westminister, you 
naked, but sandwiched between two boards ; 



Earl L avender 173 

I naked, but sandwiched between the Past 
and the Future/ 

Fired with this lofty idea, Earl Lavender 
hurried along at a great pace, dragging Lord 
Brumm with him. Arrived at the * Cap- 
and-Bells,' they entered precipitately the 
room in which they had dined the night 
before, and seating themselves at the table 
they had formerly occupied, they lifted up 
their eyes, and beheld opposite them a 
pleasant-looking matronly lady. 

* Mrs Seamier ! ' groaned Lord Brumm, 
turning as white as a sheet. 

' Mr Gurdon — my dear Mr Gurdon ! ' ex- 
claimed Mrs Seamier, who had been en- 
gaged in an animated conversation with the 
assistant waiter. ' However could you do it ? ' 

Mr Gurdon groaned. 

* I forgive you, dear; don't be downcast,' 
said Mrs Seamier tenderly. 'And this is 
the young lady's gentleman,' she continued, 
indicating Earl Lavender with her eye- 
glasses. * Oh, sir, you must know that I 
have met your young lady — 135's her 
number, Great British Hotel — and we're 



1 74 Earl Lavender" 

the best friends in the world. Tve played 
her a little trick I confess ; because we 
arranged that we were to go round the 
restaurants as usual in pursuit of our gentle- 
men, and meet here at night ; but something 
led me to the *' Cap-and-Bells " at once, and 
my instinct was right, you see. Instinct — 
what is it the poet says ? — 

* Instinct succeeds where angels fear to tread/ 

For the first time since his great mission 
began, a concerned expression stole across 
Earl Lavender's face. 

' Whom do you mean by my young lady ? * 
he said to Mrs Seamier. 

* No. 135,' replied Mrs Seamier ; * a lovely 
and most delightful person.* 

'No. 135!' repeated Earl Lavender. 
* Clearly this is an escaped lunatic. Waiter, 
call a policeman.' 

* Well, I never ! ' cried Mrs Seamier, 
pushing back her chair, and nearly upsetting 
the table. * Mr Gurdon, can you sit still, 
and hear that said ? ' 

Lord Brumm writhed and groaned, and 



Earl Lavender 175 

would probably have made some reply had 
not Earl Lavender forestalled him. 

* Do you know this person, Brumm ? * he 
said. * Never saw her before,' whispered 
Lord Brumm, catching his breath. 

* Quite so. Waiter, have this person 
ejected at once. She is clearly an im- 
postor by habit and repute. The city 
swarms with her kind.' 

Mrs Seamier stood up, staggered, and 
fainted away. The junior waiter sprang 
to her assistance, and Lord Brumm sheep- 
ishly took one of her hands. Misery, 
fear and shame devoured the latter ; and 
yet he had momentary intervals of respite 
when he observed that Mrs Scamler's nails 
were dirty, that there was a hole in one 
of her stockings, and that her bodice was 
soiled. 

* Brumm,' said Earl Lavender sternly, 
stepping towards his henchman, 'you do 
know this woman.' 

Lord Brumm mumbled something indis- 
tinctly. 

' I see you know her,' continued Earl 



176 Earl Lavender 

Lavender. *You must now at once make 
choice between her and me — perhaps she is 
your wife already ; make choice between 
all the worn-out ways of the world, and 
the great era we have inaugurated. I go ; 
follow me, or stay behind, as you choose.' 
As Earl Lavender turned towards the 
door a shadow darkened it, and she whom 
Mrs Seamier had denominated his young 
lady stood before him. He stepped back 
involuntarily, saying under his breath, 
* Maud ! ' and sat down in a chair, his 
action, attitude and whole expression in- 
dicating the deepest agitation. The young 
lady stood quite still, very pale, breathing 
with difficulty, and every whit as disquieted 
as Earl Lavender. In his corner the head 
waiter looked on powerless and speech- 
less ; Lord Brumm dropped Mrs Seamier s 
hand, and the assistant paused in his 
attempts to restore that remarkable widow. 
There is no saying how long Earl Lav- 
ender and the young lady might have con- 
tinued staring at each other, with the 
waiters and Lord Brumm watching them, 



Earl Lavender 177 

for the spell that held them was suddenly 
dissolved. Finding herself no longer at- 
tended to, Mrs Seamier opened her eyes, 
sat up in the midst of the sawdusted floor, 
looked about, and exclaimed, — 

* Lord bless] me! — My dearest No. 135,' 
she continued, when all eyes were turned 
towards herself, ' I owe you an apology, 
and you owe me one, so that there is no 
need to make them, as like draws to like 
and chancels each other, which I suppose 
is a way of saying that the two become 
one, though why marriage should score the 
couple out I never knew. I determined 
as soon as I left you to come straight 
away down here and prosecute my in- 
quiries from this basin — or base, is it ? — 
we are playing a kind of game you know ; 
and you did the same, my dear, clearly ; 
only I took a cab, and perhaps you walked.' 

During Mrs Scamler's remarks the young 
lady had entered the room. Standing on 
Earl Lavender's right side, she laid her 
left hand on his shoulder, and looked round 
and down at him with such an almost irre- 

M 



178 Earl Lavender 

sistible appeal that he had lifted her fingers 
to his lips before he recollected himself and 
his great mission. Then he tossed her 
hand aside, sprang up, and crying *Away, 
Brumm! Fly!' he ran out of the tavern. 
His henchman was not slow to follow, 
groaning and grumbling at his horrid fate. 

* Come, Mrs Seamier,* said the young 
lady, after a moment's weakness and a 
moment's irresolution. *They must not 
escape us.' 

'That they mustn't,' replied Mrs Seamier, 
gathering herself up, shaking the sawdust 
from her clothes, and talking breathlessly 
as she tripped after her companion. * But 
hear me, my dear ; when I am Mrs Gurdon, 
I swear by yonder sun — roll on, though 
deep and dark blue orb, as the poet says, 
though why, beats me — to visit my hus- 
band with all the weight of my indignation 
once a week. I shall invent a punishment, 
let me see. I shall make him be present 
at the weekly washing, or at the cleaning 
of a room ; or I shall dust the whole day 
in his presence. Oh, he shall suffer ! Why 



Earl Lavender 179 

there they are! Look! What audacious 
villains ! ' 

They had pursued Earl Lavender and 
Lord Brumm through Deadman's Alley, 
down Fleet Street and into Farringdon 
Street — in spite of the three turnings only 
a short distance. While the young lady had 
had them in view from the start, Mrs 
Scamler's exclamation was produced by her 
first sight of them in the very act of riding 
away from a cab stand ; Earl Lavender on 
the box of a hansom, and Lord Brumm, 
pale with terror, huddled together inside. 
Without hesitating the young lady sprang 
into another hansom with Mrs Seamier 
close at her heels, and bade the driver 
follow Earl Lavender. The man whose 
cab had been purloined ran after it a little 
way. Speedily convinced, however, from 
the rate at which his horse was driven, 
that this was no mere frolic, he enlisted 
the services of a brother jarvey, and the 
chase, two hansoms pursuing one, rattled 
under Holborn Viaduct, across Charterhouse 
Street, and along Clerkenwell Road into Old 



1 80 Earl Lavender 

Street. The break-neck pace of the start 
soon gave way to a trot. Stoppages at 
crossings, and the current of the traffic had 
compelled an ordinary rate of motion in 
these main thoroughfares, but when they 
had crossed the City Road, Earl Lavender, 
instead of continuing along Old Street, 
turned off to the left into a labyrinth of 
side streets where there were few vehicles, 
and whipped up his hack until it flourished 
its hoofs in a vain endeavour to break into 
a gallop. At a distance of a hundred yards 
the ladies' cab thundered after, their hack 
rivalling in action the grotesque exhibition 
of the leader. The last horse seemed to 
be of better mettle than the other two, for 
at this point in the race it made greater 
progress with less signs of effort ; but, alas ! 
at a sharp turn it stumbled and fell, break- 
ing one of the shafts. The robbed cabman 
and his driver swore at each other and at the 
perversity of things, and the former, followed 
by a volley of oaths that seemed to crackle 
in the air, set off after his property on foot. 
When he had gone about a furlong he heard 



Earl Lavender 1 8 1 

a running step behind which soon overtook 
him. 

* Heh ! heh ! ' cried a high, harsh voice 
at his ear. ' I zee 'im vrom my vintow 
ov my room. He lose me my situacion. 
He no understant. Ve catch 'im, ant ve 
*afe off 'im vun, dwo revench.' 

* He's stolen my cab,' panted the driver. 

* Steal a cab ! ' cried the baboon-faced 
waiter. ' Sacrd ! He is ze tefifil, but he 
matters not.' 

A number of boys and idle men now 
joined the chase, and one of the latter, 
finding things hardly as lively as he 
required, bawled in a huge voice, ' Stop 
thief ! stop thief ! ' The cabman, cursing 
his own stupidity in not having raised the 
hue and cry earlier, echoed him, and 
immediately the whole crowd took it up. 

' Ze boleece ! ' sobbed the waiter. * Tell 
ze boleece. I s'all yet zee him in ze mill- 
vheel hum.' 

A constable, rapidly informed of the 
circumstances, raised the more likely shout 
of ' Stop, cab ! ' blew his whistle and joined 



1 8 2 Earl L avender 

the chase. This was in the Kingsland 
Road, the cabman and his company having 
made an involved journey through the 
streets of Hoxton. Another constable, 
stationed at the bridge over the Regent's 
Canal, which is crossed by the Kingsland 
Road, hearing the whistle and the shouts, 
and seeing the running crowd, stopped the 
entire traffic, and the cabman, coming up, 
went straight to his property — as he 
supposed. But the cab he had had his 
eye on was not his ; nor was the one 
behind it that which the ladies had com- 
missioned : they were both occupied by 
sporting gentlemen bound for a trotting 
match at the Alexandra Park. Only two 
other cabs were in the block, and they 
were empty, being on their way to fulfil 
engagements. 

The taunts of his brothers of the whip, 
the jeers of the mob who looked on them- 
selves as having been hoaxed, and the 
suspicious glances of the policeman exas- 
perated the cabman to such a pitch that 
he upset a butcher with his left elbow and 



Earl Lavender 183 

a lawyer's clerk with his right, and rushed 
through the crowd roaring Hke an enraged 
bull. Over the bridge he went, followed 
by the baboon-faced waiter, and a section 
of his former retinue. 

* Pachiens ! pachiens ! ' cried the waiter. 
* Ve s'all not be escaped. Come in here ; 
come, I say.' 

He dragged the scarcely resisting cab- 
man into a public-house, and the remnant 
of the crowd soon dwindled away, leaving 
only a few boys who stuck their heads in 
at the door and uttered remarks more or 
less original. 

* 'Oo stole the cab ? Garn ! ' said one. 

* 'E 'ad it in 'is watch-pocket hall the 
tyme,' said another. 

VE's p'yed for it,' said a third. Mt's a 
bloomin' advertisement — ''The Myst'ry of 
a 'Ansom Cabby." ' 

The length of the last remark detained 
the speaker for a sufficient time to allow 
the waiter, who had been watching for an 
opportunity, to hit him sharply on the nose 
with a cork. This unexpected reply was 



1 84 Earl Lavender 

followed by much shouting, but no more 
heads appeared in the door. And so the 
first episode in the chase ended. 

' Now,' said the waiter, assuming the 
command, ' ve vait here till ze cabs come.' 

' What do you mean ? ' asked the cab- 
man in a very surly manner. 

* Pachiens ! ' replied the waiter. ' Here 
iss beer, trink it ; a tabble, zit ; a schkreent 
vintow, vatch. I know zis bart of Lonton 
veil. Bonne mere^ I know him ! Ve 
vollowt ze wrong cabs at zome turn in 
zat vilderness ; but ze cabs must come in 
ze Kingslant Roat.' 

'How's that?' 

* Musd ze poor vaiter on his Lonton 
instruct ze cabman ? Ze cabs musd come 
— almost zay musd come in ze Kingslant 
Roat, or svim ze canal.' 

* Blow that ; there's plenty of bridges.' 
But the waiter insisted that the cab- 

stealer, meaning to get out of London, 
would keep towards the east, and without 
fail cross the canal by Kingsland 
Road. 



Earl Lavenaer 185 

* Why not by Brunswick Street — further 
east still ? ' queried the cabman. 

* Ve cannot tell ' replied the waiter ; * ve 
know noth-ing ; ve musd 'afe vaith and 
risk. Ve neet him by Kingslant Roat. 
God vill zend him. Revench ! ' 

' He's far past the canal by this time, I 
bet,' rejoined the cabman with a resigned 
sigh. 

*Oh, no! He vander and vander in 
Oxtown. Come, ve meet him at ze 
bridge.' 

The waiter took the cabman by the arm, 
and they left the public-house. A shout 
and a shower of mud from an ambuscade 
of boys greeted them ; but they had no 
time to retaliate. About fifty yards further 
north than the public-house two cabs 
whirled round a corner making towards 
Dalston. 

' Didn't I tell you ! ' cried the cabman. 
'They kept west, and crossed by Whit- 
more Street.' 

' I vas righd alzo,' insisted the waiter. 
'In ze Kingslant Road zay come. — 



1 86 Earl Lavender 

Hansom, hansom ! Ve must 'afe a cap 
doo/ 

Again the chase was formed, two cabs 
hunting one ; and again luck was against 
the cabman and the waiter. Their new 
hack had already gone a long journey 
that morning, and the driver was unable 
to flog it into anything like a pace. At 
Dalston, at Clapton, at Lea Bridge, they 
still kept the second cab in sight, but at 
an increasing distance ; and before they 
came to Walthamstow the driver refused 
to proceed any further. They had there- 
fore to get out and follow the quest on 
foot, because they could not afford an- 
other hire. 

Earl Lavender won the race. His hack 
was no fresher than that in the ladies' cab, 
but unlike the driver of the latter, he had 
no scruples as to overtaxing the animal. 
Between Hoe Street and Wood Street, 
Walthamstow, he escaped from the .sight 
of his pursuers, and wheeling to the South- 
east, came to a halt near Whips Grove. 
There he unharnessed the horse and turned 



Earl Laveitder 187 

it into a field. Proud of his adventure, 
Earl Lavender then strode into Epping 
Forest, accompanied by Lord Brumm, 
now a ghastly spectacle. 



CHAPTER IX 

EARL lavender's EXTRAORDINARY DISCOVERY 

When Earl Lavender and his henchman 
had travelled a furlong or two along a 
broad grassy path, both in total silence, 
they were involuntarily brought to a 
sudden halt by the most extraordinary 
sound ever mortal heard. It rose out 
of the forest on their right, and its 
source seemed not far off. 

*What can it be?' exclaimed Lord 
Brumm. 

* It's like the screech of a soul in 
hell, basted by one devil and tickled by 
another,' replied Earl Lavender. 

* There it's again,' said Brumm. 

The amazing sound continued to rise 

i88 



Earl Lavender 1 89 

and fall in prolonged shrieks, and seemed 
indeed the outcry of a sufferer, who, 
although undergoing the most horrible 
torture, had yet a sense of something 
irresistibly humorous. 

* I must know what this is,' said Earl 
Lavender, turning in the direction of the 
sounds, and beginning to force a way 
through the undergrowth, which at this 
part of the forest was almost impene- 
trable. Brumm, afraid to be left alone, 
followed his leader, receiving many a back- 
hander from the branches of the thorns and 
brambles through which Earl Lavender 
cleft a passage. 

Little more than a dozen yards from 
the woodland path, they came upon the 
source of the extraordinary sounds as 
suddenly and unexpectedly as the sounds 
themselves had burst upon their ears. 
In a small open space, in the centre of 
which was a slight eminence, there sat 
a thing so preposterous and unheard of 
that Earl Lavender fell into a muse, 
lasting fully five minutes, and Lord 



1 90 Earl Lavender 

Brumm, crouching behind his chief, 
sweated with distress and peeped occa- 
sionally, pale and terrified, at the fright- 
ful object of their wonder. Some com- 
pound monster it seemed — a double jinn 
or deeve sweetening its solitude with 
music. One of its bodies in a short 
dress of scarlet and black check lay- 
prone on the earth, its face buried in 
the grass, its half-naked, red-haired legs 
and shaggy red head, and, indeed, the 
whole demi-jinn apparently writhing with 
delight in the discordant sounds dis- 
coursed by the other half of its anatomy. 
It was difficult to tell from the position 
of the monster how the two bodies were 
joined, that one which produced the 
music seemed to be s:itting between the 
shoulders of the other, holding with its 
lower limbs those of the prone portion 
— a position from which Earl Lavender 
inferred that the creature, unlike the 
Siamese twins, was joined at the back. 
The sitting half of this divided entity 
was dressed in chestnut-coloured skins — 



Earl Lavender 191 

a strange choice considering the time of 
the year ; wore on its head a Scotch 
bonnet and feather, and played upon a 
bagpipe. Its face, surrounded by russet 
hair was of a horrible bluish-grey hue, 
and as it blew up its chanter, its dis- 
tended cheeks, protruding with the jaw 
far beyond the line of the brow, gave 
the creature such an expression of brutality 
and stupidity combined, that Lord Brumm, 
by the time he had grown somewhat ac- 
customed to the sight, could not restrain 
a sickly smile. 

This extraordinary monster, oblivious of 
the presence of human beings, continued 
intent upon its music, although, except 
for a fixed idea of the necessity of blowing, 
it seemed to have but little skill on the 
bagpipes. It did make some attempt to 
govern the ventages with its hairy fingers, 
but so ineptly that it was clear its hands 
were wholly unused to manipulation of any 
kind. It was evidently quite ignorant also 
of the advantages of compressing the bag ; 
its whole science consisted in blowing 



192 Earl Lav efider 

fiercely, and a hazardous touching of the 
stops. Great and sounding inhalations 
were succeeded by long efforts of ex- 
pulsion, in which its cheeks rivalled 
the inflation of the wind-bag, and became 
in hue as black as a sloe, while its deep- 
sunk eyes danced and flamed above its 
blown face. The hideous broken yelling 
of the bagpipes was accompanied by the 
voice of the prone division of the monster 
in a monotonous chant. ' Hi ! hi ! hi ! ' 
it shrieked continuously in seeming wild 
enjoyment of the music. 

Earl Lavender surveyed this amazing 
object with boundless interest for fully five 
minutes, and then, turning to his henchman, 
he said radiantly, — 

* Our luck is almost incredible. My good 
Brumm, I am much mistaken if this is 
not the Missing Link. It must be so, 
and here you see, Brumm, how science, 
counting its steps and feeling about it at 
every footfall with all kinds of tests, may yet 
go astray. It is now demonstrated by our 
discovery of this double creature on the very 



Earl L avender 1 9 3 

first morning of the new era that the effort 
of Nature in evolving man from the lower 
animals produced a bi-formed beast, one 
portion of which became the progenitor of 
the human race, the other of the monkey 
tribe. Only in this way could mankind 
have been accomplished, because by no 
other means could the cruder brutishness 
be separated from the higher qualities of 
the animal creation ; hence the ape is the 
most abominable of all beasts, the sink 
of all the vileness of the blood of the 
world. In the missing link, however, as 
the separation is not yet final, there is 
an intermixture of properties, and we shall 
doubtless find both members of this duality 
less human than man, less brutish than the 
ape.' 

Even the gist of these remarks failed to 
penetrate to the mind of Lord Brumm ; 
the squealing of the bagpipes and the 
monotonous chant of the monster prevented 
him from hearing more than a few detached 
words ; besides, had there been no deafening 
noise, the state of fear in which he was would 

N 



194 Earl Lavender 

have prevented him from grasping Earl 
Lavender's meaning. 

Having instructed his follower to the best 
of his ability in the natural history of their 
stupendous discovery, Earl Lavender stepped 
from the shadow of the trees and stood in 
front of the piping portion of the bi-formed 
beast. 

* Most noble Missing Link ! ' he shouted ; 
but the creature, absorbed in its music, 
neither heard nor saw. * Marvellous beast ! ' 
began Earl Lavender again, this time laying 
his hand upon its shoulder. 

The piping stopped at once, and the 
monotonous chant ceased also ; the erect 
portion of the monster looked inquiringly 
at Earl Lavender, and the prone portion 
became strangely agitated. 

* My dear monster,' resumed Earl 
Lavender, * the pleasure I have in greeting 
you, the Missing Link, might be surpassed 
only by your pleasure in beholding me, the 
fittest of all creatures. Perhaps, however, 
you are inclined to think that I must wish 
to compass your destruction in order to 



Earl Lavender 1 9 5 

obliterate all trace of the brutal origin of 
man ; but fear not, for last night the Evolu- 
tionary Era began, and since it is our desire 
to find out and publish the relationship of 
humanity, even with the most insignificant 
and despised of crawling things, how shall 
we repudiate consanguinity with our nearest 
connections ? ' 

' Earl Lavender ! Earl Lavender ! ' cried 
the prone voice. 

* 'Tis he,' rejoined Earl Lavender proudly. 
' Behold, good Brumm, the missing link 
acknowledges me by my name.' 

* Save me ! save me ! ' cried the prone voice. 

* Now,' said Earl Lavender, again ad- 
dressing Lord Brumm, *you have proof 
of the correctness of my theory of this 
creature. It is the more human half which 
cries to us, wishing to be delivered from 
its brutal companion. Have patience, 
brother,' he continued to the monster, 'you 
shall be delivered. But you must instruct 
us how to secure you. When we have 
bound you we shall take you to London, 
and the foremost surgeons in the land, be- 



196 Earl Lavender 

fore a crowded theatre of savants, shall 
separate you from the body of this death. 
How shall we bind you?' 

* Man alive ! ' grunted the prone voice, 

* don't you see I'm being choked by this 
ape ? ' 

* I see it — I know it,* replied Earl 
Lavender, * and I shall help you at once ; 
to doubt my ability to encounter the Missing 
Link is to be unfaithful to myself, the fittest 
of men/ 

The sitting portion of the creature had re- 
mained quite motionless during this con- 
versation, but as soon as Earl Lavender 
moved upon it menacingly, it flung the bag- 
pipes at Lord Brumm, who had kept apart 
from his chief, and uttering a cry between a 
bark and a shriek, seized Earl Lavender in 
one hand, while it held on with the other to 
the prone figure. The latter, it was now 
apparent, formed a separate entity, but Earl 
Lavender had no time to be astonished ; the 
ape was throttling him. 

* Help ! ' he shouted with his failing breath. 

* Help, good Brumm ! ' 



Earl Lavender 197 

Help he needed ; his struggles in the 
sinewy grasp of the enraged animal were 
futile ; and this wonderful history would have 
come to a sudden end, had not the other part 
of the soi-disant Missing Link succeeded in 
releasing itself by a powerful effort. 

* Rorison ! ' exclaimed Brumm, who had 
fallen trembling on his knees. 

Rorison it was in Rob Roy tartan. With- 
out waiting to recover breath, the Scotchman 
clutched the ape by the ears and tore it from 
its hold. Earl Lavender, finding himself at 
liberty, seized the beast's lower limbs, and for 
a second or two it hung suspended between 
the two men ; but the enormous length and 
strength of its arms enabled it, behind its back, 
to grapple and overturn Rorison, and immedi- 
ately, to their astonishment, the combatants 
found themselves in their original positions, 
the only difference being that Rorison was 
now recumbent. 

At this crisis Lord Brumm saved Earl 
Lavender's life ; and for a second time in as 
many minutes an abrupt conclusion to this 
full and true account was obviated by the 



1 98 Earl Lavender 

veriest chance, or rather by an undiscovered 
Evolutionary law. Tongue-tied hitherto, ex- 
cept for his single cry of astonishment on re- 
cognising Rorison, Lord Brumm, helpless 
and despairing, suddenly set up a dreadful 
howl, so unexpected, so piercing and un- 
earthly, that the ape paused in the very act 
of strangling Earl Lavender, and looked most 
intently in the direction of the outcry. Its 
fixed and savage gaze drew from Lord 
Brumm a still more horrid cry, and the ape, 
in all likelihood, thinking itself challenged by 
a more redoubted champion than the foes it 
had already mastered, flung Earl Lavender 
aside, and sprang at one leap on Lord 
Brumm, who immediately fainted away. 
Earl Lavender and Rorison, breathless, but 
little injured, picked themselves up, broke 
each a branch from a tree, and hastened to 
the attack. So wily was the ape, and so 
rapid its actions, that by the time its enemies 
had covered the few yards between it and 
them, it sat embattled on the unconscious 
Lord Brumm, with its back against an oak 
and both arms ready for the fray. 



Earl Lavender 1 9 9 

* Strike its hands,' said Earl Lavender, 
and at the word he and Rorison brought 
down their sticks with all their might, but 
without effect, for the ape caught them in its 
vicious grasp, pulled the men within its reach, 
and grappled them both. The three fell to 
the ground, and rolled over and over, the ape 
snarling and spitting, and the men grunting 
and grinding their teeth, in a catherine-wheel 
of arms and legs. 

In the midst of this scrimmage there en- 
tered on the scene with much outcry about 
two dozen men and boys. He who seemed 
the leader of the band carried a gun, 
another was armed with a whip, a third with 
a lasso, and the rest had sticks. 

* Keep as still as you can,' shouted the 
leader ; and the man with the lasso advanced 
a step in front of the crowd. He had hardly 
prepared his cast, however, when a little 
figure dashed at the combatants, and plung- 
ing a long knife twice into the tumbling 
group, was about to escape into the forest. 
But the lasso, intended for the ape, caught 
the assassin round the neck, and he was 



200 Earl Lavender 

pulled to the ground half-choked and splut- 
tering some jargon in which the word *re- 
vench ' was alone intelligible. 

' You rascal ! ' cried the leader of the band; 
*you have killed him.' 

* He lose me my situacion,' said the 
prisoner, endeavouring to free his throat 
from the constriction of the lasso. * I re- 
vench myself. I s'all drop like ze dew from 
ze gallous on ze lion's mane, but I care not 
for 'im. I 'afe a lesson taught zat ze broud 
arishtocrad in his reminiscence s'all lay to 
heart as ze hens lays eggs for years to come. 
He lose me my situacion ; I lose him his 
life.' 

* What rubbish is this ? ' exclaimed the 
leader. * He never was in any show but 
mine. What the devil did you mean 
by killing him ? Your situation ? Whose 
monkey were you? By Jove, I'll dress you 
in poor old Rang-tang's skin, and stick you 
in his cage ! You'd pass for a monkey any 
day, and a beastly ugly one too.' 

* Rang-tang ! ' cried the waiter, who has 
doubtless been recognised. * What ! 'afe I — 



Earl L avender 201 

ah ! He is zen alive still. Heh ! heh ! I 
vas dwo precocious. He sail yet hum in ze 
mill-vheel for stealing ze cab, and zen I 
s'all kill 'im again. How vas it zat I en- 
joyed sticking ze rang-tang wen it vas not 
'im. All cats, zay say, grow grey in ze 
dark.' 

The showman, paying no heed to the 
waiter's last remarks, endeavoured to stanch 
the wounds of the ape which lay on its face 
bleeding to death ; while Earl Lavender and 
Rorison, all scratched, and with the clothes 
torn from their backs, stood beside each 
other recovering their breath and their 
senses. 

Then as soon as Earl Lavender realised 
the presence of an audience, he ascended the 
little eminence on which the ape had lately 
sat with Rorison for a cushion, and, turning 
now to one side now to the other, ad- 
dressed the crowd with all the arts of an 
orator. 

* Gentlemen,' he said, ' the persistence 
with which Evolution provides opportunities 
for the display of my fitness, and audiences 



202 Earl Lavender 

for the reception of the new doctrine, inspires 
me with an enthusiasm in this great cause, 
which I am certain will carry me even further 
than I have already gone. But in the 
meantime I wish to call your attention to 
a discovery I have made, a discovery so 
remarkable that it ranks second in im- 
portance to that which is beyond a doubt 
the greatest of any country and any age, 
■the autodiscovery of myself. Gentlemen, 
that remarkable Scotchman there in a kilt, 
Mr Rorison namely, and that dying ourang- 
outang together form the missing link. 
When I first beheld them, from their rela- 
tive positions I imagined that they were actu- 
ally connected by some ligament, but I was 
soon undeceived. Mr Rorison, the human 
half of the link, was in total ignorance of 
his own identity no longer ago than last 
night, and the ourang-outang, the bestial 
part, on show in a menagerie until this 
morning from what I can gather. But no 
sooner do I appear on my great mission 
than these two are brought together in the 
most extraordinary way, and I am impelled 



Earl Lavender 203 

to the place of their meeting by what can 
only be regarded as an Evolutionary miracle. 
Nor can the full wonder of this matter be 
properly conceived until I remind you how 
the man was brought out of Scotland, and 
the beast over land and sea all the way 
from the wilds of Borneo ; the former ex- 
pecting in all liklihood to end his days as 
an editor ; the latter, intended by the agents 
Evolution employed to be a mere source 
of gain in a travelling show. But, gentle- 
men, they constituted the missing link ; 
Evolution, therefore brought them together 
with a clash ; and in the conflict, happily 
ended, between them and the fittest, in 
this great convulsion of Nature, as I may 
call it, the beast is finally overcome, and 
man triumphant. If you cannot understand 
this actually, then understand it symbolically. 
The time will come — ' 

But Earl Lavenders audience, at first 
amused and curious, having gradually and 
then quickly deserted him, he stopped speak- 
ing, and gave his attention also to that 
which now attracted everybody. The 



204 Earl Lavender 

ourang-outang, concious of the approach of 
death, had tried to rise, but finding itself 
much too weak for such an effort, it had 
uttered a most mournful cry, turning at the 
same time a beseeching look on its master. 
The showman, much moved, lifted the ape's 
body and held it against his own, and the 
dying beast let its head fall on the man's 
breast. Its breath came short and quick. 
It half raised its arms as if to embrace its 
master, but its strength was quite gone. 
Now and again it looked round with a dark 
despairing glance out of its human-like brown 
eyes. At last its head dropped forward, and 
it seemed as if it would never move again. 
Not a sound came from the crowd, and the 
whole forest was unusually still. The sun 
shone out of a clear blue sky ; a soft wind 
touched the leaves here and there ; it was a 
pleasant hour to die in. Suddenly there 
rose into the air a long shrill call, whether of 
a beast or a bird no one present knew. 
The intensity of the note thrilled everyone, 
and the ape was seen to quiver from head to 
foot. When the prolonged sound had died 



Earl Lavender' 205 

away, it sat up with a spasmodic motion and 
looked eagerly round. Then it raised its 
face to the skies. ' Wa ! wa ! ' it cried, and 
fell dead against its master. 



CHAPTER X 

HOW THEY ALL FOREGATHERED IN EPPING 
FOREST 

The showman, having deposited the ape's 
body decently on the ground, rose with a 
sigh and addressed himself to the waiter, 
who although released from the lasso was 
still held a prisoner. 

* I wouldn't have taken five hundred — I 
wouldn't have taken a thousand pounds for 
poor old Rang-tang,' he said. * He was the 
only one in England. , What did you mean 
by killing him ? He had done you no harm.' 

* I vish not to kill him,' replied the waiter. 

* Then what in God's name did you 
mean ? ' 



Noth-ing.' 



206 



Earl Lavender 207 

'I'll sue you/ said the showman. 'I'm 
not going to loose a thousand pounds in this 
way. What are you ? Who are you ? ' 

The waiter making no reply to these 
questions, Earl Lavender answered for him. 

* He is,' he said, * a special agent of Evolu- 
tion. Last night he lent material aid in a 
demonstration of my fitness, and he has 
to-day been employed as you all have seen 
in a most important service. Whether he is 
a conscious agent or not I do not know.' 

' An agent ! ' exclaimed the showman. 
' Evolution ! You seem all to be mad. 
Who and what are you next ? ' 

But Earl Lavender, suddenly remember- 
ing the condition in which Lord Brumm 
had been left, turned abruptly from the 
showman, and running to the tree under 
which the ourang-outang had deposited his 
henchman, knelt down beside him. 

* My good Brumm,' he cried, *my good 
Brumm.' 

Lord Brumm, who was slowly coming 
to himself, opened his eyes at the sound of 
his chiefs voice and sat up. 



2o8 Earl Lavender 

* Am I dead or alive ? ' he asked plain- 
tively. 

* Alive and unscathed,' replied Earl Laven- 
der, helping him to his legs. 

Lord Brumm felt himself tenderly all 
over, more especially examining his ribs. 

* Nothing broken, I hope ? ' said Earl 
Lavender. 

'Nothing,' replied Lord Brumm thought- 
fully. * Nothing ; but I have now become a 
misanthropist as well as a misogynist.' 

Without another word he turned on his 
heel and walked towards one of the paths by 
which the crowd had entered the glade. 

'Where are you going .»*' asked Earl 
Lavender. 

'Anywhere/ replied Lord Brumm, turn- 
ing defiantly. ' I hate women ; I hate men. 
I have never all my life been on inti- 
mate terms with anyone who has not tried 
to use me for his or her own ends. My 
good nature always yields, and things go so 
far, that in order to recover my independ- 
ence a rupture is regularly required. I break 
with you now, sir. I break with the whole 



Earl Lavender 209 

world for good and all. You and your 
demonstrations! Was it not enough to 
be whipped by a muscular young hussy 
in — hell, for all I know? But to have bag- 
pipes thrown at me, and to be sat upon by 
monkeys. That is the last straw.' 

Earl Lavender had listened with some 
astonishment to the opening of Lord 
Brumm's speech, but he had quite re- 
covered that equanimity for which he was so 
remarkable before his recalcitrant henchman 
had made an end of repudiating all the ways 
of men. 

* Well, good-bye,' he said, waving his hand, 
and then, addressing the crowd : — ' Honest 
folk, I invite you all to breakfast with me, 
and thereafter to attend the funeral of the 
bestial part of the Missing Link. I saw on 
the outskirts of the forest as I came alonor 
a comfortable-looking old inn where I 
daresay accommodation can be found for us 
all' 

* Lunch, you mean, sir, I suppose ? ' said a 
man in the crowd. 

* For you it may be,' replied Earl Lavender. 

o 



2 1 o Earl Lavender 

* For me it is breakfast, as I have not yet 
eaten to-day, and am quite famished.' 

Lord Brumm, hearing word of food, 
for want of which he was Hke to faint again, 
slackened his steps, stood still, and then 
slowly crept back to the neighbourhood of 
his chief; a manoeuvre which Earl Laven- 
der observed, but took no notice of; he had, 
indeed, anticipated it. 

*Sir,* said the showman in reply to Earl 
Lavender's invitation, * I accept for myself 
and my men, and thank you kindly.' 

* We all accept,' cried the crowd, every 
man and boy of them. 

* You shall all be w^elcome,' rejoined Earl 
Lavender regally. * But we must proceed 
ceremoniously. This is a great historical 
occasion. We shall make a bier on which 
to carry the deceased part of the Missing 
Link, and the surviving part shall pace 
before it blowing a dirge.' 

Rorison, who had gathered up his pipes, 
assented with a grim smile ; the corpse of 
the ourang-outang was laid on some inter- 
woven branches, and the procession moved 



Earl Lavender 2 1 1 

through the forest with all decorum. The 
piper went first playing the pibroch of 
Donuil Dhu ; then came four men carry- 
ing the bier, immediately behind which 
walked Earl Lavender and the showman ; 
a yard or two after them the crowd fol- 
lowed, headed by Lord Brumm. 

His mind divided between regret for the 
loss of his ape, and curiosity as to who 
and what Earl Lavender might be, the 
showman gave but little heed to the dis- 
course of his companion, and took the 
opportunity of his first pause to inquire 
who he was. 

* I am the Earl of Lavender,' was the 
reply, *and my friend is Lord Brumm. 
We are inaugurating a new era in the his- 
tory of the world. In taverns and forests 
we give illustrations of the survival of the 
fittest, and expound our creed. Our success 
is constant ; you yourself have seen how the 
Missing Link dropped into our mouths as 
it were.* 

The showman, a good-natured, conceited 
young fellow, quite unable to comprehend 



212 Earl Lavender 

Earl Lavender's sincerity, and never doubt- 
ing his perfect sanity, leapt at once to the 
conclusion that he had to do with two titled 
gentlemen out for a frolic. With easy con- 
fidence he entered into the spirit of the 
joke, and smiled and nodded approval at 
everything Earl Lavender said. When 
they arrived at the inn he took the land- 
lord aside, and admonished him as to who 
his principal guests were. While the show- 
man talked with the landlord, Earl Lavender, 
halting a few paces from the door, summoned 
Lord Brumm to his side, and bade him 
contemplate the inn. 

* Is it not a charming old house '^, ' he 
said; *with its heavy thatch, its cream- 
coloured walls, and low, broad windows ^ 
But look at the sign, good Brumm ; 
look at the sign ! ' 

On one side of a swinging board a red 
shape, clearly intended for a bird, sat under 
a thing which might have been either a 
scythe or a gallows. The other side of the 
sign translated this cryptoglyph. 

'The ''Razor and Hen,"' said Lord 



Exrl Lave7tder 2 1 3 

Brumm, well-pleased to be restored to favour 
without any parley ; ' a very odd sign.' 

*It is, indeed/ rejoined Earl Lavender. 
* And I confess that I am puzzled. Beyond 
a doubt it contains some message for me ; 
but what, is more than I can tell. Can you 
interpret it ? ' 

'The ''Razor and Hen,"* repeated Lord 
Brumm, looking vefy wise and feeling 
very hungry. * It will be necessary to 
analyse it.' 

* Very good, indeed,' said Earl Lavender. 

' The hen,' continued Lord Brumm, 
with a tremendous mental effort, *is a 
domestic fowl, and the razor is a domestic 
implement.' 

'Yes?' 

But Lord Brumm was already at a loss, 
and stood rubbing his chin in an attempt to 
throw light on the subject of the sign, when 
the showman brought up the landlord to 
receive Earl Lavender s order. 

' Oh ! ' said Earl Lavender, ' can you ac- 
commodate us all in one room } ' 

The innkeeper had a barn where in wet 



214 Earl Lavender 

weather he entertained pleasure parties of 
school children, etc. 

* But/ he remarked deprecatingly, * I can 
hardly ask your lordship to go there.' 

' Oh, yes, you can/ rejoined Earl Lavender. 
* Count how many there are.' 

The innkeeper counted thirty, and Earl 
Lavender bade him prepare lunch for that 
number. 

' But I am quite unprepared, my lord, for 
so many,' said the innkeeper. 

* There are bakers and butchers in Walt- 
hamstow,' rejoined Earl Lavender. * Send 
for whatever you need, and let it be a 
lordly feast. In the meantime, Lord 
Brumm and I having had no break- 
fast will eat whatever you can give us.' 

* The responsibility,' began the innkeeper 
hesitatingly, but his irresolution vanished 
when he looked squarely at Earl Lav- 
ender's handsome, frank face, and remem- 
bered that he had two live lords to deal 
with. *Very well, your lordship,' he 
said. 

' Now, we must get some clothes,' added 



Earl Lavender 2 1 5 

Earl Lavender. ' We are in rags, Lord 
Brumm and myself; can you get us 
clothes ? ' 

' Well, my lord, I haven't anything that 
would fit you, but I can get some from a 
ready-made shop in Walthamstow.' 

* What do you say, Brumm ? ' asked 
Earl Lavender. * Shall we have ready-made 
clothes .^ ' 

' Certainly,' cried Lord Brumm, reck- 
less with hunger and misery. * And bring 
watches. We have no watches.' 

' You hear 1 ' said Earl Lavender. * You 
are to get from Walthamstow samples of 
ready-made clothing and watches for our 
approval.' 

The innkeeper again hesitated, but the 
showman winked to him that it was all 
right. 

* Very well, my lord,' he said. * Chops shall 
be ready for your lordships in ten minutes, 
and I will be ready to begin to lunch the 
company in an hour.' 

'And now,' said Earl Lavender, when 
a messenger had been despatched to Walt- 



2 1 6 Earl Lavender 

hamstow, and the innkeeper had gone, 
still with some hesitation, about his busi- 
ness, 'we must prepare to bury the bestial 
part of the Missing Link.' 

' My lord,' rejoined the showman, who 
thought the time for his business had come 
at last, ' I shall be glad to sell you Rang- 
tang's corpse for five hundred pounds.' 

'Sell it?' exclaimed Earl Lavender. 

* Yes, my lord. I cannot afford to bury 
him for nothing.' 

* But it will not cost you anything. With 
the help of a pick and spade we can bury 
him in the forest.' 

' But he's worth money to me, my lord. 
Stuffed he would make a good advertise- 
ment outside ; or I could sell him to a 
museum.' 

' Nonsense ! He must be buried out of 
sight and out of mind. I require it.' 

* Oh, ho ! ' cried the showman. * Perhaps 
you will be kind enough to bury your own 
property.' 

Before Earl Lavender could reply, the 
innkeeper, who had returned to resolve 



Earl Lavender 2 1 7 

one last doubt, still feeling uneasy about 
the anomalous orders he had received, 
thrust out his hand and said bluntly, — 

* My lord, I don't know you, and never 
heard of you. I shall be obliged to you 
for five pounds to account.' 

* My good man,' said Earl Lavender, * I 
never pay for anything.' 

The innkeeper turned pale and his jaw 
fell. Then without even wasting an oath 
on Earl Lavender, he set off at the top 
of his speed to countermand in person 
the orders that had been despatched to 
Walthamstow. 

* What the devil are you, and what the 
blasted nuisance do you mean } ' cried the 
showman. 

* Friend,' replied Earl Lavender gravely, 
' I am he who shall put an end to all ex- 
pletives and exhibitions of temper. You 
must know that I am the fittest of human 
beings, and that I have come forth to con- 
vert people to Evolution. I mean to show 
the world that, appetites being provided, 
food and drink must be forthcoming ; and 



2 1 8 Earl Lavender 

that, granted bodies which cannot endure 
exposure, clothes are imperative. I wish 
to indicate my right, and the right of every- 
body, to the necessities of existence. Work ? 
Yes, for every man when it can be had ; 
but food and clothes and fire for every 
man, woman and child exist, and must 
be distributed. This is a new aspect of 
Evolution suggested to me by my own 
hunger, which is at present intolerable, as 
I have tasted nothing since eleven o'clock 
last night. 

Lord Brumm groaned. 

' Very fine, indeed,' said the showman. 
' And what about our lunch "i ' 

This was the signal for an outburst on 
the part of the crowd. Men and boys 
hooted and yelled for fully two minutes; 
and when the clamour subsided the ill- 
feeling against Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm became articulate. 

* They're no better than they should be,' 
said one voice. 

' 'Oss thieves,' said another. 

* Seen 'em at Barnet,' cried a third. 



Earl Lavender 2 i 9 

' makin' believe to sell knives and 
purses.' 

* Duck 'em in the pond ! ' 

* They ain't no docks, not them/ 
' Only earls ! ' 

' No pride about them ! ' 

Uttering these and other remarks un- 
quotable, the disappointed crowd began to 
hustle Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm 
with toe-treadings, pushes, and elbow-thrusts. 

' He stole a cab,' cried the waiter, who 
had been held a prisoner hitherto, but had 
regained his liberty in the tumult. * Of 
him I 'afe to zay that he iss thief, zat he 
talk, talk, talk ze golt off ze gingerbread, 
and iss ze most unhung villain.' 

' Steal a cab ! ' exclaimed the showman. 
' Common thieves ! Why, then, they stole 
Rang-tang, and the poor fellow didn't stray 
after all. Lend a hand here.' 

In spite of Earl Lavender's struggles 
and Lord Brumm's whimperings the 
Evolutionists were both speedily pinioned, 
while the waiter tripped round them in a 
frenzy of gratified malice. 



2 20 Earl Lavender 

* Now then, Signer Maccaroni/ said the 
showman to the waiter, * let's hear your 
charge.' 

* Ah ! ' said the waiter, stopping his 
dance, * I charge zem vis night-robbery and 
a cab. In ze Cafd Benvenuto I vait ; I 
qvarrel vis everybody. My temper loses 
my head ven I zee ozzer vaiters smile and 
smile and smile and stuff zer bogkets vis 
inzolens and tips. I take no inzolens, I 
take no tips ; I 'afe no custom but ven 
zer is no ozzer tabble. I svear, I mutter, 
I gif not satisfaction. Beople gomplaing. 
One, dwo, trice I am varned ; if a 
vourth time I qvarrel, go I musd. Ze 
Cafe Benvenuto is my sixt blace in Lon- 
ton ; I am known ; insteat of my vortune 
I make debts. I can get noth-ing. My 
life is spoiled. Understandt ; I came to 
zis lant of awvul for my vortune — in six 
year, I said. I 'afe been six month ; I 
'afe six blace ; I 'afe six pounds of debt. 
It vas my last chance.. I stroggle, stroggle, 
stroggle myself to behafe. I fail drice 
dimes. Zen I fight myself; I vin ze 



Earl Lavender 2 2 1 

battle of myself for vun month. Zen come 
he and he zit at my tabble, zupper, and 
afe no money. Zey make ze qvarrel, but 
ze qvarrel vas vis me, and I am lost to 
my blace. I zay to myself, " Revench ! " 
zey afe stolen my vortune, for I cannot 
now vait more. Zis morning inconzolably 
I buy a knife. I say to myself at my 
vintow of my room, " I vait " — Heh ! heh ! 
— Ah, yes, I vait in Piccadovvndilly, and 
on his ribs blunt my edge. Zen I zee 
him on a cab. *' He comes to be killed," 
I say, and out vly. A cabsman tells me 
he stole a cab. Ve run, ve miss, ve vind, 
ve lose ; but ze cabsman catch his cab in 
a vield and go home ; I catch ze thief in 
ze vorest, and kill a rang- tang.' 

'Truly,' said Earl Lavender, who had 
listened with intense interest, ' here is an 
irrefutable proof of the truth of Evolution, 
and of the validity of my claim to be the 
fittest. When my life is in danger, behold 
the Missing Link is offered up in my room.' 

' I am afraid,' said the showman, address- 
ing Earl Lavender, * I owe you an apology. 



222 Earl L avender 

If you drove out here now in a cab you can't 
have stolen my monkey. But all you do 
and say is so outrageous, that Fm hanged 
if I don't think I ought to take you to 
the police station. What do you say to 
the waiter s charge "i ' 

* I have not the least doubt that every 
word of it is true/ replied Earl Lavender. 

* But I must point out to you that the 
charge is against himself, not me. He 
accuses himself of attempting manslaughter, 
me of nothing the law can possibly cognize/ 

' True/ said the showman. 

' Recognize ! ' cried the waiter mistaking. 

* I recognize him anyvhere. He steal, he 
lie, hear him not. Bonne mere. I recognize 
ze tip of his elsbow, a hair of his head. I 
know him.' 

* What am I to do ? ' asked the showman. 

* Nothing/ replied Earl Lavender. * Stand 
by, and you will see Evolution deliver us out 
of your hands.' 

Rorison, who had remained unobserved on 
the outskirts of the crowd, advanced to the 
central group at this crisis. He was about 



Earl Lavender 223 

to speak but a great shout of laughter greeted 
him. His disordered Highland dress had not 
seemed so very ludicrous when he marched 
in front of the funeral procession blowing a 
pibroch. Now, however, his function being 
ended, his uncouth looks, and disarrayed 
philibeg caused, not inopportunely, a mirth- 
ful diversion. The crowd recovered its good 
nature, and after a few sallies of advice to 
*tuck up his petticoat,' of nonchalant in- 
vitation to ' tip us the Highland Fling,' of 
pathetic inquiry as to ' where he had been a' 
the day, bonnie laddie, 'Eeland laddie,' 
Rorison was accorded quiet attention. 

* Unpinion these gentlemen,' he said 
gravely. 

Inquiring looks were bent on the showman, 
but he had nothing to say. 

* Unpinion them,' repeated Rorison with 
increased gravity. 

After a little hesitation he was obeyed. 

' I told you,' said Earl Lavender triumph- 
antly to the showman. ' Nor could there be 
a fitter agent of my release than the surviving 
part of the Missing Link.' 



2 24 Earl Lavender- 

* Now,' resumed the Scot, * beer and bread 
and cheese will be served in the barn for all 
who want them. ' You,' including with a 
gesture Earl Lavender, Lord Brumm, and 
the showman, 'will breakfast with me.' 

Without more ado Rorison led the way to 
the ' Razor and Hen.' x\t his instructions the 
barn was thrown open and the homely feast 
provided for the public company, while he 
and his private guests sat down to a smoking 
dish of chops and kidneys in a low-ceiled 
room with a great fireplace. Earl Lavender 
and Lord Brumm devoured several plate- 
fuls in silence, and were still busily eating 
after the other two had satisfied their hunger. 

* I would give,' said the showman, * I would 
give a lot to know what the meaning of all 
this is.' 

*Ah,' said Rorison, 'that nobody can tell 
you, not even Earl Lavender himself.' 

' I question that,' said Earl Lavender. * In 
the meantime — some more chops, Brumm. 
But about yourself, Mr Rorison ? I beg you 
will tell us this great adventure of yours. 
Last night you seemed to be a dusty literary 



Earl L avender 225 

man ; to-day you are a wild cateran, kern, 
and gallowglass. How comes it ? ' 

* It will please me to tell you/ replied 
Rorison. ' I am a dusty literary man, and 
make an insufficient and insecure income by 
reviewing. There are perhaps only two books 
published in a year on which I could write 
with satisfaction at any length, and I have to 
turn out swathes of stuff — columns, when I 
could have said all I wanted to say in a 
sentence. This I have endured for three 
years ; there seemed nothing else for it but 
suicide. How I came into this predicament 
— to submit to this alternative, I may not 
tell you. But last night the sight of you 
and your beautiful adventurousness set my 
brains working, and in the early morning 
I donned my Highland costume, took my 
bagpipes, and set off on foot for Scotland.' 

* Were you originally a piper, then ? ' asked 
Earl Lavender. 

*Oh, no ! Every Scotchman has a High- 
land dress and a set of bagpipes. Did you 
not know that ? ' 

* I was not aware.* 



226 Earl Lavender 

*Very few of them will admit it, I dare- 
say ; they even try to conceal it from each 
other ; but in some cupboard or corner every 
Scot keeps a kilt, a dirk and a chanter. 
Well, I had in an old purse five sovereigns 
saved up to buy a coffin, should I die sud- 
denly. I put these in my sporran — hoping 
that I should not require to spend them, but 
having them in the last resort — and started 
to tramp to Scotland. I missed the Great 
North Road at Highgate; but, walking 
along in the right direction as I thought, 
and being in a ruminant mood, and having 
besides the worst head in the world for 
locality, I didn't notice my whereabouts 
until I found myself on the borders of 
Epping Forest, miles out of the way. 
That didn't put me much about, however; 
in fact, I soon began to see in my divaga- 
tion, a sort of what certain people would 
call providential something — ' 

*Call it Evolutionary.' 

*Ah, yes, I recognised an Evolutionary 
something or other, and determined, as my 
home in Scotland had been on the border 



Earl L avender 227 

of Cadzow Forest, to make a fresh start 
from Epping Forest, and so journey from 
wood to wood. As I had not touched the 
pipes for three years, and have but little 
skill, I selected the retired nook in which you 
found me so strangely situated to practise 
a little before my first public appearance ; 
for it is my intention to live on the road by 
my music. I had no sooner started a reel 
than I was attracted by a strange motion in 
the top of a pollard-hornbeam, and my drone 
ceased with a broken squeak, when I per- 
ceived an immense ape sit up on its hind 
quarters and regard me intently. I had 
heard of wolves in Epping Forest but never 
of monkeys, and concluded, of course, that 
the beast had escaped from a menagerie. 
Remembering stories of wild animals sub- 
dued by music, and thinking also that the 
skirl of the bagpipes would be certain to 
attract those who were doubtless searching 
for the runaway, I resumed the reel, though 
with trembling fingers. The ourang-outang 
bent its head on one side and looked at 
me with a quaint expression as much as to 



228 Earl Lave^ider 

say, — ''Ay, man, and that's the way you do 
it." Then it leapt from the tree head first and 
came towards me on all fours. I continued 
playing, although breathless with anticipation 
of what the ape would do. It came quite 
close, sat up and watched me for, I think, 
nearly five minutes, then, with a scream, 
and the rapidity of an explosion, it seized 
the pipes in its forepaws and me in its 
hind ones, and seated itself as you found 
it. Panting and frightened, I was at first 
unable to do anything. When I did find 
breath and courage to make a motion, the 
brute gripped the calves of my legs so 
fiercely that I yelled with pain, and my 
efforts in my own behalf were reduced to 
crying out in the hope of attracting attention. 
It seemed to me when you came to my 
deliverance that the ape had been sitting 
upon me for a whole day, although it can't 
have been more than half an hour.* 

* I wonder it didn't turn your hair white,' 
said Lord Brumm sympathetically. 

' Ah, yes,' said Earl Lavender, * I for- 
got you were sat on too — and fainted.' 



Earl Lavender 229 

Brumm nodded his head, sighed, and 
thought of a reply, but, before he could hit on 
one, there entered the room the innkeeper, 
flushed and staring, and carrying a big parcel, 
followed by Mrs Seamier and the young lady 
of the Great British Hotel. 

'Well, there you are at last,' cried Mrs 
Seamier, smiling and conjuring with her 
eyeglasses. * It's a mercy to see you alive ; 
it's a mercy to see you in health ; it's a mercy 
we little expected to see when you slipped 
from our presence by stealth.' 

Mrs Seamier turned pale, looked about 
her in alarm, and dropped into a chain 

* Lord bless me ! ' she continued. * Is it — 
have I — my dear, was that poetry just now 1 

It's a mercy to see you alive, 
It's a mercy to see — 

No! — ha, ha! — he! — I believe it was 
poetry. No one ever can tell what may 
come popping into their heads. That's the 
first poetry I ever made, and perhaps it will 
be the last ; but I understand it now. I 
always wondered how they did it; now I 



230 Earl Lavender 

know they didn't do it. Lord, now ! There 
it's again ! It only needs a start, you see. 

I always wondered how they did it, 
Now I know they didn't do it. 

That's what they call blank verse, I sup- 
pose, my dear, and it comes out of you. 
You don't make it ; but you're excited, half 
laughing and half crying, and you open your 
lips or take up your pen and the poetry 
flows. Now, if I had given up the time I 
spent on the study of the French lan- 
guage and model drawing to the writing of 
poetry I might have been famous by this 
time. But it is a mercy to see you alive 
after fighting that dreadful beast, and enjoy- 
ing your lunch, too, as happy and uncon- 
cerned as schoolboys. Oh, you wicked boys! 
— truants ! — truants ! You know, we lost you 
in that long-winded place Walthamstow, 
and drove and walked here and there and 
everywhere, and went to a tea shop to rest ; 
and while we were sitting there a man came 
in and ordered two dozen loaves, and then 
Mr Landlord came in and revoked the order. 



Earl Lavender 231 

and told his man that they were mad, and 
explained to the shopkeeper that two lunatics 
had escaped from Colney Hatch, and came 
to the Forest and killed a monkey, and 
ordered lunch for thirty with no money to 
pay, and watches and clothes, and his man 
hadn't been to the watchmaker, or the 
butcher, or the clothier yet ; so Maud — oh, 
I know your young lady's name, now, sir 
— Maud and I looked at each other, and I 
whispered *' them ? " and she nodded her head, 
and I described you to the landlord, and he 
said it was you, and we brought clothes when 
we learned how ragged you were, and we're 
going to pay for everything, and go back to 
London by train as soon's you re ready.' 

'Evolution fulfils itself in many ways,' 
said Earl Lavender. 

*What shall I do?' moaned Lord 
Brumm. 

' Can you give me a needle and thread ? ' 
asked Rorison of the landlord. 

Mrs Seamier, noticing Rorison for the 
first time, exclaimed and muttered, and then 
burst out, — 



232 Earl L avender 

' I can't help it, but I must see you nearer. 
I never was under the same roof with a kilt 
before. And you have bagpipes too. What 
a very interesting and delightful person you 
must be.' 

During these remarks Mrs Seamier had 
taken a seat beside Rorison who looked at 
her askance and somewhat sheepishly. 

* Do you like it now — really ? ' asked Mrs 
Seamier with her head on one side. 

' It's torn,' replied Rorison, somewhat in- 
continently, as he crouched into the corner. 

* Oh ! ' returned Mrs Seamier ; * were you 
in the fight too ? ' 

At that moment the innkeeper, who had 
gone in search of Rorison's requirements, re- 
turned with a needle and thread. 

* Show me to another room, please,' said 
Rorison. 

' You don't mean to say you're going to 
sew your kilt yourself ? ' cried Mrs Seamier. 
* Nonsense ! Give me the needle and thread, 
Mr Landlord. And the best thing that you 
gentlemen can do is to take that parcel of 
clothes and change yourselves. There's six 



Earl Lavender 233 

suits to choose from, and Mr — Mr High- 
landman, you can choose one too, if you 
like, but you must send your kilt to me 
to sew. Now, isn't that the best plan, my 
dear?' 

The young lady admitted it was, and so 
did Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm. 
As for Rorison, he would probably have pre- 
ferred to sew his own kilt, but rather than 
argue out the matter with the possessor of 
such an uncontrollable and tireless tongue as 
Mrs Scamler's, he withdrew with the others, 
and sent in his philibeg by the landlord. 
After examining it with great interest, Mrs 
Seamier hung it round her own ample 
haunches and made a turn of the room with 
the bagpipes under her arm. She even 
essayed to blow, but the sudden harsh buzz 
of the pipes behind her so took her by sur- 
prise that she flung them from her and 
settled down at last to repair a rent 
which had been made in the tartan by 
the ourang-outang's teeth during the final 
m&l&e, 

* Maud, dear,* she said, ' you ought to 



234 Earl Lavender 

watch at the door that they don't run off 
again/ 

Maud did so, heaving many a heavy 
sigh. 



CHAPTER XI 

OF THE 'razor AND HEN,* AND HOW THEY 
DANCED ON THE GREEN 

Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm did in- 
tend to run away again. Having changed 
their clothes, they walked as lightly as they 
could along the lobby that led to the door of 
the inn, but Mrs Seamier, seeing them pass, 
cried out, — 

* Ah, my dear Mr Gurdon, come in, come 
in!' 

Lord Brumm groaned and slunk into the 

room, but Earl Lavender, supposing that 

his 'young lady' was with Mrs Seamier, 

made a dash for it, only, of course, to drop 

into Maud's arms. She, indeed, was nearly 

overset, and had to cling to him to keep from 

falling. 

235 



236 Earl Lavender 

*Oh, Harry!' she cried, clasping an arm 
of his with both hers, * what is it ? What is 
it?' 

He grew pale, and said with forced cold- 
ness, — 

' Now, Maud, you would be much wiser 
not to invite a discussion. You will only 
make yourself miserable/ 

* Miserable ! As if I could be more miser- 
able than I have been all this week. Oh ! ' 
she whispered, gulping a legion of sobs, 
while the tears poured down her face. 

Earl Lavender blushed a fiery red, then 
turned even paler than before. 

* Maud,' he said, speaking low and thick, 
* Maud, I will tell you all, but you must not 
laugh at me.' 

* Laugh ! ' she replied, with some scorn in 
her broken voice. 

* Yes, laugh,' he rejoined. * A prophet has 
no honour among his friends. Prepare your- 
self for a revelation, and whatever you think 
of it do not, as you love me, laugh. I can 
bear — I can welcome the laughter of any- 
body except you — and one other.' 



Earl Lavender 237 

' One other ? ' she queried, with a start. 
' Yes/ he assented. ' Only one other.' 

* What other.?* 

' The fittest of women.' 

' Oh, me ! What is it ? ' she whispered, 
and her tears fell afresh. 

' You mustn't cry,' he answered gently. 
* Let us go under a tree.' 

Beneath the shade of a hawthorn they 
sat down side by side. The larks shouted 
high overhead, and in the wood behind a 
great chorus of birds sang joyfully. A 
soft wind swayed the shadows on the 
grass, and now and then a fleecy cloud 
veiled the midsummer sun. 

* What,' cried Earl Lavender, looking 
about him, * what a beautiful day, and what 
a beautiful place! I could enjoy a retired 
life so thoroughly. Why is this mission 
thrust on me? Why am I the fittest of 
men ? ' 

Deeply perplexed, and with tearful eyes, 
Maud took one of his hands in both hers, 
and then in tones that she vainly en- 
deavoured to steady, said, — 



238 Earl Lavender 

* Oh Harry, do stop this nonsense, and 
tell me what it is thats wrong?' 

She paused for a second or two suspend- 
ing her breath, and then added, as she 
dropped his hand, — 

' Who is this — other — the fittest of 
women ? * 

* I do not know yet,' replied Earl 
Lavender. 

* But you spoke of her just now.' 

' Yes ; for she must exist. I thought I 
had found her last night, but I was mistaken. 
It is she I am in search of; it is part of my 
mission.' 

' Are you mad, Harry ? ' 

* It is little use my talking to you, Maud, 
unless you empty your mind of all pre- 
conception, and, giving me a willing ear, 
invite conviction.' 

*Well, dear, tell me,' she said, appearing 
as submissive as she could, *how are you 
to find out the fittest among women ? ' 

* By Natural Selection ; that is the phrase, 
I think.' 

*By Natural Selection!' 



Earl Lavender 239 

* I must devise some means of gathering 
out of all the countries of the world — all 
Aryan countries I mean — or — who knows? 
— perhaps I am to discover that true 
beauty, true fitness — in the female, that 
is — may be found only in one of the bar- 
barous African tribes, or among the ever- 
lasting races of Asia. It will be advisable, 
therefore, to have delegates from all peoples. 
Fifty Russian ladies, say ; no French — an 
effete race ; thirty Germans ; a dozen 
Romans — from that little town on the Tiber : 
I forget its name, where the Latin race is 
said to survive in its purity ; a score of 
Norwegians ; a hundred Chinese ; a hun- 
dred Africans — assorted ; and so on. The 
hotels about Charing Cross could be hired 
for their reception, and out of the mass I 
could choose say a hundred of the best- 
favoured, the others being sent home — 
without prejudice. In two years, you see, 
I could live a week with each of these — 
if that were necessary ; but in all likeli- 
hood it would not take me half — a quarter 
of that time to find the fittest. Here it 



240 Earl Lavender 

seems to me you have a very fair scheme 
of Natural Selection.' 

* Very fair, indeed,' said Maud mechani- 
cally, looking out at nothing with a stony 
stare and pale, wet cheeks. 

*Then we understand each other, my 
dear,' rejoined Earl Lavender. 
' I understand nothing about it.' 
*Oh, you will in time. I must return 
to London now, having to prepare for a 
remarkable demonstration to-morrow which 
will eclipse anything I have yet done.' 

* But what about me ? ' exclaimed Maud, 
passionate and indignant. 

*You? Well, I suppose you can come 
with me — in the meantime.' 

* In the meantime ? ' 

Much to Earl Lavender's relief, their 
talk was interrupted at this point by the 
sudden appearance of Lord Brumm and 
Mrs Seamier, who came out of the inn 
together and ran towards them hand-in- 
hand, Mrs Seamier skipping like a girl 
and as radiant as a bride. Lord Brumm, 
however, looked very shamefaced, and 



Earl Lavender 241 

evidently overcome with difficulty a desire 
to hide behind the buxom widow. 

' My dearest people/ said Mrs Seamier, 
plumping down on the grass beside the 
others and dragging Lord Brumm along 
with her, *it's all right ! I've got the whole 
story, and it was just as I said, the malevel- 
ling interference of a deputation, partly, only 
partly, for, oh, you dear Mr Gurdon ! there 
was another reason, most honourable, most 
honourable. You must know, my lord, or 
whatever you are, for I know you're not, Tve 
-told Maud already how on the very eve of 
our marriage he ran away, for pleasures are 
like poppies spread, you see the flower, the 
bloom is shed, as saith the poet. Well, 
he'd hardly been half an hour in the hotel 
where he went to, you remember, so as not 
to be in the same house, when up came an 
anonymous letter with a blue-tailed envelope, 
sealed with a door key, and written upside 
down, I mean sloping the wrong way, in a 
feigned hand, although it's got very common 
now to slope the wrong way, and sloping is 
a wrong thing to do certainly in any case, 

Q 



242 Earl Lavender 

Mr Gurdon had a good excuse — very 
crooked and illegitimate you said it was, 
Mr Gurdon — and it told him all about my 
advertisements, and about the men who 
came down to marry me in buggies and 
traps with whisky bottles in their pockets, 
and red noses, all smelling of bad cigars and 
bird's-eye tobacco. It told him how I 
had gone in wholesale for the French 
language, and that I was a most danger- 
ous character, full of the French Revulsion 
znA fang-de-seeaycle. Do you know French, 
my lord, or, Mr whatever you are ? * F * 
*i' 'n' — they called it 'fang,' you know, 
that's how they pronounce it ; and it's 
very strange, and no wonder ignorant 
people are suspicious. Well, it struck 
him all of a heap, and he sent for the 
messenger, but the boy, oh, where was 
he ? — I did laugh at that once : I heard 
two gammons — that's what they call city 
Arabs in French, and a very good name 
too — gammoning about it, and the one 
said, — *'The boy stood on the burning 
deck," and the other said, — " covered 



Earl Lavender 243 

with blisters," and I stood at the shop 
window and laughed in the street — Hol- 
born it was, and very comical indeed. 
But the boy, whether he was covered 
with blisters or not, he ought to have 
been, couldn't be found ; and so he sat 
in blank despair chewing the letter until 
he thought of going into the bar and 
putting questions. ' 

* But, my dear, I didn't chew the 
letter,' said Mr Gurdon. 

'That is the way I tell the story,' 
retorted Mrs Seamier. * Do you suppose 
it would have the least interest for any- 
body as you told it to me — leastways if 
they hadn't the power of putting two 
and two together as I have ; yes, in- 
deed, and making five of it. Then the 
barman, a very civil man, I can say, 
and one that must tell the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, 
ratified the letter every word of it, and 
a woman came in for beer, a drunken 
trollop that had been my servant once, 
Sally Dwindlepeak her name was, I 



244 Earl Lavender 

remember, but what she married, or if 
she married, I don't know. She used 
two and a half pounds of butter and 
three pounds of sugar a week to her 
own share, until I put her on commons, 
and short ones, too, and had to have 
water poured over her in the morning 
to waken her — a dirty, lazy cat, with 
Tommy this and Tommy that forever 
running after her. Well, she put in 
her word it seems, and says, — **An old 
close-fisted chattering Judy that Mrs 
Seamier is." ' 

' My dear, she didn't say that,' pro- 
tested Mr Gurdon. 

' Didn't she, though ? I know Sally, 
and if it wasn't that it was something 
worse ! " She talks and talks to you," 
she says, ''all forenoon, and keeps you 
from your work, and then talks and 
talks at you all afternoon for being idle. 
Such a tongue I never did hear," which 
wasn't all a lie, I do admit ; but if she 
said I didn't give her a good written 
character, don't you believe her, more 



Earl L avender 245 

than she deserved. And now I remem- 
ber she married Tom Strammel, but not 
out of my house, and had triplets, and 
the very last that should — ** Goodness and 
mercy," cried Mr Gurdon. Now, don't 
interrupt, my dear! — or would have done 
— there ! — if it had been his mark of ex- 
clamation, ''talked at you all day, did 
she ? " and without another word he put 
on his hat and coat and went away, 
late as it was, without paying his bill, 
and has never been seen since till this 
morning in the ''Cap-and-Bells," when I 
fell on the floor, which the sawdust is 
about me still. My lord, or mister, you 
will wonder why Mr Gurdon went away 
so precipitously, and so Til tell you that 
he is a mahoganist of the deepest dye, 
and had been lured on to marriage by 
me pretending that I was as silent as 
death, and as docile as a tame rabbit. 
Poor, dear gentleman, he has been 
brought to the brink of the grave 
twice by scouring wives with yelping 
tongues, and when he learned beyond 



246 Earl Lavender 

a doubt that I was the most wonderful 
conversationalist in all Nettleby-Kings- 
croft, and a woman as can't abide a 
speck here and there or anywhere, in- 
stead of the quiet, smiling little mouse 
he knew, pouring out his tea with a 
hole in her stocking and a smudge on 
her brow — ha, ha, ha ! — he cut and run 
there and then, although, mind you, he 
was playing a deep little game too. Ah, 
Mr Gurdon, Mr Gurdon, we were a 
pair of tricksters, weren't we ? Do you 
know, my dear, he has just told me 
that the reason he made up his mind to 
marry me was because all the money 
left him by his two wives was lost in 
these bank failures, and he wanted me 
for my income. There, would you have 
anything to do with a man like that ? ' 

Maud couldn't say for certain. 

' Ah ! but he had not really lost every- 
thing, his honour as a mahoganist remained. 
You see, although he could marry me and 
have a comfortable home for ever and a 
day, the deep principle of mahoganry, out- 



Earl L avender 247 

raged at finding me the same kind of woman 
he had buried two of — you might have 
thought It a recommendation ; but no, he 
rose and ran, like Joseph's coat, with only a 
few pounds in his pocket, which were stolen 
next day. He's been destitute and miserable 
ever since, and yet he wouldn't come back. 
Therefore I declare him to be most honour- 
able and worthy, for he did place something 
or other before mere comfort, though it was 
only fear of my tongue and my scouring 
ways. My dear Mr Gurdon, I shall make 
you the happiest of men.' 

Lord Brumm, too overpowered to speak, 
cast a very dejected and rueful glance at 
Earl Lavender, who laughed aloud at the 
conclusion of Mrs Scamler's story, and wished 
her and her betrothed joy of each other 
heartily. 

* And now for London,' he continued, get- 
ting to his feet. ' Back to the fray, good 
Brumm. This refreshing interlude has 
already lasted too long.' 

* Ah ! ' cried Mrs Seamier, jumping up 
and clapping her hands, ' here comes Mr 



248 Earl Lavender 

Highlander with his pipes and the kilt I 
sewed/ 

Running to Rorison, who had just stepped 
out of the inn, she asked him to play a reel, 
'and we'll have a little dance,' she said, 
* before we go.' 

Nothing loth, Rorison tuned up * Tul- 
lochgorum,' and Mrs Seamier invited Earl 
Lavender to trip it on the green. 

*With all my heart, madam,' he replied. 
' I am delighted with your frankness and 
the extraordinary power of surviving which 
you evidently possess. Lord Brumm, your 
baroness to be is distinctly fit.' 

*And you can't say no fairer than that,' 
assented Mrs Seamier merrily, as she 
whirled away light as a bird, with flying 
skirts and firm feet. 

Mr Gurdon and Maud, wretched as they 
were, found the example irresistible, and 
dashed into the dance, glad of the distrac- 
tion. The sound of the pipes and of the 
whooping of Mrs Seamier, who spared 
neither lungs nor limbs, reached the thirty 
lunchers in their barn : each man looked 



Earl Lavender 249 

at his neighbour, finished his beer at a 
gulp, and made for the door. The ser- 
vants came from the inn ; young women 
and middle-aged women, mostly with bare 
heads and naked arms, appeared from no- 
body knew where ; and soon at least fifty 
couples pranced upon the sod, many of them 
with but a crude idea of what they were 
doing, but all able and pleased to toss them- 
selves about in time to the music. 

When the mirth was at its highest Earl 
Lavender seized Maud by the arm and led 
her to the door of the inn. His action, 
frantic in its haste and suddenness, was 
observed by everybody. Rorison stopped 
playing, and the crowd followed the de- 
serters in amazement. 

In the midst of a dead silence, which 
everyone felt to be most impressive by 
contrast with the riot of the previous 
moment, Earl Lavender, pointing to the 
sign above the inn door, said to Maud, — 
* I cannot make it out ; Lord Brumm 
cannot make it out. Can you tell me what 
it means 1 ' 



250 Earl Lavender' 

'The *' Razor and Hen,'" panted Maud, 
breathless with the dance. ' It's just one 
of these old signs that have no meaning.' 

' Ah, no,' rejoined Earl Lavender mourn- 
fully. ' Nothing is without meaning. Can 
anyone tell me' — turning to the crowd — 
' what is the significance of the '' Razor 
and Hen?" I am Earl Lavender, the 
fittest of men. Me, all prophets have fore- 
told ; all poets, all preachers are my fore- 
runners. There is not a vein upon a leaf, 
not a scratch upon a pebble, not a name 
above a shop, not a torn word on a scrap 
of paper, without a message for me ; and 
I am in despair because I cannot read the 
meaning here. The ** Razor and Hen!"' 

No one spoke. Mrs Seamier opened 
her mouth, but closed it again without a 
remark. Earl Lavender appealed mutely 
to Rorison. The Scot shook his head, as 
did the showman when he was referred 
to ; but the waiter elbowed his way to 
the front, and thrusting his hands in his 
pockets, said in a formal voice, as if he 
had been announcing a recitation, — 



Earl Lavender 251 

' Ze '' Racesor— ant Hen." ' 

* Yes, my friend/ said Earl Lavender 
expectantly. 

*Ze ''Racesor — ant Hen/** repeated the 
waiter, coughing. 

* Well ? ' said Earl Lavender with much 
solicitude. 

' It meance noth-ing,' replied the waiter, 
scratching his head. ' My head zought I 
had zomezing, but he pass avay.' Ze 
" Racesor ant Hen.** Heh, heh ! How 
vun come to baint him, ah, who can tell ! 
Bonne mere ! Ze Angleesh are ze beoble 
abzurd.' 

' In the city,* said Earl Lavender to 
Maud, ' my faculties, relaxed by this ex- 
cursion, will regain their strength, and I 
shall find the meaning/ 

He shook hands with Rorison and the 
showman, and walked off to Wood Street 
Station, accompanied by Maud, and followed 
by Lord Brumm and Mrs Seamier, while 
the crowd set up a shout, and the waiter 
cried, * God zave ze Qveen ! * 

When Rorison inquired of the landlord 



252 Earl Lavender 

about the bill it appeared that Mrs Seamier 
and Maud had settled quietly for everything; 
and on quitting the showman to pursue his 
journey to Cadzow Forest he learned that 
the waiter had agreed to work in the men- 
agerie for a while as some compensation for 
the slaughter of the ourang-outang. 

* Thus are earthly things made . even,* 
said Rorison to himself as he turned his 
face northwards, and passed out of this 
full and accurate narrative. 



CHAPTER XII 



WITH OTHER MATTERS 



All the way to London Earl Lavender 
considered in silence the mystery of the 
* Razor and Hen.' It was easy enough to 
foist a significance upon this extraordinary 
sign, but he could evolve nothing that 
fitted both it and him ; so, on the arrival 
of the train at Liverpool Street, he gave 
the question up, promising himself to ex- 
amine it exhaustively when his mind should 
be freer. Maud's presence troubled him ; 
the idea of his proposed march from St 
Paul's to Westminster and that of his new 
scheme of Natural Selection jostled each 

other in his head ; he must have patience 

3S3 



254 Earl Lavender 

and submit to the Evolutionary will. He 
taxed himself with having endeavoured to 
rush things ; and as if to make amends for 
his late headlong exploit he sat down on 
one of the seats on the platform, lit a cigar 
which he had bought from the * Razor and 
Hen/ crossed his legs, and smiled at his 
companions. 

* Lord bless me ! ' exclaimed Mrs Seamier. 
*Well, of all the places to do the Duchy 
Farrinaty ! — though I never did make out 
how that awful, hideous, roasted, old Italian 
in the lime-kiln in Dante's pictures could 
possibly make up such a proverb as " easy 
does it." ' 

* Will you not — come with us ? ' asked 
Maud hesitatingly. 

She felt utterly powerless because she was 
most unwilling to form that opinion of Earl 
Lavender which his conduct was forcing on 
her. She and Mrs Seamier had arranged, 
if possible, to take both wanderers, in the 
first instance, to the Great British Railway 
Hotel, and then to their respective homes. 
It now became clear that they should riot 



Earl Lavender 255 

have counted so securely as they had done on 
Earl Lavender's consent. 'As long as we 
keep by them they will go with us,* Mrs 
Seamier had said. Maud shrugged her 
shoulders as she recalled the remark. * Yes,' 
she thought, ' as long as we can keep them 
we shall be with them.' 

' No,' replied Earl Lavender, a minute 
having elapsed since Maud put her ques- 
tion, * you will come with me. My mind 
is made up, or, rather, the immediate steps 
to be taken were evolved the moment I 
ceased to consider.' 

He led the way promptly to the station- 
yard, and they all got into a four-wheeler. 

' Trallidge's Hotel,' said Earl Lavender, 
and had to repeat the direction before the 
driver grasped it. 

Lord Brumm turned pale, and seemed 
about to protest ; but gradually his mouth 
tightened, and a grim smile began to play 
about his eyes. The ladies, lost in wonder, 
said nothing. Maud paid the driver when 
they got out. Lord Brumm chuckled 
nervously, and Mrs Seamier touched him 



256 Earl L avender 

with her eye-glasses and chuckled too, 
vaguely sympathetic. In a few minutes 
they all stood in the cedar-floored room at 
the foot of the broad stair. Four stately 
men, and four stately women — not those 
of the preceding night, but another octave 
as grave and pleasant-looking — rose from 
the couches, laid aside their books, and, 
gathering their robes about them, received 
the visitors graciously though in silence. 
Earl Lavender whispered a few words to 
the four stately dames, who immediately 
approached Mrs Seamier and Maud and 
led them abashed and wondering to the 
women's apartments. 

Earl Lavender and Lord Brumm were 
conducted as before to the bath. Having 
passed from hot water through snow to 
the douche of attar of roses, they were 
clad in the costume of the Underworld and 
taken to the Whipping Room. There, 
armed with whips, they reclined on couches 
beside the middle-aged men and women, 
whose grave presences preserved decorum. 
In a few seconds Maud and Mrs Seamier 



Earl Lavender 257 

entered the room. These ladies, fresh 
from a series of baths similar to the men's 
lustration, presented a dazzling appearance 
in the sight of their * gentlemen.' Mrs 
Seamier, a beautiful damask in her cheeks, 
her mouth a crimson geranium, a soft and 
limpid light in her kindly eyes, and every 
hair of her head crisp and sparkling, looked 
like Maud's elder sister. And Maud ! 
She stepped through the curtains of the 
door like the moon issuing from a cloud. 
Her face shone pale, radiant and warm, 
with the faintest shade of pink, that came 
and went in the light like the soft, clear 
colour in mother-of-pearl. Her breath 
seemed to curl out of her parted lips — 
perfume from a flower ; you saw her 
breathing and thought you saw the incense. 
Her rich black hair hung coiled and loose, 
and full of mystery ; and full of mystery 
were her deep, dark eyes. 

Several couples were flogging each other 
when the ladies entered. Boundless as was 
the astonishment of the new-comers, it was 
fully a minute before Mrs Seamier could 

R 



258 Earl Lavender 

utter a word. At last she said, speaking 
very quietly for her, but with her usual 
rapidity and recklessness, — 

* It may be Hell, or it may be Heaven, 
or It may be Purgatory, but, thank God, 
weVe not dead, Maud, and they can't do 
that to us ! Mercy me, though ! what 
a broad back I have if I am dead ! ' 

The comely, middle-aged censors rose, 
surrounded Mrs Seamier, looked at her 
intently with their agreeable gravity, placed 
their fingers on their lips, and retired to 
their seats. In following the movements 
of these monitors with their eyes, Mrs 
Seamier and Maud for the first time since 
entering the Whipping Room encountered 
the glances of Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm. Mrs Seamier noticed at once 
that they had whips in their hands, and 
drew Maud s attention to the fact. 

' What does it mean ? ' said Maud, under 
her breath, staying a step in Earl Lavender's 
direction she had been about to make, while 
Mrs Seamier turned pale, clutched her 
companion's skirt, and whispered, — 



Earl Lavender 259 

* I knew there was something wrong with 
our gentlemen, their conduct was like ghosts.' 

The suspense of the ladies was not of 
long duration. Earl Lavender and Lord 
Brumm, who had waited only until the 
floor should be cleared, rose as soon as the 
last couple of floggers had withdrawn, and 
stepped up to Mrs Seamier and Maud. 
Undoing the * wicket,' as the flap of the 
underground robes was called, they brought 
down their scourges with vigour on the 
backs of each, before either quite realised 
what was toward. Mrs Seamier screamed 
and spun round like a top, nearly tripping 
in her clinging skirts ; but Lord Brumm 
caught her neatly a second time on the 
broad white shoulder-blades. At that Mrs 
Seamier screamed louder than before, and, 
dropping on her knees, exclaimed in a 
terrified voice, — 

* Oh, my sins were very, very little ones ; 
but ask me not to remember them all, 
for I can't and never could. I only began 
irregular verbs, and never came near the 
nude. Oh my ! Did I ever ! Poetry again ! ' 



26o Earl Lavender 

Ask me not to remember them all, 
For I can't and never could. 
I only began irregular verbs, 
And never came near the nude. 

Wonderful ! Oh, I did charge all the sugar 
of the house to you — and the bread — and 
the butter ; but if you'll come away up out 
of this and marry me, you'll get it all back 
again. My dear — ' 

Mrs Seamier was allowed to proceed no 
further in her petition, for the four stately 
dames of the room bound and gagged her, 
and Lord Brumm gave her the remaining 
ten strokes at his ease. 

Maud took her flogging sedately. She 
neither winced, nor clenched her hands, nor 
set her teeth, nor uttered cry, but stared at 
Earl Lavender all the time. As for him, the 
tears were streaming down his cheeks, and a 
sob burst from him at every stroke ; yet he 
did not curb the force of his arm one jot. 
When he had counted twelve, he handed the 
scourge to Maud, and, having adjusted her 
robe, undid his own. His back was all 
black and blue from last night's whipping. 



Earl Lavender 261 

Maud shuddered when she saw it, and 
turned away. But the four stately dames 
came to her, and one of them, who seemed 
the eldest, said authoritatively, *You must 
lay on and spare not : one good whipping 
deserves another.* Whereupon Maud, having 
measured her distance, closed her eyes and 
brought down the whip with all her might. 
At the sixth stroke her arm was stayed, 
and opening her eyes, she beheld with 
horror dark crimson stains streaking Earl 
Lavender's bruised back. 

* Twelve strokes, or until the blood starts,' 
said the eldest of the monitors, taking away 
Maud's whip. 

Another of the grave and gracious dames 
brought from beneath one of the couches a 
sandal-wood box, out of which she took 
wherewithal to dress Earl Lavender's wounds. 

* You will be whole to-morrow,' she said. 
* But you are not allowed the privilege of the 
scourge again until all traces of whipping 
have left your back.' 

Earl Lavender was about to reply ; but 
the censors of the room once more laid their 



26 i Earl Lavender 

fingers on their lips. Complying with the 
unspoken monition, Earl Lavender bowed 
low, and, taking Maud's hand, led her with 
high courtesy into the Dancing Hall 

Lord Brumm had imagined himself 
strong enough to undergo without flinching 
a thrashing at the hands of Mrs Seamier 
as the necessary pain accompanying the 
great pleasure of scoring that impetuous 
and overpowering widow's broad and solid 
shoulders : nothing less than the antici- 
pation of this satisfaction could possibly have 
tempted him back to the Underworld. 
When Mrs Seamier began, however, he 
found that he had made a mistake. The 
good lady, although not a trained athlete 
like Maud, was possessed of a powerful arm, 
whose strength had been well developed by 
household work. Enraged at the treatment 
she had received, and at the incomprehen- 
sibility of the circumstances in which she 
found herself, she put such a fury into her 
blows, that Brumm shrieked at the 
second, fled at the third, and had to be 
gagged and tied during the infliction of the 



Earl Lavender 263 

remainder. His flogging extended only to 
eight strokes. The eighth indeed should 
not have been delivered, for the blood had 
sprung at the seventh, but Mrs Seamier was 
so enthusiastic and expeditious, that she 
overstepped the limit before the censors 
could interfere. Yet, as soon as she saw 
the blood, her whip dropped from her hand, 
and she fell a-whimpering. But when his 
wounds were dressed Lord Brumm smiled 
on her in a superior manner as one already 
initiated, and, taking her by the hand, led 
her into the Hall of Fantasy, where he had 
been entertained on his former visit. 

The Hall of Fantasy was lit by exquisite 
mellow lights pendent from the high, groined 
roof. Paintings by great masters adorned 
the walls, and between every picture hung 
velvet curtains of various hues accordant 
with the requirements of the canvases. 
Velvet-covered seats of every shape and 
degree of accommodation were scattered 
over the floor, the latter being car- 
peted with velvet shaded in aesthetic 
relation to the decoration of the walls. A 



264 Earl Lavender 

number of people — couples and groups — 
were seated in this apartment talking 
in ordinary conversational tones when 
Lord Brumm and Mrs Seamier en- 
tered. 

*Ahr cried the roguish damsel, who 
had whipped Lord Brumm the evening 
before ; * back already ? ' 

She sat with several companions near 
the door by which Lord Brumm and Mrs 
Seamier had come in ; and as she spoke 
she beckoned with her hand. Lord Brumm 
saluted her, and leading Mrs Seamier in 
gallant style, joined the company, most of 
whom he had met on the previous night. 
He himself found a place beside the 
roguish damsel, and Mrs Seamier was 
accommodated between two pleasant- 
looking young gentlemen. 

'Well, do you know,' said Mrs 
Seamier, as soon as she had seated 
herself comfortably, beaming on every- 
body through her gold-rimmed pebbles, 
and touching lightly with her fingers the 
knee of her right-hand companion — 



Earl Lavender 265 

' Do you know, I wish my mother had 
whipped me when I was a girl. You've 
no conception — or, rather, you all must 
have, to be sure, a regular high-top- 
liftical conception of the perfect comfort 
and heavenly ecstasy one experiences after 
having been whipped. My language simply 
flows from me, and I find myself using 
words that I didn't know I knew. But it 
does sting ! Oh, my ! And then, when 
they gag you and hold you, and you can't 
scream or move, and the whip comes down 
swing — swish — and seems to cut your soul 
out — it's like nothing earthly. Lord bless 
me ! I thought I was dead each time, 
and the blood seething in my veins, and 
my heart jumping and thumping like the 
pistol of an engine — though why it should 
be called a pistol I never did know, for 
it's much liker a ramrod. But why do you 
do it ? Where am I ? ' 

*You are in the Underworld,' answered 
the roguish damsel. 

* The Underworld ? ' said Mrs Seamier. 
*Is it really Hell, then? Am I dead.^* 



266 Earl Lavender 

*0h ! You do expect to go to Hell when 
you die ? ' said the roguish damsel 

*Well, my dear,* rejoined Mrs Seamier 
in a very candid tone, * to tell you the 
truth, I'm not quite sure whether there are 
a Heaven and a Hell to go to. That's the 
result of education, and a very uncomfort- 
able result it is. In the good old days, 
when people knew no French — though 
how the French themselves did is a thing 
that puzzles me, and always will — there 
was Heaven, and there was Hell, and you 
went to one or the other if you were a 
Protestant, and the Catholics had Purga- 
tory, which I always think a most con- 
soling and good-natured thing, and a thing 
worth spending money on. You hadn't 
the least difficulty about it ; you paid the 
price and took your choice. Poetry ! — 
nearly : — 

You paid the price, 
And took your choice. 

But now one never knows. Only, I think, 
since you ask me, that if I am dead, which 



Earl Lavender 267 

goodness knows I may be, for I never heard 
of such a thing before, I'm certainly not in 
Heaven — there s a picture over there — ' (Mrs 
Seamier nodded her head significantly at a 
beautiful painting of Venus and Adonis) — 
* and as Tm a Protestant, of course, it can't 
be Purgatory, so, my dear people, it seems 
very likely that it's the other place, and a 
very pretty and comfortable place it is, no 
infernal flames and stupid devils at all, but 
we whip each other when we're in the mood, 
and we laugh and talk and enjoy ourselves, 
and I'm very glad I came/ 

* The whippings, madam,' said one of the 
pleasant young gentlemen who sat on either 
side of Mrs Seamier, 'are not punitive.' 

* Punitive ? * queried Mrs Seamier. 
' Nominative, possessive, abjective, is it a 
case "i ' 

'Yes, it's a case to denote the sufferer 
of a punishment,' replied the young gentle- 
man. ' Our whippings are not punishments.' 

* Aren't they ? ' said Mrs Seamier. 

* No, they are stimulants ; and this isn't 
Hell, at least as far as we know.' 



268 Earl L avender 

*A prudent reservation/ said the other 
young gentleman. ' The denizens of Hell, I 
expect, don't know they're there.' 

* Good,' said the other. 

* My dear madam,' said the pleasant young 
gentleman who had endorsed the reservation 
regarding the tenants of Hell, 'how do we 
know? Perhaps we are all dead, perhaps 
we never lived. I know I often take my- 
self to be not even a phantom, but a non- 
existent item in the dreary nightmare of 
some swinish creature, with secret aspirations 
after higher things than hog-wash. Do you 
know Heine and Carlyle ? ' 

* I'm afraid I never heard of the gentle- 
men — Carlyle?' said Mrs Seamier. 'Yes, 
I seem to know of him, he was a mahoganist 
and a wife-beater, wasn't he? Oh, if I'd 
only had him, I'd have laughed and talked 
and scoured and scrubbed him into the 
gentlest of husbands. My dear Mr Gurdon, 
don't you be frightened, you're a mahoganist 
but you're a gentle creature too, stout and 
stolid as you seem, and although you don't 
know it, just as we don't know whether we 



Earl Lavender 269 

are alive or dead, whether we are in Heaven 
or Hell. — These are very clever young 
gentleman, Mr Gurdon. — Well, now, do you 
know I'm rather sorry I'm not dead. I had 
made up my mind that it was all over, and I 
could marry Mr Gurdon in these infernal 
regions and live happy ever after through- 
out all eternity, world without end. Amen. 
But I want to know about these whip- 
pings. They do stimulate certainly ; I 
never was so stimulated in all my life. But 
how did this Underworld begin? What's 
the meaning of it ? ' 

* Nobody knows how it began,' replied 
one of the pleasant young gentlemen ; * and 
it has no meaning.' 

' No meaning ? ' 

' No. There are things that can be 
said about it, of course,' continued the 
pleasant young gentleman, ' For example, 
a whipping has a much more exalting 
effect on the mind than a bottle of cham- 
pagne, and a much less deleterious effect 
upon tlie body. It is a sort of substitute 
for dissipation. Then novelists, artists, poets, 



270 Ea rl L avender 

dramatists and leader-writers come here 
when they are suffering from depression or 
brain-fag, and one good whipping is always 
quite sufficient to restore their mental 
vigour for a whole year. Best of all, it is 
the great alternative to, and preventive of, 
adultery.' 

* Now, you don't say so ! ' cried Mrs 
Seamier. 

* I do, though,* retorted the pleasant 
young gentleman. * More than half of the 
couples who come here for mutual stimula- 
tion are lovers, married to unloved spouses, 
who, if it were not for the vent their feel- 
ings obtain in scourging each other, would 
most infallibly figure in the divorce court.' 

' How very interesting ! ' exclaimed Mrs 
Seamier. 

* What can be the matter now 'i ' said the 
roguish young damsel before Mrs Seamier 
could utter a syllable of the countless ideas 
suggested to her by this singular use of 
whipping. 

The noise which interrupted Mrs Scam- 
ler's discourse had attracted the attention 



Earl Lavefider 2 7 1 

of many others in the Hall of Fantasy, 
and a considerable number of people surged 
into the corridor to find out what had 
happened. One of the pleasant young 
gentlemen joined the crowd of quidnuncs, 
and returned hurriedly to announce that 
a visitor, who had been arrested the night 
before, had again broken some rule and 
was being haled to judgment. 

* Earl Lavender ! ' cried Lord Brumm. 
'But I'll not be his sandwichman.* 

* I should think not/ said Mrs Seamier. 
* Sandwichman, indeed ! Whatever do you 
mean ? What he needs is a strait-jacket ; 
that's the sandwich for him.' 

Mrs Seamier, Lord Brumm, the roguish 
damsel, the two pleasant young gentlemen 
and their friends crushed with the crowd 
into the Judgment Hall, where they beheld 
Earl Lavender arraigned for the second 
time before the three reverend-looking men 
who sat at the scroll-covered table. Maud, 
although not a prisoner, stood close beside 
him. 

' Judgment, oh, sages ! ' cried one of the 



272 Earl Lavender 

young men who had arrested Earl Lav- 
ender. 

The white - robed sage signed to the 
accuser to proceed ; and he, having made 
his obeisance, addressed the court. 

* Oh, sages/ he said, ' as I sat playing 
the violin in the Hall of Dancing, this man 
ascended the steps of the musicians' gallery, 
and cried out : — " Meaningless dwellers in 
this lower world, who whip and dance 
away the golden hours, I bring you 
strength and meaning and delight, I bring 
you fitness, for I am the fittest."* 

' Blank verse ! it is,' said Mrs Seamier 
under her breath. * That young man's as 
wonderful as me. Oh, but it's not him ; 
he's only quoting that stupendous creature, 
Earl Lavender.' 

* Before he could proceed further,' con- 
tinued the accuser, * I and others seized 
him and brought him hither.' 

' Has he spoken truly in all points, so 
far as you know } ' asked the white-robed 
sage of those who had assisted in bringing 
Earl Lavender before the judgment-seat. 



Earl Lavender 273 

An inclination of the head expressed the 
acquiescence of the others In the deposition 
of the accuser. 

The three sages consulted for a minute 
in whispers, and then the spokesman pro- 
nounced doom. 

* This is your second offence/ he said 
sternly, * and the last you will be allowed 
to commit in the Underworld. You will 
be taken hence to a bedroom, and locked 
in till to-morrow at noon, when you will 
be stripped to your shirt, and sent up 
into London never to be re-admitted here.* 

As Earl Lavender was led away, his 
eye searched among the crowd until it 
lit upon Lord Brumm, whereupon he 
smiled triumphantly, and uttered in a loud 
voice the one word, — 

' Remember ! ' 



CHAPTER XIII 

HOW THEY ALL ENDED WHERE THEY BEGAN 

Immediately on the departure of Earl Lav- 
ender from the Judgment Hall, Maud fell 
down in a faint in the middle of the floor. 
Mrs Seamier hastened to her assistance, and 
was attended in her good offices by a 
number of other ladies, among them the 
famous Damsel of the Veil. As soon as 
their charge came to herself again, Mrs 
Seamier declared that they must *get 
straight away out of here as fast as their 
legs could carry them ; ' but the Lady of 
the Veil explained that no one might 
leave the Underworld before the morn- 
ing, and offered to take care of Maud 
until bedtime. Mrs Seamier gratefully 

274 



Earl Lavender 275 

assented to this proposal, and she and 
her friends returned to the Hall of Fan- 
tasy, while Maud was re-conducted to the 
Whipping Room. With the approval of 
he censors, the Lady of the Veil gave 
Maud four sound lashes, thereby effectu- 
ally dispelling the lassitude which had 
overtaken her; indeed, such an emphatic 
call on her reserve force made a new 
woman of her, as the saying is. The 
two young ladies then whirled slowly 
across the Hall of Dancing to the ante- 
room in which Earl Lavender had made 
his confession, and were soon engaged 
in a most intimate conversation, reclining 
on couches opposite and quite close to 
each other. 

*And how long have you been in the 
habit of coming here?' asked Maud. 

*For three years now,' replied the other. 
* Oh ! ' continued the Lady of the Veil, 
after a pause, sitting up and speaking 
with great intensity, ' what would you 
have me to do ? Life is so stale.* 

* Women are having more liberty now : 



276 Earl Lavender 

there are many things they may do that were 
forbidden to them before,' rejoined Maud. 

*Yes, but what things?' was the scorn- 
ful reply. * Doctoring, travelling, journal- 
ising — ^antique things that men have been 
doing for centuries, and can do much 
better, and always will do much better 
than women. There is only one thing 
that women can do better than men — a 
thing men can't do at all. But I won't 
do it. I am often tempted to yield to 
love, and be married and bear children. 
But what would be the sense.'* What 
would be the use ? Suppose I were to 
become the mother of a Caesar, of a 
Shakespeare, of a Christ. Where would 
be the advantage? Who wants to serve 
people who have made in one continent 
a Popedom, in another an oligarchy of 
millionaires, out of the Sermon on the 
Mount ? Besides, what does it matter 
whether people are happy or miserable, 
bond or free, when the world will be 
an icicle in a year, or twenty millions 
of years — duration is of no consequence ; 



Earl Lavender 277 

the ends the same, a quenched cinder, 
and not a voice to whisper in all space, 
*' There was once a man.''* 

' But surely this is very morbid ? ' said 
Maud. 

* Morbid.'* Of course it is morbid. Is 
there anything that is not morbid.'* Life 
is a disease : the moment we are born 
we begin to die.' 

' Were you ever really in love ? ' 

' Ever really in love ? Look at me ! 
I am always in love. If you mean, have 
I ever deluded myself with the childish 
notion of love, which finds the universe 
in an individual, I say, no, a thousand 
times. I love, I love ; but I would sooner 
give my body to the flames than to mar- 
riage. I will not be as the beasts 
are, a slave of nature. I will not! 
I will not ! And so I come here 
for days at a time, and starve myself, 
and am lashed, and conquer desire. And 
sometimes I burst out in this way to an 
ingenuous girl like you. But I have done. 
Now, tell me about yourself and this 



278 Earl Lavender 

strange man who has brought you here. 
Do you love him ? ' 

* Yes,' answered Maud. 

' And does he love you ? ' 

'He once did — or said he did. Now 
he — but let us talk of something else.' 

*Dear, I want to help you,' said the 
Lady of the Veil. * Now — he is searching 
for the fittest woman, isn't he ? ' 

* How do you know ? ' 

* Because he mistook me for her last night.' 
Maud, unable to restrain her tears, whis- 
pered huskily, — 

' I am afraid he is mad.' 

' But tell me about it,' persisted the Lady 
of the Veil, taking one of Maud's hands. 
'Whoishe.?' 

* He is Sir Harry Emblem of Golden 
Arbour, in Surrey, and my cousin, and we 
were married eight days ago, and went to 
Harwich for Antwerp, and there, almost as 
soon as we arrived, he left me without a 
word. I was too ashamed to ask any help, 
for I knew I was accused of — of courting 
him, of angling for him, and, I love him so, 



Earl Lavendei' 279 

that it may have looked like that, and every- 
body would have jeered ; so I wanted to 
keep it quiet, and went after him alone.* 

* And you have spent the first week of the 
honeymoon in hunting your husband ? ' 

There being no response to that the Lady 
of the Veil continued after a pause, — 

' I don't think your husband is really mad. 
It is simply a wild humour of vanity, ignor- 
ance and ambition.' 

Maud was crying quietly, and made no 
remark. This was the first time she had 
told anyone of her husband's desertion, 
and this the first real flood of tears she had 
shed since her marriage morning. 

* I know — I have it ! ' cried the Lady of the 
Veil, starting up suddenly. * Wait here till 
I come back.' 

She returned in about ten minutes, and 
told Maud that she had been to the highest 
known authority in the Underworld, a 
nameless old man of a most powerful per- 
sonality, and that she had persuaded him to 
visit Earl Lavender and reason with him. 

* He has reasoned often with me,' she 



28o Earl Lavender 

added, * and advises me to marry, but I am 
not persuaded. Your husband, however, is 
already married, and I think he may be 
able to do something with him. Come with 
me and we shall wait at the door. This is 
a breaking of all rules for ladies to enter 
the gentlemen's apartments ; but the Name- 
less One takes the responsibility : he can 
make and unmake laws as he wishes, and 
ordered us to do this.' 

Having reached the men's division, they 
stood close to the door of the room in which 
Earl Lavender had been shut up, and Maud 
for a second or two listened at the keyhole, 
but only the murmur of speech was audible. 

The conversation between Earl Lavender 
and the Nameless One, although conducted 
in a very quiet tone, was none the less im- 
portant on that account. Much impressed 
by the great age, lofty stature, and majestic 
proportions of his unexpected visitor. Earl 
Lavender was at first inclined to be reticent, 
but the Nameless One soon set him at his 
ease, and led him on into an eloquent state- 
ment of his great mission, which ended thus, — 



Earl Lavender 28 1 

* The day for half measures is over. 
There must be no more grafting of new 
ideas on worn-out stems. We must grub 
up the decaying trunks. All the old creeds 
must be torn out though the heart of the 
world come with them. All art, all literature 
must begin over again. Religion must cease 
absolutely, and be for ever forgotten. Mark 
you, I do not mean only Christianity or re- 
ligiosity, but I mean religion in the broadest 
sense in which the most advanced thinker 
may cling to it. For religion we must sub- 
stitute Evolution. I perceive you to be a 
man of authority in these nether regions. 
Be converted ; become an Evolutionist, and 
aid me in the conversion of all who visit 
these abodes. Let us arm ourselves. Let 
us sally forth in the middle of the night, and 
crying, ** The fittest shall survive, and Earl 
Lavender is the fittest,'^ seize London in the 
name of Evolution.' 

* You are a caricature,* said the Nameless 
One in a deep voice. 

* What ? ' cried Earl Lavender. 
' You are a caricature.' 



282 Earl Lavender 

* I fail to understand you/ 

* I say you are, at present, a caricature. 
You must go marry ; know the world ; and 
endeavour to live a decent, honest life. You 
are only an exaggerated type in these latter 
days of individualism — fantastic creatures, 
made what they are by pseudo-philosophy, 
feeble poetry, and foolish fiction. Go ; be 
human ; and give nature a chance.* 

Earl Lavender was utterly confounded, 
as many a greater man has been by quiet 
ridicule, and the dreadful common-sense 
point of view. 

* But,' he gasped at last, * Evolution is 
the word of the age.* 

* If you like,' rejoined the Nameless One; 
* but it was not the word of the past age, 
and it won't be the word of the next age. 
There is a famous nursery rhyme which I 
am persuaded was made about ages and 
men and words — 

I had a little husband, 

No bigger than my thumb ; 
I put him in a pint-pot, 

And there I made him drum. 



Earl Lavender 283 

The ages love jokes, and they take hold 
of men frequently, and put them inside a 
word to beat their brains out against it.' 

* Idle mockery/ said Earl Lavender, re- 
gaining confidence. ' There can be no 
doubt of the truth of Evolution; to-day I 
discovered the missing link.' 

* Everything is true as long as it is 
believed. Men make truth : were there 
no men there would be neither truth nor 
untruth. You discovered the missing link ? 
Well, and good. But what missing link ? 
The link through which men have de- 
generated into monkeys, or the link through 
which monkeys have developed into men ? 
But we never talk or think of monkeys in 
the Underworld. Ugly, loathsome brutes, 
their horrible caricature of humanity has 
degraded man in his own eyes, and helped 
him to a ridiculous theory of the universe. 
Instead of regarding man as the descend- 
ant of an ape, one is sometimes much more 
strongly inclined to look upon the whole 
quadrumanous tribe as the mongrel off- 
spring of some prehistoric human race. 



284 Earl Lavender 

I would have all the monkeys destroyed, 
and erase their image from the memory 
of man.' 

' But that would be a sin against science. 
Surely you know well that nothing un- 
necessary ever existed, or can exist.' 

* I know nothing of the sort/ replied the 
Nameless One. * Many races of animals 
are now extinct, destroyed in convulsions 
of nature, or in the struggle for existence. 
Was their destruction a sin against science ? 
Why should not mankind in an aesthetic 
rage — which would really be a convulsion 
of nature — obliterate this ugly libel upon 
itself?' 

*You talk irrationally,' retorted Earl 
Lavender. * Science cannot yet dispense 
with monkeys. The theory of Evolution — ' 

* Damn the theory of Evolution,' said 
the Nameless One in his deep, passionless 
voice. * It is time it were played out, like 
the hundred theories that have preceded 
it. Had there been no monkeys this 
theory would have been a very subordin- 
ate theory indeed ; it could never have 



Earl Lavender 285 

made much headway against two missing 
links.' 

* But what are we to do ? ' asked Earl 
Lavender blankly. 

* Await in patience the great man of 
science who shall arise and instal, as 
Moses did, a theory of the universe ignor- 
ing entirely all known facts.' 

* Why, I can do that,' said Earl Lavender 
eagerly. ' I am as ignorant as can be.' 

' So I perceive. But in order to do 
without facts now-a-days, you must know 
them all. No merely ignorant theory 
could possibly improve on the Mosaic 
one.' 

* Then I shall study,' said Earl Lavender, 
greatly excited. ' But, tell me, what is 
the symbolic meaning of the ** Razor and 
Hen.?"' 

* It is the symbol,' answered the Name- 
less One promptly, 'of the foolishness of a 
barber, who married the daughter of the 
innkeeper of the ''Hen and Chickens," 
and changed the sign when the old man 
died.' 



286 Earl Lavender 

* How did you divine that the " Razor 
and Hen " was a tavern sign ? ' asked Earl 
Lavender breathless with wonder. 

* I did not divine it,' replied the Nameless 
One. ' I knew the inn — it is in Epping 
Forest, and I remember when the sign was 
changed. Perfect divination is possible only 
to perfect knowledge : hence the inadequacy 
of all messages.' 

* Then to make my message adequate I 
must acquire knowledge ? ' 

' Most indubitably.' 

* And how shall I set about it .'* ' 

* You must marry and have children, read 
as your tastes direct you, and take a share in 
the world's work.' 

*But that is exactly what Tom, Dick and 
Harry do.' 

' Exactly.' 

Without another word the Nameless One 
left the room, and thrust Maud into it. 
Then, when he had locked the door on the 
outside, he said to the Lady of the Veil, — 

* He was quite unable to distinguish be- 
tween what I said sophistically, and what I 



Earl Lavender 287 

said sensibly ; but he is a fine young fellow, 
this Sir Harry Emblem, and not nearly so 
mad as you are, my dear. He has a greedy, 
powerful intellect which has been starved, 
and so lost its temper.' 

* I am the only sane person of my 
acquaintance,' said the Lady of the 
Veil. 

The Nameless One smiled, and the two 
waited in silence at Earl Lavender's 
door. 

* It is time,' said the Nameless One when 
ten minutes had elapsed. 

He then re-entered the room, accom- 
panied by the Lady of the Veil, to find 
Earl Lavender and Maud, or rather Sir 
Harry and Lady Emblem, sitting on the 
edge of the bed in a close embrace, with 
tears in their eyes and blushes on their 
cheeks. 

'High time, indeed!* said the old man. 
' There is only one law which I may not 
set aside : there must be no honeymooning 
in the Underworld. But I shall send you 
away at once with your companions.' 



288 Earl Lavender 

The Nameless One then kissed Lady- 
Emblem, shook hands with Sir Harry, and, 
taking a ring from his finger, gave it to 
the Lady of the Veil. 

* This,' he said, * will open all doors. 
Return it to me when you have seen them 
forth.' 

In the Hall of Fantasy, to which the 
Lady of the Veil led the reconciled couple, 
the reappearance of Sir Harry Emblem so 
shortly after his imprisonment created a 
profound sensation ; but no questions were 
asked, nor comments made, for the ring 
of the Nameless One was known to 
all. 

' Oh, your lordship, or mister,' began Mrs 
Seamier. 

' Silence,' said the Lady of the Veil, ' and 
follow us.' 

Sir Harry Emblem and the quondam 
Lord Brumm retired to the men's toilet- 
room. Having quickly dressed themselves 
in their own clothes, they found their way 
to the staircase by which they had de- 
scended into the Underworld, and were 



Earl Lavender 289 

there joined by Lady Emblem and Mrs 
Seamier. Sir Harry looked about for 
the Lady of the Veil, but she was not 
to be seen. 

* She sent you this/ said Lady Emblem, 
kissing her husband. 

In another minute the errant couples 
stood in Rookwood Square, within sound 
of Piccadilly, scarcely knowing whether 
they were asleep or awake. It was Mr 
Gurdon who spoke first. 

' I vote/ he said, ' that we take a growler 
straight away, and dine together in the 
** Cap-and-Bells." ' 

* It is not a brilliant remark/ said Sir 
Harry, * but it is very sensible.' 

* Now,' said Mrs Seamier, as she stepped 
into the four-wheeler, ' I never did under- 
stand why people's brains were the only 
brilliant thing about them. Their bodies 
may be brilliant, too.' 

' Admirable ! ' said Sir Harry. * Men 
should have credit for brilliant appetites, 
capacious stomachs, and active livers.' 

* And the march from St Paul's to West- 

T 



290 Earl Lavender 

minster?' said Mr Gurdon, as they drove 
away. 

Sir Harry pressed his wife's hand and 
made no reply. 



THE END 



COLSTON AND COMPANY, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH 



BOOKS BY JOHN DAYIDSON, 



PERFERVID : The Career of Ninian Jamieson. With 
Twenty-three Original Illustrations by Harry 
FuRNiss. A few copies of the First Edition remain ; 
crown 8vo, cloth, gilt, price 6s, 

New and Cheaper Edition^ cloth^ 2S. 6d. 

* Cleverly written, and the scenes between the Provost of 
Mintern and Cosmo Mortimer, especially the opening scene on 
the railway, are extremely comical.' — TAe World. 

* A delightfully ridiculous story.' — Pall Mall Gazette. 

* Cosmo Mortimer is a genuine creature ; the book is delightful 
to read.' — Vanity Fair. 

' The volume will make a place for itself. . . . A more fascinating 
story for boys, or for those who are not too old to remember their 
boyhood, has rarely been written.' — Glasgow Herald. 

' Mr Davidson is a real master of English, and reveals, in stray 
touches, unusual power of description.' — Manchester Examiner. 

'Those whom genuine humour conciliates will keep a warm 
corner in their hearts for this volume.' — The Speaker. 

THE GREAT MEN : and A Practical Novelist. With 
Illustrations by Edwin J. Ellis, i vol., crown 8vo, 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 

' The stories have a clean-cut, dramatic vigour, and a plenitude 
of unforced wit. . . . For pure and simple delight few modern books 
have beaten Mr Davidson's.' — Anti-facobin. 

' Written with unmistakable power.' — AthencBum. 

' Mr Davidson has a gift of mad humour. ' — National Observer. 

* A remarkably clever book, intensely human in some of its parts, 
as, for instance, *'The Schoolboy's Tragedy," and abounding in 
genuine fun and caustic humour.' — Dundee Advertiser, 

'"The Schoolboy's Tragedy" must be allowed to be super- 
latively good.' — The Academy. 

WARD & DOWNEI, Ltd., 12 York Buildings, AdelpM, W.C. 



BOOKS BY JOHN DAVIDSON— a«/^. 



IN A MUSIC HALL: and Other Poems. i vol., 
crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. 

* Mr Davidson is nothing if not bluntly original. ... In these 
sketches he shows himself frankly as a realist in poetry.' — Scottish 
Leader. 

'Poetically graceful and morally courageous.' — Glasgow Herald. 

' Should be welcomed if only for its attempt to deal with life in a 
spirit of healthy frankness.' — The Star. 

BAPTIST LAKE, i vol., square crown 8vo, buckram, 
3s. 6d. 

* It is a book to read. ' — AthencBum. 

* Clever and brilliant beyond all doubt, at times even fascinating.' 
— The Academy. 

* Strikingly clever. . . . The imagination of the poet glows in 
every page.' — The Speaker. 

' Its originality and cleverness, and the refreshing directness of 
speech of its characters make it worth reading.' — Spectator. 

*It abounds in felicities of expression, in clean-cut, incisive 
portraiture, and in descriptive passages of singular beauty that 
linger on the mind.' — Daily News. 

*■ One of the best things in the book is the conception of " The 
Middle-Class Club." This is really a regal effort. But the book is 
full of good things of another kind, of poet's good things, which 
are the best to be had.' — The Star. 

'The book is fantastic, extravagant, often irritating in its ab- 
surdities ; but it abounds in marvellous descriptive passages, it 
pulsates with life and wit, and it is undeniably clever.' — Glasgow 
Herald. 

WARD & DOWNEY, Ltd., 12 York Buildings, Adelphi, W.C. 



V 



1^8646 



RETURN TO: CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT 
198 Main Stacks 



LOAN PERIOD 1 
Home Use 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS. 

Renewals and Recharges may be made 4 days prior to the due date. 
Books may be renewed by calling 642-3405. 


DUE AS STAMPED BELOW. 


mM 1 2 7000 



































































FORM NO. DD 6 
50M 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY 
Berkeley, California 94720-6000 



U. C. BERKELEY LIBRARIES 




CDM77M^7b7 



