A HUMAN DOCUMENT 



Sobtl 



BY 

W. H. MALLOCK 



IN THREE VOLUMES 
VOL. II. 



LONDON: CHAPMAN AND HALL, LD. 

1892 

[All rights reserved] 



PR 

i/772 



RIOHAKD CLAT & SONS, LIMITED, 
LONDON & BVNGAY. 




791)53" 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE white houses and the emerald leafage 
of Lichtenbourg had the glow on them of 
a warm, peach-coloured sunset. During the 
last few days the rapid spring had been 
busy, multiplying flower and bud. It had 
also called into existence a number of new 
visitors. It was not a number that by any 
means amounted to a crowd, but it still 
was sufficient to give an air of life to the 
place ; and the walks and seats in the square 
on which the restaurant opened were gay 
with a sprinkling of company, looking forward 
to dinner. The eye was at once caught by 

VOL. II. B 



2 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

various feminine dresses, most of them rather 
startling, a few exceedingly pretty; and by 
some officers in uniform, ready to scrutinize 
and admire them : whilst the prettiest dress 
of all, surmounted by the prettiest' hat, 
illuminated the seat which was most open to 
observation, and shared it with an officer whose 
good fortune was widely envied. The officer 
himself evidently considered it enviable, and 
was making the most of his voice and his 
handsome eyes ; whilst the eyes of his com- 
panion, and the delicate colour in her cheeks, 
seemed to show that she was excited, even 
if not pleased, with her situation. He was 
talking to her now in French, now in German ; 
and he was just in the middle of a quotation 
from a French song, which his manner showed 
that he considered extremely telling. 

" Qui veut ou'ir, qui veut savoir 
Comment les diplomats aiment." 

" Us aiment," he was continuing, with an 
insinuating smile, "ils aiment si diploma- 
tiquement," when he saw to his mortification 
the lady's eyes wander, and her expression 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 3 

completely change. She rose suddenly front 
her seat, and moved forward to meet a man 
who, he was conscious, had stopped just in 
front of them. This man's expression too, 
as well as that of the lady, was troubled and 
discomposed. Pleasure, surprise, and a some- 
thing that was not pleasure, succeeded each 
other on his face, and remained there mixed 
together. As the two greeted each other, a 
very acute observer might have seen that 
their cordiality, or at least its extreme open- 
ness, was due to nervousness quite as much 
as to feeling. The officer, however, was far 
from being acute ; and having borne neglect 
heroically for the better part of a minute, he 
rose, lit a cigar, and catching the eye of the 
lady, whilst pique shone in his own, he forced 
a smile, made a bow, and departed. Had he 
waited a moment longer he would not perhaps 
have fled so precipitately ; for the manner of 
the lady and her friend, as soon as the greet- 
ing was over, grew rapidly more constrained, 
and almost suggested coldness. 

" Do you know, Mr. Grenville, I was never 



4 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

so surprised in my life," the lady was saying. 
" I thought you must have been your ghost." 

" Well," he answered, " and I really believe 
I might have been, for since I last saw you, 
I have been through a kind of death. My 
dear Mrs. Schilizzi, you needn't look so con- 
cerned. If I told you what I meant, you 
would say Is it only that ? " 

"Well," she laughed, "at all events that's 
a comfort; but what you said had a most 
tragic sound in it. I thought you were in 
England." 

" I have managed," he replied, " to settle 
my business without going there ; and I have 
done now what, if possible, I always meant 
to do come back here to see the castle whose 
photograph we were looking at, at luncheon. 
It seems a year ago to me, that does ; so much 
has happened since then." 

" To me, too, it seems ages." 

" Is that," he said, " because so much has 
happened to you also ? " 

" It is rather," she replied, " because nothinor 
has." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 5 

She had not resumed her seat. They were 
walking together slowly. They were silent 
for a few moments ; and then with a con- 
strained indifference, " You" have, at any 
rate, found," he said, " a very attentive 
acquaintance." 

She looked up at him with a half mis- 
chievous smile. " What," she asked, " do 
you mean that Austrian captain ? I met him 
at Vienna at a public ball last year. Perhaps 
he is, now that you come to mention it, one 
of the things that has made my time pass 
slowly. He's handsome, and could be pleasant 
if he'd never open his mouth. As it is, he's 
been boring my very life out ; and the only 
pleasure he's given me is the thought that 
he goes to-morrow." 

At this news Grenville's expression softened. 
He asked her where she dined. She told 
him in her own rooms, adding that she had 
letters to write, and would not reappear that 
evening. 

" Then perhaps," said Grenville, " I shall 
see you to-morrow morning. Will you let 



6 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

me tell you my adventures ? And if we find 
it can be managed, perhaps you will make 
another expedition with me "? " 

"I can never," she said, "see you in the 
morning. Quite early, I teach my children, 
and after that I am busy with something of 
my own. In spite of the charms of your 
friend, the Austrian officer, I have been obliged 
to make an occupation for many hours of 
solitude." 

" And what occupation is that ? " he asked. 

"I wonder," she said, half flippantly, "if 
I can tell you ; you'll only laugh if I do. 
What do you think it is ? I have begun 
writing a diary." 

" I too not long since began doing the same 
thing. I dare say we're not singular. My 
diary, I find, has one merit at all events : my 
last few days in Italy have turned it into a 
book of surprises." 

''Italy!" she exclaimed. "And have you 
been in Italy ? 1 should like to hear about 
that. One of these days you will perhaps 
tell me that is to say if you are not leaving 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 7 

directly. Good-bye, it is late I must be 
going in to my children." 

As she said this they were just at the 
entrance of the hotel ; and, without giving him 
time to detain her by some question which 
she saw was on his lips, she ran up the 
steps, throwing a parting smile at him, and 
was lost to sight in the shadow within the 
doorway. 

Grenville was not much pleased by this 
abrupt ending of the interview ; and after 
dinner he loitered in the neighbourhood of 
the band, hoping that after all he should find 
a chance of renewing it. But he looked in 
vain for her. She had been quite sincere in 
saying that the whole of that evening she 
meant to give to her letters; and she was, 
indeed, in her sitting-room with envelopes 
and paper before her. These, however, she 
presently pushed aside. " I can't," she mur- 
mured, and drawing towards her some sheets 
of foolscap, she began, not to write, but to 
read something already written on them. This 
was the beginning of her diary. 



8 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

What she read was as follows 

" Different people write diaries for different 
reasons and objects ; some because they do 
so much else, others because they have so 
little else to do ; some to record what they 
have seen, others to record only what they 
have been. As for rne, the last case is mine. 
I have done nothing and seen nothing. What 
I have been is my only history. And why 
am I going to write it or try to write it ? 
Not because I am idle, but because I am 
lonely, and I must speak to something I 
must be myself somehow. I write for the 
same sort of reason that makes a boy sing, 
or a woman at times sob. Just as a sob 
relieves the heart, so will this writing relieve 
something else in me something I don't 
know what. 

" But before I do so, I want to assure 
myself of one thing that I am not like a 
silly sentimental school-girl, sighing and cry- 
ing over her own fancies. I have known some 
girls girls who have kept diaries, and who 
have used them like looking-glasses in which 






A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

they made interesting faces at themselves. I 
am not like that, I wish to see myself as I am 
and have been ; and I shall try to record this, 
and I believe I shall be able to do so. I don't 
know life, but I do at least know my own life, 
uneventful as it must seem to every human 
being that has known me. Its events have 
been all within. I know the difference between 
fact and fancy ; but I do not know the differ- 
ence between fact and feeling. There are facts 
which are not feelings, but all feelings are 
facts, and the only facts which give the others 
any meaning. What would action be if it 
affected nobody's feelings ? It might as well 
be something taking place in Jupiter. What 
would thought be if we felt nothing ? Thought 
at its highest is but the genius, the slave of 
the lamp, who either guides feeling or works 
for it. 

" Yes, but granting all this, here comes 
another question which will trouble me till I 
have made my answer to it. My life may 
consist of facts, even though it only consists 
of feelings. True but are they facts worth 



10 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

having their history written 1 Will my sense 
of the ridiculous allow me to think they are ? 
It will, and for this reason. Every human 
being may not be a good model to draw, but 
every human body would be a good subject to 
dissect how much more every human soul ! 
Who am I ? What am I ? I am nobody, and 
less than nothing. I am not even one of my 
own few possibilities. I know it. And yet if 
human existence has any meaning at all, my 
life must have some meaning also. None of 
us is worth anything, if any one of us is not 
worth something. 

" How philosophical I am ! But I am 
going to be philosophical no longer. I sink, 
with a sudden fall, to the style of a foolish 
woman. 

" I call this a diary. It will at first be a 
memoir, for I can only get at myself by going 
first back to my childhood. The chief charac- 
teristic of my life I can trace in it even then 
that I was alone. My own mind was my 
only real playground. I do not mean that I 
was an only child, or that in any marked way 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 11 

I isolated myself from my brothers and sisters. 
On the contrary, I laughed and romped and 
lay in the hay, and climbed trees, with them. 
But as I dangled my legs from the boughs 
I remember it still so clearly what filled my 
consciousness was the world of leafy branches 
and the green lights which seemed, in some 
strange way, to hint to me of another life. 
When I lay amongst the hay and looked 
up at the sky, the clouds were enchanted 
mountains, and I wandered amongst their 
dissolving passes. 

" How often have I heard people say that 
self-analysis is morbid. But what I am writing 
now is not self-analysis ; I only wish it were ; 
I wish that myself then were myself now. 
Oh, little girl who art lost, who never can live 
again, I can think about you and describe you 
as if you were some one else ! . The sole link 
between us is the nerve called memory that 
is so often aching and the pronoun 'I.' 

"And yet, perhaps, I am wrong. As I 
write on, I shall see. 

" My father and mother were both people of 



12 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

family, though they never mixed in what is 
commonly called the world ; but in both their 
characters was a certain pride, which though 
we were not important enough for it to 
develop in us exclusiveness, did develop some- 
thing which is nearly the same seclusiveness. 
All my childhood was spent in an enclosed 
garden. 

" And what sort of childhood was it ? I 
have said something about it already, but not 
all I want to say. In going on I feel a kind 
of diffidence. It is easy enough to say that 
my life was a life of loneliness, but it is 
not so easy to say at least I shrink in 
doing so that the heart of that loneliness 
was religion. But so it was. Nobody would 
have thought so, and clergymen would not 
admit that I am using the w r ord rightly. For 
I do not mean that I was always going to 
church, or always or indeed often saying 
my prayers ; but I was full of the longing 
that moves people to pray, and to do and 
feel many other things besides. It was a 
longing for something beyond and above 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 13 

me, and at the same time about me, but 
always eluding me. I saw it in the sky and 
in the woods, and I heard it in church when 
the organ sounded. As for what people com- 
monly call religion, I had to pick up my 
knowledge of that pretty much for myself, 
for mother was born a Catholic, though she 
went to the English church ; and my father, 
though a very good man, had, I believe, only 
one religious belief, and this was that the 
Church of Rome was wrong. Still I was 
confirmed ; and when I went to my first 
communion, I felt I can't express it now ; 
but it was something the same feeling I had 
when first I saw the sea ; or when the sky, or 
a flower, or anything, struck me suddenly with 
its depth of beauty. I remember so well how 
on such occasions as these I used sometimes to 
whisper to myself ' How beautiful ! ' and some- 
times ' God, be good to me ! ' It was a chance 
which of the two I whispered ; I meant the 
same by both. 

" I remember also another thing, which 
makes me laugh as I think of it. I used 



14 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

often as most girls do to stand looking at 
myself in the glass ; and the beauty of my 
own reflection, such as it was, moved me 
and troubled me, much as other beauty did. 
I never thought never, so far as I can 
remember, 'There's beautiful me/ I only 
thought, ' There's a beautiful something.' I 
seemed to myself, as I looked at my cheeks, 
to be merely like a flower given into my own 
keeping, and I wondered about the meaning of 
the petals, and was half frightened at their 
delicacy. 

" Idiot that I am to write these trifles 
down ! And yet am I ? They are facts 
hard, unvarnished facts of a life that at all 
events was quite free from affectations. And 
why should the movements of a young girl's 
thoughts not be as well worth recording as 
the movements of sap in a vegetable ? 

" Anyhow I have put enough of them down 
now. I go on to what is broader. All these 
feelings of mine,' for the sky, the sea, for 
church music, or my own complexion, were 
only manifestations of a constant something 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 15 

within me, panting to fulfil itself, and not 
knowing how. 

" But, though it did not know, it was always 
trying to find out ; and these attempts form 
really the whole history of my girlhood. 
Poetry, drawing, music, and then knowledge 
hard, dry knowledge I tried them all. I 
am not talking of what I did in the school- 
room that counts for nothing. I am talking 
only of what I did by myself, and with my 
whole heart prompting me. And indeed 
everything that came home to me I had to 
pick up in this way, much as I did my in- 
struction about religion, without any help or 
guidance. What volumes of poetry at one 
time I knew by heart ! I found them all out 
for myself, and took to them only because I 
hoped to find in them some answer to the 
question, ' What is it that I long for ? ' But 
they did not quiet me, they only made me 
more restless ; and I felt an impulse to do to 
fulfil myself by action. I tried to draw and 
paint, and till I saw I could do neither, for a 
good six months I was almost beside myself 



16 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

with hope. Then I think came music. Could 
I only have done what I attempted, the music 
of the spheres would have been nothing to 
what I should have extracted from a cottage 
piano. But the keys at last became like a 
row of tombstones, forming a cemetery in 
which my attempts were buried. After that I 
began to read books of science and philosophy, 
full of hard words the meaning of which I had 
to guess at ; and it seemed to me for a con- 
siderable time that what I longed for was to 
be found in the satisfaction of the intellect. 
What ideas I had ! How my mind rode 
away on them as if they were wings ! I used 
to work them out in things that I called 
essays, trembling with pride as I wielded the 
long words of Mr. Herbert Spencer. And 
then, generally by the time I had read a little 
more, I found all the profundities I had arrived 
at were mere truisms or commonplaces, or 
that else they were nonsense. But I was 
not discouraged at least not for a long 
time. Perhaps perhaps I am not wholly 
discouraged now. If I am, I am done for. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 17 

"And all this while, what became of my 
religion I mean my religion of prayers and 
church-going ? 1 can't quite tell. The whole 
history of it is so vague. The fact is, about 
such matters I was not very clear, to begin 
with ; and with me, feeling, and faith, and 
longing, and self-prostration were so much 
more than any defined beliefs, that I hardjy 
noticed how these last were gradually sapped 
by the books which I read so eagerly, and 
how so much of what the clergyman said 
came gradually to seem so foolish. But I 
think it was only the words that I heard 
in church that lost their power over me. I 
put these aside as one might put aside the 
libretto of an opera which had some con- 
nection with the music, but only an insuffi- 
cient one ; whilst the meaning of the music 
itself still remained the same for me, and 
shook my heart as the organ shook the 
windows. How often contrition I can't tell 
for what came trembling into me, and the 
spirit of prayer bowed me, as the wind bends 
corn! But what came oftenest was mere 

VOL. II. C 



18 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

adoration mere longing again I can't tell 
for what; but all was for the same thing 
that I felt in nature, that I tried to capture 
in drawing, and to express in music, and to 
find in thought and study. Some people, 
who lose any of the definite beliefs which 
they learnt as children, experience much 
misery at the loss. I don't think I did ; and 
the reason was what I have just stated that 
the definite part of religion was to me the 
least important part. Indeed I remember 
saying to myself one day in church, when 
the clergyman was preaching about Joshua's 
moon in Ajalon, ' Perhaps I have not got a 
religion, but I myself am religion.' I meant, 
' I am a-longing for whatever will most com- 
pletely fulfil myself,' and my only articulate 
prayer was little more than this 'Reveal 
to me what I long for, and unite me com- 
pletely with it.' 

" If any one besides myself were to read 
these confessions, I know one thing which he 
or she would say ' This silly girl in search of 
an object for her sentiment, did it never occur 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 19 

to her to fancy herself in love ? Did she 
never try to solve her perplexities that way ? ' 
Yes and no but much more no than yes. 
Love did enter into my thoughts ; but let 
me explain how. I felt myself capable of it ; 
but I felt this in some far-off way. As for 
associating the idea of it with any one I ever 
met, that seemed to me sacrilege. I felt it to 
be something which was so sacred, and which, 
if it came, would be so overwhelming, that it 
frightened me. It made me afraid of myself, 
as if I held within me some mystery. One or 
two men indeed more than one or two, 
whilst I was still quite young fell in love 
with me. Instead of being flattered or touched 
by this, I felt it as a kind of impertinence, and 
I was glad when I saw how very easily I could 
repulse them. They, I believe, thought I 
was heartless. I was not. It was because I 
reverenced my heart so much, and felt in such 
awe of the Unknown contained in it, that I 
was indignant at them for presuming to think 
about it. Could I only love this is the 
thought that would come to me what would 



20 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

the feeling be? I should die of it. Where 
would it carry me? I was afraid to go on 
thinking. I only knew this, that I never had 
seen any one, and could not imagine any one, 
who would justify the feeling in me, and make 
it not seem wicked. I remember still how 
afraid I grew of myself. I hardly dared even, 
at one time, to read Keats' poetry, it moved 
me so, without any justifying cause. 

" The only emotion, the only love, that I 
could indulge in frankly, and that supported 
and did not frighten me, was love of my 
parents. They didn't understand me I 
always felt that ; but I felt that they desired 
my welfare ; and though they could not share 
my thoughts, it seemed to me that they 
sheltered them. What was my pain then 
when one day, quite by accident, I heard 
mother saying this to father ' Irma is so 
pretty that she ought to marry well.' And 
then, before I could get out of hearing, I 
caught the name of a neighbouring country 
squire. I had no dislike to the man I 
thought nothing about him ; but to hear him 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 21 

mentioned in this way, was like hearing a 
knife talked about that was to be drawn 
across my throat. After that, for three weeks 
I was miserable. Father and mother couldn't 
tell what had come to me ; and when a letter 
arrived from my aunt, asking me to stay with 
her in Hungary, they thought the change 
would be good for me, and gladly let me go. 
I too was half glad ; but I had a little garden 
where I used to work by myself; and I was 
sorry to leave that, and my poor little book- 
shelf full of well-worn books, some of which 
were children's fairy-stories. It was arranged 
that a friend of my aunt's who was going 
there at the same time should look after me 
on the journey. I knew nothing of him, till I 
saw him, except his name and the fact that 
he was very rich ; and after I had seen him, I 
knew nothing more for weeks, except that he 
had almond-shaped dark eyes, a straight nose, 
and a smile ; that he talked rather fast, and 
that he talked a great deal to me. My aunt 
told me that if he had wished it the Emperor 
would have made him a baron. A few 



22 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

days later she told me he wished to marry 

me. 

" How I consented I really can hardly tell. 
Secret correspondence went on between my 
aunt and my parents; and mother wrote to 
me and told me how happy my prospects 
were, and how little money I should ever have 
of my own ; and how sad and anxious she 
had once been for my future. One reason, I 
think, why I at length yielded, one reason 
why I did not shrink from this marriage as I 
might have done, was just the very fact that 
for me there was no love in it. Marriage 
came to me as something completely outside 
myself: it came to me simply as a new shell 
of circumstance, into which, with unavowed 
pressure, mother and all the others pushed me. 
How could I know what I was doing, or what 
was being done to me ? I had no experience. 

" Well, I have experience now. And yet, 
who would think it? No one who had 
watched me or lived with me, no matter how 
constantly or closely. Who could guess the 
history of my first married years ? Certainly 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 23 

not my husband ; and for one very sufficient 
reason, he never would care to try. My 
brother Robert told me how, when he first 
went to school, he used to cry to himself at 
nights, longing for home, thinking with a 
passionate affection of every worn patch in 
the carpets, and of the air full of peace and 
tenderness. For three years after my marriage 
I did just the same. I had plenty of servants 
and an extravagant cook ; but every time I 
looked at our smart dinner-table I thought of 
our school-room meals our boiled mutton 
our rice-pudding ; and I longed like a truant 
to run away and go back to them. What 
would mother have thought if she had seen me 
come back to her, and hiding, as I should have 
liked to hide, my face once more in her lap ! 

" What could I have told her ? How could 
I have explained such a step ? I could not 
have explained it in any intelligible way to 
her. I could indeed have summed up my 
experience in a very few words. I could have 
said to her, Marriage is the suicide of hope ; 
but I could tell her no facts that would explain 



24 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

so tragic a view. I could have told her that 

o 

Paul's temper was not always, or often, of the 
best. In fact when I made mistakes in any 
little household matters, he was furious with 
me ; and once, though I must say he was 
handsomely sorry for it afterwards, he struck 
me on the wrist with an ivory paper-knife, 
leaving a mark which for a fortnight I hid 
with a velvet band. I didn't mind that. 
Indeed I think the only time that I ever 
voluntarily kissed Paul was after he had struck 
me, just to show that I had forgiven him. No 
what I minded was not what he was, but 
the sense which he inflicted on me daily of 
what he was not. He liked me in a way. 
In a way he took good care of me. But the 
way was th^s ; he regarded me as a piece of 
china, which ornamented his drawing-room, 
and which had to be dusted carefully. The 
only difference between me and an e'pergne he 
was very fond of, was that it stood in the 
middle of the table, and I sat at the end of it. 
I was like a book which he valued for the 
rarity of its binding, but which he neither 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 25 

could nor cared to read. How long I hoped 
against hope that this might not be true that 
he was merely shy, merely slow in understand- 
ing me, and that we should at last really 
become companions ! I tried to love him, and 
to make him love me ; and could I only have 
met with any response from him, to some 
extent at least, I should have succeeded. I 
tried every means I could think of. In the 
afternoon I used to hurry home, in order to 
meet him when he returned from the railway 
he was then making. I did all I could to 
look glad and happy when I saw him. But 
the only result was this. Five minutes after I 
was in the drawing-room he was sure to go 
out of it ; and if ever I ventured to follow 
him into his study, he invariably met me by 
asking me what I wanted. What did I want ? 
It makes me laugh now to think of his asking 
that of me. It was something, Paul, you 
could never have understood, if I had told 
you. But at dinner, Paul, you couldn't 
rebuff me for being with you ; and do you 
remember how I tried then to find my way 



26 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

into your life ? I tried at first to talk about 
the things that interested me or touched me 
about the things that seemed to me to be 
beautiful, or happy, or sad, or perplexing. 
Good heavens ! I might have been talking 
Hebrew to you. I put my thoughts into 
your hands thoughts which I valued and 
cherished ; and I hoped that you might be 
pleased with them. But what you did was to 
stare at them blankly, and then drop them, 
and let them break themselves into pieces. 
But still I would not be disheartened. I tried 
to approach you in another way. As you 
would not talk to me about my subjects, I 
tried to talk to you about yours. That 
annoyed you still more. It made you rude to 
me, not only cold. How different you were 
with men with the men you brought to dine 
with you 1 They and you understood each 
other. You responded to what they said to 
you, as if you were a musical instrument 
touched by them or rather a band of instru- 
ments a band of instruments at a music-hall. 
For me, the attempt to talk to you was like 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 27 

going out into a frosty day. How cold I was 
when I came back to myself again ! 

" During those three years, it seems to me 
that I was dead. If it had not been for my 
two children I should have died literally. I 
was very fond of them from the first ; but 
babies are not companions. Though they 
were near my heart, they could not tell how 
it was aching. Still they kept me alive. 
They prevented my heart from freezing. But 
when the eldest began to know me, and speak 
and understand a little, then I was conscious 
of some new accession of happiness ; and 
gradually, to my surprise, I felt in better 
spirits. I felt at last that I was something 
like myself again ; and to Paul's extreme 
annoyance, I sang in the hall one morning. 
He swore at me, and I cried. No matter. 
What I was going to say was this. This 
revival of my spirits, through my growing 
love for rny children, had a very odd effect on 
me. My vanity woke up again. I wanted 
company, I wanted a little amusement. Some- 
times in the afternoon, when I was left all 



28 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

alone, I went to look at myself in the glass, 
and wish that some one could see me. A 
woman would have satisfied me. I should 
often have liked a woman best ; but sometimes, 
I confess, I did wish for a man or two just 
for the sake of seeing what effect I produced. 
My desire for admiration had all the temerity 
of innocence. That I could do anything 
wrong, or even wish for it, never seemed 
possible to me. Well I made some acquaint- 
ances, not amongst Paul's connections. I 
made friends with some pretty and well- 
connected women ; and through them I -came 
to know a certain number of men. My wishes 
soon fulfilled themselves. Every afternoon I 
had some admiring visitor. 

" What things in life can be more different 
than some of our wishes before their fulfilment 
and after ! These men I speak of all their 
attention and homage at first flattered and 
soothed me after Paul's neglect. Paul could 
never see too little of me. They could never 
see too much. At first this was charming. I 
really took an interest in some of them, and 
N 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 29 

thought they did in me. But, little by little, 
various things enlightened me. These men 
saw my beauty ; but I now divined how they 
saw it ; and they appeared to me hardly 
human. When their voices grew soft, how I 
hated them ! And yet, in spite of this I 
allowed them to go on calling on me ; and 
I began to take a sort of perverse pleasure in 
keeping them captive under false colours. I 
sheltered my real self the self they could 
never understand under an outer husk of 
the false self that they imagined ; and I 
thus enjoyed two different sorts of pride 
one derived from their admiration of me, 
the other derived from my contempt for 
them. 

" This has not been good for me ; but it led 
to what was worse. The women with whom 
I now associated,. and who were friends also of 
these men, almost before I was aware of it, 
made me one of their sisterhood. I thought 
they were angels first ; and then I learnt that 
they were not angels. How kind and pleasant 
they were to me, and what torture they 



30 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

inflicted on me, when they first let me know 
them thoroughly ! What they did, so far as I 
am concerned, was this. They did not induce 
me to follow their ways ; but they made me 
familiar with their ideas. One of them lent 
me a number of French novels. They were 
novels by celebrated writers classics ; but 
oh, how wicked they seemed ! How wicked 
the women were in them ! I felt this, and 
yet I read. I read one book after another. 
But then, after a time, I felt I could stand it 
no longer. Some of the books I burnt ; and 
others, I don't know where they are. 

" If any one else I again come back to that 
if any one else were to read what I have just 
written, what dreadful things he or she would 
think of me ! I should seem to be suggesting 
so much more than I have said. Wrong ! 
wrong ! What I have said has been the utter- 
most that I mean, so far as badness and folly 
go. And now I have this to add. These 
women, these men their companionship and 
their flattery, even then, were not all my life, 
or indeed, I think, the most important part of 






A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 31 

it. For just as my happiness in my children 
roused my vanity and my wish for excitement, 
because it raised my spirits, so did this excite- 
ment and this tribute to my vanity revive 
in me other things, not by raising my spirits 
but by troubling them. Those dreadful novels 
were not the only books I read ; nor was 
admiration the only thing I thought of. I 
took again to my books of science and philo- 
sophy ; J bought translations of all kinds of 
classical writers. My old longing to realize 
my own existence once more took possession 
of me ; and all the false companionship which 
I now got, made my mind tumultuous with 
longing for some companionship that should 
be true. As to what this true companionship 
would be, I was as far off as ever from know- 
ing. Would it take the form of knowledge, 
of beauty, or of a human friend ? I know one 
thing that not once, but several times, when 
the best of my admirers was coming to see 
me, and I had promised to be in by a certain 
hour in the afternoon, I forgot all about him 
in looking at a March sunset from a lonely 



32 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

seat amongst some pine-trees, more than a 
mile from home. 

" And what am I now ? How structureless 
all my history is ! What I have just written 
applies to the last four or five years of my 
life ; and applies to me at this moment. Am 
I fairly good ? or am I very bad ? Five or 
six men are, I know, this moment in love with 
me ; and I have been proud to think they are 
so. Though I have no love for them myself, 
is not that bad ? But somehow, when I think 
it over, it makes me feel, not how bad I am, 
but how lonely I am. I have never in my 
whole life been myself to any one. I have so 
many unuttered thoughts troubling me, and 
increasing in number, and there is nobody to 
whom I can tell any of them. I don't know 
what I should have been could I only have 
met some one who would have helped me to 
live with whom I could have shared some- 
thing beyond a part of his income and the 
parentage of two children a number that 
never will be added to. 

" Oh, you what have you done to me ! 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 33 

You took me you would marry me. You 
took an entire life, and you sacrificed it, in 
order to ornament one small corner of your 
own. And I I tried to love you. I waited 
for you and watched for you during your 
absence. I ran to meet you when you came. 
Your own mind was for me like waterless sand ; 
none of my thoughts would grow in it. I 
found that out ; and then what I tried to do 
was to share that desert with you, acting as 
if it were some oasis. And I should have 
succeeded in this had you let me ; in some 
sort I would have learned to love you : but 
you repulsed me. Do you remember that night 
when you struck me, and when I kissed you 
because I saw that you were sorry ? You 
were sorry you struck me. You were sorry 
you had struck a woman. You were ashamed 
of yourself ; but not even then did you show 
any tenderness for me. It is not the blow 
I remember with any bitterness, but your 
conduct after. 

"And now, whom can I speak to? As I 
have said, to no one. You have made me 

VOL. II. D 



34 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

bitterly wise. You have taken even my 
mother from me. Not even to her can I speak 
with perfect confidence. You have made me 
feel that she sacrificed her daughter, treated 
her daughter as a thing without heart or soul. 
You have driven me into the company of 
waters, and woods, and sunsets. In nature I 
do feel a vague something that touches me, 
that moves in me the religious impulse, that 
calls me out of myself. And yet whenever I 
see a beautiful thing, along with the sense of 
its beauty I have this sense also that I have 
no one to whom I can turn and say, ' How 
beautiful ! ' 

" Mother, perhaps, would tell me that I 
ought to make the best of things. I know 
she thinks I could be happy and successful 
socially. Could I ? How little she under- 
stands the situation as it really is ! She sees 
me, just as I too, for that matter, can see 
myself in the glass a woman dressed perfectly 
from her hat to the tips of her toes : she sees 
how certain shades of colour become me. She 
has sometimes told me that I am like an 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 35 

exquisite picture. I like to believe I am ; 
but for all that, I am isolated, and shall always 
be so. Mother wouldn't wish me to be bad ; 
and I can't be worldly. Great ladies frighten 
me : bad women repel me. What a simple 
life would content me, if I could only live it ! 
I had a simple life once ; but mother, for my 
good, took me away from that ; and as far as 
my soul and my thoughts go, I have now no 
life at all. 

" And yet I am ungrateful. One treasure I 
have, though one only my children. They 
keep me alive ; they prevent my soul from 
dying. If there is any revelation at all, my 
children reveal God to me. Oh, my beloved 
ones, let me pour out my heart to you t 
Let me spend and be spent for you. My 
little ones, forgive your mother, for I have 
sometimes been so selfish as this : I have 
wished that you might be ill and suffering, 
that I might wear myself out in tending 
you. 

" And yet, my little ones, there are solitudes 
in your mother's heart which you even cannot 



36 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

fill. She can be your companion, but in some 
ways you cannot be hers." 

Mrs. Schilizzi, when she finished her reading, 
with a listless deliberation took up her pen, 
and though her hand trembled as she did 
so, she set herself to resume her writing. She 
tried to continue her narrative without any 
formal break ; but having completed a sentence 
or two she presently scratched them out, and 
abandoning all attempt at literary form or 
consistency, she abruptly put down the date, 
and slowly, but without hesitation, wrote the 
following few lines, which might have come 
from the diary of a child 

''I am at Lichtenbourg now. All these 
papers were written here. I like it very 
much ; it is a very pretty place, and it suits 
the children ; but except for them, and a silly, 
good-looking Austrian, whom I don't count, 
I have as usual had not a soul to speak to. 
That is why I have tried to solace myself with 
a diary. But this evening, to my astonishment, 
who should appear but Mr. Grenville ? And 
he spoke to me very kindly, and seemed glad 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 37 

to see me. I believe he is kind, really. I 
thought him so when I was here with him 
before ; only I came afterwards to fancy that 
he was only laughing at me, or amusing 
himself by pretending to be kind, and so 
drawing me out. I felt, when I was under 
that impression, as if I could have died of 
shame ; and I was hurt and miserable. But 
now that impression has passed away, and I 
am beginning to feel grateful to him. A little 
kindness a little real kindness quite upsets 
me. Oh, how my head is aching ! If I think 
more I shall cry, and make a fool of myself. I 
will kiss my children, and then try to sleep. 
Irma, darling, darling, I shall have you by my 
side." 



CHAPTER XIII. 

GRENVILLE, who was bent on making his 
expedition to the castle, and who was anxious 
to secure Mrs. Schilizzi as his companion, was 
annoyed, as he dressed next morning, to re- 
member her account of her occupations, and 
to think that it was many hours before he 
could hope to see her. Just, however, as he 
was about to leave the hotel, in order to pay 
an early visit to the springs, a neat-looking 
maid tripped after him with a note, scribbled 
in pencil, and consisting of the following 
words " I am not well, and shall not be busy 
this morning. If you can do so, will you take 
me for a walk at eleven ? IRMA SCHILIZZI." 

Grenville was delighted, and sent back 
"Yes" for an answer. Thinking over his 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 39 

late experiences, and contrasting them with 
his position at present, Lichtenbourg seemed 
to him the most charming place in the world. 
He felt as if the spirit of freedom were im- 
pregnating the air, and he inhaled it each 
time he breathed. He was conscious of vigour 
alike in his mind and limbs ; and work and 
enjoyment shone in an equal sunlight. 

At eleven o'clock he and Mrs. Schilizzi met 
by the glittering kiosque. Close to this was a 
bed purple with violets ; they both stooped 
for a draught of the pure delightful perfume ; 
and they went off together as if the soul of the 
spring were in their pulses. As they passed 
through the town, the entire world looked 
young. Sunshine basked on all the people 
they came across, and varnished the wares at 
the doors of the little shops, where shop-keeping 
had the air of idle, happy-hearted play. 

" Look," said Mrs. Schilizzi, as they passed 
a villa-garden, " at the bells of the magnolias 
white in the blue sky ! " 

Grenville, having looked, stood still for a 
moment. "You know," he said, "how princes 



40 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

and princesses in fairy-tales are transformed 
into cats and lions and every kind of shape. 
It seems to me to-day as if happiness had been 
transformed into flowers." 

His own happiness was such, indeed, that he 
had gone on walking beside her, without any 
thought of what direction they were taking ; 
but realizing presently that they had left the 
town behind them, he said to her, " Where are 
we going ? have you any idea ? I've not." 

"I am taking you," she said, "to a place 
I've found out myself. Do you see this river 
which comes flowing out of the woods and 
valleys ? We are going to turn into the foot- 
path which skirts it beside the willows." 

They left the road, following the course she 
indicated. Birds sang with the water, and all 
the foliage whispered. At last they reached a 
curious timbered mill, with which was united 
a simple but picturesque restaurant. There 
was a garden containing arbours, and a large 
inviting summer-house. " I often," said Mrs. 
Schilizzi, " bring my children to tea here. 
The woman gives them such beautiful cakes 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 41 

and biscuits ; and early in the season, she tells 
me, it is always perfectly quiet. You mustn't 
think I do nothing but talk to Austrian 
officers." 

They passed through the gate and seated 
themselves on the green benches of the summer- 
house. "I'm a little tired," she said. "Will 
you order a cup of coffee for me ? Last night 
I was restless and hardly slept at all. It 
would have been nice to have breakfasted 
here ; but I must go back to my children. 
Ah ! " she went on, when the coffee was 
brought out to her, " how peaceful this place 
is ! Will you tell me, while we rest for 
you have not told me yet what you have 
seen in Italy, and why you have returned to 
Lichtenbourg ? " 

They had attempted during their walk no 
serious conversation ; and the consequence was 
they were now 'quietly at their ease with each 
other. 

" Well," answered Grenville, smiling, " as 
to my return to Lichtenbourg, if you will 
promise me not to be sceptical, I will tell you 



42 A HDMAN DOCUMENT. 

what I believe to be the reason. I believe 
that old castle, whose pictures the Princess 
showed us, must have mesmerized and brought 
me back here ; for I am determined to go and 
see it. It is only ten miles away. You think 
I am laughing at you ; I see that in your face. 
But I am not : only " 

" Only what ? " 

" The question you asked me sounded a 
very simple one, but to answer it truly, do 
you know what I should have to inflict on 
you ? A long discourse on the philosophy 
of life generally especially upon prose and 
poetry, and the types of life that correspond 
to them." 

" Go on," she said, starting with surprise 
and pleasure. " This is what I like listening 
to." 

He hesitated a little as if doubtful how to 
express himself. " You know," he began, 
"how all our modern philosophers denounce 
as useless the life of the contemplative 
monastic orders. Virtue, they say, is utility, 
not private perfection. But to Christian 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 43 

critics, at all events, the monks and nuns have 
an answer. Different people have different 
works in the world. Theirs is to realize com- 
pletely certain spiritual possibilities, which 
every Christian, it is assumed, should try to 
realize partially. Well what saints are to 
men as Christian beings, poets are to men 
as human beings. The highest use of the 
practical man is to improve the environment 
of life ; the use of the poet is to develop the 
spiritual organism, or to be an example of its 
development. Do you see my meaning ? " 
" Yes," she said eagerly ; " of course I do." 
" I talk of poets," he continued ; " but you 
understand, of course, that I don't mean 
merely people who write verses. I mean 
people generally, whose chief desire and 
necessity is to live the life of which poetry 
is the literary expression ; for poetry is merely 
the body, of which those who appreciate it 
are the soul. I don't want to be sentimental ; 
but I think I may say this : few people can 
write good love-poems ; but whoever loves 
deeply lives one." 



44 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" Go on," she murmured ; " your words are 
like carrier-pigeons. My feelings have wings, 
but my words can hardly flutter." 

He hesitated, and then said 

"I am urging all this, as you will see 
presently, in order to shield myself from my 
own self-criticism. I want to show to you, 
and to myself too, that the emotional or 
poetic life has, on practical grounds, as good 
a claim to be cultivated and respected as the 
practical life. I am not thinking specially 
of love, though I took that as an example, 
but of every kind of feeling that fills the 
heart with music, or lifts it with aspiration. 
Just take a type or two of the two kinds of 
life. Take Shelley, or Goethe, or Horace, or 
Sir Walter Scott and then take Napoleon, 
or the Duke of Wellington, or James Watt.. 
Compared with a campaign, or a revolution, 
or the introduction of steam-power, what a 
trifling thing a poem seems a butterfly as 
compared to a locomotive. And yet all that 
gives meaning to such things as these to 
the hurrying train or steamer, or miles of 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 45 

military pageant to courage, or to triumph, 
or to industry is, the jewels that the poets 
brighten. Poetry let me go on ; let me 
tell you how I define poetry it is the 
emotional expression of a sense of life's value. 
I don't mean that a poem need be all senti- 
ment. Poems like ' Faust ' and ' Hamlet ' 
may be full of the profoundest thought ; but 
thought in poetry is always thought which is 
in direct connection with emotion ; and that 
emotion, whatever it may be, depends upon 
some belief in the value and the beauty of 
life. Well, such being the case, I put the 
matter in- this way. Poetry is adoration 
secularized ; and the poetic life, or, if you 
like to call it so, the romantic life, is the 
monastic life secularized. You may say that 
this life is useless, and in one sense so it is. 
But it has the same sort of use which the 
life has which aims at complete sanctity. It 
embodies and pursues an ideal just as truly 
as the life of any community vowed to per- 
petual adoration. What are you listening to ? 
The clock ? Yes it is striking twelve." 



46 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

"We must go," she said. "My children 
breakfast in half an hour. Don't stop what 
you were saying. Finish it as we walk back." 

"A love-match," he resumed, as soon as 
they were on their way "we have both of 
us sense enough to talk about these things 
rationally I mean a marriage which has 
nothing but love to recommend it, is an 
attempt at the poetic life, even if not always 
an attainment of it. Most people and in 
most cases they are right think such a 
marriage ridiculous. The reason is that the 
lovers have rarely a true vocation. You see," 
he went on, jerking a stone into the river, 
and speaking in a matter-of-fact voice as if 
he were reading an advertisement, "the 
need for this kind of life varies in intensity 
in different natures. But I believe, though 
I have never been fortunate enough to prove 
the belief by experience, that for some people 
who find affection, and who leave for its 
sake houses and lands and ambition, the 
heavens are opened as truly as they were 
for Stephen." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 47 

They were both silent for a time, not from 
any sense of embarrassment, but merely 
because respectively they were following out 
their own thoughts. At last she said gently, 
"But Stephen's vision was a dream." 

" Yes," exclaimed Grenville, losing the 
reserve of his manner ; " and what higher 
end could there be for all practical activity, 
for all public careers, for all social reforms, 
than to make beds for all of us, on which to 
dream dreams like these ? " 

Again there was sijence, which presently 
he interrupted with a laugh. She looked at 
him narrowly, and asked him what amused 
him. 

"Merely to think," he said, "how far I 
must seem to have strayed from the question 
you asked me why I came back to Lichten- 
bourg? However, what we have just been 
saying will help me to tell you why. I have 
no true vocation for the higher, for the ideal 
life, whether poetic or religious. My lot is 
cast amongst the secular and prosaic plough- 
lands, where ambition sows and reaps. But 



48 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

I once was allured by the other life ; and at 
times it allures me still, and I long to escape 
to that happy world of the imagination where 
those for whom, poetry has no direct message 
can hear its echoes in the lives of others, and 
of other ages. The world of the imagination 
I find now in this country. It represents 
poetry to me. It liberates me from the 
prison of my circumstances. Italy last week 
represented prose and there you have the 
reason why I have ever come back here. I 
am, in fact, like a school-boy who has run 
home from school. Do you understand all 
this nonsense ? " 

"Yes," she said, "yes. I didn't answer 
you, for I was thinking about it. Of course," 
she went on, "people must act and work. 
Goethe, indeed, said that action is the cure 
of doubt ; but to me well, to me it seems 
the cure of aspiration also. I speak only for 
myself. Personally, I want not to act, but 
to be. That is the reason of my interest in 
what you said about saints and poets. But 
I don't, in one point, quite agree with you. 



A mJMAN DOCUMENT. 49 

Poetry, the sense of beauty, and the aspira- 
tion for something beyond, which comes from 
the sense of beauty as the scent comes from a 
flower you say that this is religion secular- 
ized ; I should be content to say simply that 
it is religion. And I should wish, if I knew 
how, to lead the religious life. I sometimes 
think that it is wicked to feel like this that 
it is wishing to be selfish and useless ; but 
what you have said reassures me a little. 
Besides, when a woman when a woman says 
she wishes not to act, but to be, her real 
wish, I suppose, is to be something for the 
sake of somebody else. Take me, for instance. 
I wish it principally for the sake of my 
children. My children are my religion, or 
at least the practical part of it. The next 
religious service will be their breakfast or 
luncheon. Will you assist at it ? If you 
will, you will be very welcome ; and you 
will see what I think is the real triumph 
of management that I have got the chef to 
make me a genuine child's rice-pudding." 
He was not only pleased but touched by 

VOL. II. E 



50 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

this homely invitation. As he entered the 
salon with her, where the cloth was already 
spread, she said to him 

" I am sure you must think me very 
stupid ; and I know I am so : only with you 
I seem more stupid even than I am. You 
keep me silent by giving me so much to 
think of." 

Had she made such a speech to him when 
first he began to know her, he would have 
certainly tried to respond to it with some 
species of compliment ; but in presence of 
her complete simplicity compliments seemed 
out of place, and almost cruel ; and his only 
answer was, " No, you are not stupid." 

The children rushed to their mother, bright 
as if her coming were sunlight; and then 
turning to Grenville, whom they recognized 
as an old friend, they gave him a share of 
the smiles which their mother had called into 
existence. A sense of partnership with her 
subtly stole into his heart, and spread its 
enchantment over the whole simple meal. 
This was deepened from time to time by the 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 51 

gentle, unconscious way in which she asked 
him to do this and that for the children, as 
if he were a friend whom she might call on 
for all assistance ; and through the happy 
sounds of the present, echoes of their 
morning's conversation made a vibrating 
music, and the ripple of the river sang to 
him. 

The children had a passion for flowers, and 
asked Grenville, who told them that he had 
seen quantities in the meadows, why he had 
not brought them some. 

" Suppose," he said to their mother, " that 
we have tea at the mill. They can, as we 
go, pick flowers to their hearts' content." 

The children were delighted at the pro- 
posal ; and the mother's eyes had assented 
even before her lips did. 

" Let us go at five," she said. " Till then 
it is too hot." 

" In that case," he answered, " hot as it 
is, I will fill up the time between by a visit 

to Count T . I have an introduction to 

him, and I hear he has just arrived; and no 



52 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

doubt he will tell us something about the 
country." 

The Count's castle, perched on its wooded 
eminence, could be reached on foot by a 
climb of half an hour. Grenville's visit was 
in every way satisfactory ; and when he 
rejoined his friends and went off to the mill 
with them, he was full of accounts of what 
he had heard and seen. "The castle," he 
said, "of which the Princess told us, can be 
reached from here easily ; and the Count 
assures me it is the most curious place in the 
country. He was particularly anxious also 
that I should go to a place of his own an 
hotel which he has built in the heart of one 
of his forests, near a lake and a mineral 
spring, and which is going to be opened 
presently. He has a hunting-lodge close by, 
which, if I cared for fishing, he said would be 
at my disposal for as long as I chose to occupy 
it. Suppose one day we accept this handsome 
offer, so far as to drive over there, and use the 
lodge for a picnic." 

They were sitting in the summer-house, the 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 53 

scene of their morning's talk, hearing the mill- 
wheel turn with its plunging murmur, and 
watching the children as they went to and fro 
like butterflies. Presently at the gate of the 
garden appeared an itinerant flute-player, who 
began some simple melody, the notes of which 
were sweet as a thrush's. The children 
dropped their flowers, and ran off to listen 
to him. Mrs. Schilizzi, pleased with the scene 
before her, seemed pleased still farther at the 
idea of the proposed expedition. Seeing this, 
Grenville continued, " I have something else 
to propose besides. The castle we were speak- 
ing of belongs to a Baron K , who has 

two rooms in it, which he occupies for a week 
sometimes ; and he is, the Count tells me, 
expected there in a day or two. While he is 
in residence, the castle is closed to strangers. 
So what do you say ? Do you think you 
would have the energy to take time by the 
forelock, and go there with me to-morrow ? " 

" Listen to the flute," she said. " To-day 
has been full of music. To go to the castle 
would make to-morrow full of it also. Find 



54 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

out about getting there, and this evening I 
will tell you if I can manage it." 

He met her at the band, after dinner. They 
stayed there for a short time only. The scene 
struck both of them as artificial, after their 
late experiences ; but he sat with her long 
enough to convince her that the expedition 
was an easy one, and when he said good-night 
to her she had agreed to undertake it with 
him. It was too long for the children, so she 
stipulated for a late start, which would leave 
them their mother's company for nearly all 
the morning. An hour's drive, and half an 
hour in the train, brought them to a station 
almost at the foot of the castle. It was a 
station which stood amongst flat fields and 
furrows, and all around were hills covered 
with forest. Here and there some peasant 
women were working ; the roads were nothing 
but primitive unfenced tracks ; silence and 
sunshine slept on the whole country. And 
straight before them, rising from the quiet 
levels, was a spire of rock, covered with wood, 
and gleaming with roofs and turrets. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 55 

Mrs. Schilizzi stood still, contemplating it. 

" It is like a stage," she exclaimed, " ready 
for some mediaeval drama. Since you began 
to talk to me, my imagination is always 
working. This is literally a country of 
romance." 

Near as the castle was they seemed indeed 
to be almost under it they had before them 
harder work than they bargained for. The 
beginning of the ascent was up some grassy 
slopes, which brought them at last to a grove of 
ragged pine-trees ; and here, gray amongst the 
foliage, they discovered a moss-grown tower. 
Passing through this by a gateway, they found 
themselves on a rising road, with a battle- 
mented wall on the outer side, and impending 
precipices on the inner; and it wound upwards 
round the rock like a corkscrew. At every 
fifty yards they came to a fresh tower, with 
an iron door and a mouldering coat-of-arms, 
and now and then to a gap spanned by a 
creaking drawbridge. The ascent was so steep 
and long, and the whole scene was so singular, 
that they often paused, at once to rest and to 



56 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

think. Down below them were the fields at 
an increasing depth, up in the air we're the 
walls and gables of the castle. Even Fritz, 
who had accompanied them, was overcome 
with the spectacle, and said to his master 

" Sir, if these trees could talk, what strange 
things they would tell ! " 

As for Grenville and Mrs. Schilizzi, they 
hardly spoke at all. He at first had made 
one or two observations ; but she presently 
said 

" Don't talk. I feel as if I were in a 
cathedral." 

They were conscious, however, of thinking 
the same thoughts ; and by and by, seeing 
that she was growing tired, he had merely 
to look at her, and without thanks or apology 
she took his arm, and silently leaned her 
weight on it. 

Thus they reached the summit. Under 
some archways hung a smell of wood-smoke ; 
and here and there a few cocks and hens were 
straying. These were the first signs of life 
they had come across ; and Fritz was sent to 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 57 

see if he could find the custodian. Grenville 
and his companion found themselves mean- 
while in an irregular courtyard, filled with 
old copper water-tanks, and surrounded by a 
medley of doors, arcades, and windows. One 
of the doors was open. Mrs. Schilizzi looked 
in, and discovered a miniature chapel, hanging 
on the very edge of the precipice. There was 
a book on the altar, some candlesticks, and 
some fragments of gold lace ; and some fixed 
worm-eaten seats, which would have held per- 
haps twenty worshippers. The air seemed full 
to her of the prayers of dead generations, and 
suddenly she realized that in the seat nearest 
the altar was a kneeling figure, habited in full 
armour, with its gauntleted hands clasped, and 
stretched towards the crucifix. She felt in- 
stinctively, what she afterwards discovered 
was the truth, that for hundreds of years this 
figure had remained there kneeling. Moved 
and awed, she hardly could tell why, she 
herself too sank on her knees, and half out- 
stretched her hands in a similar rapt attitude. 
In a few minutes' time she rejoined Grenville 



58 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

outside. He saw that she wished to speak, 
but was afraid of her own voice. She found 
it at last, and taking hold of one of the 
buttons of his coat, she said 

" Do you remember, at the foot of the hill 
we passed a poor woman, who was sitting with 
a sick baby ? I want to go down, and see if 
we can't help her. I want to help some one 
I want to do something good. Do you think 
me off my head ? What is happening to me ? 
I hardly know myself." 

He saw her swallow some strong access of 
agitation. He saw the effort undulate in her 
throat. 

" Wait," he said, " for a moment. Here is 
Fritz with the custodian. Fritz, at the foot 
of the castle was a poor woman with a baby. 
Give her a florin ; ask if she wants help ; and 
tell her the lady will presently come and speak 
to her." 

"She is here," said Fritz. "She is the 
custodian's wife. I think they are only tired. 
It is a long way to get up here." 

The woman was entering the court at the 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 59 

very moment. Mrs. Schilizzi almost ran 
towards her ; but moving gently as soon as 
she got near, spoke to her in a voice so 
kindly, that the woman looked up in wonder. 
Grenville saw her presently take the child in 
her arms, and carrying it, go with the mother 
through some low shadowy archway. The 
rose of her face presently came back again 
into the daylight. 

" I know," she said, " what it is that the 
child wants. I have told the woman it shall 
be sent to-morrow to her from Lichtenbourg." 

They now proceeded to follow the custodian 
through the building. The rooms they entered 
were full of dust and echoes. They were bare 
of all furniture except a few dilapidated tables, 
and a multitude of rude portraits hanging on 
the whitewashed walls. But in place of fur- 
niture, in one room after another, were piles 
of rusty armour, heaped up like hay-stacks. 
They saw the quarters which the Baron was 
shortly to occupy, once the priest's, and almost 
as bare as the others. Saints and scenes 
from the Bible, half obliterated by time, were 



60 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

daubed on the rough plaster ; and if it had 
not been for some china pipes on racks, and 
some pairs of Hessian boots, they would still 
have seemed the abode of some ascetic of the 
Middle Ages. By and by the sight-seers found 
themselves in the open air again. They were on 
a narrow platform, hanging over the precipice ; 
and all about them were loop-holed turrets and 
batteries, clinging to the rock like swallows' 
nests, and connected by scrambling stairs. 
The hush came over them which is caused -by 
the spectacle of a great depth. Presently 
they saw at one side of them a little tri- 
angular garden, supported on a ledge by 
parapets, and reached by some rough steps. 
There were a few bushes in it, and a bench 
on which they seated themselves. Looking 
towards the custodian they noticed that his 
head was bare. A second glance showed them 
he was standing under a wooden crucifix. 
There was in his face a manliness mixed with 
melancholy, and a hardy devout patience, that 
seemed strangely in keeping with the gaunt 
sacred image, embrowned by a thousand 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 61 

storms. They called him to them, and talked 
to him. He was grateful for their interest in 
his child, and showed a simple pleasure in 
telling them of his monotonous life. Once 

O 

each week either he or his wife descended to 
the world below to purchase their scant neces- 
saries ; otherwise, they' lived alone in this 
aerial solitude. Once a year a priest said 
mass in the chapel ; once a year the Baron 
came for a day or two ; and now and then 
some sight-seers. His life was varied by no 
incidents but these. They asked him to look 
for Fritz, and tell him to go on to the 
station and see that their dinner was ready 
for them, which they had ordered at the 
small restaurant. 

The man went and left them alone together. 

" You mustn't," she said presently, " take me 
to any more places like this." 

" Why not ? " he asked. 

" I can't tell why it is," she said, " but they 
overwhelm me. If one's soul, if one's imagin- 

o 

ation, has a heart, as one's body has, they 
make mine throb and beat so that I can 



62 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

hardly live." She turned her eyes to him, 
sad like an evening sky. " I have lived," she 
said, " so seldom, or rather not at all. I am 
not accustomed to it." Presently she went 
on : "I don't know why I feel like this ; but 
it's you, I think, who have set my imagination 
going. This is literally a country of romance. 
You are right about it. I feel it all as you do. 
It makes all the fetters of reality melt into 
dreams, and become unreal, and leave one 
free. I am a child again : all my life is before 
me. Oh, to live ! To be oneself, as one had 
hoped to be ! " 

He heard her murmur to herself something 
that had the sound of verse. He asked her 
what she said. 

"Nothing," she replied. "Or it is a 
propos of nothing. It was some lines, I 
think, translated from the second part of 

Faust 

' Here the unspeakable 
Grows to fulfilment.' 

I don't know why I said them. Here in this 
high silence the past seems face to face with 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 63 

one. Or is it the past ? I can't tell what it is. 
Look at the sunset. That too seems to be 
part of it." 

" It is," said Grenville, " what yesterday I 
called poetry. I see you understand quite as 
well as I do better even. I only stand on 
tip-toe ; you float on the air." 

" I wonder," she murmured, " if we have 
any right to float. Perhaps we were made 
only to walk to plod." 

" That," said Grenville, " is a question we 
must each answer for ourselves. What is 
folly in most people is elevation in some. 
Fancy St. Francis promoting a company ; or a 
stock-broker in an ecstacy, like St. Francis ! 
You know," he went on presently, " that space 
has three dimensions. So has life ; and as led 
by different people, it may consist of different 
movements of lateral movements, like those 
of a cart-horse ; or of a movement upwards. 
The movement upwards is the movement of 
saints, and poets, and yourself. The reason is 
that they and that you have wings. I have 
long lost mine. They fell from me with my 



64 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

boy's curls : and yet when you talk I feel the 
fanning of yours." 

She rose from her seat, and looked down at 
him with a smile that had something of amuse- 
ment in it. 

" Do you know what you do ? " she said. 
" It is something that you shouldn't. Instead 
of saying what is true about yourself, you are 
saying what is the exact opposite. Look at 
your watch, will you ; for I think, to judge by 
the light, that instead of a movement upwards, 
we ought to begin one downwards." 

As they went together descending the 
winding road, unnoticed by him she often 
turned and looked at -him, with the curious 
intentness of a child. 

Suddenly she said, laughing, " Had you 
curls when you were a little boy ? " 

He laughed too, and again admitted that 
he had. 

" When you were a little boy," she asked, 
" what name did they call you ? " 

He told her it was " Bobby." 

She repeated the word softly. " That," she 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. '65 

said, " was my brother's name." She looked 
him in the face for a moment, and once more 
repeated, " Bobby." 

" And you," he said, " when you were a 
little girl, I know what they called you ; for 
your name no one would alter. It was Irma 
Miss Irma little Irma. Did not they call 
you that ? I wrote a poem once to a person 
of that name. I did indeed and not very 
long ago." 

She stopped short, and looked at him, 
reddening with a painful flush. He went on 
rapidly " It was to a very small person. It 
was to Irma, your little daughter." 

She caught her breath sharply, as if with 
sudden relief ; then he saw the shadows of her 
throat tremble. She gasped, " You must tell 
me the verses not now but some day/' 
And her eyes before she could avert them 
had filled suddenly with tears. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THAT evening before she went to bed, 
inspired by the events of the day, she pro- 
duced the sheets of her diary ; and having 
given her children's eyelids the gentle bene- 
diction of her kiss, she leaned her head on her 
hand, and began writing as follows 

"Am I sad or happy? I don't know. I 
never felt as I feel now, before. I am quite 
bewildered. I wish I was a child again, and 
had mother to guide me. And yet, why ? 
What is there to make a fuss about. Only a 
very pleasant thing has happened to me ; 
which, though to me it is surprising, is surely 
in 'itself very commonplace ; but I find it 
quite new. How baldly and badly I put 
things : what has happened is this. I have 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 67 

met a man who cares to talk to me because he 
understands my thoughts. He likes me for 
what is human in me, not for what is animal ; 
and he does not look at me with the eyes of 
a cowardly beast of prey. At first, indeed, 
he did not care to look at me at all, but 
even that is better than the ways of other 
men : though I confess that there have been 
times months, I think perhaps one whole 
year, when I allowed my vanity to be flattered 
by those men's admiration. I thought any 
'sort of attention was better than none, then. 
Again as to this man, I thought at first that 
he laughed at me. Perhaps he did. Socially 
I knew he thought nothing of me ; and I'm 
sure he thinks nothing now. But of that I 
am glad ; for somehow it makes the change in 
him seem deeper and more sincere. He is 
sincere, I am sure ; for only once and then 
it seemed forced and unnatural has he paid 
me a single compliment, except that one 
compliment of understanding me. 

"To be understood ! The sensation is so 
strange to me that it makes me a new 



68 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

creature. My mind, my tastes, my feelings 
have all become new things. Bobby I 
mean dear Bobby, my sailor brother once 
described to me his delight when in some 
strange place in the East he heard the sound 
of his own language. For the first time in 
my life I have heard some one else talk mine. 
Mr. Grenville does more. He not only talks 
my language, but enlarges it for me. In 
addition to saying what I have often myself 
said before, he says other things I have only 
tried to say ; and again others which I have 
never even thought of, but which become 
mine the moment he has said them. He 
seems to have liberated in me a host of 
thoughts that were in prison. He is the 
fairy prince who has entered the sleeping 
palace.' 

" What have I written ? Perhaps I shouldn't 
have written that : and yet I am reassured, 
so far as regards him, by seeing that I have 
written it so naturally. It is a witness to the 
fact that he has never tried to make love to 
me. He might easily have tried to do so, and 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 69 

so have destroyed everything. But I noticed 
this, that whenever matters of sentiment were 
talked about, everything personal or even 
emotional was carefully banished from his 
manner ; and he contrived to give me the 
same unembarrassed feeling I might have had 
if we were talking politics : no, much more 
unembarrassed than that ; for I couldn't talk 
politics if I tried. 

" And yet for certain reasons this is making 

*/ O 

me feel fearful and anxious. To be understood 
in this way spoils me. It is taking me away 
from the hard benches and starved table of a 
school to which I must soon go back, and 
is showing me what life might be a thing I 
had best forget. His understanding has made 
mine, which was once so barren, become green 
like fields in spring. I feel as if I were float- 
ing as if I were being taken off my feet. He 
no, not he I didn't mean that I mean the 
fact that he has understood me, makes my 
thoughts rise like a kite rising on the wind." 
Her next day's record was this 
" We are going to-morrow to see Count 



70 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

T 's hotel in the forest. Every sunrise now 

brings with it something to hope for. Mr. 
Grenville came in after the children's dinner to 
arrange how we should go. I am happy ; for 
an accident occurred which confirms me in all 
I thought about him ; and yet, as for me, if I 
think of myself merely, I ought, I suppose, to 
blush at it. Indeed it touches myself so 
closely that I hardly know how to write it ; 
and yet, apart from me, it was so simple. 
"What occurred was this. 

" The waiter, in laying the table, had moved 
some of my books a pile of them and had 
put them on a chair near the window. Many 
of them were English poets. Mr. Grenville 
took some of them up, and said something 
about the library with which I travelled. I 
thought of telling him but I had not the 
courage to do so that I was making some 
notes on the different moods and ways in 
which English poets had approached and 
treated Nature. 

" ' I see/ he said, ' you have underlined a 
great deal of Wordsworth.' 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 71 

" And all of a sudden, under Wordsworth, he 
came on a heap of horrible French novels. I 
never had meant to bring them; I thought 
they were burnt : but some had been left, 
and Julie packed them up by mistake. I call 
them horrible ; but as I said before, they were 
classics. They were not books it need neces- 
sarily be a disgrace to read. But the moment 
he noticed them, I saw him give a look at me, 
and his tone changed and grew cold. 

" ' Your tastes are certainly catholic,' he said, 
as he took one of them up. 

" ' They are not,' I exclaimed, ' if you mean 
I've a taste for those. They were packed by 
mistake. They've no business to be here. 
They were given me. I meant to have burnt 
them. I wish you would put them into the 
fire for me.' I don't know how I said all 
this ; but he saw I was sincere at all 
events ; for he looked relieved, and his old 
manner came back to him. But I still felt 
shy and awkward, and hurried on to explain 
myself. I observed what a pity it was that 
books of so much genius should have so much 



72 A HDMAN DOCUMENT. 

in them one regretted having even looked at. 
' One is always being told/ I went on, ' that 
they are justified by the fact of their being 
true : and perhaps they are true I can't tell 
about that ; but on me the impression which 
they leave, is not that they are true, but that 
they are bad.' 

" Now I am perfectly certain, though I 
cannot tell how I became so I am certain 
that he thought these books bad, dangerous 
how shall I put it ? for me personally. And 
he was right there is evil in every one of us. 
But without dropping the subject, which might 
have put me to shame so easily, he gave our 
discussion a turn which completely separated 
it from myself. 

" ' I am exactly like you,' he said, ' in the 
way I regard the matter. Like you, I recog- 
nize that these books have genius, and that, 
compared with novels expressly written for the 
school-room, they have truth ; but I have the 
same sense which you have, that for some 
people they are bad. For people like our- 
selves, however, their offensive quality is, I 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 73 

believe, their artistic badness, far more than 
their moral badness. Oddly enough, in the 
train, when I came from Paris to Vienna, I was 
talking to a man by the way, he is the doctor 
here about this very subject ; and he helped 
me to see the matter clearly. I believe that in 
novels written for grown-up people all sides of 
life should be treated with equal fairness ; but 
the human imagination is so constituted, that 
six lines written about certain things will 
impress us as distinctly as six pages written 
about others. The French school we are talk- 
ing of wholly forget this, and although they 
may not give more words to man's lower 
nature than to his higher, they produce on 
the mind of the reader a far more vivid im- 
pression of it. There is the artistic badness. 
The moral badness is this that the impression 
thus produced is not only disproportionate, 
but it tends to corrupt the judgment long 
before it has appealed to it.' 

" How true this is ! I myself feel its truth 
so keenly, that I could hardly have thought 
it possible to discuss it without embarrass- 



74 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

ment. But it was Mr. Grenville's whole man- 
ner, as well as his actual phrases, which made 
everything easy, and surrounded one with a 
cleanly atmosphere. I was more grateful to 
him than I can say for his chivalrous delicacy 
towards myself. Could any brother be kinder 
or so kind ? 

"He took the books with him. May I 
never see them again them, or any like 
them. 

" I was just preparing to put my papers 
away, when shall I really put it down, the 
little silly thing that has happened ? On the 
table at which I write stands a small looking- 
glass in a Dresden china frame. Quite by 
accident I have seen my face in it ; and I 
have seen, and said to myself, that I do well, 
that I do look charming. Mr. Grenville, I 
believe, doesn't think me a bit pretty. Most 
men have thought nothing else about me. 
I'm glad Mr. Grenville is as he is. I like 
him to see in me the good points I am in 
doubt about, not those about which I can't 
help being certain. And yet, being a woman, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 75 

I should like him to see my prettiness, just 
as a fact of nature. Shall I ask him if he 
does so ? Stop ! what am I writing ? How 
vain how vain ! I ought to be above such 
thoughts. I have forgotten them. 

"To-morrow let me think of that we 
are going into the heart of the forest. These 
expeditions to me are like her first balls to 
a girl. Everything now is so unaccountably, 
so unfathomably fresh to me." 

Before composing herself to sleep she knelt 
up in her bed, her hands crossed on the folds 
of her white drapery. She did not, even 
mentally, say any definite word, for the in- 
fluences to which, as she grew up, her religion 
had been subjected, hardly admitted of this ; 
but she let her soul open itself to something 
beyond her and above her, as she rested for 
some moments in the attitude of an infant 
Samuel. When she closed her eyes now there 
was no frown on her forehead, but a placid 
faith in the day towards which sleep would 
waft her. 

Faith in this case was certainly not dis- 



76 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

appointed. A light varnished carriage, whose 
brownness shone in the morning, adapted for 
rough roads, and drawn by four active little 
horses, who jingled bells as they moved and 
tossed red tassels, took them away with a 
speed that was in itself exhilaration. Out of 
the town they sped, through valleys and fields 
and orchards. Then came ground that was 
wilder, plantations of pine, and spaces covered 
with pine-needles. Kocks cropped up through 
the soil, and prickly bushes dotted it. At 
last they entered a great undulating forest, 
where the branches whispered and the breath 
of the pine-trees floated. Through this they 
drove for a good two hours at least, encounter- 
ing all the way hardly a sign of life, except 
some men who, in one place, were busy mend- 
ing the road, and a waggon which they over- 
took, laden with chairs and tables, and which, 
as they surmised, must be bound for the 
Count's hotel. 

They had arranged to picnic in the hunting- 
lodge, and go to the hotel from thence. A 
rising slope, covered with heath and bog- 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 



77 



myrtle, at last appeared, like an island in the 
sea of foliage. Driving up this, and passing 
through a belt of trees, they saw the lodge 
before them a whitewashed building, with a 
high-pitched tiled roof, and an open arcade 
by which the few rooms were connected. 
Fritz soon produced the forester and his wife, 
who took charge of it ; and having made them 
aware who his master was, it was hardly a 
minute before the principal doors were open, 
and their hamper of provisions was being 
carried into the principal sitting-room. 

Mrs. Schilizzi was in the happiest mood 
possible, and G-renville had caught it from 
her, in all its buoyant freshness. They in- 
sisted on being left to unpack their hamper 
for themselves ; and she exclaimed with 
delight at the various delicacies contained in 
it, taxing him, as if he were a boy, with being 
wrong and extravagant in having ordered 
them. Every package opened had all the 
savour of a discovery ; every missing requisite, 
which they asked the old woman to supply, 
was the occasion of an adventure. Grenville 



73 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

ran her to earth in her own kitchen regions, 
and came back with stories of her pots and 
pans and her cooking-stove, and she presently 
followed him in with a pile of thick white 
plates, and with some old Bohemian glasses 
having coats-of-arms in colour on them. 
Whilst she was arranging them, eager to do 
her utmost, Grenville and Mrs. Schilizzi took 
stock of the room its bare polished floor, its 
velvet chairs and sofas, stiffly grouped together 
at one end round a table ; they peeped into 
a writing-room, and a charming bed-room 
beyond ; they examined some pieces of tapestry 
and a large number of horns, which formed 
the only decorations of the rudely distem- 
pered walls; and at last they went to the 
windows. They turned to each other with 
looks and expressions of admiration, for 
straight before them, at a distance of a 
hundred feet or so, was the smooth glass 
of a lake, full of the sky and pine-woods, 
which stretched itself out to a breadth of 
fully a mile, and reached away curving into 
some indefinite distance. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 79 

Charmed by this unexpected prospect, they 
now turned to their meal, which was happy 
like a meal of children. Its microscopic 
incidents were sufficient to fill the moment 
the pouring out of the wine, the cutting up 
of the chicken, the extracting the salt from 
the paper packets that held it. They ex- 
perienced together the most charming form 
of confidence the unaccustomed sharing in 
the enjoyment of little things such as these. 
No thought seemed too small to communi- 
cate, no sense of amusement too trifling to 
share. Then they went out to inspect the 
landscape in the neighbourhood, having first 
asked the way to the Count's hotel. The 
way, they presently found, hardly required 
asking ; for the building was full in sight, at 
about a furlong's distance. It stood near to 
the lake, and was somewhat Swiss in appear- 
ance, surrounded with wooden balconies, and 
shaded by projecting roofs. They entered. 
It was full of a smell of newly-planed wood 
and varnish. Though it was not yet open, 
the furnishing was nearly complete, and the 



80 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

manager was beside himself with delight at 
showing his accommodation to the strangers. 
Some private suites were fit for immedi- 
ate occupation ; everything was ready but 
the fittings for the public rooms. "The 
air," said the manager, " owing to the near- 
ness of the pine-trees, is supposed to be 
healthier even than that of Lichtenbourg, and 
the neighbouring mineral spring has properties 
quite unique. Will not your excellencies 
honour me by taking coffee ? " 

They told him that the woman at the lodge 
was at that moment preparing some, and 
they slowly strolled back enchanted with all 
about them. There were grassy slopes, tufted 
with aromatic shrubs ; there were glimpses of 
cart-tracks leading away into the forest ; there 
were reeds by the lake-side up to their waists 
in water; and a beech-tree in front of the 
lodge made a shade on the warm soil. Here 
they had their coffee ; their tray rested on 
the beech-husks, and they themselves lay 
on some rugs beside it. During luncheon 
everything reminded her of incidents in her 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 81 

childhood, of picnics with her brothers and 
sisters, and of absurd shifts they were put to. 
She told him how Dick stole her pocket- 
handkerchief for a napkin, and how Olga 
used to say, "Do look at Irma gobbling." 
And Grenville had thought, though he for- 
bore to tell her so, that he saw that sub- 
merged childhood shining still mischievous 
in her eyes. Now, however, her mood had 
become more pensive. She talked not of 
the amusements of her childhood, but of its 
charms and dreams. " There were reeds like 
those," she said, " in a lake that was near 
our home. I used often to sit by them and 
wonder how Pan could have made his pipes." 
Then gradually one thing after another recalled 
to her her father's garden, its tall trees and 
its flower-beds. Each memory as it floated 
into her mind shaped itself into artless words ; 
and occasionally she would call Grenville's 
attention to something in the scene before her 
some ripple of sunlight on the lake, or the 
ruddy or silvery bark of some gleaming tree, 
which appealed to her for its own sake only. 

VOL. II. G 



82 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

This extraordinary quality in her of sensi- 
tiveness to natural beauty, struck Grenville 
afresh ; and as they were driving back he at 
last gave his thoughts utterance. 

" I have been wondering," he said, " since 
the mere colouring of scenes like these 
appeals so strongly to your sense of beauty 
and your imagination, how you would be 
affected by such a country as Italy." 

" Ah," she exclaimed, " if I could only 
see it ! " 

"All sorts of scenes, and objects, and 
aspects of things," he went on, "are floating 
into my mind at this moment, the beauty of 
which would, I am sure, make you hold your 
breath." 

"Tell me," she said. "What sort of 
things ? " 

He answered her slowly, as if he were 
talking to himself, and enumerating chance 
memories. 

" The marble peaks," he began, " of the 
pure Carrara mountains, rising out of violet 
mist, and glittering in a sky of primrose- 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 83 

colour ; the crescent of turquoise waves, which 
one sees framed by the ilexes under whose 
shadow Shelley wrote TJie Cenci ; sands white 
like an arum-lily I have walked by in the 
hush of the morning, whilst the dark blue 
waters slept on them ; boats gliding on Lake 
Como, with sails like the breasts of swans 
I should like to be with you when you were 
looking at things like these when you were 
hearing the songs of the peasants floating at 
dusk amongst the fire-flies, or the notes of 
the angelus vibrate, some near, some distant, 
from half a dozen craggy villages amongst the 
Apennines." 

" That is enough," she said. " Let me 
think a little of that. Every word is a 
picture ; I wish we could see it all." Then 
suddenly she turned to him, and, looking at 
him with a smile of curiosity, " But you told 
me," she said, "that Italy was a place that 
represented prose to you." 

She heard him sigh faintly, and for a 
moment he did not speak. " I remember," 
he said at last ; " but that was only on a 



84 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

special occasion ; and it was due to how 
shall we put it ? to extraneous, or (shall we 
say ?) adventitious, circumstances." 

"What grand words!" she laughed. "I 
wonder what the circumstances were." 

" I am not sure whether, supposing you 
care to hear, I may not one day tell you. If 
ever I do, you will know something about me 
which at the present moment I hardly know 
myself." 

When they reached Lichtenbourg it was 
latish. She was tired, and dined in her room. 
Grenville said to himself, amongst the clatter 
of plates in the restaurant, " It seems as if a 
brook had been rippling at my side all day, 
and the god Pan or somebody had filled all 
the reeds with music." As for the clatter of 
the plates and the music of the band outside, 
loud as they both were, he was hardly conscious 
of either. 

She, for her part, was indeed thoroughly 
tired. Before she went to bed, her glance 
fell on her diary. She laid her hand on it, 
and pushed it away wearily ; but then with 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 85 

a change of purpose she opened it, seized a 
pen, and hastily wrote on the page the follow- 
ing verse from Tennyson, with blots above and 
below it, meant to do duty for asterisks 

" Across the hills and far away, 

Beyond their utmost purple rim, 
And deep into the dying day, 

The happy princess followed him." 



CHAPTER XV. 

THEY had made no plans for the following 
day, but he took it for granted that he should 
spend it with her somewhere and somehow ; 
and he was pleased rather than surprised 
when, before ten o'clock, a note was brought 
to him from her, begging him to come to her 
instantly. Surprise, however, came as soon 
as he found himself in her presence ; for her 
face and manner were full of trouble and 
agitation. " I have just," she said, " heard 
such awful news ; and I can't at all tell what's 
the best thing to be done. The doctor has 
just told me that scarlatina has broken out 
in Lichtenbourg that three children have 
already died of it, and that there are two 
bad cases in the villa next the hotel. I 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 87 

want," she went on, " to be off without a 
moment's unnecessary delay ; but I am so 
perplexed I can't decide where to go. I 
might return to my aunt ; but the children 
are never well at the castle : and of course 
we have our flat at \ r ienna ; but Vienna, in 
this heat, would be death to them. Poor 
little things they are both of them so 
delicate ! And then," she added with a faint, 
regretful laugh, " everything here was begin- 
ning to be so pleasant. Do help me tell me 
what you advise." 

Grenville's face, whilst she was speaking, 
had shown as much concern as her own ; but 
by the time she had ended, its expression had 
changed suddenly, and he looked at her for 
a moment in silence, with a dawning smile. 

" Can't you help me ? " she said, a little 
irritably. "To me this is really serious. I, 
whatever you may do, see in it nothing to 
smile at." 

" I was smiling," he said, " at something 
you don't see ; and that is a way, and an 
easy one, out of all your difficulties. Take 



88 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

your children to the Count's hotel in the 
forest." 

The suggestion came to her like a burst of 
sunshine out of clouds. She drew her breath 
and clasped her hands with delight at it. 
But then, relapsing into despondency, she 
sighed, "The hotel's not open." 

" No," urged Grenville, " but some of the 
rooms are ready ; and we know the cook's 
there. No doubt they could take you in. 
If you will let me, I'll order a horse, ride 
over, and arrange about it ; and whilst Fritz 
goes to the stables I'll see the doctor, whom 
I know. I'll tell him our plan, and send him 
back to you, in order that he may give you 
his opinion on it." 

She paused reflecting ; then she looked at 
him inquiringly. " And what would you 
do "? " she said. " Would you stay here ? 
You couldn't at least I suppose so come 
very well to the hotel." 

" I," he said, " would go to the Count's 
hunting-lodge. As I told you the other day, 
it is already as good as lent to me." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 89 

" It's too kind of you," she murmured. 
" But how bored you would be shut up 
there ! " 

" As soon as I am," he answered, " I 
promise you I will go away. Only tell me 
shall I ride over now and arrange things ? " 

" Yes ; do what you can ; and I shall be 
waiting for your report anxiously. Don't be 
too long not longer than you can help." 

This parting injunction kept softly echoing 
in his ears, as his horse's hoofs rang on the 
road of yesterday ; and he was back again, his 
mission accomplished, before she had begun 
expecting him. The manager, he said, had 
been charmed at his prompt return, and more 
charmed still at finding out the reason of it. 
A suite of rooms with a lovely view of the 
lake were perfectly ready at this moment for 
occupation ; and though as yet there were 
only a few servants, there were still sufficient 
to wait upon one family. As for himself, 
Grenville had been at the lodge. The forester 
and his wife had heard from the Count that 
morning, that the English Excellency was to 



90 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

occupy it whenever it pleased him ; and " By 
this time," he said, " they will be airing the 
sheets and dusting. If we go to-morrow 
afternoon we shall find everything prepared 
for us ; and in case at the hotel there should 
be difficulty the first night about dinner, I 
have ordered something at six, for ourselves 
and for the children, at the lodge." 

" I see," she said, laughing, " you will have 
everything your own way ; and as the doctor 
has been here, and considers your plan 
excellent, we are all bound to be grateful to 
you. You must also arrange about the 
carriages. Our flight will be a regular 
exodus." 

And indeed with the luggage, and the 
servants, and the children, it appeared so. It 
was a journey slower than their first, and so 
far as scenery went, it could not offer them 
the excitement and charm of novelty ; but 
they felt in it a novelty of some kind they 
hardly could tell what ; and though the place 
to which it was taking them was still fresh in 
their memories, the life to which it was taking 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 91 

them had something in it that 'was hardly 
imaginable. 

Columbus, when he landed first in the New 
World, could not have felt the thrill of entire 
strangeness more keenly than they did, when 
they finally reached their destination. The 
halt of the three carriages at the wooden porch 
of the hotel, the bustle of the servants, the 
sorting of the luggage, the taking of hers 
indoors, and the despatch of his to the lodge, 
were for them like events that never had had 
a parallel. They inspected her rooms together, 
and admired their fresh daintiness ; they went 
out on the balcony, and admired the lake and 
forest. The children were wild with delight, 
as if they had never before been happy ; and 
the mother clapped her hands and laughed as 
happily as the children. 

Presently Grenville hurried off to the lodge, 
promising to return and bring them over to 
dinner. The gold of the warm evening was 
floating on the lake and melting in it, when 
he did so an hour later, and they went with 
him across the grass and the pine-needles a 



92 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

bright exotic group ; for the children wore 
their red frocks, and their mother, who 
apologized for her appearance, was glittering 
in the cloak which had startled his eyes at 
Lichtenbourg. The meal which they found 
awaiting them was a supper rather than 
dinner. There was fish from the lake, a 
chicken, and a variety of early vegetables. 
There was for the elders a slim bottle of hock, 
and an old German jug full of milk for the 
children. The mellow daylight was still 
bright enough for them to eat by ; but some 
candles were burning, whose flames were like 
pale daffodils. 

"When we were little," Mrs. Schilizzi said, 
"we had a game which we called 'pretending.' 
One could play it in many ways ; but our 
favourite way was this. We put a tent we 
had on the back of an old donkey, and we 
walked away to a common behind the house. 
We pitched our tent, we encamped amongst 
the furze-bushes, we lit a fire, and pretended 
we were Arabs in the desert. Those encamp- 
ments have always seemed to me the remotest 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 93 

places in the world, and the hours we spent 
there the most adventurous life imaginable. 
I feel somehow as if we were playing at 
' pretending ' now." She said this when the 
meal was drawing to a close ; and then she 
added presently, laughing into her children's 
eyes, "Now, children, there is another adven- 
ture in store for you. You must come back 
with mother a long, long way to bed, all 
across the grass and through the myrtle-bushes 
where the beautiful fairies play." 

The children opened their eyes, and they 
were deep with the joys of imagination. 

" Must we go yet ? " said Grenville. 
" Won't you wait for our coffee ? " 

"No," she answered, laying her hand 
on his arm. " They are tired ; it is very 
late for them. Get them their hats, and 
let us go. We will come back for our 
coffee." 

As they went, in the dusk, the children 
played amongst the bushes, constantly running 
up to their elders to ask where were the 
fairies ; and Mrs. Schilizzi said, " Whenever a 



94 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

child sees them, they become shy and change 
themselves into glow-worms." 

She and Grenville, when they went back to 
the lodge, drank their coffee by the window in 
almost complete silence. Only now and then 
one or other of them said a faint common- 
place something about the charm of the fading 
view ; and once he rose, and seeing her 
slightly shiver, folded her cloak a little more 
closely round her. 

" Won't you smoke ? " she said presently. 
" I'm sure you would like to do so." 

The floating puffs of his cigarette had an 
effect which was welcome. They seemed to 
excuse the silence, though they did succeed 
in breaking it. At last he asked her what it 
was she was thinking of. " I was counting 
the clouds," she replied. " which have still any 
pink left in them." 

After a little while he spoke again. " You 
and I," he said, " must know each other very 
well, I think." 

She asked why ? as if sure of the answer 
and yet waiting for it. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 95 

" Because we can sit like this," he said, 
"and talk without ever speaking." 

For a time she made no response, except a 
look and a faint smile. But at last she rose 
from her seat, and said, "It is time to go." 
He expostulated, telling her it was early ; and 
indeed it was only nine. 

" Don't keep me," she said very softly and 
gently. " Let me go. If you like you can 
walk back with me." 

They were both standing by this time, but 
both seemed withheld from moving. Suddenly 
she uttered a word, quite naturally, and as if 
she hardly knew she was using it ; but it went 
through his whole being as if it had been a 
spell. It was simply his own name, " Bobby." 
He said nothing. She continued as if talking 
to herself rather than to him " That was the 
name of my favourite brother, and he is dead. 
He used to tell me everything ; and I was 
more like a mother than a sister to him." 
Then clasping her hands, she raised her eyes 
to Grenville's. " Listen," she said. " Will 
you listen to me ? I want to tell you some- 



96 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

thing. You have been very good to me. 
You have taken care of me. I wanted to tell 
you" 

For a second or two she was motionless. 
Then with a sudden movement she came up to 
him, and put her hands on his coat. "Bobby," 
she whispered, lingering over the syllables, " I 
want you to be always good to me always. 
Tell me that you will be not loud tell it 
me in my ear." 

A silence followed, and only her eyes spoke. 
There was trouble in them, like the conflict of 
two meeting waters. A moment later he had 
stooped his head to answer her ; but the 
answer, which was tender as a moth's wing on 
a flower, had been caught by her, not in her 
ear, but on her lips. The instant after, she 
had hidden her face in her hands, and when 
she removed them, in her eyes were tears 
and happiness. " I am tired," she said at 
last ; "I must be going." 

As yet he had not uttered a word ; but now, 
looking half sadly at her, "Irma," he answered, 
" I will be to you the best I can be. You 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 97 

are right. You must go now. Come I will 
take you back." 

As they went into the open air, the night 
was wild with perfume. The forests lay 
around them zones of enchanted shadow ; the 
lake, glimmering like dim steel, was an en- 
chanted water ; but in Grenville's mind, as he 
returned, was a sense of sorrow and anxiety, 
bewildering and troubling, although it could 
not lessen a longing for the to-morrow which 
lay beyond the night. 

As for her, however events might have 
tired her, they had at any rate not made her 
sleepy. A lamp stood on the table ; her 
window was half open ; a faint sound as of 
murmuring boughs came in through it ; and 
before her, according to her custom, was the 
case that contained her diary. The last words 
she had written were the lines she took from 
Tennyson. Unity of style as a diarist was 
not her strong point, certainly ; nor did what 
she wrote now show any concern to make it 
so. It was hardly like a diary at all, indeed, 
except that it was prefaced by a date. 

VOL. II. H 



98 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

"To-night," she began, "if I am to make 
any true record, I must make it in a new way. 
I must address myself, not to myself as if I 
were my own reader, but to something that is 
outside me, and beyond me. I cannot tell 
what it is, or at all events I will not define it. 
I shall let its form and nature remain vague ; 
and I shall be able, by doing so, to speak to it 
more freely. 

" Listen then, you, whatever you are, before 
whom I am going to lay my thoughts naked, 
as the sea lays bare to the moon its hushed 
and yet troubled waves. Let me feel my way 
by telling you one little trifle about my child- 
hood. When I was a child, I used to read 
Ovid's Metamorphoses; and I often amused 
myself by speculating how the people felt 
when they found themselves changing into 
trees and flowers and fountains. I think I 
know now ; for I am undergoing the same sort 
of change myself. 

" Power to whom I speak, into what am I 
changing ? You will be able to see perhaps ; 
but I want myself to tell you. If I could 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 99 

laugh about it and I don't see why I shouldn't, 
for one can always afford to laugh when quite 
sure that one is serious I would tell you that 
I felt like Aaron's rod when it budded. As 
for Ovid, to go back to him, the bodies of his 
women turned into flowers. I feel like a 
flower turning into a woman's soul. 

" How vague this seems don't you think 
so ? Tell me do you catch my meaning ? 
What I want to do, is to put it more plainly ; 
but when I try to do so in my mind, do you 
know what happens 1 The sentences I shape 
to myself become metamorphosed like Ovid's 
heroines ; and instead of speaking about my- 
self, I find myself speaking about what ? 
About the warm silence of the night ; about 
the stealing scents of the forest, that just 
make the edge' of the thin lace curtains 
tremble ; about the lapping of the lake that I 
can just hear at intervals, as at intervals when 
one is awake in the darkness one can just 
hear one's watch tick. Yes, I feel inclined to 
speak to you about all these things, instead of 
speaking to you of confessing to you, about 



100 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

myself. But if I were really talking to you, 
and you could hear me, you who have so 
much experience, whilst I have so little, would 
be sure to read the whole of my confession 
in my voice. 

" And now you must consider again. Is 
this a sign of anything this, which I am about 
to tell you ? I write these sentences slowly, 
pausing between each and dreaming dream- 
ing as I watch the flames of the candles 
tremble, and little white drops of wax chase 
one another down the sides ; and as I dream 
with my pen balanced in my hand, fragments 
of poetry I have read, and had long forgotten 
fragments of all kinds come like bees in 
summer, winging their way into my mind ; 
and each conies laden with some meaning 
which it never had before, and which is all my 
own some pollen, some honey, some dew, out 
of life as I have myself lived it. 

" Can you imagine how a rose feels when all 
its petals are unfolding ? This is how I feel. 
I am unfolding towards you. Power to 
whom I speak, do you see what you have 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 101 

done for me ? Oh, but you must not boast 
till you have heard the rest of the story ; 
for if you have done this for me, there is 
something I have done for you. You must 
let some boasting be mine, for it is a pleasure 
I have never had before. I have done this. 
You, you who are so much stronger than I 
am I have led you, I have influenced you. 
Can I go on ? It is more difficult to do so 
than a moment ago I thought it would be. 

" If you could ever see what I am writing, 
I wouldn't write another word I mean about 
this point. But you never will see it, so I 
will be intrepid and go on. There has been 
something in you and I know what it was ; 
it was regard for me, for I saw that in your 
eyes, and felt it in your whole demeanour 
there has been something in you which has 
held you back from me, or held you up from 
me ; and because of this I valued you all the 
more. But I have made you stoop ; my power 
has been greater than yours. I have made 
you stoop till your lips have at last touched 
mine ; and your touch is upon them still, like 



102 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

what odd fancies come to me ! like the taste 
of manna, which means ' what is it ? ' And do 
you know how I did this ? how I drew you 
to me so near, so near ? I begged you not 
in so many words, but you knew my meaning 
perfectly I begged you, I prayed you, to 
keep away from me. And I meant it too, for 
I have never, never lied to you. But there 
was something in me at the same time that 
must have meant something quite different, 
and meant it more strongly. At least I 
suppose that was the case ; for now we see the 
result. Isn't that so ? Perhaps I shall teach 
you what a strange thing a woman's heart is. 
It's motto I think ought to be, ' I am nothing 
if logical.' 

"And yet, seeing that in all this some 
responsibility perhaps a very grave one has 
been incurred somewhere, I don't mean to let 
you off, and say you are responsible for nothing. 
For do you know what you have done ? I 
wonder I wonder if you do. I hope you do 
but I will tell you. You have entered my 
mind ; you have moved amongst my thoughts, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 103 

like a wind moving through a garden and 
stealing into the flowers, and fluttering their 
petals. You have been where no human being 
has ever been before, not even I myself, and 
you have said to me, ' See these flower-beds, 
see these flowers you never knew, did you, 
that you had such things in your garden ? ' 
Why did you do this ? You had no business 
to come there and wander there at all. But 
since you have come, do you know how I 
am going to punish you ? I am going to 
keep you there. You never shall go away 
again. 

" I began talking of you vaguely, as some 
impersonal power, and owing to a kind of shy- 
ness I thought of you vaguely ; but by this time 
I have, I expect, pretty well betrayed myself. 
And yet I can no more tell you now, than I 
could at the beginning, all that I want to 
tell you. Let the air of the night, which we 
both are breathing, breathe it to you ; let the 
forest murmur it. Let the lake, which is so 
near you, ripple it to you through your win- 
dows. Let me tell it to you myself, in telling 



104 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

you how I love my children. I feel sometimes 
as if nothing I could do for them could ever 
satisfy what I feel for them ; that they could 
never be close enough to my heart ; that my 
life could never completely enough be spent 
for theirs. As the arms of a mother long to 
enfold her child, so, my companion, my friend 
what am I going to say ?--! I long to 
enfold you ! " 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE following morning when she stepped 
out on her balcony, whilst a waiter inside was 
clattering with the white breakfast-cups, she 
murmured, feeling the freshness that seemed 
to pervade everything, " And the evening and 
the morning were the first day." 

She presently looked towards the lodge, 
watching the ground in front of it, but she 
saw no one stirring ; and a shadow a very 
transparent shadow of disappointment crossed 
her mind. " Does he like me ? " she said to 
herself as she passed indoors. But the smile 
on her lips showed, that she had little doubt 
about the answer. 

At breakfast a packet was brought to her. 

" What ! " she exclaimed. " The post ! I 



106 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

never thought that letters would follow me 

O 

here so soon." But she saw the next moment 
that it was something that had come by hand ; 
and she found, on undoing it, that it was a 
copy of Grenville's poems. She recollected 
no\y that she had asked him if he had a copy 
which he could lend her. He had said, " No " ; 
but a line which he now enclosed ran thus 
" By accident this was found in one of my 
boxes. I will come to you after breakfast. 
You have made me once more a poet." She 
turned over the pages with a placid, half- 
tender interest ; but all of a sudden she 
started and blushed crimson. She had come 
to the fly -leaf ; and that showed her his 
meaning, when he spoke of once more being 
a poet. Her initials were written on it, 
and under her initials these lines : 

" What may I write that shall hint of my love for you ? 

My pen trembles idly, and doubts as it dips. 
Teach me some name that is tender enough for you : 
Or else hold me silent, my love, with your lips." 

Mrs. Schilizzi remained for some time with 
the book lying open in her lap, and her eyes 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 107 

fixed on the verses as if they were some 
strange flower. She had left the breakfast- 
table, and was sitting outside in the balcony, 
shielding her head from the sun with a large 
parasol, whilst a light breeze played with the 
soft tendrils of her hair. Her parasol and her 
dress were red ; and as Grenville came presently 
over to the hotel from the hunting-lodge, he 
saw her from far off, like one brilliant patch of 
colour. She however did not see him till he 
came to her through the window of the sitting- 
room, and the sound of his steps roused her. 
She gave him no good-morning, except with 
her eyes. She looked up at him, her hand 
still resting on the book, and she merely said, 
" How could you ? " 

He returned her gaze, not with sadness 
exactly, but with gravity ; and for a few 
moments both were silent. At last he said, 
" Are you angry with what I wrote ? It was 
written before 1 knew what I was doing." 

" No," she said, " not with it, but with 
myself for being made so happy by it." 

There was a long silence, which for some 



108 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

reason had in it no embarrassment, as was 
shown by their manner when again they began 
speaking.. 

" What shall we do ? " he said presently. 
" The manager tells me that he has a 
pony-carriage, and also that there are roads 
in the forest, a little rough, but still fit for 
driving." 

" Oh," she exclaimed, " let us drive ! " and 
her face was like a sunlit sea, from which the 
shadow of a summer cloud had floated. 

The carriage was ordered, and they drove 
off together, first for a short way skirting the 
borders of the lake, and then following the 
road into the heart of the shade and leafage. 
The wheels waded in cart-ruts, and delightful 

' O 

grasses. Active glancing lights were playing 
on all sides amongst the branches ; birds sang, 
squirrels whisked their tails, and the white 
throat of a stoat confronted them, who was 
tame with wonder. Mrs. Schilizzi seemed to 
Grenville, as she sat by him, to have the same 
relation to nature that an echo bears to a voice, 
and she filled his mental ear with a happy 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 109 

magical music. Every appreciation he shared 
with her, every passing laugh, was a new link 
uniting them, that was fashioned and fastened 

o 

noiselessly. 

Having driven for some way amongst pines, 
they at last reached a wood of beeches, where 
the undergrowth was cut into glades, evidently 
for the purposes of sport, and where the open 
ground was gleaming with moss and grasses. 
They left the pony in charge of a boy they 
had taken with them, and wandered away 
together through one of these inviting ways. 
By and by they seated themselves at the foot 
of a tree, she more flower-like than ever, in 
her red dress amongst the greenness. 

" Never," wrote Grenville afterwards, ad- 
dressing her in imagination, " never shall I 
forget that scene, and the strange manner in 
which our acquaintance ripened. After we 
had sat there for a minute or two, talking of I 
cannot remember what, you turned to me with 
a half-mischievous laugh playing in your eyes 
and mouth, and yet with something in your 
manner that was serious, and you said to me, 



110 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

' Bobby ' you said these two syllables linger- 
ingly and softly, as if you liked the sound, and 
as if uttering them helped you to think ' I 
should/ you said, ' think you were a brother, 
if it were not for one thing. Do you know 
what that thing is ? It is that I want to ask 
you one question such a vain one. Do you 
think I am pretty ? I don't believe you do.' 
Irma, when you asked me that, you were so 
simple in your very self-consciousness, your 
curiosity was awake so openly, that you made 
me absolutely simple in my answer. ' If you 
were anybody but yourself, I should think you 
very pretty, most likely. As it is, I see not 
your face, but the meaning of it.' And yet 
you were pretty, and I said you were. Eound 
your red skirts, through the mosses, blue 
flowers, whose name I do not know, were 
pushing themselves like tiny spires ; and 
above you ovals of green sunlight were swing- 
ing themselves on the diaphanous films of 
the beech-tree's young leaves ; and we had 
for companions the hush and whisper of the 
forest, and the profound embowered solitude. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. Ill 

" Irma, you turned over in your mind what 
I said to you, as if you were a girl a little 
bit of a girl sucking a sugar-plum, and won- 
dering how you liked it ; and at last I saw 
that you were pleased, and you said, ' I am 
glad of that. I hate people who like me 
merely because I'm pretty.' 

" We were both satisfied ; and for a time we 
did nothing but pick up grasses and flowers, 
and ask each other if we knew their names. 
We were neither of us very good at botany. 
Suddenly, with an inconsequence that delighted 
me, you began to tell me of a place in a 
wood near your old home, where you used to 
go and hide yourself, taking your books with 
you. There was a copy of Keats you were 
very fond of that ; and also an As You Like 
It ; and on one of them I forget which you 
had managed to spill some milk ; and your 
brothers and sisters used to say of you, ' Irma 
always is so messy.' And you laughed as you 
told me this, and said, 'I am very clean now/ 

"Ah, Irma, and then you began telling me 
one little anecdote after another about your 



112 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

early years. I should wrong them by writing 
them down ; they would die on paper. But 
the effect they produced on me still lives in 
my mind. They made all the atmosphere of 
your life's spring breathe about me. How 
you touched me, my little child, Irma ! You 
seemed to be bringing out all your toys and 
treasures, and showing them to me one by one, 
with a child's simplicity mixed with a woman's 
humour ; and with a something more than 
this with a knowledge that to me you would 
never have thought of showing them, if you 
had not been confident that whatever was 
yours would interest me. There lay the 
magic of the moment, and its subtle spiritual 
alchemy, transmuting so much within me. 

" What trifles such things are ! Anybody 
who is not a fool is able, in some moods, to 
laugh at them : a fool is able to laugh at them 
in all moods indiscriminately. But nobody 
except a fool will be frightened by his own 
laughter. Men who know life best and whose 
sense of humour is keenest, best know that 
we never should value anything, if we valued 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 113 

only what we could never despise or laugh at. 
In fact what are commonly called the serious 
interests of life are valuable solely for the sake 
of what are commonly called its trifles. Let me 
think of ourselves in the wood, and that idle 
childish talk of ours, and compare ourselves 
well, with me securing their money for the 
Egyptian bond-holders, or some man in the 
city who in a morning has made fifty thousand 
pounds. TJhere, in that last case at all events, 
we have sense, we have seriousness, with a 
vengeance. Well this city man what does 
he do with his money ? He buys this is 
no uncommon thing he buys for his wife, 
whom he probably calls his lady, a magnificent 
tiara of diamonds. But what are diamonds ? 
Nothing but bright pebbles. The final end, 
then, of this serious thing business is to 
look at or exhibit some little pebbles twinkling. 
What is that compared with my vision of you ? 
" We most of us know, or have imagined, 
what intimate conversations are conversations 
which open, and also bind, soul to soul. But 
few people could suspect that the most intimate 

VOL. II. I 



114 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

conversation of all, is conversation full of 
such infantine confidences as yours. Every 
word was a caress, the more tender and pathetic 
because unconscious. Well after you had 
talked to me about these enchanted trifles, you 
suddenly checked yourself, and you said to me, 
' Look here I am doing all the talking. It's 
your turn now ; you must tell things to me.' 
I asked you what sort of things ? You reflected 
a little ; and then, Irma, then looking at 
me with a persuasive gravity, you said, ' Tell 
me why Italy seemed a prosaic place to you.' 
I hesitated for reasons which by this time you 
entirely appreciate. They concerned another 
woman ; and the devotion and respect I felt 
for you, and my sense of how impossible it 
would be for me to discuss you with any one 
else, gave me the same reverential feeling with 
regard to the woman I speak of. There seemed 
to be something wanting to justify me in even 
naming her. And yet I spoke the truth when 
I answered you, ' I should like to tell you, but 
it would take a long time.' And here, having 
mentioned time, I found an escape out of my 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 115 

difficulty. I pulled out my watch, and showed 
you how late it was. You started and laughed. 
' Help me up,' you said ; and as quick as our 
feet could carry us, we went to the pony 
carriage, and returned. I lunched with you at 
the hotel. How well I remember the look of 
that meal the brown crumpled skin of the 
children's rice-pudding, and the clear blue 
shadows the dishes made on the table-cloth ! 
I remember, too, saying, as we entered the 
room together, ' So far as liking goes, I should 
like to tell you everything/ 

" That evening, Irma, that evening I did so 
that evening, full of fate for us. 

" In the afternoon you had letters to write ; 
so had I. You wrote yours in a summer- 
house by the lake, with your children playing 
round you. I went to write mine in my own 
rooms. But write I could not. I could not 
concentrate my thoughts on the people I 
wanted to address, or the subjects I wanted to 
deal with. Between me and the paper your 
image would come ; and five minutes after 
five minutes I found myself sitting motionless, 



116 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

occupied with it only. At last I gave the 
attempt up, and pushed my pen away from 
me. I longed to go back to you; but I 
thought it the kindest thing to give you one 
hour to yourself at all events ; so I kept away 
from you for all that weary time. I never 
knew before how long an hour could be, or 
how in an hour a sense of want could be 
developed in one, springing up like the tree 
that grows under the napkin of an Indian 
juggler. At the end of that hour I went to 
you, and found you still in the summer-house. 
' Have you written your letters ? ' I asked. 
You pointed to two sheets of note-paper, on 
each of which were scribbled a few lines, and 
which you began listlessly to put into their 
envelopes. ' I couldn't write/ you said. 'That 
is all I have done.' Irma, that pleased me. We 
had been going through the same experience. 

" But then suddenly, to my intense surprise, 
I was annoyed with you. You said you were 
tired, and wanted to lie down in your own 
room. What was more natural ? And yet 
how to explain it I don't know one of those 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 117 

wayward caprices of temper, which sometimes 
take the bit of reason in their mouths, and 
carry off the imagination on their backs, made 
me say to myself, you were tired because you 
were tired of me. ' Must you go ? ' I ex- 
claimed, as if this petty parting were a tragedy. 
I felt I would have done anything to keep you. 
I had brought those verses with me which I 
had written about your child. I pulled them 
out, and asked you to let me read them ; but 
instead of doing that, you made me give them 
up to you. ' How pretty they look ! ' you 
said ; ' I will take them and read them by 
myself That annoyed me still more. Per- 
haps my poet's vanity was wounded, though I 
don't think so. Well, you went ; and for an 
hour I was left alone. Fool that I was what 
folly could have possessed me ? I actually felt 
deserted, despised, miserable. Could you 
believe it ? I went roaming about, treading 
as if I could tread time under my feet, still 
half angry with you, and yet longing, longing, 
longing for you as if we had been separated 
for weeks. 



118 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" The hour went by, and still you did not 
come. You had told me that, when you were 
rested, you would come out on the balcony. 
' Come, come, come/ I said, ' and I will tell 
you everything. About Italy and what kept 
me there come, and I will tell you all. Every 
thought in my mind is longing to pour itself 
into yours.' 

" Suddenly it occurred to me that the old 
man at the lodge had shown me a boat-house 
with some boats belonging to the Count in it. 
An idea came to me. We would dine at the 
lodge at six, and I would row you on the lake 
afterwards. This gave me at once an excuse 
for sending up a note to you. I longed to be 
in communication with you, even through a 
sheet of note-paper. I turned towards the 
hotel, for at the time I was looking away from 
it, and there, Irma, I saw you sitting in the 
balcony. You waved your hand. I went ; I 
believe I ran towards you. I was up-stairs, I 
was by your side in a moment; and your 
smile showed me how foolish my bitter dreams 
had been, and that whatever had tired you, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 119 

you were not tired of me. I told you of my 
plan for our dinner, and our boating. You 
assented with pleasure ; and then you said, 
softly and musically, as if you hardly knew 
you were saying it, as if it were a thought 
that had become embodied accidentally, 'Do 
you care for me ? I thought just now that 
perhaps you were only amusing yourself.' 'I 
will tell you/ I said, ' on the lake what will 
make you think otherwise.' 

" And then, these little things happened. 
You said, 'I have not been sleeping, I have 
been reading your verses. After I had read 
them, I could not close my eyes.' Presently, 
too, you told me this that you had been 
writing your diary in a new way, as if you 
were talking to me. ' Of course,' you said, ' I 
shall not show it to you ; but it helps me to 
fancy you are listening.' I told you that for 
the future I would do the same. ' If you 
care for it,' I said, ' I will leave it you, and 
you shall read it when I die/ This accounts 
for the form in which I am writing my diary 
now. 



120 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" We dined at the lodge you and I and 
the children ; and afterwards you and I went 
floating out over the water. ' Well/ you said 
presently, c what are you going to tell me ? ' 
I said I was going to answer you the question 
you had asked me about Italy. I said, too, 
that you must be patient, and let me answer 
you in my own way. I began my story like 
this, as no doubt you remember. ' Since the 
days when you did your geography lessons 
out of a school-book, I dare say you have 
forgotten the very name of the city of 
Vicenza. It is little talked about ; few 
tourists visit it ; and yet, in all northern 
Italy, there are few places more interesting. 
Its narrow streets, blinded with Venetian 
shutters, are full of old palaces, having carved 
and pillared fronts, and great arches under 
whose shadow you enter, passing through 
them into stately courts. There are pale 
marble staircases, hushed and mysterious, 
leading to saloons and halls, whose ceilings 
are dim with paintings, whose great hearths 
are overhung with carvings and coats-of-arms, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 121 

and whose walls are darkened with old tortoise- 
shell cabinets. Down on the streets look 
rows of antique balconies, whose iron railings 
are twisted into leaves and lyres. There is a 
theatre built more than three hundred years 
ago, which still has on its stage some of its 
original scenery. Lamps at night twinkle 
before the images of saints. There are 
churches everywhere, full of twilight and 
gilding ; and stray scents of incense meet you 
as you come round corners. You would 
think it the very place to dream in. Well 
it was to Vicenza I went ; and shall I tell 
you why I went there ? It was to meet 

somebody to whom ' Irma, when I said 

this you started, and exclaimed in a breathless 
whisper, ' Somebody whom you are going to 
marry!' I said, 'If you had asked me 
that question three weeks ago, I should have 
answered Yes ! Wait a moment, and you 
will see how I answer it now/ Irma, what 
a true woman you are ! I can't help laughing 
as I think of what you did then. Do you 
remember how you leaned forward, and 



122 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

exclaimed, ' Tell me her name ! I'm sure 
she is beautiful and yet, no I'm quite sure 
she was horrid ! ' I smiled even then, at 
that. I told you who she was ; and you said 
that she was very grand, and that she was 
this, and that, and the other, and that I had 
better go and marry her ; and then you said, 
' Well go on. How did you fall in love 
with her ? ' I told you I described her 
her looks and character, even how she did 
her hair, and how she dressed ; and you were 
delighted Irma, you know you were when 
you found out that her boots were not very 
well made. I described the feeling which, 
when I first met you, I had for her, and the 
mood of mind in which I went to meet her 
at Vicenza. Then I described our meeting 
there. I described her pleasure at meeting 
me so placid and yet so frank, and the kind 
of pleasure I felt in response to it ; and then 
I went on in this way. ' All that was good 
and genuine and intelligent in her, I recog- 
nized as clearly as ever, and also the quiet 
high-breeding that betrayed itself or should 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 123 

I say hid itself? in every movement and 
gesture, and in every intonation of her voice. 
But, for some reason I could not divine 
what she seemed changed ; she seemed 
faded ; something seemed to have passed away 
from her ; and I began to wonder what had 
been my condition of mind, when a girl like 
this could have tinged all my dreams with 
rose-colour. In due time we began the 
whole party of us to explore the town. 
She and I were constantly apart from the 
others. It seemed tacitly arranged that this 
should be so ; and I tried to point out to her 
all the many things that touched my own 
imagination, and perfumed the very air with 
interest. One thing I soon found out. So 
far as mere facts went, she knew a great deal 
more about Vicenza than I did ; and small 
wonder indeed, for, as it appeared presently, 
she had just been learning by heart the 
contents of two guide-books. But as to the 
sentiment of the place, as to that strange, 
plaintive music that old things make in ears 
able to hear it of this she knew nothing. 



124 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

For instance, those old iron balconies I told 
you of I, each time I looked at them, 
thought of the women's forms that long ago 
had leaned on them palpitating, and of their 
expectant eyes. But my friend's mind was 
occupied with the fact that the two best 
specimens were to be found in a certain street, 
and that the date of them was 1500. I had 
been to Vicenza once before, alone. I had 
found it fascinating then ; but now, as I went 
through it with her, the town seemed changed, 
just as she seemed changed herself. Both 
somehow were disenchanted. Do you know 
how, after two days' sight-seeing, she summed 
up her impressions ? She said that Vicenza 
was very quaint and interesting, but it would 
be a dull little place to live in. The last 
statement was no doubt absolutely true ; but 
it affected me, when she made it, exactly as 
I should have been affected if, after having 
witnessed some wonderful religious ceremony, 
she had nothing to say about it except that 
the church was draughty. Well now let me 
tell you this : I am coming to the end of 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 125 

my story. All the time that I was there 
going about with her, memories kept, echoing 
in my mind of another relic of the past 
an old castle in a forest on the borders of 
Hungary, where iron balconies overhung a 
forest of beech-trees, and where I stood with 
some one who was looking for something that 
never came. That day I seemed to have 
lived to music ; and I felt that now by 
contrast I first knew its full charm. That 
day was summer; these were frost. That 
day I was at home. During these days I 
was an exile. I was home-sick, Irma, for our 
golden holiday. I didn't understand my 
feelings clearly then. I have learnt to do so 
since. I never said then to myself that the 
want in my life was you ; but I began to find 
out, and to feel a relief in finding, that 
cordial as my friend was, there was nothing 
whatever in her manner which need mean 
necessarily anything more than cordiality. 
She was often conscious of not quite under- 
standing me. I could see this ; and I could 
see something besides that she found in the 



126 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

fact very little to discompose her ; indeed, in 
a kindly and cheerful way she was amused 
by it. When I tell you that, how little I 
seem to be saying ! In reality, I am saying 
so much. The result was this I grew 
certain of two things : first, that although I 
might, if I made an effort, secure her affection 
easily, yet if I did not make that effort, she 
would not be much of a sufferer ; secondly, 
that the effort was one which I had no heart 
to make. Affairs being in this position, fate 
did me a kind turn. It visited an aunt of 
my friend's with a bad attack of bronchitis. 
This lady, who was passing the spring in 
Florence, was lonely and nervous, and tele- 
graphed to her relatives at Vicenza, the 
consequence being that they went to her, at 
a moment's notice. I went to the station 
with them 1 said good-bye to my friend. 
We were cordial nothing more. The train 
steamed off, and I was left alone on the 
platform, filled with a feeling of relief, and. 
yet of blankness also ; for it seemed that my 
future, which had lately showed a definite 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 127 

prospect, had all of a sudden melted into 
stormy clouds.' Just as I was saying this, 
Irma, you gave an exclamation. Some large 
rain-drops had fallen, and turning your face 
to the sky, you said, ' We are going, I think, 
to have stormy clouds now.' We looked 
about us. The sky had become purple ; the 
stars were steadfast above us, and were 
wavering below us in the faint depths of the 
lake ; but up from the west was floating a 
film of dusky vapour. Some more drops fell. 
We were not far from land, and we were both 
on shore before the real downpour had begun. 
We hastened into the lodge, where my room 
was already lamp-lit. We~ sat down. For a 
short time we were silent, and I was doubtful 
how to take up the broken thread of my 
history. By accident your eyes fell on a 
photograph lying upon my writing-table. It 
was a photograph of an old house. You took 
it up, and first because you felt it a relief to 
speak about an indifferent subject, and then 
because you saw how beautiful the house was, 
you broke out into expressions of admiration. 



128 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

You asked, ' Whose is it ? ' I said, ' It is mine 
at least at present. But soon I am going 
to sell it.' You asked why, and I told you 
to get money. 'What!' you exclaimed, 
' your old family home I If I had a place 
like that, I would sooner sell my life.' In 
your voice, when you said that, there was 
something like contempt. I had not intended 
to tell you what the next moment I did 
tell you. ' It is my life,' I said ; ' but I am 
going to sell it for the sake of another life.' 
Then I explained everything to you. I ex- 
plained how all my future, so far as my 
fortune went, depended on my projected 
marriage ; and how I found now this marriage 
to be impossible impossible for one reason, 
which was you. You looked at me as if 
you could hardly believe your ears, and you 
drew a long breath, the sound of which I can 
hear now. You were sitting on a sofa. 
' Bobby,' you said, and you could hardly 
speak for emotion, ' is this true ? Are you 
really not going to marry her ? And am I 
alone in the world no longer ? ' And then 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 129 

you said, ' And you have really not been 
playing with me ? Come to me here, and 
tell me so.' 

" Do you remember how on one occasion we 
talked about certain French novelists, and how 
we condemned parts of their writings ? If 
one of these writers had taken up the thread 
of our history, his pages would probably be 
open to every condemnation we could pass 
upon them. But I will tell you why. What 
he would remember would be what we forget. 
What we remember, he would neither under- 
stand nor dream of. 

"Irma, Irma, when two lives are united, it 
is a serious thing. Some changes in life are 
as unexpected as sudden death and as great. 
Irma, we know both these truths. I took 
you back to your hotel when the rain had 
ended, and I said to you do you remember 
what I said ? ' There may be sorrow between 
us, but now there is no division.' ' 



VOL. 11. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

IN the gray of the morning Grenville woke, 
with a dull sense weighing on him that a 
vague something had happened, which he 
shrank from looking at, and when looked at 
would change him in his own eyes. 

A man's life may be judged by two stand- 
ards some ideal standard of saintly or ascetic 
perfection, and the ordinary standard of the 
world. With regard to that class of conduct 
to which all men apply, and men who are mad 
confine, the term morality, he had not been 
immaculate if tried by the first standard ; but 
self-restrained, healthy, and honourable, if tried 
by the other. He had never so lived as to lose 
that mental quality which is in the inner world 
the equivalent of a clear atmosphere ; on which, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 131 

apart from any ideas of Puritanism, so much 
that is valuable in the human character de- 
pends ; and which every one of sound judgment 
praises under the name of purity. However he 
might have acted on this or that occasion, his 
acts had never committed him to any course of 
life which the timidest conscience, in its most 
conventional mood, would look on as inde- 
fensible, or even needing defence. He had 
never made love, in any serious way, to any 
woman who might not have become his wife ; 
and rarely without a thought that perhaps she 
would become so actually. 

His present position was therefore wholly 
new to him. As occupied by others it was of 
course familiar enough. It was the position 
of men and women he was intimate with in 
his daily life men and women of whom, 
whatever their fault in this respect many 
seemed otherwise better, not worse than their 
more regular neighbours. But as occupied by 
himself, it was strange, unknown, untried ; 
and he learnt, what surprises everybody who 
lives to learn it, that the constant sight of a 



132 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

burden borne by others, tells us little of what 
it will feel like when we come to bear it our- 
selves. Hitherto, as regarded the others, his 
mental attitude had been this. He had prided 
himself, not on condemning them, but on being 
different from them, and in this respect above 
them ; and frequently though almost uncon- 
sciously comparing his own character with 
theirs, the comparison always flattered him by 
showing his own to advantage. And now he 
felt that at last he had joined the band from 
which, with secret pride, he so long had held 
aloof; whilst voices, half mocking, seemed to 
whisper about his bed, " Welcome, welcome. 
Now you are one of us." Half awake as he 
was, he was at the mercy of all those spectres 
grotesque, obscure, monstrous which beset 
the ante-chamber of the conscience, begging 
to be employed by it, and pretending to be 
employed by it, eager to bring to the soul 
madness, not sane self -judgment, and with 
which a sane conscience will have nothing at 
all to do. This flock of grimacing presences, 
whilst he. lay drowsy, filled him with horror of 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 133 

himself; and then his thoughts in a moment 
turned to the situation of another, and he 
wondered whether she was overtaken by the 
same humiliation and torture. This poignant 
consideration stung him into complete wake- 
fulness. He roused himself ; he sat up ; he 
stared round him, with heavy -lidded eyes. 
He felt as if he had done her a wrong. He 
wondered if she were reproaching and scorning 
him. He wondered, with even more anxiety, 
how she would bear her own scorn of herself. 
The doors of his conscience opened, and her 
phantom came forth to meet him. 

He moved to get up, but felt like a man 
on a steamer, who is so sea-sick that he dares 
not quit his berth. To get up would be to 
face realities : he had not the heart to do so. 
He did so at last, however ; his will rallied 
its strength. He hastily put some clothes 
on, muffling himself in his great-coat. He 
softly unlocked the door, and he went out. 
The sky was a field of dim moving fleeces, 
damp as Gideon's, and so was the lake as 
well. All the ground was spongy and gray 



134 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

with dew. Nothing about him stirred but 
a slow and silent breeze, which just laid on 
his cheeks the touch of the weeping air. He 
looked blankly round him. In spite of its 
strange aspect everything spoke of her. He 
thought of their drive of yesterday, and the 
meeting of their sympathies in the sunshine ; 
and then he started as his eyes rested on the 
hotel. Had it not been for that, yesterday 
might have been years ago ; but that was a 
witness of her actual neighbourhood, as it 
slept with its closed white curtains, and its 
wet tiles glimmering. His eyelids were 
heavy still ; his head ached. How, he asked 
himself, would she meet him ? Or would 
she meet him at all ? Perhaps, he thought, 
she would merely send him a letter, telling 
him coldly never again to see her ; or per- 
haps, so some fancy whispered, she would be 
dead. He looked at his watch. It was only 
five o'clock. Hours must pass before he could 
have any news of her. He longed to throw 
himself at her feet, crying, " Forgive, forgive 
me ! " Then again another thought tormented 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 135 

him. " Perhaps she will be saying to herself 
that I despise her." 

Close to the lodge was a little patch of 
garden. There were some white roses in it, 
and some red tulips. He picked a bunch of 
these, and arranging them very carefully, went 
indoors, and put them in a tumbler of water. 
The cold air was now making him sleepy. 
He sought his bed again, and slept till Fritz 
awoke him. He made Fritz tie the flowers 
together, and told him to take them at once 
to Mrs. Schilizzi, and ask if she had caught 
cold owing to last night's rain. " If she 
wishes not to see me," he thought, " she will 
send back word to say so. I shall escape 
the humiliation of finding her door closed." 
He waited miserably impatient for the return 
of Fritz. He waited for half an hour. At 
last a message came to say that she was 
quite well, and would hope to see him soon 
after ten o'clock. Along with the message 
came a small scrap of paper, with this scrawled 
on it " Ho\v good of you ! what lovely 
flowers ! " 



136 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

The words operated like a charm on him. 
A load fell from his heart. He realized that 
his coffee was at his bedside. He drank it, 
and rose instantly. He dressed with a hur- 
ried eagerness, and turned his steps to the 
hotel. As he approached it, his heart again 
sank, and his hand trembled as he knocked 
at the door of her sitting-room. 

He entered. She was at breakfast with her 
children, and some of his flowers were in 
the breast of her red dress. She looked full 
at him. There was no anger in her face, 
there was no confusion, and her voice still 
had its laugh, like the ripple of a brook in 
spring-time. The only change in he*r and 
indeed there was a change was the growth 
in her eyes, and smile of an inquiring pathetic 
earnestness. 

" I see," he said, by way of saying something, 
" that Fritz has brought you my flowers." 

" Yes," she murmured, pointing him to a 
chair at the table. " I know, too, why you 
sent them. Sit down and have some coffee 
with us. Olga, get him a cup." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 137 

Grenville declined. 

"Won't you?" she said. "You look 
tired." 

" Do I? " he said ; " I've been thinking." 

" Yes," she replied ; " so have I thinking 
about many things. Come outside on the 
balcony. The children can finish by them- 
selves. Tell me," she said, in a whisper, as 
soon as they were alone together, " you don't 
hate me, do you ? Speak, Bobby, and tell 
me!" 

Grenville looked at her in silence, as if 
vainly seeking for words. At last he said 
slowly, " I don't want to use exaggerated 
language." 

She gave a gasp, as if a knife had wounded 
her. " What ! " she exclaimed. " Then you 
do hate me ? Tell me do you ? " 

" I don't want," he repeated, " to use ex- 
aggerated language ; but I believe I am not 
exaggerating if I tell you that I would 
willingly die for you." 

He was surprised himself at the almost 
bald intensity which he heard in his own 



138 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

voice as he quietly said this. The effect on 
her was like that of the sun reflecting itself 
in water. The returning smile on her lips, 
and the trusting affection in her eyes, which, 
deep as it was, seemed as if yet it were but 
half unfolded, filled him with something which 
would have been overwhelming happiness, if 
he had not, in consequence of his recent 
trouble and suffering, felt it as rather the 
blessing of overwhelming peace. 

And yet through all this, though he was 
scarcely conscious of the fact, there was some- 
thing in her which troubled and perplexed 
him, and was a riddle a riddle, however, 
which she could herself have answered, could 
she only have confessed herself to him, as 
she did a few hours later to her diary. For 
although she had calmed him, yet in a certain 
way she had shocked him. He feared she 
would have suffered too much : it seemed as 
if she had suffered nothing. But she too, 
like him, had been face to face with self ; 
and had confronted conscience with a braver 
face than he had, though naturally she had 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 139 

expected an even keener wound from it. 
Her husband's social connections had prin- 
cipally been amongst the severest middle- 
class, and she had thus seen how the just 
persons who need no repentance were accus- 
tomed to throw stones at women in her 
present position, as eagerly as little gamins 
in the street throw stones at a cat ; and she 
had feared that her own conscience might 
stone her in the same way. This treatment, 
however, she had not experienced. Her con- 
science had behaved very differently from 
his ; and the reason was, not indeed the 
greater intensity, but the greater simplicity 
of her own emotion, and a certain moral for- 
titude greater than his, which it had endowed 
her with. What she wrote in her diary was 
as follows 

" Considering what I have to write about, 
it seems odd that I can take up my pen -so 
calmly. But the oddness is not due to any- 
thing that I feel in myself, but to the dis- 
crepancy between that and what I ought to 
feel, according to conventional theory. In 



140 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

connection with the step I have taken, my 
own impression of myself is most vivid. One 
often reads stories of a soul's surprise after 
death at its own condition, so completely 
different from what was expected. I am 
like such a soul. Nothing has happened to 
me which conventional theory would demand. 
I have crossed a chasm into which I ought to 
have fallen, whose depths are said to be full 
of mire and rocks ; but something has borne 
me up has carried me through the air I 
am neither soiled nor injured. 

" If I were I would confess it. When I 

i 

awoke I thought I must be, and each moment 
I was afraid I should find myself a spiritual 
wreck. As a matter of fact, however, to my 
surprise I found myself sound and whole. 
Why should I pretend otherwise ? I should 
not mend matters by lying. I will be honest 
and pretend nothing. I ought to feel de- 
graded that may be but I don't. This 
is the plain truth I can't say more than 
that. 

"And yet I can I can say a great deal 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 141 

more. I have not said half yet. If I fail 
to feel what the occasion is supposed to de- 
mand, it is not from callousness. If I were 
really degraded, surely surely I should know 
the signs of it. I should feel unworthy of 
doing or thinking anything good ; my eyes 
would flinch from the thought of ideal good- 
ness ; and somehow and somewhere I should 
be hardened. But I am conscious of nothing 
of this kind. No no. On the contrary, 
never has affection, or the sense of goodness 
and beauty, filled my heart so full as they 
fill it now. My children to-day are more 
dear to me than ever. The desire for self- 
sacrifice, the desire for prayer, trouble me, 
and are ever in my heart. I am not de- 
ceiving myself. I can distinguish good from 
evil as well as most people ; and my good 
thoughts and my pure thoughts I know 
them as my guardian angels. After the 
step I had taken, I feared they would have 
deserted me ; but I look about me, and 
they keep me company still as near me 
as ever, as much mine as ever. And he is 



142 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

mine also, and keeps me company along with 
them." 

Such being her condition in her own eyes, 
what possessed her mind when she met him 
again that morning, was a sense not of abase- 
ment or trouble, but of exaltation a sense 
not of a lost but rather of a transfigured 
universe ; and gradually Grenville's spirit 
adjusted itself under the direction of hers, 
as though it were stronger than his own, and 
had mastered life more fully. 

" I want you," she said presently, "to be 
with me all to-day. The children have their 
lessons to do. Let them come with us into 
the summer-house, and whilst they work you 
shall read to me." 

He was himself not in a mood for reading ; 
but he felt, for a reason which by and by 
became more clear to him, that this did but 
make him happier and more zealous in obey- 
ing her. As they returned to the hotel for 
luncheon, he picked up a broken flint. " Do 
you think that pretty-?" he said. "Don't 
you ? I wish you did." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 143 

She asked why. 

" Because," he said, "if it would only give 
you pleasure, I would willingly sit all day 
long and break stones for you." 

Few things are so constantly misinterpreted 
as the changes of women's moods, by the per- 
verse faculties of men. After luncheon, con- 
trary to what she said in the morning, Mrs. 
Schilizzi surprised Grenville by begging him 
to leave her to herself for a little, explaining 
her words by adding, " till four o'clock." He 
felt that to do this was a tax on his self- 
denial not quite so agreeable as that she had 
lately made on it. But he hid his reluctance, 
and left her when she wished. Her first step 
was to write and she was some time in doing 
so the passage in her diary which was just 
now quoted ; and then, not being strong, she 
lay down to rest, repeating it with closed 
eyes, and reaffirming its meaning. 

He, meanwhile, was undergoing a very 
different experience. He walked restlessly 
along the borders of the lake, and, removed 
from her presence, the charm of which seemed 



144 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

to protect him, the first bitterness of his 
waking mood revived in him, and he now 
found it aggravated by the sense that she did 
not share it. He hardly dared to scrutinize 
what was going on within him ; he tried to 
believe it was mere impatience to be with 
her again. But when the time came to go 
back to her, something had begun to stir 
in him which, though he would not recognize 
it, was like anger against her ; and shrinking 
from this, and indignant at it, he told it to 
get behind him : but it did not vanish ; it 
dogged him like some cowled figure, and kept 
him a prey to self-reproach and dejection. 
He did his utmost to disguise from her the 
change that had overtaken him ; and his voice 
recovered its tenderness, but he could not 
recover his spirits. They had arranged to 
take the children for a walk amongst the 
shadows of the forest ; and he tried to hide 
his condition in his kindness and his attention 
to them. For a time this succeeded ; but at 
last the truth was felt by her, his replies 
when he spoke to her were so short, and his 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 145 

smiles were so slow in coming. At last she 
said to him with a certain constrained abrupt- 
ness 

" I know why you are so moody. You are 
afraid you have done me an injury, though 
you might perhaps have thought of it a trifle 
sooner. But leave that matter to me. We 
have quite enough each to do to bear our 
own responsibilities." 

To his morbidly sensitive ear her voice 
seemed hard and flippant. He hung his head, 
and walked on in silence. 

" Well," she said presently, " are you not 
going to speak to me ? " 

He looked at her, and was wounded afresh 
by a smile that seemed almost mocking. 

" Perhaps," he said, " if what you tell me 
is true, I had better go and bear my respon- 
sibility in solitude." 

" If you like to," she answered, " certainly." 
He stopped short in his walk, and fixed a long 
look on her. Then he held out his hand, and 
quietly said, " Good-bye." 

" Good-bye," she repeated, and turning 

VOL. II. L 



146 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

away moved on. He remained where he was, 
leaning listlessly against a tree. A swarm of 
torturing thoughts at once sprang at him out 
of their ambush, accusing with hateful voices 
the woman from whom he was parting himself. 

" You," they said to him, " are by no means 
her first lover. You are not the first in fact, 
and you have not even the first place in her 
fancy." 

That these suggestions came to his mind 
like truths it is too much to say ; but they 
irritated him like the stings of mosquitoes, 
with a pain which he despised whilst it mad- 
dened him. He looked after her to see if 
she were out of sight. She was not. She 
was at some distance, but just as his eyes 
turned to her, she too, stopping, had turned a 
glance towards him a glance which, though 
still resentful, seemed to be full of melancholy. 
He hurried towards her, as though she were 
his life escaping him, which he must return to, 
though the process were full of pain. 

" Irma," he said, " forgive me. My sou] 
will kill itself if I leave you." 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 147 

They walked on side by side, each of them 
still troubled. At last she spoke. 

" It seemed," she said coldly but yet gently, 
" that whatever your soul will do, you could 
leave me very easily. I never," she went on 
presently, and her voice was a little harder, 
" I never knew a man take offence so quickly." 

They had reached an open spot, where the 
children were picking blue-bells. 

" I am rather tired," she said. " I am 
going to sit down. May I ask you to 
be so kind as to spread my cloak on the 
ground ? " 

He did so, and sat down by her. Her tone 
had filled him with fresh bitterness, and in- 
flamed anew the stings of all his recent 
suspicions. He was afraid to speak for fear 
of what he should hear himself saying ; but 
at last, slowly and firmly, as if he were 
addressing a stranger 

"I am sorry," he said, " that my temper 
is so very unreasonable, and that I show to 
so little advantage by the side of your former 
lovers." 



148 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

She started in horror, and looked at him, 
as if she could hardly believe her ears. 

" How can you/' she gasped, " say a thing 
like that to me ! " Her eyes held him motion- 
less. They at once petitioned and judged 
him. They slowly filled with tears, and he 
saw that her lips trembled. Instead of re- 
proaching him she helplessly leaned towards 
him, and resting her arm on his knee, ex- 
plored his face wistfully. " Bobby," she said, 
" you shouldn't treat me like that. For your 
sake I have taken off my armour, and now 
you are stabbing me, after you have made 
me defenceless. Tell me what is it ? Why 
do you think bad things of me ? " 

He tried to explain. He did so very 
lamely ; but she realized that he was remind- 
ing her of something she had said about 
" other men." 

" I'm not perfect," she said, " I know that. 
I would willingly tell you all there is to tell ; 
but it's not much. I've been interested in 
other men yes, I have been interested ; but 
that's all. Do you believe me ? You must. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 149 

It is the entire truth. I don't quite know," 
she continued, " what you are thinking about 
me. I have seen so much less of the world 
than you. I believe I'm so much simpler." 

" Irma," he said, " Irma, are you ? " 

" I think so. From you, at least, I have 

nothing I wish to hide ; and you are the only 

person to whom I can say that, or ever could 

have said it. Once yes, I must confess this 

I thought I could have loved one man ; 

but I didn't ; and no man, not even that one, 

has ever so much as held my hand. Bobby 

you must believe me." 

Disbelief was impossible. He was con- 
quered : he showed her that he was so. Her 
voice slowly changed to a happy murmur, 
which still suggested tears, but tears with a 
rainbow spanning them. 

" I was like a dog," she said, " that had 
been beaten all its life. I trusted in you ; 
and you you were more cruel than any one." 

The words sounded like a reproach, but 
really they were the seal of a reconciliation. 
She seemed to be giving the keys of her heart 



150 A HUMA.N DOCUMENT. 

into his hands to be placing herself wholly 
at his mercy. Her soul lay before him as if 
it were clear water ; he was filled by the sense 
of how wholly her entire being was his ; and 
he felt that their union had been but half 
complete till now. The wood, which a moment 
ago had been chilled with gloom and bitterness, 
was once more full of sunshine and moss- 
scented air and flowers. This pair, lately so 
taciturn, sent out their voices to the children ; 
and the laughter of the children, which 
answered them, was hardly more gay than 
theirs. 

Grenville noticed, as an experience alto- 
gether new to him, these sharp and rapid 
changes from happiness to aggravated misery, 
and from misery again to happiness. His 
nature had hitherto been equable under all 
vicissitudes. He had never suspected it to 
be capable of being shaken and moved so 
violently. But happiness, at all events, was 
what possessed him now ; and when it ceased 
at intervals to sparkle, it did but become 
peace. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 151 

All through dinner that evening enchant- 
ment hung in the air. In the warm dusk 
afterwards the children played amongst the 
glow-worms ; and then, when the nurse came 
out, calling them and telling them it was 
bed-time, Grenville and his companion again 
committed themselves to the boat, and glided 
off together into the stillness between the sky 
and water. 

The boat was commodious ; and when he 
had rowed some way, he shipped his oars, 
and silently seated himself beside her. They 
hardly, for the time, felt any need for talking. 
Each trusted the other to think and to brood 
in silence, each knowing that each was being 
taken into the other's life. All nature con- 
spired to assist the process, isolating them as 
if they two were the only human beings in 
the world, and making all ties unimaginable 
except that which bound them to one another. 
Over their heads was the veil of the im- 
measurable twilight. Stars the immemorial 
friends of lovers were showing themselves ; 
a young moon glittered like liquid silver. 



152 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

All around, the forests, softly dim and mys- 
terious, guarded the lake, as they stood above 
their own reflections ; and down in the depths 
below were the horns of the floating crescent. 

Every trace of bitterness was gone from his 
heart ; every wound was healed in hers. 
" But peace," as he wrote subsequently, " need 
not mean, and did not mean then, quiescence. 
An element in my passion," he went on, 
" which had already made itself felt, but 
which I had not understood clearly, was now 
coming to the surface, and growing in power 
as it did so. This, Irma, was a longing not 
only to enjoy your society, but to suffer for 
the sake of enjoying it. I wished to prove 
in this way, not only to you, but to myself, 
the truth of my devotion to you. I wished 
to bear witness to it by some species of 
martyrdom. I am like David, I would not 
offer you that which costs me nothing." Of 
what this feeling meant, and cf what it would 
one day lead to, even yet he was not fully 
aware ; but the consciousness of it even then 
gave wings to his passion, and enabled him 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 153 

to conclude his diary for the day thus " For 
the first time in' my life I have realized, from 
my own experience, how matter and spirit 
are capable of being fused together, how the 
body can rise with the soul instead of weighing 
it down, and how instead of dying it can be 
changed." 

Before they returned, he said to her hesi- 
tatingly, almost shyly, " There is something 
I want to tell you. If every husband loved 
his wife as well as I love you, marriage would 
indeed be a sacrament, and earth long ago 
would have been heaven. If love like this 
is degradation, there is no elevation possible." 

" Bobby," she said, " why do you fret 
yourself 1 ? I know that my soul is living 
now for the first time. You said you would 
die for me. My wish is to live for you." 

She had arrived at the same self-knowledge 
as he had ; only he had reached it gradually, 
by a conscious and painful progress, in the 
teeth of adverse prepossessions, which had to 
be met and reasoned with. To her, every- 
thing, though strange, had been entirely 



154 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

simple. Thus far she had not reasoned about 
anything about sacrifice, or flesh, or spirit. 
Her thoughts were lost in him ; she had ceased 

o 

to busy them with herself. She only remem- 
bered herself when his words had reminded 
her of it ; and later on, when again they had 
found themselves on shore, and when by and 
by the doors of the hotel received her, she 
hardly knew that her feet had touched the 
earth, or that her cheeks were like fluttered 
rose-petals. 



CHAPTER XVIH. 

SOME women perhaps may not be pleased 
to hear it, but women influence men not by 
how they argue, but by what they are by 
the effect which their arguing has, not on 
others, but on themselves. And Mrs. Schilizzi 
in this way affected Grenville more than 
volumes of philosophy could have done, 
written in defence of his position. The 
serenity of her self-confidence communicated 
itself to him, and became for the time being 
the moral foundation of his life. She was 
his support, and he rested on her. 

Days and evenings now passed on without 
their counting them, varying little in respect of 
outer incidents, but witnessing, so far as their 
own consciousness was concerned, the formation 



156 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

of a new world either of reality or illusion. 
What it was, they had to learn by experience. 
Its formation was an experience by itself. 

From the first moment of his regarding her 
with any attention, he had not only felt her 
temperament to be attractive to his own, but 
he had discovered, under a misleading manner, 
that her intellect was active, and that her 
knowledge, though it was scattered, was 
curiously extensive. He now learnt how her 
education had been the work solely of herself. 
No guiding hand had been ever held out to 
help her. She had been the lonely sower of 
seed in her own soul ; and some of the seeds 
had sprung up like wild-flowers ; others had 
hardly sprouted ; and others, perhaps most, 
were sleeping. On these his thoughts seemed 
to descend like rain ; and ground that before 
looked barren, began to grow green with life. 

Apart from his personal attachment to her, 
she was in this way singularly interesting. 
She had found herself solitary in the wilder- 
ness of possible knowledge, with nothing to 
guide her choice of what she would try to 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 157 

know, except the needs of her own nature, so 
far as she was able to understand it. What- 
ever, therefore, she had tried to learn, she had 
tried to learn not because it was considered 
by others as an article essential to a decorously 
upholstered mind, but solely because a con- 
scious want told her it would be of interest to 
herself. Tims, whether it bore immediate fruits 
or riot, what she learnt passed at Once into her 
life, and became part of her being. 

Her knowledge in consequence was certainly 
the strangest medley ; and the books she had 
attacked, not only modern but ancient, at first 
made Grenville smile at her naive temerity. 
But presently he admired her for the un- 
expected degree to which she had mastered 
them. In many cases, without any philo- 
sophical training,. she had gone straight to a 
point which students seized only after painful 
labour; and although, as to much her judg- 
ments and her knowledge were childish, she 
had one gift at all events which philosophers 
may envy children. She had the vividness, 
the early freshness of vision, which belongs to 



158 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

those who make their own discoveries, and see 
things for the first time. She viewed the 
knowledge as Columbus viewed America. 

Grenville in talking to her felt as if he were 
being born again, and were half recovering 
through her this^long-lost, irrecoverable faculty. 
But for what he received he gave her a full 
equivalent. Of the services he rendered her, 
one of the chief was this. She had been shy 
of accepting and using her own conclusions ; 
he showed her their value ; and partly owing 
to his assistance, partly owing to a develop- 
ment of her own self-confidence, her ideas 
began to marshal themselves into new order. 

She had read, for instance, a good deal of 



German criticisms on the text and history 
of the Bible, and the origin of Christian 
doctrines ; but she had been totally unaware 
of the degree of reputation or influence en- 
joyed by the critics, or how thought in general 
had been affected by them. All sorts of books 
on morals she had studied in the same way, 
assenting or not assenting to the views ex- 
pressed in them ; but whilst clinging to her 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 159 

own opinion, doubtful of what value to attach 
to it. Grenville was the first person she had 
ever met to whom such thoughts and subjects 
were familiar, or at any rate the first to whom 
she had ever been able to speak about them ; 
and gradually through his conversation she 
realized her intellectual bearings. 

This process of education was embroidered 
on hours that seemed idle. They read their 
books to the music of the lake or forest ; 
when they closed the pages, some wild wood- 
flower would be their marker ; when their 
attention was tired, the laughter of the 
children would refresh them. All their specu- 
lations about life were but parts of intense 
living, tinged and vivified by the blood of 
the coloured moments. Sometimes they would 
spend an entire morning in fishing, and un- 
tangle their views and the children's lines 
alternately. She would pause in the middle of 
her philosophy to ask him how he liked her 
dress; and she often relieved some mood of pro- 
longed seriousness by surprising him at dinner 
or luncheon with one he had not seen before. 



160 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" I felt," she would say laughing, " that 
it was quite necessary for me to show it to 
you ; and if it is too smart for a forest, why 
there's no one but you to see it." 

Such little exhibitions of true feminine 
vanity gave an added charm to her deeper 
and more spiritual qualities ; and her philo- 
sophy itself would constantly show its woman- 
hood, when, under the influence of some 
inward emotion, or some aspect of nature, it 
would suddenly become silent, and then re- 
appear as poetry. But all their conversation, 
indeed, even when it seemed to be driest, was 
permeated by the poetry of life in its subtlest 
form. Even a discussion of a book such as 
Mill's Logic, about which one day she ques- 
tioned him with great shrewdness, had the 
same charm in it by which all their discus- 
sions were transfigured. It was a living act of 
relationship between him and her ; a conscious 
interchange of embracing and interlacing 
thoughts. And the forests, and the wood- 
flowers, with the sunlight laughing amongst 
the leaves, and the smell of the bog-myrtle, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 161 

and the colours of the silent sunsets, mixed 
themselves with all these incidents of her 
intellectual growth, or surrounded them with 
a garland, until, as she said in her diary with 
regard to this period, " Every day of my life 
is like a page out of an illuminated missal." 

Such being the character of the lovers, and 
of the subjects which occupied their attention, 
it is not to be supposed that, in spite of their 
happiness, the peculiarity of their situation, 
with the question of how far it was defensible, 
did not force itself on their thoughts. It did ; 
but owing to a variety of reasons, their doubts 
showed themselves only to be set at rest. In 
the first place, they knew that their mutual 
attachment in itself deserved none of the 
opprobrious epithets which conventional re- 
spectability would apply to it. To call it 
shameful, or impure, or degraded, would, they 
felt, be utterly inappropriate. But however 
elevated it might be in itself, what was to be 
said for it if taken in connection with its 
circumstances ? So far as Grenville was con- 
cerned, Mrs. Schilizzi, without meaning it, 

VOL. II. M 



162 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

was constantly answering this question afresh. 
She often mentioned her husband, showing no 
shrinking in doing so ; and her tone, not 
resentful, merely apathetic, together with 
many details which she let fall as to his 
treatment of her, showed how completely she 
knew herself to be nothing to him how little 
interest in her he had, or even pretended to 
have. . And whatever effect this fact had 
upon Grenville, its effect upon her was 
naturally yet more direct. At the same 
time their singular isolation from the world 
made many other considerations so dim as 
to be hardly imaginable ; and of the con- 
ventional judgments which that remote world 
might pass upon them, some seemed based 
on beliefs no longer tenable, and others on 
a necessary ignorance of their own characters 
and circumstances. They read their situ- 
ation only by its own internal light ; and the 
only transgression they could see in it, was 
one not of depravity, but of daring. They 
felt like two lonely voyagers striking out a 
course for themselves, who indeed had lost 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 163 

their landmarks, but had for their guide a 
star. 

They had no shyness in discussing this 
conclusion, whenever they were visited at 
intervals by any misgivings as to its sound- 
ness ; because their passion, justifying itself by 
its own intensity, made them feel that such 
misgivings must be in themselves unsound. 
But they never neglected them, or pushed 
them aside contemptuously. As each sug- 
gested itself, they examined it and treated 
it tenderly, like a child who cried in the 
dark, and had to be soothed to sleep. 

On one occasion, for instance, as if trying to 
alarm her conscience, she had urged that no 
one could have a right to make a law for 
himself, or to do what would injure society if 
everybody followed his example ; and he had 
answered her 

" You forget the most important part of the 
matter. You forget that what a man does, on 
any given occasion, is not only that part 
that small part of his act which can be 
named in a short commandment. His act 



164 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

includes his entire inward disposition, his 
circumstances, and those of others connected 
with him ; and the quality of his act depends 
principally on these. Amplify your supposi- 
tion thus, and see what then comes of it. 
If all the unhappy couples in the world were 
to re-sort themselves to-morrow, and were to 
follow our example in this fuller and truer 
sense, by doing as we do, and by being as 
we are, would the world be happier or un- 
happier, purer or more impure?" 

As for him, his doubts and answers to 
them were comparatively simple and obvious ; 
and after everything else had been said, the 
thought that chiefly supported him as was 
but natural in the case of a man was this 

"If I am not injuring her, I am injuring 
no one. If I am not ruining her life, I am 
redeeming it." 

But on her mind her position had an effect 
far wider. As she examined herself, she 
seemed to be examining not her own fate 
only, but the possible fate of any woman ; 
not herself only, but womanhood ; and she 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 165 

felt herself possessed of a sudden clairvoyance 
into its claims. About this general aspect 
of the matter, indeed, she was diffident of 
speaking to Grenville. She was anxious to 
show him how honestly she could defend 
herself; she was too timid to appear as a 
philosopher on behalf of her sex generally. 
But she expressed in her diary what she could 
not confide even to her friend, and often 
forgot her own case in contemplating that 
of others. 

One evening, for instance, she wrote as 
follows ; and it will serve to show what was 
taking place in her mind 

" If marriage is a sacrament, as the Roman 
Church says it is, it is a sacrament I have 
violated. I have committed a sin : there is 
no getting over that. But if this view be 
true, I have lived in sin always, ever since 
I was a child, for I have neglected sacraments 
which are even more important. I have never 
been to confession ; I have never been to 
mass. But if I am justified in declining to 
regard myself as a life-long sinner in other 



166 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

words, if I am justified in not being a Roman 
Catholic, but in working things out as best I 
may for myself, which indeed I have been 
always left to do then I can speak to myself, 
and to others about myself, in a very different 
way. I can say that it is not I who in this 
case am wrong, but the conception of marriage 
and of woman's nature, tested by which I 
seem so. 

" For who shall tell me that this is not 
true ? Different women have different needs ; 
and the conditions under which many will 
thrive will kill others. Of course it may be 
said that life's chief solace is duty, and that it 
is open to all of us to do that. But even 
supposing that we all of us acted on this 
theory, no one could be inhuman enough to 
deny that some personal happiness is craved 
for by our nature, to support us in our painful 
efforts. Well some women can be made 
happy by circumstances that are generally 
pleasing by a wide circle of friends, and 
social activities and successes. But with 
others, the first need of their lives is some 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 167 

close sympathy and companionship ; without 
this they can enjoy, or indeed be fit for, 
nothing else ; and I don't think that these 
are the worst women. 

" Now if a woman of this kind, young and 
inexperienced, is married to a man who can 
never be her companion married to him, as 
often happens, before she really knows what 
she is doing to what is she condemned by 
that which conventionally is called morality ? 
I don't want to speak too generally ; but 
indeed I may say this much. Sometimes 
such a woman is condemned to absolute 
solitude. When she walks up to the altar she 
is literally taking the veil, not as a willing 
bride, but as a nun with no vocation. From 
that moment the highest faculties of her soul 
are condemned to be never exercised, its 
deepest needs never to be satisfied. A 
husband, by a marriage of this kind, becomes 
his wife's murderer. He kills her by starva- 
tion. He can give her no food himself; and 
his one active function is to prevent any one 
else from giving her any. Is a marriage of 



168 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

this sort a true marriage at all, which shuts a 
woman out from everything it was meant to 
open to her ? How many women could write 
that question in tears and blood ! 

" Of all the great errors of life, an unhappy 
marriage is for a young wife the greatest. It 
stands alone in being the most innocent, and 
also the most remediable. Why must it be 
the only one for which no remedy is allowed ? 

" I am not unreasonable no. We must 
all of us suffer much ; but surely there is 
a point when unnecessary suffering becomes 
superfluous suffering. I think that's true. I 
would lay down the following rule a rule 
indeed which I did my best to follow. Let 
a wife try I do not say till seven times, but 
even to seventy times seven. to give her 
best to her husband, and get from him some- 
thing that corresponds to it. Let her do that : 
but if, after all her endeavours, he not only 
refuses to give what her spirit asks of him, but 
to receive and acknowledge what it offers him, 
then is it not a mere senseless tyranny to ordain 
that things which one man has rejected as 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 169 

worth nothing she may not offer to another, 
to whom they would perhaps be everything ? 
" The more I think of it, the more terrible 
does marriage, as conventionally regarded, 
seem to me for some women. I see this at 
times with such a ghastly clearness that I 
wonder at its escaping any one. For the women 
I am thinking of, there ought to be a new 
marriage service written ; and the words of it, 
which need be very few, should say what it 
really means for them. So far as all their 
highest sympathies are concerned, and all their 
capacities for affection other than those which' 
are maternal, such a marriage service might be 
comprised in Christ's curse on the fig-tree 
' Let no fruit henceforward grow on thee for 
ever ! ' And of many such women it indeed 
might be truly said, ' How soon is the fig-tree 
which was cursed withered away ! ' 

A day or two later she went on thus 

" I have been looking back at what I have 

written. I am anxious to be fair ; and I see 

an important objection to it ; but I see also an 

equally important answer. It may, no doubt, 



170 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

be urged that if the principle I have hinted 
at were once admitted and embodied in 
laws, a woman would be formally justified in 
yielding herself to any wanton caprice ; and 
family life would have no stability whatever. 
Yes but this is only so, not because the 
principle is bad, but because it is one which 
laws never can embody fully ; because whilst 
it applies to some cases, it does not apply to 
others, which, though inwardly different, out- 
wardly seem identical ; and because none but 
those who are themselves concerned can know 
if it applies to their own. 

" What then ? Does it come to this that 
conduct is right or wrong not in proportion to 
the extent to which facts justify it, but in 
proportion to the amount of evidence that 
could be adduced for such facts in a law-court ? 
No, no, I will never admit that. If the 
laws cannot always be fair to us, it is our 
misfortune ; but we shall not mend matters 
by being unfair to ourselves. 

" Here, however, comes another question. I 
say the law cannot always distinguish one 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 171 

case from another ; but I have been trying to 
think out also how we ourselves are to do 
so. How, of the women whose conduct needs 
defence, are we to distinguish the good woman 
from the bad one ? I am not a logician I 
can't put things properly ; but I can answer 
the question to my own satisfaction by merely 
saying one thing, which I know to be true. 
Some of the women who, finding no love in 
marriage, have by the need of their nature 
been driven to seek it somewhere, are the 
women who, if married happily, would have 
been most passionately faithful to their hus- 
bands. As for myself, I can indeed speak 
with confidence. I have never wished to 
wander ; I have only wished for this to find 
some one to whom all my nature may be true. 
And I have found him ! I have found him ! " 

When, instead of writing about such matters, 
she spoke about them to Grenville, there was 
often something pathetic in her perfect open- 
ness and simplicity. 

Once she said to him, "Last night I was 
thinking this that I should never again be 



172 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

able to despise any one. But why should I ? 
Is that the test of virtue ? You don't think 
do you, Bobby that virtue is the position 
which enables us to despise others ? " 

But her questionings of her position, whether 
expressed dispassionately in writing, or more 
timidly and more appealingly in speech, had 
always the same ending. Each new doubt 
gave way to a new impulse of certainty ; and 
love, for a time kept aloof by argument, 
returned to enjoy the triumph which argu- 
ment had again won for it, at once supporting 
and overwhelming her more completely. He 
too shared in the result. He followed her 
even when he seemed to be her guide. 

At last came a night, when for the last 
time in their solitude she felt or gave expres- 
sion to any of these misgivings. They were 
together in the boat, which was motionless 
far out on the lake. The surface of the water 
was so still as to be invisible. It showed not 
itself, but only an inverted heaven. Suddenly 
she said to him after a long silence, during 
which her eyes had been fixed on the clouds 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 173 

and stars, " I wonder" and her eyes now 
fixed themselves upon his " I wonder, if some 
day I were to become very good, whether you 
would still go on caring for me. Tell me, 
dear tell me would you ? You see I often 
think how I should condemn us, supposing we 
were two other people." 

" If we were not ourselves," he said, answer- 
ing her in her own words almost, " we should 
not know the things that are really the most 
essential facts of our case. Irma," he went 
on, " listen to me a little. You talk of 
becoming 'good.' Of course I understand 
your meaning. Good and bad, pure and im- 
pure no two people could better understand 
the difference ; but our union, whether we 
condemn or justify it, is not in itself degraded 
by that which you now are thinking of; rather 
it is completed and sealed by it. What we 
call passion is an impulse which can raise 
men or unutterably degrade them. How shall 
we each tell ourselves which, in our own case, 
is its tendency ? Not by interrogating the 
passionate impulse itself, but by asking our- 



174 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

selves what other impulse it awakens in us 
what layer of thoughts it touches and sets 
free. What are the thoughts that I, Irma, 
have offered you ? Have I ever breathed to 
you one that was impure or shameful ? Have 
I ever breathed to you one that was not half- 
brother to a prayer? My passion for you is 
worship, and my whole being is cleansed by it." 

" Stop, stop," she said. " No, go on ; go 
on. Do you remember what you told me 
once, that for people who loved truly you 
believed the heavens were opened as truly 
as they were for Stephen ? Look up ; look 
up. It seems as if they were opened now. 
Come, be near me. You never must go away." 

" Irma, Irma, can this indeed be living ? 
It seems to me to be so much more than life. 
See the depth above us, and the depth re- 
flected under us, holding endless space, and 
all the endless ages, and ourselves like a ball 
of thistle-down floating between two eternities. 
Where that milky light is are new universes 
forming themselves the book of their genesis 
yet remains to be written. From some of 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 175 

these stars the arrows that to-night reach us 
started on their vibrating way before Eve's 
foot was in Eden. Think of the worlds form- 
ing, think of the worlds shining, and the 
darkened suns and systems mute in the night 
of time. To us, to us, what can it all say, 

! 

more than the sea says to a rainbow in one 
tossed bubble of foam \ And yet, Irma, to 
me it seems that it says something." 

" What does it say ? " she murmured, almost 
inaudibly. 

" It asks, can it have no meaning for us, 
seeing that we are born of it ? And can we 
be out of harmony with it, seeing that it 
speaks to us now ? " 

By and by that night, when he entered the 
lodge solitary, he heard himself utter aloud 
this passionate exclamation " Can it be true ? 
Can it be I am not dreaming 1 Is the rose 
indeed in my hands that I always had thought 
fabulous ? Barren garden of life, bitter frost- 
bitten furrows, can it be that you have 
blossomed for me into this one wonderful 
flower ? " 



CHAPTER XIX. 

MOST people who have ever amused their 
idleness by watching the reflections of objects 
in clear water, are familiar with the experience 
of seeing real rocks or pebbles force them- 
selves into view through the visionary clouds 
or foliage. Grenville and Mrs. Schilizzi had 
soon an experience that was similar, when a 
packet of forwarded letters arrived one morning 
from Lichtenbourg. 

They were at breakfast at the time, in her 
sitting-room, the children with them ; and 
Fritz, who brought in a small packet for her, 
informed his master that for him there was 
another which had been taken to the lodge. 
Mrs. Schilizzi glanced hastily at the enve- 
lopes. She tore open two or three, and read 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 177 

the contents indifferently ; but finally she 
came to one at which her expression changed. 
Grenville looked at her with a va^ue mis- 

O 

giving, silently asking her for an explanation. 

" It is from my mother-in-law," she said. 
" I don't know what to do. I really can 
hardly understand her. It seems that she 
wants me to go back at once to London." 

" What has happened ? " he asked. "Is it 
illness ? Is it anything serious ? " 

" No," she said ; " only business. I re- 
member something about it ; and something 
has to be done, about which I have to be con- 
sulted, and more important still for which 
they require my signature." 

She showed Grenville the letter, and ex- 
plained what she understood of the case to 
him. In spite of the rude break which it 
would make in their present existence, he saw 
that for her own sake it was really well 
that she should go ; and he pointed out to 
her what she had not at first realized that 
the whole business could be settled within a 
week. 

VOL. II. N 



178 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" Leave the children here," he said, " and 
ask the Princess to come to them ; and before 
ten days are over you can easily be back 
again." 

" And you," she said, " what will you do ? " 

" 1 will come to England also. Who knows 
but that my letters may also contain a sum- 
mons ? I had but six weeks of freedom, and 
four have already gone." 

She started at these last words, and sud- 
denly seemed scared. " Yes," she faltered, 
"yes; and what will you do then?" 

His eyes dropped. He was silent, lost in 
perplexed thought. She let the letter fall 
from her hands, helplessly. 

" I feel," she said at last, " as if we had 
been sailing in a beat of dreams, and were 
now, with all that belongs to us, being lost 
upon the rocks of reality." 

Her speech roused Grenville. " Nonsense," 
he exclaimed with a vigour which approached 
roughness, but which brought her, for this 
very reason, a certain sense of comfort. " If 
you and I are only realities to one another, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 179 

we shall find that it is not our boat which 
is the dream, but the rocks, which you fear 
will wreck it. Come, you mustn't be down- 
cast. Let me go to the lodge, and look at 

my own letters ; and when I come back you 

i 

shall see me in the character of a practical man." 
There was every need, he found, for at once 
redeeming this promise. It is true that none 
of his letters was an absolute summons to 
return ; but there were amongst them two 
important communications which made him 
see that his instant return would be desirable. 
One was from his man of business, the other 
from the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Both 
of them were serious enough in themselves ; 
but quite apart from the actual news con- 
tained in them, they brought him face to face 
with a number of practical problems which 
he had known would one day ask for a new 
solution, but which had till this moment 
seemed more or less vague and distant. All 
of a sudden they became close and tangible, 
and pressed on him as they did so their 
importunate and painful details. 



180 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

Returning to Mrs. Schilizzi he discussed 
their immediate movements. A messenger 
was despatched to Lichtenbourg, who would 
go from thence to the Princess, taking a letter 
to her, and returning that night with an 
answer : and so soon as arrangements could 
be made for the proper care of the children, 
Mrs. Schilizzi would start, by way of Vienna, 
for England. At first it was assumed that 
Grenville would travel with her ; but sud- 
denly, with a doubtful smile, she said to 
him 

" Do you think you ought to ? Perhaps 
I am foolishly nervous. I know the world 
so little, and I never before had occasion to 
be nervous at all. You must say what is best 
for me. I trust everything to you." 

" Irma," he answered earnestly, " I need 
hardly tell you, for you already are sure 
enough of it, that except for external circum- 
stances, I would never quit your side. But 
in this case perhaps it may be best that we 
go separately for part of the way at least. 
Let me think it over- by myself, as I put my 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 181 

own things in order. My own things ! " he 
repeated as he prepared to go back to the 
lodge. " How wretched to think that my 
things are for a moment separable from 
yours ! " 

As soon as he was alone he set himself to 
consider the situation. With regard to the. 
journey, he judged it best on the whole that 
he should precede her to Vienna, where he 
would meet her and her maid, and go from 
there in the Orient Express to Paris with 
them. In this way he would avoid meeting 
the Princess, who, since he had reached 
Vicenza, had heard nothing of his movements, 
and who, if she arrived promptly, as she 
might very possibly do, would be startled at 
finding him where he was, in close attendance 
on her niece. 

" How much happier " the thought came 
like a cloud " how much happier life would 
be, were there nothing in it that required 
concealing ! Any one, up till now, would 
have been welcome to find me anywhere. 
And yet," he continued, " we all of us have 



182 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

our burdens. Let me make the best of this 
one by the way in which I accept its pain." 

Then with a sigh he let these reflections 
pass, not to leave him he knew that well- 
but to take up their lodgings as guests in 
some dim chamber of his mind ; and others 
succeeded them, in certain respects more for- 
midable, but yet of a kind which he faced 
with a better heart. The latter, but not the 
former, he recorded carefully in his diary. 

" At last," he wrote, " the test, which I have 
so often invoked, is going to be applied to 
me ; and I shall be taught by experience 
whether all this is inspiration or madness, and 
what sort of stuff I myself am made of. I 
have often reflected not with reference to 
myself, but merely as a general truth that 
a man of imaginative temperament buys his 
moral furniture cheap. He may decorate his 
mind, as if it were a spiritual palace, with 
visions of the loftiest feelings, the tenderest 
sympathies, the purest principles and acts of 
complete self-sacrifice ; and connecting himself 
with these by a certain imaginative process, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 183 

just as he might connect himself with a 
character in a poem or novel, he may seem 
to himself to be a fine and sublime person, 
when he is in reality selfish, and mean, and 

heartless. 

> 
" And now this comes as a question which 

I I, Robert Grenville must answer. Am 
I myself a person of this kind ? Most worthy 
Judge Eternal I cannot think except by 
supposing myself before some such judge if 
this be so, to what a depth I must have sunk ! 
For nothing can justify me in my present 
condition and situation but the fact that I 
am what I think I am that I mean my 
feelings, and shall be true to them not in 
imagination, but in reality. Do I mean them 1 
Now comes the time for testing whether I do. 
And I welcome the test. I am impatient to 
be applying it, like a man who hits himself 
to make sure that he is awake. It's no good 
my hitting myself, or I might do so at this 
moment; but I shouldn't be a truer lover 
because I gave myself a black eye. How can 
I laugh ? I am not laughing really. Let me 



184 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

just state it over again my whole case as it 
stands. 

" Suddenly, during the last three weeks, 
that strange catastrophe has befallen me, 
which when happening in the sphere of 
religion is commonly called conversion. A 
something which I had always considered as 
something of secondary value has bewildered 
me by showing itself as the one treasure in 
life ; and for the sake of securing this so I 
have told my soul I have already sacrificed 
much, and am prepared to sacrifice everything. 
But what I have sacrificed thus far has been 
merely certain scruples, which I have indeed 
respected throughout my life till now, and 
which I have certainly violated not without 
a pang ; but so long as one's sacrifices are 
merely at the expense of one's scruples, they 
can hardly be accepted as much evidence of 
one's sincerity. I have felt this all the time. 
Again and again I have said to her, 'What 
I long to do is to suffer for you.' And my 
meaning I am sure has been though I did 
not at first perhaps understand it fully that 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 185 

I longed to convince myself of my own abso- 
lute sincerity to convince myself that I was 
offering her my truth, and not my falsehood. 

" Well, sooner than I expected, and more 
completely than I expected, like a thief in the 

! 

night, the real trial has come. I see now 
that if I am genuinely devoted to her, if in 
any serious and self-denying way I mean to 
make my life the companion and support of 
hers, I shall have to sacrifice many things 
besides scruples. I told her that owing to 
her I should have to sell my property ; and 
I knew when I said so that this was true. 
But I thought little indeed I had hardly 
time to think of all that my words meant. 
I realize what they mean now. I have re- 
ceived a letter informing me that an offer for 
the whole property has just been made, of a 
kind unexpectedly liberal. My lawyer tells 
me that if I am to sell at all, now is my lucky 
moment ; and indeed I can well believe him. 
Such an offer would probably never be made 
again. I might have to sell on terms that 
would leave me a beggar. These will, at all 



186 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

events, make me sure of a competence. I 
must decide within three weeks. 

" Within three weeks ! so soon to part 
with everything ! I feel like a prisoner who 
hears that to-morrow is the day of his execu- 
tion. How near it is all coming ! And a 
fortnight ago the entire prospect was different. 
Then, instead of selling my home, I saw before 
me the redemption of it. I saw life and 
honour returning to the old disconsolate rooms. 
And now it must all go ; it must pass away 
like a shadow pictures, furniture, everything, 
with some few exceptions. And why ? For 
the sake of what ? Is it not for the sake of 
a shadow? a shadow, a dream, a fancy, of 
which the very memory will soon be unin- 
telligible ? If that were the case, I am certain 
at least of one thing ; I should look on myself 
as a creature beneath even my own contempt. 
But it is no dream, no shadow, the thing for 
which I shall make this sacrifice. I knew it 
was not. I knew that the feelings within 
me the longing, the joy, the worship, the 
self-devotion -I knew that all these were no 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 187 

mere idle sentiment, but that for better or 
worse they were part of my genuine self. 
And now I am about to prove that my self- 
knowledge was true. Can my love be unreal, 
if I am deliberately, for her sake, giving so 
much up ? Or can it possibly be selfish if the 
things I am giving up are the very things 
by which self would most be flattered ? Irma, 
I am leaving all for you. I am not pitying 
myself when I say this. On the contrary, I 
only want to convince myself that I am not 
quite unworthy of your love for me. 

" I talk about leaving all. I speak correctly; 
for I don't mean my property only. That's 
something ; but I shall have to leave more 
than that. At all events, I think I shall ; and 
at all events I arn prepared to leave it. It is 
my own career that I am referring to. That 
would take me to Constantinople, and part me 
from her for an indefinite period. Irma, for 
those who are united as you and I are, there 
must be no separation such as this. For us, 
who can be bound together by no outer ties, 
the inner ties must, for that reason, be all the 



188 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

stronger and closer ; and if any of the links 
wound me, I shall offer the pain to you, as a 
sort of secret oblation. Irma, what would 
preachers and respectable people say, if we 
told them that love like ours was really the 
asceticism of love, and demanded far more 
self-denial and self-restraint than any apparent 
marriage ? And yet this would be quite true. 
Listen ! Let me keep as near you as I may, we 
shall be separated often enough. How often 
I cannot tell. The difficulties of our future 
till this morning were mere abstractions to 
me ; and for the first time now they are 
becoming hard and real. They may prove 
eventually to be more or fewer than I antici- 
pate ; but be they what they may, I promise 
you this faithfully there shall never be a day 
or an hour which I could possibly give to you, 
and which I will fail to give you an account of 
what it may cost myself. 

" The kind old man who has acted so 
liberally to me about my marriage, the minister 
who has taken so friendly an interest in my 
advancement to both of these I shall have to 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 189 

explain myself somehow ; how I hardly know. 
I shall have, without the delay of a needless 
day, to make the authorities aware that they 
must not reckon on my services. It will be 
difficult. There will be difficulties everywhere. 
And yet, what am I ? I am so mad or so 
inspired I have so completely lost my reason, 
or so completely found my soul that all these 
difficulties, even whilst they fret and perplex 
me, and put an end to these weeks stolen from 
heaven, are at the same time filling me with 
exultation, and in every pang they inflict are 
saying to me, ' You are true to her.' ' 

He wrote this that morning, before rejoining 
her at luncheon ; and he felt, having done so, 
more at peace with himself. Of the thoughts 
he had recorded he said little to her ; but she 
felt in his manner a certain quality which 
soothed her. He told her the conclusion he 
had come to with regard to their journey ; 
and though she winced at the idea of leaving 
him even for a day, she agreed that his plan 
was wise. In the course of the afternoon she 
said to him, " If I liked you less I should be 



190 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

more unhappy at parting from you ; but the 
more I know you, the more of you enters into 
my soul, and will still remain with me, even 
when you are absent. Listen to me. I trust 
you. These are three short words ; but all 
that is best and strongest in a woman's passion 
is implied in them." 

Late that night the messenger who had 
been sent to the Princess returned with a 
letter from her, full of all sorts of kindness. 
She said however that to come to the hotel 
in the forest was an adventure beyond her 
strength, and she begged that, in their mother's 
absence, the two children might be sent back 
to the castle. " In fact," she added, " unless 
you telegraph to the contrary, I will meet you 
at Lichtenbourg to-morrow, in the middle of 
the day, and receive them straight from your 
hands, as you are on your way to Vienna." 

" In that case," said Grenville, " I will be 
gone by cock-crow. I shall have the start of 
you by a few hours only. You will reach 
Vienna at midnight. I will call on you, at 
your apartments, next morning ; and that 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 191 

same afternoon we will start together for 
Paris." 

They dined that evening at the lodge, with- 
out the children. " In thirty-six hours," she 
said, " I shall .again be with you ; but still, 
since we have been known and belonged to 
one another, this is our first good-bye. Will 
you think me doubtful and fretful if I ask you 
one thing ? Are you sure you will be mine 
always mine always and in every way, as 
you are now ? " There was a gentle solemnity 
both in her voice and look which produced 
the sensation in him of being bound afresh to 
her bound by a new link which was indeed 
unnecessary, but the added pressure of which 
he felt and received with gratitude. As he 
walked back with her to her door, she clung 
to his arm like a child being taken to school, 
and about to be parted from its parent. The 
starlight showed on her cheeks something that 
gleamed like dew ; and as she hid them and 
dried them on his sleeve, she murmured, " I 
want never to leave you." 

Grenville had to start by four o'clock in the 



192 A HUMAN" DOCUMENT. 

morning. The sinking moon still shone as he 
dressed himself ; but none of the lights of day 
were yet astir amongst the eastern clouds. 
The lamps of the carriage he was to travel in 
were staring with their nocturnal eyes ; and 
he drove off behind the four jangling horses, 
feeling as if all the world were from hencefor- 
ward to be night. Knowing that the sight 
would pain him, he turned to watch the hotel, 
as a man whose tooth is aching cannot resist 
touching it ; and a desolating sense filled Him, 
that though she would be soon restored to 
him, the conditions of their perfect union were 
done with, were lost for ever. The mysterious 
forests at first saturated with the darkness, 
and then, as the wan dawn touched them, 
yielding it up like an exhalation, would at any 
other time have charmed and aroused his fancy. 
But now every mile of the road meant to him 
one thing only a return from Eden, into the 
forgotten troubles of life. Lichtenbourg, with 
its hotels and gardens, as he reached it in the 
ashy twilight, chilled him with vivid memories 
of his first days of acquaintance with it. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 193 

Those days, as lie looked back to them now, 
were coloured with the light of what succeeded 
them. They were vivid with hope and pro- 
mise ; but they were past, and their promise 
seemed vain. ^Horses were changed at the 
Hotel Imperial, where he had stayed. The 
front doors were closed ; but his mind through 
the shuttered glass saw the gleam of a certain 
brown hat and dress, which had appeared to 
him on the sunny morning of a day that flut- 
tered with cherry-blossoms. " Irma ! Irma ! " 
he constantly muttered to himself as he waited ; 
and then presently the horses were put to, 
and whatever he muttered further, the bells 
and the wheels drowned it. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER XX. 

WHEN he reached the rail way- station he 
experienced another shock. His life of late 
had been so removed from the world, and had 
given time such a new and expanded value, 
that though hardly three weeks ago he had 
arrived at this very place, a train seemed as 
strange to him as if he had not seen one for 
years ; and the musty smell breathing from 
the red plush cushions of his compartment, 
where the confined air was at once close and 
chilly, seemed to him like the soul of our 
common unprofitable life. This journey to 
Vienna he compared dreamily with his last, 
when his mind was perplexed with, thoughts 
about Lady Evelyn, stimulated with thoughts 
of his own brilliant prospects, and troubled 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 195 

little as lie at the time knew it by her, under 
whose influence all these prospects were to 
evaporate. " I can hardly believe," he reflected, 
" all that has happened to me in a fortnight. 
All those interests I had meant to live for, 
and even the very world that holds them, I 
have already resolved to sacrifice, and am now 
on my way to do so. I can hardly imagine 
the value I once set on them. On the other 
hand, the thing which I value now, and for 
the sake of which I am renouncing everything 
else, is a pearl hid in a field which I flattered 
myself I should never enter." 

When he reached Vienna about three in the 
afternoon, the change which had taken place 
in himself came home to him yet more vividly. 
The last time he had been there, and especially 
the time before, the very air of the streets had 
been provocative, whispering in his ear ambi- 
tion. He had felt himself becoming one of the 
most important figures of Europe, and about 
to be honoured and welcomed as a part of its 
most stately life ; whilst the pride of blood 
which underlay his desire of achievement had 



196 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

been stimulated there as it could have been 
nowhere else. But now all was different. 
The very reasons which formerly had made the 
Austrian capital, with all its glitter of to-day 
and all its traditions of yesterday, seem to 
him familiar and sympathetic, made it now 
seem bleak and alien. He felt as if no longer 
he had either part or lot in it. Under other 
circumstances, without losing an hour, he 
would have gone to the British Embassy to 
see the Ambassador and his wife ; but now, 
though he thought of them still as two of his 
best friends, he shrank from the atmosphere 
which breathed through their bright drawing- 
rooms. It was once his natural element ; he 
would now move like a ghost in it. 

Far more answering to his mood was what 
lie actually did. He went to the offices of the 
International Sleeping-Car Company and took 
the necessary places for Paris in next day's 
Orient Express. In doing this he was conscious 
of doing something, not for himself only, but 
also for the woman he was devoted to ; and 
the simple act seemed to be bringing him close 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 197 

to her. He even rejoiced in himself paying 
for an extra ticket in order that she and her 
maid might be secure of a compartment to 
themselves. That business concluded, he 
rambled through the town like a tourist, and 
presently bethought himself of going to the 
Ring or Boulevard, in which her apartment 
was situated, and taking a look at her windows. 
This he found, however, was hardly an attain- 
able solace, as there was nothing to tell him 
which her windows were. They were some- 
where or other in a huge block of building, 
whose frontage was rough with carving and 
gay with extended awnings, the upper part 
being devoted to flats or offices, the lower to 
glittering shops. Mrs. Schilizzi's flat was 
apparently over the shop of a jeweller, and 
some of the objects in which were at once so 
tasteful and splendid that Grenville for a 
minute or two stood in the street studying 
them. Whilst thus engaged he was startled 
by the sound of his own name, pronounced 
with a charming though very foreign inflection ; 
and looking round he discovered the Countess 



198 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

C , who had just emerged from the jewel- 
ler's swing-doors. 

She was full of questions which she gave 
him no time to answer, and then of invitations, 
answers to which she demanded ; but, finding 
that Grenville was only a bird of passage, and 
that he could neither come to her castle in the 
country nor join her in her box at the opera, 
she insisted on taking him off that moment 
for a drive in the Prater. Unwilling to yield, 
he had yet no excuse for refusing. A huge 
engine of torture in the shape of a heavy 
barouche, with two gawky footmen in salmon- 
coloured stockings, attending it, was there 
touching the curbstone ; and this was presently 
bearing him away with the Countess, hardly 
more willing than Proserpine when she went 
from the fields of Enna. 

Till they reached the Prater ennui was his 
chief suffering, but here ennui was lost in a 
kind of painful interest. As they drove through 
the crowd of carriages, or paused now and 
then under the trees, the Countess kept point- 
ing out to him this and that personage, one 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 199 

great as a magnate, one fascinating as a beauty, 
whom he ought to know, and whom lie would 
know, would he only stay in Vienna. Some 
of these desirable acquaintances stopped for a 
moment and spoke to her ; and Grenville 
noticed in men and women both the same 
charm of manner which had at once attracted 
him in the Countess. Suddenly a carriage 
came by, the harness glancing with silver 
and the servants breasting the air with gold 
lace and crimson waistcoats. It contained 
two ladies and a dark-bearded, handsome 
man. 

" Look," said the Countess, " there is the 
King of Moldavia." 

Grenville turned, but it was not the king he 
looked at. What held his attention was two 
faces under parasols. Of one he only saw 
that it was middle-aged, refined, and cynical. 
The other he recognized by its wonderful 
velvety eyes a face now set off by a dress 
almost insolent in its daintiness. Every one 
as it passed gave it the homage of a stare. It 
was the face of Miss Juanita Markham. 



200 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" The woman with her," said the Countess, 

" is the well-known Baroness X . I suppose 

you have heard her story. Your pretty com- 
patriot is hardly to be congratulated on her 
friend ; and as for the king, they say he is 
tiring of her already." 

All this spectacle, varying, bewildering, 
brilliant, with a key to it here and there given 
by the Countess's comments, had for Grenville, 
no doubt, a degree of interest ; but it pained 
and chilled him in two distinct ways. It 
made him feel how Mrs. Schilizzi was taking 
him away from it ; and also how it, at the 
moment, was taking him away from Mrs. 
Schilizzi. His imagination, he felt, was being 
invaded by a vulgar crowd out of the street, 
which divided him from her to whom all its 
domain was consecrated. " Irma ! Irma ! " he 
again repeated to himself passionately, but 
under his breath, and with a due mundane 
self-repression, so that the Countess, who once 
actually caught a murmur, concluded that he 
was merely blowing away a speck of dust from 
his waistcoat. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 201 

At last his trial was over. The Countess 
dropped him at his hotel. The moment the 
porter saw him he put into his hand a letter. 
Grenville received it eagerly, fancying it might 
be from Mrs. Schilizzi. It was not. It was 
from the Ambassadress, who had somehow 
heard of his arrival. She begged him to come 
that night to dinner ; there would be no party. 
He despatched an acceptance, resigned rather 
than pleased ; and, indeed, when the time 
came he was little less than miserable. His 
host and hostess talked to him so much of his 
prospects ; and he could not explain that they 
were now his prospects no longer. He was 
conscious of their wishes for his success, but 
their very wishes irritated him. He felt as 
jealous of any influence that would draw him 
from Mrs. Schilizzi as he could feel of any that 
would draw her from him. A strange sensation 
was dawning on him that his affection for her 
was, except for herself, making him alone in 
life a pariah amongst those who had hitherto 
formed the world for him. He was not afraid 
of the situation. It only made him feel how 



202 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

entirely he depended upon her. Wearied with 
the fatigues of the day, he returned to his 
hotel early, and was just preparing to close his 
eyes, and so to abridge the hours which still 
separated him from her, when the thought 
suddenly struck him that it might be a help 
and a pleasure to her if he went to the station 
and met her on her arrival. To rouse himself 
now was really a matter of effort ; his eyelids 
were so heavy he could hardly keep them 
apart. But rouse himself he did, and re- 
dressed himself; and driving to the station, 
he awaited her. As the train came drifting 
in, he half feared that something would have 
detained her, and his heart gratuitously em- 
bittered itself with a pang of anticipated 
disappointment. Amongst the dim figures 
that emerged he soon detected hers, and 
hastened to her glowing with sudden happi- 
ness. With a start of surprise and pleasure, 
she gave him her hand and looked at him, but 
the moment after the pleasure gave place to 
nervousness, and her voice hardening and 
acquiring a note of petulance, "You shouldn't 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 203 

have come," she said. " Please go away and 
leave me." 

" Can I do," he said, " nothing for you ? 
May not I get you a carriage ? " 

" No, no," she said, almost turning her back 
on him. " Good-night ; you can call at twelve 
to-morrow." The next moment he saw her 
hasten towards a man a tall, corpulent man, 
whose hands glistened with rings, and who, 
with the aid of his nose, suggested finance and 
Israel. "With her hand on the sleeve of this 
gentleman's furred overcoat, she quickly dis- 
appeared in the direction of the cabs and 
omnibuses. 

Grenville returned to the bed in which he 
had been about to rest himself, full of a be- 
wildered bitterness which made rest impossible. 
He could not banish her strange reception of 
him from his memory. Her voice through 
the watches of the night kept ringing and 
echoing in his ears ; and hour by hour its tone 
became harder and more bitter, till her image 
at last appeared to him, as he lay there half 
dreaming, like that of a woman who had 



204 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

suddenly grown to hate him, and having 
ruined his life was going now to spurn it away 
from her. The misery of this experience was 
'increased by its entire unexpectedness. It 
staggered him. The elements of his Kfe ap- 
peared to him in some new combination like a 
kaleidoscope shaken by the Furies. 

His condition next morning was somewhat 
calmer ; but a sense of estrangement from her 
remained with him even then, and anxiety 
branded his forehead with its keen physical 
pain. But through all this he was famishing 
for her presence ; and it wanted still a good 
ten minutes to twelve when he was standing 
at the door of the building in which her 
apartment was, and rousing the concierge with 
a peal of the electric bell. 

"The first floor," said the man. "The 
first door on the right." 

And Grenville, with trembling hand, was 
presently again ringing. A white-capped 
woman with an inquiring look admitted him, 
and, passing through a lobby in which the 
carpets were up, he found himself in a large 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 205 

drawing-room overlooking the street. There 
were no traces of life in it, except that on 
one of the tables was a pair of gloves and a 
parasol, both of which he recognized. He 
looked about him, full of curious interest. 
The floor was covered with thick red velvet 
carpet. There were red velvet chairs and 
sofas, whose woodwork was sumptuously 
carved, but which suggested the fittings of 
an hotel rather than of a private dwelling. 
The walls were papered with staring brown 
and gold, relieved only by two large mirrors 
and a life-sized photograph of the Emperor, 
liberally coloured in oil. Here and there 
were some fine vases and candelabra, but 
they seemed arranged for sale rather than 
ornament ; and the only other objects that 
decorated the shelves and tables were some 
ormolu trays for cigar- ash, some inlaid cabinets 
for cigars, and several sets of bottles and 
glasses for liqueurs, coloured and gilt as gaudily 
as artists in glass could make them. One 
thing more he discovered, and one thing 
only. It was a photograph lying under one 



206 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

of the ormolu ash-trays, faded and ragged, 
and representing a half-clothed Viennese 
actress. 

Anything more depressing, anything more 
hopelessly bourgeois, it would hardly have 
been possible to imagine. And this was the 
home, or at least one of the homes, of the 
woman to whom he was devoting everything ! 
He thought of the drawing-rooms at the 
Embassy, and compared them with it. They 
seemed to belong to two wholly different 
universes designed for the lives of people 
who had not a thought in common. A 
surprise which he could not analyze at first 
occupied his mind, and made him forget how 
the time was passing ; but at last it gave 
place to wonder as to when Mrs. Schilizzi 
would present herself; and wonder by and 
by gave place to impatience and resentment. 

Of all the troubles of life, the suspense of 
protracted waiting, with every nerve of doubt, 
of hope, and of expectant hearing stretched 
upon the rack, is, in proportion to its real 
importance, the hardest for some tempera- 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 207 

ments to bear. Grenville now discovered his 
own temperament to be one of these ; and it 
is no exaggeration to say that he soon was 
enduring tortures. Hitherto, though like 
most men he knew what pain was, he had 
rarely, if ever, known himself robbed by it of 
his self-control. Now he found himself at 
its mercy. Angry, savage thoughts came leap- 
ing into his consciousness creatures till now 
hidden in the unexplored jungles of his mind, 
longing to lacerate the woman whose conduct 
seemed so heartless, and lacerating him mean- 
while in their blind fantastic fury. As he 
stood amongst them he felt like a man amongst 
a pack of wolves, trying to beat them down, 
to kill them, or to cow them into silence, 
and yet strong with a temptation to let them 
have their way, on the woman and on himself 
also. Once, one memorable day, he had 
indeed quarrelled with her before, and thought 
bitter things of her ; but that passed quickly 
that he had quite forgotten. And then, 
only last night, he had experienced pain on 
her account, of a new kind. But that was 



203 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

pain merely ; this was humiliation mixed with 
pain. -He hardly recognized himself. 

At last and it seemed he had been kept 
on the rack for hours he heard, or thought he 
heard, something like a distant rustle. All 
his senses of a sudden turned into hearing. 
He held his breath ; the noises in the street 
became audible carriages, people talking. 
Then he started ; the door burst open ; and 
there before him, her eyes eager with welcome, 
was the woman for whom he waited. 

She looked at him ; she came up to him. 
She was wholly, entirely different from the 
distorted image which his mind had been 
just fashioning; but the stress of his late 
mood was still affecting his muscles, and his 
voice and look as he greeted her were, against 
his will, unnatural. Her greeting to him 
had been what it used to be in the forest, at 
once gentle and passionate ; and it was not 
for a minute or two that she took note 
of his change. At last she said, scanning 
him 

" What's the matter with you ? Are you 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 209 

angry ? Have I kept you waiting ? Am I 
late ? " 

" Oh, no," he said, smiling in spite of 
himself, " only three-quarters of an hour." 
His words dragged bitterly, and he hesitated. 
" It wasn't that," he went on ; " only after 
your anger last night, I felt rather doubtful 
if you ever would come at all. I thought, 
you see, that at the station I might have 
been some help to you. In fact I got out 
of bed in the middle of the night to come. 
You must forgive me for doing unintentionally 
what roused in you so much resentment." 

For the first time the idea seemed to dawn 
on her that she had done or said anything 
which could possibly wound his feelings. A 
flush came into her cheeks, and a sudden 
moisture into her eyes, and putting her hands 
on his shoulders, she whispered, "Dear, 
forgive me. Come, sit down. We are all 
alone forgive me. But, dear, you were in- 
deed imprudent. If he had seen you meeting 

me at night well, you know the impression 

it would have given. Was I unkind or rude 

VOL. II. P 



210 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

to you ? I felt so afraid and nervous, I hardly 
know what I said ; and I trusted you so 
completely, I felt you would understand/' 

The trouble was over, and peace had again 
returned to him. 

" In twenty minutes," she said, " I have 
told them to bring luncheon. Oh, do look 
round, and tell me what you think of this 
place. Will you dislike me when you see 
the kind of home I belong to ? Isn't it all 
dreadful, Bobby ? " she went on presently. 
" Doesn't it tell you a little about what my 
life is ? Paul thinks it quite splendid. At 
first I tried to alter it ; but it made him 
perfectly furious. He swore at me. Shall 
I show you something ? Paul did more than 
swear." She began whilst she spoke to pull 
up one of her sleeves. "Look at my arm," 
she said, " a little above my wrist. Do you 
see the scar on it ? Wait, and I will explain 
its history to you." 

She went to a drawer in a cabinet, and 
brought out an ivory paper-knife. " Paul," 
she said, "struck me with that because I told 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 211 

him this room was vulgar, and wanted to put 
away these terrible sets of liqueur things. And 
then I see you've been looking at that 
photograph." 

" Who is it ? " said Grenville. 

She blushed a little, and gave a little faint 
laugh. "That," she said, "is one of my 
many rivals. When Paul is in Vienna 
without me, that lady reigns here. I believe 
she chose the furniture. Paul supposes I 
know nothing about her ; and this he must 
have left by accident. He has the oddest 
notions of respectability so far as I am con- 
cerned ; and he thinks I ought to be ignorant 
that bad women exist. Ah ! " she exclaimed, 
sighing, and suddenly changing the subject, 
not as if it pained but merely repelled and 
wearied her, " how often when I looked round 
this prison have I thought of my own home 
the shelves crowded with old well-worn 
books, the faded chintz, and the thread-bare 
carpets and our boxes of wooden bricks ! I 
used always," she said, laughing suddenly, 
" to be building castles on the floor with 



212 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

bricks. Since then, Bobby, I have been 
driven to build them only in the air. Hark 
hark ! Gretchen is coming with the luncheon. 
As soon as we have lunched, you must go ; and 
you must meet me punctually at the train." 

When he rose to leave her, she said, hang- 
ing her head, " There is something I should 
like you to see something I found here in 
my room. And yet I don't know shall I 
show it to you ? It's Paul's photograph. 
You've seen his friend. Perhaps you had 
better see him. I will show it you in the 
train." 

He was at the station before her, watching 
the passengers for the express, as they slowly 
assembled, and hoping they would all be 
strangers. He deputed Fritz to wait for Mrs. 
Scbilizzi, to help her maid with the luggage, 
and to see them settled in their places. Until 
the train had started, he had hardly done 
more than speak to her ; but as soon as they 
were off, and found themselves surrounded 
by strangers only, they secured a couple of 
comfortable chairs in the saloon, and engaged 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 213 

a table for dinner in the restaurant car adjoin- 
ing. It was five when they started in the 
mellow and golden afternoon ; and the air 
from the gardens in the suburbs came with a 
gust of summer. In half an hour they were 
Hearing meadows and wooded hills, vivid with 
exuberant green ; and the shining curves of 
the Danube began to show and hide them- 
selves, here reflecting a sail, here a town or a 
villa, and here the domes and fa9ade of some 
palatial monastery. During their dinner they 
had drifted, not perceiving it, into the night ; 
and the windows, instead of revealing the 
moving landscape, did but repeat the light 
of the lamps in the gilded roof. Mrs. Schilizzi 
retired with her maid to her own compart- 
ment, and Grenville shared his with a pasha 
and two Roumanians. The following morning, 
again in the warmth and sunlight, their eyes 
began to be greeted by lodges and blossoming 
gardens, and houses with mansard roofs. 
Then came buildings stretching in long white 
masses, and tall brick chimneys pricking 
the clear blue air. The train rattled over 



214 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

points, and they were soon stationary in 
Paris. 

As for the photograph, she had quite for- 
gotten to show it to him. To both of them 
the journey had been one long idyll ; and they 
had almost banished from their minds the 
doubtful sequel it was leading to. But an hour 
or two later the aspect of things had changed. 
After a hasty meal, they found themselves 
at the Gare du Nord, getting what seats they 
could in the crowded train for Calais. English 
newspapers were being sold. A variety of 
vulgar English were pushing and swaggering 
as only our vulgar can. A man with a 
cockney twang had a seat next Mrs. Schilizzi, 
and was solacing himself with sucking 
cherries, and throwing the stones past her 
out of the window ; and when presently he 
began quoting to a friend opposite him the 
refrain of some song popular at the London 
music-halls, she and Grenville felt that for a 
second time they had dropped down out of 
cloudland, and would have to face and struggle 
with the squalid difficulties of reality. 



CHAPTER XXL 

MRS. SCHILIZZI was to be met at Charing 
Cross by her mother-in-law a lady whose 
instincts always distrusted beauty, and who, 
strong in the virtue that comes of having 
never possessed it, felt herself bound, when- 
ever circumstances admitted, to act towards 
her daughter-in-law the part of a guardian 
angel. Her zeal, indeed, was much in excess 
of that which a well-worn simile ascribes to 
the angels of tradition ; and instead of con- 
tenting herself with keeping her charge under 
her wing, she endeavoured to hold her fast 
in the grip of her guardian clutches. Grenville 
gathered this and more from what Mrs. 
Schilizzi told him. He accordingly parted 
from her at Dover, taking the train to 



216 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

Victoria, and engaging not to call on her 
till she wrote to him to give him instructions. 

He saw her as he turned away, looking 
after him through the crowd, which at last 
hid her ; and a puff of briny wind swept 
between them laden with the smoke and 
odour of the packet. Having reached London 
at six, and having slept or tried to sleep for 
an hour or two, he found himself by twelve 
washed and brushed and dressed, and, so far 
as externals went, ready to face the world. 
But the world that was now around him 
seemed blanker than the sands of Sahara. 

Everything bewildered him. At first he 
could hardly realize what time of the year it 
was, or in which of its social stages he might 
expect London to be. Was the season in full 
swing, or had he, by chance, lit upon the 
Whitsuntide holidays ? Or was it possibly 
Easter ? These questions presented them- 
selves not because he wished for society, but 
for a reason precisely opposite. He dreaded 
the very sight or sound of it. Could he have 
so arranged it, he would willingly have seen 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 217 

no one till the hour came when he should 
again see Mrs. Schilizzi. That, however, at 
the earliest would not be till to-morrow ; and 
meanwhile matters admitting of no delay 
matters fraught not with pain only, but with 
embarrassment, and also with the fate of his 
whole future life, were calling on him for 
instant action, and granting him no reprieve. 
His eyes, as he thought this over, wandered 
wearily round his sitting-room. Everything 
had an air of being blighted even the light 
that turned the windows into two staring 
oblongs. He looked on the wall above 
his sideboard an unnatural blank. His 
favourite painting had gone from it. He 
looked at a drawing of his home. His home 
was about to go. In his looking-glass were 
still sticking a few dusty cards of invitation. 
One of them bore the name of the then 

celebrated Lady , the wife of the 

Chancellor of the Exchequer. Grenville re- 
membered the party it referred to his last 
before leaving England a small and brilliant 
concert, not a political mob. He remembered 



218 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

his hostess, when he left, coming with him 
to the door of the room, detaining him there 
in conversation, and going out with him into 
the corridor ; and he thought of how presently 
he would be returning to the same house, not 
to fulfil but to destroy the hopes that were 
then formed of him. 

Here were two people his lawyer and the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer whom he ought 
to see at once, and for seeing whom he ought 
then and there to prepare. And also more 
formidable still he would have to com- 
municate with Lord Sol way. But he felt 
unequal to any one of these tasks, or even to 
the preparation for them. His mind shrank 
from them with an aversion at once weary 
and irritable, and wandered away to an 
unknown suburban villa, till a longing to 
reach it a longing which he knew to be 
futile threatened to unfit him for any species 
of exertion. A man's strength of character, 
however, is shown not in having no weakness, 
but in conquering it ; just as the highest 
bravery is the conquest, rather than the 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 219 

absence, of fear. And Grenville presently, 
contemptuous of his subdued condition, pulled 
together his faculties by a strong effort of will, 
and forced them to their distasteful duties. 

First of all he began to write to the Chan- 
cellor, hardly knowing, when he took the pen 
in his hand, what he was going to say, or what 
position he should assume. But thoughts, 
however scattered, are things which, in many 
cases, need only a severe enough summons to 
gather them together in an instant. Men often 
wait idly for their thoughts to inspire their 
will; whereas what they really need is, that 
their will should compel their thoughts. Gren- 
ville found out this ; and presently, to his own 
surprise, a letter was written which exactly 
suited the situation. With every phrase of 
regret which could flatter the person he was 
addressing, he stated that private matters, 
which did not admit of explanation, would 
prevent his going, at the time arranged, to 
Constantinople ; and indeed had rendered his 
whole plans so uncertain, that he feared he 
must abandon all claim to the privilege of 



220 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

serving the Government. There was, he 
added, another competent candidate for the 
post he was thus renouncing ; and he con- 
cluded his letter by saying that his worst 
regrets were tempered by the knowledge that 
his loss could be so well supplied. 

This letter he at once despatched by mes- 
senger ; and he then drove off to his lawyer's. 
As his cab carried him towards the dim regions 
of Bloomsbury, he kept saying to himself, 
" What have I done ? Do I realize it ? " 
His head and his eyelids ached, and his eyes 
were becoming dizzy. But the task he had 
just accomplished, whatever might be its 
results, he found had been easy compared to 
the one now before him. The loss of his 
career was something va^ue : and for the 

O O ' 

present, at all events, he could contemplate it 
with dull apathy ; but he was keenly alive to 
the meaning of this second act of sacrifice. 
He knew how heavy his hand would feel the 
pen which would cut him off for ever from the 
old home of his fathers, and leave him so he 
felt a naked waif in the world. When he 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 221 

entered the dirty passage leading to his 
lawyer's offices, his sense of all this grew 
deeper ; and a back parlour in which he was 
asked to wait, furnished with some japanned 
deed-boxes and a couple of old dining-room 
chairs, seemed to him a condemned cell. He 
thought of his haunted forest, the lodge, the 
lake, the starlight ; and then of these sur- 
roundings : and he asked himself if these 

O ' 

two sets of things could be both realities ; or, 
if not, which of them was the dream. The 
result was that, though his purpose never 
wavered, he humoured his weakness by post-, 
poning the fatal act. He contented himself 
with examining the details of the offer made, 
ascertaining afresh the present state of the 
property, and saying that his decision should 
be given in a few days. " And yet," he asked 
himself, when he was once more in the street, 
" why do I hesitate. ? I thought just now I 
was going to sell my home. I forgot myself. 
A man situated as I am has no home. I 
must now write to Lord Sol way, and explain 
to him that I shall never have one." 



222 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

This last was the hardest task of any, not 
because of the act of renunciation involved in 
it, but because of the difficulty of assigning 
for it the smallest reason. Sheets of note- 
paper and some pens were still lying on his 
table ; and he was affected by them as a 
sea-sick man is by the chance sight of food. 
But again by force of will he compelled his 
thoughts to his service, and cut a way through 
obstacles which a moment since seemed in- 
superable. 

He apologized for not having written earlier, 
to describe the upshot of his meeting with 
Lady Evelyn at Vicenza. He then explained 
that, far from having been able to propose 
to her, he had come to feel doubtful as to 
whether she even valued his company, and 
that before he could assure himself as to how 
matters really stood, her aunt's illness had 
for the time stopped everything. Here he 
suddenly paused, wondering how he should 
proceed. His letter thus far had the merit 
of being perfectly true ; but as to his political 
career, how could he be equally candid ? 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 223 

Lord Solway in that career had taken en 
almost fatherly interest. Grenville could not 
palm off on him a mere reference to " private 
matters," and say that his career was aban- 
doned for indefinite and mysterious reasons. 
" And yet," he thought, " what is there I can 
say ? " He detested falsehood, and it was 
impossible even to hint at the truth. At last 
he wrote as follows " With regard to my 
appointment at Constantinople, there is still 
much to be settled ; and it is partly on ac- 
count of that, that I have returned to London. 
My confidence alike in your kindness and 
your profound knowledge of the world, enables 
me to say to you what another might mis- 
interpret as ungrateful ; and this is, that all 
these affairs of mine, which you have so gener- 
ously tried to forward, are now in a condition 
to prosper best by being left to slowly settle 
themselves, unquestioned and unnoticed. In 
telling you this," Grenville added after a 
moment's hesitation, " I need hardly ask you 
to forgive me." 

This letter he sent by post, feeling no 



224 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

special desire to expedite its arrival. He 
then went out for an hour or two, and avoid- 
ino 1 the fashionable quarters, wandered about 
aimlessly, thinking of Mrs. Schilizzi, whose 
inaccessible form was painted on a background 
of unfamiliar wretchedness. At last, com- 
pelled by mere physical fatigue, he returned 
to his own rooms, thinking over what he had 
accomplished, or almost accomplished, that 
day namely, the deliberate surrender of 
three things, his ambition, his property, and 
all prospects of a home. A sense of forlorn- 
ness suddenly settled down on him, through 
which, indeed, the thought of Mrs. Schilizzi 
shone tremulously like a star ; but, like a 
star, at the moment it seemed hopelessly far 
away. " When," he exclaimed. " when when 
shall I see you again ? " 

His whole soul seemed to be saying to him, 
"You have made yourself quite alone in the 
world." And the same conclusion was pre- 
sented to him in a homelier and more tangible 
form, when he thought of the evening that 
now awaited him so blankly. Should he dine 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 225 

at a club, or at a restaurant ? Or should he 
dine anywhere ? 

In the middle of this perplexity a knock at 
the door roused him, and Fritz entered with 
a note. His heart throbbed with a hope that 
it might be from Mrs. Schilizzi. It was not. 

o 

It was from Lord Sol way. It was an urgent 
invitation to dinner for that night. He 
despatched an acceptance. The thought of 
society was hateful to him ; but still more 
hateful was the leaden intolerable time, which 
still lay between him and Mrs. Schilizzi ; and 
society would assist in abridging it. Whilst 
he was dressing, a large envelope was pre- 
sented to him, from which he extracted a 
card for yet another entertainment a party 
at the house of the Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer a card with the flattering words, 
" To meet their Royal Highnesses," at the 
top ; and these yet more flattering words, 
" Very small," at the bottom. 

The moment he entered Lord Solway's 
drawing-room, he saw that the party was one 
of the most dignified kind. Stately brocades 

VOL. II. Q 



226 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

gleamed, and there was a general palpitation 
of diamonds. No Royalty was present ; but 
the first person he recognized was a dowager 
whose well-known features were usually a sign 
that a king or prince was in the neighbour- 
hood. There was more than one blue riband, 
and but one unmarried woman the daughter 
of a widowed ambassador. Lord Solway 
shuffled up to Grenville, and welcomed him. 
with a benignant smile, which, despite its 
benignity to friends, seemed to hint that it 
could be saturnine to enemies. 

" You wrote me," he said, with a sort of 
hollow chuckle, " a very nice a very nice, 
sensible letter. It contained only one thing 
for which you ought to apologize." 

" And what," said Grenville, " was that ? " 
" Your apology," said Lord Solway. " Come 
I must take you to the young lady I don't 
know if you know her whom you are to 

make happy this evening. Lady " he 

said, pausing before a magnificently dressed 
widow of sixty, "this is a young man dying 
to make your acquaintance. He's come all 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 227 

the way from Vienna to take you in to 
dinner." 

" How silly lie is ! " said the lady, who 
blushed and bridled, till one of her chins 
overlapped her emerald necklace. " I've 
known Mr. Grenville for years ; and I saw 
him at Vienna a month since. Mr. Grenville, 
is not Lord Solway silly ? " 

She was indeed one of the luncheon party 
which Grenville had encountered at the 
Embassy ; and however absent or dejected 
he might be at heart, she left him at dinner 
no time to betray himself. Gossip arid scandal, 
balls, liaisons, and marriages, came from her 
lips sparkling like a succession of pearls ; and 
she had never showed to greater advantage 
her talent for two things, which are not 
perhaps as different as might be thought from 
the names she gave them picking people to 
pieces, and putting two and two together. 
Want of charity, however, has this advantage 
over charity, that it sometimes fails at last ; 

and it did so on this occasion. Lady 

found towards the middle of dinner that the 



228 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

characters of all her acquaintance had died a 
painless death at her hands ; so she left them 
in Grenville's memory, where she knew they 
would come to life again, and turning to her 
other neighbour, a widowed duke of seventy, 
renewed, with a well-preserved archness for 
which she happened to be celebrated, an 
attack on his ducal heart, which practice 
enabled him to resist. 

In spite of himself, Grenville was becoming 
amused. The very look of the table with its 
piles of splendid plate presents from crowned 
heads to a field- marshal, Lord Sol way's father 
in itself was some distraction. On the 
other side of him was the one unmarried lady, 
with the face of five-and- twenty and the 
happy aplomb of forty. Grenville knew her 
by sight, but he had never made her acquaint- 
ance ; and he was pleasantly flattered now, 
when, the moment his widow had discarded 
him, she met his eyes with a smile, and 
quickly began a conversation. She seemed 
quite aware that he had just come from 
Vienna, and treated his appointment at Con- 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 229 

stantinople as a matter of public news. She 
was acquainted with both cities, and talked 
about both pleasantly, giving her social judg- 
ments neatly, like the strokes of an artist's 
pencil, never laughing at any one, not even 
the widow near them, but letting it be seen 
constantly that she could laugh if she chose ; 
and all through this, by some subtle elusive 
means, not designedly, but as if by a natural 
instinct, she contrived to make Grenville 
conscious of two flattering facts that she felt 
him to be an interesting man, and that she 
knew him to be a distinguished one. The 
anxiety and the longing for the absent, which 
was really occupying his mind, began to be 
overlaid and hidden by a little superficial 
pleasure ; and after a time he felt himself taking 
note that the speaker's lips were pretty, and 
that her right cheek had a dimple. But the 
moment this crossed his mind, with a sudden 
and painful vividness, another image other 
lips and cheeks hovered before his like an 
image painted on the air. The first thing 
that reminded him of the charm of woman's 



230 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

beauty repelled him from the women present, 
glorifying the woman absent ; and, completely 
for a second or two losing command of his 
thoughts, he actually found himself mur- 
muring the words, " Irma ! Irma ! " He 

o 

turned to his neighbour. She was looking at 
him. There was no help for it he lied. 
" I'm right again now," he said. " I just had 
a twinge of neuralgia." 

After dinner he fell an easier prey to the 
flattery, merely social, of the elderly great 
ladies ; and one of them, who discovered that 
he had been asked to the party in Downing 
Street, offered to take him in her carriage with 
her. He went. There were many hours that 
still required killing. Before going to bed he 
wished to be absolutely tired, or he should 
not, he knew, get a single hour's repose. 

During the drive his whole unhappiness 
returned to him, yawning again before him 
like a gulf which some film had hidden, and 
in the depths of it Mrs. Schilizzi glimmered, 
unattainable as in a dream. The lighted 
doors in Downing Street, the red baize and 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 231 

the linkmen, the flower-like figures in the hall 
making their way to the cloak-room, all 
seemed to him like the entrance to hell or 
purgatory ; and the party proved an ordeal 
far worse than the dinner. To the marked 
notice of Royalty he was not indeed insen- 
sible ; but it affected his memory as a gift 
of money might affect some poor woman 
mourning for the loss of her child ; and as 
for the feminine beauty which was moving 
on all sides of him, it merely chilled him with 
a sense of the beauty that was not amongst 
it. Several women, young, and even there 
exceptional for their charms, showed them- 
selves delighted to see him, and counted on 
him returning the feeling. The feeling was 
not at his command, but the manner and 
look proper to it, from mere force of habit, 
came to his aid and produced themselves ; 
and any one watching him would have thought 
on two or three occasions that he had fallen 
a happy victim to the eyes that were then 
detaining him. Several observers indeed did 
think so ; but no observer could have known 



232 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

that at the very moment when appearances 
seemed most to warrant such conclusions, the 
name of an absent woman was still secretly 
on his lips, and that the touch of a hand 
not hers on his arm as he went to supper 
sent through his nerves a shudder as if it had 
been some pollution. 

Thus drew to its close his first day in 
London. It began as a sombre, and then 
turned to a sparkling, desolation ; and when 
at last he went to bed, how did it end ? It 
ended with a hope of a certain letter next 
morning a hope so intense that it defeated 
its own ends, and was troubled and made sick 
by doubt. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

THE morning came. A few letters were 
brought to his bedside. For a moment or two 
he held them in his hands, keeping his eyes 
closed, and not daring to look at them, he 
was so perversely fearful of finding that there 
was none from her. However, there was one. 
It was merely a hasty scrawl ; its wording 
was curt and almost careless ; but it begged 
him to call on her that morning at twelve. 
" I have told my mother-in-law," it continued, 
" that you know Lichtenbourg and its neigh- 
bourhood ; and she is pleased to consider 
that as a sufficient explanation of your 
existence." 

In one way he was delighted. He would 
be with her sooner than he had expected. 



234 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

He had, however, the preceding night promised 
his host to call at twelve in Downing Street ; 
and there was some awkwardness in post- 
poning so important an engagement. Postpone 
it he did, however, despatching a messenger 
with a letter, full of excuses which were not 
perhaps very accurate. But the messenger 
had hardly been gone for half an hour when 
a telegram reached him from her, begging 
him to come at four. Here was a double 
annoyance first, the dreary interval thus 
suddenly thrust between him and the time 
for meeting her, and then a confused sense 
of that strange feminine selfishness which will 
allow a woman sometimes to disregard in a 
man's life every claim or interest not immedi- 
ately connected with herself. For a moment 
there blew through his mind a little east 

O 

wind of reproaches against her ; but this 
spent itself, and without losing a moment, 
he hurried off to Downing Street, reaching it 
before his messenger. He was naturally too 
early, and passed, as he knew he should have 
to do, a good half-hour of waiting, which his 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 235 

thoughts made anxious and miserable. He 

o 

had time to arrange more time than he 
wanted precisely what he should say at the 
forthcoming interview ; but every moment his 
considerations were either disturbed or shifted 
by thoughts of the woman without whom he 
could hardly breathe. The room in which he 
found himself was surrounded by rows of 
blue-books ; and blue-books and Acts of 
Parliament loaded the solid tables. He took 
one or two of them, and tried to calm himself 
by reading them. But through the paper, 
through the paragraphs and the tabulated 
figures, would flicker a vision of a brown 
hat fluttering with feathers, and of cheeks 
like pale geranium petals. A physical weight 
seemed. to be lying on his chest and smother- 
ing him. He could not read ; he could only 
keep moving about restlessly. He could think 
of one thing only which would have given 
him immediate solace ; and that was to tear 
in pieces a Eeport on the last census, which 
he had twice taken up, and opened in the 
same place, which had maddened him with 



236 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

an intolerable analysis of the occupations of 
adults in Lancashire. But he heroically re- 
sisted this temptation of the devil ; and a 
secretary at last appeared, who invited him 
into the sanctum of the minister. The result 
of the interview was more satisfactory than 
he had hoped. It settled nothing, and 
therefore was quickly over ; and he went 
away made almost buoyant by the news that 
it would be quite possible, owing to certain 
recent events, to give him, if he wished it, 
another two months before he would be 
obliged to enter on his post or to resign it. 
The Chancellor also had said to him, " If 
you are not leaving London immediately, 
there are one or two matters in which you 
might be of the greatest help to me ; and I 
know that the Prime Minister, as well, would 
be anxious to have some talk with you." 

But the pleasurable sense of importance 
which these last intimations gave him, had 
long been driven from his mind by very 
different matters, when at four o'clock he 
found himself on the heights of Hampstead ; 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 237 

and after much inquiry of the way, and many 
misdirections, his cab stopped at the gate 
of a large semi-detached villa, which was 
separated from the road by a walk and a 
few flower-beds. As he rang the bell a 
presentiment he was unable to conquer filled 
his mind that she would not be true to her 
appointment ; and he stood expecting the 
misery of learning that this was so, and 
hated the windows that stared at him, and 
showed him their dull rep curtains. The 
door was opened by a man-servant, who 
looked like a dissenting minister ; and when 
Grenville heard from him that Mrs. Schilizzi 
actually was at home, the evangel that came 
from such a mouth seemed almost incredible. 
He entered. He was conscious of some hall- 
chairs and a barometer, and also of a smell 
of floor-cloth and distant cooking. He was 
shown into a drawing-room on the ground- 
floor, where there were paper flowers in the 
fire-place, where French polish breathed from 
the rosewood furniture, and where a flock of 
antimacassars had settled themselves down 



238 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

like sea-gulls. Grenville looked round him, 
as one dismayed and curious. There were 
some large, but not beautiful, pieces of oriental 
china ; some large but hideous mirrors ; some 
pictures in oil of ladies in beaded gowns, and 
between them some photographs, edged in 
black, of tombs. On one table were two busts 
and a tea-caddy ; on another a gilt Bible, 
and a set of ivory chess-men. There was a 
copy of Scott's poems in a varnished tartan 
binding ; there was a volume of Texts for the 
Elect, for every Day in the Year ; and under 
this some numbers of a well-known financial 
newspaper. At last, on the chimney-piece, 
Grenville discovered to his surprise some 
genuine Greek vases, of extreme beauty and 
grace, with figures of the Amazons on them, 
and of some sacrificial procession ; but all were 
masked in petticoats of opaque spotted muslin, 
in deference so it seems to British ideas of 
decorum. The beauty of the objects them- 
selves, and the charming modesty of their 
disguise, saved him from the pangs of some 
moments of expectancy ; and he was still 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 239 

beguiled by a sense of unexpected amusement, 
when an opening door startled him, and Mrs. 
Schilizzi entered. 

He had been secretly annoyed here, even 
more than he had been at Vienna, by being 
forced to connect her with surroundings so 
grotesquely alien to herself ; but the moment 
she now appeared the effect of these sur- 
roundings was reversed. Her dress, her 
expression, and her movements, seemed by 
contrast with the room to possess an added 
refinement which gave her the aspect of an 
apparition ; and her nearness to what was 
vulgar and tasteless showed him how com- 
pletely she was detached from it. Her eyes 
were soft with welcome ; her lips eager and 
parted. But as he approached her he ex- 
perienced a sudden check. She gave him 
her hand with a coldness which effectually 
kept him at a distance. With a quick 
peremptory frown, " Don't come near me," 
she said. " You must sit there quite away 
from me," and then added, half laughing, 
" There in that leather chair." 



240 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

In act he was completely obedient, but his 
mind was up in arms and rebellious ; and 
though he still smiled as he spoke, and re- 
sponded sufficiently to what she said to him, 
he felt his manner assuming a certain chill 
formality, which meant, " If you are distant, I 
can be distant too." As for her, had his 
judgment been only calm enough, he would 
have recognized in the tones of her voice, and 
in the way her eyes followed him, much if not 
everything that he had hungered for and 
missed in her greeting. He would have 
recognized it also in something else, which 
did as a fact merely annoy him farther ; 
namely, the sort of subjects to which she 
managed to confine the conversation. But 
this perhaps would have required an amount 
of philosophy beyond the command of any but 
a lukewarm lover. For not only did she 
make no allusion whatever to their past, but 
whenever he tried to do so, she rendered his 
efforts futile, and kept moving from one 
indifferent topic to another, like a bird moving 
among branches that just are out of reach. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 241 

Unintentionally he helped her in doing so. 
Hoping in time to change her mood by 
humouring it, he spoke to her about the 
Greek vases ; and he really enjoyed sharing 
with her a momentary laugh about the matter. 
But she saw in it an avenue of escape, through 
which she could lead the conversation to other 
matters similar, and keep it far away from 
everything to which he wished to bring it. 

" I don't know," she said, " what you will 
think of Mrs. Budden." 

" And who," he asked, " may Mrs. Budden 
be?" 

" Oh," she replied, " my mother-in-law ! 
She married again after Paul's father died. 
She, you know, was English as English as 
any one could be. She was born at Clapham, 
and belonged to some religious sect there ; and 
this room represents her idea of the beauty 
of respectable holiness. Everything is an 
expensive protest against beauty of any other 
kind. She and Paul's father quarrelled like 
cat and dog ; but, as soon as he died, she 

began to speak of him as a saint, and she kept 
VOL. II. R 



242 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

those vases there as ' a souvenir of my dear 
first husband ' ; though I fancy she enjoys 
their petticoats partly as a slap at his memory. 
He brought them from Athens, and they 
really are very fine." 

Grenville caught at these last words, think- 
ing they gave him an opportunity. He raised 
one of the muslin veils, and examined the 
vase it covered. " This," he began, " might 
have inspired Keats with his lines ' On a 
Grecian Urn.'" 

Only a week ago, at such a remark as this, 
his hearer's eyes would have dwelt on his, full 
of the thoughts suggested by it. Now she 
seemed not to notice it, but went on in her 
former tone. 

"Mr. Budden," she said, "who died of a 
sore throat, which he caught at a meeting for 
the suppression of dancing on the stage 
Won't you listen to me ? Why do you frown 
like that ? Don't be cross : let me go on 
telling you. Mr. Budden was anxious that the 
vases should be broken to pieces ; but my 
mother-in-law, who resents all suggestions on 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 243 

principle, has often told me how indignant 
she was at this one ; and then when Mr. 
Budden timidly ventured on another, which 
was that they should be sent as a present to 
the British Museum, ' Mr. Budden,' she said, 
' I know my own business best. Were they 
sent to the Museum, their indecorum would 
be exposed to the public. Here, modestly 
covered, they at all events can do no mischief ; 
and I can avoid affronting my dear first 
husband's memory without feeling that I have 
any sin on my conscience.' ' 

In the way all this was said there was no 
trace of unkindness. There seemed to be in 
her nature a gentleness which left her blows 
their precision, but checked their force just as 
they were in the act of striking. 

Under other circumstances her anecdotes 
might have amused and pleased him ; but 
now they jarred on his nerves as flippant, and 
as a sign of heartlessness. Here he was, half 
separated from her, seeing her only in this 
breathless interval, longing to breathe to her 
some words of devotion, and to receive from 



244 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

her the comfort of some answer ; and her 
deliberately wasting, this short golden oppor- 
tunity in idle gossip about Greek vases and a 
mother-in-law, filled him with a bitter and 
growing sense that he was being trifled with. 
He made one or two further attempts to force 
her to speak more seriously ; but he made the. 
attempts in vain. She reverted each time to 
topics more or less trivial ; and at last, stung 
by her treatment, and hardly reflecting on 
what he did, he rose abruptly and said to her, 
"I have bored you enough. I must be going." 

" Must you ? " she said, startled, and look- 
ing as if she understood nothing of his mood. 
" What time is it ? It is late. Perhaps you 
had better go, then." 

He had not expected to be taken at his 
word like this. He stared at her incredulously 
for a second or two, and then, in a voice which 
she hardly recognized as his own, "When 
shall I see you again ? " he said. " I will 
never come again, if you don't wish me to. I 
will never trouble you more." 

" Bobby ! " she exclaimed, " what can you 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 245 

be talking of ? How silly you are ! You had, 
indeed, better go now, unless you wish to see 
Mrs. Budden." For the first time, as she 
looked at him, it struck her that there was 
pain in his expression. She came close to 
him, and taking him by both hands, with 
distress in her own eyes, she said to him, 
" What is it, dear ? " 

" I feel," he said, " that you have hardly let 
me speak to you, and now you turn me away 
as if I were some chance visitor, and you will 
not even trouble yourself to tell me when, if 
ever, I am to see you again." 

" Don't," she said, " don't remain any longer 
so near me. I feel as if all these rosewood 
chairs had eyes. You can see me to-morrow, 
I think. I have to go to my lawyer's, and 
you might take me afterwards to some place 
where we can have luncheon. I will let you 
know to-night. Please don't be angry with 
me, but go." 

Half soothed by her parting words and 
manner, and yet still embittered by the un- 
natural constraint of the interview, he went 



246 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

out into the maze of suburban roads, and 
heavy with a sense of desolation began to 
walk towards London. But a week ago only 
a week ago they were in that enchanted 
world of forest and lake and solitude, and now, 
he reflected, how great and how desolating 
was the difference ! 

The following day the promised letter 
arrived, and, having repaired at the hour 
named in it to the street where her lawyer 
lived, he waited for half an hour, and she at 
last came out to him. There was a well-known 
hotel in the neighbourhood, and they lunched 
together in the coffee-room. Confidential 
conversation was, under the circumstances, 
impossible ; but there was something in her 
manner which spoke to him of her affection 
as plainly as words could have done, and 
perhaps more plainly than was prudent. But 
after luncheon she was obliged to meet her 
mother-in-law, and they parted without the 
solace of one single natural moment. 

For the next few days they met in the same 
way. Sometimes she was tender with him, as 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 247 

she had been on this occasion ; and not she, 
but circumstances, were the only objects of 
his resentment. But just as often she was 
ill-tempered and absent ; her business seemed 
so to preoccupy her as almost to put him out 
of her thoughts ; and once, when he slightly 
reproved her for not noticing some personal 
question, she turned on him, saying, " What 
is it you ask me ? Do you think I came here 
for the purpose of talking to you f You forget 
that to me this law business is really serious." 
On that very occasion he had, in order to 
meet her, given up an important business en- 
gagement of his own, and also a luncheon at 
which he was to have met the Prime Minister. 
The next day, what happened was even worse. 
His conduct with regard to the luncheon had 
produced considerable awkwardness, and with 
regard to his business engagement, extreme 
trouble and inconvenience ; and when he met 
Mrs. Schilizzi, there was a trace of pre- 
occupation in his manner. This seemed to 
annoy her. She taxed him with being out of 
temper, and said, " If you don't want to see 



248 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

me, you'd better have stopped away." He 
explained to her as well as he could what it 
was that was on his mind. " You know," he 
added, " the state my affairs are in. I am 
selling all I have, and must make the best 
bargain I can. By not keeping my engage- 
ment " 

" Well," she said, " what of that ? " 

He hesitated. " Merely," he said at last, 
" I shall lose, I think, several hundred pounds. 
To a poor man like me, this is a real loss. 
Please forgive me for thinking about it." 

She asked him for no particulars ; she never 
said she was sorry for him. She said only, 
" Can't you forget it, as long as you're with 
me?" 

He tried to do what she asked him, and this 
interview ended happily ; but the memory of 
it, that night, came back to him clearer than 
the experience. The wounds she had inflicted 
on him, hardly noticed by him at the time, 
began to ache and bleed ; and his diary was 
the reflection of a heart knowing its own 
bitterness. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 249 

" We have," he wrote, " two consciences a 
moral and an intellectual one ; and I suppose 
that most men who have not silenced both, 
are not only accustomed at times to examine 
their own condition, but to see it in two 
different lights. Now my moral conscience, 
in a way which I never should have thought 
possible, has justified my choice in life ; and 
so till lately did my intellectual conscience 
also. But my intellectual conscience now is 
asking me if I am not a fool. 

" trma, what have you done to me, that I 
should ask myself this question ? Here am I 
deliberately not in an impulsive moment, 
but deliberately preparing, with a careful 
and painful choice of means, to make myself 
naked of everything which ordinary wisdom 
would tell me was best worth my living for. 
I am throwing into the fire everything for 
which ambition craves, just as it was being 
put into my hands. The home of my family, 
which I might have restored, I am going to 
sell ; and all chances of a home in another 
sense I am putting voluntarily away from me. 



250 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

And for what? This very morning, before I 
met her, I was with my man of business, going 
over the details of the proposed sale of my 
property, and learning, amongst other things, 
how by meeting her yesterday I had lost 
my chance of arranging with a very difficult 
creditor ; and then, when I tell her this I 
was obliged to tell her ; I should never other- 
wise have breathed to her a word about it 
good God ! how does she behave to me ? I 
should have felt less pain if she had stuck a 
dagger into me. And yet what I wince at is not 
so much my own pain, as the thought that her 
nature should make it possible for her to inflict 
it. She sees that for her sake I am giving up 
everything ; and she might, one would have 
thought, have guessed without being told that 
it costs me something at all events to part 
with my old home. She might even have sym- 
pathized with my troubles about money when 
they were accidentally brought to her notice. 
But no I got from her not one word of 
sympathy. Whatever I may suffer seems to 
be absolutely nothing to her, except in so far 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 251 

as I annoy her by letting her see my suffering. 
How can a woman be like that ? I don't know. 
It's all a puzzle to me. Irma, Irma are you 
going to make me hate you ? If you could I 
should be free, and there would be an end of 
the matter. But I can't hate you that's the 
difficulty. Perversely and irrationally my 
faith in you still sticks to me, though it gives 
me no comfort ; and my love for you puts in 
your hand the weapons with which you wound 
me. If I didn't love you, you might be as 
hard and shallow as you pleased. And yet at 
times I can plead for you, and make out a case 
for you, explaining away all your strange 
behaviour, and showing you to be still un- 
changed. But then then here is the dis- 
tracting thing : the moment I have done that, 
I refute all my own pleadings and represent 
you to myself as I can't write down what. 
Irma, I won't even think of it. I will believe, 
though I can hardly realize, that you are still 
the Irma of that far-off lake and forest, who 
was not ashamed to tell me all her thoughts, 
or to show me her eyes with tears in them. 



252 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

Yes I will believe that, even if I cannot 
feel it. 

" But quite apart from all doubts of tins 
kind, how wretched my position seems ! As I 
say, I have given up everything for the com- 
panionship of this woman ; and with what 
result ? Three-quarters of an hour out of the 
twenty-four is the most I see of her ; and 
these few minutes are snatched with diffi- 
culty, followed by hours of pain, and preceded 
by hours of anxiety, as if all the time between 
them were stretched and tortured on a rack. 
And yet and yet if you are not the most 
contemptible of women, Irma, Trma, I should 
like to be saying this to you if you are worth 
anything to me you are worth everything." 

After he had written this, he read it over 
again. He paused at one sentence, repeating 
it half aloud to himself. "Yes," he said, "it 
is just that. All my time is being stretched 
and tortured on a rack. I am wretched until 
I have seen her. I am still more wretched 
afterwards." 

Several days went by. and matters did not 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 253 

mend. Indeed, the strain on his nerves became 
even more intolerable. Each time he met her 
she would, once or twice at least, look at him 
with her old expression, and speak to him with 
her old tenderness ; but always in the back- 
ground there seemed to be some ambushed 

o 

anger, which would spring out at him suddenly, 
he knew not for what reason ; and, worse still 
than this, when her anger was hushed or 
absent, and when her eyes were kind, she had 
an air of preoccupation which he had never 
noticed in her before ; and when her words 
replied to him, her thoughts seemed to be 
wandering. At each successive meeting, from 
its beginning to its close, he was hoping every 
moment that she would break through this 
strange disguise, and show him her true self 
again the self he had once known. But he 
hoped in vain ; and even when she said Good- 
bye, something rigid remained in the lines of 
her softening lips. 

Painful and perplexing as these interviews 
were in themselves, their pain was doubled in 
the memories which they left behind them, 



254 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

and which permeated the hours he was away 
from her like the virus from some snake's bite. 
And these hours now formed the great bulk 
of his life. Some of them were occupied by 
his own business matters; some by work in 
Downing Street ; and for each night he had 
some dinner or party. But these occupations 
and engagements left him long intervals of 
solitude, and he had not the heart himself to 
seek out any society. Indeed, even had he 
wished to do so, he would generally have been 
unable ; for she left him in such uncertainty 
as to where and when she would see him, that 
he rarely could make an engagement four 
hours in advance. He was always returning 
to his rooms to see if there were any letter 
from her ; and then, when there was one, which 
settled their next interview, he vainly tried 
during the interval to calm himself by walk- 
ing, wandering away into the suburbs, or 
into obscure streets ; whilst life was for him 
like a tree of iron in hell, and his thoughts 
were like birds who found every twig burn 
them. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 255 

" I used," he wrote in his diary on one of 
those unhappy days, " I used to think, before 
all this happened, that I had plenty of self- 
control ; but I don't know now what's come 
to me. Certain words from her, even little 
looks and gestures, wound me, and make me 
beside myself. My wretchedness now is like 
the acute wretchedness of a child. All these 
parties I go to seem like parties of the 
damned, or some mad show got up to mock 
me. Through conversation, through music, 
through everything, I feel the desolation to 
which she has reduced my life ; and then 
I can't help it I get embittered against her. 
Sometimes when that happens I am aghast 
at my own temper, and I wonder if any one 
ever had such a devilish heart as mine. All 
I plead is that when this temper possesses 
me, I never quite yield to it. I said I was 
wretched as a child is wretched; but the 
difference is, I don't show my wretchedness. 
Often, when I have felt most violent and 
vindictive, I have, in order to cure myself, 
done little acts of kindness which I might 



256 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

not have thought of otherwise. Once when 
I caught myself can I write it ? when I 
caught myself cursing Irma, I helped an old 
woman it was on a road near Wimbledon 
to lift into a cart some baskets of clothes 
that had fallen from it. She said, ' God bless 
you, sir ! ' I was glad to hear her say that. 
And then in the street sometimes, when, 
absorbed in my angry mood, I have refused 
a penny to a beggar, I have walked back and 
caught him up, and given him something. 
The day after Irma had made me most angry, 
I spent the morning with my old aunt, 
trying to make things smooth for her ; and 
I paid some money into her account at her 
banker's. Oh, Irma, why do you make me 
so angry so unworthy of my own self- 
respect ? 

" But anyhow, though I see now my own 
inward weakness, for practical purposes I have 
been able to conquer it. In spite of the pain 
which has had its teeth in my heart, I have 
pleased the Chancellor of the Exchequer with 
some work I have been able to do for him. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 257 

He praised me for my clearness and my 
energy. I have seen the Prime Minister, and 

O/ 

he too was complimentary. This is good for 
me ; because, when I next see Irma, and she 
treats me like so much dirt, or seems to do so, 
I am able to bear it better ; for I think I 
must be still worth something." 

Next day, however, his philosophy quite 
broke down. She asked him to meet her at a 
shop, and help her to choose a carpet, which 
was, she said, wanted for her own home at 
Hampstead. He went. He waited for half an 
hour in the street, till a group of boys and a 
policeman all began to stare at him ; and 
then, when she came, her only greeting was 
this, " Come in quickly. Don't you know I've 
no time to spare ? " In the shop when she 
asked his advice, and he did his best to give 
it, every opinion of his and every suggestion 
she received as if it were some affront to 
her ; and when once again they were in the 
street, she stood scanning the passing vehicles, 
and said to him sharply, " Well are you 
not going to call a hansom ? " " Do you 

VOL. II. S 



258 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

want one ? " lie asked. " What do you 
suppose ? " she answered. " Do you suppose 
that I'm going to walk all the way from 
here to Hampstead ? " He called a hansom 
instantly. In another second it was by the 
pavement. The promptitude of his action 
seemed a little to discompose her ; but he 
gave her no excuse for lingering. He politely 
helped her to enter. He closed the door ; 
gave the man the directions; raised his hat 
to her, turned on his heel, and went. That 
evening his diary was very brief. It was 
simply, "This can't go on. Unless she 
changes, I must leave her. There's nothing 
else to be done. Irma, I must say good-bye 
to you." 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE following morning he could hardly 
believe his eyes. Having lain awake half 
that night, he had finally overslept himself; 
and the moment he woke, a letter was put 
into his hands. It was from her. " To- 
morrow," she wrote. " my mother-in-law will 
be away for the entire afternoon. Call for 
me here at two, and we will go to my own 
house. I have several things to attend to, 
and I want you to see the place. Was I 
cross yesterday ? You were." 

This invitation, though its closing words 
annoyed him, came to Grenville like summer 
returned in winter. The pain at his heart 
ceased, like noise giving place to silence. It 
is true that when she met him in Mrs. Budden's 



260 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

drawing-room, she still treated him with a 
certain superficial coldness ; but it was a 
coldness which her eyes belied. She had on 
her hat and gloves, prepared to go out at 
once ; and her cheeks were bright by contrast 
with the same brown dress which she wore 
on the day of the first expedition she had 
made with him. All the air of Lichtenbourg 
seemed clinging to its folds like a perfume. 

"We will walk," she said. "It is the 
other side of the Heath. Come : I am quite 
ready. Let us be out of this dreadful room. 
As I told you the other day, my mother-in- 
law and all Paul's family seem to be staring 
at me out of these rosewood chairs." They 
were soon outside. "Do be careful," she said. 
" Walk not too near me. We can't tell who 
may be looking." 

Before long, however, they were out of the 
region of streets, and had taken a path over 
the broken and furze-grown heath ; and now, 
as she felt they were more securely alone 
together, her own natural manner, which Gren- 
ville had almost forgotten, came back to her. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 261 

" Irma," he said, " do you know how I feel 
now ? I feel as if you had been dead, and 
had suddenly come to life again." 

" Indeed," she replied, " I have been living 
under conditions that well might kill me." 
Her look and manner both showed that she 
understood him ; but they left him sore with 
a sense that her sympathy was inadequate to 
his pain. "There," she said presently, "there 
is our house beyond those pine-trees." 

It was a large house in a garden full of 
foliage, with a gleaming conservatory on one 
side, and stables and out-buildings on the 
other. The drive and the flower-beds were 
kept with exquisite neatness ; the steps that 
led to the entrance were as white as a clean 
table-cloth. Everything suggested the aggres- 
sive neatness of a man who can think himself 
a gentleman only when his clothes are new. 
Indoors Grenville received the same impres- 
sion. The floors were scrupulously polished ; 
the walls smelt of paint and gilding; but at 
the same time he was astonished by the 
quality of the objects that surrounded him. 



262 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

There was in the hall a magnificent Italian 
coffer, and a huge picture, which purported 
to be a Kubens, and which, if not an original, 
was at all events a splendid copy. There 
were fine Florentine chairs, and a large 
Venetian mirror ; and glass doors on one 
side opened into the conservatory, which was 
glowing with tropical vegetation. The re- 
ception rooms were just what the hall might 
have led one to expect. The ceilings were 
gaudy with Parisian clouds and cupids ; there 
was abundance of' modern furniture, which 
had been bought at an exhibition ; some 
Sevres and Chelsea china ; some marketable 
modern pictures ; and placed about under 
glass cases, some cameos, some crystal goblets, 
and other objects similar. Though none of 
these individually was first-rate, nothing was 
bad ; but the effect of the whole was frightful. 
It represented a life altogether at variance 
with whatever beauty the individual things 
possessed. They all took a tone from the 
large shining tables, on which photographic 
albums were arranged in pyramids, and from 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 263 

the carpet, rich' in pile, but monstrous in 
design and colour, whose crude vulgarity 
made a staring ground for everything. 

Grenville tried to keep his impression of 
the room to himself, and merely said, " What 
a fine collection you have here ! " 

" Paul," she replied, " says that there isn't* 
a saucer that wouldn't fetch now at Christie's 
more than the price he paid for it. Come 
I will show you his room." 

This was full of floridly carved walnut 
furniture, much resembling that of the apart- 
ment at Vienna ; and the whole was some- 
what suggestive of the interior of a Pulman 
car. On the thick hearthrug was an electro- 
plated spittoon. There were some shelves 
designed for books, but used for boxes of 
cigars ; and art was represented by some 
coloured prints of race-horses. 

"You won't," said Mrs. Schilizzi, "find 
the portrait of any actress here. Paul is 
afraid of his mother, whose eyes are as quick 
as arrows. She tolerates those horses only 
under severe protest ; and she takes him to 



264 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

church with her every Sunday twice. Oddly 
enough, in England he thinks she is quite 
right ; and for this reason he prefers living 
abroad." 

"What a home," thought Grenville, "for 
such a woman as this ! " It bore the same 
relation to the homes with which he was 
familiar, that a school-boy's nonsense verses 
might bear to a passage from Virgil composed 
of the same materials, but differing in having 
no meaning. 

At last, however, a door was opened, passing 
through which he felt himself in another 
world. Here was a room, chill indeed with 
the tidiness that comes of being not occupied, 
but full of all the signs of delicate and refined 
life. The chairs were covered with old- 
fashioned flowered chintz ; there were books 
in profusion, bound, not expensively, but with 
all the careful taste of one who evidently 
loved them. Over the chimney-piece were 
a few Chelsea figures ; and on each side of 
the mirror were some cases of old miniatures. 

" 1 have told the housekeeper," she said, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 265 

" to let us have tea here. We can be quiet 
here for a little ; and for a little while I can 
be myself again. How horrid and how 
strange you must have thought me these 
last days ! Bobby," she went on, " this room 
means to me an entire lifetime. All these 
things were mine before I married ; and it 
was here that I first grew at home with 
pain. And yet, compared with the other 
rooms in this house, I look back on it as a 
refuge. I could be alone here away from 
that dreadful drawing-room. Do you see this 
carpet, how old and shabby and worn it is ? 
I had it in my room at home. Paul was in 
such a rage with me because I wished to 
keep it. These old things of mine seemed 
often my only friends." 

He began to look at her books, at her 
pieces of china, and her miniatures. She 
went round the room with him, standing by 
him and explaining everything. He saw the 
volumes she had valued most when a child, 
with the blots and pictures she had made on 
margins and title-pages. She pointed out to 



266 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

him her mother's miniature and her father's ; 
and all the affection and purity which had 
brooded over her childhood seemed to spread 
its wings over both of them and fold them 
in a common shelter. 

" Irma," he said at last, " if only I could 
keep you always ! " 

She made no direct answer, but starting 
as if at a sudden thought, " Wait a minute," 
she said, and moved away towards a drawer. 
"Do you remember I told you at Vienna 
that I would show you something? Well, I 
couldn't find it, and you forgot to ask me 
about it. Here's what will do as well. See 
this is Paul's photograph." 

Grenville took it. He stared at it. The 
features were not new to him. They were 
those of the lover who had been his com- 
panion in the train. He examined it care- 
fully to make himself quite sure ; and for 
reasons which at the moment he had not 
time to analyze, he felt as if some unknown 
weight had been lifted from his heart, or 
had been lightened. She had turned away 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 267 

from him when he took it, so noticed nothing 
of his expression. His first impulse had been 
to tell her of his recognition, but he stopped 
himself; and he returned the picture to her, 
saying merely, " One day I must tell you 
something." 

She looked at him shyly, without asking 
his meaning. 

" It is late," she said. " It is time for me 
to be going. You must leave me here. You 
must on no account walk back with me." 

" Tell me," he rejoined, " when shall I see 
you to-morrow ? " 

" Ah ! " she exclaimed, " I wanted to talk 
to you about that. To-morrow I am quite 
free ; Mrs. Budden is going into the country ; 
but the day after I am going into the country 
myself. That day is Saturday, and I must 
stay away till Tuesday." 

An exclamation of displeasure involuntarily 
escaped from Grenville. 

"Don't be angry," she said; "why should 
you be so hasty ? You can come with me if 
you like. That was what I was waiting to tell 



268 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

you. I am going to a little sea-side place in 
Suffolk, to be for a day or two with a child of 
one of my sisters." 

Grenville's expression underwent an im- 
mediate change. Happiness was filling his 
mind like water surging into a lock. 

"Of course I will come," he said. "But 
about to-morrow listen. I have seen your 
home to day. Will you come with me and 
see mine to-morrow *? I am going to visit it, 
perhaps for the last time. It is," he went on, 
"only thirty miles from London." And he 
mentioned the railway by which to reach it, 
and also a convenient train. At first the 
expedition struck her as impossible. The fear 
of her mother-in-law seemed to paralyze her 
powers of movement ; but the longing to come 
with him, growing as she thought over the 
project, presently showed her the means of 
absenting herself without offence. 

At the appointed hour they met at Waterloo 
Bridge, and an hour's rapid travelling brought 
them to a Hampshire station, situated in a 
region of fir woods and wild commons. The 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 269 

dusty road, along which they were soon driving, 
was bordered with trees which made a flicker- 
ing shade. Yellow gorse glittered ; red-roofed 
cottages sunned themselves ; and the signs of 
old-world inns swung by the broad footpath. 
The whole landscape was full of that singular 
primitiveness to be found in so many places 
that are almost within sight of London ; and 
Mrs. Schilizzi was at once surprised and de- 
lighted at it. At length they reached a wide 
undulating heath, tufted with gorse and heather, 
and surrounded by zones of woodland, where 
white glimpses of several important houses 
showed in the distance, shimmering through 
the haze of trees. In the middle of this heath, 
at the beginning of an abrupt ascent, Grenville 
stopped the driver, and proposed to his com- 
panion that they should walk. He took her 
by a footpath up the slope through the gorse- 
bushes ; and the moment she reached the 
summit she stopped short with an exclamation. 
For there, on a slope beyond, backed by blue 
fir woods, and fronted by grass and fern, a 
forest of twisted chimney-stacks rose from a 



270 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

dim red pile, whose magnitude was at once 
apparent from the number of its mullioned 
windows. Domed turrets in the garden, 
steps and balustrades, were visible. An avenue 
of elms climbed the slope to the house ; and 
hardly a furlong from where they stood were 
the lodge-gates giving access to it. 

" And is that your home ? " exclaimed Mrs. 
Schilizzi. " How beautiful ! " The words 
were ordinary enough ; but there was a sort of 
sob in her utterance of them, full of thoughts 
and feelings which she was unable to speak. 
" And am I depriving you of this ? " Such 
was its general meaning. Grenville knew that 
it was so, but affected to be otherwise occu- 
pied ; and when he spoke he forced his tone 
to be cheerful. " Do you see this ? " he said, 
as he pulled a parcel from his pocket. 

" Yes," she replied. " What is it ? " 

And as she looked and spoke, he saw that a 
tear fell from her cheek upon her glove. He 
showed her, with a laugh, a false beard and 
whiskers. 

" I don't," he said, " want to be recognized 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 271 

in case there should be any one to recognize 
me. I want to go as a stranger, and I have 
an order to view, which will admit us. Look 
are the things on properly ? I wore them 
at some private theatricals ; and my oldest 
friends said that they would never have re- 
cognized me. Tell me do you think you 
would ? " 

She assured him his disguise was sufficient, 
and not altogether unbecoming ; and they 
went together up the avenue. It was evident 
that the place received a certain amount of 
attention ; but signs of neglect and dilapida- 
tion might be nevertheless traced everywhere. 
There was a sheet of water covered with green 
weed ; there were fences ill-mended, and 
clumps of trees and shrubs killing each other 
for want of pruning. At last came the iron 
gates, just outside the house. Half their scroll- 
work was eaten away by rust. They passed 
through these into a great gravelled enclosure, 
and made their way towards the lofty win- 
dowed walls, which the down-drawn blinds 
covered with blots of whiteness. 



272 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

" My tenants," said Grenville, " I know 
are away now. I shall pass for a stranger 
for an intending purchaser. I couldn't have 
borne to be seen in my true character. Every- 
thing here has for me some memory every 
door every window even that kennel there, 
where our old dog Ponto lived." 

An echoing peal of the bell had meanwhile 
summoned a servant ; and in the course of a 
few minutes they were making their tour of 
the house. On the principal floor, reached by 
a wide oak staircase, was a magnificent suite 
of rooms, hung with tapestry, and leading into 
a long gallery, full of old chests, and spinning- 
wheels, and the boots and breast-plates of 
cavaliers. The dark boards, with some scraps 
of faded matting on them, were here uneven 
with age, and the air was pungent with an 
incense-like smell of dust. To Mrs. Schilizzi 
the whole place was a revelation ; and her 
breathless appreciation of it beguiled Grenville 
of his melancholy. 

" We never," he said in French to her, 
"used this part of the house. We could 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 273 

hardly afford even to have it swept. Our 
quarters," he continued, when they descended 
to the floor below, " our quarters were here, 
looking out on the garden." And the servant, 
as he spoke, admitted them to a good-sized 
drawing-room, hting with portraits, and sur- 
rounded with dim gilt tables. On one of these 
portraits Grenville fixed, his eyes, and then 
said hastily to the servant, " Pray open the 
dining-room and the library too, and the 
boudoir. I know the house I shall have to 
see all of them." 

The man went ; and as soon as they were 
left alone, " Irma," said Grenville, " that 
picture is my mother. That is my little sister. 
They are both dead. Do you see this marble 
table, with a pack of cards inlaid in it ? My 
mother was sitting by it, her head resting on 
her hand, the only time I ever said an unkind 
word to her. I was only fifteen then. I 
remember to this day the line of pain 
that quivered at the corners of her closed 
mouth. Everything speaks to me here. 
Don't think me a fool. I hope that man's 

VOL. II. T 



274 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

not coming. I shall be too blind to see 
him." 

His face was averted. He looked as if he 
were staring at the wall ; but a moment later 
he turned to her, first biting his lip, then 
forcing a laugh ; and there was nothing left in 
his eyes betraying a want of fortitude. After- 
wards they went into the garden, and then 
through portions of the park. He pointed out 
to her the bark of a youngish beech-tree, on 
which some letters were cut, distorted by the 
rind's growth. They were still legible ; and 
they spelt, " Eobert Grenville." 

" Come," at last he said to her, " come we 
have seen all. When my mother and my 
sister died, I was fonder of this place than of 
anything." 

"And now," she said, "for the sake of a 
worthless woman, you are going to rob yourself 
of all that was most dear to you." 

" No," he replied ; " a woman has revealed 
to me something that is dearer." 

At a convenient spot he freed himself of his 
slight disguise. They rejoined their carriage, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 275 

and the train was hurrying them soon to 
London. 

Her manner now had a tenderness he had 
never known in it before. In the earlier days 
of their relationship her being had clung to 
his. It now seemed to him brooding com- 
passionately over it. Poetry and prose come 
into strange contact. Signs and advertisements 
on each side of the line showed them they 
were nearing London, and roused her from a 
long silence. 

" You," she said, " who are sacrificing so 
much for me do you know what I should 
say to you if I had the courage ? I should 
say to you, Do not complete the sacrifice. As 
it is, I can say only, Let me do my all to repay 
you for it. And that all is so little. I never 
knew till to-day how much you really cared 
for me. This has been a day of happiness ; 
and also a day of trouble." 

" Well," he answered, " trouble is to love 
what night is to a star." 

" Vauxhall ! " shouted a voice outside. 
" Tickets ready all tickets." 



276 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

They both laughed at this interruption, and 
their parting at the terminus had peace in it 
a peace which was disturbed only by throbbing 
anticipations of to-morrow. As for him, he 
all that night dreamed of the station at Liver- 
pool Street, which was to be the scene of their 
next meeting ; and each time he awoke, as he 
often did restless from expectancy, the dark- 
ness of the future was illuminated by an 
Aurora Borealis of hope. But doubts still 
annoyed him as to whether hope would fulfil 
itself, till he actually saw her dress glimmering 
amongst the crowd on the platform ; and he 
found himself gliding away with her from 
under the station arches, leaving London 
behind them for the hush of the Suffolk shores. 

But now he was secure of her. The melan- 
choly of yesterday, the anxieties and jarring 
incidents of the days preceding, gave to them 
a feeling of exultation, as if they were escap- 
ing from some house of bondage ; and as 
for the sacrifice which had so lately saddened 
both of them, he had forgotten he had to 
make, she, that she had to accept it. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 277 

The watering-place they were bound for 
was little more than a fishing-village, with 
some villas, an hotel, and a terrace of lodging- 
houses annexed to it ; and though in its 
season Cockneys swarmed like flies there, now 
it was full of its own local silence. Two 
musty cabs, however, were waiting patiently 
at the station, whose drivers appeared even 
more surprised than pleased when two well- 
dressed strangers appeared and engaged both 
of them. 

Mrs. Schilizzi was to stay in lodgings that 
had been engaged by her sister. Grenville 
had, by telegraph, ordered rooms in the 
hotel. The two abodes were not very far 
apart. They both looked on a wind-swept 
down or common, fringing which was the 
beach and the shining sea. On this common 
they had arranged to meet in an hour ; and 
Grenville saw at a glance that there would 
be no chance of their missing each other. 
They met. After the jars and noises of 
London, and the painful and precarious in- 
terviews which, straining the nerves of each 



278 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

and trying the tempers, still left smarting 
traces of the pain that had been thus inflicted, 
the intense peacefulness which now surrounded 
them lay on their ears like velvet, and found 
its way into their souls. The only sounds 
heard were intermittent and isolated the 
occasional rattle of some solitary cart or van, 
or of one little yellow omnibus with the 
packages of some commercial traveller, the 
voices of a child or two playing, or of one 
man calling to another by name, or the plunge 
of the waves which, long and slow and shining, 
curved into foam and fell on the shingle not 
far away. She took his arm, confidingly, 
with a frank temerity, and they went towards 
the beach, over the thin pale-coloured grass, 
crushing with their feet as they did so many 
a drifted shell. Scents of the sea moved 
and floated in the air, and their hearts were 
filled to overflowing with a deep tumultuous 
tranquillity. They sat on the shore ; played 
with the pebbles and threw. them ; and watched 
the dove-coloured clouds change their shapes 
on the horizon, and catch the gleams of sunset. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 279 

"To-morrow," she said to him, "we will 
manage to dine together. This evening at 
six I must have tea with my little niece. 
You can dine meanwhile, and take me out 
again afterwards." 

At a little distance was an old wooden 
pier, dilapidated, and looking like the ribs 
of some wrecked vessel. An hour or two 
later they walked to it, when it looked black 
in the moonlight, and they sat together 
almost silent on one of its crazy benches. 
The tide was full. There was a hush on the 
breathless waters ; and in Grenville's heart 
was the hush and fulness of the tide. At 
last he felt her his own again, as she had 
been in the Hungarian forest. All his doubts 
and pains and desolating exasperation faded 
out of his memory, and became things un- 
believable. They only had this effect, that 
she was dearer to him now than ever. For 
some time they spoke only in those broken 
syllables which if written down seem so 
silly or unmeaning, but which are for lovers 
signs of a silent eloquence, like ripples that 



280 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

break at intervals on a current of noiseless 
waters. But at last Grenville roused himself, 
and with an effort changing his manner, began 
to address her with a distinct and deliberate 
utterance, which might to a passing listener 
have sounded entirely commonplace. At first 
she looked at him, puzzled ; but she soon 
understood his meaning. 

"I wish," he said, "but I don't wish it 
from vanity, that you would think over various 
merits which I venture to think myself 
possessed of. In many ways I'm an excellent 
man of business. I can grasp a legal point 
almost as quickly as a solicitor. I could at 
this moment go into many a city office, and 
amend the details of many a financial scheme. 
I have a keen sense of the ridiculous. I'm 
a seasoned man of the world ; and no one 
has known better than I how to value the 
world's advantages. But you I am not in 
the least exaggerating have transmuted the 
world for me like an alchemist. You have 
turned my estimate of things entirely topsy- 
turvy. What I would tell you, if I could, 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 281 

in the most passionate language of poetry, 
I can tell you also in the baldest and most 
matter-of-fact prose. My devotion to you is 
so real, and goes so through my whole life, 
that it would bear being expressed in an 
affidavit quite as well as in a poem. Nero 
wished that the populace had only one throat, 
that he might cut it. All the things I value 
have only one pair of eyes ; and they are 
close to me -.1 see them shining now. Irina," 
he continued, "my heart is like a cathedral, 
where a lamp is always burning in your 
honour, and where sometimes in your honour 
there is nothing but solemn silence, sometimes 
the murmur of some new act of devotion. 
Tell me, do my words reach you so as to 
make you feel them ; or are they like a jet 
of water from a fire-engine too far off, which 
breaks into spray before it strikes what it 
is aimed at." 

"Don't," she exclaimed, "don't. Your 
words not only strike, but penetrate ; and 
my heart is so full of what they mean, and 
so jealous of losing it, that what shall 



282 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

I say ? Dear, I can hardly bear it. I am 
rather sad to-night. I will tell you why 
to-morrow." 

To-morrow came ; but the promise was not 
at once fulfilled. In the morning she was 
sad no longer. She was buoyed up on the 
tide of a triumphant happiness against which 
she could not struggle ; and the horizon of 
the day before her was like that of a summer 
sea, which met heaven and hid all the world 
beyond. Some hours she devoted to her 
little niece, doing for her all that could be 
done by the kindest mother; but every 
minute not thus occupied she spent with 
Grenville, full of a simple-hearted happiness 
which trouble dared not sully. But towards 
the evening her sadness returned again. They 
were sitting on the beach, watching some 
distant sails. Suddenly she said to him 
" To-day you've been very good to me. You've 
not been angry with me because I've given 
so many hours to my niece ; and yet I am 
sure it tried you. But you knew it was my 
duty; and you never once looked cross at 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 283 

me. I am so touched, dear, by all these 
little forbearances. And yet oh, Bobby, 
Bobby, there is something I want to say to 
you. I wanted to say it last night, only I 
hardly knew how ; and all to-day I've not 
wanted to say it at all." 

"What is it?" he asked. She hesitated 
and blushed. She began to speak, and then 
stopped herself. What was in her mind 
Grenville could not conjecture ; but one thing 
came better to his view than ever it had 
done before the fact that for him she was 
guilelessly and defencelessly truthful. There 
was something almost painful in the degree 
to which this touched him in the new and 
sudden call which it made on his care and 
tenderness. " What is it ? " he asked again. 
" Tell me. I shall understand, whatever it is." 
" Yes," she said ; " I indeed believe you 
will. You understand me too well ; and it 
you are too good to me. I think I can 
tell you now. You see, Bobby, my loving 
you you see sometimes it is mere happiness, 
just as it's been to-day; and then at other 



284 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

times it overwhelms me and lifts me like a 
religion. It was like that last night, and it's 
so again now. Well, this is what I feel 
if we weren't in a public place, I should like 
as I told you to hide my eyes on your shoulder 
I feel that the higher and purer my love 
gets, it raises some standard in me by which 
I condemn myself; or at any rate, it makes 
doubts trouble me which in more careless 
moods I can answer. Don't be angry with 
me. I blame myself, not you." 

" I myself," he said, " am not free from 
trouble. When I put before myself our posi- 
tion in general terms, often and often I con- 
demn it ; but when I think of it as it really 
is, and when I think of you as a part of it, let 
me say what I may to myself, it is redeemed, 
and my blame falls powerless on it. But oh, 
Irma, I ought to tell you this : If you don't 
agree with me naturally I don't want how 
difficult it is to put some things I don't want 
to cajole you with what your conscience may 
resent as sophisms." 

"Dear," she said, "I did not mean to dis- 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 285 

tress you. I believe at heart I feel exactly as 
you do ; but my doubts will come at times, 
and I like to tell you everything. But this 
evening, Bobby, they have come, not, I think, 
on their own account, but merely because my 
spirits are getting a little low again. I have a 
sort of presentiment that something bad will 
happen to-morrow ; and even if it doesn't, to- 
morrow is our last day here. The day after I 
shall have finished my business ; and then I 
shall have to leave you and hurry back to my 
children. To leave you that will be sad 
enough ; but not even for your sake would I 
stay away from my children. Perhaps if they 
were here I should have none of these morbid 
fancies." 

" Irma ! " said Grenville, " what have you 
just been saying? Do you suppose that when 
you go I shall not go also ? So long as your 
welfare will not suffer by it, and so long as 
you will allow me, I mean never to leave you ; 
whilst as to your children I should hardly 
believe I had any place in your heart if that 
place in some ways were not subordinate to 



286 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

theirs. And now," he went on, " there is 
something more I have never yet mentioned 
it to you ; indeed, I only knew it a day or 
two ago which I want to tell you. It has 
made to me a considerable difference since I 
knew it." 

" Yes "? " she gasped. " Is it anything very 
dreadful?" 

" You remember," he answered, " that at 
your house the other day you showed me a 
certain photograph. Well I recognized it. 
I have already met the original. I travelled 
with him from Paris to Vienna before my 
visit to the Princess. I talked to him. Listen, 
I will explain to you all about it." 

" Are you sure it was he ? " she interposed. 
" Was he alone ? I believe he very rarely is." 

" He was alone in the train ; but somebody 
was with him on the platform. He told me 
who she was. He was very frank and com- 
municative. You, I dare say, will know what 
I mean by that. I don't want to dwell on it, 
but I want to tell you that since I made this 
discovery, the chief uneasiness that lurked in 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 287 

my mind is gone. I only knew it was there 
by the relief it has given me by going. I am 
appropriating nothing that he either under- 
stands or values. I always felt that this was 
so ; but only now has it been proved to me. 
Can't you see with me what a difference this 
must make ? " 

She looked him long in the face ; and at 
last, turning away, " I am glad," she said, " of 
this. It makes me also happier. You now 
see what my position is, and how completely, 
except for you, I am alone. Please don't fret 
about me. My heart has been lightened as 
yours has been. I am happy. I am alone 
no longer." 

Nor next day was the state of her mind 
changed. The thought that this peaceful 
interval would so soon come to an end did, 
indeed, sadden both of them ; but it was a 
sadness brooding over peace, like clouds over 
a quiet sea. The midday post, however, 
brought her a letter from London, bearing 
many stamps on it, and darkened with re- 
directions. "It is something from Paul ! " 



288 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

she exclaimed. Her cheeks flushed as she 
read it. " His work at Smyrna is nearly 
done," she said presently, " and what is 
this ? There are some new waterworks at 
Bucharest, for which the firm has a contract. 
He will be going there in three weeks. He 
supposes that I and the children are at Vienna 
or with the Princess ; and as soon as he is 
able to do so, he will come to us." 

She dropped the letter on her lap, and 
looked at Grenville silently. " Of course," 
she said at last, "it must have happened 
sooner or later ; but sometimes, Bobby, some- 
times one forgets things." 

" If you," he replied, " are as serious as I 
am, we both of us have to face a difficult 
and painful situation. I have known this all 
along ; still, when such a thing comes close, 
of course at first one shudders at it. But 
even if our path grows stony, do not the less 
lean on me." 

As he spoke her smile again came back to 
her, but she acknowledged his words solely by 
a single glance of gratitude. He felt that this 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 289 

gave him a new insight into her character. 
He felt that many things in her behaviour, 
many little cases of what seemed neglect and 
carelessness, were due not to any want of 
recognition on her part, but to a foregone 
conclusion that he would take her recognition 
for granted. And so through all that day, 
though a certain sadness filled it, a happiness 
reigned which the sadness only deepened. 
They arranged to dine late, so as to catch 
the last glow of the evening ; and again they 
sat on the shore together, playing with the 
pebbles and the sea- weed, and watching the 
waves fall. Everything on which their eyes 
rested was steeped in a pathetic beauty, which 
did not come from the sunset, though that 
indeed was beautiful, but which comes at any 
hour to things seen for the last time. She 
had been repeating some random fragments 
of poetry. Once or twice she had quoted 
a line wrong, and he had laughed at her. 
Certain sorts of ridicule are more tender than 
a caress. For one verse especially he insisted 
on finding fault with her. It was an English 

VOL. II. U 



290 A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 

verse of eight syllables, and ought to have run 

thus 

" See, on the shore, the waters fall." 

She, however, turned waters into " waves," 
and he tried to convince her how halting she 
made the metre. Presently a thought struck 

him. 

" See, on the shore, the waves fall ! " 

he repeated. " Do you know, in itself that 
metre is musical. I can't tell why, but my 
thoughts at this moment are in tune with it. 
Irma, be quiet a moment, and I will set them 
to the music of your mistake." He borrowed 
a pencil of her, and the back of an envelope ; 
and now murmuring to himself, and now 
writing, he was occupied whilst she watched 
him. " Listen to this," he said at last ; and 
he looked up at her seriously. She leaned 
her hand on his shoulder, and watched his 
hasty scribbling, as he read 

" See, in the west the day fails ; 

Low on the sands the waves sound ; 
Slow on the down the lean sails 
Of the mill drift round. 



A HUMAN DOCUMENT. 291 

See, in the west is one star ! 

See, a day we have found fair 
Is leaving the things that still are 

For the things that once were. 

Hold me fast by your true hand ; 

Turn away from the changed sea. 
Our day forsakes the forlorn land ; 
Never forsake me ! " 



END OF VOLUME II. 



RICHARD CLAY <& Sons, LIMITED, 
LONDON & BUNOAY. 



~ 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



Mallock, William Hurrell 
4972 A human document 

M5H8 
v. r 



