ALADORE 

HENRY NEWBOLT 




IY 




Presented to the 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO 
LIBRARY 

by the 

ONTARIO LEGISLATIVE 
LIBRARY 

1980 



ALADORE 







;-: * 



BY 



HENRY NEWBOLT 

AUTHOR OF 'THE TWYMANS," 'THE NEW JUNE,' ETC. 



ILLUSTRATED IN COLLOTYPE FROM DRAWINGS BY 

THE LADY HTLTON 



: 

' 
f* \" ' . 



William Blackwood and Sons 

Edinburgh and London 

1914 




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 



CONTENTS. 



1. Of the Hall of Sulney and how Sir Ywain 

left it I 

2. How Sir Ywain saw his own Face the First 

Time 8 

3. How it fortuned to Ywain to find a Staff 

in the place of his Sword . . .14 

4. How Ywain came to an Hermitage in a 

Wood ....... 20 

5. Of the Hermit and of his Dealing with 

Ywain . . . . . . .26 

6. Yet more of the Hermit, and of a Word 

that was in Ywain's Ears . . 32 

7. How Ywain looked into the Water of a 

Well, and of that which he saw therein 36 

8. How the Hermit set Ywain on his Way and 

of two Secrets that he told him . . 43 



Contents 

9. Of Ywain's Journey by Night, and how he 
was brought by a Lady to the Place of 
his Vision, and so left her ... 50 

10. Of the Lady Aithne, and of the Gifts that 

she had from her Birth .... 58 

11. How the Lady Ailinn departed out of this 

Life and of the Counsel that she gave to 

her Daughter Aithne . ' . . . 65 

12. Of the Warring of two Companies, and how 

Ywain did Battle for the one of them 
against the other . . . . 71 

13. How Ywain was brought into the City of 

Paladore . . . . . 78 

1 4. How Ywain sat at Feast in Paladore with the 

Company of the Tower and the Company 
of the Eagle . ' . . . . . 82 
i 5. Of the Gifts that were given to Ywain and of 

a Dream that he dreamed ... 88 

1 6. How Ywain found his Lady again, and how 

she went from him the Second Time ' . 94 

17. Of Aladore and of the Sands called the 

Shepherdine Sands . . i . 101 

1 8. Of Paladore and of the Princes thereof . . 109 

19. How Ywain spoke with the Prince of Pala- 

dore and how he took upon him Three 
Adventures . . . . . .115 

vi 



Contents 

20. Of the Adventure of the Chess, and by 

what means Ywain brought his Men into 
Obedience . . . . . .119 

21. Of the Adventure of the Castle of Maidens 

and how Ywain was counselled to escape 
therefrom . . . . . .130 

22. Of the Adventure of the Howling Beast . 137 

23. How Ywain emprised to go to the City of 

the Saints and so into the Delectable Isle 145 

24. How Ywain saw the City of the Saints the 

First Time and how he heard the Bells 
thereof. . . . . . .150 

25. Of the manner of the City and how Ywain 

fell adrowsing therein . . . 1 56 

26. How Ywain found his Lady in a Garden . 161 

27. How Ywain was bidden to an Abbey and so 

to be entrapped by Treason . . .166 

28. How the Moon changed, and how Ywain 

broke forth from the City of the Saints 171 

29. How Ywain came into the Lost Lands of the 

South, and of Three Signs whereby that 
Country might be known . . .177 

30. How Ywain had Fellowship with the Fauns . 188 

3 1 . How Ywain met with a Shepherdess and 

heard a Music, and how he had Sight of 
Aladore the First Time . . . .192 



Contents 

32. How Ywain lived as it had been in the 

Golden Age and how he was still un- 
satisfied ...... 201 

33. Of the Madness of the Fauns, and how Ywain 

forsook them suddenly, and his Lady with 

him . . . . . . . 206 

34. How Ywain and Aithne went flying between 

Sun and Moon . . . . .212 

35. Of the City of Dcedala, and how an Old 

Dame therein despaired of it . . . 218 

36. Of a Promise that was made to Ywain, and 

how he took Wings to seek for Aladore . 224 

37. How Ywain came the Second Time to the 

Hermit, and how he took Counsel of him 232 

38. How Ywain returned again to Paladore for to 

dwell there, and how he spoke to appease 

a Strife that was between the People . 239 

39. How Ywain beheld a Game of Children and 

heard their Singing .... 246 

40. How Ywain came to Aladore ... < . . 252 

41. How Ywain entered into the Rhymer's 

Heritage, and how he found his Lady 
therein . . . . . . .258 

42. How Ywain and Aithne were given each to 

other, and how they were Wedded by the 
Freedom of Aladore . . ... 263 



Contents 

43. How Aithne showed Ywain of the Enchant- 

ments of the Rhymer, and of them which 

do thereafter . . . . . .271 

44. How Ywain beheld his Lady sleeping, and 

how he desired to see the Castle of 
Kerioc . . . . . .279 

45. How Ywain found again him which was for- 

gotten in Aladore, and how he heard a 
Ring of Bells at Midnight . . .284 

46. How Ywain was counselled of the Prince of 

Paladore . . . . . .291 

47. How Ywain and Aithne had sight of Hubert, 

and returned together into Paladore . . 296 

48. How Ywain was awearied of Paladore, and 

how he was mishandled by the Great Ones 

of the City . . . . . .301 

49. How Ywain was excommunicate after the 

Custom of Paladore . . . .307 

50. How Ywain and Aithne came to Aladore the 

Last Time, as in this Transitory Life . 313 

51. Of two Cities that were builded diversely, 

and how Ywain and Aithne heard a Horn 
blown oversea for Battle . . . 3 1 9 

52. Of a Ship that was full of Ladies and Lovely 

Knights, and how Ywain and Aithne 
departed with them over Sea . . 325 



Contents 

53. How Ywain and Aithne came to Paladore 

the Last Time, and how the Snow fell 

all Night Long . . . . 33 2 

54. How the Horn was given into Ywain's Hand, 

and how he sounded thereon a Mort Royal 338 

55. How the Eagles fared in Fighting, and how 

Sir Rainald would have dealt with Ywain . 343 

56. How Ywain beheld a Dead Man laid on Bier 3 5 1 

57. Of a Battle by Fire and how Ywain and 

Aithne were no more seen in Paladore . 358 

58. Of a Tomb that was found in Paladore, and 

of Divers Sayings that were heard con- 
cerning it . . . . .361 



ILLUSTRATIONS. 



PAGE 

1 . How Sir Ywain was led away of a Child . 4 

2. "It was the hour of sparrow-chirp, which 

comes a little before the rising of the sun " 16 

3. How Ywain looked into the Water of a Well 36 

4. How the Lady Ailinn saw Two Women of 

the Sidhe 58 

5. " He saw under the moon that lady sitting " . 92 

6. " He came to the mirror and stood still to 

look into it" 98 

7. " And as he heard it Ywain forgot all the ills 

that he had suffered in all his life, and he 
thought on such a place as might be the 
land of his desire" . . . .142 

8. How Ywain found his Lady in a Garden . 162 

9. " One child held a squirrel between his hands " 184 
10. "There was yet another child fast by, which 

vexed the piper with a barley straw " . 186 
xi 



Illustrations 



ii." Upon the rocks was the young faun sitting, 

and playing on his pipes " . . .198 

1 2. How Ywain beheld a Game of Children . 246 

13. "There before the doorway stood Aithne in 

the morning gold " . . . .260 

14. "And as she sang she weaved a witch-knot 

upon the air with both her hands " . . 322 

15. A Tomb that was found in Paladore . . 360 



XII 



In every land thy feet may tread 
Time like a veil is round thy head : 
Only the land thou seekst with me 
Never hath been nor yet shall be. 

It is not far, it is not near. 
Name it hath none that earth can hear : 
But there thy soul shall build again 
Memories long destroyed of men, 
And joy thereby shall like a river 
Wander from deep to deep for ever. 

Dream-market. 



xiv 



A L A D O R E. 



CHAPTER I. 

OF THE HALL OF SULNEY AND HOW 
SIR YWAIN LEFT IT. 

SIR YWAIN l sat in the Hall of Sulney and 
did justice upon wrong-doers. And one man 
had gathered sticks where he ought not, and 
this was for the twentieth time ; and another 
had snared a rabbit of his lord's, and this was 
for the fortieth time ; and another had beaten 
his wife, and she him, and this was for the 
hundredth time : so that Sir Ywain was weary 
of the sight of them. Moreover, his steward 
stood beside him, and put him in remem- 

1 Ywain = Ewain or Ewan. 
A I 



Aladore 

brance of all the misery that had else been 
forgotten. 

And in the midst of his judging there was 
brought into the hall a child that had been 
found in the road, a boy of seven years as it 
seemed : and he was dressed in fine hunting 
green, but not after the fashion of that day or 
country. Also when they spoke to him he 
answered becomingly, but in a speech that 
no one could understand. 

So Sir Ywain had him set by the table at 
his own side, and now and again as he judged 
those wrong-doers, he cast a look upon the 
child. And always the child looked back at 
him with bright eyes, and even when there 
was no looking between them, he listened to 
what was being said, and smiled as though 
that which was weariness to others was to 
him something new and joyful. But as the 
hour passed, Sir Ywain felt his mind slacken 
more and more, and whenever he saw the 
boy smiling, his own heart became heavier 
and heavier between his shoulders, and his 



Aladore 

life and the life of his people seemed like a 
high-road, dusty and endless, that might never 
be left without trespassing. And though he 
would not break off from his judging, yet he 
groaned over the offenders instead of rebuking 
them ; and when he should have punished, 
he dismissed them upon their promise, so that 
his steward was mortified, and the guilty 
could not believe their ears. 

Then when all was said and done the hall 
was cleared, and Sir Ywain was left alone 
with the boy. 

But the steward, looking slyly back through 
the hinges of the door, saw that his lord and 
the child were speaking together ; and he 
perceived that they understood one another 
well enough, though how this should have 
come about he was not able to guess, having 
himself heard the boy answering to all ques- 
tions in none but an outlandish tongue. 

Then he saw Sir Ywain rise up, and sud- 
denly he was aware that his lord was calling 
for him loudly and with a hearty voice, as 
3 



Aladore 

he would call for him long since, when they 
were at the wars together. And when he 
went in, Sir Ywain bade him summon all 
the household. 

Now when the household were come into 
the hall they stood at a little distance from 
the dais, in the order of their service, and 
Sir Ywain stood above them in front of the 
high table. And beside him was the boy, 
and before him was his own brother, who 
was now an esquire grown, with hawk on 
wrist. 

Then Sir Ywain bade his brother kneel 
down, and there he made him knight, taking 
his sword from him and laying it on his 
shoulder, and afterwards belting it again 
round his body. And he took the keys from 
his own girdle and the gold spurs from his 
own feet, and said aloud : I call you all to 
witness that as I have done off my knight- 
hood and the Honour of Sulney, and given 
them to this my brother Sir Turquin, so 
also by these tokens do I deliver unto him 
4 



Aladore 

the quiet possession of my house and goods 
and the seisin of all my lands, to hold unto 
him and his heirs for ever, by the service 
due and accustomed for the same. And 
henceforth I go free. 

Then his brother, who was both glad and 
sorry, and moreover was still in doubt how 
this might end, stood holding the keys and 
the spurs, and looking at him without a 
word. And he looked also at the child, and 
he saw that for all the difference in their 
years, the eyes of Sir Ywain had become 
like the boy's eyes : and as he looked his 
heart became heavy, and for a moment he 
envied his brother and feared for himself. 
But in his fear he moved his hands, and 
the keys clanked and the spurs clinked 
together, and his heart leaped up again for 
joy of his possessions. 

And all this Ywain saw as it were a 

great way off, and he smiled, and forgot 

it again instantly. And the boy took his 

hand, and they went down the hall together. 

5 



Aladore 

And when they came to the door to pass 
out, the steward got before them and bowed 
as he was used to do, and he spoke very 
gravely to Sir Ywain, reminding him that this 
same afternoon had been appointed among 
the lords, his neighbours, for the witnessing 
of certain charters. 

But Ywain and the boy looked at one 
another and laughed, and the steward saw 
that they laughed at the lords and at him 
and at the very greatness of the business: 
and he was enraged, and turned away and 
went to his new master. 

Then Sir Turquin came hastily after them, 
and he laid his hand upon his brother's arm 
and bent his head a little, and spoke to him 
so that none else should hear, and he said : 
What is this that you are doing ; for no man 
leaves all that he has, and departs suddenly, 
taking nothing with him. But those two went 
from him without answering, and they passed, 
as it seemed, very swiftly along the road 
under the woodside, and were hidden from 
6 



Aladore 

him. And again, as he stood still watching, 
he saw them going swiftly above the wood 
where there was no path, but only the bare 
wold before them. 



CHAPTER II. 

HOW SIR YWAIN SAW HIS OWN FACE 
THE FIRST TIME. 

Now the truth is that when Ywain turned 
his back on his old life and the snug lord- 
ship that was his, he had no thought of what 
was to be the way of his wandering, nor did 
he so much as know by which of the world's 
four roads he would begin his journey. But 
he climbed upon the open wold as if all his 
pleasure was to climb and to strike his feet 
firmly and to breathe deep : and the boy 
went by his side in like manner, and they 
spoke no word. 

But when they were come to the height 
of the slope, Ywain turned and looked down 
upon the homestead of Sulney, and he saw 
8 



Aladore 

it small and clear under the midday sun, as 
like as may be to a toy that a child would 
play with : and there was no man moving 
about it, but only the white pigeons flying 
this way and that upon the roofs. And it 
was lovely to him, for he saw it as a time 
that is past. 

Then he looked a little farther, and he saw 
the broad road, and dust kindling along it 
like smoke, and in the dust a great company 
riding : and they rode in order by two and 
by two, and their jogging was heavy, and 
Ywain remembered that these were the lords 
who had appointed to do business with him. 

And because of them the place was no 
longer lovely to him, and he turned away 
and ran quickly over the ridge, and when he 
could see them no more he laughed : and 
the boy also ran and laughed, and their 
laughter was as though they were both 
truants from school, escaping narrowly with 
fear and joy together. And on the other 
side of the ridge they cast themselves down 
9 



Aladore 

upon the grass, and among the grass were 
thistles, and the thistles pricked them sharply, 
and they rolled and were pricked again, and 
laughed again and yet again. 

Then they set their shoulders against a 
bank, and sat still, looking to the country 
that was before them. On the one hand lay 
the sea near by, and upon it white sails 
of ships that were sailing marvellously, for 
though they were upon the sea yet they 
sailed, as it seemed, high above the land. 
And on the other side lay a thick wood 
that hid all the far country, and before the 
wood was a village and a tower. And 
Ywain knew that village well enough, cot 
and lot, barn and balk, and he thought not 
at all of the village, but only of the wood 
and the great depth of it and of what might 
be beyond. And so thinking he fell asleep. 

But when he awoke the sun was westering, 
and he looked again upon the village and 
saw it as though it were strange to him, 
and he could not remember even the name 

10 



Aladore 

of it. Then he stood up, and turned towards 
the place beside him where the boy had 
been : and as he looked he was astonished, 
for the boy was there still, sleeping as him- 
self had slept, but his face was like the face 
of an old man, and the lines upon it were 
countless, like bird-marks on the river sand. 

So Ywain stood staring for a while, and 
he said to himself: Now I know by the 
trouble in my head that either I have lost 
my wits, as a man beat down in battle, or 
else in all this there is a meaning that I 
have known and forgotten, for it seems to 
be both reasonable and impossible. Then 
he touched the boy's hand and awoke him, 
and when he saw his eyes again, he asked 
him : Who, then, are you ? 

And the boy said : Answer me first the 
same question. 

But Ywain would not, for he said : Why 
must I answer first ? 

And the boy said : Let be, then ; for you 
know already what you would answer, and 
ii 



Aladore 

there is but one and the same answer to 
your question and to mine. 

Then Ywain looked no more into the boy's 
eyes but upon the ground, and bewilderment 
came upon him again, for he said in his 
heart : This that he says is madness, and 
yet I seem to know that it is true. And 
when he lifted his head again he said to the 
boy : How can a man speak with himself 
face to face : and how can I, that am neither, 
be both an old man and a boy ? 

But the boy answered him : Is not every 
man that which was and that which shall 
be : and in all the days of his life shall he 
not once or twice see the face of his desire ? 
And as he spoke Ywain heard him plainly, 
but now he saw him not so plainly, though 
he stood looking down upon him in the 
same place : and he said quickly : Tell me 
this, then : what is my desire ? 

And he heard again the answer as one 
that hears a voice through the mist : but the 
words were in an unknown tongue. And he 
12 



Aladore 

peered down, and stooped, and where the 
boy had been there was but the long grass 
and the thistles : and when he rose up again 
he saw the hillside clear before him, and the 
sun was low and the edges of the bents were 
glistening, and nothing moved among them 
but the wind of sunset. 



CHAPTER III. 

HOW IT FORTUNED TO YWAIN TO FIND A STAFF 
IN THE PLACE OF HIS SWORD. 

THEN Ywain turned his face towards the 
village, and went down the hill : and he went 
with a good heart, for though the boy had left 
him, yet he hoped not to be long without him, 
and even now when he looked straight forward 
it seemed that he had the joy of his company 
and his laughter. But when he turned and 
looked beside him, there was but his own 
shadow ; black it lay and long, and about the 
edges of it a brightness was shining. Then 
he remembered that the sun was low and night 
rising among the hollows, and he bethought 
him of his supper and sleep. 

So he went quickly to the village, and 



Aladore 

passed through it and came to the farmer's 
house that lay beside the great wood : and 
the farmwife gave him welcome, as one 
that knew not who he was, but could well 
pitch her guess within a mile or so. And 
she whispered to her husband, but he was 
hard of hearing and full of slumber from the 
fields. So when Ywain had supped, they 
showed him where he should lie. And when 
he was come there he laid him down, and 
the day went from him in a moment and he 
knew no more whether he were alive or dead. 

But very early in the morning he awoke, 
and he saw that over against his face as he 
lay abed there was a window in the wall. And 
the window was open, and there came through 
it a small sweet noise, for it was the time of 
sparrow chirp, which comes just before the 
rising of the sun. So he rose from his bed 
and went to the window and leaned with his 
arms upon the sill, watching for the day to 
turn from greyness to light. 

And as he leaned and watched he heard 



Aladore 

a noise of talking in the house below, for the 
door was right there beneath him, and it 
stood open wide. Moreover, the talking was 
loud, for they that talked were the farmer 
and his wife, and she spoke loud because he 
was hard of hearing, and he spoke yet louder 
because she was his wife, and he wished his 
saying to prevail over hers. 

So she said in a high voice : As surely as 
an egg is an egg, by the same token this is 
my lord of Sulney. 

Then he spoke scornfully of her and her 
eggs, and he asked her for what reason of 
all the reasons on earth should such a one as 
my lord of Sulney come to sup in a farm- 
stead that was none of his, and sleep in a 
vile bed, when he had better within a bare 
league, 

And she answered quickly that though a 
thing were clean past a man's understanding, 
yet it might well happen so for all that : and 
further, she would have him to know that in 
her house were no vile beds, but such as 
16 



Aladore 

were fit for any man to sleep in, and she 
cared not who he might be. 

And at that he growled a little, like a dog 
that is made to cease barking. Then he spoke 
to her again, in the manner of one who deals 
with a child, making a show of gentleness and 
mastery together. See now, he said, and 
I will give you three reasons why you have 
the wrong and I have the right of it. First 
then, this one that has had supper and 
sleeping-room of us is a young man, and quick 
to rise and to sit down, but my lord of Sulney 
is past his youth and waxing heavy. Secondly, 
this one came to us walking upon his own 
shanks, and that no lord would do that had 
the horses of Sulney, for I have seen them 
time and again, and in these parts there are 
none better. And beside these two reasons, 
there is a third that you might well have seen 
with your own eyes, for this man's cloak is 
the cloak of a pilgrim and not of a lord, and 
his hat and staff are such as none use but 
wayfarers. And if you will not believe me 
B 17 



Aladore 

now, you may ask him for the truth of it 
yourself. 

That will I do, said the woman. 

Then Ywain fell into a study, for he saw 
that in despite of all those reasons her mind 
was not changed, but that she would certainly 
ask the truth of him. And it seemed hard 
to him to know what the truth might be : 
for he remembered how he had put off the 
lordship that was his, but he could not tell 
how he had become young, nor how he had 
lost his sword and come by the hat and 
staff of his pilgrimage : so that he thought 
at one moment, I am that lord, and at 
another, I am not, and his life past seemed 
like a dream of the night. 

And while he was still wondering he went 
down the steps, and in the room that was 
below he saw the farmwife with bread for 
him to break his fast, and the man by the 
door ; and against the wall he saw his hat 
and staff. And as he ate, the woman said to 
him : Look you, sir, we are not used to 
18 



Aladore 

keep guests that are unknown to us. But 
we knew you, that you are my lord of 
Sulney. 

Then Ywain said, I am not, and immedi- 
ately the farmer slapped his hand upon his 
thigh and shouted at his wife. But Ywain 
saw the woman look at him, and he looked 
at her, and she smiled to him as to one that 
was bidding her keep a thing secret. And 
she said to her husband, There is no need 
for you to shout : for an apple may have a 
red side and a green, and yet it is an apple, 
to him that hath understanding. 

Then Ywain gave her thanks, and took his 
leave of them both : and he went out into 
the sunlight, and followed the path into the 
high wood. But he saw nothing of his way 
as he went, for all his thought was upon 
that answer which he had given, whereby he 
had answered others, but in no wise answered 
himself. 



CHAPTER IV. 

HOW YWAIN CAME TO AN HERMITAGE 
IN A WOOD. 

So Ywain marched alone in the high wood, 
and for a time he saw no more the sun, nor 
the light of the sun, for the wood was of 
pines and they were marvellous thick above 
his head. But the stems were far enough 
apart and the track went this way and that 
among them, and whiles it turned aside and 
whiles it forked, and whiles it was no track 
at all. But Ywain went always right forward 
and would not stay, nor leave following his 
own thought. And as he went it came again 
into his mind that he was a new man, for 
though he was still amazed with questions yet 
he carried neither forethought nor repentance, 
20 



Aladore 

and he marched to a song that was in his 
ears. And in his marching there came to 
him the remembrance of the child that had 
led him forth, and though he knew surely 
that he was now alone, yet, by the imagina- 
tion of his heart, he could well see the child 
dancing before him upon the path of the 
forest. 

And at last when he had gone a long way 
and could by no means tell how long, on a 
sudden he looked far before him and saw 
the ground all fresh with grass, and no more 
pine-needles upon it but sunlight and shadow. 
And he went quickly forward and came out 
from the dark wood and stood in an open 
grove that was hoar with silver-birches : and 
beyond the grove was a stream that ran 
burbling, and beyond the stream was a bank 
with great beeches upon it. So for delight 
of that place he turned and left following 
the path, and went along between the beech- 
roots and the stream. 

And as he went the bank upon the right 
21 



Aladore 

hand was ever higher and steeper, until there 
were no more beeches upon it, but by the 
stream was a bare lawn between this wood 
and that, and a little cliff thereby, as sharp 
as a cliff of the sea. Now the cliff was of 
red sand, and the face of it was carven curi- 
ously : for in it were two steps and a door- 
way, as it were the doorway of a church, 
and two windows of like fashion with a 
little mullion to each : so that Ywain knew 
it for an hermitage. And he sat down to 
look upon it, stepping back within the shadow 
of the beech-trees : and when he looked, it 
did him great good to see and to think upon 
it, for the house was small and secret, and 
though the carven work of it was but plain, 
yet it well showed the pleasure of him that 
had worked at it. 

Then the hermit came out from within, 
and when he saw him Ywain kept close to 
watch what he would do, for he knew not 
the manner of hermits, nor how they live 
all their life-days, seeing that they have time 
22 



Aladore 

before them like new-fallen snow, without 
fence or foot-mark. 

Now the hermit had bread in his hand, 
and Ywain hungered at the sight of it, for 
he had had none since the morning was 
early, and it was now late, and this he knew 
by the hermit's shadow, for it lay small and 
squat about his feet. Nevertheless he would 
not move, but kept still where he sat, for his 
desire to see was greater than his desire to 
eat, and he thought moreover that he might 
yet come to the eating after the seeing. 

So he looked and saw as he desired : for 
the hermit broke the bread and rubbed it 
in his hand and threw the crumbs abroad 
upon the lawn : and instantly there came 
upon the place a dozen of small fowls, such 
as dunnocks and finches, and they hovered 
and hopped after the bread as long as he 
would throw it. And some part of it he 
would not throw, but he walked away from 
the birds and came to the stream and held 
out his hand above a little pool where the 
23 



Aladore 

water ran curdling. And Ywain knew that 
he was giving the remnant to the fish, and 
that they were by likelihood trout that came 
for it, for where a crumb fell upon the pool 
there he saw the water broken, and at some 
times there was no splashing but only a ridge 
that ran swiftly upon the face of the pool. 

Then when all was finished the hermit 
stood looking upon the water as one that 
loved the sound of it and had no need to 
be elsewhere. But the sun was strong upon 
his head, and Ywain saw how he drew his 
hood around his neck where it was bare 
at the nape, and so went back to the house 
in the rock. And as he entered in at the 
doorway the shadow was cool and dark upon 
him, and then he was gone as a fox goes 
into his earth. 

But Ywain mused yet a little while longer, 
and all that he had seen seemed strange and 
very good to him, like the tales of the elves 
and pixies, of whom there is nothing told 
that will not please young children, because 
24 



Aladore 

they also have their dealing with the little 
things of the earth, and are of no account 
with grown men. And he wondered if this 
might be the end of his desire, to live secretly 
and far off from men, having his converse 
only with the creatures of the greenwood. 



CHAPTER V. 

OF THE HERMIT AND OF HIS DEALING 
WITH YWAIN. 

So within a while he got upon his feet and 
came to the door in the rock and called to 
the hermit ; and the hermit came from 
within and stood shading his eyes with his 
hand, and asked him the reason of his call- 
ing. And Ywain answered him courteously, 
making as though to take his hat from off 
his head in sign of reverence : and the her- 
mit lifted his eyes in the same moment and 
saw that the hat was the hat of a pilgrim, 
and yet of no accustomed pilgrim, for there 
were upon it neither shells nor images. 
Also he saw that Ywain's cloak was not 
threadworn nor his shoes broken. And his 
26 



Aladore . 

face he could not well see for the bright- 
ness of the sunlight, but by his voice he 
might perceive him to be young and gentle, 
and none of the wandering rogues of whom 
all hermits dwell in dread. Then he brought 
him into his cave, that was as like a house as 
a cave may be, and he made him sit by a 
table, and gave him to eat and to drink. 

And when Ywain had well eaten and 
drunk the hermit asked him concerning the 
way by which he had come, and the way by 
which he would go forth again : but he 
would not ask of his name, nor in what 
house he was born, nor even of his pilgrim- 
age, for he also was courteous, and his 
mind was to pleasure his guest and not 
himself only. Nevertheless he was not 
willing to lose the companionship that had 
fallen to him until he should have heard 
somewhat of the dealing of men, for it was 
long since he had had knowledge thereof by 
one of like breeding with himself. So he 
spoke to Ywain of to-morrow, and of certain 
27 



Aladore 

things that he would show him, and Ywain 
heard him gladly enough, for his feet were 
now heavy with weariness and good eating. 
And the hermit knew this by the sound of 
his speech, and he laid him upon his own 
bed and bade him take his ease. 

Now when Ywain awoke he looked first 
upon the wall of the chamber and saw that 
there was a glint of sunlight upon it high 
up, whereby he knew that the day was fall- 
ing. Also he was aware that there was one 
watching him, and when he had turned his 
head he saw how it was the hermit who 
stood in the doorway of the chamber : and 
the man's face seemed to him wise and 
quiet, as of one that had many thoughts 
and mastery therewith. 

So they two went to supper, and this was 
the first time that they had eaten together. 
And at one time they remembered this, and 
at another they forgot it : for they spoke not 
of their doing but chiefly of their deeming, 
and often they would be eager the one to 
28 



Aladore 

put question to the other, and often they 
would know before question put how the 
answer would be. 

Then at the last Ywain was minded to 
ask counsel of the hermit, and in one tale 
he told him all, to wit, how that in a day 
his life had changed, and how that he had 
left his own house and the house of his 
fathers, and gone out to seek his desire, 
and again how that he had as yet no 
certainty of what his desire might be. Only 
he told nothing of the boy that had come 
and led him away : but he put his own 
desire in place of the boy, for he was willing 
rather to be counted a fool than a teller of 
marvels. And he thought that his adventure 
might be judged as well by the part as by 
the whole, for that which he would hold 
back was in no wise the marrow of it. 

But the hermit said : Desire is a child : 
yet will he take a man by the hand and lead 
him away. 

Then Yvvain was astonished, for he said 
29 



Aladore 

within himself, How can this hermit have 
knowledge of the child, seeing that I told 
him nothing? 

Then the hermit said further, This is 
the part of a man, to know whether his desire 
be a wise child or a wayward. For the 
wayward will swiftly take him a-wandering, 
and swiftly in his wandering will leave him : 
but the wise will never leave him utterly. 

Then Ywain asked him, By what reason 
may that be ? And the hermit said, By 
nature : for every man is that which hath 
been and that which shall be. 

Then Ywain was yet more astonished, and 
his mind swung backwards and he thought, 
Certainly I must have told him, for these 
words are every one of them the words of 
the boy. And instantly his mind swung 
again and he thought, But I told him not. 
And he looked at the hermit's face and saw 
it hardly, for the twilight was covering it 
from him by little and little : but he saw 
the two eyes of him and they were not 
3 



Aladore 

fainter but clearer, and Ywain's heart lay 
open to them like water to the stars. And 
he said within himself, The words that I 
told not, he perceived them with his eyes. 

Then the hermit rose up softly and went 
out, and when he came again he brought 
heather and fern, and he made Ywain a bed 
beyond his own, and they slept before it 
was dark. 



CHAPTER VI. 

YET MORE OF THE HERMIT, AND OF A WORD 
THAT WAS IN YWAIN's EARS. 

IN the morning when they had arisen they 
went out of the house and came to the stream, 
for the hermit said that they should bathe 
in it, and he showed Ywain a pool that was 
deep enough. Then they did off their clothes 
hastily and threw themselves into the water 
after the manner of otters, and at a stroke 
they came to the top of the pool. And there 
was a little waterfall there, and the stream 
of it carried them down, and they touched 
the stones and crept out upon them. Then 
they took the water again more strongly 
and came right to the waterfall and stood 
beneath it, and it splashed upon their heads 
32 



Aladore 

and divided the hair like a cold knife. And 
at that they laughed together and so threw 
themselves back and were carried down 
again, and they came quickly to their 
clothes, blowing with their breath and shiv- 
ering. But when they had run to the house 
they were warm and fresh. 

Then the hermit set two bowls of milk 
with bread upon the table. And Ywain was 
glad of the sight of that food, and he sat 
where the murmuring of the stream came 
in at the window, and a soft air with it, 
and the world was made new for him. But 
he ate and drank with few words, for he 
was thinking within himself how that to- 
morrow had come and he knew not yet 
whether to go or stay. And often in 
his thinking he looked at the hermit, and 
the hermit looked kindly back at him, and 
nodded: and it was as though he nodded 
to Ywain's thought, but he spoke nothing 
with his lips. Yet at one time there was 
a voice, and Ywain heard it plainly: and 
c 33 



Aladore 

the voice said : For delight men stay, but 
for desire they go forth. And he looked 
hard at the hermit, and the hermit nodded 
again to him, as though he also had heard 
that voice, and knew it to say truth : but 
he spoke nothing with his lips. 

Then Ywain said aloud : Surely I heard 
a voice and it was not your voice nor mine, 
yet it seemed to me that I heard it not in 
my imagination but in my ears. 

And the hermit said : I also heard it, 
and before this I have heard many such, 
and no great wonder ; for in all solitude 
there will be voices, as in all still water 
there will be visions. 

And as Ywain heard those words he be- 
lieved them, and he thought on still water, 
but found none in his remembrance : only 
he saw before him the picture of the stream, 
wherein he had but now been bathing, and 
the course of it was all racing and burbling, 
and where it lay more still, even there froth 
turned and drew together upon the face of 
34 



Al adore 

it. And he asked the hermit boldly : Where 
then is the still water of your visions ? 

And the hermit answered : It is near at 
hand : but the looking is longer than the 
way thither. 



35 



CHAPTER VII. 

i 

HOW YWAIN LOOKED INTO THE WATER OF 
A WELL, AND OF THAT WHICH HE SAW 
THEREIN. 

THEN they rose up and went out, and the 
hermit showed Ywain a little path that went 
along under the cliff and so into the wood 
beyond: and thereby, he said, was the way 
to a dead thorn-tree that stood in a space 
alone, and under the thorn-tree was a well- 
spring, and from the well-spring came a 
runnel of bright water whereby it might 
surely be found. Then he put a wheaten 
cake into Ywain's hand and said to him : 
Farewell now for to-day, and at supper- 
time come again with your visions, and we 
will talk of them together. But when you 
36 



Aladore 

stand by the well-spring and look therein, 
then, said he, be not weary of your look- 
ing, but return always and be always in hope 
until the sun go down. For the visions are 
not quickly to be seen, as the common sort 
suppose that they see all things which are 
before their faces: whereas they see, as it 
were, but the shadows upon the ground and 
not the life of those who cast them. But 
that which you seek to see is the dealing of 
spirits, and men come not thereto suddenly, 
but by long time and loneliness. 

Then he returned from him, and Ywain 
took the path and went into the wood, and 
in no long space he saw a great thorn-tree 
before him, and it was all dead and without 
leaf or berry, and other trees there were none 
very near it, but only the cliff that bore hard 
upon it on the one side, whereby it leaned 
a little outwards. And beneath the spread of 
it Ywain saw a well-head made of stone 
from the cliff, and it was of the height of a 
man's thigh. Also there was a step or 
37 



Aladore 

margin of stone under it, and the step and 
the well-head were both shapen with six sides, 
every side equal to every other, after the 
manner of the waxen chambers of bees. And 
when Ywain came nearer he saw that the 
spring rose in the well - head within four 
fingers of the brim, but it could not rise 
above the brim by reason of a little sluice 
below, that was made in the stone above the 
step, and a runnel came therefrom of bright 
water and went into the wood darkling. 

Then he looked into the water of the 
spring, and it was deep and still, for the 
fountain was as great as the runnel and no 
more, so that there came no moving of the 
water that was above. But the shadow of 
the cliff lay yet upon the well-head, for the 
sun was not high, and by that reason the face 
of the water was like the face of a mirror, 
and all that Ywain could see therein was his 
own image, and with that the image of the 
thorn-tree, and no more could he see though 
he looked long and warily. 
38 



Aladore 

So for a while he ceased from looking, and 
he went into the wood beyond the well, and 
walked softly therein, for he meant to come 
again as the hermit had counselled him. And 
as he went he mused, and when he awoke 
out of his musing he perceived that the sun 
was now high above him. Right so he 
turned about and came quickly back to the 
thorn-tree, and looked again into the water; 
and where dimness had been there was sun- 
light, and the water was clear and thin, and 
in the depth of it were many lights both 
shining and shimmering, for some of them 
rested in their glowing, like embers, and 
some rose and curdled, like smoke of gold, 
and so passed and came again continually. 
But of visions Ywain could find none : only 
these lights could he see, and else nothing. 
Then again he left looking in the water, and 
sat down under a green tree, for it was past 
noon and hotter than before : and he took 
his wheaten cake that the hermit had given 
him and ate it sitting there. And as he 
39 



Aladore 

ate he thought on these days that were 
hardly yet three days since he left his former 
life, and they seemed to him to be as it 
were three long years, that lay between him 
and the time that was before. 

Then suddenly he perceived that with his 
thinking the heat of the day had gone over, 
and the sun was dipped into the trees of 
the wood behind him where he sat. And 
he looked again towards the well-head that 
stood there before him, and a light was upon 
the stone of it that was the last of the sun- 
light, and afterwards that light passed away 
and the stone was left dark. Then he knew 
that his time was come, and he leapt up and 
strode to the well and leaned over it. And 
at the first he looked and saw nothing, for a 
darkness seemed to rise and roll within it, 
like a cloud in storm : but after no long 
watching the darkness rolled away, and he 
saw clearly. 

Now that which he saw was a marvel, for 
it was not water, though it lay within the 
40 



Aladore 

well-head : nor was it sunlight, for the sun 
was now far down behind the wood. But it 
was by seeming a piece of that country, as 
it were between the night and the day: for 
there was a wood and a river with a high 
bank, and in the sky above there was neither 
sun nor moon, but one only star of bright 
silver. And as he looked the star faded, by 
reason that the sky was more light, and he 
saw that the river was wide and shallow, and 
over the width of it were stepping-stones, 
one beyond another in a line, like floats upon 
a fish-net. And out of the wood came a boy, 
and though his face was turned away, yet 
could Ywain tell without doubt that he was 
in all things like the boy that had been 
with him : and his heart beat and he strained 
in his watching as one that fears lest he 
be seen or heard. But the boy came to the 
stepping-stones and passed lightly over them, 
and began to go upon the bank. And as 
he went there came a bright light upon the 
topmost of the bank, and Ywain perceived 
41 



A lad ore 

that it was the light of sunrise, and it fell 
upon a banner that was there, with men 
about it in armour, and twice or thrice there 
came sudden glints upon the armour. And 
for all that they seemed far off and small, 
it was clear to be seen that they fought to- 
gether in two companies. And the boy, when 
he had climbed the bank, came to one of the 
companies and entered into it, and Ywain 
saw him no more : but that company stayed 
not where they were, for they were hard 
pushed in the fighting, and gave ground by 
inch and by inch. And one man of them, 
that had no helmet upon him, came to the 
edge of the bank, with a horn in his right 
hand: and he set the horn to his mouth to 
blow it, and in that instant the darkness 
came again, and Ywain saw nothing but only 
the water in the well, and the cloud that 
rolled within the water. And he started up, 
and fear and joy took him in the same blood- 
heat, and he turned and ran quickly by the 
path under the cliff. 

42 



CHAPTER VIII. 

HOW THE HERMIT SET YWAIN ON HIS WAY 
AND OF TWO SECRETS THAT HE TOLD HIM. 

Now it was the hour when the hermit would 
be going to supper, and thereupon came 
Ywain to the house. And while they sat 
eating and drinking Ywain told the hermit 
of that which he had seen : but he spoke 
warily, for he told him nothing of the boy. 

And the hermit said : The vision is yours 
and not mine : yet this much concerning it 
is in my head and not in yours. I tell you, 
therefore, the woodside that was shown to 
you, and the stepping-stones, and the bank 
beyond the water, all these are of no solitary 
vision, but may be seen of any man that has 
a mind thereto. 

43 



Aladore 

Then said Ywain quickly : That mind have 
I ; and the hermit looked him in the face 
and nodded to him after his own fashion. 
Then he told him of the way to that place 
which he had seen : and as he spoke Ywain 
saw the way plainly, as it were before him, 
and the winding and the turns of it, and the 
stars above the trees, and the setting-place of 
the moon. And the hermit said how it was 
a nine hours' yourney for a man like himself, 
that was now out of his youth and past 
hurrying. 

And when he heard that, Ywain kept silence 
for a moment, and in the silence he made his 
reckoning, that it wanted even now but eight 
hours to sunrise. And thereupon he stood 
up suddenly upon his feet and stretched out 
his hand to bid the hermit farewell. 

But the hermit left him there standing, 
and went to and fro and took bread from 
the table and put it in a wallet and brought 
it to Ywain, and he took also a hunting- 
knife from the wall behind the door, and a 
44 



Aladore 

thong thereto, and gave it to him to belt 
about his middle. But Ywain laid it first 
upon the table, and drew the knife from out 
the sheath and cut off a silver button of his 
cloak. And the knife he returned into the 
sheath and left it lying : and the button he 
gave to the hermit in token of bargain and 
sale, lest in the time to come by the gift of 
a knife their friendship should be parted, as 
hath happened unto many and many. And 
then he belted on the knife without fear, 
and they two went swiftly from the house 
and came to the wood and entered into it. 

Now the moon was high and bright, being 
near the full, and the light of her came softly 
between the trees and made clear the path. 
And Ywain and the hermit spoke little in 
their going, for all the need that they had 
of each other: but their speech seemed to 
them as it were forbidden, by reason of the 
shadows. So they went dumbly for the most 
part, walking the one before the other and 
making great haste, and when a full hour 
45 



Aladore 

was gone they came to an open heath that 
was beyond the wood. And the hermit 
stayed there and set him down upon the 
heather, and he said to Ywain that he could 
go with him no farther, for the moon was 
fast southing and he was an hour's journey 
from home. But this he said courteously, as 
one that spoke of necessity and against his 
own heart. 

Then Ywain sat by him, and suddenly in 
his heart also there came division, with 
thoughts straining this way and that as two 
hounds that strain in the same leash. For 
though he was hot to follow his desire, yet 
he remembered the companionship of the 
hermit and the quiet of his dwelling; more- 
over, he saw the man there beside him and 
none to take his place. But again the re- 
membrance of the boy drew him more 
strongly, and he chafed till he should be 
gone. So he said to the hermit : Let me 
go now, for even as they say of death, the 
longer the colder, so it is with the parting 
46 



Aladore 

of friends. But I know also that I go too 
soon, for you have perceived of me more 
than ever I told you, and of a certainty with 
your counsel I might have feathered my shafts. 
And though this may not be, yet tell me 
now, I pray you, in few words, of the likeli- 
hood of this my journey, how it shall pros- 
per or in what danger it shall come, that I 
may thank you and fare the better. 

But the hermit said : In this you are 
astray: for that which a man may learn in 
solitude is not knowledge but wisdom, and 
wisdom is not of this or that, but of the 
nature of things. So now concerning you, I 
know not how you shall fare, but I know of 
that which you may become, and in some 
part I know the way thereto. Follow there- 
fore your desire, for so only can you live 
and be alive, and this is the first secret. But 
the second is this, that you serve another, 
for so only can you put away your enemy 
that was born with you. And truth it is 
that if a man overtake his desire and have 
47 



Aladore 

not done away his enemy, it had been better 
for him that he had died first, for he shall 
never have peace. 

And Ywain heard the words and marked 
them, for they were spoken deeply. But what 
the meaning of them should be, that he knew 
not yet, for his mind was all a-bubble with 
the thoughts of his journey and of the boy, 
aud of the fighting that he had seen in the 
vision. And the hermit perceived that he 
was distraught and in haste to be gone : and 
he stood up and bade him good-speed. But 
first he took a promise of him that he would 
come again, and then he spoke the last words 
and turned away into the wood. 

And with that Ywain's heart fell, and his 
strength was slackened, and he laid his hand 
to the stem of a pine-tree and leaned upon 
it, that he might keep watch upon the hermit 
until he should be wholly gone from him. 
And at the first he saw him as a living man, 
but afterwards as a shadow without form or 
substance ; for that which he saw was ever 
48 



Aladore 

moving through the forest and the moonlight, 
as a fish is seen dimly in green water, going 
among the reeds. And at the last he saw 
him not at all, for the very shadow of him 
was wholly mingled with the night. 



49 



CHAPTER IX. 

OF TWAIN'S JOURNEY BY NIGHT, AND HOW HE 
WAS BROUGHT BY A LADY TO THE PLACE 
OF HIS VISION, AND SO LEFT HER. 

So Ywain turned him from his watching : and 
as he turned him he drew his breath again, 
and his heart rose and he took the path 
strongly among the heather. And he went 
therein a good two hour or more, until he 
saw upon his left side how the land rose up 
ridgewise like the back of a great hog: and 
for all that it was night, yet he saw the top 
of the ridge clearly, as it were a black line 
that ran along the sky. And thereover stood 
the moon all broad and yellow, and he per- 
ceived that this was the place of her setting, 
as the hermit had shown it to him by his 
So 



Aladore 

counsel. Then he knew that it was hard on 
midnight, and he had great gladness because 
that he had come so far on his way and no 
time lost. And he left the heath and took 
a good road that was below the ridge, and 
for a little space the moon hung above him 
as it were a great lantern of yellow horn. 
And then she sank behind the ridge, and in 
no long time afterwards the land was dark. 

Nevertheless he ceased not to go swiftly 
and without stumbling, for the stars were 
now brighter before him, and the road under 
his feet was smooth and white with dust, so 
that he had no need to walk warily. And 
as he went he remembered all the words of 
the hermit, and he turned them over in his 
mind as a man turns over his money upon 
his hand : for it may chance that he knows 
not yet how much it is, or in what manner 
it may serve him. Even so Ywain considered 
the words of the hermit, and namely the two 
secrets : whereof one was plain to his under- 
standing and one was dark. For he was of 



Aladore 

himself fully minded to follow his desire ; but 
to serve another was no such matter, seeing 
that in his old life he had served both lords 
and over-lords, and for his wages had little 
but weariness. And in this wise he reasoned 
hotly as he went, speaking as it might have 
been to the hermit himself there present. 

Then upon the instant his sight went from 
him, as it happens many times to those that 
reason hotly. And he saw no more the road 
beneath him nor the stars above, but by seem- 
ing he came again into the house in the rock, 
and there was the hermit sitting over against 
him, and his eyes shining in the twilight. 
And Ywain said to the hermit : What is this 
secret that you have told me, and how can 
a man both follow his desire and also serve 
another ? For by his desire he would be free, 
but service is to freedom as water upon fire. 
And the semblance of the hermit looked at 
him and nodded kindly, but he answered 
nothing to Ywain's questioning, save that he 
spoke again the former words. 
52 



Aladore 

Then because of the hermit's voice and the 
deepness of it and the quiet of his house, the 
tangle in Ywain's heart was untwisted and 
he had no more lust of reasoning. And he 
came back as it were from another place, and 
perceived that he had been a long time absent, 
for the way was changed beneath his feet, and 
from being a high-road was become a green 
ox-drove, and the stars in the sky were few 
and pale. 

Then Ywain saw that the night was far 
gone, and fear came suddenly upon him lest 
in his dreaming he should have wandered 
aside from the right way. And he stood still 
to peer about him, but he could see nothing 
save only the ox-drove and a little bank that 
was the border of it, and the field beyond 
the border. But while he stood still there 
came the sound of a cock crowing : and in 
the same instant he was aware of a tower 
that lay hard by, and it lay in the field all 
bare and open where he had looked before 
and had seen nothing, until the crowing of the 
53 



Alndore 

cock. But now he could see it without peer- 
ing, and how it stood on a little mound in 
the field, with a pool beside it and a great 
rowan-tree thereby. 

Then he made to go to the tower, and 
when he came to the bank to pass out of the 
ox-drove he found a gate therein : and he 
looked over the gate and saw how there was a 
door opened in the tower, and a woman that 
came out from it, and she began to go towards 
him over the field. So he passed through the 
gate and went out to meet her. And as he 
went he perceived that she was some great 
one, for she was richly arrayed in colours all 
of blue, and her raiment was close about her 
as the sheath is about a flower. Also she 
wore a veil and not a hood, and the veil was 
upon her head only and not upon her face, 
and it was light and cloudy like smoke in 
still air. 

And when they two drew together the lady 
bade Ywain good-morrow, and great wonder 
took hold upon him : for her voice came to 
54 



Aladore 

him as it had been out of old memory, and 
whereas in her outward seeming there was 
nothing that was not strange to him, yet by 
her speaking he was persuaded heartily that 
he had known her all the years of his life. 
Then she asked him whither he went, and he 
began to tell her of the place of the stepping- 
stones and of the fighting beyond the water. 
And she heard him courteously, but while he 
spoke she ceased not to go forward, so that in 
short time they came again to the bank and 
the ox-drove. 

And Ywain looked before him in the half- 
light, and again he was amazed : for the gate 
was there by which he had passed out, and 
beside it were two horses, a white and a 
black, and by their bridle-reins they were 
tethered to this post and to that. Then the 
lady came to the white horse, and she laid her 
hand upon the mane of him, and her one foot 
she gave into Ywain's hand and so went to 
saddle and rode fast away. And Ywain took 
the black horse and followed hard after her : 
55 



Aladore 

and they rode long and the sky lightened 
towards dawn, and they went ever faster and 
faster, till the wind rushed by their faces as a 
stream rushes by the stakes of a weir. 

So they came to a wood and coasted it, for 
the trees of it were set so thick together that 
no horse might go therein : also the land fell 
sheer and sudden within it. And in a five 
furlongs more the lady stayed her galloping, 
and she leapt down and cast away her bridle- 
rein and turned her into the wood. And 
Ywain followed after her, and she caught him 
by the hand, and they two ran down the wood 
together with pain and stumbling. And they 
came to the edge of the wood, and the land 
there was level, and Ywain looked out between 
the trees and saw the place of his vision, for 
there before him was a meadow and a broad 
water with stepping-stones, and beyond the 
water was a bank. And upon the top of the 
bank there went a banner, with men fighting 
about it: but child there was none to see, 
neither upon the stones neither upon the bank. 
56 



Aladore 

Then Ywain raged within himself to go 
forward, but first he turned him of his 
courtesy to give thanks to the lady, for he 
said that without help of her he had never 
come there : whereby he was wholly bounden 
to her, if that she would command him in 
anything. And she looked him in the eyes 
and said to him : Yea, sir, are you so 
bounden ? Then have I found a friend to 
my need : for I have a hundred knights that 
are sworn of my allegiance, yet there is none 
of them that serveth not his own desire before 
mine. 

Then despair came upon Ywain, as upon a 
wild thing that is trapped, and he struggled 
blindly and saw no way out. And in his 
struggling he heard the sound of a horn that 
was blown behind him, and he turned about 
and perceived him that blew it standing upon 
the height of the bank. And at the blare of 
that horn all the blood of his body was made 
fire, and he left the lady alone and went 
furiously up to go into the battle. 
57 



CHAPTER X. 

OF THE LADY AITHNE, AND OF THE GIFTS 
THAT SHE HAD FROM HER BIRTH. 

Now leave we Ywain to his fighting and turn 
we to the lady, that was there heavily cast 
down to be so left and benothinged. For she 
was of all earthly women the most beautiful 
and the wisest in magic: yet she had great 
need of such as would serve her truly, for her 
life was full of pain and perplexity, being 
divided in a strange manner between two 
realms. And this came of no sudden hap, 
but it fortuned so to her from her birth, and 
was according unto her nature, as I shall 
show you. 

First then, she was of a high lineage and 
descended out of faery : for her father was Sir 
58 



Aladore 

Ogier, Lord of Kerioc, that lies over beside 
Broceliande, and her mother was called the 
Lady Ailinn of Ireland, and she came of the 
kindred of Fedelm of the Sidhe, that was 
called Fedelm of the Nine Shapes, by reason 
that she could take on her nine shapes, and 
each more beautiful than other. Therefore 
the Lady Ailinn would have called her 
daughter Fedelma, but Sir Ogier named her 
with the name of Aithne, and she was called 
thereby all her life-days, as for her earthly 
name : but of her elfin nature she had other 
names, as was but reason, and in especial one 
name she had that none ever knew but Ywain 
only. So of that name I shall make no more 
matter. 

Now when the Lady Ailinn had been some 
while wedded, and was looking for her child 
to be born presently, upon a night she lay 
abed in the castle of Kerioc : and midnight 
was two hours past and there was none waking 
but that lady alone. And in her chamber was 
a fire of wood burning, for the year was still 
59 



Aladore 

cold and hard : and the fire was bright and 
cast upon the wall of the chamber both light 
and shadow. And Ailinn lay so upon her bed 
that she saw not the window, but the wall 
only, and she perceived that the shadow upon 
it was the shadow of her nurse, that was fallen 
asleep beside the hearthstone. 

Nevertheless though the nurse slept, yet were 
there voices in the chamber, as of two women 
beside the fire : and Ailinn knew well that 
they were fays, or women of the Sidhe, 
seeing that there were upon the wall no 
shadows of them but only of the nurse. So 
she lay still to hearken what they would say. 
And one said: The child shall be a woman, 
and I give her the gifts of womanhood : for her 
skin shall be white as the swans of Aengus, 
and her eyes grey like the dawn, and the colour 
of her cheeks soft like the sunset. And she 
shall be loved by a hundred knights and one, 
and her love shall be to her true lover both 
meat and madness, like the wild honey of 
Arroy: and so is my giving done. And the 
60 



Aladore 

other said : The child shall be a fay, and I 
give her the gifts of faery : for she shall hold 
of me the realm of Aladore, that was the 
Rhymer's heritage : and of her own magic she 
shall come thereto and therefrom, all her days. 
And so is my giving done. 

Then the two voices fell silent, and Ailinn 
turned her upon her bed that she might 
see after what likeness they were that had 
spoken. And she saw no one by the fire 
save the nurse only. But in that moment 
came the moon, going downwards to the 
sea, and a beam of her shining entered 
into the chamber and lay upon the floor, 
and so moved across the floor and came 
to the hearthstone. And in that beam 
Ailinn saw plainly how there stood two 
shapes of women between the bedside and 
the hearth. And they were grey shapes 
and thin as air, for she saw behind them 
the fire burning and the embers of it, but 
she saw it some deal faint, as it were 
behind two wisps of smoke. 
61 



Aladore 

Then those two fays drew near to her 
and stood by the bedside, and the one 
of them touched her head and the other 
touched her hand. And at the touch of 
them her blood was made heavy, and she 
slept deep, beyond voice or vision. And in 
the morning when she awoke she found in 
her hand a golden key, and upon her head 
she found also a golden comb that she 
knew not : and by the tokens of the key 
and the comb she had certainty of that 
which she had heard and seen. But of 
the meaning thereof she held great debate 
with herself and might not be satisfied. 
And she thought to take counsel of her 
kindred, when she should come again into 
Ireland: but to Sir Ogier, that was her 
husband, she said nothing of the matter, 
for he was a man that had no dreams, 
neither by night, neither by day. 

Then in short space thereafter the child 
was born, that was called Aithne, and she 
was heir to her father and her mother both, 
62 



Aladore 

for other child they had none, man nor 
maid, but this one only. And she was a 
wise child and a beautiful, but always she 
made for herself a way and walked in it. 
And when she was come to seven year, and 
it was the day of her birth, she played in 
the Castle of Kerioc all such games as she 
would. And at the last she came into her 
mother's chamber and there found a little 
chest, and opened it, and in the chest was 
a comb of gold and a key of the same. 
And the key she left there lying, but the 
comb she laid into her hair, and stood 
before a mirror and preened herself. Then 
came her mother suddenly and took the 
comb from her, and gave her instead the 
key of gold, to make her a game therewith. 
And right so the child was gone from the 
place, and she was seen no more in Kerioc 
for the space of three hours. Then before 
night she came again with the like swift- 
ness, and she was no whit weary or hungry 
or afeared, but she greeted her mother 
63 



Aladore 

dearly as one that had been long gone 
from her into a far country. And after- 
wards the child said how that she had been 
in Aladore, and the time that she had been 
there was by her deeming three years, for 
she said firmly that she had seen the cow- 
slips there three several times, and three 
times had gathered them all fresh in their 
springing. And thereat her father laughed 
out, as a man will laugh that hath the 
better knowledge : but the Lady Ailinn per- 
ceived that she spoke truth. And as the 
child had said, so it was with her many 
times thereafter: for she came and went by 
her own magic, and that was by the gift 
that she had of faery. 



64 



CHAPTER XL 

HOW THE LADY AILINN DEPARTED OUT OF 
THIS LIFE AND OF THE COUNSEL THAT 
SHE GAVE TO HER DAUGHTER AITHNE. 

THEN with the years so passing the time 
came that Aithne was a damsel grown, and 
many knights sought her love and many 
asked to have her in marriage. And it 
happened at this time that her mother, the 
Lady Ailinn, was taken with sickness, and 
though her malady was but light to the 
deeming of such as saw her and heard her 
speak thereof, yet inwardly she knew that 
the end of it was to be by death only. 

So upon a day she lay in her chamber in 
the Castle of Kerioc, and Aithne sat there 
beside her and they talked together of this 
E 65 



Aladore 

and of that. And at the last the Lady 
Ailinn ceased from talking, and then she 
spoke to Aithne again and said : My 
daughter, I would not have you parted from 
me by blindness, as others are parted from 
me : for they deem that in the Spring I 
shall be healed of this my malady, whereas 
I know inwardly that before the thorn is 
hoar I must be otherwhere. And of that, 
beloved, I say no more ; for you too shall 
one day pass out by this gate, and I bid 
you to the Tryst after Death. But as for 
your earthly life I have a counsel for you : 
that you consider well to whom you give 
yourself; seeing that a woman should not 
love but after her own kind, and for one 
such as you are this may well be a hard 
thing to compass. For the half of your 
heart is with the faery, and the half of 
your days you live in a land that is no 
land of men. And of that land I also have 
had knowledge, for I was somewhile there 
in my maidenhood : and though I came 
66 



Aladore 

never there again, yet have I remembered 
it in my dreams, and I know this, that few 
men find the way thereto. Yet will a 
maiden think, as I also thought, to take a 
man for lord and lover and to bring him in 
thither : but the magic of it is not so, for 
every man must win there by his own de- 
sire. Choose then whom you will, as of 
your sovranty : but if it may be, my daughter, 
before your choice be uttered, come you up 
hither into this that was my chamber, wherein 
also you were born, and remember me, and 
how that I spoke with you of that realm 
that is your heritage. So shall your choice 
be my choice, for good fortune or for ill, 
and we two shall not be parted. 

Then Aithne when she heard those words 
held her mother fast by the hand and 
bowed her head down upon the pillow beside 
her : and she wept bitterly, for the heart of 
youth cannot bear to hear speak of death 
and departing. And it is no marvel, seeing 
that the darkness is great and the Tryst is 
67 



Aladore 

_ . . - 

very far off. So it was with Aithne at her 
mother's departing; for in no long time 
afterwards that lady's life failed her, as in 
this world, and she was gone. But Sir 
Ogier for all his grief was still the more 
minded to make for his daughter some 
marriage of good counsel : for he held 
women to be as it were ships, that may 
fetch and carry well enough, but without 
a master they are blown about and go no 
whither. 

Now came again those knights of whom I 
spoke before: and they were by number a 
hundred from the first to the last. And 
they loved her all of them, not for her 
lands only, but each with such love as he 
had: for her beauty some, and some for her 
sweet voice, for oftentimes when she spoke 
and looked the blood would dance in them 
that heard her. And many there were 
that came from far countries, whereof some 
sought her for the praise that went abroad 
of her, even to the out isles, and some for 
68 



Aladore 

the renown of her father Sir Ogier ; for he 
was a great knight under shield, and a 
hunter that never knew weariness, and 
thereby he came quickly to his end, for he 
took the river with a horse that was wholly 
spent. 

So Aithne was left alone, and her loneli- 
ness was great : for always in her castle of 
Kerioc she saw the faces of them that were 
otherwhere, and at night she had no peace 
for the crying of the sea-birds. And many 
times she made escape into her realm of 
Aladore: but there also was loneliness, for 
she had found as yet no soul to dwell with 
her. I speak not of fays, for of them there 
was great plenty : but they have no com- 
fort in them, for they are born of moon- 
light and not of blood and breath. There- 
fore also they are from the beginning 
without transgression, and they know not 
pain or memory, neither do they fear or 
hope at all. And of these Aithne took no 
count, save that she dwelt often with them 
69 



Aladore 

and was their lady in Aladore. But of the 
knights that were her earthly servants she 
took much pleasure and perplexity : and to 
one or another of them she came near to 
have yielded her. 

Yet when the time came, at every time 
she held aback : for she remembered her 
mother the Lady Ailinn and the promise 
that she made to her at her departing, 
and always when she thought of her words 
she saw that they were true. And there- 
with she remembered a saying of her father, 
and she saw that this also was true, as for 
the most part : for he said of men and 
women that though they be born of one 
blood yet they are ever strangers each to 
other, both by kind and by custom, and 
though they sit at one board and lie under 
one blanket, yet they dwell apart all their life- 
days. But Aithne hated that saying in her 
heart, and in her hope she bettered it. 



70 



CHAPTER XII. 

OF THE WARRING OF TWO COMPANIES, AND 
HOW YWAIN DID BATTLE FOR THE ONE 
OF THEM AGAINST THE OTHER. 

MARK now that which I tell you concerning 
the Lady Aithne : for after the manner of 
minstrels I tell you both that which she 
knew herself and that which she knew not. 
First then she knew not, for all her magic, 
that this was a man of a strange fortune, and 
as it were born again by the casting away 
of his possessions : nor she knew not yet 
what her spirit and his spirit had perceived 
at first sight, each of other. But she knew 
in her heart darkly that he was either boon 
or bane to her, for of his coming she had 
been warned without words, as it will hap- 



Aladore 

pen to those that have the gift : and this 
also darkly, that his looking and his speak- 
ing were both to her mind, whereby she 
was the more cast down at his breaking 
from her. And again she knew not where- 
fore he should wish to go, yet she could 
not choose but remember that he seemed to 
have some great purpose in his going; and 
upon a man's face such purpose will show 
like beauty, so that even out of her pain 
there grew a sweetness, as fruit grows out 
of the wounding of a tree. 

But Ywain thought not at all of her, 
neither darkly nor clearly, for he saw the 
banner upon the top of the bank and 
under it the two companies fighting. And 
they fought in a green ground before the 
gate of a city : and they that fought to 
keep the city were all of a likeness, armed 
every one in black armour, and their banner 
was of black with a golden tower upon it. 
But they that strove against them were 
furnished scantily and piecemeal, no two 
72 



Aladore 

alike, save that every man of them had a 
sword in his hand, and upon his body a 
badge of a silver scutcheon with an eagle 
displayed therein, and though the badges 
were of one fashion yet they were of diverse 
colours. 

Now when Ywain came to the top of 
the bank he saw the companies, and the city 
some deal beyond them, and he looked about 
him to see the boy, and saw nothing of him. 
But hard by there was a man there stand- 
ing, the same that had blown upon the horn, 
and beside his feet upon the grass lay two 
naked swords. And as Ywain looked towards 
him he threw down his horn and took up 
the two swords, and the one of them he 
gave into Ywain's hand, and the other he 
took by the hilt, and without a word said 
they two began running towards the banner, 
for it was some way from the bank thereto. 
And when they were come there where the 
banner was, Ywain saw that the companies 
had ceased from fighting and were standing 
73 



Aladore 

apart : and they were glad to do so, as he 
guessed, by reason that the men of the Tower 
were weary and fordone with the burden of 
their armour, and as for the men of the 
Eagle they were beaten back, and there 
were many of them wounded and some 
dead men. But the battle in this manner 
standing still, there came forth a man of the 
Tower armed at all points, and he mocked 
the men of the Eagle for striplings and fools, 
and defied them to fight with him, man to 
man and one down another to come on. 

Then when Ywain heard those proud words 
it seemed to him as though the quarrel were 
his own quarrel and the scorn the scorn of 
his proper enemy: for he looked upon the 
company of the Eagle and saw them as 
men, enduring with weariness and pain, but 
those of the Tower he saw not as human 
flesh but as ironwork of artificers, multiplied 
according to one pattern, and without blood 
or mercy in them : and he hated them and 
the green earth went red before his eyes. 
74 



A lad ore 

Then again his blood changed, and his heart 
became hard and smooth and cool like the 
heart of oak : and he stooped slowly and 
took from a dead man the badge that he 
had worn, and made it fast upon him, and 
he threw down his cloak and in his left 
hand he took the knife that the hermit 
had given him, and in his right hand the 
sword. And he stepped forward until he 
came within five paces of his enemy, and 
the two companies drew near to watch the 
fighting, and the man of the Tower let 
close his visor and came on. And Ywain 
looked at him and saw how he moved him 
as one that bears a great weight and under- 
props it warily lest it fall over on this side 
or on that : and he remembered to have 
moved himself in like manner at end of 
day, when he was outwearied in the wars. 
And he laughed in his heart at the remem- 
brance, for it seemed to him of good counsel. 
And in that moment he saw his enemy make 
at him to strike, and he caught the stroke 
75 



Aladore 

upon his sword and put it by, and ran in 
upon him as dog runs in upon dog, and 
caught him by the throat and shook him 
one way with his arms and another way 
with his knee, and threw him down upon 
the ground. 

Then the man of the Tower rolled heavily 
in his armour, that he might come to his 
knees and rise again, but in his rolling 
Ywain fell upon him and pressed him down, 
so that he grubbled in the earth with his 
visor as a swine grubbles with his snout. 
And Ywain held him so and leaned upon 
him : and he struggled with his legs a little, 
but no long time, for his breath left him. 
Then Ywain found the lace of his helm, 
and with the hermit's knife he cut it, to 
recover him : and in the cutting of it he 
was aware of a great shouting and ramping 
all about him ; and he looked up and saw 
that the men of the Eagle had run in upon 
those of the Tower even as he had run in 
upon his man, and had toppled them in like 
76 



Aladore 

manner, and they were prising them open 
with their swords, whereby in short space 
they had them all unharnessed and disarmed. 
Then Ywain got him to his feet, and the 
rest in like wise : and they of the Eagle 
gave the banner into Ywain's hands and set 
him in the forefront, and they marshalled 
the men of the Tower as beaten men behind 
him, and so set forth with shouting towards 
the city. 



77 



CHAPTER XIII. 

HOW YWAIN WAS BROUGHT INTO THE CITY 
OF PALADORE. 

WELL may you imagine that Ywain was 
astonished as he went, for it came upon 
him coldly that he knew not what he had 
done, nor wherefore, and moreover he saw 
that he had not yet come to the end of the 
matter. And he would willingly have ques- 
tioned those that went with him, but they 
were every man of them a -bawling and 
a-singing, and when he spoke to them they 
answered nothing to the purpose, but con- 
tinued praising him and giving him joy. And 
so with great tumult they came before the 
gate of the city, and there was Ywain yet 
more astonished, for he had thought to find 
78 



Aladore 

it well shut and defended. But now the 
barriers were down and the gate was open, 
and upon the gatehouse and upon the walls 
there stood a multitude of people past count- 
ing, and they cried : An Eagle ! an Eagle ! 
and shouted for joy every man louder than 
another. 

Then Ywain and they that were with him 
entered the gateway and passed through it, 
and began to go into the city. And certain 
of the townsfolk took the banner from be- 
tween Ywain's hands and carried it before 
him ; and others of them pressed upon the 
beaten men of the Tower and jeered at them 
by their names and cast dust upon their 
heads : and so they came all together to the 
market - place, which was great and square, 
but the crowd of them filled it from side to 
side and from end to end, and stood therein 
as close as standing barley. 

Now on one side of the market-place was 
a high hall, with steps thereto ; and those 
that led Ywain brought him to the steps and 
79 



Aladore 

made him stand there upon a width of stone 
where he could be seen of all, and the multi- 
tude threw up their hands and waved them 
at him, crying that he should speak to them. 
And this he would have done willingly, as 
one not unused to speak before others, but 
what he should find to say to these men, 
that he could no more tell than a babe 
unborn, for he was alone in a strange world, 
and the time of his understanding was not 
yet begun. Moreover, though the secret of 
Solomon had been in his mouth, yet he 
could not have uttered it for the noise of 
the shouting, which came about him like the 
clamouring of rooks when they are fluttered, 
and so continued for the space of a good 
hour. And an evil hour it was for him, 
seeing that the sun was now high and fierce, 
and the burden of it made his back weary, 
and the noise became as it were a bruise 
within his head. 

And at the last, when it was now hard on 
noon, he saw that the crowd was moved 
80 



Aladore 

and parted to right and left, and through the 
midst there came a train of great ones, walking 
slowly between halberdiers and trumpeters. 
And they came upon the steps of the great 
hall, where Ywain was standing, and saluted 
him with bowing ; and two that were ser- 
vants brought him a robe of black, broidered 
with gold, and they made as though they 
would have taken from him his cloak of 
pilgrimage. But that he would by no means 
suffer, for he remembered how he had come 
by it : so that in the end they covered his 
cloak with the robe and were content. Then 
two of the chief ones took him by the hand 
and led him into the great hall, and there 
went in after them all that train and many 
more. 



8r 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HOW YWAIN SAT AT FEAST IN PALADORE WITH 
THE COMPANY OF THE TOWER AND THE 
COMPANY OF THE EAGLE. 

Now the hall was ordered within as for a 
feast, and the ordering of it was after the 
accustomed manner of feasts : for at one end 
of it was a high table upon a dais, and other 
two tables there were that came squarely 
therefrom as the two posts of a door come 
squarely from the lintel. And the napery 
upon the tables was fine and white, and the 
dishes were of silver : but upon the dais was 
a cupboard, and the cups upon it and the 
ewers and the plates were all of gold. And 
up and down the hall there went six marshals 
who showed courteously to each man where 
he should be seated : and they showed to 
82 



Aladore 

Ywain a seat at the high table, and when 
he sat therein he overlooked wellnigh all the 
hall. Then came two pages with water to 
let wash his hands, whereof he thanked them 
without feigning. Then the marshals brought 
to him those that should sit on either side 
of him, and when they had demanded of 
Ywain how he should be called, then they 
named each to other by their names. And 
of those two the one was called Sir Rainald, 
and he was shaped like a pear and yellowed 
in face, and slow of speech as one upon 
whom men wait : and about his neck was a 
gold chain, and a jewel of gold hung thereby, 
made in the fashion of a tower. But the 
other of them was by name Hubert, and he 
was a young man and slight ; and he bore 
upon him the scutcheon of the Eagle, and 
his speech was restless and full of joy. 

Then stood up a great Archbishop, and a 
herald smote upon the table and called loudly 
for silence : and when the Archbishop had 
spoken a set piece of grace, then all men 
stirred and sat them down again with much 
83 



Aladore 

clatter. And thereupon came servitors and 
served every man with meat and drink. 

And as Ywain ate and drank his weariness 
departed and his spirit came again to him, 
and he was minded to learn the truth of all 
that he had seen that day. To which end 
he turned him first to Sir Rainald, seeing 
that he was manifestly of the Tower and 
dwelt, as Ywain supposed, within the city. 
But Sir Rainald was not to be so handled : 
for he was such an one as would liever ask 
ten questions than answer two, and his 
manner of speaking was like water that is 
slow and deep, against which there is no 
force to stand, but only to go therewith. Yet 
was the man courteous after his kind, for 
he said how that Ywain had done well, as 
for so young a fighter, and might yet come 
to some good. And though he knew it not, 
yet in one matter he told Ywain that which 
he would have asked him : for when he began 
to speak he demanded to know this, whether 
Ywain had been in Paladore at any time past, 
or was only that day come among them. And 
84 



Aladore 

thereby Ywain perceived that the name of the 
city was called Paladore. 

Then in no long time weariness came again 
upon Ywain, and he left speaking with Sir 
Rainald, making excuse in the best manner 
that he could : and he set his hope upon the 
young man Hubert, for he saw that he bore 
the scutcheon of the Eagle. And Hubert 
told him all that he asked, and more thereto : 
for he said that what was done was done 
according to the custom of the city, whereby 
each year they banished all such of the young 
men as had come to their strength : and once 
in each year the young men came before the 
gate in a company and demanded to enter, 
and they were favoured of many within the 
city, but certain of the elders went out and 
fought with them to drive them away. And 
this they did because of the company of the 
Towfir : for it was a most ancient company, 
and they feared greatly lest the young men 
should change the ordinance thereof, seeing 
that it was fitter for men in age than in youth. 

Then Ywain asked him concerning the 
85 



Aladore 

company of the Eagle, and first, what was 
the ordinance of it : and Hubert said that 
they had no ordinance but one, and that was 
that every man should wear his own colours 
and do after his own heart : and this also, 
that he should always and in all places fight 
against the Tower. Then Ywain asked him 
again whether it was so that the Eagles had 
always the better of the Tower, as they had 
at this present. And Hubert said that there 
was no such fortune : for though they were 
many in number and of a great spirit, yet 
they were poor and poorly furnished : and 
there was yet another reason, and that was 
because they kept no fellowship together and 
had small knowledge of war. For as soon 
as one of them gathered skill or strength 
in fighting, they of the Tower came secretly 
and offered him entrance, so that for the 
time to come he fought not against them. 
Yet, time and again, he said, there would 
come one that could not be reckoned with ; so 
that once in ten years, as it might be, the 
86 



Aladore 

Eagles would have the mastery; and for the 
hope of such an one the horn was blown, to 
call him to the place of the fighting. 

Then Ywain left that, lest he should seem 
to speak of himself, and he said how he was 
astonished because that he saw about him 
both those of the Eagle and those of the 
Tower, sitting and feasting together after so 
cruel a day's work. And Hubert answered 
that this also was of the custom, and great 
was the evil that came of it : for though a 
young man, he said, may become old before 
his time, never will an old man come back 
into the mind of his youth, so that it was 
but according with nature that through the 
mingling of the companies the Tower should 
be continually plenished and the Eagles 
minished. 

Then the herald called again for silence, 
and Ywain and Hubert spoke no more 
together. And when the Archbishop had 
chanted yet another piece then all men went 
out from the hall. 

87 



CHAPTER XV. 

OF THE GIFTS THAT WERE GIVEN TO YWAIN 
AND OF A DREAM THAT HE DREAMED. 

AND it was now long past noon, but the crowd 
continued still in the market-place, and when 
they saw Ywain come out upon the steps they 
shouted again : for above all things they 
loved to see fighting and to hear tell of it. 
Also they were glad when they saw the Eagle 
go before the Tower : for men will reverence 
their betters and yet take pleasure to see 
them discomfited ; moreover they of the 
Tower ruled continually over them and were 
thereby the heavier to bear, but they of the 
Eagle came only to make sport for them. 

Ywain therefore perceived that the com- 
mons held him in honour of their own good 
88 



Aladore 

will : but the great ones he deemed to be 
his friends in fear rather than in love, honour- 
ing him for the sake of the custom and 
because he had the good will of others. 
Nevertheless they spoke not so but continued 
in their courtesy : for they set him in the 
midmost of their train and brought him 
through the city to a house that was made 
ready for him, and the house and all that 
was in it they gave him freely to have and 
to hold. Furthermore they gave him certain 
customary gifts in such case provided : and 
first, a hogshead of wine, very sweet and very 
drowsy, and this was the gift of the Eagles; 
and second, a silver collar, that all men might 
salute him whensoever they saw it, and this 
was the gift of them of the Tower, for they 
themselves loved such greeting beyond 
measure. And the third gift was a full 
bushel of gold, and this was the gift of the 
whole city and the greatest of the three, for 
in Paladore they have a saying that gold is 
the noblest of the metals, and nobleness they 
89 



Aladore 

honour above all virtues. Then when they 
had given Ywain these gifts, they took their 
leave of him, as for that time : and Ywain 
thanked him as best he might, and made fast 
the door of his house. And for a short space 
he was content to look about him at one thing 
and another, as a child will play with his 
toys when they are new : and then he thought 
to taste of the wine that had been given him, 
and when he had drawn a little of it into 
a cup, he drank it. And for a moment he 
had some joy thereof, for it was sweet upon 
the tongue and ran bravely through his blood : 
but afterwards the drowsiness in it was yet 
stronger than the sweetness and the bravery, 
so that he desired no more to live but only 
to dream, and instantly he had his desire. 

Now in his dream it seemed to him that 
he awoke out of sleep and saw that the sun 
was set and the moon rising. And in the 
moonlight he saw beside him a boy weeping, 
and it was the boy whom he had followed 
and found not. Then Ywain had great pain 
90 



Aladore 

at the heart, and he asked him the reason 
of his weeping: and the boy gave him no 
word, either of reason or unreason, but con- 
tinued weeping pitifully. So for comfort 
Ywain took him by the hand: and instantly 
the boy left weeping, and made to go forth, 
and he led Ywain from the house as formerly 
he had led him from the house of Sulney. 

Then they two went through the streets 
together and came quickly to the gate of 
the city, that was the same by which Ywain 
had come in : and the gate was shut and 
locked, and the porter gone within the gate- 
house. But the boy laid his hand against 
the wicket and opened it lightly, and he drew 
Ywain after him, and they went out towards 
the place of the fighting. And the boy 
stayed not there, but went forward to the 
edge of the steep bank and looked towards 
the wood : and Ywain also looked with him, 
and he saw the river and the stepping-stones 
and the meadow-ground beyond them. And 
by the woodside was a poplar tree new fallen, 



Aladore 

and thereon he saw under the moon that 
lady sitting, and suddenly in his dream he 
repented him that he had so left her, and 
he well knew wherefore the boy had wept. 
And they two ran down to her together and 
Ywain cast himself before her : and he laid 
his hands between her hands and sware by 
his faith to serve her truly. And in his dream 
she looked kindly upon him, and he saw 
her eyes, and they were grey like the dawn, 
and filled with coming brightness. So he 
turned him about to bring in the boy, that 
he also might be comforted : but the place 
was all clear moonlight, and boy there was 
none, neither to right nor to left. 

Then the lady rose up and went towards 
the city of Paladore : and Ywain went with 
her, and she brought him to the gate and 
it was shut. But with her hand she touched 
the wicket and so opened it, and they entered 
in thereat. And in short space they came 
to Ywain's house and passed it by, and when 
they had gone some deal farther they came 
92 



- 




Aladore 

before a house that Ywain knew not, where 
was a great shield of arms beside the doorway. 
And there the lady stayed, and she looked 
at Ywain, and he at her, and when he thought 
that she would have said somewhat she turned 
her away : and she went from him into the 
house without word spoken. Then Ywain 
also went his way : and as he went in his 
dream the moon set, and the sun rose on 
Paladore. 



93 



CHAPTER XVI. 

HOW YWAIN FOUND HIS LADY AGAIN, AND 
HOW SHE WENT FROM HIM THE SECOND 
TIME. 

LONG time was Ywain musing on that which 
had befallen him by night, and it seemed to 
him that he had been made to live as it were 
in two lives, seeing that out of one sleep he 
had twice awaked. And of the truth of 
this he had no certainty, but of his service 
that he had sworn to his lady, of that he had 
certainty, for whether in his dream or out of 
his dream his heart assented thereto. More- 
over, he desired greatly to come again to that 
house where he had seen her go from him : 
and if such a house there were in Paladore, 
he doubted not to find it, for he saw yet 
94 



Aladore 

before his eyes the shield of arms that was 
there beside the door, and it was party of 
sable and silver, with a ship sailing therein 
counter-coloured. 

But now while he was musing came a 
messenger from Sir Rainald, and entreated 
him of his courtesy that he would be with Sir 
Rainald shortly, for he had that to say to 
Ywain which was worth his hearing. So 
Ywain went with the messenger and came to 
Sir Rainald. Then Sir Rainald spoke to him 
slowly and with many words, as men speak of 
grave matters : and he told Ywain how he 
was commanded to bring him that same day 
before the Prince of Paladore, and he gave 
him joy therewith, for he said that the honour 
was great, and such as fell not commonly to 
them that were strangers, but if they were 
on some embassage. 

Then Ywain thanked him in such words as 

were fitting, and so covered his thought : for 

in his old life he had had knowledge of princes 

and he was well-a-way weary even to remember 

95 



Aladore 

them. Yet for the desire that he had to meet 
again with his lady, and to do her service, he 
was willing to pleasure Sir Rainald and the 
Prince and any other. So when an hour had 
been set, that he should meet with Sir Rainald 
before the door of the Great Card, then Ywain 
took his leave and was gone until the evening. 
And first he came hastily to his own house : 
for before any other thing that he might do 
he was set to find that house of the shield, 
and he thought to go by the way of his dream. 
And he found the way like as he remembered 
it, and came before the house and saw the 
shield : and he entered into the house, for the 
door was unlatched and there was no man to 
stay him or to answer him. Yet he entered 
not so easily, for the door stood heavy against 
his hand and cried out upon him : and he 
perceived that the hinges of it were eaten 
with old rust. Also upon the inward side of 
it was much cobweb of spiders, and in the 
hall-way dust like grey sand upon the flags. 
Then he went from chamber to chamber, and 
96 



Aladore 

they were all wide and waste in like manner : 
and his eyes were "darkened to look upon the 
place, and his heart was cold within him, for 
he saw it as a place of the dead that was 
mouldering and forgotten. 

Then at the last he came into a little 
chamber that was high above the hall : and 
it was the chamber of all the house that was 
most richly hung and furnished, and in it 
was a lute and a book and a frame of broidery, 
and upon the wall a round mirror of glass. 
And he came to the mirror and stood still to 
look into it, and when he looked the blood 
leapt in his heart as a horse leaps to the 
spur : for in the glass was the chamber made 
small and clear, as it were far off, and all 
things in order as he had seen them, save 
only that before the frame of broidery he saw 
a lady sitting at the work. And for all the 
bending of her head and the shadow upon 
her, he knew well that she was his own lady ; 
and he kept watch upon her where he 
stood, for to move him from the mirror 
G 97 



Aladore 

he dare not, lest she should go from him 
again. 

Then he saw in the glass how she raised 
her head, and looked : and in that same 
instant the mirror was filled with cloud, and 
he turned him swiftly about in great fear. 
But his fear was vain, for his lady was verily 
there before him sitting, and by her the book 
and the lute, and all things in the chamber. 
And she gave him no greeting, but bent still 
to her broidery and made as though he had 
been long time there with her. And presently 
she bade him take the lute and sing thereto : 
and her voice was light and careless, as of 
one that thought most of her own business. 

Then he was ashamed, for he had no skill 
with the lute, and he prayed her forgiveness 
humbly. Then she said it was no matter, 
but that he should take the book and read to 
her. And he took the book, and opened it : 
but every word that was in it was written in 
an unknown tongue, so that he was ashamed 
for this time also. Then again she said it 
98 



Aladore 

was no matter, but for a little while she was 
silent : and afterward she bade him look from 
the window and tell her of that which he saw. 
So he came to the window, that was an 
oriel and high above ground : and before it 
and beneath lay the ridge tiles of the city, 
and beyond them was a wall with battlements, 
and above the battlements was a long line and 
dim, where the sky met with the sea. 

Then he said to his lady, I see some part of 
the city hereunder, and what shall I say of it 
to do you pleasure ? But she answered him 
that he should look not upon the city, but 
beyond it. Then he said to her, I see above 
the battlements a dimness of blue, and in it is 
a line where the sky meets with the sea : and 
what more shall I say of it to do you 
pleasure ? And she answered him not, but 
left her broidering and so came and stood 
beside him at the window, and they two 
looked upon the sea together. And at the 
last she said to him, Look well now and tell 
me all : for I see that of which you have not 
99 



Aladore 

told me. And he looked again, shading his 
eyes with his hand and peering carefully : but 
nothing could he see, save one dimness upon 
another. 

Then an evil thought came into his mind, 
and he said within himself, This is her will, 
to put shame upon me, and to make me speak 
of that which I see not, as though I saw it 
with my eyes. Then he looked once again, 
and as he looked he spoke, and in his voice 
was a little grain of anger, as small as the 
sand that grits between the teeth. And he 
said, I see nothing where nothing is : and in 
that instant he heard his lady sigh, there as 
she stood beside him ; and sorrow came upon 
him to hear her, and he would have turned to 
yield himself. And he turned and found her 
not, for in the taking of a breath she was 
gone from him. 



100 



CHAPTER XVII. 

OF ALADORE AND OF THE SANDS CALLED 
THE SHEPHERDINE SANDS. 

THEN Ywain groaned inwardly, for he said, I 
am a fool and worse than a fool, and for a 
moment he hated himself and all that he had 
done. But afterward he considered a little 
and said, This comes not of folly but of new- 
ness, for I have not been used to live in two 
several lives. Yet by all seeming my lady 
does even so, and I with her : therefore she 
knew well that I was her sworn servant, 
dream in and dream out, and if I had be- 
thought me of this I had never been angry. 
But now I have offended the second time, 
and how I am to meet with her again I 
cannot tell, seeing that she comes and goes 
like the wind among the leaves. 
101 



Aladore 

So he went down the house and out of it, 
and set his face to go toward the sea, for he 
thought by carefulness 'or by good hap he 
might come to perceive that which before had 
been hid from him. And as he went he heard 
one call him by his name, and he looked about 
and saw the young man Hubert behind him 
coming quickly, and he stayed for him so that 
they went forward together. And as they 
went they talked, and this time also Hubert 
told Ywain all such things as he demanded to 
know, for whether feasting or fasting he was 
ever the same man, and his speech was restless 
and joyful. 

And first Ywain asked him of the house of 
the shield, wherefrom he had come ; and 
Hubert said that it was of old the house of 
Sir Ogier, but now of his daughter the Lady 
Aithne, for Sir Ogier was by his own out- 
rageousness drowned and dead. And of the 
Lady Aithne he said that she was beautiful 
beyond telling, and therein Ywain well believed 
him, and then he said that she came never 
102 



Aladore 

there, but hated them of Paladore and forsook 
them utterly, and Ywain laid that saying by, 
that he might ponder it. 

Then in their talking they came to the wall 
of the city, and Ywain saw before him a gate 
that he knew not yet : and beside it upon the 
left hand was a castle, and a courtyard, and 
men afoot with halberds, and men ahorse with 
swords drawn, and many folk coming and 
going. And this, said Hubert, is the Great 
Card of the Prince of Paladore, and it lies 
against the wall of the city and overtops it, 
and so runs a good furlong to the south : but 
on the east it stands above the city and looks 
down into it, as a tree may stand above a 
sheep-fold. Yet not so in truth, for in what 
place a tree stands, there will it look down 
on this side and on that, and not on one side 
only, as it is with this Card of theirs. 

Therewith he brought Ywain to the gate 

and so out of the city; and he turned about 

and showed him that on this side the face of 

the Great Gard was as it were blind, and in 

103 



Aladore 

no way looked upon the sea. And Ywain was 
astonished thereat, for the place was passing 
beautiful, with a broad way beneath the wall, 
and a border of great trees, and between the 
trees the wide water, coloured diversely with 
green and purple colours. Then he looked 
out as far as eye might see, and as he looked 
he forgot Hubert and remembered Aithne, 
for he longed greatly to know what was 
the thing which she had perceived and 
he not. 

Then he turned back in his thought to 
Hubert, and asked of him, What place is 
this, and for what reason so forsaken ? And 
Hubert answered, Well is it that you ask 
this of me and of none other. For the place 
is called the High Steep of Paladore, and it 
is not forsaken but forbidden : for in Paladore 
the sea is held for a dread thing and an evil, 
and the great ones and those of the Tower 
and those of the Prince's household will have 
it neither in sight nor in hearing, so that it 
is not so much as named with us, save now 
104 



Aladore 

and then with women, or else with harpers 
and rhymers and the like. 

Then Ywain said, Without doubt you make 
mirth of me, for I perceive that you are speak- 
ing one thing and thinking of another, as men 
use in jesting. But Hubert said, There is 
no mirth in the matter, save it be the mirth 
that covers aching bones. For at times we 
have sight from hence of that which in all 
the world we most desire, and well -begone 
is he that sees it : yet for this desire are we 
shamed and slighted, as children are hushed 
that speak foolishly among their elders. 

But what see you, said Ywain, or what 
desire you to see ? And therewith his heart 
began to go to and fro, for he knew that 
he was near his lady's secret. Then Hubert 
laughed a little and made as though he 
would answer him : but he answered him 
as it were slant -wise, for he said, Their 
shame is a toothless dog ; and again he said, 
They see but little that never see Aladore. 

Then of a sudden he changed his manner 
105 



Aladore 

of speaking, and went laughing and talking 
at great random : whereby Ywain perceived 
that he had done with that matter, and 
would have no more of it, until he should 
return into his former mind. So Ywain took 
counsel with himself to lay wait for him 
there, seeing that it behoved him greatly, 
for his lady's sake, to hear tell of Aladore. 
Then they two left the way under the 
wall, and passed out between the trees: and 
they cast themselves down upon the grass 
and lay there for a space looking towards 
the sea. And below them where they lay 
was the high steep, grey and green : and 
below the steep was a beach upon the 
margent of the water. And as for the 
water, that was of two kinds, for nigh land 
it was unvexed and still, as a deep river is 
still : but a mile out it was broken and 
foam - flocked, as it were a great green 
meadow and a thousand of white sheep 
thereon, and so continued as far out as eye 
could see. And Ywain marvelled to see the 
1 06 



Aladore 

breaking of the water, for there was no wind 
and the tide was well nigh silent upon the 
strand. And Hubert told him that it was 
no marvel, for the water inshore was deep, 
so that a ship might go thereon : but out 
yonder, he said, no man may sail and keep 
his life, for the sea is full on every side with 
banks of sand, and the name of them is 
called the Shepherdine Sands, and many a 
one have they covered from all sight and 
seeking. ' 

Then said Ywain, They are well named 
by the name of the Shepherdine Sands, for 
I see the sheep plainly; but tell me this, 
for what sake any man should go among 
them to peril of death ? And Hubert said, 
For the sake of Aladore. Then Ywain 
thought to anger him that he might be the 
more certainly answered : so he spoke scorn- 
fully and said, What manner of men are 
they that for such a sake will go to peril 
of death ? But Hubert was no whit angered, 
and he said joyfully, Well worth the peril 
107 



Aladore 

and the death ; for they tell such tales of 
Aladore that if but the half of them be true, 
then may it well be the land of every man's 
desire. And this you believe not yet, for 
you have not seen it, nor can I tell you 
on what day or by what enchantment you 
may come to see it: for a man may watch 
half his life in vain, and suddenly in the 
lifting of his eyes it will be there, between 
sky and sea, as clear as stone in sunlight. 

Then, when he heard this, Ywain was 
silent for a space, and continued looking 
out to seaward : but he saw there nothing 
that was new, for he saw only the still 
water anear him, and afar off the blue 
border of the sky; and between them he 
saw that pasture perilous of the Shepherdine 
Sands. 



108 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

OF PALADORE AND OF THE PRINCES 
THEREOF. 

RIGHT so came the sound of trumpets from 
within the battlements: and Hubert started 
up upon his feet and said joyfully how it 
was the trumpets in the Great Card blowing 
to hall. And he made Ywain also to rise 
up and go with him : and he brought him 
again through the gate and into the city, 
and so to his own lodging, and there Hubert 
would have Ywain to dine with him and 
with certain others. And of those others 
one was named Maurice and another Bar- 
tholomy and the third Dennis, and they 
were all the three of them young men and 
restless in their speech as was Hubert him- 
109 



Aladore 

self. So they five talked together all the 
time of dinner, and afterward they rose not 
from the table but continued talking. 

And as reason was, so it happened in their 
talk, that there was ever one that made 
question and four that answered : whereby at 
the last it seemed to Ywain that his head 
span round, for they four smote him with 
strange sayings on this side and on that, 
as boys will smite a top and spin it. And 
when they had told him the customs of 
Paladore concerning war and witchcraft and 
marriage, then they told him of the clergy 
and the Court. And of clergy they said 
that there was scarce one to be seen in all 
the city, for the great ones believed them 
not and the commons loved them not : there- 
fore they banished them for the most part, 
yet not far off, lest evil should come thereby, 
or some sudden need. But the Archbishop 
they kept still within the city, for he was of 
the company of the Tower, or at the least 
so they thought of him. And of churches 
no 



Aladore 

they made no account, but left them there : 
yet for the hope of Paradise there were 
many that went pilgrimage. 

Then they all praised the Prince some deal, 
but of the Court they told Ywain such things 
as men will tell of Courts, and in part he 
believed them and in part he believed them 
not : for in his time he also had told the like 
and found it otherwise. But this much he 
heard of Maurice and took it for truth, namely 
that by old custom none could be Prince in 
Paladore save that he were a giant of his 
stature and of his lineage : also must no 
Prince take a wife save that she likewise came 
of giants, to the end that the same estate and 
goodliness might remain unto their children's 
children. And by this counsel, said Maurice, 
it came to pass that being no more of one 
kind with smaller folk, he that was Prince 
could not have ado with his people, neither 
in battle nor in love : but he had of them 
great reverence, for all men praised the doing 
of his lineage in time past. Moreover upon 
in 



Aladore 

high days there would go lords before him, 
bearing a great sword and a crown of tourney : 
and when they of Paladore saw the Prince 
accompanied therewith, there was then no 
renown that they would not believe of him. 

So said Maurice, and Bartholomy laughed 
and said further, It is true enough, yet this 
also is true, that our Prince is no free man, 
but lives in durance all his life-days. For 
by no old custom, but belike by fear of his 
greatness, it is forbidden that he come abroad 
into the city without he be guarded by armed 
guards, lest perchance he should some time 
break forth and go his own ways. Moreover 
it is provided that in his own house also, and 
whether he be eating or drinking or what else 
doing, he shall in any case be bound with 
chains : and in the making of such chains 
they of Paladore have great skill, for they 
will tie a man hand and foot with bonds of 
no seeming substance, and yet past breaking 
of any, save he be strongly holpen of 
friends. 

112 



Aladore 

Then Dennis laughed also, and he said 
Nay, but this one thing you have forgotten, 
how that our Princes have leave for all man- 
ner of hunting and fowling : and they go 
freely into all such forests as are large 
enough, and strike all such game as shall 
come near enough. For though they ride 
not with hounds, lest their horses fall down 
under so great weight, yet will they stand in 
covert the day long with marvellous endur- 
ance, to shoot at such few birds and beasts 
as may be driven forth to them. And this 
is well done, for in Paladore good hunting 
brings good will, and the Prince thereby has 
the love of all his people. And their love 
fails not, but increases continually : for they 
hold this Prince that now is, to be better 
than his father, and he also was better, as 
it is reported, than any that was before him : 
and certainly in the old time they killed not 
their game so easily, nor one fourth part of 
the number thereof. 

Then said Ywain, I perceive plainly that 
H 113 



Aladore 

this is a good Prince, but I am yet to seek 
wherefore he should desire my presence. And 
Hubert and Maurice and Bartholomy and 
Dennis when they heard Ywain say so, they 
were astonished, for they knew not of the 
sending of Sir Rainald ; and they ceased from 
their laughing as men cast suddenly into fear. 
And Hubert said, This is of the Tower, for I 
know their handiwork of old. Then Ywain 
said merrily, By seeming I also am a beast 
of the game. But they four laughed no more, 
and Ywain perceived that there was no merri- 
ness left in them : for they dreaded the favour 
of the Tower, whereby they might lose their 
man as soon as they had gained him. And 
in no long while after Ywain took his leave 
of them : and he hastened and came to Sir 
Rainald, for it was time. 



114 



CHAPTER XIX. 

HOW YWAIN SPOKE WITH THE PRINCE OF 
PALADORE AND HOW HE TOOK UPON HIM 
THREE ADVENTURES. 

So when he had met with Sir Rainald, they 
two went up together into the Great Card : 
and when they came therein Ywain perceived 
that Maurice had told him truth, for the house 
was high and wide and full of great chambers, 
and in no way fit to be the dwelling of a man, 
save he were of a bigness beyond all other. 
Also he saw that the farther from the gate 
the taller were all those on whom he came : 
and it seemed to him as though he also took 
some change thereby. For when he had been 
brought into the chamber that lay before the 
chamber where the Prince was, then he began 
"5 



Aladore 

to doubt of his own stature, and his bones 
became shrunken and his sinews weak within 
him. 

Then came lords unto Ywain and unto Sir 
Rainald, and put robes upon them and so 
led them in. And when they were come in 
they found the Prince at play, sitting upon 
the floor of the chamber: and beside him 
upon the floor were a multitude of toys, 
fashioned after the likeness of men-at-arms, 
and he made them go hither and thither as 
he would, so that it was a marvel to behold. 
And when he saw Ywain and Sir Rainald he 
ceased not from his playing, but he called to 
them lightly to come on, and take their share 
in his pastime. And Ywain wondered and 
looked hard at him : for the words were the 
words of a child, but he that spoke them 
was by all seeming a man of forty year. 

Then at the last, when he had done with 

his playing, the Prince came to his feet, and 

he was nothing terrible, for all his bigness. 

Neither was he a child, no, not by some deal : 

116 



Aladore 

for he asked such questions as they ask that 
have seen the manner of men, and of women 
also. But he said not many things of his 
own, nor new things in any sort : and it was 
plain to see that his bonds wearied him. And 
Ywain also they wearied, for he could not 
choose but watch them glittering upon the 
Prince, so that he seemed to bear the burden 
of them himself. 

Then the Prince brought him to a window 
that looked upon the city, and he asked Ywain 
whether it were in his mind to stay in Pala- 
dore or to go from thence shortly. Then 
Ywain remembered his lady Aithne, and he 
answered quickly that if it pleased the Prince 
he was minded to stay. And the Prince was 
pleased thereat, and he said that he looked 
for Ywain to take upon him certain adven- 
tures; for so did all those that had so much 
of skill and fortune. And Ywain answered 
yea, for he loved this Prince and thought no 
evil of him : but he knew not of what ad- 
ventures he would speak. 
117 



Aladore 

Then the Prince looked at him pleasantly : 
and he considered a little, as a man considers 
of divers meats upon the board, every one of 
them sweet to his tooth. Then he named to 
Ywain three several adventures, that he would 
have him take upon himself: and he named 
the first thereof the adventure of the Chess, 
and the second the adventure of the Howling 
Beast, and the third he named the adventure 
of the Castle of Maidens. 

Then it seemed to Ywain as though his 
stature had returned to him, and he answered 
lightly that he would take upon him these 
adventures, and that forthwith : and the Prince 
gave him leave to depart, and said how that 
he had done well and should yet do better. 
And this also was Ywain's thought within 
himself: but in the same moment he looked 
upon the face of Sir Rainald, and he saw it 
as the face of a fox, well pleased with the 
cunning that he has practised. 



uS 



CHAPTER XX. 

OF THE ADVENTURE OF THE CHESS, AND BY 
WHAT MEANS YWAIN BROUGHT HIS MEN 
INTO OBEDIENCE. 

So within a while came letters to Ywain 
appointing him a day for the adventure of 
the Chess. And on the day appointed he 
looked forth from his house and saw how 
there stood before the door a company of 
great ones, and they called to him courteously 
and showed him a horse that was made ready 
for him. And when he came out to them they 
let cover him with a cloak of silver and blue, 
and they gave him for his head a cap of silver 
with a plume of blue, and he perceived that 
his horse was furnished in the like colours. 
Then they brought him to the gate of the 
119 



Aladore 

city that looked toward the South, and one 
of them told him by what way he should go, 
and how it behoved him to come before noon 
to the Castle of the Chess, and so prove 
the adventure. Also another of them cast a 
baldrick and a horn about his neck, and said 
how that without doubt it should fortune to 
him as he should deserve, and if so be that 
he achieved the adventure then when he came 
again he should come blowing upon the horn, 
that his friends might make ready betimes to 
meet him. And some there were that laughed 
thereat, and among their faces Ywain saw the 
face of Sir Rainald. 

Then he set forth, and he rode at an easy 
pace, for the morning was yet hoar with the dew 
of night and the gossamer upon the grass. And 
when he had passed over the high land that was 
before the city he came to a river and forded 
it, and so took the forest and went by a green 
road therein. And before noon he was aware 
of a castle that stood above the forest, and 
he entered in at the gate of it and came to 

120 



Aladore 

the hall and alighted down from off his horse. 
And he marvelled at the manner of the castle, 
for he found none there to stay or to speed 
him, neither in the gatehouse neither within 
guard : yet was the hall well kept and fur- 
nished, with meat 'and drink on table and 
new rushes thereunder. Also there was a 
great bell above that sounded to dinner with- 
out hand or rope : so that it was easy to 
perceive that the place was enchanted by 
sorcery. 

Now when Ywain had well dined he fell 
into a study, not knowing what more he was 
to do. And as he studied he heard a noise 
without the hall, but of what the noise might 
be he could not tell, for it was faint as wind 
or water. So he arose and went into a bay 
window that was beside the high table, and 
there was a great lattice there which stood 
wide open, and he came to it and looked 
out. And he saw there a courtyard that lay 
beneath the window, and the floor of it was 
chequy sable and white after the fashion of 
121 



Aladore 

the tables of chess, whereby he knew that he 
was come to his adventure. And thereby also 
he perceived the meaning of the noise that he 
heard : for even as he looked there came out 
of a cloister two companies apparelled after 
the fashion of the chess, as it were pawns 
and bishops and the like, on this side and 
on the other. And they of the other side 
were all in cloth of gold with red bordures, 
but they of the side that was Ywain's were all 
in cloth of silver with bordures of blue, and 
of the rustling of the cloth of gold and of silver 
came that noise aforesaid, and other nois6 was 
there none, but that only, and the sound of 
it was like the whispering of the wind in 
an ambush. 

Then Ywain looked to see who was he that 
should play with him : and he saw how that 
beyond the chequer there was a window 
opened, over against the window wherein he 
stood. And in that window was a shadow, 
and in the shadow a semblance like to the 
semblance of a man : but between the windows 
122 



Aladore 

came the sunlight broad upon the chequer, 
and for the glare of it he had no certainty 
of that which was within the shadow. 

Then he saw that the two companies were 
all in order arrayed upon the chequer, and 
the game awaiting for him : and he thought 
how he would send his pawn forward accord- 
ing to the usage, but he spoke no word as 
yet, for he had no desire to hear his own 
voice in that place. Nevertheless the pawn 
moved as he would have it, and immediately 
a pawn of the gold moved also to meet him : 
whereby Ywain perceived that the manner of 
the game was not by speaking but by think- 
ing, and when he thought again to command 
a piece, then that piece also moved accord- 
ing to his thought. 

Thus began the playing upon this side and 
upon that : and in the beginning Ywain had 
the advantage, and he looked presently to 
have the mastery. But the way thereto was 
long and tangled, and the end fell suddenly 
into doubt. For when the time of the stroke 
123 



Aladore 

was come Ywain perceived that either his 
remembrance had failed him in strange wise, 
or else that he had been undone by a knight 
of his : for whereas by his intention the 
knight should have been upon the sable, now 
he was found upon the white, and so out of 
distance for the stroke. Then was Ywain in 
great peril, but he fought warily to recover 
his game, and rebutted stoutly and so came 
again into good hope. 

But with the misadventure and the doubt, 
and with the slowness of the playing, the 
day was wellnigh passed over, and the 
shadow of the battlements crept softly upon 
the chequer. Then the sun fell more quickly 
to the high tower of the castle, and was gone 
behind it suddenly, and a little wind stirred 
in the coldness of his going. And Ywain 
saw how the wind caught the gold and silver 
pieces as it were in a whirlpool, and it carried 
them away under the cloister wherefrom they 
had issued: and they went after the manner 
of dead leaves, rustling and eddying by no 
124 



Aladore 

motion of their own. And he marvelled 
greatly thereat, for he had supposed them to 
be men like himself, but now he doubted. 

Then he went to sup and to sleep, and 
found all things made ready as before, but 
the silence of the place choked him and the 
solitariness lay deathwardly upon his spirit. 
Yet he remembered how he had that day 
been near to win his game, and he thought 
well to amend it on the morrow and give 
mate before the time of sunset. But therein 
his hope deceived him, for again on the mor- 
row his fortune was at odds with his force, 
and when he came to make his stroke he 
was undone by the transgression of his men : 
so that his battle was disordered until sunset 
and the wind right welcome to break off the 
game. 

And when he thought thereon, despair came 
upon him, because he saw that the obedience 
of his company was not as the obedience of 
those others. And when he came to his bed 
he lay long waking, and he cast every way 
125 



Aladore 

for counsel how he might make his thought 
to prevail more perfectly. Then in the last 
hour of the night he rose up out of his bed 
and came softly down into the cloister to 
see the truth of the companies, for his mind 
was so busy that he could not sleep. And 
when he was come down the day was break- 
ing, and he found the men all together, the 
gold with the silver, and they lay this way 
and that upon the stones of the cloister, even 
as the wind had drifted them : and by seem- 
ing they were light and hollow, like the barren 
mast beneath a beech-tree. 

Then Ywain stood looking upon them, and 
as he looked the sun rose and he saw a 
marvel : for with the sun rising their life came 
again into them, and they began to breathe 
and stir as men breathe and stir in their 
sleeping. Then he put forth his hand and 
touched one and another of them : and when 
he had touched them all, he perceived that 
they of the gold party were every one ruddy 
and warm of flesh, but they of the silver were 
126 



Aladore 

all white and cold as mushrooms. And in 
the same instant he knew the truth of their 
disobedience : for he said within himself, They 
fight in my quarrel, but the heat of my blood 
they lack. 

Right so he knew what he must do : and 
he took the hermit's knife that was about his 
neck, and loosed it from the sheath, and with 
the point of it he pierced his breast strongly, 
so that the blood came forth in good plenty, 
and the pain drew at the roots of his heart. 
And he came again to them of the silver 
company and with his own blood he touched 
them upon the lips, until he had be-bled them 
all : but the gold ones he touched not, for 
there was no need. And last of all he touched 
the Queen, and she awoke and rose up and 
looked upon him as with remembrance : and 
she put forth her hand in turn and touched 
him upon the breast, and immediately the 
pain ceased and the blood was stayed. And 
Ywain's heart trembled as she looked at him : 
for beneath her looks he saw his lady's image, 
127 



Aladore 

as men see faces in the fire. But she let 
close her eyes again and turned her from 
him and so fell suddenly to her sleep. 

Then Ywain entered into great meditation 
and continued long therein, so that he walked 
in meditation and ate and drank the same 
to his dinner and came unawares to the hour 
of the adventure. But when the pieces were 
now arrayed and by his thought he began 
to move them upon the chequer, then he 
perceived that on this day the game was in 
his hand : for his men obeyed him with so 
brisk obedience that he saw them moving 
before ever he knew that his will was set. 
Also they went no more from his intent, but 
kept his ordinance and came all together to 
the stroke: whereby the gold company were 
discomfited and their king was both checked 
and mated. 

Then upon the instant came a wind and 

thunder and lightning, and Ywain's eyes 

dazzled therewith. And when he opened his 

eyes again the castle was gone from him 

128 



Aladore 

utterly, with the windows and the courtyard 
and the chequer : and he stood in a place 
of rocks upon a green mound of the forest. 
And there also he saw his horse beside him 
saddled and bridled, and upon the saddle 
bow two crowns, a gold and a silver. And 
he took the crowns and rode lightly towards 
the city: and when they of Paladore heard 
his horn they came forth to meet him, as 
they had said. Nevertheless the most of 
them were astonished and some displeased : 
for they looked not to have seen him again. 
And the gold crown they took for the Prince, 
as reason was : but with the silver crown they 
crowned Ywain and so brought him cityward. 
And as they went he fell aweary : and the 
sun set, and the night rose on Paladore. 



129 



CHAPTER XXI. 

OF THE ADVENTURE OF THE CASTLE OF 
MAIDENS AND HOW YWAIN WAS COUN- 
SELLED TO ESCAPE THEREFROM. 

Now for this adventure Ywain had great 
honour of all the commons, for there was 
no sort of fighting that they did not love, 
and they gave praise above measure to him 
that could bring men into his obedience. 
Wherefore they were not willing that Ywain 
should meet as yet with the Howling Beast, 
for by that adventure they had lost many 
that should have been great men for them. 
So they went clamouring that he might be 
assigned a day for the Castle of Maidens, 
for that was an adventure without pain and 
without peril, as the most of them deemed : 
130 



Aladore 

howbeit others there were that thought other- 
wise. 

Then the Prince consented to their clam- 
our, being counselled thereto by them of the 
Tower : for they looked to have Ywain either 
this way or that, and by favour first, if it 
might be so, but if not, then by foul work, 
as by the Beast. So on the third day they 
came again to Ywain with smooth faces, and 
they brought him forth to a great castle that 
was named the Castle of Maidens : and it 
stood a three mile from the city, in a meadow 
toward the sun-rising. And thither resorted 
all the lords of Paladore and great part of 
the commons, by hundreds and by thousands : 
and in the midst of them went Ywain with 
a twenty more that were of his company. 
And these were all young and lusty men, of 
lineage and wealth sufficient, and they took 
Ywain for their captain and banneret. 

So they came to the castle anon, and found 
barriers thereby and lists set ready: and 
Ywain and his company went within the lists. 



Aladore 

And against them there came forth as many 
others, for to do battle with them : but the 
custom was that they fought not with weapons 
of war, but with spears of wood only. For 
upon the walls of the castle were many 
maidens, both young and old ; and though 
they might not all be young, yet were they 
all too tender to look upon wounds and death. 
And they were apparelled in hoods of clear 
colours, right joyous and well - beseen, like 
flowers arow upon the wall : and they ceased 
not from making a high sweet noise among 
themselves, as it were the noise of swallows 
upon a ridge-tile. 

Then Ywain and his were armed and came 
riding merrily to tourney. And they bestirred 
themselves in the best manner, so that in 
one hour they had the castle yielden and 
in mercy: for they that kept it fought but 
for the custom's sake, and had no force to 
make good their keeping. Then when he had 
received the keys, Ywain entered into the 
castle with all his company : and there the 
132 



Aladore 

maidens unarmed them and brought them to 
hall, that they might eat and drink and make 
ready to fulfil all the custom. 

Now the custom of the castle was this, 
that whosoever should have the mastery 
thereof and enter as by conquest, never might 
he and his depart again therefrom save first 
they should be wedded, every man with a 
maiden of the castle. And they were all, 
both men and maids, no better than blind- 
fold, for the manner of their wedding was 
by lot. And when the time for the lotting 
was come, the maidens sat together in a 
gallery, among such as were of their blood 
and fellowship : and they were all diversely 
clad in silken gear, no two alike, but every 
one of one only colour. Then they that had 
won the castle were brought in before them 
in coats of silk ; and the coats also were 
diverse and no two alike, but every one of 
one only colour. And the colours of the 
maidens and of the men were such as each 
one pleased, according to their fantasy : and 



Aladore 

the maidens knew not of the men, nor they 
of the maidens, how they would make choice : 
but when they came in presence, if any were 
matched in their colours then those two were 
wedded together and so departed from the 
castle to their own place. 

Then when Ywain heard tell of the custom 
he was vexed with indignation, for he saw 
how he had been snared unwitting. And he 
went hither and thither, as it might be a 
young wolf raging in the net : but all the 
doors of the castle were barred and bolted, 
so that there was no escape. Then by 
chance he came upon an old dame, that was 
there within a little chamber alone : and he 
made excuse and would have taken his leave 
of her. But she called to him and said, 
Good Sir, what ails you ? And he answered 
her, Good Madam, what think you ? Shall a 
man be wedded by custom and by chance ? 
Then she said, So are the most of men 
wedded ; but if you will verily, it may 
be that I shall help you therefrom. Yea, 



Aladore 

verily, said Ywain, for I am bounden other- 
where. 

Then the old dame put forth her hand 
and made to give him somewhat, and when 
he had handled it he perceived that it was 
a silken coat, and the colour of it was of 
black, both within and without. And she 
said to him, Take this and abide the lot- 
ment, for it is not to be heard of among a 
million of maidens that any hath chosen 
black for her wedding. Then Ywain consid- 
ered of her counsel, and saw that it was 
good : and though it had not been good yet 
he could not better it. So he made to leave 
her, but first he thanked her heartily: and 
that old dame looked kindly upon him, as 
with remembrance. And Ywain's heart trem- 
bled within him, for he saw beneath her looks 
the image of his lady, as beneath a many old 
faces may be seen the beauty that was there 
aforetime. 

So he went from her to abide the lotment : 
and as she had said, even so it was, for there 



Aladore 

was none among the maidens that had black 
to her colour. Then all were matched save 
Ywain, and he only was left there unmatched : 
so that every man might see how he had 
taken counsel to escape. And some said that 
he had not wholly achieved the adventure, 
and others said that he had achieved it twice 
over, for he had prevailed both without the 
castle and within. 

Howbeit they brought him forth with the 
rest that were all matched and wedded, and 
they came cityward with a great noise of 
shouting. And as they went Ywain fell 
aweary of them and of their customs : and 
the sun set and the night rose on Paladore. 



136 



CHAPTER XXII. 

OF THE ADVENTURE OF THE HOWLING 
BEAST. 

THEREAFTER Ywain continued in weariness, 
and in despite and anger against the great 
ones of Paladore : for he perceived how they 
had devised these adventures of a very pur- 
pose, so that they might have him at their 
will by fellowship or else by treason. More- 
over he longed greatly to see his lady again, 
and could not : and of such longing also 
comes weariness, when a man sees time go 
by and nothing bettered. So Ywain made 
search in all Paladore, if he might but hear 
tell of the Lady Aithne : and he found some 
few that would speak of her, and little he 
got of them. For one would say how she was 
13? 



Aladore 

gone into a far country, and one how she was 
ever a wanderer : and thereby they intended 
no good thing, for their meaning touched 
on Aladore, howbeit they named not the 
name. So Ywain went to and fro, and re- 
turned continually to the house where he 
had seen her : and in a three days he came 
there twenty times, and at last he thought 
to lie like a dog before her doorway. 

Then at this time Sir Rainald sent a 
messenger to him, and said how that in two 
adventures Ywain had done great pleasure 
to his lord the Prince, and he gave him to 
think that by the achieving of the third 
adventure he might well establish himself. 
And Ywain believed him not, for he knew 
better: but by reason of his despair he made 
assent : for he cared not what might become 
of him. 

So upon the morrow very early two came 

and called him forth : and they brought him 

a horse and an axe, but no gear else, and 

he went with them apparelled in the cloak 

138 



and hat of his pilgrimage. Then he asked 
them of the adventure, and they told him 
thereof: and the manner of it was that he 
should enter in a certain park and hew 
therein a tree : and the tree might be which 
he would, but he must hew it within a day 
and a night, and it must be down before 
the daybreak. And as for the hazard and 
the pain of the adventure, they said how 
that came by the howling of the Beast ; for 
at the sound of the axe it would howl be- 
yond endurance, so that none might hear it 
and be the man he was aforetime. 

Now the park was from the city a two 
hours' journey, and there was a high wall 
about it and a strong gate thereto : and there 
were some within which were appointed to 
keep the Beast, but they were all deaf men, 
and heard nothing in the world. So the)' 
that brought Ywain there unlocked the gate, 
and they gave him the axe and bade him 
enter quickly, for they were in haste to be 
gone. Then he left his horse and entered, 



Aladore 

and the gate was shut upon him, and he 
could well hear those men departing, for 
they rode as men in fear. 

Then he looked and saw how the park 
was all full of thickets, very dark and tangled 
of old growth ; and he went forward slowly, 
lifting high his feet. And as he went it 
bechanced that he struck his axe against a 
tree, and wounded it chipwise. And im- 
mediately there came a noise beside him like 
the growling of a great hound, and there- 
with a fear took him that was like a fear 
out of childhood, for it was quicker than 
thought and more deep within him. And he 
looked all ways, and saw nothing ; and he 
listened and heard the beating of his heart. 

Then he went forward again and found a 
place that was open ground : and it was a 
green valley between the thickets, and in the 
midst of the valley stood a goodly elm-tree. 
Yet was the goodliness of it by semblance 
only, for within bark it was long since gone 
and rotten. And Ywain came to the elm- 
140 



Aladore 

tree and struck it wilfully, for he was there 
in a clear field and thought to see the truth 
of the matter. But in his stroke his senses 
departed from him, for there came a noise 
behind him such as he heard never in all 
his days, no, nor dreamed thereof in an 
evil dream. For it was like the roaring of 
a wild bull and like the howling of a dog 
upon a grave : and when he heard it his life 
turned black within him and his heart was 
angered even to madness. And he swung his 
axe and struck the tree haphazard, as a man 
may strike that is blinded in battle, and his 
fear was greater than his courage, and his 
anger was greater than his fear. 

So he went smiting, and his hands were 
bruised and his body shaken : and the Beast 
howled even more loud and the rage of it 
pierced Ywain's heart and broke it utterly. 
For when he heard that sound it seemed to 
him that he was hated of all men and of 
himself also, and he felt his life perishing into 
dust as the grain perishes between the mill- 
Mi 



Aladore 

stones. And his strength went from him 
momently, so that in no long time he had 
been mad or dead, save only for the help 
wherewith he was holpen presently. 

For in his misery there came to him a sound 
of clear music, as a lantern comes to a child 
that is lost in darkness : and the music 
was of a reed only, yet there was within it 
a voice singing that was as plain as words. 
For as Ywain heard it he thought on old and 
noble wars, and he remembered in his heart 
the names of them which had renown 
therein ; and he feared no more to be hated, 
for he had part with them. And therewith 
the howling of the Beast became faint and 
without meaning, as a noise that is very far 
off: and Ywain's strength came again to him 
and he hewed with might and with measure, 
and in a hundred strokes he felled the tree 
endlong. 

Then with the fall of that tree the noise 
of howling ceased, and Ywain looked and 
saw that he had been long in his madness, 
142 



Aladore 

for it was now the last hour of the day. And 
the music that he heard ceased not, but the 
voice changed within it : for it sang no more 
of old things but of new. And as he heard it 
Ywain forgot all the ills that he had suffered 
in all his life, and he thought on such a 
place as might be the land of his desire : 
and it seemed to him that he was not far 
therefrom. Then his thought went from him 
and he slept. 

And when he awoke it was grey dawn : 
and he rose up and began to go from that 
place. And as he went there met him a 
herd-girl with a herd of black swine, and in 
her hand was a little pipe of wood, and when 
Ywain saw the pipe he remembered how he 
had been holpen overnight. Then he thought 
to ask of the herd-girl what might be the 
music which had come to him. And she held 
up her pipe before him and said : Sir, there 
is here no music but of this only : for here are 
none but deaf men, and I that pipe to the 
deaf. But whither you go there is music 
MS 



Aladore 

enough : for you will go, as I think, by the 
high-road. And therewith she left him and 
went further. But as she went she looked 
again at him, and she smiled as with re- 
membrance : and in her smiling he saw his 
lady the third time. Yet he saw her not to 
his profit, but as a man may see an image in 
a glass, which is certainly of the world 
visible, but in nowise of the life thereof. So 
he looked only and let her go from him. 



144 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

HOW YWAIN EMPRISED TO GO TO THE CITY 
OF THE SAINTS AND SO INTO THE 
DELECTABLE ISLE. 

So within a while he came to the gate, and 
found it wide open. And when he had 
passed out he looked towards Paladore, for 
they which brought him thence had spoken 
of a day and a night, and they said how 
they would return again thereafter, if per- 
chance they might find him still in life and 
understanding. And as he looked he saw far 
off a company that moved upon the road 
hitherward : but he perceived that they came 
not ahorse but afoot, and they were not two 
but many. Also they were banded in good 
order as they came, and kept measure, foot 
K 145 



Aladore 

by foot, and they sang all together : and that 
which they sang was a godly hymn, but it 
was some deal fierce in the singing. 

Then Ywain stood still to mark their 
passing : but they left him not so. For when 
they were now going by him he saw among 
them the young man named Bartholomy, that 
was friend to him in Paladore, and Bartho- 
lomy had sight of Ywain also in the same 
instant. And he ceased from his singing 
and ran out of the company and came 
to Ywain and took him by the two hands : 
and he entreated him to be of the com- 
pany and to go with them. And Ywain was 
little loth, for he saw how their backs were 
turned on Paladore, and he cared not greatly 
whither he went, so only he went not to that 
city. So he gave Bartholomy neither nay 
nor yea to his entreaty, but he began to go 
with him slowly, following behind the 
company. 

And as they went Ywain began to ask of 
him to what place they were going and on 
146 



Aladore 

what adventure. And Bartholomy answered 
him quickly and said how that it was no 
adventure but a high emprise, sounding in 
life and death, yea, of their very souls. For 
they were aweary of Paladore and misdoubted 
of all the customs there, seeing how they 
were hard customs with no kindness or 
godliness in them. Also he said how that in 
all the world there might no peace be found, 
save only in the City of the Saints : and that 
was by report far off and beset of many 
enemies. Yet were they vowed both to come 
thither and to dwell therein, if by endurance 
and good hope they might achieve their vows. 
Then Ywain asked him : Whence then hath 
the City this peace ? And Bartholomy said : 
The report of it is diverse. For some men 
say of it that it cometh by one way and 
some by another : as first, by conquest, for 
they that dwell there do continually subdue 
their enemies. But this to my thinking is 
a doubtful saying. And secondly, as some 
have said, it cometh by hope of reward : for 
147 



Aladore 

the people of the Saints trade thence into 
the Delectable Isle, where a man may have 
all that he will, whether of gold or ivory. 
And this also, said Bartholomy, I take for 
profit rather than for peace. But the third 
way is by good ordinance, for in that city 
they follow not their own will, nor strive 
amongst themselves, but every one to serve 
another: also they do nothing waywardly, 
but all things by rule and governance. And 
for this peace I long both by day and by 
night. 

Then as he heard him Ywain was kindled 
a little, and he said within himself: I also 
am aweary, and would serve another, and not 
myself. And whether all this be true I 
cannot tell, but as I guess it is an old report 
that has warped in wandering. For what is 
this Delectable Isle wherein a man may have 
all his desire, if it be not that Aladore which 
I am to look for over sea, and who knows 
but I may come thither and find my lady 
and my love? 

148 



Aladore 

But to Bartholomy he told nothing of his 
musing : only he took him by the arm and 
said that he would go with him and see this 
city. And therewith he pressed his arm in 
token of fellowship : for he drew near to him 
in spirit because of his voice, and because of 
the words which he had spoken. 



149 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

HOW YWAIN SAW THE CITY OF THE SAINTS 
THE FIRST TIME AND HOW HE HEARD 
THE BELLS THEREOF. 

Now was Ywain once more upon pilgrimage : 
yet he had not that joy which he had afore- 
time, when he left his house of Sulney. For 
then he went of his own will and followed 
after the boy, that was no stranger to his 
blood : but now he was lonely and without 
desire, and though he had somewhat to seek, 
yet his going moved rather from despair. 
Also the sky was changed above him, for the 
year began to leave summer and to turn to- 
wards winter, and the green was brown and 
the brown yellowing, and the nights coldened 
and the days drew in. 

150 



Aladore 

Moreover Ywain walked not so willingly 
with all his company : for some of them were 
but ale - knights which had repented them 
when they were adrunken, and some were 
swashers home from war, and others there 
were which loved anguishment above all, 
and being feeble goers would make themselves 
yet feebler, with peasen underfoot and hairy 
shirts and bodycords about them. Neither 
were they wholly at one in their emprise : 
for the half of them were in hope to be at 
rest in the City of the Saints, and the other 
half to be speedily at war against their 
enemies, so that many times when they sang 
their singing was diverse, and their fellowship 
most like to go agrief. 

And in no long time this came to pass. 
For when they were a ten days gone upon 
their way, they that were angriest among 
them departed from the feeble ones : and 
they set off across country at great random, 
saying how they would take the city by 
assault and keep it against all others. Then 



Aladore 

they that remained went every day slower 
and more slow, and though they had all one 
weariness yet had they not all one mind. 
For they fell into much doubt and dispute 
concerning their two guides : whereof the one 
was a young lad that knew but little of that 
country, and the other was an old man and 
blind these many years. So at the last they 
were severed again into two bands and went 
their ways : for they that went with the 
youngling said how they would build a new 
city and forsake the old, but Ywain and a 
five or six more went not with them, for 
Bartholomy entreated Ywain against his will. 
Then they set forward again, and came to 
a country of hills : and before they entered 
upon the hills the old blind fell adying that 
was their guide. And they found a warm 
village under the hills, and left him there, 
for it was plain to see that his time was 
come. Then Ywain and Bartholomy thought 
to go their way, to find the city or to end 
in seeking it ; but they that had come so 
152 



Al adore 

far would go no farther with them, for they 
were afeard to leave their guide, or living or 
dead. 

So these twain entered alone upon the 
hills, and came through them in three days : 
and when they had passed through they saw 
the city there below them. And it lay in 
the midst of a plain, upon a hill that was 
but a great mound, with a river thereby 
like silver flowing : and the sea was fast 
by beneath the sun-setting, and the river 
went thereto through meadows and through 
boskage. 

Then Ywain and Bartholomy came down 
towards the foothills and drew nearer to the 
city : and when they were upon the foothills 
they saw it over against them in marvellous 
wise. For the walls of it were of a white 
old age, with great bastions between all 
rounded, and before the walls were meadows 
and above them were massy trees. And 
within the city the roofs were of red and 
of grey, and among the roofs were spires 
153 



Aladore 

and domes and high towers innumerable : and 
Ywain saw them clearly against the sky, and 
they were all passing beautiful, and not one 
of them like another. And there lay upon 
the city an enchantment, like to a mist or 
dimness upon it : for to such as stood with- 
out and looked upon it and beheld the walls 
and the gardens and the high towers thereof, 
to them it seemed ever to be abiding in 
ancientry and peace, as of no earthly city, 
but to those within it showed after another 
fashion. 

And while Ywain and Bartholomy stood 
still looking upon the city the sun set and 
dusk came round about them ; and in the 
dusk they saw a glimmering of lights. And 
they perceived that in that city was full 
plenty of chapels and of halls : for on every 
side there were great windows, and in the 
windows were many lights shining, rich and 
orderly, window by window aline upon the 
darkness. Also they heard suddenly a ring- 
ing of bells, so many and so sweet to hear, 



Aladore 

that they were astounded with the harmony 
of them : for they sounded one under another, 
as it might be under deep and shallow water. 
And there was one great bell which donged 
below all other : and the sound of it came 
up to Ywain like a sound from the bottom 
of the sea. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

OF THE MANNER OF THE CITY AND HOW 
YWAIN FELL ADROWSING THEREIN. 

AH, said Ywain, what is this city and by 
whom builded ? For it is certain that I 
came never here until now, and yet there is 
not one tower of it that I know not of old 
time. And Bartholomy answered him not, 
but out of the dusk a voice came and 
answered him, saying : Good truth and good 
reason, for this city was builded from the 
beginning, and all men are by nature free 
thereof; so that come they what day they will 
they come not as strangers but inheritors. 

Then Ywain saw a man before him stand- 
ing, habited after the fashion of the religious : 
and he saw him gladly, for he took comfort 
in the words that he had spoken. And 
156 



Aladore 

Bartholomy was comforted also, for he had 
been in doubt how they should come that 
night into the city, seeing that by likelihood 
the gates would be shut and guarded. And 
he took the man by the hand and entreated 
him that he would make good his saying : 
and he told him how they were of Paladore, 
come hither by reason of weariness, and how 
they were by name Ywain and Bartholomy. 
And he answered them, Yea, but they should 
have new names for a new life ; for he also 
had in the world a name worldly, but was 
now become Vincentius, and prayed daily 
against remembrance of things past. 

Then Bartholomy said Ay: and Ywain 
spoke no word, but his lips trembled. And 
Vincent looked upon their two faces, and he 
perceived the diversity of them, for he read 
them as the pages of a book. And he said 
to Bartholomy : What look you to find here ? 
And he answered Peace : and Vincent said 
to him, It is well. Then he asked of Ywain 
also the same question : and Ywain said 



Aladore 

openly : I am a lover and a seeker, and I 
look only to love and to seek. And Vincent 
answered him : It is well with you also, 
since you are come hither: for you shall 
love that which you desire not, and seek that 
which you have never seen. 

Then he led them down toward the city : 
and as they went they were astonished that 
he should so have met with them in the 
nick of need. But Vincent said that it was 
no marvel : for that every day at the time 
of twilight it was his custom to come forth 
out of the city and walk abroad, to the 
intent that he might lead in any that were 
forwandered. So they came to the gate and 
passed in with him, and he brought them 
through the city to a house where they 
should be lodged, and they supped there 
within the hour. 

And while they sat at supper they spoke 

of all that had fortuned to them : and Vincent 

heard them and answered them comfortably, 

as a Doctor will answer them which are 

158 



Aladore 

diseased. But of that which he said Ywain 
heard not the half, by reason of the bells 
which continued sounding above the city : 
for the sound of them wrapt him about as 
it were with softness and with sleep. And 
his weariness became pleasant to him and 
his thought a dream: and he desired nothing 
else but to hear those bells continually both 
by night and by day. 

And so it fortuned to him and to Bar- 
tholomy : for this was the manner of the 
city whereto they were come, and when it 
was showed to them they received it to their 
joy and solace. Then might you have seen 
them rising lively from their beds, and going 
forth under morning mist to keep the daily 
ordinance : for though the city was thronged 
with all manner of folk yet there was but 
one and the same rule for all. And they 
rang bells at the point of day, and again 
when they had broken fast : and they rang 
before noon and after, and at evening and at 
midnight, so that they went never an hour 



Aladore 

without ringing of bells in some part of that 
city. And they took all their delight therein, 
and when they met together, as at board or 
bench or whatsoever doing, then they would 
have their converse of bells and of the com- 
fort they took thereby. For they supposed 
that the properties of bells were many and 
diverse : and they heard one bell for courage 
and another for meditation, and one for ruth 
and another for gladness. And the deepest 
they heard for fellowship, seeing that the 
sound of it was very great and came into 
every house both near and far. And in sum, 
the life of those which dwelt in that city 
was all to ring bells and to hear them, and 
to do no other thing : and therefrom was 
their sustenance and their repute. 

So Ywain went daily aringing with the 
rest : and he lived as it were by sound alone 
and thought to have found peace. For his 
sorrow was rocked continually as a child is 
rocked in a cradle, and his soul was stilled 
as with a lullaby. 

1 60 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

HOW YWAIN FOUND HIS LADY IN A GARDEN. 

Now in this drowsihood was Ywain living 
well content : and the winter passed over and 
the year began to stir again from under 
ground. And March came with dust and 
dryness, and then came April with sweet 
showers to pierce that dryness, and in the 
gardens the small birds were a-pairing and 
a-nesting busily. But Ywain was still assotted 
upon bells, and his mind was subdued unto 
the tune of them. For he forgot neither his 
love nor his seeking: but when he should 
have wept therefor he remembered them only 
as an old and tender tale, or as a picture of 
one aforetime living, but now departed where 
is neither hope nor striving. 

So on a day he walked alone in a garden 
L 161 



Aladore 

of the city, and heard a sweet sad peal of 
bells chiming, and mused pleasantly thereon. 
Then suddenly he came upon a lady that 
was standing on a sward of daisies, and she 
stood between two laylock bushes, a purple 
and a white, and gathered flowers of each. 
And her face was turned away from Ywain : 
but his blood moved at the sight of her, and 
he heard the bells no longer for a singing 
that was in his ears. 

Then the lady looked down upon the flowers 
that she had gathered, and Ywain saw her 
face athwart, over her shoulder; and though 
her eyes were hid from him yet he saw well 
that she was his own lady. For he knew 
her by the turning of her neck, and by her 
hair, and by her ear that was like the hollow 
of a shell : and beside all these he knew her 
by a reason that was no reason but certainty. 
And he spoke to her by her name : and she 
turned her about and looked at him. And 
he said no more, for he was astonished 
dumbly, like a man awakened out of sleep. 
162 



Aladore 

And she said to him : Tell me somewhat 
of your amazement : for what came you 
hither seeking, if it were not that which 
you have found? Then he stood before her 
stockishly, like a thing of wood : but in his 
heart he went out of himself and kneeled 
upon his knees before her. And he said : 
Forgive me, for I thought to find you, but 
not here. And as he spoke there came into 
his mind the remembrance of the Queen of 
Chess, and of that old dame among the 
Maidens, and of the herd-girl in the wood 
of Howling : and when he saw his lady here 
also and in her proper shape he was be- 
wildered suddenly. And he looked at her as 
at one that was past his understanding, and 
he cried out as in fear: What are you 
verily ? 

But she looked at him kindly, and her 
voice came to him as from a far distance, 
and she said : How shall I tell you that which 
I know not, seeing that I have been many 
things in many times ? And he looked at 
163 



Aladore 

her again and saw her strangely, as a man 
may see his own home by moonlight : and 
he cried out : Ah ! lady mine and not mine ! 
For as I think, you were a rose in Eden, 
and a golden child in Babylon, and a rain- 
bow in Arcady, and a moonlight shadow on 
the walls of Troy : and you were loved of 
Tristram and of Troilus, and for you Lancelot 
fought and Sigurd rode the fire, and the 
sons of Usnach died. 

And when he had so said her voice came 
nearer to him, and she spoke yet more 
kindly, and she said: Yet for all this I 
am your lady and your earthly friend, and 
I have chosen you to my servant and my 
fellow -pilgrim. Then she smiled and said 
further : But there is no pilgrim that can 
live by sound alone, no, nor by ordinance 
of others. 

Then he said quickly: Must I forswear all 

bells for ever ? And she answered him : Not 

so, but I shall show you reason. And she put 

forth her hand and showed him the flowers 

164 



Aladore 

which she had gathered. And she showed 
him first the purple, and she asked him : 
How name you this, and of what colour? 
And he said: It is laylock, and the colour is 
the colour of laylock. Then she showed him 
the white and asked him again the same 
question. And he said : This also is lay- 
lock, but the colour of it is white. Then 
she looked gladly at him and a little mock- 
ing, and she said : You have well named 
them both. And in like manner the life of 
men is of the colour of life, but the life in 
this city is white, and though it be life 
after a sort, and sweet enough, yet is it 
no life for a man. And if it please you, 
we will take counsel together to depart from 
it : for we must still be going if we are to 
achieve our pilgrimage. But the time is not 
yet : for I come and go whither and whence 
I will, but you are bell - bound until the 
moon shall change. 



165 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

HOW YWAIN WAS BIDDEN TO AN ABBEY AND 
SO TO BE ENTRAPPED BY TREASON. 

WHEN Aithne had so said she stood looking 
upon Ywain : and her face was troubled, and 
her soul looked out of her eyes patiently, as 
it were one waiting for the dawn. For she 
was but newly come from Aladore, and she 
remembered as of yesterday how her mother 
had spoken with her before her death. And 
of Ywain she knew well that he was in good 
truth her friend and her lover: but for the 
rest she doubted, and in especial whether 
he were of one kind with her, that they 
might dwell together and find no division. 
And Ywain looked upon Aithne, and he 
also was troubled, but after another fashion : 
1 66 



Aladore 

for he doubted not of her, but of him- 
self. 

So they stood looking, on the one part 
and on the other: and they knew not how 
for all their doubting their spirits were 
already handfast, and devising of fellowship 
together. Nor they knew not what was 
being contrived against them and against 
their pilgrimage. For they talked, as they 
supposed, in secret : but in secret also they 
were betrayed. 

Then suddenly there came a little noise of 
rustling, as of one that went by stealth among 
the laylock bushes. And Ywain started and 
strode forth and looked along the garden : 
and he saw a man going hard away from 
him, and no other near that place. Then 
he would have followed after him : but the 
going of that man was marvellous, for he 
went not by leaping but by creeping, like a 
lizard going among grass. So Ywain came 
again to Aithne, and told her of that which 
he had seen : and they laughed thereat to- 
167 



Aladore 

gether. And Ywain was a little shamed, and 
thought no more of it : but Aithne laid it by, 
for she perceived that there was treason. 

Then they went out from the garden, and 
so departed slowly each from other: and 
they made promise to come together day by 
day until the third day thereafter. For on 
the third day at night was the time of the 
moon's changing, when they should escape 
out of the City of the Saints. But when 
Ywain thought thereon he could not tell how 
it might be compassed. And he doubted not 
without reason, seeing that he was still in 
subjection. For when he was together with 
Aithne he heard only her voice and nothing 
else : but when he was gone from her, then 
perforce he would follow the usage of the 
city and hear bells to his pleasure. 

Now on the morning of the third day, 
when Ywain was not yet gone forth, there 
came in Bartholomy to speak with him. 
And he bade Ywain to a bell - ringing in a 
certain Abbey of the city: for he showed 
168 



Aladore 

him how it was that night the festival of 
the Golden Bell. And he said how that 
bell was rung but once in the year, upon a 
solemn watch - night : and men were bidden 
thereto by no common favour. Then Ywain 
answered Bartholomy gladly, and was ac- 
corded to go with him. Then in the same 
moment he remembered Aithne and the 
words which she had spoken : for this was 
the night when the moon should change. 
And he would have made excuse to forsake 
the festival : but Bartholomy held him 
strongly thereto. So Ywain left him alone 
and went to seek his lady. 

And when he had met with her, he told 
her all : and she said to him : This is the 
treason, for he that devised it is the same 
which heard me say how you were bell- 
bound. And the snare is the festival, and 
Bartholomy is the decoy: but he that sent 
him to you is some greater one, for it is he 
that has bidden you both. Then Ywain said : 
It is Vincent, for he brought us in hither, 
I 169 



Aladore 

and he crept upon us so in the beginning, 
as a cat creeps upon young birds at the 
dusk. And it will be hard for me to escape 
from him, for he is of great power in the 
city. 

But Aithne smiled a little and said : A 
great power and a strong magic : yet it may 
be that there is a stronger. And the trial 
shall be between him and me : for before 
the moon changes I shall be gone into the 
Lost Lands of the South. And I bid you 
to my tryst as he hath bidden you to his. 



170 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

HOW THE MOON CHANGED, AND HOW YWAIN 
BROKE FORTH FROM THE CITY OF THE 
SAINTS. 

So when the evening was come Ywain and 
Bartholomy accompanied together; and they 
went through the city darkling, for the moon 
was now in umbrage. And when they came 
to the Abbey where was the Golden Bell, 
they found a crowd gathered thereabout, and 
the gate well guarded : and within the gate 
was Vincent with certain others. And there 
was a great lanthorn above, and when they 
came beneath the light of the lanthorn 
Vincent saw them who they were : and he 
greeted them and brought them to the 
Chapel. 

171 



Aladore 

Now the manner of the chapel was this : 
and it was by repute as proper a chapel as 
any in that city. For it was thrice as long 
as wide, and the roof was of white stone, 
high embowed and carven with spreading 
ribs. And the walls were of white stone 
also, but overlaid below with cedar wood : 
and the wood was ancient and empanelled 
with many rich devices. And upon the walls 
were canopies with carven tracery above, and 
stalls of dignity thereunder : and below the 
stalls were other stalls and again other, so 
that there were of them three several rows on 
this side and on that. And they which sat 
therein were set over against each other: 
and beside every man in every stall there 
was a fair white candle burning. And with 
the light of those candles the whole place 
was lit and glorified : yet there was a dark- 
ness also within it, for the cedar work was 
wellnigh black with ancientry. Also the floor 
was of marble, lozengy black and white, and 
in the candle-shine it glimmered sombrely. 
172 



Aladore 

So they came within the chapel, and 
Vincent showed them where they should be 
seated. And to Bartholomy he showed a 
seat among the lowest, but Ywain he set in 
a high stall beneath a canopy, among those 
which were great ones in the Abbey and in 
the city. And when he was come to his 
place Ywain looked adown the chapel, and 
he saw how Vincent had bestowed himself: 
for he was set fast by the doorway, on the 
one side of it, and on the other side was 
set the Lord Abbot in his state. 

Then when all men were in place the doors 
were closed, both the outer and the inner, 
and the Lord Abbot gave command and the 
Golden Bell began to ring. And at the 
sound of that bell the hearts of all that 
heard it were comforted exceedingly, and 
they folded their hands to rest: for that 
which they heard was as a sweetness poured 
out upon all things, whereby the wrongs of 
men were hidden and their crying drowned. 
And Ywain also forgot in that instant all the 



Aladore 

ills that he had suffered in all his life : and of 
the morrow he dreamed without desire. For 
the fights wherein he had made forfeit and 
the hopes which he had never achieved, he 
remembered them but with tenderness, as 
shames and perils of childhood, nothing 
great : and in likewise he thought carelessly 
on all that was to come. And he knew 
not how long he sat there musing : for the 
blood lulled idly in his pulse as the sea 
water lulls before the turning of the tide. 

Then upon a sudden his eyes opened and 
he beheld a marvel. For over against him 
there came upon the air the semblance of a 
man's hand : and the hand was great and 
black, and habited in a manch of black. 
And it came slowly along the chapel, by no 
motion that might be perceived: and as it 
came the lights perished dead before it by 
stall and by stall. And the lowest row were 
those which perished first, and then those 
next above them : and last of all the lights 
that were before the canopies. 



Aladore 

And Ywain knew not what had befallen 
him, for he felt in his heart a lifting of 
heaviness : and he looked about to see his 
fellows, and when he saw them he was 
astonished. For they started up stiffly and 
yet they moved not : but they sat every one 
in his place with his eyes staring and his 
mouth misshapen. And the hand went to- 
wards Vincent and towards the Lord Abbot : 
and their lights also perished, and the bell 
clanked brokenly and fell to silence. 

Then came upon Ywain both memory and 
understanding : and joy leapt from within 
him fiercely, as the tide leaps beneath the 
wind. And he rose up and made to go forth, 
and they that were near him clung about 
him and entreated him, for they were in 
terror of darkness. And he tossed them from 
him and came striding to the door : and 
Vincent cried out that all should stay him. 
But Ywain said : Let be, your light is out : 
and he smote him endlong and went on and 
left him lying. And he came forth to the gate 



Aladore 

and burst it, and the crowd stood without 
wondering. And Ywain saw them as a city 
of sluggards and slumberers, dead before their 
time : and he cried, The Moon is changed, 
and he went through them as the wind will 
go through standing corn. And by what 
way he knew not he came to what gate he 
recked not : and he smote the porter with 
his own keys and went forth shouting into 
the darkness. 



176 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

HOW YWAIN CAME INTO THE LOST LANDS 
OF THE SOUTH, AND OF THREE SIGNS 
WHEREBY THAT COUNTRY MIGHT BE 
KNOWN. 

Now Ywain had in his going but one only 
intent, and that was by reason of his lady's 
word that he should find her in the South. 
So he ceased from his running and his 
shouting, and he looked upon the stars ; 
and under the Herdsman he found the 
South and made to go thitherward. But 
he went not by the way of the high-road : 
for he supposed that Vincent and his would 
raise hue and cry after him. So he left the 
road and climbed forthright upon the foothills 
that were hard by the city. And as he had 
supposed, so he saw it come about upon the 

M 177 



Aladore 

road beneath him : for there issued suddenly 
out of the gateway both lanthorns and torches, 
like a scattering of sparks out of a chimney. 
And they which bore them ran hither and 
thither both up and down the road, bawling 
and babbling in the worst manner: for their 
voices were harsh to hear, and out of all tune 
of bells. And Ywain sat above and beheld 
them unaware : and all their fury was by 
reason only that one had forsaken their 
ordinance. 

Then he left them to their hunting, and 
climbed further above the foothills : and he 
went all night to the Southward by starlight 
only. And when the cold of dawn was past 
then the sun shone warmly upon him : and a 
shepherd gave him milk and bread to break 
fast, and he lay long thereafter in a hollow of 
the hills. And about him was much blossom 
of wild flowers, and upon the blossom came a 
million of bees, some great and some small, 
and every one of them droning busily upon his 
bagpipes : and also below that place was a 
meadow of sheep with many lambs bleating. 
178 



Aladore 

And Ywain had joy of those beasts and of 
their droning and their bleating : for whether 
he slept or wakened the sound of them was in 
his ears and in his blood. 

Then at the dusk he set forth again, and so 
he went nine nights and days : for always he 
voyaged by night and slept by day, because of 
espial. But on the ninth night he came into 
the lands which Aithne named to him, for she 
named them the Lost Lands of the South ; 
and when he was come therein he knew them 
by a sign, and the sign whereby he knew them 
was the third of three. 

For when he first came into those lands it 
was evening, and not long past moonrise : and 
notwithstanding that all day he had taken joy 
of the sun and of the noise of beasts and birds, 
yet now he had no less joy of the coolness and 
the silence. And he strode forward upon the 
shoulders of the hills, going swiftly and 
strongly : for the moon was now waxing fast, 
and the light of her lightened the green spaces 
of the grass. 

Then as he went his eyes also were light- 



Aladore 

ened, and he saw the world anew. For he 
perceived how that the beauty of it was of no 
fading excellence, but only by long time for- 
gotten : and belike remembered again and 
again forgotten many times, according as men 
made clean their hearts or darkened them. 
And he saw that land as a land of gods and 
not of men only : and though he saw not the 
gods nor heard them, yet he perceived plainly 
both their radiance and their breathing. 

Then in his joy he gave thanks to the Moon, 
as to the Queen of Heaven : for he knew no 
longer what he did. And immediately he saw 
before him an upland all hoar in moonlight : 
for upon the sides of it there was a semblance 
as of mist rising. Yet was that semblance no 
mist, for it moved swiftly without wind : and 
Ywain looked again and saw it as a company 
of maidens dancing together. And their attire 
was all of cloudy silk, and their feet were 
bright as with ten thousand dew drops : and 
their hair was whirled about them like wisps 
of smoke. And it seemed to Ywain that they 
1 80 



Aladore 

danced so lightly as no thing living, save 
music only : for that will dance lightly without 
sound in the imagination of the heart. 

And Ywain knew not the dancers nor how 
they might be named : but I suppose that 
they were of the hill maidens, which were of 
old time called by the name of Oreads. And 
it is like enough that they which he saw were 
the same : for their beauty also was of the 
earth but nowise transitory. And Ywain 
beheld their dancing gladly and kept no count 
of time ; for as he stood the Moon passed over 
him and went Southing, and he marked her 
not. But at the last they danced more 
quickly, and with the sight of them his blood 
began to work : and he endured it not long, 
but he went running towards the upland. 
And as he ran the maidens whirled them 
thrice into the air, and so sank down : and 
Ywain saw them no more, for the earth 
received them, and the hill lay bare before 
him. 

Then he took his way Southward and 
181 



Aladore 

looked again upon the moon : and the silver 
of her beam was faded, and the sable of her 
shadows, for she was well-nigh drowned in 
dawn. And when the day was risen he began 
to go more wearily : for in those lands the 
sun was nearer and bore hard upon the way- 
farers. And within a fair mile he saw a wood 
before him : and the wood was full of great 
ilex -trees, with laurels shining about the 
margent of it. And he devised to go therein, 
by reason of the shade and coolness. 

But when he was come thither he clean 
forgot his weariness: and he perceived that 
the wood was no lonely place but full of 
magic. For when he looked he saw nothing 
stirring : but when he looked not then always 
he perceived a stirring or a flitting or a vanish- 
ing on the one side or on the other. And he 
walked no more freely, but warily, by reason 
of the eyes and ears that were about him : 
yet he saw neither eyes nor ears to give him 
reason. 

Then at the last he came again to open 
182 



Aladore 

ground, and he laid him down upon the edge 
of it within the shadow of the wood : and he 
took his rest and thought to be there alone. 
But within a while he returned into his rest- 
lessness : for he heard a sighing as of a little 
wind that came quickly and went past him 
and so along the hillside upwards. And in 
the passing of the wind he saw as it were three 
damsels running swiftly one after another. 
And as they ran his eyes were dazed with 
the beauty of them and his wits stood still 
and the whole world moved about him. And 
he got him to his feet and laid his hand upon 
his eyes : and when he had covered his eyes 
then he remembered how he had seen those 
damsels plainly. For they were tall and 
.slender of form and clear brown of colour: 
and they were arrayed all in green and gold 
like young boughs in sunlight. Also they ran 
smoothly as a full river will run towards a 
weir. 

Then he lifted his eyes and looked again : 
and he saw them and saw them not. For the 
183 



Aladore 

place was still and no thing moved upon it : 
but under the sun were three trees there before 
him. And the trees were by seeming three 
laurels windy-blown : for they leaned a little 
forward one after another, and their greenery 
went all one way, as it were streaming up the 
hillside. And Ywain supposed that in the 
dazzle of his eyes he had seen the trees and 
taken them for damsels : yet he looked long 
upon them as though perchance they were 
damsels indeed, and trees by semblance only. 
So he went forward pondering, and this time 
also he knew not that it was a sign which he 
had seen. 

Then he began to leave the high hills, and 
he came into a little downland with downs 
that tumbled divers ways. And it was a bare 
land, but warm and rich : and in the valleys 
were cots with corn about them, and rivers 
going softly in deep meadows. And as he 
went he saw before him a beechen grove with 
seven trees therein : and the grove was lonely 
and clear of boskage, and it seemed to Ywain 
184 



Aladore 

that he had sight of children playing between 
the trees. So he came nearer, going slow and 
craftily: and he stood behind the endmost 
tree and looked through the grove, for it was 
but little. And that which he saw was pass- 
ing strange to him : for the children were 
there before him, and the like of them he saw 
never in all his days. Naked they were and 
manlike to the middle, in their flesh fat and 
in their countenance all merry babes : but 
below they were of another fashion, for their 
hams were wool-begrown and they were goat- 
kneed and goat-footed. Also their hair upon 
their heads was woolly and their ears were 
pointed and a-prick like little horns. And it 
was plain to see that they were kin to the 
beasts and of them well understanded : for 
one child held a squirrel between his hands, 
and the squirrel feared not, but kept his tail 
a-high ; and one sat piping to a company of 
small fowls, which also sat and piped to him. 
But there was yet another child fast by, which 
vexed the piper with a barley straw : and he 
185 



Aladore 

ceased not for his brother's frowning, but 
tickled him evilly amidst his ear. 

Then when Ywain saw those babes and 
their playing his thoughts left him and for- 
getfulness and joy came upon him very sud- 
denly, and his heart was delivered of a great 
laughter. And that laughter went rolling 
forth from him as smoke goes rolling from 
a fire of green wood, and like smoke it was 
renewed continually, bursting thickly forth 
without end. And the children heard it and 
ceased from their playing: yet it brought no 
fear upon them, neither upon the beasts that 
were their fellows. For the squirrel chat- 
tered and the small fowls piped more loudly, 
and the children also wantoned in laughter, 
and rolled upon the ground together : and 
when they came upon their feet again they 
spied Ywain and cried out joyously upon him, 
and they ran against him with their heads 
and blethered after the manner of kids. And 
when Ywain felt the butting of their heads 
and the busyness of their hands about him 
then there came before his eyes a haze of 
1 86 



Aladore 

brightness, so that he saw the world as it 
were golden and gleaming, and it seemed to 
him that he had returned into the morning 
of his youth. 

Then with his much laughter his strength 
went from him, and for content he sighed and 
so laid him down upon the ground: and the 
children sat them beside him and tumbled 
one with another. And as they sported and 
tumbled together it bechanced that one of 
them struck Ywain with his foot : and Ywain 
started a little, for the kick was notable. And 
he perceived right well the reason : for he saw 
again the child's foot, how it was small and 
hard like the hoof of a goat. And instantly 
his thought quickened that before had been 
sleeping : and he knew the land whereto he 
had come. For this was the third sign, and 
sign past doubting : howbeit the first two 
were also signs and plain enough. But what 
he perceived not by Oreads and by Dryads, 
that he learned easily by Fauns : for of those 
he had but vision of the eyes, but with these 
there came also kicking of the flesh. 
187 



CHAPTER XXX. 

HOW YWAIN HAD FELLOWSHIP WITH THE 
FAUNS. 

So Ywain lay there upon the earth, and his 
laughter ebbed from him : and he set him to 
gather his wits together as a huntsman gathers 
his hounds that have been chasing over wide. 
And in part he gathered them but not all : 
for it seemed that some part of him was be- 
yond calling and would not return. But of 
that he left thinking, and was content : and 
his heart was emptied of all thoughts save 
three only. For he had great desire of eating 
and of fellowship and of dancing : and the 
sun filled him with strength and the air quiv- 
ered before his eyes, and he leaped up upon 
his feet. 

1 88 



Aladore 

Then he looked down between the beechen 
boles and saw where other two fauns came 
swiftly up the hill, leaping towards him with 
great leaps : and they were no children but 
goatmen grown with little beards upon their 
faces. And he stood still to meet with them, 
for he knew not what their dealing might be : 
but they came joyously to him and favoured 
him with their hands and with their looks and 
with their voices. And when they had greeted 
him they began to lead him away into the 
valley : and Ywain went with them gladly and 
the children followed after, lagging and sport- 
ing one with another. 

And as they went Ywain beheld the grown 
fauns curiously : and he saw how one was by 
seeming older and one younger, as it might 
be two youths of eighteen year and twenty. 
Yet their faces were not two but one, for they 
were made after one and the same pattern : 
and they differed in no wise save in the hair 
of their beards. For of one the beard was 
soft and like the down within the rose-hips, 
189 



Aladore 

and of the other it was hard and like the 
beards of barley. But in their lips and in 
their eyes was nothing diverse, and Ywain 
saw them as a man may see one only face 
in two several mirrors : also their voices 
chanted together tuneably, like voices of 
young sheep in a flock. 

And they showed Ywain how they were 
called : for they pointed each at other and 
so named their names, and the older one was 
called Panikos and the younger one was 
called Paniskos. Then Ywain spoke their 
names and laughed and he showed them his 
own name also : and he laughed again, for 
they used it strangely, bleating somewhat in 
their speech. Then in the like manner they 
showed him other words, and he learned of 
them easily : for they spoke of no far matters 
but only of such as were according with his 
appetite. And in especial they spoke of eat- 
ing and of drinking and of music: and also, 
as he supposed, of hunting and of sleeping. 
And though Ywain knew not yet what they 
190 



Aladore 

would say concerning these things, yet he 
knew certainly that they spoke thereof. And 
he perceived their joy, and had fellowship 
with them : for he saw how they lived far 
off from carefulness and perplexity, and how 
their life was mingled continually with the 
beauty of the earth. 



191 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

HOW YWAIN MET WITH A SHEPHERDESS AND 
HEARD A MUSIC, AND HOW HE HAD 
SIGHT OF ALADORE THE FIRST TIME. 

THUS began Ywain to be consorted with 
fauns, and to live, after their manner: and 
he slept with them that night in a little 
wildwood fast by a river. And before they 
slept they gave him to eat of such things as 
they had : and truly his supper was no feast. 
For the fauns live all by nuts and by grains, 
and have no bread : also they will taste flesh 
but they know not the use of fire. So on the 
morrow early they caught a good fish and 
tore it : and when they perceived that Ywain 
loved not raw meat, then they had pity on 
him. And they left the river and brought 
192 



Aladore 

him to a shepherd's hut, and they made him 
understand that he should go nearer and 
knock upon the door. For they knew that 
where there were men, there belike would 
be men's meat, whether of bread or of 
flesh. 

So Ywain came to the hut, and knocked 
upon the door: but he heard no voice within. 
And when he would have knocked again a 
second time he dared not : for he knew that 
there stood one within and listened silently. 
Then he devised to speak instead of to knock : 
and he spoke the greeting of a pilgrim, humbly. 
And while he was yet speaking the door was 
opened, and there was there a young shep- 
herdess standing upon the threshold. And 
when he saw her his heart began to beat 
furiously : and the beating of it upon his ribs 
was like the galloping of a horse upon a green 
road. For the shepherdess stood looking at 
him out of youth and fearfulness : but the 
face was the face of his lady and of no 
woman else. 

N 193 



Aladore 

Then his voice changed, and he spoke 
again to her trembling: but she nodded with 
her head and answered not. And she put 
forth her hand to bring him in, and he per- 
ceived that it was brown and hard, and he 
looked again and saw how her face also was 
brown as with the burning of one summer 
upon another. Then he said within himself: 
My lady was never so : yet if this be not her 
body it is her soul, and in all her shapes I 
am to serve and follow her. 

Then the shepherdess gave him to eat : and 
that which she gave him was no rich man's 
portion. But without doubt she changed it 
in the giving : for the bread was fine bread 
between his teeth, and the flesh was as the 
flesh of swans and peacocks. And while he 
ate she looked upon him, and he also looked 
upon her : and he ate but little by reason of 
his looking and his delight. And when she 
perceived this she forsook him suddenly and 
went out : and immediately his hunger in- 
creased upon him and he dealt shortly with 
194 



Aladore 

all that she had given him. Then she came 
again suddenly, and looked upon the bare 
board, and laughed : but in all this time she 
spoke not one word, so that Ywain marvelled 
and was some deal discomfited. 

Then he called her by her name, Aithne : 
but thereto she shook her head and continued 
saying no word. And he said to her : What 
do you in this place, and by what name shall 
I call you ? And again she answered not, but 
she took two shepherd's crooks that stood be- 
hind the door of the hut, and one of them 
she kept and one she gave into his hand, and 
so led him forth. And they came together 
to the sheepstead and untied the wattled 
cotes, and loosed the sheep : and together 
they went hillward in the cool of the 
morning. 

Now as they went together Ywain looked 
about him, and he saw the fauns that were 
his friends : and they stood beside the valley 
road in a place whereto Ywain should come 
presently. And he called to them joyfully, 
195 



Aladore 

and they heard him calling : so that he hoped 
they would have stayed for him. But when 
he was now within a pitch of them, he saw 
how they were suddenly gone away : for they 
ran swiftly from him towards their wildwood, 
and the reeds of the river hid them as they 
ran. Yet they went not with one mind or 
one fear : for one of them stayed in his run- 
ning and returned. And Ywain had sight of 
him among the willows, peering with bright 
eyes : and he perceived that he was stealing 
fast upon them, and going from tree to tree. 
And when they were at the turning of the 
road, where they must leave the valley and 
go upon the hill, then the reeds rustled and 
crackled beside the road: and the faun broke 
forth suddenly upon them, and he was that 
one that was the younger of the two. And 
he looked no more upon Ywain but upon the 
shepherdess only : and he stooped down and 
took her hand and nosed in it lovingly as a 
deer will nose in the hand of her that feeds 
him. And Ywain spoke to him by his name : 
196 



Aladore 

but thereat he started up and went leaping 
after his fellow, and rustling like a wind 
among the reeds. 

Then the shepherdess led Ywain forth upon 
the hill, and behind them was the river and 
before them was the little beechen grove. 
And they came to the grove and sat within 
the shade of it and looked over the valley : 
and the sheep went cropping the wild thyme 
and the milkwort, and clanking pleasantly 
with their bells. And the shepherdess looked 
downward upon Ywain, for he lay before her 
at her feet : and he turned and looked upward 
into her eyes. And as he looked the day went 
over him in a moment of time, between two 
beats of his heart : and he lacked speech of 
her no longer, for he dreamed under her 
silence as a man may dream under a starry 
night. 

Then she rose and led him again down- 
ward : and the sheep went down before them 
to the river, and fell to drinking greedily. 
And as they drank the wind of evening came 
197 



Aladore 

softly down the stream, and upon it came a 
sound of piping : and Ywain's heart ached 
to hear that piping, for it was of a sad and 
piercing sweetness. Then his feet began to 
move beneath him, and he left the sheep to 
their drinking and went toward the music. 
And he came to a glassy pool among the 
rocks : and upon the rocks was the young 
faun sitting, and playing on his pipes, and 
under his feet was the evening sky, shown 
clearly upon the water of the pool. 

And Ywain came near, for the music drew 
him strongly : and he stood and looked upon 
the pool, and he saw the sky therein. And 
he saw it not as sky but as a great region 
of the sea : for the clouds upon it were like 
lands of earth, and they lay there after the 
fashion of bays and heads and islands. And 
there was a coast that lay fast by him, as it 
were beneath his very feet : and it ran to the 
right of him and to the left, and beyond it 
was the void space of the sea. And as he 
looked upon the coast he knew it well : for 
198 



Aladore 

he stood by seeming upon the High Steep 
of Paladore, and looked out over the Shep- 
herdine Sands. 

Then with the beauty of the place he fell 
to longing, and because of the music that 
he heard his heart was restless : and he 
desired greatly to be seeking for the land 
wherefrom that music came. And in a 
moment it was there before him, beyond 
the void space of the sea. And the form of 
it was as the form of Paladore, with the 
city and the steep all fashioned out of cloud : 
but it lay lonely and far out, like an island 
of the West. And a light was upon it more 
delectable than all the lights of sunset, so 
that it seemed to burn also in the eyes of 
him that saw it : and the light and the music 
increased together, and together they faded 
and ceased. And when they ceased Ywain 
turned him aside to weep, for he perceived 
that he was homeless. 

But as he turned he saw his lady beside 
him standing, and she spoke and called him 
199 



Aladore 

by his name as one that knew him afresh and 
was no more bedumbed. And he cast himself 
into her arms and kissed her : for he knew 
that he had had sight of no earthly city but 
of Aladore. Then he looked again upon the 
pool, if by fortune he might see that city 
again : and he saw but a ripple on the water, 
for with his hoof the faun had dabbled it. 



200 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

HOW YWAIN LIVED AS IT HAD BEEN IN THE 
GOLDEN AGE AND HOW HE WAS STILL 
UNSATISFIED. 

RIGHT so came the night and they got them 
homeward. And Aithne went to her hut, 
where she had her living among the shep- 
herds, but Ywain returned and rested with 
the fauns. And he slept not, but lay a great 
time waking, and longing for the morrow 
morn : whereby he hastened it not, but delayed 
it rather. And this is the folly of men that 
they will look ever forward to that which they 
have not, and take no rest in that which 
they have. For Ywain had that day gathered 
to fill both his hands namely, by seeing 
Aladore and by taking of his lady in arms : 
20 1 



Aladore 

and in a long life there will come but few 
such days, so that it were wisdom to cherish 
them in memory. But Ywain remembered 
scantly that which was past and gathered, 
for his mind was all on the kisses that were 
to come : and folly it was past gainsaying, 
but of such folly is the life of man. 

So he lay longing, and arose in hope, and 
continued many days after the same gait. 
And his desire fled still before him, and he 
followed and thought not on the way of his 
going : for to him one day was like another, 
and one night was like another, and he 
counted them no more than a child will 
count the beads upon a string. But Aithne 
counted them and laid them by, and when 
she counted them she trembled. For she also 
would have him gone on pilgrimage, seeing 
that so only might she meet with her love 
in Aladore : but many times she said within 
herself: Not yet, poor lady me, for none 
knows what may fortune, and belike this is 
all that shall be mine. 

202 



A] adore 

Now the manner of their days was after 
the manner of the Golden Days. For their 
meeting was in the freshness of the morning, 
when all things are made new : and they ate 
and drank together with few words, and 
between them was a bowl of milk, and over 
it they laughed one at another with their 
eyes. For about the bowl was a thread of 
scarlet wool, and Ywain knew well for what 
reason it was there : yet would he ask many 
times for asking's sake. And Aithne said 
how it was there of great necessity : for she 
set it there to be a witchknot, to draw her 
love to her by shepherd's magic. Then many 
times he broke the thread and cast it on the 
ground, and always when he came again the 
knot was freshly knotted upon the bowl. So 
out of nothing they made much, after the 
old fashion. 

Then with their sheep they took the road, 

and came thence upon the upland pastures. 

And while the day was yet cool they two 

went wandering alone, and marvelling at all 

203 



Aladore 

the diverse flowers upon the hills. But when 
the sun was overhead and the air began to 
tremble upon the rocks, then beneath a little 
cliff they found a spring of water flowing out 
continually and sparkling like crystal above 
the pebbles. And thereby grew tall fir-trees, 
and white poplars, and cypresses and planes, 
and on the branches the cicalas were chir- 
ruping, all sunburnt, and the ring-doves 
were moaning one to another of love. And 
below them were many flowers of fragrance, 
such as fill the meadows in the heyday of 
the year before it wanes : and all the land 
smelt sweetly of summer, and the wild bees 
went booming about the water springs. 

And thither came Ywain to his shepherd- 
ing and he forgot the world as though it had 
never been. For he remembered neither land 
nor gold, nor his old fame among men : but 
he sat with his love beneath a rock and held 
her in his arms, and they murmured one to 
another, and watched their sheep feeding 
among the thyme. And when it drew towards 
204 



Aladore 

evening then they came downward from the 
hill, and listened to hear the young faun's 
music : for among the fauns there is not one 
that dare pipe at noon, but at evening they 
will pipe without fear. And when there was 
a sound of music then Ywain came always 
to the glassy pool, hoping that he might 
have sight of Aladore. And when the pool 
was still he saw it, for the piping of the faun 
was of a strong magic, beyond all under- 
standing of him that made it, as happens many 
times to them that make music. But Ywain 
had of that magic more pain than joy : for 
the vision which he saw thereby was of no 
substantial city, but an image made in water. 
And to find that city in truth his heart was 
restless with desire, for he knew that except 
he came there he might have neither fulness 
of love, neither abiding. 



205 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

OF THE MADNESS OF THE FAUNS, AND HOW 
YWAIN FORSOOK THEM SUDDENLY, AND 
HIS LADY WITH HIM. 

MOREOVER when midsummer was now come 
Ywain began to misdoubt him of the fauns: 
for from gentle they were become fierce, and 
when he saw their eyes he saw them changed, 
as a sky that is hot with thunder. Also they 
departed from him continually, both by night 
and by day, and he saw how they went wander- 
ing alone and secretly : and when they went 
forth they went as it were ravening like 
beasts, and when they came again they came 
weary and shamed before him, as with the 
shame of men, for in their nature they were 
divided between two kinds. 
Then upon a night it fortuned to Ywain 
206 



Aladore 

that his sleep was broken, because of the 
moonlight that crept upon him. And at 
the last he awoke utterly, and in the moon- 
light he saw the young faun beside him 
sleeping, but the old one he saw not, for he 
was plainly slunk away. And Ywain took 
but little heed of him, as at this time, for 
his own head was weary and he had yet no 
comfort of the night. So he turned him and 
lay still again and thought to sleep. 

But as he lay there came a sound from 
far off, like the cry of one that shrieks 
suddenly in fear. And with that sound Ywain 
also was affrighted, and his heart stood still, 
and he held his breath to listen. And there 
was silence for a space, and he said : It is 
an evil dream, for it is long since that cry 
was in my ears. And therewith the cry came 
again, louder than before, and Ywain per- 
ceived that the voice was the voice of a 
woman : and he started up and leaned upon 
his hand, and the sweat pricked him sud- 
denly among the roots of his hair. And the 
young faun also started up out of sleep and 
207 



Aladore 

stood before Ywain listening : and Ywain saw 
his eyes that glittered under the moon, and 
his mouth that grinned and trembled, as a 
dog's mouth grins before he bites. 

Then the crying came again the third time, 
and continued more and more, and it was by 
seeming nearer, as of one running and cry- 
ing upon the hillside; and Ywain thought 
to know the place, and he leapt upon his 
feet to go thither. But when he would have 
gone he could not, for the young faun cast 
his arms about Ywain's knees and held him 
fast. And Ywain looked down upon him and 
was astonished, for aforetime he had seen 
him as a thing young and tameable, and of 
a nature softer than the nature of men. But 
now he saw the teeth of him and heard the 
growling: and therewith a red hatred came 
upon Ywain, and his heart swelled up to burst- 
ing, and he fell upon the faun and beat him 
with fists upon the head. But the faun loosed 
him not for all that, nor ceased not from his 
mirth, and they two rolled upon the ground 
and fought together, the one grinning always 
208 



Aladore 

and the other sobbing, for Ywain wept fiercely 
with rage to be so hindered. 

Then at the last he caught the faun and 
choked him, and so cast him grovelling : and 
he escaped out of the wildwood and began 
to climb upon the hill. And now that he 
was escaped he knew no longer whither he 
should go, for there was no more sound of 
shrieking, but a great silence of moonlight 
and solitude. And he went to and fro upon 
the hillside and found there no living thing : 
and at the last the sky began to lighten 
towards dawn, and his strength left him, so 
that he laid him down and slept he knew 
not where. 

And when he awoke the sun was high, and he 
looked adown the hill and saw Aithne coming 
towards him, and she was leading forth her 
sheep, for it was time. And as she came he 
saw her loveliness while she was yet far from 
him, for her going was both proud and 
womanly, and she showed forth in it the 
fashion of her heart. And when he saw that 
he thought on pain and terror, and he had 
o 209 



Aladore 

great pity upon all women, and he went 
quickly to meet her and said : What have 
we here to do, for we should be gone long 
since. But she looked at him and saw how 
he was already weary, even in the first hour 
of the day, and how he was troubled beyond 
measure, even in her presence that loved 
him : also she saw how he was soiled and 
somewhat be-bled upon the hands. And she 
touched his hand with her hand and asked 
him of his hurt, and for what cause he would 
be gone. And he told her no truth, for he 
would not tell her of his pity, but he spoke of 
himself only, and he said : I am afraid, for I 
go in peril of my life, by reason of the fauns. 
Then she said : Dear heart, be not afraid, 
for I know the fauns, that they will be cruel 
at their hours, and I have a spell to tame 
them, for they are but beasts. Yea, said he, 
they are my brethren of the half blood. And 
now I beseech you that you lay down your 
crook and leave your sheep to feed as may 
befall them, and let us begone by what way 
you will. And she delayed and asked him 

210 



Aladore 

Whither ? And he said : I know not whither, 
but this I know, that I have fought with my 
kin, and I have dwelt among them long 
enough. 

Then Aithne sighed, and she turned her 
about and looked upon the valley, and the 
sun lay broad upon it, and the morning 
shadows, and the river ran bright among the 
willows below and in the rocky pools above. 
And she sighed again, and then she said : It 
is nothing, beloved, for we have been long 
together, and we have that which hath been 
and that which shall be. But as men say, a 
joy that ends is never long enough, so now I 
sigh because I must bid this place farewell. 
And I knew always that we must some day 
be gone from it : and I waited only for your 
will. This is my will, said Ywain : and he 
cast her crook upon the ground, to be a token 
to them that should find it lying. Then he 
took her by the hand, and they looked again 
upon the valley : and they kissed for comfort 
and for memory, and turned them and went 
together across the hills. 
211 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

HOW YWAIN AND AITHNE WENT FLYING 
BETWEEN SUN AND MOON. 

THEN they went hastily until it was past noon, 
and Ywain would not that they should stint, 
till at last they wearied both, and lacked 
strength for lack of meat. And they espied 
a shepherd's hut all lonely among the hills, 
and it stood fast by a thicket, and they knew 
not whose it might be, for it was far off from 
the valley of their dwelling. So they came 
thither and found it empty, for the shepherds 
were abroad with their flock. Then they went 
within the hut and shut to the door and 
thought to rest them awhile. But Ywain sat 
him down beside the window and hid himself, 
that he might keep watch, for he doubted 
that they were not yet wholly escaped. 
212 



Aladore 

And when he had watched for the space of 
half an hour he saw how that there was some- 
thing stirring in the border of the thicket : 
and presently came forth the young faun, 
going warily upon his hands and upon his 
shanks. And he cast about him on this side 
and on that, nosing the earth as a hound upon 
the trail : and he began to creep toward the 
hut, and Ywain moved not but laid hold upon 
his staff. But in the same moment he looked 
beyond the faun and saw two shepherds which 
came coasting the thicket, and he heard their 
dogs behind them barking and driving in the 
sheep. And the faun also heard them and 
was discomfited: for his wits had been all 
upon the trail and he was well-nigh trapped. 
And the shepherds saw him and cried out 
upon him and made to beat him with their 
crooks, but he ran with great leaps, and 
passed before them and was gone into the 
thicket. 

Then Ywain went out to meet the shepherds, 
and to question them, for he perceived that 
they were come home from pasture before 
213 



Aladore 

their time. And they said that they had 
great need to come, for that there was a 
gathering of fauns throughout all the country, 
and it was the time of their madness wherein 
they would be fell and beastly. 

Then Ywain told his tale also, and they 
counselled him earnestly to go further, for 
they understood how that he was hated of 
the fauns, and belike against him was their 
gathering, and against none other. So Ywain 
brought his lady forth in spite of weariness, 
and the shepherds gave them such meat as 
they had, and sent them away. 

Then Ywain began to be afeared as he had 
never been afeared in all his days, for he saw 
how his lady was fallen lame with the rough- 
ness of the hills : and this that was before him 
was no proper warfare, wherein a man may 
die reasonably, but a desperate and unclean 
fortune, to be overtaken by beasts in darkness. 
And on every wind he heard voices, and 
behind every tree he saw the shadow of his 
enemies, so that he went continually as 
through an ambush, forlorn of hope. But 
214 



Aladore 

Aithne spoke always with good cheer, and 
made light of fauns, as one that had a spell 
to subdue all creatures at her will. And 
almost Ywain believed her, for she was sted- 
fast beyond all bravery of feigning. 

Then at the last the sun began to fall more 
swiftly to his setting, and a great perplexity 
came upon Ywain. For he supposed that in 
the darkness would be the end of all, but he 
knew not how nor in what point of time : 
and he had a longing to say somewhat to 
Aithne, yet for shame he could not say it, 
lest by chance after despair there should come 
deliverance. And therein his heart betrayed 
him not, for his fortune was better than his 
fear. 

Thus they continued going forward, and 
speaking as in hope : and though they spoke 
deceivingly each to other, yet their spirits 
were in peace together. And as they went 
they looked upon the sky westward : and 
there was a little span between the sun and 
the sky border, and by that span they saw 
their life and measured it. And the sky was 
215 



Aladore 

clear above and without cloud, but the sun 
was greatening below in a mist of rose : and 
against the mist was a black jot, as it were a 
black crow homing towards nightfall. And 
when it came nearer they saw how it was in 
bigness greater than a crow and in colour 
diverse : for the light went through it and 
yellowed it, and it flew more swiftly than a 
bird. Also it came with a sound of humming, 
like a great bee, and the nearer the louder, 
till the air was shaken with the humming 
of it, and the blood quickened in them that 
heard it. And Ywain and Aithne stood still 
to look upon it, and they saw that it was 
by seeming a man which flew with wings : 
and he came over them where they stood 
and went about them in a circle like a 
buzzard, wheeling lightly and looking down 
upon them. 

Then Ywain made a sign requiring succour 

of him : and he took Aithne into his arms and 

made to shelter her, and with his staff he 

swung great strokes about him, as it were 

216 



Aladore 

against a host of enemies. And his sign 
was well understanded of him that was fly- 
ing, for he dropped swiftly down upon the 
earth, and he put off his wings and came 
running where Ywain was and Aithne. And 
they saw how that he was a man like 
unto themselves, but tall and strong and 
comely out of measure, and at a word he 
perceived their peril and the evil malice of 
the fauns. Then hastily he did on his wings, 
and he took a thong, and when he had bound 
Ywain and Aithne with the thong he made 
them fast beneath his pinions, and so mounted 
lightly upon the air. 

And Ywain and Aithne looked down and 
marvelled and held their breath, for the 
whole earth fell from them suddenly. And 
for a moment they had sight of fauns, running 
together like ants beneath them : and then 
they saw the fauns also fall from them and 
become as dust. And the sun set, and the 
moon rose, and they went flying swiftly 
between the sun and the moon. 
217 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

OF THE CITY OF DCEDALA, AND HOW AN OLD 
DAME THEREIN DESPAIRED OF IT. 

So they went swiftly and spoke no word, being 
astonished unto dumbness : for their life was 
changed suddenly and they were in no place 
of the world. But he that bore them held 
his course, and he flew Eastward by the space 
of an hour. Then they were aware how he 
sloped downwards in his flight, and they 
looked and saw beneath them a great city on 
the border of the sea, and in no long time 
they came lightly down and took land before 
a gate that was there. Then they three 
entered afoot into the city, and they came 
quickly to a good house and were received 
therein. 

218 



Aladore 

Now the house was the house of an old and 
noble dame, by name Eirene, and she was the 
mother of Hyperenor, which had borne Ywain 
and Aithne upon his wings. And them she 
greeted courteously, and received them to be 
her guests while it should please them : but 
to her son she spoke after another sort. For 
in one and the same breath she dealt him 
sweet words and bitter, giving thanks to all 
the gods for his home coming, and also 
bidding him begone where she might never 
be troubled with him more. And after this 
manner she continued all supper -time, and 
she would have Aithne to know how she was 
the most miserable of all women living. 

For I was born, she said, in a city far off 
from this, in a land of other men and other 
customs, and I came hither blindfold in my 
youth. And the veil wherewith I was blinded 
was the veil of marriage, as it fortunes to the 
most of us. For of this city I knew nothing, 
but I supposed it to be an ancient city and a 
pious, with gods and customs like our own : 
219 



Aladore 

and I found it given over to a madness of 
inheritance, and by special wrath of heaven 
accursed and punished. For this is the city 
of Dcedala, where is the tomb of Dcedalus, 
whom they call the father of inventions : and 
though his bones be perished, yet they keep 
here his impiety, and do after it. And their 
madness is beyond belief, for there is nothing 
that they will do by way of nature if by any 
means they can devise to do it otherwise, as 
by mechanemes of iron or brass. And at my 
first coming they were assotted upon chariots 
of fire, and afterwards upon a hundred other 
devices, full of noise and dangerous exceed- 
ingly : and now they sin with the very sin of 
Dcedalus. For when he had found out many 
inventions, he found out this also, to fly above 
the earth with wings : a thing plainly hateful 
to the gods, for if it had been their will, they 
would have made men like to birds in the 
beginning. But their will was not so, and 
they have sent upon this city the curse of 
Dcedalus : for as the god took his son from 

220 



Aladore 

him and cast him dead upon the sea, so now 
it is with us, and heavier a hundredfold. 

Then the old dame wept bitterly, that it 
was pity to see, and her son ran to her and 
knelt beside her and handled her lovingly. 
And when he had some deal comforted her, 
then he spoke merrily and said how it was 
shame to lay so much on gods and to make 
them unreasonable and so bring them into 
judgment. And it may be, he said, that it 
is we, and none other, that are the gods, for 
certainly we are greater than our fathers, 
and there shall yet be greater that shall 
come after us. But his mother rebuked him 
and said : I will not hear such words ; for 
your fathers kept due observance and lived 
long, and you of this generation do reverence 
to none, but you fly outrageously in the face 
of heaven, and your youth is cast down upon 
the earth as upon a dust-heap. And to what 
profit ? for you die like the flowers and leave 
no name behind you. And Hyperenor said : 
So be it, but our fruit shall follow us : for 



Aladore 

it may be that our sons shall fly and not 
fall. But Eirene wept again and said : You 
are great givers, for you tear your mothers' 
hearts to feed your children. 

Then Aithne went to her to comfort her, 
for she was sorry in her heart for that old 
dame, and she saw how she had no other 
son but this one only, and him she looked 
daily to lose. And Ywain also had pity on 
her, for there is no man that can bear to 
look upon a woman weeping. But he was 
divided in mind, and in part he was pitiful, 
as need was, but in greater part he took 
side with Hyperenor and upheld him to have 
the right of it. For he saw how the young 
man was a great knight and strong and 
passing comely : and though his words were 
some deal big, yet his voice was slow and 
courteous, as the voice of one that would 
make good. Also in his doctrine Ywain 
upheld him : for in all wars there will be 
some that die, and they die gladly to subdue 
a kingdom, though for themselves they see 

222 



Aladore 

it not nor enter into it. But most he loved 
him as one that would dare and do, and of 
his daring and his doing he would willingly 
hear more : for it seemed to him a great and 
marvellous thing that men should fly, that 
so they might come into all places of the 
earth, yea, and perchance into some that 
are beyond. 



223 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

OF A PROMISE THAT WAS MADE TO YWAIN, 
AND HOW HE TOOK WINGS TO SEEK 
FOR ALADORE. 

THEN after supper the old dame went out, 
and Aithne with her, and Ywain was left there 
with Hyperenor, and they two sat a long time 
talking together. And as they talked they 
drank their wine, by cup and by cup : and 
they sat beside a window, and the window 
was open wide, looking upon the city and 
upon the lights thereof, and the night over 
them was blue and spangled with bright stars. 
And Ywain perceived how that Hyperenor 
was no longer strange to him, but near and 
kind as out of old friendship : and he spoke 
with him concerning many matters, and was 
224 



Aladore 

accorded with him continually. Then at the 
last he spoke of Aladore, and he told him 
how that he must of necessity come there 
to be wedded with his lady, and how he 
had sight of that land as it were of a cloud 
in heaven, yet he could by no manner of 
means attain to find it. 

And Hyperenor received his saying readily, 
and began to make him large promises : for 
he was such an one that in his book was 
no word for things impossible. And he said 
how he would give Ywain wings, and learn 
him quickly how he should use them, 
so that in one day he might well come to 
fly with all ease, if he had but good courage 
and continuance of fortune. And as for 
Aladore, he had no knowledge thereof, but 
to find it he took to be no hard matter. 
For if such place there be, he said, be sure 
that flying will bring us to it, save it be at 
the sea bottom : and in that case, he told 
Ywain how that he had yet another 
mechaneme to do his purpose, so that by 
p 225 



Aladore 

wing or by water Ywain should certainly 
come thither. 

Then when Ywain heard those words he 
was fain to believe them, and he began to 
feel his wings uplifting him. And he doubted 
not of Hyperenor, but he thought to know 
more of his mind concerning Aladore : there- 
fore he asked him toward what quarter of 
the earth they should begin their seeking. 
And Hyperenor answered Toward no quarter : 
for that the land was plainly no place of 
earth, but a floating isle, after the kind of 
the isles which float upon the sea, and belike 
it would be found in the region of the stars. 
And Ywain marvelled at his knowledge and 
took comfort of it : for he also believed that 
it was no earthly city which he sought, but 
what else it might be he knew not, until it 
was showed him reasonably. 

So he heard Hyperenor and was content, 

and looked upward to the stars: and he 

beheld their aspect such as with his eyes 

he never yet beheld it. For he knew them 

226 



Aladore 

of old both by stars and by constellations, 
but now first he saw their images in heaven : 
and behind every constellation was an image, 
like a great shadow decked with stars, and 
the shadows went about the high dome like 
servants of the gods, going silently in their 
appointed order. And Ywain knew no longer 
where he might be, for he saw no more the 
lights of the city nor heard the voice of 
Hyperenor that talked beside him ; also it 
seemed to him that time was fallen dead, 
so that the world was void and still, as a 
glass is void when all the sands are run 
down upon the heap. And he awoke as 
from long dreaming: but he perceived that 
Hyperenor knew not how he had been from 
him all that space. So within a while they 
betook them to their rest. 

Then on the morrow they rose up early, 
and came to a meadow ground which lay 
before the gate of the city: and Hyperenor 
gave Ywain wings according to his promise, 
and shewed him all his own skill therewith. 
227 



Aladore 

And Ywain received his teaching quickly, 
and brought it to good market, so that in 
no long time he went which way he would : 
and he wearied not nor failed of strength, 
but his wings upbore him lightly without 
labour, for they were so devised. 

And when it was evening he thought to 
prove his adventure : for he was not willing 
to return into the house to Aithne until he 
should have somewhat to tell her. And when 
the sun was now going down into the sea 
Ywain did on his wings again, and scanned 
all the regions of the sky: and there was no 
cloud near the sun, but over against his setting 
there was one only cloud, made golden by 
the light of evening. And under the cloud 
was the moon rising, and she came up out 
of the mountains of the East and went climb- 
ing towards the cloud. Then Ywain called to 
Hyperenor and together they leapt into the 
air. 

Then at the first they went wheeling about 
and about, to gain the height of the sky, 
228 



Aladore 

and the dusk began to fall softly round them. 
And Ywain looked down in his wheeling, and 
there was the city of Dcedala very far beneath 
him, and it smallened and darkened con- 
tinually, so that save for the moonlight upon 
the towers he had soon seen it no more. 
But for a time he saw it still lying cold and 
white by the border of the sea. Then he 
looked up and saw the stars, and above him 
Hyperenor flying beneath the starry roof: and 
Ywain followed him and they left their wheel- 
ing and flew straight toward the cloud above 
the moon. And the moon rose up to meet 
them, and the light of her came cold upon 
their faces, and they strained in their flight to 
hold their way above her, so that they flew 
faster and faster into the hollow of the night. 
And as they went the coldness of the void 
entered into Ywain's blood, and he felt no 
more neither hope nor fellowship, and his love 
lay frozen within him as the root of a flower 
lies frozen in winter. But his thought was 
busier than aforetime, and his desire was to 
229 



Aladore 

know all things which might be known. 
And he looked down again toward the earth, 
and saw it as a thing without life or meaning : 
for in bigness it was lesser than his hand, 
and it fell beneath him like a stone that is 
hurtled from a cliff. And he said within him- 
self: What is that to me, for it is but one 
amongst many : and he looked up again to 
Hyperenor that he might follow him further. 
But when he looked he saw him not nor 
the cloud neither, and in a moment his 
thought was dazed within him, and went 
staggering like a man struck suddenly upon 
his eyes. For on every side the stars were 
changed about him, and they kept no more 
the order of their constellations, but they 
were as a crowd rushing upon him, countless 
and disorderly. Then he looked again upon 
the moon, and saw her as it were hard by 
him, and he was yet more in dread : for she 
was no living land but a bare plain and cold, 
and upon the plain were hills like naked 
bones, and black pits like the pits of dead 
230 



Aladore 

men's eyes. And in the same instant he saw 
against the moonlight Hyperenor, falling like 
a dead bird towards the earth. And in his 
fall he came by Ywain and went fluttering 
past him, and Ywain leaned over and peered 
after him, and the coldness left him, and 
the blood came again swiftly from his heart. 
And he stooped his head and went whirling 
down the gulf, and the winds rushed up to 
meet him and bore him whither they would ; 
for his strength was as the strength of a leaf, 
that falls at end of summer. 



231 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

HOW YWAIN CAME THE SECOND TIME TO THE 
HERMIT, AND HOW HE TOOK COUNSEL OF 
HIM. 

Now Ywain fell swiftly earthward, and belike 
the time of his falling was no great space : 
but to him it seemed long, beyond reckoning, 
for his wits were battered and edgeworn, as 
a stone is worn by a hundred years of rolling. 
And whiles he dropped headlong through the 
void, and whiles the wind came up beneath 
him and lifted him lightly, so that he rose 
and fell as it were upon great waves of the 
sea. But at the last he came hurtling down 
upon a forest, and among the trees of it his 
wings were caught and broken : yet was Ywain 
not broken therewith, but he took the earth 
easily and recovered himself. 
232 



Aladore 

Then he got to his feet and began to go 
through the forest, and it came to his mind 
that he was thrice lost, and not once only : 
for he was gone from his lady and from his 
friend, and he knew not where to seek them 
nor in what place of the world he might 
himself be wandering. And for Aithne he 
prayed to see her again in no long time, for he 
knew how she could come and go by her own 
magic, that was her gift of faery : but for 
Hyperenor he lamented without praying, for 
he supposed that he was gone beyond that. 
And for himself he raged against fate, for it 
seemed to him that his life had fallen suddenly 
from light to darkness, as a lamp that is 
thrown down, and though it be not broken, 
yet it cannot be kindled again, but cold it 
lies and blackened that was burning but a 
moment since. And when he perceived that, 
then he bit and beat against time as a wild 
thing will bite against the bars of a cage. 

Howbeit he continued still upon his way, 
and suddenly he perceived that he was in 
233 



Aladore 

no strange path : for he was going between 
tall pines, and beyond the pines was a stream 
that ran burbling, and a bank with great 
beeches upon it, and he went forward quickly 
as one that well knows what he shall find. 
And as he thought, so it fortuned to him, 
for he came by sunrise to a bare lawn under 
a cliff, and in the face of the cliff was a door 
carven and a window or two, and it was the 
house of the hermit that was friend to him, 
and right glad he was to see that place again. 

And when he came there the sun was risen, 
and the hermit was coming forth out of his 
house in like manner as he had done afore- 
time, and in like manner he brought bread 
and broke it for the small fowls of the forest. 
And Ywain was amazed to behold his dealing : 
for there had come no change upon the man, 
nor upon the place, nor upon anything therein, 
but Ywain only was changed within himself 
and made new by time and trouble. 

Then he stood still beneath a beech-tree, 
and called with a quiet voice and bade the 
234 



Aladore 

hermit a good morning : and the hermit moved 
not but answered him yet more quietly, and 
continued feeding his birds. So they two 
came together without ado or overmuch 
heartiness, but inwardly they were quickened 
both, as with memory and friendship. And 
they went together to the stream, and when 
they had given bread to the fishes, then they 
did off their garments quickly and took the 
pool as they had done aforetime : and they 
sported joyfully and so came home to break 
their fast together. 

Now as they sat at table Ywain looked out 
from the window, and he saw the sunlight 
upon the lawn, and he heard the murmur of 
the stream, for the sound of it came by upon a 
little wind of morning ; and he bethought him 
how the times were changed, and all his mind 
unknown to the hermit that sat beside him. 
Then the hermit said to him : We are strangely 
met again: for in a year this place is nowise 
changed, and I have gone but a little down- 
ward on the byway of my life, but you have 
235 



Aladore 

journeyed far to the forward, and are come 
within sight of your desire. And Ywain was 
astonished and asked him : How know you 
that which has befallen me, for it is a long 
tale and I have not yet told a word of it. 
And the hermit answered : I know it not, 
but there is little need of telling. For I set 
you forth on your way to Paladore, and therein 
you followed your desire : and without doubt 
there met you by the way a woman, for by 
every man's way there is a woman, and 
without doubt you learned of her that which 
all women teach. And for the rest, you have 
encountered this and that adventure, and 
though you have proved them well, yet have 
you failed of your achievement unto this 
present, for there is hope in your eyes and 
no certainty, and you are here alone and 
wandering. 

Then Ywain opened his heart, and he told 

his story by part and by parcel, until he had 

told it all. And when he had ended his telling 

the hermit was silent, and he sat there stilly 

236 



Aladore 

and moved no more than if he had been lost in 
sleep. And at the last Ywain said to him : 
That which I have done, is it well done or ill ? 
Then the hermit stirred a little, and sighed 
deeply, and so fell again to silence. But after- 
wards he spoke and said to Ywain : Forgive 
me, for I was thinking of myself. Yet not 
of myself only, but of you and of many, for we 
are all banished men, and we seek for the road 
of our returning. And you do well on your 
part, for your serving and your seeking are 
one, and though you find not yet neither do 
you turn aside to rest: for the time is not 
come wherein you must be content with 
memory and solitude. 

And Ywain looked upon him and he saw 
that he spoke out of sorrow : for his eyes were 
like still water, but deep within them the 
spirit of the man was troubled, as the sand 
is troubled beneath the stillness of a spring. 
And Ywain longed greatly to comfort him, but 
found no words, for he would not question him 
of his sorrow. Then he thought tofput him 
237 



Aladore 

in mind of his wisdom that he had found by 
loneliness : but thereto the hermit answered 
yet more sadly and said : There are that choose 
loneliness, but upon me it came perforce. And 
for my wisdom, it is one thing to you and 
another thing to me : for to you it is as a 
living voice, to counsel the living, but to me 
it is as the stone upon a grave, which gives 
good words when there is none left to hear 
them. 

Then Ywain said to him : What then ? 
Will you return and come with me ? And 
the hermit smiled a little and answered him : 
Not so, for I should be none the nearer to the 
country of my abiding. But go you, he said, 
and return to the city, and do your seeking 
among men : for your life is yet to find, and 
among men you must find it. 



238 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

HOW YWAIN RETURNED AGAIN TO PALADORE 
FOR TO DWELL THERE, AND HOW HE 
SPOKE TO APPEASE A STRIFE THAT WAS 
BETWEEN THE PEOPLE. 

So on that day Ywain had converse with the 
hermit, and on the morrow early he departed 
from him. And he went from him by the 
former way, but he went not after the former 
manner: for at this time his journeying was 
by daylight and not by moonlight, and he 
had no aid of horses but fared always upon 
his feet. Notwithstanding he made good 
speed and came betimes to the place of 
the stepping-stones, and it seemed to him a 
place right dreary and desert, where before 
had been his lady with him and great fight- 
239 



Aladore 

ing upon the bank. So he passed on quickly 
and came to Paladore : and he saw the city 
also as a dim and dreary city, for his heart 
was fordone with loneliness and his thought 
dragged like a man that is footsore with 
going. 

Then he came to the gate and passed in : 
and immediately there came to meet him 
two men, and they ran towards him on this 
side and on that, and one of them was clad 
in scarlet and the other in black. And they 
two laid hold on him both together, and 
they spoke to him loudly as it were with 
one voice, so that he heard not of their 
saying two words in twenty. But when 
their ardour was somewhat abated, then he 
heard them more plainly : and their tale was 
this, that the Company of the Eagle and 
the Company of the Tower were at odds 
together, and some of them were even now 
within the Great Hall of the city speaking 
the one against the other, and like enough 
to go further with it. And as for them 
240 



Aladore 

which took hold of Ywain, they had the 
office from their companies to wait within 
the gate, and if any should enter, to send 
him quickly to the place of meeting. And 
they offered Ywain badges, of the Tower and 
of the Eagle, and were urgent with him each 
for his own, that Ywain might declare him- 
self as of that company : for they knew him 
not, or else they had forgotten, or belike 
they thought to carry him away with words. 
And when he heard their clamouring, and 
knew not for what cause the striving might 
be, then at the first his spirit was sick 
within him, and he thought to break away 
from them. And he said to them : Let me 
go my way, for I have enough business of 
my own. And again he said : Let me go, 
for I am weary and would rest. But when 
he had spoken those words he saw the men 
no longer, neither the red nor the black, 
but he saw beside him the hermit standing 
and looking into his face. Then the hermit 
took him by the hand and began to lead 
Q 241 



Aladore 

him towards the market-place : and as they 
went he spoke not to Ywain, but held him 
always by the hand, and it was as though 
his mind was poured into Ywain's mind like 
wine that is poured from one cup into another. 
And Ywain knew whither he went, and he 
made no more resistance, for he said within 
himself: This is the life of Paladore, to 
strive by companies, and I know of which 
company I am. Then he thought again upon 
the Eagles and his blood leapt up to be with 
them, and he hastened in his going and knew 
not that he hastened. And in that moment 
the hermit was gone from him, and he came 
alone into the market-place. 

Now there was gathered in the place a 
crowd exceeding great and turbulent, and 
they were plainly divided between the two 
companies. For they which favoured the 
Tower stood upon the steps of the Great 
Hall in a ground of vantage, and they which 
were of the Eagles stood in the street below : 
and they were waiting until their men should 
242 



Aladore 

come forth to them from within the Hall, 
and as they waited they gibbered and gibed, 
the one party against the other. But when 
they saw Ywain they left that and shouted 
at him all together, for they remembered 
him and desired him each company for their 
own. And the Eagles desired him because 
he had fought for them aforetime, and they 
of the Tower desired him because he had 
fought against them and worsted them : so 
that between them Ywain thought to be 
divided piecemeal. 

But in that moment the doors of the 
Great Hall were opened, and they which 
were within began to come forth. And 
there came before them a crier with a bell, 
and he stood upon the topmost step and 
rang his bell and cried : and Ywain heard 
of his crying the last word only. And they 
of the Tower caught up that word and 
shouted joyfully: He is banished. Then the 
Eagles shouted : He shall not be banished ; 
and their shouting was the louder and by 
243 



Aladore 

some deal the fiercer. And they called to 
Ywain to help them, and they made way and 
pushed him forward upon the steps. 

Then he went slowly up the steps, and he 
stood and looked upon the crowd : and as 
he stood he cast about in his mind what he 
should say, for of the matter in dispute he 
knew but this word only, that one was in 
danger to be banished. So from that word 
he began his speaking, and he said first, how 
that to banish any man was an evil custom, 
against kindness and against reason both : 
for if a man had done wrong he should suffer 
there where he had done the wrong, seeing 
that it was his country notwithstanding. And 
secondly, he said how that in any case a 
man should suffer by law and not by hatred : 
for he may offend a whole company and yet 
be no law-breaker, nor of evil intent. And 
thirdly, he said that to speak against customs 
is lawful : for a custom may be such as was 
good yesterday, but in nowise good to-day, 
nor for ever, and to end it is no murder. 
244 



Aladore 

And all this he spoke not angrily but with 
a sad voice and a slow: and from fierce the 
crowd became gentle, and they murmured 
continually for pleasure as a cat will purr 
when she is stroked with the hand. For 
they of Paladore love best to see fighting, 
but after that they love to hear speaking, 
and he that hath power of wind may raise 
their anger at his own will and lay it again, 
like the waters of the sea. 

So they were stilled and put in peace 
together, as for this time, and they left the 
market-place and departed each to his own 
business. But they of the Tower forswore 
not their intent, for they held by their custom 
and hated Ywain, but they perceived well 
that they must abide their time. 



245 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

HOW YWAIN BEHELD A GAME OF CHILDREN 
AND HEARD THEIR SINGING. 

Now Ywain stood still to see the crowd 
departing, and of them which came near to 
him there were some which greeted him and 
some which looked sullenly upon him. And 
as he saw them he thought upon the fashion 
of this world, wherein all men are homeless : 
for though a man dwell where he will and 
see good days, yet everywhere he will be at 
strife with some, and belike with many. Then 
he thought to go to his own house, and he 
came there and entered into it : but when 
he was therein he looked about him doubt- 
fully, for he could not tell if it should be 
still his own, or given to another. 

So he stayed not there, but went forth 
246 







_ 



Aladore 

again he knew not whither: for his wits 
wandered otherwhere, but his feet lightly 
found out the ways of his desire. And the 
time was the time of sunset, and there went 
a great thunder over the city, and a sudden 
rain ; and when the rain ceased there was a 
light in the air and a marvellous clearness. 
And it seemed to Ywain as though that 
clearness was in his eyes also, and in his 
mind and in his heart : and he went wander- 
ing in joy. So he came to a gate of the 
city and marked it not, but passed through 
it : and beyond the gate he saw suddenly the 
High Steep before him, grey and green, and 
upon it was a company of children singing 
and making merry, for they had run forth 
after the ceasing of the rain. And there 
beyond them was the sea, shining like grey 
steel, and the trees were dark against it ; and 
the sky was heavy above with bands of purple, 
but between the bands the colour of it was 
pale and cool, and like to the colour of green 
apples. 

247 



Aladore 

Then Ywain stood still to look upon the 
sea and the sky, and the children came round 
about him and looked also. And as they 
stood looking there passed a cloud over the 
Shepherdine Sands, and the cloud was drawn 
down upon the white water, and it was the 
last cloud of the storm going west before the 
wind. And the passing away of it was like 
the drawing of a curtain, for immediately 
there was light instead of darkness upon the 
Shepherdine Sands and upon all the region 
that was beyond. And in the light there 
was a land, as it were far off but exceeding 
clear : and upon the land was a steep and 
a city, and by seeming it was no strange 
city, for it was built and bulwarked after the 
very fashion of Paladore. Notwithstanding 
it was strange enough : for it was small and 
bright as a city that is painted in a book, 
and the light wherewith it shone was a light 
of dawn and not of sunset. 

And as Ywain looked upon the city it 
seemed to him that the light was upon his 
248 



Aladore 

own eyes also, and upon his mind and upon 
his heart, and he named the land aloud and 
called it Aladore. And the" children that 
were beside him heard the word that he 
spoke, and immediately they broke into shout- 
ing after the manner of children, and ran 
busily from one to another among themselves : 
and Ywain perceived that they would play 
at a game together, and by seeming the 
game was called the game of Aladore. And 
at the first he marvelled, but afterwards he 
marvelled no more, for he remembered how 
that it was forbidden to speak that name in 
all the city, and how that the desire of 
children is ever to do and to say that which 
is forbidden them. 

Then he went a little aside and stood 
within the gateway and looked forth to see 
the playing of that pastime. And he saw 
how the children departed them into two 
bands, which stood aline the one over against 
the other. And their pastime was the sing- 
ing of a song : and they sang it as it were 
249 



Aladore 

an antiphony, verse answering to verse, and 
they kept the time full orderly with their 
hands and with their feet. And the verses 
of the song were in number six, and the 
words of it were these 

To Aladore, to Aladore, 

Who goes the pilgrim way? 

Who goes with us to Aladore 
Before the dawn of day ? 

O if we go the pilgrim way, 

Tell us, tell us true, 
How do they make their pilgrimage 

That walk the way with you ? 

O you must make your pilgrimage 

By noonday and by night, 
By seven years of the hard hard road 

And an hour of starry light. 

O if we go by the hard hard road, 

Tell us, tell us true, 
What shall they find in Aladore 

That walk the way with you ? 

You shall find dreams in Aladore, 

All that ever were known : 
And you shall dream in Aladore 

The dreams that were your own. 
250 



Aladore 

O then, O then to Aladore, 

We'll go the pilgrim way, 
To Aladore, to Aladore, 

Before the dawn of day. 

Now these were all the verses which the 
children sang, but when they had sung them 
all, then they sang the last verse again and 
yet again. And as they sang they turned 
them about, and they went by two and by 
two along the edge of the green steep, after 
the manner of lovers or of friends which go 
together on pilgrimage : and when Ywain 
saw that his heart burned his eyes, for even 
in the playing of the children he beheld an 
image of his own life. But they went from 
him quickly, for they continued still in their 
singing and their marching, and they passed 
by a tower that was in the wall and Ywain 
saw them no more. But he heard their 
singing far off, when they were long gone 
from him, and at the last he knew not 
in truth whether he heard it or heard it not, 
but only he knew that the sound of it was 
still abiding with him. 
251 



CHAPTER XL. 

HOW YWAIN CAME TO ALADORE. 

THEN Ywain went forth again from the gate- 
way, and he came to the edge of the High 
Steep, to the place wherein the children had 
their pastime: and there under the trees he 
began to go to and fro, for he was restless 
by reason of the song that was yet in his 
ears. And as he went to and fro the song 
continued with him, and it worked as it 
were an enchantment in his blood: for he 
kept looking upon Aladore, that lay there 
under the sky border, beyond the Shepherdine 
Sands, and he saw it in a light that was no 
light of earth. And he knew no longer where 
he might be, but the world was lost and 
vanisht from him ; and his feet ceased from 
252 



Aladore 

going, and he stood at gaze, looking only 
upon that land of his desire. 

Now at the first it was far off from him, 
but afterwards he beheld it near and clear 
past telling, for it seemed to him that power 
came upon him whereby he had vision of 
things not to be seen with eyes. And for 
the land, he saw that it was in all ways 
like to the land whereon he stood, and in 
like shape it lay beside the sea margent, and 
in like manner it rose up in a high steep, 
green and grey, and set with tall trees and 
shadowy. And for the city, that also was 
of no strange semblance, for it was in fashion 
the very image and counterpart of Paladore : 
and it was compassed with like walls and 
towers, and with like gardens and streets 
enriched and diapered. 

But by imagination Ywain beheld the place 
otherwise ; for in his vision he perceived it 
as a city of peace, and one that knew neither 
strife nor evil custom, nor men of wood nor 
men of wildfire, but only young lovers and 
253 



Aladore 

old friends and folk of free and gentle deal- 
ing. And besides these there were none 
other, save only fays and phantoms : and 
Ywain knew that it was in all things such 
a city as seeing it he would have loved it 
in his youth, and his life-days seemed to him 
but wasted until he should enter and dwell 
therein. And therewith his spirit rose within 
him and cried after that land with utter 
longing, for his memory and his hope were 
become one, and he knew not how to endure 
them. 

Then he started suddenly out of his vision 
and went down the High Steep like a rolling 
stone, and he came quickly with great bounds 
to the margent of the sea. And when he 
came there he was aware of a little ship 
that lay upon the water, and it was made 
fast to the shore with a black rope and a 
white, and in it was a mast and a sail, and 
the sail was party black and white. And 
Ywain stayed not there, but leapt aboard and 
hoised up the sail : and he took the hermit's 
254 



Aladore 

knife from his breast and cut through the 
ropes, both the black and the white, for they 
were knotted strongly upon a ring of iron. 
Then he took the tiller into his hand, and 
the ship began to go swiftly from the shore. 
And he looked towards Aladore, and saw it 
fair before him : but how he should come 
there he knew not, for he must come first 
into that white and tumbling water of the 
Shepherdine Sands. 

Right so he came flying amidst the Sands 
and entered into the quick of them : and the 
ship staggered and went suddenly from under 
him, and he fell down and down to the 
bottom of the sea. And he fell flatling, and 
sprang up again and leapt upon his feet : and 
he looked upward, and beheld the sea, as it 
were above his head, all white and seething. 
And he perceived how it was in truth no 
sea but mist, and belike it was a mist of 
faery, for it rolled and swirled above him in 
all semblance like to the sea, but there was 
in it neither death nor darkness. 
255 



Aladore 

Then he went forward under the mist, and 
as he went it broke and was made thin be- 
fore him, and he saw green grass beneath his 
feet, and over against him a mount of grey 
and green, and he knew that he was come 
unto the High Steep of Aladore. And he 
saw it with no amazement but with gladness 
only, for it was with him as with a man 
that has been long voyaging and is return- 
ing at last into his own country. And he 
loved the land and greeted it in his heart; 
and he found the path and climbed upon 
it, and came quickly to the topmost of the 
Steep. 

And as he went climbing, he heard again 
the song that before was in his ears, and at 
the first he knew not whether he heard it 
within him or without. Then he saw above 
him the walls of the city and the gate 
therein, and before the gate were children 
playing, and the children were the same 
children and their pastime was the same 
pastime: for they stood aline in two lines 
256 



Aladore 

and sang together after the former fashion, 
and the words of their song were these 

You shall find dreams in Aladore, 

All that ever were known : 
And you shall dream in Aladore 

The dreams that were your own. 

Then when he heard those words he as- 
sented thereto, and he laughed in his heart 
and so passed on : for they seemed to him 
nothing new, but he heard them as it were 
out of childhood and sweet memory. And 
he entered by the gateway and came singing 
into the city ; and the streets of it were cool 
and shining like pale gold, for they were all 
agleam with a light mist of sunrise. 



257 



CHAPTER XLI. 

HOW YWAIN ENTERED INTO THE RHYMER'S 
HERITAGE, AND HOW HE FOUND HIS LADY 
THEREIN. 

Now as Ywain went into the city he went 
joyfully, for his heart was uplifted, and his 
thoughts were like high white clouds in a 
blue sky of summer. And most of all he 
joyed to see the beauty of the place, for the 
form of it was the form of Paladore, but the 
beauty was mingled of likeness and unlike- 
ness. And wherever he looked, there he saw 
that which he remembered, and there also 
he saw that which he remembered not, so 
that his joy was both old and new. 

And when he had gone but a score of 

paces into the city, he came to the court 

that lay before the great Gard, and in the 

entrance of it he stayed. And there passed 

258 



Aladore 

by him two or three which went not in : 
and he asked them whose was the castle, 
for he perceived that there was a change 
upon it. And they answered him that it 
was no castle, but the Rhymer's Hall; for 
that by the Rhymer it was long since founded 
and upbuilt. And when they had so an- 
swered they vanished from him suddenly, and 
were gone as though they had never been. 

Then he was astonished and pondered a 
little, looking within the court. And in the 
court he saw not the halberdiers and men 
a-horseback which had been there aforetime, 
but upon the steps of the castle he saw a 
five or six minstrels with their lutes, and 
anon they sang and anon they talked to- 
gether, and by seeming their talk was all 
only upon their lutes and upon their singing. 

Then Ywain came to them and greeted 
them, and said : How long is this become a 
place of singing ? And one of them answered 
him courteously, and said : Fair lord, by your 
will we sing and by your will we are silent, 
seeing that we are but the servants of your 
259 



Aladore 

dream. And even as Ywain heard those 
words the minstrels vanished, and there was 
nothing of them left in that place, save a 
little sound of lutestrings that lingered way- 
wardly. 

So Ywain entered into the Rhymer's Hall, 
and within door he found the porter, and the 
man sat there reading upon a book. And 
Ywain asked him : What read you ? and im- 
mediately the porter vanished without answer 
given, and there was nought seen of him but 
his chair, and upon the chair was the book 
whereon he had been reading. Then Ywain 
came near and took up the book and looked 
within it : and it was a wide book, painted 
delicately with great letters and with pictures. 
And the picture that was open before him 
was the picture of two lovers by a garden 
door; and the lady stood beside the door 
and leaned upon it with her hand to open 
it, but the lover came to her in habit of a 
pilgrim, and his hat was broad above his 
face, and shadowed it. And Ywain's heart 
quickened as he looked : for the lady was his 
260 



Aladore 

own lady, and she stood there as living as 
the leaves in spring. 

Then he laid the book upon the chair 
and left it lying, and he went through the 
Rhymer's Hall from end to end, and through 
all the courts of it and out beyond. And he 
came by a pleached alley to a close, and 
looked across the close : and upon the far 
side of it was a wall of stone, and in the 
wall was a carven doorway, and a door of 
wood. And there before the doorway stood 
Aithne in the morning gold, and she laid her 
hand against the door and looked a little 
downward, as one that is waiting and mus- 
ing. And when Ywain came to her she spoke 
no word, but she turned away and led him 
through the doorway, and the door fell back 
and closed behind them : and it closed full 
slowly, but at the last there was a small 
noise of clanking and the bar went home 
into the notch. 

And that noise was sweet in Ywain's ears, 
for it seemed to shut the world away, and 
he went to his lady as one that comes to 
261 



Aladore 

his own land after long captivity. And little 
they spoke in words, but they looked each 
at other, and his eyes were to her like two 
bright spears levelled in battle, and her eyes 
were to him like a valley at evening, when 
the smoke goes up into the twilight. 

Then at the last he said to her : What 
then is this place ? And she said : It was 
the Rhymer's heritage, and now is mine ; and 
that which is mine is yours, for you have 
found it out and taken it. And belike it 
was yours from the beginning, for it is you 
that have made it anew, and you are the 
master of your dream. And as she spoke jjp 
those words a fear came suddenly upon him 
lest she also should vanish and be gone from 
him. And he would have cried aloud of his 
fear, but she laid her hand upon his mouth 
and laughed and stayed him from uttering. 
And she said : I know your thought, and 
vain it is : for your dream and mine are one 
and not two, as they were aforetime, but each 
in other we have our home and our abiding. 
262 



CHAPTER XLII. 

HOW YWAIN AND AITHNE WERE GIVEN EACH 
TO OTHER, AND HOW THEY WERE WEDDED 
BY THE FREEDOM OF ALADORE. 

THEN Ywain stood still and mused, looking 
down upon the grass about his feet : and he 
mused upon his pilgrimage whereby he had 
at last come hither. And Aithne asked him 
of his musing, and he answered her not, but 
he said: Tell me, O my beloved, when shall 
be the end of this my pilgrimage? And she 
answered : It is ended, for the shrine is found, 
and the lamp of the world is lit afresh. But 
he asked her again : By what token shall I 
have certainty of this ? And she said : By 
a flame and by a gift, for by those tokens is 
love confirmed of all lovers both of old and 
for ever. Then his blood beat and his throat 
263 



Aladore 

trembled and he said : Yea, beloved, but it 
may yet be far to the hour of giving. And 
she also trembled and said : The hour of 
giving is the hour of starlight, and between 
the sunsetting and the moonrising it will be 
here. Then Ywain looked again upon the 
ground and he saw beside his feet the long 
morning shadows, and he said : It is far, O 
my beloved. And she said : Nay, but have 
I not told you, that all things here are yours, 
for that you only are the master of the 
dream ? 

Then with her hand she pointed to the 
shadows upon the grass, and they were two 
shadows that were as one, and they lay upon 
a wide and open space. And Ywain looked 
again upon them and was amazed : for the 
shadows drew in apace, and they went round 
him as the finger goes upon the dial, save 
that they went a forty times more quickly. 
And he asked of his lady : What mean these 
shadows, for they are gone from the West 
into the East. And she answered him softly : 
264 



Aladore 

O my lord, see you not that you are master 
even of the sun in heaven ? And she looked 
stilly into his eyes, and a little wind of even- 
ing blew cool upon him. 

Then she took him by the hand and led 
him within the house, and she brought him 
to an upper room and to a window therein 
which looked upon the city. And the window 
was wide open, and without it was a gallery 
of stone; and Ywain held his lady's hand 
and went forward upon the gallery. Then 
he looked down, and saw beneath him the 
courtyard full of folk, and the place was filled 
with the thronging of them, and the street 
beyond the gates was filled also. And at the 
first the folk were silent and shadowy, and 
the twilight gathered thick upon them : and 
Ywain looked hard among them, peering to 
see if by their faces he might know them. 
And by one and by two he knew them, and 
there were by seeming in that place the faces 
of all men and women that he had known 
in all his life-days. 

265 



Aladore 

Then pity came upon him in a moment, 
and great pain : for he saw them as folk lost 
and gone from him, and he would have had 
them to be partakers in his joy. And in that 
moment came a light of sunset into the sky, 
and it glowed upon the faces of them that 
were before him : and they cried all together 
and called him by his name, giving him 
friendship and honour. And Ywain shut to 
his eyes, for there was that which burned 
them hotly : and when he looked forth again 
there was neither face nor form of any man, 
but only a sound as of folk departing. 

Then Ywain said to Aithne : Are there not 
also some within doors in this place, that I 
may do them courtesy ? And she answered : 
They, too, are of the bordure of your dream. 
So she brought him within, and they went 
towards the great hall, and there went with 
them lights and trumpets. And when they 
came to the hall they found there a great 
company of knights sitting at feast together: 
and the knights were in number a hundred, 
266 



Aladore 

and they were all they which in their time 
had sought the Lady Aithne and her love, 
and their feasting was full sombre and 
courteous. And when they saw Ywain and 
Aithne they rose up and did them reverence, 
and they gathered about them and spoke 
many things of honour and of farewell. 

Then Ywain gave them thanks with the 
like honour, and immediately they faded from 
before him, and with them the lights also 
faded and fell to darkness. And in the hall 
was none left with Ywain and Aithne, save 
one child only : and the child was nowise 
strange to them, for it was he which had 
been the beginner of their pilgrimage. And 
in his hand was a torch burning, and he bore 
it up before them, and about them the shadows 
went dancing upon the walls and upon the 
roof: and he went down the hall, and they 
two followed after him with hand in hand, 
and so he brought them to the chamber where 
they should be wed. And when they were 
come there he turned his torch downwards 
267 



Aladore 

to quench it upon the floor: and the flame 
of it vanished and the child therewith, and 
the place was lit by starlight only. 

But in the chamber was also a little glow- 
ing as of embers, and Ywain saw there an 
altar of bronze : and it seemed to him right 
ancient, as a thing made in the time out of 
mind. And beside the altar was a platter of 
meal and a cup of red wine standing: and 
Aithne took the meal into her hand, and in 
like manner Ywain took the wine. And they 
two stood beside the altar on this side and 
on that, and sprinkled it with meal and wine ; 
and there went up from it two bright flames 
of fire, a red and a white, and they spired 
up and were entwined together so that they 
were two colours but one only flame. 

Then Ywain looked upon his beloved and 
said : The flame is here truly, but where is 
the gift? And she also looked steadfastly 
upon him and answered him : The gift is here, 
but it is yours to show first the manner of 
the giving. And thereat he took her by the 
268 



Aladore 

hand and said : Here in free marriage I give 
thee the body of me, my life with thy life, 
my blood with thy blood, my dust with thy 
dust to be mingled and made one. Then with 
a low voice she said after him the same words. 
And he said again : Here also I give thee the 
heart of me, my love with thy love, my hope 
with thy hope, my sorrow with thy sorrow 
to be mingled and made one. And those 
words also she spoke in like manner. Then 
he said the third time : Here also do I witness 
that I have given thee long since the spirit 
of me, to be thy friend and fellow to the end 
of pilgrimage. Yea, she said, and thereafter : 
and with thee and with all spirits to be 
mingled and made one. 

Then she said again as to herself only: 
Now am I wedded by the freedom of Aladore, 
and so is my promise fulfilled. And when 
she had said that she fell suddenly to weeping. 
And she went to the window and leaned upon 
the sill, and Ywain came near, and he saw 
her tears falling bright under the starlight. 
269 



Aladore 

And he was both sorry and afraid, and he 
took her in his arms and asked her many 
times wherefore she wept, and she told him 
not. And at the last she said : That will I tell 
you, but not now : and I weep not for sorrow 
but for remembrance. Then he solaced her 
with comfort of strength and of silence : and 
afterwards they went joyfully to their wedding 
and to their rest. And the moon rose on Ala- 
dore, and they saw her not : for they slept as 
it had been the sleep of childhood. 



270 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

HOW AITHNE SHOWED YWAIN OF THE EN- 
CHANTMENTS OF THE RHYMER, AND OF 
THEM WHICH DO THEREAFTER. 

So in this wise Ywain and Aithne fulfilled 
their youth, and they entered into newness 
of life. And they endured no more the fear 
of time, for in Aladore are days and seasons, 
but no count of them : and there is there 
neither change nor perishing. 

Now on a day it befell that they two stood 
together at dawn, looking upon the sea : and 
the sun rose out of the sea and went swiftly 
up the sky. And Ywain looked upon the 
sea, and he saw it bright and clear even to 
the farthest border, and there was neither 
land nor cloud upon it, but gold only and 
271 



Aladore 

a void space above the gold. And thereat he 
was astonished, and he asked of Aithne : 
Where then is Paladore ? for I came thence 
by no long voyage. And she smiled a 
little and answered him : Let be, dear 
love, for it is not far off: and as much 
thereof as was yours, so much is yours 
still, for so much you brought hither 
when you came. And this is the law of 
Aladore, that in it hath every man his own 
and nothing less : yea rather he hath more, 
for unto his own vision are added many great 
enchantments. Then said Ywain : Which be 
these enchantments ? And she answered : 
They are the enchantments of the Rhymer, 
that was a wizard indeed: and his magic 
he left to all such as are able for it, unto 
the world's end ; and many there be of 
them. 

Then she took Ywain up into a high tower, 

and so forth upon the battlements thereof, 

and she said : Look now and behold the 

sorrows of Gudrun, for she loved much and 

272 



Aladore 

suffered many things, and her end was full 
of right piteous remembrance. And Ywain 
looked down from the battlements, and he 
saw a steep coast and a river which ran 
swiftly to a western sea. And there lay hard 
by the river a steading upon a knole amidst 
the vale, and it nourished plenteously both 
sheep and kine. And an old man he saw 
which dwelt therein, and five boys that were 
his sons, and one more that was his brother's 
son : and all they went among the cattle, and 
rode by hill and by dale. And Ywain looked 
further, by a seven mile, and he saw yet 
another steading amidst the grey slopes, and 
there also was an old man dwelling, and five 
sons, and a daughter thereto : and these 
men likewise went among the cattle and 
rode by hill and by dale, and the maiden tended 
them within the hall. And Ywain saw how 
the folk would come and go between the 
steadings, and how in their dealing there 
would be love and strife among them. 

Then Aithne asked of him : What see you ? 
s 273 



Aladore 

And he told her of that which he saw. And 
she said : Not so shall be your vision, for 
though by your deeming these are but country 
folk, and their land a little land and a barren, 
yet is your deeming vain, and their life is 
greater than you know. Look therefore again, 
and by enchantment shall your eyes be made 
clear to see them. 

Then Ywain looked again, and as he looked 
a voice was in his ears, and his heartstrings 
rung deeply thereto, for they were plucked 
and quivering as beneath the hand of a 
strong harper. And now he saw that land 
after another fashion : for he saw it as a 
strange and awful land, and the folk of it 
as a folk beset with fearful things, yet fearing 
nought, as men in the hollow of God's hand. 
And as folk loving and beloved he saw them, 
and strong and uncomplaining and com- 
passionate, yet also working wild deeds, after 
the manner of men. For he saw young 
Kiartan the Icelander, and Bodli that was 
his friend and fellow, and Gudrun that was 
274 



Aladore 

beloved of them both : and the double skein 
of their love was tangled and broken in his 
sight. 

And first the voice showed him all the love 
of Kiartan and Gudrun, and how Kiartan 
came daily from Herdholt by moor and dale 
unto the house of Bathstead, wherein Gudrun 
dwelt : and how her heart fluttered joyfully 
at hearing of his footfall : and long they 
talked together, and at evening departed 
hardly each from other. And their very 
parting was sweet, for in that moment the 
veil of time would fall away from before 
them, so that they saw love whole and with- 
out cloud. 

Then the voice bade Ywain see the pride 
of Kiartan, whereby he went adventuring 
over sea. And he saw how Kiartan came 
across the foam to Norroway, and there 
lingered by the space of three good years, 
making pastime of another love. And that 
was the love of Ingibiorg, that was King 
Olaf s daughter : yet at the last he left her 
275 



Aladore 

also and returned, howbeit he returned not 
till it was too late. 

And the voice showed Ywain all the sorrows 
of Bodli, Thorleik's son : for he was of all 
her lovers the man which most loved Gudrun. 
And Ywain saw him come alone from Norro- 
way with tidings of Kiartan and of Ingibiorg : 
and thereby he wedded Gudrun and fulfilled 
his longing and his doom. 

Then Ywain's heart trembled with pity and 
with terror : for he saw how Kiartan came 
again after three years, and found Gudrun 
gone from him utterly and given to his 
friend. And upon Kiartan also came despair, 
as it had come before upon Gudrun : so that 
he turned him to Refna and wedded where 
he had no heart's desire. And thereafter fell 
great bitterness between Herdholt and Bath- 
stead, and though there was love still between 
Bodli and Kiartan, yet was there death also 
by the custom of men. 

For on a dark road among the hills came 
Kiartan riding with two more : and there met 
276 



Aladore 

him all the five brothers of Gudrun, and Bodli 
with them. And Ywain saw how Kiartan 
fought strongly with Gudrun's kin, and Bodli 
stood apart : yet at the last he might not 
forsake the men of his own house. And he 
drew near the fighting and thrust his sword 
into the side of Kiartan whom he loved. And 
Ywain knew that he had slain therewith his 
own soul also. 

Then said the voice to Ywain that he should 
look once more upon Gudrun, for that she 
lived long afterwards when the rest were 
gone their way. And Ywain saw her as an 
old and sightless dame, and she sat within 
her bower at evening. And it was summer, 
with hay in field, and the carles sang as 
they went homeward : and the sea murmured 
below, and above was a chapel on the hill, 
with bells which rang therein. And Gudrun 
sat there with her son, that was the son of 
Bodli : and he asked her of those whom she 
had loved, which was most loved. And she 
told him in no plain words, but in a dark 
277 



Aladore 

and sorrowful saying: for she that was blind 
and old saw again Herdholt and her youth, 
and the deeds that she had done therein. 

Then the voice ceased, and the vision : 
and Ywain looked upon Aithne. And he 
would have spoken, but he could not, for his 
voice was choked within his throat. And 
she smiled tenderly upon him, as one that 
has understanding of pain, and therewith she 
gave her hand into his hand : and presently 
he spoke and said : What is this place, and 
whose is the voice which I heard ? 

And she said : It is the Rhymer's Tower, 
and the voice is the voice of one which had 
the Rhymer's magic. For there are here 
many voices, and all to your solace : and by 
them is the world re-made after the fashion 
of life enduring. 



278 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

HOW YWAIN BEHELD HIS LADY SLEEPING, 
AND HOW HE DESIRED TO SEE THE 
CASTLE OF KERIOC. 

So Ywain dwelt in a land of enchantments, 
and had his will thereof continually. And 
many things he devised for his joyance, and 
one thing beyond all other. For it befell 
him on a day that he awoke at dawn, and 
thereafter came the sunrise and made light 
the chamber where he was. And he turned 
him and looked upon Aithne, thereas she lay 
still sleeping : and her face was fresh and 
clear and tranquil as the face of a little maid 
in her flower of youth. And as Ywain looked 
upon her his heart was pricked through with 
a sudden pain : for he saw her as she had 
279 



Aladore 

been aforetime, in the days when she was 
no lady of his. And the pain was sharp, 
for wellnigh he forgot that which he knew 
of her, and thought only on that which he 
knew not, and he perceived that he could 
never come thereto, except he should go 
behind the back of time. 

Then Aithne awoke and saw him looking 
down upon her, and she said : O my beloved, 
why look you so darkly upon me ? And he 
said: Great things have you given me, and 
great enchantments have you showed me, 
but one thing I lack that you have held 
from me. Then she asked of him : What 
have I held from you, or what will you ask 
of me that I will not give you presently? 
And he was glad of that word and made 
request of her, saying : I beseech you that 
you bring me into the Castle of Kerioc, 
wherein you were born and nurtured: for 
except I see the manner of your youth 
therein I am not wholly mingled with your 
life. 

280 



Aladore 

And when she heard him she laughed and 
loved him in her heart, for that which he 
asked was pleasing to her. And she said to 
him : Go now and have your will, for your 
request is granted you. And you shall go 
by the way of yesterday, and enter into the 
garden close and come thence into the place 
beyond. And you shall stand therein, look- 
ing upon the ground and speaking no word 
save one word that is your name, and that 
you shall say aloud by a hundred times and 
one. So prove your adventure and come 
again to me ; for until you come I am 
alone. 

Then Ywain kissed her thrice and went 
out : and he went by the way of the garden 
close and came to the place beyond. And 
he stood and looked downward upon the 
ground and spoke his own name aloud, and 
when he had spoken it but a score of times 
then his name was his name no longer, but 
a sound without sense and void. And he 
knew that the place was changed wherein 
281 



Aladore 

he stood : and he looked up and saw the 
sea hard by him, and by the sea was a castle 
both great and ancient. And he went for- 
ward boldly and entered into the castle with- 
out help or hindrance. 

Then he went spying out all things within 
the castle, and he found it rich and well 
beseen : and folk there were therein, but they 
took no heed of him, no more than if he 
had not been. And at the last he heard a 
voice singing and coming towards him : and 
presently there came to him a little maid. 
And she left singing, and looked curiously 
upon him, as one that knew him not. Then 
his heart was buffeted within him, for she 
was the maid which he sought, but he per- 
ceived that she had of him neither love nor 
knowledge. 

And he said to her: Of a surety you are 
Aithne : but where is she which is my lady in 
Aladore ? And the child looked upon him 
with clear eyes, and she answered him in a 
little voice and sweet : Sir Stranger, you come 
282 



Aladore 

hither too late : for long ago she is grown up 
and gone away. 

Then fear came upon him, and he longed to 
be with his own again : and he woke as from a 
vain dream, and stood in his chamber whence 
he had gone forth. And before him was his 
lady in her own image, and her kisses were 
still upon his lips : and she lay looking upon 
him in the sunlight and her eyes were filled 
with love and with laughter. 



283 



CHAPTER XLV. 

HOW YWAIN FOUND AGAIN HIM WHICH WAS 
FORGOTTEN IN ALADORE, AND HOW HE 
HEARD A RING OF BELLS AT MIDNIGHT. 

THEREAFTER came Ywain many times into 
the castle of Kerioc, and Aithne with him. 
For she loved greatly to have him there, not- 
withstanding that she had good game at him 
when he went thither the first time : and in 
especial she would have him there in winter 
at the time of Yule. For that castle stands 
by the very margent of the sea upon a high 
rock ; and it is in fashion like to an island, for 
on the one side it is set high above the land 
and on the other side it goes down steeply 
toward the shore. And the wind of winter 
goes over it from the land seaward: and on 
the shore is warm lying among the sand-hills 
284 



A lad ore 

which are beneath the castle. And above the 
sand-hills is a postern gate and steps of stone : 
and thereby came Ywain and Aithne many 
times unto the shore at midnight, that they 
might see the stars and hear the crying of the 
birds. For the sea-birds cry about that place 
with a sweet cry and a sad, and in the dark- 
ness they draw near and are not seen, as it 
were the souls of the beloved. 

So after this wise Ywain and Aithne came 
and went, and they took of all seasons such 
days as they would, and lived carelessly : for 
they were as those which have more than they 
can spend. And after certain times it was so 
with Ywain that he remembered no longer the 
days when he knew not Kerioc ; for his life 
was changed and deepened as a river is 
deepened when twain flow together in one. 
And he desired no more, save that he might 
always so continue : for he forgot that the 
road of his pilgrimage was not yet passed 
beyond the gateway of death, yet at the last 
he remembered it perforce. 

For upon a day he wandered alone in the 
285 



Aladore 

castle of Kerioc, and by chance he came into 
a crypt that was thereunder ; and in the crypt 
he spied a door, which was well locked and 
made fast so that he could not open it. Then 
he came to Aithne and said : What is this 
door, whereof you gave me not the key ? For 
all other keys she had given him save this 
one only. And she denied not, but answered 
him plainly, and she counselled him that he 
should forbear that door. But when she saw 
that he would not forbear then she gave him 
the key, and she said to him : Go now and 
take your way, for it is a man's way, and it 
may be that your heart shall be stronger than 
your head to serve you. And if not, then 
must I endure it, for I knew long since how 
this should be. And Ywain perceived how 
she spoke to him ; and she spoke with love 
and mirth, and in the mirth was a little 
sorrow : but he put by the sorrow and took 
hold on the mirth, and so kissed her and went 
his way. And he came to the door and opened 
it, and within were bare chambers of rock, in 
manner of dungeons. And in one chamber he 
286 



Aladore 

perceived a dim light, and when he was come 
there he saw a lamp of bronze hanging, and 
beneath it an old man on a chair of black 
stone ; and his beard was long and white, and 
it fell over his knees as a stream falls over a 
mountain-side. And when he saw him Ywain 
trembled, for his heart misgave him who the 
old man should be. 

Then Ywain said to him : Sir, forgive me, 
for I came hither unknowing. And the old 
man answered him : My son, this long time 
that you have been in Aladore, you do all 
things unknowing. And Ywain said thereto : 
Yet my life I know, and my own gladness : 
for this a man cannot but know, and it suffices 
me. Then the old man looked hard upon 
Ywain, and his eyes were like grey stones, 
and the weight of them sank into Ywain's eyes 
and lay heavy upon his heart. And he said to 
Ywain : You speak also unknowing, for in 
Aladore is no substance of truth, but all is 
dream. And this for you is Kerioc, and the 
seventh winter that you are herein : but I 
tell you that all is dream. For since you for- 
287 



Aladore 

got Paladore it is not yet seven days : and as 
for Kerioc it is there where it was aforetime, 
beside the forest of Broceliande. 

Then Ywain hardened his heart, and he said 
to the old man : Sir, I have heard your saying 
and I understand it not : for I am here, and in 
my right mind, and therein is the substance of 
truth for every man. And the old man said : 
Not so, but you shall awake and know your 
dream. And I will give you a token : and 
the token shall be when you shall hear the 
bells of Paladore ringing midnight in your 
ears. 

Then was Ywain angered against the old 
man, for he feared his saying: and he left him 
suddenly and went out, and locked the door 
fiercely upon him. And he came to Aithne 
and said no word : and she perceived how he 
was lost in trouble. Then she spoke gently 
to him : Tell me your thought, for I perceive 
that you have found again him that was for- 
gotten. Then Ywain told her of the old man 
and of his great beard, and of his eyes, and 
of his evil saying : and he told her with many 
288 



Aladore 

words, for he was angry and afraid. And 
she also was afraid, for she had seen that 
old man aforetime, and found no force against 
him. But now she took her lute and made 
a song of him : and when he heard the song 
then was Ywain brought again into his former 
mind, as for that time, but Aithne doubted 
within herself. 

Then within a while the day drew in and 
the sun set on Kerioc and on all the lands 
of Aladore. And Ywain and Aithne laid 
them to their rest : and Aithne slept deep 
and stirred not, but Ywain awoke suddenly. 
And he found darkness on all things and no 
light at all, for moon there was none, and 
the stars were hid in mist. And for a while 
he lay still and moved not, but his mind 
moved continually, and it led him hither 
and thither until he was perplexed and weary. 
And in an evil moment he thought on that 
old man which he had seen : and instantly 
he heard a sound of bells, and he knew that 
they were the bells of Paladore, for they were 
sounding midnight. Then he started up in 
T 289 



Aladore 

fear and went softly out of the chamber, for 
he said within himself that he would walk 
upon the shore and come again, and so ease 
him of his thought. 

So he came to the postern and opened it, 
and went down upon the sand-hills, and he 
wandered to and fro thereon without respect 
of mind or body : and at the last he was 
fordone with weariness, and set him down 
to rest, and right so he fell to forgetfulness 
and sleep. And when he awoke the second 
time it was grey dawn, and the mist was 
still upon the sea: and he turned him about 
and looked up that he might see the castle 
of Kerioc. And he saw neither shape nor 
sign of it, nor any way of his returning : but 
he saw instead a high steep, grey and green, 
and walls and towers thereon. Then the 
mist began to depart from before his eyes, 
and he knew the place as a man knows 
again the face which he had forgotten. And 
his heart failed within him, and the sun rose 
on Paladore. 

290 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

HOW YWAIN WAS COUNSELLED OF THE 
PRINCE OF PALADORE. 

THEN Ywain came to the height of the steep, 
and there before the gate he stood in doubt, 
for he knew not whither he should go. And 
in his doubt his feet drew him unwittingly, 
and he looked up suddenly and saw the Great 
Card and the courtyard which was before it. 
And the courtyard was as it had been afore- 
time, with halberdiers before the door and 
men a -horseback in their armour: and the 
Rhymer's Hall and the minstrels and all his 
dealings therein seemed but an old vision or 
a show which had passed into memory. Not- 
withstanding he doubted even of his misery : 
for he said within himself: Surely this also 
291 



Aladore 

is a dream, and there beyond the garden 
close is my lady waiting until I come to her. 

Then he went towards the door, and one 
came thereout to meet him : and Ywain per- 
ceived that it was Sir Rainald, and he would 
have passed by with such courtesy as might 
suffice. But Sir Rainald stayed him and took 
him by the hand, and he said to Ywain how 
that it was even he whom he sought and 
none other: for the Prince would speak with 
him of certain matters. And of these matters, 
he said, I will tell you this much, by way 
of friendship : and namely, that the Prince, 
which is your master and liege, takes it ill 
that he is so deceived in you. For you gave 
him assurance that you would dwell in Pala- 
dore, and do after the customs of the city : 
but now you deal otherwise and are gone con- 
tinually from hence, and none knows whither. 

Then Ywain was perplexed and knew not 

what he should answer : for he remembered 

how that it was forbidden in that city to 

speak the name of Aladore. Also he remem- 

292 



Aladore 

bered the saying of the hermit, that he must 
return to Paladore and find his life among 
men and so come to the land of his desire. 
And Sir Rainald kept watch upon him slyly 
out of the side of his eye, and he saw his 
perplexity and in part he knew the reason 
of it. And he said to Ywain : Go now, and 
follow the counsel of a friend ; and say what 
you will unto the Prince, save only that you 
say not any thing which is outrageous against 
our custom. For even to utter such a word 
before a Prince is ungentle, seeing that he 
is not bred to hear villainy and hath no 
skill to answer thereto. 

So Ywain went from him and came pres- 
ently before the Prince ; and the Prince was 
counting his money : for he was a careful 
man, and every month he counted his money 
from one great chest into another. And at 
the first he looked upon Ywain and gave 
him no greeting, but afterwards when he 
had made an end of his counting then he 
spoke to him. And he said as Sir Rainald 
293 



A lad ore 

had reported him, how that he was 
deceived in Ywain : for he had looked to 
have him dwelling continually in Paladore, 
to fight and to do adventures, and not to 
go wandering otherwhere. 

Then Ywain answered him courteously and 
said : Sir, I have done with my wandering, 
and except it be in Paladore I have no place 
of dwelling, as in this world. And when he 
had said that the Prince looked shrewdly 
upon him, as one that would pierce a covered 
thing, and he asked of Ywain : Whither then 
go you, and whence came you now ? For 
you have been seven days in hiding, since 
that you were seen within the city. And 
Ywain answered : Sir, it is hard to tell : for 
I have been in no place of the world, but in 
a land of dreams. Ha! said the Prince, I 
knew it well, for it is a common case and 
an evil. And I will deal patiently with you 
in this matter, seeing that you are an out- 
lander born and not yet perfect in the custom 
of our city. Know then that in Paladore a 
294 



Aladore 

dream is a thing of nought and a byword of 
folly, for we are lovers of truth, and in dreams 
is no truth at all. And we approve all snch 
things as have substance, and gold the chief 
and sign of all : and thereby is the repute of 
them which are great among us. For to do 
and to have is the virtue of men, but they 
which dream do nothing and gain no penny- 
worth. 

And Ywain could well hear that which was 
said, for it was clearly spoken : but in the 
same moment he heard also his lady's voice 
and remembered him of her sweet fellowship. 
And his heart grew hot and his eyes were 
lightened : and the Prince faded suddenly 
from before him and the gold was turned to 
sunshine within the chest. And Ywain turned 
him about toward the doorway, and he saw 
there Aithne in the beauty of morning : and 
she smiled and said to him : Beloved, why 
went you from me : for I dreamed evilly of 
bells at midnight, and I awoke and found 
you not. 

295 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

HOW YWAIN AND AITHNE HAD SIGHT OF 
HUBERT, AND RETURNED TOGETHER INTO 
PALADORE. 

Now was Ywain again in Aladore and accom- 
panied with his love : and for a while he 
forgot the Prince and all his counsel, and 
went 'among divers delights as a honey-bee 
goes among a wilderness of flowers. And it 
befell on a night that he sat with Aithne 
beside a fountain, and in the pool of the 
fountain they looked upon the summer stars. 
And round about them were cypresses and 
shadows, and there was no wind in the 
hollow of the night nor any sound save a 
little silvery sound of the fountain. 

And Aithne spoke softly to Ywain in the 
dark, and she said to him : Beloved, tell me 
296 



Aladore 

of many things, for the night is still and 
secret, and this fountain shall be your foun- 
tain of memory. And he asked her for 
asking's sake: Of which thing first shall I 
tell you ? and she answered : Of your life in 
Paladore, and of those with whom you had 
your dealing, whether in love or in hate, for 
some of them I also have known and some 
never: and they shall be to me like them 
which are in a tale of faery, or a picture 
woven upon the wall. 

Then Ywain leaned over and looked into 
the pool of the fountain, and he remembered 
the saying of the hermit, how that in all still 
water there will be visions. And true it was 
aforetime and true now : and in this water 
Ywain saw both Paladore and all that he 
had done therein. And the faces of his 
friends he saw, and of his enemies, and he 
saw his own face and form among them, and 
he perceived all their love and their evil 
malice. And that which he saw he told it 
to Aithne as a tale out of live memory, for 
297 



Aladore 

it was there before his eyes in clear colours. 
And he told her of those four which had 
been friends to him in Paladore : and namely 
of Maurice which had a merry wit, and of 
Dennis whose sayings bit like salt. Also of 
Bartholomy the religious and of Hubert that 
first of all named Aladore to Ywain by name : 
and Ywain made a more especial mention of 
Hubert, because that he was such an one as 
would give the world for a dream. And ever 
as he rehearsed of Hubert, Ywain saw his 
face more clear before him : and when he 
had come to an end of his tale then he saw 
him yet more clear. And Ywain fell silent 
and bent him down above the water, for he 
remembered the well of the hermit, and he 
thought to see not only that which had be- 
fallen, but also somewhat of that which should 
befall. But Aithne knew his thought and 
said to him : Look no more, for this is the 
fountain of memory, and though the memory 
be not ours but greater, yet in it are shown 
no deeds save those which are accomplished. 
298 



Aladore 

Notwithstanding Ywain continued looking, 
and as he looked he cried out in anger, for 
he saw in the vision Sir Rainald, and how 
he came with certain of his and laid hold 
on Hubert : and they led Hubert away by 
force and so passed as it were out of the 
pool into the dimness of the night. Then 
Ywain started up, and told Aithne of that 
which he had seen : and she said : You do 
well to cry out, howbeit you cry too late, for 
that which you saw is surely done already. 
But Ywain stood staring into the darkness, 
for it seemed to him that he heard a going 
among the cypresses. 

And as he stood there staring, and Aithne 
with him, there came one walking toward 
them in the thickest of the shadows : and 
when he was come nearer he lift up his face 
and looked steadfastly at them, and so passed 
by and was gone from them again. And 
Aithne said to Ywain : Tell me quickly, 
whose face was that which I saw. And 
Ywain drew in his breath and answered her : 
299 



Aladore 

It was the face of Hubert, and though he 
spoke no word, yet with his eyes he called 
me. Yea, said Aithne, and methought he 
called us both : for he looked upon me also, 
and in his look was strong sorrow and en- 
treaty. Then pity and anger went over Ywain 
like a river in flood, and he said to his lady : 
What must I do, for I have need of your 
help and your enchantments. 

Then Aithne answered him not, but she 
took him by the hand and brought him to 
the margent of the fountain. And they held 
firmly each by other, and so stepped together 
into the pool : and Ywain felt the water cold 
about his knees. And he shivered and awoke 
as it were from a sleep : and the fountain 
and the cypresses were vanished from him 
and he stood with Aithne upon a beach of 
the sea. And before them was a high steep, 
shining with grey and with green : and above 
it was a grey and silver cloud, and a cres- 
cent moon, and the moon rose over Paladore. 



300 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

HOW YWAIN WAS AWEARIED OF PALADORE, 
AND HOW HE WAS MISHANDLED BY THE 
GREAT ONES OF THE CITY. 

THEN they climbed the Steep together and 
entered into the city : and Ywain brought 
Aithne home to his own house. And he 
made her a little supper, scant enough, and 
drew wine for her of the wine which the 
Eagles had given him : and sweet it was 
still, but the spirit was gone out of it. And 
when they had eaten and drunk, then a great 
weariness came upon Ywain, and he spoke, 
and uttered his complaint unto Aithne : for he 
was adread to hear ill tidings of Hubert, and 
in his heart he sighed after the peace of 
Aladore. And his lady comforted him and 
301 



Aladore 

said : Beloved, think not to be alone in weari- 
ness, for to me also the business of Paladore 
hath been as dust upon the tongue. But this 
is the fortune of men, to dwell in two realms, 
until that our life is changed : and it may be 
that the time is not long. And what matter, 
if by our own magic we may come and go? 
and what grief, if we may be together ? 

So Ywain was comforted by means of those 
words, for they were more than wine to him : 
and the chime told midnight, and they twain 
laid them to their sleep. And in the morning 
before men were stirring Ywain ran quickly to 
the house of Hubert and knocked upon the 
door : and there came to him Maurice and 
Dennis, and told him ill tidings of Hubert, 
how that he had been thrust forth out of the 
city, never to return under pain of life. And 
they told him further how that the Eagles 
were sworn to bring him in again : for he had 
done no wrong, but only to speak against 
them of the Tower. And Ywain had great 
indignation thereat, and swore instantly to be 
302 



Aladore 

of their fellowship ; but inwardly he groaned 
to be so bound again, for he saw no end to 
strife and no day of returning. 

Notwithstanding he stooped him to his 
burden and shouldered it : and he went here 
and there throughout the city and spoke 
among divers sorts of men. And in general 
he found them to be of three sorts : and 
namely, there were some of good will toward 
the Eagles, and some which held by the 
Tower, for favour's sake : and yet more there 
were which were men of ease and loved 
nothing so much as to keep order and custom 
and to hear no questions. And these said to 
Ywain that they were neither of this side nor 
of that, but would favour no man that should 
be a disturber of peace. 

Then came one to Ywain and stayed him 
in the midst of the street : and he was a 
Summoner, and by his office he summoned 
Ywain to come before the Archbishop. So 
Ywain went with him, and as he went he 
marvelled within himself what manner of 
33 



Aladore 

turn was this, for he had had no dealings 
with clergy, neither for them neither against. 

And when he came to the palace then he was 
yet more astonished : for the Archbishop sat in 
no public place but in a little chamber set about 
with books, and with him were three or four 
great ones of the company of the Tower. And 
they greeted Ywain courteously and asked him 
to speak his mind unto them concerning 
Hubert. Then Ywain took the word and 
reasoned with them, that it was no good cause 
to banish a man, if he should have spoken 
against a company or against a custom. And 
when he had said that, he looked to be down- 
cried and angrily used. 

Howbeit the game was otherwise played, as 
at this time, for none cried out nor used him 
angrily, but they of the Tower made a show to 
receive his saying courteously and to agree 
thereto. Then the Archbishop spoke to 
Ywain, and his eyes glowed like coals, and his 
voice was rich and sweet like strong wine 
softened with honey, and he said : These are 
304 



Aladore 

my friends and yours, and they would be 
friends to Hubert also, for there is no malice 
in them, but good will and free forgiveness. 
But Hubert would not, to my grief I say it : 
for he was taken with an ill mind and brought 
disease upon many. And his disease was this, 
that he became a dreamer of dreams, and 
would have others to be like himself: and 
thereby they were in danger to have perished. 
Then said Ywain : My lord, I pray you 
pardon me : of what dreams do men perish ? 
And the Archbishop answered him patiently 
and said : Surely of all such dreams as are 
not according to faith. Then said Ywain : I 
rejoice to hear my lord's saying, for Hubert is 
of all men most full of faith, as one that would 
give the world for a dream. And even as he 
does, so do I and mine : for we long after our 
own land, and go pilgrimage to find it. And 
in that it is a land of dream it is a land of 
faith : for by our dreams we make life new and 
ever during, and what else do all the men of 
faith ? 

u 305 



Aladore 

And when he said that the Archbishop was 
some deal choked in his throat, and the red 
blood came into his face about his eyes. And 
he said to Ywain : What mean you, sir, for I 
fear lest I should understand your saying. 
And Ywain answered : Let me use plain words 
with reverence : for we are both of us men and 
the sons of men, and to each man his own 
magic. And we all seek for the land of our 
desire, and we build therein a city and a 
house for our abiding. And you call your city 
Paradise, and ours we call Aladore, for of our 
own dreams it is builded and upheld. 

Then the Archbishop rose up upon his feet, 
and he looked on Ywain with a stern counte- 
nance, and said : It is enough. And he went 
out in his wrath, and the great ones followed 
after him. 



306 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

HOW YWAIN WAS EXCOMMUNICATE AFTER 
THE CUSTOM OF PALADORE. 

LITTLE enough thought Ywain of the anger 
of those great ones, for he held himself to 
have outreasoned them, and he perceived 
not how by his cunning the Archbishop had 
entrapped him before witnesses of repute. 
But Aithne perceived it, and more, for 
Ywain told her some deal, and other deal 
she divined of herself. And when she had 
considered a little she bade him make haste 
and do those things for which he came, 
and look not to be long unharassed of his 
enemies: for that they had fastened an ill 
quarrel upon him by no chance but by in- 
tent, and they were such as would follow 
their craft. 

307 



Aladore 

So he went about the town busily, seeking 
out all those which were friends to Hubert 
and all those which were haters of evil 
custom : and he found some and persuaded 
other, and thought to have made good way. 
And this time also he perceived how he was 
favoured of the commons of Paladore ; for 
he discoursed to them hotly, and they were 
ever assotted on discourse and on a burning 
tongue. 

And on a day he came down to the door 
of his house, to go forth into the city : and 
there came to his ears a sound of a bell 
tolling and of a multitude of people going 
all one way. And he hastened and came to 
the end of the street and found them pass- 
ing by; for they were going toward the 
market-place. And he perceived that in the 
middle was a train of some sort, walking by 
two and by two, and there went a great bell 
before them, and beside them the multitude 
ran and jostled under the walls of the street. 
And Ywain joined himself to them, for he 
308 



Aladore 

was willing to know of their dealing : and 
for the thickness of the crowd he could not 
see what was to the forward, but only he 
perceived that in the train were many great 
ones of the company of the Tower. 

Then he spoke to a man that was beside 
him in the crowd, and he asked of him 
what might be the meaning of the concourse 
and of the tolling: for the bell was of a 
right dolorous sound, but among the people 
was no sadness at all. And the man an- 
swered him : Well may you ask, as I also 
have asked but a moment since, for the like 
of this hath not happed within my memory. 
And the concourse is all to see and to hear 
the Archbishop a-cursing, and the bell also 
is part of the cursing, for it betokens that he 
which is cursed should be as it were buried 
out of sight and fellowship. Then Ywain 
remembered Hubert, and his heart rose and 
he asked again : Whom then will they curse 
and for what cause ? And the man answered : 
He is one Ywain, and I know him well : and 
309 



Aladore 

the cause is a true cause, for he is a blas- 
phemer of the faith, a dealer in dreamage 
and all manner of sorceries. 

And at that saying Ywain was astonished 
and said no more : for he had thought to 
hear speak of Hubert and not of himself. 
And he went forward strongly through the 
press, and came out into the market - place 
and stood upon a step under an archway and 
looked forth over the heads of the multitude. 
And he saw the train there before him : and 
in the forefront were an hundred of the com- 
pany of the Tower, wearing their livery of 
black with a golden tower thereon. And 
after them came an hundred of clergy, ap- 
parelled in black clothes and white, and an 
hundred doctors of the schools with gowns 
of divers colours: and the Archbishop was 
robed in a silken robe of crimson with a 
great hat of the same, and before him went 
two with candles in hand, and one with a 
bell. 

So they came upon the place in seemly 
310 



Aladore 

order, and they halted there and departed 
into two lines the one over against the 
other : and the Archbishop passed through 
and stood upon the steps of the Great Hall. 
And he held up his hand, and immediately 
the bell ceased from tolling, and they of the 
multitude were hushed from their babble. 
Then came seven clergy before the Arch- 
bishop, having seven great candles in their 
hands, and they stood and set light to them 
and held them aloft : and when all the 
people had perceived their dealing, then 
they threw down the candles upon the 
ground and trod out the flame of them. 
And as they trod them they cried against 
them : Out, out, accursed ; until all were 
quenched. 

Then the Archbishop stood forth with staff 
in hand, and he bade all men to know, and 
to make known, how that Ywain was thence- 
forth cut off from the company of all men 
living, and from the company of all the 
faithful dead. And under pain of the like 



A lad ore 

sentence he ordained that none should give 
him neither shelter nor speech, nor food 
nor fellowship, nor any means of life nor 
burial after death. And when he had so 
said he went solemnly out from the place : 
and all his train followed after him, and last 
of all went he that had the bell, a -tolling 
dolorously. 



312 



CHAPTER L. 

HOW YWAIN AND AITHNE CAME TO ALADORE 
THE LAST TIME, AS IN THIS TRANSITORY 
LIFE. 

Now Ywain was known of none, for he was 
in a sure place and looked forth above the 
heads of the multitude. But he perceived 
all that was done, and none better, and he 
understood right well the evil malice and craft 
of his enemies, and his heart was pricked 
therewith as with the poison of wasps. And 
the tolling of the bell he regarded not, neither 
the treading of the candles, for he held such 
things to be shows to frighten fools : but the 
curses and the sentences, and all the words of 
the Archbishop, those stung his blood and 
made bitterness in his throat. 



Aladore 

Then he thought to get some comfort of 
the people which were round about him, and 
he went forward a little and mingled with 
them and heard their talk. And at the first 
he had some pleasure of them, for there was 
not one in twenty but was making merry, 
with no saving of reverence, no, not of the 
Archbishop himself. But therewith came 
displeasure, that he also was but lightly 
accounted of: for the most part of the crowd 
made no distinction, but they cheapened the 
sin with the punishment. And the best that 
he could find was this, that the young and 
lean men were for him and the old and fat 
against him : for in Paladore the old dream 
not, save it be of gold and gluttony. And 
with this he was but ill content, for they 
which are young in that city are no more than 
one in three, and they are of small account, 
seeing that the best of them are banished. 

So he left that and came away covertly to 
his own house, and he found Aithne therein, 
and told her of all that he had seen and heard. 



Aladore 

And of the pain which he had in his heart, of 
this he told her not, but she perceived it by 
the manner of his speaking, for she knew his 
thought as it were by touch and not by words. 
And she said to him : It is no marvel if you 
are in pain : for there is no venom in nature 
like to the venom of speech, and many times 
it will work madness in the blood. But there 
is good magic against it, as I shall show you 
presently, for this is a woman's gift from the 
time out of mind. And bethink you also 
how their curses are no better than their 
ceremonies, and both alike folly : for they 
are but tokens and have in them no power 
to make good. 

Nay, said Ywain, but they have this power, 
that they hurt where they are aimed: for in 
another man's case I had never regarded 
them, but when they struck my own name 
then they pierced and rankled. And thereat 
he cast down his eyes and fell into a weariness. 
And Aithne came to him and stood beside 
him where he sat, and she took his head 



Aladore 

between her arms and drew it in upon her 
breast. And immediately the bands of his 
weariness were loosed, and his spirit was 
rocked in a sure hold as a young child is 
rocked by his mother: and he shut to his 
eyes and remembered no more the things 
which were done against his peace. 

Then he opened his eyes again, and he 
saw how that he stood in a meadow of 
flowers, and the flowers were kingcups and 
lady-smocks and other such as are chiefly 
loved of children. And among the flowers 
there ran a little brook, and in the brook 
were minnows going all one way like boats 
upon a wind; and it seemed to Ywain that 
it were worth all other joys if he might take 
but one minnow in his naked hand. And not 
far off from him stood a little maid and called 
to him : and she called him to come home, 
for it was time. And he knew that she was 
his sister, that was his elder by two years, 
and it was in his mind to obey her, but not 
yet. Then he stretched out his hand and 
316 



Aladore 

stooped forward above the brook, and he 
snatched suddenly at a minnow that was 
there : and the sedge yielded beneath him 
and he fell with his arms upon the water. 
And immediately he came to his feet again 
and stood upon the meadow : but he was 
all bedabbled and bedrenched, and he feared 
to be chidden, and his fear burst forth from 
him and he wept. 

Then the maid that was his sister came to 
him and stood beside him, and took his head 
between her arms and drew it in upon her 
breast. And he shut to his eyes and immedi- 
ately his fear was stayed and the water was 
dried upon his arms and upon his feet, and 
his heart was comforted. And he opened his 
eyes again and looked about him, and he saw 
the place wherein he was : and the place was 
changed and was become Aladore, and he sat 
by the margent of the sea, where he had been 
aforetime, and Aithne was there beside him to 
his solace. 

And he said to her : O my beloved, what 
31? 



Aladore 

enchantment is this that you have used ? 
For I have been a child again, and in great 
grief concerning little things : and I have 
been comforted with the comfort of my 
mother and of my sister which are long since 
dead and gone from me. 

And Aithne stooped over him and kissed 
him and said : Even so, beloved, and this 
enchantment is no marvel, seeing that it is 
common with them which are lovers of men : 
for it is the gift of a woman, and an heritage 
from the time that is out of mind. 



CHAPTER LI. 

OF TWO CITIES THAT WERE BUILDED 
DIVERSELY, AND HOW YWAIN AND 
AITHNE HEARD A HORN BLOWN OVER- 
SEA FOR BATTLE. 

THEN said Ywain : Doubtless your saying is 
true, and well have I proved the gift : yet I 
marvel notwithstanding, for a man may 
wonder in despite of knowledge. And there 
is one matter concerning which I am still 
perplexed. And Aithne said to him : Say on. 
And he said to her : I am perplexed between 
two verities : for there is one truth of Paladore 
and another of Aladore, and though they be 
diverse yet they both have by seeming the 
nature of truth veritable. And many times 
my mind is in doubt concerning them : for 



Aladore 

in our life that now is we come and go between 
two realms, and I would that I might know 
which of them shall outdure other. 

And Aithne asked him : After what manner 
seem these verities to you ? And he an- 
swered : O beloved, now am I with you in 
Aladore, and all things else and all men and 
all places are but as shadows cast by this 
our life, and we move them as we will, and 
as we will we take away their being. But 
when I am alone and dwelling yonder among 
men, then have those shadows truth of sub- 
stance and of touch, and the life of Aladore 
becomes an image in the mind, as it was 
aforetime when I saw it as a cloud in 
heaven. 

Then Aithne was silent a space, and fear 
came into her eyes : and afterwards she spoke 
suddenly and said : O my beloved, keep in- 
nocency, for to a child these things are plain. 
And you were a child this moment past, and 
I with you : and wherefore now should we 
cloud our wisdom with a doubt ? And she 
320 



Aladore 

rose up and said to him : Let us play a game 
together, as children that play upon the shore. 
For here is sand enough, and loneliness, and 
the tide returning : and we will build us two 
cities, and see which of the two shall best 
endure. And you shall build your city with 
your hands, and name it Paladore : and you 
shall make it in all things like to the city 
that you know, with a High Steep seaward, 
and a wall, and a gateway and towers thereon. 
And I also will make a city and name it 
Aladore, and I will make it after the same 
fashion, but not of the same substance : for 
I will not build it with hands but with a 
power of the spirit. 

So Ywain took of the wet sand and of the 
dry, and he built him a great mound after 
the manner of children. And when he had 
made it strong then he carved it into the like- 
ness of a city, with a high steep and a wall 
and towers thereon : and it stood upon the 
shore and looked out seaward, and he named 
it Paladore, for it was fashioned in no other 
x 321 



Aladore . 

wise, and the tide came running toward the 
edges of the steep. 

Then Ywain said to Aithne : This is my 
city, O my playfellow, and I marvel that 
yours is not yet a-building. But Aithne an- 
swered him not, for she was singing a song 
of witchery : and she sang in a low voice and 
sweet, and as she sang she weaved a witch- 
knot upon the air with both her hands. And 
immediately there came a little mist upon 
the shore, and the mist drew upward from 
the sand and hung in one place upon the air 
like smoke : and so it continued the while 
Aithne sang her song. And when she had 
ceased from her singing then Ywain saw the 
mist no more, for it was clean vanished and 
in the place thereof was another mound and 
another city, in semblance like unto the first, 
and those two cities were nigh together upon 
the shore and the tide came about them both 
by little and little. 

And Ywain and Aithne stood still and looked 
upon the tide : and it came running and lap- 
322 



Aladore 

ping more fiercely, and the froth of it began 
to foam upon the edges of the mounds. And 
the water gnawed upon the sand of the one 
city, and that was Ywain's : and the walls 
and towers of it began to crumble and to 
crack, and at the last they were perished 
wholly as by ruin of time, and the tide flowed 
over them and they were gone. But with 
Aithne's city it was not so, for the sea bit 
not upon it nor overflowed it, but it stood 
above the water until the turning of the tide. 
And Ywain came near to touch it, but he 
could not, for it was but mist between his 
fingers. And he left it alone and stood and 
looked upon it again : and it endured as rock, 
notwithstanding it was builded of a song. 

Then he said to Aithne : The game is 
nought, for you have played it by no fair 
hazard but by enchantment. And she an- 
swered him : Not so, for by this same en- 
chantment is Aladore upbuilded and sustained, 
and that is the truth of it. And she looked 
into his eyes and her spirit entered into him, 
323 



Aladore 

and they twain were one spirit. And the 
dusk began to fall about them and peace 
therewith, for they were in their own place 
beyond time and tide. But in that moment 
came change upon Ywain, for a sound was 
in his ears : and the sound was the sound of 
a horn blown over sea, and in the hearing 
of it all the blood of his body leapt furiously 
up to battle. 



324 



CHAPTER LII. 

OF A SHIP THAT WAS FULL OF LADIES AND 
LOVELY KNIGHTS, AND HOW YWAIN AND 
AITHNE DEPARTED WITH THEM OVER SEA. 

THEN Ywain looked upon Aithne, and in one 
moment he remembered all her love and her 
kindness, and pain was mingled with his joy. 
And his heart was filled with a tumult past 
bearing, and he groaned aloud and cried : 
Ah ! my beloved, what is this that has come 
upon us ? For here is the land of our desire 
and the land of all loveliness and all delectable 
enchantments, and herein we might have had 
life enduring. But now I see well that there 
is no such fortune : for the horn has sounded, 
and the sound of it has power upon body and 
blood. And peace is gone from me suddenly, 
and I can by no means keep me from the 
325 



Aladore 

fight : for the cause is a right cause and one 
that must be ransomed, yea, though all else 
be given and lost for it. 

But Aithne regarded him out of the depth 
of her eyes, and she said : Grieve not, dear 
heart, for how shall that which is given be 
lost ? And as for the life which dureth, that 
is of the spirit and not of the body : for 
consider them which were great lovers of 
old time, how that they all are perished, as 
in the world transitory, yet their souls dwell 
not in death nor forgetfulness. 

And when he heard those words Ywain's 
heart was made strong again and his eyes 
were lightened ; and he saw his life as it were 
a tale that shall be told. And he turned him 
about suddenly, for he was aware how there 
came somewhat from the seaward. And that 
which came was a ship, going slowly under 
stress of oars : and Ywain perceived that the 
ship was builded after the fashion of old time, 
and her sails were furled upon the yards, and 
she came by her oarage landward against 
326 



Aladore 

the wind. And upon her deck stood many 
goodly persons : and they were all in silk or 
else in armour richly beseen, and they bore 
them gently and with a joyful courage. 

Then Ywain was astonished, and he asked 
of Aithne : Who be these ? for I know them 
not : yet their faces are like faces out of 
childhood. And Aithne answered him : You 
say not amiss, for these are they which are 
known of all men, howbeit none hath seen 
them, that is now on live. For yonder by 
the prow is Helen, fairest of women, and 
Paris, by whom Troy fell : and there is great 
Achilles that was loved both of maid and of 
man, and Prince Troilus that had double 
sorrow in loving of Criseyde, and Duke Jason 
that won the Fleece Perilous, and Medea that 
for his sake forsook her father's house. And 
hard by them is Sigurd of the Volsungs, and 
Brynhild the Queen, for whom he rode the 
Wavering Fire : notwithstanding they came 
never together, but they were proud lovers 
until death. And other two queens there 
327 



Aladore 

are beside Brynhild, and they are Isoud and 
Guinevere ; and with Isoud haunteth Sir 
Tristram, which drank with her the cup of 
sorrow, and with the lady Guinevere is that 
Sir Lancelot, that was never matched of 
earthly knight's hand. 

Then Ywain looked, and he saw all those 
which were named, and other beside : and 
his heart was stirred with the sadness and 
the glory of them, and he asked again of 
Aithne : Tell me yet more of these lovers 
and of their renown, for of their loveliness is 
no need to tell. And Aithne spoke again, 
and she showed him where there stood a 
lady with a face like a flame of beauty, 
shining marvellously. And she said : Behold 
then Deirdre, that was born to be a death to 
many and a tale of wonder for ever. And 
with her is Naoise, son of Usnach, that 
loved her greatly. For when he saw her 
the first time, there and then he gave her 
the love that he never gave to living thing, 
to vision, or to creature, but to herself alone. 
328 



Aladore 

Notwithstanding she has a little grave apart. 
And there also is Niamh, that Cuchulain 
loved, and with three kisses she sent him to 
his death. And there is Ailinn, daughter of 
Lugaidh, and Baile of the Honey Mouth, that 
died each for other, upon false tidings of 
their death. And there is Nicolette the slave 
girl, that was by rights the daughter of a 
king, and had twelve princes to her brothers. 
And beside her is her lord, that was her 
lover through all, and Aucassin he was 
called, and Count of Beaucaire thereafter. 
And they four which haunt apart, by two 
and by two together, they are Leila and 
Majnun, whose love is the song of Araby 
and the mirror of the East, and they are 
Valeh and Hadijeh, that were parted by 
land and by sea, yet at the last they came 
together by the secret road of dreams. 

So Aithne made an end of her telling, and 

Ywain moved not but continued looking 

upon the ship and upon them that were 

therein. And his heart rejoiced in those 

329 



Aladore 

mighty dead and in the grandeur of the 
dooms that he had heard told of them. And 
the ship came onward and was driven of the 
oarsmen upon the beach, and they called to 
Ywain and Aithne that they should come 
aboard. So they took hands together and 
went aboard, and they were received joyfully 
of all those knights and ladies. And the 
ship was thrust strongly out from off the 
beach, and so turned seaward, and the sails 
were hoised upon the masts, and the wind 
filled them roundly, and all they that were 
aboard began to sing. 

And Ywain knew not the song which they 
sang, but he perceived that it was a song of 
the Rhymer's making, for when he heard it 
he was mightily comforted, and he felt the 
springs of life leaping up within him. And 
the ship drave onward over foam and furrow 
and came swiftly upon a coast that was no 
strange coast : for upon it was the High 
Steep of Paladore, and the horn was blown 
again from the topmost of the city. 
33 



Aladore 

And by seeming that sound was well known 
of the lovers that were in the ship, for when 
they heard it they smiled and looked kindly 
one upon another, as remembering old sorrow 
long since lightened. And they brought 
Ywain and Aithne to land, and kissed them 
and bade them be of good courage, and so 
to meet with them again, for they said how 
their fellowship was an ever-during fellowship, 
and might never be broken. Then the ship 
put off from shore and went slowly to the 
westward; and it was no more seen, for it 
became as it had been a wreath of mist upon 
the water. And Ywain and Aithne climbed 
the steep together, and came into the city: 
and the dusk was falling round them, and a 
great star stood over Paladore. 



CHAPTER LIII. 

HOW YWAIN AND AITHNE CAME TO PALADORE 
THE LAST TIME, AND HOW THE SNOW 
FELL ALL NIGHT LONG. 

THEN they looked upon that star, and as they 
looked they marvelled and were dismayed, for 
a great cloud came up and took the star from 
them utterly. And with the cloud came a 
wind, exceeding cold and bitter, and they 
perceived how that in one hour the year was 
turned to winter ; and the wind got hold upon 
their bones and shrunk them, and their hearts 
were sick with silence and foreboding. Then 
the wind fell again suddenly, and the snow 
began to come thickly down the air, and it 
came upon their faces now driving and now 
feathering, in manner as the wind was still 
or gusty. 

332 



Aladore 

So they bent down their heads and went 
through the city at speed, devising whither 
they should go and of whom they should seek 
counsel. And as they went they met one 
which passed them by : yet by seeming he 
knew them as he passed, and he stayed and 
turned him about upon the street. And he 
called not to them, but he made haste and 
followed after them, and when he was come 
near he looked about him warily and came 
nearer yet. And Ywain peered at him through 
the darkness and the snow falling, and he per- 
ceived that he was Dennis that had been 
friend and fellow to him : and for all the pains 
and curses that were against him Ywain mis- 
doubted not of his faith. And as he trusted, 
so it was : for Dennis took him and pressed 
his hand, and he pressed it strongly in token 
of friendship, but he spoke no word. Then 
Ywain thought on danger and remembered 
him of his enemies, and he bade Dennis go 
before, in manner of one that had no know- 
ledge of any beside himself, and so bring 
333 



Aladore 

them to some place where they might speak 
together. And Dennis went quickly before, 
and brought them into Aithne's own house, 
that was long time deserted and out of mind 
of all men. And when they were come there 
they entered in full silently, for they spoke no 
word, and their feet were dumb with snow. 
And they climbed the stairs groping, and came 
into the upper chamber, that was Aithne's, 
and made fast the door : and they darkened 
the window and kindled a little fire upon 
the hearth. And the fire took hold and 
grew, and they had joy of it, for in a fire 
there will be comfort against misery, as in 
a thing that hath life and fellowship. 

Then they began to speak together, and 
Ywain asked of Dennis what should be the 
meaning of the horn which he had heard 
blowing. And thereat Dennis was astonished, 
as one that understands not what is asked of 
him : and at the last he said to Ywain : 
Whence are you come hither, and by what 
error deceived ? For there has no horn been 
334 



Aladore 

blown in Paladore this year. Then he said 
again : It is a marvel : for the blowing of 
the horn is for to-morrow, and it is agreed 
among us that at the sound of it the Eagles 
shall draw together and make war against 
them of the Tower. 

Then said Ywain : So be it, and good end 
thereto : yet without doubt I heard the horn, 
and for that sake only did I come hither. 
And Aithne said : I also heard it, and no 
marvel : for there is a hearing of the spirit, 
and many times one friend may perceive 
another's counsel, and as well far as near, 
and as well before as after. 

And to that Dennis gave assent, for he had 
heard the same of certain others : and he told 
Ywain and Aithne of the counsel of the 
Eagles. For their purpose was to bring in 
Hubert and all other banished men, and they 
would have no more such banishing hence- 
forth, but all to live and let live. And they 
devised to go upon their enemies by two ways 
and so come against them unaware : and 
335 



Aladore 

namely that one party should take the gate 
and the other party the great Hall. For 
that Hall was the chief place of the city, 
where was ever the concourse and the 
government : and there should be their 
stronghold and the blowing of the horn. 
And at the sound of the horn should come 
Hubert and his before the gate, and so to 
break in with force. And though their em- 
prise was hazardous, yet they looked to 
achieve it, seeing that the Prince of Paladore 
was suddenly departed out of this life without 
survivors to inherit him, and by likelihood 
the great ones would be in confusion. 

So all these counsels Dennis showed unto 
Ywain and Aithne, and it was long before he 
made an end of speaking. And when he had 
made an end they three sat silent, looking upon 
the fire ; and the logs crumbled upon the 
hearth and the fire began to fail. And Ywain 
rose up and unbarred the window to behold 
the night : and the snow fell without ceasing, 
and it lay in a great crust upon the sill. Then 
336 



Aladore 

Ywain sighed and shut to the window, for he 
was a-weary of the darkness, and he took 
wood and kindled the fire again, blowing upon 
the ashes with his breath. And they three 
outwore the night together, speaking of old 
things and things to come, and watching for 
the dawn. 



337 



CHAPTER LIV. 

HOW THE HORN WAS GIVEN INTO YWAIN's 
HAND, AND HOW HE SOUNDED THEREON 
A MORT ROYAL. 

AND when it began to lighten towards dawn, 
then they went forth out of the house and made 
to go by the way of the market-place. And 
the snow had ceased from falling and it lay 
upon the ground before them deep and white, 
for it was yet untrodden. So they drew their 
cloaks about their faces and went quickly, to 
the intent that they should be known of none : 
and at the first there was no living soul that 
met with them. But afterward they had sight 
of three or four which came towards them, and 
by seeming they were the servants of some 
great one, accompanying with their master 
homeward. 

338 



Aladore 

And Ywain saw the lord of those men 
coming behind them, and he knew him well, 
for all that he was enwrapped against the cold. 
And they drew near to pass by one another, 
for there was no avoidance : and the lord 
gave Ywain greeting and would have stayed 
him, but Ywain muttered somewhat and so 
passed on, and Aithne and Dennis with him. 
And in truth this was Sir Rainald, that was 
ever busy against other, and more especially 
against the Eagles : and when he saw Ywain, 
though he saw not his face, yet he misdoubted 
him who he was. And Ywain looked after 
him as he went, and he saw how he stood 
staring upon the footprints in the snow : and 
when he had considered them he followed 
them backwardly, that he might find the house 
from whence they had set forth. 

Then Ywain turned him to Dennis, and he 
said : What now ? for we must make short 
work. And Dennis stayed not, but ran quickly 
towards the great Hall, and Ywain and Aithne 
followed after him. And with a key Dennis 
opened the door of the Hall, and they three 
339 



Aladore 

entered in : and there was no man within, but 
upon the wall was a great horn hanging, and 
Dennis took down the horn from the wall and 
gave it into Ywain's hand. 

But Ywain said : How shall I blow for war 
that know but the hunter's notes ? For belike 
you have another manner for war, or else 
you are agreed among yourselves. 

And Dennis answered him : Not so, but the 
sounding of the horn is enough, and no matter 
the music. For this is an ancient horn and a 
magical, and there is none among us that is 
able to sound it, save Hubert only : but it may 
be that you also are able, for there was a power 
upon you from the beginning. 

Then Ywain went forth and stood before the 
door, and looked out over the city, and he saw 
it as a town of faery, for it was new and soft 
with snow. And he set the horn to his mouth, 
and blew therein with all his strength, and the 
note that he sounded was a mort royal : for he 
said within himself: God willing, we have 
hunted an evil thing to death. 
340 



Aladore 

And the sound of the horn blared out and 
went wide upon the air, and it came loudly 
into all the quarters of the city and into every 
street and every house, and there was no man 
in Paladore that heard it not. And they which 
heard it were awoke out of sleep, and the most 
of them groaned and turned them to their 
sleep again : but upon others came fear and 
hatred, and they got them quickly to their 
armour. And the Eagles also heard it and 
were glad, and they did on their swords which 
they kept in hiding, and issued forth to go 
upon their enemies. 

But Ywain stood upon the head of the steps 
that were before the Hall, and he looked out 
over the city and saw no man stirring, nor he 
heard no sound of feet. And fear came upon 
him and loneliness and he thought upon Aithne 
and said to her : O my beloved, I have brought 
you to your death. And she answered him 
proudly : Nay, not yet : for you have sounded 
but once, and there are many faithful. 

Then Ywain took the horn and blew it the 
34i 



Aladore 

second time ; and all they which were his 
began to run towards the place where he was, 
and they ran quickly, as men that thought not 
on danger, for joy that the time was come. 
And Ywain saw them how they came running, 
and his heart was uplifted with their joy and 
their fellowship, and his blood within him 
became like wine. And he set the horn to his 
mouth and blew it yet a third time, louder 
than before, and the sound of it smote the 
walls of Paladore, and the gates and the towers 
and the houses great and little, and all the 
whole city rang therewith, and the air trem- 
bled and the sky was filled with echoes. 

Then the desire of battle came upon the 
Eagles and they ran together to Ywain and 
thronged upon the steps before him : and they 
lifted up their swords and shouted as it were 
one man, and the noise of their shouting 
went up mightily and was mingled with the 
echoes of the horn. 



342 



CHAPTER LV. 

HOW THE EAGLES FARED IN FIGHTING, AND 
HOW SIR RAINALD WOULD HAVE DEALT 
WITH YWAIN. 

THEN when the sound of the horn had ceased 
Ywain held up his hand and stayed the noise 
of the shouting, and he spoke and said to the 
Eagles how they should go with him to take 
the gate of the city, and so to bring Hubert 
in. And they all assented thereto and made 
them ready. But Ywain turned him about 
and looked upon Aithne, and a sharp pain 
went through his heart and he said to her : 
I am distressed, O my beloved, because of 
you : for to-day by the space of an hour we 
must be parted one from other. And I know 
not how to leave you, for I fear the great 
343 



Aladore 

ones of Paladore. And Aithne answered him 
lightly, and she said : Go now, and have no 
fear : for there is a chapel beside this Hall, 
and it is long time forsaken and forgotten, 
and there shall I be in sanctuary, until you 
come again. Then Ywain looked sadly at 
her, and she said to him : And if so be that 
you come not again, then in some other place 
shall you and I be met together. And she 
took him by the hand and led him in, and 
he went throughout the Hall and found the 
chapel as she had said : and they came by 
a bailey from the Hall into the chapel, and 
there they kissed and parted in the best 
manner that might be, as of lovers parting 
in dread. 

Then Ywain came forth again to the Eagles, 
and he took a sword naked in his hand and 
went before them : and they came swiftly to 
the gate and looked to find it open, for they 
were agreed with the porter and with the 
guard. But they found it right otherwise, 
for the porter lay there slain upon the snow, 
344 



Aladore 

and before the gatehouse was no guard, but 
a great company of spears. And Ywain per- 
ceived the malice of his enemy and he cried 
out to Dennis : This is that Sir Rainald, 
and he has outrun us by his craft, for I saw 
him running counter upon our trail. 

And right as he was speaking there came 
a noise from without the gate, and Ywain 
and his shouted together and called on 
Hubert by his name. And they which were 
without heard them shouting, and they cried 
the war-cry of the Eagles, and battered with 
axes upon the gate. And Ywain called his 
company to rescue, and he went before them 
and they set on fiercely upon the spears, 
and the men of the Eagles and the men of 
the Tower hewed and thrust on this side 
and on that and were mingled furiously in 
battle. And for the space of half-an-hour 
they had no mastery either of other, but 
they swung back and forward like two wrest- 
lers, seeking their advantage in great grips 
together. 

345 



Aladore 

Then at the last their breath began to fail 
them, and they drew a little apart and stood 
looking one upon another. And they of the 
Tower perceived how the Eagles were minished, 
for they were fewer from the beginning, and 
though they had slain each his man, yet were 
many of them dead upon the spears. And 
when the spearmen saw that they called 
each to other to go forward and make an 
end, and they came thrusting heavily upon 
Ywain and his, and by their weight they 
drove them backward. And more especially 
they thrust upon them by the right hand 
and by the left, that they might close them 
in on every side : but they prevailed not, for 
the street was narrow. Notwithstanding they 
continued thrusting, and Ywain perceived 
their intent, and feared it, for he saw how 
it should be when they were come into the 
market-place. And he gathered his strength 
together and shouted loudly to the Eagles; 
and they strove as men desperate, and lopped 
their enemies both spear and spearman, and 
so stayed them from their thrusting. Then 
346 



Aladore 

when Ywain saw that they were stayed, he 
commanded the Eagles to be gone suddenly: 
and they ran back and escaped over the 
market-place, and came to the Great Hall 
and were gathered together upon the steps 
before the door. 

And Ywain looked down from the steps 
and saw his enemies before him, and they 
were strong men armed and armoured, and 
they came running to the foot of the steps 
like the sea-tide upon the beach. And he 
looked back upon his own men and saw them 
few and faint, and it came into his mind that 
the end was not far off from them. 

Then the spearmen made them ready again 
for battle, for they were strictly commanded 
that they should assault the place and stint 
not till they had taken it. So they came upon 
the steps with spears all thick together, as 
it had been thorns in a quickset hedge, and 
they began to push the Eagles upward from 
step to step. And Ywain saw their dealing, 
and he perceived the vantage which they had 
thereby, and the danger : for they were 
347 



Aladore 

clumped so close that they could not move, 
except it were to go forward all together. 
Then he ran and stooped quickly, and he 
loosened a great stone of the flags which were 
before the Hall, and he came forward again 
upon the steps and cast it down upon the 
spearmen : and it fell like death among them, 
and they cried out piteously and went back- 
ward, and in their fear they trampled one 
upon another. And Ywain and his made 
haste and took up other like stones, for there 
was there no lack, and they stood ready to 
hurtle them down after the same manner : 
but the spearmen gave ground and would not 
abide their coming. And some among them 
clamoured that they should send for archers, 
to shoot safely upon the Eagles : and when 
the Eagles heard them clamouring they bade 
them good speed, for they knew how the 
archers were a free company, and favoured 
not the Tower. So the battle stood still on 
this side and on that, until that some new 
thing should fortune. 

Then with watching the day began to pass 
348 



Aladore 

over, and the great bell of Paladore rang noon 
above them. And in the same moment there 
was a stir among the spearmen and the 
throng of them was parted in the midst and 
one came forth and began to go upon the 
steps. And Ywain was astonished, for he 
which came was Sir Rainald, and he came 
courteously and without fear. And he gave 
Ywain greeting, and looked cheerily there- 
with ; and he demanded to speak with him 
privily, and truce to be had between them 
while they continued one with the other. 

So they went into the Great Hall, they two 
alone, and the door was shut to behind them. 
And Sir Rainald began to speak with Ywain 
as one that found no fault in him, but he 
blamed only the Archbishop and his, and he 
named their curses witless and unlawful. 
And Ywain answered him : All this I have 
forgotten, for I only am accursed : but to-day 
our fighting is against a more evil custom, 
and there is nothing shall stay us except 
death only. Then Sir Rainald looked kindly 
upon him and said : A pity of your fighting, 
349 



Aladore 

and of your friends : for there are few of 
them which are not slain or hurt. And the 
pity is this, that if you would, the weak 
should be the stronger. 

Now when he had said these words he 
looked fixedly upon Ywain, and he took his 
hand and set a great ring upon his finger: 
and Ywain saw the stone of the ring, and in 
it were the arms of Paladore engraven. And 
Sir Rainald said : The Prince hath left none 
to inherit him, save you only: for there is 
none other that hath power in Paladore. 

Then Ywain's heart fluttered like a bird in 
his bosom, and for a moment he thought to 
have escaped the death. Then his eyes were 
lightened and he remembered him of the 
Prince, how he had seen him in his chains. 
And he said to Sir Rainald : Take the ring 
again : for your princes have no power against 
your customs, else had they never been so 
bound. Then Sir Rainald took the ring and 
went out : and he spoke no word, nor he let 
no sign be seen upon his face. 



CHAPTER LVI. 

HOW YWAIN BEHELD A DEAD MAN LAID 
ON BIER. 

Now when Sir Rainald was departed the men 
of the Tower made no more show of righting, 
but they drew off a little space and set a 
watch upon the Eagles : and they fetched 
wood and kindled them a fire, for the day 
began to darken and the snow was cold about 
their feet. And the Eagles kept their guard 
upon the steps, for they durst not move there- 
from, but their hope was that Hubert and his 
should presently break in and rescue them. 

And the dusk fell, and Ywain looked forth 
over the market - place, and he saw a child 
which walked alone and made to come from 
the one side to the other openly. And by 



Aladore 

his going Ywain knew him without doubt, 
and he was the boy by whom he had gone 
forth on pilgrimage. And he saw how the 
boy passed through the midst of the spear- 
men and they perceived him not : and though 
he trod downright upon the snow, yet he left 
behind him no footprint nor any mark of his 
going. And as he had passed through the 
spearmen so also he passed among the Eagles, 
and he came to Ywain and took him by the 
hand : and he led him through the Hall and 
through the bailey, and brought him to the 
chapel. 

Now the chapel was dim with twilight, and 
Ywain entered within it and stood still ; for 
he looked to see Aithne, and at the first he 
saw her not. But the child that was with 
him drew him by the hand, and he went 
farther, and came before the altar. And 
there upon the north side of the choir was 
a tomb beneath a canopy of carven stone, 
and the tomb was by seeming empty, for 
there was upon it no effigy, nor arms nor 
352 






Aladore 

words memorial ; but beside it was Aithne in 
sanctuary, and she was fallen asleep upon the 
floor of the chapel. And Ywain regarded her 
lovingly, and he had great comfort of her 
beauty, seeing how she lay as one at rest 
and upon her face was no care but only the 
softness of sleep. Then the child left hold- 
ing of Ywain's hand, and he went apart and 
kneeled upon the step which was before the 
altar, and there he folded his hands together 
and bowed his head : and when Ywain saw 
him so kneeling, then upon him also fell 
peace and quietness of heart. And he bowed 
his head after the like manner, and when he 
lifted it up he saw the child no more. 

Then he heard above him the sound of a 
bell that was tolling stroke by stroke, and 
the door of the chapel was opened behind 
him and the sound of the bell came in clearly, 
and with it came a wind as cold as death. 
And Ywain turned and saw how there entered 
in six men in white clothes and black, with 
hoods about their faces : and they bore upon 
z 353 



Aladore 

their shoulders a bier, and that which lay 
thereon was covered with a pall. And the 
three which were on one side were all in 
black, and the three which were on the other 
side were all in white : and they set down the 
bier before the altar and kneeled beside it. 
And there came in after them a great com- 
pany of knights, and they were all armed and 
visored, and their surcoats above their armour 
were of black or else of white. And with that 
company the chapel was fulfilled from end to 
end and from side to side, and in every 
knight's hand was a candle burning ; and the 
flame of the candles was clear and bright, and 
wavered not for any wind. 

Then one stood forth between the altar 
and the bier, and prayed aloud ; and the 
words which he prayed were old words, yet 
was their sound stranger than an unknown 
tongue. And thereafter he began to sing a 
solemn chant, and all the company of knights 
made their response : and the sound of their 
chanting went over Ywain as it were the 
354 



Aladore 

deep sea closing up his eyes. And he strove 
with all his force, whether to move from 
that place or to cry out, for he was in an 
agony : but neither his body moved nor his 
tongue gave utterance. 

Then he that said the office made a sign 
of blessing, and the knights fell down upon 
their knees. And afterwards they rose up 
altogether and chanted again right joyfully, 
and they went forth singing, and the sound 
of their voices came back out of the night. 
And they left there the bier before the altar, 
and at the head of it were seven candles 
burning. 

Then Ywain was loosed from his bondage 
and his spirit returned into his body, and he 
wept silently because his agony was past. 
And he longed to find the meaning of that 
which he had seen, for in his life -days he 
had seen many visions and dreamed many 
dreams, but none like to this, neither for 
dread nor for deliverance. And as he thought 
thereon he cast his eyes upon the bier, and 
355 



Aladore 

when he beheld it he knew that the vision 
was not yet ended, seeing that this also was 
part of it. 

Then he went forward, for his feet drew 
him ; yet he trembled also and his heart 
was shaken, and he had great need of hardi- 
hood. And he came trembling and stood 
beside the bier and looked down upon the 
pall: and under it was the semblance of one 
lying alone. And Ywain put forth his hand 
and took hold on the edge of the pall, and 
he drew back the pall upon the bier and 
looked and saw the face of him which lay 
thereon. And when he beheld it, in that 
same instant there came into his mind 
remembrance of all deeds that ever he had 
done, and he saw them afar off, and some 
of them were as lights which flare up and 
fade again, and other of them were as fires 
which smoulder and will not be put out. 
And in like manner he remembered all men 
and all women whomsoever he had known, 
and he saw them afar off and had pleasure 
356 



Aladore 

in them all : for he saw them not as doers 
of good and of evil but as pilgrims only, 
and every one walking by the light that was 
in him. 

Then he stretched out his hand and took 
the pall again to cover the face of the dead. 
And when he had covered it he stood a long 
time questioning : for the face which he had 
seen was his own face, and it was secret as 
silence is secret. 



357 



CHAPTER LVII. 

OF A BATTLE BY FIRE AND HOW YWAIN AND 
AITHNE WERE NO MORE SEEN IN PALADORE. 

THEN Ywain heard a voice which called him 
by his name, and it was the voice of Aithne, 
and she came to him and stood beside him. 
And he said to her: Come not nigh the 
bier, for there is one thereon which hath a 
secret in his face. And she said : I also 
have seen that face, for I saw it in a dream. 
And for the secret, be not troubled over- 
much, for the end is coming when all things 
shall be made plain. Then said Ywain : 
O beloved, I doubt not : but when I looked 
upon the dead I trembled, and I tremble 
yet, for the face will not be gone from me. 

Then Aithne came near to him and stood 
before him, and she laid her hands upon 
his forehead and closed up his eyes. And 
358 



Aladore 

immediately his care went from him, and he 
was covered round as with soft wings of 
peace. And afterwards Aithne drew down 
her hands from off his face, and he looked 
before him : and the bier was vanished and 
that which lay upon it, and the place was 
void. Howbeit the seven candles were not 
vanished, but they stood burning in seven 
great candlesticks, and the flames of them 
were like seven spearheads of gold. 

So they two stood hand in hand and looked 
upon the light : and in the same instant there 
came a noise of shouting from before the Hall, 
and they ran hastily and came forth upon the 
steps. And there beneath them was the 
whole place filled with torches and with 
spears, and they heard their enemies shout- 
ing fiercely against them. And they heard 
also the sound of bowstrings, and the 
arrows came thick about them : and upon 
every arrow was a pennon of quick flame, 
and they came through the night like fiery 
serpents flying. And some of the arrows 
entered into the Great Hall and lit upon the 
359 



A 1 adore 

beams and upon the carven wood : and the 
flame licked upon the wood, and there was 
no force to stay it. And Ywain saw well 
that the end was come, for there was no 
rescue, and the fire began to roar among the 
timbers of the roof: and in his heart was no 
more care, but he rejoiced with a new joy, 
such as he had not known in all his days. 
And he came forth before his people, and 
in his right hand he took his sword, and in 
his left hand he took the hand of his beloved. 
And he looked down upon the faces of his 
enemies and he laughed aloud and cried to 
them : Come near and take what is left of 
the night, for to-morrow is ours and all that 
is to come. 

Then the arrows flew more thickly, and 
the torches came onward with the spears, 
and the place was filled with flame and 
death. And Ywain and Aithne went swiftly 
down, and all their people with them : and 
the battle swayed about them heavily, and 
they were no more seen. 
360 



CHAPTER LVIII. 

OF A TOMB THAT WAS FOUND IN PALADORE, 
AND OF DIVERS SAYINGS THAT WERE 
HEARD CONCERNING IT. 

IN the same hour came a noise of shouting 
from the West, and Hubert and his broke in 
upon the battle. And they struck upon the 
spearmen as the wood-knife strikes upon the 
ashlings, so that there was neither resistance 
nor recovery, but all laid to length upon the 
ground. And when they had made an end 
of their enemies, then they sought busily to 
find their fellows, if there might be any with 
the life yet in them. And they found of 
them one here and another there, for they 
were buried beneath the slain : but Ywain 
361 



Aladore 

and Aithne they found not, neither sign of 
them, neither report. 

And when it was morning light then they 
made search again : and they came into the 
chapel wherein Aithne had been in sanctuary. 
And there also they sought, and when they 
came before the altar and saw the tomb that 
was thereby, then they found that which 
they sought not. For upon the tomb were 
two lying in semblance of a man and a 
woman : but they were fashioned of black 
bronze after the manner of the tombs of 
kings. And the faces of them were the 
faces of Ywain and Aithne, and they lay 
there as they had been sleeping. 

And they which saw them marvelled : and 
one said : They are here sleeping, and belike 
they will come again from their sleep. And 
another said : Nay, how shall this be ; for 
they were but man and woman, like unto 
ourselves. But Hubert rebuked them both, 
for he said: They are not here but other- 
where, and their sleep is but a semblance. 
362 



Aladore 

And doubtless the pilgrim hath achieved his 
pilgrimage, for he learned of his lady: and 
she came and went of her own magic, and 
had from her birth the Rhymer's heritage. 



THE END. 



PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS. 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



PR Newboldt (Sir) Henry John 
5103 Aladore 

N4A? 



