A Lecture on The Principle That ...
Author: Elliott, Ebenezer.
Publication info: More Verse and Prose . 220 p. London: Charles Fox, 1850.

A Lecture on The Principle That Poetry is Self-Communion [in, More Verse and Prose; By The Cornlaw Rhymer. In Two Volumes Vol. II]
[Page 125]
A LECTURE ON THE PRINCIPLE THAT POETRY IS SELF-COMMUNION. WRITTEN FOR THE HULL MECHANICS' INSTITUTE,
BY EBENEZER ELLIOTT. Young Men !—Poets, it is said, know nothing. What, then, can they teach? Nothing, of course, if the saying is true; but, assuming to be teachers, they may choose subjects on which something may be said by people who know nothing; and in this way, I believe, much business is done. I may be wrong in my opinions on that something, or that nothing, which is called poetry; but I have endeavoured to be right; and what I shall say to you on this occasion is my own, or made such by reflection, for I take no man's opinions on trust. I come, then, to tell you what poetry is—not what that word is—for, not having learned Greek, I don't know; and, if I tell you anything about poetry but what you have already felt to be true, I am unfit to address you on the subject: for what is poetry—what can it be—but the heart speaking to itself? This principle of earnest self-communion —on which all composition
[Page 126]
purporting to be poetry must stand, or, wanting it, fall—I now purpose to elucidate and confirm by examples; because it has been asserted by a great philosopher, 1 that poetry has no fixed principles—as if anything could exist without them; because a great living poet, 2 whose example refutes his theory, declares, if I understand him, that poetry is distinguished from prose by being written in verse, or, in other words, that verse is essential to poetry; and because the history of modern poets, as such, is the history of the revival of poetry in Britain, their distinguishing characteristic being poetry, or earnest common sense—whereas, some of their predecessors often wrote that dullest commonplace which common sense laughs to scorn. Now, this effect must have had a cause; for, as the earth could not move an inch, as a watch could not go at all, in opposition to the indisputable will of God, as declared in his mechanical laws—so only on the axis of its principle can move the universe of poetry, representing the Most High in the heart of man.
When a poet, ceasing to commune with himself, addresses others, he may be eloquent, but he is no longer poetical, unless he forget his audience; and in that case he is addressing himself,
[Page 127]
and not others. I never read a poet, from John Milton to Robert Nicol, who does not, negatively or positively, exemplify the principle that poetry is self-communion. Almost every page of Byron's “Don Juan” exemplifies it in both ways, and the writings of Moore too often in one way only. I think I shall be able to show you why it is that some ostentatious men of the highest talent cannot write a word of genuine poetry, while honest, modest, unpretending men utter it to their hearts every day of their lives.
But I must now bespeak your merciful consideration. I am not an actor. I came to read, not to impersonate. Unluckily, too, or luckily, perhaps, I am told by my fireside critics, that I do not read poetry, but sing it to a bad tune. I can, however, give reasons for the faith that is in me. Why should rhymes be written, if they are not to be made sensible to the ear? It is hard to deprive the poet of his music, often the only thing the poor fellow has of his own.
“Glory to God, and to the Empress! Ismail is ours!” Thus wrote Suwarrow to his petticoated master. “Powers Eternal! such names mingled!” says Byron. “These are the most tremendous words, since, Mene, Mene, Tekel, and Upharsin, that ever were written of swords.” And who that remembers the impious dispatch.
[Page 128]
does not utter this sentiment in his soul? It is true poetry . But when Byron goes on to say, as he does immediately afterwards, “that what Daniel read is short-hand of the Lord's;” and “that Suwarrow wrote his dispatch as a Polar melody, and set it,” &c., he may be witty, but for a moment he ceases to be a poet, and becomes a mere vain man, seeking the applause of others, with a misgiving in his bosom that he does not deserve it. Not so, when he continues, “I will teach the stones to rise against earth's tyrants.” He is then again a poet—he puts his head into his pocket, and lets his heart speak.
“When the dance gaed through the lighted ha' ”—and, “though this lady was fair, and yon lady was braw, and that lady the toast of a' the town”—poor Burns said in his heart, “Ye are na Mary Morrison,” the words he uttered were of the very essence of poetry, because his heart spoke them to itself.
When a husband, already widowed in soul, bends over the bed of the dying mother of his children, and, without uttering a single audible syllable, addresses to her every mournful and endearing epithet, his heart is conversing with itself—that is to say, with God, in the depths of our nature; and his feelings are poetry, because there can be no insincerity, no reserve about them,
[Page 129]
no possible misgiving, no starting back from the arms of Truth. They are poetical as the reply to them—the last wordless heart's look of the dying.
Orators sometimes unconsciously become poets. O'Connell was a great poet when Stanley said to him, “I love Ireland as well as you do,” and the “man of men,” pausing for a moment, replied, “I check myself—I will not utter another burning word; he who loves Ireland, cannot hate me . Let our hearts shake hands.”
There is a passage in one of Scott's novels, which finely exhibits the poetry of the heart, struggling with circumstance, and controlled by that feeling of deference which power and rank command: it is that passage in which Jeanie Deans implores the Queen of George II. to intercede with him for the life of her sister, Effie:—
“How did you travel up from Scotland, young woman?” said the Queen to Jeanie.
“Upon my foot mostly, madam.”
“What! all that immense way on foot! How far can you walk in a day?”
“Five and twenty miles, and a bittock.”
“I thought I was a good walker; but this shames me sadly.”
“May your Leddyship never hae sae weary a heart, that ye canna be sensible o' the weariness
[Page 130]
o' the limbs. I would have gone to the ends of the earth to save the life of John Porteous, or any other man in his unhappy condition. He is dead, and gane to his place. But my sister—my poor sister Effie—still lives, though her days and hours are numbered. She still lives, and a word of the King's mouth might restore her to a broken-hearted old man, who never forgot to pray that his Majesty might be blessed with a long and prosperous reign, and that his throne, and that of his posterity, might be established in righteousness. O Madam, if ye ever kenn'd what it was to sorrow for and with a sinful and suffering creature, whose mind is sae tossed that she can neither be called fit to live or die, have some compassion on our misery! Save an honest house from dishonour, and an unhappy girl not eighteen years of age from an early and dreadful death. Alas! it is not when we sleep soft and wake merrily ourselves that we think on other people's sufferings. Our hearts are waxed light within us then, and we are for righting our ain wrangs and fighting our ain battles. But when the hour of trouble comes—and seldom may it visit your Leddyship!—and when the hour of death comes, that comes to high and low—and long and late may it be yours!—oh, my Leddy, then it is nae what we hae done for oursels, but what we hae
[Page 131]
done for others, that we think on maist pleasantly. And the thought that ye hae interfered to save the poor thing's life, will be sweeter in that hour, come when it may, than if a word of your mouth could hang the whole Porteous mob at the tail of ae tow.”
This is poetry and eloquence—the heart and the head—the soul's self-communion, and the mind addressing another.
Perhaps there is nothing in the world so poetical as the love of a mother for her child; it is altogether unreserved. Honesty is always poetical, because it is in earnest—it means what it says— it does what it has to do with its whole heart—in word and deed, it is sincere. And whoever inspects human nature closely, will find that the least trust-worthy is the least poetical of his acquaintance; because to him the love of the true, the beautiful, the good, if it visit him at all, is a bird of passage—it is seldom homed, never bosomed with him. Poetry, then, is sincerity in earnest—impassioned truth— the heart , not the head, speaking to itself . If you think I am wrong, read for yourselves the introductory lines of the “Lay of the Last Minstrel,” which remarkably confirm my opinion; our second Shakspere having entered into the feelings of his old bard, with all the heart's unreserve and self-forgetfulness.
[Page 132]
But we will now ask the dead who cannot die , what two things differ more than the poetry of truth, and that of convention? “Here oft,” says Burns—
“Here oft, by sweet endearing stealth,
   Shall meet the loving pair,
Despising worlds and all their wealth,
   As empty, idle care.
The flowers shall vie, in all their charms,
   The hour of heaven to grace,
And birks extend their fragrant arms,
   To screen the dear embrace.
Here, haply, too, at vernal morn,
   Some musing bard may stray,
And eye the smoking dewy lawn,
   And misty mountain grey.”
Contrast, now, these simple lines with a farfamed passage from Moore:—
“Now over Syria's land of roses
Softly the light of eve reposes,
And, like a glory, the broad sun
Hangs over sainted Lebanon,
Whose head in wintry grandeur towers
And whitens with eternal sleet;
While Summer, in a vale of flowers,
Is sleeping rosy at his feet.”
This description must have great merit of some
[Page 133]
sort, for it has been praised as far as our language is known; but, with the exception of one word from Milton, and another from Homer, it is not poetry, for it is not truth, The light of evening is light in transition, not in repose, for repose is rest. The remaining lines (though three of them, if they stood alone, are good) do not convey to my mind any adequate idea of a mountain older than death, frowning over the stern wildness of arid and sun-smitten regions, spread in immensity beneath and around. Moore was not writing from the heart, nor for it, when he compounded this description. It is precisely such a one as a man of extraordinary cleverness, without a single home-thought in his soul, or an atom of poetry in his nature, might have made to order, and per receipt and inventory. It is as pretty as if it had this moment been taken out of a French milliner's sample-box of artificial flowers, newly scented. But I do not like dead things, not even roses. If Moore's National Melodies themselves are without vitality, and if the author of such things can conquer time, what writer need fear oblivion? I cannot help feeling, when I read his “Loves of the Angels,” that, if it had been fashionable in his time for men to wear false hair and ribbons, he would have placed on the heads of his celestial dandies, periwigs of the most approved twizzle,
[Page 134]
and on each wing, a shoulder-knot of the bestbred pink and blue. I grant his inimitable instinct of versification; but the noblest poetry under heaven, in the prose of the Bible, laughs to scorn the rhymester's skill; and I contend that the versifying and the poetic power are frequently found in inverse ratios to each other. The perusal of Moore's compositions, in prose and verse alike, is to me a humiliating task, like that of a full-grown man-child, listlessly seeking, in a box filled with moss, for pretty insects, not worth finding. How unlike him are earnest, conscientious Cowper, and fervid, intense, passion-souled, all-hearted Burns!
It is impossible, however, not to admire the elegance of the lines which, for two reasons, I have quoted from Moore. Many persons suppose that elegance is essential to the perfection of poetical composition; but, so far is this from being the case, that beauty itself is not essential to poetry, except inasmuch as beauty is truth. Poetry, like truth, is a common flower. God has sown it over the earth, like his daisies, sprinkled with tears or glowing in the sun, even as he places the crocus and the March frosts together, “and beautifully mingles life and death.” Wherever there are hearts that can feel, it is found—in the budding rose and the fading leaf, in the palace
[Page 135]
and the cottage, in the workshop and the jail. Hearken, and I will recite to you a poem of God's making! But don't raise your expectations too high. It is only too true a tale of a young woman who became an inmate of a workhouse, after having known better days. She had saved from the wreck of her prosperity a silk gown, which she was allowed to keep locked in a box, and which she carefully examined every day. At the end of about three years, she was observed, with the gown in her hands, rushing from the place where it was usually deposited, and exclaiming, “O poor Jane! what wilt thou do?” She had discovered in the gown a failing thread. Nobody else could perceive it. Raising the gown in her trembling hands, she asked her companions in misfortune, if the thread would break. From that fatal day, she put the same question to every person who entered the workhouse. She put it to me, not many days before she died; for, whenever she could get out of the house, she wandered in the neighbouring lanes, muttering, in a whisper, “O poor Jane! what wilt thou do?” and if a passenger approached, she would look up earnestly in his face, and, placing her finger under the failing thread, ask him if it would break. “Will it break? Oh, will it break?” Alas! it broke! And with it broke her heart.
[Page 136]
For the last link which bound her affections to the beautiful past, in which alone she lived, was broken; her sole dependence was a thread—and it failed! But the grave did not refuse her an asylum: she died, I am sorry to say, by her own hand. Now, though any workhouse could furnish incidents as affecting as these, let me not be told that, if no man had condescended to speak or write a word about them, they would not still have been, in principle, genuine poetry. How could they have been otherwise, written as they were and are, by our Almighty Father himself, on his tablet of the universe? Think you the record would perish, if it did not bear man's sign manual? Think you that God turns in disgust from the memorial of his desolate daughter's sufferings, to look on the blood-stained trophies of a Wellington, or the tawdry splendours of a Heliogabalus? No, no. When He required of her the failing thread, she had nothing left but Him and the grave; and He makes no erring estimate of the widow's mite, when, willingly or unwillingly, she casts into the treasury all she hath.
We have heard much of the dependence of poetry on style. But poetry is independent of language itself. The heart which a thread broke proves this. Indeed, that style which is called
[Page 137]
poetical, is by no means peculiar to verse; and, in prose and verse alike, nine times in ten, it is disjoined from poetry. To show you that the poetry which has found words, depends not on style but on sentiment, allow me to quote from the New Testament a few words known to you all:—
“And, as Paul spake for himself, Festus said, with a loud voice, ‘Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad.’
“But he said, ‘I am not mad , most noble Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness. For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak freely; for these things were not done in a corner. King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.’
“Then Agrippa said unto Paul, ‘Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.’ And Paul said, ‘I would to God that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds .’ ”
This, you will say, is prose; but I say it is dramatic poetry, the poetry of action. Now, it might be the language of action without being poetry, just as a prosaic lecture becomes dramatic without being poetical, if the audience loudly
[Page 138]
praise or loudly blame it; for, while they give the lecturer time to breathe by interrupting him, they dramatise his discourse, making it for the moment a part of themselves, and, though dead, a living thing. But, if the language of Paul might be that of action, without being poetry, what constitutes it poetry? The last three words— “except these bonds.” Plainer words were never used; but they were spoken from the heart, by a man who had suffered injustice, a man whose wisdom was not derived from books, but written on his heart by the finger of God.
I hold in my hand a true poem, which the heart of an American bard has sent to mine, on the wings of the press, over 3000 miles of sea:—
   “Come home!
Come to the hearts that love thee—to the eyes
   That beam in brightness, but to gladden thine;
Come where fond thoughts like holiest incense rise,
    Where cherish'd Memory rears her altar's shrine!
Come to the hearth-stone of thy early days;
   Come to the ark, like the o'er-wearied dove;
Come with the sunlight of thy heart's warm rays ;
   Come to the fireside circle of thy love!
                     Brother, come home!
It is not home without thee! the lone seat
   Is still unclaim'd where thou wast wont to be;
In every echo of returning feet,
   In vain we list to what should herald thee.
[Page 139]
Would I could send my spirit o'er the deep,
   Would I could wing it like a bird to thee,
To commune with thy thoughts, to fill thy sleep
   With these unwearying words of misery—
                     Brother, come home!”
But this true poem is not all poetry. It is least effective where most poetical, as the saying is. The fifth line is pompous nonsense. The eighth is not even head-work—it is elbow-work; a tailor might have forked it out of a dictionary with his bodkin. The words, “Brother, come home! it is not home without thee!” are worth all the rest of the poem—they are the poem; Shakspeare would have written them only.
Wordsworth declares, in his celebrated preface, that it is the business of poetry to represent the shows of things—not things as they are, but as they seem to be. Luckily, however, for him and us, his practice proves that it is the business of poetry to represent the realities of things, by speaking from the heart with all sincerity. But I will quote from him by and by; for, since I came into this town, a poem has been put into my hands by a gentleman present, which is full of hometruths, so affectingly real, that I think no person, after hearing it, can be in doubt as to what it is that constitutes poetry, and “passeth show.”
[Page 140]
LINES ON A STATUE OF HIS DEAD CHILD. BY RICHARD LANE, ESQ.
I saw thee in thy beauty! Bright phantom of the past,
I saw thee for a moment—'twas the first time and the last;
And, though years since have glided by of mingled bliss and care,
I never have forgotten thee, thou fairest of the fair!
I saw thee in thy beauty! Thou wast graceful as the fawn,
When, in wantonness of glee, it sports along the lawn;
I saw thee seek the mirror—and when it met thy sight,
The very air was musical with thy burst of wild delight.
I saw thee in thy beauty! with thy sister at thy side—
She a lily of the valley, thou a rose in all its pride;
I looked upon thy mother—there was triumph in her eyes;
And I trembled for her happiness, for grief had made me wise.
I saw thee in thy beauty! with one hand among her curls—
The other with no gentle grasp had seized a string of pearls;
She felt the pretty trespass, and she chid thee, though she smiled;
And I knew not which was loveliest—the mother or the child.
[Page 141]
I saw thee in thy beauty! and a tear came to mine eye,
As I press'd thy rosy cheek to mine, and thought even thou could'st die:
My home was like a summer bower, by thy joyous presence made,
But I only saw the sunshine, and felt alone the shade.
I see thee in thy beauty! for there thou seem'st to lie,
In slumber resting peacefully!—but, oh, the change of eye—
That still serenity of brow—those lips that breathe no more—
Proclaim thee but a mockery of what thou wast before.
I see thee in thy beauty! with thy waving hair at rest,
And thy busy little fingers folded lightly on thy breast;
But thy merry dance is over, and thy little race is run,
And the mirror that reflected two, can now give back but one.
I see thee in thy beauty! with thy mother by thy side—
But her loveliness is faded, and quell'd her glance of pride;
The smile is absent from her lip, and absent are the pearls,
And a cap almost of widowhood conceals her envied curls.
I see thee in thy beauty! as I saw thee on that day—
But the mirth that gladden'd then my home, fled with thy life away;
I see thee lying motionless upon th' accustomed floor,
But my heart hath blinded both my eyes , and I can see no more.
[Page 142]
The departure of Paul from Miletus, as related in the Acts of the Apostles, is genuine narrative poetry. What constitutes it such? Its earnest truth. I am not acquainted with any composition in prose or verse, that more beautifully illustrates the goodness of God, in the use of that great instrument of his mercy, pain. Is not labour His right hand? Are not all our virtues born of those necessities, which He has not inflicted, but bestowed? So thought he “who coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel, but laboured with his hands to support the weak; remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’ ” “Ye know,” said Paul, “from the first day that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you in all seasons, serving the Lord with all humility and with many tears; and how I kept back nothing that was profitable to you, but taught you publicly and from house to house. And now, behold! I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city that bonds and affliction abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus,
[Page 143]
to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And now, behold! I know that ye all among whom I have gone preaching the kingdon of God, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure; for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers; for I know this, that, after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter among you, not sparing the flock. Therefore watch, and remember that for the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one of you day and night with tears. And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel; ye yourselves know that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have showed you all thing, how that so labouring you ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’
“And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all. And they wept sore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which he
[Page 144]
spoke, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him unto the ship.”
When I say that verse is not poetry, and that prose may be, I utter no paradox, nor have I any cause to gain, any battle to win; for poetry wins its own battles. This age, fertile in great poets, may not have produced one who is singly equal to Shakspeare; but it has produced two, whose joint merits are a counterpoise to Shakspeare's utmost worth—Scott, in characterisation and poetry; and Bulwer, in poetry, intellectuality, wit, and felicity of expression. The author of “Eugene Aram” is a great epic poet. His novels abound in poetry, that speaks, like Scott's, through the heart to the eye, and, like, Dante's, to the inmost soul.
Take example from his “Rienzi,” describing the page of that personage, hastening, too late, to beg the life of his father, whom he himself had, in ignorance, betrayed:—
“As one frantic, as one whom a fiend possesses or pursues, he rushed from the convent, he flew through the desolate streets. The death-bell came, first indistinct, then loud, upon his ear. Every sound seemed to him like the curse of God; on, on—he passed the more deserted quarter; crowds swept before him—he was mingled with the living stream—delayed, pushed
[Page 145]
back—thousands on thousands, around, before him. Breathless, gasping, he still pressed on— he forced his way—he heard not—he saw not— all was like a dream. Up burst the sun over the distant hills!—the bell ceased! From right to left he pushed aside the crowd; his strength was as a giant's. He neared the fatal spot. A dead hush lay like a heavy air over the multitude. He heard a voice as he pressed along, deep and clear —it was the voice of his father!—it ceased—the audience breathed heavily—they murmured—they swayed to and fro. On, on, went Angelo Villani. The guards of the senator stopped his way; he dashed aside their pikes—he eluded their grasp— he pierced the armed barrier—he stood on the Place of the Capitol. ‘Hold, hold!’ he would have cried—but his tongue clove to his lips. He beheld the gleaming axe—he saw the bended neck. Ere another breath passed his lips, a ghastly and trunkless face was raised on high— Walter de Montreal was no more!
“Villani saw—swooned not—shrunk not— breathed not!—but he turned his eyes from that lifted head, dropping gore, to the balcony, in which, according to custom, sate, in solemn pomp, the senator of Rome—and the face of that young man was as the face of a demon!
“‘Ha!’ said he, muttering to himself, and
[Page 146]
recalling the words of Rienzi, seven years before, ‘ Blessed art thou who hast no blood of kindred to avenge !’”
Almost all Barry Cornwall's serious lyrics confirm the principle that poetry is self-communion. How many hopeless idlers, trading gamblers, lovers who dare not tell their loves, and mourners whose loves are in the grave—how many reckless and desperate, and broken and breaking hearts, are there at this moment around us, all eagerly, but each in its own-way, drinking King Death's coal-black wine!
“King Death was a rare old fellow—
He sate where no sun could shine ,
And stretched out his hand so yellow,
With a glass of his coal-black wine:
Hurrah! the coal-black wine!
There came to him many a maiden
Whose eyes had forgot to shine,
And widows with grief o'er-laden,
For a glass of his sleepy wine:
Hurrah! for the rare old fellow,
Who laugh'd till his eyes dropp'd brine,
As he stretched out his hand so yellow,
And pledg'd them in Death's dark wine:
Ha, ha! the coal-black wine!” 3
[Page 147]
Behold, with the eyes of your hearts, the statue of the dying gladiator, and then read Byron's description of it. They are both poetry. Is silence poetry, then? Oh, certainly. I am reading Byron's description now, in my soul, though to you I have not yet uttered a syllable of it.
“I see before me the gladiator lie:
He leans upon his hand; his manly brow
Consents to death, but conquers agony;
And his droop'd head sinks gradually low;
And, through his side, the last drops, ebbing slow
From the red gash, fall heavy, one by one,
Like the first of a thunder shower;—and now
The arena swims around him—he is gone,
Ere ceas'd the shout that hail'd the wretch who won.
He heard it, but he heeded not— his eyes
Were with his heart , and that was far away;
But where his rude hut on the Danube lay,
There were his young barbarians all at play,
There was their Dacian mother —he, their sire,
Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday!
All this gushed with his blood . Shall he expire,
And unavenged? ‘Arise, ye Goths!’”
But this, you may say, is the poetry of noise. Why so? The words “Arise, ye Goths!” would be equally effective, if uttered in the lowest possible tone. The deep feeling of hatred which they breathe, might not actually have made its whisper
[Page 148]
audible. Perhaps, the dying man could not have made it audible. But suppose yourselves present at the spectacle, with a brother of the Dacian, disguised among his enemies! How would he express those words? If sorrow and rage did not conquer prudence, he would choke them in his heart; but, if he forgot his danger, he would start up, the representative of indignant human nature, and, bidding long-outraged nations redress themselves, shout, as I have done, “Arise, ye Goths!” Two individuals, then, might recite this poetry differently, yet both well—that is to say each according to his nature? Certainly they might. Poetry, then, is not alike to all? Certainly it is not. To some persons it does not exist; to those who have no hearts , it is a nonentity. In matters of taste, then, let there be no dictation. Who shall tell that wonderful instrument, the human heart, in what particular key it shall play its tunes?
To show you that the stillest thoughts are often the deepest and the strongest, I will quote a few lines of what is called mere description, from the most thoughtful of poets—Wordsworth:—
“It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
Is sinking down in his tranquillity;
[Page 149]
The gentleness of heav'n is on the sea:
Listen!— the mighty Being is awake !
And doth with his eternal motion make
A sound like thunder, everlastingly.”
One short extract more, from the same “mighty” poet, who, like the ocean he describes, speaketh “everlastingly:”—
“The clouds are split asunder, and I see
The clear moon, and the glory of the heavens.
There! in a black-blue vault she sails along,
Follow'd by multitudes of stars, that, small,
And sharp, and bright, along the dark abyss
Drive as she drives. How fast they wheel away,
Yet vanish not! The wind is in the tree,
But they are silent!—still they roll along,
Immeasurably distant; and the vault
Still deepens its unfathomable depth.”
To me, these words express the very soul of the scenes described; and it is the power of expressing that soul which constitutes a man a poet. If you will look up thoughtfully to the heavens, on a clear but tempestuous night, “when the wind is in the tree, and the stars are silent,” your minds will speak to your hearts, and the scene to both, and, for the moment, you will be sublime poets. Every man is poetical, when, feeling strongly, he reflects deeply. And if there are (which I doubt)
[Page 150]
men who cannot communicate the soul's electricity to the souls of others—if the heart ever fails to make itself understood—depend upon it, there is some misgiving in the speaker, some want of sincerity, something reserved or suppressed. Then begins the “strife of poor humanity's afflicted will, struggling in vain with ruthless destiny;” and that strife constitutes the moral tragic, as opposed to the physical. “Black!” says Truth, smiling through her tears—“not yet, not yet, my poor child, can I take thee to my bosom. Repent! thou hast offended: the want of a single ray of light makes thee all darkness.” Alas, young men! there are worse misfortunes than those which accident inflicts upon us—even those direst ones which our want of honesty inflicts upon ourselves!
To the principle that poetry is self-communion, perhaps you will still object, that there is one description of poetry—the metaphorical—to which it does not apply. But, unless a metaphor be sentimental—that is, unless it be, at least, an image and a sentiment—it cannot be poetical, though it may be illustrative. We feel the metaphor in Wordsworth, when he says of the placid sea, “The mighty Being is awake .” The metaphor is perfect. It is an image, a thought, and a sentiment. To the perfection of a metaphor,
[Page 151]
these three conditions are necessary— it must be, at once, an image, a thought, and a sentiment : and the more complete a metaphor is, the more poetical it is. No figurative author can live, unless his figures possess two of the three requisites; the metaphors of the highest minds possess them all. There are men without number who can pour out metaphors with amazing fluency, and such men are commonly mistaken for men of poetical minds: it would be as correct to say that ice is of the poetical temperament. Such men are utterly unimaginative, cold in heart, and barren of soul. Good writers and good speakers never use a metaphor, if plain words will express their meaning as briefly and as well. The late Lord Castlereagh, of liberal and diplomatic memory, was a metaphorical speaker; but his mind was not even “the mind of his own eyes”—his images were pictures of nothing—yet some of them have obtained notoriety, at least, if not fame; and they who never saw “the great statesman now no more,” may remember his “fundamental feature.” Truths which have become proverbs, are almost always expressed metaphorically. Money makes the old mare trot . The picture is before you! But why does money make the old mare trot? Because the mare cannot work without food, and food cannot be procured without an equivalent,
[Page 152]
the representative of which is money. This proverb, then, possesses two of the conditions of vitality— it is an image, and thought ; it speaks to the intellect, and to the fancy, but not to the heart : it is not poetry. But the kind-hearted among you can make poetry of it, by thinking of the cheerful gratitude of the poor old mare! Our greatest masters of metaphor in prose and verse, are Shakspeare, Junius, and a writer whom I will not name, because, though he is the author of one of the very best books in the world, it is doubted by some good men whether, on the whole, his writings have done good or harm. We all remember Shakspeare's “unwedgeable and gnarled oak.” This metaphor “is not one,” do you say? It is perfect, however, as Wordsworth's. It is an image, a thought, and a sentiment . It brings before the imagination the instruments and the action—before the mind, the stubborn texture of the substance acted upon—before the heart , the almost eternal struggle of the all but immortal tree with time and death. “The plumage of the noble bird,” says Junius, when strangely endeavouring to prove that the trappings of royalty are necessary to the security of the throne—“The plumage of the noble bird supports his flight; strip him of his beauty, and you fix him to the earth.” In this sentence he says
[Page 153]
more, and says it better, than he could, without the metaphor , in ten times the number of words; and, the metaphor being perfect, is poetical in the highest degree. During the war of our oligarchy with the colonies, Lord Howe addressed a proclamation to the Americans, bemoaning the insulted dignity of the crown, (meaning the lords and squires,) but saying not a word about slaughtered brethren, widowed mothers, and orphan children. The nameless writer to whom I have alluded, and who was employed by congress to answer the proclamation, said, in reply, “He pities the plumage, but forgets the dying bird.” The same author, having shown that governments hitherto have done more harm than good, and that, if men were wise and good, legislation would be unnecessary, says, “Government, like dress, is a badge of lost innocence: it is a temple built on the ruins of paradise.” Need I now tell you that these prose metaphors are poetry? They want not the aid of verse to constitute them such; they require not rhyme to make them remembered; the world will not let them be forgotten: possessing all the three requisites of vitality, as metaphors, they are poetry in the highest; and, therefore , they can never die. Mere metaphors, then, are not poetry. On the contrary, those writers who use them most, are the unpoetical.
[Page 154]
Their metaphors may hide the extent of their mental poverty, but cannot place before us, in mournful grandeur, that fallen angel “whose stature reached the sky, and on whose crest sate horror plumed .” It is easy to liken swiftness to a dove's wing; but to make poetry of the image, you must put your hearts into it; and the poetry will be none the worse if you put your heads into it also; for poetry is truth—the heart's truth. What were the words uttered by Mary of Scotland, when the first approached the window of her prison at Fotheringay? “Oh, that I had the wings of a dove, that I might flee away and be at rest !” Is this poetry? Ay, and such poetry as is to be found only in the pages of inspiration. Perhaps the very highest poetry never yet found words—never yet was expressed metaphorically, or otherwise; for it is not the melodious sound, but the inexpressive feeling; not the angel's wing, but the truthful spirit, eternal in its truth. The Almighty himself may not have uttered it; but it is homed in our hearts, be they bad or good, if we have hearts, for truth is there undeceivable; yes, undeceivable, for, though the heart often deceives the head, no man's head ever yet, for a single moment, deceived his heart. Castlereagh's heart was not deceived, when conscience gave him a crimson necklace; Cardinal Beaufort's heart was
[Page 155]
not deceived, when he died and made no sign. The truth was in their hearts, but in their hearts the truth was not hallowed; their wicked minds were always warned, and they believed—and, at last, they trembled. But now for the end. If it be sinful to waste anything, why should we waste this lecture? Young men! my hair is already grey. I have lived in eventful times, and witnessed marvellous changes. You will witness changes still more marvellous. William Hazlitt, using a metaphor which is perfect , said, in prose which is poetry —“That the great world of electricity lies all undiscovered before us; like America, asleep for centuries by the side of her unconscious sister .” It may not be in the destiny of any one of you, to invent and perfect a machine which shall be worked without cost by the electric fluid, and supersede the giant power of steam; but if, in my course through life, any truth has been more strongly impressed upon my mind than another, it is this—that (did they but know it) men possess collectively, and therefore individually, the greatest of all powers, except that of Him who is, and was, and shall be— I mean the power of co-operation. Use that power, as true poets write their verses, earnestly, and without selfishness; let the exercise of it be “its own exceeding great reward;” use it in a
[Page 156]
manner worthy of the living image of the everlasting God, remembering that the great family of man is one family, and that God is its father. And then, if any true-hearted man tells you that he does not understand poetry, tell him, in reply, that it is the business of his life, and that he practises it every day. “For wisdom lives with children round her knees.” And this will be the first great discovery which honest co-operation will enable you to make. The most valuable things in the world are men; and when the majority of you think so, wo be to them who shall dare to throw away a man! You will, then, hear no more of emigration-committees. But now, mark! He who compels, or willingly suffers, a human being to remain in ignorance, does much worse than throw away a man; he converts a man into a beast, fit only to beget creatures destined to live and perish miserably— creatures without minds , and therefore not men! In furtherance, then, of that co-operation which can alone put an end to such wickedness and misery, may God hallow and bless in your thoughtful hearts the truth , which is poetry; not that barren understanding which meaneth no evil, but that only fearless and truly pious one, which meaneth good ! I must now conclude this long exemplification of a principle which is perhaps
[Page 157]
of little importance, but which must be of some, or you would not have come to hear me talk about it. I thank you for your thanks, your applause—and your silence, the best applause; and surely I have reason to be proud and thankful, if I have at all deserved the approbation of the townsmen of Daniel Sykes and Andrew Marvel.
E. E.
NOTES
1 Adam Smith.
2 James Montgomery.
3 In some instances, as in this, I quote from memory, thinking it best to do so—the most vital part of an author being probably that which we remember.
$$$
