uictoria R'S" 



Victorian 
823 
Lll6a 
1886 



COLLECTION 

OF VICTORIAN BOOKS 

AT 

BRIGHAM YOUNG = 

UNIVERSITY 



O 
CM 
CM 
CO 





'iht-TfuA^ D^-J)UA t^ut^tlih. nl ij 



n 



A VOYAGE TO OTHER WOELDS. 



ALERIEL; 



OB, 



A VOYAGE TO OTHER WORLDS. 

BY 

Rev. W. S. LACH-SZYRMA, M.A. 

VICAR OF NEWLYN ST. PETEE, 

author op 

"a voice from anothbb wobld; " "a shobt histobt op pekzancm," etc.; 

"hEBOES of the DAT ;" " PLEAS FOB THE FAITH," ETC. ETC. 
WITH MAPS OF MARS AND VENUS. 



SECOND EDITION. 



LONDON : 

WYMAN & SONS, 74-76, GKEAT QUEEN STREET, 

lincoln's-inn fields, w.c. 

1886. 

All Rights Reserved. 



PRESS NOTICES. 



" The book is curious, and not a little mystical." — Bookseller. 

" We hope the tale will have the success which its merit 
fully deserves." — Literary Churchman. 

" This very fantastic tale has been written with a fixed 
purpose." — Notes and Queries. 

" The story is very skilfully and ingeniously told, and as a 
speculation in science is consistent and not improbable." — 
Yorkshire Post. ♦? 

" Portions of the book remind us of Swedenborg, Fontenelle, 
and Lord Lytton .... The story throughout, however, is 
curious, and very well told." — Liverpool Mercury. 

" No ordinary reader will rise from its perusal without enjoy- 
ment, and without having gained in a most attractive form a 
better knowledge of the wandering stars." — Western Daily 
Mercury. 

" The author never offends, and the moral lesson inculcated 
is a good one." — Lloyd's. 

" The author has allowed his fancy to have free play, while 
his speculations are based on the known facts of Astronomy, 
and he has imparted a moral and religious tone into his amusing 
and somewhat fantastic tales." — Church Times. 



THE LILRARY 

BRIGHAM YOUi\G LNIVERSriT 

PROVO, UT VH 



PEEFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION. 



I AM, on the whole, pleased with the reception of 
this little book by the literary world. It has 
received less adverse criticism than I anticipated. 
The serious side of the book, the underlying theory 
of the Cosmos, has, however, not generally been 
noticed. Although seemingly light and imagina- 
tive, this work is the result of many years^ study of 
Nature's laws, and my meditations upon Creation 
have led me to a theory which I have only ventured 
to lay before the public in this popular and ima- 
ginative form. 

This theory is that life is well-nigh universal, 
and that, as we see the elements (in the spectro- 
scope) which are found upon the earth, prevailing in 
distant stars in divers combinations, so the forms 
of life which are found on earth, prevail in other 
worlds, but under various kinds of development. 
At present, man knows of two worlds of life — the 
Land and the Aquatic, to which we may add the 
worlds of past ages in Palgeontology. But, both on 
land and sea, we find the same general conception 
(so to speak) of flora and fauna. The sea has its 
plants (in the algse), its moluscs, its insects (in the 
Crustacea), its vertebrata (in the fishes and cetacea). 
So in past ages life, both by sea and land, seems to 
have been complete : plants, insects, vertebrate 
animals existing even in secondary formations. 



IV ALERIEL. 

Let US now by the symbols A, B, C, D represent 
the four great types of life. 

A.Vertebrata| p,,S: Iw. | ^A- «--'- 

B. Articulata AB. Birds. 

^ ,^ „ { AC. Reptiles and 

^- Mollusca I Amphibia. 

D. Radiata and Zoophytes ... A.D. Fishes. 

I A. Dicotyledons. C. Ferns & Cryptogamous 
In Plants < Plants. 

I B. Monocotyledons. D. Algae. 

Now, may not these types be found on other 
worlds, distributed and developed according to the 
fitness of their habitats ? I have supposed the 
type :— 

AB. in Mercury, which is similar to Venus in many ways. 
(With this I have not dealt in this work.) 

AB. in Venus. Mountainous ; dense atmosphere ; moderate 

gravitation ; varied climates, suited to birds or flying 

beings, able to traverse space easily ; plants, perhaps 

monocotyledons. 
AA. in Earih^s Land. (Perhaps with element of B for man 

as a biped, has some slight corporeal connection with 

both the quadrumana and birds.) 
AD. in Earth's Ocean. Fish type and Algse. 

AC. in Earth in ancient state in secondary formations. 

More marshy, therefore reptilian and amphibious 
types prevailed. 
AA. in Mars. Moderate atmosphere ; few mountains ; 
surface, mostly land. Mammals, like carnivora. 

AD. in Jupiter. Great gravitation ; surface, mostly fluid. 

Plants, algae. Animals of fish type. 
AC. in Saturn. Antique world, like Earth in secondary 
epochs. Uranus and Neptune as yet little known in 
their physical formation. 

This is the conception of Nature I have thought 
of : Unity in Diversity, but all showing the same 
Divine Law-giver ; life developed under the same 
laws, and united in its higher forms to rational 
intelligences,, like Man. 



PEEFACE. 



WHEN children are shown the wonders of 
the heavens, for the first time, in the 
telescope, their natural exclamation usually 
is, '' Are there any people up there in those 
planets ?" 

It is an old question, and the affirmative 
answer is rather supported than overturned by 
the discoveries of modern science. When we 
are told that everything almost that we can see 
on Earth — yea, every particle of dust — has once 
lived, we are inclined to think that the same 
law which seems to be the dominant law of 
Earth, i,e., that nearly all things on Earth's 
surface either have lived or are now living, 
may perchance be the general law of the 
universe. 

Our Earth is singular in nothing. In size, 
the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and 



vi A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

Neptune are mucli larger ; Mercury, Mars, the 
planetoids, and the satellites much smaller; 
Venus, our twin-sister world, almost the same. 
In form, the Earth is nearly a sphere, and so 
are all, or nearly all, its fellow-worlds ; some are 
more flattened at the poles, and some less. 
The Earth is enveloped in an atmosphere, — so it 
seems are Yenus, Mercury, Mars, and probably 
the giant planets Jupiter and Saturn. The 
earth has continents and oceans, — so have Mars 
and (probably) Yenus. The Earth has snow in 
winter, — so it seems has Mars. The Earth 
possesses a satellite, — so do Mars, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus, Neptune possess their satel- 
lites. In fact, the Earth is peculiar in nothing 
which we might expect to trace in other worlds. 
Why should we suppose it to be the sole abode 
of life ? This subject has been much discussed. 
Not to speak of the older astronomers, in our 
own time Proctor, Flammarion, Brewster, and 
Powell have discussed it. I must own that the 
objections have ever seemed to me to be most 
frivolous. Can this grain on the sands of 
infinity — this little planet of an unimportant 
system — be the sole abode of vitality ? 

But, if there be life, what life ? This is a 
question which lias occupied many of the 
noblest of human minds. Man cannot know 



Preface. ' vii 

absolutely, in this his Earth-life, what the life 
of other worlds may be. 

On Nature's Alps I stand 
And see a thousand firmaments beneath, — 
A thousand systems as a thousand grains; 
So much a stranger and so late arrived, 
How shall man's curious spirit not inquire 
What are the natives of this world sublime, 
Of this so distant interrestrial sphere, 
Where mortal untranslated never stray'd "? *" 

Probably the best conception of this matter 
is that suggested by Messrs. Nasmyth and 
Carpenter, in their valuable work on the Moon, 
where they say, ''Is it not conceivable that the 
protogerms of life pervade the whole universe, 
and have been located on every planetary body 
therein ?" In the Moon, circumstances seem to 
be unfavourable to life ; but it is a mere begging 
the question to assume that this is the law of 
every orb in heaven save this earth of ours. 

In the following tale or speculation (as you 
choose to take it), although apparently I have 
given no rein to the imagination, yet I have 
endeavoured to avoid as much as possible any 
conflict with established scientific discoveries ; 
and, indeed, have based my speculations on the 



* Young. 



viii A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

known facts of astronomy, only allowing the 
fancy to have free play where science is, and 
must be, unable, in its present state, to answer 
the questions here considered. If there are 
any statements which are found to be irrecon- 
cilable with any of the recent discoveries of 
inductive science, I shall be much obliged to 
any scientific reader to draw my attention to 
them, and they shall be corrected in a future 
edition. 

It will be noticed by the reader that, to give 
it more human interest, and also to ventilate 
some practical subjects, there are two Utopias 
in this book — the one in which there is a specu- 
lation as to a perfect society of perfect happi- 
ness, such as may be regarded as a meditation 
on the possible joys of a future state ; the other 
a more practical Utopia, implying the tendencies 
of human progress, and suggesting improve- 
ments for human society as it now exists. The 
other worlds beside these two (Venus and Mars) 
have no special earth-lesson to teach ; they are 
little more than bold deductions from observa- 
tions or probabilities suggested by them. 

I have by no means assumed, as some 
extreme partisans of the habitability of other 
worlds are w^ont to do, that all the planets are 
inhabited. I rather suppose that Earth at 



Prpface, ix 

present is merely an example of one phase of 
planetary development, i.e., one in which life 
can exist ; that some worlds are like it (though 
none in precisely the same condition) ; that 
others are as yet in a primitive state, just as 
the Earth was in the period of, say, the 
secondary formations ; that others, however, 
are more highly developed than this world ; 
and, finally, that in others life is extinct. This 
ideal is much the same as that of Oersted, 
who says : '' On some planets the creatures 
may be possibly on a far larger scale, on others 
far smaller, than on our own ; on some, per- 
haps, they are formed of less solid matter, or 
may, indeed, approach the transparency of 
ether ; or, on others again, be formed of much 
denser matter. The rational creatures on some 
of the planets may be capable of receiving far 
quicker, more acute, and more distinct impres- 
sions than on the Earth. We may imagine that 
there are reasonable beings with weaker facul- 
ties than our own" (as I have in these pages 
supposed to be the case) ; '' but, if we properly 
appreciate our present distance from the aspi- 
rations of our reasoii, we feel compelled to 
acknowledge that an endless number of degrees 
of development may exist above the point we 
have reached." 



X A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

I have further supposed that no two worlds 
are alike in their developments of vitality, just 
as no two are alike as seen in the telescope, 
nor in their apparent physical characteristics. 
Yet, as in all the solar system there is an 
underlying unity of design, so I have supposed 
that '' unity in diversity " is the law of vitality 
as well as of matter, and thus that the life in 
each of our sister-worlds is like some form or 
other of life to be found on Earth, just as the 
fact has been revealed to us by the spectroscope 
that the same metallic and gaseous elements 
as we find about us on Earth exist even in 
distant stars. Thus I have supposed that the 
life in other worlds is like what we find on 
earth, but that in each world there is a distinct 
development. In the apportionment of each 
such development to divers worlds, I have sup- 
posed that the physical constitution of each 
Avorld, as far as we know it, affects the form of 
life upon it. 

As to the theological question of God's deal- 
ings with the inhabitants of other worlds, I 
have hardly presumed to touch the subject. 
These things we can only know when we see 
no more as '* in a glass darkly, but face to 
face "; and it seems to me that those who have 
ventured to speculate on it, as Kircher or 
Swedenborg, have exceeded propriety. 



Preface. xi 

The pessimism of my hero also requires some 
apology. I appeal, however, to my reader's 
intelligence, whether any one coming from a 
happier world, and seeing the anomalies and 
misery of Earth, would not be shocked and 
pained ? As it is, the pessimism of Aleriel is 
not stronger than that of the Wise King in 
Ecclesiastes, nor of many ancient and modern 
philosophers. It is not nearly so bitter as that 
of Byron. 

With regard to the resemblances to other 
works of this character, e.cj.y Swedenborg, 
Fontenelle, Lord Lytton, &c., I may say 
frankly that I have not copied, consciously at 
least, from any one. If resemblances occur, 
they may be attributed to the fact that two 
minds have come by diverse paths to the same 
conclusion, and that conclusion has therefore 
something to be said for it — -which is all one 
can say for an obscure speculation of this 
nature. 

The fabric of the work is a continuation ot 
my "Voice from Another World/' a short 
resume of part of which I have given in the 
Trehyndra letter, to make the argument plain. 
I must add that the dramatis personce are, ot 
course, purely imaginary. 

In conclusion, I must ask my readers to 
consider the work as a whole, and not condemn 



xii A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

it entirely if they find some one passage opposed 
to their preconceived notions. I can hardly 
expect any one to agree with me in all points. 
I trust, however, that this seemingly fantastic 
tale may encourage the young to study in more 
serious works the facts of astronomical science, 
and perhaps cheer their elders with the thought 
that, though much is sad on Earth, yet there 
may be brighter worlds than this, and a happier 
existence than we can have here. Earth is not 
the Universe, and our life here is not eternity. 



CONTENTS. 



PART 1. 






CHAPTER 






I. The Hunchback of Mont St. Gabriel. 


.page 


1 


II. Besieged in Paris 




8 


III. The Escape 




U 


IV. London 




22 


Y. Oxford 




29 


YI. A Love Chapter 




34 


YII. A Strange Letter 




42 



Part IL— THE MYSTERIOUS DOCUMENT. 
I. Aleriel's Journey Home — The Moon 64 



II. Copernicus 

III. Welcome Home 

lY. Earth as Others See it. 

Y. A Strange Proposal 



71 
73 

82 



XIV 



A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



Part III.— MARS. 

CHAPTEB 

I. The Voyage through Space 
II. The Ice Island 

III. Tycho Island 

IV. A Martian Instructor . . . 
V. The Ocean Capital 

VI. The Voyage of Circumnavigation 
VII. The Feast 



page 



97 
100 
106 
114 
12& 
139 
149 



Part IV.— THE GIANT WORLD. 

I. Deimos, and the Voyage from Mars through 
Space 

II. First Impressions 

III. The Ocean World 

IV. The Land of Fire 



155 
162 
169 
17.-> 



Part V.— SATURN, 



L Titan... 
11. Saturn 
III. Return 



179 
18G 
193 



Contents, 



XV 



Part VL— CONCLUSION. 

CHAPTBB 

I. Consideration page 197 

II. JUNGFRAU 200 

III. A Night WITH Unearthly Friends 206 

IV. Explanations 210 

V. Adieu 2ia 



NOTES. 
The Moon — Venus— Mars — Jupiter ... 



215 



A VOYAGE TO OTHER WOELDS. 



PART I.— CHAPTER I. 

THE HUNCHBACK OF MONT ST. GABRIEL. 

IT was a lovely morning in the June of 1870, 
when I left the little town of B , in 

Brittany, for a walk to the neighbouring hill 
of Mont St. Gabriel, where there was a cele- 
brated old chapel, commonly counted as one of 
the sights of the neighbourhood. I had just 
left Oxford for the vacation, and was refreshing 
myself, after a term's hard work, by a walking 
tour in France. My companion, Galton, had 
sprained his foot, and was staying at the hotel 
resting himself for the day, but I was unwilling 
to miss this opportunity of seeing Mont St. 
Gabriel; so I started on the morning's walk of 
some four kilometres alone. 

It was a quiet and somewhat desolate route, 
and many thoughts about the past and future 

B 



2 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

and eternity came unbidden before my mind. 
But I need not trouble my readers with, them, 
for they have little directly to do with my 
story ; they were, however, afterwards indelibly 
fixed on my memory. 

I at length reached the little promontory 
running into the sea, on which Mont St. 
Gabriel stands. I climbed over some rocks 
which bounded the path and made my way up 
to the picturesque and antique chapel, now 
ruined. The view was splendid. The blue 
sea adorned here and there by little ridges of 
silver foam, the wild rocky coast, the crying of 
the sea-gulls, and the low roar of the ocean, 
all tended to awe me, and then to quiet my 
mind into a calm reverie. 

" How beautiful is this world ! " I thought. 
'' I wonder if there is anything that can exceed 
in loveliness such scenes as these, or the 
glorious Alps, or the splendid rough Cornish 
coast in a storm, or the lake districts of the 
north. This world is very beautiful." 

I am afraid I must have been giving way to 
the bad habit I sometimes have when quite 
alone of talking to myself, for suddenly I was 
aroused by a slight rustling behind me. I 
turned, and a very singular-looking person met 
my gaze. He was a very short fair young 



The Hunchback of Mont St. Gabriel. 3 

man, greatly deformed about the shoulders. 
He was dressed in a common ouvrier^s cos- 
tume, with a large Breton hat and a cloak 
thrown over his blouse. His face, however, 
in spite of his coarse costume and manifest 
deformity, was of exquisite refinement and 
even beauty. His complexion was fair as a 
girl's, but pale even to bloodlessness. His 
eyes, though somewhat obscured by the hat, 
were most strange and brilliant. His features 
small and delicate. He had neither mous- 
tache nor beard, and scarcely looked above 
twenty. He was gazing at the sea, and 
though near me appeared not to notice my 
presence. 

For several minutes I remained silently 
looking at the waters, with, I must own, an 
occasional glance at my companion. " Poor 
fellow," I said to myself; " what a singular 
malformation about the shoulders. I never 
saw anything like it before. And, then, how 
deadly pale he is, and so refined, in spite of 
that peasant's dress. Perhaps he is some 
gentleman in distress ; some unfortunate 
student who has failed in life's battle." And 
then a dreadful thought seized me. ''I hope 
he is not meditating suicide, or he is not mad. 
In either case I am in an awkward position in 

B 2 



4 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

this lonely spot, in a strange country, with a 
madman or one in utter despair." 

But when I looked again at that strange 
meditating face the thought was dispelled. 
He was thoughtful, but not at all sad; nor 
was there either the excited or the sullen look 
of mania about those intellectual eyes. But 
still he looked on, silently watching the sea. 

I was immensely puzzled, and was getting 
quite uncomfortable, for Galton had been 
entertaining me the evening before with a 
whole series of horrid Breton legends about 
the " White Lady," and the ghosts and the 
signs of death ; and really here was a personage 
who, if he had been met at night, might have 
been easily taken for a revenant. But it was 
not night, and the sun was shining brightly, 
and the shadow of this stranger's curious 
figure was clearly defined on the chapel wall. 

At last I thought it was useless and un- 
courteous to thus pretend not to heed him, 
and that it would be better to speak. So I 
broke the silence with a polite bow and a 
*' Bonjour, monsieur." 

'' Good morning, sir ; you are English, are 
you not ? " he said, in a very sweet and clear 
contralto voice, and a singular but pleasing 
foreign accent. 



The HunchhacJc of Mont St. Gahriel. 5 

^' Yes," I said, '' and am very glad you can 
talk with me in my native language. May I 
ask also if you are French, or a stranger to 
this country ? " 

'^ Un efcranger, monsieur," he said in French, 
and then relapsed into silence. 

So it was evident that he knew both French 
and English, and was neither French nor 
English. What countryman was he ? The 
voice, the accent, and the manner were as 
strange as the appearance of my new ac- 
quaintance, and gave me no clue. 

My question seemed to have silenced him, 
and, for several minutes again, he appeared to 
have no wish to renew our conversation. At 
length I broke the silence. 

"You speak English well for a foreigner. 
Have you ever been in our country ?" 

'' Never, sir, but I much wish to visit it. I 
have been told it is a land of liberty and 
progress, that there is much that is noble and 
good in your country. There is a great deal 
that is sad to see in other parts of Europe — 
misery, oppression, and sorrow. I should 
like to see a happier land in this world. 
Perhaps England is such — perhaps it is," 
he added, after a pause. *' They say your 
country is rich. I hope that the many have 



6 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

the benefit of that wealth, and not the 
few/' 

"I am afraid we cannot say that. There 
are great disparities in England as in other 
lands. How do you like France ? I may ask 
you ; for you say you are not a Frenchman." 

" A gay, pleasure-loving nation, wanting in 
gravity, in stability, in religious sentiment. 
France lives too much for the present and not 
enough for the future — not enough in the past. 
It is selfish and proud, and pride oftentimes 
precedes a fall. The Latin races seem growing 
effete. They have had their day. The Teu- 
tonic races may have the present and the 
immediate future. However, I cannot tell. 
The state of Germany is sad, though not as 
sad as France." 

The intelligence of his remarks touched me. 
I looked down at his worn and almost ragged 
trousers. It seemed to me sad that one so 
intelligent and educated should be a mere 
peasant and in want. After some momentary 

misgivings, as I rose to return to B , I 

resolved to do something to aid him. I put 
my hand in my pocket, and, blushing, offered 
him a five-franc piece. '' My dear sir, perhaps 
you want this more than I — pardon me in 
offering it." He took it, smiled, and- simply 



The Hunchback of Mont St, Gabriel, 7 

said : " Thank you, sir ; if I can return your 
kindness I will. We may meet again." 

" Adieu," I said, ** I hope we may meet 
again." 

I bowed, and left him still standing gazing 
on the sea. 



8 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER II. 

BESIEGED IN PARIS . 

I WENT up to Paris by the next morning's 
train, Galton, whose foot was much better, 
accompanying me. His walking tour was 
necessarily terminated by his accident, and so, 
as I did not wish to lionise Brittany alone, we 
resolved to stay a little while in Paris tpgether. 
The gay city looked gay as ever — bright, cheer- 
ful, and frivolous. How few in those two 
millions dreamt of the catastrophe hanging 
over them, an unseen Damocles' sword sus- 
pended by a hair in the midst of all that gaiety 
and splendour. I am sure I as little foresaw 
the peril to Paris as any one, nor, still worse, 
the catastrophe hanging over myself. 

^ « « 4& 

One morning, just as the papers were getting 
excited about the Spanish succession question, 
I thought it would be a pleasant change to 
have a trip to Versailles. Galton had gone off 
to Brussels that morning, so I was left alone. 



Besieged in Paris, 9 

I little dreamt of what that little trip would 
cost me. We had just got to near Sevres 
station, when, in a moment, I heard a tremen- 
dous crash, the panels and roof of my carriage 
fell in masses about me, and amidst the screams 
of the passengers, the wounded and the fright- 
ened, I felt a sudden blow and then an intense 

agony in my leg, and then 

* * * * 

I will not dwell on that painful time at the 
Hopital de S. Clotilde. I was put in the acci- 
dent ward, and must say that I shall ever feel 
grateful to the careful and kind nurses and 
doctors who attended me. My injuries were 
tedious and painful rather than dangerous ; my 
leg was fractured, and the shock of the acci- 
dent had shaken my nervous system. 

While in the hospital I heard the patients 
one day talking of a remarkably able young 
doctor, whose wonderful cures were attracting 
great attention in medical circles. I listened 
with avidity to these stories, and resolved 
directly I was able to consult him. 

In a few days I was well enough to be 
removed to my hotel in the Rue Pelletiere. 
Here, directly I was ensconced in my own 
chamber, I wrote a note to Dr. Posela (the 
young doctor of whom I had heard so much in 



10 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

the hospital) asking him to come and see 
me. 

In about a couple of hours after my note was 
sent, the g argon announced Dr. Posela. He 
entered, and, to ray astonishment, I beheld 
again my deformed little friend of Mont St. 
Gabriel. He was now somewhat better dressed, 
but, though the day was warm, was wrapped up 
in a cloak. There was the same soft, strange 
expression on his face — a peaceful repose — and 
yet a je ne sais quoi of mystery and solemnity 
about him. He was surprised as well as I was. 

" I am glad to meet you," he said, *' and 
yet sorry to see you thus. You suffer, I fear. 
Oh ! frail humanity. What man has to go 
through in his earth-life I I wish I could make 
you well at once, but what you say in the 
report of your case you have enclosed in your 
letter shows me it is just a case where I can 
do least. A broken limb ! Only nature can 
cure that. But I can relieve your pain." 

He then questioned me on my symptoms, 
and, on leaving me, gave me a potion which 
marvellously relieved my nervous depression. 

« « « 9i& 

Day by day news became more anxious in 
the political world. The war had broken out. 
The march a Berlin had commenced, and the 



Besieged in Paris. 11 

shouting had even reached us when I was in 
the hospital. Now the papers formed an occu- 
pation for my thoughts even in my sick-bed. 
Posela's treatment gave me wonderful relief; 
but the broken bone needed rest for cure, and 
I had to stay in my room a prisoner while the 
busy and memorable scenes of the war — 
Gravelotte, Mezieres, Sedan — were exciting 
the minds of every one around me. 

I saw nothing of Posela after that visit. I 
learnt that next day he had started with an 
ambulance in connexion with the army of 
Marshal MacMahon. 

I was really beginning to get very anxious. 
I at length quite recovered from my illness 
and was able to get about; but the line of 
^' blood and iron" bound me, like every one else, 
within the besieged city. There was no lack 
of excitement indeed. The news of every day 
was thrilling, and one often saw terrible scenes 
of war. It was like being a spectator of a 
vast tragedy, and the Parisians viewed it as 
such. Their strong dramatic sentiment was 
excited and almost amused, at first, by the 
spectacle of war at their very gates. I could 
not resist the contagion ; but still I had a good 
deal to be anxious about, as they had. My 
autumn term was hopelessly lost at Oxford, of 



12 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

course, and possibly my Lent term would be 
also, for it looked as if this siege would go on 
for a long time ; indeed, the Parisians declared 
they would hold out to the last. If so, my 
prospects of getting away were bad indeed, 
and I was in danger of this wretched Franco- 
Prussian War doing a permanent injury to my 
career. 

^ 7^ W 7P 

I remember one evening walking along the 
Tuileries gardens watching the flashes of the 
Prussian artillery, and seeing the French 
troops marching up to the ramparts, with their 
drums beating before them. The cannon were 
roaring as a thunderstorm, and yet the Parisian 
crowd was looking on calmly, as if merely 
witnessing a tragedy, instead of themselves 
being in a beleaguered city. Suddenly I 
noticed Dr. Posela passing close by me. 

" Where are you going ? " I said. 

" To the ramparts. I must do my best for 
the wounded. Oh, it is a terrible war ! How 
can men ever carry on and systematise this 
horrid mode of settling national differences ? 
Hark ! how the cannon are roaring ! Many a 
soul is being launched into eternity. How 
terrible ! How unfit are some to go ! " 

" You take it more to heart than most 



Besieged in Paris, 13 

around you. But you are in danger in the 
front." 

" Do not trouble yourself about me ; think 
of yourself and of the poor soldiers ; I am in 
no danger," and he smiled. 

'' Yes ; but you are in the front. The 
cannon kill doctors as well as combatants. 
It is really a dreadful system of war — this 
long range. It is almost worse than the hand- 
to-hand strife of the days of chivalry. Every 
one suffers. I heard only yesterday of a shell 
bursting in a bedroom of a school where nine 
little boys were sleeping, and killing three. I 
only wish I could get out of the city, for 
I have nothing to do with this quarrel." 

" Perhaps not. However, let us have a talk 
again to-morrow. Au revoir ! " 

I went home to my hotel, and as I woke in 
the night and heard the distant roar of the 
cannon, and saw the flashes through my 
window-blind, I thought once or twice of 
brave, kind Posela, and his errand of mercy in 
the ramparts. 



14 A Voyage to Other Wo7-Ids. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE ESCAPE. 

NEXT morning, just after my late dejeuner 
(of a rather limited and not luxurious 
character, for food was getting terribly dear 
in Paris, and the horses were beginning to be 
doomed to the slaughter-house), I was starting 
for a lounge in the Rue Rivoli to hear the 
news, for which every one was almost as eager 
as for dinner, when I met my eccentric friend. 

'' How have you fared last night ? Will you 
come in and take some refreshment ? " 

" I cannot take anything ; but I should like 
to speak with you." 

We went upstairs to my bedroom. Posela 
sat down and looked at me fixedly, in a way 
that somehow made me very nervous, for he 
had a wonderful fascination about the eye. I 
never felt any one's eye like his. 

'' Do you really wish very much to get out 
of this terrible place; to go home to your 



The Escape. 15 

peaceful country from these horrid scenes of 
war ? " 

*' Indeed, I do ; I would pay almost any 
price, short of doing a wrong action, to get 
out of it. What is it to me? I am not a 
Frenchman ; this is not my country. I have 
no interest in this quarrel, and, if I had, I 
hate war ; I always have hated it, and now 
more than ever. It may develope manly 
qualities, but still it is an evil thing at the 
best.'' 

" You really wish to get out of Paris ? " he 
asked. 

" Why ask ? Is it not clear that I must 
wish to get home ? My whole future may 
depend on it. If I lose another term my 
chances of honours are gone. Do, in God's 
name" (for I was getting excited), ''tell me 
how I can get out." 

" I cannot do that ; but I can get you out." 

''How?" 

" I must not say how. But by to-morrow 
morning, if you wish it, you may be on your 
way to England. Only, you must promise me 
never to ask how I have freed you." 

" I promise you. I give you my word — I 
will give you my word of honour as a Christian, 
and as an English gentleman — I will never ask 



16 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

you, if only you engage that it is by no wrong 
or dishonourable act that I am passed out." 

'' I can assure you of that. There is no 
harm in my mode of liberating you and myself. 
For I must go with you to England ; that is, 
if you like my company." 

"My friend, my liberator, how shall I ever 
be able to show you how grateful I am ? 
Perhaps, if you come with me to England, I 
may strive to show you a tithe of my gratitude. 
But how can we get out ? " 

" Hush 1 you have promised." 

" Pardon me ; it was so natural an excla- 
mation. When will you come to take me 
away ? " 

" At eight. Be ready ; but I can only take 
you, not your property; that must be left. 
Adieu ! " 

I can scarcely say how delighted I was at 
the prospect of deliverance. The condition 
seemed curious; but I was too glad at the 
hope of escape to trouble myself about it. 

* ^P ^^ ^T* 

I packed up my things and locked my 
portmanteau, and asked my host to take great 
care of it when I paid my bill, and to let me 
have it when the siege was over. 

"But, monsieur, you cannot possibly pass 



The Escape. 17 

the Prussian lines. They will not let any one 
through, I assure you, not even an English- 
man. You will be shot, monsieur." 

" I cannot tell you how I can get out ; but 
a friend says he will manage it, and, as he is 
a very clever fellow, I am too glad to believe 
him." 

" Perhaps it may be by a balloon ; but there 
will not be any balloon going for three days." 

'' Well, I must be off. So please take care 
of my portmanteau, and I trust you will be 
spared in this terrible siege." 

'* Ah, monsieur, c'est vraiment terrible," 
said mine host. 

I went off, bidding good-bye, with a light 
purse, — hardly enough left for my journey to 
England. 

I hurried on to 17, Rue Soubise, in Mont- 
martre, where I knew Posela lived. In answer 
to the concierge, I was directed to the fourth 
etage, where I knocked at a humble-looking 
door just as the clocks were striking eight. 

*' Entrez,'' said Posela's soft, sweet voice. 

I opened the door and entered. It was a 
quiet, unpretending little room, but with a fine 
view over the city, most of the lights of which 
were clearly visible from the window. There 
was hardly any furniture, and what there was 

c 



18 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

seemed poor. It looked a mere ouvrier^s room. 
In front of the open window was a sofa. 
" Are you sure you wish to leave Paris ? " 
^' I am quite sure, believe me. My money is 
nearly gone, and my patience also. My life 
may soon be in danger. I assure you I shall 
be deeply indebted to you if you set me 
free." 

*' Then, sleep ! " As he said that, he made 
a sort of mesmeric pass over me with his hand. 
I felt my senses dulled, an oppressive drowsi- 
ness overcame me, I sank upon the sofa, and 
was soon buried in a heavy sleep. 

* * * * 

How long I slept I know not; I think it 
must have been three or four hours. When I 
awoke I at once saw that I was in a totally 
strange place. It was a large field near a 
chaussee, with a wood close by. Not a human 
being was to be seen. Everything was still 
and calm, and the air was fresh and chilly. It 
was the repose of the country. I got up and 
stared about me, but the light was insufl&cient 
to make anything visible, except the indistinct 
outline of the trees and the greyish- white stones 
of the chaussee. I turned. In the distance 
behind me was the haze as of the lights of a 
distant city. I paused and listened. Yes ! 



The Escape, 19 

far, far away was the dull roar of distant 
artillery. I was out of Paris. 

The thought of my sudden release quite 
overcame me. I fell on my knees and thanked 
God for my deliverance, which was so sud- 
den and inexplicable as to seem almost 
supernatural. How could I ever have passed 
that line of " blood and iron " ? What 
means could have been used. At any rate, 
Posela had kept his word. I was out o£ 
Paris and beyond the Prussian lines at last,, 
and nothing remained between me and Eng- 
land but a train and steamer journey of a 
few hours. 

As I was walking along the cliaussee-, still 
uncertain where I was, or where I ought to 
turn my footsteps, I suddenly noticed a man 
seated on one of the white stones that marked 
the border of the road. He was crouched down ; 
but, even in the darkness, I thought I recog- 
nised Posela. 

*' Is it you, Posela ? " I said. 

" Yes.'' 

" Well, I am greatly obliged to you for your 
successful fulfilment of your promise. But 
where are we ? We are out of Paris, that ia 
clear ; but where are we ? " 

** At Pontoise. Do you not see the lights of 

c 2 



20 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

the city ? Hark ! there is the boom of the 
cannon ! " 

" At Pontoise ? Let me see ; that is a station 
on the line to Amiens. Let us get to the 
railway, and proceed to England by the first 
train." 

Posela assented, and we walked down the 
hill. In a quarter of an hour we were entering 
the town and passing down its silent streets, 
quite deserted, save by the Prussian sentries, 
whose helmets glistened in the gaslight. I 
now beheld them for the first time. It was 
evident we were out of the lines of Paris. 

We found the railway- station lighted up, and 
half full of people waiting for the early train. 
A Prussian sentry was walking up and down, 
and a corporal's guard were lounging in the 
salle d/attente. At length the train came up, 
and I can hardly describe my feelings when at 
last I was on my way to England. 

My strange travelling companion was rather 
sad. He spoke again and again of the miseries 
he had seen, caused by this terrible war ; of 
the folly of nations in not abolishing such a 
mode of settling disputes ; of its waste and 
sinfulness. I listened to him, and accepted his 
arguments, which were eloquently put. Then 
he changed the subject, and asked me a host of 






The Escape, 21 

questions, many of whicb. I could not answer, 
about England ; about its liistorj, government, 
population, natural products, climate, &c. As 
we talked, he took out a note-book, and seemed 
to be taking down what I said. I was mde 
enough, I fear, once to look over his shoulder ; 
but, though a fair proficient at shorthand, and 
a student not only of the phonographic but 
other systems, I could not detect what it was 
he was writing. 

At length we came to Dieppe, which I found 
in possession of the Prussians. In a few hours 
I once more trod on British soil. 

" How delighted I am," I said, '' and how 
grateful to you for bringing me home to dear 
old England ! '' 

*' One loves one's country. I suppose I 
should love mine, even if it were less lovable." 

" But what is your country ? " 

He was silent, and seemed not to hear my 
query. 



22 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER IV. 

LONDON. 

IN a couple of hours we were at London 
Bridge. It was already morning — a cold 
wintry morn, but not so foggy as usual. We 
had no luggage to carry, and my purse was 
nearly empty; and, really, Posela seemed to 
have nothing, for I had paid his fare and my 
own, and he seemed utterly to ignore the fact, 
a point of eccentricity which at another time I 
should not have quite liked ; but which, under 
the circumstances of my deep debt of gratitude, 
I could not complain about, so I suggested we 
should walk to my home in Kensington. As 
we crossed the bridge he seemed much struck 
at what he saw; at the crowds and the 
shipping. He leant over the parapet looking 
at the Thames. 

*' This, then, is the greatest city upon 
earth ? " 

" Not merely the largest that is, but that 
ever has been. Not even Imperial Rome was 



London, 2^ 

ever as great as London is. It has nearly 
four millions of population." 

" That is truly great. Four millions ! That 
is more than Sweden, or than Denmark, or 
than Greece ! " 

" Much me^e," I replied. 

" Do you think it is for the happiness of 
such a number of people to be living alto- 
gether in one city ? Have they enough light 
and air ? Is it always smoky here like this ? " 

We talked on thus as we walked through 
the City. He showed keen interest in every- 
thing, and often varied his questions by sage 
and thoughtful reiiiarks. His character through- 
out was very strange ; he seemed full of 
sympathy for human sorrow, and yet he was 
not dazzled by anything. He seemed curious, 
and yet when he saw a thing was disappointed, 
and spoke in a tone of sadness and pity of 
everything, showing how it might have been 
better, and .ought to have been better than it 
was. It was, in a sense, disappointing to 
show our great metropolis to so severe, 
though, at the same time, so kindly, a critic. 
He evidently sincerely pitied us, pitied London, 
pitied England, pitied everything and every- 
body, and yet, strange to say, he was not 
conceited, not self-opinionated, not misan- 



24 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

tliropic. He appeared, however, to look on 
everything from an exalted standpoint, saw 
every imperfection, and yet did not rejoice at 
seeing it. I tried with patriotic zeal to set 
everything in the best light before my kindly, 
though mysterious, benefactor, but it was use- 
less. He evidently thought us in England a 
very unfortunate race of beings, and London 
a very large, but by no means a grand, city. I 
remembered his remarks at our first interview, 
and was sorry to find his expectations of 
England were disappointed. 

We thus came to my home. My father was, 
I need not say, delighted to see me. I had 
written from Pontoise, and posted my letter 
just before leaving ; but I had come faster than 
the post. The family had only heard of me 
by balloon post some weeks before, and now I 
was come, most unexpectedly. 

''How did you ever get out, my boy? I 
understood the Prussians would not let any one 
pass their lines. I suppose you were favoured 
as an Englishman ? " 

" By no means. How I got out must remain 
a secret ; in fact, I do not understand it myself. 
However, all I can say is, that I owe my safety 
entirely to Dr. Posela, whom I must now 
present you as my best friend and deliverer." 



I 



London, 25 

" Well, sir, I am happy to make your 
acquaintance, and am too glad to see my son 
in safety to be too curious to know how you 
evaded Prussian vigilance. Are you a stranger 
to England?" 

" I was never here,*' said Posela, " till this 
morning; and yet I have often looked on 
England from afar, and wished to be there.'* 

" From Calais, I suppose. One can see the 
white cliffs of Albion in fine weather there." 

Posela made no reply. 

The conversation changed. A flood of 
queries gathered round me. The breakfast- 
bell sounded, for it was still early, and we 
went into the breakfast-room. When he had 
finished his questions to me, my father naturally 
turned his conversation to our guest, and I 
noticed at once how much he was impressed 
with him. On the war he had very little to 
say, all questions on it appeared disagreeable ; 
but on every other topic he talked well. Still, 
he was by no means one who wished to lay 
down the law, or to show his talent. He rather 
excelled in question than in reply ; but his ques- 
tions showed a naivete, a thoughtfulness, that 
was striking. He asked upon almost every topic 
connected with England — its history, govern- 
ment, politics, statistics, religion, commerce — 



26 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

everything. My father was a man fond of 
giving his opinion on things, and so he was 
dehghted with his intelhgent and thoughtful 
guest. Some things Posela seemed to have 
a difficulty in comprehending, especially how 
there could possibly exist so much misery in 
such a wealthy land, and how people could 
differ so on religious topics. The government 
by parties confused him, as well as the existence 
of unchecked immorality in our great metropolis. 
After breakfast we went out to see London, 
my father accompanying us. We saw as much 
as we could in that day. Posela took an 
interest in everything, but was a rapid sight- 
seer. In most things he took in what he saw 
very quickly, and I thought was rather inclined 
to hurry. The sight which struck him most 
was the British Museum, where we stopped 
some hours, and he here especially took 
interest in the ornithological department. 

In the evening, after our long sight-seeing 
was done, and I was thoroughly tired (although 
I had accompanied them to scarcely half the 
sights), Posela inquired how he could get to 
America, as he wanted to visit Niagara, and 
then to proceed to San Francisco. We found 
that one of the Cunard steamers was to sail in 
a couple of days, so it was resolved that he 



London, 27 

should proceed with me to Oxford after another 
day in London, and thence go to Liverpool to 
embark. 

This programme was carried out. He spent 
another day's sight-seeing in town, a portion 
of which he insisted on giving again to the 
British Museum, where he studied some of the 
curiosities with keen interest. In the evening 
we went to a festival service at one of the 
London churches. It was, he said, the first 
time he had an opportunity of attending a 
Church of England service. He had talked to 
me on religious topics two or three times, and 
always expressed himself with the utmost 
reverence. Indeed, he seemed of a highly 
devotional type of mind, though of what form 
of Christianity he was I could not tell ; he was 
certainly not an Ultramontane, nor did he 
seem a foreign Protestant. Once or twice I 
thought he belonged to the Greek Church, 
but really of this there was not much 
evidence. 

At the service he behaved with the utmost 
reverence, and joined in the singing with a 
riqh and wonderfully melodious contralto voice 
(it was far above a high tenor). He seemed 
to throw himself utterly into the service, and 
appeared wrapt in devotion. When it was 



28 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

over, having said my private prayers, I pre- 
pared to go, but Posela remained kneeling. 
I waited and waited. Every one, except the 
attendants, had left the church, but Posela 
remained in an attitude of prayer. At last I 
had to touch him and whisper, " The service is 
over, and they will want to put the gas out 
soon." 

" Over ; and so soon ! I thought this was 
merely the preliminary. How soon men are 
tired of prayer and praise ! " 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 29 



CHAPTER V. 

OXFORD. 

NEXT morning we started together by an 
early train for Oxford. On tlie whole, my 
singular friend appeared more pleased with the 
university city than I expected ; — the number 
of public buildings, the grouping of the archi- 
tecture, the gardens, the museum, the libraries. 

" I rather like Oxford," he said, after a few 
hours' hurried walk about the colleges and "the 
lions "; *' If I had time I should wish to stay 
a day or two here. It reminds me " 

He paused and did not finish the sentence. 

** At any rate stay the night," I said. " You 
are really not doing justice to the city, and I 
should like to introduce you to some friends." 

I had, indeed, asked some of the reading set 
to which I belonged — all quiet, studious men, 
going in for honours — to my rooms to coffee 
after dinner. Posela consented to stay another 
day with me, and dine with me. 

My friends were warm in their reception of 



30 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

me, and full of questions about my adventures 
in tlie siege. I soon noticed, however, that my 
strange companion attracted their attention. 
Quiet, unassuming, and retiring though he was, 
there certainly was something so singular in 
his manner, appearance, and mode of speech, 
that one could not help observing him. Hilbert, 
a Merton man, with whom I was very intimate, 
and who had joined our party, was especially 
fascinated by him. Hilbert was an eccentric 
man, who was chaffed a good deal for his 
credulity in mesmerism and spiritualism. He 
and Posela were greatly drawn to each other, 
and were soon on Hilbert's favourite topic — the 
occult sciences. 

" I am convinced,'* said Hilbert, " that there 
are two ruling forces in this world at the 
present day. Money and Psychic force. Of 
these I am by no means sure that the latter 
and least accepted is not really the most 
potent ; for the man possessed of psychic force 
can compel those under his influence to give 
their money as he wishes by will-power. 
Many of the great men of history have been 
so, not so much by reason of their mental en- 
dowments, as by reason of this psychic force. 
See Napoleon I. — how marvellous, almost 
supernatural, was his career ; and a great deal 



Oxford, 31 

of it was due to his will-power over men. In 
destroying authority, and in weakening the 
power of kings and priests, we have given these 
two forces — money and psychic power — un- 
bounded range. As long as authority existed, 
the rich man might be restrained in the use of 
his wealth, and psychic force had also its limits. 
Now, more and more, man deals with man in 
the battle of life ; thus the richest and strongest 
gain supremacy.'' 

" True," I said. " I see this most markedly 
in the religious movements of this world. How 
marvellous is the devotion of some of the sects, 
who profess so strongly to believe in private 
judgment, and the rights of liberty of con- 
science for their leaders and preachers. I can 
only account for this by psychic force. All 
revivalism partakes of it. A revival is a 
kind of seance^ where spirits are invoked who 
possess the converts. Only the worst is, that 
the theory is that these mesmerised patients 
are hereby sanctified. It is only a sort of 
deification of psychic force." 

^'What do you think of this matter?" asked 
Hilbert of Posela. 

"Psychic force," he replied, "is indeed a 
motive agency in the history of mankind. It 
is useless talking of liberty as long as weak 



32 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

men submit unquestioningly to the commands 
of other men of stronger wills than their own, 
even to their own injury. It is one of the 
marvels of this world, and one of the secrets of 
the possibility of the wretched government and 
misrule we see, that men so blindly submit to 
one another's will, and then talk of liberty." 

As we had been just talking of spiritualism, 
I suggested a seance. I was not much of a 
believer in it, but I knew Hilbert professed to be 
a medium ; and I thought at least, if there was 
anything in it, that this might be a way of solv- 
ing the secret about my mysterious friend, 
without asking him questions. I rather 
thought he objected to the seance at first, but 
at length consented to join the circle. We 
half turned down the lights, and laid our hands 
on the table in the approved mode. In a few 
minutes Hilbert gave symptoms of drowsiness, 
and then appeared to be slightly convulsed, the 
usual symptom of what spiritualists call " being 
under control." A sheet of paper and a pencil 
had been laid on the table under a cover. 
" Take off that cover," said Hilbert. I did so, 
and on the paper was traced these word : — 

*' We cannot reveal anything to-night. There 
is one in the room whom we cannot understand, 
but who looks very different to us from what he 



Oxford, 33 

does to you. Perhaps lie knows more than we 
do." 

Posela did not Hke this message. He rose 
from the table and remained nearly silent for 
most of the evening. Next morning he started 
for his American tour. 



D 



34 ^ A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER VI. 



A LOVE CHAPTEE. 



SIX months had passed. To me it was one 
of the most eventful periods of my life. 
I had gone in for my degree. My honours were 
not so high as I had once hoped for, as my 
Paris adventure had thrown my reading back 
terribly. I took a second, however, and found 
some of the brilliant and fresh thoughts of my 
mysterious friend of value to me in the 
examination. " We have had to examine you 
for a first class, for some of your answers were 
so remarkable," said one of the examiners to 
me afterwards. '' Where did you read these 
extraordinary ideas ? " 

" I never read them," I said, " I only heard 
them from a very singular and eccentric genius 
whom I met in Paris. I think they seemed 
true, though where he got them I cannot 

say. 

)i& « ^ # 

After leaving Oxford, I went as private tutor 



A Love Chajpter* 35 

to a young man called William Richardson, the 
son of a rich shoddy plutocrat, of Manchester, 
who wished his son to go, under an Oxford 
tutor, on a tour through Europe. As I knew 
France fairly already I was especially fit for 
this kind of work. Our tour, however, ex- 
tended beyond France into Switzerland and 
Germany. We went to Strasburg, thence into 
the Schwarz Wald, where we took a charming 
walking tour for a few days. We took train 
at Freiburg for Bale, whence we walked 
through the region of the Juras to Berne. 

At Berne we met a charming family, a 
father, mother, and daughter, — the Christo- 
phersons — to whom I had introductions from 
some college friends. I found Mr. Christo- 
pherson a most agreeable acquaintance, and 
one who especially suited my tone of mind. 
We often took excursions in the mountains 
together with young Richardson, sometimes in 
the company of the two ladies, who drew out 
very pleasantly the intelligence of my young 
charge. I must say I was, at first, somewhat 
jealous of the notice Miss Christopherson took 
in Richardson, but I soon saw that she merely 
patronised the raw lad, whom I think she 
rather despised than admired, though, in kind 
good-temper, she sometimes brought him out. 

D 2 



36 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

Those walks and rides round Berne — in the 
sight of the glorious snowy Alps, or by the 
brawlino^ Aar — ^I never shall forg^et. Thev are 
among the brightest parts of my life. Several 
times I referred to my mysterious friend and 
deliverer, Posela, from whom I had not received 
any letter or communication since he bad left 
for America. 

*' I so wish you could meet him," I said one 
day, as we were walking on the hills near 
Berne, to Maud Christopherson. '* Perhaps 
you could find out his mystery. They say 
ladies are sharper in detecting secrets than 



men are." 



'' I should, indeed," said Maud, *' like to make 
the acquaintance of your mysterious friend. A 
man who can pass a friend out of Paris in the 
midst of the siege through the Prussian lines, 
— wbo has such wonderful powers of putting 
people to sleep when be wants, — who is so 
learned on every subject and yet so young, — 
such an admirable C rich ton, who never will tell 
anything about his nation, or origin, is indeed 
a curious person worth meeting. I rather like 
eccentric people. Your friend seems like Joseph 
Balsamo of Dumas' novel; but I hope he is 
not such a rascal." 

** No ; I am almost sure, mysterious though 



A Love Chapter. 37 

lie is, that he is no rascal. He seems religious 
in his way; though what his religion is I cannot 
detect. He speaks most reverently of every 
phase of Christianity, and appears in conduct 
to be quite consistent. His manner at St, 
Anselm's church was most devout, and as for 
the fashionable scepticism of the age he 
always spoke of it with ineffable contempt, 
as even more silly than wicked ; for, again and 
again, he urged to me that piety was true 
wisdom." 

'' Perhaps he is a hypocrite," said Mr. Chris- 
topherson, breaking in on our talk. " I do not 
like these mysterious folk. He may be a 
Nihilist, or head-centre of the Fenians, or 
some such dreadful thing." 

So we often talked over Posela, and the 
more I spoke the more the ladies seemed — 
excited by curiosity — to wish to meet this 
strange being, so different from everybody else. 

% ^ * ¥li 

One morning, when I came down to break- 
fast, I found a letter in a strange, but fine, 
hand on my table, addressed on from my 
college at Oxford. It bore the Bombay post- 
mark. I broke the seal, and was both surprised 
and pleased to read the following : — 



38 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

"Bombay, , 1871. 

" Dear Hamilton, — I expect to be at Berlin 
at the entry of the Prussian troops in triumph, 
If you should be there, I should be glad to 
meet you. I shall be in the Unter den Linden, 
on the left side of the Brandenburg Gate. May 
God be with you. 

"POSELA." 

I showed this strange epistle to the Christo- 
phersons. The ladies were charmed. 

"Do let us go to Berlin," said Maud. "I 
should so like to see the entry of the Prussian 
troops. It will be a sight we can never see 
again. It will be seeing a great historical event, 
to be talked of ever after." 

Although I suspect that the charm of the 
Prussian entry was only a part of their reason 
(for they had never talked of this long journey 
to Berlin before), yet their entreaties were so 
earnest that Mr. Christopherson yielded, and 
together we proceeded through Germany to 
Berlin, just reaching there the day before the 
triumphant entry. 

TfZ yfz ^^ ^f 

I need not attempt to describe this splendid 
mihtary spectacle, so often told by abler pens. 



A Love Chapter. 39 

Suffice it to say that it exceeded our expecta- 
tions. We took our stand close to the Bran- 
denburg Gate. The crowd was so dense that 
it seemed Hke looking for a needle in a bundle 
of hay to look for Posela there; but, as the 
Gruards swept past in serried array, on lifting 
my eyes to a tree, I noticed there my singular, 
eccentric friend. He saw me also, and made a 
sign of recognition. Keeping my eyes fixed on 
him, I noticed, before the procession ended, 
bhat he let himself down, and was lost in the 
3rowd. We remained where we were, and in 
a few minutes Posela elbowed his way to my 
side. 

" I thought I should meet you here, although 
the crowd was so great. I am glad we have 
found each other." 

" So am I," I said. " Allow me to introduce 
you to Mr. Christopherson. Come and dine 
with us at our hotel — the Hotel de T Europe." 

Posela accepted, and we hurried through the 
crowd to the hotel. At dinner I put many 
questions to him about his journey. He had 
been round the world, and seemed to have seen 
everything. He had been in California, Peru, 
Australia, New Zealand, Japan, China, India, 
and Egypt. He had climbed Chimborazo and 
several Mexican mountains. He had sailed up 



40 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

the Hoang-ho and Yang-tze Kiang. He had 
visited Siberia, and had scaled the giant moun-/ 
tains Everest andDwahghiri. At first, evidently,! 
Mr. Christophers on was not agreeably strucl 
by him. I saw that, as a man of the world, h< 
suspected Posela of boastfulness and untruth-, 
fulness. In fact, he evidently did not believef 
he could have been in all these places, especiallj^ 
in so short a time. As for Mrs. Christopher- | 
son, she was certainly amused, and somewhat 
pleased to have a chat with so great a traveller. I 
Our conversation naturally turned to the' 
pageant of the day. I asked Posela what he 
thought of it. 

" I never saw anything like it of the kind 
before. I do not admire it, for, as you know, 
I do not like war. And yet courage and 
endurance are virtues, and, perhaps, such 
pageants are needed to encourage men to be 
brave and enduring." 

We stayed till late in the evening talking 
over many matters. As before, — indeed, more 
than ever, — I was struck with Posela's varied 
information, the freshness of his thoughts, his 
brilliancy, depth, and acumen. Many of the 
ideas he expressed I had never heard before. 

*' Will you give me a recommendation to 
some friend of yours in England,'* said Posela, 



A Love Chapter. 41 

** who is living in a country place ? I want to 
have a little rest in quiet." 

" Oh, yes. I am sure S , one of the 

fellows of my college, who is now Vicar of 
Trehyndra, in Cornwall, would be glad to 
know you. We often talked of you at Ox- 
ford, and he wishes much to make your 
acquaintance." 

I wrote him a letter of introduction, which 
he took. 

* * * * 

" What do you think of Posela ? " I asked of 
Maud next morning. 

"I do not altogether like him sometimes, 
and yet I think he ought to be liked. There is 
a something uncanny about him. Sometimes, 
really — do not laugh — he hardly seems like a 
human being at all. His eyes are so wonderful 
and uncanny, his voice so singular, — his mar- 
vellous learning, — his apparent youth. Eeally, 
he seems like the ' Wandering Jew ' or the 
* Flying Dutchman,' or something else super- 
natural. I feel quite afraid of him." 



42 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER YII. 

A STEANGE LETTER. 

MONTHS had passed — eventful montlis for 
me. One of the events my readers may 
guess. Our sympathy about Posela and his 
secret had developed into sympathy in other 
matters. There was a mutual approachment 
between Miss Christopherson and myself, which 
ultimately led to my suggesting to her a change 
of her name for mine, on which subject I was 
referred to her parents. The saying is, that 
the course of true love never runs smooth, and 
perhaps ours did not ; but the obstacles did not 
prove very serious, and in less than a year from 
our first meeting we were joined one fine sunny 
morn together at the altar of St. Aldemund 
Church, '' for better, for worse ; for richer, for' 
poorer,*' in the bonds of matrimony. 

My readers may expect that with this denou- 
ment my simple story ought to end. But, in 
fact, we have only got through the introduction ; 
the really important part is yet to come. 



A Strange Letter. 43 

We set off for a quiet honeymoon to Oban, 
and there, a day after my arrival, the following 
extraordinary letter reached me from my friend 
the Vicar of Trehyndra, containing the key to 
the wonderful secret of the mysterious Posela : — 

'' Trehyndra. 

" My Dear Hamilton, — I have at last solved 
the secret of your mysterious friend ; but what a 
secret it is ! All your guesses were quite wrong ; 
but it is excusable that you never thought of 
the real solution of the mystery. I never 
should have supposed it possible, had he not 
told me it, and shown by ocular demonstration 
that his statement was true. 

"As you know, I was very much interested 
in what you told me of Posela ; and after your 
letter saying he probably would visit us in 
Trehyndra, I looked out for a visit from him 
with longing expectation. No letter, however, 
arrived announcing the day he had selected for 
coming to us. 

" He came to our village in a storm — a 
night fit for the witch scene in Macbeth. 
The wind was blowing 'great guns,' as the 
sailors say, and the sea was heaving with a 
succession of waves which struck in foam and 
spray against the shore. The storm had 



44 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

raged all day ; but lie did not come till 
night. 

*' A ship was being wrecked on our dreadful 
coast — an event, alas, not very rare. Posela dis- 
tinguished himself most wonderfully — it almost 
seemed to me at the time supernaturally — in 
saving the crew. I did not have any interview 
with him that night, but next morning he 
introduced himself to me, and gave me your 
letter. 

" I was charmed with him from the first. 
He was evidently a person gifted with remark- 
able intelligence and mental power, and con- 
siderable brilliancy ; but of that I now feel no 
wonder. 

" The only thing that seems to me mar- 
vellous is his wonderful adaptability to circum- 
stances so different from those to which he was 
born, and his wondrous power of disguising 
his real nature. We had many and pleasant 
talks about numbers of subjects, and some of 
his remarks I remember then struck me as 
very strange, although I see now everything is 
capable of explanation. The only thing, beside 
the wonderful mystery hanging about him, that 
I did not like was his contemptuous criticism 
of many of the things of this world. Still he 
was not conceited in manner, but occasionally 



A Strange Letter. 45 

humble and unpretending, and seemed by no 
means void of sympathy. 

'' On the whole, I think he is the most 
agreeable companion I ever met, and his 
variety of information upon every subject is 
very remarkable. However, it appeared rather 
in generalities than in details. Upon natural 
science he was especially well informed, being 
thoroughly conversant with the most recent 
discoveries, and advancing many theories to 
explain natural laws such as I never heard 
before, and which I now suspect no one on 
earth but himself was acquainted with. His 
grasp of the laws of nature was truly extra- 
ordinary. 

" One of his most remarkable, and, as I 
thought, most incongruous, characteristics was 
his love of children. I took him into the 
schools to show him our mode of teaching, 
in which, as in everthing else, he took an 
interest. He taught a class several times, 
and seemed wonderfully gifted in power of 
illustration, quite fascinating the children by 
his bright manner, his vivid imagination, his 
lucidity, and brilliant descriptive power. 
Especially in the geography class did he shine, 
telling the children about the different places 
on the map that he had seen, and he appeared 



46 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

to have been almost everywhere. You ex- 
pressed doubts, as you recollect, on the 
possibility of his having been at all the places 
that he said he had visited* I have no such 
doubts ; certainly not now, nor even had I 
when I heard him give our little ones a 
geography lesson. 

** I even, though I had some scruples at first, 
gave him a class for religious instruction, and 
shall never forget it. His reverence in speak- 
ing of sacred things, his eloquence, his tender 
illustrations of the love of God, were simply 
wonderful. 

" But he soon made friends of the little ones, 
not only at work, but at play. His acrobatic 
skill is marvellous, and he very soon fascinated 
them by showing feats of skill and entering 
into their games. 

*' Here was a mystery to me that I could 
not at the time fathom. How could this 
strange being, — about whom some marvellous 
secret hung, — who appeared so profound, so 
learned, and so wise, — be so popular with the 
children ? I could not solve the problem. I 
once ventured to ask him about it. He replied 
by a question : 'Is it not wisdom to mingle 
with the beautiful and the good, where we 
can find them — to make friends of innocence ? ' 



A Strange Letter, 4i7 

" I feared tlie children would grow too 
familiar with him, and take liberties. It was 
not so, however. They soon loved him ; but 
I thought thej also feared him a little, and a 
naughty child was in a moment cowed and 
awed by a look from Posela. 

'* So things went on in the parish. Posela 
regularly attended our daily services, and 
appeared to be most devout. The services 
are humble enough, as you know, and few 
avail themselves of them. Posela expressed 
wonder at this. ' How is it,' he asked me 
once, * that so few come to church on week- 
days ? ' 

" ' Some are employed about their work, 
some are indifferent to religion, and some re- 
gard it as a matter only for Sundays.' 

** ' But do not all your people wish to go to 
heaven when they die ? ' 

" ' Yes ; I suppose so.' 

'' ' Then, if they find the half-hour or so of 
the service of the Church on earth too much 
for them, how can they hope to enjoy properly 
the ceaseless adoration of the Church in heaven? 
I always am glad to go to church while on 
earth ; it is the brightest part of my life here. 
I love to be in contact with my Creator and 
with the souls of good men. An earthly 



48 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

parish churcli, with all its defects, is most like 
of all things in this world to heaven. If one 
is in sorrow, surely it is the best place to pour 
our griefs to a loving Father ; if in joy, it is 
the best place to think of heaven.' 

" I was much struck by this remark. ' Can 
any one, I thought, who expresses such senti- 
ments be really wicked ? He is evidently no 
hypocrite. He enjoys the service greatly, and 
is of a devout mind. His secret, whatever it 
is, cannot be a very harmful one.' 

" And still it was manifest, with all his child- 
like love of childhood, with all his unobtrusive 
piety, that he had some wonderful secret which 
he sought to conceal from every one. His 
manners and habits were strange. He loved 
to walk alone on the moors ; he shrank from 
every question about his antecedents, save and 
except about his recent voyages, on which he 
was particularly communicative; he expressed 
himself strangely at times, and certainly had 
odd ideas. 

" No letter came for him while he was 
staying with me, but a large box arrived by 
the parcels delivery. After it arrived he 
grew more reserved, and went out on the 
moors by night a good deal. I ventured once 
or twice to enter his room. His box was 



A Strange Letter, 49 

locked. It was very wrong of me, but I own 
to have felt curious about that box, for in it 
I knew was much that might solve his mystery. 
*' If he was popular with the children, he 
was not entirely so with the grown-up people. 
Our folk, though very civil to strangers, are, 
like most country people, somewhat suspicious 
of them. They noticed a mystery about my 
friend, and, though he was very 'free and 
homely ' (as they called it) with them, they 
saw there was some secret about him. Mys- 
teriousness engenders suspicion. Curiosity 
was excited. In a country place, where there 
is not much intercourse with the outer world, 
any stranger would attract attention. We 
need not wonder, then, at the intense curiosity, 
and the many surmises, aroused by Posela. 
Strange rumours arose about him in the 
parish. Our superstitious people evidently 
thought him supernatural, a sort of ' white 
witch,' for they use the term ahke for men 
and women ; but, as they believed also in ill- 
wishing and ghosts, I did not heed this much. 
However, there was one thing which appeared 
not to be altogether fanciful, i,e., sundry lights 
of different colours were noted to arise on the 
wild moors of Penmor and upon the marshes, 
which were rarely traversed by human foot. 

E 



50 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

Thougli few people passed at night by this 
desolate moor, yet so large a proportion of 
these saw these lights that it would be difiBcult 
to believe that they all suffered from delusion. 
The lights seemed to come and go, to appear 
and disappear, but never to be seen again 
of the same form. It could not all be a 
delusion, for the number of witnesses was so 
great, and yet, curious to say, no two persons 
agreed in their accounts of what they saw ; all 
saw something, but each one gave a different 
account. 

*' The subject occupied my mind, and at last 
I resolved, unknown to Posela, to go myself 
one night to investigate the matter, which I 
doubted not was connected with this mystery 
or my strange guest. 

" I went out one evening on the moors with a 
companion, who, however, deserted me as soon 
as the lights appeared. They were very extra- 
ordinary, and suited the descriptions of the 
peasantry, in being exceedingly varied in form 
and colour. Several acres of moorland and 
swamp suddenly changed colour. The cause 
must have been very powerful, as the twilight 
was scarcely out of the heavens, and the planet 
Venus was shining brightly amid the stars, giv- 
ing a pale light over the country. Still neither 



A Strange Letter, 51 

the vestiges of twilight, nor Venus, nor the stars 
were anything to these brilHant and vivid lights. 
One of them suddenly illumined the place 
where I stood, for a moment. Then I was left 
in comparative darkness, with the unpleasant 
feeling that whoever caused them must have 
detected me. 

" I heard behind me the sound of the flapping 
of wings, and then suddenly I perceived, close 
by, a figure sitting on a granite block just in 
front of me. It was Posela. I asked him 
plainly what could induce him to come there 
at that time. His answer was a singular one. 
' To write a letter to my friends.' This 
strange reply encouraged me to put the great 
question which had so often been almost on my 
lips, and ask him what was his secret. At 
first he was silent. I pressed him. But he 
did not speak. I looked at him. It was evi- 
dent he was answering me in act, not in words 
— to my sight and not to my hearing. His eyes 
were phosphorescent and shone in the dark- 
ness. It appeared as if he were not a human 
being. Greatly agitated, I solemnly adjured 
him in the name of the Most High. The phos- 
phorescence died away and he spoke. ' Let it 
be so ! ' In a moment after, casting off his 
cloak, I beheld a sight that I never shall forget. 

E 2 



62 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

It was no human being that was before me ; 
nay, more, it was no earthly creature. His 
aspect still was partly human ; but from his 
shoulders expanded huge wings, while from 
under his dress a most extraordinary robe was 
outspread. Around his head and form a sorb 
of phosphorescence flickered, which gave him 
a strange and unearthly look. All I can do 
to describe him is that he seemed to combine 
the human and the bird type — not unlike the 
pictures we see of angels. I felt natural alarm, 
but he comforted me. I asked him whether 
he was an angel, or a spirit of one departed 
from this life. But he said he was neither, but 
only an inhabitant of another world, who had 
been able — first of his race — to visit this earth : 
that once he had been a being inferior to man, 
but in process of ages, not being liable to 
death, had developed in his far-ofi* planet into 
his present condition. Having thus far satis- 
fied my curiosity, he departed and left me alone 
on the moor. 

'' It was difficult for me at first to believe that 
my strange visitor was not a human being. 
His disguise was so complete, and he had so 
wonderfully adapted himself to the ways, 
words, and doings of humanity, that really 
I thought it was a mere dream, and I can 



A Strange Letter. 53 

well pardon you if you are incredulous on 

reading tliis. 

* ^ * * 

'' ' I am incredulous, indeed/ I said to 
Maude. ' Can it be really true that I have 
been travelling with, talking to, entertaining a 
being who is not only not human, but not even 
earthly.' 

' Well,' said Maude, * I do believe it* 
There was always something about him of the 
supernatural I could not help shrinking from, 
and yet I liked him. He seemed so good and 
kind, and yet so mysterious. I am sure that 
what you have just been reading is quite 
true.' 

'' ' But let us go on with this strange epistle,' 
I said, and continued reading. 

* * * * 

'' When I recovered myself I found myself 
alone on the moor. I thought at once it might 
be all a dream ; that I had fallen asleep on the 
rocks, tired out by my walk, and dreamt this 
wonderful vision. I went home full of doubts, 
thinking over this extraordinary and unearthly 
scene. Was it, or was it not, a mere dream ? 

'' Next morning Posela did not reappear 
until near midday. I found him alone in my 
study. At once I entered on the great ques- 



54 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

tion upon my mind, and asked him if I haa 
been dreaming last niglit. He answered, with- 
out any delay or explanation : ' You saw me as 
I really am, Aleriel, the wanderer, from another 
world, the explorer of the realms of space.' 

" I was then encouraged (finding I had un- 
awares entertained so unearthly a visitor) to 
ask him some questions about his world and 
the universe around us. He said that life was 
the highest primal force, and existed through- 
out the universe. As earth was only one of 
milHons and billions of worlds, so man was 
only one of millions of forms of the higher 
developments of life. In some worlds they 
were in a lower condition than mankind, in 
others there were intelligences superior to man. 
Mankind might ultimately develope into some- 
thing superior to what he is now. At first, he 
repeated, he was inferior to mankind ; but in 
the peace of his beautiful world, in their 
loving obedience to God's laws, its inhabitants 
had developed a higher and a better life than 
man on earth, and thus had become superior 
to man, as they were better than man. This 
could account for his power of passing from 
one world to another, because in his world 
the intelligences had a far greater control 
over natural forces than on earth, and so he 



A Strange Letter, 55 

had been able to come to earth, though no 
human being could ever hope in earth-life to 
quit the earth's surface for any distance. Hav- 
ing told me something about his beautiful 
world — which I understood must be the planet 
Venus — he consented to show it to me in a 
vision. I lay down and dreamt a strange 
dream. 

'' It seemed to me that, for a time, I was in 
•awful loneliness in space. The stars were 
shining in black ether over me, and the glorious 
sun still blazed. I felt I was in the heavens, 
but alone. The feeling was awful ! 

" It passed away soon. The bright evening 
star — the glorious planet Venus — rapidly grew 
larger and larger. At length I beheld a huge 
glittering globe before me and then beneath 
me : I felt sinking into it. Vaster and vaster 
it grew. Continents, oceans, mountain-chains 
were opening to my vision, although more than 
half veiled in silvery clouds. I seemed rushing 
to it with incredible velocity. 

* ?^ * * 

" Then it appeared that a huge ring of stupen- 
dous mountains, shining in the bright sunlight, 
were beneath my feet : I was sinking into their 
circle. They were of vast height; the Alps 
would be mere hills in comparison. Their 



56 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

peaks were twenty miles high at the least, and 
the ring was greater than a couple of good- 
sized counties. The lowlands were still half 
hidden by floating clouds. I can hardly describe 
that huge mountain-chain. We have nothing 
on earth so gigantic. Precipices of miles high, 
jagged peaks of shining rocks, hanging terraces 
clad with what looked like vegetation of many 
hues ; soft yellows, delicate pinks, and especially 
pale blues. 

'^ At last it seemed I was approaching one 
of the peaks. I rested there. There was no 
snow, though so high, and the rock was bare. 
It was like an earth rock, but of no stone that 
I had ever seen. I looked around me on that 
wonderful spectacle. Lines of colossal moun- 
tains, chain beyond chain, were on one side 
of me ; on the other, an immense expanse of 
low country stretched in a huge amphi- 
theatre, partly shining in the blazing sun- 
light, partly shadowed by the huge ranges of 
distant peaks — a land divided between day 
and twilight. 

*' Then my dream changed. I felt that I 
was slowly sinking lower and lower into that 
vast valley. As I sank, it appeared that the 
sun set amid the gigantic mountains. A vast 
lake lay at my feet, and in it a large island with 



K^ 



A Strange Letter. ^7 

gardens, towers, and spires of a very quaint 

and extraordinary style of architecture. 

* * * * 

"Then it became night. I was walking in 
the midst of a vast garden. Around me were 
a thousand forms of dense vegetation — or what 
looked like vegetation — but of a sort utterly 
different to anything we have on earth. Our 
earthly words are only formed to express earthly 
ideas, but for these scenes of another world 
they are quite inadequate. One wants another 
language for another world of ideas. So every- 
thing around me, in earth's words, would be 
nameless, and, except by a long account, in- 
describable. Yet it seemed as if both the 
animal and vegetable kingdoms were there — 
things very different from the productions of 
the earth, but still not utterly of another order 
of being. 

'* The plants were various, graceful, and 
beautiful. Birds in thousands were fluttering 
in the air, some as huge as the fabled ' Roc ' 
of Arabian fable, some small and brilliant in 
colour as our humming-birds. But what caught 
my attention most was the crowds of winged 
semi-human figures, like Aleriel, who moved 
amidst. the gardens. Like everything around 
in this brilliant world, they were beautifully 



58 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

attired, in many divers ways and in many 
colours. There was an air of peacefulness, of 
cheerfulness and happiness, all around me, 
which seemed most charming. 

" But withal there was something intensely 
tropical in the scene. It looked as if it were a 
land where light and heat and moisture were 
combined to develope life ; everything was of 
most brilliant colouring, as if it revelled 
in intense vitality — something beyond even 
the tropic luxuriance of the West Indies or 
Ceylon. 

"I noted figures of sentient being moving 
about in all directions amid these tropic 
gardens, and seemingly conversing with one 
another, or else listening to soft and delicious 
music which was borne on the breeze. 

" At length I came to a palace of enormous 
size and most quaint architecture (quite unlike 
any style I had ever seen, whether Greek, 
mediaeval, or even Indian or Chinese), airy and 
fantastic to the last degree; brilliant with 
mosaics of every possible colour; lighted up 
with all sorts of coloured fires and electric 
lights. It was a perfect fairyland. 

" I entered this palace, and saw in its 
corridors many strange sights, such as I 
should never have thought of in my wildest 



A Strange Letter. 59 

dreams, and such as I find it diflBcult to 
describe. 

" Then I awoke from my wild vision, and 
found my strange guest sitting by me. 

" ' You have seen my home,' he said. 
' Is it not lovely ? I am going to it to- 
morrow.' 

"It was as he said. I accompanied him, at 
his request, to a wild part of our coast in the 
evening. Here I followed him up one of our 
cliff castles, where he mounted on one of the 
granite rocks, and, throwing off again his dis- 
guise, he bade me farewell. It seems that 
I fainted, for when I looked for him again he 
was gone. 

"I do not know what you will think of this 
solution of the mystery of your singular friend. 
It appears to me like a dream, and probably it 
will appear so still more to you. As far as I 
can tell, however, it is nothing more than the 
plain truth. It would seem that (as every one 
almost now believes) there are other worlds 
than ours — worlds peopled by intelligences, 
some of which are superior to man. One of 
these intelligences has, in human disguise, 
visited us. That is all the explanation I can 
give you. He was neither a spirit nor a 
phantom, but an embodied intelligence similar 



60 A Voyage to Other Worlch, 

to mankind in nature ; but not the same, as 
composed of a body, not formed of earthly 
elements, and of a soul not the same as our 
human soul, as never liable to separation from 
that body. Such an intelligence we have 
received among us. — Yours faithfully, 



S- 



j> 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 61 



PART II.— INTRODUCTORY. 

THE MYSTERIOUS DOCUMENT. 

WE had been inarried some years, and were 
settled in our quiet little home at 
Branscombe, when one morning, just as I was 
sitting down to breakfast, Maude brought me 
up with the London paper, and the usual 
circulars, begging petitions, &c., which came 
daily to us by the post, a curious little packet 
with a Swiss postage-stamp and post-mark 
on it. 

** I declare," she said, '' this looks like a 
letter from our wonderful friend, Posela." 

''Impossible," I replied. "It cannot have 
dropped from the sky. How could it have come 
in a meteor ? Well, if we do establish a post 
from another world, really things have come 
to a climax." 

*' I should always have been interested in 
a letter from your mysterious friend ; but 



62 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

now, when we know his story, it is especially 
interesting. Do open it." 

I opened the roll with trembling hands. 
It was so strange a feeling to be touch- 
ing a manuscript, not of this earth, earthy, 
and written by a denizen of another world. 
The first thing that caught my attention 
was that it was not of paper or of parch- 
ment, but of some soft and light pinkish skin, 
unlike anything that I had ever seen. It 
was extremely thin, as, indeed, in the Post- 
office it was only charged as an ordinary 
letter ; but it appeared, as I unfolded it, sheet 
by sheet, to be quite a book, closely written over 
with a bright purple ink. The document was 
in English, and I had no difficulty in tran- 
scribing it, for Posela's handwriting, in our 
characters, was clear and very delicate. 

The first thing that I took out of the packet 
was a small green note with a curiously orna- 
mented border. It read thus : — 

"Dear Friend, — Before I left you I pro- 
mised to write to you again, and tell you about 
myself. I doubt not that you have heard from 
Trehyndra about me, and who I am. But, as 
much has happened since I was with you on 
the earth, I give you this narrative of myself 



The Mysterious Bocument, 63 

and my journeys since we parted. May every 
blessing rest on you and yours, and may you 
in time rejoice in a happier world ! 

'^ Aleriel." 

I read and re-read this curious note, and 
then proceeded to read over the MS. It was, 
indeed, a strange document. I could hardly 
restrain expressing my astonishment in many 
places, and had a difficulty in following it ; but 
I give it here just as I received it, hoping my 
readers may have as much pleasure and wonder 
as I had in its perusal. The manuscript read 
as follows : — 



64 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER I. 



ALERIEL's journey home. — THE MOON. 



*' TT7HEN I ascended from Trebyndra, I soon 
VV attained to regions where man could 
never in his earth-life exist — far above the earth's 
atmosphere. Higher and higher I ascended, 
till the whole of Western Europe opened like 
a map before me, with Great Britain and 
Ireland on the blue sea, like a brownish-green 
triangle on a blue field. Higher and higher 
still I went, till the white Alps expanded 
before me, and I saw the realms of Asia 
opening up, lightened by the dawn. On, 
higher and higher, till all the earth seemed 
a huge globe, with part light and part dark- 
ness, only varied by the cities' lights. 

" As I ascended, I soon came near to one of 
the great meteor streams that dash through 
space with the rapidity of cannon-balls. I 



21ie Mysterious Document, 65 

selected one large meteor, and chaining my 
car to it, swept with it onwards towards your 
satellite, which loomed as a distant globe, part 
light, part dark, in the black ether. 

As I drew near it, in the vast realms of 
space, I loosened my car from the meteor, 
and then, restoring the power of gravitation, 
dashed on into the lunar sphere of gravitation 
towards the southern mountain-region that 
surrounds the lunar South Pole. It was a won- 
drously grand, and yet an awful, spectacle, — 
those vast and desolate rings of lunar moun- 
tains. Chain beyond chain, circle beyond 
circle, ring beyond ring, of extinct volcanoes 
opened up to my vision, — all glistening in the 
bright sunlight. To man, the heat would have 
been fatal. Boiling water was nothing to it. 
The thermometer rose to what you call 400 
degrees. But our natures can bear much 
greater heat than that. In our own world, 
so near the sun, we often get it. Higher and 
more potent than man in vitality, freed from 
his lower necessities, we can flourish and enjoy 
a vigorous life where he would die. So the 
intense heat did not inconvenience me. I only 
dwelt admiringly on the superb spectacle — 
a spectacle such as I never saw before ; though 
it was more like, in some points, the scenes on 

F 



66 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

Venus than on the earth. The nearest thing 
I can hken it to on earth is the view of the 
Alps from some of the Swiss mountains. I 
have seen something a little like it when I 
rested once on the summit of Jungfrau, and 
looked upon the chains of Alpine peaks, — on 
Eiger, the Wetterhorn, and far-off Mont Blanc. 
Peak upon peak, chain upon chain, opened to 
my view. Bat the absence of the ring-shape 
of the mountains marks the difference between 
the mountain-lands of the earth and those of 
the moon. In this the lunar mountains are 
more like ours than those of earth, though 
Vesuvius and the mountains of the Sandwich 
Isles are a little like the huge craters of the 
moon. 

I made designedly for Tycho, — the metro- 
politan crater, as your astronomers call it. 
The huge circle of ramparts (but little lower 
than the loftiest mountains of Europe), in 
terrific precipices of a mile or more in sheer 
descents, opened before me. The enclosed 
region of the ring was larger than many an 
English county, but it was a vast desert ; not 
an even plain, but rugged, with piles of rocks, 
relics of ancient volcanic eruptions. The cen- 
tral cones stood out somewhat as the Malverns 
stand in the midst of the plain of Worcester- 



The Mysterious Document, 67 

shire. Fancy tlie circle complete — the Cots- 
wolds and Welsh mountains some ten or twenty 
times more lofty — up to the level of the taller 
Alps ; the Malverns raised to Ben Cruachan ; 
the plains of Worcester and Hereford and 
Gloucester a lifeless desert covered with rocks, 
and you may gain a feeble conception of what 
Tycho is. 

All was dead around me. JSTot a city, not a 
house, not a tree, not even a blade of grass 
was to be seen. All horror, desolation, death 1 
And yet, withal, Nature, even in that dead 
world, has a certain strange beauty. 

I made for the central group of mountains 
(which I have likened to the Malverns). Here 
on their southern slope I descended. The 
shock was violent, though I tried to soften 
the fall. I dismounted from my car and trod 
another world, the third world I had visited. 
It was a solemn and sublime feeling, — that of 
treading a fresh world in space. 

I clambered up the chief peak of the central 
mountain of Tycho. Around me stretched the 
desert-plain for some twenty miles on every 
side, and then, beyond and above all, the mighty 
ring of mountains, without a break, only varied,, 
here and there, by the long shadows of their.* 
rocks. 

F 2 



68 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

I paused and gazed a long time on this 
wonderful, but desert, scene, and then, longing 
to expand my view, I strove to fly. But in vain. 
There was no atmosphere to support me, so 
I had to return to my car and to set its motive 
forces at work so as to cast off the gravitating 
power of the great orb about me and to float 
in ether over its surface. I passed over the 
ridge of Tycho to some four miles* altitude 
above the plains and crater- valleys. Again 
ring beyond ring of mountain circles — some 
glistening white, some shaded — opened to my 
eyes. It was a grand scene of confusion such 
as Alps or Himalayas cannot approach. I first 
resolved to turn towards the south, to the 
great ring of Clavius, — almost as large as 
Wales, with peaks as lofty as the Andes, and 
with ninety craters in its vast expanse, — about 
as many volcanoes as sufl&ce for the whole 
earth. I mounted its lofty rampart, and resting 
on the highest peak, as high as Chimborazo, 
i.e., some 23,000 feet, contemplated the superb 
and yet most strange scene. 

These ring-mountains of the moon are almost 
as large as countries on the earth, and Clavius 
was more like a Swiss canton than a crater. 
Vast forces had been here at work ! Were they 
the huge convulsions that destroyed life on 



The Mysterious Document. 69 

your satellite ? If not, if life could have existed 
in these lunar rings, each of them would be a 
separate country, as separated from the others 
as France is from Spain or Italy. Such ridges 
could not easily be passed by any but flying 
animals ; but flying animals and a dense atmo- 
sphere probably never existed on the moon. 
If ever life existed on that world, it must have 
been very varied in its developments. 

I dwelt on these thoughts as I rested upon 
the topmost peak of Clavius. I stayed there 
as long as one of your earth-days, and watched 
the shadows deepening on the cliffs. Then I 
thought of the bitter dreariness of the long 
night in this dead world; and before the 
shadows had lengthened on the craters I flew 
northward towards the equator. 

I set forward my ether car and made for 
the twin rings (each as large as an English 
county) which men call Stoefler and Mau- 
rolycus. I thus again returned into the realm 
of Tycho, for two of his great rays came from 
his vast crater to Stoefler. These two ring- 
systems were in themselves most wonderful. 
Maurolycus with its ramparts as lofty as the 
Andes, and Stoefler as the Alps. Here, on one 
of the peaks between the two vast rings, I rested 
and looked for a while on the terrible desola- 



70 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

tion around me. A thousand peaks were in 
sight, chain beyond chain, ridge beyond ridge, 
of mountains ; — the vast, ghttering region of 
the lunar South Pole on the one side, and 
to the north the huge crater-chain rising in 
successive lines. '' Is all this," I thought, 
'' the result of the terrific convulsions that 
ruined life upon this satellite, or is it but the 
nature of this world — a world of mountain 
ranges, — of huge craters, — of volcanic ac- 
tion?" 

Then I rose upwards into the dark airless 
expanse of ether, and directed my car to the 
mighty ring of Ptolomaeus. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 71 



CHAPTER II. 



COPERNICUS. 



FEOM Ptolomasus I directed my car to the 
great ring of Copernicus, the rival of 
mighty Tycho. It was a vast plain of 56 miles 
diameter, walled in by ramparts, in rising 
terraces up to 12,000 feet. The peaks in 
succession glistened in the sunlight. 

Then I turned westward from Copernicus 
to the huge chains of the lunar Apennines, 
which recalled to my mind, more than anything 
else I had seen since I had left Trehyndra, the 
memory of the mountains of the earth. Long 
lines of peaks with narrow gorges, with lines 
of awful precipices, such as you cannot imagine. 
Some of the peaks were as lofty as Mont 
Blanc. The scenery was magnificent and 
terrible. 

From these peaks (on which I rested) I 
looked over the vast plains — those waterless 
seas of the moon — like what your Atlantic, or 
Pacific, or even North Sea, would be if the 



72 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

ocean was drained from tliem and only the sea- 
bottom left. 

^ » ^ ^ 

The feeling of loneliness intensified and grew 
rapidly upon me as the dark shadows of these 
tremendous peaks in the setting sun, sharply 
defined in the absence of an atmosphere, 
gathered around me. The valleys long had 
been in darkness. Now peak after peak grew 
black ; at last night closed around me, and the 
bright orb of day sank amid the mountains. 

The black sky was now varied by a myriad 
glittering stars, amid which the great earth 
rolled with its oceans and continents partly 
defined through the clouds and mist, with 
which, in many places, it was enveloped. I 
looked for England, but I only saw the mist 
in which it was wrapt. Some parts of the 
earth, however, came out clearly, especially the 
regions of the tropics. At either pole, just 
as you see on Mars, there was a glittering 
mass of snow and ice shining white in the 
sunlight. 

I looked and wondered, and then I turned 
to the desolate scene around me, dimly illumined 
by the earth-light, and then, as I felt my lone* 
liness — alone, alone, in a dead world, — I knelt 
in awe and worshipped God. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds, 73 



CHAPTER III. 



WELCOME HOME. 



I FINISHED the first prayer that for ages, 
perchance, had arisen from that dead world, 
and then I set my ether car homewards, and 
plunged out again into vast and boundless 
space, not to earth, but to our bright world. 

At length, when some time had elapsed, such 
as men would count by weeks or months, our 
glorious world opened to my view, with its 
soft tints, and white, misty clouds, lighted by 
the sun's blaze, — and, here and there, the long 
ridges or the lofty peaks of the mountains. 

As I drew nearer it, thoughts of home 
gathered around me. '- Why 'had I left a 
world so lovely and so happy to dwell, even 
for a while, on one so fallen and so sad as 
earth is, or so utterly dead as its lifeless 
satellite, — the twin homes of sin and death? 
Yet, on the other hand, I had succeeded in my 
enterprise, and entirely so. I had visited 



74 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

eartli, I had seen all its beauties and its 
sorrows ; I had mixed with men, and been 
undetected by them ; I had added immensely, 
not merely to my own, but to my fellow- 
creatures' field of knowledge. Now they would 
be able to classify and criticise my information, 
and by it advance in their grasp of the know- 
ledge of creation." 

Such thoughts passed through my mind as 
I directed my vessel through space to my own 
city, near the great Southern Ocean. Then 
I turned on the gravitating power, and dashed, 
at the speed of a cannon-ball, towards the 
glorious and brilHant globe before me. Down, 
down I rushed, till the sea of vapour was close 
under my feet. It reminded me then of the 
scene I more than once had lingered over in 
the Alps. The white sea of mist stretched 
before me, with here and there, like islands in 
a lake, a few of the glittering mountains of 
our South Polar continent. " After all, the 
solar system is really akin," I said to myself. 
" Surely our world is hke to the earth, its 
sister in space." 

Down, down I rushed. The clouds were 
round me, one sea of white mist ; and then I 
had dashed through the veil, and our glorious, 
our lovely world, the '' queen of beauty " in the 



Welcome Home. 75 

solar system, opened to my view. There all 
was just as I had left it. There were the tall 
mountain-cliffs, huger far than the Himalayas, 
piercing up through the clouds into space ; 
there were the soft, tinted forests, and the grey 
ocean, and the vast gardens of every delicate 
and tender hue. '' How could I leave such a 
world to be on the earth, with all its misery 
and sadness ? " I cried. '' And yet the earth 
has its beauty, its loveliness. The gaily- 
coloured islands of the tropics, the green 
summer verdure of England, the virgin forests 
of America, have their beauties ; for God has 
made all things good, even on earth." So 
thought I as I sped on my way. There was 
our city, with its many hundred towers and 
hanging gardens, and its thousand fantastic 
roofs. It was my home ! Home, even if poor, 
on earth is beloved ; but who would not be 
proud of such a home, seeing its grandeur 
now, as, for a year or more, I had only looked 
on earthly cities ? Some had reminded me 
feebly of my fair home ; for instance, Prague, 
with its mingled eastern and western archi- 
tecture, and Edinburgh, and, in some sense, 
Paris. 

I made first for the overhanging moun- 
tain, and there rested my car on a ledge, and 



76 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

then, leaving it there in a quiet spot, flew over 
the city. As in duty bound, I made first for 
the temple of my ward (for we have seven 
wards and seven great temples in our city). 
Its lovely towers looked vast indeed by 
contrast with anything I had seen on earth, 
and when I flew through the great circular 
door (like a rose window in the western gable), 
how glorious it appeared ! I had of late seen 
Cologne Cathedral and St. Peter's at Rome, 
and York and Durham. How poor they all 
seemed in comparison with the church of our 
ward ! There are three things in which we 
have an immeasurable advantage over men. 
We have immortality, for the powers of death 
have been conquered in us for ages, and so we 
need not waste our powers in the struggle how 
to live. We have had perfect peace, without a 
possibility of war, for thousands of years. We 
have a devotion to offer the vast resources in 
our power to the service of religion. So the 
poorest church of the smallest and most insig- 
nificant city in our world is grander than the 
finest cathedral or palace upon earth. Our 
powers are immeasurably vaster than those of 
man. Yet you might do much if you had no 
war, and were to concentrate your powers on 
the arts of peace. 



Welcome Home. 77 

As I entered, the service, of course, was 
going on : it has not ceased for ages. Four 
choirs of winged choristers were raising their 
pseans of joy and thankfulness. Night and day 
the song is unceasing. As I rested on the 
capital of a pillar and looked on the four choirs, 
in their robes of blue and red, green and purple, 
and heard the heavenly sound of many voices 
rolling through the lofty arches, soft and sweet 
and entrancing — now one choir, now another, 
now two combined, now all four together in 
one great chorus — I felt enthralled as I never 
felt before. "How wonderful is our world; 
how thankful am I to God for his love in 
placing me here ! " So saying, I sank down 
gently on the pavement, and prostrated myself, 
adoring. None seemed to heed me, though 
many saw and knew me. The worship went 
on, and the delicious song still swept over me, 
and through the aisles and vaults, until the 
time when the thunder- signal marked the 
change in the course, and four other choirs, 
with solemn music, entered their places to 
continue the next watch of ceaseless adoration. 
Then I arose, and, going out with the choir, 
as 1 reached the garden, was met by many 
kindly greetings. 

*' Dear brother, we are glad to see you home 



78 



A Vo7jage to Other Worlds. 



and happy. Tell us of the earth," was said 
Jpy many of my comrades. 

" Let me go to the prince of the ward, and 
then I shall tell you all. I have a thousand 
things to say, only I know not how to begin. 
Only now I shall say how much I love my 
home, and how glad you all should be of 
dwelling where you are." 

So saying, followed by a friendly crowd, with 
many loving greetings, I came to the palace of 
the ward. Here, in the outer court, sat our 
prince upon his crystal throne, ready to 
welcome me, for many had seen me flying over 
the city, but none had spoken to me till I had 
finished my worship of the Most High. 

''Welcome, Aleriel, he said, home ! God has 
preserved you in a long and perilous voyage, 
such as none, save the princes of the sun and 
the great spirit-messengers of the Highest, have 
yet taken. Welcome, tell us of your journey! " 

'' I have so many thoughts, I know not how 
to tell them. It is a sad, a sorrowful world, 
that 'beautiful planet of the single satellite,' 
our twin sister in space. There is sin there, 
and death, and suffering, and disease, and war. 
I have seen all — all — much that is sad and 
terrible, such as we never even think of in our 
happy world. And yet it is beautiful. What 
God has made is beautiful, and that world is 



Welcome Home, 79 

beautiful ; not quite as lovely as ours, yet very 
lovely sometimes, and it is larger than ours ; 
it has greater oceans and vaster continents. 
It is in some way fitted for happiness, and 
perhaps there is a something nobler and 
grander in man than in us ; but in his earth- 
life man has no hope of perfect happiness, 
though on earth he is often fitted for perfect 
happiness in another life, when the penalty of 
sin has been paid, and Redemption been 
accepted." 

" We ought, Aleriel, to be thankful to the 
Most High that we have been placed here, and 
not on that beautiful planet, our sister world 
in creation. It seems you have seen much 
sorrow and evil that you never would have 
known of had you not ventured over the abyss 
of space." 

At my request, the prince sent for my car 
from its mountain ledge. It was soon brought 
down to me, and placed in the palace hall. 
Here I opened the larger case in which I had 
placed the packets of my earth-curiosities. 

First and chief there were closely packed 
some thousands of photographs of earth's chief 
cities, and scenes from almost every land. 
This alone would have given months of study. 
But I had other things — some earth-flowers, 
pressed and dried, a phial of ocean and of 



80 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

fresh water for our naturalists to study ; a 
pocket Bible, several specimens of earth's 
rocks, a few coins of different states, some 
pieces of polished woods. No animal or even 
insect could have lived in the airless realms of 
ether through which I had passed, so all I 
brought was dead — dead as the meteoric 
stones, the sole link in matter between the 
earth and other systems in space. Living 
beings only of the highest order and the most 
vigorous vitality can pass from world to world 
and live. So nothing earthly could exist even 
a hundred miles away from its own orb — man 
is a prisoner to his world. 

These curiosities excited much attention and 
interest. Thousands were the questions I had 
to answer. Everything was examined, not 
merely with the naked eye, but with the micro- 
scopes that most of our citizens are wont to 
carry with them to investigate and admire any 
of the beauties of nature that attract their 
attention. Small shreds of many of the sub- 
stances were taken by our chemists for 
analysis, to be quite sure that the elements of 
matter in our sister- world would be exactly 
the same as we had in our planet. 

At once the news spread by electricity all 
over our world, and strangers from many far- 



Welcome Home. 81 

off cities came to converse with me, and to see 
the earth-specimens I had brought. It was, 
indeed, with us just as it would be with you, if 
any one from another planet had come to 
earth with curiosities belonging to that distant 
world; what an excitement there would be 
in every intelligent society, in every city, in 
every university, at every observatory ! But, 
alas, what wrangling would ensue ! Not so 
with us. All knew I spoke only the truth, 
and that these things were really the product 
of our sister- world — the earth. 



G 



82 A Voyage to other Worlds, 



CHAPTER JY. 

EARTH AS OTHERS SEE IT. 

IT was a solemn yet a sublime moment when 
I was called on to address the wisest and 
noblest of the inhabitants of our world, and 
tell them of my visit to the earth. The 
assembly was vast, millions were gathered 
along the ledges of the cliffs, and on the 
slopes, and on the lower plain of the ring crater 
wherein the assembly was gathered. I stood 
by the prince of our city and sundry of the 
great leaders of our nation, upon the central 
platform, where, amidst the insignia of our 
cities, I looked down on the gathered host. 
Around me were the rings of microphones and 
telephones to carry my voice to the uttermost 
circle of that multitude. The host, with all 
their robes of varied tints, made a gorgeous 
spectacle, while the grand natural scenery of the 
crater and its many cliffs was adorned in every 
part by banners and insignia. I had never seen 
such a spectacle since the Prince of the Sun 



Earth as Others see it. 83 

came with his message to ns. When the 
assembly gathered, the signal was given, by the 
sound of cannon, for the opening hymn (for 
€very national or general assembly was com- 
menced by a tribute of praise to the Most 
High). Then from a million voices burst the 
long and mighty pgean of praise, with the soft 
music of ten thousand harps and trumpets. 
My spirit was moved to its depths as I looked 
down on the vast host before me, and thought 
of God's love to me in giving me so bright and 
glorious a world to live in. What a contrast 
to the earth — torn by strife, desolated by sin, 
stained by sorrow, suffering, misery ! What a 
still greater contrast to the miserable dead 
world I had just left ! 

Then, as the majestic song of a million 
voices died away, the prince of our nation 
arose and waved his sceptre, and bade silence, 
and all was still as though no living being 
were in that huge crater. Then he spake : — 

" Citizens of the bright world, listen ! Aleriel, 
our brother, has come back from earth by 
divine permission. The awful journey through 
space has been achieved. Our prayers have 
been heard. Welcome him home." ^^: 

He spake, and then from a million voices 
came the chanted song : *^ Aleriel, welcome 



84 ^1 VoT/age to Other Worlds, 

home." I cannot tell you the thrill of that 
loving welcome. You cannot understand it 
now ; but yet you may in a future state know 
the sweet welcome to a realm of bliss by angel 
voices. 

Then he said aloud that all might hear : — 
" Aleriel, tell us of your journey." 
I was moved in spirit, and yet I rose and 
spoke. 

" Thanks, comrades of a happy land. Be 
grateful for God's love to you. The story of 
my journey is very long, for I have seen so 
many million things which you hardly know 
of, for to me they were unknown until I saw 
them. I have been in that strange planet that 
so often lightens our evenings, when we see 
the outer skies through openings in the silvery 
mists. I have seen it ; I have walked on it ; I 
have twice travelled round it ; I have visited 
its cities, traversed its oceans, crossed its 
continents, ascended its mountains. Man I 
have seen also — the ruling intelligence of that 
world. I have beheld man in his various 
races, in his struggles for higher things, in his 
sorrows, in his agonies, in his death. I have 
seen some noble things on earth, very many 
wretched and miserable things ; not a few, 
very terrible — to us inconceivably terrible. I 



Earth as Others see it. 85 

have beheld men struggling against their 
misery, and in vain ; I have witnessed starva- 
tion, want, disease in a thousand loathsome 
forms of death. I have seen the wretched 
selfishness of men grasping for self only ; the 
weak crushed by the strong, and the strong 
still insatiate. It is a world in which there 
are many terrible, and horrible, and despicable 
things, and a few noble or glorious. Yet, as 
to the world itself, it is, like all God's work, 
good of itself. Nature on earth is often very 
beautiful. In some things it rivals in loveliness 
our world. In the evenings often the silvery 
light of the satellite gives it a mysterious and 
soft beauty, such as we have not, and by day 
even many a scene is grand and brilliant. 
That green gem-like island south of the great 
continent* is very beautiful, and so in colder 
regions are many parts of the fair isles west 
of the great continent. The regions round the 
equator are full of splendid scenes. Even 
colder realms, in their frequent changes, have 
great variety — some silvery in whiteness, when 
the moist rain falls frozen to the earth in flakes ; 
or in spring, green; or in summer, of many hues, 
growing more sober as winter comes. The 

* Ceylon. 



86 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

oceans are grand also, and the storms, when 
the blue waters are silvered with foam. Yes, 
God made all things good — even on earth. It 
is only man that makes them vile. How 
strange it seems that bond of man to evil — that 
clinging to the bad, even of those who wish to 
be good and to love the good ! It seems like an 
evil nature, a secret spiritual power, marring 
God's creation on earth, which over us has 
never had any influence. Yet men who 
conquer this evil, how noble they grow, how 
majestic in spirit ! The very struggle makes 
them nobler, stronger in spirit, grander even 
than we are. Such souls as good men have 
are fitted for a higher existence, not only than 
earth, but even than our lovely world can 
offer. Our natures are soft, and gentle, and 
simple ; but we have never known the struggle 
against sin and sorrow that men know. 

" I have seen many things that you never can 
see on our world. I have seen the hospital — 
men and women struggling with death in 
dying agony. I have seen misery such as you 
cannot fancy — thousands, tens of thousands, 
without enough of light or air, in smoky, dingy, 
dirty dens, lingering on a weary life to make 
others rich. I have seen debauchery and sins, 
such as we have, happily, no name for. I have 



Earth as Others see it. 87 

seen wickedness triumpliant, proud, ricli, self- 
suflBcient ; and I have seen men and women 
struggling almost against hope — save that one 
blessed anchor of the human soul, the expec- 
tation of a joyful resurrection. I have seen 
untold misery such as you cannot conceive, 
and I have seen what is far worse than misery, 
human souls carried on to ruin by the mad 
thirst for pleasure. O sad earth ! beautiful 
and glorious though thy God has made thee ! 
what an untold depth of woe is to be seen on 
thy fair lands ! " 

The vast assembly seemed moved to sorrow 
by my words ; a sympathetic thrill went through 
them. I noticed it and changed the subject, 
struck at how much my fellow-beings felt for 
and pitied men who were not as happy as they 
were. 

** In that world the forms of life akin to our 
lower nature are humble, small, weak, stupid, 
soulless. The earth cannot develope the flying 
type of life to a great size or intelligence. The 
beings akin to us are smaller than men, and 
of low sense; as the beings akin to man 
{i.e. the creatures who climb the trees) are in 
our world feeble and despised. The moun- 
tains of earth are not as ours. Even the 
Himalayas and the Alps — those white spots 



88 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

you see on the great continent — are mere hills 
compared with the ring mountains of our 
world. Man cannot even yet fly, but some- 
times as a great feat he risks his earth-life by 
floating on a huge gas ball in the air, carried 
by every current. All on earth cliugs to the 
surface, and ever has so clung. Even in the 
ages long gone by before the days of man, the 
huge beings of primeval time crawled in 
the marshes. Only a few birds soar a mile 
or so in the air, and those birds are thought 
wonderful, the ensigns and heraldic signs of 
earth's greatest monarchies. Earth is one 
vast prison-house, where all are bound to the 
surface. 

" What the destiny of earth is to be I 
cannot say. Men, the most thoughtful and 
most holy of mankind, believe it is to be de- 
stroyed, to be wrapped in some vast cataclysm, 
and in the great crash of doom be ruined 
utterly and eternally. Better, methinks, it 
should be so. It has its work to do in training 
up brave souls to endure hardness, to develope 
in the spiritual combat their hidden nobleness. 
When that work is done and enough human 
souls have struggled, striven, conquered in the 
agony of that great combat, better that earth 
should pass away and be broken up and 



Earth as Others see it, 89 

crushed in atoms, and then there will be an 
end to earth and to the earth-life of man, and 
the strong souls that once were men in the 
higher life of other worlds will glory in their 
victory. For their souls are immortal, and, if 
they cannot obtain their destiny on earth, they 
will in higher and happier spheres." 



90 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER V. 



A STRANGE PROPOSAL. 



I CAME liome to my city. I rested there a 
quarter of a year (we have no months, 
because we have no moon). Many came from 
distant cities to ask about earth and what I 
had seen or heard. Myriads of questions were 
put to me — some that I could, and many that 
I could not, answer. 

The pictures of earth — your cities, moun- 
tains, river scenes and so on — were examined 
by myriads of our comrades, copied again and 
again, and copies sent to every city and every 
museum of our world. My journey was given 
in writing, and ten million copies scattered 
through every country. Many were the com- 
ments on it. Some even foolishly suggested 
that a party of our citizens should go forth as 
missionaries to vour world to teach men to be 
better and happier ; but I at once checked this 
idea. " The Church on earth does her work," 
I said, '^ and God deals with men in His way. 



A Strange Proposal, 91 

Our going openly to men would only make 
them worse — might disturb the good and form 
a mere pastime to the wicked." So the wise 
ones of our world stifled the proposal in its 
germ. 

One evening, as I was returning from the 
service of our course in the great temple of 
the city, I found our prince waiting for me 
in my home. With him there was a stranger, 
who, by his robes and insignia, I recognised 
must be one of the princes of Saldonio, the 
city of the stars, in our northern continent, 
where the study of astronomy was chiefly 
carried on, more than anywhere else. " I have 
long read and re-read the narration of your visit 
to the earth," he said, " and it has filled me 
with interest. It seems to me that the time 
has come when we may, by subduing the forces 
of nature, travel from world to world; not 
only to the earth, but to the farther worlds of 
our system. Our mechanician, Azoniel, has 
constructed a globe fitted for such journeys* 
and has perfected your mode of conquering 
gravitation. My friend Ezariel, one of the 
leading masters of the laws of nature in our 
city, will join us." 

I gave reflection to the proposal. At first 
the love of home, stronger than ever since I 



^2 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

had seen earth's miseries and sorrows, made 
me unwilling again to launch forth into im- 
measurable space ; but I was unwilling to deny 
myself the pleasure of beholding new works of 
the Creator's love, new evidences of His mercy 
and His majesty, and also I reasoned that, per- 
chance, other worlds might be as beautiful as 
earth, but less fallen and spoilt by sin. So, 
perchance, in other worlds I might behold 
better and fairer things, by which I might learn 
more. I consulted with the chief sages of our 
city. They were of opinion that now I had 
been able to pass to two of our sister orbs, it 
would be well to try if we could proceed further. 
Some suggested Mercury as suitable for a trial ; 
but my own feeling, and that of the great 
majority of our senate, was that, if we should 
again plunge forth into space, we should select 
the outer worlds rather than the inner planet 
of our system. The gorgeous realm of Mars, 
and even the huge systems of the giant and 
the ringed worlds (as we call Jupiter and 
Saturn) might be visited. 

I went to Saldonio in our air car. It was a 
long journey of three days, half round our 
world, for Saldonio was in a far-off continent. 
Thousands of fair cities, vast territories of 
beauteous vegetation, lakes, rivers, and seas did 



A Strange ProposaL 93 

we pass over, night and day. Still on we flew, 
until, at last, we reached the mighty mountain 
ring, upon one peak of which Saldonio was 
reared. It was built on a plateau of rock 
some twenty miles above the plains, far above 
the fleecy clouds which usually cover our 
planet. Thus the astronomers could usually 
watch in clear nights the expanse of heaven, 
and all the wonders therein contained. Around 
the city, from many miles afar, were to be seen 
the lower mountains of the chain rounded into 
the form of spheres, each of which depicted 
some world in the solar system, carved over 
and stained as gigantic models of the planets 
around us. Close to the city was the model of 
the earth, a globe far vaster than any man has 
ever made, six hundred yards around, on which 
the loftier Himalayas were raised some four or 
five inches, and where London was marked 
as a dark spot about the size of a large leaf. 

I came to the city over which enormous 
instruments of study towered above every 
spire and roof. It was a wondrous place. All 
that art could do was done to know the 
other worlds. They were observed, mapped, 
examined, measured. Science had done every- 
thing, save open the gates to visiting them. 
And now Arauniel was planning that also. 



94 A Voyage to Other Woidds. 

He welcomed me in tlie Palace of tlie Stars. 
He showed me the treasures of the city — the 
results of the studies of thousands of astro- 
nomers for many ages past, and inspired me 
with his interest and curiosity to know more. 
At last he showed me, in Azoniel's hall (where 
his works of mechanism were stored) the globe 
for a voyage through space. It was a sphere 
of some twenty feet diameter, of strongest 
polished steel. At its top there was a rounded 
door which could be lifted up, and around its 
equator were four crystal windows, to observe 
as we travelled through space. Within were 
copies of my instruments for conquering gravi- 
tation, but of enormous power. Mighty electro- 
magnets were there, and within there was a 
room with every comfort for the travellers 
during their long and perilous voyage. In the 
side were a thousand instruments of every kind 
for observing, measuring, registering natural 
forces, and so forth. A long bar pierced the 
base of the sphere in which were the explosive 
forces to impel or direct the sphere. It was a 
wonderful triumph of skill — a little artificial 
world, as it were, fitted to dart through inter- 
planetary space with every triumph of our skill 
and science comprised within its globe and 
stored in its many cells. All accidents appeared 



A Strange Proposal. 95 

provided against, while the apparatus gave us 
an immense power over nature. 

I admired the ether car, as we called it, and 
felt inclined to join once more in a great expe- 
dition into space beyond the earth's orbit, 
and into the vast outer regions of the giant 
planets. 

I returned from Saldonio to our city, calling, 
as I went on, at most of the great cities on the 
way, and studying, in their museums, both of 
the things which might relate to earth and 
also to my coming voyage. I talked with the 
wisest sages of many lands on our project, and 
on the things we might hope to see, and what 
should be the special points of our researches. 
I found the general opinion was that life was 
universal in the solar system, except in some 
few of the smaller worlds (like the moon) on 
which it had existed, but had passed away, or 
which were, as yet, not enough developed to 
receive it. The idea was that, as in the spectro- 
scope we had seen that the elements of the 
solar system were everywhere the same as on 
our world, probably derived from the sun — 
and, as on your earth, only the same metals 
and gases were proved to exist as we had — so 
also, in life, that the same types of life were 
everywhere existent, only developed more in 



96 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

one world than in another. I satisfactorily 
had proved that, as the metals and the com- 
mon forces, so the life-types were the same in 
your world as in ours ; so, also, we hoped to 
find whether they could be traced all through 
the solar system, just as the metals were 
traced. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 97 



PART III.— MARS. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE VOYAGE THEOUGH SPACE. 

AT length, the day appointed for our depar- 
ture arrived. We had resolved to start 
from Saldonio. The ether-car was fixed to the 
central spire of the chief cathedral of the city — 
one of the highest points of our world. About 
two millions of our Venusians had gathered to 
behold the spectacle, and now they crowded 
every vantage point in the city — every spire 
and tower, every battlement and roof, every 
square and garden, was thronged with the vast 
host who had gathered from all lands to behold 
the sight. Their variously coloured robes and 
ornaments formed a most brilliant scene. 

It was about sunset. After the tranquil 
service in the glorious cathedral, and the 
solemn blessing of the chief priests of the city, 

H 



98 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

we passed forth into the crowded square, and 
flew up to the spire where the ether-car was 
suspended. A subUme spectacle (such as I 
have never seen in all my wanderings excelled) 
opened to our vision. At our feet for a 
hundred miles or more stretched the vast 
Saldonian territory, the lines of mountain 
chains and rings, and forest-clad hills, and 
milky lakes. The shadows of evening were 
already gathering over the low country, for 
Saldonio was so lofty that it was in sun- 
light when the evening had wrapt the plains. 
The lights of a hundred cities were just glim- 
mering in the grey evening. At our feet was 
the magnificent city — a city such as you cannot 
imagine (though Edinburgh might be mentioned 
as a feeble parody of it), with its thousands of 
graceful spires, and airy gardens and plazas 
and public buildings — now one living mass of 
intelligent beings, in their varied coloured 
robes. It was a scene not to be described in 
human words. 

"We entered the ether-car. The chiefs of the 
city bade us farewell, and gave us their blessing. 
At a signal from the Prince of Saldonio, the 
great hymn of praise burst from two millions 
of voices, and just as the sun sank behind the 
serrated ridge of the Ulcorian mountains we 



The Voyage through Space. 99 

cut the bond, developed the anti-gravitating 
force, and launched into infinite space. 

^ Sjf 9p ?K 

I need not describe the long journey into 
interplanetary space we took. We soon reached 
one of the meteoric systems which traverse 
ether in all directions, and swept on by it 
towards the planet Mars. What you call days 
and weeks and months passed as we rushed on 
away and away from the great Sun. 

The time did not pass as heavily, however, as 
I found it on my former lonely journey. Com- 
panionship brightens life even to us, more per- 
haps than to men, for we Venusians have never 
anything unkind to say, no quarrel, no bitter- 
ness, no selfishness, no pride, no envy to trouble 
each other with. So we talked, or studied the 
precious books that Arauniel had stored us 
with, or compared notes and conjectures what 
we should see in those other worlds which we 
should visifc. 

At length we passed the earth's orbit, but at 
manymilhons of miles from the earth, and then 
went on, further and further, into space, till the 
ruddy orb of Mars grew larger, and then we 
severed ourselves from the meteors and re- 
stored gravitation and dashed at immense 
velocity to that gorgeous world. 

H 2 



100 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER II. 



THE ICE ISLAND. 



OUR descent was planned for the Great Ice 
Island in tlie Delarue Ocean. It was a 
bright spot from our world, and so we had 
chosen it as one suited for a first descent — the 
more as it seemed isolated, and ^Drobablj our 
arrangements would not be disturbed. 

On then we flew through space till we 
reached the attraction of the ruddy planet, and 
could see his mighty expanse of crimson plains 
spotted by green oceans and lakes and veiled 
in clouds with either pole robed in eternal 
snows. It was autumn in the Southern hemi- 
sphere of Mars then, and the white glittering 
snows stretched over the south. But Huyghens 
continent and even Laplace land, ruddy with 
their mighty forests, glowed blood-stained, as 
it were, beneath us. 

On, on we rushed, ever faster and faster, by 
the power of gravitation of the world to which 
we were approaching. How vast it seemed ; 



The Ice Island. 101 

and yefc, as we all know, it is smaller far than 
either your world or than ours. At length the 
whole expanse beneath us, the equatorial region 
of Mars, was red or green. Then the ruddy 
shores of Copernicus and Galileo continents 
only were in sight on the horizon, with the two 
great islands which earth's astronomers call 
Tycho's Island and Schroeter's Land. All else 
was the green ocean absorbing the sun's rays 
into its dark emerald verdure. On we flew to 
the crystal peaks covered with snows of the 
great Ice Island. They were huge mountains, 
not unlike your Alpine group of Mont Blanc 
and Monte Rosa. A vast region of snowy 
peaks glittering in the Sun, but unlike Switzer- 
land, not set in green, heaving lands, but in 
the storm-toss'd waves of the Delarue Ocean 
—like the peak of Teneriffe in the Atlantic. 

Down we sank until at last the anti-gravitat- 
ing power had to be used to stem the impetus, 
and even when we reached the snowy peak of 
one of the ice mountains, we struck it with a 
violence that almost cracked the rock. Our 
vessel was, however, strongly constructed, and 
so it was merely shaken. 

Again I felt the joy of treading the firm 
ground of another world. This was the fourth 
I had stood upon. My native world had even 



102 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

for ages been my joy — a bappy abode. Eartb I 
bad trodden on and traversed, even in places 
wbere man's foot bad never wandered, in 
Arctic snows, up to tbe very Pole itself. I 
bad twice gone round your eartb, bad seen its 
cities, mountains, oceans, its sin, its misery, its 
follies, its conceits. Your satellite I bad visited 
and wandered, as I told you, over tbe rugged 
slopes of Tycbo, and clambered tbe lunar 
crater range, and crossed tbe crater of 
Copernicus. 

And now I stood upon anotber world — a 
world tbat seemed most beautiful, altbougb 
furtber removed tban ours or yours from tbe 
great source of life and beauty, i.e., tbe 
glorious centre of our system — tbe ligbt- giving 
Sun. 

We found ourselves on tbe summit of a small 
ice-formed mountain, partially filled witb snow. 
Here we placed our etber-car and buried it in 
tbe snows, so tbat it migbt not be disturbed by 
any Martian wbo migbt come across it. Tben 
we took jBigbt to tbe loftiest peak of tbe ring,, 
from wbicb we surveyed tbe country. 

In tbe foreground of tbe strange scene 
before us was a vast succession of mountains, 
not unlike icebergs, or tbe lunar mountains 
of tbe Soutb pole. Tbey were all wbite witb 



The Ice Island, 103 

snow, or glittering here and there with, icy 
glaciers. The scene reminded me of some parts 
of the Moon, and of the lofty plateau of the 
Dofrefeld. But beyond it and below, was 
neither lunar desolation nor brown plains of 
moorland, nor green fields and forests as in 
your European snowy mountain ranges. As 
the snows were lost in the low country, vast 
forests appeared — crimson as blood, or orange- 
coloured — glowing in the sunlight with a rich 
deep red. They grew on the ledges of the 
cliffs under the snows, on the mountain terraces, 
and lastly stretched down in slopes to the green 
waters of the Delarue Ocean. 

We resolved to plunge downwards to these 
forests. We flew easily to one of the terraces 
with overhanging cliffs around it. Here we 
alighted amidst this crimson vegetation. The 
effect, as the sun shone through the blood-red 
leaves, was unutterably superb. The very light 
was tinted to a ruddy glow. All was gorgeous 
and magnificent. There is a certain majesty 
and power in the colour of red which, when 
seen in large fields, impresses the mind. But 
no one who has not seen vast masses of red 
all around in every direction above (in leafy 
foliage), below in the ruddy, as it were, blood- 
stained turf, around — in vegetation of quaint 



104 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

forms, but of crimson hue, can realise the 
inexpressible gorgeousness of this spectacle — 
a field of peonies or other red flowers would 
very feebly represent it, for these red flowers 
of earth have green leaves, and ours have pale 
and delicate tints ; but all was here, as it were, 
ensanguined in hue. To men's eyes the sight 
would soon have been wearying, or even 
maddening ; to us it was simply magnificent. 

It would not be fair, however, to say that 
only red was present. It is true, the very light 
was tinted with red as it passed through the 
ruddy vegetation ; but there were other tints 
besides, and glorious ones, but only enough to 
vary the spectacle and to make it splendid. 
Every colour of the rainbow was there, but 
crimson and orange predominated. Every 
other colour was, as it were, set in a glorious 
back-ground of red. The forms of the plants, 
for such I suppose I must call them, were 
various — very different from ours or yours, — 
quaint growths in curious developments of 
form, yet not without a certain grace and 
elegance, for all that God has made is good. 

We walked a little while among these strange 
productions of nature in all their ruddiness, 
when I heard a rolling sound, and calling the 
attention of my companions, we walked to- 



I 



The Ice Island. " 105 

Avards it among the quaint cactus-like plants 
and trees that made up this wondrous forest. 
At length we saw something green glittering 
amidst the red foliage. We came nearer to it. 
Then we saw the cause of the sound ; it was 
the cascade of green liquid that flowed down 
with crash and noise from the terrace above. 
Here, then, were the causes of the Martian 
tints — i.e., the green waters and the ruddy 
foliage of that which men once called the w^ar 
planet ; not the mere red rocks (like your 
Devonian red sand-stone on earth), but that 
which everywhere results from moisture and 
sunlight and warmth — vegetation and vege- 
table life. This ruddy foliage is not unknown 
to you. The copper-beech is a slight approach 
to it, the poppy, and the peony, and the red 
geranium are better examples though on a 
minute scale. And even green is not unknown 
in earth seas. I have seen it often when the 
sun has shone through blue seas on yellow 
sands — so Mars is not so unearth-like as many 
planets are. 

The Ice Island. seemed to be a vast mass of 
icebergs that had attached themselves to an 
island covered with vegetation. We resolved 
at once to leave it for 1 ycho Island. 



106 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER III. 



TYCHO ISLAND. 



ON we flew over tlie green Delarue Ocean, 
till at length tlie white peaks of the ice 
mountains were lost behind the waves. Soon 
a blood-red line appeared on the horizon. It 
grew clearer and clearer. The shores were 
more and more defined. Then there opened 
up the long red forests of Tycho Island — the 
great island of Mars — the largest tract of land 
enclosed in the green ocean of the southern 
tropics. It was very glorious and gorgeous. 
The red forests waved like gigantic poppies or 
carnations in the breeze. We floated over 
them. Everything looked unlike what we all 
had seen on our own fair world, or I on earth. 
The tints were not the soft pale tints of our 
sunny home, nor yet the refreshing green or 
dull browns of the earth, but glowing gorgeous 
red and orange. The shapes of the trees were 
such as I cannot describe — quaint and extra- 
ordinary — a new phase of creation, and, to 



Tycho Island, 107 

us, fresh manifestations of creative power and 
love. Glorious in form, as in colour, were 
those ruddy forests of Mars. As yet we could 
see no trace of intelligent beings ; but, after 
floating in the air for some hours, Ezariel 
said : '' See, there is something like the abode 
of an intelligence, or of something possessing 
reason." 

It was a massive wall of grey stone in a 
triangular form under some large red trees. 
Upon it there was a metal roof, which glit- 
tered in the sunlight. This roof was conical 
in form, and quaintly ornamented. We ap- 
proached it, and passed by a path through 
the ruddy cactus-shaped plants. The building 
looked one constructed to resist pressure from 
without — massive and strong. 

'' Surely," said Ezariel, '' this must be 
formed to resist outward pressure, and cast off 
the winter snows. This is an Arctic clime. 
The winters must be terrible, and so it would 
appear the first object of the Martians must be 
to keep off the snow, and to exclude the cold." 

Under the forest shade, as we descended, we 
saw a figure half human in aspect — erect and 
dignified — but gigantic in figure. His face was 
very like a man's and like ourselves, but yet 
he had a sort of lion look also in his limbs. 



108 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

We approached liira. For a moment he 
seemed awed and alarmed by us — the natural 
shrinking of every living being from the 
creature of another world was manifest on our 
side and on his. Yet we felt no antipathy. 
There was a nobleness and a dignity in his 
presence which, though distinct from the soft 
lovingness of our nature, was not opposed to 
it. His manner was rather of astonishment 
than of fear. He looked at us in silence for a 
while, and then as we halted at some distance 
he himself approached us, and waved his hand 
in the air, keeping still erect, as if in greeting. 
We made the signs of greeting and sang, as i^s 
our wont, the song of welcome to a friend. 
He listened, as if moved and enthralled, then 
in deep solemn tones, from his great chest, 
heaved out some words that we could not 
understand. 

" It seems that where there is intelligence 
there is speech," said Ezariel. '' Perhaps it 
always follows the gift of reason." 

*' We have found it so far," I said, ^'but we 
may not in other w^orlds. It seems here 
reason implies speech." 

We followed him towards the liouse to 
which he beckoned us. He came to it and 
touched a boss in the outer wall. A portcullis 



Tycho Island. 109 

arose at once, and left an opening. He 
beckoned to us to enter. We followed him 
into a domed hall, deeply and closely padded 
with thick fur-like substances. The door was 
shaped someAvhat like an opening flower, and 
so were the windows, which were deeply and 
richly coloured in divers hues. In the centre 
was a low metal pillar (apparently of brass) 
supporting a large plate. On this, directly he 
entered, our guide lighted a fire, over which he 
made sundry signs and gestures towards us. 

'' Sm^ely," said Ezariel, " this is their mode 
of greeting. All seems adapted against cold, 
and perhaps the lighting of this fire is a symbol 
of welcome. Let us imitate him." 

We did so, and also made signs of greeting 
close by the fire. He then opened another 
small door close by, and presently brought 
with him another Martian, differently attired, 
but also having a long flowing fur-like robe, 
with a still greater number of metallic orna- 
ments. Her look was softer and gentler than 
her dignified husband, and she evidently feared 
us more — indeed, she shrank back when she 
saw us ; but after some delay she also came 
to the fire and made signs over it like her 
husband. 

She then retired, and soon brought to us a 



110 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

crystal vase full of fruits. She held them over 
the fire, and rather timidly presented them to 
us warm. They were grateful to eat — warm 
and aromatic. 

"You see, still," said Ezariel, "the fire, 
symbol prevails. They welcome us by warmth. 
It is evident that in this world cold is counted 
the greatest of evils." 

After we had partaken of the food, we had a 
short consultation as to what we had better do, 
Ezariel proposed that he and Arauniel should 
remain in retirement in that quiet forest 
district, or in the Ice Island, while I, profiting 
by my experience on earth, should endeavour 
to acquire the Martian language, and go among 
the people. Strange to say, both my com- 
panions expressed a great shrinking from the 
Martians, and as it was understood we were to 
keep a rigid incognito, we agreed that it was 
better for me to travel alone, while they 
studied the almost infinite natural treasures 
around them. 

A venerable and majestic-looking Martian 
suddenly entered as we were discussing our 
projects. He was as tall as his comrade, i.e., 
some nine feet high, but grave and apparently 
aged. His face was thoughtful, and he had an 
appearance of authority. Around his neck there 



Tycho Island, 111 

hung a large chain, and a silver symbol of two 
trianerles. On the chain I traced some of the 
well-known letters of the alphabet of the 
heavens. This cheered me. I at once saw 
that here was one with whom there might be a 
basis of communication. After greeting us, 
which he did solemnly, and with gestures 
evidently of a religious character, he seemed 
to welcome us as fellow-creatures called into 
being by the same Creator. 

The thought struck me of a mode of com- 
munication. I drew from my vest a tablet, 
and wrote on it symbols in our hieroglyphic 
character expressing where I came from. With 
a little difficulty and some gesticulation, I made 
him understand our symbols, which expressed 
the sentence, "We, Aleriel, Arauniel,andEzariel, 
come in the ether ship from the beautiful planet 
near the sun." When he understood what I 
had written, he said something to the other 
Martian, who expressed great astonishment and 
wonder. Then, having paused awhile, as if in 
thought, he drew from the fold of his robe a 
box, whence he took a sheet of a cloth-like 
texture, on which he traced in large and rude 
characters, in a system of celestial picture- 
writing, not the same as ours, but sufficiently 
like it to be intelligible to us : 



112 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

'' Welcome to tliis our Martian world. Do 
not reveal who you are, or that you come from 
the planet near the sun, in the name of God." 

This confirmed our resohition to keep our 
incognito. It was evident that there would be 
danger to others, if not to ourselves, if our 
nature was revealed. So I symbohsed assent, 
and so did my two comrades. 

Then I wrote in hieroglyph, '' I want to learn 
your Martian language." Here a difficulty 
arose, for their symbol for language was evi- 
dently different to ours. But by gesture I 
showed them what I meant, and he at once 
wrote : 

" Come to my house and I will teach you." 

He then made some signs to the female, who 
went out by another door, and soon returned 
with a robe much smaller than her own (which 
probably belonged to one of her children). She 
threw it around me, and drew a fur-like hood 
over my head. 

Evening had now come in. The sunlight 
ceased to glow through the rich-toned colours 
of the stained windows. The clear sky was 
adorned by stars in the same constellations as 
you know so well — for the sidereal heavens are 
the same for all the solar system. The distance 
between us and Neptune is not enough to make 



Tijcho Island. . 113 

serious displacement in a single constellation. 
There was the Southern Cross and Orion and 
Sirius, just as on the earth, all glistening in the 
darkness, and the ruddy trees were now a very 
dark crimson, or almost black in the more 
shady places. 

We passed along a forest path, with many 
strange forms looming in the gloom. At length 
we reached a little hill, covered with rocks, 
under one of which, nestled in a corner, was a 
domed house such as we had left. Mv con- 
ductor ushered me in. There was a chamber 
like the other, adorned with many thousand 
symbols in picture-writing all over the walls 
and roof. 



114 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER IV. 

A MAETIAN INSTRUCTOR. 

NEXT morning I commenced my study of 
the Martian language. The picture- 
writing was not difficult, for the symbols were 
the same in principle as ours, founded, indeed, 
on the bases of geometry, or natural symbolism, 
such as must be almost universal. The circle 
meant space, the point meant unity, the multi- 
plication of points meant numbers, the equal 
lines meant equality, the crossed lines meant 
addition, the picture of the thing meant the 
thing depicted. It was the same symbolism as 
was the basis of human writing in the Egyptian 
hieroglyphic or the ancient Chinese, a small 
part of which still lingers with you in mathe- 
matical and masonic symbols. It was the 
language, not of aparticular world, but of the 
universe ; still it had local symbols for ideas 
belonging to that Martian world. These I had 
to learn, but my instructor soon put me in the 



A Martian Instructor, 115 

way of tliem by explaining tliem through general 
symbols. 

When I could read the Martian writing, I 
found there was another, as on earth, phonetic 
mode of writing, short and simple as your 
shorthand, which represented sounds, and was 
in common use. By this I was soon able to 
learn the spoken language, and thereby to con- 
verse with my instructor by word of mouth. 

The spoken language was very simple. Each 
syllable conveyed an idea, the consonant sounds 
representing the idea in its special sense, the 
vowel sound the part of speech or grammatical 
inflection. Thus all roots were consonants, all 
inflexions vowel sounds. By this the idea was 
in the consonants, and the part of speech, the 
form of tlie idea, was in the vowels. Thus, sup- 
posing we were to adopt this system in England, 
man would represent the thought man, m..7^ 
meaning humanity, and a marking a noun Man 
would be " men." Men would be " manly.'* 
Min ''to man," or '' provide with men." Mon 
"to belRanly." Mun would be ''manliness." 
And so the idea would be altered through some 
score of vowel sounds. 

"Have you many languages in your world, 
as they have on earth ?" I asked my instructor. 

" We had them once, but we agreed to abolish 

I 2 



IIG A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

them, and substitute one as near perfection as 
we could make it. It is far better for a world 
to liave only one language. Now, one can 
travel from land to land without hindrance, and 
converse with people of all nations. It is many 
centuries since we had diversity of speech.'* 

" How did you arrange this?" 

" We had some ages ago a great congress 
on this subject, where all the assembly agreed 
to have one language. An academy was formed 
to establish a perfect language. After long 
discussion, a scheme was adopted and submitted 
to the whole world again, and accepted. This 
was taught in all the schools, and in time, as 
the young grew old and died off, the old 
languages died with them, or rather were 
reserved for a study of a few of the learned. 
Since then we have had but one language." 

'' It almost looks," I said, ''as if on earth, as 
with you and us, this may in time be the case, 
for two quarters of the earth are accepting the 
use of one language — the English. Perhaps it 
may in time be dominant. But yours is a 
formed, not a natural language." 

" Partly so ; but only in part, for we still 
retain the basis of the ancient tongues." 

" Have you any exceptions in your lan- 
guage r 



A Martian Instructor. 117 

" No, none ; a rule once given is always 
preserved. In the old languages corruptions 
and exceptions did exist, in the new none." 

As soon as we could thus converse together 
easily, my instructor asked me many thousands 
of questions about my world, and also (when 
he learnt I had been on Earth) about yours. 
He seemed of a most inquisitive mind, and 
anxious to learn all I could teach him about 
our worlds. It seemed that the first elements 
of astronomy were as well understood by him, 
as by your best astronomers. Observations 
had been systematically carried on for ages, 
and instruments had been perfected. The 
Martians evidently wished, as far as they could, 
mentally to soar above the little world to 
which they had been bound, and on which they 
lived. They had measured the distances of 
their sister worlds from their own, and from 
the mighty Sun ; they had examined their 
elements in the spectroscope, they had watched 
their movements. 

I asked him once about the history of his 
world, and what was its past. 

" There was a time," he said, "when war 
raged in our world most terribly. Each of our 
four great continents were separate nations. 
Each struggled for supremacy. Each strove 



118 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

to obtain sovereignty over all the rest — a 
sovereignty bought at a terrible price. All 
countries were desolated ; population was re- 
duced to a hundredth. Many evil souls were 
sent forth from our world unfitted for a higher 
state. Then God looked on us with pity. 
Our world was losing her use in this vast 
creation, as the fitting abode of spirits for 
awhile incarnated to prepare for a higher life 
in happier spheres. Then, in His love. He 
sent the Holy One to teach us better. He 
taught us useful lessons, that peace, not war, 
was the source of happiness ; that love, not 
hate, was the due of all ; but the Holy One 
taught us also to hate sin, and lying, falsehood, 
and gross low pleasure. And our ancestors 
learnt the lesson. We had been united by 
force into one state, and now were taught to 
love one another. Peace was established ; but 
still our sensitive, irritable natures were eager 
to hate something. We were taught to hate 
sin, and, if needed, to slay the sinner. A 
great war arose then against Sin, and was 
waged against all who erred against our pristine 
nobleness ; and so the law was instituted that 
those who erred against truth, or honour, or 
(in females) against modesty, should be cast 
out of our world ; but yet cast out lovingly, in 



A Martian Instructor, 119 

the hope that in another Hfe they might do 
better. And so the arts of peace prospered 
among us. The energy wasted in war was 
given to science and to progress, to seek to 
know more, to draw forth nature's secrets, to 
develop, to ennoble our race, to increase the 
sum of happiness. And so we prospered. 
Cities were raised where only forests grew 
before. The wild beasts were tamed and 
utilized, knowledge was augmented, and the 
forces of nature were subdued to our will. 
Population increased wonderfully. There were 
millions where there had been hundreds. Still 
we sought to increase the means of subsistence, 
and nature wonderfully answered our demands. 
Our world began to assume its true position in 
creation." 

''Tell me," I said, "what, is your govern- 
ment ? How do you secure peace ? " 

" In the olden days of wars and mutual 
destruction, as I said, we had four great 
states — four great nations — for our four con- 
tinents, with minor states on the islands. All 
these contended against each other. But 
then, when the Holy One's teachings were 
established, and peace and love accepted, the 
first step was to give each of the four natioDS 
their rights. The great principle of unselfish- 



120 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

ness was establisliecl, and only those who ex- 
celled in wisdom and virtue were promoted to 
positions of trust and power." 

"I should like much to see some of your 
great cities. May I not do so ? " 

*^ Yes, I think you may — only disguise your- 
self. It would not be well for you to own 
yourself to be of another world than ours. It 
might put some of our weaker ones into temp- 
tation. Foolish curiosity would be excited ; 
you would find much trouble for yourself and 
for us, so you must disguise yourself." 

So he arranged a disguise for me as a child 
of the Martians, to cover my inferior size, and 
stained me to a colour like theirs, and other- 
wise disguised me so that I could hardly know 
myself. 

So one day he took me out again into 
the forest, and told me that we should go 
together to the City of the Waters, the capital 
of the great island on which he dwelt. It was 
situated between the great Delarue Ocean, and 
that wide lake you call the Lockyer Sea, the 
point whence earth's astronomers usually cal- 
culate the meridians of the ruddy world. 

As we walked on we conversed on many 
subjects. 

" We are wont to travel much in this our 



A Martian Instructor, 121 

land," lie said, " for our winters are very cold. 
In our early state, ages and ages ago, we Mar- 
tians used to have but one home, and when the 
snow came and the cold, we used to huddle- 
up ourselves in our houses and cause artificial 
heat, and so spend the wretched winter. Hence 
have arisen our fire customs. Now, as science 
has progressed, every one, except those who 
live near the equator, has two homes, one in 
the northern and the other in the southern 
hemisphere, and also most have an electric 
ship and car ; so, when the winter comes on, 
the family enter their ship, and float down ta 
the port of the other home with all their goods, 
and so it is with each commune. The same 
friends gather together in the other hemisphere 
as here, and all home comforts are the same, 
with the same friends, the same community in 
the southern as in the northern hemisphere. 
There, then, we dwell till again autumn 
comes, when we go back again all together 
to the old home .to find spring once more. 
We thus live now in constant spring and 
summer." 

" You are like the migratory birds, it seems, 
of earth, which never stay for winter. Possibly, 
in ages to come, men may be like this, when 
modes of transit improve. The rich sometimes 



122 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

already are so ' cheating the winter ' in warm 
climes." 

" From what you said about earth," said my 
conductor, " and the state of humanity there, 
I should say it was a world as yet far less 
developed than ours — perhaps younger in the 
scale of creation, a younger child of the glorious 
sun, and yet very like ours. Men appear, as 
yet, hindered by sin, wars, bad government, 
intestine quarrels, and class selfishness, from 
reaching the state in which we are. And yet, 
in our history, I can well trace a period, many 
thousands of years ago, when we Martians 
were no further advanced in enlightenment, or 
in the knowledge of what was best for our- 
selves, than you say you found mankind upon 
the earth during your recent visit. Perhaps 
the time may come, in thousands of years 
hence, when the human race may attain some- 
thing hke the state of society in which we 
Martians now live. The two worlds are very 
much alike in everything. In the future, 
perhaps, men who live in cold countries will 
usually quit them for summer climes." 

We had not walked many minutes in the 
forest before, almost suddenly, his Avords about 
winter appeared realised. The sky was clouded 
over, the white snow fell on the ruddy vegeta- 



A Martian Instructor, 123 

tion. I cannot describe liow lovely it appeared. 
Above, the leaves were glittering white and 
ornamented with exquisite snow crystals ; but 
below, their ruddy glow was manifest. 

" This snowfall is not unlike," I said to him, 
'* what I have often seen in earth-winter in 
northern Europe. Really, if it were not for 
the ruddy foliage, this might almost be a scene 
upon the earth." 

'' Yes," he replied, '* I was prepared for that 
remark. The two worlds are very much alike 
in almost everything — in snowfall, in summer 
sun and winter cold, in distribution of land 
and water into continents and seas, in islands 
and lakes. We even think we sometimes 
can trace a resemblance in the northern part 
of one of the hemispheres of earth to our 
world." 

" You mean in North America, in Canada, 
and the lake regions of the United States. It 
is true the configuration of the country there 
is very like what we see in Mars." 

Meanwhile, the snow fell more and more 
heavily. My guide led me to a shelter which 
had been formed by some rocks, and here we 
waited for the snow shower to pass. 

'' You were talking of your continents and 
islands with which your world is mapped out. 



124 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

Tell me, how can I see them, and traverse your 
globe as I have done the earth? You advise 
me to maintain my secret, but I fear my dis- 
guise will not suffice me to do what I managed 
safely to do upon the earth. Our difference in 
size alone makes it impracticable." 

" I think we can do it, but you must go with 
me. Listen to my proposal. When we reach 
the Ocean city, if you desire it, we may embark 
together on the little electric ship of our com- 
mune, which I have at my disposal. I can 
easily navigate her myself in every sea and 
port." 

" Is it possible ? Can one Martian alone, 
with a smgle companion, navigate a vessel 
round the whole of his world ? No man has 
ever attempted such a feat yet. It is almost 
impossible." 

"You forget," said my companion, "the 
conditions of the voyage are quite different to 
those which men would have to encounter on 
earth. Our oceans are not so vast, from shore 
to shore is not so far, our electric ships are 
exquisitely constructed to give a complete 
power over the natural forces ; we have but to 
connect or to disjoin a wire to establish or 
destroy an immense force, and electricity is, as 
you know, the key force, the master force of 



A Martian Instructor, 125 

our solar system. By my command of this 
power in my little vessel I can go anywhere on 
the waters, and do anything." 

We reached a shed close to a railroad of 
polished steel. Erom the shed he drew an 
electric car, and mounting it, bade me do so 
likewise. He touched the electro-motor and 
we dashed through the forest. 



12G A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER y. 

THE OCEAN CAPITAL. 

AT length we came to a mountain- side, up 
which the electric engine crept, amidst 
rocks and cliffs and ruddy woodlands. On a 
sudden, by a turn of the road, a strange scene 
opened before my eyes, such as I shall strive, 
though ill able to describe it in earthly words, to 
depict. A vast plain lay before us, stretching 
towards the green sea of what you call the 
Delarue Ocean. Its surface was not all ruddy, 
but speckled with great white spots of shining 
metal, which glistened in the sun, and tall 
spires and towers varying the expanse. Over 
it there were extended various ramifications, 
like a spider's web, of hanging railroads in long 
lines, crossing and intersecting each other, 
resting on huge pillars and massive towers. 
It stretched for twenty miles away, or more, 
sinking into the horizon on one side, but, on 
the others, bounded by mountains and the 
green sea. 



The Ocean CajntaL 127 

" Is that your Ocean capital of which you 
spoke ? " I asked. 

" It is," he replied. *' Here is the capital 
of the seas ; but we have several other cities 
great as this, and even still more beautiful. 
The capital of Learning you shall see in the 
great northern continent. The four capitals 
of the four continents are each as great as 
this." 

'' The greatest city I have yet seen," I said, 
^* is on the earth. It also is an ocean capital 
in some sense ; the centre of the earth's trade. 
It has four millions of people in it. What is 
the population of this ? " 

'' Five millions and more." 

''But they extend over a vast extent, far 
vaster than that great city on the earth." 

'' Perhaps so ; but you see we do not crowd 
our people. Each one of the twenty wards of 
this great city has its public park and gardens 
for the health and enjoyment of the citizens, to 
give them the contact of Nature even in the 
city, which is the right of every living creature. 
Every dwelling is isolated from the others, to 
avoid fire, and to give free ventilation. Every 
street is planted with trees. So the city 
extends over a huge extent, as you perceive. 
But, see ! we are passing its borders, the 



128 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

ancient fortifications reared in the days of 



war." 



We came to a mighty wall, almost a little 
mountain ridge of rock, carved in quaint style, 
and flanked with triangular towers, on which 
still were placed curious engines of war, which 
appeared worn out by age and falling to pieces. 

'' They have left these as a memory of past 
times. We destroy nothing of the works of 
ancient days ; but they are mere curiosities 
now, useful to remind us of the errors of our 
ancestors, and to warn us to keep in better 
paths. How many thousands have been 
launched into eternity upon and before these 
walls ! But all is over now. War never can 
return." 

We dashed over the ridge, and then along 
the hanging road, passed over the city on, as it 
were, a thread of rail. Clusters of towers and 
thousands of glittering metal roofs, mostly 
dome- shaped, and curious gardens full of trees 
of every form, were beneath our feet. Some 
of the gardens were on the roofs or on the 
fronts of houses, full of flowers, while between 
not a few of the towers were massive chains 
from which hung, here and there, baskets of 
creeping plants of every hue, which sent their 
perfume up to us. It was a beautiful scene of 



The Ocean Oapital. 129 

many colours and forms, where art used nature 
for her purposes ; and nature, in that world, is 
as lovely as it is on earth, or even almost as 
with us, though so very different. The colours 
were richer and more glowing, and less delicate. 
But still they were splendid — deep crimsons, 
rich browns, dark purples, massive-looking 
greens. The air seemed full of hanging gardens 
of flowers and plants, beneath which, as through 
a net, one saw the many-shaped roofs of houses, 
and towers and spires of public buildings of 
every kind. 

''It is something like a city of earth," I said 
to my companion, "but far more splendid. 
Paris, men think their finest city, but Paris 
is nothing to this." 

We stopped at one of the towers, and then 
descended from our car. We went down the 
stairs into the city. The street was wide, but 
shaded from the sunlight by long avenues of 
red-leaved trees — or rather plants, for they were 
not trees like earth's trees, though vegetable 
products ; their huge leaves spread over the 
road, and the sunlight glowed through them in 
blood-red tints. It was a scene such as would 
almost madden some human beings to dwell in 
that intense lurid glow, and yet it was glorious 
in its gorgeousness. 

K 



]30 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

In the roadway, made partly of shining metal, 
partly of rocks laid out in mosaics of varied 
designs, and polished, there were many Martians 
going to and fro, some in cars, some on foot. 
Their cars were electric, for they use the 
master-force of nature very extensively, and 
employ it to cause the lesser and inferior forces, 
as heat, motion, magnetism, at will. The 
electric cars darted hither and thither on the 
metallic rails, with their violet sparks flashing 
from their electro-condensers, varying the scene 
of glowing splendour with their rapid motions. 
All around was glow, and motion, and sound ; 
almost as great a contrast to the soft, sweet 
calm of our cities, as to the busy, but sad and 
gloomy tone of yours. And yet there was a 
something glorious about it ; and I can easily 
fancy how those accustomed to such a world, 
and fitted for it, " might immensely enjoy 
existence in such a cheering scene. 

We entered through a massive arched door- 
way into a fine vestibule lighted by coloured 
windows. Thence we passed into a room 
where there reclined on a carpet a huge and 
majestic Martian of apparently venerable age, 
wrapt in a^vast cloak. I noticed that these 
Martians showed their lion nature in reclining 
on the ground — crouching, as it were. Man 



I 



The OcecCn Capital. 131 

sits, for man is linked to the scansorial mam- 
mals, or the apes ; but the Martians, in rest, lie 
down, or crouch as lions on the floor. I was 
presented to my strange host, who was told in 
a few words my secret. He expressed surprise 
at a being from our bright world having 
crossed the vast chasm of space. When I 
showed him really who I was, and cast off my 
disguise, he asked me many questions, pre- 
facing that I need only answer him on points 
which were lawful to be spoken of. He 
enquired much about the earth also, and enter- 
tained me some hours in conversation. Then 
he gave me his blessing and wished me all 
success, but bade me most earnestly not to 
reveal myself, nor to let my secret be detected. 
Evening was drawing in, and we went forth 
again into the busy city streets. The electric 
lights were shining on every side, and blazing 
on the rich red foliage and the domes of the 
houses. At length we came to the water- side. 
On the green waves there were floating many 
thousands of large vessels, of graceful shape. 
My conductor led me to a little ship close by 
the shore. We alone embarked on it. In a 
few minutes an electric signal blazed from the 
prow and we plunged forth on the Delarue 
Ocean. Soon the lights of the ocean city grew 

K 2 



132 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

fainter in the distance and only the sea was 
around us, heaving with waves much hke 
earth's ocean. Overhead there were the same 
stars as you know, but both the moons were 
shining together that night on the waters. 
We two were alone on the deep in our little 
electric ship. 

We were not long out of sight of land. 
Lights, as of cities and towns, were on either 
side of us. We were passing up what you call 
Dawes Sea, between the two great Galileo and 
Hiiyghens' continents. The scene was such as 
I can scarcely describe. There is nothing on 
earth like it. Around us were the green 
waves, varied by forests of algae of many 
colours, which tinted the waters into the sem- 
blance of a vast and glorious garden, while 
beyond, on either side of the long and narrow 
inlet were the ruddy shores of the two con- 
tinents, with their crimson forests covering 
hill and dale, varied here and there by dis- 
tant ranges of snow-capped mountains, soon 
lightened by the sun. 

At length we came to an island rising out of 
the waters, with many vessels lying around it. 
It seemed quite built over. Thousands of 
towers and spires and domes of all glittering 
metals rose from the ruddy gardens — strange 



The Ocean Capital, 133 

and majestic edifices with richly ornamented 
fagades, as different to anything in our world 
as to the scenes of earth. 

'' That is the sacred city," said my guide, 
*' the great centre of our reHgion, where the 
Holy One once dwelt when with us, and which 
we honour for His name. As you also are a 
servant of the One Eternal God, as you are a 
brother in the same Eternal Church that He 
has formed, I have brought you here to adore 
Him in our holy place, to pray in your own 
way, and in the way of your bright world, for 
God's blessing." 

"It is well," I said. " I have prayed at 
Jerusalem, on earth ; I now shall pray at the 
holy city of another world." 

To prevent detection, we did not land till 
night had set in, and then we went from our 
little ship through strange scenes and proces- 
sional avenues of mystic import to the great 
temple in the centre of the city. It was a 
magnificent edifice, but quite impossible for me 
to describe ; huge in massive grandeur, richly 
ornate with singular designs of colossal size. 
It was partly of rock, partly of metal, and 
most of its ornaments were imitations of 
natural objects, for the Martians hold that the 
highest conception of beauty is in the works 



134 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

of God, and the best they can do is to imitate 
them. 

It was a wonderful scene that opened to my 
eyes as I passed that portal. I had known for 
ages the soft and peaceful worship of God in 
our blissful world. I had joined in the adora- 
tion of all the temples of our great cities. I 
had mingled my voice in the hymns of all the 
nations of our world. The grand ideal of our 
adoration is peace and beauty and joy and 
repose — the soul lost in an ecstasy of peace 
and thankfulness. I had also, as you know, 
joined with men in their worship — imperfect, 
like all things on earth are imperfect by man's 
sin — and yet, in spite of all defects, having the 
shadow of higher things. I have adored in most 
of your greatest fanes. I have been at S. 
Peter's when the silver trumpets have sounded 
and the grandest music on earth has welcomed 
the presence of the Pontiff. I have seen 
Cologne and Rheims. I have mingled with the 
adoring hosts in S. Isaac's at S. Petersburg and 
the Cathedral of Kazan. I have seen the 
worship of the Armenian church of the Copts 
and Abyssinians. I have joined also with the 
simpler worship of your English Church, more 
like ours than the others on earth in being so 
congregational, but unlike ours in being so 



The Ocean Capital. 135 

imperfect. I have been at S. Paul's and 
Canterbury, and York, and Ely, and your best 
churches. I have seen the worship of nearly 
all the Protestant sects — still more imperfect 
in beauty, still more didactic, but further still 
from ours in want of reverence and love, and 
beauty. I have even seen the most defective 
and darkened of the heathen rites — some of 
mingled causes, evidently of the earth most 
earthy; the temples of India, the mosques of 
Stamboul and Mecca. 

But all these were unlike this new spectacle 
of the adoration of the creature to the Creator. 
It was as splendid as ours, but its splendour 
was gorgeousness, not repose; its spirit was 
passion, not peace ; its aim was enthusiasm, not 
simple reverent love. Let me try to describe 
it, though I feel how defective earthly words 
are in describing any except earthly thoughts. 

The Temple was vast and magnificent. A 
hundred thousand of the Martians were there 
in state robes of worship (for they specially 
vest for religious worship), the males on one 
side, the females on the other — two vast 
armies. The immense domes, to which your S. 
Paul's, and S. Peter's at Home, were mere mole- 
hills, rose in exalted elevations over the heads 
of the hosts. All the walls, the pillars, the 



136 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

domes were encrusted with crystals of many 
colours, but all dimly visible in a dull liglit, 
whicli seemed to leave everything obscure. 

The service began with a procession in 
gorgeous robes, and as they approached the 
central dome, the whole building shone in a 
blaze of electric lights; then from a hundred 
thousand voices burst the loud roar of song 
(too crushing to be melodious), and the blare 
of many trumpets made it seem as if the vast 
edifice could crush us. Then down on the 
ground the vast host fell adoring, and all died 
away, and there was silence. Then came soft, 
sweet melodies, and the light grew softened by 
degrees till we were again almost in darkness. 
Then again the host were silent, and one voice 
— a mighty voice, as speaking to us in silence 
and in darkness, was heard. I think I caught 
his words : — 

"Adore Him, creatures ! Adore Him by 
Whom is all, in Whom is all. Whose ye are ! 
Adore Him for His love ! Soften and still the 
evil voice of passion in your souls, that all may 
be hushed before His presence ! " 

We did not stay long at the Holy City. My 
conductor seemed to doubt whether he ought 
to declare to me the mysteries of their religion, 
and I feared to enquire, for it is our belief that 



The Ocean Capital, 137 

each of the worlds has its special dispensation 
designed by the great Creator of all, and that 
to enquire into the dispensation of God's will 
in other worlds would be mere curiosity, and 
harmful if not sinful. The same thought 
seemed to be in my conductor's mind. So I 
neither asked nor did he explain the strange 
mysterious sights we saw, and we merely 
passed through the city and saw its myriad 
worshippers crowding its vast streets, and the 
huge temples with their sacred symbols, some 
of which I could understand and some I could 
not. It was very grand and glorious altogether, 
though as different from the religion of our 
world as from yours. And yet truth is one as 
God is one, only the truth is reflected from 
different standpoints by divers minds. If, as 
you see, there is such a diversity of religions 
upon earth, you need not wonder at the variety 
of the reflections of truth in finite minds in other 
worlds. And yet amid the higher develop- 
ments of being, the higher forms of mind, I 
have found more unity in the conception of 
things relating to God, i.e., between ourselves 
and the Martians and the wisest and best of 
Christians, than I have found among men on 
the same earth; some of whom by stupidity 
misconceive the things relating to religion, and 



138 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

others by tlieir sinfulness are obscured in their 
perception of it. So as in the material fabric 
of the worlds of our solar system there is an 
essential unity amid an infinite diversity, so in 
the conception of religion, there is an essential 
nnity among the noble and good of all the 
worlds, though their modes of expression of 
their ideal may differ. 



I 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 139 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE VOYAGE OF CIRCUMNAVIGATION. 

WE sailed on over the Airy Sea till we saw 
the varied white and red outline of 
Laplace Land ; white, because of the snows of 
the Arctic continent, but rendered most beau- 
tiful by the red vegetation, when the cold had 
not killed vegetable life. We crossed the 
Arctic circle in the Faye Sea, and then, 
bordered with glittering icebergs, shining in 
the sunlight rising from the green waters, the 
long ranges of snowy mountains of the Arctic 
continent appeared in all their grandeur. The 
scenery was very splendid, but, at the same 
time, not quite unearthly, for you have some- 
thing like it even in Europe, in the northern 
shores of Norway, which so many now visit to 
watch the midnight sun. The red of Mars, 
however, is missing upon earth — the rich com- 
binations of white and crimson — two of the 
most beautiful of colour combinations. The 
white slopes of the Arctic continent blushed 



140 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

like the cheek of a fair girl, brightened by a 
momentary excitement, while the green ocean 
and fantastic glittering icebergs formed a mag- 
nificent fringe to the blushing slopes of red and 
white. 

We coasted for some days along the Arctic 
•continent in these splendid scenes, passing 
sometimes vast submarine forests of algae, 
which tinted the green waters, and made its 
colour change to such a degree that even your 
telescopes can notice these tinted spots upon 
the green ocean of Mars. The ocean was not 
lifeless. Amidst the icebergs sported huge 
monsters of the deep, and now and then electric 
ships of the Martians dashed past us. 

At length (having sailed through what men 
€all, from their astronomer's name, the Beer 
Sea) we crossed over from the icy Arctic con- 
tinent, and its superb natural scenery, to what 
you call the Herschel continent. Here we 
sailed up the narrow channel between it and 
the Copernicus continent back to the warm 
a.nd ruddy regions of the tropics. Sometimes 
the shores of both continents were in sight, 
with towers and cities rising out of the rich 
€rimson forests. The hum of industry could 
be heard. The channel was filled with the 
electric ships. My companion told me the names 



The Voyage of Circumnavigation. 141 

of the many cities we were passing till, crossing 
the equator, we pushed on out of sight of land 
to the great Newton Ocean. "We crossed the 
*' tropic of the Lion " (for that is the southern 
tropic of Mars, as yours is the tropic of 
Capricorn), then came to the great island of 
the Southern Ocean, which you call Secchi's 
Land. The winter was coming on. Thousands 
of vessels filled with their freights were sailing 
down the Zollner Sea to bear the Martians of 
Secchi's Land to more favoured lands. The 
snow was already appearing. However, we 
pushed on rapidly to near the antarctic circle, 
where the sea was already nearly a mass of ice- 
floes, into Philipp's Sea, just sighting the 
antarctic isle (now clad in snow) of Rossland. 
Then pushing down the Terby Sea, we once 
more came in sight of Webb Land. 

^p ^r ^p ♦• 

" Tell me," I said, " how you arrange your 
exchanges of material things. On earth there 
is a use of bits of gold and silver, which are 
stamped to represent a certain amount of 
things which are wanted, as food or clothes, 
and people who have many of these bits of 
gold are called rich ; but in our world of 
Venus there is by a beneficent providence such 
an abundance of everything that there is little 



142 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

need of excliange, and all our gold and silver 
are used for ornament. How do you regulate 
the supply of things that are wanted ? " 

'* There was a time, when we were in our 
imperfect state, when war existed, and selfish- 
ness and all its evils, that we had a system of 
exchange and barter, and bought and sold, as 
it seems men do now. Each laboured for him- 
self and his family, and for them alone. The 
strong prospered, and the weak suffered. But 
now we arrange that nothing shall belong to 
the individual, but all to the community. All 
that is wanted is supplied from the common 
stores." 

'' How do you provide against indolence ? 
On earth some theorists have held this view ; 
but it never has been found to answer — human 
selfishness is too great — each man would grasp 
all that he could from the common stores 
intended for all, and some would idle when 
others would have to work." 

" We have stamped out selfishness in our 
world, or nearly so. The first point in the 
education of our little ones is to teach them to 
be truthful and unselfish. If, when they grow 
up, they are found to have failed to learn the 
lesson, we first punish them as liars or selfish, 
and if they are incorrigible, send them through 



The Voyage of Circumnavigation, 143 

the Tower of Doom out of our world. We pray 
for them, but we slay them. There is no 
room in our world either for liars or selfish 
people." 

" It would be well if they could get rid of 
them on earth also. Men suffer crime to fester 
in their midst, and to pollute society. But 
tell me how do you govern your state ? " 

'' By the rule of the wisest. Those who 
excel in wisdom and virtue are promoted to 
power ; but they are never suffered to use 
their power for their own advantage, but for 
that of the community. We do not choose by 
popular election, but by competitive examina- 
tion. The wisest of our mathematicians, and 
those who excel in calculation, are given the 
care of the treasures ; those physicians who 
are proved to excel above others in physiology 
are given the care of sanitation ; the most able 
architects the care of public buildings ; the 
greatest botanists the care of the forests. 
The chief object of the state is to secure the 
greatest possible happiness to the greatest 
possible number, and to do this we require 
the highest available scientific knowledge in 
each department." 

" I think you are wise. One of the greatest 
thinkers on earth — Plato — thought it would 



144 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

be best if philosopbers were kings, or kings 
philosophers. Men now derive mucli of 
their trials and sorrows from giving power to 
political empirics, who know how to talk or 
to intrigue, or to toady, or to cringe and flatter, 
and then by their stupidity misapply the power 
entrusted to them, or else use it for their own 
selfish ends. You are wise in giving power to 
these who know the most. But is power 
hereditary with you, as in a majority of the 
lands of earth ? " 

" As long as the son proves himself worthy 
of a wise sire, I do not see why he should not 
possess his father's privileges ; but we find 
sons and fathers often dissimilar, so we never 
put a son into his father's position until he has 
proved himself worthy of it." 

'' Then you do not recognise the family as 
the basis of society, as much as men do. I 
found among more cultured races, and es- 
pecially in that continent so like your world, 
which men call America, a tendency against 
this family basis. But here is a danger from 
engendering selfishness by making individuals 
live for themselves and struggle for them- 
selves. The strongest prosper, the weak are 
crushed." 

*' In our world duties are balanced. Each 



The Voyage of Circumnavigation. 145 

individual has his duty defined to himself, to 
his family, to his village or civic community, 
to his nation, to the whole world. The com- 
munity is the most important basis. The 
family is too small, the nation too large ; but 
the sphere of duty is really balanced to all 
relations. In our earliest state each lived for 
himself. Then wars arose, and mutual as- 
sistance was required. Since we have had 
universal peace, we have tried to insist on 
each realising his duty to all society, and to the 
whole world.'* 

" You spoke of common stores. How do 
you fill them?" I asked. "It seems to me 
there is a great deal more idle time and amuse- 
ment in this world than on earth." 

" Most of our work is done, as you see, by 
our control of natural forces. We convert the 
storm and the ocean wave into electricity, and 
by this we have a vast — almost an immeasurable 
— command of power. Thus, we can do our work, 
control and turn nature to our will, with little 
efibrfc. So the more our control of the forces 
of nature has increased, the more leisure we 
have found for recreation, for development of 
the inner life, for study, for mental improve- 
ment, for relaxation. There was a time when 
our ancestors had to labour very hard, and life 

L 



146 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

was one round of endless toil. Then tlie ricb 
and the strong made the poor and weak labour 
for them ; but since we have reached our present 
state, we have been able to adjust labour wisely, 
to give all their fair share of work and fair 
share of healthy recreation, and to get our 
efforts aided by the forces of nature subdued to 
our will through the master force of elec- 
tricity." 

'* You have done wisely," I said. '^ Perhaps 
in time man may do the same, when he ha& 
advanced further in knowledge." 

*' How do you divide the day in your com- 
munes?" I asked. 

" One-third is given to work, if required 
(which it rarely is), one-third to amusement 
and refreshment, one-third to sleep. That is 
on our working-days. On all feast-days there 
is no work, but only recreation and devotion to 
God's service. On working-days an hour out 
of the working time is ever given to prayer and 
praise." 

" What do you understand by recreation ?" 

"It is left to the individual taste. The 
Government provides amusement. We have 
no need now to fritter our means in armaments. 
In every village, in every town there are bodies 
of trained musicians, who nightly perform music 



The Voyage of Circumnavigation. 147 

for their neighbours' amusement, for music we 
regard as an important element of happiness. 
Then every village has its theatre and its body 
of actors, where scenes are represented nightly 
for the recreation of the people. Then we have 
games of many kinds, mostly to develop the 
energy of the young. Lectures or speeches on 
subjects bearing on science are delivered by 
competent teachers. Then we have books and 
libraries for the enlightenment of all. Every- 
thing, of course, is provided by our rulers, one 
of whose chief duties is to provide healthy 
amusement and recreation for all. Then again, 
in most of our villages we take our meals to- 
gether in a common hall. All work for the 
common good, and all are fed from the common 
stores. But to do this we must have perfect 
unselfishness." 

" How do you manage with regard to the 
relation of the sexes ? On earth this constant 
throwing young people together would be 
fraught with danger." 

" Where the females are not taught modesty 
it would be so ; but modesty and self-restraint 
are, after unselfishness, the first lessons we 
inculcate. But there is a great advantage in 
letting the young people of both sexes mix 
together, and know each other well before they 

L 2 



148 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

marrj. So we soften tlie character of the males 
by friendly and supervised conversation with 
the females." 

" How do you manage about marriages ? 
There is the chief difficulty in the societies of 
earth, and men have divers ways of dealing 
with it in divers nations." 

" We expect those who wish to be married 
^0 know each other many years before the 
marriage is completed, and to obtain the 
consent of the elders." 

^ ^ ^ ^ 

We had many such conversations, which I 
cannot now describe to you, but the more he 
told me, the more I thought that in many things 
men might learn from the Martians — a class of 
beings not unlike men in many things, and 
living in a world very like your earth, but 
further advanced. 

When passing Webb's Land, I asked if I 
might see one of the common feasts and 
recreations of the Martians. After some delay 
and consideration, my friend assented, on con- 
dition of my being very careful about pre- 
serving my secret, and not of exposing myself 
to detection. He promised to show me the 
Hall of Feasting and the Hall of Recreation of 
his own commune, when we got back to Tycho 
land, which we did next morning. 



A Voyage to Other Woj^lds. 149 



CHAPTER VII. 



THE FEAST. 



HE led me through a large garden, over- 
shadowed with ruddy foliage, amidst 
which could be seen flowers of every colour. 
It was a most gorgeous scene, but the colours 
were glaring and almost feverish — less pleasing 
to me far than the soft tints of our lovely 
world, and even than the grateful green verdure 
of the earth. Here all was glowing, and the 
very sunlight burst through leaves blood-tinted 
on the red ground. It was magnificent and 
gorgeous, but it had at last grown wearisome. 
Amid all this were the green cascades and 
fountains of the Martian waters, making a 
striking contrast to the red. 

At length, about a mile off*, we came to a 
large palace with lofty facade, flanked with 
metal towers. We entered its portals. There 
was a huge hall, as huge as any in Europe, with 
galleries around. Here were a number of 
Martians crouching on cushions on the ground. 



160 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

My guide led me to a place, and here we sat 
down ready for a meal. 

The loud blare of a trumpet sounded, and 
then a report as of a cannon. Then all stood 
as in an attitude of adoration, and there swelled 
a strange and mighty hymn of praise to God, 
the giver of all good. Then all reposed again, 
and the meals were laid before each — messes of 
food such as you have not on the earth, and as 
I cannot well describe. The very elements were 
somewhat different from those which men 
require in food. One thing was peculiar. With 
the meals was served out in cups a ruddy fluid 
of fragrant odour but metallic taste. I asked 
my guide what it was. 

"It is a blood mixture, made by science to 
represent the elements of our blood. In our 
early and defective state, when war existed in 
our world, we used to kill animals, and even 
drink their blood. We were to a great extent 
carnivora. Now this is changed. Science pro- 
vides us the same elements as flesh, and we can 
live on mere fruits with the aid of this metallic 
compound, which is more grateful, and I think 
more suitable, than the flesh or the blood of 
dead animals. It does just as well." 

After the feast, we went forth into the next 
hall, and I saw many strange sights not easy to 



The Feast 151 

describe. The Martians seemed a race full of 
energy and of high development. Many games 
of skill were going on, and as the young 
Martians cast off their garments, I saw that 
they were really not so entirely like men as 
they seemed when clothed. Their limbs were 
more muscular, and they had more hair about 
them than human beings. When clad as I said, 
they T^-ere extremely like men. Their heads 
were quite human in intelligence, but their 
lower limbs showed as much resemblance to the 
carnivora as the human limbs do to the quad- 
rumana,. 

I passed from here into another hall — very 
splendid and ornate — where music was going 
on, and then into another, where a drama 
was being performed. Another hall was beyond, 
where science was expounded, and beyond this 
we came to a library with books. Everything 
showed that the Martians, though they had to 
work (as men have), still strove to make life 
pleasant. 

* * * * 

It is impossible for me to describe all the 
strange sights I beheld on Mars, while I 
traversed again, with my Martian friend, the 
oceans of this strange world. Earthly words 
are only fit for earthly things, and so are im- 



152 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

perfect and, therefore, deceptive, when applied 
CO the things of another world. There were, 
however, many matters on which you might 
learn from the people of your sister orb. The 
main point I learnt there was, that all our three 
worlds are in many points akin, but that earth 
is the least happy of the three. With us little 
evil exists ; on Mars, though there may once 
have been quite as much as on earth, and the 
Martians quite as wicked as men, yet nearly all 
great evils have been put down and stamped 
out by the courage and good sense of the 
Martian rulers. If we are better than men, 
the Martians are braver, and so have crushed 
evil which you have left to fester horribly, and 
render earth one of the most miserable of the 
many worlds that roll around the King of Day 
— our mighty sun. 

I saw, on my journey, many wonderful things 
— great cities ; long, straight ranges of hills, 
and equally straight lines of inlets and sounds 
of green sea ; forests and fields of many forms 
and of varied vegetations ; hundreds of fine 
rivers, of green waters, and canals without 
number. The land of Mars is nearlv as exten- 
sive as that of earth (the seas being much less), 
and so there is as much to see of interest on 
Mars as on your world ; indeed, there is more 



The Feast. 153 

— larger populations, more developed civilisa- 
tion, a society more advanced in intelligence, 
progress, and good government than any you 
have ever yet known on earth. 

Thanks to my friend, I was enabled to see a 
good deal, and yet to keep my secret unsus- 
pected ; but, except on the occasion I men- 
tioned, in his own village and at his request, 
never went to any place of public resort, nor 
did I venture to converse with the Martians, 
except when obliged to do so. I thus had 
more restraint put on me than in your world, 
where I managed to disguise myself perfectly, 
and mix freely with mankind. I appeared only 
as a child under the tutelage of my guide, and 
such a disguise was essential to me. 

At length, having seen much of this strange 
and beautiful world, we returned to Tycho 
Island, and I parted, with many prayers and 
blessings for his welfare, from my kind Martian 
friend. I again joined my companions, Ezariel 
and Arauniel, whom I found near where I had 
left them in the rendezvous awaiting me. They 
had seen most of the natural beauties of the 
planet, having flown from mountain to moun- 
tain, mostly by night and at great heights, 
resting in remote and inaccessible places, lest 
they should be discovered. Perhaps they had 



154 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

had more bird's-eye views than I had had. 
They had visited both the North and South 
Pole, even in the regions of perpetual ice. 
Once they had noticed me sailing in our little 
vessel over the Terby Sea. Their far-seeing 
instrument had enabled them to detect me at a 
great distance, but they had purposely made no 
sign by which I might recognise them. They 
had examined the peaks of the loftiest moun- 
tains of Mars, and had flown over most of the 
great cities both by night and by day. Once 
or twice they thought they had been noticed by 
the Martians, but on each occasion had soared 
out of sight directly. They had also collected 
many specimens of curious things. 

We flew together to the mountain where we 
had left our ether- car, and then, once more 
developing the anti-gravitating power, darted 
forth into space. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds, 155 



PAET IV.— THE GIANT WORLDS. 



CHAPTEH I. 

DEIMOS, AND THE VOYAGE FEOM MAES THEOUGH 

SPACE. 

HIGHER and higher did we rise from the 
Ice Mountain. At our feet the green 
expanse of the Delarue Ocean opened wider 
and wider, with the verdant billows rolling 
one after another in long lines, like the huge 
pampa-grass of your American plains, with 
now and then a white snow-cloud resting on 
expanse. 

Higher and higher we rose, till the red cliffs 
of Schroeter's land were in sight, and the white 
and red plains of Tycho's Island now dappled by 
snow, with the Lockyer Sea in its centre, and 
then the wide ruddy plains of the Copernicus, 
Galileo, and Huyghens' continents. Still higher 
and higher, till, from a sea of green, the world 
we had left seemed, as it does to you, of red 
and white, the ruddy plains and forests glowing 



156 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

like fires beneath the blazing sun. It looked 
very rich and gorgeous in its varied colours — a 
splendid and majestic spectacle ; none the less 
so, because every point we could see had now 
for us some pleasing reminiscence of what we 
had beheld when viewing it more nearly. 
Higher still we went, till Mars seemed as a 
huge globe beneath our feet. 

Our first start was, as I said, for the moon 
of Deimos, one of the two little satelhtes of 
Mars. It is one of the smallest of the worlds 
of the solar system, for few even of the plane- 
toids are so minute. Its surface is smaller 
than that of the Isle of Wight. London might 
have almost covered one of its hemispheres, 
and Paris would have taken up a great part of 
it. It was a half-moon when we approached it, 
and its aspect, part black as night, part shining 
in the sunlight, was very striking. At first it 
seemed as a huge balloon rolling through space ; 
but, as we drew nearer, the rocks and cliffs 
showed it a tiny world, hardly deserving the 
name of world, were it not for its regular orbit 
and its position in space as definite a satellite 
as, comparatively, huge Titan or your Moon. 

The aspect of Deimos is very striking. Its 
size is so small, that you feel that it is a globe 
even when upon it; indeed, it appears little 
more than a colossal meteor, an expanse of 



The Voyage Through Space, 157 

rock and rugged canons of piled cliffs and 
stones. We rested on one of its largest rocks, 
and thence surveyed the dreary little world 
around us, and the great ruddy planet, with its 
green seas and its snow-clad hills, and polar 
ice and glaciers. It was a lovely sight ! Mars 
is so glorious in colour — one of the lovehest, 
the most varied, the most gorgeous of the 
many worlds that roll around the mighty sun. 
In other worlds one colour is prevailing : on 
the earth blue and green ; in our lovely Venus 
white, and the paler, or more glowing tints ; 
but in Mars all colours save blue — the very 
antithesis to the earth, where blue is dominant. 
Mars has the dominant hue of red, and the 
earth of blue. 

Glorious he looked from that tiny moon, and 
from its rugged cliffs and rocks, and as we 
rolled on around him, like a moving panorama, 
he opened to us new splendour. Seas, con- 
tinents, oceans, and mountain chains, ruddy 
plains and green lakes, all dappled by the 
white fleecy clouds, and, in some places, 
glittering with snows — all appeared before us 
as we moved with more than railway speed 
around this world. It was like a balloon view 
of earth, only on a far vaster scale. The 
motions of Phobus, the other satellite, varied 
the scene as he also dashed through space 



158 A Voyage to Other Worlds. ' 

around the gorgeous and many-coloured orb — 
the sovereign world to both. It was a wonder- 
fijl and splendid scene of glowing hues, and in 
the evening, when the stars decked the sky, 
the cities' lights made it appear hardly less 
glorious than by day. 

We lingered several days on that tiny moon, 
rolling round the ruddy planet, thus watching 
the oceans and continents opening to our 
vision. There was a fascination in the scene, 
so that we could hardly tear ourselves from it. 
It was like rolling in a car through space — a car 
so small and rapid that one felt and perceived its 
motion, which one cannot do in larger satellites. 

As we spent our time watching Mars, we 
also compared notes. I told my companions 
of my travels, and pointed to them the cities 
and long lines of roads of Mars. They in their 
turn showed me the natural treasures they had 
collected — the plants, the rocks, the smaller 
animals. They explained the variations of 
nature they had observed, the operation of the 
natural laws, the combinations of the elements. 
They pointed out to me the lakes and rivers, 
the mountains and morasses of Mars, and told 
me of the measures they had taken and the 
wonders they had seen in the many ruddy 
lands that we saw rolling before us. 



The Voyage Through Sjpace, 159 

Then at length Ezariel, wearied at onr 
long delay and our rapt dwelling upon Mars, 
said : " Let us behold more. Perchance, Mars 
is not to be compared with the mightier orbs 
beyond. Let us go on — forward into space to 
behold new splendours, new miracles of Divine 
love and power." 

We assented to the justice of what he said, 
and tore ourselves unwillingly from the ruddy 
orb and its tiny satellite, and went onwards into 
space. We put our machine into action. The 
compensating force was set against gravitation. 
The little moon and the orb of Mars lost their 
attractive power, and we launched into in- 
finity — far into the black ether, studded with 
its myriads of distant systems — the huge 
measureless ocean of the infinite. The satellite 
Deimos rushed away from us in his course around 
Mars, and we plunged in our little ether-car 
into infinity. 

Our first work, as before, was to seek 
for one of the meteoric streams rolling away 
from the sun. We soon, flying through ether, 
came on one of these — a long crowd of rocks, 
poised in space, rolling on through ether 
around the sun in an ellipse. We attached 
our car to one of the larger of these, and then 
swept on with it. 



160 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

The journey was long, and would have been 
somewhat tedious had we not had abundant 
occupation in arranging the wonders we had 
collected in the ruddy world we had left 
behind. The rock, or meteor, on which we 
rested offered but little to employ us. It was 
but a few scores of yards across, and was 
formed irregularly. It was a mass of iron 
and manganese, chromium, and sodium. Still 
it was easier than the ether-boat we had 
attached to it. Sometimes we landed on it, 
sometimes remained in the ether-car. We 
analyzed its rocks, and examined micro- 
scopically their texture, and found in them 
vestiges of infusorial life of many orders. 

On, on we went ; on towards the vast 
system of worlds to which we aimed. On 
day by day (speaking of the earth or Yenu- 
sian days), up to a year, ever forward we 
flew, with the long flow of myriads of 
meteors around us dimly reflecting the sun- 
light, and Jupiter slowly growing larger and 
brighter, till we tfelt hat we might get within 
his influence. 

Then Ezariel called us into the ether-boat, 
and he detached it from our friendly little rock, 
and we launched out again into space. But 
now purposely the anti-gravitating power was 



The Voyage Through Space, 161 

not used. We were within the influence of the 
planet and his vast mass. We rushed through 
space as fast as a cannon-ball fired from a 
rifle cannon — hundreds of miles a minute — on 
towards the great world before us. 



^1 



162 ■ A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER II. 

PIRST IMPEESSIONS. 

WE went witli terrific rapidity to tbat huge 
globe, whicli constantly grew linger, with 
his four moons — rather planets than moons — 
rolling round him. 

The orb of Jupiter was evidently wrapt in 
clouds — long lines and belts, and broken spaces 
here and there, through the masses of mist, in 
which we hoped to see the planet himself. 

At length we felt we were getting into his 
cloud-land. The force of gravitation had then 
to be compensated. '' If we," said Arauniel, 
** strike land like this, we shall pierce into the 
depths like a bullet for many yards. Back 
with the pressure ! Undo the gravitating 
power!" We did so. Still the momentum 
was terrific. Swift into the clouds we dashed. 
Long miles of floating vapour were passed 
through in a few moments. It seemed as a 
dream, a mere gauze veil. Then a momentary 
glance at a vast expanse of heaving, tempes- 



First Impressions, 163 

tuous ocean, overcast with overhanging piles of 
clouds, then a tremendous splash, and we were 
rushing into the waters of the ocean of the 
great planet. 

To anv man it would have been instant 

v 

death, but we have, as you know, far mightier 
vitality than man's, and under the waters we 
can live for a long time. Still, the crash was 
inconvenient to us, and when the resistance of 
the waters had quieted our onward motion, 
Ezariel again jout the force of impetus to the 
ether boat upward, and we rushed up again out 
of the ocean depths to the planet's surface, 
the boat glowing with heat caused by friction, 
and the waters hissing in a cloud around us. 
We rose, therefore, in a vast whirlpool, with 
great clouds of steam rising from the heated 
depths, until again we came to the surface. 

It was a vast ocean in which we found our- 
selves. The waves rose to the height of real 
mountains, and sank again. We floated on 
this tempestuous sea, such as the earth in its 
worst hurricane has never seen, hoping some- 
times, as we were swept upwards on a moun- 
tain-like crest, to catch a sight of land, but none 
could we see. 

Having thus floated for some time, Arauniel 
proposed that we should rise into the air, and 

M 2 



164 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

by flying over the surface seek for land. We 
flew up to a moderate heiglit, under the clouds. 
The wind was not so violent as the waves 
would imply, and even they were going down 
now. So we managed to fly in the air, floating 
beneath the clouds over the tempestuous waves. 
Our ether-car floated rapidly, like a balloon, 
over the great heaving mountains of the mighty 
waters, — like a mountainous region, but all in 
motion, — peaks and clifis of foam ever rising 
and falling. 

Long we floated, over many thousands of 
miles, but nothing save liquid mountains, hun- 
dreds of feet high, and dark ocean valleys were 
in sight. No land, nor trace of land, did we 
see. At length Arauniel called out from the 
top that he saw an island. It appeared really 
to be one, but very small — just like a large 
rock on the sea, a few hundred yards across. 

We descended and landed on the island. It 
was not firm. In a moment we felt its heaving 
as it was shaken by the waves. It was evidently 
of some light substance, floating upon the 
waves. Still, putting our ether ship into a 
cleft, we rested awhile, watching the strange 
scene of the tempestuous waves and the vast 
overhanging clouds, and every moment were 
reminded of the primseval chaos, such as our 



First Impressions. 165 

world and the earth were in in the remote ages, 
before the time when lands and continents were 
defined, and when all was ^^et unformed. 
*' Surely," said Arauniel, " this huge planet has 
not yet attained its solid state, like Earth and 
Mars and our world." 

After some hours of wondering at this scene, 
we were inclined to explore our floating islet. 
One of the first things we noticed was an 
enormous cavern of a hundred feet high in the 
rock. We entered it, and passed into a huge 
hall, the extent of which partly explained the 
floating power of the island, for it was practi- 
cally as hollow as an ironclad, and if the 
walls were heavier than water, the hall made it 
lighter and gave it buoyancy. The hall was 
colossal in proportions — much larger than any 
cathedral I have seen on earth. On one side 
of it was a large terrace, and the surface was 
damp, though the waters in mass were well 
kept out of it. The roof was vaulted. Huge 
arches were raised of the massive rock, and the 
dripping waters had formed vast stalactites. 
These was a certain grandeur and beauty, how- 
ever, in this rocky cavern, as we examined it by 
the electric light, which Ezariel took with him. 
At the end were two great openings, which might 
possibly lead to more huge caverns in the rock. 



166 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

As we were admiring the cavern, suddenly a 
strange gigantic being entered the open door. 
He was of colossal height, rational and erect 
in aspect, yet strangely fish-like also. A vast 
monster of the deep, yet apparently something 
more than a mere brute. His body was 
covered with scales. His head was not alto- 
gether stupid, and he had a forehead and 
walked erect like a man. I can best describe 
him as like what one of the huge beings of the 
secondary formation of earth — of the oolite or 
lias — would have been if endowed with intelli- 
gence and reason ; yet he was more symmetrical 
in aspect, and therefore more beautiful, than 
they ever were. He evidently was of the type 
of life which in the earth is still seen in the 
huge monsters of the deep, and yet he looked 
in aspect semi-human — like to the fabled Titans 
of the old Greek poets — a monarch of the deep, 
colossal and majestic, yet for all that oceanic. 

He entered the cavern dripping with water, 
and at once seated himself on the terrace. 
He rested back as if weary, and leaning on the 
rock sank off to sleep. 

This gave us a chance of examining him. 
We mounted the terrace and contemplated his 
huge limbs at our pleasure. He was evidently 
formed to live in the water — rather to swim 



First Impressions. 167 

than to walk, and certainly not to fly. The 
pressure of gravitation of the huge planet 
made us feel that swimming was the most 
suitable mode of existence there. To walk 
was an effort, for one wanted a resisting 
medium, and this huge body was formed for 
the purpose of floating in the waters, or for 
plunging into its depths. 

As we thus surveyed him with our electric 
lamp, which on his entry we had extinguished, 
another gigantic being entered the cave, and 
resting on another terrace also sank to sleep. 
The cavern darkened. We went to the open- 
ing. I^ight — the short night of Jupiter — was 
setting in. The sky was covered with stars, 
and three of the four moons were shining on 
the heaving waters. It was a wondrous scene 
— that ocean and its heaving waves, and the 
starry sky with those three moons shining in it. 

On we went over the heaving ocean- surface, 
on for hundreds of miles. Now and then, 
however, floating islands did appear, heaving 
on the oceanic waves. Some of them appeared 
not to be natural, but artificial — the work of 
created intelligences ; on some of these (as we 
were floating in the air) we could see the 
colossal Jovians resting on them. These 
islands were not like the ships of earth, merely 



168 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

for floating on the surface, bat sometimes they 
sank suddenly into the deep and as suddenly 
appeared on the surface. 

I noticed the difference to Ezariel. '* Men 
float on the surface because they want air to 
breathe. If they could live under the surface, 
they would doubtless sink into the deep, and 
construct ships to do so, like these huge ships, 
which seem to us floating islands of the 
Jovians." * 

We resolved also to explore the depths of 
the vast ocean. 

* There are three classes of views about Jupiter. 

(1) That which is held by Mr. Proctor, that it is an un- 
formed world, and therefore as yet nntitted for life. 

(2) That of Swedenborg, that the inhabitants of the 
greatest of the planets are of superior nature. This can- 
not be refuted, as thereby they would be superior to the 
destructive agencies at work on the planet. (3) M. Flam- 
marion's view, that life is here " manifested under strange 
forms, in beings both vegetable and animal of astonishing 
vitality, in the midst of the convulsions and storms of a 
developing world " is the one I would favour. It is hard to 
believe this huge world a lifeless desert, though terrestrial 
life (such as we have on earth) could not exist there. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 1G9 



CHAPTER III. 

THE OCEAN WORLD. 

DOWN into the deep we sank. On-rusliinp^ 
through miles of water. As we passed 
onwards thousands of strange monsters of the 
deep met our sight, swimming about here and 
there, single and in shoals. Most of them 
appeared as irrational as the great fishes of 
earth. Some were reptilian in aspect, more 
like the ichthyosaurus or the cetiosaurus of the 
secondary formation of earth than any earthly 
fish. Some were apparently higher in type, 
like the whales or dolphins of the earth's 
oceans.^' But a few appeared of rational nature, 
and were provided with singular implements of 
swimming, alone, or elsewhere floating in sub- 
marine ships of metal, curiously designed, and 
propelled through the waters with great velocity. 

* '' They are aqueous, gelatinous creatures, too sluggish 
almost to be deemed alive, floating in their (' ice-cold ') waters 
(of Saturn and Jupiter), shrouded for ever by their humid 
skies."—" Plurality of Worlds;' 301. 



170 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

At length we came to a strange scene of 
aquatic vitality sucli as I never dreamt of, and 
sucli as I can scarcely describe. It seemed 
like an island in the waters. It was manifestly 
not the solid bottom, like the bottom of the 
earth's ocean. Huge walls and towers ap- 
peared, vast and massive, as one might expect 
in the hugest world of all our solar system. 
Amidst them swam hundreds of vast forms, 
dashing hither and thither in the waters. It 
was a scene of bustle, and motion, and activity, 
yet all most strange. 

" Nothing we have yet seen is like this," said 
Ezariel. "Neither in Mars nor in our own 
home." 

*'Nor vet the earth or her satellite," I said. 
" This is a world of waters. All other peoples 
we have seen live on the surface. These dwell 
evidently in the depths of their huge world. 
To them the waters are as the air to us." 

"And might we not have expected this?" 
replied Ezariel. " Have we not known for 
ages, that this giant world was very light in its 
gravitating power, considering its size ? It 
appears a liquid sphere, or system rather, as the 
mighty Sun is a vast orb of gases or metals 
fused into a gaseous state. In our world, as 
on Earth and Mars, all three states of matter 



N 



The Ocean World. 171 

exist fairly proportioned — tlie solid, the liquid 
and the gaseous ; in the Earth's Moon you say 
you only found the solid ; in the Sun there 
seems to be only the gaseous ; why should we 
not here expect to find the liquid dominant — a 
world in which the fluid prevails as with us the 
solid ? Now we can understand the sudden 
changes we have seen, even in a single night, 
upon this vast globe — his shifting belts, his 
spots forming and dissolving in a few hours — 
the most wondrous example (save the mighty 
Sun himself) of vast and rapid change in our 
system ; now we can understand his lightness, 
his comparatively small gravitating power, 
perhaps even his brilliancy." 

cc There must be an advantage in this," said 
Arauniel, '' to these huge beings, some of whom 
seem endowed with intelligence. They are not 
bound to the surface as men or the Martians 
are, or near the surface as we ; they can 
traverse their world up and down — down into 
its inner depths for hundreds of miles." 

'' On earth," I replied, " they partially feel 
this advantage of the waters. It is true, man 
has never yet obtained that sovereignty over 
the sea that he has over the land. But still 
the sea is of use to man. It is the great high- 
way of commerce. Upon the sea he carries 



172 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

much of bis products. The dominion of the sea 
confers on the nation that holds it a supremacy 
and power that other nations have not. The 
sea is a great civiHser, for the ports of many of 
the wilder resrions of the earth are far more 
civilised than the interior regions ; and the last 
strongholds of barbarism and savagery will 
probably be the inland parts of Africa. From 
the sea man gathers much of his food. One of 
the greater problems of his future on Earth, 
perhaps, is the utilisation of the ocean to his 
purpose. On Earth there are, as it were, two 
worlds of life — the terrestrial and marine ; and 
of these the marine is the larger, though the 
less important. Each world has its animal and 
vegetable kingdom, with their orders, families, 
general species, as distinct as though they 
belonged to different planets." 

" Then it seems," said Ezariel, *' that Earth 
must be a sort of mean between this world and 
the solid Moon. In Mars we have seen a 
world where land is quite dominant, though 
sea exists. May there not be a law in this ? 
The larger worlds more fluid, the smallest 
solid, the medium ones mixed ?" 

Our conversation had an abrupt termination. 
One of the huge Jovian s at length perceived 
our ether-car, and, rapidly swimming to it. 



The Ocean World. ]73 

strove to grasp it. Seeing the clanger of our 
capture, and not knowing liow we might fare 
with these huge beings, for once we felt 
helpless and overcome. But we had provided 
for such a possible danger. In our car we 
had, as I said, vast command of electrical 
forces. Seeing the peril, I at once set the 
electricity in full force. As he grasped our 
car, the shock rolled him back into the 
waters. 

Then we set the full motive-power at >york. 
Up we dashed through the deep. For a 
moment it seemed as if the Jovians would 
pursue us, for several noticed our ether-car. 
But we rushed on, defying pursuit towards the 
surface. EapidJy we dashed upwards through 
the waste of dark waters, till at last the great 
])illows of the surface could be felt heaving to 
and fro, and then we rushed up into the air 
throuo'h masses of hissino^ foam. 

We rose from the surface into the mist-lands 
beneath the clouds. 

*' It is well," said Ezariel, " we have escaped 
those Jovian giants of the deep ; but it is sad 
to think that w^e cannot hope to know them as 
we did the Martians. Their nature is too 
distinct from ours for us to understand them, 
or to make them understand us. And yet this 



174 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

huge world of waters, like everything in creation, 
appears wonderfully suited for its object." 

'' How different each world is from all the 
others," said Arauniel ; '' and yet each, doubt- 
less, in its way, most admirably adapted. Our 
fair world is very different from that gorgeous 
world of Mars ; and, from your account, Earth, 
and the dead world of the Moon are very 
different from each ; and now this giant world 
is utterly different from all the others." 

" Not utterly," I said, " there is an under- 
lying unity beneath all this diversity." 



A Voyage to Other Worlds, 175 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE LAN D OF FIEE. 

WHEN we came to the surface, we again 
resolved to rise into the air. We rose 
over the mighty heaving ocean of the giant 
planet. 

" There is no chance," said Arauniel, '' of 
conversing with these huge beings, as we did on 
the gorgeous planet we have left. Whatever 
may be their polity, their thoughts, their faith, 
their hopes, we cannot know. They seem of 
another order to us, — another class of beings. 
The inner and lesser planets, such as the Earth, 
or our own planet of love, and the one we have 
left, all have much alike, and so life in them is 
like ; but here we have life of another type, 
and one with which we cannot well communi- 
cate." 

'' Not quite another type," I said. '' On 
earth, as I told you, they have this type, but 
in a low and soulless state, in the fishes of the. 
ocean. In the earlier ages of the earth it 



176 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

was more developed than now. Men now 
place these fish in aquaria, and watch their 
movements. The scene we have just beheld 
somewhat reminds me of the monsters of 
Earth's ocean, — of the type of life in their seas. 
Here it is still more gigantic, — still more mar- 
vellous ; and it would seem that in these huge 
frames intelligences are enshrined it may be, 
for aught we know, of a nobler order. That 
crystal city was grand and wonderful ; design 
and beauty was there, but of strange kind. It 
is not for us to judge these singular, vast 
beings, whom we cannot understand.'* 

'' It looks like the fish type exaggerated and 
developed," said Ezariel. 

''But is there not some truth in the old 
beliefs of mankind on the Earth, which are now 
exploded — of Titans, and Mermaids, and ocean- 
beings endowed with life and intelligence ? On 
Earth there are none such, and never were; 
but it may be that man, by inspiration, or by 
instinct, or by contact with spirits superior to 
himself, has gained the thought of such a 
type of life as this endowed with intelligence. , 
On earth once it was the hugest type of life, 
and still it is so, for the animals of the sea are 
greater than on the land." 

"What is this light to which we are 



The Land of Fire. 177 

coming?" said Ezariel. "I see a vast fire 
raging over the sea." 

Then we looked from our windows and saw, 
far over tlie heaving waves, a long line of 
blazing fire, as of huge masses burning. 

'' Perhaps this world," said Arauniel, '* is still 
unformed. As you saw in the Moon a dead 
world, worn out, exhausted, where life is des- 
troyed and finished with, — here may be an 
imperfect world, a huge mass yet developing^ 
which has not thoroughly cooled." 

"Perhaps so," I replied, '* as upon the 
Earth it would seem, when the cooling process 
had gone on for many ages, the sea was first 
inhabited by living beings, before the land was 
properly formed." 

'' One thing has struck me," he said, '^ ever 
since I came here, — the much greater heat of 
this world than we expected. Men, as you 
say, supposed that this giant planet would be 
too cold for an abode of life because it is so 
far from the Sun, and yet now the air is far 
hotter than it is even in our own sunny world, 
and even the tropics of Earth are never so hot as 
this. But the heat here is plainly internal, not 
solar. It is from Jupiter himself, and not from 
the Sun." 

'' There is one origin of the heat plainly," 

N 



178 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

said Ezariel, pointing to the blazing, copperous- 
looking fires. 

*' The heat is hke the blast of a furnace/' I 
said. *' It reminds me of Hecla on Earth in a 
state of eruption ; but no Earth- volcano for 
many thousands of years has ever blazed like 
this. The air would even now be insupportably 
hot to any terrestrial animal. Men would call 
this the heat of boiling water, and still we are 
miles off. Had we not better turn away from 
this eruption ? The instruments will soon be 
affected by the heat, and some of our collec- 
tions destroyed.'' 

Ezariel consented, and we upraised the 
ether-car a mile or two, the better to contem- 
plate the terrific conflagration. There were 
rising out of the waters, surrounded by huge 
piles of scorias and ashes, some hundreds of 
miles of blazing flames and incandescent matter. 
Out from the deep rushed vast columns of 
smoke and steam and ashes, whilst glowing 
rivers of lava flowed towards the hissing seas, 
which, in a cloud of mist and steam, from time 
to time enveloped the volcanoes. Stromboli, 
Vesuvius, Etna, Hecla, indeed all the volcanoes 
of either hemisphere on Earth together, in full 
eruption, would not produce such an effect as 
this. 



A Voyage to Other Worlds, 179 



PART v.— SATURN". 



CHAPTER I. 

TITAN. 

Look then abroad through nature to the range of planets, 
suns, and adamantine spheres, wheeling unshaken through 
the void immense. 

WE ascended from tlie wondrous scene of the 
fire-land and vast, hissing mists, and the 
huge waving sea of the giant planet. We pierced 
the regions of clouds around him, and at length 
we came to the vast, black expanse o£ ether, 
studded by a million stars. Again we launched 
into the infinite. 

Thus once more we plunged into space — 
infinite space, — dark^ airless ether, with the 
myriads of glittering stars far off on every side. 
Again we got upon a meteor ring, and swept 
on through space toward the mighty system of 
the Ringed World. The journey was long — 

N 2 



180 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

days and weeks and months, by your earth- 
measurement of time, passed on this weary 
voyage. Still Saturn seemed little more than a 
great star in space, with its mighty rings and 
its eight moons slowly growing more and more 
distinct. On, still on, we swept, away from the 
great orb of day, the Sun, which slowly grew 
less and less glorious. As we travelled onwards, 
we compared our experiences of the worlds we 
had seen, and examined the relics of them we 
had collected. The conclusion we came to was 
that which I had anticipated : the solar system 
is one, yet it is unity in diversity. The elements 
of matter are the same — the metals, the rocks, 
the main forms are one, as springing from the 
same great nebula of primaeval chaos. But the 
combinations differ. Even in the Giant AVorld 
we had left there was nothing really and essen- 
tially new to us, except in form and combina- 
tion. The origin was the same, the main points 
of being identical, but an infinite variety in 
combination. 

So also with life. We had seen no really new 
forms of life. Even on your Earth they are to 
be traced, though often imperfect and low in 
development. As the worlds were the same, or 
very nearly the same, in metallic elements, in 
spherical shape, in motion, in atmospheres, in 



Titan. 181 

gravitation, in electricity — so also in the vitality 
on their surfaces. 



TITAX AND MIMAS. 

At length we came within the influence of 
the great Ringed World, and felt ourselves 
dashing towards it by the mighty power of 
gravitation. Like three huge rainbows in the 
starry sky appeared the mighty rings — vast 
tracks of nebulous matter cast off by the planet 
in its rapid whirl. '' Such rings as these,'* 
Arauniel said, '' were probably once around all 
the exterior planets. Around Jupiter, where 
the four moons sometimes still remind us of 
them ; around little Mars, even when Deimos 
and Phobos were in formation ; around the 
Earth, when the Moon was being cast off into 
space in palaeozoic times. All once were ringed 
worlds, but they have passed that stage of 
being. Yet here we have a very ancient world 
still by its own inherent power retaining the 
ring formation, — a last relic of a primaeval stage 
of world-existence." 

As we rushed forward, we felt the force of 
attraction drawing us from our onward course. 

We were deflecting towards one of the minor 
worlds that rolled around that great ringed 



182 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

system. It was the chief of them — the satellite 
you call Titan, the greatest of the satellites of 
our solar system, greater than the world Mer- 
cury himself. On, on we flew, on to this lesser 
world, worthy of being a follower of the great 
Sun, but now a satellite of Saturn. 

" Let us rest on one of the mountains," said 
Arauniel, ''and watch this wonderful system — 
a miniature of our own great solar system, with 
yon huge world as a minor sun, around which 
these eight worlds roll, and the three rings 
around his surface marking that which once 
circled on a smaller scale the Earth and Mars." 

We flew on towards this moon, not so very 
much less than the earth itself. Continents and 
oceans were stretching far and wide beneath 
its clouds. 

It was a strange world — primitive in forma- 
tion, imperfect in development. I cannot well 
describe the wonders we there saw. The 
marvels of its heavens were great, and the 
wonders of its surface greater still. It was, as 
it were, a world of double suns — the one, the 
glorious Sun, now shining, with rays feebler far 
than those which you know in the arctic regions 
of the earth ; the other the great ringed sun of 
Saturn, far larger and more majestic, with his 
triple walls of light girding him like a huge 



Titan. 183 

citadel enclosed in triple lines of fortifications. 
And there also were to be seen the seven sister- 
satellites, that followed like seven great planets, 
while beyond there were the planets we were 
wont to see in the heavens and our own world 
and earth now fading in the distance. Yet all 
were indistinct compared with the great system 
of Saturn around us. 

We quitted this giant satellite before Titan 
had made a quarter revolution around his 
primary — the great belted and ringed world, — 
and plunged into the system itself, passing by 
four of the moons, — Rhea, Dione, Tethys, 
and Enceladus, — until we came to the little 
world of Mimas, where we rested again. 

I cannot describe the strange things of that 
world of Mimas. Earthly words depict only 
earthly things, or at best only things of nature 
akin to those of earth. But here there were 
other forms of development, other conditions 
of life, and other resultants than such as you 
find on earth. And yet, just as the minerals of 
that world were much the same as we have and 
as you have, though in quite strange combina- 
tions, so the elements of life were somewhat 
the same, though in the dull, imperfect light, 
less developed in their 4iigher forms. One 
thing was singular, however, which I had not 



184 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

noticed yet, — the higher living creatures of that 
world neither walked as the animals of the 
dominant type of life on Earth or Mars, nor 
flew as we do in the dense atmosphere of our 
glorious mountain world, nor were chained to 
the depths as the huge beings of the giant 
planet, but sprang. I asked Arauniel why 
should this be. " It is the effect of gravita- 
tion. Do not you feel how light you are? 
You see on this world there are two forces 
^t work — the moderate gravitation of Mimas 
and the less but still felt power of Saturn. 
One gravitation partly neutralises the other. 
So by slight exertion these beings leap, — they 
neither need to walk nor fly ; a slight effort 
overcomes their gravitation. Here, practi- 
cally, all things belong to two worlds, the little 
satelHte on which they dwell and the mighty 
planet, like a giant globe (many times the 
size of the sun in our skies), above them." 

The evenings in that little world were 
wonderfully glorious. There, ever through 
the sky, were rolling the huge orb and his 
three rings, and the seven sister-moons ever 
varying in their phases. 

There was nothing here, it seemed, to detain 
us, save wonder ; there was nothing beautiful 
nor sublime in this world, only things quaint 



Titan. 185 

and strange. However, the heavens above and 
the changes there were wonderful. So we 
rested on a mountain far removed from the 
lower manifestations of life which filled the 
plains, — those wierd beings that seemed with 
little effort to rise from the surface and go 
where they would. 

* * * * 

I can hardly describe our final journey into 
the realm of Saturn — the voyage from Mimas 
to the huge central orb itself. Nothing had 
we beheld more magnificent or awe-inspiring 
than those gigantic rings. There was a solemn 
sense at the approach to the outer ring. We 
drew near to it purposely, but as we approached 
nearer its solid appearance dissolved. Rents 
here and there appeared in its surface, and 
what looked solid at a distance was manifestly 
composed of millions of fragments of matter, 
meteors in millions were sweeping onwards in 
many streams. If there be anything on earth 
to which I might liken it, it would be the Lake 
of a Thousand Islands, only the islands were 
not rocks rising out of the waters, but shining 
meteors in space, and the medium in which 
they floated was ether, not water. As swarms 
of bees, the millions of meteors rolled on in 
space around the huge belted orb of Saturn. 



186 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 



CHAPTER II. 

SATURN. 

Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge and chaos to retire, 
As from her outmost works a broken foe 
"With tumult less and with less hostile din. 

Milton's Paradise Lost. 

ON, on we went through space towards that 
vast belted globe, the great rings rising 
overhead like a huge aurora, and the moons 
in a vast corona around. It grew huger and 
huger, till its glistening clouds formed a vast 
expanse before us, and the belts of Saturn grew 
into huge openings. Into one of these we 
dashed. The scene of that outer region of mist 
■was not unlike that of the great planet we had 
left — Jupiter. It seemed as if we were ever 
going on and on for hundreds of miles, with the 
huge seas of mist rising around us. At length 
we came to a resistance, as of some solid ex- 
panse of matter, through which we dashed, and 
then felt our further progress stopped in a great 



Saturn, 187 

morass, in wliich our vessel sank. We had 
some difficulty in extricating it, by using all 
the force we had in the stored electric force of 
the machine. When we reached the surface 
again, it was indeed a strange scene that met 
our eyes. A huge forest, as it seemed, of 
gigantic plants was there in rank luxuriance. 
They looked akin to the lower orders of Earth's 
vegetation — something like gigantic lichens — 
in nature, or rather in position in creation, not 
remote from the forms of vegetation that formed 
your coal- shales. All were of low type, but of 
colossal size, such as would suit a world in pro- 
cess of formation, — such as existed on your world 
in the carboniferous age, — such as our world and, 
possibly. Mars once knew, when in their earlier 
stages of development. 

*' Strange it is," I said, " here in these giant 
planets we have worlds that seem in the state 
of formation which we know our world and 
Earth once passed through ; and yet in some 
of the satellites (for instance, in the Earth's 
Moon), we find finished, worn-out, dead worlds. 
How can this be if, as it seems, this world of 
Saturn is a more ancient world than ours, 
thrown ofi'long ago by the sun ?" 

*' Perhaps it is simply," said Arauniel, '' be- 
cause this world and Jupiter are so huge that 



188 A Voyage, to Other Worlds. 

they have more independent existence, — more 
difficulty in developing, so as to suit the higher 
types of life. Here we evidently have a very 
early type of world. Not only has it eight 
satellites, but you see it even retains the ring 
which Earth and Jupiter once had, but which 
ages ago they lost. All here is antique and 
archaic, as, indeed, men foresaw in their theories 
of astrology. Here one may study the juventus 
nnundi — an antique, primitive, undeveloped, half- 
chaotic world." 

He had scarcely finished, when beneath the 
huge shadow of the giant fungi appeared a 
strange and terrible creature — inchoate like all 
around, huge in size and ill-formed in aspect, — 
something of the insect type, but colossal. It 
moved towards us. For once we felt horror. 
I had, alas ! felt it on earth before, in scenes of 
woe and crime. But here we felt there was a 
creature of huge strength, yet of nature not 
akin to ours. Whether he had intelligence I 
cannot say. He moved among the gigantic 
fungi to our ether-car, and then moved it with 
his .huge ciliated limbs. His aspect was hor- 
rible. After staying and looking at it with 
seeming curiosity — though it may be no more 
than a mere animal might feel at a thing strange 
and unknown, — he let it go, and then passed 



Saturn, 189 

on into the huge forest of colossal fungi and 
lichens. 

This was not the only denizen of the forest. 
Strange forms still appeared, such as men never 
think of save in nightmares : some gigantic, 
some of more moderate dimensions, but none 
apparently of any nobleness of aspect ; nothing 
like what we had seen in other worlds, and all 
seemed of inferior types, or rather developments 
in great size of the inferior types of life. We 
remained in our car, watching these strange 
beings pass and re-pass. 

" This seems," I said, '' like some of the 
dreams of Dante's ' Inferno.' These horrid, 
inchoate forms are what men dreamt of in the 
Middle Ages as the eternal companions of the 
spirits of the wicked. Is this a region given 
up to sin, — a world more fallen than Earth even, 
— a realm in rebellion against God?" 

'' Not necessarily so," said Ezariel ; '4t may 
be only a region undeveloped as yet, where 
Nature is imperfect, — where as yet she cannot 
produce her masterpieces. It may be that the 
higher forms of being may even thus be de- 
veloped in these strange types." 

''It would seem," I said, ''as if there was 
some little ground in the notion of the old 
astrologers of Earth, that this vast planet is 



190 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

inimical in its influence. Saturnine is used 
even now among men as a term for dark, 
harsh, evil influences. It may have been that 
it was because this planet, removed from the 
Sun's rays, is less brilliant than the others, or 
it may have been that Man, by some higher 
instinct or revelation, knew that it was of a 
form of creation distinct from Earth.'* 

'' In one sense it is, and Saturn is more than 
another world — than ours or Earth ; it is 
another system. His rings and his moons 
mark a complete system, distinct from the 
others, though chained to the distant sun by 
the power of gravitation. May it not be that 
solar influences, so potent with us, and still 
energetic in the Earth and Mars, here are weak, 
and that the planet himself has a force, — an 
independent existence distinct from the sun? 
We felt this in Jupiter ; here it is more 
manifest." 

" Had we not better secure ourselves first, 
and afterwards discuss these points ? I see 
another of these strange. Saturnine monsters 
approaching us." 

As he spoke, we turned and saw another huge 
being of extraordinary aspect rising from the 
morass and making towards us. We loosened 
the anti-gravitating force, and rose into the 



Saturn. 191 

clouds. Here, poised in mid air in the Saturnian 
atmosphere, we watched the wondrous scene. 
Night was coming on. The sun, small and 
cold looking, was sinking in the clouds. It was 
a very different sort of day to yours or ours. 
The only thing I can liken it to was the short, 
dark day of a North Russian winter. But it 
was not cold. From the planet itself there rose 
a heated steam, evidently the result of its inter- 
nal fires — a world yet not half cooled, such as 
yours was in the carboniferous age of the coal- 
shales. 

As night closed in, the scene grew more than 
ever grand. Seven of the eight moons were in 
sight. Titan was at his full, Japetus was half- 
moon ; Mimas, Enceladus, Rhea, were in the 
first quarter; Dione and Tethys were at the 
third. This alone — this galaxy of splendid 
moons — would have made a wondrous spec- 
tacle. But there was something still more 
marvellous. Like a huge yellow comet (only 
such a comet was never seen by man), from the 
eastern horizon to the western, stood the huge 
arc of the rino^s. It might be also likened to a 
rainbow, but more firm and solid in aspect, and 
not of many colours. The chasm between the 
rings came out clearly, and between them the 
stars could be seen. We floated on in this 



192 . A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

wondrous spectacle over the vast world, the 
glorious rings and the seven moons giving light 
(for seven only were in sight) to the strange 
scene of heaving oceans, and here and there 
low islands clad in mist and cloud, of that 
strange world. Night soon passed. Again the 
sun rose to give a clear light to that singular 
spectacle, but still a dim one compared to that 
which you and we have. Soon after sunrise, 
however, the great banks of cloud hid him from 
our eyes, and we were enwrapped in mist. We 
resolved to rise out of this. Using our anti- 
gravitating power, we rose once more into clear 
space, and then, beneath our feet, for hundreds 
of miles, we saw the vast clouds rolling around 
the mist- clad planet, much as, on an overcast 
day, the aeronaut sees the earth clad in cloud. 
"We flew on hundreds, nay, thousands of miles, 
but still nothing but cloud was visible. The 
planet and his vast oceans and morass-like 
islands, and the strange forms that moved 
through his forests, were all lost to view. It 
was a huge cloud-land. 



A Voyage to other Worlds. 193 



CHAPTEH III. 

EETURN. 

''T ET us go back," said Ezariel. "We have 
-Li left a world of love and beauty to be- 
hold one of terror and wonder, where all 
seems unsympathetic to our nature. We have 
no place here. Happiness calls us home. We 
have seen enough." 

Arauniel was at first inclined to make a still 
further plunge into space to the great world of 
Uranus; but I agreed with Ezariel that we had 
evidently passed beyond the regions where our 
nature was in place, and that it would be well 
to go no further. We had seen enough of the 
wondrous works of God to satiate our desire 
of knowledge. " Let us go back," I said. 
'^We have seen enough. We have no place 
here." 

So once more we mounted in our ether-car 
and plunged into space, and looked for many 
long days in wonderment still on that marvel- 
lous system of worlds and rings that we had 
left behind and never wished to re-visit. By 
degrees it sank into the sky and grew amalga- 





194 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

mated into one planet; by degrees the great 
sun regained his glory. 

We had long passed the orbit of Jupiter, 
when suddenly we perceived the force of gravi- 
tation drawing us toward a strange- shaped 
planet,, or world rather, which suddenly ap- 
peared near us. 

" It is one of the planetoids," said AraunieL 
'' They are not all spheres like the other planets. 
They are probably fragments of some great 
ancient world destroyed in primaeval time, or 
else broken pieces of a huge ring that once 
circled our sun, like the rings we have just 
seen around Saturn." 

We drew near to it. I cannot well describe 
it. More desolate than your moon, more terri- 
ble in its desolation. Vast mountains, water- 
less, treeless, huge masses of rock, coagulated 
blocks of star-forming matter — nothing living 
or moving. We rested on it some days and 
wandered on its strange cliffs, and then plunged 
off again into the orbit of the gorgeous planet 
Mars. 

"Shall we not visit the earth?" said 
AraunieL ''You have seen it, but we have 
not. Perhaps we may find on it some things 
which you have not seen." 

"If you so resolve," I said, "you must 
indeed beware that men do not find out who 



Return, 195 

you are. I kept my secret well, and only to 
one man did I quite reveal it, just before I left 
it for our home. If you do not keep your 
secrets, and if men find out who you are, you 
may lead them into sin ; some will be ready 
almost to worship you; some will mock and 
deride you ; some will brand you as imposters ; 
in the end they will quarrel over you, and then 
you will lead them into sin, and thereby your- 
selves will fall and ofiend God." 

" Then let us land in some place where men 
are not, and yet where we can see some of 
their works afar — say on some mountains in a 
fertile and cultured region." 

" I can only think of the Alps," I said, " as 
a place suited for us. From them you will 
see a part of France and Italy and much of 
Germany. Men will not trouble you and you 
will not trouble them, for you need not go near 
their cities nor their haunts. If they find you 
amidst the snows and glaciers, you can flee 
from them and hide yourselves in the great 
fastnesses that man has yet never trodden. 
If we go from Alp to Alp, we may see a great 
deal and have a fair idea of Earth. But I 
warn you, go not into the haunts of men . One 
might do it and be unknown, as I have been ; 
we could not all do so." 

'' Good," said Arauniel, ''let it be so. We will 

2 



196 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

land upon the earth, but avoid men. We will 
see the works of man from the mountains and 
afar, and gather what we want of the natural 
wonders of the earth in spots untrodden by 
man. So be it, as you say — let us make for 
the 'white spot on the little continent,'" — for 
so we call the Alps, as ever snow-clad. We 
directed our ether-car towards the earth. 
Again I saw the familiar lines of the continents 
and oceans expanding before me — again I saw 
the lights of Earth's cities. We directed our 
course to the tall, white cliffs of the Jungfrau. 
At length we reached them, and once more I 
stood upon the rocks of Earth, amid the ice and 
snow and rock of Europe's greatest mountains. 
My first thought was to send to you this 
narrative of my journey. May it encourage 
you to lead the higher life on earth, that in 
another state of being you may be found 
worth V to know the s^lories of the heavens. 

If you wish to see me again, come to Jungfrau, 
to the place marked, on the 26th, at sunset. 

Aleriel. 

At the bottom of the page I noticed a map 
of Jungfrau with a place marked by a cross. 
I looked at the page, I rubbed my eyes, 
''Is it true or a dream?" 



A Voyage to Other Worlds. 197 



PART VI.— CONCLUSION. 



CHAPTER I. 

CONSIDERATION. 

'' T SHOULD like to go," I exclaimed. 

i- '' Oh, don't," exclaimed Maud. " It is a 
long journey to Switzerland, and," — slie paused 
— '' and I do not like these supernatural beings, 
if the J really are such. I do not like anything 
above this earth. Perhaps it is a mere impos- 
ture. If so, you would show yourself a mere 
fool to go ; if it is not, you will be utterly in 
their power. Do not go ; I believe it is all 
nonsense, after all. Don't go." 

Her arguments were convincing. I thought 
over it. No, I would give it up. It might be, 
as she urged, a mere trick of a designing man, 
or a dream of some maniac. 

Next morning, when the subject had been 
slept over, and I had just been working out 



198 A Voyage to Other Worlds, 

some practical sclieme of business, Maud, 
looking up from her work, said : 

" If you are going to Switzerland, I wish you 
would take me with you." 

" But, my dear, I have given up all thoughts 
of going. It is an imposture probably, or a 
delusion of a very eccentric man." 

'' I should like to ferret it out," she replied. 
'' I wonder what it all means. Do these state- 
ments suit what astronomers have really found 
out about the planets ?" 

" As far as I know they do. But, for all 
that, I think it a mere delusion of some per- 
son, who perhaps has learnt something about 



science." 



a 



If there is anything in it, surely it would 
be worth seeing some one from another world, 
even if one went to Switzerland to see him." 

'' Well, my dear, but what is the good of it ? 
The probabilities are against it ; and, beside 
that, you were opposed to my going last 
night." 

" So I was ; but give me the privilege of my 
sex. I am full of curiosity about these curious 
beings. I wonder what they are like." 

To make a long story short, I yielded. I 
made arrangements for going away. Our things 
were packed, and in a week from the receipt of 



Consideration. 199 

the mysterious packet, we were en route for 
Switzerland. We crossed via Newhaven to 
France, and then from Dieppe went to Paris. 
There stopping a day to rest, we proceeded via 
Dijon and Dol to Neufchatel, and thence to 
Berne. 



200 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTEE 11. 

JUNGFRAU. 

WE got to N , on the slopes of Jungfrau, 
about noon on the 26th. We lunched 
at a little auberge, and then climbed up the 
slope, pretending that we were merely on a 
walk, and refusing a guide. Without much 
diflBculty we reached the spot pointed out by 
Aleriel on the map. After some three hours* 
walking, we sat down on a rock waiting the 
sunset. Slowly the orb of day sank to the west, 
amid the glorious mountains. The rosy tints 
of sunset were just beginning to adorn the 
peaks, when I noticed coming towards me a 
figure wrapped in a large cloak, who, as he 
drew nearer I saw must be my mysterious 
friend. 

*'0h, I am so frightened," said Maud, seiz- 
ing my arm. '' There he is. I wish we had 
not come. I wish I had never persuaded you 
to take this mad journey." 

'*Do not fear, dearest ; all will be well. God 



Jimgfrau. 201 

is overhead, and will protect us. Besides, 
there is nothing evil or unkind in this strange 
being." 

*' I am glad you have come," said Posela, for 
it was he. '' My friends would like to see you 
before they leave Earth. They wish to see a 
man before they quit this world. And thank 
you, madam, also for coming. They will be 
glad to meet you," he added to Maud ; *' you 
are as welcome as your husband. Follow me." 

It was easier said than done. The ascent 
grew more and more dijfficult, and in some 
parts rather dangerous. Aleriel had to help us 
in several places ; but he said nothing, and I 
was really, I must own it, too awed to trouble 
him with questions. The scenery was magnifi- 
cent, but terrible. The sun had now set, and 
the Alpine peaks were tinted with rose light. 
This grew dimmer and dimmer, till the cold, 
white snows stood out against the black night 
sky. Still we followed our mysterious guide 
up the mountain side. 

At length, getting anxious, I said, "Is it 
much further ? It is dangerous to be on Jung- 
frau in the dark, and it soon will be dark." 

'' We have almost arrived. Descend this 
gulley." 

He pointed to a small depression in the 



202 A Voyage to Other IVoj'lds. 

mountain side, almost full of snow. We, fol- 
lowing his direction, glided down into it some 
thirty feet. Then he led us a few yards up the 
ravine, to a vast snow-pile, and pointed to an 
opening cut in the snow. Taking Maud by 
the hand, he led her towards it. She entered 
with him, and I followed close. A metal door 
stood in the snow. Aleriel opened it. A blaze 
of light came from within. Maud, who was 
in front, and thus could see more than I, gave 
a sudden scream, and fell backwards fainting in 
my arms. What could it be ? As yet I had 
seen nothing but the light. 

Aleriel took from his breast a phial, and 
poured a few drops on her lips. She revived 
almost at once, crying out, '' Oh, do not go in ! 
They are dreadful — so unearthly !" 
"Who ?" I said. " Let me see." 
I leant forward, and once at least in my life 
I beheld a scene plainly of another world. It 
was a small room, encrusted all over with 
crystals of every colour and strange ornaments 
in curious designs. It rose into a little dome- 
shaped roof, in the centre of which blazed a 
powerful electric light, which made all around 
glitter. On the walls were fixed a dozen or so 
curious instruments of a nature quite unknown 
to me. In the dome there fluttered a large 



Jung frail. 203 

t3agle, which had evidently been alarmed at 
Maud's cry. But this was not the curious 
part of the scene. On the side of the room 
opposite to the door were two strange beings 
with large wings, but who, I noticed in a 
moment after, were somewhat human in aspect, 
with faces full of intelligence and of calm ex- 
pression. On their breasts were brilliant gorgets 
of jew^els of divers colours, and down to their 
feet hung long robes of metallic tissue, richly 
embroidered in singular designs. It was 
indeed a combination of the bird type of life 
with human, or more than human, intelligence. 

They looked at us as if with curiosity and 
interest, and then each waving their hands (for 
they had hands, unlike the avine tribe) over 
their heads in what looked like a gesture of 
greeting, suddenly burst forth together in a 
short song of welcome, soft, sweet, and en- 
thralling. It had a most weird and unearthly 
effect. They seemed utter foreigners to us in 
every sense, — in nature, in language, in mode of 
greeting ; in fact, they evidently were not of 
the earth earthy. 

'' This is our mode of greeting a stranger," 
said Aleriel. " Every nation on earth has its 
diversity of customs, surely another world 
must be distinct from earth in all things." 



204 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

I bowed to the mysterious beings, and 
entered the jewelled room. Maud stood at 
the threshold still awe-struck, but I beckoned 
her to come in also. It was truly an unearthly 
scene. I never realised till now how perfectly 
and cleverly Aleriel had disguised himself to 
seem so human. 

I looked around me. All was quaint and 
unearthly, but, for all that, beautiful. Crystals 
of every tint glittered around and about me in 
curious and quaint designs. Everything looked 
different to what we are accustomed to see. It 
was impossible to conjecture what some things 
were for, and why they were so made. It was 
evident that nothing there was earthly, or 
made by human hands. 

"You are cold," said Aleriel. ''We can 
easily warm the car. All the forces of nature 
are under our command here." 

So saying, he touched a metal knob on the 
side of the vault. In a moment a warm breath 
seemed pouring down upon us from above. I 
looked up and saw two of the ornaments in the 
roof glowing at white heat, apparently under 
powerful electric action. 

There was no seat in the room ; but Aleriel 
took two downy couches and laid them at our 
feet, bidding us repose there, and, as he did so. 



Jiingfrau, 205 

one of his strange companions, reacliing up, 
unhung from one of the ornaments a large 
ruby vase full of grapes and bread, and, 
walking across, offered them to Maude. She 
shrank at the approach of the strange being, 
and turned to me as if for protection. I 
thought to myself, '' No human power could 
protect us here if these strange creatures, with 
their wonderful command over the forces of 
nature, chose to injure or kill us." I felt how 
powerless humanity was in such a company. 

Aleriel noted the shrinking, and consoled 
her. 

" Do not refuse our friend, Ezariel. You 
have never had the opportunity before of re- 
ceiving from the hands of a being of another 
world the fruits of earth. That vase I 
brought from the great ocean- capital of Mars. 
So see three worlds, the triad of which earth is 
centre and largest, are here joined together. 
The giver is from Yenus, the fruits of Earth, 
the vase from Mars. Accept, pray, his refresh- 
ment." 

She took the fruit and bread. He offered it 
to me, and I accepted it also. 



206 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER III. 

A NIGHT WITH UNEARTHLY FRIENDS. 

"TT70ULD you like to retire ? " said AlerieL 

T f '« You must be tired. I have prepared 
a couch for you here in this cabin, from 
which I have moved our instruments." 

He touched a ghstening crystal ornament at 
the side of the room, and instantly a sliding 
panel rose in the wall, disclosing a. small cabin 
where some cushions were laid, co\ered with 
rich, but quaint, ornaments of fine embroidery. 
The cabin looked comfortable, and gorgeously, 
though eccentrically, fitted. 

*' Do let us go back," whispered my wife, 
"it seems dreadful to spend the i sight with 
these extraordinary beings. I would rather 
sleep in the meanest chalet on the slope than 
in this place." 

"Why should you fear us?" said Aleriel. 
"What have we done or said t. make you 
think that we would harm you P We would 
injure no one. Still our ways, evrn our life, is 



A Night with Unearthly Friends, 207 

not the same as yours, or under tlie same con- 
ditions. So, if in any way you are distressed, 
say what you wish, and we will obey." 

We retired to the cabin, and were soon asleep 
on the soft couch. I awoke, however, after the 
first dose, by my wife calling me. '' I am so 
faint, I feel suffocating. What can the matter 
be?" 

" I feel the same," I said. " The room is 
hermetically sealed. Ho! help!" I called, as 
I staggered to the door, and knocked at it. 

A soft song answered. I tried the various 
crystals with which it was embossed. I could 
not open it, so I knocked more forcibly. It 
seemed a matter of life and death, for really, if, 
as it appeared, the room was without ventila- 
tion, we must shortly be suffocated. A soft 
song replied. I knocked again. *' Do let us 
have some air. There is not ventilation enough." 
Again a soft song. I knocked still louder. Then 
instantly the panel parted. I saw the two un- 
earthly friends of Aleriel standing in the outer 
domed room, looking towards the cabin. He 
was not there. They knew, as I was aware, no 
earthly language. I could only make a sign to 
my mouth, and draw a long breath to imitate 
breathing. The air in the outer room was 
purer, but still it was warm and close. How- 



208 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

ever, actual suffocation was not risked there. 
I tried to make them understand we needed 
ventilation, but they could not comprehend me. 
I thought it best for us mortals both to go into 
the open air and breathe awhile. They thought 
evidently, when I made for the outer entrance, 
I wished to leave them. However, by gestures 
I made signs we would return. They touched 
then the outer panel, and, wrapping ourselves 
up, we passed into tbe fresh, cold, mountain air. 
It was a glorious, clear, starry night, and the 
white, snow-clad mountains loomed majestically 
around us. 

Having both recovered from faintness, we 
returned to the outer vaulted chamber. Arauniel, 
it seemed (for that, I understood, was the being 
with the silvery wings and great jewelled star 
hanging from his neck), had understood my 
pointing to my mouth as a symbol of need of 
food, so he had got ready for us a large green 
vase filled with what looked like some dried 
fruit. But, though really we were both rather 
hungry — seeing our supper of bread and grapes 
had been a very light one, — we were afraid to eat. 

'*'It may be poison to us, if it is food to 
them," said Maude. ''Oh, do not eat it. It is 
evident there is a danger of their killing us, 
even without meaning us any harm." 



A Night ivith Unearthly Friends. 209 

"That," I said, ''perhaps was the reason 
that Aleriel got for us the bread and grapes 
from the village. Still, the perfume of that 
food is very grateful, but I am afraid to eat 
any of it." 

It was a strange position to be in — on this 
earth, in company with beings, though so 
singular, seemingly good, and certainly bene- 
volent to us ; yet fearing to be killed at any 
time accidentally, from the simple reason that 
our human life was linked by a thread too 
feeble for them to comprehend. I thus 
realised how impossible it would be for a man 
to exist, even if he could get there, in the con- 
dition of our earth-life, on any world but this 
of ours. 

Aleriel entering soon dispelled our anxiety. 
I mentioned my trouble at once to him, and he 
quieted us by saying that he had lived long 
enough on earth to realise the conditions of 
our earth-life, and that there would be no 
danger from our being left alone, as he would 
not depart from us while we remained in his 
ether-car. He opened with a burning bar a 
hole to ventilate our cabin. We retired to rest 
again, quieted by his assurance, and refreshed 
by some more provisions which he had procured 
us from a chalet not far off. 



210 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



CHAPTER IV. 

EXPLANATIONS. 

NEXT morning we breakfasted in strango 
company. We tasted a morsel of the 
singular perfumed food whicli they had supplied, 
and which Aleriel said he was sure would be 
harmless. It was most agreeable to the palate, 
Our meal was made, however, of the simple 
provisions he had got and a little coffee. No 
animal food was offered, and I imagine he felt 
scruples in procuring it. At the beginning and 
end of the meal our hosts, with strange but 
solemn and impressive gestures, sang with 
exquisite sweetness a short hymn. After break- 
fast, Aleriel said : 

" Arauniel is very anxious to ask you some 
questions about the earth, and I shall act as 
interpreter. May we put them to you, and 
record for our friends, to bring home with us, 
the sound of your voices in the phonograph?" 

I consented at once, and he placed a phono- 
graph (of a different form to ours) near my 



Explanations, 211 

moutli. For some five hours I then had a 
strange series of questions put to me, which 
I answered as best I was able — some of them 
relating to topics about which I had never 
thought, and which I honestly believe (having 
done a good deal of variorum reading) never 
yet have been discussed on earth. Others were 
far simpler, but I found a great difficulty in 
making my replies understood. Especially in 
religious questions I found this difficulty. None 
of the three evidently could understand how, if 
Christianity witnessed so strongly to the doc- 
trine of love, Christians could so quarrel with 
each other on religious topics. That any one 
could be angry on religion none of them 
evidently could understand. It was an in- 
soluble problem. They said that if people are 
in error we should feel pity, not anger ; that 
truth could not be manifold, but one ; and that 
passion must tend to encourage error, rather 
than to destroy it. Then they passed on to 
another mystery — the origin of war. They 
could not see why or wherefore men should try 
to hurt, or, still worse, to kill, one another. 
Surely there was enough misery in the world 
without adding to it ? This led to politics. The 
political divisions of Europe, the quarrels of 
nations and their mutual jealousies, the different 

p 2 



212 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

forms of government, even the diversity of lan- 
guages, — all seemed to thorn very mysterious. 
On every matter they not only asked me what 
was the case on earth, but why things were as 
they were. As I, like most people, had taken 
things much as I found them, the causes of our 
social phenomena were very. puzzling. In not 
a few matters, when pressed hard, I had to 
reply, that all this must be the result of sin, and 
of man's Fall, and if men were better things 
could not be in such a state. I must own it 
was painful to give these strangers so unfavour- 
able an idea of humanity and of our earth, but 
there was no help for it. 

Then we turned to other topics — to the mys- 
teries of Nature, to the laws of death, and pain, 
and disease. Here new difficulties arose, and 
I had again to plead the Fall and man's sin. 
It seemed they knew of no pain, only under 
certain unfavourable circumstances, e.g., on 
Saturn, or amid the burning regions of Jupiter, 
they had felt a certain difficulty of existence ; 
pain — localised pain — they had never felt. I 
found, however, they were not sure that they 
would under all circumstances be secured from 
death, or rather '' would have to seek a new 
form of corporeal existence," as Alei iel put it ; 
but they always had evaded this by precautions, 
and by their intense and renewable vitality. 



A Voijage to Other Worlds, 213 



CHAPTER V. 

ADIEU. 

AT length I was pliysically wearied by the 
conversation, wiiich required all my con- 
centrated faculties to follow. I felt that if my 
object was to defend the state of society in our 
world, I had a bad cause. Maud tried to help 
me here and there with bright woman's wit, 
and to explain things I conld not make clear. 
Our weariness was noticed by our hosts, who 
got us a refreshing mid-day meal, and Ezariel 
offered us with it, in an emerald goblet, a strange 
but most exquisite liquor, which entirely re- 
covered us both, and the invigorating effects of 
which we felt for weeks after. Then we re- 
newed our conversation, and so talked on till 
late in the afternoon, when I said that we must 
go if we would reach the inn before sunset. 
They made no objections, but said in an hour 
they meant to depart from earth. Our farewell 
was as strange as our meeting, and I felt a 
certain regret — I know not how to express it — 



214 A Voijage to Other Worlds. 

at parting with those who appeared so good 
and happy, and who had tried to be so kind to 
ns. Ezariel and Arauniel both accompanied us 
to the door, and, giving each of us a small ring 
of crystal as a keepsake, raised a sweet song of 
blessing ; and each according to their use, as 
it seemed, touched us on the forehead. A 
solemn thrill passed through me. Then we 
turned half unwillingly to descend the mountain, 
Aleriel leading the way. We soon reached a 
beaten path, and then Aleriel also bade us fare- 
well : 

'' God bless you both, and may we meet 
again in a happier world." 

So saying, he parted from us, remounting the 
declivity. A few minutes after I heard a 
sudden explosion, as it seemed, in the moun- 
tain, and felt a rushing gust of wind. 

" They are gone," said Maud. " I am glad, 
now, I have seen them. It was like a glimpse 
of heaven." 



NOTES. 



'' Hark ! there is the boom of the cannon." The cannon 
at the siege of Paris could be heard distinctly by day and 
night at Pontoise. I remember hearing the artillery from 
Mont Valerien myself during the second siege. 

" I have often looked on England from afar." An island 
of the size of Great Britain would be distinctly visible in 
powerful telescopes on Mars or Yenus. Indeed, many 
islands visible on Mars are probably no larger than our 
"tight little island." 

The Moon. 

" I selected one large meteor." This may sound fantastic, 
but accepting the conditions given, i.e., of a being of 
immense vitality and power over natural forces, is not 
irreconcilable to astronomical observations. The number 
of meteors is calculated. 

" Boiling water was nothing to it." The calculation of 
the heat of the moon is higher than I have given. 

'* The absence of snow." There appears to be no snow, 



216 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

iior rain, nor even water, nor atmosphere on the mooo. 
What looks so ice-like in the telescope is merely (it would 
seem) the bare rocks glittering in the sunlight. 

"Tycho." The metropolitan crater of the moon. His 
diameter is estimated. 



" So I went forward .... to the great circle of Coper- 
nicus." The following eloquent description from " The 
Moon," by Nasmyth and Carpenter, maybe worth quoting, 
as showing how some of our descriptions are not exaggerated. 
" Let us choose, for instance, the hillside of Copernicus 
. . . As hour succeeds hour, the sunbeams reach peak after 
peak of the circular rampart in slow succession, till at 
length the circle is complete, and the vast crater-rim, Ififty 
miles in diameter, glistens like a silver-margined abyss of 
darkness. By-and-by appears a group of bright peaks and 
bosses. These are the now illuminated summits of the 
central cones, and the development of the mountain-cluster 
they form henceforth becomes an imposing feature of the 
scene. From our high standpoint, and looking backwards 
to the sunny side of our cosmorama, we glance over a vast 
region of the wildest desolation. Crateis, from five miles 
diameter downwards, crowd together in countless numbers 
to the surface, — as far as the eye can reach looks veritably 
frothed over with them." " The Moon," pp. 164, 165. 

Yen us. 

"Whence the mighty Alps." This description is not 
imaginary. I saw it in February, 1872, more than once in 
the neighbourhood of Lake Biehne. I have often thought 
since that it admirably represented the way Mars appears 



Notes, 217 

to us in a good te'escope, and, possibly, Venus, i.e., a world 
wrapt in mist, with a projection here and there, and 
openings in the clouds. A somewhat similar arrangement 
of clouds I have noticed from the Dartmoor Tors. It is 
probably common in all mountainous districts. 



I find that Fontenelle says of the " inhabitants of Venus," 
that they would be " loving music, inventing fete-days, 
dances, and tournaments." It is natural to suppose this 
lovely planet bright with love and joy ; but I have supposed 
the love of the higher spiritual kind.* 



The reasons which led me to assume the bird type to 
be dominant on Venus are the following : — 

1. The dense atmosphere of the planet ; probably one of 
the densest and most extensive in the solar system. 

2. Its mountainous state, unfit for walking animals. 
Such mountain regions would be more fitted to bird than 
mammalian life. 

3. Lastly, the apparent suitableness of the lovely bird- 
type of life to the Queen of Beauty in the heavens, revelling 
in that glorious blaze of sun-light. In spite of Swedenborg, 
unless proof were attainable to the contrary, I should like to 
think the creatures living on the fair evening star to be 
beautiful and joyous and good. 



* Fontenelle, " Pluralite des Mondes." 1783. 



218 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 



Venusian. 

I must also apologise for the word " Yenusian." I know 
well that compounds ought to be derived from the genitive^ 
Veneris ; but these are already connected with ideas op- 
posed to those I wish to convey. 



Mars. 

The ideal of vitality on Mars appears to be that as Mars 
is so like the earth in (1) geographic configuration, (2) 
climate, thus possibly its vitality is like that on earth. I 
have supposed it nearly th» same at least in higher in- 
telligence, only more near to the higher mammalia, i.e., the 
carnivora, than on earth, on account of : — 

1. The tradition of the ancients of Mars symbolising 
War. 

2. Its Arctic climate. The carnivora, e.g., the bear and 
dog dominate in earth's Arctic realms. If there were a world 
in which the Arctic element dominated, it would be one in 
which the carnivora might be supposed to be supreme. 
The idea of a lion or bear being endowed with reason is not 
so ridiculous. The former was called the king of beasts, and 
there is a school of German naturalists who regard the bear 
as nearer man than other animals. 

In Mars we see an older world than that of this Earth, 
and thus I have ventured to suggest there a more advanced 
state of society, heir of all the ages, and thus something — 
like what human society may tend — if progress is healthy. 
The differentia of nature, however, the fiercer Martian 
character, I have tried to preserve. It has been suggested 



Notes. 219 

to me by a friend that this part of my *' fairytale " is like 
Lord Lytton's "Coming Race." If so, the resemblance is 
accidental, or rather Bulwer and 1 have, from observation 
and induction, come to the same conclusion. 

The nomenclature of Martian lands I have used is the 
French system of M. Flammarion. 

Jupiter. 

The question among astronomers now is whether life can 
exist on the largest of the planets. Most regard Mars and 
Yenus as probably peopled (it may be with higher intelli- 
gences than earth) ; but the recent discoveries, which tend 
to show the great heat of Jupiter, are urged against the 
largest of the worlds around us being peopled. It is almost 
manifest that this huge world and Saturn cannot be peopled 
by beings like men, or our higher land mammalia ; but this, 
I contend, does not hinder the existence in those huge 
oceans of Jupiter of beings like the monsters of the deep, 
somewhat similar to the cetiosauri or ichthyosauri of our 
ancient seas, or the whales and dolphins of our own times. 
On earth the two main conditions of abundant life are heat 
and moisture ; on Jupiter and Saturn both of these appear 
to be in excess. If life can exist on these heated oceans, it 
must be somewhat as M. Flammarion and I have supposed. 
If such a life as I suggest is not there, then there either is 
none, or beings of a totally distinct nature to what we can 
conceive. 

As to Saturn, the conception of an invertebrate being of 
intelligence is one that seems monstrous at first ; but, as 
Brewster says, " Is it necessary that an immortal soul 
should be united to a skeleton of bone, or imprisoned in a 
cage of cartilage and of skin 1 Must it see with two eyes 



220 A Voyage to Other Worlds. 

and hear with two ears, and touch with ten fingers and 
rest on a duality of limbs ? How many possible forms are 
there, which eye hath not seen, nor the heart of man 
conceived." These strange forms are to us grotesque, but 
not necessarily impossible. 



P. 203. " They had hands unlike the avine tribe." ' As 
the most serious objection I met with in my " Voice from 
another World " was to the supposition of vertebrate beings 
existing with three pairs of limbs, I venture to quote 
Professor Owen on this point : " We have been accustomed 
to regard the vertebrate animals as being characterised by 
the limitation of their limbs to two pairs, and it is true 
that no more diverging appendages are developed for 
stature, locomotion, and manipulation. But the rudiments 
of many more pairs are present in many species ; and 
though they may never be developed as such in this planet, 
it is quite conceivable that certain of them may be so 
developed, if the vertebrate type should be that on which 
any of the inhabitants of other planets of our system are 
organised." *In some fish, if I mistake not, there are more 
than two pair of limbs. As to the question of muscles, the 
amount of vital force, if increased, might generate strong 
muscular action without large muscles. 



*Owen "On the Nature of Limbs," p. 83. 



THE END. 



WYMAJI A5D JOiVS, VRHfTERS, UKhl\r tJfEeJf STKtKT, LONDOS. 



WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 



A VOICE FROM ANOTHER WORLD. 

Oxford & London : James Parker & Co. 1874. 



A SHORT HISTORY OF PENZANCE, 

S. MICHAEL'S MOUNT, S. IVES, and THE 
LAND'S END DISTRICT, 

Truro : Lake & Lake, Princes Street. 

London : Simpkin, Marshall, & Co. 1878. 



HEROES OF THE DAY. A Poem. 

1861. 



THE BISHOPRIC OF CORNWALL. 

1869. 



PLEAS FOR THE FAITH. 

Especially designed for the nse of Missionaries at Home 
and Abroad. 

Oxford and London : James Parker & Co. 1873. 



THE NEWLYN HYMN BOOK. 



1879. 



THOUGHTS ON CLERICAL LIFE. 

London : Elliot Stock & Co. 

Penzance : J. Rodda. 1881. 



