An Essay on Taste (1780)
Author: Gerard, Alexander.
Publication info: An Essay On Taste. To Which Is Now Added Part Fourth, Of the Standard Of Taste; With Observations Concerning the Imitative Nature Of Poetry . xi, 284 p. Edinburgh: Printed for J. Bell, and W. Creech; and T. Cadell, 1780.

 An Essay on Taste. To which is now added Part Fourth, of the Standard of Taste; with Observations Concerning the Imitative Nature of Poetry. By Alexander Gerard ... The Third Edition
[Page ]
[To the Right Honourable John Earl of Bute] TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
JOHN EARL OF BUTE,
&c. &c. &c.
CHANCELLOR OF THE MARISCHAL
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY OF
ABERDEEN:
EMINENT FOR
ELEGANCE OF TASTE, AND THE PATRONAGE
OF ARTS AND SCIENCES:
DISTINGUISHED BY
THE MOST IMPORTANT PUBLIC SERVICES
TO HIS KING AND HIS COUNTRY;
WHICH WILL COMMAND THE HIGH
ESTEEM, AND ENGAGE THE WARM
GRATITUDE, OF LATE POSTERITY:
THE FOLLOWING ESSAY IS,
IN SINCERE EXPRESSION OF THE AUTHOR's
SENSE OF HIS LORDSHIP's ACCOMPLISHMENTS
AND VIRTUES,
WITH PROFOUND RESPECT,
INSCRIBED BY
HIS LORDSHIP's
MOST OBLIGED,
MOST DEVOTED, AND
MOST HUMBLE SERVANT,
ALEX. GERARD.
[Page ]
ADVERTISEMENT. THE Edinburgh Society for the encouragement of arts, sciences, manufactures, and agriculture, proposed, in the year 1755, a gold medal to the best Essay on Taste ; and, not having assigned it that year, repeated the proposal in 1756. This determined the author to enter on the following inquiry into the nature of taste ; the general principles of which only he presented to the Society, suspecting, that the whole might exceed the limits which they had fixed, by requiring an essay. The Judges appointed for that subject having been pleased to assign the premium to him, he is encouraged to offer the whole, as it was at first composed, to the public .
Aberdeen, Sept. 28. 1758.
[Page 197]
Part IV. Of the Standard of Taste. SECT. I.
That Differences of Taste are unavoidable .
THERE is doubtless considerable difficulty in determining, what are the general qualities which gratify taste, and what it is that constitutes perfection of taste: but the difficulty is wholly of that kind which attends every accurate investigation, especially on an abstruse or delicate subject; as soon as the investigation is completed, the conclusions produce a full conviction of their truth. Few will entertain a doubt, whether novelty, sublimity, beauty, skilful imitation, and the like, are the qualities on which we fix our attention, and from which we derive our pleasure, when we survey the works of nature or the productions of human art. It will likewise be acknowledged without hesitation, that the perfection of taste consists in delicacy and justness, or more particularly,
[Page 198]
in sensibility, refinement, correctness, and the due proportion of its several principles.
But when we come to compare the taste of one man with that of another, we meet with difficulties of a different sort, which cannot be resolved so easily, nor in a manner so convincing. Though all agree that beauty pleases, it may still remain a question, whether beauty does or does not belong to this or that object; and it is a question which it seems often almost impossible to find the means of answering. Of what importance is it for deciding in any one instance, that correctness and delicacy are universally consessed to be perfections of taste? For which is the correct taste, or which the delicate? What one approves as correct, another censures as insipid or enervated; what one admires as delicate, another pronounces viciously refined, and a third perhaps blames as not altogether free from coarseness. The tastes of different men seldom coincide perfectly: and when they disagree, by what rule can we determine, to which the preference is due? The general principles may be rendered unexceptionable; but in applying them to particular cases, there is room for an endless variety of sentiments.
That there is a very great diversity of tastes among mankind, is plain from every day's experience;
[Page 199]
that this diversity must always continue, is no less plain from reflection on those principles of the mind, by the operation of which the several perceptions of taste are produced.
On every subject, in every point of view, the taste of one man obviously differs from that of another. In painting, some are pleased with correctness of design, some with richness of invention, and some with beauty of colouring. The excellence of music has been placed by some in simplicity, by others in a kind of rich variety; and others have put the highest value on those compositions which surprise the ear and display masterly execution. Some prefer the subtile, close, and nervous stile of eloquence; others the more diffuse and copious manner of popular declamation. Every species of poetry, and every mode of poetical composition has had its patrons. Many have admired the sublimity and spirit of the ode; a great writer insinuates that he looks upon it as only harmonious extravagance 1 . It has been made a question, whether an epic poem or a tragedy be the greatest work; each side of the question has had advocates of undoubted
[Page 200]
taste and judgment. Every age has something peculiar, which distinguishes its taste, in dress, in manners, and in arts, from that of other ages. What is highly approved in one nation, is perfectly repugnant to the taste of another the most contiguous to it. The irregularities of Ariosto cannot prevent his being the favourite poet of his countrymen; the more artificial and connected plan of Tasso has determined most foreigners to give him the preference. Those theatrical entertainments which yield high pleasure to a Frenchman, appear insipid and uninteresting to an Englishman; and what suits the taste of the latter, would often shock the refinement of the former. The oriental stile in writing, is reckoned inflated and fantastical, by Europeans; and the simplicity of composition which prevails in Europe, would be no less censured by an inhabitant of Persia or Indostan.
The constitution of human nature renders this variety of tastes inevitable. It must be produced both by an original inequality and dissimilitude in the powers whose combination forms taste, and by the different degrees and modes of culture which have been bestowed upon these powers.
[Page 201]
Most of those internal senses which belong to taste, are exerted by the intervention of an external organ; and all men are not precisely alike in any of their external organs. There are eyes which can scarcely distinguish one colour from another: such eyes must render a person unfit for being a judge of painting, at least so far as colouring is concerned, in whatever degree of perfection he may possess the internal principles of judging. A person whose sight is feeble or obscure, cannot discern, and therefore cannot approve that variety and multiplicity of ornaments, which gives high pleasure to a person indued with acuter or distincter sight. To a very quick sense of hearing, that degree of sound will be painful, which gives music only the strength and fulness fit to gratify a duller organ.
But the original differences lie chiefly in the internal senses, or in those mental processes by which the sentiments of taste are produced. For instance, a degree of difficulty in conceiving an object, which is only sufficient to give one person a grateful feeling of exertion, may fatigue another, and render either novelty or variety in some cases unpleasant to him. On the contrary, a degree of facility which pleases one, may sink another into langour, and make uniformity or simplicity disgusting. This very
[Page 202]
difference of constitution leads the bold and active spirit to chuse and to delight in a severity of exercise, a bustle of business, or an application of thought, which would overwhelm an indolent and feeble mind: the quick change of companies and the incessant round of diversions, which is no more than enough to give play to the vivacity of the gay, would be a torment to persons of a more sedate turn; and the tranquility in which these latter find their enjoyment, would be insupportable to the former. —All the sentiments of taste have a great dependence on association; and must derive immense variety from the endless diversity which takes place, in the strength of the associating principles, in their particular modifications and combinations, in the tracks to which they have been most accustomed, in the nature and the number of accessory ideas which they connect with the objects of taste. —Men differ much in sensibility of heart; and therefore must feel differently and judge differently, in all those cases in which the perceptions of taste are affected by the warmth or the coldness of the heart. — Men have very unequal measures of sagacity and quickness in inserring design and mental qualities from sensible appearances and effects; and consequently must differ in their tastes, in all the numberless cases, in which their pleasure has any
[Page 203]
dependence on such inferences; whereever, for example, the gratification results from a perception of the dexterity of the artist, whereever the passions are expressed by bodily features or attitudes, whereever character is indicated by delicate touches. —They have very different degrees of skill in comparing, and are prone to very different sorts of comparison; and therefore must be differently affected in all those cases, in which the pleasure arises from a perception of the relation of the parts to the whole, or of the means to the end, from imitation, or from a comparative view of different objects.
The perceptions of each of the internal senses, are the result of these and the like mental energies; and they must be in every man duller or livelier, stronger or weaker, distincter or more confused, according to the perfection or the imperfection of those energies by the combination of which they are produced. On this account it cannot be expected that any one of the internal senses should be equally good in all men. The internal senses which belong to taste are many; and each of them is distinct from the rest, in respect both of its principles and of its objects: they are generated by different mental processes; and they are adapted to the perception
[Page 204]
of different subjects or of different qualities of the same subject. A man may be well turned to those processes which generate one of the powers of taste, and consequently perfect in it, while he is defective in another, by being naturally ill-disposed to those processes which should produce it. Hence different men will excel in different sorts of taste, and be chiefly attached each to a peculiar set of subjects and qualities. This must introduce a variety and dissonance into their decisions. One man is principally struck with novelty, another with grandeur, another with beauty, another with harmony, another with the ludicrous; and each gives the preference to that which makes the strongest impression on himself. Many of the forms of judgment, likewise, enter into the operations of taste; and no two men are perfectly similar in their powers of judgment.
The original diversities of taste, in this manner great and unavoidable, cannot fail to be increased by the very unequal degrees and dissimilar modes of exercise and culture, which it receives in the several individuals: these would be sufficient to produce diversity, though the powers of taste had been naturally uniform in all. In the bulk of mankind, these powers receive no culture: engrossed by attention to
[Page 205]
the necessaries of life, attached to pursuits remote from the pleasures of the imagination, or by some other means deprived of opportunities of exerting the internal senses, their taste remains wholly unimproved; or rather the elements of taste which nature implanted in their souls, are extinguished, as seed, by being buried so deep as to prevent its vegetating, is corrupted and lost. Every difference in the degree of exercise, which taste receives, produces a difference in the degree of improvement which it reaches: every difference in the manner of conducting its exercises, occasions a correspondent peculiarity in its structure. If a person has access only to a few of those objects which draw forth the powers of taste, and give them vigour, his sentiments are formed upon these objects; they are confined to the qualities which these exhibit, they cannot coincide with the sentiments of those men who have taken a wider range, who have been conversant with a greater variety of objects, and from the contemplation of them have derived more extensive views. A man who has spent his life in an uncultivated country, may have a high relish of the rude magnificence and wild sublimity of nature, but cannot even conceive the beauties of a rich and highly improved country; and when he is first introduced to them, amidst all his admiration of regularity
[Page 206]
and fruitfulness, he feels disgust in the absence of the grand, though rough and barren, scenes which have been familiar to him. There are many instances of persons who have visited the finest countries in the world, returning to their native mountains, and, from the peculiar taste which they had early acquired, as well as on account of other attachments, giving them the preference to the most delightful regions. It is in nations where the fine arts have been pursued and carried to perfection, or where the productions of great masters abound, that taste in these arts becomes elegant and just. By accustoming himself to attend only either to the noble, or to the graceful, a man may render himself almost incapable of relishing the other. By confining his application to one of the fine arts, or by having opportunities of surveying productions only in that one art, a man may become an accurate judge in it, while he has no taste in the sister arts; a nice judge of poetry, is not necessarily a judge in painting, in music, or in architecture; he may either have no relish for them, or he may have a perverted relish. Our sentiments, as well as our opinions, are liable to be warped by prejudice: the sentiments of taste have, in every man, a distinctive tinge, derived from the peculiarities of his temper, his passions, his situations, and his habits.
[Page 207]
SECT. II.
That there is notwithstanding a Standard of Taste .
IT is the variety of tastes obvious in mankind, that renders it necessary to enquire concerning a standard of taste. But the variety is so great as to render it difficult to fix a standard; and even doubtful, in the opinion of some, whether any standard can be fixed. Either we must allow that all these different and opposite tastes are equally good, or we must acknowledge that some of them deserve the preference, and that there are means of determining, which these are. The former supposition seems to have been so generally admitted, as to have passed into a proverb, That tastes are not to be disputed: yet it is too wild to be seriously admitted by any, in its full latitude. It would imply that every man is to himself an infallible judge of beauty and deformity, of excellence and defect; it would imply that the same objects, and the same qualities of objects, may merit at once approbation and disgust; it would imply that our natural principles of taste, unlike to all the rest both of our mental faculties, and our bodily
[Page 208]
powers, are incapable of being either improved or perverted; it would infer that it is absurd to censure any relish, however singularly gross; it would put all critical discussions precisely on a level with Don Quixote's dissertations on giants and enchantments. The proverb, though frequently expressed, is never steaddily or consistently adopted. Its authority is sometimes urged by persons whose sentiments are called in question; but it is disregarded by the same persons, whenever they are disposed to call in question the sentiments of others. If they be at a loss, by what principles to support a decision which they have given, if they be unwilling to own that they have judged wrong, or to use the means of acquiring greater justness and delicacy of sentiment, they take shelter in the received maxim; they plead that this is their taste, and they have a right to indulge it. But there is no man who does not think himself entitled to find fault with the taste of another in some particular instances; and to find fault with any taste, necessarily implies the acknowledgement of a right and a wrong, and of a standard by means of which they may be distinguished; without taking this for granted, we could never dream of finding fault; but if any taste can be wrong, none has a claim to absolute authority, merely on account of its being
[Page 209]
taste. However frequently the indisputable equality of tastes may be retailed without examination or attention to its meaning, however frequently it may be applied to conceal want of taste, to disguise the perversion of it, or to excuse negligence in improving it; yet every man makes it evident at times, that he gives no credit to the maxim, that he knows some of the sentiments of taste to be right, others to be wrong; and that he admits some criterion by which, in some cases at least, they may be discriminated.
There is one situation in which we are peculiarly prone to admit the maxim which has been mentioned: when sentiments are very different, we readily acknowledge that a preference is due to one of them; but when the difference between them is inconsiderable, we are disposed to allow the same authority to both. It is not difficult to discover the cause of this inconsistency. There is scarcely any state of mind more uneasy, than that in which it is solicitous to determine a point, and yet finds it impossible to determine to its own satisfaction: it hangs in painful suspence between opposite judgments. It is in this state, when it attempts to decide between turns of taste which differ but a little; it is involved in perplexity; it is distracted by contrary principles
[Page 210]
of nearly equal force; it can find nothing in which it may rest with perfect acquiescence: It is eager to fly from this uneasiness; but finds no other means of flying from it, but to persuade itself, that there is no preference due to either turn, that each has an equal and an indisputable authority, and that consequently there is no room for a decision. When a taste differs widely from our own, we do not hesitate to pronounce it barbarous and unnatural; it is when the difference is more minute, that we recur to the infallibility of sentiment. In this case we allow ourselves to admit sophistry, that we may banish suspence. It will by no means follow that the taste of one man is not juster than that of another, because we cannot easily decide, to which the preference is due, or because, when we give a preference, we cannot produce incontestible proofs of the rectitude of our judgment. In matters of science, opposite opinions may be supported by arguments of such equal plausibility, that a man who is not perfectly acquainted with the subject, cannot satisfy himself, to which of them he ought to yield assent; yet one of these opinions may be notwithstanding true, and the other false. In like manner, there may be a good and a bad in taste, though you be at a loss to pronounce, in a particular case, where it precisely lies; and you may be convinced
[Page 211]
that there is, though your propensity to dispel disagreeable suspence inclines you to stifle your conviction, and to suppose for a moment, that there is no certain criterion in the case.
It has been common to consider the pleasures of taste as belonging to the imagination. Perhaps this has contributed to introduce the opinion, that taste cannot be reduced to any fixed standard. We are disposed to regard the imagination as an irregular and lawless power, the parent of whatever is fantastical and capricious. We acknowledge the pleasures and the pains of the external senses to be something real and substantial, for the perception of which there is an unalterable foundation in the constitution of our nature. But the pleasures of taste are thought to have no such permanent foundation: they are derived only from fancy; they depend on a particular turn of imagination, which cannot be expected to be the same in all men, which springs up without a sanction from reason, and again changes without its allowance, a new whimsy driving out the old. But this reasoning can have weight only with superficial thinkers. It is true that mere fancies, and these too absurd and preposterous, have been sometimes undeservedly honoured with the name of taste, as in the ever-varying modes of dress, equipage,
[Page 212]
and furniture; yet even in these trivial subjects, every thing is not wholly arbitrary; there are fixed principles of propriety, on which one mode may be approved and another condemned: and in the genuine province of taste, in the sublimer field of nature and the fine arts, though it be certain, and though it has been a great part of our business to prove, that almost all the sentiments of taste are derived from certain exertions of the imagination, it is equally certain, and has been proved with the clearest evidence, that these exertions are as little capricious, as regular, as universal, and subject to as fixed laws, as the exertions of any other principle in the human constitution.
An argument against the possibility of fixing a standard of taste, has been drawn from the very nature of sentiment. Sentiment, it is said, has not, like judgment, a reference to any thing beyond itself, nor represents any quality inherent in the external object: it implies only a certain congruity between that object and the faculty by which it is perceived; this congruity does certainly take place whenever the sentiment which indicates it is felt; and consequently the sentiment cannot be false or wrong 2 . This argument, however plausible,
[Page 213]
has no solidity. For, first , Suppose it true that our sentiments mark some congruity between certain objects and our faculties, and nothing more; it will not follow that every sentiment is necessarily right, or that one taste may not be preferable to another. If this account of sentiment be just, it must be applicable to all our sensations, as well as to those of taste; but it is readily acknowledged concerning every one of the external senses, that in one man it is more acute than in another; and, therefore, it ought to be acknowledged, that one man may possess taste in greater perfection than another. One eye is more piercing, one ear more quick, one palate, one smell, or one touch, more delicate than another; and there are, in most cases, infallible means of determining, to which the superiority belongs: and why should we hesitate to own, that one taste is superior to another? or why despair of discovering some means of ascertaining which of them is the superior? There may be a congruity between an object and our organs, which undeniably implies a defect or imperfection in the latter: darkness agrees best with weak eyes; but this very conformity is a proof of their weakness. In like manner, the conformity of some objects to a man's taste may be such as shews it to be weak and imperfect. But, secondly , The supposition on
[Page 214]
which the argument proceeds, is not strictly true. Sentiment implies something more than a congruity between objects and our organs. It is not a copy of any thing exterior; but it is the result of it: it is not an image of a quality inherent in the object; but it is the natural effect of it: and when a quality acknowledged to belong to an object, fails of producing its natural and usual effect upon a particular person, the failure indicates a deficience or perversion in that person's organs. Thirdly , Taste implies judgment, as well as sentiment: and therefore, it must, in some respects at least, refer to something beyond ourselves, and be either right or wrong, according as it is conformable or not conformable to that external standard.
Taste may be considered in two different lights, the not distinguishing between which, has embarassed the question concerning a fixt criterion of its sentiments, and bestowed some degree of plausibility on the assertion of the indisputable authority of every taste. It may be considered either as a species of sensation , or as a species of discernment . In the former light, it is mere feeling and perception; it is touched and affected by certain objects, and attaches us to them immediately and without reflection;
[Page 215]
it is simply the faculty by which we receive pleasure from the beauties, and pain from the faults and imperfections of those things about which we are conversant. In the other light, it is a faculty by which we distinguish the true causes of our pleasure or of our dislike; by a reflex act, it discerns the several qualities which are fit to excite pleasure or disgust; it estimates the degree of satisfaction or dissatisfaction which every object ought to produce. Taste considered in the former of these lights, in respect of what we may call its direct exercise , cannot properly admit any standard. The feelings of every man depend, in a great measure, on the original structure of his mind, which is unalterable: they depend on the precise degree and mode of improvement which his natural powers have received; while this remains the same, his feelings must also continue what they are; they can be changed only by a variation in the state of his improvement; but it is not possible that all men should either have the same opportunities of improving taste, or make the same use of the opportunities which they have. It is not, therefore, possible, that all men should be equally pleased, or that they should be pleased with precisely the same things. But notwithstanding this, there may be a standard of taste in respect of its reflex acts : and it is only in respect of these,
[Page 216]
that a standard should be sought for. A standard of taste is not something by which all tastes may be reconciled and brought to coincide: it is only something by which it may be determined, which is the best among tastes various, contending, and incapable of coinciding perfectly. It is so far from being impossible to discover a standard which may answer this purpose to the impartial, that a standard may be found, to which even they whose relish it condemns, may find themselves obliged to submit. The person who feels in a certain manner, and who cannot, by any means, bring himself, at present, to feel in a different manner, may yet be convinced that he feels amiss, and yield readily to a judgment in opposition to his feeling. This happens even with regard to the external senses. A person may perceive in himself an unconquerable antipathy to a particular species of food; and yet, if he can trace its origin to an accidental disgust, he will not, on account of his antipathy, pronounce that food either unwholesome or unpalatable, he will not be surprised that other men are fond of it, but on the contrary believe, that himself also should have been fond of it, if he had not happened to contract an unreasonable prejudice against it. There are persons who dislike particular colours: but these may sometimes be sensible that their dislike proceeds from a
[Page 217]
groundless association; and though it has taken so fast hold of their imagination, that they cannot get the better of it, yet they may be far from pretending that that colour ought to be generally disliked, may be disposed to give credit to those who say that they perceive it beautiful, and even able to discover a strong foundation for their judgment. In like manner, a man may be sensible, that his not receiving pleasure or disgust in the fine arts, does proceed, in particular instances, from an imperfection in his organs, from want of opportunity of improving his taste, or from a prejudice which he has contracted; and, from consciousness of this, may be ready to acknowledge that, in these instances, his own taste is false and of no authority, and that the very different taste of another deserves the preference. One who has a bad musical ear, is not surprised that he perceives not either the excellencies or the defects of a tune, or that he blunders in endeavouring to trace them out; but, disregarding his own feelings, appeals to, and acquiesces in, the decision of those whom he confesses to be better judges. One who has never had access to study the works of the great matters in painting or sculpture, will naturally be diffident of his own taste in these arts, disposed to pay a deference to that of others, who have had superior opportunities,
[Page 218]
and cautious of forming a decision concerning the merit of performances, upon his own feelings, however lively they may be. We often find persons candid enough to decline passing judgment, and to own that they cannot pronounce with impartiality, not only concerning the conduct, but also concerning the works of a particular person, on account of their friendship for the author, or their enmity against him.
Nor needs it to appear absurd to assert, however oddly it may sound, that in some instances, “a man ought not to be pleased when he is, or ought to be pleased when he is not 3 ,” that this may be evinced on solid principles, and that he himself may be convinced of it. This is precisely similar to every case in which reason and reflection are said to correct the reports of the senses. It is well known to philosophers, that many perceptions are ascribed to sight which really belong to touch, that all men think they see certain qualities of bodies, ideas of which only, are, in consequence of habit, suggested by visible appearances. Reason can demonstrate this; but the demonstration can have no influence even on the philosopher in the moment of sensation; he perceives just like other men; and,
[Page 219]
till he happens to reflect, thinks that he sees the tangible qualities of bodies. Just so, a man may have feelings in the fine arts, which he knows to be wrong, and which his knowing them to be wrong, cannot hinder his continuing to have. This is a remarkable difference between sentiment and opinion: no man can hold an opinion for a moment after he has discovered it to be false; but a man may clearly perceive a sentiment to be wrong, and yet find it for a long time impossible to abandon it. The firmest conviction of reason cannot prevent a perverted sensation; it must, in spight of that conviction, continue to be received, till the natural peculiarity or the habit which occasions it, be corrected by proper exercise and culture. Men, therefore, who are affected differently, may notwithstanding judge alike: and men who judge differently, may admit some common principles which serve as a test of both their judgments. Actually to reconcile the feelings, or even the discernment of all men, in matters of taste, is impossible: but it is not therefore impossible to find the means of determining which is sound, which not, and of estimating the degree of excellence or imperfection which belongs to each; or, in other words, to investigate the true standard of taste.
[Page 220]
SECT. III.
That the Standard of Taste cannot be ascertained by explaining away Diversities of Sentiment .
IT is of small importance to evince, that some of the sentiments of taste may be called in question, or that one taste may deserve to be preferred to another, unless we can likewise find some criterion by which it may be determined in every case, which are the faulty sentiments, and which the decision that has authority, and ought to be submitted to. There cannot be an external standard by the application of which the merit of different tastes may be compared, as quantity is measured by feet and inches, and the excess, the defect, or the proportion of one quantity to another, precisely marked. The standard of taste must be something internal ; it must be derived from some general qualities of taste itself, or from general principles of human nature. It will be universally allowed, that these are to be investigated and ascertained in the same way as all the other principles of the mind, by experience and observation. But all have not pursued the investigation on the same plan, and therefore have adopted different conclusions.
[Page 221]
The elegant author of the Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful 4 , brings the question to a quick decision, by maintaining, that the differences of taste are only apparent, and that all men, in effect, perceive nearly in the same manner. So far as the senses are concerned in exhibiting the perceptions of taste, these perceptions must be pretty much the same in all men; for, without contradicting experience and introducing absolute scepticism, we must suppose the conformation of the bodily organs, and consequently the manner of perceiving objects by means of them, and the pleasures and pains thence resulting, to be nearly similar in all men: and though custom and other causes produce some deviations from the natural pleasures and pains of sense, yet all men distinguish these from the acquired; and every man's senses are like those of other men in most respects, and vitiated only in some points. So far as the perceptions of taste can be referred to the imagination, they arise either from images of sensible objects, or from imitation: in exhibiting the former, imagination being only the representative of the senses, it must be pleased or displeased on the same principle as they are, and consequently must be as similar in different men; in being pleased with
[Page 222]
resemblance, all men are pretty equal, as far as their knowledge of the things compared extends; and though in this knowledge there be considerable differences, arising from the variety of accidental situations, these produce not properly a difference of taste. Judgment is the only remaining source of the perceptions ascribed to taste; and it gives us the same degree of certainty with respect to the imitative arts, as with respect to morals and the science of life, and in fact produces a closer agreement in matters of taste than in matters of science. On the whole, the principles of taste are entirely uniform, but men possess very different degrees of these principles.
If all this were strictly true, there would be no need to enquire concerning a standard of taste, for there would be no real differences to be adjusted. But it cannot be meant, that the sentiments of all men concerning the individual objects, of taste presented to them, are the same. The expressions used by the author, seem often to imply this; but the contrary is evidently acknowledged in many of the illustrations brought to evince, that men who form very different judgments concerning individual objects, yet judge on the same general principles. It is undeniable that their judgments are not only apparently, but really different;
[Page 223]
nay it is, not without reason, observed by an ingenious author 5 , that the difference is greater in reality than in appearance, because the sentiments of men with regard to beauty and deformity, are discordant, while their general discourse is the same, and they all use the same words importing praise or blame, but affix very different meanings to them. A perfect or a near uniformity of tastes in mankind, can be reasonably asserted in no other sense than this, That all the sentiments of taste are ultimately resolveable into certain general principles, which all men possess in common; which may therefore be referred to, as a fixed standard of taste; and the want or perversion of any of which renders a man in that respect monstrous, and unfit to be reasoned with in the case. This position is just; but the manner in which this author endeavours to ascertain the general principles of taste, seems to be liable to several exceptions. It will be readily acknowledged, that the original perceptions of the external senses are almost the same in all men, that they are distinctly remembered, and continue to be easily distinguished from all adventitious perceptions, and that they form an obvious standard for determining which is the sound and natural state of the senses. But this is by no means
[Page 224]
applicable to taste. If it were, we must maintain that the rudest and most uncultivated taste is the standard; for all sentiments which imply a refinement and enlargement of taste, are evidently acquired and adventitious, not original; and consequently would be, not natural, but deviations from nature. The reason of the difference is, that our external senses are at first formed complete and perfect, but taste is an improveable faculty, the elements of which only we bring into the world with us. Again, though it were acknowledged that the perceptions of the external senses are perfectly uniform in all men, it would not follow that the sentiments of taste, so far as they proceed from the imagination, are likewise uniform; for it is not true, that the imagination, in presenting images, is only the representative of the senses: it can vary to infinity, the disposition of the perceptions which we have received from them; and consequently it presents numberless images, which the senses could not possibly exhibit, and which give pleasure or disgust on totally different principles. In imitations also, a difference in the knowledge of the things compared, is not the only cause of a variety of sentiments: differences in the propensity to comparison, and in the skill of comparing, and discerning likenesses, unavoidably produces diversity of sentiments in those whose knowledge is the same.
[Page 225]
SECT. IV.
That general Approbation is not the immediate Standard of Taste .
Others , acknowledging the variety of mens tastes, in relation to individual objects, to be real, have supposed that a standard may notwithstanding be inferred immediately from experience of their judgments concerning these objects 6 . Some things have pleased universally, in all countries and in all ages: these possess the true and universal beauty. There are other works, concerning the merit of which there is not an universal agreement: these are to be estimated according to the judgment of the majority. Whatever is universal among mankind, must be natural to them; whatever is general, must likewise be reckoned natural, though there be found some exceptions. What is natural to any species, we necessarily regard as right, and every deviation from it in individuals, we reckon an
[Page 226]
imperfection. We conclude, therefore, without hesitation, and without imagining it necessary to enquire farther for reasons in support of the conclusion, that whatever has pleased the taste of mankind universally, or even generally, is, from the original and fixt constitution of human nature, calculated to please, and the contrary to displease; that they will produce their respective effects wherever the mind is in a sound state; and that when they fail of producing them in a particular instance, it must be owing to some defect or imperfection in the organ or in the structure of the mind. But in collecting from experience, what is the common nature of man, or the sound state of the mind, with respect to matters of taste, we are not to consult the feelings of every individual. Many, by being confined to incessant labour for the necessaries of life, or by being engaged in pursuits which give all their thoughts a different direction, are prevented from ever bestowing the smallest attention on productions in the fine arts; in many, taste has not received sufficient culture by education, practice and reflection; in many, its native relish has been perverted by prejudices, by injudicious imitation, wrong habits, corruption of manners, and the like; some are naturally void of taste, or remarkably defective in its principles: all these are to be excluded, in forming our
[Page 227]
judgment of what generally pleases or displeases in the fine arts. The sentiments of those only are to be taken into the account, who have a good natural taste, who have not allowed it to be vitiated, who have improved it by study or conversation, and by such extensive acquaintance with works of imagination, as enables them to compare one with others, and to judge of its relative as well as of its intrinsic merit: and the sentiments, even of persons thus qualified, are to be regarded with respect to a particular work, only when they have come to the examination of it with serenity of mind, in a disposition fit for giving its several beauties and blemishes their due influence upon them; when they have examined it with attention; when they have studied it deliberately, and surveyed it in every different point of view. In this manner, the persons whose sentiments deserve regard in the present question, are reduced to a small number; among these there is almost a perfect uniformity of judgment; and their concurrence determines the merit and the rank of every work. The number of capable judges varies likewise according to the nature of the work which comes under their cognizance; fewer can form a judgment concerning the Iliad or the Æneid, than concerning a modern poem in their native language; fewer concerning a
[Page 228]
picture than a poem; and in some places and some periods, the capable judges in any art are much fewer than in others. When a new work appears, the judgment of the public concerning it, remains for some time in suspence, but it never fails to be pronounced at last, according to the real merit of the work; and it either fixes it in its just reputation, or condemns it to oblivion. Some of the beauties or of the faults of a work may escape the notice of many at first, but they cannot escape the notice of all; by those who have observed them, they are pointed out to others; and being attended to, they come to be generally acknowledged. All tastes are not equally alert; as some eyes see at a greater, and some at a less distance, so one taste perceives more quickly, another more slowly, and in both cases objects appear differently, when they are first exhibited; but after each has surveyed the objects in that light, and from that station which suits his organs, their perceptions are in both cases reconciled. Some may be prejudiced for or against a work; but they are so few in comparison with the whole public, that their voice is scarcely heard, and cannot prevent its passing an impartial sentence. A spirit of party, or other temporary or local circumstances, may give a vogue to an insipid work which coincides with them, or obstruct
[Page 229]
the reception of a work of merit, which runs counter to them: but it is only for a while; these circumstances quickly cease, and then the former is treated with just contempt, or totally forgotten, and the latter rises to its deserved rank in the general estimation. There are always some men eminent for strength, improvement, and impartiality of taste; and their sentiments gradually diffuse themselves among the rest, and are approved and adopted. The judgment of the public thus derived from sentiment, from the effect which they feel that a work has upon them, from experience of its fitness or unfitness to please, is to be regarded as the general sense of mankind, and is the only test and standard of merit and demerit in the fine arts. Works which have been disapproved, after a deliberate examination, by contemporaries, have seldom risen to a high reputation among posterity; and works deliberately approved at their first appearance, have never been disapproved afterwards, though their being succeeded by performances of far superior merit, has occasioned their gaining less applause than they received from those who were acquainted with no better, or has perhaps prevented their continuing to be generally studied. The opinions of critics, however supported by general principles and rules, is of no authority in opposition to this
[Page 230]
general sense of mankind. When sentiment is clear and distinct, we may acquiesce in it, without any danger of error; but in deducing general conclusions, on this as well as on every other subject, errors are frequently committed. The business of the critic is only to investigate the causes of those pleasures or of that disgust which mankind actually receive from works of imagination: he has by no means a right to determine that what pleases is not good, or that what displeases is not bad: if the former be a transgression of the rules laid down by critics, this proves only that these rules are arbitrary and wrong. The censures of critics, pronounced upon a cool discussion, may retard the general approbation of a work of merit, by keeping some from attending to it, by prejudicing some against it, and by making others diffident of the rectitude of their own taste: but it cannot totally or finally obstruct it; the judgment of sentiment gradually gets the better of the judgment of criticism; the critics differ among themselves, this hastens the prevalence of the public taste; critics themselves yield to it, or if a few continue obstinate, they are neglected, and it never fails to triumph at length.
In this account of the standard of taste, most men are disposed to rest. Yet it seems
[Page 231]
not to be altogether satisfying. The following observations are designed to shew in what respects it is exceptionable, and to point out, in what manner a more precise standard may be derived from philosophy.
If it be certain that some works have been generally approved in all places and in all ages, it would be absurd to affirm, that these ought not to be approved. It would be to contradict universal experience, in a case in which experience is the sole foundation of a legitimate judgment. Some have now and then ventured on such contradiction, with respect to works which have obtained the most extensive and unanimous approbation: but it has almost always been easy to discover the cause of their singularity. Scaliger was eager to depreciate Homer: but he was actuated by partiality to his countryman Virgil. It was the fashion, for some time, with a party of the French, to deny almost all merit to the ancients: but it was in order to exalt a set of favourite writers, who had adopted a manner so different, that they and the ancients could not be admired at once. The detection of such motives excludes persons from the number of impartial witnesses and capable judges. Their dissent is no exception from the unanimity of the sentence. If there be no other exception,
[Page 232]
the author or performer certainly possesses the real excellence: his having been always and every where approved as excellent, is a full evidence of it.
But is there any work of the excellence of which we truly have this evidence? I doubt if there be. The Iliad of Homer, the tragedies of Euripides and Sophocles, the orations of Demosthenes, gained the approbation of the enlightened Greeks, were admired by the Romans, and continue to be the delight and study of the moderns. But does this amount to the consent of all ages and nations? Not at all. It is only the consent of the European nations, and a few others connected with them, and similar in their sentiments and manners. But there are regions in the East, exceeding Europe in extent, and in the number of inhabitants, who have never given their suffrage in favour of these works. Among them too, poetry and eloquence have flourished: they have productions in both these arts, which have obtained, for an equal number of ages, as extensive and as unanimous an approbation. In these productions we acknowledge the fire of genius, but censure numberless irregularities and extravagancies. Were they acquainted with the works which we admire, they would no doubt censure them with equal severity.
[Page 233]
Here then are two parties, equally numerous, equally unanimous, pronouncing opposite decisions. On what grounds shall we give the preference to one of them? Shall we set aside the judgment of the Asiatics, by pronouncing them destitute of that sedateness of reason, that purity of discernment, that elegance of mind, that simplicity of relish, that extensive acquaintance with the varieties of art, which are necessary for bestowing authority on their sentiments? But will not they, in their turn, decline the authority of our judgment, as proceeding from a tameness of imagination, a coldness of spirit, a preciseness of thinking, or a dullness of feeling? And with equal reason, if the question be such as only the number of suffrages can determine. If, therefore, universal or even general approbation be the sole touchstone of real excellence, there is no such excellence; the touchstone, however promising in appearance, vanishes in the moment of application, as if it were but the effect of some of those enchantments in which the magicians of oriental story are expert. The highest sanction that works of the greatest merit can possibly obtain, is the approbation of a majority: and in every case it will be difficult, if not impossible, to ascertain on what side the majority is. If, notwithstanding this uncertainty, the relative merit of works whose reputation is
[Page 234]
equally established in different regions, can be determined, it must be by criticism or philosophy. To the music and the architecture of distant and unconnected nations, these remarks are still more applicable than to their poetry. They are likewise applicable in some measure, though not perhaps equally, to their painting.
But suppose that, in fixing a general or an universal approbation, it were fair to take into the account only those nations who have been improved by an acquaintance with Eurpoean arts. This is indeed a liberty which we always take without examining scrupulously, how far it is fair. Yet still such general approbation would not be a just or impartial standard of merit. It is not impossible, and therefore we may put the case, that a work of great excellence in any of the fine arts, should be produced by some singular genius, in an obscure and inconsiderable country, which has little connexion or intercourse with foreigners: it could obtain only a very limited approbation. A work of no greater excellence, appearing in a more conspicuous region, meets with approbation incomparably more extensive. From the very circumstance which we have mentioned, the poems of Camoens, however much approved by capable judges who were acquainted
[Page 235]
with them, have been known but to a few; and till very lately the poems of Ossian have been almost totally unknown. If the extent of the approbation which a work obtains, depend so much on the celebrity of the country where it is produced, and on other circumstances wholly accidental or extraneous, it cannot alone or immediately be the measure of its intrinsic merit. It will perhaps be said, that works of real excellence will be approved as soon as they are rescued from their accidental obscurity. But till this shall happen, have the few who know them, no means of judging concerning their degree of genuine merit, or of justifying their expectation that they will be approved in proportion to it? They can justify it, only by applying to them general principles which belong to criticism or to philosophy. The expectation may possibly be disappointed. If it be, can we conclude with certainty that these few were mistaken in their opinion of excellence? We cannot in every case: the very merit of such works may contribute to the disappointment. The greater the originality which they possess, the more unlike they will be to the works which men have been accustomed to admire; habit will prevent their relishing their beauties. Repeated perusals might wear off the prejudice: but when men have already sufficient entertainment from works which they
[Page 236]
are prepared for relishing, they are not always willing to undergo the labour necessary for correcting their prejudices and conquering their habits. By this means, works circumstanced as we have supposed, may be prevented from ever rising, in the general estimation, to the rank which they deserve to hold. If they can be raised to it, it will probably be by the instructions of the true critic, unfolding their uncommon beauties, and forming the general taste to the perception of them. But though he should be unsuccessful, his instructions may nevertheless be solid, and their objects highly excellent.
It deserves to be particularly observed, that general approbation can never be applied, with any degree of exactness, as a standard in comparing ancient with modern works, at least in the arts which employ language. The latter are necessarily deprived of the consent of ages which the former have obtained; and must therefore be pronounced inferior without farther examination, if to have pleased always be an essential character of the truest excellence. They stand likewise on a very different ground for obtaining the consent of nations . The language of the ancients is almost equally understood in all the polished nations of Europe: and therefore their beauties may be alike relished
[Page 237]
by the capable judges of all these nations. Modern languages have generally a more limited reception, On this account the ancients, independent of their merit, from the very nature of the language which they use, will of course obtain a wider concurrence of nations, than the moderns. This circumstance has contributed to procure them a degree of estimation, perhaps greater than they can justly claim. If it shall be said, that some modern languages are studied and understood by as many nations as any ancient language, and will therefore introduce the works which are written in them, to a no less general approbation; it may be answered, that this only creates a new difficulty in comparing these works with such as are written in other modern languages. Good authors in a language, no doubt promote the study of it among foreigners; but this is not the only cause of its obtaining a wide reception: the prevalence of the French language cannot be ascribed solely to unrivalled excellence in the French writers; it is much more owing to other causes. But having once taken place by any means, it immediately renders multitudes competent judges of the writers of France, who can give no suffrage in favour of the best writers of other countries. But an advantage so accidental cannot be decisive of their superiority. On the other hand,
[Page 238]
works written in the modern language of any country, though thus necessarily circumscribed with respect to the approbation of other nations, have a considerable advantage for obtaining approbation, in another point of view extensive. They will be, in that particular country, understood by a greater number, and consequently more generally approved, than either foreign or ancient works can be: they will likewise be more perfectly understood, and for this reason more exquisitely relished and more highly approved. If the ancients please many capable judges in several nations, a modern may equally please perhaps as many, though all belonging to one nation. By what rule can the weight of the suffrages be determined? In a word, if we rest in general approbation as the sole criterion of excellence, the difficulties which occur in comparing the ancients with the moderns, or the writers of one country with those of others, appear to be inextricable. If their relative merit can be at all ascertained, it must be by applying to them some general principles derived from criticism and philosophy, which are not affected by the accidental advantages or disadvantages peculiar to each of them.
The observations which we have suggested, concerning the difficulty both of ascertaining
[Page 239]
general approbation, and of applying it as a standard to works of taste, have weight even with respect to such as have obtained the highest degree of it: but in proportion as any work falls short of universality of approbation, they have with respect to it the greater force.
If , however, general approbation, when once obtained, might be considered as the standard of excellence, another difficulty will still remain. No new work can obtain general approbation in an instant: it is of slow growth, it requires considerable time to reach maturity. In this interval, the intrinsic merit of the work is the same that it is afterwards: but there will be no possible means of appretiating it. Must every man then suspend his judgment, till numbers be prepared to declare their sentiments together? Must he obstinately refuse all credit to his own feelings and discernment, till the time come for the public to give its voice? This would be in some measure inconsistent with that authority of sentiment, on account of which it claims to be a standard. But this is also in many cases impossible: when a man, who is conscious of good taste, finds himself delighted with a new work, he hesitates not to pronounce it excellent, without waiting for the public suffrage; he is confident that it will obtain it in due time. He founds not
[Page 240]
his confidence merely on his feelings; he justifies it by reasons; he shews that it has beauties similar, equal, or superior to those which have generally pleased. His producing such reasons implies an acknowledgment, that sentiment may be tried by general principles, and is authorized by its coincidence with them. Before Milton's Paradise Lost had time to rise from obscurity, Denham and Dryden expressed their admiration of it without reserve; and when the one pronounced it the noblest poem that ever was written in any language or in any age, and the other gave it the preference not only to contemporary, but also to ancient works; they both intimated, that they supported their judgment by general principles of comparison between this poem and other poems.
Though general or universal approbation be assigned as the test of excellence, it really amounts to no more than the approbation of a very few. Multitudes are excluded from the right of suffrage, as being in one respect or another unfit to judge; the select few take the lead; what pleases their vigorous and improved taste, ought to please all; whoever dissents, ought to impute it solely to his own want of taste. An authority so absolute and uncontrolable had need to be clearly established.
[Page 241]
But in determining, who are the persons entitled to exercise it, such difficulties must occur as cannot fail to render it in some degree uncertain. No doubt, true taste will gradually gain the ascendency by its native force and influence. But must we wait till this has happened, before we can judge with any probability, whether it be true taste or not? Are there no menas of estimating the goodness of a man's taste, except the success of his decisions? If there be, they must be derived either from a philosophical investigation of the characters of true taste, or from his producing arguments in support of his decisions, the use whereof implies an acknowledgment of general principles, to which an appeal may lie from mere sentiment. But suppose the few sufficiently authorized to pass a decisive judgment, in what manner does it diffuse itself among the generality, and obtain their concurrence? It cannot exact their implicit acquiescence; wherever this takes place, it continues to be only the particular judgment of a few. It may operate by a sort of contagion; by exciting their attention and directing their notice to what would have otherwise escaped them, it may enable their own taste to exert itself in a coincident determination. But it may likewise gain ground, and often does, by proving that it is not arbitrary, by supporting itself by
[Page 242]
argument, by appealing to some general rules of criticism, or some general principles of human nature. It is in this way that Addison recommended the beauties of Milton; and in this way the admiration of Shakespear has been heightened, extended, and justified 7 .
No work of taste is absolutely perfect: beauties and blemishes, excellencies and faults are intermixed: and sometimes both are found in a very great degree. In this case, all that can be expected from mere sentiment, is the being pleased with the former, and displeased with the latter. Its judgment can amount only to a number of detached, unrelated approbations and disapprobations, or to an indefinite approbation or disapprobation of the work upon the whole. To render either definite, to form one decisive judgment of the work, to be able to assign it its due place in the scale of merit, we must at least reflect upon the several feelings, whether of pleasure or disgust, which the different parts or qualities of the work excite; we must estimate the importance of each; we must weigh them against one another, and determine the excess.
[Page 243]
Even this implies the necessity and the legitimacy of reasoning and discussion. But this will not be sufficient: our feelings are fleeting and unsteady; it is not easy to render them so fixed or so well defined, that we can estimate them with exactness, or compare and balance them with accuracy. To render our judgment of a whole work precise, we must ascertain and reflect upon the causes of our feelings, the qualities from which they result: these are more fixed and more definite; we can contemplate them more steadily, estimate them more justly, balance them more nicely, and determine their proportion more exactly. But the abstraction by which these qualities are analyzed, the investigation by which the causes of our feelings are discovered, fall properly within the province of criticism and philosophy. It is in the same manner, by a comparison, not of our sensations themselves, but of their causes, that we can judge with precision of the relative excellence of different works.
What is said concerning the formation of public taste, and its authority as the standard of excellence, derives a great part of its plausibility from the opposition which is studiously, but without reason, stated between the critic and the man of taste. The critic is supposed
[Page 244]
to be a person wholly destitute of taste, incapable of sentiment, who, with absolute frigidity, examines a work by certain mechanical rules, framed without any regard to what actually pleases or displeases, nay often in contradiction to it. That the opinion of such a person ought to yield to his who has lively and vigorous sensations, that it can merit no degree of deference, will be readily acknowledged. But it by no means follows, that the decisions of genuine criticism are of no authority, or that general principles, properly investigated and established, may not be a surer criterion of excellence, than mere feelings of pleasure or disgust, unarranged and unexplained. In the composition of the genuine critic, the very first ingredient is vigorous taste 8 . If he is to be distinguished from the man of taste, it must be by restricting this latter epithet to the person who feels strongly, but cannot explain what it precisely is that pleases or displeases him, or in what manner his feelings are produced. But if it be thus restricted, few will be disposed to place the authority of the man of taste above that of the critic. It is the critic, it is he who not only feels strongly, but is also capable of reflecting on his feelings, of accounting for them, of distinguishing their objects, and tracing out their causes, that is
[Page 245]
naturally allowed to take the lead in pronouncing concerning works of taste; it is the concurrence of persons of this character, that enlightens and directs the judgment of the generality. From discussion, therefore, as well as from sentiment, general approbation derives its very existence. It is consessed, that the critic has a right to investigate the causes of our pleasure or disgust: but if this investigation contributes to render our judgment more precise and certain, it will follow, that it provides us with a more accurate standard than mere sentiment. It is denied, that he has any right to pronounce that not good, which actually pleases, or that not bad, which actually displeases. In opposition to general sentiment, he can have no right to determine, and the true critic never will determine: But to deny that he has a right to pronounce that not good, which actually pleases some, and that not bad, which actually displeases some, would be to establish the indisputable authority of every taste. He has a right to distinguish the natural from the accidental, the sound from the unsound; and it is he that can distinguish them in the most satisfying manner; it is only by the general principles which he investigates, that the distinction can be justified.
[Page 246]
SECT. V.
That the Standard of Taste is to be found in general Principles .
THUS, in whatever light we consider general or universal approbation, we find great difficulties in applying it as the sole or the immediate standard of excellence in works of taste; and all these difficulties seem to point to science, to criticism, or philosophy, as capable of supplying us with a standard more determinate, more accurate, and more easily applicable. 9 Indeed to such a standard, the general sense of mankind leads them constantly
[Page 247]
to have recourse, however much they may in words seem to acquiesce in sentiment as ultimate. Every man whom we acknowledge to possess any degree of taste, not only approves or disapproves, but specifies what it precisely is that pleases or displeases him, what is the nature of the pleasure or the disgust which it excites, and what the manner in which it excites them. The very operation of taste, when in any measure improved, implies so much of judgment, reflection, and analysis, as plainly intimates how serviceable they may be in defining, vindicating, or correcting its sensations. When our judgment in a particular instance is called in question, we reckon it always allowable to support it by reasons; and our reasons are always deduced from principles more or less general; the authority of which in preference to mere sentiment, we therefore tacitly acknowledge by our using them. In every art there are some general rules of established authority, to which all readily appeal, and which all reverence as the fundamental laws by which the differences of individuals must be terminated. Were general approbation the only standard,
[Page 248]
so much as to point out beauties which have, by any means, failed of actually obtaining it, would be not only useless, but preposterous and absurd. Since then it is clear that general principles and rules have authority in matters of taste, it only remains to explain, in what manner they serve as the real and just standard of excellence or defect.
When we deny that general approbation is the proper or immediate standard, we are far from insinuating that it is of no account. It is of very great account. Though it be not itself the standard, it is the materials of which the standard must be composed: it is the block from which it must be hewed out: it is the principal of those ingredients from which it must be extracted. It holds the same place in this enquiry, that experiments and observations concerning the real phænomena of things, hold in physical investigations of the laws of the material world. It is from the experiments and observations, that all just conclusions concerning these laws must be deduced; it is only by examining and comparing them, that the laws of nature can be discovered: that cannot be truly a law of nature, which is contradictory to the phænomena; however plausible it may appear, however strongly supported by some of them, there must be an error in the
[Page 249]
reasoning by which it is inferred: such error may very readily be committed; many false hypotheses have been adopted in natural philosophy; but it will not follow, that we ought to rest satisfied with observing the phænomena, not attempting to investigate the laws according to which they are produced, or that these laws may not be traced out successfully by a more careful and skilful induction: when any general law is traced out, it accounts for phænomena which at first sight appear unaccountable; it reconciles such as appear discordant, and often shews that they proceed from the same principle differently modified; it answers many purposes which could not be answered by a mere collection of the experiments from which it is inferred. All this is directly and without difficulty applicable to our present subject. It is only from what actually pleases and displeases in works of imagination, that the true critic deduces his general principles and rules: it is on what has pleased or displeased universally that he lays the greatest stress; he founds his conclusions, not on his own feelings only, but on the common feelings of men; it is from the most excellent and admired performances in every art, that the rules of that art ought to be, and by judicious critics always have been taken: so far is he from despising sentiment, that he pays some regard to whatever
[Page 250]
has actually pleased or displeased any; he acknowledges that it has some sort of fitness to please or displease; and he examines whether it is owing to a natural or to a distempered state of the organ. His decisions, his general principles and rules claim no authority in opposition to the common sense of mankind; if they really oppose it, if they be irreconcileable to the unperverted sentiments of any individual, they are false, there is some mistake in the induction by which they were established. Men are necessarily fallible; many false principles and arbitrary rules of criticism have been proposed: but we cannot hence conclude, that we ought not to search for any principles or rules, or that it is impossible to find out such as are true and solid. Suppose that in forming general conclusions there is always a possibility of error, but that in acquiescing in clear and distinct sensations there is none; yet the former may in some instances have indubitable certainty, and may be applicable to many uses, for which the latter are insufficient: they may lead us to perceive how works whose qualities are in appearance contrary, come nevertheless all to give us pleasure; they may convince us that sentiments seemingly incompatible, excited in different persons by the same work or even the same part of a work, proceed from principles equally
[Page 251]
natural to man; it may enable us to reconcile the most dissimilar sentiments, to account for the most singular, to explain which are most conformable to the real constitution of human nature. This is all that can be expected from a standard of taste; and this, general principles only can perform. In a word, as it is not a mere comprehension of the separate phænomena of things, but a discernment of their common causes and laws that immediately serves to explain the operations and the course of nature; as it is the knowledge of the general principles of mechanics that best enables us to judge of the construction and merit of a complicated machine; so it is an acquaintance with the objects and the sources of our pleasures, not an undistinguishing attention to them as they affect the several individuals, that proximately contributes to ascertain the genuine excellence in the fine arts.
Not only is every work of taste complicated, containing lights, shades, and blemishes; but almost every part of the work is in like manner complex, made up of something that pleases and something that is in itself indifferent. To separate these, to distinguish the excellence from what serves only as a vehicle for it, or from the fault which adheres closely to it, to point out what it precisely
[Page 252]
is in a passage, that gives us pleasure on disgust, is the lowest and simplest effort of criticism. It is a degree of reflection, an exercise of abstraction, which every man of tolerable acuteness of taste employs for himself: without it there could be no distinct perception, but only a blind, enthusiastic feeling. It cannot therefore be expected that by this alone, criticism should supply us with a very precise standard. Yet even by this, it gives a standard more accurate than mere sentiment. It enlightens us so far as to prevent our ascribing our pleasure or our disgust, to causes which have no share in the production of them. It prepares us for discerning and estimating passages in which there is the same excellence or the same fault, but differently accompanied. It leads us to form our judgment of a work, from its intrinsic qualities, not from any extraneous or unessential circumstances. It substitutes a determinate judgment, in the place of an indefinite, indiscriminate admiration. It defends us from the danger of being so much dazzled with shining beauties in a work, as to become insensible to gross deformities mingled with them, or perhaps to mistake them also for beauties. It is absolutely necessary, in order to our ascertaining the real degree of merit to which a work is entitled; confused consciousness of the feelings which it has anyhow
[Page 253]
excited, would be totally insufficient for this purpose.
All objects which produce the same species of pleasure, however different in other respects, have some qualities in common. It is by means of these qualities, that they produce this pleasure. It belongs to criticism to investigate and ascertain these qualities: and the discovery of them contributes in many ways, both to render our appretiation of excellence more easy and accurate, and to furnish principles for deciding between discordant appretiations. The qualities of an object, which gratify us, are more fixt and definite than the sensation which they excite. When we attempt to confine our attention to the latter, it as it were twinkles in the eye, and eludes a steady contemplation: but when we turn our view to the former, we can contemplate them at leisure, examine them on all sides, and determine their precise dimensions. We can compare them with the same qualities in other objects, decide which object possesses them in the highest degree, and infer which ought to give the highest pleasure. We can compare them with the sensation which they produce; examine whether it be exactly adequate to them, whether it be rendered more intense than they alone could have rendered it, by the
[Page 254]
operation of other qualities of a similar tendency, in this instance conjoined with it, or whether it be weakened by the conjunction of qualities of an opposite tendency. When we discern that an object which we approve, has the same general qualities with other objects which generally please, we are satisfied that our approbation is right; when we evince that it has them, we account for our approbation, we justify it, and are entitled to condemn the taste which disapproves that object, or is indifferent to it, as perverted or defective. Many of those qualities in objects, from which the pleasures of taste result, are capable of being measured with considerable accuracy. The degree of uniformity, for instance, of variety, of amplitude, of fitness for its end, which a particular object possesses, can generally be defined with tolerable precision. This gives a rule for assigning to each of them its own rank. Among beautiful objects, that is, the most beautiful, which has the highest degree of those qualities which are acknowledged to constitute beauty. Of grand objects, that is, the grandest, which possesses the greatest unbroken amplitude. Of descriptions of an object, that is, the finest, which impresses on the mind an image of its most characteristical and striking features. If a man's sentiments be not proportioned to the degrees of such qualities,
[Page 255]
which objects are acknowledged to possess, they must be so far wrong.
It is chiefly attention to the general qualities of objects which gratify taste, that enables us to perceive to what class the gratification belongs. The gratifications of taste agree in this, that they are all pleasant; they are likewise analogous in other respects: if we regard only our feelings, we cannot sufficiently distinguish them into kinds. But the quality, or the combination of qualities, which produces one gratification, is very different from that which produces another: by turning our view to it, we can decide with certainty, of what kind our pleasure is, and either correct or confute his opinion who, from indefinite feeling, would refer it to a different kind. If the object which pleases us, possess uniformity, variety, and proportion, we are sure that it is beautiful. If it possess amplitude along with simplicity, we know that it is grand. We can thus determine, whether different works gratify taste in the same way or in different ways. This is of great advantage in comparing them: if they please in the same way, our business is, to enquire which possesses the greatest degree of those qualities from which the pleasure results; if in different ways, we must estimate the moment of the several species of pleasure.
[Page 256]
It is generally by a combination of different qualities, that any object gratifies taste. One object excels in one of these qualities, another object in another of them. In this case, there is a difficulty in determining which object deserves the preference; we cannot always say, which of these qualities gives separately the highest pleasure. The Grecian architecture excels in simplicity; this is unquestionably a source of pleasure: the Gothic has variety; this is likewise a source of pleasure: Which of them is most approveable? Of two sublime objects, one exceeds the other in magnitude, but falls as much below it in simplicity: How shall we determine, which is the most sublime? But this difficulty is not always insurmountable. It may happen, for instance, that one of the objects has more approveable qualities, the other no more: the Grecian architecture has proportion, the Gothic is destitute of it; the addition of this quality plainly turns the balance in favour of the former. Thus again, every work has its end and use: some qualities productive of pleasure, may by their situation be subservient to this; other qualities very pleasing in themselves, may by their position obstruct it: on this principle, we justly condemn very beautiful passages in a poem, and very beautiful figures in a picture, as blemishes,
[Page 257]
which take from the merit of the whole.
There are many combinations of qualities, each of which produces a distinct species of pleasure. A complete enumeration of these combinations would enable us to determine many questions concerning discordant sentiments. In particular, it would supply principles for a just estimate of all such sentiments as are of a complicated nature. It is in these that men are most apt to differ, and general principles to run counter to the feelings of individuals. A person who is equally attentive to all the pleasing qualities which are united in an object, and equally formed for relishing them all, will approve it more highly than another person who has overlooked some of these qualities, or is defective in that sense which is adapted to the perception of them. The former will prefer that object to one which has some of these qualities in greater perfection, but is destitute of the rest: the latter will give the contrary judgment. It is by analysing the object, that the difference can be adjusted. One man sets a high value on a particular object; to justify this, he shews that it possesses a great degree of those qualities which produce a particular species of pleasure: another, who sets less value on it, acknowledging this, points
[Page 258]
out some blemishes which justly bring down its value: and by doing so, evinces that the former has given a wrong judgment through want of discernment sufficient for detecting these blemishes.—A full enumeration of all the qualities which are fit to gratify taste, would go far to banish contracted rules of criticism. Such rules have given the most plausible handle for calling in question the authority of general principles. When a thing is contrary to rule, and yet actually pleases, we conclude with reason that the rule is false. The qualities which it requires do actually please: but objects destitute of them, may likewise please by means of other qualities; of these the critic was not aware when he formed his rule: he did right in pronouncing that the former set of qualities are fit to gratify taste; but he did wrong in affirming, that they are absolutely necessary to its gratification: he mistook for a general canon, what is only one of the cases subordinate to that canon. That the regularity and the unities of the ancient drama, pointed out by Aristotle, are means of pleasing, is certain: the fault lies only in reckoning them essential. Shakespear has given convincing evidence, that a dramatic work in which they are totally neglected, may yet have other qualities productive of very high gratification. Partial and confined principles
[Page 259]
of criticism in any art, arise only from our being unacquainted with, or not taking into the account, some class of qualities which constitute a real excellence in that art.
In a word, an analysis of the several combinations of qualities which are agreeable or disagreeable to taste, would enable us to compare and to fix the rank of all those objects which please by means of the same combination: the degree of these qualities, which belongs to each of them, can generally be ascertained with abundant accuracy; and every sentiment which is disproportioned to the acknowledged degree of pleasing qualities in its object, may confidently be condemned as wrong and perverted. The only difficulty would be, to decide between objects which, possessing different qualities, yield distinct species of pleasure. In this, attention to these qualities, it must be acknowledged, can give us no assistance. But this is a case in which it is seldom necessary to decide; there is often an impropriety in attempting it. To render objects capable of being compared, they must have something in common: it is only objects which have some quality in common, that can be compared in respect of the degree of it. When two pleasures are different in kind, it is not generally of importance, it is not always possible
[Page 260]
to determine which deserves the preference; it is sufficient to define the kind to which each belongs. Whether beauty of form, or harmony of sounds, whether the sublime or the pathetic, whether the witty or the humourous, give the highest pleasure, are questions which, with many similar ones, if it be difficult to answer, it is not perhaps altogether proper to propose. Yet there are general principles which may lead to the solution even of such questions. In order to discover them, let us turn our view from the external objects of our pleasures, to their internal causes.
The sources of all the sentiments of taste lay in the mind. The qualities of objects affect, in a certain manner, some principles of human nature, which by their operation, either singly or several in conjunction, produce gratification or disgust. It is the business of philosophical criticism, to investigate these principles: many of them have been pointed out in the course of our enquiry. Simplicity, for instance, occasions easiness of conception; novelty or variety, an effort to conceive; amplitude, an expansion of soul. This takes place in every individual, in numberless cases; he is therefore certain from his own experience, that it is conformable to the constitution
[Page 261]
of his nature. It is likewise to every man, matter of experience, that some of these modes of conception are ordinarily pleasant, and others ordinarily painful. The experience with respect to both these points is extensive, various, and unequivocal; for it occurs not only in matters of taste, but likewise in science, and in common life. When, therefore, taste is analysed into its simple principles, these will serve as a criterion for distinguishing the genuine from the false sentiment: for if, in a particular instance, either an object acknowledged to have certain qualites, fails to produce the mode of conception generally correspondent to it; or that mode of conception, when confessedly produced, fails to give the pleasure or the pain which it uses to give; it must be owing to some indisposition, distemper or perversion of soul. The person who labours under it, may have convincing evidence of this, not only from the general experience of mankind, but from his own. Often too the precise distemper of mind, which he has contracted, may be discovered; and his sentiments corrected, at least satisfactorily accounted for, even to himself.
When taste is analysed into its simple principles, it will be found that, in its province as well as in that of the external senses, pleasure
[Page 262]
and pain border closely upon, and sometimes by an almost imperceptible gradation run into one another. Both facility and difficulty of conception, are pleasant when moderate; but both become painful when they exceed a certain degree, the former producing languor, and the latter fatigue. What expands or elevates the mind is agreeable, but an object may give uneasiness by straining its powers. It is no wonder then, that what gratifies one man, sometimes disgusts another: these contrary effects may proceed from the very same principle, in minds possessed of different degrees of vigour. To evince this, is in some measure to give an account of them: and whenever it can be ascertained, which is the degree that commonly belongs to mankind, this decides which is in the present case the right sentiment, and which the wrong. If a person is in one instance disgusted with such an effort to conceive an object, as is commonly agreeable both to other men and to himself, it must be owing to a fit of sickly languor, of which he may be rendered as sensible, as of an accidental imbecillity of body.
Different qualities in objects, may affect the same simple principles of human nature, and affect them in a manner nearly similar. To point out the principle thus affected, is to
[Page 263]
prove it natural and right, that these objects, however unlike or opposite in some respects, should be equally approved; and that either of them should attach the person who has attended to it alone. It is not necessary to proscribe either the correct fable, and regular sublime of the classical writer, or the wild fiction, and extravagant greatness of the oriental tale; however distant in degree their merit is, both have real merit; the gratification produced by both is in a great measure resolvable into the same ultimate principles of the mind, and is sufficiently accounted for by being resolved into them. Sentiments in appearance very dissimilar, are reconciled by being traced up to a simple principle common to all men; as the ascent of vapours and the descent of rain are shewn to be consistent by being explained from the very same law of gravitation. In taste, as in the material world, the phænomena are various and mutable; but the laws of nature, from which they proceed, are universal, uniform, and fixt.
The general principles and laws into which the sentiments of taste must be finally resolved, are numerous. One of them, however real and powerful, may in a particular situation be counteracted by another. A projectile force makes an heavy body to fly upwards: it overbalances
[Page 264]
the effect of gravitation, but does not destroy the principle: the observation of it only suggests an enquiry concerning the nature of that force. In like manner, when a particular judgment in the fine arts, seems to be contradictory to a general law of human nature, it often amounts only to this, that the operation of this law is suspended by the opposition of another law equally authentic: and by the discovery and explication of the latter, that judgment is shewn to be natural, in the circumstances in which it is pronounced; and we are furnished with the means of determining, whether these circumstances indicate a sound or a diseased temperament, a free or a constrained exertion of the powers of taste.
If a person has attended only to some of those simple principles of human nature, which are the sources of our pleasures, he will be ready to fall into mistakes in explaining these pleasures. He will resolve every pleasure into one or other of the few principles with which he is acquainted; and a pleasure which cannot be referred to any of them, he will endeavour to discredit. Hence have arisen many of the critical rules which contradict sentiment and experience. Simplicity in any system, is an excellence: but an injudicious affectation of simplicity has, in every species of philosophy,
[Page 265]
occasioned many ill-founded hypotheses. Genuine simplicity consists not merely in resolving phenomena into a few principles; but in rendering the principles, by a just induction, as general and comprehensive as possible. If any thing which actually pleases, cannot be accounted for from any general principle hitherto established, there must be some other real principle of human nature, yet unexplored, to which it ought to be referred. An investigation of all the immediate or proximate sources of the pleasures of taste, together with an analysis of these into the more ultimate principles of the mind, which give them power, is necessary for establishing general rules of real authority. And if all such principles were traced out, and the proper influence of each of them acknowledged, the result would be, a system of rules coinciding exactly with the natural, unperverted sentiments of individuals, and fit for discriminating them from such as are unnatural and vitiated.
Acquaintance with the general principles of taste, puts it in our power, in many cases, to compare pleasures different in kind , and to determine to which the preference is due. That one of these principles is the source of higher pleasure than another, may be proved by its influence in numberless situations of human
[Page 266]
life. We have experience every day, that moderate difficulty gives higher pleasure than facility; it is in activity that man finds his chief enjoyment. This leads us to conclude, that such pleasures of taste as are resolveable into a sense of difficulty, are superior to those which hold of facility. The conclusion is just; in all the fine arts, it is the work which draws out the powers of the mind, and gives them play, that excites our admiration. Again, an object which gratifies only one of these principles, must yield to an object which gratifies several of them at once. Beauty addresses itself to more mental principles than novelty; and it will be universally acknowledged to be a greater excellence. There is not perhaps any general character by which the lesser kinds of poetry can be more precisely distinguished from the higher than this, that they touch fewer principles of our nature, and occasion a more imperfect exertion of soul.
Thus , as in natural philosophy it is not collections of experiments and observations, but the general conclusions legitimately deduced from them, that amount to an explication of the course of nature; so in the fine arts it is not the several sentiments of individuals, but just conclusions deduced from them, concerning the qualities in objects which gratify taste,
[Page 267]
and the simple mental principles from whose operation the gratification is derived, that serve immediately for estimating excellence or faultiness. To assert this, is not to establish general rules, in opposition to sentiment; for they are wholly founded upon sentiment, and if they be just, cannot but be conformable to it. It is from it they derive their whole authority: but this hinders not that, after having been thus duly vested with authority, they may perform what it could not so well accomplish by itself. In every part of knowledge, general rules and principles give us great advantage for judging concerning particular phenomena. If none of the laws of matter were yet investigated, a great number of experiments, and each of them frequently repeated, would be necessary for establishing any one general conclusion with certainty: but after these laws have been ascertained, a certain conclusion conformable to them, may often be deduced from a single experiment carefully conducted; our very limited experience in this particular instance becomes unquestionable by borrowing the force of that extensive experience from which the known laws of nature have been already inferred. In like manner, when excellence in the fine arts has been traced up to its general principles, we are not obliged to wait the event of general approbation,
[Page 268]
before we can determine the rank to which a new performance is entitled; every man of true taste may determine it, by the feelings which it produces in himself, compared with, and authorised by, well established principles of criticism in the kind; when he determines it with assurance, he does not fondly presume that others will approve or disapprove, because he does; but he foresees that their judgment will coincide with his own, because he perceives that it is justified by those very principles to which the general judgment is in all other cases consonant.
To those who are destitute of taste, general principles and rules, however just, will not supply the want of it. Whenever they pretend to judge, they will go wrong: not because the principles and rules are useless, but because they are incapable of applying them to the present case. Though a person be acquainted with all the laws of motion, he cannot by them account for a phenomenon till he has first observed it: the phenomena of excellence or faultiness in any work of art, taste alone can lead us to perceive; if after this, general principles can give us assurance, whether our manner of perceiving them be right or wrong, singular or co-incident with that of others, it is all that is requisite for entitling
[Page 269]
them to be regarded as the proper and immediate standard of taste.
Submission to their authority in this extent can have no tendency to repress the sensibility, to abate the ardor, or to diminish the pleasures of taste. It by no means substitutes frigid discussion and analysis, in the place of warm and enrapturing sensations. It allows us to give full scope to every feeling which a work impresses on us; it even requires us to give scope to it, that we may form a genuine conception of its features. While sense is touched, reflection is in a great measure suspended, and general principles are little attended to even by those who are best acquainted with them. It is after sense has performed its office, it is after we have felt; it is when we come to review our feelings, when we find reason to suspect that they need to be corrected, or when we are inclined to justify them, that we recollect the general principles to which they ought to be conformable. With the fullest indulgence of sentiment, the application of these principles in this situation, cannot possibly interfere. But if the habit of examining our sentiments by them, should lead us to intermix attention to them, with the first exertions of sensation, this will not damp its vivacity, or cool its servour. It will always improve the feelings, and
[Page 270]
heighten the gratifications of a correct taste; by suggesting a view of their causes, it will add a new ingredient; by infusing a consciousness of their rectitude, it will encourage us to give up ourselves, with unrestrained confidence, to admiration and enjoyment. Sound principles of criticism can never betray us into the irksome task of disputing against our pleasant sentiments: they will generally enable us to approve, as well as to feel them; and when at any time they condemn them, it is only to prepare us for receiving more refined pleasures.
The investigation of general principles, and deference to them as the test and measure of excellence, far from extinguishing the fire, or confining the range of genius, will contribute most effectually to its elevation and enlargement. From a person who satisfies himself with observing and admiring a number of curious machines, the utmost that can be expected is, the production of a similar machine: it is only from him who, either by his natural sagacity, or by study, has acquired a comprehension of the general principles of mechanics, that we can expect the invention of new and dissimilar machines, or even any considerable improvement of the former. The same must
[Page 271]
happen in the fine arts. Any one work is necessarily confined to the prosecution of one end, to the production of one kind of gratification; and it can admit only one set of means for answering this purpose. The man who seeks for no other criterion of excellence, but what has always pleased, will naturally employ his attention on those works which have been distinguished by universal admiration, will think himself obliged to adhere to them as his models, will endeavour to produce the same effect by the same means, or by means as analogous as possible. If he have genius sufficient to preserve him from sinking into a servile copier, still he is no more than a successful imitator: whenever the originality of his own powers would carry him into a new track, his excursion is checked by the reflection, that this would be a deviation from the course which mankind have concurred in approving. “I have long been of opinion, says an elegant writer 10 , that the moderns pay too blind a deference to the ancients; and though I have the highest veneration for several of their remains, yet I am inclined to think they have occasioned us the loss of some excellent originals. Whilst it is thought sufficient praise to be their followers, genius is checked in her flights, and many a fair track
[Page 272]
lies undiscovered in the boundless regions of imagination. Thus had Virgil trusted more to his native strength, the Romans, perhaps, might have seen an original epic in their language. But Homer was considered by that admired poet as the sacred object of his first and principal attention; and he seemed to think it the noblest triumph of genius, to be adorned with the spoils of that glorious chief.” Knowledge of the ultimate sources of our pleasures, tends directly to overturn this tyranny of precedent, and to free genius from the fetters which it would put upon it. That knowledge may enable a person to perceive that ends may be aimed at, that modifications of pleasure may be conveyed, considerably different from those which have been attempted by preceding artists; but equally adapted to the natural principles of the mind, and equally enchanting: and will thus enrich the arts with a new species of composition. Or it may lead him to discover, that an end which has been often pursued, will be as successfully obtained by other means, as by those which have been hitherto employed; may prompt him to make trial of these; and thus introduce an agreeable variety of execution. In either case, it impels imagination to strike into an unbeaten road, which blind deference to what has been universally approved, would have deterred him
[Page 273]
from essaying. Whether by being enlightened with an uncommon comprehension of the manifold sources of human pleasures, or by being supported by an undaunted consciousness of his own abilities, Milton, it is certain, has with full success ventured on a mode of poetry, in so many respects unlike to any which had been exhibited before, that it has been made a question, whether it can properly be called heroic, or reduced to any species defined by critics. Perfectly acquainted with the ancient epos, exquisitely sensible to all its beauties, adhering to its principles so far as they are really catholic and indispensible, imitating it in the artificial structure of the fable, in the unity of the design, in the splendour of diction; he has boldly deserted it, in conceiving an action specifically different, in carrying it on by spiritual and supernatural agents, in displaying characters which never came within the reach of human experience, in directing the whole rather to fix the mind in astonishment, than to raise it into admiration.
If the observations by which we have endeavoured to shew that principles of science form the most accurate standard of excellence in the fine arts, be well founded, they will justify our considering philosophical enquiries into the objects and the causes of our feelings, as of very
[Page 274]
great importance. They are not the amusements of the idle, or the entertainments of the speculative. They rest not in gratifying curiosity, by unvailing the inward springs of our sensations. They are of real and extensive utility. They both stimulate genius, and expand it. They contribute in many ways to the improvement of taste; they excite its attention, correct its deceptions, and add both light and assurance to its sentiments: and when the decisions of individuals differ, they often reconcile them, and almost always account for them, and determine which of them deserves the preference. The principles established by means of them, admit as indubitable certainty, and as great precision, as those of any science. If human imperfection allowed them to be rendered so general as to comprehend all the simple and ultimate causes of our gratifications, and human fallibility could be secure from error in the application of them, they would be sufficient for removing every difficulty, and resolving every question, concerning the merit of works of taste.
[Page 275]
APPENDIX.
Concerning the question, Whether Poetry be properly an Imitative Art? and if it be, In what sense it is Imitative ?
Questions merely verbal, are frivolous. Yet it is often of importance to ascertain the precise meaning of words, because impropriety in the use of them, may occasion confusion of thought, and errors in reasoning. This holds true especially of those words which denote the leading ideas on any subject: for these ideas set in a wrong light, would necessarily introduce improper modes of expression, and even false conclusions. The rules which are laid down concerning any art, must be considerably affected by the idea which is formed of the end of that art, and of the means by which the end may be attained. Whatever idea is formed of the proper nature and end of poetry, it will affect the rules which are laid down for poetry, in respect both of their nature, and of the manner of proposing them. It is therefore of importance that that idea be formed with precision.
Aristotle , who was the first that endeavoured to reduce poetry to an art, and subject
[Page 276]
it to rules, calls it an imitation , without explaining particularly in what sense it is an imitation: and on his authority, poetry has ever since been called generally an imitative art , without either proof that it is such, or explication of how it is such. Some, however, have denied that poetry is imitative, confining this character to painting and sculpture 11 If it be false that poetry is an imitation, it is plain that many of the rules of poetry, by being detached from that idea, may be rendered simpler than they can be, when they are proposed with a relation to it. If the idea be just on the whole, but have been left indefinite, an accurate definition of it may prepare the way for rendering the rules of poetry more precise and exact, than they would otherwise have been. That poetry, as well as the other fine arts is imitative, has been supposed in the preceding Essay, and some of the general principles there investigated, will be affected by the truth or the falsehood of the supposition. I shall therefore briefly attempt a professed examination of it.
To imitate, is, to produce a resemblance of a thing. Painting and sculpture are in all cases strictly imitative. They produce a proper resemblance of the forms and proportions of visible objects, and exhibit that resemblance to the very same sense, which is adapted to the
[Page 277]
perception of the objects themselves. Even when they go beyond the visible appearances of things, and suggest passions, emotions, and characters, still they suggest these, by producing a proper resemblance of the attitudes and features, by which the passions or characters show themselves in real life. With respect to some objects, poetry is as properly and strictly imitative: so far as it is dramatic, so far as it introduces persons acting and speaking, and does not merely describe how they acted or spoke, it exhibits an exact copy of their conversation and actions.
But whenever poetry ceases to be dramatic, whenever the poet, in his own person, describes or relates, poetry no longer exhibits a resemblance of the things related or described, in the same sense as painting does of the things which it represents. Poetry makes use of language, or artificial signs. These bear no resemblance to the things signified by them; and therefore the poem can have no proper resemblance to the subject described in it. It cannot be called an imitation of that subject, with any more propriety than an historical narration can be called an imitation of the transaction of which it gives an account.
A poetical description excites an idea of the object described, as conceived by the poet;
[Page 278]
and, if it be well executed, a very lively idea. But it cannot, for this reason alone, deserve to be denominated an imitation of that object. For, not to insist that the idea is not properly a resemblance of the object, it is sufficient to observe that, if every species of composition which excites an idea of the subject, were to be called an imitation of it, we might call, not only history, but reasoning also, an imitation. But this would, without hesitation, be pronounced by every person, to be a gross impropriety.
No doubt, there are many circumstances peculiar to poetical description, and which render the idea excited by it, livelier and more affecting than that which is produced by a mere narration of facts, by an exact and minute delineation of a natural object, or by a process of reasoning. This difference might justify our calling the former a livelier imitation than these latter, if both were allowed to be imitations: but it cannot justify our denominating the former an imitation, while we maintain that these latter are not at all imitations.
In consequence of the vivacity of the idea excited by them, poetical descriptions produce effects on the sentiments and passions, which cannot be produced by arguments, by historical narrations, or by physiological details.
[Page 279]
These make an important difference between poetry and other species of composition: but they cannot render that a proper imitation, while these are no imitations. Nothing can establish this precise distinction between them, except it could be proved that poetry produces a resemblance of the things described, and that these other kinds of composition produce no resemblance of their subjects.
Some perhaps, when they called poetry an imitation, and history no imitation, have meant only to say, that poetry excites stronger and livelier ideas, sentiments, and emotions, than history; that it in a manner sets the objects before our eyes; that we almost think that we see them. This is very true: but it is improperly expressed; the word imitation is used in an indefinite, figurative, and abusive sense: and the use of it in such a sense, when one professes to mark the distinctive nature of poetry, tends to mislead and introduce confusion; especially if he reasons from this figurative sense, as if it were the literal.
Poetry is not, nor can be properly imitative, as producing a resemblance of its immediate subject. Its employing language, or instituted signs, renders it absolutely incapable of being in this sense imitative. No combination of significant sounds can form an
[Page 280]
image or copy, either of sensible or of intellectual objects. An historical narration of any transaction, or a naturalist's description of any visible object, would not, by any man, be called an imitation: but a painting of the same transaction, or of the same object, would be termed an imitation by all men. The only reason of the difference is, that in the latter case the artist has produced a resemblance of that transaction or object, in the former no resemblance is produced; and as little could any be produced by poetry.
If poetry, therefore, be, strictly speaking, an imitation, it must be such in some other sense, and for some other reason, than its expressing in words the subject chosen by the poet. What other reason there is for calling poetry an imitation, we shall be assisted in conceiving, by attending for a little to the nature of painting. On account of its producing a real resemblance of things, painting is in every case an imitation. But it is not in every case, an imitation in precisely the same sense. A portrait or a landscape, is a copy of the person or the country from which it is taken; and it is an imitation only for this reason, that it exhibits a copy of these individuals. But suppose that a painter, instead of copying an individual object with which he is acquainted, invents a subject; suppose, for instance, that he paints
[Page 281]
an Hercules, from a standard idea in his own mind: in this case, the picture is not an imitation, as being a copy or resemblance of any one individual existing in nature. It is still an imitation, but in a quite different sense: the subject itself is an imitation; it is, not a real individual, but a general representation of the make of a strong man. The imitation made by poetry, is of this very kind. The poet conceives his subject; and this subject is an imitation; it is not, in all its circumstances, a thing which really exists in nature, or a fact which has really happened; it only resembles things which exist, or which have happened.
All men seem to have an implicit idea that this is the true nature of poetical imitation, though they have not unfolded it distinctly, and though perhaps they have often talked as if their idea had been different. Hence it proceeds that, whenever we speak of poetry as an imitation, we constantly call it an imitation of Nature ; never an imitation of the poet's particular subject, as we readily would if we considered it as denominated an imitation merely on account of the lively idea of that subject, which is excited by it.
It is plainly in the very sense which we have pointed out, that Aristotle calls poetry an imitative
[Page 282]
art. For the distinction which he makes between poetry and history, is, that history describes things as they are ; but poetry, as they may be . The subject of the former is the real ; the subject of the latter, the probable , or what resembles the real. And now we can perceive clearly, why we call poetry an imitation, history not. History is more than an imitation; it is an accurate detail of real things. But poetry is an imitation, and no more: it is not a description of what has actually been, but a description of something so like to real fact, that it might have been, or is probable.
A poet sometimes chuses a real thing for his subject; a particular place, for instance, or a prospect, or a series of events. So far as he adheres strictly to that real thing, his description is no more an imitation of that thing, than the geographer's, or naturalist's, or historian's account of it would be an imitation. But his description may, notwithstanding, be poetical: it may be embellished and enlivened by images, & c . not belonging to the real thing, but formed by the poet's fancy. It is the introduction of these that renders the description poetical; and these are imitations of nature, not actual appendages of the real thing described. A simple gazette in verse, would be no imitation of the events related; nor would it be a poem, however harmonious the verse
[Page 283]
might be; it would be only a history in metre. Had the Iliad been a mere detail of certain events of the Trojan war, thrown into hexameters, it would have been no poem: had it adorned the detail with a variety of beautiful figures and images, it would have been poetical, but no imitation. Homer only takes his hints from the real events of the Trojan war; he introduces the heroes who served in it; but he engages them in whatever combats he thinks proper; he feigns those circumstances, those turns of success, and those consequences of the several combats, which produce the best effects on the imagination and the passions; he brings deities into the field of battle, to assist or to oppose the several combatants, who never appeared there; but who, agreeably to the received mythology of the times, might have appeared. It is this that renders the Iliad an imitation; and it is this that renders it, in the highest sense, a poem. The subject of every poem, is to a certain degree a fable , and to the very same degree, it is an imitation.
In a word, poetry is called an imitation, not because it produces a lively idea of its immediate subject, but because this subject itself is an imitation of some part of real nature. It is not called an imitation, to express the exactness with which it copies real things; for then history would be a more perfect imitation than
[Page 284]
poetry. It is called an imitation for the very contrary reason, to intimate that it is not confined to the description only of realities, but may take the liberty to describe all such things as resemble realities, and on account of that resemblance, come within the limits of probability. It were easy to shew, that this very circumstance is the source from which are derived almost all the rules of poetry, so far as they differ from those of history and other species of composition. Hence it arises, for example, that in descriptions of natural objects, the poet is not obliged to take in all their real qualities and appearances, but is allowed to select such as may form a striking picture, and to combine with these, such consistent qualities and appearances, not actually belonging to the objects, as are fit for heightening the beauty and force of the picture. Hence it arises, that poetical characters represent a whole kind, and are not required to include the peculiar and discriminating circumstances, which never fail to be joined with the generic ones, in real individuals. But it is not necessary for our present purpose, to point out what influence this view of the nature of poetry has upon its rules: it is sufficient to have ascertained the sense in which poetry is an imitative art.
THE END.
NOTES
1 Voici les Lyriques, que je méprise autant que je fais cas des autres, et qui font de leur art une harmonieuse extravagance. Lettr. Persan. 121.
2 Hume's Dissertation on the Standard of Taste.
3 Elements of Criticism, chap. 25.
4 Introduction on Taste.
5 Hume's Dissert. on the Standard of Taste.
6 Considerable stress is laid on a standard in this manner formed, by two ingenious philosophers of our own country. Hume's Dissert. 4. Elements of Criticism, cap. 25. And it is explicitly defended as the only standard by the ingenious Abbé du Bos, Reflex. Crit. 2. part, sect. 21,–32. See also Fitzosborne's Letters, 39.
7 In the same way, the public approbation is claimed in favour of the Poems of Ossian, in a critical dissertation on them, which displays fine taste, confirming its sentiments by the deductions of sound criticism.
8 See Part iii. sect. 3.
9 It is the professed design of D'Alembert's Reflections on Taste, to prove that philosophy justly claims authority as a standard in matters of taste, and to suggest some rules and cautions respecting the application of it. And the ingenious author of Elements of Criticism, after having allowed general approbation all the weight which he thought that it could possess, concludes with referring to general principles of human nature, scientifically investigated, the principles that ought to govern the taste of individuals, as a standard in which he puts great confidence, as more unerring than any selection of the persons capable of judging; and with intimating that to lay a foundation for this branch of knowledge, that is in other words, to form such a standard, is the declared purpose of that work. Chap. 25. at the end. This observation appears to me to be perfectly just and well founded, and will perhaps be both confirmed and illustrated by the remarks which I am now making.
10 Fitzosborne's Lett. 5.
11 Elements of Criticism, chap. 18.
$$$
