Animaduersions uppon the Annotacions ...
Author: Thynne, Francis.
Publication info: Illustrations Of the Lives and Writings Of Gower and Chancer ... By the Rev. Henry J. Todd ... . [3], xlvii, 394 p. London: Printed for F.C. and J. Rivington, T. Payne, Cadell and Davies, and R.H. Evans, 1810.

Animaduersions Uppon the Annotacions and Correctons of some Imperfectons of Impressons of Chaucers Workes ... Sett Downe by Francis Thynne [in, Illustrations of the Lives and Writings of Gower and Chancer ... by the Rev. Henry J. Todd ...]
[Page ]
ANIMADUERSIONS
UPPON THE ANNOTACIONS
AND CORRECTONS OF SOME
IMPERFECTONS OF IMPRESSONES
OF CHAUCERS WORKES
(SETT DOWNE BEFORE TYME AND
NOWE) REPRINTED IN THE
YERE OF OUR LORDE
1598.
SETT DOWNE BY
FRANCIS THYNNE.
[Page ]
TO THE
RIGHTE HONORABLE HIS SINGULER GOOD LORDE
SIR. THOMAS EGERTON, KNIGHTE ,
LORDE KEPER OF THE GREATE SEALE AND MASTER OF
THE ROLLES OF THE CHAUNCERYE. It was (ryghte honorable and my verye good lorde) one aunciente and gretlye estemed custome emongst the Romans in the height of their glorye, that eche one, accordinge to their abylytye or the desarte of his frende, did in the begynnynge of the monthe of Ianuarye (consecrated to the dooble-faced godd Ianus, on the fyrste daye whereof they made electione of their cheife officers and magistrates,) presente somme gyfte vnto his frende as the note and pledge of the contynued and encresed amytye betwene them; a pollicye gretlye to be regarded for the many good effectes which issue from so woorthye cause. This custome not restinge in the lymyttes of Italye, but spredinge with the Romans (as did their language and many other their vsages and lawes) into euerye perticuler countrye where theyr power and gouermente stretched, passed also ouer the oceane into the litle worlde of Britannye, being neuer exiled from thence, nor from those whome eyther honor, amytye, or dutye doth combyne;
[Page 6]
fforwhose cause lest I myghte offende in the breche of that most excellente and yet embraced custome. I thinke yt my parte to presente unto yo r Lo: suche poore newe-yeres gyfte as my weak estate and the barrennesse of my feble skyll will permytte. Wherefore, and because Cicero affirmeth that he whiche hathe once ouerpassed the frontiers of modesty must for euer after be impudente, (a grounde which I fynde fully veryfyed in my selfe, havinge once before outgonne the boundes of shamefastnesse in presentinge to yo r Lordshippe my confused collectons and disordered discourse of the Chauncelors,) I ame nowe become vtterlye impudente in not blushinge to salute you agayne (in the begynnynge of this newe yere) with my petye animadversons vppon the annotacons and corrections deliuered by master Thomas Speghte vppon the last editone of Chaucers Workes in the yere of oure redemptone 1598; thinges (I confesse) not so answerable to yo r Lordshippes iudgment, and my desyre, as bothe youre desarte and my dutye doo challenge. But although they doo not in all respectes satisfye youre Lordshippes expectacone and my goode will, (accordinge as I wyshe they sholde,) yet I dobt not but yo r Lordshippe (not degeneratinge from youre former courtesye wontinge to accompanye all youre actons) will accepte these trifles from yo r lovinge wellwiller, in suche sorte as I shall acknowledge my selfe beholdinge and endebted to yo r Lordshippe for the same. Whiche I hope
[Page 7]
yo r Lordshippe will the rather doo (with pardonynge my presumptione) because you haue, by the former good acceptance of my laste booke, emboldened me to make tryall of the lyke acceptance of this pamphlette. Wherefore yf yo r Lordshippe shall receve yt curteous (and so not to discharge mee in my swete and studiouse idlenesse) I will hereafter consecrate to yo r lykinge soome better labor of moore momente, and a higher subiecte, answerable to the excellencye of yo r iudgmente, and mete to declare the fulnesse of the dutyfull mynde and seruice I beare and owe vnto youre Lordshippe; to whome in all reuerence I commytte this simple treatyce. Thus (withe hartye prayers comendinge youre estate to the Almightye, who send to yo r Lordshippe manye happye and helthfull yeres and to me the enlarged contynuance of youre honorable favour,) I humblye take my leave.
Clerkenwell Grene the xx of december 1599. Your Lordshippes wholye to dyspose, FRANCIS THYNNE.
[Page 9]
TO MASTER THOMAS SPEIGHTE
FFRANCIS THYNNE SENDETH GREETINGE. The industrye and love (master Speighte) whiche you haue vsed, and beare, vppon and to oure famous poete Geffrye Chaucer, deseruethe bothe commendatone and furtheraunce: the one to recompense your trauayle, the other to accomplyshe the duetye whiche we all beare (or at the leaste, yf we reuerence lernynge or regarde the honor of oure Countrye, sholde beare) to suche a singuler ornamente of oure tonge, as the Workes of Chaucer are. Yet since there is nothinge so fullye perfected by anye one, wherein some imperfectone maye not bee founde, (for as the prouerbe is Barnardus , or as others have, Alanus non videt omnia ,) you must be contented to gyve me leave in dyscharge of the duetye and love which I beare to Chaucer, (whome I suppose I have as great intereste to adorne withe my small skyll as anye other hath, in regarde that the laborious care of my father made hym most acceptable to the worlde in correctinge and augmentinge his Workes,) to enter into the examinatone of this new editone; and that the rather, because you, with Horace his verse Si quid novisti rectius istis candidus imperti , have willed all others to further the same, and to accepte your labors in good
[Page 10]
parte; whiche as I most willingly doo, so meaninge but well to the worke, I ame to lett you vnderstande my conceyte thereof, whiche before this, yf you wolde have vouchesafed my howse or have thoughte me worthy to have byn acqueynted with these matters, (which you might, well have donne without anye whatsoeuer dysparagement to yourselfe,) you shoulde have vnderstoode before the impressione, althoughe this whiche I here write ys not nowe vppon selfewill or fond conceyte to wrangle for an asses shadowe, or to seke a knott in a rushe; but in frendlye sorte to bringe truthe to lighte; a thinge, whiche I wolde desire others to vse towardes mee in whatsoeuer shall fall oute of my penne. Wherefore I will here shewe suche thinges as, in my opynione, may serue to be touched; not medlinge withe the seconde editione to an inferior personne than my fathers editione was.
Ffirste, IN YOUR FORESPECHE TO THE READER , you saye secondly the texte by written copies corrected. By whiche worde corrected I maye seme to gather, that you imagine greate imperfectione in my fathers editione, whiche peraduenture maye move others to saye (as some vnadvisedly have sayed) that my father had wronged Chaucer. Wherefore, to stoppe that gappe, I will answer, that Chaucers Works haue byn sithens printed twyce, yf not thrice; and therfore by oure carelesse (and for the most parte vnlearned) printers of Englande, not so well performed as yt ought
[Page 11]
to bee: so that of necessytye bothe in matter, meter, and meaninge, yt must needes gather corruptone, passinge through so manye handes; as the water dothe, the further yt runneth from the pure founteyne. To enduce me and all others to iudge his editione (whiche I thinke you neuer sawe wholye together, beinge fyrst printed but in one columne in a page, whereof I will speake hereafter,) was the perfectest, ys the ernest desire and love my father hadde to have Chaucers Workes rightlye to be publyshed. For the performance whereof, my father not onlye vsed the help of that lerned and eloquent knight and antiquarye S r Briane Tuke, but had also made greate serche for copies to perfecte his Workes, as appereth in the ende of the Squier's Tale , in his editione printed in the yere 1542; but further had commissione to serche all the libraries of England for Chaucers Works, so that oute of all the Abbies of this Realme (whiche reserved any monuments thereof) he was fully furnished with multitude of Bookes: emongst whiche, one coppye of some parte of his Works came to his handes subscribed in diuers places withe examinatur Chaucer . By this Booke, and conferringe manye of the other written copies together, he delivered his editione, fullye corrected, as the amendements vnder his hande, in the fyrst printed booke that euer was of his Works, (beinge stamped by the fyrste impressione that was in Englande,) will well declare; at what time he added manye thinges,
[Page 12]
which were not before printed, as you nowe haue donne some, of which I ame perswaded (and that not withoute reasone) the originall came from mee. In whiche his editione, beinge printed but with one columne in a syde, there was the Pilgrymes Tale , a thinge moore odious to the Clergye then the speche of the Plowmanne ; that Pilgrimes Tale begynnynge in this sorte:
In Lincolneshyre, fast by a fenne,
Standes a relligious howse who dothe yt kenne, &c.
In this Tale did Chaucer most bitterlye enveye against the pride, state, couetousnes, and extorcione of the byshoppes, their officialls, archdeacons, vicars generalls, commissaryes, and other officers of the spirituall courte. The inventione and order whereof (as I haue herde yt related by some nowe of good worshippe both in courte and countrye, but then my fathers clerkes,) was, that one comynge into this relligious howse walked vpp and downe the churche, beholdinge goodlye pictures of byshoppes in the windowes; at lengthe the manne contynuynge in that contemplatione, not knowinge what byshoppes they were; a grave olde manne with a long white hedde and berde, in a large blacke garment girded vnto hym, came forthe and asked hym what he iudged of those pictures in the windowes; who sayed, he knewe not what to make of them, but that they looked lyke vnto our mitred bishoppes; to whome the olde
[Page 13]
father replied, yt is true, they are lyke, but not the same, for oure byshoppes are farr degenerate from them; and, with that, made a large discourse of the bishoppes and of their courtes. This Tale when kinge Henry the eighte had redde, he called my father vnto hym, sayinge, “William Thynne, I doubt this will not be allowed; for I suspecte the byshoppes will call thee in question for yt.” To whome my father, beinge in great fauore with his prince, (as manye yet lyvinge canne testyfye,) sayed, “yf your grace be not offended, I hope to be protected by you.” Wherevppon the kinge bydd hym goo his waye and feare not. All whiche not withstandinge, my father was called in questione by the byshoppes and heaved at by cardinall Wolseye, his olde enymye, for manye causes, but mostly for that my father had furthered Skelton to publishe his Collin Cloute againste the Cardinall, the most parte of whiche Booke was compiled in my fathers howse at Erithe in Kente. But for all my fathers frendes, the Cardinalls perswadinge auctorytye was so greate with the kinge, that thoughe by the kinges fauor my father escaped bodelye daunger, yet the Cardinall caused the kinge so muche to myslyke of that Tale, that Chaucer must be nowe printed and that discourse of the Pilgrymes Tale lefte oute; and so, beinge printed agayne, some thinges were forsed to be omitted; and the Plowmans Tale (supposed, but vntrulye, to be made by olde sir Thomas Wyat, father to hym whiche was executed in the firste
[Page 14]
yere of Quene Marye, and not by Chaucer,) with much ado permitted to passe with the reste, in suche sorte that in one open parliamente (as I haue herde S r Iohne Thynne reporte, being then a member of the howse,) when talke was had of Bookes to be forbidden, Chaucer had there for euer byn condempned, had yt not byn that his Workes had byn counted but fables. Whereunto yf you will replye, that their coulde not be any suche Pilgrymes Tale , because Chaucer in his Prologues makethe not mentione of anye suche personne, which he wold haue donne, yf yt had byn so; for after that he had recyted the Knighte, the Squyer, the squiers Yeomane, the Prioresse, her Nonne, and her thre Preists, the Monke, the Fryer, the Marchant, the Clerke of Oxenforde, Seriante at the lawe, Franckleyne, Haberdasher, Goldsmythe, Webbe, Dyer, and Tapyster, Cooke, Shypmane, Doctor of phisicke, Wyfe of Bathe, Personne, and Plowmane, he sayeth, at the ende of the Plowmans Prologe,
There was also a Reve, and a Millere,
A Sumpnoure, and a Pardoner also,
A Manciple, and my selfe, there was no mo.
All which make XXX persons with Chaucer. Wherefore yf there had byn any more, he wolde also haue recyted them in those verses. Whereunto I answere, that in the Prologes he lefte oute some of those whiche told their Tales; as the
[Page 15]
Chanons Yeomane, because he came after that they were passed oute of theyre inne, and did ouertake them, as in lyke sorte this Pilgrime did or myght doo, and so afterwardes be one of their companye, as was that Chanons Yeomane, although Chaucer talke no more of this Pilgrime in his Prologe then he dooth of the Chanons Yeomane; whiche I doubt not wolde fullye appere, yf the Pilgrimes Prologe and Tale mighte be restored to his former light, they being nowe loste, as manye other of Chaucers Tales were before that, as I ame induced to thinke by manye reasons. But to leave this, I must saye, that in those many written Bookes of Chaucer, which came to my fathers hands, there were manye false copyes, which Chaucer shewethe in writinge of Adam Scriuener, (as you haue noted,) of whiche written copies there came to me after my fathers death some fyve and twentye; whereof some had more and some fewer Tales, and some but two and some three. Whiche Bookes being by me (as one nothing dobting of this whiche ys nowe donne for Chaucer) partly dispersed aboute xxvj yeres agoo, and partlye stoolen oute of my howse at Popler, I gave diuers of them to Stephen Batemanne, person of Newington, and to diuers other; whiche beinge copies vnperfecte, and some of them corrected by my fathers hande, yt maye happen some of them to come to some of your frendes handes, whiche I knowe, yf I see agayne. And yf by anye suche written copies
[Page 16]
you haue corrected Chaucer, you maye as well offende as seme to do good. But I iudge the beste; for in doubtes I will not resolue with a settled iudgmente, althoughe you may iudge this tedious discourse of my father a needlesse thinge in setting forthe his diligence in breaking the yce, and gyvinge lighte to others, who may more easely perfecte than begyne any thinge: for facilius est addere quàm invenire . And so to other matters.
Under the tytle of Chaucers familye , you seme to make it probable that Richarde Chaucer, vinetener of Londone, was Geffrye Chaucers father. But I holde that no more than that Iohne Chaucer of Londone was father to Richarde; of which Iohne I fynde in the recordes in Dorso Rotulor. patent .—24. de anno 30. Ed. I. in the towre, that kinge Edwarde the firste had herde the compleinte of Iohne Chaucer of London, who was beaten and hurt, to the domage of one thowsand pownde; that some amountinge at this daye to three thowsande pownde;) for whiche a comissione went forthe to enquire thereof. Wherbye yt semeth that he was of some reckonynge. But as I cannot saye that Iohne was father to Richarde, or hee to Geffrye; so yet this much I will deliver in settinge downe the antiquytye of the name of Chaucer, that his auncesters (as you well coniecture) were strangers, as the etymon of his name (being Frenche, in Englishe signyfyinge one whiche shooeth or hooseth a manne,)
[Page 17]
dothe prove; for that dothe the etymon of this worde Chausier presente vnto vs; of which name I haue founde (besides the former recyted Johne) one Elias Chauseyr lyvinge in the tyme of Henrye the thirde and of Edwarde the firste, of whome the recorde of pellis exitus in the receyte of the Exchequier in the firste yere of Edwarde the firste hathe thus noted: Edwardus dei gratia &c. Liberate de thesauro nostro Elie Chauseyr decem solidos super arreragia trium obulrum diurnorum quos ad vitam suam per litteras domini H. Regis patris nostri percepit ad scaccarium nostrum. Datum per manum Walteri Merton cancellarij nostri apud Westm. 24 Julij anno regni nostri primo . With whiche carracters ys Geffry Chausyer written in the recordes in the tyme of Edwarde the thirde and Richarde the seconde. So that yt was a name of office or occupatione, whiche after came to be the surname of a famelye, as did Smyth, Baker, Porter, Bruer, Skynner, Cooke, Butler, and suche lyke; and that yt was a name of office apperethe in the recordes of the towre, where he is named Le Chaucer, beinge more aunciente than anye other of those recordes; for in Dorso Claus. of 10. H. 3. ys this: Reginaldus Mirifr s . et Alicia uxor eius attornaverunt Radulfum Le Chausier contra Johannem Le Furben et Matildam uxorem eius de uno messuagio in London : This Chaucer lyvinge also in the tyme of kinge Johne. And thus this muche for the antiquytye and significatione
[Page 18]
of Chaucer , whiche I canne prove in the tyme of Edward the 4 to signyfye also, in oure Englysh tonge, bootes or highe shoes to the calfe of the legge ; for thus hathe the antique recordes of Domus Regni Anglie, ca. 53. for the messengers of the kinges howse to doo the kings commaundements; that they shalbe allowed for their Chauses yerely iiijs. viijd. But what shall wee stande vppon the antiquytie and gentry of Chaucer, when the Rolle of Battle Abbeye affirmeth hym to come in with the Conqueror.
Under the title of Chaucers countrye , you sett downe that some heraldes are of opynyone that he did not descende of any great howse; whiche they gather by his armes. This is a slender coniecture; for as honorable howses and of as greate antiquytye haue borne as meane armes as Chaucer; and yet Chaucers armes are not so meane eyther for color, chardge, or particion, as some will make them. And where you saye, yt semeth lykelye, Chaucers skill in Geometrye considered, that he tooke the groundes and reasons of his armes oute of seuen twentye and eight and twentye propositiones of Euclide's first booke; that ys no inference that his armes were newe or fyrst assumed by hym oute of Geometricall proportions, because he was skyllfull in Geometrye: for so you maye saye of all the auncient armes of Englande, whiche consyste not of anymalls or vegetalls. For all other armes whiche are not anymalls and vegetalls, as cheuerons,
[Page 19]
pales, bendes, checkes, and suche lyke, stande vppon geometricall proportions. And therfore howe greate soeuer their skyll bee, whiche attribute that choyse of armes to Chaucer, [they] had no moore skyll in armes then they needed. In the same title also, you sett downe Quene Isabell &c. and her sonne Prince Edwarde withe his newe maried wyfe retourned oute of Henalte. In whiche are two imperfections. The first whereof ys, that his wyfe came oute of Henalte with the prince; but that is not so, for the prince maryed her not before he came into England, since the prince was onlye slenderly contracted and not maryed to her before his arryvall in Englande, beinge two yeres and more after that contracte, (betwene the erle of Henalt and his mother,) about the latter ende of the seconde yere of his reigne, though others have the fyrste; the solempnytye of that mariage beinge donne at Yorke. Besides, she came not ouer with Quene Isabell and the Prince, but the prince sent for her afterwardes; and so, I suppose, sayeth Hardinge in his Chronicle, yf I do not mysconceve yt, not havinge the hystorye now in my handes. But whether he saye so or no, yt ys not materiall; because the recordes be playne, that he sent for her into Henalte in the seconde yere of his reigne in October, and she came to the kinge the 23 of Januarye followinge, whiche was aboute one daye before he beganne the thirde yere of his reigne, wherunto he entred the 25 of Januarye. And
[Page 20]
for proofe of the tyme when and whome the kinge sente, and what they were allowed therefore, the pellis exitus of the Exchequier remaininge in Master Warders office hathe thus sett downe in the forthe daye of februarye: Bartholomeo de Burgershe nuper misso ad partes Douor ad obuiandum filiam comitis Hannonie—consorti ipsius Regis , &c. But this recorde followinge is most playne, shewing both who went for her, the day when they tooke their journeye towardes Henalte, with the daye when and where they presented her to the kinge after their retorne into Englande, and the daye on whiche they were payed their charges, beinge the forthe of Marche, on whiche daye yt is thus entered in the records of pellis exitus, Michaell. 2. Ed. 3. Rogero Couentry et Lichefeld episcopo nuper misso in nuntium domini Regis ad partes Hannonie pro matrimonio inter dominum Regem et filiam comitis Hannonie contrahendo ab octauo die Octobris proximè preterito, quo die recessit de Notingham, ipso domino Rege ibidem existente, arripiendo iter suum predictum versus partes predictas usque vicesimum tertium diem Januarii proximè sequentem, quo die rediit ad ipsum Regem predictum apud Eborum in comitatiua filie comitis Hannonie predicte vtroque die computato pro cviij diebus percipiendo per diem iij ll vj s viij pro expensis suis . Thus muche the recorde, whiche confirmethe that whiche I go aboute to prove, that she came not into Englande
[Page 21]
with prince Edwarde, and that he was not maryed at that tyme, no, not contracted, but only by agremente betwene the erle and his mother. Next you seme to implye by a coniecturall argumente, that Chaucers auncesters sholde be merchants, for that in place where they haue dwelled the armes of the marchantes of the staple haue bin seene in the glasse windowes. This ys a mere coniecture, and of no valydytye. For the marchantes of the staple had not any armes granted to them (as I haue bin enformed) vntill longe after the deathe of Chaucers parentes, whiche was aboute the 10 or 12 of Edwarde the thirde; and those merchantes had no armes before the tyme of Henrye the sixte, or muchwhat thereaboutes, as I doubt not but wilbe well proued, yf I be not mysen formed. But admytte the staplers had then armes, yt ys no argumente that Chaucers auncesters were merchants because those armes were in the wyndowes, as you shall well perceave, yf you drawe yt into a syllogisme; and therefore you did well to conclude, that yt was not materiall whether they were merchants or no.
In the title of Chaucer's educatione , you saye that Gower in his booke entituled Confessio Amantis termethe Chaucer a worthye poet, and maketh hym as yt were the iudge of his workes; in whiche booke, to my knowledge, Gower dothe not terme hym a worthye poet, (althoughe I confesse he well deserueth that name, and that the same may be gathered oute of Gower comendynge
[Page 22]
hym,) nether doth he after a sorte (for any thinge I canne yet see) make hym iudge of his workes, (whereof I wolde be glad to be enformed,) since these be Gowers woordes, vttered by Venus in that booke of Confessio Amantis :
And grete well Chaucer when ye mete,
As my disciple and my poëte:
For in the flower of his youthe,
In sondrye wise, as he well couthe,
Of dytyes and of songes glade
The whiche for my sake he made,
The laude fulfilled is ouer all:
Wherefore to hym in especiall
Aboue all others I am most holde;
Forthy nowe in his dayes olde,
Thow shalt hym tell this message,
That he vppon his latter age
Sett an ende of all his werke,
As he whiche is myne owne clerke
Do make his Testament of Love ,
As thou hast done thy shrift above,
So that my Courte yt may recorde, &c.
These be all the verses whiche I knowe or yet canne fynde, in whichye Gower in that booke mentioneth Chaucer, where he nether nameth hym worthye poet, nor after a sorte submytteth his workes to his iudgmente. But quite contrarye Chaucer doth submytte the correctione of his works to Gower in these playne wordes, in the latter ende of the fyfte booke of Troylus:
[Page 23]
O morall Gower, this booke I directe
To thee, and the philosophicall Stroode,
To vouchesafe where nede is to correcte
Of your benignityes and Zeales good.
But this error had in you byn pardoned, yf you had not sett yt downe as your owne, but warranted with the auctorytye of Bale in Scriptoribus Anglie , from whence you haue swallowed yt. Then in a marginall note of this title you saye agayne oute of Bale, that Gower was a Yorkshire manne; but you are not to be touched therfore, because you discharge your selfe in vouching your auctor. Wherfore Bale hath mistaken yt, as he hath donne infynyte thinges in that Booke de Scriptoribus Anglie , beinge for the most parte the collections of Lelande. For in truth your armes of this Sr John Gower beinge argent on a cheuerone azure, three leopardes heddes or, do prove that he came of a contrarye howse to the Gowers of Stytenham in Yorkeshyre, who bare barrulye of argent and gules a crosse patye florye sable. Whiche difference of armes semeth a difference of famelyes, vnlesse you canne prove that, beinge of one howse, they altered their armes vppon some iuste occasione, as that some of the howse maryinge one heyre did leave his owne armes and bare the armes of his mother; as was accustoomed in tymes paste. But this difference of coates for this cause, or anye other, (that I colde yet euer lerne,) shall you not fynde in this famelye of Gower: and therefore seuerall
[Page 24]
howses from the fyrst originall. Then the marginall note goeth further out of Bale, that Gower had on his hedde a garlande of ivye and roses, the one the ornamente of a knyghte, the other of a poet. But Bale ys mystaken, for yt ys not a garlande, vnless you will metaphoricallye call euerye cyrcle of the hedde a garlande; as crownes are sometymes called garlandes, from whence they had their originall. Nether ys yt of ivye, as any manne whiche seeth yt may well iudge; and therefore not there sett for anye suche intente as an ensigne of his poetrye; but ys symplye a chapplett of roses, suche as the knyghtes in olde tyme vsed ether of golde, or other embroderye, made after the fashone of roses, one of the peculier ornamentes of a knighte, as well as his coller of SSS, his guilte swoorde, and spurres. Whiche chaplett or cyrcle of roses was as well attributed to knights, the lowest degree of honor, as to the hygher degrees of duke, erle, &c. beinge knyghtes, for so I haue seene Johne of Gaunte pictured in his chaplett of roses; and kinge Edwarde the thirde gaue his chaplett to Eustace Rybamonte; only the difference was, that as they were of lower degree, so had they fewer roses placed on their chaplett or cyrcle of golde, one ornament deduced from the dukes crowne whiche had the roses vppon the toppe of the cyrcle, when the knights had them onlye vppon the cyrcle or garlande ytselfe. Of whiche dukes crowne to be adorned with little roses,
[Page 25]
Mathewe Paris, speakinge of the creatinge of Johne erle Mortone, duke of Normandye, in the the yere of Christe 1199, dothe saye, Interim comes Johannes Rothomagu veniens in octavis pasche gladio ducatus Normauie cinctus est, in matrice ecclesia, per ministeriu Waltheri Rothomagesis magesis Archiepti, vbi Archiepiscopus memoratus ante maius altare in capite eius posuit circulu aureu habente in summitate per gyru rosulas aureas artificialiter fabricatas : whiche chaplett of roses came in the ende to be a bande aboute oure cappes, sett with golde buttons, as may be supposed.— In the same title you saye, yt semethe that these lerned menne were of the Inner Temple; for that, manye yeres since, master Buckley did see a recorde in the same howse where Geffrye Chaucer was fined two shillings for beatinge a Franciscane Fryer in fletestreate. This is a hard collectone to prove Gower of the Inner Temple, althoughe he studyed the lawe. For thus you frame your argumente. Mr. Buckley found a record in the Temple, that Chaucer was fyned for beatinge the Fryer; ergo , Gower and Chaucer were of the Temple. But for myne owne parte, yf I wolde stande vppon termes for matter of antiquytye and ransacke the originall of the lawiers fyrst settlinge in the Temple, I doubte whether Chaucer were of the Temple or noe, vnless yt were towardes his latter tyme; for he was an olde manne, as appereth by Gower in Confessione Amantis in the xvi yere of
[Page 26]
R. 2. when Gower wroote that Booke. And yt is most certeyn to be gathered by cyrcumstances of Recordes, that the lawyers were not in the Temple vntill towardes the latter parte of the reygne of kinge Edwarde the thirde; at whiche tyme Chaucer was a grave manne, holden in greate credyt, and employed in embassye; so that methinketh he sholde not be of that howse; and yet, yf he then were, I sholde iudge yt strange that he sholde violate the rules of peace and gravytye in those yeares. But I will passe over all those matters sicco pede , and leave euerye manne to his owne iudgemte therein for this tyme.
In the title of Chaucers mariage you saye, you cannot fynde the name of the Gentlewomanne whome he maryed. Trulye, yf I did followe the conceyte of others, I sholde suppose her name was Elizabethe, a waytinge womanne of Quene Philippe, wyfe to Edwarde the thirde and daughter to Willia erle of Henalte. But I favor not their opynyone. For, although I fynde a recorde of the pellis exitus , in the tyme of Edwarde the thirde, of a yerely stypende to Elizabethe Chawcere, domicelle regine Philippe , whiche domicella dothe signyfye one of her waytinge gentlewomen; yet I cannott for this tyme thinke this was his wyfe, but rather his sister or kinswomanne, who after the deathe of her mystresse Quene Philippe did forsake the worlde, and became a nonne at Seinte Helens in London, accordinge
[Page 27]
as you have touched one of that professone in primo of kinge Richarde the seconde.
In the Latyne stemme of Chaucer you saye, speakinge of Katherine Swyneforde, Que postea nupta Johanni Gandauensi tertij Edwardi regis filio, Lancastrie duci, illi procreavit filios tres et vnica filia . Wherebye we may inferre that Johne of Gaunte had these children by her after her mariage. Whiche is not so. For he had all his children by her longe before that mariage; so that they beinge all illegitimate were enforced afterwarde vppon that maryage to be legytymated by the pope; and also by acte of parliament, aboute the two and twentythe of kinge Richarde the seconde; so that you cannot saye, que postea nupta procreavit Lancastrie duci tres filios, etc.
In the title of Chaucers children and their advauncemente , in a marginall note you vouche master Campdene that Barthelmewe Burgershe, knyghte of the Garter, was he from whome the Burgershes, whose daughter and heyre was maryed to Thomas Chaucer, did descende. But that is also an error. For this Barthelmewe was of a collaterall lyne to that S r Johne Burgershe the father of Mawde wyfe to Thomas Chaucer; and therefore coulde not that S r Johne Burghershe be descended of this Barthelmewe Burgershe, though hee were of that howse. Then, in that title, you vouche oute of Mr. Campdene that Serlo de Burgo brother to Eustachius de Vescye built Knaresborowe Castle. But that ys not righte. For this Serlo beinge
[Page 28]
called Serlo de Burgo sive de Pembroke was brother to Johne father of Eustace Vescye, as haue the recordes of the towre, and so vncle and not brother to Eustace. For another marginall note in that tytle you saye, that Jane of Navarre was maryed to Henrye the forthe in the fourthe yere of his reygne, wherein you followe a late englishe cronicler whome I forbeare to name. But Walsingham both in his historye of Henry the fourthe, and in his Ypodigma, sayeth that he was maryed the 26 of Januarye in the yere of Christe 1403, whiche was in the fyfte yere of the kinge, yf you begynne the yere of our Lorde at the annunciatione of the Virgine, as we nowe doo; but this is no matter of great momente. Ffourthlye in that title you seme to attribute the advancement of the Pooles to William de la Poole, merchante of Hull, that lente the kinge a greate masse of moneye. But this William was not the fyrste advancer of that howse; because his father Richarde [de la] Poole beinge a cheife gouernor in Hull, and serving the kings necessytye with money, was made Pincerna Regis , an office of great accompte; by the same gyvinge the fyrste advancemente to the succedynge famelye. Whereof the record to prove Ric. de la Poole Pincerna Regis is founde in the pryvye seales of the eleaventh yere of kinge Edwarde the thirde, in master Wardoures office, the lorde treasurers clerke. Where yt is in this manner: Edwardus dei gratia rex Anglie et dux Acquitanie, etc. Supplicavit
[Page 29]
nobis dilectus noster Richardus de la Poole Pincerna noster, vt quum ipse de expensis officii Pincernarie ac omnibus aliis officiu illud tangentibus, ad dictu Scaccariu à festo sancti Michaelis anno regni nostri decimo, vsque ad ide festu proxime sequens plenarie computaverit, et 2090 li : 13 5 : et 11 d et vnus obulus sibi per computu illud de claro debeatur: volumus ei solutione inde seu aliàs satisfactione sibi fieri competentem: Nos eius supplicationi in hac parte, prout iustu est, annuentes, vobis mandamus, etc. Datu apud, Westmonasteriu 14 Decembris, anno regni nostri vndecimo . To whose sonne this William de la Poole the older, and to his sonne Michaell de la Poole (who was after Chauncelor) and to his heyres, the kinge graunted fowre hundred markes by yere out of the Custome of Hull, as appereth in the record of pellis exitus of 46 Ed. 3. the same Michaell de la Poole recevinge the arrerages of that annuytye. For thus yt is entred in Michaelmas terme on the first of December of that yere: Michaeli de la Poole filio et heredi Willielmi de la Poole senioris per tallia levata isto die continentem iij c lxx li xviij s l d ob. eidem Michaeli liberat. per compotum suum factum ad Scaccariu computator. virtute cuiusdam brevis de magno sigillo Thesaurario et Baronibus Scaccarii directum pro huius compoto faciendo, de quodam annuo certo iiij c marc. per annu, quas dominus rex Willielmo de la Poole seniori defuncto, et Michaeli filio suo et heredibus suis de
[Page 30]
corpore suo exeuntibus, de Custumia in portis ville de Kingeston super Hull per litteras suas patentes concess: percipendu quamdiu vij. c xxxv li xviij s i d ob. eidem Michaeli per compotu predictu sic debitu, etc. Dns rex mandat vt ei satisfactionem vel assignationem competentem (in locis vbi ei celeriter satisfieri poterit) fieret et haberet, per breve de magno sigillo inter mandata de termino Pasche anno quadragesimo tercio, etc. So that Richarde, Michaell de la Pooles grandfather, (a magistrate of greate welthe in Hull,) was the fyrste that gaue advancemente to that howse; although William, father to this Michaell, were of lyke estate and a knyghte. Neither canne I fynde (nor ys yt lyke) that Michaell de la Poole was a marchante, (havinge two such welthy marchantes to his ancestors before hym,) notwithstandinge that Walsingha (more offended than reasone, as all the Clergye were against temporall menne who were nowe become cheif officers of the realme; and the spyrituall menne, till then possessinge those offices, displaced, whiche bredd greate [sorenesse] in the Churchmenne againste them;) sayeth that Michaell de la Poole fuerit à pueritia magis mercimoniis (vtpote mercator mercatoris filius) quam militia occupatus . And yet yt may bee that he might have some factors in merchandise, and deale by his attorneyes as many noble menne and great persons have donne. Whereuppon Walsingham (who wrote longe after) might seme to call
[Page 31]
hymmerchante by reasone of other mens dealings for hym, although in trooth he was neuer merchant in respecte of his owne personne, (for whiche they are properly called merchantes,) as may be supposed. Ffyftlye in the same title you saye, that Alice, wyfe of William de la Poole duke of Suffolke, had a daughter, by her seconde husbande Thomas Montague erle of Sarisbery, named, after her mother, Alice, maryed to Richarde Neville sonne to Raphe Nevill erle of Westmerlande, by whome he had issue Richarde, Johne, and George. But this is nothinge so. For this Alice, the wyfe of Richarde Neville, (erle of Sarisbery in the righte of the same Alice,) was daughter of Thomas Montacute erle of Salisburye and of Alice his wyfe, daughter of Thomas Hollande erle of Kente, and not of Alice daughter to Thomas Chaucer and widdowe to William de la Poole duke of Suffolke.
In the latter end of the title of Chaucers deathe you saye, that printinge was brought oute of Germanye in the yere 1471 being the 37. H. 6. into Englande, beinge fyrst founde at Mogunce by one Johne Guthembergus, and broughte to Rome by Conradus [Sweynheym] an Almayne. But the yere of Christe 1471 was not the 37. H. 6. but the eleuenthe of kinge Edward the fourthe; and, as some have yt, [it] was not fyrste founde at Mogunce or Mentz but at Strasborowe, and perfected at Mogunce. David Chytreus in his historye sayeth, yt was fyrst founde in anno 1440, and brought to Rome
[Page 32]
by Henricus Han a Germane [“cognomine Latino Gallus,” Maittaire Ann. Typ. i. 52.] in the yere 1470; whereof Antonius Campanus framed this excellente epigramme:
Anser Tarpeii custos Jovis, vnde, quò;d alis
   Constreperes, Gallus decidit; vltor adest
Vlricus Gallus; ne quem poscantur in vsum,
   Edocuit pennis nil opus esse tuis.
But others do suppose that yt was invented at Argenterote, as dothe Mathewe Parker in the lyfe of Thomas Bourchier archbyshoppe of Canterburye: whiche for the incertentye thereof I leave at this tyme to farther examinatone, not havinge nowe present leysure therefore.
In the title of the augmente to euerye tale and booke you write, that the Romante of the Rose was made in frenche by Johne Clopinell alias Johne Moone; when in truthe the booke was not made by hym alone: for yt was begunne by Guillaume de Loris, and fynished fourtye yeres after the deathe of Loris by Johne de Meune alias Johne Clopinell, as apperethe by Molinet, the frenche author of the moralytye vppon the Romante of the Rose , ca. 50. fo. 57. and may further appere also in the frenche Romant of the Rose in verse, which Chaucer with muche of that matter omytted, not havinge translated halfe the french Romante, but ended about the middle thereof. Againste whiche Booke Gersone compiled
[Page 33]
another, intituled La reprobatione de la Romante del Rose ; as affirmeth the sayed Molinet, in the 107 chapter of the sayed moralization, where he excusethe Clopinell and reprouethe Gersone for that Booke, because Gersone soughte no further meanynge than what was conteyned in the outwarde letter; this Clopinell begynnynge the Romante of the Rose , in these verses of Chaucer:
Alas my wanehoope! nay, pardyee;
For I will neuer dispayred bee:
Yf happe me fayle, then am I
Vngratious and vnworthy, &c.
Secondly UNDER THAT TITLE you saye, the worke, before this last editione of Chaucer, termed the Dreame of Chaucer , is mystermed, and that yt is the Booke of the Duches , or the Death of Blanche . Wherein you bee greatlye mysledde in my conceyte; for yt cannott bee the Booke of the Duches or of the Death of Blanche , because Johne of Gaunt was then but fowre and twentye yere olde when the same was made, as apperethe by that tretyse in these verses:
Then founde I sytting euen vprighte
A wonder well-faringe knighte,
By the manner me thought so,
Of good mokell, and right yonge thereto,
Of the age of twentye fowre yere,
Vppon his bearde but little heare
[Page 34]
Then yf he were but fowre and twentye yeres of age, being born, as hath Walsingham, in the yere of Christe 1339 the 13. of kinge Edwarde the thirde; and that he was maryed to Blanche the fourtene calendes of June 1359, the 33 of Ed: the thirde; he was at his mariage but twentye yeres of age, who within fower yeres after sholde make his lamentacion for Blanche the duchesse which muste then be dedde. But the duchesse Blanche dyed of the pestilence in the yere of Christe 1368, as hath Anonimus MS, or 1369, as hath Walsingham; whiche by the first accompte was the ix th. and by the last the x th. yere after the mariage, and sixe or at the least five yeres after this lamentacion of Johne of Gaunt made in the fowre and twentye yere of his age. Wherefore this cannott be the Booke of the Duches ; because he coulde not lamente her deathe before she was deade. And yf you replye, that yt pleinlye apperethe the same treatyce to be mente of the duches Blaunche , whiche signyfyeth whyte , by which name he often termeth his ladye there lamented, but especially in these verses,
Her throte, as I have memoyre,
Semed as a round towre of yvoire,
Of good gretnesse and not to greate,
And fayre white she hete,
That was my ladies name righte :
She was thereto fayre and brighte,
She had not her name wronge,
Right fayre sholders and body longe, &c.
[Page 35]
I will answere, that there is no necessitye that yt must be of Blanche the duchesse because he sayeth her name was white ; since there ys a famelye of that denominatione, and some female of that lyne myghte be both white in name, and fayre and white in personne; and so had not her name wronge or in vayne, as Chaucer sayeth. Or yt mighte be some other lover of his called Blanche, since he had many paramours in his youthe, and was not very contynent in his age. Wherefore, to conclude, yt apperethe as before that yt coulde not be mente of the duchesse Blanche his wyfe, whiche dyed long after that Compleinte. For whiche cause that Dreame of Chaucer in mye opynyone may well (naye rather of righte sholde) continew his former title of The Dreame of Chaucer ; for that, whiche you will haue the Dreame of Chaucer, is his Temple of Glasse ; as I haue seene the title thereof noted, and the thinge yt selfe confirmeth.
In the expositione of the olde wordes , as you shewe greate diligence and knowledge, so yet in my opynione, vnlesse a manne be a good Saxoniste, French, and Italyane linguiste, (from whence Chaucer hathe borowed manye wordes,) he cannott well expounde the same to our nowe vnderstandinge; and therefore (though I will not presume of much knowledge in these tounges) yt semeth yet to mee that, in your expositione, some wordes are not so fullye and rightlye explaned
[Page 36]
as they mighte bee; although peradventure you haue framed them to make sence. Wherefore I haue collected these fewe (from many others lefte for more leysure) whiche seme to mee not to be fully explaned in their proper nature, though peradventure you will seme to excuse them by a metaphoricall gloose.
Aketon or Haketone you expounde a jackett withoute sleves, without any further additone, that beinge an indiffynyte speache, and therefore may be entended a comone garmente daylye vsed, suche as we call a jerken or jackett withoute sleves. But haketon is a slevelesse jackett of plate for the warre, covered withe anye other stuffe; at this day also called a jackett of plate. Suche aketon Walter Stapletone, bishoppe of Excester and Custos or Warden of Londone, had vppon hym secretlye, when he was apprehended and behedded in the twentyeth yere of Edwarde the seconde.
Besante you expounde a duckett. But a duckett ys farre from a besante , bothe for the tyme of the inventone, and for the forme; and as I suppose for the valewe, not withstandinge that Hollybande in his Frenche-Englishe dictionarye makes yt of the valewe of a duckett, whiche duckett is for the most part eyther Venetienne or Spanyshe, when the besante ys mere Grekishe; a coyne well knowen and vsed in Englande (and
[Page 37]
yet not therefore an auncient coyne of Englande, as Hollybande sayethe yt was of France,) emongst the Saxons before, and the Normans after, the Conqueste; the forme whereof I will at other tyme describe, onlye nowe settinge downe, that this besante (beinge the Frenche name, and in armorye rightlye according to his nature, for a plate of golde ,) was called in Latine Byzantium, obteyninge that name because yt was the coyne of Constantinople sometyme called Bizantium; and because you shall not thinke this any fictione of myne owne, I will warrante the same with Williame of Malmesberye in the fourthe booke De Regibus , who hathe these wordes: Constantinopolis primùm Bizantiu dicta. Formam antiqui vocabuli preferunt imperatorii nummi Bizantiu dicti ; where another coppye for nummi Bizantiu hath Bizantini nummi ; and the Frenche hath yt besante or bezantine , makinge yt an olde coyne of France, (when he sholde haue sayed an olde coyne in France and not of France,) of the valewe of a duckett.
Fermentacoe [fermentation] you expounde dawbinge, whiche cannott anye way be metaphoricallye so vsed in Chaucer, although yt sholde be improperlye or harshlye applied. For fermentacone ys a peculier terme of Alchymye, deduced from the bakers fermente or levyne. And therefore the chimicall philosophers defyne the fermente to be anima , the sowle or lyfe, of
[Page 38]
the philosophers stone. Whereunto agreeth Clauiger Bincing, a chimicall author, sayinge; autem vivificatione, id est, fermentacoem , which is before tinctinge, or gyvinge tincture or color; that beinge as muche to saye as gyvinge sowle or lyfe to the philosophers stone, wherby that may fermente or color or gyve lyfe to all other metaline bodyes.
Orfrayes you expounde goldsmythes worke, whiche ys as nere to goldsmythes worke as clothe of golde; for this worde orefrayes , beinge compounded of the Frenche worde or and frays or fryse the Englishe; is that whiche to this daye (beinge now made all of one stuffe or substance) is called frised or perled clothe of gold ; in Latyne, in tymes past, termed aurifrisium or aurifrixorium . A thinge well knowen to the Saxons in Englande before, as to the Normans after, the Conqueste; and therefore fullye to satisfye you thereof, I will produce two auctorities of the weavinge and vse thereof before the Conquest and since, wherein you shall playnely see what yt was, and in what accompt yt was holden, beinge a worke peculier to the Englishe. The lieger booke of Elye, speakinge of Ediswetha daughter to Brightnothus aldermanne erle or duke of Northumberlande before the Conquest, sayeth; cui tradita Coveneia, locus monasterio vicinus, vbi AURIFRIXORIE et TEXTURE sccretiùs cum puellis vacabat ; and a litle after, tunica rubra purpura per gyrum et
[Page 39]
ab humeris AURIFRI. vndique circumdatum . Then, after the Conquest, Mathew Paris speakethe thereof aboute ornamentes to be sente to the Pope. But because I haue not my Mathewe Paris here, I will vouche one whose name hathe muche affinytye with hym, and that is Mathewe Parker Archbyshoppe of Canterburye, who, in the Lyfe of Bonifacius Archbishoppe of that see, hathe these wordes. A°. Domini 1246, Rome multi Anglicani aderant Clerici, qui capis vt aiunt chorealibus, et infulis, ornamentisque ecclesiasticis, ex Anglice tunc more gentis, ex lana tenuissima et auro artificiosè intexto fabricatis, vterentur. Huius modi ornamentorum aspectu et concupiscentia provocatus Papa, rogavit cuiusmodi essent. Responsio est , AURIFRISIA appellari, quia et eminens ex panno et lana quam Angli FRYSE appellant, simul contexta sunt. Cui subridens et dulcedine captus Papa, Vere, inquit , (for these are the wordes of Mathewe Paris whiche lyved at that tyme,) Hortus noster delitiarum est Anglia, verus puteus est inexhaustus, et vbi multa abundant, de multis multa sumere licet. Itaque, concupiscentia illectus oculorum, litteras suas bullatas sacras misit ad Cistercienses in Anglia Abbates, quorum orationibus se devotè commendabat, vt ipsi hec AURIFRISIA speciosissima ad suum ornandum chorum compararent. Hoc Londoniensibus placuit, quia ea tum venalia habebant, tantique quanti placuit vendiderunt . In whiche discourse you not onlye
[Page 40]
see that orefryes was a weved clothe of golde and not goldsmythe worke, [but] that Englande had before and since the Conqueste the arte to compose suche kynde of delicate clothe of golde as Europe had not the lyke; for yf yt had, the Pope wolde haue made suche prouisione thereof in other places, and not from Englande. And because you shall not thinke that yt was onlye vsed of the Clergye, you shall fynde in a Record of the Towre that yt was also an ornamente of the kings garmente, since the Conqueste. For, in Rotulo Patentium 6, Johannis in dorso (in whiche the kinge comaunded the Templers to deliuer suche jewells, garmentes, and ornamentes as they had of the kings in kepinge,) are these wordes: Dalmaticam de eodem samitto vrlatani de ORFREYES et cum lapidibus . Whiche is to saye, the kings Dalmaticall garmente of the same samitte (spoken of before, whiche was crymsone,) vrled or bordrede (suche as we nowe calle garded) withe orfreyes.
Oundye and Crispe is by you expounded slyked and curled , whiche sence althoughe yt may beare after some sorte, yet the propryetye of the true sence of oundye (beinge an especiall terme appropriate to the arte of Heraldye) dothe signifye wavinge or movinge , as the water dothe; being called vndye , of Latyne vnda for water . For so her haire was oundye , that is, layed in rooles vpp
[Page 41]
and downe, lyke waves of water when they are styrred with the winde, and not slyked or playne, etc.
You expounde not Resager , beinge a terme of Alchymye; as you leave many of them vntouched. This worde sholde rather be resalgar . Wherefore I will shewe you what resalgar ys in that abstruse science, whiche Chaucer knewe full well, althoughe he enveye againste the sophisticall abuse thereof in the Chanons Yeomans Tale . This resalgar is that whiche by some is called ratesbane , a kynde of poysone named arsenicke , which the chimicall philosophers call their venome or poysone. Whereof I coulde produce infynyte examples; but I will gyve you onlye these fewe for a taste. Aristotle, in Rosario Philosophorum , sayethe, Nullum tingens venenum generatur absque sole et eius vmbra, id est, uxore . Whiche venome they call by all names presentinge or signifyinge poysone, as a toade, a dragon, a basilyske, a serpente, arsenicke, and suche lyke; and by manye other names, as in exercitacione ad turbam philosophorum , apperethe; where aqua simplex is called venenum, argentum vivum, cinnabar, aqua permanens, gumma, acetum, urina, aqua maris, draco, serpens, etc. And of this poysone the treatyce de phenice , or the philosophers stone, written in Gothyshe rymynge verses dothe saye;
[Page 42]
Moribunda, corporis virus emanabat
Quod maternam faciem candidam fœdabat.
Begyn and Bigott you expounde supersticious hypocrites. Whiche sence I knowe yt maye somewhat beare, because yt sauorethe of the dispositione of those Begins , or Beguines , for that ys the true wrytinge. But this worde Begyn sholde in his owne nature rightlye haue ben expounded supersticious or hipocriticall wemenne, as appereth by Chaucer himselfe, who nombreth them emongst the wemen in the Romante of the Rose when he sayethe,
But empresses, and duchesses,
These queenes, and eke countesses,
These abbasses, and eke Bigins ,
These greate ladyes palasins.
And a little after, in the same Romante, he doth write,
That dame Abstinence streyned
Tooke on a robe of camelyne,
And ganne her gratche as a Bygin.
A large cover-cherfe of thredde
She wrapped all aboute her hedde.
These wemen the Frenche call Beguynes or Nonnes; being in Latyne called Bigrinæ or Biguinæ ; whose originall order, encrease, and contynuance are sett downe by Mathewe Paris
[Page 43]
and Mathewe Westm. But as I sayed, since I haue not my Mathewe Paris at hand, I will sett you downe the wordes of Mathewe Westmynster (otherwise called Flores Historiarum or Florilegus ) in this sorte. Sub eisdem diebus (which was in the yere of Christe 1244, and aboute the 28 of kinge Henry the thirde,) quidam in Alemania precipué se asserentes vitam et habitum relligionis elegisse, in utroque sexu, sed maximé in muliebri, continentiam cuius vite simplicitate profitentes se voto privato Deo obligârunt. Mulieresque, quas Bigrinas vulgaritér vocamus, adeó multiplicate sunt, quód earum numerus in vna ciuitate, scilicét Colonia, ad plus quam mille asseritur ascendisse, etc. After whiche, speakinge yn the yere of Christe 1250 of the encrease of Relligious Orders, he sayeth, Item in Alemania et Francia mulieres, quas Biguinas nominant, etc.
Citrinatione you do not expounde, beinge a terme of Alchymye. Whiche citrinatione is both a color and parte of the philosophers stone. For, as hathe Tractatus Avicenne (yf yt be his and not liber supposititius , as manye of the Alchimicall Workes are foysted in vnder the names of the best-lerned authors and philosophers, as Plato, Aristotle, Avicen, and suche others,) in parte of the 7 chapter: Citrinatio est que fit inter album et rubrum, et non dicitur color perfectus : whiche citrinatione , as sayeth Arnoldus de Nova Villa, lib. i. ca. 5. nihil aliud est quám completa digestio.
[Page 44]
For the worke of the philosophers stone, following the worke of nature, hathe lyke color in the same degree. For as the vrine of manne, being whityshe, sheweth imperfecte digestione; but when he hathe well rested, and slept after the same, and the digestione perfected, the vrine becomethe citrine , or of a depe yellowe color; so ys yt in Alchymye: which made Arnolde call this citrinatione perfect digestion, or the color provinge the philosophers stone broughte almoste to the heighte of perfectione.
Forage in one place you expounde meate , and in another place fodder . Bothe whiche properly cannott stande in this place of Chaucer in the Reves Prologue , where he sayeth, “my fodder is forage.” For yf forrage be fodder , then is the sence of that verse, “my fodder is fodder.” But fodder beinge a generall name for meate gyven to cattle in winter, and of affynytie withe foode applied to menne and beasts, dothe onlye signyfye meate . And so the sence is, “my meate ys forage;” that is, my meate is suche harde and olde provisione as ys made for horses and cattle in winter. For so doth this worde forragium in Latyne signyfye. And so dothe Chaucer meane. For the word next before dothe well shewe yt, when the Reve sayeth,
I am olde, me liste not play for age,
Grasse tyme is donne, my fodder is forrage.
[Page 45]
Yet metaphorically yt may be taken for other than drye horse-meate, although improperlye; as Chaucer hathe, in Sir Topas Ryme , where he maketh yt grasse for his horse, and vseth the worde rather to make vpp the ryme than to shewe the true nature thereof; sayinge,
That downe he layed hym in that place,
To make his steede some solace,
And gyve hym good forage.
Heroner you expounde a certeyne kynde of hawke. Whiche is true: for a gowshawke, sparrowe-hawke, tassell, &c. be kyndes of hawkes. But this heroner is an especiall hawke (of anye of the kyndes of longe winged hawkes) of more accompte than other hawkes are. Because the flighte of the herone ys more daungerous than of other fowles, insomuch that, when she fyndeth her selfe in danger, she will lye in the ayre vppon her backe, and turne vpp her bellye towardes the hawke; and so defile her enymye with her excrementes, that eyther she will blinde the hawke, or ells with her byll or talons pierce the hawkes brest yf she offer to sease vppon her.
The Hyppe is not simplye the redde berrye on the bryer, vnlesse you adde this epitheton and saye, the redde berrye on the swete bryer, (which is the eglantyne,) to distinguyshe yt from the
[Page 46]
comone bryer or bramble bearinge the blacke berrye; for that name bryer ys comone to them bothe; when the hyppe is proper but to one; neither maye yt helpe you that you saye the redd berrye, to distinguyshe yt from the blacke; for the blacke berrye ys also redde for a tyme, and then may be called the redde berrye of the bryer for that time.
Nowell you expounde Christmasse , whiche ys that feaste and more. For yt is that tyme, whiche is properlye called the Advente together with Christmasse and Neweyeres tyde. Wherefore the true etymologye of that worde ys not Christmasse, or the twelve dayes; but yt is God with us , or, oure God ; expressinge to vs the comynge of Christe in the fleshe: whiche peradventure after a sorte, by the figure synecdoche, you may seeme to excuse, placinge then Christmasse a parte of this tyme of Nowell for all the tyme that Nowell conteynethe. For in the same worde is conteyned sometyme xx, but for the most parte thirtye dayes before Christmasse, as well as the Christmasse yt selfe; that worde being deduced, as hathe Will. Postellus in Alphabet. 12 Linguarum , from the Hebrue worde Noell : for thus he writethe:— Noel, sonat Deus noster sive Deus nobis advenit; solitaque est hec vox cantaria plebe ante Christi Natalitia viginti aut triginta dies quodam desiderio.
[Page 47]
Porpherye you expounde marble . Whiche marble ys genus , but porpherye is species . For as there is white and grey marble, so ys there redd marble, whiche is this porpherye , a stone of reddish purple color, distinct or interlaced with white veynes as you may see in the great pillars entringe into the Royall Exchange or Burse in Cornhill.
Sendale you expounde a thynne stuffe lyke cypres. But yt was a thynne stuffe lyke sarcenett, and of a rawe kynde of sylke or sarcenett, but coarser and narrower than the sarcenett nowe ys, as my selfe canne remember.
Trepegett you expounde a ramme to batter walles. But the trepegett was the same as the magonell . For Chaucer calleth yt a trepegett or magonell . Wherefore the trepegett and magonell being all one, and the magonell an instrument to flynge or cast stones (as your selfe expounde yt) into a towne, or against a towne-walles, (an engine not muche vnlyke to the catapulte, an instrumente to cast forthe dartes, stones, or arrowes,) the trepegett must nedes also be an instrumente to cast stones or such lyke against a wall or into a towne, and not a ramme to batter walles; since the ramme was no engine to flinge anye thinge, but by mens handes to be broughte and pushed againste the walles; a thinge farr different in forme from the magonell or catapulte, as appereth
[Page 48]
by Vigetius and Robertus Valturius de Re Militari.
Wiver you expounde not. Wherefore I will tell you, a wyver is a kynde of serpent of good bulke, not vnlyke vnto a dragon, of whose kinde he is; a thinge well knowen vnto the Heraldes, vsinge the same for armes, and crestes, and supporters of manye gentle and noble menne. As the erle of Kent beareth a wiver for his creste and supporters; the erle of Pembroke, a wiver vert for his creste; the erle of Cumberlande, a wiver gules for his supporters.
Autenticke you expounde to be antiquytye . But howe you may seme to force and racke the worde to Chaucers meaninge, I knowe not; but sure I am, the proper signyficatione of autenticke is a thinge of auctoritye or credit allowed by menne of auctoritye , or the originall or fyrste archetypum of any thinge; whiche I muse that you did not remember.
Abandone you expounde libertye ; whiche in all Italiane, Frenche, and Spanishe, signifyeth relinquere , to forsake and leave a thinge; whiche methinketh you most hardely stretche to libertye , vnless you will saye that, when one forsakethe a thinge, he leaveth yt at libertye; whiche ys but a streyned speche, although the Frenche Hollybande,
[Page 49]
not vnderstandinge the true energye of our tongue, hath expounded yt libertye ; whiche may be some warrante vnto you.
VNDER THE TITLE OF YOURE ANNOTACIONS AND CORRECTIONS. In youre Annotacions you describe, out of the Prologues, the vernacle to be a broche or figure, wherein were sett the instruments wherewith Christe was crucyfyed, and withall a napkyn wherein was the printe of his face. But the vernacle did not conteyne the instrumentes of his deathe, but only the clothe wherein was the figure of his face; as I conceve yt with others.
Fo: 1. pa: 2. For Campaneus you wolde reade Capaneus , wherunto I cannott yelde. For although Statius and other Latine authors do call hym Capaneus , yet all the writers of Englande in that age call him Campaneus ; as Gower, in Confessione Amantis, and Lidgate in the Historye of Thebes taken out of Statius, and Chaucer hym selfe in many other places. So that yt semethe they made the pronuntiatione of Campaneus to be the dialecte of our tongue for Capaneus . Besides Chaucer is in this to be pardoned, in that taking his Knightes Tale out of the Thesayde of Bocas, written in Italiane and of late translated into Frenche, doth there, after the Italiane manner, call him Campaneus ; for so the
[Page 50]
Italians pronounce wordes beginninge with cap , with the interposition of the letter m , pronouncinge yt camp . For that whiche the Latins call capitolium , the Italians call campidoglio ; and suche lyke. Wherefore since yt was vniversallye receved in that age to call him Campaneus , let vs not nowe alter yt, but permytte yt to have free passage, accordinge to the pronuntiatione and wrytinge of that age; since, in deducinge wordes from one language to another, there ys often additione and substractione of letters, or of sillables, before, in the middle, and in the ende of those wordes. Whereof infynyte examples mighte be produced, whiche I nowe shunne for brevytye.
Fo: 3. pa: 2. [“Noughte comelye lyke to lovers maladye of Hereos .”] For whiche worde Hereos you reade Eros , i.e. Cupide ; a very good and probable correction, well gathered out of Luciane. But (salva patientia vestra, and reservinge to myselfe better iudgmente hereafter yf I nowe mystake yt,) I wolde, for the printed Hereos of Chaucer, read Heroes . Whiche two wordes onlye differ in misplacinge of the letters; a comone thinge for the printer to do, and the corrector to overpasse. For Arcyte , in this furye of his love, did not shewe those courses of gouernmente which the heroes , or valiante persons, in tymes past vsed; for though they loved, yet that passione did not generallye so farre overrule them (although yt mighte in some one particuler
[Page 51]
personne) as that they lefte to contynewe the valor, and heroicke actions, whiche they before performed. For the Heroes shoulde so love, as that they shoulde not forgett what they were in place, valor, or magnanymytye; whiche Arcite , in this passione, did not observe “lyke to lovers malady of Heroes .” Whereof I coulde produce six hundred examples, (as the proverbe ys,) were yt not that I avoyde tedious prolixytye.
Fo: 6. pa: 2. [“Manye a florence .”] In whiche note you expounde a florence to be ij s Frenche, and a gelder to be the same in Dutche. Wherein you mistake the valewe of the florens , suche as was vsed in Chaucers tyme; whiche taking the name of the workemenne, being Florentynes , (of the terrytorye of Florence in Italye,) were called Florens ; as sterlinge money took their name of Esterlinges , who refyned and coyned the silver in the tyme of kinge Henry the seconde. For two shillinges Frenche ys not equall in valewe (as I nowe take yt) to two shillinges Englishe; and much lesse equall to the florens in Chaucers tyme, whiche was of the value of three shillings, and fowre pence, or half a noble; or, at the leaste, of two shillinges tenne pence farthinge, as apperethe by recorde and historye; some of them being florens regall . Whereof you shall fynde, in the recorde of pellis exitus in the Exchequer in Michelmas terme 41. Ed. 3. this note: Bartholomeo de Burgershe militi in denariis sibi liberatis in parte solutionis
[Page 52]
8000 FLORENORUM de scuto pretii petii iij s . iiij d sibi debitis de illis 30000 FLORENORUM de scuto in quibus Rex tenebatur eidem Bartholomeo pro Comite de Ventadoure prisonario suo apud Bellum de Poyters in guerra capto, et ab eodem Bartholomeo ad opus Regis empto, vt patet per litteras Regis patentes, quas idem Bartholomeus inde penes se habet . In dors. De summa subscripta per breve de magno sigillo, inter mandata de Term. Michaelis de anno 36—xx li . To the valewe whereof agreeth Hipodigma Neustriæ , pa. 127, where, setting downe the ransome of the Frenche kinge taken at Poyters to the valewe of three milliones of florens , he sayeth, “of whiche florens duo valebant vj s . viij d .” These florens the same Walsingham in another place callethe scutes or Frenche crownes , pa. 170, sayinge, Rex quidéGm Francie pro sua redemptione solvit regi Anglie tres milliones SCUTORUM, quorum duo valent vnum Nobile, videlicet, sex solidos et octo denarios . Whiche scutes in lyke manner, in the tyme of kinge Henry the sixte were of the same valewe, as apperethe in Fortescues Commentaries of the Lawes of Englande . But as those florens for the redemptione of the Frenche kinge were of the valewe of half one noble; so at the tyme of that kings reigne there were also one other sorte of florens , not of lyke valewe, but conteyned within the price of ij s . x d . q. called florene regales ; as apperethe in this record, of Easter terme, of pellis exitus before-sayed, where yt is thus
[Page 53]
entred on the sixte of Julye: Guiscardo de Angles. domino de pleyne martyne, in denariis sibi liberatis per manus Walleri Hewett militis in pretio 4000 FLORENORUM REGALIUM pretii petii— ij s . x d . q. de quibus FLORENIS REGALIBUS 7 computantur pro tribus Nobilibus, eidem Guiscardo debitis . Whereby you see the meanest of these florens did exceed the valewe of ij s . Frenche, (although you sholde equall that with ii s . Englishe,) as yt did also in other Countryes. For in the Low Countryes at those dayes yt was much aboute the valewe of iij s . iiij d . beinge halfe a pistolet Italiane or Spanyshe. For so sayethe Heuterius Delphicus, in the Historye of Burgundye , in the lyfe of Philippe le hardye, lyving at that tyme, and sonne to the Frenche kinge taken prisoner by the Englishe. Heuterius' wordes be these: Illustris viri aliorumque nobilium mors adeóG Comitem commovit, vt relicta obsidione exercitus ad commeatus ducendos in proxima loca distribuerit. Decem millibus FLORENORUM ( moneta Belgica est SEMIPISTOLETUM Italicum pendens) pro Anglicani aliorumque nobilium cadaverum redemptione , etc.
Fo: 7. pa: 2. For unseriall you will vs to reade cerriall ; for cerrus is a kynde of tree lyke an oke, bearinge maste; and therefore by your correctione yt sholde be “a garland of greene oke cerriall .” But for the same reasone (because cerrus ys a kynde of oke as ys also the il x ) I judge yt sholde not be redde cerriall , but
[Page 54]
unseriall , that ys, (yf you will nedes have this worde cerriall ,) a garland of greene oke not cerriall , as who sholde saye she had a garland of greene oke, but not of the oke cerriall , and therefore a garlande of oke unseriall , signifyinge a garlande that was freshe and greene, and not of dead wannyshe color as the oke cerriall in some parte ys. For the cerrus , being the tree whiche we comonly call the holme oke, (as Cooper also expoundeth the ilex to be that which we call holme,) produceth tow kyndes; whereof the one hathe greater, and the other lesser acornes; whose leaves beinge somewhat greene on the one syde, and of an over-russett and darkyshe color on the other syde, were not mete for this garland of Emelye, whiche sholde be freshe and greene on everye parte, as were her younge and greene yeres, lyke to the goddesse to whome she sacryfyced, and therefore a garland of greene oke unseriall ; not beinge of oke cerriall . For yf yt had byn oke cerriall , yt wolde haue shewed duskyshe and as yt were of deadyshe leaves, and not freshe and orient as Chaucer wolde haue her garlande. And this for your expositione of unseriall , in some parte; for I wolde suppose that this worde unseriall doth not vnaptly signifye perfectione of color: so that the having a garlande of greene oke unseriall , doth signyfye the oke to be grene and unseriall , that is, (as some do expounde this worde unseriall ,) unsered, unsinged, unwithered, of freshe color, lyke unto
[Page 55]
the oke quercus whiche hath no sered nor withered color in his leafes. And yt was of necessytye that Emelye (sacryfysinge to Diana) must haue a garlande of the greene oke quercus , because that they whiche sacryfyced vnto Diana, otherwise called Hecate, (which name is attribute to Diana, as Natalis Comes affirmeth with Statius in his Achilleis in his first booke sayinge,
Sic vbi virgineis Hecate lassata pharetris,
being Diana adorned with her bowe and arrowes, called also Trivia because Luna, Diana, and Hecate, were all one, whereof Virgil speaketh,
Tergeminamque Hecaten, tria virginis ora Dianæ,)
were adorned with a crowne of the greene oke quercus , because that Hecate was wont to be crowned therewith, as hath Pierius Valerianus in his 51 booke of Hieroglyphes , sayinge, Hecate quoquéG QUERCU coronari solita est . For although quercus be consecrate to Jupiter, because he gave his oracles in the same in Sylva Dodonea, and therefore called Jupiter Dodoneus; yet Antiqutye adorned and crowned Diana Hecate with the same crowne also. Wherefore I conclude, since Emelye had a garlande of greene oke, (as Chaucer of purpose addeth that worde greene to explane unseriall , whiche signyfyeth unsered, unparched, unwithered in every parte, not lyke to the oke
[Page 56]
cerriall, whose leafe on the one syde is duskyshe as though yt were somewhat withered,) that the same word unseriall must stand unamended, as well (as I sayed before) by youre owne correctione and the nature of the worde, as for that Diana, called Hecate, was crowned with the oke quercus and not with the oke cerrus . But yf you obiecte to mee that, in this place, yt must be a garlande of oke cerriall accordinge to the wordes of Chaucer in another place, because that he in The Flower and the Leafe (newely printed by you) hath these wordes;
I see come first all in theire clokes white
A companye that were for delighte:
Chapletts freshe of oke serriall
Newly spronge; and Trompetts they were all;
I denye that therefore in the Knightes Tale yt must be oke serriall . For yt may well bee, that such meane persons as Trompetts might be crowned with so base an oke as the serriall ys, whiche I call base in respecte of the oke quercus (dedicate to the god Jupiter) wherewithe Hecate was crowned, and whereof garlands were gyven to the Romans for their noble deserts in the warres, as apperethe in the quernall crowne gyven to those whiche had saved a cytyzen. Wherefore Chaucer dothe rightly (and of purpose with great iudgment in my conceyte) make a difference in the chaplettes of the Trompettes and the garlande of Emelye, in that the Trompetts chapletts were of
[Page 57]
oke serriall newly spronge, and not come to perfectione, whiche yet yf they had byn perfecte wolde not haue byn so oryent and greene on both sydes as ys the oke quercus, wherewith he wolde haue this Emelye crowned; as was her goddess Hecate (to whom she dyd sacryfyce) accustomed to bee. For so in tymes past (as I sayed before) the sacryfycer should be adorned with garlandes of suche thinges, as were consecrate to the goddes to whome they sacryfyced. For whiche cause also I am not moved, though Caxtone in his seconde editione do call yt an oke serriall . For I knowe (notwithstandinge his fayre prologe of printing that by a true copye) there be manye imperfections in that Booke.
Fo: 9. pa: 1. For everye you will us to reade eyther . But the sence ys good, as well that they dyd ryde on everye syde of hym, as of eyther syde of hym. For they bothe coulde not ryde of everye syde of hym, no more than they both coulde ryde of eyther syde of him; and therefore they two ryding on everye side of hym, canne haue none other constructione than that the one did ryde of the one syde and the other on the other side. And therefore an over-nice correctione, thoughe some coppies do warrant yt.
Fo: 10. pa: 1. For save only the intellecte, you woulde haue us to reade “ and also the intellecte.” But yf you well consider the wordes of Chaucer, (as I haue donne in all the written copyes whiche I haue yet seene,) his meaninge
[Page 58]
ys not that the intellecte was wholy gonne, as yt wolde bee yf you sholde reade “ and also the intellecte” for “ save only the intellecte.” For Chaucers meaninge ys, that all his strength and vitall spirites aboute his outwarde partes were gonne, save only the intellecte or vnderstandinge, whiche remayned sounde and good, as apperethe after by the followinge wordes: For when deathe approched, and that all outwarde senses fayled, he [Arcite] yet cast eye vppon Emelye, remembringe her, though the cheifest vitall spirit of his heart and his strengthe were gonne from hym. But he coulde not haue cast his eye vppon Emelye, yf his intellecte had fayled hym. Yet yf you liste to reade “ and also the intellecte,” yt may after a sorte somewhat be borne withall, notwithstandinge that a pointe at strength is loste; and a parenthesis (Save only the intellecte, without more,) will make the sence good in this sort as I have here pointed yt:
And yet moreouer from his armes two
The vitall strengthe is lost; and all agoo
(Save only the intellecte without more)
That dwelleth in his hart sicke and sore
Gan faylen: When the hart felt death &c.
Fo: 10. pa: 2. For armes straughte you wolde reade yt haughte ; when straughte is more signyficant (and more answerable to Chaucers wordes whiche followeth) than haughte ys. For he speaketh of the bredth and spredinge of the
[Page 59]
boughes or armes or branches of the tree, whiche this worde straughte doth signyfye, and is more aptlye sett downe for stretched than this word haughte , whiche signyfyeth catchinge holde, or holdinge faste, or (yf you will streyne yt againste his nature) stretching on heigh; whiche agreeth not well with Chaucers meanynge. For these be his wordes:
And twentye fadome of bredth armes straughte;
That is to say, the boughes were so broad, &c.
Fo: 11. pa: 1. For all forgotten is his vassalage , you wolde haue vs reade “for all forgotten is then his visagè ;” a thinge mere impertinente. For the forgettinge of his visage and personage is not materiall, nor [is it] regarded of anye to haue his face forgotten; but yt is muche materiall (and so ys Chaucers meanynge) that his vassalage , and the good service donne in his youthe, shold be forgotten when he waxethe olde. And therefore yt must be “his vassalage forgotten;” as presently after Chaucer sayeth, Better for a manne to dye when he is yonge, and his honor in price, than when he is olde, and the service of his youthe forgotten; whiche I coulde dilate and prove by manye examples; but I cannott stande longe vppon euerye pointe, as well for that I wolde not be tedious vnto you, as for that leysure serveth me not there- unto.
[Page 60]
Fo: 13. pa: 1. For lothe you bidde vs reade leefe ; which annotacione neded not to haue byn there sett downe, because the verye worde in the texte is lefe.
Fo: 14. pa: 1. For knocked you reade coughed ; but, the circumstance considered, (although they may both stande,) yt is more probable that he [Absolon] knocked at her [the Carpenter's wife's] windowe, than that he coughed . For although those wordes “with a semely sownde” may haue relation to the voyce, yet they may as well and with as much consonancye haue reference to a semely and gentle kynde of knockinge at the windowe as to the voyce; and so his meanynge was by that sounde to wake her, whiche wolde rather be by the noyse of a knocke than of a coughe. For so he determyned before to knocke, as apperethe in these verses, when he sayed,
So mote I thryve, I shall at cockes crow
Full privily knocke at his windowe:
And so apperethe by the Tale afterwards that he knocked, as he did before, although he coughed also at the latter tyme; for he knocked twyce.
Fo: 23. pa: 2. For Surrye you read Russye . True yt is, that some written copies haue Russye , and some Surrye . And therefore indifferent after the written copies, and some auncient printed copies before my fathers editione. But yf I shall interpone my opynione, I wolde more willingly
[Page 61]
(for this tyme) receve Surrey ; because yt is most lykelye that the Tartarians whiche dwelt at Sara (a place yet well knowen, and bordering vppon the lake Mare Caspium,) are nerer to Sorria or the countryes adioynynge called Syria , than to Russia . For as Hato the Armeniane, in his Tartarian Historye, sayeth, the cyttye of Sara was auncyently the famous cyttye of the countrye of Cumania; and the Tartarians obteyned the kingdome of Syria in the yere 1240, whiche must be in the tyme of the fyrst Tartarian emperor called Caius canne , beinge (as I suppose) he whome Chaucer nameth Cambiuscan , for so ys [it in] the written copies, such affynytye is there betwene those two names. And, as I gather, yt was after that tyme that the Tartarians had warres in Russia . But I leave yt indifferent at this tyme, meanynge further to consider of yt.
Fo: 31. pa: 2. For these wordes, “that may not saye naye,” you reade “ there may no wighte say naye.” Both whiche are good, and both founde in written copies; and yet the firste will better stande, in my conceyte; because [the king of Faerie] there speakinge to his wyfe, he urgeth her that she cannott denye yt, because you knowe yt and experience teacheth yt; so that these wordes, “that cannott say naye,” must be taken as spoken of his wyfes knowledge, and so as good or rather better than “ there may no wighte saye naye;” consideringe that these wordes “ that cannott saye naye,” do signyfye “ whoe cannott
[Page 62]
saye naye,” in such sorte that this relatyve ( that ) meanynge ( whoe ) must haue reference to his antecedente, i.e. this worde wyfe.
Fo: 35. pa: 2. For “He cleped yt Valerye and Theophraste ,” you saye some wolde haue vs reade “Valery and his Paraphraste .” But as you haue left yt at libertee to the reader to iudge, so I thinke yet must nedes be Theophraste , as the author [of] Policraticon in his eighte booke, ca. II. (from whome Chaucer borrowethe almost worde for worde a great parte of the Wyfe of Bathes Prologe ,) doth vouche yt. For the author of that booke, Johannes Sarisburiensis, lyvinge in the tyme of Henrye the seconde, sayethe, Fertur authore Hieronimo Aureolus Theophrasti liber de nuptiis, in quo quœritur an vir sapiens ducat vxorem, etc. And the Frenche Molinet, moralizinge the Romant of the Rose, and turnynge it out of verse into prose, writeth, Ha si i'eusse creu Theophraste , &c. Oh, yf I had beleved Theophraste, I had never maried womanne; for he doth not holde hym wise that marieth anye womanne, be she fayre, foule, poore, or riche; as he sayeth in his booke Aureolle; whiche verye wordes Chaucer doth recyte.
Fo: 38. pa: 2. For this worde Countrye you will vs to reade Coventrye . But in my written copies yt is, “in my Countrye ,” whiche I holde the truer and for the sence as good yf not better.
Fo: 41. pa: 1. This worde makethe is corrected by you, who for the same do place wakethe ;
[Page 63]
whiche cannott well stande. For Chaucers wordes being, “this maketh the fende,” do signyfye (by a true conuersione after the dialecte of our tongue, whiche with beautye vseth suche transmutacione as I coulde gyve you many pretye instances of,) that the sence thereof ys, “the fende makethe this.” For whiche Chaucer vseth these wordes by transpositione, accordinge to the rhetoricall figure Hyperbaton. “This makethe the fende:” Whiche this? Anger: for that cometh, ys made, or occasioned, by the devill. But yf yt sholde be wakethe , then must the sence bee, that this (whiche is the anger he speakethe of before) waketh the fende ; whiche oure offences cannot do; because he cannott be waked, in that he neyther slumbreth nor slepeth, but alwayes watcheth and howrely seeketh occasione to destroye us, lyke a roringe lyone. But yf you will nedes saye “this waketh the fende,” that is, by conuersione after this manner, “the fende waketh this,” whiche signyfyeth the fende waketh or styrreth this in manne; yt may, after a harde and over-streyned sorte, beare some sence, whiche yet hath not that energye, spirit, or lyfe, which haue Chaucers wordes, “this maketh the fende.” Whiche wordes are in my written copies, and in all written and auncient printed copies whiche I have yet seene.
Fo: 96. pa: 2. Vppon these wordes, “O Hughe of Lincolne sleyne also, &c.” You saye, that in the 29. H. 3. eightene Jewes were broughte from Lincolne, and hanged for crucyfyinge a childe
[Page 64]
of eight yeres olde. Whiche facte was in the 39. H. 3. so that you mighte verye well haue sayed, that the same childe of eighte yeres olde was the same Hughe of Lincolne; of whiche name there were twoe, viz. thys younger Seinte Hughe, and Seinte Hughe bishoppe of Lincolne, whiche dyed in the yere 1200, long before this litle Seinte Hughe. And to prove [that] this childe of eighte yeres olde and that yonge Hughe of Lincolne were but one, I will sett downe two auctoryties out of Mathewe Paris and Walsinghame; whereof the fyrste wryteth, that in the yere of Christe 1255, beinge the 39. of Henrye the 3, a childe called Hughe was sleyne by the Jewes at Lyncolne, whose lamentable historye he delyvereth at large; and further, in the yere 1256, being 40. Hen. 3, he sayeth, Dimissi sunt quieti 24 Judœi à Turri London. qui ibidem infames tenebantur compediti pro crucifixione SANCTI Hugonis Lincolne . All whiche Thomas Walsingham, in Hypodigma Neustria confirmeth; sayinge, A o . 1255. Puer quidam Christianus, nomine Hugo , à Judœis captus, in opprobrium Christiani nominis crudelitèr est crucifixus.
Fo: 86. pa: I. [Where the sunne is in his ascensione, &c.] You will us to reade for the same,
Ware the sunne in his ascensione
Ne fynde you not replete of humors hotte,
For yf yt doe, &c.
[Page 65]
but, saving correctione, the former sence is good: for these wordes, Where the sunne is in his as censione , must haue relatione to the wordes of the verse before,
Ye be righte colericke of complexione;
and then is the sence, that she [the fair Pertelote] willed hym to purge, for that he was righte (that is, extremclye and in the highest degree) colericke of complexione, where (whiche signyfyeth when ) the sunne is in his ascensione. Wherefore he must take heede, that he did not fynde hym repleate (at that tyme of the sunnes being in his ascensione) of hotte humors; for yf he did, he shoulde surelye haue an ague. And this will stand with the wordes Where the sunne is in his ascensione , taking where for when , as yt is often vsed. But yf you mislyke that glosse, and will begyn one new sence, as yt is in some written copies, and saye, Ware the sunne in his ascensione ne fynde you not repleate, &c. yet yt cannott bee that the other wordes, for yf yt doe , canne answer the same, because this pronoune relative yt cannot haue relatione to this worde you , which wente before in the lyne, Ne fynde you not repleate of humors hotte . So that yf you will nedes reade ware for where , yet the other parte of the followinge verse must nedes be, “for yf you doe,” and not “for yf yt doe;” vnlesse you will saye that this worde yt must haue relatione to these
[Page 66]
wordes, the sunne in his ascensione , whiche yt cannott have, those wordes goinge two lynes before, and the pronoune you interposed betwene the same and that his correlative yt . Wherefore these wordes, for yf yt doe , must nedes stande as they did before, though you will correcte “ Where the sunne &c.” and saye “ Ware the sunne &c.” Whiche yf you will nedes haue, you must correcte the rest in this sorte:
Ware the sunne in his ascensione
That yt fynde you not repleat of humors hotte,
For yf yt doe, &c.
But this correctione (savinge, as I sayed, correctione,) semeth not so good as the former texte.
Fol: 86. pa: 2. Vppon these wordes, Lo, in the lyfe of Kenelme we reade , you saye that Kenelme was sleyne by his sister Quenda ; whiche shoulde be Quendrida ; as Williame of Malmsberye and Ingulphus have. Whiche Quendrida dothe signyfye Quene Drida; as the author of the Antiquytyes of Seint Albons and of the Abbotts thereof (supposed to be Mathewe Paris) dothe expounde yt. For that author, speakinge of the wyfe of Offa the greate kinge of Mercia, (a wicked and proude womanne because she was of the stocke of Charles the greate,) dothe saye, that she was called Drida, and being the kings wyfe was termed Quendrida, id est, Regina Drida.
[Page 67]
Fo: 87. p: I. Vppon these wordes of Taurus was fortye degrees and one , you saye that this place ys misprinted, as well in not namynge of the signe, as of the misreckonynge of the degrees, that the two and twentye of Marche the sunne is in Aries, and that but eleven degrees or thereaboutes, and hathe in all but thirtye degrees. In whiche, in seminge to correcte the former printe (whiche in truthe deseruethe amendement, but not in that order,) you seme to mee to erre, as farre as heauen and erthe, in mistakinge Chaucers meanynge and his wordes, as well for the daye of the monthe, as for the signe. For where you suppose that Chaucer meanethe the two and twentithe daye of Marche, you mistake yt. For although yt should be the 22 of the monthe, as the printed booke hathe; yet canne yt not be the 22 daye of Marche, but must of necessytye be the two and twentythe of Aprille; and so the signe Taurus trulye named. But first I must saye, the number of the dayes is misprinted; for where yt is twentye dayes and two, yt must be (and so are my written copies) thirtye dayes and two ; whiche must be the seconde of Maye, as you shall well see by the wordes of Chaucer. For whether you reckon thirtye two dayes, withe the truthe, as hathe the written copye; or twentye two dayes, with the printe; yet must you begynne to reckon them from after the last of Marche. For so dothe Chaucer; saying Marche was com pleate, in these wordes:
[Page 68]
When the monthe in whiche the worlde began,
That hight March, when God first made man,
Was complete, and passed were also
Since Marche byganne, &c.
Whereby you see, that you must begynne to reckon the number of dayes from the tyme of Marche complete; and then woulde the signe fall out to be in Taurus . Yf you holde you to the printe for the 22 daye after Marche, which is the 22 daye of Aprill in which the sunne is aboute xi degrees in Taurus; or to the written copye of thirtye two dayes, which is the seconde of Maye at what tyme the sunne ys also aboute some xxi degrees in Taurus; the signe is not misreckoned or misnamed, as you suppose. Neither canne these wordes, Since Marche beganne , helpe you to reckon them from the begynnynge of Marce, as you seme to doo; because they must answere and be agreeable to the former wordes of Chaucer, whiche sayethe Marche was complete; and, for that we shoulde not doubte thereof, he addethe also farther, and passed were also since Marche beganne ; where the worde beganne ys misprinted for begonne , that is, since Marche be gonne , this word begonne being put for is gonne , or gonne by , or departed . So that the genuyne sence thereof is, When March was complete, and also were passed, since March is gonne, or gonne by, or departed. For, in many olde Englishe wordes, this syllable be is sett before; to make
[Page 69]
yt more signyficant, and of force; as for mone we saye bemone ; for sprincled, besprincled ; for dewed, bedwed , &c. as in this case for gonne ys sett downe begonne . But although there be no misnaminge of the signe, yet yt is true the degrees of the signe are misreckoned; the error whereof grewe, because the degree of the signe is made equall with the degree of the sunne ascended above the horizon, beinge at that tyme xli degrees in heighte from the horizon. But to remedye all this, and to correcte yt accordinge as Chaucer sett yt downe in myne and other written copies; and that yt may stande with all mathematicall proportione, whiche Chaucer knewe and observed there; the print must be corrected after those written copies (whiche I yet holde for sounde till I maye disprove them) having these wordes:
When that the month in whiche the worlde beganne,
That hight Marche, when God first made manne,
Was complete, and passed were also
Since Marche begonne thirty dayes and two;
Befell that Chanteclere in all his pride,
His seven wives walkinge him beside,
Caste vp his eyen to the bright sunne,
That in the signe of Taurus had yrunne
Twentye degrees and one and somewhat more;
And knewe by kynde and by none other lore
That yt was pryme, and crewe with blisful steven:
The sunne, quoth he, is clomben vp on heaven
Fortye degrees and one, and more, ywis, &c.
[Page 70]
And that this shoulde be mente xxxij dayes after Marche, and the seconde of Maye, there be manye reasons, besides those that Chaucer nameth; which are, that the sunne was not farre from the middle of his ascensione, and in the signe Taurus. Further, since I am now in Chanteclere's discourse, I must speake of one worde in the same deservinge correctione, whiche I see you overslipped. And because I thinke you knewe not what to make of yt, (as indede by the printinge few menne canne vnderstand yt,) I will sett downe the correctione of the same; being the worde Mereturicke , farr corrupted for Mercenricke , in Saxon Enlarge this image.
which is the kingdome of Merciœ for so was Kenelme the sonne, and Kenulphus the father, both kinges of Mercia; the one reignynge 36 yeres, and the other murdred by his sister Quendrida, as ys before noted. And that yt is the kingdome of Mercia, the etymon of the worde doth teache; for Enlarge this image.
in the Saxon tongue signyfyeth a kingdome; Enlarge this image.
signyfyeth markes or boundes or marches of countryes: So that Mercenricke is regnum Merciœ , or the kingdome of Mercia, or of the boundes so called, because all the other Saxons bounded vppon the same, and that lykewise vppon them; since that kingdome did lye in the middle of England, and conteyned most of the shires thereof.
Fo: 90. pa: 2. For pilloure , you will vs to reade pellure , signifyinge furres. But although the Clergye ware furres, and some of them had
[Page 71]
their outwarde ornamentes thereof when they came to their service, as the Chanons had their grey amises; yet in this place, to shewe the proude and stately ensignes of the Clergye, he there nameth the Popes crowne, and the Cardinalls Pilloures , yf I be not deceved. For euery Cardinall had, for parte of his honorable ensignes borne before hym, certein silver pillars; as had Cardinall Wolsey, in the tyme of kinge Henrye the eighte; and Cardinall Pole, in my memory. So that pilloure in that place is better than pellure ; because pilloures were a note of more pride and maiestye (against whiche the Plowmanne dothe enveye in those wordes,) than in the wearinge of furres.
Fo: 90. pa: 2. For these wordes, With change of many manner of meates, you woulde have vs reade, They eate of many manner of meates. Touchinge whiche, although the sence stande well, yet sure Chaucer followeth this matter in many staves together with this prepositione cum , (with,) and this coniunctione et , (and;)—as, “ With pride misledd the poore, and with money filled manye a male, &c.” so he contynuethe yt still with that prepositione, “ with change of many meates;” whiche is as good as the other; for euery one knoweth Chaucers meanynge to be that they eate of many meates, when they haue change of many meates; for why shoulde they haue change of meates, but for varyetye to please the palates taste in eatynge. In the next staffe, for myters moe then one or two
[Page 72]
you teache vs to reade, “myters they weare mo then one or two;” whiche, methinkethe, nedeth not. For the wearinge of their myters is included in these wordes, And myters more then one or two . Whiche wordes are curteyled for the verse his cause, that the same mighte kepe an equall proportone and decorum in the verse, whiche would be lengthened one foote or sillable more than the other verse, yf your readinge shoulde stande. But yf you saye, that in this and other thinges I am overstreyghte-laced and too obstinately bente to defende the former printed editione, in that I woulde rather allowe an imperfect sence, and suche as must be vnderstoode when yt ys not fully expressed, than a plain style; I will answere withe a grounde of the lawe, quòd frustrà fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora , and quod subintelligitur non deest . Wherefore yt is nedelesse to make that playner by additone of wordes, when yt maye be as well conceyved in any reasonable mens vnderstandinge without such additone. But on these and suche petit matters, I will not nowe longe insiste, (being things of no greate momente,) vntill I haue further examyned more written copyes to trye, whether wee shall reade the olde texte or your newe correctione.
Fo: 122. pa: 2. The lordes sonne of Windsore . Vppon these wordes you saye, this maye seme strange bothe in respecte that yt is not in the Frenche, as also for that there was no lorde Windsore at those dayes. But yt semeth to me
[Page 73]
more strange that these wordes shoulde seme strange to you, not to be in the Frenche, where you shall fynde them. For thus hathe the Frenche written Romante , as maye appere in the old Frenche vsed at the tyme when the Romante was composed, in this sorte:
Pris a Franchise lez alez
Ne sai coment est appelles,
Beaus est et genz, se il fut ores
Fuiz au seigneur de Guindesores:
Whiche is thus englished: Next to Franchise went a young bacheler, I knowe not howe he was called, he was fayre and gentle, as yf he had byn sonne to the lorde of Windsore Where in olde Frenche this word fuiz (vsed here as in manye places of that booke) is placed for that whiche we wryte and pronounce at this daye for filz or fitz , in Englishe sonne . And that it is here so mente, you shall see in the Romante of the Rose turned into prose, moralized by the French Molinet, and printed at Paris in the yere 1521, who hathe the same verses in these wordes in prose: A Franchise s'estoit prins vn ieune bacheler de qui ne scay le nome, fort bell, en son temps filz du seigneure de Guindesore . Whiche you mighte have well seene, had you but remembered their orthographie, and that the Latyne, Italiane, Frenche, and Spanyshe have no doble w , as the Dutche, the Englishe, and suche as haue affynyntye with the Dutche; since they vse for doble w
[Page 74]
(a letter comone to vs) these two letters gu , as in Gulielmus , which we wryte Willielmus ; in guerra , which we call and write warre ; in Gualterus , which we write Walter ; in guardeine , which we pronounce and write wardeyne ; and suche lyke; accordinge to whiche in the Frenche yt is Guindesore for Windesore . For your other coniectures, why that Chaucer shoulde inserte the lordes son of Windesore, they are of no great momente; neque adhue constat that Chaucer translated the Romante, when Windsor Castle was in buildinge. For then I suppose that Chaucer was but younge; whereon I will not stande at this tyme, no more than I will that there was no lord Windsore in those dayes; although I suppose that Sir William Windsore, being then a worthye knighte and of great auctorytye in Englande and in the partes beyond the seas vnder the kinge of Englande, mighte be lord Windsore, of whom the Frenche tooke notice, being in those partes, and by them called seigneure de Windesore , as euery gouernor was called seigneure emongst them. But whether he were a baron or no in Englande, I cannott yet saye; because I haue not my booke of Somons of Barons to Parliamente in my handes at this instante.
Fo: 171. pa: 2. By ordall , &c. Vppon whiche you write thus. “ Ordalia is a tryall of chastytye, through the fyre, as did Emma, mother of the Confessor; or ells over hotte burnynge coulters of yron, barefoote, as did Cunegunde, &c.” But
[Page 75]
in this describinge definitione you have comytted manye imperfectons. First, that ordall was a tryall by fyre , whiche is but a species of the ordall; for ordalium was a tryall by fyre and water . Secondlye, that yt was a tryall of chastity , whiche was but parcell thereof; for the ordall was a tryall for manye other matters. Thirdlye, you saye yt was by goinge through the fyre, when the fyery ordall was onlye by goinge on hotte shares or coulters, or by holdinge a hotte pece of yrone in the hande, and not going through the fyre. Fourthlye, that Emma, mother to Edwarde the Confessor, receved this tryall by goinge through the fyre: but she passed not through the fyre as you bringe her for an example of your ordall, but passed barefoote vppon nyne burnynge shares, fowre for her selfe, and fyve for Alwyne bishoppe of Winchester, with whome she was suspected of incontynencye; whiche historye you maye see at large in Ranulphus Higden, in his Policronicon , li: 6. ca: 23, and in other authors; of whiche ordall I coulde make a longe and no comone discourse; of the manner of consecrating the fyre and water; how yt was vsed emongst the Saxons before, and the Normans since, the Conqueste; and of many other thinges belonging vnto yt. But I will passe them ouer, and onlye deliver to you a thinge knowen to fewe; how this ordall was contynued in Englande in the tyme of kinge Johne, as appereth in Claus. 17. Johis, m. 25, vntill
[Page 76]
yt was taken awaye by the Courte of Rome; and after that, in Englande, by the auctorytye of kinge Henrye the thirde, whereof you shall fynde in the Towre Patent . 3. H. 3. mem. 5, where yt speakethe of iudgmente and tryall by fyre and water to be forbydden by the Church of Rome, and that yt shoulde not be vsed here in Englande; as apperethe in the wordes of that record; Illis verò qui mediis criminibus rectati sunt, et quibus competeret iudicium ignis vel aquœ si non esset prohibitum, et de quibus si regnum nostrum abiurarent nulla fieret postea maleficiendi suspitio, regnum nostrum abiurent &c.
Fo: 246. pa: I. Speaking of the storke , you saye that Chaucers wordes “ wreaker of adulterye” shoulde rather be “ bewrayer of adulterye;” whiche in truth according to one propryetye of his nature may be as you saye, but according to another propryetye of his nature yt should be “the wreaker of adulterye,” as Chaucer hathe it; for he ys a greater wreaker of the adulterye of his owne kynde and female than the bewrayer of the adulterye of another kynde, and of his hostesse on the toppe of whose howse he harboreth. For Aristotle sayeth (and Bartholomeus de proprietatibus rerum, li: 12. cap. 8. with many other auctors) that yf the stroke by any meanes perceve that his female hath broked spousehedde, he will no more dwell with her, but stryketh and so cruelly beateth her, that he
[Page 77]
will not surcease vntill he hathe killed her yf he maye, to wreake and revenge that adulterye.
These and suche lyke in my conceyte are worthye to be touched in your Annotacons , besides other matters whiche you haue not handled; where-of (because tyme requirethe after all this tedious treatyce to drawe to an ende) I will not now treate; but onlye speake a litle more of fyve especiall thinges worthye the animadversone . Of whiche the fyrste ys, that you make the Plowmans Tale to go next before the Persons Tale , suffering the Persons corrupted Prologue to passe with this begynnynge, By that the Plowmanne had his Tale ended ; when all written copies, (whiche I coulde yet see,) and my fathers editione, haue yt, By that the Manciple had his Tale ended . And because my father coulde not see by any Prologues of the other Tales, (whiche for the most parte shewe the dependancye of one Tale vppon another,) where to place the Plowmans Tale , he putt yt alter the Persons Tale , whiche, by Chaucers owne wordes, was the last Tale; as apperethe by the Persons Prologue, where the hoste sayeth, that euery manne had tolde his Tale before . So that the Plowmans Tale must be sett in some other place before the Manciple and Persons Tale , and not as yt ys in the last editone.
Another thinge ys, that yt would be good that Chaucers proper Workes were distinguished from the adulterat and suche as were not his; as the
[Page 78]
Testamente of Cressyde , the Letter of Cupide , and the Balade begynnynge I have a ladye whereso she be , &c. whiche Chaucer never composed, as may sufficientlye be proved by the things themselves.
The THIRDE MATTER ys, that in youre epistle dedicatorye to Sir Roberte Cecil you saye, “This Booke when yt was first published in printe was dedicate to kinge Henrye the eighte.” But that is not so. For the firste dedicatione to that kinge was by my father, when diverse of Chaucers Workes had byn thrise printed before; whereof two editions were by Willm Caxtone, the firste printer of Englande, who first printed Chaucers Tales in one columne in a ragged letter, and after in one columne in a better order; and the thirde editione was printed, as farre as I remember, by Winkin de Worde or Richarde Pinson, the seconde and thirde printers of Englande, as I take them. Whiche three editons beinge verye imperfecte and corrupte occasioned my father (for the love he oughte to Chaucers learnyng) to seeke the augmente and correctone of Chaucers Workes, whiche he happily fynyshed; the same being, since that tyme, by often printing much corrupted. Of this matter I shoulde have spoken first of all, because yt is the first imperfectone of your paynfull and comendable labors. Yet because the proverb ys Better late than never , I hold yt better to speake of yt here then not at all.
[Page 79]
The FOURTHE THINGE ys, that, in the Catalogue of the Auctors, you haue omitted many auctors vouched by Chaucer; and therefore did rightlye intitle yt, Most, and not All, of the Auctors cited by Geffrye Chaucer.
The FYFTE MATTER ys in the Romante of the Rose , fo. 144, that the worde Haroldes [or Haroltes ] in this verse,
My kinge of Haroltes shalte thou be,
must, by a metathesis or transpositione of the letters, be Harlotes , and not Haroltes , and the verse thus,
My kinge of Harlotes shalt thou be.
And so ys yt in the editone of Chaucer's Works, printed in anno Domini 1542, accordinge to the Frenche moralizatione of Molinet, fo. 149. where he is called “roye des Ribauldes ,” whiche is, the kinge of Ribaldes or Harlottes or evill and wicked persons; an officer of great accompte in tymes paste, (and yet vsed in the Courte of France but by another name,) in some parte beinge the office of the marshall of Englande. All whiche, because you shall not thinke I dreame, (though yt may seme strange to the ignorant to have so greate an officer intituled of suche base persons as to be called kinge or governor of Ribauldes ,) you shall heare Johes Tyllius (in his
[Page 80]
seconde booke De Rebus Gallicis vnder the title de prefecto pretorio regis) confirme in these wordes: In domesticis regum constitutionibus, quos proximo capite nominavimus, fit mentio regis ribaldorum , officii domestici, quem semper oportet stare extra portam pretorii , &c. And a litle after the explanynge of their office, he addeth; sic autem appellantur, quia iam tum homines perditi ribaldi , et ribaldÆ mulieres puelqueœ perditœ vocantur . regis nomen superiori aut iudici tribuitur, quemadmodum magnus Cubicularius dicitur Rex Mercatorum , &c. Where he maketh the Regem Ribaldorum an honorable officer for manye causes, as Vincentius Luparius in his fyrste booke of the Magistrates of France doth also, vnder the title of Rex Ribaldorum et Provostus Hospitii ; makinge the iudex pretorianus and this rex ribaldorum or provostus hospitii to seme all one; addinge further (after manye other honorable partes belonginge to this office) that meretricibus aulicis hospitia assignare solebat . In whiche pointe, bothe for orderinge and correctinge the harlottes and evill persons followinge the Courte of Englande, (whiche is the duty of the Marshall,) the Frenche and wee agree. Wherefore, touching that parte, you shall heare somewhat of the Marshalls office sett downe and founde in the Customes, whiche Thomas of Brothertone (sonne to kinge Edwarde the fyrste) challenged to his office of Marshalrye; where, emongst other thinges, are these
[Page 81]
wordes: Eorum (whiche was of the Marshalls deputyes executinge that he should ells do hym selfe) virgatam à meretricibus prohibere et deliberare ; et habet, ex consuetudine, Mariscallus ex quâlibet meretrice communi infra metas hospitii inventâ iiij d . primo die. Quœ, si iterum inventa in Ballivâ suâ inveniatur, capiatur; et coram Seneschallo inhibeantur ei hospitia Regis et Reginœ et liberorum suorum, ne iterum ingrediatur , &c. And so afterwarde shewethe what shall be done to those women, yf they be founde agayne in the Kinges Courte, in suche sorte, that, as by Tillius, this Rex Ribaldorum his auctorytye was over homines perditos, mulieres puellasque perditas : And that yt was, by Luparius, to assigne to Ribaldes lodginge out of the Courte, (for so modestye willeth vs to vnderstande, because they should not offende and infecte the Courte with their sighte and manners,) so ys yt our Marshalls office to banyshe those harlottes the Courte, and bestowe them in some other place, where they might be lesse annoyance. Wherefore I conclude with the Frenche, and the former editone of Chaucer in the yere of Christe 1542, that False Semblance was of righte to be made kinge of Harlottes , who woulde mightely be offended to haue them holden of the conditions of False Semblance. Nowe here be nugœ in the Romante of the Rose , I cannott (as the proverb ys) take my hand from the table, fyndinge so manye oversightes in the two last editiones, but must speake
[Page 82]
of one thing more, deserving correctione, in these wordes of the Romante, fo. 116 of the last impressone:
Amidde saw I Hate stonde,
That for wrathe and yre and onde
Semed to be a Minoresse ;
Where this worde Minoresse shoulde be Moueresse , signyfyinge a mover or styrrer to debate. For these be the Frenche verses in the oldest written copye that euer was to be founde in Englande, yf my coniecture fayle me not, by the age of the Frenche wordes, which are these;
Euz euz le milieu vi Hayne,
Qui de courouz et datayn
Sembla bien estre moueresse ,
Et courouse et teucerresse.
Beinge thus englyshed, as of righte they oughte, accordinge to the Frenche:
Amydde sawe I Hate stonde,
That of wrathe and yre and onde
Semed well to be mooveresse ,
An angry wighte and chyderesse.
Whiche word mooveresse the learned Molinet, in his moralization of that Romant, doth turne into ducteresse, a leader or leadresse ; so that they agree yt shoulde not be a minoresse , but a mooveresse
[Page 83]
or leadresse of and to anger and yre; anye of whose wordes will as well and rather better fitt the sence and verse of Chaucer, and better answer the Frenche originall and meanynge, than the inserted worde Minoresse.
Thus hoping that you will accepte in good and frendlye parte these my whatsoever conceytes vttered vnto you, to the ende Chaucers Workes by much conference and many iudgmentes mighte at lenghthe obteyne their true perfectone and glorye, as I truste they shall, yf yt please God to lend me tyme and leysure to reprinte, correcte, and comente the same after the manner of the Italians who have largely comented Petrarch; I sett end to these matters; comyttinge you to God, and me to your curtesye.
Clerkenwell Greene,
the xvi of december 1599.
Your lovinge frende,
FRANCIS THYNNE.
$$$
