An Inquiry Into The Alleged Anti-Poetical ...
Author: Mackay, Charles.
Publication info: Egeria, Or, the Spirit Of Nature and Other Poems . xx, 204 p. London: David Bogue, 1850.

An Inquiry Into The Alleged Anti-Poetical Tendencies Of The Present Age [in, Egeria, or The Spirit of Nature; And Other Poems. By Charles Mackay]
[Page ]
AN INQUIRY INTO THE ALLEGED ANTI-POETICAL TENDENCIES OF THE PRESENT AGE. Though it may look like a truism to assert that poetry has been the preacher of virtue, the inciter of heroism, and the refiner of society; yet the fact needs repeating, in consequence of the misconception that seems to have arisen on the true nature of poetry and the duty of the poet. Modern civilization is said to be weary of poetry; or, if not wearied with the poets of past ages, to be quite contented with them, and to wish for no more. The very name of poet has latterly been received with a sneer. The poet has been thought a trifler; the obstinate devotee of a defunct art, which, in its most vigorous time, was only fitted for the amusement of the idle and the frivolous. This misconception has arisen from various causes; partly from the ignorance or indifference of critics and philosophers; partly from the more unpardonable indifference of some, not unworthy of the name of poets, who have depreciated their own calling; and, in a still greater degree, from the incompetence of the vast multitude of persons who have been styled poets without the slightest right to the title—mere verse-makers, who have thrown discredit upon the name, not knowing that the hold of poetry upon the fancy and the imagination is secondary to its sway over the heart and the intellect, and that the true poet can preach and prophecy as well as sing.
Lord Bacon did some harm in this respect. Being more conversant with the pretensions of the rhymers of his day than with the performances of the poets, he misstated the whole object of poetry. In his famous Essay on Truth , he asserted that the proper clement of poetry was fiction , as distinguished from, and the opposite
[Page x]
of, truth . “One of the later schools of the Grccians,” said he, “is at a stand to think what should be in it, that men should love lies, where neither they make for pleasure, as with poets , nor for advantage, as with the merchant ; but for the lie's sake. But I cannot tell: this same truth is a naked and open daylight that doth not show the masques, and mummeries, and triumphs of the world half so stately and daintily as candlelight. Truth may, perhaps, come to the price of a pearl, that showeth best by day, but it will not rise to the price of a diamond or a carbuncle, that showeth best in varied lights. A mixture of a lie doth ever add a pleasure . One of the fathers, in great severity, called poesy, ‘the wine of demons,’ because it filleth the imagination, and yet it is but with the shadow of a lie.” So said the great philosopher; and so too many have believed, because they were told to believe by one who spoke with authority. Lord Bacon did not reflect on the abuse of this word, LIE . He , of all men, ought not to have forgotten what he so well know, that a fiction is not necessarily a LIE . He should have remembered that fables are truths to the wise. Plato, though he would have banished poets from his ideal republic, meaning thereby the writers of licentious and mischievous plays, and not the real poets, had more correct notions of the sublimity and divinity of poetry. He said that “ poetry comes nearer to vital truth than history .” And this, indeed, is the secret source of the power and grandeur of poetry. The highest poetry approaches nearest to vital truth; and poetry is only good and beautiful, and worthy to be loved and admired, in proportion as it identifies itself with the truth. No truth can be alien or inappropriate to it. It embraces all things, and has no other bounds than the aspirations of the soul of man, its knowledge and enjoyment of the actual, and its hopes of the possible. While the world has thus been led astray by inconsiderate criticism, and while rhymers have written and published piles of wearisome books, founded upon this misconception, it is no wonder that poetry has fallen into some disfavour with men who have something else to think of and to do than to read mere fictions, without any soul of truth; inane repetitions, teaching nothing, containing nothing, and as worthless as Lord Bacon imagined all
[Page xi]
poetry to be. While such ideas have been considered criticism, the province of poetry has been restricted as a necessary consequence. The poet, too commonly by his own consent, has been tethered with a critical string. Criticism has said to him, “You shall not touch upon religion; that is not within your province. You shall not meddle with politics; they are allen to you. You shall not travel into the regions of science; for science and poetry are antagonistic. You may listen to the birds singing, the streams flowing, or the sea roaring; you may make love verses, or write pastorals; you may be passionate or musical, or merry, or melancholy, if you will. All you have to do is to amuse us, and leave serious subjects alone.” Dr. Johnson, in his Life of Akenside , informs us, that “with the philosophical or religious tenets of the author he had nothing to do ; his business was with his poetry .” And this he said, although his poetry could not be properly considered without the politics and religion which gave it a colour. Again, in his Life of Dr. Watts , he hinted, what is known to have been his belief, that good poetry could not be written upon a religious topic. “It is sufficient for Watts,” said he, “to have done better than others, what no man has done well.” To introduce politics into poetry is thought to be wrong by many critics, who would think you injured them if you questioned their acuteness. “The union of politics with poetry,” say they, “is always hurtful to the politics, and fatal to the poetry.” In fact, they consider it unpardonable to wed them together; or even to let the smallest love passage take place betwixt them; “as if,” say the objectors, “we have not politics enough in the newspapers, in public places, at the very corners of the streets.” And they say right, if their idea of poetry be right; but not right for those who have notions more exalted, and sympathies more extended. These objectors confound politics with party, which is a mistake; and they think poetry destined for mere amusement, which is another. They do not think that there are politics far better than any parties that ever were formed; and that the amusement found in poetry is a mere accident—an extrinsic adornment only—and that its object is to teach, exalt, and refine; to inspire, like religion, the humble with dignity, the sad with comfort, the oppressed with hope; to
[Page xii]
show the abundant and overflowing blessings of familiar things- the riches, the beauty, and the beneficence of nature; to fill all men with the love of God and of one another; and to encourage society in its onward career from bad into good, and from good into better, through all Time into Eternity. The lovers of mere amusement have not reached this pinnacle, and do not see so goodly a prospect around them. But they ought to educate their faculties, until their minds can soar to these high regions, before they pronounce what poetry ought not to be, and define the limits which it should not overstep.
Yet, after all, it is not so surprising that critics should go wrong, when those who should be superior to the critics-the poets themselves—have set the bad example. When Charles II. objected to Edmund Waller, that his verses upon Cromwell were better than those he had written about his lawful sovereign, Waller replied, “ Your Majesty knows that we poets succeed better in fiction than in truth .” In this pretty speech, he behaved like a courtier and a man of the world, but not like a poet, and committed treason to the majesty of his art. We find a modern poet, too, seriously accommodating himself to the same error—Mr. Monekton Milnes, in his volume entitled Palm Leaves , devotes a poem to the praise of Mahomet, as a prophet and a legislator. He speaks of him as—
“No poet he, weaving capricious dreams
    To please inconstant youth;
But one who uttered without shows and seems
    The serious facts of Truth.”
This, it must be admitted, is strange language to come from one claiming to have “the vision and the faculty divine.” As if a poet could not utter “serious facts” without “shows” and “seems,” and as if a poet were, of necessity, a vain dreamer, and an idler of no use or advantage to society!
Mr. Wordsworth, whose writings testify loudly to the utter untenableness of this theory, has also uttered a sentence which some have interpreted to the depreciation of his divine art. He says, in an essay supplementary to one of his early prefaces,
[Page xiii]
“that the appropriate business of poetry, her appropriate employment, her privilege, her duty, is to treat of things not as they are , but as they appear; not as they exist in themselves, but as they seem to exist to the senses and the passions.” It is, however, no depreciation of poetry to assert that its province is not to treat of things as they are. His meaning is not merely as they are; but to add to them a grace and a beauty over and above their positive existence. He will not diminish the existence of a thing, but he will increase its existence by the aid of the beauty perceived by the senses and given by the passions. He never considers that the province of poetry is the unreal against the real, the fictitious uninclusive of the true; and against such a theory his poems are immortal evidence, as Milton's are, and Shakspeare's, and those of all great poets.
Very many of those who restrict the domain of poetry are fain to admit, upon discussion, that religion and politics, in their highest sense, are legitimate sources of inspiration; but they stipulate for pure religion, not sectarianism, and for catholic and national politics, not for party warfare. This being conceded—and that poetry should enter within these, precincts solely in search of, and for the promulgation of, truth—they would, nevertheless, shut the door of science against it. Within this they will on no account suffer it to enter. “The scholar,” says Madame de Staël, as quoted by D'Isracli the elder, in the fourteenth chapter of his Essay on the Literary character , “has nothing to say to the poet, the poet to the naturalist.” The author of Sketches of the History of Literature and Learning in England , published in Knight's Weekly volumes , falls in a degree into this error. He says, in his notice of Darwin, that his scientific descriptions, in the Botanic Garden and the Loves of the Plants , “display more ingenuity than poetry”—a judgment in which most men will agree. He goes on to say— “Poetry and Science are two rival and hostile powers. Whenever anything has been reduced to matter of science, its poetical character is extinguished; it ceases to appeal to any passion or affection. What was veneration or terror, religion or superstition, becomes satisfied and unimpassioned intelligence. Imagination is dethroned there; its creative power abolished and destroyed,
[Page xiv]
its transforming illumination made impossible. Even more wonder, the lowest of all the imaginative states of mind, ceases, when the scientific comprehension is complete; for, of course, when understood, no one thing is really more wonderful than another. ∗   ∗   ∗   The tendency of science is to reduce and level; the tendency of poetry is to magnify and exalt. Each, therefore, has its proper and peculiar ground. They cannot act in concert. In other words, it is impossible to treat any subject at once scientifically and poetically.” The author of the Pleasures of Hope expressed a similar sentiment in his celebrated Ode to the Rainbow —
“When Science from Creation's face
    Enchantment's veil withdraws,
What lovely visions yield their place
    To cold material laws.”
Both of these writers seem to be wrong in this particular, the first more especially so. No doubt the prose writer is quite correct in his condemnation of the technicalities and scientific minutiæ of Darwin, and their incapability of poetical treatment; but he carries his principle too far, and falls into a great mistake. Any one must have studied “the great truths of science” to little purpose, who can talk of the “satisfied and unimpassioned intelligence” with which he comprehends them. Those truths, even the very least of them, are of sublimest import; and it is not after such a manner that those who have most studied, and who know most of the ever wondrous, ever new revelations of science, would think it fitting for the humble spirit—humble in the littleness of the highest knowledge—to speak either of the known or the unknown agencies of the Indefinitude. Poetry may and must treat of the truths of science, wherever it suits its purpose to do so, or it abdicates a portion of its prerogative. This it can do without allusion to technicalities and trivialities, such as those which so offend us in the writings of Darwin. As for the solitary stanza of Campbell, no true poet will take it for his guide. No man knew better than Campbell that science was the nursing mother of poetry, who showed it whither to fly, and to what glorious regions to turn in search of new inspiration. In spite of his authority in this stanza,
[Page xv]
great as many will consider it, we, in our day, must acknowledge that the withdrawal by science of the veil from creation's face, though it may deprive fancy of some filagree adornments, robs imagination of nothing. The rainbow has venerable associations, when we think upon it as the sign of the covenant:
“We think its jubilee to keep,
    The first made anthems rang.
On earth delivered from the deep,
    And the first poet sang.”
But science, which shows us the secret wonders of its mechanism, adds a new delight to its contemplation, without depriving it of this. We see it spanning heaven like an arch; we see it, if we stand upon the mountain-tops, developed into the complete circle; we see its counterpart in the spray of the torrent on a sunny day; and can produce Irises as often as we will, in the glancing drops cast upwards in the sunshine from the paddle-wheels of steamboats— the same in their magnificent hues, so exquisitely overlaid, and gliding the one into the other with the same loveliness. We acknowledge the simplicity, the grandeur, the majesty, of “the material law” which is obeyed in their formation. We find that law to be, not cold, as Campbell sings, but warm and fruitful, producing invariable and inevitable results from the same causes. We see that both the cause and the effect are proofs of infinite wisdom and divine goodness filling all nature with things of beauty, of which the contemplation increases our enjoyments and exalts our souls, and makes us fitter to be true men in this world, and to mount in the scale of creation in the next to a state of a higher intelligence, purer love, and more certain happiness. The comet careering through the heavens does not cease to impress the mind with its grandeur and its mystery, because it is no longer thought to scatter war and pestilence from its “horrid hair.” On the contrary, it inspires emotions still more sublime of the might and majesty of God, when we consider that IIis hand who made it, made also that awful intellect of man, which traces its course through the infinitude of space, and calculates its coming from afar. The sun is not less poetical as the centre of a vast system, than as a mere adjunet to the earth, set in the heavens to give her light,
[Page xvi]
and to form the succession of her seasons. The planets are not less “the poetry of heaven” because astrology is defunct. They do not the less loudly chant to the devout soul, in the silence and the splendour of the midnight, that “the hand that made them is divine,” because we believe them to be, like the kindred planet on which we live and move, the abode of myriads of immortal spirits, playing their allotted part in the mighty progression of the universe. The stars, scattered in such seeming confusion over space, are not the less poetical because we, by the aid of science, have discovered order amidst apparent disorder, because we have grasped the majestic secret of gravitation, and beheld the simplicity and the universality of the law which upholds and regulates them, in all the complication of their harmony. The Milky Way, as resolved into suns, systems, and firmaments, by the telescopes of Herschel and Lord Rosse, does not the less impress us with awe and adoration, because it is no longer a faint light in the heavens, but a congregation of innumerable worlds. The nebula in Orion, that white fleecy cloud on the far verge of space, does not become unpoetical when we know that it is a universe; nor do we look upon that great constellation of Orion itself with less prostration of our feeble powers—with less hopefulness that we too shall be made perfect, because science teaches us that our sun and all its train of planets are moving towards one of its stars; and that, in this mystic development, the 6,000 years of recorded history multiplied by 6,000, and that product multiplied by itself, are but the fragment of a cycle, and the morning of a day. No! Poetry is not inimical to Science, nor Science hostile to Poetry. Poetry is universal. It includes every subject; and can no more be restricted in its range, than the Intellect, the Hope, and the Faith of man, of which it is the grandest exponent and the most sublime expression—making Intellect more intellectual, Hope more hopeful, and Religion more religious.
If we inquire into the subject of the duties of the poet in the present age, we should first of all consider what the age is—what are its desires and aspirations—what its characteristics, and at what point of human development it actually stands. That the age is utilitarian most men assert. Let us inquire what the word
[Page xvii]
means. Mr. Bentham either invented it for his philosophy, or it was fastened upon him by others. In either case it is a good word, if its meaning be not unduly restricted. Some men are such strict utilitarians, that in the furnishing of a house (for other people) they would exclude the ornamental. They would have the kitchen poker and the roasting-jack, the chair, the table, and the bed, the carpet, and perhaps the curtains; but not the picture, nor the bust, nor the poem, nor the play, nor the novel. These are a small class only. Utilitarianism is a much better thing than they would make of it. This class of people are rarely met with in private life, and if they preach such a doctrinc, they rarely practise it. We sometimes hear of them in the House of Commons, where the money of the nation is begrudged for every purpose tending to the advancement of art, or literature, or the encouragement of those who excel in them. But individual men are generally ashamed of such a restriction to their idea of utility. True utility by no means excludes the ornamental. It does not consider man as an animal only, but as a being with an immortal soul. Utilitarianism, in its widest and only true sense, includes the wants of both body and soul. It has relation to the complete man. It is not sufficient that we should gain victories over time, and space, and the obstruction of matter; but the mind has its cravings as well as the body, which must be satisfied. Utilitarianism of this kind is essentially popular and philanthropic. It requires that the bulk of mankind should be made physically comfortable, as a preliminary to their being mentally and spiritually happier than they are. Without losing any of their hopes of a higher state of existence in another world, or departing from the faith which teaches that hope, the men of the present day are very strongly impressed with the belief that this world can be made very much better than it is. Looking back to history, they find that man's career is but a record of crime; that the many have been the victims of the evil passions of the few; that bloody wars, debasing superstitions, revenge, cruelty, lust, and ignorance, have filled the world with misery since time began; that in the more peaceful periods of human history, when art, science, and learning flourished—when intellect gained its most splendid victories—the great masses of mankind were sunk in
[Page xviii]
physical or mental slavery—and that in the bosom of civilization herself the multitudes have not participated in her benefits, but have been the prey of poverty, disease, and crime. Reason and faith, and all experience, as far as it has gone, combine to show that this state of things is not a necessary consequence of man's nature. By looking about us, we see that many evils have been remedied; that a great many more are falling beneath the advances of intelligence, and the sublime doctrine of Christianity, that we ought to love one another; and we are encouraged by that which has been already done to hope for much more. Science, by increasing the physical comforts of mankind, is preparing the way for mental blessings and mental progress, to an extent which to some minds seems Utopian to imagine, but which will be realised nevertheless. All our physical conquests over matter are proofs and results of mental energies, working to various ends, and all of them we cannot doubt, though we may not yet understand, to ultimate spiritual, as well as physical, good. The utilitarian, who confines utility to merely physical advantage, may deny in a great degree the usefulness of literature, and wholly deny the usefulness of poetry. Believing it to be founded on fiction; to be, as the ancient father has it, “the vain shadow of a lie,” he may say that he will have none of it; and turn his mind to the contemplation of his money-bags. But there are better and truer utilitarians than the men of this class; who can see a good, and consequently a beauty, in every manifestation of the human intellect. To utilitarians who believe this, poetry has as great a claim to respect as science or religion—provided always it be TRUE poetry. It follows from the utilitarianism of the age—if this be a correct definition of it—that it is an earnest age; for if facts be stubborn things, utility is an earnest and a thoughtful thing, and the man who would exert any influence over such an age, must himself be thoroughly and hopefully in earnest. Hitherto, in England, the great fault of men of letters, as a class, has been a deficiency of earnestness. They have not loved their vocation. Notwithstanding all their vanity and pride, they have been ashamed of it. Their lot has been cast in a country where there was a tendency to wealth-worship, and a rush into all professions or pursuits promising to success the rewards of wealth
[Page xix]
or rank. The man of letters has had no chance of either from his profession; he has not been recognized at all; and but too often thrown into it from a failure in other pursuits of life—like a friendless woman, who, losing her husband, sets up a day-school as a last resource in her extremity. Too often, therefore, they have cringed to the powerful, or pandered to the passions and prejudices of the crowd. Writers of this class have done nothing for literature but degrade it. They have impaired the respect of serious men for all literature that is not stamped with the seal of antiquity, or the approval of one generation of thinkers at least, and rendered more difficult the task of him who loves it and cultivates it for its own sake, independently of worldly recompense. Happily this earnestness of feeling, without which no good can be done, is increasing; and the day seems to be approaching when an author will no more be ashamed of his profession than a lawyer or a divine, a painter or a physician, a merchant or a manufacturer. The new generation read books. A bold and craving spirit is abroad. Our living authors should remember that the great minds of the past preach to us evermore. By a divine privilege, we are enabled to converse with the mighty men who went before us. Their words and thoughts are perpetuated for our consolation, our instruction, and our guidance. We weep for the sorrows, rejoice for the gladness, tremble with the fears, and glow with the hopes, of departed centuries. And if our living writers will not fulfil their high functions in as good a spirit as these, they are unworthy of the high place that would otherwise have been set apart for them. They distract the attention of the age with their vain babble, and bring contempt upon a vocation which should be considered holy. We have books enough, and more than enough. Hence the arduous task reserved for all writers, and more especially for poets, in the present day—for men who would reflect the age, and yet be in advance of it—who would be of sympathies with it and yet beyond it—who would give it the blossoms of their intellect with a full certainty that those blossoms, fair and flowery to this age, would be fruit to the ages which are to follow it.
To think that because we are a practical people, living in a practical age, that we shall no more find pleasure in the varied
[Page xx]
beauty of nature, animate and inanimate; that the beams of the sun, or the mental sunshine of bright faces, shall fill us no more with delight; that love, or hopes, or joys, or sorrows, shall no more affect us; or that poetry, which refines and spiritualizes all these, shall be extinguished by the progress of civilization, is mere lunacy. As civilization increases, the world will, doubtless, become more difficult to please in poetry. The wiser men grow, the less aptitude will they exhibit for being put off with shadows instead of realities. But poetry itself, purified and exalted, will all the more purify and exalt mankind. Those who speak great truths from their fulness of heart, and enshrine them in noble words set to the music which stirs the blood, will never want listeners. The poets who would do that have an arduous but noble task. Such poets need not fear they that have fallen upon evil times for their vocation; if they be but in earnest with it, and will not make it their pastime, but the business and recompense of their lives. Let them put on their singing robes cheerily in the face of heaven and nature; and wear them in a trustful and patient spirit, and speal that which is in them for the advancement of their kind and the glory of their Creator, and there will be no risk that they will be allowed to sing in the wilderness, “no man listening to them.”
$$$
