This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized  by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the  information in books and make it universally accessible. 
https://books.google.com  
  
  

S. 
TH 
RY
  
  
600065066T
  
  

  
  

  
  

ANNALS OF THE 
TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY.
  
  

Give me leave To speakmymind, and I will through and through Cleanse the foul body of the infected world, 
If they willpatiently receive my medicine. 
MERCHANT OF VENICE. 
If the contentsplease thee, and be for thy use, suppose the man of the moon or whom thou wilt to be the author. BARTON.
ANNALS OF THE 
TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY ; OR, 
The Autobiograpby of the Tenth President of the Idorld -Republic. 
IN THREE VOLUME S. 
VOL. II. 
ANA 
CMIND.IS . 
su ONGER COS 
  
THANVATTER   
London : 
SAMUEL TINSLEY, 
10, SOUTH AMPTON STREET, STRAND. 1874. 
[The right of translation is reserved .] 
251. b . 197

1 
LONDON : PRINTED BY 
EDWARD J. FRANCIS, TOOK'S COURT, 
CHANCERY LANE, E.C.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II . 
CHAP. 
I. MY RESURRECTIONPAGE 
. 1 
II. I REACH THE MOON 8 
III. A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON 50 
IV. WINTER IN THE MOON 78 
V. THE MOON BEGINS TO BE POPULATED 92 
VI. I RETURN TO THE WORLD . 110 
! 
VII. EARTHQUAKES CURED 159 
VIII. THE THREE AORISTS 171 
IX. NIGHT ABOLISHED 200 
X. PERFORATION OF THE WORLD AND MOON . 221
1

ANNALS OF THE 
TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
CHAPTER I. 
MY RESURRECTION . 
I HURRY over the hideous horrors of the many 
weeks of my entombment by a single stroke of my pen. Language pigments cannot paint the 
darkness, dreariness, and depression which 
weighed like mountains on my sorrow -stricken 
soul. Hope after hope flickered , then languished 
and died. Desperation and despair rose upon 
me at times with maniacal fury. During sleep 
I was cruciated by nightmares and all the 
demons of dreamland, and in my waking hours 
I was tortured by still more dreadful realities. 
Now a mirage of the mind allured me with 
hoaxing hopes, anon the frontiers between sleep 
and waking were so swept away, that I was 
unable to distinguish apparitions from actualities. 
VOL. II . B

2 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
Having only six months' provisions, I felt that 
that every mouthful I swallowed pushed me 
nearer the yawning vortex of starvation. But 
for the Bible I would have gone mad. Some 
times I prayed for deliverance, sometimes for 
death . Ships were passing over me, the lashing 
of whose paddles I heard with a distinctness which was the most tantalizing derision to my 
anxiety. Divers and swimmers and aquatic 
farm -workers were doubtless all around, while 
below I heard the underground trains. Yet 
here was I lost, perhaps already in my tomb.. 
Unceasingly these reflections arose before me 
like scourges to my bold, perhaps proud ambi 
tion, forcing me to retreat in contrition to the 
only refuge and fortress of the broken -hearted 
—the Bible. Only in its pages I found shelter 
for my sorrows, and salve for my wounded 
soul. 
But day follows day, and week week, and 
I am still entombed in my kingdom of thirty 
cubic mètres. Hermetically sealed within its 
iron frontiers, hope would make me trust that 
Heaven had immured me for a time to smother 
my vanity and force my spiritual growth. Jonah 
was three days and three nights amid the

MY RESURRECTION. 3 
unsavoury pulp of a whale's stomach, that his 
soul might be purified of its worldly dross, and 
here am I in the bed of the ocean, undergoing a 
similar chastisement, peradventure to receive a 
similar deliverance. At other times the twilight 
of doubting hope would almost darken into the 
night of despair, and I would dread my days were numbered, and that I was doomed to have 
my habitation for my coffin, my coffin for my 
death -bed , and my death - bed for my grave. 
But God ruled otherwise. My students and 
colleagues, with heroic devotion, had been 
searching for me from the very moment of my 
fall, and had overrun every square inch of the 
ocean's bed within an area of thousands of 
miles until they discovered my domicile, no 
less than 200 mètres below the surface of the 
ocean's bottom. Sound asleep at the time, I was 
awakened to unspeakable joy by those in search 
of me battering on my domains. I shouted 
and danced like a maniac in the inebriation of 
my gladness, and then gratefully raised my 
Ebenezer. 
Meanwhile the joy of those who had dis 
covered my retreat was so tempered with doubt, 
that none dared rejoice until it was seen

4 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
whether I was alive. A few minutes of anxious. 
work finished the exhumation of what was 
dreaded might be my bier. A few minutes more, and the missile was raised to the surface 
of the sea, and placed on board the Mayflower, 
which formed the flagship of my brethren . 
Before an assemblage of two thousand, whose 
mindswere agitated with an anxiety and dubiety 
which no words can picture, Parry McLintock 
now advanced to burst the urn in which I was 
encased, and thus unseal the suspense. At 
this moment, I, being aware I was now within 
a few mètres of my friends, resolved to break 
the spell of their fears by letting them know I 
was still alive. I therefore mustered my feeble 
physical forces, and struck one of my broken 
instruments against my prison -walls. The 
reverberations were so loud that they were dis 
tinctly heard by those around, who answered 
the signals by such a shout of joy as made me weep with delight. A few seconds afterwards 
the shell of the iron egg was burst, and I, its 
chick, was enabled to walk out, and reappear 
upon the world from which I had been so long 
estranged. My friends were overwhelmed with 
gladness. They told me ten weeks had elapsed

MY RESURRECTION . 5 
since my burial. Unutterable, therefore, were 
their sensations on finding my soul-inhabited 
tabernacle, when they so reasonably expected 
only my ashes. For myself, my eyes were 
almost overpowered by the intensity of the 
light of day, and my mind by the pleasure of 
again beholding those whom I had never hoped 
to behold. Exhausted by the very force of my 
joyful emotions, I sank into the arms of my 
friends. Anxiously they pressed around me, 
wondering at my safety, but distressed to find 
my visage so cadaverous and my frame so 
shattered. Want of sun had blanched my skin, 
want of food had attenuated my buxom muscles 
into wizened filaments, and my rounded and 
plump figure into a mere skin -bound skeleton . 
My face was furrowed with the ploughshare 
of affliction. Miseries had bleached my raven 
hair ; suspense, that hell of hells, had heaped 
upon me the tribulations of years,, and crowned 
the shoulders of youthful vigour with the badges 
of senility. 
To Santa Cruz, our nearest port, we now 
hastened , that the joyful tidings might circum 
spread the globe, and we be the sooner em 
powered to return to our several avocations.

6 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
I was meanwhile supplied with the news of the 
world's onward march during my imprison 
ment ; of the intellectual territories it had in 
vaded, and the victories it had gained . While my mental powers had been manacled, and 
while I had been segregated from mankind 
and from usefulness, I was delighted to find the 
world had thus gloriously been advancing in 
the great millennial highway. 
At Santa Cruz we received a great ovation. 
Thereafter we were supplied with tube car 
riages, with which we were in a few minutes 
a 
blown to our several homes. The tidings of 
my safety were, at the same time, published 
throughout the earth, an operation for which 
a few minutes sufficed . The joy generated by 
the news
was unbounded. Delight flashed 
from soul to soul, until the whole heartdom of the world was fired with the flame of 
heavenly exultation . Gratitude the while rose from each soul -altar as an incense to heaven . Next morning I found the world's newspaper heavily laden with pæans over my deliverance, and speculations upon the prospects of ultra aërial travelling. It was a rich recompense for my woes and trials, to find that my cause 

MY RESURRECTION. 7 
and my misfortunes had kindled a sympathy 
so wide and so warm. 
With undiminished indomitability, I, as early 
as I had regained my health, returned to toil 
in that vocation to which my soul had been 
so long espoused. Antæus - like, every occa 
sion in which I had been tossed back upon the 
earth in my efforts to reach the moon had been 
the means of supplying nutriment to my energy 
and courage. On this occasion my colleagues and I resumed the work with such enlarged 
hopes and strengthened assiduity, that in two 
months we had completed preparations to make 
another supreme attempt to cross the mundo 
lunar ferry. The error of the last voyage dis 
counted the infallibility of our present tactics. 
Our precautions were almost ultra -prudent, our preliminary tests almost hyper-crucial. The 
trial trips were made half way to the moon 
and back under the new system , each of which was conducted with undiluted success . The 
possibility of failure was reduced to an impos 
sibility.

8 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY . 
CHAPTER II. 
I REACH THE MOON. 
The time-keeper of history pointed to the date 
August 1 , 2838, when 200,000,000 souls were 
echaloned on Everest to witness my next 
attempt to invade the moon . The scene was 
the embodiment of sublimity. Were a descrip 
tion of its grandeur attempted the most skilful 
word-painting would only distort what it meant 
to embellish. 
The prospect inspired me — the David of this 
Elah-with confidence and strength. Surely, 
thought I , this superb meeting is symbolical of 
the heavenly approval of my mission . I entered 
my iron cage with a triumphant step, assured 
that ere I again cast my eyes upon my fellow men , or my fellow -men cast their eyes upon me, 
the realms of Diana would be in our possession. 
Next moment the bullet in which I was billeted 
was pressed home, and ere my brain had time

I REACH THE MOON. 9 
to generate a single thought, the mines of ex 
plosive under me had hurled me to a point where the world appeared but a moon, and 
where man and his mightiest works were 
dwarfed into invisibility. During the entire 
flight I was imbued with sanguine expecta 
tions. Every instrument was working per 
fectly and every incident boded triumph. My 
soul was infused with heroic intrepidity. With 
equanimity I looked out from the loop-holes in 
my vessels prow and stern to view the two 
globes between which I was journeying, won 
dering the while that the quiescence in which I 
was enshrined was consistent with a motion so 
amazing. At length the bomb nears the point 
at which it is necessary for me to have it burst. 
Lashing myself, therefore, to my seat, and 
watching the celerity meter, I at the proper 
moment nervously pull the trigger. Instantly 
the iron shell is noiselessly burst. Oh, terrible 
moment ! Do you bring me life or death — the 
moon or a grave ? For a second I am held in 
the clutches of suspense. But delight soon 
succeeds when I find myself firmly seated in 
my car, and the broken fragments of my bomb 
all around. Not a single fibre of my heart

+ 
10 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
having betrayed the slightest dismay in this 
importance fraught moment, I, with a soul 
already tasting the fruits of victory, applied my electric engines, and steered towards the 
world's great serenader. In twenty minutes I 
reach the frontiers where the gravitation of the 
earth and moon are neutralized. For a few 
minutes the course of my vessel is unsteady. 
It reels and flounders, and then topples over. 
Joy of my life's joys — triumph of my life's 
triumphs; my ascent is now changed into a 
descent, The moon is now my loadstone. 
The moon is the earth to which my fealty is due, and the earth which maintains supremacy 
over my movements. I am now essentially a 
lunarian . I am the first among mankind who has 
left the world without crossing death's dread river. Billows of emotions sweep through my 
mind on this awful occasion. My feelings are 
heated up to my soul's boiling -point. My 
victory, thought I, is now gained after unnum 
bered obstacles and heart-rending defeats. 
After the sweats of travail I earn the sweets of 
fortune. At the outlay of incalculable pain and 
pains, I have achieved such a conquest as 
Alexander of Macedonia vainly envied.

I REACH THE MOON. 11 
Newton, when he made his greatest discovery 
was so dazzled by its brilliancy, that another 
had to finish his calculations. I, when about 
to achieve the greatest victory ere won by 
science, was paralyzed with gladness. With 
feelings unutterable I saw the outlines of the 
lunar mountains, valleys, and plains become so 
sharp that I began to discern plantations, 
ravines, and other details of scenery. The 
colourless map - like scene became pictorial and chromatic ; clearer and clearer grew the won 
drous picture. To the equatorial meridian I 
naturally steered, for there was one of the 
moon's richest plains. The woods, and hills, 
and valleys, and streams were meanwhile 
assuming their respective hues. 
Soon my
wonder was out-wondered on beholding amaz ingly lustrous patches of colour, sprinkled like iridescent jewels over the face of the strange panorama. My mind was racked for some minutes through the force of the puzzle, but it at length arrived at the judgment that the colour was peculiar to the moon. New trans ports of joy seized my soul over the discovery, for no hue on earth could rival its beauty and richness. By the aid of my telescope I soon 

12 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY . 
ascertained that the spots were small clumps of 
trees, and towards one, situated at the very 
centre of the moon - face, I piloted my car. I at 
first supposed that the dot I had noticed com 
prised a few roods, but, behold, as I approached, 
it widened into square kilomètres.. 
Time and my chariot flew on so quickly, 
that I soon saw the lineaments of the wonder 
ful trees by my instruments. I beheld their 
branches waving, birds flying about them , and 
below them flocks grazing. I was so captivated 
by one lovely lawn in the midst of the beautiful 
plantation, that I resolved to make it the site 
wherein the moon's human history should find 
its cradle. Examining the spectacle more 
accurately, my mind, already overgorged with 
wonder, was glutted with more on beholding 
the lunar Fauna and Flora so different from 
those of the earth. I now reached the coasts 
of the lunar atmosphere. With great anxiety 
amid the current of my joys, I doffed my 
trans- aërial breathing equipments to test its 
air with the naked mouth. My first breath 
reassured me, for lunar air proved alike whole 
some, refreshing, and pure. Now within the 
genial pale of this atmosphere, a crowd of

I REACH THE MOON. 13 
diurnal beauties burst upon my vision, while 
the nocturnal beauties vanished . The colours 
in the moon below become more lustrous. 
The scenery , before like a brilliantly illumi 
nated panorama in a dark starlit room , is now 
a world enveloped by an azure firmament, 
from which the stars are excluded. In a few 
moments after entering into this glorious 
welkin , I am amazed and amused to behold 
great flocks of birds flying towards me, and 
flitting around my balloon — nay, perching 
upon my very shoulders and head. My emo 
tions on approaching the lunar garden of Eden, 
where I, the moon’s Adam, am about to alight, 
are fanned into flame as I receive this welcome 
from the denizens of Diana. I feel that the 
incident consummates my installation as Lord 
of the Manor of Cynthia. A few more heavings 
of my o'er -pent heart, and my bark touches 
the moon. I am now so deeply moved that I 
throw myself upon its virgin soil, and give 
way to a torrent of the most intense suscita 
tions which ever stormed the citadel of my 
soul. Prayers are my only utterances, and . 
tears my thanksgiving. The moon is thus bap 
tised by the waters of gratitude which my eyes

14 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY . 
weep . Cynthia, mused I, is now the earth's. 
The first step has been taken in man's capa 
bility to soar through the skies. The history 
of the earth shall now swell and embrace that 
of the moon . We hasten towards the time 
when the historical rivers of the individual 
planets shall converge into the oceanic history 
of the solar system. As if imbued with pro 
phetic instinct, I think I catch glimpses of the 
brilliant unopened pages of lunar history. 
Unlike that of the sinful world from which I 
have come, it shall be unsullied by the blood 
of murder-trading nations . No despotic king 
craft shall taint its rule ; no ambitious priest 
craft, under a religious guise, shall crowd its 
annals with crime. God shall be its ruler ; 
the Bible shall be its statute-book , saints its 
citizens, and religious progress its politics. No Cains shall stain the preface of its history ; no 
impious ambition of its inhabitants shall lead 
to the curse of a division of tongues ; no 
spiritual arrogance of its members shall induce 
the greater curse of a division of sects ; no 
Sodoms or Gomorrahs shall require deletion 
from its geography ; no deluge shall be re 
quired to sweep its people into the jaws of

I REACH THE MOON. 15 
death . All the immeasurable horrors of war 
shall be unknown ; its soil shall be unsoiled 
by bloodshed ; crimes and all the machinery 
of misanthropy shall be contraband ; taxes, 
poverty , intrigues, monetary systems, and all 
the stings of devil - craft, shall here find no resi 
dence ; the curses of outraged nature shall be 
as thoroughly expunged as the curses of out 
raged politics ; pestilences and plagues shall 
gain no footing. In the language of inspira 
tion , — “ Violence shall not be heard in thy 
land, wasting nor destruction within thy 
bounds, but thou shalt call thy walls salvation, 
and thy gates praise." 
While in this pleasing reverie, I was aroused 
by a beautiful sheep-like animal licking my 
cheek . With a soul inundated with a tide of 
emotions, I looked up and beheld myself sur 
rounded by myriads of animals, which , as a 
rule, were of more gigantic growth than those 
of the world , and possessed greater powers of 
agility. Many of the mammalia were larger 
than elephants, many taller than giraffes. Some 
of the birds were three times larger than 
condors, many of the insects bigger than 
sparrows. I noticed moths as large as crows,

16 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
and midges as huge as blackbirds. The pecu 
liarities of the Fauna were innumerable . Some 
were bipeds, some tripeds, some quadrupeds, 
and some multipeds ; some were bi-winged, 
some tri-winged, and some multi-winged ; some 
were unicorns, some duocorns, and some multi 
corns. Stranger than all this, was their tame 
ness. My presence only excited their curiosity. 
Innocent themselves, they looked for innocence 
in me. They frisked around me, and in loving 
emulation sought to lick my hands, body, feet, 
and even my face - greetings which I viewed as 
tokens of the allegiance of the lunar residents to 
the majesty of man. Happy country, the felicity 
reigning among your creatures shows how peace 
is natural to brutes ! It must have been a fall 
which brought them as well as man in our parent 
world from a state of innocence, and instilled 
into them jealousies and cruelties. Yours, oh , 
lunar animals, are not the fierce looks with 
which artists of past ages represent untamed 
beasts, for a disobedience and a fall never 
rendered you savage ! Even now, I am another 
Adam in another world , giving names to an 
unfallen Fauna. 
After my first outbursts of feeling I arose .

I REACH THE MOON. 17 
This single and simple movement impressed 
me with the sensation of my amazing buoy 
ancy and alertness. I at once remembered 
this was because the small gravitation powers 
of the moon rendered me only one- fifth of my 
weight on earth . The least exertion made me 
leap like an automaton, or sent me sprawling 
on the 
grass. If I wished to walk, I performed 
capers which might have shamed acrobats. I was not master of my own motions. I was perpetually overshooting my mark, and coming into collision with trees and rocks. My legs so revolted against my will, that I believe I would have broken them had it not been for my moon-acquired lightness and my tardy velocity in falling. My extravagant posturings whirled my senses into a vortex of dizziness. At length I hit upon the expedient of poising myself by means of ballast, searching for which opened my eyes to the levity of all things lunary. Tall trees, under whose burden houses in the nether world might have groaned, I could raise and carry with ease. Rocks I could lift as if their composition had been cork . To me this circumstance was destined to prove a mighty advantage, as thereby I was capable of accom VOL. II . с

1 
18 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
plishing feats with ease which in the world 
would have baffled a Samson. 
Meantime I had tied huge stones to my 
body, in order that I might with the greater 
freedom maintain my equilibrium . But I was 
still unreconciled to the physical laws of the 
moon, and it was long ere my will could master 
my motions. My every action was a travestie 
of my wish. If I desired to go one mètre, I 
so miscalculated the necessary muscular force 
as to leap five. If I wished to step upon a 
rock, I often overleaped it altogether. Making 
such a poor attempt at walking, in spite of 
ballast, I donned my electric wings, and tried 1 
flying. With great delight I found that I could soar with a celerity and ease of which the world below could have no conception. While 
1
thus engaged, I was astonished to behold that I was performing my unintentional antics before a company of thousands of animals. So inter ested was this strange audience, that whatever I did they watched me, wherever I went they followed me, and whenever I stopped they crowded around me. Meanwhile, as a com mission agent engaged on behalf of all the various sciences, I was busily storing up a vast 

I REACH THE MOON. 19 
compendium of miscellaneous information and 
discoveries. In this work I was ever escorted 
by feelings of amazement. Every eyeload of 
sights piled upon my memory new phenomena. 
Even my ears, charmed with the vocal music 
of the sylvan choristers, accompanied by the 
instrumental orchestra of the sighing trees and 
the purling brooks, administered joy -forage to 
my soul . My five senses were each channels 
bearing to my brain -haven argosies of sur 
prising wonders and wondrous surprises. As 
Midas was in the midst of gold, I was in the 
midst of marvels. No man had ever had his 
amazedness stretched so far a length or for so 
long a time. I was in a great plain, affluent 
in vegetation, and palisaded by a noble per 
spective of mountain peaks, while above I had 
not only the rising sun to cheer me, but the 
world in the zenith shining like another sun. 
There it was, ceaselessly gyrating and end 
lessly varying in its phases, yet anchored in 
the heavens despite its incessant rolfings, and 
at rest amid its changes — the emblem of active 
stability and busy steadfastness. 
By this time I had realized that hunger is 
as keen an appetite in the moon as in my

20 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
parent world. Having noticed the relish with 
which some of the animals around me had 
partaken of certain plants, I followed their 
example. A most refreshing repast was this, 
the first meal tasted by man on lunar soil. 
Not the less interest it had to me when, on 
analysis, I found that my viands contained 
the proper ingredients of nutrition in their 
proper ratio. 
My next ambition was to supply myself with 
a habitation. Pursuant of this end, I took the 
electric engines out of my balloon, and, having 
extemporised them into wood- cutting apparatus, 
I felled some trees, carved them into shape, 
and, ere the sun had advanced half a degree, I 
had erected the moon's first domicile. 
Most lovely and suitable was the situation. 
Resting on the bosom of a beautiful lawn, shel 
a 
tered by woods and flanked by a sparkling 
brook, I thought I might have searched forty 
moons ere I had found a site more pleasant. 
Battling single-handed the while, I found my 
engines of infinite use, and in themselves a host. 
a
Never had any man placed in solitude been 
more fortunate. I was in a region where things 
were amazingly imponderous, and I possessed 

I REACH THE MOON. 21 
machinery which was the heritage of thousands 
of mechanists and savants. I was the beneficiary 
of a legion of the world's scientific benefactors. 
My single electric engine could claim to be the 
child of two hundred and ten inventor parents. 
Above all, I did not require to fortify myself 
against wild animals, including man, the wildest 
of all . Nay, I found in the brute creation my 
helpmates and companions. One most beau 
tiful animal, like a zebra, which I afterwards 
dubbed Rocket, was an especial favourite. I 
resolved, indeed, at the risk of its displeasure, 
to mount it and make it my prime minister. 
With somewhat tremulous feelings I led it out, 
and threw myself upon its back. Already aware of the astonishing swiftness of lunar animals, I 
felt it might be difficult to keep my seat. But 
all went well. Though swifter than a gazelle, I 
found Rocket gentle as a lamb. Its agility , no 
doubt, at first inspired me with considerable 
alarm , its every leap, when urged to full gallop, 
covering as much as fifty mètres. Craters, 
mighty defiles, and trees, were no obstacle, in 
its way, for they were vaulted over with as 
much ease as thorough-bred horses would have 
leaped a three - bar gate. While thus scouring

22 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
the country, I was surprised to find thousands 
of animals galloping at my heels. When I drew 
up they halted, and when I again moved on 
they followed. I was delighted with my daring 
ride and my imposing retinue. In my ecstasy 
I spurned on my charger, and tested its powers 
of endurance and speed to the uttermost. With 
unsweating skin and unhurried breathing, it flew 
at a pace five times that of those roulette - horses 
which in the nineteenth century were made to 
whirl round the wheels of fortune on those 
gambling fields called the turf. Yet I did not 
outstrip my escort, for the quicker I rode the 
more fleetly they pursued. Was ever king, 
thought I, honoured with such a noble caval 
cade ? Did the fox- chasers of old ever witness 
such spirited racing ? Did all the cattle exhi 
bitors of the nether world ever display such mag 
6
nificent stock ? I realized in the incidents of the adventure that I was monarch of moonland, and possessed the most obedient subjects in its Fauna. In my royal tour I reviewed my 
realms over a tract of 360 kilomètres,—a tour which showed me that my house was the humble capital of a mighty rugose scraggy plain , begirt with mighty mountains and yawning caves 
2
I REACH THE MOON. 
3 
a plain possessing a rich Fauna and Flora, and great mineralogical wealth . During my jaunt I had naturally made great accessions to my body- guards. By some hidden fascination my presence seemed to magnetize the denizens of Diana. Meantime I crossed fords, ascended hills, rode through the most luxuriant forests, and amid the most lovely valleys and downs. 
Every square mètre pictured magnificence. A few hours' acquaintance with moonland taught me its beauty, its riches, and its adaptability as a world colony. 
Returning to my palace, my kingly duties were supplanted by the menial operations of the kitchen. The moon's Prometheus, I now made a fire. I eagerly watched the gleams of 
a
the element as they burst out for the first time in its history, and I was interested more on beholding the curiosity with which the animals around viewed the same scene. But fatigued by this time with the labours of the day, and observing that my animal satellites had already ensconced themselves under trees, in order to sleep, I thought it time to follow their example. 
My diary will now suffice to narrate my 

24 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
adventures, and it may perchance possess an 
adventitious interest, as it forms the maiden moonland literary production. 
Anno Lunce dies 1 . To the creator of the 
boundless heavens, among which the world and 
its satellite may be said to be two grains of sand 
upon the sea - shore of infinity, praise and honour 
be accorded. To man's possessions he has added a new earth. I, His humble instrument to receive 
the offering, and claim it as man's, have made 
tears of gratitude my oblation over the rich gift. 
Never to be forgotten was my entrance into this 
promised land . From above I beheld that on 
the east of the meridian all was daylight and 
spring, and on the west darkness and winter. 
The meridian was a striking borderland of 
chiaroscuro, in which light was seen to invade 
darkness by aid of the peaks, and darkness to 
advance into the territories of light under 
shelter of the valleys. To this strange day 
night frontier, where it was crossed by the 
equator, I steered my course. 
Arrived on this foreign world, I, alone and 
prostrated before heaven , rejoiced in the eman 
cipation of man from his 8,000 years' captivity 
to his pigmy stellar tenement. My first breath

I REACH THE MOON . 25 
in this new world wafted thanksgiving to the Most High. 
After reconnoitering my position, I, the 
moon's king, erected my palace, an humble 
domicile, of three hours' labour. I then com 
menced the great harvest of research in the 
fields of lunar science/a harvest so rich and so 
extensive, that years shall run ere its fruits are 
all garnered. How incompetent is my poor 
brain for a work which would necessitate so 
many millions, laziness might well have sug 
gested ; but my intrepidity scrupled not to face 
the greatest store of unknown and unwitnessed 
phenomena ever presented to man . 
Made a short exploration to the south. 
Ascended to the height of three miles to study 
the configuration of the moon, and to make an 
ordnance-sculpture -photographic sketch of the 
surrounding country. The peaks of the 
country -— now a mere aggregation of choked 
up cosmical flues - carried my mind back to 
those times when the moon's ten thousand 
furnaces were in full blaze. Such had been 
the heat of the now cooled lunar kilns, that I 
found they had eructed many rich metals from 
the moon's interior. I came upon great rocks

26 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
of gold, pyramids of silver, and huge blocks of 
all the noble metals. Nevertheless, the charms 
of lunar natural history seduced my attention 
more than those riches. I found every pool an 
aquarium, every tree an aviary, and every cave 
a menagerie. When naturalists in the sublunary 
sphere leap with ecstasy over the discovery of 
an undescribed insect, to what extent must my 
delight be forced, who am in the midst of 
thousands of unknown genera of animals and 
vegetables, and who cannot take a step without 
trampling on the most curious botanical speci 
mens, nor lift my eyelids without noticing the 
most astonishing wonders of animal life ? The 
nuncio, not of one, but twenty sciences, I am sur 
feited with my discoveries. What treasures of 
unknown phenomena are waiting to be un 
sealed ! Oh, for a host of workers to roam these 
Elysian fields of research ! 
Though in the moon , I am adhering to 
earthly customs. Though its day is as long as 
fifteen mundane days, I am eating and sleeping 
at my wonted hours. Our world forms a 
noble clock in the lunar firmament. By its 
volutions I can mark the very minutes. Just 
now the sun's youthful beams fall aslant, and I

I REACH THE MOON . 27 
will therefore have the satisfaction of spending 
ten earthly days ere the moon's evening. 
To the sun and my native world I have 
repeatedly turned my eyes. What heavenly 
jewels they are in the azure casket of the 
moon's firmament ! Even Terra, with a disc 
visually thirteen times that of the sun , appears 
no mean consort to the great orb of day. Yet 
I view it with tears. It is the planet of sin, 
and the city of, perhaps, the only race of 
sinners in the universe. I feel humiliated to 
think I am formed of its sin-polluted dust. Yet 
my cloudy vexations are fringed by golden 
joys when I consider this world has been the 
residence of millions of human beings, the 
meanest of whom God has gifted with a soul 
worth more than the world itself. I felt proud 
when I considered that Christ had done more 
for it than he required to do for all the systems 
in God's boundless realms. He died for the 
redemption of its race. He conquered the devil 
in the devil's own star, and outshone the glare 
of hell by the sunshine of grace. 
After the exertion of some hours, I took my 
balloon - bed into my house, and, raising an 
altar of gratitude for God's favours, I retired to

28 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
rest. The angels then for the first time 
guarded the soul of a poor sinner in this new 
world , and guided his slumbers into realms 
of joy. Sweet, therefore, were my dreams and 
refreshing was my rest. 
Second day. Explored the land from my home 
to the lunar Apennines on the back of Rocket, 
accompanied by my animal army. In these 
sojournings I encountered various adventures, 
and took upwards of five hundred bas- relief 
sketches with my pocket photographic appa 
ratus. The ultra- worldly wildness of the 
mountain scenery made my soul giddy with 
admiration. Occasionally I looked down upon 
caverns in whose capacious mouths Etnas would 
have been morsels. In them the awful was 
married to the beautiful, for, bursting out 
amid the stupendous chasms, were spots of 
luxuriant vegetation, chafed with mountain 
jewellery - rocks of quartz , amethysts, car 
buncles, and huge boulders of gold and silver . 
Again I viewed sun -lying valleys, carpeted 
below by millions of grasses and flowers, em 
broidered by lines and clumps of trees, and 
embraced by great mountain chains, on whose 
shoulders were borne roaring cataracts, dismal

I REACH THE MOON. 29 
chasms, and frowning precipices. Now I saw 
a hoary-headed peak of Teneriffe, sitting in 
lonely majesty upon plains loaded with luxu 
riance. Anon I saw a circle of hills, which, like 
a geographical fortification, encircled a great 
plain . Sights fantastic and sights romantic, 
sights gorgeous and sights grotesque, sights 
earthly and sights infernal, were all gleaned in 
one sweep of the eye. The sun having scaled 
only a few degrees above the horizon, the 
scenes were the more striking through the bold 
contrasts caused by the commixture of spring and winter, light and shade. While the 
shoulders of the mountain were bathed in a 
flood of sunshine, their feet on the shaded side 
were still blanketed in a bed of darkness. The 
uplands and plains were clothed in the brilliant 
vestures of summer, while the caverns were 
naked in their wintry couches . Below, the 
cataracts were still glaciers-above, the glaciers 
had thawed into cataracts ; below, the streams 
were ice -locked - above, they were purling on, 
rejoicing in their freedom . 
My adventures for the day culminated when 
I rode as far west as Copernicus. On Rocket 
I managed to scale one of the passes on the

30 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
south side of the mountain ; but intent to ascend 
to its snow- crowned top, I was, through the 
difficulties of the way, forced to leave my horse 
behind, and make the journey alone. Partly by my wings, partly by my feet, and partly by my hands, I clambered up the ice - corniced 
escarpments. I had to tread a path more torn 
with crevasses, more battlemented with precipi 
tous cliffs, and more barricaded with spurs and 
aiguilles, than the Alps in those times when 
fools raffled their lives upon them for a bravado, 
a 
yet, owing to my wings and the laxity of the 
lunar laws of gravitation, I incurred no risk 
soever.
Once, on moving along the narrow 
ice- edged blade of a precipice, I slipped and fell. Frightened at first, I was re- assured on feeling how slowly I was falling. Thanks to the meagre velocity demanded by the moon's gravitation, that which would have been a downfall on the earth was here but a gentle, harmless, feather-like subsidence. In short, it took so many seconds for me to drop half the depth of the abyss, that I had time to use my wings and remount to the spot from which I had tumbled . Shortly after this, in going up an inclined plane, the snow sank below me, 

I REACH THE MOON . 31 
and an avalanche resulted. In the circum 
stances, I merely took to wing and flew to 
a point of safety . Further on I escaped 
another accident. I noticed an avalanche 
brush down from a spot a kilomètre over 
head, which would have buried me in its icy 
grasp had my pinions not purchased my 
safety. 
At length I reached the summit. To my de 
lightand wonder,I beheld a crater-saucer, several 
miles in diameter, filled with ice, and in its 
centre a mighty inverted cup mountain . The 
inner sides of the mountainous chalice were 
composed of most magnificent concentric 
terraces, which, like flights of stairs, led down 
to the great blue ice blocks. I at once saw 
that in daytime this Mer de Glace was a lake, 
and this central hill an island. Having flown 
to this mountain tongue in the mountain's 
mouth, I took out my instruments, and forth 
with pursued investigations in the interests of 
twenty different sciences. After three hours' 
labour, I returned to where I had left Rocket, 
and found that the faithful animal had not 
budged from the spot. Unfortunately , in 
flying down, I broke one of my wings upon a

32 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY.. 
crag, a misfortune which, at the moment, I did 
not fully realize. 
Now on the top of a pass in the Copernican 
range, with daylight on the one side and 
darkness on the other, I lit my electric lamp, 
remounted Rocket, and descended into the 
night-invested west, that I might study the 
glaciers. In a few minutes I had travelled 
from morning into the depths of night, so that 
in place of the sun my sky was now presided 
over by countless stellar sentries of the hosts of 
heaven . Their brightness and beauty almost 
beguiled my attention from my work.. After 
a few hours I unriddled to my satisfaction that 
here the glaciers were powerful files, which 
ground down the ribs of mountains ; and 
that here moraines, those deltas of icy rivers, 
presented the same phenomena as they used to 
do in the earth . 
Shortly after this I became entangled in a 
labyrinth of ice - veneered gorges, ravines, and 
ridges. My course would have been difficult at 
noonday ; but dipping down into regions where 
night slumbered , and where winter had laid its 
slippery snares, I felt that any moment might 
have plunged me headlong over some precipice.

I REACH THE MOON. 33 
For a time I considered my life in jeopardy, 
for fly to safety I could not, inasmuch as I had 
damaged my wings. In the exigency I trusted 
my life to the sagacity of my steed. So far 
from apprehending danger, it bounded, chamois 
like, from ledge to ledge, with such cool preci 
pitancy and such unhesitating daring, as made me feel that I was in safe company. But my 
apprehensions were rekindled, when, as my 
steed was scudding along at a speed which 
rendered the objects I passed to appear on my 
retina an illegible scrawl of fleeting images, 
I discovered I was rushing along the brink of 
a mighty precipice. Halting as soon as I could, 
what was my horror to find, on my left hand, 
a cavern which, to my eyes, appeared a bottom 
less pit. Now, keenly alive to the danger of 
journeying into the valleys, I desisted from 
my scientific hunt, and at length found a pass 
by which I was enabled to escape from my per 
plexities, and regain the regions of daylight I 
had so daringly forsaken . 
Leaving this highland district, to which the 
wildest scenery of the nether world was tame, 
I returned home by a route to whose luxuriance 
the tropical riches of the world were poor. 
VOL. II. D

34 THE TWENTY - NINTH CENTURY. 
“ Beautiful world, ” said I, in my exuberance, 
66 
thy landscapes are worthy of a paradise. 
With thy flowers angels might love to adorn themselves: thy perfumes are ambrosial ; thy air is purity itself . Delight expands my soul as I behold thy animal and vegetable creation, with their chains of orders and sub -orders intact. How unlike the sub-lunary sphere, where the cruel sports and bloodthirstiness of past ages have so mutilated the symmetry of Nature's peerless plan, and wrenched so many 
links from the chains of botanical and zoological continuity !" 
In my peregrinations to-day, I came upon two of the balls that had been fired from the Mount Everest cannon . One was plunged about forty feet into the earth, and the other had been dashed to pieces upon a rock. 
Third day. Conducted still bolder explora tions. Having embarked in my aërial car, I journeyed as far eastward as Theophilus ; flew over mountains of amazing height, valleys of astounding depth, and meadows of the most 
lavish verdure. All the while I noted the minute structure of the Fauna and Flora by means of my microscopic and telescopic appa

I REACH THE MOON . 35 
ratus. The symmetry and beauty of both were 
to me sermons preached with an eloquence 
which wrapt my soul in devotion . 
Returned by another route, and viewed a 
changing panorama of landscapes, new types 
of animals and vegetables, and new strata of 
minerals. By the time I had reached home 
I had taken 1,000 sculpture - photographic 
sketches, and loaded my vessel with nearly 
500 chemical and mineralogical specimens. 
Dismounting from my aërial equipage, I, the 
moon's monarch, marched into my metropolis 
and palace, haunted by the strange sensation 
that my little hut was the only habitation in 
this world, and I the only human inhabitant. 
Yet, though a quarter of a million of miles 
from a fellow -man, why should I feel the 
pangs of loneliness ? Is there not more soli 
tude among a billion of men , when estranged 
from God, than here alone, with God for my 
guardian ? Though my communications are 
cut off from the world, they are not so with 
heaven. Alone, I am not lonely, for, like . , 
Enoch of old, I can walk with God. My 
journey has been the grandest schooling I was 
ever vouchsafed . It has sifted from my mind

36 THE TWENTY - NINTH CENTURY. 
much of its earthly dross ; it throws me from 
the arms of the world more than ever in my 
life -pilgrimage into the arms of Providence . 
I am becoming naturalized to my position. 
Custom has thus early empowered me to run 
about on lunar soil without ballast. The gravi 
tation of Luna being so small, I can skip about 
with the agility of a squirrel. I can thus sweat 
through five times the amount of physical work 
I could overtake in the sub -lunary sphere. 
Fourth day. On Rocket I made sundry 
journeys, attended by my usual stately retinue. 
I spent some hours inquiring into the nature of 
the moon's cuticle. The electrical engines of 
my balloon I extemporized into a boring-engine. 
By its means I made eighty different artesian 
wells of great depth, in eighty different local 
ities. Clear and great was the insight these 
undertakings afforded me of the anatomy of 
the lunar rind. I learned that though the 
moon's crust had in pre- Adamite ages been 
more toasted with heat than that of the earth , 
it was now cooled to a greater depth . 
In going home I discovered a great cave ; 
fantastically overhung by a great nose of rock. 
Having anchored my air-barque, I took out

I REACH THE MOON. 37 
my wings, lit my electric lamp, and flew into 
its interior. To my amazement I wandered 
five miles, and found no end to the labyrinth. 
Unfortunately, time only permitted me to make 
a few observations, and take a few sculpture 
photographs of several of the scenes. Among 
its attractions were great veins of pure gold, a 
mighty chamber of pure alabaster, a magnifi 
cent fountain , and a small lake. 
a 
I now returned home, with my cavalcade 
laden with eighty tons of mineralogical and 
geological specimens, some of which I had 
taken from as great a depth as 1,000 mètres. 
In arranging and classifying this material I 
was engaged during the remainder of the day. 
At the close of the work I saw that I had 
amassed such a mammoth museum as neces 
sitated the enlargement of my house. 
Owing to the sun's protracted reign in the 
firmament, the weather has now become in 
tensely warm .I tremble when I think that 
the heat will continue to increase for a few 
days. The luxuriance of lunar vegetation is 
now displayed even in those valleys and on 
those mountains which but two days ago were 
blanketed by glaciers and veiled in wintry

38 THE TWENTY - NINTH CENTURY. 
gloom. Under the continued beams of the 
cloudless sun , the growth of plants is such 
as would be considered supernatural in the 
lower world. In length, some of the leaves are 
already five mètres ; in height many lunarian 
plants are already ten mètres . 
Fifth day. This is the moon's first Sunday. 
My presence in this world hallows this day, for 
till now it never knew Sabbath. Therefore it 
is that, being the first human occupant of the 
moon, I introduce into its realms this most 
sacred of all sacred institutions. In my devo 
tions I prayed earnestly for the neighbouring 
world from which I had come, and of whose 
dust I am made, and from which the prayers 
of millions of souls are now arising to the 
throne of the Most High — that great throne of 
which this solar archipelago is but a footstool 
jewel. 
Sixth day. Enlarged my house this morn 
ing according to worldly time, or afternoon 
according to the sun's declination on my portion 
of the moon . Highly pleased with my masonic 
achievements. Thanks to my knowledge of 
chemistry, I was likewise enabled to supply 
myself this day with heat and light. In two

I REACH THE MOON. 39 
hours I constructed an electrical gas-work, and 
in half- an - hour an electric furnace. As for my 
culinary arrangements, lunar fruits 
are SO 
delicious, that I do not trouble myself with cooking that which I consider Nature has suffi ciently cooked. The climate is now tropical. When I arrived here it was the moon's morn ing, and the heat, which has been and is still amazing, through the agency of an unclouded sun, would be intolerable but for the shallow atmosphere and the genial breezes . I had now in a great measure mastered the meteor ology of the moon . I saw that every lunar day comprised a summer, and that lunar 
every
night embraced a winter . I saw that the moon's morning was a spring time, its mid- day midsummer, and its afternoon an autumn. Thus the moon in the course of a year is blessed with as many as twelve summers, twelve winters, and twelve harvests. Through the protracted heat, I saw that the vegetation is goaded on to prodigious feats in growth. The sun -stimulus is , moreover, powerfully seconded by the amazing force of the lunar capillary attraction. Some leaves I thought large when four mètres : I now behold many 

40 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
nearly double that size. Not an hour passes 
but adds to their sensible growth. 
I also noted that the moon has trade-winds. 
These blow continually towards the west, 
owing to the rarefaction of the air caused by 
the sun . Benign is their influence. They moderated the climate by carrying away the 
warm air towards the cold region, and trans 
porting from the west cool breezes in lieu of 
the intense heat. I wrestled hard before I 
wrested from Nature these climatic secrets. 
Today I studied lunar ornithology, and I 
found that the migrations of the birds cor 
responded to the periods of night and day. 
In the lunar evening they left for the other 
hemisphere, to enjoy summer and daylight on 
the sunward side of the moon ; and when it 
had again revolved and re- introduced lunar 
morning in this region, they returned to their 
former quarters. 
Seventh day. For some days I have been 
planning a circum -lunar journey. I have resolved 
to be the moon's Cook as well as its Columbus. 
Besides, the approach of lunar night tells me that 
I should be removing towards scenes where I 
may escape the rigours of a lunar winter.

I REACH THE MOON. 41 
Engaged to- day in studying lunar ichthy 
ology. Equipped with sub- marine accoutre 
ments, I explored many rivers and lakes. The 
former mysteries of classification are now so 
unriddled, that it is easy for me to arrange the 
genera , species, orders, and sub- orders in a few 
minutes. 
Eighth day. Amid a flow of solemn emotions, 
a 
I bade adieu to my lunar Garden of Eden, and 
embarked in my balloon . Flying on at the 
rate of thirty miles per hour, I sculpturegraphed 
all the country I over-passed, and noted its 
Fauna, Flora, and Geology. I also took notes 
of the latitude and longitude, reckoning my 
metropolis as the lunar Greenwich. I journey 
by the poles, to study to better advantage the 
meteorology of Luna. 
At bed-time I descended from my aërial 
course to Luna firma. Again I was welcomed 
by hosts of animals, which rushed around me 
in living streams. What a strange sight to 
behold creatures as large as the mammoth and 
as tall
as the giraffe pressing around me, 
dancing their peculiar gambols, and nearly killing their smaller brethren with their rude fawning. 

42 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
Ninth day. Arrived at Aristillus. Bivouacked 
in one of its ravines. Around my balloon 
camp are great mountain galleries, by whose 
massive grandeur even the eye of wonder is 
dazzled . Great caverns bespeckle the scene, 
whose ruggedness is strangely toned down by 
their deep mouths being overhung by luxuriant 
mustachios of trees. Yet how all these rude 
splendours pale before the cultivated scenery in 
which our world now rejoices! Nature, in its 
solitary and bleak bachelordom , is wild and 
uncouth . Not till it is married to lovely art is 
it attired in its full array of beauty. Many 
past poets, in their stunted pedantry, vaunted 
of the fire kindled within them at the sight of 
wild scenery, and viewed aught artificial as 
heterodox to true poetry. They realized not 
that up to the twentieth century the world was 
a rugged, ragged beggar, unclad with vegeta 
tion over a large portion of his body, and mis 
clad with weeds, marshes, jungles, prairies, and 
pathless forests in other portions. They con 
sidered not that Nature, untamed and left ' to 
itself, became a reprobate, and produced a 
sanious pestilential vegetation, which putrefied 
the air it should have purified. They imagined

I REACH THE MOON. 43 
not that the time would come when the whole 
globe would be apparelled in the peerless embellishments of art. 
Yet while I could not fail to see how the 
hands and brains of man could adorn the moon's 
beauties, comb down its asperities, and add 
elegance to its majesty, Nature's rude and 
crude grandeur filled my mind with emotion . 
But Aristillus had for me an additional in 
terest . It is now more than a thousand years 
since it was so christened. This was a time 
when the moon itself stood in naked sterility in 
the third day of its creation — a time when its 
waters were glaciers, its valleys barren, its 
plains unpopulated, and its Fauna and Flora 
still in the womb of Time. How little reason 
had the astronomers of the nineteenth century 
to believe that in the course of a millennium 
the moon would see the week of its creation 
completed, and its territories furnished with all 
the comforts of aa habitable world, 
Today I beheld for the first time a lunar 
autumn. The oppressive heat is moderating: 
The leaves are becoming tinged with all the 
hues of Iris. The trees have their boughs bent 
with the burden of their fruits. The fields are

44 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
laden with grain. Nature is being delivered 
of the abundance with which it has been so 
long pregnant. But, alas ! only the dumb 
denizens of the wood are here to enjoy the 
bountiful harvest. 
Tenth day. The sun, after its unclouded 
journey of a fortnight in the moon’s firmament, 
is now setting. How I am to evade the long 
lunar night I have already considered. 
I am 
just three days' journey from the north pole, arrived at which, I will be in the antipodes, and again in the realms of day. 
Night overtook me about 3 P.M. earthly time, and after such a long day I keenly felt I the change. Darkness brooded over my soul as well as my senses. Yet Nature, with its genial compensating power, no sooner hid the sun, than the world assumed a wondrous lustre, -the zodiacal light irradiated the firmament, meteors sparkled incessantly in all parts of the heaven , while the aurora borealis began to play its part in the concert of nightly pheno mena with a brilliancy I had never seen equalled on earth . The sky appeared like a huge kaleidoscope of variegated fire. 
Yet sadly do I muse as night envelopes me

I REACH THE MOON. 45 
for the first time in her mantle and frost in its 
callous embrace. With eyes anchored in the 
heavens, I view the moon's moon—to wit, the 
world . The steadfast, immovable features of 
the face of mother earth contrasted strongly 
with the ever-varying atmospheric toilette with 
which she was draped. So quickly were her 
cloud -garbs changed, and so inexhaustible were 
her vapoury wardrobes, that every hour saw 
her furnished with new raiment. Now she was 
arrayed in golden , silvery, or coppery fringed 
robes, anon lightly veiled with gossamer haze 
gauze. Now she was muffled up in coarse 
nimbus doublets, anon bedight with fleecy trimmings. Now her face was helmeted in 
mists, anon she threw off her cloudy vizor. 
What a wondrous laboratory, mused I, 
is the world's aërial chaplet. It is the dis 
tillery of the seas. It gives wings to the ocean , 
and carries it into the interior of the largest 
continents, and to the tops of the highest 
peaks. It is the ocean of man and all other 
air -fish . It is the exchequer to which the sun 
lends heat and light, and enjoys the usury of 
reflection, refraction, and diffraction. 
Oft I affectionately watched the volutions of

46 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
the terranean whirligig beneath this aërial 
vesicle. Unlike Luna, with its nose ever 
earthwards, there was the earth , like a huge 
teetotum , spinning eternally in the firmament. 
Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and America 
are all in their succession presented to my 
view. Their familiar outlines have a strange 
significance seen at such a distance. They are mementos of home. They make my soul 
bridge the gulf of twenty myriads of miles. 
Up to this forenoon I had been noting the 
world's phases from new to half and half to 
full earth . In nearly its full glory I beheld 
it this evening. Its atmosphere so beautifully 
irradiated the stars within its fringe, that the 
earth appeared like a huge sun, surrounded by a gold -bespangled halo. Not only was it 
thirteen times larger than the earth's moon , its 
lustre, owing to the artistic acumen of modern 
times, by which cities are now but mighty 
tiaras and aigrettes of diamonds, rubies, pearls, 
and opals, was infinitely more bright. Had I 
been a Hume, a Paine, or a Hegel, I would 
a
have been so flooded with awe, that I would 
have damned free-thinking, cursed my own 
murderous attacks upon truth, and rushed to the 

I REACH THE MOON. 47 
refuge of religious faith . To me it would have 
spoken as irresistibly as did the light that changed 
a Saul into a Paul. As I gazed upon it in devout 
a 
admiration, my mind drifted into a maze of sad 
musings. I mourned that so glorious a globe 
had so sad a history. Oh, what a fermentation 
a 
of infamous passions had occurred on the sur 
face of that planetar vat ! What an amalgam 
of arrogance and ignorance has ever been found 
in the hearts of its people ! Had they immigrated 
here, how it would have suffocated their pride 
to find the world, though absolutely great, was 
relatively only a syllable in the volume of 
eternity, —the moon's lantern, and a mere atom 
in that solar system , which forms but a drop in 
the ocean of infinity ! 
What, then, is man , oh Lord, that thou art 
mindful of him , or the son of man, that thou 
visitest him ? How visible is his littleness seen 
from the platform of contemplation. In my 
eyes the world is but the sepulchre of a fallen 
race.
It is the cage of the contentious, feather 
less bipeds . Enviously I survey Jupiter, Mars, 
I 
Venus, and the other planets, whose Adams tasted not forbidden fruits, and in which the devil has found no footing. Oh, unhappy earth, 

48 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
but for Christ you would have been a hell,, and 
your inhabitants devils ! But when I reflect 
upon the great scheme of redemption, how the 
atmosphere of my thoughts is illuminated ! 
From the very ashes of the world's sinful 
history, behold how Divine grace has blazed 
forth our great millennium ! The reign of 
religion is now universal. Art's cornucopia has 
strewn abundance from pole to pole. The once 
semi-nude, tawdry, scraggy , untrimmed world 
is now completely arrayed in a luxuriant attire 
a 
of vegetation—an attire woven by agriculture 
from millions of plants, and embroidered by 
horticulture with millions of flowers. A million 
.marvellous agencies once unknown are now its arms and hands. Peace and plenty go hand 
in hand. Above all, the world, no longer 
sundered into petty kingdoms and nations 
founded on the pedestals of selfishness, nor 
ruled by man- exterminating monarchs, wield 
ing not sceptres, but swords and daggers, is 
knit by the cords of Christian unity into 
one great commonwealth. What Philip II. of 
Spain said of Belgium , I might say of the world, 
“ This is one great town . ” Its Its every ev road is 
a street. Country and town are an emulsion.

I REACH THE MOON . 49 
At sunset I began to study Venus and Mer 
cury . Man never having possessed the advan 
tage of viewing them from so suitable a position, 
1; with trembling hands, adjusted my instru 
ments, feeling that the doings of the subsequent 
few seconds might be emblazoned for ever in 
the volume of human annals. Scarcely had I 
rested my eyes upon the two stars, when I saw 
that Mercury possessed a satellite-a satellite 
which, being the sun's nearest neighbour, had 
hitherto eluded the eye of human research. 
But this only formed the initial of a long index 
of discoveries - discoveries which so flooded my 
telescope and inundated my vision, that I was 
surfeited with my success. I was annoyed that 
into my eyes should be deluged such a mono 
poly of unseen sights and unknown phenomena. 
Eleventh day. Plodding on, with my native 
world and the aurora borealis for my lamps. 
The icy grasp of winter is so tightening its 
hold, that I require to shut myself up in my 
balloon during sleep. Still studying the won 
drous phenomena of a lunar night. 
VOL. II . E

50 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY . 
CHAPTER III. 
A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 
Twelfth day. This day of rest brings strength 
to my wearied soul. Though the firmament of 
nature is dark , the firmament of my soul is 
resplendent with heavenly light. During the 
whole day I have been locked up in the balloon, 
and have supplied myself with heat by means 
of the electric engines. 
Thirteenth day. So majestically did the 
world reign over the commonwealth of lunar 
stars, that with sorrow I, in turning round the 
moon's polar rim in the afternoon, saw it sink 
below my horizon. Happily, I had to take 
farewell with the world, only to bid all hail to 
the glorious sun. Welcome was the change 
after my long imprisonment in the cold cell of 
night. 
Having ascertained the exact position of the 
moon's north pole, I erected a pillar on this

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 51 
astronomical pivot. I then hied along by the 
antipodes of Cynthia, rejoicing, as I went, in the 
soul-stimulating influence ofmy old friendthe sun. 
My enthusiasm in my work swells now that 
I am upon that side of the moon hitherto con 
cealed from human eye. In my trans- aërial 
travels I am , for the first time, out of sight of 
the world . 
Fourteenth day. Discovered thousands of 
unknown animals, vegetables, and minerals. 
Arrived in the evening at a large lake, or 
rather sea, across which my aërial steed sped 
in three hours. Its bosom is adorned with a 
great many islets , on some of which I landed . 
The scenery reminds me of my sea -clad mother 
world. 
How calm and serene are the elements here ! 
Gentle Zephyr is not browbeaten by blustering 
Boreas. A fall never necessitated the presence 
in Diana of those roistering demons from the 
cave of Æolus, -siroccos, whirlwinds, and tor 
nadoes. In this world the language of nature 
speaks with dulcet softness. Its voice assumes 
no deafening emphasis like thunder, nor 
breathes out poisonous effluvia by means of 
simoons or harmattans.

52 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
Fifteenth day. This morning a great victory 
was achieved in my life's campaign. While I 
was leisurely surveying the firmament, I noticed 
a speck in the zenith. The sight whelmed me 
with surprise. Wonder -struck, my eyes for 
the nonce were untrustworthy ; my judgment 
almost disclaimed their evidence ; I thought it 
unaccountable that there should be an object 
in the sky so distinct and so large. I at once 
appealed the case to my telescope, when , lo ! 
what did I behold but a small world ! After a 
most difficult series of calculations, I at length 
saw it was the moon's moon. I found that this 
microcosmrevolved round its own axis in so short 
a time as eighteen hours, and that its superficies 
was equal to the Iceland peninsula. Its posi 
tion I found to be always in the zenith of the 
moon's equatorial meridian in this hemisphere. 
Its course, consequently, was parallel to the 
moon.
While it was thus a satellite of the 
world, it continually hid itself from its mistress planet behind the cover of Cynthia. From its jagged, naked , and rugged aspect, I knew it had no atmosphere. 
Onward I am pursuing my solitary journey. Birds whistle around me, horses neigh, sheep 

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 53 
bleat ; and these voices from the creation are, 
in my ears, the echoes of God's own voice. 
They cheer me, and dispel clouds from my 
mind's atmosphere. 
Sixteenth day. On and on I proceed, trans 
acting sixty Seconds' work every minute. 
When the machinery of mind and body is 
in order, how sweet is our life's voyage, and 
how well work clears the rust from the wheels 
of life ! 
In the forenoon I came upon a lofty extinct 
volcano, whose funnel, to my astonishment, 
was not sealed up like the others I had 
inspected in the moon . Having anchored my 
aërial craft, I, to defeat emergencies, armed 
myself with wings, an electric lamp, and my 
aërifier, supplied each with force to last two 
days, and then flew down the throat of the 
crater. Downwards I plunged without any 
adventure, until, at the depth of two miles, I 
reached a chamber larger than the parliament 
hall, which was literally floored, walled, and 
roofed with a mosaic of precious stones. Just 
a
while venting my admiration of the millions 
of reflections with which the brilliants on all 
sides paid homage to my lamp, a thundering 

54 THE TWENTY - NINTH CENTURY. 
noise ensued, and hundreds, perhaps thousands, 
of huge bat- like animals flew out of their 
jewelled homes. Before I had time to escape, 
I was knocked down and immersed in dark 
ness. I lay until the noise subsided, and then 
stealthily crawled out of this huge gallery into 
a recess. 
On lighting my lamp, what was my 
horror to find that the force-supply of my wings. had escaped ! The thought was so awful, that it did not strike my heart with the sharp pangs of anguish, but benumbed it with the chloroform of despair. At length this stupefying influence left, and the stings of pain roused me to cling to hope. I called on my 
mind to find a means of rescue. 
That my
abstractions might be unimpeded, I extinguished my lamp. Desperation now goaded my brain to solve an almost insoluble enigma. For hours my mind strained after its object. The wild friction of my ideas seemed to make my very blood boil. At length I jumped up, and cried out, “ I am saved !” Reluming my lamp, I, with almost maniacal fury, sprung down a huge gallery in search of lower depths, for there I knew I would find heat with which I would be enabled to feed my wings with the 

À JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON . 55 
requisite dynamical force. The downward 
course was difficult. But for my levity and 
agility, through the small size of the moon, my 
task would have been futile or fatal. Happily, 
by dint of great gymnastic feats, in which I 
took some leaps downwards of 100 feet, I 
reached a spot in which I found heat sufficient 
for my purpose. After an hour in this inferno, 
I bottled enough power to carry me six miles. 
I now re-adjusted my flying habiliments. By 
dint of great care I successfully ran the 
blockade through the bats' chamber, and soon 
afterwards arrived at the lips of the crater. 
Need I say that, when I again saw the light of 
the sun , I felt I was completely insolvent in 
heavenly gratitude ? 
From my present lofty position I noticed a 
specially towering peak to the south . Towards 
it I now steered my air -ship. As I sailed on, 
its importance swelled in my estimation . From 
the first I thought it the Tycho of this hemi 
sphere, but I soon saw that it was the highest mountain in the moon . Seven miles in height, 
With my
the ascent cost me much difficulty. With 
balloon I could only rise to the altitude of five 
miles; but the journey over its brawny shoulders 

56 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY . 
to its head I effected by the aid of my wings and my breathing apparatus. From this 
Pisgah I had a delectable view . I saw that, 
unlike the other hemisphere, with its peak 
spattered surface, the country here comprised 
corduroy ranges, with luxuriant intervening 
valleys. To the south I joyed to behold a 
great ocean . The landscape altogether inspired 
me with admiration . 
I saw around me shrines for the poets of the 
future. Time, mused I, will yet render classic 
the unknown and unsung ground on which I 
tread . Every stream will yet be a Tiber, every 
hall a Tempe, and every hill a Parnassus. 
Seventeenth day. Toiling at my lonely 
avocations. A charm lies in solitude. It is 
the helpmate of laborious research. All great 
inventions and mental marvels have been the 
work of solitary brains in the shrines of solitude. 
It is the soil in which are reared the richest 
products of the mind. The grand jewels of 
thought which will sparkle for ever in the 
coronet of literature have come from the re 
cesses of the closet . The researches of Newton, 
the steam -engine of Watt, the loom of Jacquard , 
the ideas of Luther, yea, alike the fabrications

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 57 
of the poet, the inventions of the machinist, the 
doctrines of the Reformer, and all the emanations 
of mind, which, like Divine springs irrigated 
the fields of human annals, were generated in 
the presence of God alone. When alone 
before Him, the steel of heavenly inspiration 
most frequently strikes sparks from our flinty 
souls. 
How salutary to the intellect — that health of 
the mind, and to godliness — that health of the 
soul, that we should consecrate a portion of our 
time daily in the cathedral of retirement, in 
which, through the wings of holiness, we may 
invade the regions of religious sublimity ! Is not 
the closet the precinct nearest heaven ? —and is 
it not when alone we have most fellowship 
with the world above ? I feel that the moon 
is to me a great cloister. 
A thousand years ago to- day an important 
seed was sown in the fields of history in the 
opening of the world's first great railway. A 
thousand this same month another good 
years
seed was sown in the first voyage across the 
Atlantic by a steam -ship. Then were cradled 
the great schemes by which the prejudices 
of peoples were overthrown, and by which 

58 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY . 
were obliterated those imaginary lines called 
boundaries, on the one side of which rags of 
certain colours and shape fluttered on poles, and 
on the other rags of other colours and shape also 
fluttered on poles ; and which rags and poles, if by chance they found their way to the wrong 
side of those supposed lines, the owners of these 
toys at once gave orders for an international 
game at manslaughter, which seldom ended 
without thousands being massacred and tens of 
thousands being made mourners. · Alas ! in ! 
what a wretched plight was the world in pre 
railway ages. Religion was splintered with 
disruptions; politics saw all its senates, houses 
divided against themselves. Mother earth saw 
all her children, nations armed to the teeth to 
devour each other . The art of depopulation 
was viewed everywhere as the noblest of pro 
fessions. Mankind groaned under the bloody 
enormities of bellicose monarchies or des 
potisms. The few republics which existed, 
though commendable attempts after a good 
form of government, were but flimsy stucco 
draughts of the golden archetype. They were 
only counterfeit republicans, who essayed to 
solder the principles of Liberty, Equality, and

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON . 59 
Fraternity by the corrupt cement of Atheism . 
Few realized that the only pure, durable, and 
genuine government was a democracy, moulded 
by religion, and trusting its existence, not to 
human wisdom or human laws, but to Divine 
precepts and Divine guidance. 
Eighteenth day. Passed a region which 
may well be called the Switzerland of Cynthia. 
During the day I inspected fourteen mountains 
higher than Cotopaxi, and ten lakes larger 
than Ontario. I beheld fourteen waterfalls 
more massive than the ancient Niagara, and 
eighteen caves more gigantic than that of 
Kentucky. Fondly could I have dwelt upon 
numberless beauties unfolded to my eyes, but 
I was forbidden by duty. 
Nineteenth day. Thankful for this day 
of rest, because my efforts to master the 
great outlines of lunar science are entailing 
too much pressure on my only human 
machinery 
As a spiritual recreation I donned my 
microscopic spectacles, and read a few of my 
microscopic books. 
Twentieth day. Have arrived at the equator. 
I flew over scenery whose magnificence the

60 THE TWENTY -NINTH CENTURY . 
world of our day surpasses, but not the uncul 
tivated world of the ancients. 
The sun being near its zenith at the district 
in which I am at present, the heat is becoming 
intense. 
Arrived at another sea at mid- day, whose 
breadth is so great that I am still out of the 
sight of land. I am a prisoner in space, 
whereof the walls are the boundless concave 
firmament above, and the mighty convex of 
water below. If but one of the ten thousand 
intricacies of my machine break, I shall be 
precipitated into the sea. 
At mid- day I beheld, for the first time, a 
rainbow in this world. My soul swelled with 
emotion as I viewed in this strange land God's 
beauteous prism -seal stamped upon the heavens 
in token of the covenant made with Noah . 
While reclining at leisure in my air-barque 
as it flitted along the ocean's surface, I was 
suddenly drenched by a great body of water. 
Looking over the bulwarks of my craft, my 
wonder was magnified when I saw a huge 
whale below squirting such volumes of brine, 
that it reminded me of a water-spout. I soon 
saw that the animal belonged to a school each

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON . 61 
of whose members was twice larger than the 
largest of the world's Cetacea. I followed 
them for an hour, to watch their majestic 
gambols and the play of their blow - hole water 
engines. The leviathan , mused I, which poets, 
peering through their imagination -lenses, cari 
catured, not described, is here, for the first 
time, viewed by the naked eye. 
During the remainder of the night I was 
surcharged with novel wonders. I saw sharks 
as large as whales, dolphins as large as sharks, 
cod and haddock as large as dolphins. I saw 
that here sea as well as land animals were 
huger than in my mother -world . I almost 
thought that nature had told me that the size 
of animals and plants were in the inverse 
ratio of the size of the world they inhabited . 
Twenty- first day. Not till this morning did 
I espy land, so that I have lost a night's sleep. 
My unwearied labours are undermining my 
strength. Travelling nearly a thousand kilo 
mètres daily undera broiling sun , and sculpturing 
and eleographing every inch of territory I over 
pass, taking specimens of interesting geological 
strata, studying the moon's Fauna aud Flora , 
all this has been too much for the frail powers

62 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY. 
of flesh and blood. Distress now condemns my 
over- zeal. 
For sickness alike of body and soul what a 
panacea is the Bible ! Stationed on this un 
earthly world with it as my guide-book, I feel 
that though tens of thousands of leagues from 
my friends I am not unfriended. Within the pre 
cious volume I can conjure the society of Christ, 
the prophets, the apostles, and the saints. Oh, 
great fountain -head of literature, thy streams of 
truth flow with perennial freshness from heaven, 
bearing comfort to every troubled soul and 
refreshment to every wearied pilgrim . 
Twenty- second day. The sun is now setting, 
and autumn therefore burdens the earth with 
its fruits. I am at present making a forced 
march to escape the enemy darkness, which is 
so fleetly pursuing the rear-guard of Phoebus. 
I am spending my time diligently, and there 
fore happily. To God's glory and to man's 
advance my whole time is consecrated. I occupy 
. 
the minimum of time in sleep and the maximum 
in intellectual labour. Explorations abroad 
consume twelve hours daily, but I always 
reserve two hours, which I devote to the lite 
rary workupon which I have spent the spare

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 63 
moments of the last twenty years, and which I 
intend to style “ The Three Aorists." 
The leeward side is assuredly the ruddy side 
of this terranean peach. It is the eastern hemi 
sphere of the junior world . I grieve, therefore, 
to see that nature is now divesting itself of its 
rich day costumes, preparatory to donning the 
night-dress of winter. 
Twenty -third day. Darkness overtook me 
during the night. The new scenes which it 
has unfolded are an ample recompense for the 
discomforts of cold . Diurnal phenomena have 
vanished only to make way for nocturnal won 
ders. Night had scarcely shut the windows of 
day when it disembogued into my mind a stream 
а
of surprises. Four comets adorned the sky ; 
the moon's moon shone with brilliancy, and a 
continual play of meteoric pyrotechny illumi nated the singular scene. I at once saw that 
the moon being nearer the sun-pivot of the 
meteoric and cometic revolutions, the night 
firmament here was, therefore, richer in astro 
nomical interest. 
Despite these spectacles, my soul is invested 
with sadness. 
Twenty- fourth day. To -day my mind has 

64 THE TWENTY-NINTH CENTURY . 
burst the shackles of dejection, and I have been 
enjoying the eloquent silence of the language of 
night. What volumes of sermons are to be read 
in a skyscape! 
In daytime we are shortsighted, and behold 
only the clouds of our own earth, and at the far 
thest our nearest luminary. Butwith darkness we 
find that sunshine has been a veil which has hid 
from us the boundless fields of eternity preg 
nant with crops of stars. Welcome, then, oh 
night, that openeth the curtains of infinity ! To 
night I joyed when I beheld in the distance 
the venerable head of Mount Tycho. The face 
of the country I traversed to- day is covered 
with hill - pustules, crator pock -pits, and rocky 
wrinkles. I beheld thousands of craters and 
millions of craterules, in many of which were 
quarries of blue ice where two days ago were 
ponds of limpid water. 
Twenty - fifth day. Arrived this forenoon at 
the South Pole. In the morning I was in the 
regions of darkness and grim winter ; at mid 
ܪ
day I arrived at the territories of twilight and 
spring ; and in the evening I bivouacked in the 
regions of sunshine and summer. Such a sin 
gular journey, and such wondrous vicissitudes 

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 65 
of weather. How amazing a world is this, where 
only a few hundreds of kilomètres intervene 
between the lands of night and day, and be 
tween the realms of summer and winter. 
During the day I passed numerous forests of 
those strange coloured trees which so amazed 
me when I arrived in Luna. The sun -rise and 
world-rise, or rather my rise to their altitude, 
were to me unspeakably joyful incidents. With 
tearful eyes I looked at both , curious to know 
to which I was most indebted, and thinking 
of my Father who made and ruled both. 
Yet though under the genial rays of my mother world and the sun, and though roam 
ing amid nature's plentitude, I felt world -sick 
all day. 
Knowing there would be an eclipse of the 
sun to -morrow at Hainzel, I to -night proceeded 
thither . 
Twenty -sixth day. Spent this Sabbath in 
thanksgiving and prayer. Devotion I view 
as the great crane for the unloading of misery 
from our souls. 
In the afternoon my devotions received an 
adventitious solemnity on account of the eclipse 
of the sun . Singular it was to behold the 
VOL. II .F

66 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
two orbs meet and coalesce, then part. To 
the eye it appeared as if there would be a 
mighty collision . To the senses, the wonder 
was that the two spheres were not crushed to 
pieces. For two hours the moon was veiled 
in darkness, and the stars burst out in their 
full effulgence, as if to be witnesses of the ren 
contre of the sun and earth. Nature itself was 
impressed with the phenomenon. The tempe 
rature fell, a chill breeze whistled sadly through 
the trees, while the animal creation cowered 
under the cover of caves. The birds ceased 
to chirp, and flew to their nests. The sheep 
ceased to bleat, and hid under trees. For 
the time all the denizens of - moonland 
seemed to covet repose . Only the winds of heaven dared to make themselves heard. At 
length, when the eclipse had ended , and the 
sun had returned in its full glory, nature regained its wonted cheerfulness. The tempe rature increased, the wind fell, and the animal 
creation resumed their pleasures . 
Twenty-seventh day. An unfortunate acci 
dent befell me this forenoon . One of the 
valves of my engine broke, and, like a pigeon 
which had been shot, my mechanical bird fell

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 67 
fluttering to the ground. Happily it alighted 
in a beautiful valley, and on a bed of foliage 
of such softness, that no further harm ensued. 
This misfortune distresses me deeply, for what 
could prove a sadder disaster than the loss of 
time ? Without spending a moment, however, 
in ineffectual repinings, I commenced to mend 
my machine. But I must spend my time not 
in pencraft, but handicraft. 
Twenty -eighth day. While toiling at the 
repairs, I have been besieged by my lunarian 
friends, who have mustered around my fallen 
banners with a fidelity and affection which 
bid me take consolation . 
Twenty -ninth day. My hopes alternately 
tower and cower. Anxiety now macerates my 
soul, and anon faith whispers to me patience, 
perseverance, and time are the architects of 
the fairest constructions of success. Now 
despondence asks what blow could be more 
crushing than the loss of these precious hours 
hours that, despite the ceaseless sweating of my 
brow, and the overburdened beating of my 
heart, scarce leave a single fruit ? Anon ex 
pectation tells me that by trust in Providence 
on the part of my soul, and painstaking on the

68 THE TWENTY- NINTH CENTURY. 
part of my body, I am sure to bridge, or at 
least abridge my difficulties. 
Thirtieth day. Labours without reward, ex 
periments without result, and hopes without 
prospect of fruition, form the sad summary of 
to- day's history. 
The sun is setting, the autumn is approach 
ing, the fruits of the earth are ripening, the 
birds of the air are preparing to migrate, but 
for me I am chained to my misfortunes. I am , 
Ixion-like, tied to the wheel of affliction. 
In my sadness I have mused on the vanity 
of wealth. Compared to me, Solomon and 
Croesus were beggars. Their riches could be 
compassed within the areas of a kingdom, 
but for me, I am the owner of a whole world . 
Yet where are the joys of riches ? Though I 
am the possessor of a whole cosmos, my hands 
a
can grasp nothing larger than a shrub. Though 
possessing the harvests accruing from millions 
of acres , I can only eat a handful of fruit . If 
riches were not a phantom and an empty 
name, how is it that, though I be the proprietor 
of the moon, I am at present helpless, and 
stranded among difficulties ? He only is rich who can command sympathy. 

A JOURNEY ROUND THE MOON. 69 
Thirty-first day. Only God's kindness is 
pure, for gratitude is the only payment He 
asks for His bullion . Oh, then, my soul, now 
in receipt of heavenly bounties, defray thy 
most fervent thanks as an acknowledgment ! 
Through the goodness of Providence, this day's 
mental labour has emancipáted me from weeks 
of manual bondage and weeks of bitter anguish. 
It has furnished me with an invention by which 
I completed in a few minutes the repairs which 
otherwise would have occupied many days. 
Amid a flow of gratitude which welled pure 
from my heart-springs, I stored my aërial 
chariot with dynamical force, and bade a 
joyful farewell to my mammoth camp of 
animals,, that had made me and my balloon 
their head -quarters. As I soared aloft,, the 
mammalia watched me with snortings and 
with uplifted heads, while the birds, favoured 
with their wings, like Ruth, made me their 
Naomi. Singing gaily, they fluttered around my vehicle, and accompanied me until I halted 
in the evening. 
Thirty -second day. I have to -day scarce 
time to realize that I am a solitary human 
occupant of this world. Where I am it is