







CIHM 
Microfiche 
Series 
(Monographs) 




ICIMH 

Collection de 
microfiches 
(monographies) 



Canadian Institute for Historical Microraproductions / Institut Canadian de microreproductions historiques 





mt 



Technical and Bibliographic Notes / Notes techniques et bibliographiques 



The Institute has attempted to obtain the best original 
copy available for filming. Features of this copy which 
may be bibliographically unique, which may alter any of 
the images in the reproduc:!on, or which may 
significantly change the usual method of filming are 
checked below. 







Coloured covers / 
Couverture de couleur 



I I Covers damaged / 



Couverture endommag6e 



□ Covers restored and/or laminated / 
Couverture restaur^e et/ou pellicul^e 

Cover title missing / Le titre de couverture manque 

I I Coloured maps / Cartes g6ographiques en couleur 

Coloured ink (i.e. other than blue or black) / 
Encre de couleur (i.e. autre que bleue ou noire) 

I Z' Coloured plates and/or illustrations / 
I — I Planches et/ou illustrations en couleur 

Bound with other material / 
Reli6 avec d'autres documents 

Only edition available / 
Seule Edition disponible 

fight binding may cause shadows or distortion along 
interior margin / La reliure serr^e peut causer de 
I'ombre ou de la distorsion le long de la marge 
int^rieure. 

Blank leaves added during restorations may appear 
within the text. Whenever possible, these have lieen 
omitted from filming / II se peut que certaines pages 
blanches ajout^es lors d'une restauration 
apparaissent dans le texte, mais, lorsque cela ^tait 
possible, ces pages n'ont pas 6\6 film§es. 

Additional comments / 
Commentaires suppl^mentaires: 



D 
D 
D 



D 



D 



L'Institut a microfilm^ le meilleur exemplaire qu'il lui a 
et^ possible de se procurer. Les details de cet exem- 
plaire qui sont peut-6tre uniques du point de vue bibli- 
ographique, qui peuvent modifier une image reproduite, 
ou qui peuvent exiger une modification dans la m6tho- 
de normale de filmage sont indiqu^s ci-dessous. 

I Coloured pages / Pages de couleur 

I I Pages damaged / Pages endommagees 



D 



Pages restored and/or laminated / 
Pages restaur^es et/ou pellicul^es 



r~> Pages discoloured, stained or foxed / 
UlJ Pages ddcolorSes, tachetSes ou piqu^es 

I I Pages detached / Pages d6tach6es 

I \/\ Showthrough / Transparence 

I I Quality of print varies / 



D 
D 



D 



Quality in^gale de I'impression 

Includes supplementary material / 
Comprend du materiel suppl6mentaire 

Pages wholly or partially obscured by errata slips, 
tissues, etc., have been refilmed to ensure the best 
possible image / Les pages totalement ou 
partiellement obscurcies par un feuillet d'errata, une 
pelure, etc., ont H6 filmSes h nouveau de fa^on k 
obtenir la meilleure image possible. 

Opposing pages with varying colouration or 
discolourations are filmed twice to ensure the best 
possible image / Les pages s'opposant ayant des 
colorations variables ou des decolorations sont 
filmSes deux fois afin d'obtenir la meilleure image 
possible. 



This item Is filmed at the reduction ratio checlced below / 

Ce document est (lime au taux da reduction indiqui ci-dessous. 



lOx 








14x 






18x 






22x 








26x 








30x 






















J 



























12x 



16x 



20x 



24x 



28x 



32x 



Th« copy filmed h«r« has b««n raproducad thank* 
to tha ganarosity of: 

National Library of Canada 



L'axamplaira film* fut raproduit grica A la 
ginirosit* da: 

Bibliotheque nationals du Canada 



Tha imagaa appaaring hara ara tha baat quality 
poaaibia considaring tha condition and lagibility 
of tha original copy and in kaaping with tha 
filming contract apacificationa. 



Original copiaa in printad papar covara ara filmad 
baginning with tha front covar and anding on 
tha last paga with a printad or illuatratad improa- 
sion, or tha back covar whan appropriata. All 
othar original copiaa ara filmad baginning on tha 
first paga with a printad or illuatratad impraa- 
s'on. and anding on tha last paga with a printad 
or illuatratad imprassion. 



Tha last racordad frama on aach microficha 
shall contain tha symbol — ^ (maaning "CON> 
TINUED"). or tha symbol V (maaning "END"). 
whichavar applias. 



Las imagaa suivantas ont M raproduitas avac is 
plus grand soin. compta tanu da la condition at 
da la nattati da l'axamplaira filmi. at an 
conformity avac laa conditiona du contrat da 
filmaga. 

Laa axamplairaa origiruux dont la couvartura tn 
papiar aat imprimAa sont filmis an commandant 
par la pramiar plat at an tarminant soit par la 
darniAra paga qui compona una amprainta 
d'imprassion ou d'illustration, soit par la sacond 
plat, salon la cas. Tous laa autras axamplairas 
originaux aont filmia an commandant par la 
pramiAra paga qui comporta una amprainta 
d'imprassion ou d'illuatration at *n tarminant par 
la darni*ra paga qui comporta una talla 
amprainta. 

Kin das symbolaa suivants apparaitra sur la 
darniAra imaga da chaqua microficha. salon la 
cas: la symbols -^ signifia "A SUIVRE ', la 
aymbola V signifia "FIN ". 



Mapa, piatas, charts, ate, may ba filmad at 
diffarant reduction ratios. Thosa too larga to ba 
antiraly included in ona exposure arm filmed 
beginning in the upper left hand corner, left to 
right and top to bottom, as many frames as 
required. The following diagrams illuatrata the 
method: 



Lea canaa. planches, tableaux, etc.. peuvent atre 
filmis A des taux da reduction diffArants. 
Lorsqua le document est trop grand pour atre 
raproduit an un saul clichA, il est film* A panir 
da Tangle supirieur gauche, de gauche A droite. 
et de haut en bas, ^n prenant le nombre 
d'imegea nAcessaire. Las diagrammes suivants 
illustrent la mAthode. 



1 


2 


3 




1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



MICROCOfY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 



I.I 



I 45 
■ 50 



2.8 

■ 4.0 



2.5 



2.2 
2£ 

1.8 




A /APPLIED HVMGE Inc 

^Sr 165J Eosi Mam street 

S'^S Roctiester. New York !4609 USA 

"■^S (716) 482 - 0300 - Phone 

^:a (716) 288 - 5989 - Fax 



/l/6tV 






•^ ► .J 4.- I. 




\^o r 



Mi 



V 

i 



By ALLEN RAINE. 

"TORN SAILS." 

In bandBome clotb gilt, 3c. 6i. 

A Few Press Opinions. 

Scotsman. 
"Tn his new ston', 'Turn Sails,' Mr. Allon r.nino fiiUv nvintaiiis 
and strengthen'; the position .is a novfli^t whioh hi. "Wcisli Siiirer' 
indirated for him. It is a tcndi-r .nnd ln.r.itird roiii^inco of thu idyliic ; 
a charming picture of hfe in a WVlsh st;i:>i(lf vilhiL;f. It is "omethinj; 
of .1 prose |ioem. trii<.', tender, .niid ^;r.icefid. It is .-xls.> a ih.iriiiini; 
])icture of ;in interesting ana by no ine.\ns fami!i.Tr set iie of hfe nnd 
m.inrers, in which the humorous tr.-iits, though, are rich enough to 
enliven and brighten the wh( lo." 

N.B. Daily Mail. 
"The expect.itions aroused by 'A VWIsh Singer' have not hren 
dis.ippointed by Mr. K.iine's latest work whirh is surpassinf^lv l.eaiilihil. 
The absorbing interest of the whole story is the stroiigest tribute to the 
author's power of characterisation." 

Dundee Advertiser. 
" Lovely pictures are given here and there in the book. No recent 
novel has a more graceful influence and promised greater things for its 
author's future. Wales should be proud of her ntw noveli ,t." 

Daily Telegraph. 

'"Torn Sails' is a beautiful novel ; ilic theme, the charact<'rs, and 
the setting arc so exactly suited to each other tliat they mould the book 
into a harmonious and most artistic wliole." 

Punch. 
" Allen Raine promises to do for Wales what Mr. Ranie and Ian 
Maclaren have done for Scotland ; an idyllic story charmingly told." 

Western Morning News. 

"This latest effort of the Welsh novelist fully maintains his reputa- 
tion as a vigorous and pleasant writer. His story of Welsh vill.age life 
is indeed charming : a wtll-conceived plot abounding in striking situa- 
tions." 

Church Times. 

"A tale of the simple fi.shcr folk jf the Welsh vill.ige, charmingly and 
touchingly told. The story is well worth reading from end to end." 

Pall Mall Gazette. 
" A delightful picture of Welsh life. Hugh Morgan is an especially 
well-drawn character." 



London: HUTCHINSON & Cj., 34 PATERNOSiER Row. 



n 



By ALLEN RAINE. 

By Bervven Banks." 



la clotb gilt, •■. 



■.^J 



A Few PrCMM Opimlont. 

Literary World. 

" ' r.y Rerwon Hanks ' is a novel of charm, as mitjht be expected from 
the autiior who ^arc us stuch pleasant fictions as ' A Welsh i>j[i;;cf ' aud 
' Torn Sails.' A novel of uncommon merit." 

Graphic. 

" A (Icliphtful novel, and a worthy succt -ir to ' A 'Vclsh Singer ' 
and ' Torn S.iils— nothing better than this ci i In; said Ly way of praise. 
Wales is to be congratulated on having acquired such a novelist all to 
hciself as the writer of these three stories has already proved." 

Punch. 

"The scene of the new novel is also laid in Wales, of whose country 
and whose people the author has intimate and loving knowledge. The 
ground is new in the held of fiction, and proves supremely attractive. 
The plot IS nov.'l, ingeniou;,y devisetl, and cleverly worked out. My 
Baronile, calon fach, warmly recommends the acquaintance of Vahnai 
I'owcll, her surroundings, her friends, and her touching story." 

Lady's Pictorial. 

"A pretty love story from the pen of Allen Raine is always ap- 
preciated by novel readers, and, if I am not mistaken, ' liy Lerwen 
Banks' will be even more popular than its predecessors." 

Daily News. 

" Contains some charming descriptions of Welsh country life, the 
scenes dealing with the courtship of the handsome Carao and the red- 
cloa ed Valmai being especially fresh and sweet. " 

Bradford Observer. 

" Allen Raine has given us more than one excellent Welsh Story, 
and this new study of Welsh life and manners will be welcomed by 
many. This clever and entertaming book." 

London : HUTCHINSON & CO., 34 Paternoster Row. 



T 



kjmj'^^Tt,,, HWA^MmL^m6^:'-\'^.^. 



A WELSH SINGER 



By ALLEN RAINE. 

"A Welsh Singer. 

In bandBome cloth gilt, Ss. 6d. 



>) 



4 Few Press Opinions. 

Daily Mail. 

"Wales has waited long for her novelist; but he seems to ha-,e 
come at last in the person of Mr. Allen Raine, who, in his perfectly 
beautiful story, ' A Welsh Singer,' has at once proved himself i worthy 
interpreter and exponent of the romantic spirit of his country." 

Truth. 
" If you are in the mood for a novel, I can recommend to you 
strongly a really charming pastoral, ' A Welsh Singer.'" 

Daily Telegraph. 

"A capital tale, written wi.h vigour .^nd ability. The novel, as a 
whole, arouses great expectations." 

Manchester Courier. 

" A wealth of character, striking incidents, and vigorous and pleasant 
descriptive matter combine in making this story as pretty a bit of 
romance as we have read for many a day." 

Athenaeum. 

"Truly idyllic, well conceived, true to life, and worked out in a 
dainty spirit. Allen Raine has produced a very charming and delic.ite 
story." 

Dundee Courier. 

" The original character of the romance is itself sufficient to make 
the book a success." 

Vanity Fair. 

" Mr. Raine bids fair to have a right to lay cinim to Wales as his 
special preserve. A delightful and clever picture of Welsh village life. 
The result is excellent." 

Dund:e Advertiser. 

" The author's style is unaffected— the first element of genuine literary 
art ; and he empi >ys colour carefully and with good effect. The 
♦breads of romance in the story are skilfully woven, and the broad 
effect of the book is distinctly gwod." 



London: HUTCHINSON & CO., 34 Paternoster Row. 



A Welsh Singer 



® (Uovef 



BY 

ALLEN RAIXE 

Author cf " Tnr,i Sails'' - By Beriien Bauksr ^^ C,arth<y,ve„," "A ir,M 
mtcli:' "On the Win^s of the Whui," "Hearts of Urates,- ,1c. 



TWENTYSECOND EDITION 



TORONTO 

William Brifroc 

1905 



YJ 3 3 






O 



-W -^ >^ 



■r.--i^rr\;''y'^^-:^..'l^-M.*i^prm'*^^^ '-^r 



-i-yr--^-'--:^-. :^tfa-' 



Mr 



\^M 



:~h-. 



•M, 



CONTENTS 



CHAP, 
I. 
II. 
III. 

IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 
VIII. 
IX. 
X. 
XI. 
XII. 
XIII. 
XIV, 
XV. 
XVI. 
XVII. 
XVIII. 
XIX. 
XX. 
XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 
XXIV. 



ABERSETKIN SLOPES 

THE SHIP INN 

PRACTISING 

GLVNNE AND GWLADYS 

HOPES FULFILLED - 

THE EISTEDDFOD - 

OGO WVLOFEN 

SHADOWS - 

CATRIN's TACTICS - 

PARTING - 

TEA AT THE SHIP INN 

NEWS FROM ROME 

DEPARTURE 

EDUCATION 

TOM's LOVE 

VISIT TO THE WEST END 

OLD MEMORIES 

A D'"COVERY 

OLD FRIENDS 

GOOD-BYE TO THE CIRCUS 

SULTAN AND TO.M - 

SINGING TOGETHER 

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING 

TUNEFUL ECHOES - 



I 

14 
24 

28 

35 
46 

56 
65 
73 
86 

93 
109 

"3 

125 

137 

M3 

153 

160 

169 

180 

188 

19s 
203 
21s 






-■TT'-^; fT.or '-■T, , 



! i 



Via CONTENTS. 

CHAP. 

:CXV. ONE ABSENT 

XXVI. THE DEATH CHAMBER 

XXVII. THE FUNERAL 

XXVIII. THE DINNER PARTY 

XXIX. A MORNING RIDE - 

XXX. THE WEST END 

XXXI. RECALLING THE PAST 

XXXII. THE BALL - 

XXXIII. A CONDITIONAL PROMISE • 

XXXIV. TOM POMFREV 

XXXV. Recognition 



TAOM 

225 
236 
248 

267 
282 
292 

301 

333 

342 



'•^Tn« 



^mm^samii^mi^^mf^it^^'^^t^^i^^ 



1 



A WELSH SINGER. 



'■3 



CHAPTER I. 
AIJERSETHIN SLOPES. 

to flush the pa e eastern skV^Tl?'"' ^^/ ^'Sinning 
blown all mVht Sth th/f 5^ ''''"^' ^^^'^h had 

gradually suSdi 1^ Lo 'fitS'eul^'""'^^^' -- 
sand and foam l 3 to the Inni^ ' "^"T'"^ *^e ^O^ 
bo^ered the sho.J ^? AtS.f ^1^^ ^^^^ *^S 

like sentLls oveHook ng the bav ^^R f '^^ ^1°°^ 
stretched a sandv bearh .1^ ?u^' ^^^^^een them 

ran the little r^/erSethinn'^'^"''f^^^ °^ ^^'^^^ 
Mynach a boy and a tr^weS s and^^l °' ^°^' 
conversation, and evidentlv in '^'^"^ "§^ '" earnest 

tears ran down the S^^face Z" t'T'' ^ '^^ 
grave and serious. ' ""^ *^^ ^^^ looked 

. " ^o"'t cry, Mifanwy," he said " if. „ 
.ng . the sheep is go/e ; .hcTe'l. is it ttTb^X^^f 









2 A WELSH SINGER. 

the cliff, as dead as a red herring, and we've got to go 
and tell the master." 

" Oh ! what will I do ? what will I do ? " wailed the 
g?rl, with a fresh burst of tears. " He will beat me 
again, Icuan, for this is the second I have lost this 
year." 

" Didn't thee count them last night? " 

"Yes, indeed, and they were all there;" and she 
loaned over the edge of the crag to take another look 
at the dead sheep. " Oh, poor thing, poor thing ! " 

" What if I tell him it was one of my sheep ? I'm 
not afraid of his beating," said the boy. 

" Oh, no, leuan, it would be a lie ; and besides, thee 
would get the beating, and that would be vi^orse than 
anything." 

"Stop a bit!" said leuan, running his sunburnt 
hands through his brown curls in puzzled thought. 
" Let's call Robert the Mill to watch the sheep while 
we are away ; " and in another moment he was half 
way down the hill, running towards the old mill that 
stood at the bottom. He soon returned, followed by 
Robert, a good-natured lout of fourteen. "We'll soon 
be back," said leuan ; " now come along, Mifanwy ; " 
and, with a few parting injunctions to Topper, the 
sheep dog, they made their way hand in hand over the 
brow of the hill towards a large white house— half 
farm-house, half mansion— where John Povvys, their 
master and the owner of the sheep, lived. 

The cold morning wind followed them up the hill, 
ruffling their hair and wrapping Mifanwy's ragged 
blue Lki-t round her thin form. Her bare feet were 
small and well formed, but abnormally dark in hue ; 
the skin of her face and hands, too, had been so 
scorched and browned by the sun and wind, that 
one might easily imagine her to belong to some 
southern race. Her companion was a year older than 
herself and a goou deal taller. Hurrying along, 
helped forward by the strong sea wind, they reached 
their destination all too soon for Mifanwy, who hung 



•^^t^'^^^l 



ABERSETHIN SLOPES, 
back timidly when they reached the back donr 
ofthe house and looked into the kitchen where the 
servants were just sitting down to thei breakfast 
of milk porridge and barley bread ^reaktast 

stJrJir/StMToJl?.^'^^^^^^'' '''' ''^ boy. standing 
''Want to see the master?" said a roufrh hard 
voice from a dark passage, through which John Pow's 
was entering the kitchen. He ahvays came ,W 
meal times, and never failed to cast a ^furtfvr. lance 
round the table to sec that there was no su repti^^^ 
slice of cheese or smear of butter on the bread fTo 
was not wholly without good looks jindeeT by the 
young girls ofthe village he was called "a hn„Se 
man"; but his eyes lo^oked cunnTng Ld sht y^^^^^^ 
his large mouth disclosed a row of teeth ^.^,h;rh lu Z 
white and evai. had a crueTbof ''p^^'tl ^""^^^ 
firmly knit and his hands, seasoned by manua^l labour 

^^WU.ffu'iu 'T^ ^' '^'^S' hammers ^°"'' 

What! bo h of you here?" he cried in Wokh 
when he saw the girl's shrinking figure ''and whIt^; 
to become of the sheep ? Do I oav vnn f htl 

Sd:;^--^rdt7?^^ 

country?" '"" ""'' '"''^''■'"S about the 

leuan took a step backwards as the anrrr,, „,,„ 

'^'p 'k'^' ^"u' ^*'" ^^°°^ ^-I'^ntly before M^ffnw^ 
'; Robert the Mill and Topper^re watching them 

sir, he answered, " and we have only come to f^i' 

you that another sheep has fallen Ver the cM 

counted wrong; she is very sorry, sir, and so 
fu:^""'^^^::^^ J?!^!^ Po-y-n a voice of 
through the dark passage.and.'standing at the footo"^? 



"-P^yT^rW^^'. 



4 A WELSH SINGER. 

an old Staircase, called out. " Laissabeth, Laissabcth. 

'The^ we're^TL moments of waiting, while 
Laissabeth was heard moving about on the uncarpeted 
floor above; she soon appeared, however, holding in 
her hand a leather strap with a brass buckle at one 
end She was a girl of about the age of Mifanwy. at 

''r^^:.:l^ln':&o, up., looking ^ri^^^^J^l^n, 
serious while Mifanwy, running a few steps in terror, 
cave th^ tyrant, as he thought, a good opportunity 
for the first^stroke ; but he was balked, for. before the 
buckle Sad fallen on the ragged blue frock leuan had 
sorunci forward and covered the small thin body with 
^s sturdier form, so that the strap descended upon 
him only. She struggled to free herself and bear her 
own punishment, while he tried his b-t to shie d he. 
"There' t^et up, you tramps!" said the master at 
last " and gS back to your work ; and you John Ellis, 
fo k>w aftef and skin the sheep. And. ook here, you 
two brats," he continued, "look here, if one mo e of 
rT sheep dies, as sure as God is in heaven I wil get 
dd of you both and send you to Caer Madoc Work- 
house," and, shaking his fist at the children, he re- 

^"^W'ent '^disappeared, Laissabeth approached 

the boy and the girl, who stood panting against the 

old elder tree on whose branches the hens and turkeys 

^ept at night, and which formed a thick pojch over 

h? back door. She was dressed in a Pmk cotton 

frock-which, in Mifanwy's eyes, was the height of 

Grandeur and fashion-and held her straw hat in her 

hand she had no need to wear it, for neither w.nd 

nor sun e?er seemed to affect the dazzling whiteness 

Ther skin. Her golden hair hung down hciback^^^^^ 

two long plaits ; her blue eyes and dimpled face were 

generally wreathed in smiles, but now the eyes looked 



1 



ABERSETHIN SLOPES. $ 

tearful and the face pale. She drew her soft white 
fingers tenderly over leuan's sunburnt hands, and 
the tears, which he had hitherto restrained, started to 
his eyes. 

"Oh, leuan bach ! "^ she cried, taking no notice of 
Mifanwy, who stood by silent with a sullen look on 
her dark face, "art hurt? Why didn't thee leave 
Mifanwy to bear her own punishment ? It was all 
her fault ; oh dear, oh dear ! " and the tears began to 
fall with long-drawn sobs. 

" Hurt ! no, not a bit," said leuan, rubbing his 
shoulder; "so don't cry, and spoil thy pretty eyes. 
Mifanwy and I will go back to Mocl Mynach ; only 
give us a hunch of bread, for we have had no break- 
fast." 

She ran into the kitchen, and soon re-appeared with 
a piece of barley bread, a slici^ of cheese, and a tin 
jug of milk, which she pressed into leuan's hands. 

" Here, here, take them," she sa'd, " and don't show 
thyself to my uncle." 

The food was meant for the bo> alone, a fact which 
Mifanwy fully realised ; but leuan, unconscious of it, 
accepted the provisions gratefully, and, with a back- 
ward glance of thanks to Laissabeth, took Mifanwy 
by the hand, and they began their way towards the 
brow of the hill. 

•■' Wert hurt, Mifanwy ? " he asked. 

" No," answered the girl, " not at all." Then fling- 
ing herself down on the grassy side of the road, she 
broke into a flood of tears, that leuan tried in vain to 
stem. At last, exhausted with the passion of her 
grief, she lay silent and subdued, her dark face and 
swollen eyelids making her look the picture of misery. 
leuan tempted her with the bread and cheese, but 
she would not touch them. 

" Some milk, then, or thou wilt faint," said the bov, 
holding the jug to her lips; but she pushed it roughly 
away, and sprang to her feet with flashing eyes, 

^ Bach— dear. 



A WELSH SINdKR. 

" Drink it thyself," she said , " it is for thee. I 
was not hurt, and want no pity." 

The boy's healthy appetite asserted itself in spite 
of bruised arms and shoulders ; so, sitting down on 
the wild thyme, he began his breakfast, ceasing only 
when there was nothing left to eat, Mifanwy standing 
by, struggling silently with the pangs of hunger, and 
still more with the fiercer pangs that were gnawing at 
her heart. She had seen on Laissabcth's face, while 
the girl was handing the strap to her uncle, a vindic- 
tive look of pleasure — of pleasure, however, that had 
been quickly changed to pain when leuan had inter- 
posed to shield his companion, and the memory of 
that look had aroused in Mifanwy a bitter feeling of 
jealousy and anger. The children had been play- 
mates and companions on the green hillsides from 
their earliest childhood ; but gradually, as Laissabeth 
had grown older, she had begun to realise her im- 
portance as the niece of the rich and miserly John 
Powys. She had frequently wounded the proud and 
sensitive nature of the little shepherdess, sometimes 
by ignoring her altogether, sometimes by assailing 
her with ridicule and taunts ; and the feeling of anger, 
that had by degrees taken the place of childish affec- 
tion in the girl's heart, had culminated this morning 
in a feeling of bitter antagonism. 

Meanwhile, Robert the Mill had been longing to be 
relieved of Fiis charge. He had been seized with 
giddiness, and that sickening dread which sometimes 
attacks a mountain climber suddenly and unaccount- 
ably ; and, when leuan and Mifanwy returned to 
their sheep, he was clinging to a broom bush in 
abject terror. 

"It's a horrid place," he said sulkily, "and it's a 
wicked wind that blows up here. I thought I was 
quite safe, because the wind blew in from the sea, 
but, instead of that, it blew straight up against the 
cliff, and then rushed back at me as if it wanted to 
push me off. Come to the mill when thee likes 



1 



ABERSETIIIN SLOPES. 7 

leuan, but don't ask mc to watch the sheep again," 
and off he went, grumbluifj audibly down the hill. 

" Well, indeed, he is quite right," said Mifanvvy, 
smih'ng. "I have often felt, when the wind blows 
hard from the sea, as if it came back to mc angiily 
and tried to push me off." 

" Oh, yes, I have had to fight with it like a living 
creature sometimes," said leuan ; " but whoop ! I 
must go,Mifanwy ; just see those sheep trailing down 
towards the valley ; I will come back this evening 
after supper," and Mifanvvy was soon left alone with- 
out a human voice or face to cheer her solitude. She 
went to the edge of the cliff, and looked down sorrow- 
fully at the dead sheep. Its companions were all 
browsing peacefully on the hillside, cropping the 
short herbage and walking the dangerous paths, in 
brute unconsciousness of the gap in their ranks that 
death had made. 

Gradually the sun came up over the hill and began 
to gild the " slopes " ; the wild thyme and the g'^ ^ 
sent up their incense to greet him, the sea p* 
peeped out bravely from their grey-green tufts, i e 
sea below sparkled and glinted in the new-born 
radiance, and the gulls sailed about like flecks of 
snow. Looking across the valley, Mifanwy, her keen 
eyes accustomed to long distances, could distinctly 
sec leuan lying on the grass ; she knew well that 
before him stood a block of the soft slaty rock of the 
neighbourhood, and that from it he was carving with 
rude tools one of the shapes of beauty that came con- 
tinually into his head, and that never left him a 
moment's peace until his hands had formed them. 
He was a sculptor born ; from babyhood it had been 
his soul's delight to mould and carve from any sub- 
stance—clay, or stone, or wood— imitations of the 
things of simple beauty he saw around him. At first 
his models had been the bowls and platters in ordinary 
use in his thatched home ; later, the sheep and horses, 
and even the pigs, had been either carved or moulded. 



)l, ,., 



¥ 



8 A WELSH SINGER. 

Many a time had Mifanwy rescued from the 
" midden," that leaned comfortably against the sunny 
garden hedge, the treasures of carving tbat ShAn, 
their foster-mother, did not appreciate, and carried 
them surreptitiously into the loft, where she had 
ranged them upon a high rough shelf that ran round 
the attic apportioned to the two children. And to- 
day, while she watched him lying on the grass, his 
sheep dog, Juno, sitting beside him, she knew he 
was deeply intent upon a group he had been carving 
for some time past. 

As the long day wore awuy, the sun seemed to 
gather strength and heat, and every little flower and 
blade of grass held up its head, rejoicing, and singing 
to those who had cirs to hear, " Spring is coming ! 
spring is here!" Gradually every cloud disappeared, and 
after a day of brilliant shining, the sun set behind the 
sea like a ball of fire, making a crimson pathway, over 
which Mifanwy and Topper gazed in silence. The 
silence was broken ere long by the girl's crooning, in 
a low tone, one of the old pathetic hymns of her nation, 
that must surely have been caught by her ancestors 
from the sound of the wind as it whistled over their 
bleak moors, or sighed through their deep forests in 
the early ages, so closely do some of the melodies 
imitate its weird and mournful tones. The crooning 
was liquid and musical, and as the girl sat leaning 
against a broom bush, her hands folded listlessly on 
her lap, her beautiful eyes — so dark, that they seemed 
to throw a brown shade on her cheek — fixed dreamily 
upon the sea, her red lips parted, showing the 
white and even teeth, the body all so calm and 
motionless, the spirit welling forth in living, thrilling 
tones, one might well imagine that, for the time, the 
spirit of music had entered her frame and was con- 
trolling it. The exciting event-, of the day had 
ruffled the usual calmness of her si.nple life, and in all 
such experience, whether of sorrow or of joy, her 
feelings found vent in song, sometimes mournful and 



ABERSETIIIN SLOPES. 



wailing, sometimes rising into joyful And exuberant 
strains. 

The cottagers in the valley below were well 
acquainted with these bursts of sonp, and the intense 
love of music, characteristic of their nation, caused 
them to listen with delight, and often to droj) their 
occupations and run out of doors, the better to hear 
the clear and powerful notes that echoed between the 
high cliffs and mountain crags. 

"What has upset Mifanwy to-day?" they would 
exclaim, or, "Caton i)awb!' what is it pleases 
Mifanwy to-day?" Robert the Mill especially 
was much influenced by the differing tones of her 
voice ; when the melody was wailing and sad, he 
stood at the doorway looking mournfully up to Moel 
Mynach ; but when the tones were jubilant and cheer- 
ful, he whistled at his work, keeping time with the 
clap, clap, clap of - mill. As for leuan, the usual 
effect upon him w; to bring him racing over the 
sands, and up the side of the hill, singing while he 
came. 

The sun had quite disappeared, the sea had changed 
into lovely shades of violet and pink, and Mifanwy 
still sang on. She turned to look over the long 
reach of sands towards Mocl Hiraethog, and saw that 
leuan was gathering his flock into the fold with thj 
help of Juno, whose short yaps came clear and dis- 
tinct upon the evening air. She ceased her singing, 
and Topper was instantly on the alert. 

" Hoi y defaid ! 2 Topper," she said, and the dog, 
nothing loth, was soon scouring hither and thithe-, 
and driving before him every stray sheep and wander- 
ing lamb. Mifanwy scrutinised them narrowly as they 
passed into the fold, imd fastening the hurdles with 
extra care, seated herself once more upon the v.ild 
hyme. She saw the fishing boats lower their sails as 



I they drew into the beach below 



she saw the glowinr 



' An exclamation of astonishment, as, "good Rracious ! " 
*" Fetch the sheep 1 " 



10 



A WELSH SINGER. 



ill 






tints of sunset fade into the cold, grey shadows of 
evening; she saw Icuan, followed by Juno, turning 
his steps towards Maen Powys, their master's home, 
and she knew it was supper-time, and she was hungry; 
but still she sat on and watched the sheep in the fold. 
As it grew darker, the moon looked down over the 
hill-top, and the cold March wind blew fitfully around 
her ; but still she kept her post, until, at last, leuan 
came shouting down the mountain-side. 

" Hoi ! hoi ! Mifanwy, where art, girl ? Art not 
going home to-night ? " And when he drew nearer, 
she saw with pleasure that his wallet looked filled out, 
and that he carried a jug in his hand. She stretched 
out her own hands eagerly. 

" What is it ? " she asked. " I knew thee wouldst 
bri.ng my supper ! " 

"Bvvdran it is," said leuan, producing wood*-" 
spoon and bowl from his walle^, and pouring out tnc 
contents of his jug. "And bread and cheese, 
Mifanwy ; but why didn't thee come up to supper ? 
Laissabeth was away, too. John Powys laughed 
when he saw thou wert missing. ' She's afraid of the 
strap,' he said, ' and quite right, too.' But I brought 
thee thy share in spite of him ! " 

" Yes, and more," said the girl, beginning to eat ; 
then with a sigh she added, " but he is right, leuan, I 
am afraid of "-he strap." 

" Afraid of the strap ? " 
zt her with astonishment , 
not feel it a bit? Didn't 
thee ? " 

" Yes," said Mifanwy, " but indeed, indeed, Icuan, I 
felt it worse than any beating he has ever given me. 
When I heard the blows fall thick on thee, I felt them, 
oh ! I felt them more than if they had fallen on my 
own flesh." 

" Well, indeed, Mifanwy," said leuan, " thou art a 
straufje girl, and ungrateful into the bargain, after all 
I bore for thee ! " And, taking off his jacket, he held 



aid Icuan, looking down 
didn't thee say thee did 
1 keep every blow from 












ABERSETHIN SLOPES. 



ir 



his bare arm close to her face, endeavouring to show 
her the bruises in the fading light. 

"Wait till to-morrow," he said indignantly, "and 
I'll show thee my back, all bruised and swollen ; and 
feel this cut on my head ; and, after all, to say thee 
felt it more than ever ! " 

" Well, leuan, it is true ! " rejoined Mifai.wy, " ana 
thee must never do it again." 

" I won't," said leuan, nodding his head ; " but thee 
art an odd girl. Now, see Laissabcth ! how tender 
she was ; she smoothed my hand with her little white 
fingers. I have promised to get her a sea-euU's eee 
to-morrow." ^ ^^ 

Mifanvyy sighed. " Thee'st very fond of Laissa- 
beth ? she said. 

" Well, indeed ! she's so pretty, and so kind. Shs 
wouldn t be ungrateful." 

Mifanwy sighed again, and looked pensively at her 
brown feet. 

" Art coming home ? " asked leuan. 
c/l^°/' ''IP^'S.'^ ^I'fanwy ; " thee can tell lanto and 
bhan 1 11 be home to-morrow night : but to-nieht I 
must watch the sheep." 

leuan, still sulky, took his crook, and began his 
wav over the right shoulder of the hill ; but, before he 
had gone far, he turned round and called through the 
darkness, "Mifanwy! art afraid here by tliysclf? 
bhall I stay with thee ? " 

Mifanwy was crying softly in the darkness, and 
could only answer with a shake of the head, that 
leuan of ccuise, could not hear or see ; so he 
stalked away, leaving her to her solitude. 

It was not the first ni.nrht she had spent beneath the 
stars, but she had never before begun her vigil w-th a 
heart so heavy. & ^ 

She sat on the mountain-side, and her thoughts re- 

W-!h b-o^ '.Vn"H V'^ "^^''TS.and the fiery 
u^ ■ Ti • ''^"'^^f^ widiui her. Topper sat beside 
ner.wuh histongue hanging out and his eyeshalf closed. 



12 



A WELSH SINGER. 



4 



" I <//rf count the sheep last night, and they were all 
right, Topper, and I fastened the hi /die carefully; 
some wicked person came and unfastened it, some- 
body who hated me. Topper." The dog licked her 
face, and, putting her arm round his neck, she drew 
him close to her side. " Who did it. Topper ? No- 
body hates me but Laissabeth ; she did it!" cried the 
girl, starting to her feet, her brown eyes flashing, and 
her dark face flushing a deep red with her suspicion. 
" It was Laissabeth, Topper ; nobody else in the 
world would be so wicked ; to-night we'll catch her." 
Topper pricked his cars, and stood up ready for 
action. "We'll watch, Topper, and we'll catch her, 
and thou shalt seize ''-•er, and then we'll tell leuan, and 
he'll never like her again." 

And, sitting down once more beside her dog, she 
fell into a deep reverie, in which she pictured herself 
detecting her enemy red-handed, and exposing her to 
leuan's withering contempt. On and on in the still 
watches of the night she sat with wide open eyes, and, 
when the night grew colder, she brought from the hut 
built on the hillside, as a shelter for the shepherds, an 
old red cloak that had served her in many a storm ; 
wrapping it around her, she crouched again, a weird 
little dsrk figure in the shadow of a stunted haw- 
tho.n. Suddenly she started, her eyes opened wider, 
and she stared with a quivering excitement, which 
Topper shared in every muscle ; for they saw the 
silent, stealthy figure of 'a girl making her way round 
the shoulder of the hi.l. At a turning in the path, 
the moonlight caught her head and shoulders, and 
Laissabeth stood revealed. F"or a moment a look of 
vindictive satisfaction glowed in Mifanwy's eyes, and 
both she and the dog seemed to be steadying them- 
selves for a spring upon the unconscious enemy. 

" Down, Topper ; lie down and watch." 

Topper obeyed, and, with his nose on the ground 
between his two front paws, lay motionless, with 
eyes and ears alert. Mifanwy, too, watched silently, 



ABERSETHIN SLOPES. 



13 



but while she watched, a gradual change came over 
her face. 

" How dreadful to catch her in the very act, how 
ashamed she will be ; and I — I shall be ashamed, too, 
and leuan will be unhappy and ashamed for Laissa- 
beth. No, no, I will not." And, restraining Topper's 
frantic efforts to rush away, she began in loud, clear 
tones to sing one of her mountain songs. Laissabeth 
heard, and knew that Mifanwy was still with her 
sheep. Immediately she checked her steps, and retired 
as quickly as she could into the shadow of the hill ; 
nnd while Mifanwy still sang and watched her, she 
passed round the edge of the hill, and disappeared 
•'■om view. Gradually Mifanwy's song died away in 
.rembling tones, and ended in a burst of sobs. 

" Cruel, bad girl, how I hate her ! " she cried ; " but 
I will never tell leuan ; it would make him so un- 
happy, and he must go on liking her." At last she 
t irned towards the shepherd's hut, followed sulkily by 
Topper, who was evidently disgusted at the tame 
ending to his night watch. In one corner f the 
hut a heap of heather was spread, and on this 
Mifanwy stretchod herself, wrapped in an old red 
cloak. Topper lying at her feet. The day's events 
had tired her out, and she was soon sleeping the 
sleep of youth and innocence. 



i'ii 



CHAPTER II. 



w) 



THE SHIP INN. 

At one end of the village of Abersethin, where the 
roadway or village street lost itself in the sandy grass 
aiid loose stones which bordered the shoref stood 
ine bhip Inn. There was no occasion to go any 
farther, for there was nothing beyond it but rou^h 
grass and sea holly, mixed with clumps of seaweed • 
so It stood defiantly across the road, looking strairrht 
down the straggling street, its low doorway always 
open Its small wmdows overshadowed by its thickly 
thatched roof. They were not made to open, but 
there vvas no necessity for this, for all the doors re- 
mamed unclosed from morning to night, and the 
large open chimneys provided sufficier- ventilation 
wiHiout the modern luxury of sash windows 

The place reeked of the sea. Every door in the 
house was coated with tar ; the floor, which was paved 
with round cobble stones set in a diagonal pattern 
was swept out every morning with a hard broon of 
heath blossoms, and freshly covered with sand, which 
lietto, the maid-of-all-work, fetched in her apron 
from the shore. Before the day was over this sand 
?rom f'r"^'' so saturated with beer, the droppings 
from the jugs, the glasses and "blues," that the air 
was always pervaded by a mingled odour of sour beer 
seaweed, and tar, that permeated the air of the whole 
place, and when the wind blew from the south, reach-i 
to the farthei jiid of the village. 

The children grew up in that odour, and, In after 
years, whenever, in distant ports, the same kind of 

i4 



THE SHIP INN. 



15 



scent reached their noses, it brought back to the 
sailors' minds the old dark kitchen at The Ship 
Inn, with its wide, open chimnej^, up which the peat 
fire sent its circling blue smoke, and where, hanging 
above its glowing embers, the huge crock of " cawl " 
sent its appetising odour through the house, or the 
kettle hissed and sang its cheerful song in readiness 
for the cosy tea. 

On each side of the open hearth stood settles of 
black and shining oak, on one of which sat, when she 
was not trotting about, Catrin Howells, the landlady, 
and the patron saint of half the male inhabitants of 
Abersethin. It cannot be said that she was such a 
favourite with the female half of the community, 
although they always came to her in any trouble or 
grievance, always to find a ready ear and a sympa- 
thising heart ; but there 'vas a lurking jealousy of her ; 
her cheerful fire and eiccjllcii*: "home-brewed" ale 
were too attractive ; she ■. as too prosperous, too con- 
tent ; her brewings always turned out excellent, and 
clear as crystal ; her bread was known to be the best 
in the village, and, moreover, she had no children to 
worry her ! In fact, Catrin Howells, in the opinion of 
her female friends, was unfairly exempt from the 
ordinary troubles of womankind. She was sixty 
years of age, but was jtill bonny and comely, her 
teeth even and white ; her hair, though sprinkled with 
gray, abundantly filled out her lifgh frilled cap ; and, 
although she did not trip about her household duties 
with the youthful agility of former years, she still 
trotted nimbly up and down. Her once slim figure 
had now grown stout, so stout, indeed, that her aprcn 
stnng was a myth. Her shoulders and ample bosom 
were covered with the loose shawl of the Welsh 
costuuie, and as she sat on one side of the heartl 
directing Betto in loud, but pleasant, tones, her hus- 
band froni the opposite settle would look across at hrr 
with confidence and admiration. Dan Howells was 
seldom heard to utter a word, but sat hour after hour 



i6 



A WELSH SINGER. 



,■ I 



if 






iH' 



day after day, in the chimney corner, a long clay pipe 
in his mouth, and an empty glass on the little round 
table beside him. It was empty.because, under Catrin's 
firm rule, it was filled only four times in the day, when 
its contents were swallowed at a gulp. On his head 
he always wore a tall black hat of the s-jrt generally 
known as "chimney-pot," bruised and battered in 
every direction, but still his inseparable companion ; 
he rippearcd in it the first thing in tht morning, and 
at night, when his palsied legs carried him out of the 
sanded kitchen, he still wore it. The kitchen had 
been unaccountably empty for ten minuter;, and 
Catrin was congratulating herself on the opportunity 
for a nap, when John Powys entered. 

" A glass of beer, Catrin," he said, seating himself 
near Dan Howells. 

" Well, indeed," said Catrin, " I am glad to see you ; 
where have you been so long ? " And she filled his 
glass, Dan's also, which was instantly emptied, and 
replaced on the table. 

"Evcrythi.ig is going to the bad, Catrin," said 
John Powys, shaking his head. 

Catrin ga -e a long, low whistle, and laughingly ex- 
claimed : " Caton pawb ! " 

"You may laugh," he said, "but you wouldn't 
like to have your sheep dying as mine have been 
lately." 

" Have they indeed ? Poor things ! what has been 
the matter with them ? " 

"Oh, those two devils of children, my shepherd 
and shepherdess, have let them fall over the cliffs." 

"What! Mifamvy and leuan?" said Catrin; "I 
shouldn't have thought that of them." 

"They arc two troublesome brats, and I shall send 
them both to Cacr ]\Iadoc Workhouse one of these 
da)-s." 

" Oh, no, you won't, John Powys ; I was thinking 
about the buy last iiij^ht. " 
"Never mind thc^'boy thou a» always talking 



THE SHIP INN. 



17 



about him ; I never knew thou wert so fond of boys, 
Catrin." 

" I am fond of that one," said Catrin. " Another 
glass ? " 

" No, no, no more," he said, " one's enough ; " and 
he pulled out of his pocket a canvas bag, from which 
he extracted slowly two pennies, which he placed 
ungraciously on the table. 

" Nonsense, man ! " said Catrin, placing bread and 
cheese and golden butter before him ; " put back 
your money and niake a good supper ; I am not 
going to charge you anything, for your mother was 
a good mistress to me till I was twenty years of age ; 
sit down, man, and let us have a little talk before 
customers come in." 

Her visitor did not relish the prospect of a " little 
talk," but could not resist the temptation of another 
glass of beer " for nothing," and he at once applied 
himself to the bread and cheese. 

" Well," said Catrin, " I was thinking of that boy a 
great deal last night ; wasn't I, Dan ? " 

"H'm!" grunted Dan, "thee was talking about 
him a great deal." 

"Well, it was exactly fifteen years ago last night; 
I was sitting here late in the evening, when I knew, 
by the clinking and shouting in the harbour, that the 
Aden j^ don had come in. I knew she was expected 
to bring a cargo of slates from Caernarfon, and I 
went out to the door to welcome the men. It was a 
good while before the ' trwp ' of men who had landed 
in the small boat came up the street, and I couldn't 
thmk what made them so slow, and surprised I was 
mdeed, when they reached the door, to see a woman 
amongst them ; she walked as if she were weak and 
weary, and, in her long black cloak, which covered 
her from head to foot, and her pale face all wet with 
the spray, I thought I had never seen such a forlorn- 
lookmg creature. I gave the woman a warm wel- 
come, though she came in such a strange manner, 

B 



I8 



A WELSH SINGER. 



f 



and I warmed his feet and tied up her hair. She 
sat there in that very chair you are in now, and 
leant her elbow or the table. I can see her now," 
continued Catrin, fixing a far-away look on John 
Powys, who winced uncomfortably, and moved closer 
to Dan. "At first she would not let me unfasten her 
cloak, but when all the men had cleared out, for it 
was late, and old Dan there was noddini^ n^orc than 
usual, well ! then she let me take off her wet cloak, 
and then it was I saw by her condition that she was 
in need of more care and attention than she could 
have had on board the Aden y don. ' Caton pawb ! 
woman,' I said — " 

" There, there, that will do," said John Powys, rising, 
" a pretty thing if I were to listen to the history of 
every tramp and beggar who passes through Aber- 
sethin." And he approached the door with the in- 
tention of leaving. 

But Catrin was not to be baulked of her intended 
" little talk." She placed her ample person between 
him and the doorway. 

" Twt ! twt ! John Powys, you must listen to this 
story. At least, there is something in it that may 
interest you. Sit down ! " 

Her visitor seemed spell-bound, and sat down 
again, though unwillingly. 

" Well, well, make haste with thy gossip," he said, 
"for I must be going. The wind is rising, and re- 
member I have to ride round the Devil's Elbow." 

" Well," continued Catrin, " I nursed that woman 
for three weeks. I killed my fattest fowls for her, 
and got fresh milk and eggs from Morfa for her ; and 
a sweet creature she was. So gentle, so patient, so 
pretty. But close, John Powys, but close as you. I 
could get nothing out of her except that she wanted 
to reach Maen Powys. ' Dost know John Pow)' ; 
ray girl ? ' I said." 

*' ' Yes,' she said, ' I knew him well, and he was 
always kind to me. He has a kind heart at bottom, 



THE SHIP INN. 



19 



and he will be glad to see me: I am sure he 
will." 

"Well, after three weeks' nursing, we got her into 
the cart, and Will Bullet drove her away, wrapped in 
her cloak, and rij^^ht sorry I was to see her c^'o ; but, 
before she went, John Powys, slic asked for pen and 
ink and some paper, and she wrf)tc a letter, sitting at 
that little table : she folded it and sealed it." 

At this point Catrin's visitor becjan to j^et uneasy. 

" What has all tliis to do with me ? " Iv; snapped, 
brin.c;inj4 his fist down heavily on the little table, and 
causing- the ^lasses to jini^lc. 

Catriii, not at all abashed, drew nearer, and brought 
her fat fist down on the other side of the table. 

" Perhaps nothin;^^ Jf)hn Powys ! perhap;. a great 
deal. Put listen! When she had finished writing, 
she handed the letter to me. Didn't she. Dm ?" 

Another grunt fr(^m Dan. 

"'I feel very ill, Catrin,' she said, ' and I don't know 
v/hat may happen to me before I reach Maen Powys. 
I may die, I may be unable to speak ; but, should 
anything happen to me, and should I not be able to 
r,et speech of John Powys, I trust you to give him 
this letter. Will you promise ? ' I gave her my word, 
and, had she not succeeded in seeing you, I would 
have kept my promise." 

John Powys' mouth was dry and parched. " Have 
done, woman," he said, " and bring out my horse, for 
I must be cfoincr-" 

" Betto ! bring out his horse ! " she cried. " I have 
only a tew words more. When I came in from the 
doorway, after the poor gir! had started in that rough 
trundhng cart, I went straight back t^ 'he dresser to 
take up her letter, which I had placed there on the 
shelf, but it was a boisterous afternoon, and the letter 
was thin, and before I could lay hold of it, the wind 
had caii-<ht it and blown it behind that board. 1 
could still see the corner of it, but, in trying to get it 
up, I only pushed it further down, and there it is still. 



if ' 
m 



20 



A WELSH SINGER. 



You never got that letter, for I heard from Will Bullet 
that the poor jriri had got out of the cart as soon as 
Maen I'owys was in si<jht, and that jvu, cominj; along 
under the trees, had inct her, and when he turned his 
cart back you were talking together." 

John Towys stood up, and gathered his gloves and 
his whip from the chair beside him ; he was a little 
less florid than usual, but, with his furtive eyes and 
thin, compressed lips, looked more cruel and secret 
than ever. 

"Is that all?" he said. "Catrin, thou'rt getting 
garrulous in thine old age." 

" That's all ! " said Catrin, "except this, John Powys, 
if you do not treat that lad well you s/ia// receive that 
letter, if I have to pull down every stick and rafter of 
the old house to get it." 

With these words ringing in his ears, John Powys 

mounted his horse and rode away, taking a narrow 

bridle path that made a short cut over the bleak moor 

that lay between Maen '^owys and Aberscthin. Here 

'"a rounded hollow of the mountain-side, lanto 

and Shfin Morgan's thatched cottage lay ensconced, 

built on one side of a small basin, whose other sides 

formed the garden and the yard. At a little distance 

nothing of It could be seen but its roof and chimney, 

from which the blue peat smoke was generally 

curling. Here they had lived ever since their 

marriage, thirty years before. They had no children 

of their own, but, for all that, had brought up a large 

family; three stalwart men now sailing on distant 

seas, looked back to their thatched hut as their happy 

home, and no less than four ruddy-faced farm girls 

found their way there whenever they had a holiday, 

■u^l^^ they had been nursed and watched over 

with the tenderness and care they would otherwise 

have missed. Shan eked out her scanty livelihood 

by taking to her arms and heart any little unfortunate 

who, liaving come into this cold world uninvited, 

and with no legal right to expect a welcome, was 



THE SHIP INN. 21 

handed over to her, and, thenceforth, except for 
an occasional surreptitious visit from its shame-faced 
mother, was left entirely to her tender upbringing 
until it should be old enough to be sent to sea, or to 
a farmer to act as shepherd or shepherdess, or to help 
in the fields and gardens. Then was poor ShAn's 
heart troubled, and many a journey did the kind- 
hearted woman take, over cliff and moor or ploughed 
field, one child wrapped in her red " mantle," while 
the other trotted beside her, to visit the little brother 
or sister who had just left the warm nest to forage for 
itself. Then she would sit down by the hedge-side, 
and the little home-sick child would rush to her arms,' 
rubbing the tears away with its earthy fingers, to be 
comforted with a large slice of barley bread and butter, 
thickly spread over with brown sugar. 

On a stormy night in March fifteen years before, 
John Powys had sent for her, and, leading the way to 
the barn, had pointed to a little morsel of humanity 
lying asleep on the bed of hay, not far from his dead 
mother; and Shan's heart had leapt up at once to- 
wards the little helpless creature. 

" Hast any children to nurse now ? " the morose 
man had asked, apparently unmoved by the sad 
spectacle before him. 

" No, sir ! " Shan had answered, with a curtsey, 
"and I did not mean to take another; I am getting 
too old to take proper care of them now, but oh, the 
little one— druan bach i ! I can't leave him here, if 
you will pay me, sir. And who was she?" nodding 
towards the straight, still form, over which a sheet 
had been laid. 

"Do you think I know every tramp that comes 
here?" John Powys had replied; "any way, I want 
to get rid of the brat ; perhaps it would be better to 
send it to the workhouse." 

"Oh no, no," Shan had said, and <^cnth' lift'rr-^ the 
sleeping child, had murmured, " Come thcn/li'ttic'oVie, 

* Poor fellow 1 



22 



A WELSH SINCEK. 



come to ShAn, and thou shalt not miss thy mother, 
and a fine boy he is, too!" she had added, "and a 
heavy one." 

"There, take him away, and don't bother me; I 
will pay thee every month, and thou canst have 'as 
much milk as thou wantcst from Maen Powys." 

Shin had carried the child gently towards the silent 
form, and, turning the sheet down from the face, had 
laid the little red check of the boy on the p- 'e lips of 
the mother. " There, poor thing, let he avc one 
kiss from her baby before she is buried." 

"Thou art an old fool, ShAn." And John Powys 
had taken the candle hastily towards the door, so that 
Shan had had to hurry after him or be left in the 
gloomy barn with the dead woman. 

"Yes, I am an old fool, I know," she had muttered, 
while she wrapped the child warmly in her red mantle 
and took her road back over the moor to her cottage, 
where lanto, wondering, had been waiting for her 
return. When she had loosened the baby from its 
warm coverings, lanto had made a show of grumbling, 
though in truth he had from the first guessed what 
Shan would bring with her on her return, for he was 
accustomed to these sudden messages. 

"I thought thou wcrt never going to nurse another 
child, he had grunted. 

" Oh, but see him. see him, lanto ! " had cried the 
woman, unfolding tlie little warm bundle, and croon- 
ing over it; "see his fine limbs, and his big hand; oh! 
a fine man he will make some day ; and be a comfort 
to us in our old age. The house has seemed empty 
the last few year^ since Siencyn went to sea." 

And so the little waif had been taken into this warm 
home of love, and had grown and thriven to Shan's 
satisfaction. A year afterwards another little helpless 
orphan had been added to the family circle, for on the 
further side of the hill stood a small farm, in which 
both master and mistress had suddenlv been stricken 
down by a malignant fever, to which both had 



,:,.k.. 



Cij^r piTT^i :'■; ■-•i? ?:•*"; ;l>'*ij?'''^^0^ 



TIIF SHIP INN. 



23 



succumbed within a few clays of each other, Icavinj^ 
behind them their first and only child, barely a montll 
old. After the funeral, ihc frail girl -baby had been 
consigned to Shan's care, who had taken her to her 
ample bosom and to her large heart. 



F: 



I, 



i^^ 



'ill 



CHAPTER HI. 






PRACTISING. 

Fifteen years had passed away, and lanto and Shan 
were still strong and healthy, thoui^h the wrinkles 
round Shan's eyes and lips had grown more pro- 
nounced, and lanto's shoulders a little more bi.nt, as 
he wove his willow baskets in the evening by the peal- 
fire, while her bright knitting-needles clicked as 
rapidly as of yore. 

"\yhere's the children to-night?" he asked one 
evening, while Shan was serving out the bowls of 
cawl from the simmering pot hanging over the fire. 

" They ought to be here now," said Shan; "Mifanwy 
won't stay cu' another night, I should think." 

" No ; I wonder she's not afraid up there on the 
mountain, an-^' bo near Pcmnynydd church ! They 
do say a corpse candle was seen there last night." 

" Do they ? " said Shan, with bated breath, and turn- 
ing rather pale. The sea wind, blowing up over the 
little hollow in which their cottage was built, moaned 
and whistled eerily in the chimney, and Shan rose to 
close the door ; but, at the moment, a flood of melody 
swept over the hill on the night breeze, "it is 
Mifanwy," she said, listening ; " oh, anwyl ! how the 
child sings ! " 

" Yes," he said, pausing with a spoonful of cawl half 
way to his lips; "she will beat her grandmother one 
day, and what a singer she WcS ! " 

" leuan is with her," said Shan ; " I hear his vc' 
in the seconds ; but he can't sing like Mifanwy. Wh 

24 



PRACTISING. 



25 



a voice like tliat comes under your roof, there is no 
moie room for howling winds and ' corpse candles.' " 

Then Mifanwy's slight form appeared at the door, 
and the tender woman fd .J her in a warm embrace 

" Where hast been, . \y singl.ir,^ angel, these two long 

days and night ? " ,. t^ 

" On the hillside, m: he r, vv atxhin.^ my sheep. 1 wo 
have fallen over the c.iff, so I feared to leave them 

last night." , ,, j 

" And for each one Mifanwy was beaten," added 
leuan, sitting down at once to his supper. 

" Only once," said Mifanwy, " for the last beatmg 
w.is thy portion, lad." 

Shan and lanto were loud in their sympathy. 
" Never mind, mother," said Mifanvy, " we must 
make haste with our supper. I hear the bell on 
Ynysoer. Rhys Morgan will be waiting for us." 

" Yes, go, my child." said Shan • " I long for the 
Eisteddfod, that they may hear thee sing ; only I do 
wish it were a Welsh song. I don't know how thy 
voice will sound in that English gibberish." 

The children laughed merrily, then left the house, 
their bare feet falling noiselessly on the ground, but 
Mifanwy could be heard singing until they had crossed 
the Rock Bridge that led from the mainland to the 
little island of Ynysoer, with its thriving fishing village 
and its tiny church, built into the side of the rock for 
safety from the strong sea winds. 

When they entered the little porch, they were 
jo'ned by Laissabeth, who looked rather nervously 
at Mifanwy, but, finding she made no sign of anger 
or suspicion, immediately regained her self-possession, 
and the three children entered the dimly-lighted 
church together. 

The Rev. Rhys Morgan sat at the harmonium 
waiting for his pupils. 

The lamps had been put out, and the church was in 
darkness except for the light of a flaring <.aridle. 
Twice every week he gathered these three children 



4 1 r 



/ill] 



■J'- 
;-i^l 



\ 1 



n ( , 



HI 



26 



A WELSH SINGEK. 



around him for practice in singincr, in preparation for 
the National Eisteddfod to be held at Cacr Madoc in 
the course of the coming summer. It was a labour of 
love. Indeed, his whole life amongst the fishing folk 
of Ynysoer was so. 

He drew his hand caressingly over Mifanwy's dark 
hair while he arranged the music on the harmonium, 
and, pushing her gently into the background, drew 
forward Laissabeth, who was in nowise loth to take 
the lead. She blushed and smiled, and began in clear 
crystal tones that beautiful aria from " Acis and 
Galatea," " As when the dove," for the best rendering 
of which a prize of three guineas had been offered by 
the Eisteddfod committee, a sum of fabulous wealth 
to the simple country folk. All over the country 
young maidens were practising the air ; in the farm- 
yards, out in the fields of clover, on the sandy beach; 
anywhere and everywhere rang out the dulcet melody. 
But Rhys Morgan thought proudly, and not without 
reason, that none could rival his two pupils. 

Laissabeth pictured the hundreds of faces turned 
to her with approving smiles, id the thought lent a 
fresh sparkle to her voice. She sang from beginning 
to end with perfect self-posse.sMon, and Rhys Morgan 
could not find a fault ; the execution was good and 
the timbre excellent, but where was the soul? 

And then Mifanwy began in clear, mellow tones the 
recitative, " Oh ! did'st thou know the pangs of absent 
love, Acis would ne'er from Galatea roam ! " and then 
poured forth the graceful melody : 



" As when the dove laments her love 
All oil the naked spray, 
W liLii he rclurns— no more she mourns, 
liut loves the live long day." 



i nrl 



It was a voice of most unusual beauty both in tone 



?»vprfr 



no 






iiiiipia, jjcrnaps, as 



Laissabeth's, but with a depth of feeling that could 



PRACTISING. 



27 



not fail to s ike a responsive chord in every music- 
loving heart. The pathos of the first part the re- 
turninir happiness of the second, were so admirably 
rendered that when the last words, "Melting murmurs 
lasting love," died away, the master broke forth in 
admiration of his pupil : , , , , 

"Splendid, child!" laying hold of both her nervous, 
trembling hands. "Delightful! I believe it i3 the 
soul of music in you that wears out your little frai 
body and makes you so thin. When the Eisteddfod 
is over I advise you to leave off singing for a tew 
years until you are older and stronger." 

"Not to sing! Oh, master, I could not live; I should 

not want to live ! " j 1 « t 

The master gazed at her kindly, tenderly. 1 
believe you, child. Good-night." 

The lesson was over, and the children were crossing 
the Rock Bridge together, Laissabeth, as usual, chat- 
ting merrily with leuan, leaving Mifanwy unnoticed 
only sometimes casting a sarcastic look at her frayed 
blue skirt, bare feet, and tattered hat ; but Mnanwy 
walked on heedless of Laissabeth's airs. 1 hen, having 
reached home, the boy and girl climbed up the ladder 
to the loft in which they had slept from babjhood. 

It was only a tiny place altogether, and partitioned 
off into two sleeping rooms; it seemed scarce y laige 
enough for the narrow beds ; but health and youth 
icquiVed no rocking, and in a short time bhan Irom 
below heard the heavy breathing ol the sleepers. 



n 

i-i 






i 



% 



lit 

it I 

HI 



',W 



il 



11!/ 



M 



I 



CHAPTER IV. 

GLYNNE AND GWLADYS. 

uTflT^'ff ^°^^^y,^^e"i"g in April, the sky flecked 
with soft rosy clouds, the air clear and bright, the 
sound of the surf falling musically on the ear, when 

fLu^r^.Tu'iu^ ?''^^" ^^'■°"Sh Abersethin and 

alighted at The Ship rn. He was a sculptor, whose 

name was a household word in the world of art but 

down here his chief claim to notoriety lay in the' fact 

that, havirig been bred and born in the neighbourhood 

a simple farmer's son, he had now developed into a 

rich gentleman from London." About two years 

before Sir Ivor Glanarvon of Glanarvon Hall had 

died, but a short time before his death he had 

commissioned Sir Glynne to execute for him a marble 

monunnent in memory of his wife's father, the late Sir 

T'iu ^^^^''°"'^° ^^ P^^^^d '■" Pemnynydd church- 
and this had necessitated the frequent visits of the 
sculptor to his old neighbourhood. He had always 
been a welcomed and honoured guest at the Hall, and 
though the connection between him and its inmates 
had been fraught with bitterness in the past, this feel- 
ing had been buried deep beneath the surface, and 
out of it had blossomed a warm friendship. 

The monument had been executed to a certain 
point m Sir Glynnc's studio in London, and had been 
sent down to the Hall in separate blocks, requiring 
only the finishing touches of the master's mv.rha"d 
He was^ a man ot about forty years of age, tall and 
broad-shouldered, and firm of step, with black hair 

28 



GI.VNNE AND GWLADYS 



29 



• ' 



and heavy moustache, his clear brown complexion and 
keen black eye betokening good health and a cheerful 
disposition. He had never married, and many were 
the conjectures as to the reason ; some people said, 
" He was difficult to please;" others said, " He had 
married a country girl in his youthful days, and had 
her still hidden away in some out-of-the-way village ; " 
others thought, " He had been cruelly jiltei by some 
fashionable London belle;" but Sir Glynne kept his 
own counsel, and although he knew well why his 
handsome house in the West End was without a 
mistress, and ruled over only by Mrs. Jones, his old 
housekeeper and friend, yet, as said before, he kept 
his own counsel, and did not look like a broken- 
hearted man. 

Catrin Howells, who had known him as a boy, and 
had heard with awe and pride of his increasing fame 
and riches, accorded him a more than usually warm 
greeting, and brought out her best English, though 
Sir Glynne spoke Welsh as fluently as on the day of 
his leaving Wales. 

" Well indeed, sir," she said, " there's glad I am to 

see you." 

" Well, Catrin, how are you ? " answered h-r guest, 
in good broad Welsh, and shaking her hand warmly; 
" can you give me a crust of bread and cheese ? " 

" Iss, iss, sir," said Catrin, clinging to her English, 
for she thought the occasion worthy of the effort ; and 
she opened the door of her well-sanded parlour. 

" Not I," said Sir Glynne, turning on his heel with 
a laugh ; " you won't lure me into that cold room ; I 
am going to sit by you, Dan ; and bring me my 
lunch on this little round table, Catrin." 

Dan raised his sunken head for a moment, and 
grunted, " Glad to see you, sir." 

The little table was soon laid, and Catrin's English 
breaking- down altofrether, she glided into her native 
tor.gue,lo Sir Glynne's great relief 

While questions were being asked and news retailed. 



i: 



■11 !■ 

■^ I.! 

■V 






: , i :\ 

■I p 






If 



I' 



■t 



30 



I 



m* 






A WFLSH SINGER. 



a boy entered tne kitchen, carrying in his arms sonic- 
thing wrapped up in a red cloth, nssomc 

"ThofL!? u' ^'')'""'C '^'^ ^^^•■'" to the boy. 

1 hou hast been ask.n- for him so often ; well now 

here he is ; what dost want with him ? " ' 

and irrr''"'''^^''''!''"''^ *'^" boy, punincr his forelocl: 

w J a "^;r' ^'"-^ "'J^'^' °" ^^^ ^'^^' t-bic. and 
vvunurawmg its wrapj)in(^s. 

Catrin burst out lau-lilng ; the boy blushed f the 

well, my iad, Sir Glynne sale kindiv "what 

snovv mu And, rising f-om his scat and puttin- on 
a pair of ryold eye-glasses, he examined thl object 
Catrin's merriment, while the boy stood rubbin^one 
brown foot against the other and nervously c a W 
andunclaspin-r his fingers. ^ ^id.-,pmg 

Sir Glynne looked ""clo.sely at the block of rrrev 
stone carving on the table. A dead or dying sheep 

beside ifwfsT"1'-'"' ^ •^•^^' '^-"^^''"S on'^o.fe knee 
beside It, was looking at ,t sorrowfully, xvhile a bov 

snip faulcy m detail, but excellent in desi-m the 

fnHfi^r. "''^. "''"">' ^'^^■"S graceful and ddica e 
and^finished with more care than were the ot£ 

Sir Glynne walked back a pace or two, looked a* 

I d'nn? "'*■ . S'' ?°"^ '"' ^^^ ; '■' breaks away where 

st^i^ I Pu " '° ^'""^^ ' '^ I h^^ ^tone that wouldn't 
split, I could carve much better " vvouian t 



L 



GLYNN E AND GWLADYS. 



31 



I 



fill paint, leuan, some green for a petticoat, some red 
for a shawl, and some coal tar for her bare feet would 
make her look as if she had Sunday shoes on." 

Icuan looked inquiringly at Sir Glynne, whose black 
eyes twinkled while he answered, " No, no, that 
wouldn't do at all. You have improved, my l.ifl, 
since you showed me the bull ; I thought j'oi. would 
Will you leave that group with me ? I will show it 
to Lady Glar.arvon, and 1 w ill sec you again." 

Icuan's face beamed with delight, while Catrin, 
playfully touzling his brown curls, placed a huge 
hunch of bread and cheese in his jacket pocket and 
fetched him a drink of sweet brcci from the brewing 
tub. leuan tugged his forelock again, and ran away 
with a light heart. 

" That boy is a genius," said Sir Gljnne, " and if 
he lives he will make his mark in the world unless I 
greatly mistake. Who is he ? " 

And Catrin, nothing loth, began her tale of that 
wild March afternoon fifteen years before, when the 
poor woman had arrived in the Adc7i y don. 

" Ah ! " said the sculptor, bringing his meal to a 
close, "a not uncommon story 1 am afraid in the 
annals of our country;" and he dismissed the subject 
from his mind. 

"Come again soon, sir," called out Catrin as he 
drove away from the door. 

Some explanation is here ncccs r "-y to shovv how 
the successful sculiJtor was connected with the 
retired neighbourhood of Abersethin. As a boy 
he had shown a wonderful talent for carving. His 
parents, well-to-do farmers, intelligent and refined 
beyond their station, desiring to encourage his genius 
gave him a good education so far as was obtainable 
at the Grammar School at Caer Madoc. The lad 
was frequently invited to the Hall, the old baronet 
having early recogni.sed his talent ; and here he spent 
many happy days of his youth, petted and spoiled by 
Sir Owen and his amiable wife, rnd teased and de- 



r 



I', 

V' 



lii 



m 



33 



WFI-SH SINGER. 



" f- ' I 



I K 



I r y 



I - 'I 

n ■ "? 

I: I; 

3 
I 



"S41fe' ^^ '^- '■■""= "-S"'" Gwlady,, five 

had^over forgotten or neglected his oU pa'ren, Jo 

Ev|J„p,,°-f-=^leV;t-tar^^^ 
be oved bv h^^^r"' '"""^^ "'"" '>™«lf. »"d much 
coSoteld7aS'"«"P '° "= ""^P^P-" 

Khrarot?L"™!t;->',f-s,*rar„iJ 

Ws old h; Y^^^/ft^'-ye^r Glynne Mered th vTs"teS 
n«s old home, and year after vpar r.„u^ "i vibuea 

^itL°«rco\^ct:n*^rr.£^S 

be'.'lln°"'H"/ '"•'"' "^^'•■^ ^"ft °". thankful only t^ 
be allowed n-ee intercourse with one another None 
suspected their secret, and they never spoke of it 
Suddenly they were in the midst of the bribers 
nf h 'f ?fi1 "^"^.^f ^° Abe^sethin, and. in return- 
Llrt'^f fiff"^ u"P ^^^""^ Meredith and his sister a 
girl of fifteen who sometimes accompanied her brothel 



-Jk*^ 



GLYNNE AND GVVT.ADYS. 



33 



to the Hall. The three young people we^c chatting 
merrily, when, at a bend in the road, Sir Owen ap- 
peared, a tall, handsome stranger with hitn, who was 
mtrodiiccd to Gwladys as her cousin Ivor Gwjnne. 
Glynne and his sister were also made known to him ; 
but, from that moment, a gloomy foreboding took 
possession of him, and though, during the rest of the 
day, his treatment by the baronet and his daughter 
was as kind as ever, yet Glynne could not shake off 
the depression that was haunting him. When he re- 
turned to Berthlwyd, his own home, he found a letter 
from his friend and patron, Mr. Clifford, requesting 
his immediate return to London on important busi- 
ness connected with his studio, and adding " that he 
might finish his holiday at the end of three months," 
and Glynne had no choice but to obey, 

Gwladys Glanarvon felt herself deserted at the very 
time when she most wanted support and sympathy. 
Her cousin soon showed that his object in coming to 
the Hall was to win he*- love, if possible — at all 
events, to win her for his bride— and in this he was 
seconded by his uncle and aunt. Gwladys did all in 
her power to resist the strong influences brought to 
bear upon her, hoping that, if she could stave off her 
decision [for three months, Glynne Meredith would 
return, when, with his presence to strengthen her, she 
would summon courage to tell the truth ; but, at the 
end of the three aonths, his home-coming was still 
postponed. Mr. Clifford could not spare him, and, 
had he been able to do so, Glynne had enough know- 
ledge of the world to know that an avowal of his love 
could result only in a complete separation between 
Gwladys and himself. He, therefore, hoped that his 
fears concerning Ivor Gwynne had no foundation, and 
that, when he could return to Berthlwyd, he and 
Gwladys would be able to resume their sweet com- 
panionship. 

At last, wearied out with Ivor's pleading, the per- 
suasions 'jf her parents, and the long-deferred hope of 

c 



i. 






pi 

4". \ , 

r-i'- ' 



Hi 



34 



A WELSH SINGER. 



n « 



Glynnc's return. Gwladys yielded, but unwilllnrlN-. 
an^i shortly afterwards she and her cousin uxu- 
married at Pemnynydd church. At the bride's 
earnest request, it was a simple wedding 
, Soon after this a baronetcy was conferred upon the 
rising sculptor ; but, with the knowledge of Gwladvs' 
marriage, he felt it had come too late. About the 
same time a great trouble fell upon h.m. His youncr 

i^sf;omT/?K''''°"', ^^ '^"^ "" -^^^""S afK-ction. had 
just completed her education, and was on the point 

of returning home, when suddenly she disappcarc,! 

from the school at which he had placed her Her 

disappearance almost stunned him. He made every 

effort to learn her whereabouts, but without success 

l-rom the servants and some of her schoolfellows he 

discovered that she had frequently been seen at the 

garden gate talking to a young man of handsome 

appearance, but the fact had been kept from the 

knowledge of the schoolmistress until after the flight 

of the missing girl, when it was too late to trace he" 

bir Glynne was so shocked at his sister's deceitful- 

ness and want of principle, that his love for her seemed 

to turn to hate, and he gave up his search, and, with 

a sorrowful heart, went down to Wales to break the 

sad news to his oarents, who took it so terribly to 

neart that, before the end of the year, and within a 

short time of each other, it brought them to the grave 

bir Glynne gave out that his sister was dead— for dead 

indeed he considered her-and in the far-away villa-c 

ot Abersethin no one knew or guessed the truth "^ 



CHAPTER V. 



Hi 



HOIT.S FULFILLED. 

One day, more than fifteen years after the events 
recorded in the last chapter, Sir Glynne drove up to 
llie main entrance of Glanarvon Hall. In spite of 
his forty years, he could not quite still the tumultuous 
beating of his heart ; he had not met Gwladys since 
her husband's death, and he felt actually ashamed of 
the boyish nervousness that now came over him. 
He had been a frequent visitor at the Hall during Sir 
Ivor's lifetime, and was now warmly greeted by 
Williams, the old servant, who helped him out of the 

" Very near dinner-time, sir," he said, with a confi- 
dential nod, " but I know of old you're never long 
dressing, sir," and he condescended to carry Sir 
Glynne's portmanteau up himself. 

When he entered the drawing-room, it was fully 
ten minutes before dinner-time. The loom was 
lighted only by a wood fire, save where the moonlight 
streamed in through one of the long windows. Lady 
Glanarvon was sitting on a low chair talking to a 
gentleman, who seemed much interested in their con- 
versation. She rose at once upon Sir Glynne's 
entrance, and, in the moonlight, she looked the same 
Gwladys as of old. There was a warm clasp of the 
hands ; then, in her old natural way, she drew another 
chair to the moonlit window, saying : " Come and join 
us ; I think you know Mr. Rhys Morgan." 

The men shook hands, and a few of the usual que.s- 
tions asked and answered when a traveller arrives, put 

35 



IV. 



\l 



m 



I , 



^'r 



If 

I 



3" A WTLSII SINCFR. 

thorn all at thc'r case. They were joined by Capta.n 
arul Mrs. I'rice, cousins of Lady (ilanarvon, who had 
resided with her since her husband's death, and had 
frcHjucntly met Sir ulynne before. 

"Mr. Morgan is much interested in the Eisteddfod, 
to be held at Caer Madnc before long," said the 
hostess. "I think we must all go and patronise 

" I hope you will, indeed. There arc three children 
I am coaching up for it, two girls, esj^ecially. who 
have beautiful voices." 

lint here dinner was announced; so. for the moment 
the subject dropped ; but in the drawing-room, later 
Mr. Morgan returned to it, expatiating with enthusi- 
asm on the rare quality of Mifanwy's voice 

"You will come and hear her, will you not?" he 
concluded. 

"Certainly!" said Lady Glanarvon. 

"And I." added Sir Glynnc, "will certainly be 
there; I delight in an Eisteddfod. I think this 
neighbourhood must be rather rich in prodigies for I 
have found here a youthful sculptor. I have brought 
with me this evening a specimen of his work. May I 
ring for it ? " ^ 

And when William had lugged in the small piece 
of statuary and laid it on the table, he pulled off the 
cloth that covered it. 

"There!" said Sir Glynne, "now, what do you 
thinkof It, Gwladys?" in his excitement forgettine 
her usual title. ^ 

Lady Glanarvon noticed the omission, and while 
she approached to inspect the sculpture, blushed a 
rosy red. Sir Glynnc, wholly unconscious of the 
cause, wondered, and thought within himself, " She is 
as beautiful as ever!" 

"Did that boy do that?" she asked. "How 
wonderful! Of course I do not understand much 
about sculpture, but to me it seems beautiful ! That 
girl kneeling by the dead sheep ! Where have I seen 



1 



HOPES FULFILLED. 



37 



her before? Aiul the boy standing beside her! Is 
he the little sculptor himself?" 

" I think he is," replied Sir Glynnc; "he is a hand- 
some boy, and worthy to be a sculptor's model. And 
nc.v, will you allow it to be placed in that little niche 
under the cavalier's portrait ? I sec it is empty still. 
Do you remember how we used to wonder what it was 
meant for ? " 

" Yes," said Lady Glanarvon ; " I shall value it 
very much. It seems made for that niche. Thank 
you." 

And, after a little further conversation on the 
subject, leuan and the two j^^irl singers were forgotten 
in more interesting topics, that kept them sitting late 
over the blazing wood fire. 

" What arc you going to do with yourself to-day ?'* 
asked Captain Price, coming down to breakfast the 
next morning when the meai was half over. Mrs. 
Price never left her room till noon. 

" Well ! I am full of business to-day." replied Sir 
Glynne. "I want to see John Povvys ; and, after 
that, to find my little shepherd. I wonder, Gwlad) s, 
whether you would accompany wc? Are you as 
good at long walks as you used to be ? " 

" Oh, yes, quite," she answered ; " better, I think ! I 
was not very strong then, but now I can walk miles 
without getting tired." 

Sir Glynnc looked pleased, and Gwladys laughed 
and talked with a return of hci- old vivacity. In less 
than an hour they were both walking over the moor 
towards Maen Powys. 

" I shall be glad when this visit is over," observed 
Sir Glynne. " I do not often take dislikes to people ; 
but when I meet John Powys I must roiiicss to an 
unreasonable aversion to the man, though he has 
never done me any harm." 

"' I think the fccn'ng Is sliared by most people in 
this neighbourhood ; but why do you seek him out 
to-day?" 



■ i- 

■ I i 

I! 
Ill 






38 



A WELSH SINGER. 



fl: 



:i i 




" I want to get his cohf nt to take his shepherd, 
leuan Gwyllt, away with me, to bring him up as a 
sculptor, and — and, in fact, to adopt him ; that is, if 
no one has any objection." 

" But who is there to object ? " asked Gwladys 
innocently. " You are your own master, if any man 
can be." 

"Yes, that is true," rejoined Sir Glynne. Then 
they crossed the farmyard and stood under the thick 
elder tree that stretched its interlaced boughs like a 
porch over the door. 

John Powys was standing in the kitchen when 
their shadows fell on the si'.nny floor. When he 
turned round and first observed Sir Glynne, a dark 
scowl came over his features ; but u partially cleared 
away when he saw Lady Glanarvon's pleasant 
smile. 

" Well, to be sure ! " hw said, taking her proffered 
hand with a show of hospitality ; " well, to be sure, 
Lady Glanarvon, I am glad to see you. And you, 
Sir Glynne? What, may I ask, has procured me the 
honour of a visit from j'ou ? But romc in " and he 
led the way through a dark passage into the "hall," 
his usual sitting-room. 

In a corner of the stiff horse-hair sofa sat Laissabeth, 
surrounded by a heap of her uncle's stockiiigs, one of 
which she was busily darning. 

" Oh ! the little singing maiden ! " said Lady 
Glanarvon. " We were speaking of her last night ; I 
did not think I should have the pleasure of seeing her 

so soon." 

Laissabeth rose up hastily, scattering the stockings 

on to the ground, but was not at all embarrassed ; the 
consciousness of her pretty face was a continual 
source of confidence and assurance to her in all sorts 
of experiences, and she was soon chatting uncon- 
straincdly with her visitor, who was much amused at 
the girl's self-possession, not to say conceit. 
" Oh! yes," said Laissabeth, "I 



am going to school. 



HOPES FULFILLED. 



39 



and to have my voice trained ; my uncle thinks it is 
worth while." 

" Indeed it is," said Lady Glanarvon. " To Caer 
Madoc, I suppose ? " 

" To Caer Madoc ! No, indeed, Lady Glanarvon ; 
to London ! " 

Meanwhile, Sir Glynne had expressed his intentions 
with regard to leuan, and described his plans for the 
boy's improvement and education. His information 
was received by John Powys at first with a sullen, 
dogged look of resistance, but, as Sir Glynne pro- 
ceeded to unfold his plans, a new light seemed to 
dawn upon him, and in a sarcastic tone he asked : 

" And what in the world has made you fix upon 
my shepherd as the object of your intentions ? " 

"Well," said Sir Glynne, "the boy's genius, his 
wonderful talent in carving ; you know it is my own 
profession, and he reminds me of my own youth. If 
I mistake not, he has the making of a great artist in 
him, and I wish to give him a chance." 

John Powys stretched out his legs, dug his hands 
deep into his trousers' pockets, and throwing his head 
back, burst into a fit of laughter. 

"Great artist! Ha, ha! That is good! leuan 
Gwyllt a great artist! An idle lout, I call him. 
But take him if you like. Sir Glynne ; I give you my 
full consent, only never let him come bothering me 
afterwards." 

" Oh, no ; when I take him it will be for good ; 
but, if you have no objection, I will leave him here 
another year ; he will then be sixteen." 

" Well, that will suit me too," said John Powys. 

"I mean to tell him to-day," said Sir Glynne; 
" but, if I am right in my estimation of the boy, it 
will make no difference in his behaviour towards 
you." 

" Oh, I'll take care of that," said John Powys, with 
a chuckle. " If I see any signs of uppishness, he shitll 
soon taste of the strap." 



".fl- 



P. 






■, 






111 






1.4 i 



m 

Si 



' ! 



'in 



Mi 



40 



A WELSH SINGER. 



After his visitors had left, he stood long looking 
after them, at last muttering to himself, " Well, let 
him have him ; it couldn't be better arranged : but 
It s strange— strange ! " 

Laissabeth was full of curiosity and delight. 
Oh, uncle," she said, " will leuan be going to 
London to ive with Sir Glynne Meredith? Won't 

..^T^r ^^"'^^."'^" •' ^"'^ ^^at will Mifanwy say ? " 
Mifanwy be d-d ! " said John Powys. "and you, 

mrssT'' ^°"'' ^'^^'"^ ^°"^"'' ' ^° ^""^ S^' ""y '^'""^'' 

And Laissabeth, well used to his bursts of temper. 

went smilingly to do his behests. At dinner she 

could not refrain from asking another question : 

Am I to learn to play the piano ? " 

" Piano indeed ! " said her uncle. " No ; I want no 

tinkling and strumming here ! You can learn to sing, 

for I think you can do that. You may be glad to 

ear^n your living that way one day, when I am 

This he said with his usual cunning, and a grudging 
disinclination to let the girl expect anything mori 
from him. But Laissabeth was as cunning as he, 
and answered him, smiling : 

"Yes, indeed. Uncle John, bach! I can then earn 
plenty of money and keep myself and mother." 

:uTJ^ • ^/J*^ J"''" P°^ys. not ill-pleased, for, 
with all his craftiness, he was completely taken in by 
his niece. *- .^ / 

Meanwhile Sir Glynne and his companion were 
walking steadily over the soft velvet of the cliffs • 
a fresh March wind blew in straight from the 
sea, bearing on its breath the odours of spring and 
promisej of sweet things to come. Under the 
hillocks primroses peeped out, and in sheltered 
corners daffodils nodded to the breeze. The blue 
bay of Abersethin stretched before them, gleaming 
Sv?^^",-. ^^'''''' T^^ ^ Soiden radiance; the little ships 
flitted like moths over its surface ; one, catching the 



HOPES FULFILLED. 



41 



full sunshine on its snow-white sails, was making its 
way to the harbour below. 

" That is the Aden y don" said Gwladys. " I know 
most of the ships that trade to these ports ; there 
goes the Speedwell, I know her by her red sail with 
the new patch on it." 

Sir Glynne drew in a long breath of delight. " Oh, 
how lovely it all is ! Shall we sit down and rest 
here?" 

"Yes," said Gwladys; "and now see the contents of 
my basket." And from it she drew forth and spread 
on the wild thyme a dainty lunch of cold pie and 
cake ; and they were soon enjoying their repast, and 
chatting and laughing with the light-hearted gaiety of 
old times. 

" How this brings back our excursions of long ago, 
Gwladys; the lunch in the nut wood, d'> you re- 
member ? The teas on Moel Mynach ? How often 
my thoughts have reverted to those happy times! In 
my studio, in the toilsome pleasures of a London 
season, and, above all, on my lonely hearth at evening, 
where I have often sat till the small hours and my 
fire has gone out, thinking, thinking ; and always 
your image was woven into the pattern of my dream. 
Ah ! Gwladys, it has been a long, dreary loneliness." 

Gwladys picked at the wild thyme with heightened 
colour and fluttering breath ; and, with drooping eyes, 
replied, " Yes, yes, I know ; but don't let us talk of 
the past, it is too sad ! " 

" The future then, dearest ! " said Sir Glynne, start- 
ing towards her and clasping both her hands within 
his own. "Shall we talk of that? And will you 
promise to brighten it with your loved presence? 
Have I not thirsted long enough for your love? Give 
me one word of hope and encouragement. You must 
know, Gwladys, why in all these long years I have 
never married. I have never felt inclined to do so. 
I have kept the chambers of my heart empty, feeling 
and knowing well that no one but you could ever 



i I 

1 

4! 

i 



■ Ii: 

m 



si! 



J!' 



II i 



■if 



42 



A WELSH SINGER. 



m 






li 









walk in them. But now, Gwladys, will you come and 
make my hearth bright and my heart happy ? » 

iJnL "°l 1?"", ^'' ^^"^' ''^^^^y' but looking up 
into his earnest, black eyes, said simply, " If you can 

"And what about your own, dearest.? That is 
more important to me than my own happiness." 

hanH.%n h"1-^"''^T' ''•y'^P* ^y ''f^'"S up his brown 
hands to her hps with a long look of trustful love. 

When at last they had reached Mod Mynach, the 
^V "k^^v " "^^^ '^'"'"S down the steep slopes on 
which Mifanwy watched her sheep. She was Ivin^ 
near the top of the slope, her hcacl sheltered only by 
a low furze bush from the heat of the sun. With 
the vigi ant ear of a watcher, she heard their approach- 
ing footsteps on the soft grass, and started up in 

her sdi^JTdT '° ' "^'^ ^"^^"^ ^'""^^ '" "P"" 

r<il^^^^- ' Tf '^^^'•" '^'^ -'■'■ Glynne, "where is your 
companion ? " He spoke in Welsh, but she seemed 
not to understand. 

"My companion ! I have none, except Topper and 
he has gone to the mill to look for his dinner." ' 
^ut It IS leuan we want, my child ' " 

wh";S ' • ^?"^"J " ^^'^ *^^ Sirl with a bright smi'e, 
1m "^f'^^P'^^.a '•o^v of perfect white teeth ; « he is 
on Moel Hiraethog-ovcr there-I will show you the 
S ^"d',*^^ ding Topper's chin in her hand for a 
moment she looked into his beautiful brown eyes 
not unlike her ovvn in their Hquid softness of expres- 
sion. Now, Topper, stay here and watch!" and 
she was soon leading the way down the hill to the 
shore below ; It was dangerous work, but Mifanwy 
tripped on with steady steps and graceful motion, 
stopping sometimes to look back, or to point with her 
crook at some dangerous rock; across the sandy 
shore and up the rugged c.ide of Moel Iliracthuff thev 
made their way. The sheep were browsing on the 



HOPES FULFILLED. 



43 



ledges and slippery tussocks, Juno was sitting blink- 
ing in the sun, and snapping at the flies, but leuan 
was nowhere to be seen. 

" He is cutting his stones," said Mifanwy. 
"Where? " said Sir Glynne with interest. 
She pointed to the shepherd's hut stuck like a 
crow's nest between a huge boulder and the side of the 
hill- and there they found him, forming, w ith his rude, 
imperfect tools, from the soft, grey stone an object oj 
ideal beauty. He was so wrapped up in his work that 
he did not hear the sound of his visitors footsteps, 
and Sir Glynne gazed with breathless interest at the 
block of statuary oefore which the boy was kneeling. 
He was painfully and delicately finishing the face 
of th. 'Igure, which was that of a girl standing on the 
extreme edge of a high cliff or ledge She held her 
arms stretched out before her, the fingers apart, as 
though invoking or adoring some distant object on 
which her eyes were fixed ; she seemed to be smging 
a hymn of praise, or invocation, and was evidently 
breasting the sea-wind, for it blew back her streaming 
hair and her thin drapery. In the curl of that skirt 
and the tossing of that hair you could almost feel the 

^' At the sound of a slight exclamation from Gwladys, 
the boy turned round, surprised, but not embarrassed ; 
indeed, so intent was he upon his work that, ignoring 
Mifanwy and Gwladys, he turned instinctively to 
Sir Glynne, and, drawing him towards his work, 

^^'' How is it, sir ? Is it good, or is it bad ? " 

"Good, my boy," said Sir Glynne in admiration, 
" very irood ; it is the sea-wind, of course, thats blow- 
ing against her ; she is standing on the edge of the 
cliff, and, surely, she is singing. What is it? A 
hymn of praise, or prayer ? " „ ^, , i 

Icuan clapped his hands in delight. " Oh ! anwl, 
anwl ! 1 am so glad ! You found it out without my 
telling you. Yc>, she is singing "Codu yr Haul 



'I 



1! 



1.:. 



ill 



,1! 



I 



.^!' 



f 






m 






111 



■11 



III 
llf 



44 



A WELSH SINGER. 



wln^"l"^.°^-*''^ '"" '1' r'^°"™'"e h'"'. ^^f^ yo" sec, 
When he first rises out of the sea ! " 

s-imJ^<f;?''^V'^'-'^ ^'' ^'r"^' "'■' beautiful ; it is the 
same g.rl who m your last work was watching the 
dead sheep, is it not ? " ^ 

"Yes, yes," said leuan, pointing with his thumb 

t°he mo.'t ?^°" v^i' " J*. '\Mifanwyrof course; she is 
the most beautiful girl that I have seen ; in form I 
mean not in colo.:r Laissabeth is the most beautiful 
m colour, but I can't put colour in stone " 

ro.mH *lo^'r ^l^''?\^-l'^ ^'^'^^^y' unconsciously turned 
round to look at Mifanwy, who stood leaning on her 
crook; and both saw, what had not strucic them 
before, but what was evidently familiar to the boy^ 
artistic eye vtc, the elegant rounding of her form 
nr' f T^K attitude and the beautiful, regular S 
tures, which even the darkness of her complexion and 
the tangled wealth of dusky hair could not disguise 
the ij^?„!?.'^ Q^"^ sufficiently criticised and admired 
the statuette. Sir Glynne, holding the boy by the 
shoulder and looking into his clear grey eves Wan 
to unfold his plans for his education 'aKv'Tnce^fnt 
in his favourite pursuit. leuan was speechless with 
astonishment and delight! He did Aot thank Sir 
Glynne, but, at the magnitude of the proposal, his 
face blanched a little, and in his eyes there was a 
moisture that in a girl would have resolved itself into 
hismgged cuff ^""^P^'^'^^^'y brushed away ^nth 

•'VVell.myboy." said Sir Glynne, " it will not be 
for a year ; I shall be gomg abroad, and making some 
changes in my home this year, but this time next 
year, please God, I will come and fetch you Mean- 
while, go on steadily as you have begun; I suppose 
you cannot read or write >" 

leuan flushed over neck and brow "Yes sir I 
can read and write. Mr. Rhys Morfran has 'tnur;h* 
me a little; i go to him twice in the week, except 
lambmg tim'- ; but John Powys does not know " 



m 



HOPES FULFILLED. 



45 



" And what has he taught you ? " inquired Sir 
Glynnc. 

" Oh ! to read and write both in Welsh and English, 
a Uttlc geography, a little history, and a little arith- 
metic. But what I like best of all is astronomy, 
because," spreading his hands out towards the sky, 
" there it is, you see, and I can watch the stars all 
night, and find out their names. Oh ! it is grand and 
wonderful ! " he concluded. 

" Good, my boy. And now good-bye, and expect 
to see me here next ycur." 

Gwladys thanked Mifanwy for her assistance, and 
Sir Glynne, giving them each a bright half-crown, the 
visitors departed, taking no further notice of Mifanwy, 
who turned slowly round the corner of the hut, and 
wended her way back again to her own resting-place 
on Moel Mynach. 

At a convenient spot on the edge of the cliff she 
stopped, and, with all her strength, flung the half- 
crown Sir Glynne had given her into the seething 
waves below ; then slowly holding her crook in her 
right hand, and pressing her left to her side, £he made 
her way back to her sheep, and flung herself down 
beside Topper, who greeted her with delight. She 
lay on the ground beside him, her arm round his 
neck, her great eyes fixed mournfully on the sea. 
No sound escaped her lips, but the tears gathered in 
her eyes, and coursed each other down her cheek. 
At evening she rose and folded her sheep ; then, like 
a dumb animal that has been stricken with mortal 
sickness, she made her way homewards, took her 
supper quietly, and went to bed in the loft above; 
and, when leuan returned later in the evening, was 
supposed to be fast asleep. 



^i 













i.l. 




CHAPTER VI. 

THE EISTEDDFOD. 

Mr Rhys Morgan, o: Rhys Morgan, as he was 
familiarly call J by all the inhabitants of Aberscthin 
and Its neighbourhood, stood in the porch of the little 
Kock Church, ringing the bell with his own hand. 
Ihere had been a prayer meeting, and his congrcga- 
tion had just dispersed, and now he was waiting for 
his three pupils, for this would be the last sin^intr 
lesson before the Eisteddfod. 

Presently they came, Laissabeth first, beaming and 
sparkling, and panting with the exertion of runnint^ 
and then Mifanwy and leuan. 

"Come along, children," said Rhys Morgan- "we 
have much to do to-night. Remember this is the 
last practice we shall have. Let us begin with the 
trio. And soon the three clear voices were blendine 
m harmony. '^ 

"Bravo! well done!" he said. "If you sing as 
well as that at the Eisteddfod, you will satisfy me 
And now for 'The Dove.' " And from beginning to 
end Laissabeth sang the lovely air in perfect time 
and tune Clear and cold as crystal her sweet voice 
carolled forth and when she had come to the final 
notes, Rhys Morgan had no fault to find 

"Now, Mifanwy." and he drew his stool closer to 
the harmonium, waiting for her to begin. 



" Oh ! didst thou know the pangs of absent 

Ac!S would ne'er fr-in Galatea rove I '' 



love, 



sail;': 



the girl. The words were in a foreign tongue 
46 



tup: kisttddfod. 



47 



to her, but Rhys Morgan had taken much pains to 
teach her tiie riijht accent. 

"Beautiful! child," he ^aid. "And now the aria; 
smooth, don't hurry." 

The rich, full tones swelled out as he desired, with- 
out hurry, without passion, but with a depth of tender- 
ness that had been entirely absent from Laissabeth's 



sni<Tini^. 



That is music," he said, drawing a long breath of 
satisfaction. " Do you understand the words, Lais.sa- 
beth ? " 

" Oh, yes, I know English," said the girl with a toss 
of her head. 

"And you, Mifanwy?" 

" Yes, sir ; it is Galatea longing for Acis to come 
home, and quite happy when he returns." 

" Quite right, child, and you express it well." 

There was a good deal more practising before the 
little party broke up ; and after many injunctions 
from Rhys Morgan to be in good time at CaeV Madoc 
on Wednesday, the children went home through the 
moonlight, leuan and Laissabeth having most of the 
conversation to themselves, Mifanwy walking beside 
them silent and thoughtful. Arrived at home, she 
found Sh&n in a great state of excitement about some 
clothes she had fished out from the old coffer that 
held the family wardrobe. 

" Here," she said, " is a petticoat of my grand- 
mother's, which will make a fine frock for thee, 
Mifanwy ; and here are stockings, and Rhys Morgan 
has been here to-day, and he sa>'s he will buy thee a 
hat and a pair of shoes. I told him I knew thee 
wouldn't take them ; but he said thou wcrt sure to 
get the prize — three whole sovereif^ns, Mifanwy — 
and that out of that thou couldst pay him for the hat 
and shoes." 

Mifanwy was silent for some time. 
" I suppose it must be. But what if I should not 
'^'et the prize ? " 



1 1« 



■4 

11 



i I 

i •- 

It 



4S 



A V'FLSH SINC.KR. 



Ii! 






When the door was closed, and they had all sat 
down round the shining oak table, each with a steain- 
inj; bowl of cawl, it seemed to Icuan the pro|)cr time 
to inform his foster parents of the vista of happiness 
and grandeur opening out before him. The effect of 
his words was dramatic. lanto stared open-mouthed, 
Shan lifted up her hands in astonishment. 

" Well, I never, never, did hear of such a thing I Is 
it true, child, what thou art telling us?" 

" Quite true ! " said leuan, nodding. 

" Quite true ! " said Mifanwy. " I heard the grand 
gentleman and lady telling leuan all about it." 

" And didn't they offer to take thee, too? Never 
mmd, little one, cariad anwyl. Thee shalt stay with 
Shan and lanto, and, when leuan is a grand gentle- 
man in London, we'll all three go and see him one 
day. 

Mifanwy laughed, and leuan joined with her: both 
were conscious that there would be some sort of im- 
propriety and awkwardness in the proposed visit 
though they were too inexperienced to give their 
reasons. 

At last the eventful day arrived, and the Eisteddfod 
tent at Caer Madoc opened its flapping canvas 
doors to admit the eager crowd that, gathered from 
every part of the country, had thronged the streets 
since the early morning. There was a murmur of 
music on the air, different competing choirs goin? 
over their glees and choruses for the last time, in any 
chance corner in which they might find room to 
assemble round their conductor. In the Lamb 
parlour the Abermere choir were singing the " Halle- 
lujah Chorus." In the yard outside, a juvenile choir 
of boys gathered round their leader, a mere boy of 
two and twenty himself, who, seated on the top of a 
pig-sty, baton in hand, drilled them over and over 
again in the difficult passages. In the square by the 
market-place, where the « Stocks " stood, crowded a 
number of young girls, who were humming in an 



11 Ir 



m 



THE EISTEDDFOD. 



49 



undertone tlieir different parts, craning their necks to 
look over each other's music ; while on the " Stocks" 
themselves sat their conductor, a red-faced, burly man 
in tight corduroy leg^infjs, {dving them the key-note 
from his tuning-fork, and suggesting improvements 
and embellishments ; the Italian terms used in the 
music all rolled out in the accent of his strong, 
rough Welsh. 

" Now then, sopranos, stop that chatter and 
attend to that Adagio. Howyr bach. What do 
you mean galloping off like that ? Adagio, I tell 
you, and pl-ano, now — pi-anissimo, and don't forget 
the slurr." 

Every face beamed with pleasure, and when the 
brass bands began their competition, and the blaring 
sounds were heard through the canvas walls, all felt 
that the real business of the day had begun. Jolly 
farmers jostled up against delicate ladies ; dissenting 
ministers actually walked side by side with clergy- 
men of the Established Church ; groups of sailors 
from the coast villages, little old women with crutched 
sticks, "witch hats," and scarlet mantles or scarves, 
drawn tightly round their shoulders, crowded the field 
in which the "Steddfod" tent had been erected, 
eagerly pushing their way in. 

There was a slight commotion in the field when a 
fine carriage, drawn by a splendid pair of bays, ap- 
proached, scattering the crowd in all directions. A 
burst of laughter followed, when a country cart, 
taking advantage of the clearance, dashed up close 
behind the carriage at a spanking rate. 

Sir Glynne Meredith and Lady Glanarvon, the 
occupants of the carriage, joined heartily in the 
laughter, while they drove up to the entrance of the 
tent, for all was jollity and bonhomie on the Eistedd- 
fod day. The huge pavilion was thronged with an 
audience of Welshmen of ever>' class, all eagerly 
awaiting the coming competition, in which every one 



N 

« ? 

< ! 
I 



w.?s interested 



gay ladies with fluttering fans and 

D 



f ' 



irt 



! 

|H 
II 

¥ 

i -r 

f' 

ii 

t ■ 



i. 







Ik 



50 



A WFI.SII siNcru. 



bright riubons; bonnic lasses from the hills, with their 
broad-brimmed, high-crowned hats ; stalwart farmers 
and roistering sailors, all sitting with eager eyes fixed 
upon the platform, upon which a choir of a hundred 
voices was preparing to compete. 

" One— two — three," from the conductor, and there 
was a breathless pause, upon which broke the first 
chords of the " Hallelujah Chorus." 

Every bar was followed and critically appreciated 
by the immense audience ; not a tone of effective 
phrasing was allowed to pass unnoticed ; and, when 
some of the most familiar passages were delicately 
rendered, shrewd winks aid nods of approbation were 
exchanged between many a rough and ruddy-faced 
peasant ; and, when at last the final chord was sung, 
there was a loud storm of applause. Then the com- 
peting choir filed off the platform on one side, while 
the next competitors entered at the other; and so on, 
choir after choir, until the morning was well ad- 
vanced, and still every eye was eager and no ear was 
tired. 

leuan Gwyllt, the shepherd boy whom Sir Glynne 
Meredith was going to adopt, was watched for with 
eager expectation ; and, when, at last, the three 
children followed Rhys Morgan on to the platform 
and ranged themselves side by side in front of the 
piano at which he was to accompany them, there was 
another pause. 

leuan, quite unconscious of the interest felt in him, 
looked around him with the coolness of one who 
knows he has no important part to play ; but the two 
girls seemed confused, and for a moment frightened, 
laissabeth soon regained her self-possession, and, 
while Rhys Morgan considerately lengthened out the 
prelude, she nodded to her friends in the audience 
'.vith perfect composure, her pretty pink and white 
face lookinfT charming, surmounted bj^ a new hat with 
its white feathers and trimmings. She presented a 
gay contrast to Mifanwy, who hung her head a little 



TIIF FI'^TFnnFOD. 



51 



shyly until it w;h time to begin tho trii), ami, when 
she raised it, licr tiark skin and hair made no favour- 
able impression. As for Icuaii, tlr uj^h all his 
tattcrcil and buffeted straw hat mi.du hi tlisccrncd — 
so confident was he — the respectable; " broad cloth " 
and shinin;; beaver hat of London life ; while poor 
Mifanwy's brand new fr(jck aiul shoes, and even the 
hat presented by Mr. Rlns Mor}.jan, could not efface 
from the minds of the audicnct' lier (M'dinary tattered 
blue petticoat and bare feet and crook. 

Mr. Rhys Mor!:;an's prelude ended, Laissabcth, 
quite unembarrassed, went through her part ; every 
note was true, clear, and crisjj, and her perfect render- 
ing of the music was not lost upon the musical cars 
of the audience, who cheered and clapped loudly. 
After the final bar, she withdrew to the back of the 
platform, well pleased with herself and her perform- 
ance. Then Mifanwy took her place, to be received 
with a cold silence, that leuan, peeping from the 
background, instantly resented, and the girl her- 
self felt deeply. 

The first notes of the recitative came rather slowly 
and tremblingly, but she had scarcely sung two bars 
when she was seized with a fervid uplifting of spirit, 
and became oblivious to everything around her. 



u 



1" 



" Oh ! didst thou know the pan.ijs of absent love, 
.Acis would ne'er from Galatea roam ! " 

Every eye was fixed upon her with eagerness, 
every ear was strained to catch the melting tones, 
and when she dropped into the graceful flowing 
melody of the aria, she took possessior of the warm 
Welsh hearts, and held them in her -41 ■; until the last 
tender note had died away. 

For a moment there was silence, and Mifanwy 
.seemed to awake from, a dream to the re.alitv' of tl^;- 
scene before her ; she turned simply to Rhy.*; Morgan, 
with a glad smile of happiness, for she felt that she 



f ; 



a 



n. 




! 






I'?} 



!lf 



1; 



52 



A WELSH SINGER. 



had " spoken the truth " in her rendering of the 
music. He took her hand protectingly, and then a 
perfect storm of applause filled the air and shook the 
flapping sides of the great pavilion. The women 
waved their handkerchiefs, the men stood up and 
shouted " Etto ! etto ! " ^ and a group of enthusiastic 
sailors rushed to the edge of the platform to shake 
hands with her. 

It did not matter that the words had been in a 
foreign tongue, the music had laid hold of them, and 
the little shepherd girl, who had begun in fear and 
trembling, was now the idol of the crowd ; her bosom 
heaved with delight and pleasure at the consciousness 
that so many hearts had responded to her singing ; 
but, when Mr. Rhys Morgan called her attention to 
the frequent cries of " Etto, etto ! " and explained 
that she was expected to repeat the song, she shook 
her head artlessly, and said in Welsh : " I cannot 
indeed." Then running to the side of the stage, she 
joined leuan, and they both rushed unceremoniously 
out of the tent, never stopping until they had reached 
the Lamb Inn. 

This unceremonious departure tickled the audience 
immensely, and the storm of applause was soon 
drowned in si outs of laughter, only silenced by the 
arrival of a third competitor, who was listened to 
respectfully, but with no show of enthusiasm. 

Meanwhile, leuan and Mifanwy waited in the 
Lamb yard. 

*' Oh, Mifanwy," said leuan, " thou art an angel of 
song ! " 

' Well, indeed," she answered, suddenly growing 
serious, " perhaps it was an angel who sang through 
me. Sometimes I feel as if it were not myself sing- 
ing, but somebody else who used my voice and my 
mouth." 

leuan laughed heartily ; then he, too. grew serious. 

* Again ! again | 



%^ 



'I 



THE EISTEDDFOD. 



53 



" Poor Laissabeth ! " he said, " art not sorry for her, 
Mifanwy?" 

" No," replied Mifanwy ; " I have tried to be sorry, 
but I can't, because I'm very glad, and I hate her." 

" Well, indeed," said leuan, " I am sorry, for thee'st 
sung much better than her." 

" Dost hope she has gained the prize ? " 

" H'm — m ! " said leuan, looking thoughtfully down 
at the upturned sole of one foot, which he held in his 
hand, " well, I would wish there were two prizes." 

At this moment Mr. Rhys Morgan entered the 
yard, holding carefully between his thumb and first 
finger a tiny bow of satin ribbon, from which was 
suspended a dainty bag, also of white satin, enclosing 
three sovereigns. He held it out to Mifanwy. 

" Here, child," he said, "the pn'ze has been awarded 
to you, and ve ' iustly, too ; but why do you look so 
sad ? And y - , leuan > What has brought that 
colour to your face ? ' 

Mifanwy, at first, made no reply. She took the 
bag slowly, and with downcast eyes ; then she opened 
it, and handed one of the shining gold pieces it 
contained to Mr. Morgan. 

" Will that pay for the shoes and hat, sir ? " she 
said. 

" Oh, more, much more, child ; I should have to 
return you twelve shillings ; but will you not take 
them as a present from me ? " 

" Oh, no! sir," answered Mifanwy, her Welsh piide 
taking alarm at once. " I could not bear to think I 
had not paid for them." 

Rhys Morgan smiled, but sympathised, and gravely 
counted out the twelve shillings into her palm. 

She took them calmly, but returned the little bag 
containing the two sovereigns to Rhys Morgan. 

" It is for Laissabeth," she said ; "she tried and I 
tried, too, and I sang the best, but that is nothing. I 
will not touch the rest of the niune>. She can have 
it all ; I do not want it" 



i ■! 



a 
I 

!j 

i. 

I in 



S4 



A WELSH SINGER. 



" You are very generous, child ; your lovely singing 
springs from good soil. Here comes Elizabeth, so 
you can give it to her yourself." 

Across the yard came Laissabeth, picking her way 
daintily between the mounds of straw and over the 
pools of dirty water between the cobble stones, her 
mother accompanying her with an air of offended 
dignity. She shook hands loftily with Rhys Morgan, 
and ordered Deio, the ostler, to bring out the car, 
which she had borrowed for the day. 

"Your (laughter sang beautifully, Mrs. Powys," said 
Rhys Morgan, "and I am sure the audience thoroughly 
enjoyed it, and she must not mind Mifanwy's having 
sung better still." 

" Oh, dear, no, she doesn't mind it at all," said Mrs. 
Powys ; " perhaps next year, when she conies back 
from London, she will sing better than Mifanwy." 

*' Ah ! " said Rhys Morgan, " we shall all be eagerly 
looking out for the London singer at the next 
Eisteddfod ; but Mifanwy wishes to di ide the prize 
with her; she thinks it is but right to do so. I'll 
leave the two girls to settle the matter, for I must 
return to the Eisteddfod ; I am adjudicator for the 
next competition." 

leuan took the bag from his fingers and handed it 
to Laissabeth, while Mifanwy stood stolidly looking 
on ; she had ceased to take any interest in the prize. 

Laissabeth's eyes twinkled greedily while she took 
the bag from leuan. 

" Mifanwy says it is but fair," said the boy, " for you 
both tried, and she had the pleasure of winning." 

" Yes, 'tis only fair," assented Laissabeth, eagc 1) 
opening the bag to see what it contained. When she 
saw the two pieces of gold, she took them out and 
quickly slipped them into her pocket, holdine out the 
bag to Mifanwy. 

" Hcic is the foolish old bac?," she said; " I don't 
want it." 

" I will have that," said Mifanvv, and she i 'laced 



^^^**''' 



THE EISTEDDFOD. 



55 



shillings 



she still held in her 



"You are a 



in it the twelve 
palm. 

" It is not fair, though," said leuan. 
greedy girl ; Mifanwy is generous and noble." 

"Wilt have it back, Mifanwy?" said Laissabeth, 
putting her hand reluctantly into her pocket. 

Mifanwy only shook her head silently, and turned 
away, followed by leuan. She was happy once more. 

The sunny afternoon was drawing to a close when 
they entered their cottage home. leuan paused with 
his finger in the latch-hole ere he opened the door. 

"Now," he said, "I will li^ht the fire, and thou shalt 
put our supper ready." 

" Yes," said the happy girl, " there is plenty of cawl 
to be warmed up, and the fresh barley loaf and the 
nice butter from Ty Gwyn. Oh, what a happy day 
it is ! " and soon they were sitting down to the old 
oak table, hungry and tired, but full of buoyant, 
youthful happiness. 






f, 



1-5- 



i-^ 



CHAPTER VII. 



m 



OGO WYLOFEN. 

MOELEN, the best cow in the Maen Powys' herd 
had been aihng for several days, and John Ellis him- 
self could not tell what was the matter with her, 
though he and his master had spent a whole hour in 
examining her, front and back and sideways. 

" Don't see there is much the matter with her ; 
think she could have swallowed a snail ? I have 
known my grandmother's cow do that, and it killed 
her." 

" Swallowed a snail ! " repeated John Powys scorn- 
fully ; " say something sensible when you do speak." 

" Well, cows do swallow snails," averred John dog- 
gedly. "I would send her to the slope on Moel 
Mynach ; change of pasturage will do her good, and 
the short grass there will be just the thing for her." 

" Yes," said his master, " Mifanwy can watch her all 
night, and we'll sec how she is in the morning." 

And so it v*as settled, and Mifanwy meekly re- 
ceived her orders, and promised to keep her eyes and 
ears open to the slightest sign of uneasiness in 
Moelen. 

" Come up at once," said John Powys, closing the 
cow-house door, " if you see her get up in the right 
and stand with her head down ; d'ye hear, girl ? 
And mind what I tell you, if that cow dies from any 
carelessness of yours,you pack off from here to-morrow. 
We shall keep her in one night lonfjer, hut to-morrow 
night you will be ready to watch her on the cliff 
slopes." 



OGO WYLOFEN. 



57 



Mifanwy's heart sank within her, and she made up 
her mind to ask leuan to stay with her throughout 
the night. 

The girl had often spent the night watches on the 
craggy sides of Mocl Mynach. Towards the bottom 
of the slope lay the pasturage on which Moelen would 
be placed, and it was reached by a side path which 
led past the mouth of a chasm in the cliffs called 
Ogo Wylofen, or " the cave of wailing." Into this 
chasm or rift the sea rushed at all times with boiling 
force, but at spring tides it evidently reached some 
obstacle that checked and chafed its furious inrush, 
and caused the curif)us sounds that gave the cave its 
name. Few per pic passed over this part of the cliff 
except the shepherds, and Mifanwy and leuan 
approached it only when they were compelled. 
Sometimes, hand in hand, they ventured step by step 
nearer and nearer to the chasm, holding their breath 
the while, and preparing to fly when the weird sounds 
should become too awful. Thus the prospect of a 
whole night spent alone within sound of the Ogo 
was terrible to the girl. 

After they had finished their meal of cawl, on their 
return from the Eisteddfod, Mifanwy doffed her new 
clothes at once, and arraying herself once more in her 
frayed blue petticoat, took from its peg in the earthen 
passage the old red cloak which had sheltered her 
through many a storm. 

Shan and lanto were waiting each on their separate 
hills for the return of the children. They had taken 
their way to the slopes in the early morning, after 
Shan had given the finishing touches to Mifanwy's 
toilet, with many injunctions from the girl and boy. 

" Mifanwy got the prize, Shan," shouted leuan, 
when they were within speaking distance, and, taking 
off his tattered straw hat, he waved it round his head. 

" Dear heart ! didst thou indeed ? " said Sh&n. 
"Well, well, I knew thou wouldi>L. Gwai fi ! Oh! 
that thy grandmother could know of it, child. How 



." 'i 



I i 
I 






i 

1.1 



111 






58 



A WELSH SINGER. 






'f 



f 



glad she would be! and thy mother, ioo! but thy 
grandmother was the grand singer ! Why, here on 
this very hill she watched her sheep, and we lads and 
lasses from the village would come up and sit round 
her while she sang and sang, till you could hear her 
voice echoing from Moel Hiracthog ; " and she drew 
her hand caressingly over Mifanwy's black hair, and 
looked lovingly into her thin, dark face, while she 
continued in a dreamy voice, " Yes, we often sat here 
in the old time, and the sun would go down, and the 
moon would rise, and still Madlen sang on, and we 
could not go home. Ah ! dear anwl ! dear anwl ! 
I shall never hear such singing again on this side of 
the grave ! " 

"Well, indeed, Shan fikh," said leuan, " if you had 
heard Mifanwy sing to-day at the Eisteddfod, I be- 
lieve you would have thought it was Madlen come 
back again." 

Shan smiled indulgently, but shook her head ; then 
leuan left them to climb up Moel Hiraethog, and re- 
lieve lanto. 

" You will find the bowls and spoons washed, and 
the cawl keeping hot," said Mifanwy, preparing to 
take up the charge of the sheep and of Moelen, who 
had been driven into the fresh pasturage early in the 
day. She held Shkn by her red petticoat for a mo- 
ment longer, while she drew from her pocket a red 
and white cotton handkerchief, in the corner of which 
she had safely tied up the bag containing the re- 
mainder of her prize money. 

" I gave part of tlie prize to Laissabeth," she said, 
" and paid Rhys Morgan for my hat, and here's the 
rest" 

"And, after all, thee hast all that to spare ! " cried 
Shan, raising her hands, and opening her wrinkled 
eyes. " Well, indeed, indeed ! There's riches ! " 

lanto now joined them, and was equally impressed. 

" Here's a beginning," he said ; " who knows but 
they'll ask thee to sin^ in the anthem at Bcthcsda 



».*^ 



H 



Or.O WYI.OFKN. 



50 



now!" The division of the prize with Laissabclh 
particularly pleased him. "Of course, of course, 
child, thee couldn't do less— but what a lot remains ! 
Twelve shiUinj^s ! Well, well, Shan, let's go home to 
supper, and find some safe place to put it m till 
Mifiinvvy wants it." And the two old people disap- 
peared over the brow of the hill, the excitement oc- 
casioned by Mi'"inwy's success having completely 
driven from thei. minds the thought that the boy and 
girl were to spend the night beneath the stars. 

When their voices had died away in the distance 
Mifanwy turned to caress Topper, who had been lor 
some time endeavouring to attract her notice by push- 
ing his ct^ld nose into her hand, and wagging his tail 
vigorously. , , j i 

'" Oh ! Topper, bach ! it lias been a lovely day, and 
the people liked my singing, and everything was 
beautiful ; only it was bad to have shoes on ! 
Topper licked her hands. "And yet, I am not 
happy. Topper, oh I dear anwl ! " She bent over his 
glossy black head, and looked with yearning m his 
faithful face, and her eyes were full of tears. 

But it was time to fold the sheep ; so she had to 
dry her eyes. Soon Topper was scouring the hillside, 
and barking joyously, as though delighted to resume 
hLs faithful service. The stars came out one by one 
in the cloudless evening sky, and the heaving bosotyi 
of the great ocean stretched out into the soft mysteri- 
ous distance with whispering sighs and murmurs. 

Mifi-.nwy had watched it many times, and knew by 
heart every tint of sky and ocean. Siie closed the 
hurdle on the last sheep, and then sat down by 
Topper's side at the door of her little hut. to ga/.e 
solemnly at the face of Nature. The beauty of the 
scene impressed her. The events of the day had 
aroused feelings to which she had hitherto been a 
stranger. That intense pleasure, given to hut a few. 
of being able to interest and sway a large concourse 
of human beings, the delight of being able tc ..ive 



5 



■i J 



60 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Utterance to the music that was in her soul ; but, 
above all, the haunting shadow that had hung over 
her ever since fortune had shone on leuan ; all these 
combined had awakened feelings hitherto dormant in 
her heart. The hour that followed was a crisis in 
M.fanwy's life, though she sat in stolid silence, almost 
breathlessly listening to the mysterious sounds of 
Nature that night brought down upon the world. 

" What was this great pulse throbbing through it 
all ? Where did those stars come from ? Where did 
she come from herself? and why was she not happy?" 
An marticulate prayer rose in her heart, but she sat 
on motionless and silent, looking out into the growing 
darkness, until Juno's short yaps disturbed the still- 
ness, and she knew that leuan was at hand. The 
sounds roused her from her trance-like quiet, and a 
feeling almost of regret came over her, so fully had 
her soul been flooded with the beauty of the night ; 
but, at the approach of her companion, whistling, she 
rose, and went to meet him with a smile of calm con- 
tent born of that hour of solitude and thought. 

'' Ogo Wylofen is more alive than usual to-night. 
Mifanwy ! Dost hear it ? " asked leuan. 

Mifanwy started. "Oh! anwl. I had forgotten it. 
and I have not heard it at all. Yes, indeed, I hear it 
now. In half an hour it will be dreadful ! I can 
never get over my fear of it." 

" Let us sit here," said leuan, " and by and by we 
will go and look down ; I am not afraid." And 
sitting down side by side upon a boulder, they listened 
while the strange sounds came fitfu^'y on the air. as 
the breeze rose and fell. 

No wonder was it that the country people avoided 
that part of the cliff, and no wonder that the boy and 
girl shuddered while they listened. There was the 
long swelling rol' j{ the waves as they entered the 
mouth of the cave, and then an ominous silence, when 
they found an easj' passage between the smooth walls 
of the chasm ; then came a panting and sobbing that 



I 



OGO WYLOFEN. 



6l 



swelled into a sound of weeping and wailing, so like 
the cry of a human being in distress, that it was 
almost impossible to believe that the cave held nothinfj 
of living misery. The water found its way out 
through some underground passage, with many 
mysterious rumblings and grumblings, to begin once 
more its series of moanings and wailing. 

"Moelen is lying quietly," whispered Mifanwy. 
" John Powys said I was to go up to Maen Powys, if 
she stood up and hung her head. Oh ! I hope she 
won't. Those cries would follow me all the way." 

" Oh ! as for that, I would be with thee," said leuan ; 
"but indeed, Mifanwy, thou'rt too foolish about it 
It is only the sea after all, and hasn't the sea been 
with us always ? " 

" Yes ; but, leuan, I have looked into the cave, and 
that is what has frightened me so. Oh ! listen to that 
moaning ! I used to wonder what it was saying — but 
now — 1 know — it says thou art going ! " 

" Looked into the cave ? " said leuan; " well, I have 
never been near enough to look down, but what didst 
thou see, Mifanwy ? Let us go and look down now." 
And, laying hold of her hand, he drew her shrinking 
figure towards the edge of the abyss. 

For a moment they listened, standing hand in hand ; 
then, trembling in every limb, they ventured to peep 
over the cliff. While the water forced its thundering 
way into the dark chasm below them, they stood their 
ground with tolerable courage, but when, after a spell 
of silence, the rush of waters, returning through some 
narrow channel underground, sent forth the wailing 
and weeping sounds that gave a mysterious horror to 
the place ; and when, to add to their terror, a faint, 
white mist rose from the seething waters and seemed 
to take human shape, as it glided into the dark rift, 
they turned in abject fear, and ran breathlessly until 
they had reached the boulder, 

" Didst see it wringing its hands ? " said Mifanwy, 
"and its long white hair waving behind? I have 



62 



A Wri.SIl SINCI'R. 



often s.v'n them ; they come in from tlic sea with the 
rushini; waves, and wrin^' their hands mid moan and 
shriek as they pas^s up the cave." 

" Tvvt, twt," said Iciian, " it was only the spray 
blown in throuf^h some narrow crack; if it were day- 
li^ilit we should not see llicrii." 

Mifanwy shook her head. " Sunh"<;ht, or moonhght, 
or twih^ht, they are jiisi the same," she said " for l' 
have seen them. H..u know I } How knowest thou 
what Ihey arc? Spray or mist perhaps indeed, but 
oh ! anwl, to me they arc the ^^hosts of the drowned, 
and they weep and wail for the troubles that are 
coming upon us, their poor brothers and sisters ; to 
me they seem to say, 'Weep, weep, leuan is goifir^ 
away, away, away ! ' Hark, Icuan, I hear them now." 
And the girl shuddered and drew her red cloak around 
her. 

leuan passed his fingers through his brown curls, 
and looking at Mifanwy witli wide open eyes, replied, 
"What fancies thou ha.st in thine head, Mifanwy; 
yes, and in thine heart, too ! I am not going away 
for another whole year, and, as I said before, we shall 
be older then, almost grown up ; thou'rt getting very 
tall now; and, as for going away, Mifanwyr thou 
know'st very well that I cannot live long away from 
thee and dear old Cymru. I will make this aj^rec- 
ment," the lad went on, pounding one fist into the 
palm of the other hand, "that I am to return hen 
whenever I please ; and more than that, that thou art 
to come and join me as soon as ever I have got money 
enough to keep thee." 

Mifanwy threw back the hood of her cloak and 
gazed at him earnestly, with clasped hands. "Oh' 
leuan, dost think he will let thee ? " 

" Of course," .said leuan ; " why not ? I will have it 
so." 

" Wilt indeed ? " .she said, lookinr: dreamily out 
over the sea. " That would be ha(>piness for me, but 
I know not how it can be; and yet, leuan. I 



^1 



^1- 

J 

! 2 



Or,0 WYl.OFFN. 



63 



know, if thou dost promise, that thou wi'.t keep thy 
promise." 

" I promise," said leuan, brifiRini^ his fist with a 
thump down on his knee. " But see, Moelcn is 
standing up." 

In a moment they were flying over the dewy jrass 
to find that Moel.;n hat' but risen to change her 
quarters, and lie (iown a^.iin upon a still softer beo 
of wild thyme. 

"And see," said Mifanwy, "she is chewing the 
cud ; she will soon be well again." 

" Now." said leuan, " thou canst safely go to sleep 
in the hut, for thi..c eyes are drooping, and I will 
watch here." 

"I am sleepy indeed," said Mifanwy, "but so art 
thou, leuan." 

" Me sleep) ! " laughed the lad, " not a bit of it ; 
trust me to watch, and I can sleep to-morrow m the 
sun. 

Almost before he had finished speaking, Mifanwy 
had thrown herself on her bed of heather, under shelter 
of the rough hut, while leuan sat at the open door and 
watched. He, too, saw the bright stars overhead, and 
the heaving ocean stretched out before him, and to 
him, too, came strange thoughts and dim anticipa- 
tions : forms of beauty he would c irve one day ; hours 
of delight, when his dreams and imaginings should all 
be realised in the bright future opening out before 
him. Each day he would take note of the new 
marvels the great city should have disclosed to him, 
and on his return home in the evenin- he would tell 
Mifanwy — but, no! there would be no Mifanwy; a 
shadow fell over the radiant dream, and he tried to 
imagine what life would be without her. He turned 
to look at the sleeping form in the hut, dimly lighted 
by the rising moon, and felt that as hitherto thf^ir 
lives had been blended in one, so in the future, life 
would be impossible without her. 

" I will go," he said ; " I will become a great man 



I 



<S4 



A WELSH SINGER. 



like Sir Glynne ; I know I will, then I shall be rich 
and shall come and fetch Mifanwy / will I 
will!" ' ' 

And Mifanwy s.niled in her sleep, though a tear 
stood on her long c>elashcs. 



#* 



CHAPTER Vlir. 



SHADOWS. 



As the winter cam" on, the two children spent much 
of their time in their huts, to avoid the bitter winds, 
and as the gales increased in violence, Mifanwy drew 
her red cloak more closely around her, and leuan tier! 
his straw hat firmly under his chin, and both walked 
more carefully on the steep slojx's. They seldom met 
in the stormy weather, until the darkness had fallen 
over land and sea. When the sheep had been safely 
folded, both wended their way, with head bent against 
the bitter wind, across the moor, gladly dropping into 
their cosy, thatched home in the hollow. Then the 
long winter evenings brought their own delignts. 
Shan's budget of news from the village, given to the 
accompaniment of her fingers and glistening needles 
that never ceased their busy work ; lanto's mono- 
syllabic remarks, and Icuan's and Mifanwy 's never- 
ending talk of the glories of London, and the 
wonderful grandeur that was coming uj)on the lad. 
The old p'^ople listened with intense interest and 
simple wonder. 

" Wilt thee have fine clothes, I wonder ? " said 
Mifanwy. 

" Not until I can earn them for myself," replied 
leuan sturdily. 

" Right," put in lanfo. 

•' I will work for Sir Glynne, do all the hard chip- 
ping fur him, and he shall p<iy mc if he likes, but give 
me my clothes, no ; I am not a beggar ! " 

" No, indeed ! " said Mifanwy, tossing her head, and 

63 F. 



€JS 



A WELSH SINGER. 



m 






the two proud children of the hills, with only twelve 
shillings and their scanty earnings between them and 
starvation, drew themselves up, and resumed the 
discussion of their plans complacently. 

" But thee must have something to go in." 

" I have shoes," said leuan, " and Shan is knitting 
mv stockings." . ^, 

"And my twelve shillings will buy thee a suit, 
said Mifanwy. 

leuan was silent. Then : " That is the worst part 

" That is the best part of it," said the girl. " Oh I 
there is plenty that is bad, but that is good. What 
could I do with so much money ? " 

Merc lanto brought his fist down on the table, so 
that the b(wls and platters clattered audiblj'. 

"That shall never be," he said, with emphasis. 
" Mifanwy's mcjnej- shall be spent for her alone. I 
stand in the place of thy father, whoever the villain was." 

leuan blushed hotly. It had gradually dawned 
upon him that to be the son of a " trampess," whose 
husband, if she hud one, had never been heard of, was 
a stain upon him his own sturdy hone.;ty and pride 
could never remove; and he had often envied 
Mifanwy her knowledge of her simple though unfortu- 
nate parent.s. 

"You don't know that he was a villam, he said, 
digging his hands intt) his pttckets, and .stretching out 
his\-gs, which were becoming terribly long for his 
tattered trousers ; " he may have been a respectable 

man." ^ 

At these words lanto laughed heartily, and S...m 

joined. 

" Oh ! he might have been a king ; but, anyway, he 
treated thy poor m- ther badly, to let her tramp along 
the roads till she died in John Fowys' barn. Poor 
thing! poor thing!" said Shan, meditating ;" they 
say she came in the Aden y don from North Wales, so 
f.ir away ! " 






SHADOWS. 



67 



leuan's brow burnt hotly. 

" If I ever meet him, I will thrash him within an 
inch of his life. Poor mother, poor mother ! " 

"Well, never mind that now," said lanto. " I think 
if thou ever dost meet him, thou wilt have toe much 
onnore to let him pass without a drubbing. But about 
this suit," and attain he brought his fist down on the 
table. " I have spoken to Will teilwr about it 
already ; he will make thee a real pjood suit of the 
brown frieze that came home from the weaver's this 
summer ; three fine white shirts and collars and ties ; 
there! I have been saving my money for years. Shan 
has it safe in a hole in the chimney, and we have often 
puzzled our brains while we sat here, waiting for thee 
and Mifanwy, to settle what we could ever do with it. 
It is nearly ten pounds," he whispered to leuan, " and 
I am setting thee up for life, boy." 

leuan stood up and shook himself, as though dis- 
missing an unpleasant remembrance, and, speaking in 
rather an unsteady voice, he said : 

" And I will repay you the money, lanto, if 1 live. 
I will pay you over and over again ; but, there ! I 
never can pay you for all your kindness to me. What 
would have become of Mifanwy and me if we hat' n't 
been brought up by the kindest and best man and 
woman in Wales > " 

" Oh, anwl ! what indeed ?" said Mifanwy. 

" Twt, twt," said Shan, lifting the steaming crock of 
uwd off the hooks, and pouring it into a huge wooden 
bowl )n the table. "Twt, twt, no more of your 
flattery, but come to sup[)er." 

And when they gathered round the black shining 
table, lighted by its one rush candle and the glow of 
the jK'al fire on the stone hearth, no traveller over the 
stormy moor outside, where the wild west wind was 
blowing the scudding clouds ..cross the face of the 
moon, and bending down the withered rushes, would 
have guessed that within that tiny thatched hut dwelt 
so much of human lKi[)piness and interest. 



68 



A WELSH SINGER. 



til 



Tiic winter sped on, the sprinfT-timc came again, 
and still Mifanwy and Icuan hauntefl the same 
craggy slopes, and ever, as each month brought its 
tokens of returning life and beauty, Mifanwy grew 
more silent. She had grown much during the past 
year, her form had filled out, and the figure that was 
once painfully thin and gaunt, had now the symmetry 
of healthy youth. 

leuan, too, had grown much, both in mind and 
person, and, when the two young people walked over 
the moor in the early morning light, Shan, watching 
them from the garden hedge, had no reason to be 
ashamed of them. 

One day, when the evening shadv ws were falling, 
leuan ran breathlessly up Moel Mynach, and, flinging 
himself on the sea-pinks, cried excitedly : 

" What dost think, Mifanwy ? The little sea-crows 
have their first brood out under the cliff here ; I saw 
them plainly from Moel Hiraethog ; 1 us crawl to 
the edge and look over." 

Mifanwy, full of interest, instantly lay flat on. the 
grass, and both crawled face downwards to the edge 
of the cliff, where they lay side by side looking down 
over the seething, foaming waters below. Halfway 
down the cliff, on a ledge of rock, the jackdaws, or 
the " little sea-crows," as they were called on the 
coast, had built their untidy nest of twigs, and were 
now flying from crag to crag, cawing happily, and 
enticing their little ones back to the nest after their 
first flight. 

"See how thev flutter," said Mifanwy. "To-morrow 
they will fly down to the beach, and the next day 
they will keep thee company on Moel Hiraethog. I 
have noticed that all the birds that live on Mod 
Mynach fly over to Moel Hiraethog to spend their 
day, id those which are fledged on thy rocks come 
over here." 

" Discontented," said leuan, " like human beings, 



m 



SHADOWS. 



69 



always thinking there is something better where they 
are not." 

" Well, indeed," said Mifanwy; " I am not like that ; 
I want only to be here all my life." Then there was 
a long silence, while they watched the young brood 
return to their nest under a sheltering tuft of grass, 
and, after much cawing and shuffling, settle them- 
selves down for the night. Suddenly Icuan spoke. 

" Thee looked at the crows as solemnly as if thee 
wert at a funeral, Mifanwy ! What is it grieves 
thee ? " 

"Nothing," she said; "only I was thinking that, 
this time next year, when the little sea-crows bring 
out their first brood, thou wilt not be here." 

" No," said leuan, with a dreamy look. " I shall be 
in London, far from the sea-gulls and the little sca- 
crows, and far from thee, Mifanwy. It will be lonely 
for thee here, but thee wilt have the sea, and the 
sheep, and Shan and lanto ; while I will have nothing, 
nothing, but my carving. ' Sculpture,' Rhys Morgan 
says I ought to call it." 

" Sculpture ! what a hard word," said the girl ; " but 
thee wilt have learnt to talk English by that time ; 
but I, oh ! it will be lonely ! I will have to answer 
Robert the Mill when he shouts out frt)m the mill 
door, else I will forget how to speak." 

" Robert the Mill ! oh, yes, thee canst talk to him. 
I exj)ect thee wilt not miss me much then." Ami 
leuan pulled up a handful of sea-pinks and dropped 
them down over the cliff. 

Mifanwy was silent and thcjughtful. 

" I don't .'^(.■c how it's going to be," she said slowly. 
" W' ill the grand gentleman and lad>' let thcx; tome 
hack to fetch a poor shcplu rdess, dost think? and, 
if thou shoulcist coini' back, whit ■'•o,,!,!s( do with inc? 
No, no, leuan, I see it ,d!, v.c .iie not ihiMrrn now. 
Thou art talii .■ th.in lanto..;:.! I ;un as tall as Shan, 
and 1 know th>;t tiiuu nu!.-:>t o, ainl I must -tiiv ; God 
will:-^ it." 



JO 



A WELSH SINGER 



•' Yes, I must go," said Icuan, 

They both sti>()d up at the edge of the chff, and 
leuan laid hold of her hand, as if to draw her away 
fram danger. " But, Mifanwy, / tvill come back, I 
cannot live without thee ; dost believe me, lass ? hast 
ever found mc break a promise ? " 

" No, of course not," said Mifanwy, bending her 
head over a sc.i-pink, while Icuan held her other hand ; 
"and I know thou wilt keep this promise; but I 
know, too, that when thou comest to fetch mc, I will 
refuse to go with tluc, for thou wilt be a fine gentle- 
man then, and to have a poor shepherdess for thy 
sister will disgrace tliec in that -^Tand London." 

leuan, still holding her hantl, was silent for some 
time, and his brow was troubled. 

" 1 wish Sir Gljnne had never spoken to me," he 
said; " it is all dark before us. Only one thing I know 
and that is, I cannot live zvitliout thcc. Wilt trust me, 
lass, and not take up with Robert the Mill ? Wilt 
wait for mc ? " 

Mifanwy drew her hand away gently, and, casting 
a scornful look towards the distant mill, where 
Robert's white figure could even now be S(H*n at the 
door, rc|)lied, ' I will never take up with Robert the 
Mill, and I will wait for thee, l.id, till I die." 

leuan seemed (jnly half satisfied, ;ind rcinaiiud 
silent, while they returned to told their sheep. 'I'he 
sun was sinking in s|)!, ndour of L;old and crini-on 
over the sea when the\' turned their .leps homeward, 
facing the cool evening breeze, that ilew across the 
bare, grey mountains. 

" It will be rain sof)n," said leiian, " if this south 
wind continues. Who is that comin;; down from the 
top? It is Laissabeth." And both tur:u(l to watch 
the fluttering pink figure of the girl, who now ran 
down to meet them. She hehl her straw hat in her 
hand, and on reaching them, p.uiling with the exertion 
of running, she stretched out her arm . to u,a<!\ her- 
scll. 



SHADOWS. 



71 



" Oh ! stop me, stop me ! " she cried, with an 
affectation of fear, and leuan was obliged to open his 
arms to catch her. She fell in a little heap at their 
feet, laughing and panting. He raised her up gently.^ 
" You are not so much used to the slopes as we are, 
he said. " Mifanwy can run down there easily." 

Laissabeth held her hand to her side. " Oh, Mi- 
fanwy," she said contemptuously, with a nod at the 
girl, "she is a shepherdess; 1 am not, and I hate 
these slippery slopes." 

" Why did you come down then ? " asked Mifanwy. 
"Only to say good-bye. I am going away to- 
morrow ; Miss Gwynne Ellis is going to take me with 
her ; she has promised my uncle to take me safely to 
.school. See my new frock, Mifanwy ! and my new 
hat. I am going to be grand, I can tell thee, and am 
going to learn singing. Dost not '-nvy me ? " 

Mifanwy did not answer; she did not wish to say, 
" Yes," and " onnore," as lanto would have said, for- 
bade her to say " No ! " ., 

" Mifanwy will come to London, too, one day, .said 
leuan ; " for I will come back and fetch her." 

Laissabeth tittered. " Oh ! well indeed ! " she said, 
'• that will be fine ! And for thee, leuan ! Perhaps 
we shall meet in London. My uncle has had a letter 
from Lady Meredith, and she says I am to go aiul see 
her sometimes ; and Sir Glynne wrote to my uncle, 
too, to say that he is coming down to the Hall next 
month, and will take thee back with him ; .so, good- 
bye, leuan, but not for long." And she held out her 
little dimpled hand, which leuan grasped warily. 
She had grown into ,1 lovely maiden. The golden 
plaits which had formerly hung down her back had 
disappeared, and her hair had been gathered in coiii 
at the back of her head. 

"Good-bye, Mifanwy," she said; "perhaps I shall 
see thee in London, too ; I shall know thee, of course, 
by thy red cloak." And, dimpling and smiling, she 
turned again to bid a last good-bye to leuan. 



•• 



72 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Mifanwy breathed a sigh of rehef when she had 
disappeared over the brow of the hill. 

" How pretty she is ! " said leuan, " I don't think 
in London they can find a prettier face. She is like 
the pink and white inside the sca-shclls ! " 

" Yes," said Mifanwy ; " and I am like the brown 
sea-weed." 

" Twt, twt," said leuan, " I never remember that 
thou art so dark except when Laissabcth is with us ; 
she has not thy beautiful figure. Thou art beautiful 
too, in another way, Mifanwy, and it is the way I like 
best," he whispered in her car ; " dost hear, lass ? " 

Mifanwy already had her finger in the latch hole of 
the door, but she turned round, and, laughingly shak- 
ing her head, replied : 

' Ves, I hear, but oh, anwl ! I don't believe." 
I was too late to argue the point, for she had 
'\y entered the cottage, where the usual cosy 
ac' awaited them. 
sh ! news,' cried Shan, " news ! wonderful news ! 
Powys has been here, ach y fi ! I was frightened 
s sour looks. He came to tell us to put thee 
. my hoy, for the grand gentleman will come 
ont to fetch thee." And with her apron she 
the irs from her eyes. 



al 



J 

re 
ni 

Wi 



CHAPTER IX. 



catkin's tactics. 

The weeks slipped by swiftly. To Mifanwy they 
seemed to fly, and the last of all had come. Sir 
Gl> line and Lady Meredith were staying at the Hall, 
anil had several times visited leuan's hut. Icuan had 
no new work to show, having spent all his spare time 
latterly lying on his face on the grass, leaning on his 
elbows, studying a dog-eared grammar, geography, or 
history book ; and Sir Glytme was pleased that it 
should be so. 

" You have done exactly what I should have ad- 
vised you to do, my boy. You have tried to improve 
your mind, and to leave your sculpture to my tuition. 
Well, you will have less to unlearn, perhaps. Come 
down to the Hall to-morrow evening, and I will tell 
you finally what day I shall be leaving. But — h'm, 
ha ! about clothes, my boy. It won't do to appear in 
London, you know, in your country garb — picturesque 
though it may be — so we will take a journey to Cacr 
Madoc together, where, I have no doubt, there is a 
good tailor, who can make you a plain suit of clothes. 
After you come to London, my wife will sec you well 
set up." 

leuan coloured, and stammcn-d awkwardly: 

" If you please, sir, I want to .s;i\ si inclhing ; first, 
thank you for being so kind. 1 eiDt sa\' much 
thanks in English, not what I am thinkin;.; to say, but 
when I am with you all the lime, I will have the — 
the— the— " 

"Opi'ortuiiity," suc-;--^ested Sir G!-, i.re. 

73 



74 



A WELSH SINGER. 



" Yes, sir, the opportunity to show you my thanks ; 
but I want to say, sir, that there's two things that I 
hope you will be agreed to them. I have got a nice 
new suit of clothes ; iss lanto iss give to me, brown 
they are, and a brown cap ; and so I don't want new 
clothes until I have earned enough money to pay for 
them myself. I will work for you, sir, with the stones. 
I will do the hard work, and anything that you will 
show me ; and, if you will pay me as you would pay 
any other poor boy, I will save my money till I can 
buy a suit of clothes." 

" Well," said Sir Glynne, smiling, " I like your in- 
dejjendence ; but let us settle our business in our own 
tongue." And giving up the English, he continued 
the conversation in Welsh, much to leuan's comfort. 
" And what is the other request you have to make ? " 

" It is this, sir," said leuan, " that you will let me 
come back to sec ShSn and lanto whenever I 
like." 

"Whenever you like!" said Sir Glynne, opening 
his eyes in some surprise ; " my dear boy, that would 
be rather a rash promise to make. You might be 
wanting to come down every month." 

" Oh, no," said leuan ; " but perhaps every year, 
sir ; and, when I am old enough and rich enough, I 
must come to fetch Mifanwy, for I have promised." 

"Mifanwy!" exclaimed Sir Glynne in blank 
astonishment. " Who is Mifanwy ? " 

" My sister, the shepherdess, on Moel Mynach." 

" But you have no sister ! f thought you were an 
orphan, without brothers or sisters." 

" She is not really my sister ; but we have always 
lived toj^cthcr with lanto and Shfin ; and so, sir, you 
sec, of course, she cannot live without me, and I 
cannot live without her." 

"Oh, I see," said Sir Glynne, lau^'hing heartily; 
"a little love affair. Well, I think I may safely 
promise that, when )ou have grown old enough and 
rir!i enough, and have see;, Lf)ndon >ife. bt-en with me 



CATKINS TACTICS. 



75 



to Rome, etc., if you want to come back to fetch the 
shepherdess, you can do so." 

" Thank you, si-/' said leuan in a tone of rehef. 
The look of anxiety cleared away from his brow, and, 
after walking part of the way over the hill with btr 
Glynne, he hastened down to the shore, passing the 
mill, where Robert was standing at the door as usual, 
and across the sands where the Sethin was spark- 
ling down to the sea. He wa-^ soon running up Mc^l 
Mynach, where Mifanwv stood watching him. He 
told her what had passed between him and bir 
Glynne, and they returned home silently side by side, 
more thoughtful than usual. .j ^u* w • 

" You are rather silent, children," said Shan later in 
the evening, when the supper was over and the 
shininrr black bowls and the spoons and platters had 
been washed and put away. " Come, let us have 
' Aderyn Pur.' My mother always said, ' There is no 
thought so black that music will not silver its wings. 
Come, Mifanwy, begin." 

The girl began. Her voice was not so steady and 
strong as usual, but the plaintive air lost none of its 
sweetness for that reason. leuan joined in, and bhan 
soared around with innumerable quavers, while lanto s 
sonorous bass voice lent depth and harmony to the 
music ; and soon the cottage walls resounded with 

*""TlSt was -ood," observed lanto. "Now let's 
have 'The Blackbird.'" And again the untaught 
musical voices followed Mifanwy's clear treble in that 
most exquisite of all Welsh melodies, " Y Fwyalch, 
or " The Blackbird." And so the\- sang until the 
,.eat fire was dyin- on the hearth, and the moon was 
shinin- through the little window, throwing a square 
p;iich of silver light on the earthen floor. 

"Now t<. bed, children." said Shfin ; "I must be 
busy to-morrow finishing thy last pair of stockin-s. 

icuan laughed heartily as he climbed up the ladder 
to the loft. 



76 



A WELSH SINGER. 






"How many pairs of Ntocklnrj55 am I to have, 
Sh4n ?" he said ; "dost think I am going to walk to 
London ? " 

Late one evening in the folio wing week, in the 
kitchen of The Ship Inn, Catrin and Dan Howeils 
were engaged in a conversat ,t\ evi<!ently vcr>' inter- 
esting to both, although Dan s remarks were confined 
for the most part to a grunt or a single word. Catrin 
frequently broke off the coll. K|uy to stroll to the tiny 
window, which, although cleaned every morning, grew 
dim towards evening from the mist of the sea spray 
that always seemed to fill the air at Abersethin. After 
several vain attempts to sec through the glass, she 
sauntered out to the low doorway, and from habit, 
shading her eyes with her hands, peered up at the 
frowning top of Moel Iliraethog. 

" What can have become of the lad-iie ? " she called 
back to Dan ; "dost think he has for-ottcn ? " 

"H'm, no," said Daniel ; "shouldn't wonder if that 
old mule, John Powys, refused to let him come to- 
night." 

" Perhaps, indeed ! but then, thank goodness, John 
Powys has nothing more to do with him. Sir Glynne 
has taken possession of him now. Oh, ainvl fach ! 
what a lucky bo>' ! Indeed, Dan, that was a clever 
thought of thine to give the letter : ^ the boy before 
he goes ; and he's such a scholar, he'd read it off to 
us at once." 

Another saunter to the door, where the twilight 
still lingered, though the old kitchen was gettmg 
darker and darker. 

" Here he comes I " she said, and she turned back 
from the doorway; "here he comes, and Mifanwy 
with him of course. What that lass and laddie will 
do when they are se[)arated I can't think ; hut I must 
get rid of Mifanwy somehow, for it wouldn't do to 
tell her." 

" Humph, no ! " said Daniel. 

Here leuan entered alone ; he was greeted by one 



CATKIN'S TACTirs. 



77 



exclamation after another, having donned his new 
clothes, sh(H's, cap, and all, in honour of the occasion ; 
for to be invited down esjK-cially to sec Catrin Howells 
was an honour at Abersethin. 

" Caton pawl) ! " cried Dan 

Catrin raised her hands in astonishment. "Well, 
well!" she exclaimeil. "Merciful jjoodness! What 
shall I say ? " and she twisted leuan round to look at 
him from all points. 

It was an awkward moment for the lad, but he 
stood his j^rounil well, fli^^in^ his hands deep into 
his trousers' pockets with his old habit, and laughin^^ 
merrily, he tossed his hair from his forehead. 

"There's broad shoulders he has! and, ;i:iwl ! look 
at his loiij; Ic^s ; indeed, indeed, they'll find it hard 
to show a handsomer young fellow in all London. 
Sir Glynne will be proud of thee, lad." 

" Oh, Catrin ! " he said, " thec'st laughing at me, 
or thou want'st to drive away my nervousness ; but 
I am frightened to death about it all, and sometimes 
I think to run .iway. A poor lad like me, with no- 
thing in the world, not even a name of my own." 

"Twt, twt," said Catrin, "thy name has been 
good enough for thee hitherto, and very suitable, 
leuan Gwyllt, what could they call thee better ? But 
I am going to give thee a new name to-night, and 
perhaps thee won't like it so well. Sit down, my lad, 
whilst. I get thee a bowl of brcci ; thou art too young 
to begin with the ' cwrw ' set ; and when the fine 
gentlemen in London drag thee into the tavern and 
say, ' Come and have a glass, lad,' " and here she 
emphasised her words with her fist on the little round 
table, "then remember Catrin Howells' advice, and 
don't thee touch it, my lad." 

leuan laughed. " Not likely, Catrin ; I hate the 
stuff, though I like breci ; besides, it isn't likely that 
the fine gentlemen in London will ask a poor boy 
like me to drisik with them." 

" Poor boy like thee, indeed ! thce'.st going to be a 



Sfr: 



m 




ni 






^^ -'■•P;'--7.-:^7f-j-r 



77- • 



MICROCOW RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 





lii 



1^ 

I" 



2.8 

116 
\*0 



12.5 



1.8 




A /APPLIED MAGS 



1653 East Mom Street 

Rochester. New York 14609 USA 

(7161 «82 - 0300 - Phone 

(716) 288 - 5989 -Fox 



78 



A WELSH SINGER. 



fine gentleman, and, if I don't make a great mistake, 
a rich one too ; eh, Dan ? " 

Dan grunted and nodded, while leuan opened his 
eyes. 

"Here, drink the breci, boy, while I hunt for the 
letter," said Catrin, and she fumbled in her capacious 
leather pocket, and at last drew out a crumpled letter, 
that much excited leuan's curiosity. 

" Here, take it, boy ; I have waited sixteen years 
to hear that letter read." And still withholding it 
from leuan's eager hand, she told him the history 
already known to the reader, of the advent of the 
Adeny don, on that stormy day in March, when the 
letter was entrusted into her keeping. 

While she proceeded with her tale, leuan's eyes 
grew more and more excited ; his face flushed, and 
his heart beat tumultuously. 

" Will I hear who my mother v.-as ? " 

" How do I know .? " said Catrin ; " read the letter, 
and read it loud, for Dan to hear ; 
have thought of giving it to thee ; 
thought of that." 

Meanwhile leuan had opened . 

trembling fingers ; then, with a parched tongue and 
husky voice, he read as follows : — 



I should never 
it was Dan who 

the letter with 



fC 



"My Dear John," (" I thought so," put in Catrin; 
— " for you are still dear to me, in spite of all the un- 
kindncss with which you have repaid all my tender 
love and undying affection. How is it that I love 
you still— you who have deserted me, and so cruelly 
wounded me ? But it is true, John, I love you still, 
as I did on that June morning only eighteen months 
ago, when, a happy and innocent girl, I left Mrs. 
Wilson's school to be with you, as I thought, for the 
rest of your life. Oh, John, do you remember that 
happy day ? Do you remember all your promises of 
love and faithfulness ? Do yuu realise how much I 
left and lost for your sake? Why did you insist 



^"T- L' , . • ■' • ' ■..-•"' '<- '^: ■:f^>^(^'^y^i 



CATKIN'S TACTICS. 79 

upon SO much secrecy ? Why did you cause me to 
break my parents' hearts, to lose the respect and love 
of the dearest and best of brothers ? It is true I was 
wickedly ungrateful to them all. and basely willing 
to give them all up (or your sake!' 

"Stop, my boy," -^aid Cntrin ; "take another 
drink of brcci, 'twill steady your voice." 

But leuan only shook his head, and went on : 
" How could I guess that in so short a time you 
would have tired of me ? When you first left me in 
that loHcly cottage in the North Wales hills, I could 
not and would not believe that you had really deserted 
me, and as the months passed by, and the small sum 
of money you had left with me dwindled away, and I 
began to realise that you would never return to me, 
my life became almost unbearable, and I grieve to say 
that more than once I was on the point of ending it. 
Oh ! that dreadful lake ! by the side of which we used 
to walk lovingly, arm in arm, in the first weeks of our 
honeymoon. How different it looked to me in less 
than a year, for only so long did your love last. I have 
tried hard to give you up, John, even as you have 
given me up, and I do not write now only to reproach 
you, but to explain why I have thus sought you out 

again. 

" You knew, John, when you left me— and, oh ! how 
this adds to the bitterness of my sorrow !— that I was 
likely before long to bring into this cold and cruel 
world a child, who should have been the pledge of our 
love, but, alas ! will come unwelcomed by its father. 
What is to become of my innocent child, John ? You 
cannot, you will not thrust me from you ; at all events 
you will take care of my child— of our child ! 

" I write this letter, and entrust it to kind Catrin 
Howells, to be delivered to you in case of my failing to 
see you, for I feel a strange misgiving that my life is 
drawing to a close. 

'' I have not made myself known to Catrin 
Howells, and shall continue to regard your wishes in 



VI^HIi^ll 


^^^^^^■(^'>r^r'^.v'v^5- '•' 


V" 


1 ■ 


80 


A AVKLSH SINGER. 







that matter until after the birth of my child ; but after 
that, John, should you still discard me, I shall seek 
out my beloved brother, and see whether he will for- 
give me, and extend to me that kindness and love I 
hunger for, and which you so cruelly deny me. Oh ! 
dear John, what has made you hate me, and tire of 
me? It is true, I could never take the interest I 
ought in your business projects, and often asked for 
money when you had none to give me, but ^ am 
young, and would improve. What would have be- 
come of me I do not know, had I not happened to 
meet an old hawker who came to the Cribwr Moun- 
tains to sell his wares. He told me of your having 
come into your father's property, and that you were 
living at Maen Powys, while I was starving on the 
North Wales hills. I have suffered so much, and 
travelled so far to see you, so that my child may be 
born in his father's house. Do not deny me that 
kindness, John. I am too weary and ill to write 
more, but shall now leave this note with Catrin 
Howells, and try to reach Maen Powys, and, oh ! to 
think that I shall pass my beloved home a deserted 
and broken-hearted woman. 

" Good-bye, John, and may God forgive you for the 
cruel wrong you have done me. I am, still as ever, 

Your loving and faithful 
" Mary." 

When leuan had read the last word, the letter 
slipped from his fingers, and he stood staring at 
Catrin. 

"John Powys!" he cried. "Oh, Catrin, I cannot 
bear it ; that hateful man who has been so cruel to 
me and Mifanwy. I have the marks of his strap 
now on my shoulders." 

" Caton pawb ! " said Catrin indignantly, " what 
does the boy mean? A beggar boy like thee to 
complain because he finds that the richest man in the 
parish is his father." 



..:•'!;• 



.',"«•■> 






Y- 



CATRIN'S TACTICS. 



8i 



2 



" But my mother ! " said leuan ; " oh, my poor 
mother ! " 

And all the old stories he had heard, the scraps of 
information eagerly gathered by the child, when no 
one had thought that he was listening, the sad appeals 
for love and protection he had just read, the picture 
so often drawn by ShSn of that silent, white form in 
the barn, when she had laid his little red cheek on his 
mother's dead lips, all crowded in upon the lad's 
mind, and, dropping into a chair, he covered hia face 
with his hands, and sobbed. 

" My mother — my poor mother ! " was the burden 
of his cry. 

And Catrin, in sympathy, wiped her eyes with her 
blue checked apron. 

" She was a sweet lady, and gentle ; too gentle for 
John Powys' cruel ways." 

" A lady ! " said leuan. 

" A lady, yes, a real lady. Eh, Dan ? " 

Dan grunted and nodded several times. 

" A real lady, though her boots were tattered and 
her gown was thin ; her long, black cloak was a good 
one. I wonder what became of that ? " 

" Oh, I wonder," said leuan. " If only I 
scrap of even the ragged dress, how I would 
it. Will I never know more about her than 
name was Mary ? " 

Well," said Catrin, " now we are 
smoothing down her blue 



had one 
treasure 
that her 



ness. 



commg 
apron. 



to busi- 
and well 



pleased to feel that she had so interesting an affair to 
manage. " If thou art afraid of John Powys, / am not. 
I _ have known him since he was a boy, when I was 
his good mother'j servant. Many a cat and many a 
little bird I have saved from his cruel grip ; yes, and 
many a cuff I have given him, too, and I would like 
to give him a few more; but it will be better than any 
cuff, when I go up to him," and she stood up with her 
arms akimbo, nodding her head emphatically, • and 
when I say, ' John Powys, I have found you out ; I 

F 



■RJ^^TSIKfi. 



82 



A WELSH SINGER. 



know now that what I suspected is true ; I have read 
the letter I told you the wind had blown into the 
broken partition ; I have found it again, John Powys, 
and it tells me that the little shepherd boy, leuan 
Gwyllt, to whom you have been so hard a master, is 
your own son, and the son of that poor young lady 
who came through the storm in the Aden y don ; 
and now, what are you going to do for the boy ? ' " 

" Oh, stop, Catrin, stop ! " cried leuan, jumping up. 
" Never, never, never, will I have anything to do with 
him, and if I cannot find out anymore about my mother, 
except by asking John Powys, then will I never know 
more than that her name is ' Mary,' Mary is a dear 
name, Catrin." 

Catrin did not answer ; she was filled with astonish- 
ment and indignation. 

" Well, indeed, indeed ! if ever I heard such a thing ! 
Here's a fine gentleman ! Because thou art going 
with Sir Glynne Meredith thou art become too fine a 
gentleman to be beholden to thine own father ? " 

" Oh ! it isn't that, Catrin ; but don't you see, I hate 
him so ; besides, I have vowed to give him a good 
drubbing the first time I meet him ; only I am wait- 
ing till I am a year stronger and bigger. I have 
promised Mifanwy to pay him for every bruise on her 
body, and if I acknowledged him as my father how 
can I do that ? " 

Catrin laughed, and Dan chuckled. 

" Well, indeed ! " she said, " there is something in 
that, too; and thouvvilt only give him what he richly 
deserves, so take thine own course, my boy ; I won't 
interfere with thee ; only I don't promise to hide 
entirely from John Powys that I know his secret ; a 
hint now and then will keep the gentleman well in 
order; but there is something else that I v/ant to 
advice thee about. Now, there's Mifanwy ! Look 
here, my boy, Mifanwy and thee have been brought 
up like brother and sister, and thou must drop her 
now. If thee hadst continued to live here, it puzzles 



.;•^,■■;'LV;J■ 



catkin's tacttcs. 



83 



me to think what would become of thee anc" Mifanwy ; 
but indeed the ways of Providence are cleverer than 
ours, and it is all settled very nicely. Thou wilt go 
away with Sir Glynne, and, of course, thou wilt know 
no more of Mifanwy ; she will fret a little at first, no 
doubt, for I think the girl has a heart, in spite of her 
dark skin ; and 'tis but natural, seeing you have spent 
your lives together on those lonely hills ; but that is 
all over now, leuan, and thou must drop her ; dost 
hear, lad ? " and again her fist came down on the 
little round table. 

Poor leuan stood before her, twirling his new brown 
cap in his hands, pained and bewildered. The world — 
his world — seemed to be turning topsy-turvy, and his 
brain was a jumble of confused reflections. To be 
always dressed in his new suit, to be pressed by 
London gentlemen " to have a glass with them," to 
be expected " to drop Mifanwy," to know that John 
Powys was his father ; all these things together 
oppressed and bewildered him ; but in his confusion 
two things were clear to him : he could never drop 
Mifanwy, and he had the dear mother whose name 
was " Mary," to think of, to treasure her memory, 
and to avenge her cruel wrongs. 

" I must go now," he said, passing his fingers 
through his hair ; " thank you, Catrin, you've been 
very kind to me ; I will never part with this letter, 
but I will never claim relationship with John Powys ; 
I am ashamed of my father, but I am not ashamed of 
my mother," with a toss of his head, " whatever her 
faults may have been." 

" What's become of Mifanwy ? " said Catrin. " I 
saw her running down the hill with thee ; remember 
my words, and tell her nothing." 

" Indeed, I cannot promise that," said leuan ; 
" Mifanwy and I have never had a secret from each 
other, and I won't begin to deceive her now." 

" Well, well, we may leave that to time ; when 
thou'st been to London and seen all the pretty ladies 



84 



A WELSH SINGER. 



there, thou wilt forget Mifanwy, and thou wilt be 
quite right ; remember my advice, leuan, and, when 
thou leavest Aberscthin, drop Mifanwy. Good-bye, 
lad ; I wish thee well, and, when thee comest to 
Abersethin, don't forget that Catrin Howells and Dan 
are thy friends." 

Half way up the hill, leuan found Mifanwy waiting 
for him ; she was leaning idly against the rocky side 
of the road, half sitting on the bank, her shapely bare 
feet stretched out before her, her straw hat slung upon 
her arm, and the pale golden light of the rising moon 
shining full upon her ; her large brown eyes with their 
heavy fringed lashes with the faint " sepia " shadow 
beneath them, looked lustrous and beautiful in the 
moonlight, and, when her smile of welcome disclosed 
a row of pearly teeth between the full red lips, leuan 
saw and felt that there was some great charm in her 
appearance, in spite of her swarthy skin and shabby 
clothes. 

" What had Catrin to tell thee ? " she asked, rising 
and joining him in his steady tramp homewards. 

" Oh ! Mifanwy, much that will surprise thee," he 
replied. " It will take too long to tell thee now, but 
to-morrow at noon I w'U come to Moel Mynach, and 
thou shalt hear all about it' 

When they reached home, they found all excite- 
ment in the little cottage. Sir Glynne had been there, 
to say that he had been hurriedly summoned to 
London, and would have to leave early the following 
morning, and would expect leuan to join him at the 
corner of the road, where it branched off to the 
Hall. 

lanto was unusually serious, and Shfi,n tearful, while 
she tied up the modest bundle of leuan's belongings 
in a blue cotton handkerchief leuan gazed medi- 
tatively at it. 

"I wonder whether that will suit Sir Glynne's grand 
carriage ? " he observed. " I am afraid not." 

" What ? not that beautiful blue handkerchief, the 



MM 



CATRIN'S TACTICS, 



85 



brightest I could get in the shop ! I should think it 
would, indeed ! Art getting proud already ? " 

"It is very nice Shan fach," said leuan, "only I 
know gentlemen are odd." 

Mifanwy whispered. " I will wrap it up in the rush 
basket I have made for thee ; it is pretty, and will 
look like a fishing-basket." 

leuan nodded confidentially, and the little family 
separated for the night, with hearts oppressed by the 
shadow of the first parting. 



■>■ 



m 



CHAPTER X 



PARTING. 



In the early grey of the next morning, Mifanwy was 
up and busily engaged in preparing breakfast ; the 
han w?s taken down from the large oaken chimney, 
and the frizzled slices heaped upon leuan's plate ; 
the boy ate silently, and soon finished his meal. 

" Come out a moment, Mifanwy," he said ; " I want 
to show thee the dangerous gap in the fence on the 
edge of the cliff; we can see it from behind the 
garden hedge." 

When they had reached the place, he pointed to- 
wards Moel Hiraethog, where the sheep had not yet 
been unfolded. 

" Wilt go to John Powys, and tell him how sud- 
denly I have been called away ? He has a shepherd 
from Rianon ready to take my place, but thee'lt un- 
fold the sheep this morning for me, and keep them 
from the gap, Mifanwy." 

" Yes," she answered in a whisper, trying to still her 
throbbing heart, and to banish the terrible pain of 
" hiraeth " that was already clutching at her heart 
str'ngs, " Oh, yes, I will see to the sheep." 

There was a long silence, both gazing out over the 
sea, that lay in a leaden haze, as yet untouched by the 
sunrise. 

leuan took her hand, that was hinging listlessly by 
her side. 

" Wilt give me a kiss, lass, at parting ? " 

But she hung her head, and, drawing a little away, 

86 



J^g^^^^gg 



PARTINO. 



87 



blushed so vividly that it was visible even through 
her dark skin. 

" No? " he said inquiringly, and pressing her hand. 
" Well, next time we meet ; thee won't refuse then, 
Mifanwy?" 

She did not answer, but, drawing her hand from 
his, she buried her face in both hands, and the panting 
bosom and heaving shoulders showed the sobs that 
were convulsing her. 

leuan struggled hard to preserve his calmness. 

" Mifanwy, lass, try to bear up ; I feel the same, 
but I must not show it," he said in a hard, determined 
voice. 

" No, no ! " said Mifanwy, dropping her hands, and 
raising her face to the sea-wind. She had wept so 
often alone lately, that her eyes had become ac- 
customed to tears, and soon dried up, and showed no 
traces of her weeping, as eyes do to which tears are 
familiar. 

" Come in ; lanto and Shan will be waiting for us," 
and the girl led the way bravely into the cottage. 

When leuan took up his blue bundle, Sh4n broke 
down completely, and was loud in her lamentations ; 
while lanto snuffled and drew his cuff across his eyes. 

" Good-bye, machgeni, be a good, honest boy, and 
have too much or.nore to do anything in Sir 
Glynne's back that thou wouldst not do in his face." 

"And write to us sometimes," added Shan; "though 
we can't read thy letter ; but Mr. Rhys Morgan will 
read it — only I hear he is going to London too. 
Good-bye, my boy bach ! " 

leuan wrung their hands. " I will write," he said, 
" and, please God, I will soon begin to reward you 
for all you have done for me." 

Mifanwy stood silently by, and apparently stolidly 
callous ; but when, at last, the rumbling wheels of Sir 
Glynne's dogcart were heard approaching, she turned 
deathly pale, and when leuan grasped her hand at 
parting, he saw her lips move, but could not catch 



Ma^V' 



88 



A WELSH SINGER. 



'I 



the sound of her farewell. There was a long, linjjer- 
in^ hand-clasp, and while Sir Glynne stopped and 
spoke cheeringly to the tearful old people, Mifanwy 
surreptitiously pushed the blue bundle into the rush 
basket, and placed it in the carriage. 

leuan was going to get up at the back of the dog- 
cart, but Sir Glynne said decidedly, settling the ques- 
tion for ever in the mind of the disturbed groom : 

" No, in front with me, leuan ; when Lady Mere- 
dith is not here, you will always take her place." 

And with more good-byes, and much waving of 
hands, the dogcart rolled away in a cloud of 
dust. 

Later in the morning, Robert the Mill came panting 
up Moel Mynach. 

" Where's leuan ? " he said. " I see Will Rianon 
watching the shecj). Where is Icuan ?" 

" Gone ! " said Mifanwy in a cold, hard voice 

"Gone where? not with Sir Glynne! I thought 
they were nut going lor another week." 

" Yes, they went this morning early ; there came 
a sudden message from the Queen, or the Parlia- 
ment, or something ; indeed, I don't know which, 
and he has gone." She paused for a moment. 
" leuan is gone ! " she said again, going over the 
words to see how they sounded. Yes, she could 
repeat the words over and over again, but she could 
not realise the fact. 

" Well, he's a lucky chap ! " said Robert ; " there's 
no Tiistake about that ; my father said so last night, 
and everybody else says so ; but for thee and me, 
Mifanwy, it will be lonesome, especially for thee. I 
must come and cheer thee up sometimes ; perhaps 
thee'll deign to say a word to me now ; at all events, 
thee may say ' good-bye ' to leuan, for, if he ever 
does come back, he will be a fine gentleman, and it 
isn't likely he will take up with a .shepherd girl, nor 
yet with a miller's lad like me." 

Every word fell like molten lead on Mifanwy's 



PARTING. 89 

heart ; she saw their reasonableness, and feared their 
truth. 

" I »:m thankful to say," said Robert, with a pomp- 
ous air, " that I can do without his friendship ; my 
father says I can hold up my head with any lad in 
the parish ; I am his only son, and the mill and the 
farm will both be mine, for all thou wilt never cast a 
word at mc ! " and he turned away with but a curt 
good-bye to Mifanwy. 

That night her usual short " pader," taught her by 
ShtXn as a baby, and nightly repeated without much 
thought, was considerably lengthened, and, if " leuan ! 
leuan ! " was too much the burden of her prayer, is it 
to be wondered at ? She rose slowly from her knees 
and lay down on her bed, exhausted by the events of 
the day, and soon fell into a deep sle?p. 

With the early dawn she woke refreshed and eager, 
forgetting all that had happened the day before ; but 
instantly, at the sight of the sea, she remembered 
everything, and the light died out from her eyes, the 
life and energy from her limbs; and, with a heavy, 
aching heart, she began another day, a day bereft of 
all its usual interests and pleasures. 

About a fortnight after his arrival in London, Ipuan 
wrote to Shan and lanto. They had already been 
informed of his safe arrival through Lady Meredith, 
who had walked down one afternoon across the moor, 
to see Shan and to set her mind at ease. But a 
letter! Really written by leuan himself! Coming 
straight from London and directed to Shan herself! 

" Shkn Thomas, 
" Panteg, 

" Abersethin." 

It was a treasure to be carefully guarded so long as 
she Hved, But, alas! when it arrived, there was no 
one in the cottage who could read it. Robert the 
Mill had brought it i^p to Mifanwy on his return from 



90 



A WELSH SINGER, 






the village one morning, and she had flown over the 
moor at evening, so soon as she had folded her 
sheep, arriving breathless and panting just when 
Shan and I an to were sitting down to their supper. 

" Oh ! Shan ! a letter ! a letter ! from leuan ! What 
shall we do ? " 

" Give it to mc," said Shan, and, eagerly clutching 
it, she narrowly examined every portion of the 
envelope and the seal ; all were admired, and 
especially the handwriting. 

" I always thought he was wasting his time down 
there with Rhys Morgan, learning to write and to 
count, and things; but now I see how wise he 
was ! " 

" Shall we open it ? " said lanto. 

" No, indeed," said Shan, " what's the use ? I will 
take it to Rhys Morgan to-morrow, and he shall open 
it. It would be a pity to spoil the look of it befor^^ 
he sees it." 

"That's it," said lanto. 

And Mifanwy was obliged to agree. So it was 
placed carefully in the leaves of the Bible until the 
next afternoon, when Mr. Rhys Morgan would be 
disengaged. 

Shan knew that in the morning there was to be a 
wedding in the Rock Church on Ynysoer island, but 
in the afternoon she donned her best attire, her 
Sunday " gwnbach," her scarlet scarf and tall black 
hat, and, carrying the letter folded up in a pocket- 
handkerchief, she walked with much importance in 
her gait and countenance over the moor and down to 
the village, where she found Rhys Morgan sitting 
on a long bench outside The Ship Inn, Catrin and 
Dan seated one on each side of him. 

When Shan appeared, Catrin greeted her with much 
warmth ; they had been friends from childhood, and 
were properly interested in each other's affairs. 

'' What can she want ? " said Dan. 

"Why, a letter from leuan, of course,' was the 






PARTING. 



91 



shrewd woman's answer, "and no one to read it at 
home ; so she brings it to Mr. Rhys Morgan." 

" Yes, indeed ! " cried Shan, sitting down on a 
wooden stool that Betto had run out with. 

" And there's lucky we are," said Catrin, " that Mr. 
Rhys Morgan is here. Wake up, Dan ; art listen- 
ing?" 

Shan deliberately took out of her pocket her hand- 
kerchief, and produced from its folds leuan's letter. 

" Here it is, sir ; I would not let them open it — what 
was the good ? — until you had seen it. Such a pretty 
seal and such beautiful writing, sir, and that is thanks 
to you." 

And she rose and made a bob curtsey before she 
sat down to listen complacently, while Mr. Rhys 
Morgan opened the letter and began : — 

" My Dear Shan and Ianto and Mifanwy, — 
How can I begin to tell you of all the wonders I have 
seen ! and here is the greatest wonder of all, that I — 
leuan Gwyllt — am in London, and writing to you on 
a fine mahogany table and with ink from a silver ink- 
stand ! I am very happy. Sir Glynne and Lady 
Meredith are so kind to me, and Mrs Jones, the house- 
keeper, is kinder still ! I sleep every night on a soft 
feather bed, and oh ! Shan fach ! I wear shoes and 
stockings every day, and the nice brown suit you 
gave me every morning. Oh ! the English are strange 
people, and do many things we never even heard of in 
Abersethin ; they have so many things on the table 
at meal times that are not used, and they change 
their clothes every evening when it is nearly time to 
go to bed. I do not sleep any better on the feather 
bed than I did on my straw bed in the loft at home, 
and I do not enjoy my meals any more from the 
silver spoons and forks than I did from our bowls and 
platters at home. But oh ! there's happy I am in the 
studio with Sir Glynne. The studio is a large room, 
where he carves his beautiful figures ; he lets me help 



'-^,t-^ 



92 



A WELSH SINGER. 



him a great deal, and he pays me a lot of money. I 
am ashamed to tell you how much, I send you £2, 
and will send you a great deal more. But at first I 
have had to buy manynewthings. Mind to keep my old 
ragged trousers and jacket and cap ; for, when I come 
down next autumn, I will wear them and go with 
Mifanwy to watch the sheep. I am thinking of that 
happy time continually. Please give my love and 
thanks to Mr. Rhys Morgan, and to Catrin and Dan 
Howells, and tell them I will never forget them. 
Almost every night I dream of you all, and now I 
say good-bye, and with my thanks for all your kind- 
ness, and my undying love to you all, I remain, 

" Your affectionate son, 
" I EUAN GWYLLT. 

"Mifanwy fach! I have bought a beautiful red ribbon 
for thee, to tie thy hair." 






CHAPTER XL 



TEA AT HE SHIP INN, 

When Shan left her cottage with leuan's letter in 
her pocket, she fully intended to take tea at The 
Ship Inn, but, after the perusal of the letter, and it 
had been duly commented upon by ea'h of the party 
in turn, she began to smooth her rough plaid apron 
with her wrinkled hands, and saiid: "Well, I must 

go." 

" Go ! " said Catrin ; " not before you have tea, 
Shan fach ; it is so seldom we see you ; and now you 
must stay to tea." 

" Tea ! " echoed Shftn, lifting both hands from her 
knees in astonishment. " Caton pawb ! how can I 
stay to tea with lanto at home waiting for me, and 
the fowls all straying about under the very nose of 
the fox, and the pig ! he's calling for me already, you 
may be sure. No, no, no, Catrin fach, I cannot think 
of such a thing ! " and Shan stood up and drew her 
red scarf tighter round her arms. 

" Bt't Mr. Rhys Morgan will be going soon, and 
Betto has had time to make light cakes while we 
have been sitting here, so I will stay, of course," were 
her real thoughts. 

" Certainly you will stop to tea ! " said Mr. Rhys 
Morgan. " You and Catrin are old friends, I know, 
and must have much to say to each other ; so, good- 
bye, I am going across to the island, where one of the 
Bullets is ill with the measles," and, nodding famili- 
arly to the three old people, he left them to settle the 

93 



H 



94 



A WELSH SINGER 



f 1' i 



controversy in the wa; in which all such disputes are 
settled in Wales. 

Catrin laid her hand on the red mantle. " Come 
in," she said. " Betto has been makincj light cakes; I 
can smell them." 

" Not to-day, Catrin fach," said Shriu, "wiffing the 
aroma of the cakes, and more than ever resolved to 
stay. " I am bound to go home to-day. One day 
next w^eek I will come down and have a chat with 
you ; but not to-day, not to-day." 

" One day next week ! " cried Catrin ; " one day 
next year, you mean, and we may all be dead and 
buried before then." 

" True, indeed," assented Shan, relenting a little ; 
"and certainly lanto can feed the pig, and shut up the 
hens in the loft," and she suffered herself to be gentlv 
pulled in by Catrin, while Dan, from behind, seconded 
the motion by sundry little thumps on her back, as 
he followed the two women under the low-pitched 
doorway. 

Betto rushed wildly about in the excess of her 
hospitality, clattering the teacups, and raking the fire 
together on the hearth. When they were seated at 
the table, she placed in the middle a towering pile of 
light cakes, and, delightedly hovering round, enjoyed 
the meal as much as if she had herself been seated 
thereat. 

Shan spread her pocket-handkerchief on her knees. 
" Well, to be sure," she observed, " I never dreamt 
of stopping to tea when I came out, but I could not 
refuse you Catrin fach ! " 

"Of • .e not," said Catrin, though she had 
known a., along that Shan would stay. Even Dan 
soon became more sociable under the influence of the 
steaming cups of tea and the delicious light cakes. 

"Well, Betto fach, you can make light cakes," 
mumbled Shan, with her mouth full. "I suppose now 
leuan has these for tea every day, lucky boy he has 
been." 



amm 



TKA AT THE SHIP INN. 



95 



" Dost know at 
Catrin tentatively. 

" No," said simple Sli.ln 
trampcss who died in John 



'11 who his mother was > " asked 



"only that she was a 
Powys' barn ; she lies 
buried in Pcmnynydd churchyard." 

" And his father ; I wonder who was he ? " mused 
Catrin aloud, keeping a shrewd eye on her old friend, 
who mumbled something about " So long ago now, I 
never troubled my head to ask ; some tramp, I sup- 
pose," and she complacently helped herself to another 
light cake. Catrin positively thirsted to tell her all 
she knew, but was held back by her promise to leuan, 
and a strong feeling that by postponing her punish- 
ment of John Powys, she would render it more un- 
pleasant to him and agreeable to herself. 

When, at last, Shg,n wended her way up the steep 
road that led from the village to the moor above, she 
had time to think over the contents of her precious 
letter, and she endeavoured to recall every word while 
she toiled slowly up the hill. 

Suddenly from a furze bush Mifanwy rose up. 

" Oh, Shan ! " the girl said, with a tremble in her 
voice, " V lat was in the letter ? It does seem so long 
to wait for— oh ! what a pity that I cannot read 
myself." 

" Well, come along, child," said Shan, dipping down 
into the hollow in which her cottage was buried ; then, 
sitting down, she spread the letter out at once on the 
table, lanto and Mifanwy listening hungrily. 

" Well, first," said Shun, " let me see— what's this ?" 
and she put her shrivelled fingers on the date. " I 
don't believe Mr. Rhys Morgan read this bit. Well, 
then, he begins : — 

" ' My Beloved Mifanwy, Ianto, and ShAn,— 
I am very sorry that I have not written to you before, 
but I have been too busy,' and — and — let me see — 
yes, ' I am thinking of you all continually. Sir 
Glvnne and his wife are very kind to me, but not 









^w.? ^^ 



iiii 



96 



A WELSH SINGER. 



kinder than you, dear Shan.' Yes, indeed, he said 
that," she said, with tearful eyes. " ' And we have 
silver spoons instead of wooden ones, but I do not 
enjoy my uwd^ and cawP half so much as I did in the 
oldbwthin.'" 

" Well ! " exclaimed lanto and Mifanwy breath- 
lessly, when she came to a full stop. 

" Well, yes — let me sec," she continued, drawing her 
finger along the lines, "yes, it was just here. 

" * I sleep on a feather bed every night, but I like 
my old straw bed at home the best. I am very busy 
cutting stones, same as I was at home ; and Sir 
Glynne is very busy cutting stones too.' " 

And she stopped to laugh and remark : " Well, 
indeed, to think such a gentleman could do such a 
foolish thing." 

Mifanwy stood clasping and unclasping her hands. 
" Is that all, Shan ? " 

" Well, indeed, there was something about Mifanwy 
and the cliffs, and he said, ' Mind and keep my old 
clothes, for when I come home next autumn I will 
wear them and go with Mifanwy to watch the sheep, 
and there are for thee — lanto — two pounds.'" She 
spread the notes on the table. " And he will send us 
much more. Think of that, lanto ! " 

" Well, what next ? " a.«l<ed Mifanwy. 

"Tha's all," said Shan; "here's his name, leuan 
Gwyllt. 1 aat's the end 01' the letter, of course." 

" Here arc two lines more," said Mifanwy. 

" Yes," said Shan triumphantly, " I remember even 
those. ' Tell Mifanwy I have bought a beautiful red 
ribbon for her hair.' " 

With the first beams of the sun next morning 
Mifanwy was walking lightly over the moor towards 
the cliffs, a buoyancy in her step and a brightness in 



^ Porridge. 



2 Broth. 









tmk^i^^^i^^. 



TEA AT THE SHIP INN. 



97 



I 



her eye that had been lacking for many a day ; her 
heart was light as her step ; her thoughts were' evi- 
dently pleasant, for she smiled when her eyes caught 
the first glimpse of the sea from the crest of the hill. 
She sat down to think before she began her way down 
to the sheepfold. How different everything seemed 
in the light of this morning's sun from what it had 
looked under yesterday's ! How beautiful the bay was, 
lying in its soft grey haze, not yet touched by the rising 
sun ! How white the surf broke upon the beach ! 
How sweet the scent of the wild thyme ! Surely she 
was the happiest g'ri in the world! Surely there 
could be no more beautiful bay than Abersethin, no 
happier home than the thatched cottage at Panteg, no 
flowers more beautiful than those which were now 
studding the soft turf around her ; and then, could 
there be a more delightful occupation than watching 
the sheep ? It was true she was getting too tall and 
too old for the small pittance paid her by John Powys 
as shepherdess. Catrin HowelLs said .she ought to go 
to service, where she could easily earn two pounds a 
year ; but to be shut up in a house with mice and 
rats and cobwebs, not to breathe the fresh sea-breeze, 
not to smell the sweet wild flowers, no sheep, no 
Topper, and, perhaps, no leuan ! No, the thought 
was unbearable; at all events, she was too happy 
to-day to find room for it in her heart. Then be- 
ginning her way down the slope, she sang with voice 
so loud and clear that her notes echoed from hill to 
hill, and flooded the valley below with song. And 
all these fancies and all this music were strung upon 
a little knot of red ribbon ! 

And as week succeeded week, the happiness deep- 
ened in Mifanwy's heart, the light in her eyes grew 
brighter ; and the months slipped by like a string of 
pearls, each one more complete and more beautiful 
than the last, until the long summer days were 
merging into autumn, and the heavy crops of grain 
grew golden in the sunshine. 



98 



A WELSH SINGER. 



f 
I 



')■ I 



iS 



" Twill soon be harvest, Shin," she observed one 
evening. She was sitting on the old oak stool at the 
cottage door, while Sh&n was busily " shooing " in her 
fowls for the night. She scolded them loudly, and 
the hens scolded in return, the while they scuttered 
and fluttered in at the door, and up to the rafters 
above. When the last refractory hen had been driven 
into the doorway, Shan sat down on the low hedge 
that divided the " cwrt " from the garden, 

" No wonder," she said, shaking the feathers off her 
apron, " they call a silly woman a ' dicky-head ' ; hens 
//d!i/^ no sense. Yes, the harvest will soon be 'here; 
and, let me see, what do I owe ? Two days to John 
Powys of course, as usual," and she counted them on 
her wrinkled fingers ; " then a day to Tvvm Tim for 
thatching, and two days, at least, I have promised to 
Catrin Howell s. That's five, and by then I shall be 
ready for bed," and she laughed jovially, showing her 
gums, in which a few yellow teeth still remained. 

"What a pity I can't leave the sheep," said Mifanwv 
" to help you, Shan." ^' 

" Yes," said Shan, " if thee had any other work, 
thee couldst help me well at the harvest now. Thou 
must go to service soon, Mifanwy; thou wilt never be 
any taller than thou art now, and I am sure, in 
the new petticoat I gave thee, thou look'st quite a 
woman." 

" It is nice," said Mifanwy, looking admiringly 
down at her brick-red petticoat; "but new, Shan? 
You said it was forty years old to your knowledge." 

"Well, and what's forty years for a good cloth 
petticoat? 'Tis forty years since I saw my grand- 
mother in that petticoat (she only wore it to funerals, 
or to chapel, or to a ' bidding '), and how long she had 
had it before I can't tell ; but see," holding the cloth 
between her finger and thumb, " how good it is ; not 
a hole or a tear, nor even a fray round the edge. ' Oh 
they don't make such petticoats now," and she shook 
her head solemnly. " Everything is changed. The 



^^im^:mk0tf^W'm^^f^i:^mmtm^m'^^Mii 



TEA AT THE SHIP INN. 



99 



crops are not so good, the hens don't lay so well, and 
I don't believe the moon shines so bright as when I 
was young. And the pride of the people, Mifanwy ; 
it makes me ill. Think, there's Madlen the Mill's 
youngest child christened ' Margaret Lewis,' if you 
please ; in my day, none but the gentries would think 
of calling a child ' Marged,' indeed, as if ' Peggi ' 
wouldn't do, or ' Betto,' or * Shan ' But no! now it 
must be ' Marged,' or ' Laissabeth,' or 'Jane,' ach-y-fi ! 
P'ancy calling me ' Jane ' ! " 

Mifanwy continued to look down thoughtfully at 
her two hands, that lay clasped upon her knees. 
" Shan ! " 
"Well?" 

" What is the reason that my skin is so dark ? " 
" Caton pawb ! there's a question," laughed Shan ; 
" why, because the Almighty made it so, I suppose." 

■' Well, then, why did He make my skin so much 
browner than leuan's or Laissabeth's .^" 

Shan wagged her head from side to side, and 
looked at Mifanwy over her thick brass-rimmed 
spectacles. 

"Have I Indian blood in me.' When the lads are 
angry with me, they say that." 

" Indian blood, indeed ! anwl fach ! Indian blood ! 
not a drop of such a dreadful thing in thee, merch 
fach i 1 Thy mother had black hair, sure enough, and 
eyes black as the darkness of night, but she was fair 
as a lily ; and as for thee, child, when I first took 
thee, thou wast a show of whiteness; and that's what 
puzzles me; babies are often red, or even yellow, 
skinned ; but thou wast so white, and soft skinned as 
satin. Many times I showed thee to Catrin Howells. 
' Look at my cream and roses,' I used to say, for thy 
little lips were like roses, and thy skin was as white 
as the sea foam. Catrin always called after me when 
she saw me. 'Well, how is thy "cream and roses" 
getting on ? ' " 

Mifanwy sighed. " How is it. I wonder ? " 






lOO 



A WELSH SINGER, 



tr: 






" Well, now, there's many stranjje thiiifjs in this 
world," said Shtin, "and that is one of them, that 
thee, the very whitest baby I have ever seen— and I 
have seen a good many — should grow up to be the 
brovyncst girl. Thy grandmother was the same. But 
I think, if thee went to service somewhere, and wert 
shut away from the sun all day, the ' cream and roses ' 
would come back. But what does it matter, child? 
Thee art better as thee art," and she went in to pre- 
pare the supper, leaving Mifanwy still gazing sorrow- 
fully at her brown hands, and thinking of the " cream 
and roses." 

When August came it was a busy month. Every 
scrap and corner of the cottage was scrubbed and 
cleaned, Mifanwy rising before the sun, and working 
late in the evenings, at the labour of love. leuan was 
coming, and everything must be in order. Even the 
old black rafters were brushed and polished, the pink 
counterpane was washed and dried on the furze 
bushes, the rough sheets and blankets were hung out 
to dry in the sweet summer air, and the earthen floor? 
polished till you could see your face in them. Sh'j 
spent several hours on her knees, marking out an 
elaborate pattern as a border, using for a tool t!ie 
stalk of the fox-glove, which left dark stains as .'he 
drew her pattern. The shelf running round the "oft 
was specially overhauled, every treasure of seaweed or 
shells, or birds' eggs, carefully dusted and replaced; 
the tiny window was cleaned and polished ; and the 
bed re-filled with golden-yellow straw. 

" 'Machgen anwl i ! my beloved boy ! " said Shan, 
rubbing away at the legs of the oak table, " can it be 
that my old eyes will see him again ? lanto bach, 
will he be too grand to stay vvith us, while th<i doors 
of the Hall are open to him ? " 

"Not he!" replied lanto promptly; "he has too 
much onnore to turn his back on his old foster- 
parents ! " 

At last came September, the month of months to 



Jftr 



ii^^m^.Ts^w 



TEA AT THE SHIP INN. 



lOI 



Mifanwy. She had counted the weeks, ti.e days, and 
almost the hours, and only waited now to hear, but 
without askin^r, what day Sir Glynnc and leuan 
would arrive at the ! I all. 

The month had .ilrcady brought her one ^'rand 
event. She was called to work at the harvest in John 
Powys's fields, for the golden crops were thick and 
heavy, and every hand was pressed into the service of 
the corn fields. Will Rianon undertook to watch 
both Mifanwy's an I his own flocks for the time, and 
for the first time in her life she accompanied Shun to 
the harvest ; and as .she walked beside the old woman, 
her lithe figure and graceful .shapeliness made an im- 
pression upon the loutish country minds of the reapers 
which they felt without being able to define. 

" Put on thy reaping gloves," Shan whispered, while 
they were pa.ssing through a gap into the field; 
"they won't see how small thy hands an- then, and 
keep close to me, and do exactly as I d 

It was a grand day for Shdn ; she new every 
twist and turn of the wrist and knee usea in reaping ; 
she was bringing a "fresh hand" to the aid of 
the reapers ; and, moreover, she knew that she and 
her foster-children would be the subject of conversation 
in the reaping field. Mifanwy's voice was known and 
admired from Wern Goppa, at the north crescent of 
the bay, to Traeth yr Adam, at the south point ; and 
leuan, his adoption by Sir Glynne Meredith, and his 
expected home-coming, were the theme of gossip on 
every hearth, and at every gathering. 

Mifanwy, drawing on the reaping gloves, looked 
shyly at a group of women standing near, and wait- 
ing to form into the line of reaping. The younger 
women stared at her, and glanced at each other with 
a smile in their eyes, if not on their lips. 

"Well, my little daughter," said an old woman, 
advancing, "who art thou, and what is thy name? 
Who is she, Shan fach?" 






10> 



A wKi.sii sinc;rr. 




"She is Mifainvy, of course," said Shilii. "my 
mirsliiijT ; hast never seen her before ? " 

" Never," repliet! the old woman ; " Iml I have 
heard her voice frfun the valley, and that was cniiijrh ; 
it was Madlen come back a;;aiii. " 

" Of course," said one of the jjirls, drawinj.; martr, 
"of course, .->he's ' cream and roses,' isn't •die-'" and 
the remark was followed b>- a j^eneral lau'dv 

Mifanwy heard it and understood. I'hey were 
lauj^hing at her, at her brown skin, her awkwardness 
with the sickle. She knew it, and felt the hot bloftd 
rush into her face, while she stooped in rank and tried 
to bend on one knee and to bind her sheaf exactly a; 
Shan did in frctit of her. Next IkJu'iuI h<;r came 
the kindly old woman who had addressed her, and 
Mifanwy was thankful to be separated from the bevy 
of young girls working behind her. For a little whil(! 
she was frightened and subdued by the novelty of her 
position, but she soon learned to bind a sheaf with 
case, and the spirit of happiness, which had gilded 
her life of late, took possession of her again ; anrl 
when, at ten o'clock, the reapers took a rest under 
the shadow of a hedge for their early lunch, she was 
no longer frightened, and, sitting down beside her 
old friend, known to everybody as Modryb Gwen, ate 
her " uwd " with a hearty appetite. 

In the afternoon M-Tanwy was greeted by a 
familiar voice ; Robert the Mill was reaping before 
her. 

" Hullo, Miflmwy ! is it thee ? " 

" Yes," she said, smiling, glad to hear i friendly 
voice ; and, for the rest of the day, she enjoyed her- 
self thoroughly, until, when the evening shadows wer;; 
lengthening, the reapers left off working. 

At the gap in the hedge a ' not of lads and lasses 
were gathered together, and. whea Mifanwy drew ne-r, 
she remembered the " cream and roses." and was 
going to pass without speaking ; but one ot the young 
men -iddressed her. 



2Si£M::^ 



r\ \ Al rilK SIIII' INN. 



loi 



" Art tirt-d, Milaiuvy '" 

" No," s.ii.l the [\'r\, ami there vva^ a Innpf pause, 
Mifanwy sliyly rxamiiiiii^' her rcapini^-hook, while 
the y(>un^^ man, who had a freckleil lace and a shock 
of red hair, shutncd awkwardly. 

" I tlnui^dit perhaps thee wast, hein^j first tinn ; but 
if thee isn't, wilt sin^j for iis?" 

The ^irls drew nearer at the prospect, and Mifanwy 
hrif^ditcned ii[), and threw her sickle down ; then, sit- 
ting by the side of the hed^jc, she uskeil : 

" What shall I sin^,' ? " 

"Oh ! ' Screh Hudol,'' and wc will sin^j the chorus." 

Mifanwy took off her hat, forgotten the brown skin, 
for^;ottcn the "cream and roses," for^^otten cverytlinj^ 
but the divine passion of song, which was so strong; in 

her. 

" Far o'er tlic plain 
Loudly a^;aifi 
Sounds »hc trumpet's warlike strain, 
A signal to depart," 

sang Mifanwy, and the chorus was taken up by the 
others. Tenor, alto, bass, soprano, joined in harmony, 
and, before she had finished her second verse, the 
whole company of reapers had gathered '•ound her. 

" But, dearest, when I'm far from thee, 
In death, defeat, or victory. 
Thy form alone will ever be 
Still nearest to my heart," 

sang the girl. Heads wagged, and feet marked the 
time, and " Ktto, ctto ! " was the universal recpicst. 
Over and over again they sang the chorus, imtil the 
answering echoes flew from hill to hill, and filled the 
air with throbbing melody. 

" Ah ! how she sings," cried one of the lasses. " It 
is as if her soul were singing ! " 

And so it was, for Mifanwy had given herself up to 

• "The Allurement of Love. 



.•T 



104 



A WELSH SINGER. 



at 






the happiness of the hour. The soft evening air. the 

ZrV^^v K /^" '°'"' '^^ ^°"S °^ '^^ '-?k above 
her, the dehghtful power of swaying the hearts of her 

hearers the admiration which she knew her voice ex- 
cited, all these together were an experience to her 
new and delightful. It was a second Eisteddfod ' 

hL^7,u^lu?^^'^ "P°" ^^' '^'t'^ pleasure, every 
heart throbbed in sympathy with her own. and a rich 
tide of life and happiness coursed through her veins 
Her heart was almost too full of joy while she sang 
the final words ; and, after she had ended, there was 
a sigh of relief, as though the listeners had held their 
breath to listen. ' 

. ^'4?-^' ^I?^V"' ^^'^ ^ woman, snatching up her 
toddling child, .md relieving her feelings by hugging 
It tightly to her breast. " Oh, gwae fi ! that my - "f 
one might smg like that on. day ' " 

^ "She is the ' Queen of Song,' she is our own 
nigh ingale ; and, co show her how much we prize 
her, let us give her a new name to-day," said one of 

and 'S'hff.EP'^g ^^'^t-'^' P"^^'"S back his hat. 
and with his thumbs m his armholes, constituting 
himself the spokesman of the meeting. '= Let us call 
her ' Ein Eos .vi.' " x There were loud shouts of ap- 
proval from the men, even joined in by the eirls who 
had at first flouted M i fan wy ; and '« Hvvrf ! hwr^° 
Ein Eos N. ! now woke the echoes, while Mifanwv 
was coming down to earth, and waking to the fact 
that all this love and admiration was hers. \Vas i 
happiness or the spirit of music that had so trans- 
figured the girl ? Her red lips parted, her white 
teeth showing between, her ej-es 'shining with the 
bright light of triumph and joy, she looked more 
beautiful in her dark swarthiness than the fairest of 
the fair girls surrounding her; and when at last she 
and Shan passed through the gate into the hiVhroad 
the old woman's eyes still wet with tears of happiness,' 

^ Uiir Nightingale. 






>i-' 



uk 



l-h' " ^- 3^^f^r^<l^€^^ ^"'^l?^^i??^^ 



TEA AT THE SHIP INN. 



15 



Mifanwy could still hear behind her loud cries of 
" Ein Eos Ni ! " 

Shan took the girl's hand lovingly, and they walked 
silently along the white, dusty road. Suddenly, 
round a turning between them and the glowing west, 
came a carriage drawn by a spirited hoiao, which 
seemed to be somewhat beyond control. The pranc- 
ing horse, now close upon them, so bewildered the 
girl and her companion, that for a moment or two 
there was a flutter of confusion in the road, while they 
hesitated which side to take. Mifanwy rushed to one 
side, but Shan, less agile, fell on the dusty road. 
The driver pulled back his horse upon his haunches 
only just in time to prevent his trampling on the 
prostrate woman. Mifanwy, with a scream, flew to 
her assistance. 

" Ach y fi ! " said the man ; " what wass the matter 
with the pippie ? For what are you not keeping out 
of the way ? " 

And Mifanwy recognised Owen Pritchard, one of 
the Hall servants, who, like most of the domestics 
connected with a large establishment in Wales, thought 
it his bounden duty always to express himself in 
English, though his knowledge of the language was 
very limited. 

" Here you, Robin Groom," he said, addressing a 
younger man who sat beside him, "jump down and 
see^ who was the ' ole ooman ' whatever. Hello ! 
Shan Panteg, iss it you ? " 

Sl.an had already gathered herself together, and, 
being frightened, was only anxious to get behind the 
dog-cart, and well out of the fiery animal's way. 

Robin Groom helped Mifanwy to shake the dust 
off the old woman's skirts, and, while doing so, he 
said in Welsh : 

"Well, Mifanwy, how art thou? Hast heard the 
news ? " 

iicr heart almost stopped its beating. 

"Sir Glynne and Lady Meredith have both gone to 



rod 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I 
I 

•i 






I-tally, and taken Icuan Gwyllt w.ch them ; there, my 
lass, she is as clean as a new shilling again," and 
Robin Groom, jun-.ping up by the driver's side, the 
impatient horse was given the rein, and soon passed 
round another corner of the road, leaving the two 
women looking silently after the flying carriage. 

" What did he say ? " asked ShAn in a weak and 
broken voice ; her fall had frightened her, and she 
seemed a little dazed. 

Before she answered, Mifanwy gazed around her. 
Was it the same world that had seemed so bright and 
joyous a few minutes ago? Was she the same? 
Was it her hear^- thumping so loudly in her ears, where 
even now the sounds of " Ein Eos Ni I " seemed still 
■ to linger ? 

" The master and mistress are gone to I-tally and 
have taken leuan with them, that's what he said." 

Her voice was hard and liusky. 

" That's what he said," cried Shan, awaking from 
her stupor ; " and thou canst tell me that without a 
bit of feeling in thy voice ? Dost not understand, 
child, that he is my beloved boy, and that I have 
been hungering to see him ? Oh ! Mifanwy, thou art 
a hard-hearted girl. Thou canst bring tears to other 
people's eyes with thy singing, and thou hast not a 
tear to shed for my bitter disappointment." 

"Shan fach," said Mifanwv ; " I am disappointed, 
too." 

" Disappointed ! " said Shan, unreasonable in her 
grief ; " disappointed indeed ! What hast thou to be 
disappointed about ? Thou hastn't been counting the 
days and hours as I have been. Thou hastn't been 
mending his clothes, and thou hastn't been up all hours 
of the day in the loft to dust it, and clean it, and 
smooth his pink quilt. Oh, dear, anwl, anwl ! " and 
the old woman broke down completely, and, sitting 
down by the roadside, sobbed aloud. 

Mwanwy steed looking at her, her hands hanging 
listlessly down at her sides, a hard stolid look on her 






TEA AT THE SHIP INN. 



107 



heart a.hing with intolerable disappoint- 



facc, her 
ment. 

" Come, Shan," she said presently ; " he will come 
another time ; crying will not bring him ; let us go 
home to supper ; lanto will be waiting." 

" Let him wait." said Shan, still moaning and rock- 
ing herself backwards and forwards; "or go home 
thyself; thou hast no heart, to talk of supper, indeed, 
when my heart is breaking for my boy ! " 

But she slowly rose, and, taking her reaping-hook, 
followed Mifanwy silently towards home. 

lanto's disappointment was almost as great as theirs. 
He sulked over his supper. The crock of " uwd " 
was put away almost untouched, the bowls and 
platters were washed and placed on the shelf in 
silence, and then Shan sat down to her knitting, and 
to nurse her sorrow in the chimney corner. 

And what did Mifanwy do? Having seen the 
supper things put away, and swept up the hearth, she 
went out into the open air. 

" I will go and see if the sheep are folded," she 
said. 

Her heart was aching, and her eyes were burning 
with unshed tears. One spot in the world she desired 
to reach, and in the evening shadows she turned her 
face towards the ser.-breeze, and, having seen that the 
sheep were safe, diverged a little to the left, going 
along a path that led to Ogo Wylofen. Here she 
knew she w^ould be unobserved, alone vith Nature 
free to sob and moan. Her usual horror of the place 
had left her, and she now felt that it was the one 
place m the world that accorded with her present 
feelings. She threw herself face downwards on the 
grass. 

" Oh, leuan, leuan ! " she moaned, and the weird 
voices in the Ogo moaned with her. " Oh, leuan, my 
brother, come back," and the moaning and wailina 
rose higher, and Mifanwy's tears, once unloosed, fell 
fast and faster. She saw the white mistv figures ris- 









r - 




io8 



A WELSH SINGER. 



ing in tho cave, and they seemed to be wrinfTin<r their 
hands, and waving their long hair. M i fa nwy stretched 
out her hands towards them over the edge of the cliff. 
" Oh ! you, you know what sorrow is," she cried ; 
" pity me, comfort me, send leuan back to me." 

A heathenish prayer truly, but where could this 
child of Nature, this untaught, inexperienced creature, 
find an explanation of the yearnings and instincts that 
fought within her? She craved for happiness, and, 
in her untutored manner, had asked God for it. 
Many times she had besought Ilim, and now He was 
denying it to her, crushing her with a relentless 
cruelty, so she turned with a passionate cry to the 
familiar forms of Nature that had been her life's 
companions. She lay on the grass until the nig! 
dews were falling heavily, and the golden harvest 
moon was shining, and, when at last she had no more- 
tears to shed, no more v/ords in which to pray, she 
rose slowly, and turned towards the shepherd's hut, feel- 
ing it impossible to sleep and rest shut up within the 
walls of a house. Here, sitting ?lone and silent at the 
door, she passed the night under the broad vault of 
heaven, and, as once before, she gazed and gazed on 
the glittering stars that kept their watch above her, 
while the placid moon rode silently on her path. 






CHAPTER XII. 



NEWS FROM ROME. 

1^'OR many months after that evening in the corn- 
field, Mifanwy's life was shadowed by bitter disap- 
pointment and extinguished hopes; wearily she led 
her sheep out in the morning, and sadly she folded 
them at night, returning home silent and cheerless, 
rising heavy and listless in the early dawn, no smile 
on her lips, no song to awaken the echoes. But, at 
last, there came a letter for her. 

" Mifanwy Owen, 
" Shepherdess, 

" Abersethin." 

Robert the Mill gave it her with a sulky look. 

"I got that at the post-office when I passed 
through the village. It is from leuan of course." 

" Yes," she said, placing it in her bosom, " of course ; 
who else would write to me?" And she hurried 
away to open it, for she could not read it ; to look at 
the writing, and oh, delightful happiness, to draw 
from Its folds a knot of red satin ribbon ! She was 
breathless with admiration and excitement. " Oh, the 
beautiful, smooth satin," she said, as she laid it 
against her cheek. She fastened it on a furze bush to 
gaze at it, and while awa)- the time until evening 
should come. When, at night, she reached the 
cottage, she was in luck's way, for she fnund ShSn i-nd 
lanto in animated conversation with a dapper yo ng 
shopman from Caer Madoc, who had called in to jee 

109 



no 



A WELSH SINGER. 



them on his way to his mother's cottage. Mifanwy 
came in breathless, holding Icuan's letter in her 
hand. 

"A letter for me, mother," she said, " and, oh, how 
lucky we are ! Now Lias will read if," 

The young man was delighted to show off his 
learning. 

"Of course," he said, spreading "t out, while Shan 
and lanto listened with as much eagerness as Mifanwy. 

" Villa Amalfi, 
" Rome. 

"My Dear Mifanwy,— It is your turn to have a 
letter now. The last letter I wrote in a great hurry, 
and left for the servants to post; I hope they did 
so, and that it reached you safely. It was to tell you 
of our sudden visit to Rome. Of course you have 
never hea'-d of Brindley Moor, the sculptor, but in 
England ^ his name is as well known as Sir Glynne 
Meredith's, and they are great friends. I told you in 
my letter that we were going to Rome with him next 
spring, but it was suddenly settled that we were to go 
at once. Sir Glynne was very kind to me, and offered 
to let me go down to Wales instead of going to 
Rome, but I saw that would be a great disappoint- 
ment to him, and a great loss to me. 

" But I need not say all this again; I have explained 
it before. 

" My thoughts are often with you all, especially I 
think of thee, Mifanwy. My days are full of pleasures, 
and I am too busy with my studies and my sculpture 
to be sorrowful, but in the evening I always think of 
the sunset at Aberscthin, and I long to tell thee all I 
have seen in the day. 

"Oh, Mifanwy, gwac fi! would that thou couldst 
be in London to see the beautiful sights, and to hear 
the beautiful miisic ! Sir Glyn. j gives me pieniy of 
money— 1 hope lanto received the ^^5 I sent in 



NEWS FROM ROME. 



HI 



my last letter— and couldst thou hear the beautiful 
music, the singing, Mifanwy, indeed thou wouldst re- 
joice ; not that I ever heard any voice more beautiful 
than thine! but, indeed, teaching can do wonders for 
even a poor voice ; and even I, Mifanwy, am learning 
to smg ! Who dost think I sang with one day, before 
a score of people in Lady Meredith's drawing-room ? 
who but Laissabeth ! Uus Powys, as they call her in 
London. 

"As for Rome, 1 will not tell thee anything about 
It until I tell thee sitting on the slopes of Abersethin 
We shall be back in London next month. 

T u-^",^ "°^^' '^^'^^ "^y ^^^^ ^°^^ ^° Shan and lanto 
I bid thee farewell, Mifanwy, and am ever ' 

" Thine affectionate brother, 

' I EUAN GWYLLT." 

Not a word about the red ribbon; but somehow 
Mifanwy did not mind this ; not even the vision of 
leuan and Laissabeth singing from the same page of 
music could spoil her happiness. Shan and lanto 
v/ere jubilant once more. But trouble was in store 
for Shan, for in a few days John Powys called at the 
cottage to tell her that Mifanwy would be no longer 
wanted as his shepherdess, for that Will Rianon 
would watch the two flocks together. 

"What shall I do, mother, what shall I do?" 
wailed the girl despairingly. She had chafed under 
the loneliness of her life lately, she had wished with 
unutterable longing that she could fly away to Rome 
to London, anywhere, to find leuan and be at rest ' 

qJ' '^^''^wu ^V ff'''''^, ^'^^ °^^^' Sirls," suggested 
Shan. _" Why shouldn't thee go to ' the Works ' ? " i 

The idea found acceptance at once by the three 
members of the family. 

" Only, how shall I get there ? and where shall I 
get clothes ? " 

* The colloquial name for Glamorganshire. 



«i»-<».1Fl 



si 



112 



A WELSH SINGER. 



^-^■vl 



^ii:--' 



r7^ - 




-v« 



i 



"Oh, that I will take care of," said ShAn ; "thou 
shall be well set up ; good strong shoes." 

" Ach y fi ! how shall I wear them ? " said Mifanwy. 

"And stockings I have plenty, ready knitted, and 
a new brown frock I will make from my mother's ; 
thy hat and jacket that thou hadst at the Eisteddfod 
are ready in the coffer ; but oh, my child ! what will 
old lanto and Shan do without thee ? the last yellow 
chick of the nest ! and now I was hoping thee wouldst 
help me with the harvest." 

"I will send you all my wages." 

" Caton pawb ! " cried Shan. " No, thou wilt not 
send me thy wages. lanto and I are getting too 
rich ; the hole in the chimney won't be large enough 
to hold much more." 

And so it was settled ; and in a few days Mifanwy's 
belongings were tied in a small bundle, and after a 
tender farewell to Topper and her old haunts, and a 
still more tearful and sorrowful one to the old people, 
she began her trudge along the high road to Caer 
Madoc. Thence the carrier would take her all the 
way to Glamorganshire, and, once in Merthyr, the 
El Dorado of the Welsh peasants, she would be all 
right. 

" Go straight to Salem chapel," were Shan's injunc- 
tions, " and tell Price the preacher that thou art Shan 
and lanto's child ; he knows us well — wasn't he one 
of my first nurslings ? and he will find thee a place, 
and will write to tell us thou hast reached him in 
safety." 

And with this vague programme, the young girl 
was launched on the sea of life, with nothing but her 
innocence and purity to guard her from all the dangers 
and temptations that lay in wait for her. 



m i 



CHAPTER XTII. 



DEPARTURE. 



The grey shadows of evening were closing over the 
httle country town of Caer Madoc, when a sh"m c^irl 
looking rather tired and dusty, approached it late'^on 
an autumn day. The cold wind ulew in icily from 
the sea, that lay two miles to the west, and the 
darkening sky, with its evening shadows and its 
threatening of winter, hung like a heavy oall over 
land and sea. The girl was Mifanwy, who, shivering 
and rather home-sick, drew near the town. 

" How smoky and dark the air is ! " she thouf^ht 
beginnmg unfavourably to compare her new surroulid- 
mgs with those she had left behind ; but presently on 
the quiet evening air there came the sound of music 
borne on the wind in fitful throbs. Her sharp ears' 
were instantly alive to the delightful sounds. 

" Music ! " she said, and she stopped to listen • and 
agam on the fitful breeze came a louder strain of 
melody. 

She quickened her steps, and, guided by the sounds 
she soon reached the straggling suburbs of the town' 
one of the first houses in which belonged to Simon 
Siencyn the carrier. His w/e Peggi was an old 
friend of Shans, and she welcomed Mifanwy with 
true Welsh hospitality. 

"A bed, merch fach i ? Why, of course, and clean 
and comfortable, fit for the judge or the mayor but 
not too good for my old friend Shan's child. But 
stay ! you are not really her daughter, are you ? " 

" No," said Mifanwy, " only her nursling " 



1 1 



H 



F - 



-.> 



If4 



A WELSr SINGER. 



rv. 



"Yes, yes, I know," resumed Peggi. "Sit you 
down here, my little one, by the fire ; the nights get 
very cold now. Tea, merch i ? Well, well, I should 
like to see .Shun again. Bread and butter? Only 
barley bread though. Yes, yes, I remember, you are 
poor VVatkin Owen's child ! Well, you could never 
have a kinder mother than Shun — but not your own ! 
not your own ! " 

Mifanwy, tired and hungry, ate her simple fare 
with an appetite that delighted Peggi, and, when the 
meal was over, she began to seek for information 
from her hostess. 
" When does Simon start ? " 

"Tuesday he comes back, and he starts on the fol- 
lowing Friday." 

Mifanwy did not answer ; she was listening intently 
to the strains of music that still floated on the air, 
" Where is it, Peggi ? Can I go nearer ? " 
" Oh, as near a> thee likes, child. At the corner of 
that street is the gate leading into the field, and there 
thou wilt find the show. Been to it ? Not I ! I 
should be turned out from my chapel. Besides, I have 
no taste for such foolish things ; elephants and horses 
and trumpets and silly women in spangles. But thou 
canst go and look at it, child. Oh, yes, thy bundle 
will be quite safe." 

Mifanwy was already at the door, and listening 
eagerly to t'le seductive strains that fell on her ear 
and drew her on. On turning the corner of a street, 
she came in full view of the show, and she hasteneii 
to the gat.'way that opened into the field. Numbers 
of people were already thronging it, and pressing in 
for the evening's entertainment. 

At thf.' further end of the field was a large round 
tent or oavilion, bearing the words, " Pomfrey's Grand 
Circus," emblazoned in gold and scarlet and blue. 
In front, on a temporary raised stand or balcony, was 
the ba id, a medley of many instruments, trombones, 
cornets, flutes, violins, and a huge drum. 






DEPARTURE. ,,- 

Mifanwy had never heard such sounds before 
ora^d.f?' ^' Eisteddfod, when the music had S 
of a different kind, more severe and more classic^ 
She stood with the throng in absolute ddight lis en-' 
ing to the inspiriting tones of a waltz, by no mea" 
badly played Tlie time and rhythm o? the mus"c 
were new to her, and entrancingly delighi fu! and 
when seven o'clock struck on the old church 'towe; 
c ose by the field, and the band ceased playhigTnd 
dieippeared into the tent, the people thronging^fter 
them and leaving the field empty,' she followed too 
and when at the entrance she was'^'asked for payment' 
•she willingly untied the corner of her pocket S 
kerchief and produced sixpence fromTt ^It happened" 
to be nght. and she passed into the tent in a Team 
of blissful anticipation. aream 

And, oh ! what an evening she spent ! How the 
two hours flew by ! The splendid horses, so sleek so 
clean and so lovable ! She longed to put her arm 
round their necks, and kiss their soft noses as sh^ 
often kissed the cows on Moel Mynach The won 
derful sight of the elephants passing round so do^e to 
her that she could even touch them if she wished 
the spangled men. and the fairy forms in tarlatan 

trodrn'h^^.^'^'^".^^' '^' ^'g^^^' ^he smel of thl urf 
trodden by the hocfs of the horses ; all these com 
bined o form a vision of delight that all the p easZs 
and triumphs of her after lifc^ould not effacr 

At last the delightful performance drew near the 
end and in compliment to the national L nf f^ 
audience, the band struck up ^ The Ma 'h of Jt^ 
Men of Harlech," and the exxited throng oin^^^^^^ 
wh ul^ TP"''' irresistible. Mifanw^.^efpedallv 
who had been standing all the time, fo gett^^^ he^r' 
fatigue, sang with all her heart fi>^"mg ner 

Near her, but inside the circle of the arena stonH . 
SrylreTyf^^tlir ^"''r°".^' ^^g.^e^'S a^ 



II6 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I. 



f 

S, ; 



eldest son of the owner of the circus, but not at all 
above taking an inferior part in the entertainment. 
Sometimes he was the chief rider of the evening ; 
-sometimes he received the money at the entrance ; 
sometimes he acted as clown ; ami, at a push, was not 
at all a bad hand at the cornet or violin. In fact, he 
was a man of many parts, appealed to by all the em- 
ployes, grumbled at by his father, the confidant of his 
mother's worries, and the friend o«" .1 the children 
connected with the circus. Never cro.>.s; never sulky; 
always ready to help every member of the troupe ! 
Xo wonder he was popular and beloved. 

The music of the band was flat and stale to him. 
He knew every tune by heart, but to-nigh, the un- 
usual strains of the Welsh melody aroused his fancy, 
and, while he stood holding his banner carefully, and 
watching the approach of the blue fairy, he joined in 
the martial air. He was soon struck by the voice of 
the girl who stood close to him, outside the barrier ; 
he looked with interest at her dark skin and dark 
Hashing eyes. 

^ " By jove ! " he thought. " What a voice ! These 
Welsh can sing, but 1 have nev-f he .. i one lil.o this 
girl : " and he listened intently, while Mifanwy, un- 
conscious of any auditor, sang out her heart, not keep- 
ing always to the tune, but roaming, as it were, 
around it, with trills and runs of melody, but always 
in perfect harmony with the music. 

This march finished the performance, but she still 
stood with clasped hands, and a happy smile on her 
lips ; her thoughts had flown to leuan. " Where was 
he now ? " In that far off foreign town did he think 
of her? In some such scene as this perhaps! It 
could not be more beautiful. And while the crowd 
pressed by, she remained lost in thought ; she was 
much startled when a hand was laid on her 
shoulder. 

" My girl," said the owner of the hand, and Mi- 
fanwy started indeed ; it was the grand gentleman 



♦ 




DF.rARTURE. 



117 



A big bit, I think ! Where do you 



who had stood near her all covered with gold spangleii' 
she could on; / stammer out : 
" Sir." 

" You know how to sinjj any way ! " said the young 
man, lookm- nito her face, and thiukinj? what a pity 
It was that she was not pretty. 

Mifaiiwy's English was extremely limited ; every 
word recnured thought, and she could only say in 
return : ' ^ 

" Iss, sir, a little bit." 
" A little bit ! 
live ? " 

She could only answer with a shake of her head 

" Me not know, sir." 

•'Where's your home ? Haven't you got one ? " 

Alifanwy again shook her head. 

" Well, then, do you want a place ? A place, you 
know a situation-servant girl, you know-mistress?" 
And he went through the pantomime of a good scrub 

underwood' '^' '■'"^' '^"' ^^^^""''^ '"^*^"tl>' 

" Oh ! iss, sir, indeed : " she said, '« me's want to go 

servant, me s want to go to the ' Works ' " 
. ■• The very thing ! " ,^;j Tom Pomfrey, slapping 
|s velvet eg ; " plenty of work here. Y^u want f 

place ; mother wants a girl. You can come with 

A less simple and innocent girl would have hesita- 
ted to follow the young man, but Mifanwy, with per- 
fect confidence, did so at once, and was led throuXa 
narrow passage with canvas wall into a smaller 'tent 
one corner of which was occupied by an open van 
which was evidently Mrs. Pomfrey's domestk store- 
room. It was raised three steps from the ground and 

ev'er'paSr.^'"; 'Y^ '^^^P '^^^ S°«^ lady was Tor 
ever passing; indeed, it seemed as if her daily life 
were spent upon those three sten. ^ ^ 

nJ^f .'i-^'' ^° ^^^' '^°*''^ ^"^' Willie; her , your 
night things," and she trundled up the three steps' 



Ii8 



A WELSH SINGER. 



m 

,!p! 
m 

1 f'i 

h 



and, flinging a bundle at two little spangled ficrures 
she trundled down again. " Bless'd if that baby ain't 
awake again ! Whathever is the matter with 'im I 
can't think ! " and, muttering something about his 
" drops," she trundled up and down again, and stood 
with arms akimbo, while a man from the stables ad- 
dressed her. " Well 1 never ! Sultan lame ! That's 
bad. 'Ere's the embrocation." And up and douv. 
those three steps again ! Panting, she plumped her 
fat figure down on a scarlet painted box, and, when 
Tom Pomfrc}' and Mifanwy came on the scene, she 
was preparing to administer the " drops " to ' the 
baby. " There ! there ! there ! drat the child ! Oh ! 
Tom, is that you ? " She gazed in astonishment at 
Mifanwy, who stood staring at her in return, with in- 
tense interest, not unmixed with awe. " VVhathever 
'ave you got with you ? " she inqu.red, turning the 
baby face downwards on her jogging knees. 

" Servant girl for you, mother. Didn't you say you 
wanted one ? '' 

"Yes, but—" said Mrs. Fomfrey, looking Mifanwy 
over from top to toe. "She looks respectable enough," 
she thought. " What's your nime, my gal ? What 
they call you .' " she explained. " Mary, or Pollie, or 
Betsey ? " 

_ " Oh," said Mifanwy. " No, no— Mifanwy Owen 
iss my name." 

" Well I never ! What a nimc ! And can't you 
talk English ? " ^ 

" Iss, me talk very little bit," said Mifanwy. " Iss 
me work, iss me take care the baby." 

"Oh," said Mrs. Pomfrey, turning to her son, "she'd 
never do for me with that gibberish she talks. What 
do I -vant with a foreigner ? I don't want no one a? 
cant speak the English language. Mifanwy Owen 
indeed ! Take off your velvets, Tom ; here's your 
thmgs." Another trundle up the stairs and down 
again. " And take that baggage aw^v/' she said : " I 
don't want her." 



DE[^ARTURE. 



ri9 



" Well, mother," said Tom, drawing nearer, and 
spe&king a little below his breath, " you should hear 
her sing. She's got the voice of an angel, I tell you, 
and nc ; Intake. She'd make the fortune of the show, 
sin^: ig H-uh th^t. heavenly voice." 

" v) long with you, To.n, and your 'eavenly voice. 
Wh ' ^' 'od would that be to me to 'elp with the baby 
and iue wa^lr'ncf and that? " 

" Well, I believe, mother, she'd do all that, and sing, 
too. Don't you see it would be a saving ? We could 
get rid of Harriet Long, who sings as flat as ditch- 
water, and is getting beyond all control ; there's no 
living with her." 

"That's true," said Mrs. Pomfrey ; "^"^ what's 
made yer take such a liking to this 'ere girl ? She 
ain't pretty ! I'm not going to 'ave no larks, mind, in 
my department." 

" I'm not thinking of larks, mother." 

Mrs. Pomfrey was pacified, and deigned to look 
again at Mifanwy, who had already made friends with 
a little toddling child, who, dressed in a pair of pale 
blue drawers and silver spangles, was sitting con- 
tentedly on a box munching a bun, pulling out all the 
currants with his finger and thumb, and dividing 
them between Mifanwy and himself. 

Mifanwy was delighted to be engaged by this 
" grand lady " as nursemaid, and thankfully accepted 
the promise of ;£'3 a year. And she went back to her 
lodgings along the dark street, congratulating herself 
upon rhe wonderful success of her first day in the 
world. 

Peggi, not being quite so rustic as Shan and 
Mifan»yy, demurred a little, but, " Sure, it was a ver>- 
fine thing to be taken in hand at once by a lady like 
Mrs. Pomfrey, and an English lady, too ! It will be 
fine for thee, Mifanwy. Thou'lt learn to speak Eng- 
lish soon ; but don't thee forget thy Welsh now." 

That night Mifanwy 's head was scarcely on the 
pillow before she had fallen into a deep sleep, un- 



120 



A WELSH SINGER. 






m 



broken even by the morning sun, that shone briHiantly 
into her room. In dreams she had been roaming 
once more upon the mountain paths, and watching 
the sun while it sank behind the gorgeous sunset 
clouds of evening; leuan sat beside her, and his 
hearty laugh resolved itself into Peggi's rather un- 
musical voice. 

" Mifanwy ! Mifanwy ! Art never going to wake, 
child ? Breakfast is waiting." 

She started up in a fright. " Oh, anwl ! what time 
is it ? Has the sun risen ? " 

"Hours ago," said Peggi ; "and the teapot and 
bread and butter are waiting for thee." 

" I have never slept so late before," said Mifanwy. 
" Oh, indeed, it must have been the feather bed ; never 
before have I felt such a soft bed." 

"Twas thy long walk, child. But now make haste; 
here is soap and water and towel for thee." 

She was quickly dressed and down in the kitchen, a 
queer ramshackle old place ; the rafters hung thickly 
with bacon, bunches of herbs, bladders of lard, etc. 
Near the brigb fire stood the little round tableland 
from a bro'/n teapot Peggi frequently replenished 
the cups with fragrant tea. 

" This bonnie brown egg; thee must eat, child ; my 
little hen lays one every day. Thee was smiling in 
thy sleep when I called thee; what wast dreamintr 
child?" ^' 

^ " Of home ! " said Mifanwy, the tears welling up 
mlc her eyes. 

"Twt, twt ! thee mustn't think of home yet ; that's 
what spoils the Welshman— it's always 'home.'home,' 
with him. If you put him in the Oueen's palace he'd 
want to come home." " ' 

And Mifanwy tried to smile through her tears • 
but it must be confessed that, after bidding Peggi 
good-bye, and taking up her little bundle of clothes 

*' ^^1 1 ^^^Y, ^°'''°''" ^"<J home-sick maiden who 
passcu throuj^h the gateway into the circus field. 



;: i 






DEPARTURE. 



121 



What a different scene presented itself to the eye 
to-day ! Great van-loads of poles, boards, and canvas, 
surmounted by boxes and packages, the whole covered 
with tarpaulin. Two or three vans containing the 
wardrobe and paraphernalia ; the splendid horses, 
now in undress, and yoked to the heavy errs; the two 
elephants laden and ready to start on their accus- 
tomed journey, each one drawing a light covered van, 
that held the children of the establishment, together 
with many of the smaller animals, the performing 
dogs, pigeons, etc. 

The scene of confusion frightened Mifanwy, and 
she stood for a moment hesitati.ig whether to fly back 
to the slopes of Abersethin to her sheep and Topper, 
or to fulfil her engagement with Mrs. Pomfrey. 

" lanto would say I ought to h-ve too much 
onnore to break my promise, and so I ought," she 
said, turning towards a van which she thought she 
recognised as Mrs. Pomfrey's ; and throwing^ liesita- 
tion to the winds, she followed the impulse that was 
urging her on. 'Tis true the happy home of her child- 
hood lay behind ; but before was London, in the 
future was leuan ! 

" Hello, Miss Mifanwy ! " said a voice close behind 
her, " is that you > I was afraid you'd change your 
mind. Well, you are a plucky little thing ! Coming 
with us to London, eh ? " 

" Iss, sir, if you pliss," replied Mifanwy. 

" Come along, then ; I will take you to my mother 
You will go with her in that break, do you see? to 
take care of the baby." 

" Iss, sir," said Mifanwy, smiling, and showing a very 
pretty mouth full of perfect teeth, which Tom Pomfrey 
took note of 

" She's a pretty little thing when you come to look 
at her, after all," h^ ihought. " Where's Mowbray ? 
Ah! talk of the devil—" 

" Vv^ho the blazes have you g.it th^re ? " said a 
coarse, boisterous voice, and a man approached, and, 



H<^i 



122 



A WELSH SINGER. 



lo Mifanwy. 



with mock politeness, took off his h 
" You coming with us, my girl ? " 

" Iss, sir," said Mifanwy, again disclosing the prettv 
teeth, but before the bold black eyes her own quailed 
and were cast down. A burning blush overspread 
her face, and, turning to Tom Pomfrey with instinc- 
tive confidence, she said, " You's mother, sir, if you 
pliss. ' 

" Exactly so, my dear," said Tom Pomfrey. " You 
come with me," and he led her up to where Mrs 
Pomfrey stood, ready to step into a break, in which 
seven or eight " ladies " were seated on each side 

" Oh, here you are ! " said Mrs. Pomfrey, carrying 
her baby, and two or three bundles. " Glad you are 
come, my dear, for this 'ere blessed child is almost 
too much for me. I declare 'e grows pounds 'eavier 
hevery di This is my new girl," she explained to 
the rest of the company, and, after this introduction 
Mifanwy was expected to take her share in the day's 
work. •' 

But everything was strange to the shepherd girl, 
ihe husthng groups of men and women, all intent 
upon gettmg their things together in some order 
apparent to themselves, but to no others, for every- 
thmg seemed in a hopeless tangle of confusion ■ the 
horses pawing the ground, impatient to be off ' the 
coarse laughter; the loud voices!; all helped to frighten 
and excite the simple girl. The bad language she 
did not understand, so it fell unheeded on her ears 
Where were the "lords and ladies " of the previous 

tr?u^J ^^^'^ ^^'^ ^^^ "^"^'<^ and the glamour 
that had enlivened the scene ? 

"Come, look alive!" said Mrs. Pomfrey, and 
Mifanwy started from a dream. " Put your thoucrhts 
in your pocket, my girl, and just go and see in that 
there elephant car whether the children are all right 
I do believe the girl is daft," she added, when Mifanwy 
stared helplessly from her to the elephant car 
Here, you get in then, and take the baby." 



.**" 



DEPARTURE, 



123 



Mifanwy gladly took the child, and seated herself 
in the long break, while Mrs. Fomfrey rushed away to 
take a peep into the elephant car, where ten or a 
dozen children were squabbling over some cakes and 
apples that Tom Pomfrcy had good-naturedly thrown 
in amongst them. During her absence, the man 
named Mowbray came saui -ering up to the brf k 
with a pipe in his mouth. 

' Good morning, ladies ! we are going to have a 
fine day, I think. I see you have the little brown 
nightingale amongst you. Have you heard her sine 
yet ? " ^ 

'• Can she sing ? Lor ! " said Miss Hawkins. 

" Good morning, miss," he said, turning to Mifanwy. 
" Hope you slept well ? " 

" Iss, thank you, sir," she answered. 

Mowbray spoke his native tongue without the 
drawling twang so common among the lower classes 
of England, indeed, far toe common amongst those of 
a higher grade. It was evident that he had been 
better educated than the rest of the troupe, and his 
shabby and dissipated appearance could not hide the 
fact that he must have " seen b'-tter days.' 

" Lor ! " said Miss Hawkins again, with a titter, 
" she hunderstands you, Mr. Mowbray. Mrs. Pomfrey 
could not make 'er hunderstand ! Ain't she a fright 
too ? " ^ ' 

" I don't agree with you," answered Mowbray. " I 
think when we have fleshed and polished her up a bit 
she'll make an uncommonly fine girl. Hope you will 
give us a song, miss, when we've started." 

Mis« Hctwkins seemed much put out, and cast spite- 
ful look.^ at the innocent object of Mr. Mowbray's 
attention. Her anger did not seem to make much 
impression on him, for he busied himself in arranging 
the seats and rugs to suit the new-comer's comfort. 

At last everything was ready for the start. Thn 
first hea\y vans passed into the street and through 
the gapmg crowd, followed by the usual procession of 



124 



A WELSH SINGER. 



carriages and horses ; last of all came Mrs. Pomfrey's 
own break, with four beautiful piebald horses, Tom 
Pomfrey seated on the box, and driving the gentle 
creatures, who seemel to understand every motion of 
his hand and every tone of his voice. Mr. Mowbray 
sat beside him, with a pipe in his mouth, and his hat 
very much on one side. 

At the last moment, when the break was leaving 
the field, an insignificant-looking, shabby little man", 
with a big paunch and a red nose, stepped into the 
break and took his seat, without speaking, close to 
the door. He was Mr. Pomfrey, the owner of the 
circus, a man of considerable wealth, who had been 
porn m a circus tent, and had lived in a circus all his 
life. He was a shrewd man of business, just in his 
deahngs with his employes, though always keeping an 
eye to the main chance. A splendid organiser, his 
shrewd and active mind was the spring of action that 
kept the whole affairs of the circus going ; without 
him, it would have fallen to pieces in a week, and yet 
he seemed to be of " no account " in the troupe, a cir- 
cumstance which, though he was well aware of 'it, did 
not seem to affect him in the least ; for he was satis- 
fied with the knowledge that he was " the boss," and 
that, when he chose to assert his authority, his word 
was law. 

Behind the break came the van, the last of the pro- 
cession, containing the band chat had so delighted 
Mifanwy the evening before. When she passed out 
ot the town, seated in the break, with the delicious 
sound of the band playing a martial air, she thought, 
indeed, that her fortune had been made, and wished 
only that leuan could see her, and Laissabcth ! What 
were school, pink frocks, and satin ribbons, compared 
to this glory ? > f 



hi 



mi 



CHAPTER XIV. 



EDUCATION. 

For the first hour or two tlie drive in the break with 
the circus troupe was unmixed pleasure to Mifanwy. 
The beautiful horses, the new sights and sounds 
that greeted her while she rolled along the romantic 
roads of South Wales, sometimes following for a mile 
or two the course of some clear swift^ river that 
tumbled over the rocks like a boisterous child, or 
glided smoothly along like a sleepy maiden, or caught 
a glint of the blue sky on its brown surface ; some- 
times they climbed over the ridges of the barren hills, 
and sometimes passed througii a tiny hamlet or 
sleepy village, whose every inhabitant turned out gap- 
ing to see them go by. All— all was delightful and 
refreshing to the girl whose life hitherto had been so 
uneventful. How wonderful it was to think that she, 
Mifanwy, the shepherdess, should be taken in hand by 
these grand people, anu hat the path from Abersethin 
slopes to London and Icuan should be made so easy 
and so beautiful! She did not understand the 
pleasantries of Mr. Mowbray, who frequentl>- turned 
round from the box seat to address her, or the sar- 
castic remarks of the women who drove with her ; 
but she did understand that Mrs. Pomfrey was troubled 
by her baby's fretfulness, and that she, Mifanwy, 
possessed some soothing power over the restless little 
creature that its mother lacked, and she cooed and 
chirped, and patted and jocfged, until at last the little 
one slept, and there was a long calm in the break 
Mrs. Pomfrey was pleased, and congratulated hersel 

I2S 



126 



A WELSH SINGER. 



on having secured a "good girl." and even Tom Pom- 
irey and his companion were conscious of an agreeable 
change. ** 

■aKT T/ T'"''' '"y '^^^'■' ^^ °^ve you thanks," 
said Mr. Mowbray, " for this peace ; and something 
more than thanks you shall have when we get to a 
town a bonnie red ribbon to tie up that bonnie black 
hair! And he turned his bold black eyes upon 
Mifanwy, who, wholly unconscious of his meaninjr 
blushed and smiled. ^' 

Tom Pomfrey flipped up his horses, and, when thev 
reached the top of a hill, passed the rest of the 
carriages, leaving them to come on at a slower pace 
while he and his companions tooled along on the 
road to Swansea. ^ 

It was well known by every member of the troupe 
that, although old Pomfrey was "the boss of the 

'J!urh ^fi t "^""'^ I'"""" ^'^ ^''^^^t s°" weighed 
much with him, and generally influenced his de- 
cisions ; accordingly, no one willingly offended Tom • 
thus It was that Mifanwy, who was evidently a 
favourite of h.s, was treated with less familiarity and 
coarse attention than were the other youn- women of 
the establishment. Her days were ^pent^ w^Mrs 
Pomfrey and the children, for the most part in he 

c'rri d ont'"n'"' '" ""T"'''' --"^--ents were 
carried out. Dressing and undressing the children 
nursing the baby, and tidying up generally, kept hS 

meteH """tuVl' ^^-"""^ Performance 'hadCm- 
menced and the baby was asleep in its cradle. Then 
she would creep along the dark passage with canvas 
walls and floors of sawdust that opene^d ^u into the 
large tent, where the lights were flaring, the horses 
prancing, and the country yokels stSfng ; whik 

ightful waltz tune, that seemed to sway and guide 
Mifanwy's senses as they did the horsesf who curved 
and swerved and bounded in time with the musk 
Here she would stand in a corner, unnoticed hylh. 



EDUCATION. 



127 



throng of spectators or actors in the evening's enter- 
tainment, for actors they were— she had found it all 
out now ; that was Jim Rawhngs dressed up as the 
" Brigand Chief," and there went George Wilson in 
those blue velvet tights ; but none of them noticed the 
shm girl with the large dark eyes, in the plain brown 
dress, who stood there hidden by that pillar, with its 
flapping red and white drapery, except, indeed, Tom 
Pomfrey, who, as he galloped round on his dappled 
steed, balancing himself on one toe, and performing 
all sorts of wild feats of horsemanship, still never 
forgot, when he passed that flapping corner, to look 
at the little brown figure, and throw her a genial 
smile. 

" Oh ! there's handsome he is indeed ! and good ! 
he's like a brother to me! What iss this town, Tom?' 
she asked, when, the circus business over, Tom came 
into his mother's tent for supper. 

" Why, Merthyr to be sure ! Don't you know your 
own Welsh towns ? " 

"Towns ! " said Mifanwy ; " me know the towns 1 
Ach y fi! No, indeed, I not know them! But 
Merthyr ! Oh, anwl, I was promise to write to Sh^n 
from here. What will I do ? 'cos I can't write." 

'' Can't you write ? " said Tom Pomfrey. 

"No, and not read, too," she said sorrowfully. "Oh ! 
I V. ill be glad if somebody will learn me to write and 
read ! " 

'• I vvill," said Tom ; " I'll write your letter for you 
to-night, and to-morrow night I will teach vou to 
make pothooks." j' tu 

And after the supper of cold beef and bread and 
cheese had been cleared away, Mifanwy fetched from 
the wonderful van, up and down whose steps she made 
almost as many pilgrimages as Mrs. Pomfrey, the 
materials for writing a letter, and Tom spread them 
out before him on the large packing-case, used as a 
.table. He dated his letter 



128 



A VVKLSM SINGER. 



" MKRTIfYR, 

" Octoh.r 20th. 
"Mv Dkar Motiikk." 

"Mv DiiAK Shan," corrected Mifaiiuy ; "she's not 
my mother, I not got a mother." 

" Oh ! I didn't know that," said Tom apologetically, 
bcginnin!^ another sh' :t. 

"Dkar Shan, will that do? Now, what shall I 
say ? " 

" Dear ShAn,— I am here since yesterday, and I 
like it very much. I have a good place ; Mrs. Pom- 
frey is very kind to me, and the little children I love 
almost like the dear sheep on Moel Mynach. Mr. 
Pomfrcy is tlie master of us all, like John Powys, you 
know, only, oh ! so different ! and Mr. Tom Pomfrev 
is like— is like—" ' 

" Well," said Tom, looking up anxiously. 

" Like Topper," said Mifanwy. 

" Topper ! who's Topper ? '' 

" My dog, the sheep dog, you know." 

'■ Well ! " said Tom, " you are complimentary ' " 

" What's that ? " said the girl. 

" Oh, never mind ; go on."' 

" Now you arc angry," she said. " But, indeed, in- 
deed, now, if you knew Topper." 
_ " Oh, I have no doubt," said Tom, " Topper is all 
right, and, after all, I think you are right. * You can 
call me ' Topper' if you like." 

" Oh, no," said Mifanwy ; " there's only one Topner 
in the world." ^^ 

" Oh ! well, go on. What next ? " 

"Where were we? Oh! like Topper— quite so 
good, quite so true, and quite so—" She hesitated 
again. 

" Fond of me ? " inquired Tom. 

" Kind to me," corrected the girl, 

" Sha'n't I put fond of me ? " 

" No, that wouldn't be true. You don't know how 
fond of me Topper is." 



EDUCATION. 



129 



" But I can guess," said Tom. 

Mifanwy's thoughts had already strayed from 
Topper and Tom. 

" I wonder whether leuan has written to you aeain " 

" Who's leuan ? " asked Tom. 

•'My brother," said Mifanwy. "Not my brother 
exactly, you know ; but Shuns nursling, like me" 

"Oh! that's different," said Tom. "Where is he 
now ? " 

" Oh ! that's what I want to know ; because of that 
1 want to go to London. Icuan will be glad to see 
me ! " 

" Where does he live ? " pursued Tom. 

" Oh, anwl ! I don't know ; but he is with some 
grand gentleman, whatever. Sir Glynne Meredith is 
his name. He took a fancy to leuan, and took him 
away with him, and left me alone at Abersethin 
Ach y fi ! I couldn't bear it. The waves and the 
wind and the crows were saying to me the whole 
white day, 'Where is leuan?' and so," she added 
claspmg her hands, " I am nearly break my heart' 
and now I am coming to London to see leuan. and 
there s glad we will be ! " 

''Sir Glynne Meredith!" said Tom thoughtfully 
Ive heard his name somewhere; seems quite 
familiar to me." ^ 

II Familiar ! What's that ? " asked the girl. 
" Oh, seem to know him, you know, but can't re- 
member him." 

" Oh, indeed ; we'll go out in the street, and ask 
everybody where is he live? Here's the paper with 
the name. And she drew from her bosom a little 
packet containing the red bow and a little crumpled 
paper. ^ 

It was now Tom's turn to say, " What is that ? " at 
the sight of a bit of glistening red satin. 

" Oh, nothing," she said, hastily replacing it, and 
handing h.m the paper. Tom looked troubled, but 
took the paper, and silently smoothed out the creases. 

I 



130 



A WELSH SINGER. 



i 



" No. I, Marhrunk Gardens, Hyde Tark," he read 
" Phew ! that's a swell part." 

" A what part ? " 

" Oh, a grainl part of Lotulon, where the ' upper 
ten ' Uve, you know." 

A'.jain Mifanwy's awkward (luestion," Wli.it' that?" 
lUit rem never lest his patience. 

"The errand pcoplt.', you know -the dukes and 
duchesses, and the lords an! latlies." 

"I know! 1 know!" said Mifaiiuy; "the nice 
people like l/idy Meredith and Mr. Rhys Mon^an. 
and leuan, too, now. I am i^kid he is with nice 
people. I wouldn't like to fjo tu him if they were 
nasty. 

Tom looked dubiou s but made no remark. 

" What else ? " he said after a pause, pointing to the 
letter. 

" Mr. Rhys Morc,^in will read this letter just so well 
as if it was written in Welsh. I am going to learn to 
read and write, and, when I can write myself, it will 
be Welsh, the dear old Welsh." 

" What el.se ? " said Tom. 

" Nothing el-;e— only m\' kind love to you, dear 
Sh'in, and lanto.— Your affectionate child, 

"Mil ANWY OWKN." 

The letter was addressed in Tom Pomfrey's best 
writing, with many flourishes, and, of course, he had 
paraphrased her words, and it reached its destination 
safely, in spite of the mis-spelling of the Welsh names. 
Shan and lanto were delighted beyond measure to 
hear of her safe arrival at Mcrthyr, for, though they 
had accepted the fact of her long silence with that 
pathetic meekness and patience which is so ciiaracter- 
istic of the rustic mind, they yet felt relieved of a great 
burden of anxiety when Mr. Rhys Morgan had in- 
terpreted the letter to them line by line. 

" I can't think," said Sliun, " why I'rice the preacher 
didn't write to me in Welsh ; but, dear atiwyl, he has 



EuUCATION. 



m 



been in Merthyi for many years, and I hear it is full 
ol bacson, so perhaps lie has forfjottcn liis Welsh " 

VVIicn the circus drew near Althorpe, a large town 
about fifty miles from London, all was excitement 
and bustle. It was the best i)lacc for "takings" Mr 

omfrcy said, along the whole route, and being the 
last town at whicii they gave an exhibition before 
reachmg London, he always put forth his best energies 
to please tin- spectators, wiio were considered more 
critical than th-.se of the country towns through which 
they had passed. 

"Here's a :;r>," cried Tom Pomfrey, rushing into 
the small tent where his father and mother were 
busily engaged in discussing a supper of steak and 
onums, Mifanwy hovering about u ith the irrepressible 

" jJere's a go." 
In." h.''''T''-r ^^^ matter?" asked old Pomfrey. stand- 
table ' "'"■ '^''^ '" '"*^'' ^'^^ "" the 

" Here's Harriet Long taken ill, really ill ; been up 

to her lodgu,gs to see for myself, for I c.ukhl't believe 

iMo-Abray. and sure enough, she /. ill and no mistake." 

Ill go and see her," said old Pomfrey; "she's 

only tnvd w,th her journe>', I .xpect. A g >od "t^ff 

t,/\\V'''lT'^-'l ""T'^' "!'^ "^^^''' t^^"t' ^"^1 ''P the street 

cnei^d \: f ^""^' '"^^'"^>^' Ooni which he 
c^nergLd ni a few minutes lookincr worried and 
;— us. Then he called at the doctor's to ^p'"^ 
!>-> h-m the importance of netting her all right fo 
the next afternoon s performance. "^ 

What IS It, sir?" ho asked the doctor, when h» 
nad seen hi.s patient. 

:^Zh''''^^ *•"" >'-'^' '"'^' ""'^^'^^ 'f mistake-typhoid • 
anyhow, uuite tmnn^^iiJo r.... I,..,. 4.^ ,. , ^ '-.xiJiiuiu , 

or' c.r „, ' ' i' ,' '■' "''" '■''' ^i'-'- ^V' tu-niorrow. 

n;ortv:"''s;od-St."^^^ ' '"" ^'^ "" -^'y '"- 



132 



A WELSH STNGER. 



W^'il 



3^^.: 



J£^' 



" Good '. wens, what's to be done ? 'ere's a kettle of 
fish, ' Princess of Randclar ' placarded all over the 
town, and no princess in the circus; what shall I do? " 
And Mr. Pomfrey bawled out, " Where's Tom ? " as 
he usually did in any difficulty. 

Tom and his mother were still discussing the 
situation, 

"Whathever will you do?" said Mrs. Pomfrey; 
" there was a time when I'd have taken the pare for 
you like a shot, I would." 

Old Pomfrey only deigned to notice the remark by 
saying, " Go on," which Tom tried to soften by a good- 
natured laugh. 

"It wouldn't suit you now, mother; I'm afraid 
sliort tarlatan skirts and spangles are not in your line 
any longer." 

" Can't 'ou suggest something ? " said o!d Pomfrey ; 
" what's the good of 'aving such an idjut of a son as 
can't suggest anythink when a man's in a pickle." 

" When you are in a pickle, get out of it, is my 
suggestion," said Tom. 

"And 'ow's that lo be done?" retorted the old 
man, sitting down on a coil of ropes, and wiping his 
streaming brow, for, th.ough he bullied his son un- 
grudgingly, he yet had infinite faith in his resources. 

" Lizzie Hawkins take the part, eh? or Emma Lone, 
ch?" 

" Emma Long and Lizzie Hawkins ? " said Tom 
scornfully, "wouldn't do, father; no, I don't deny 
you are in a bit of a mess ; but, if you leave it to me, 
I believe I can help you." 

" No one can 'elp me," said the old man despon- 
dently, "unless they can find someone to take the 
part of the Princess of Randclar." 

" And that I believe I can do, father ; " and, turning 
round on his seat, he pulled Mifanwy's dress to attract 
her attention. " Here," he said, placing her in front 
of his father, '* here's the Princess of Randelar ; now 
look here, Mifanwy, I've heard you sing that waltz 



Wii^^^, 



rM^^'-i:'lL- 



EDUCATION, 



^33 



tune that Harriet Long sings while she rides Sultan 
round the ring; you sing it ever so much better than 
she does; in fact, father, I believe if she sang it, she'd 
make the fortune of the show. Now. Mifanwy. you 

n'i"ghtTo'the'baIy.''' ^°" ^"°^' ^°" ^''" ^^"^^"^ '^'' 

« S^ l^"^ ^ "°^ ^^°^ *^e English words." 

_^ Dash It. but that spoils it all." said old Pomfrey. 

M.T.n " "° T""^ T^ *° "'""g '" the circus," said 
Mifanwy, "and stand on that beautiful Sultan, and to 

;reTe'r.'' °'' '^°'' ''°'^'' ' °^ ' "°' '"^^^^' that can I 
"Now listen, Mifanwy," said Tom, "I don't want 
you to stand on Sultan's back, and I don't want you 
to wear those short skirts, but I do want yoTto r^de 
round on Sultan on a comfortable saddle ^ou shall 
have a long yellow satin skirt, Harriet Long^ black 
velvet zouave and her scarlet satin cap; your hat 
must hang down, and you must sing the vvaltz in 

SuTan'^wm ZTi-'"' ' "^^^ "°* *^" y- th^l and 
\xr\u ,™'"^ ^'^ °^vn paces. You were sinVin- 

Welsh words to the waltz last night, and I thought 
how much better they suited the music than those 

see what a bother my father is in." 

thinkfnf thli"°^ T^^' ^""^ '^'"^ time ; she was 
tmnking—thinking what a wonderful thin? had come 
to pass, that she, who had said, « NothinI can Zr 
hapoen to me," should have suddenly s"?pneS into 

Randdar o°"'-r ^^'^^ ^^^ P^^ ofX ^1 "o°f 
Kandelar, to ride round under those SDanpleH 



'w^^^^sm^^^ 



:iw:' 






i 



I' t 



134 



A WELSH SINGER. 



and said, " Well, I'm blowed if you arn't the cleverest 
chap to get one out of a mess. But I must see 'er 
rc'earsc before the hentertainment." 

And so it was arranged ; and the next morning, 
while poor Harriet Long was tossing about in a high 
fever, the band struck up in the empty circus, and 
Mifanwy " re'earsed " for the benefit of old Pomfrcy. 
She was much relieved to find that Tom would walk 
beside her ; " Only I don't want a saddle ; I was used 
to ride all John Powys's horses without ix saddle often 
up and down the steep slopes." 

Round and round the circle she rode, Sultan keep- 
ing time with the waltz, and the girl, with her true 
and delicate car, finding no difficulty in adapting the 
words of some old Welsh ballad to the rhythm of 
the music. 

When the last tones had died away, and Sultan 
stopped his graceful canter, old Pomfrey clapped his 
hands vigorously, the band and Tom joining, while 
Mifanwy blushed with pleasure and delight. 

"Well, I am blessed," cried the old man; "who'd 'a' 
thought that little brown sparrar were a nightingale?" 
And he hastened into the smaller tent to inform Mrs. 
Pomfrey of Tom's successful " coup." 

" He's done it this time," he said ; " she'll make the 
fortune of the show ; why, her voice is like — like — 
melted butter." 

There was great excitement in Mrs. Pomfrey's tent 
that afternoon, when the entertainment was in full 
swing, and Mifanwy was being dressed for her part. 

"Well, I never; well, I never did," said Lizzie 
'Awkins, who was lending a 'clping 'and, "who'd 'a' 
thought you 'ad such white shoulders ; why, they are 
the whitest I 'ave ever seen, and you with such brown 
face and 'ands." 

"Yes, indeed," said Mifanwy sorrowfully, " I don't 
]^-r>nw hnw it is whatever : but the sun and wind wass 
make me blacker than anybody else" And she 
sighed heavily. 



I 



■.>^F'.'-.. ^'^WV^fylij^ 



EDUCATION. 



135 



" You ain't 'alf so black as you were any'ow," put 
in Mrs. Pomfrey. And, when Mifanwy was dressed, 
and entered the circus with a beating heart, Tom 
Pomfrey echoed the sentiment. " She's not half so 
dark as she was, and, any way, black or white, she's a 
winsome lassie." 

Mifanwy, accustomed all her life to horses, vaulted 
easily on to Sultan's back, and, although the short 
skirts, and the powder, and paint were missing, the 
large audience seemed to take to the girl at once ; 
her graceful figure, her simple manner, and beautiful 
voice made her part of the entertainment a complete 
success ; and behold her now, a regular member of 
Mr. Pomfrey 's troupe, and satisfied, nay, charmed, with 
her employment. 

To think that she was :ntering London in this 
grand position, no longer the poor shepherdess ! 

Old Pomfrey, conscious of his good bargain, had 
increased her wages, much to her astonishment ; and 
leuan would see that she was no longer the neglected 
and ragged shepherdess ; her heart was full of buoyant 
hopes and delightful anticipations. 

Sorrow and disappointment may be the soil out of 
which spring some of the noblest traits in the human 
character, for patience, meekness, and humility 
flourish in such a soil ; but happiness and success are 
the garden in which are fostered the equally important 
graces of joy. and thankfulness, and delight. The 
various characters around her, the changing scenes, 
the anticipation of meeting Icuan, all combined to 
deepen and strengthen the different shades of 
Mifanwy's artistic temperament, and, both in mind 
and person, she daily expanded, like a bud that opens 
to the sun. She was always ready, with a helping 
hand and a pleasant smile, to take her share either in 
Mrs. Pomfrey's worries, or old Pomfrey 's cares ; she 
becarne the confidante of all the "young ladies'" 
troubles and pleasures, and above all, the gentle 
soother of poor Tom Pomfrey's annoyances in his rule 




J 36 



A WELSH SINGER. 



of "buffer" between his father and his employees. 
Her complete simplicity and innocence blinded her to 
the faults of those around her. If Mr. Mowbray 
swore, she was blissfully unconscious of the meaning 
of an English oath ; if the " young ladies " favoured 
her with some doubtful confidence or vulgar joke, 
though she was vaguely conscious of its coarseness, 
it did not seem to sully her ; her freshness and purity 
remained undimmed. 






p 






CHAPTER XV. 



TOM'S LOVE. 

" POMFREY's grand circus " had returned from its tour 
through the provinces, to cheer and enliven the 
inhabitants of the Warkworth Road and its grimy 
neighbourhood. The front of the shabby building 
was placarded with notices of the fact, in all types of 
letters and shades of colouring, accompanied by 
gorgeous illustrations of the wonders and glories to 
be seen within ; the most prominent being a huge 
picture of a black horse with curved neck, pawing feet 
and sweeping tail, ridden by a girl in a yellow riding 
skirt, with long black hair surmounted by a scarlet 
cap ; described in flaring red letters as the " Princess 
of Randelar " on her Arabian steed, " both brought 
by Mr. Pomfrey from the 'Plains of Ind ' at an 
enormous expenditure of time, trouble, and money, Tor 
the delectation of the British public." The " Princess 
of Randelar," it went on to state, " is by far the most 
beautiful woman, the most accomplished equestrian, 
and the most gifted singer who has ever graced a 
circus," with a great deal more to the same effect. 

A large door in the hoarding admitted the public, 
and over it was erected a balcony as a " band stand," 
on which every evening the band, under the direction 
of Mr. Mowbray, stationed itself and discoursed sweet 
music to the surrounding neighbourhood. 

The most delightful hour to Mifanwy was that 
which Tom Pomfrey dev'>«-''d to her education. She 
could already read with se and write with very 
tolerable neatness. 

137 






i 




:; t 



I 



138 



A WELSH SINGER. 



"Come, Mifanwy, here's the ink, and here's your 
copy-book," said Tom, one evening. 

Mifanwy sat down on the opposite side of the 
table, and, pushing back her hair, took the pen in her 
hand, and looked inquiringly at Tom. 

"The words were very long last time," she said; 
"couldn't we have something easier to-night?" 

"Well, we'll try," said Tom, turning over his 
rustling newspaper, for Mifanwy's education, so far as 
Tom Pomfrey was concerned in it, was conducted 
chiefly through the columns of the newspaper. 
"Here's an article on music that seems interesting. 
" Now, let us begin." And, slowly and plainly, he 
read it aloud, stopping at every difficult word, and 
looking inquiringly at his pupil, who wrote it on a 
slip of paper. Then, when the reading was over, 
Tom explained, with patience, and as clearly as he 
could, its meaning, and the ideas suggested by it. 
They were delightful hours both to the teacher and 
the taught. 

"Oh, Tom," said Mifanwy, when, all the words 
explained, .she wrote her lesson over again, " it's much 
plainer now ; if you have patience with me, I shall 
know a lot one day." 

" You will, indeed," agreed Tom, drawing a large 
atlas towards him, and beginning upon a geography 
lesson; "you'll know more than I do very soon, if 
you go on as you have done, and what shall we do 
then ? " 

" Then we can go on learning together." 

"Yes, that will be awfully jolly; we can go on 
regularly now that we are settled at home." 

"Yes," .said Mifanwy, clasping her hands, "I am 
glad, indeed. To think we are in London ! the real, 
true London ! I can scarcely believe it, Tom ! " 
And her eyes were moist with tears of joy. 

"Well, now," said Tnm, "what is it, Mifanwy, that 
makes you so very glad to be in London ? " 

" VV^ell," she answered, looking down at her pencil, 



":*?, 



TOM'S LOVE. 



139 



"you are all so kind to me, and your father pays me 
such a lot of money ; and then — and then, oh, I 
wanted to get to London so much ! " 

" Why, Mifanwy ? That's what I was asking my- 
self last night in the circus, while you went round on 
Sultan, and sang your Welsh words. It seemed as if 
your voice were full of laughter and happiness ; and 
I said to myself, ' It is because we have got to Lon- 
don ; ' but I wonder why that is. Will you tell me ? " 
And the honest fellow looked sad and anxious. 

" Well," replied Mifanwy, " it is because of my 
friend, you know, that I want to see so much." 

" Yes, er — er — " said Tom, " is it — is it — er, would 
it, now, be a young man — cr — that you wanted to 
see ? That young man, I suppose, your brother, you 
know ? " 

"Yes, yes," said Mifanwy, in her quick Welsh 
fashion, " but, indeed, Tom, you are getting very 
clever, whatever. How did you guess it was 
him?" 

" Well, you see, you told me once, and I've been 
thinking of it off and on ever since." 

" Anwl, anwl, there's foolish, you are ; but, indeed, 
now, 'young man' is a grand word to call leuan ; I 
will never know him if he's a young man. He was 
a boy — a boy, Tom, with bare feet and ragged 
trousers." 

"You wouldn't think much of him, then," .said Tom 
hopefully, and brigiitcning up a little. 

"Think much of him! Oh, Tom, I think every- 
thing of him ! all — all ! and constantly ; I long so 
much to see him, and, if he were not in the world, I 
would long to be out of it, too." 

Tom looked serious, and he scribbled unconsciously 
with his pencil on the paper. " And does he love 
you as much, Mifanwy ? " 

" Yes, yes," cried Mifanwy, " without .1 bluiuow 
of doubt, quite as much. If I were not in the world, 
the world would be era[)ty to him, too." 



140 



A WELSH SINGER. 



' .-; 






Tom sighed heavily, "There is no hope for me 
then ? " 

" Hope for you ? " The girl suddenly awakened to 
the pain she had unconsciously been inflictinf^, for 
love is ofttimes selfish. " Oh, anwl, Tom, you won't 
go to be unhappy yourself now, and spoil my happi- 
ness, for it will make me unhappy to see you so." 

" No, no, of course not," said Tom in an apologetic 
tone ; " it was selfish of me ; but, you sec, Mifanwy, I 
hoped it would be different." 

" How could it be different ? " 

" I had hoped you would have learned to love me." 

"And don't I love you?" asked Mifanwy, turning 
up the palms of both hands. " Yes, indeed, indeed, 
better than anyone in the world, except leuan." 

" Ah ! that's it," said Tom ; " he comes first, doesn't 

"Why, of course. Haven't I known him since I 
was a baby? Didn't he always carry me over the 
nettles and thistles? and didn't he try to bear my 
punishments for me ? Of course I love him most." 
She looked with a frank smiL- at Tom, but instantly 
withdrew her eyes, for she was shocked to see the 
change in her companion's usually happy face. He 
was pale, and his lips seemed dry and parched. 

" Oh, Tom, Tom!" she cried, "what is it? what makes 
you look like that ? I will break my heart if I find 
that my coming here has spoiled your happiness. I 
am not worth it. If I were indeed the Princess of 
Randelar, it might be worth while for you to love 
me like that ; but I am only a poor little shepherdess 
living here through your kindness, and upon your 
father's charity. Try not to think of me. No, I 
can't say that, too, for the world would oe so cold 
and empty to me without you. I love you, Tom; 
indeed I do ; but not as I love leuan." 

There was a long pause, during which Mifanwy 
covered her face with her hands and cried a little. 

Tom pressed his white lips together firmly, and, 



TOM'S LOVE. 



141 



bcTjnnmg to fold up the papers, and put away the 
books, said, with rather a husky voice, " Enouch 
essons for to-night, Mifanwy ; f am going to see to 
the horses. 

She stretched out her hands after him. " Tom vou 
are not angry with me ? " ' ^ 

"Angry with you?" he answered, clasping her 
hand, and looking steadily for a moment into her 
eyes. " No, M.fanwy, I wish I were,"~and he went 
out, and busied himself with the horses, but without 
his usual blithesome whistle. When it came to 
Sultan s turn, he patted the glossy neck, and smoothed 
the soft tremulous nostrils. "Ah. Sultan, old boy" 
he said, she loves us. but she will leave us both one 

On the next afternoon, Tom was missing, and 
missed he truly was by almost everybody 

fhrM°"; 'a '^•■^^'",^^ M*"^- Pomfrey at the back door 
that looked on to the circus stables. " Where can he 
be.? ow can I make up these jackets for the ' Bound- 

p"Lrn"'''"' '' ^' ""'^ ""''' '° ^^°- "^^ the 
. "Where;s Tom?" asked Mr. Mowbray, saunterincr 
"nr L'flT'';; '•^"°"*'- -Here-sthe'^'.trombo'e^ 
tnn. fh. ^^^ ^^'''•^ ^ regular row about that new 

"Where's that blooming idjut of a boy?" inquired 
old Pomfrey ; <« 'ow am I to make up these accZtsI '' 

And Tom! Tom! where's Tom?" was bandied 
about from mouth to mouth until late in the afternoon 
when he appeared upon the scene. ' 

fu" Jl^'^ ^^7"" ^ ^^^" '' ^^hy, out for a little walk • 
thought I'd take a little turn^owards the VVest End 
and see hovv the ' upper ten ' were getting on ; saw 
the Queen driving round the Park ; she fsked very 
k ndly after you, mother, and said .he was coming [o 
the circus to-morrow.' ^ 

"Go 'long with your nonsense, and come to tea,', 






mAi 



1 



i-- 



•I/; 



.1 



142 



A WELSH SINGER. 



scoffed Mrs. Pomfrcy, trying to look cross ; " you've 
been a precious long time with the Queen any'ovv." 

Tom drew his chair to the table, and Mifanwy, sit- 
ting opposite, between vVillie and Totsie, looked 
nervously across at him. 

" Did you, indeed, sec the Queen ? " she asked, for 
the sake of saying something. 

" Yes, indeed, indeed, as you say," was Tom's reply; 
"and if mother will let you come, I'll take you to the 
Park one day ; you'd like to see the Queen ? " 

" Oh, yes," said Mifanwy ; " what a letter I would 
write to Shan and lanto then." 

" Well, it can't be this week," said Mrs. Pomfrey ; 
" for there's them new jackets to be made for the 
' Bounding l^rotheis,' and a set of new dresses for the 
Cinderella play." 

" Oh, any time will do," said Mifanwy, " if it will be 
some time." 

Tom had been out reconnoitring. He had desired 
to learn something of the surroundings of his rival in 
the affections of Mifanwy. 

He remembered the name of Sir Glynne Meredith, 
and that he lived at i Marbrook Gardens. He had 
not had much difficulty in finding the address, for 
Tom knew his London well. He had walked up the 
street, if street it could be called, with handsome 
mansions on one side, and leafy trees and grass and 
flowers on the other. They were all fine houses, but 
one only he had had eyes for. He had gazed at the 
closed door, as if longing to thrust it back upon its 
hinges, and enter the precincts that held the secret on 
which he thought his happiness hung. At last he 
had slowly turned away, and thoughtfully made his 
way into the Park, where he had sat for some time in 
a brown study, before again making his way eastward, 
to find himself in great request. 



^^£7^ 



.r- 



je rrf 




CHAPTER XVI. 

VISIT TO THE WEST END. 

One day in the fcMlowiiig week, while Mi'fanwy was 
busy darning her yellow satin riding-skirt, Tom 
entered. 

" Come along, Mifanwy," he said, " here's a fine 
day for a stroll in the West End. Let's go and see 
whether we can find the house where that young 
man lives." 

"What young man?" asked Mifanwy, with 
brightening eyes and flushing cheeks. 

" Why, leuan, your friend, your brother, as you call 
him." 

" Oh, Tom ! " was all the girl could answer, while 
she lifted her face from her work with palpitating 
breath ; " will we go there, indeed ? I have got his 
address in my box." 

" All right," said Tom, when Mrs. PtMnfrey, followed 
by Totsie and Willie, entered the room. " Mother, I 
am going to take Mifanwy, and show her about 
London a little. Hyde Park, you know ; it's a pity 
she shouldn't see a bit about her." 

" So 'tis," said Mrs. Pomfrcy. " Go up, child, and 
dress yourself as smart as you can." 

Mifanwy ran upstairs, and in a wonderfully short 
time was back, and standing ready dressed in the 
doorway. Tom regarded her with a critical eye and 
an admiring smile. Mrs. Pomfrcy, however, did not 
share in his satisfaction. 

" Well, if hcver I did ! " she cried ; " going in that 

143 



m 




144 



A WELSH SINGER. 



5} \ 

ii i 






i 



\\ f. 



I 
I 

!i- i 



old grey dress ! Why didn't you put on your 
green ? " 

Mifainvy faltered, and hcKl up her grey skirt in her 
neatly gloved hand. 

" Will I, Tom ? " she asked deprccatingly, with her 
head on one side. " Will I put on my green ? " 

" No," said Tom ; " grey or green, you look very 
nice, and I'll back you against any of the fine ladies 
in the Park." 

Mifanwy had never mentally followed the path of 
leuan's career, nor realised the difference between the 
shepherd boy on the Welsh hills and the proteg^ and 
favourite of Sir Glynne Meredith. She pictured him 
grown, of course, and altered, but still her childhood's 
simple, rustic friend. Some innate tenderness or deli- 
cacy had restrained her when she had unfolded her 
best dress of green merino. No, poor leuan would 
be taken aback, he would think she was changed, be 
would feel she was too grand for him. Would he 
know her? And, for a moment, she gazed at her 
image in the glass, with some anxiety, and she finally 
decided to wear a dress of grey serge. While she 
was fastening on her little brown velvet hat, her 
anxiety resolved itself into a pleased and happy 
smile, for what she saw in that crooked, unflattering 
glass was truly a pleasing and beauteous sight ; the 
glossy black brown hair was drawn back from a face 
of exquisite contour ; the skin, which, from its ex- 
treme delicacy, had felt so cruelly the scorching sun, 
had regained its pure and transparent fairness. She 
was very pale, and her dark brown eyes might have 
lent a shade of sadness to her face, had not the rosy 
red lips and glistening teeth told another tale ; she 
could laugh as merrily as anyone, and, at such times, 
she had the unusual advantage of looking her best. 
To the beauty of many women a hearty laugh is a 
severe ordeal. 

Tom felt proud of the graceful figure in grey beside 
him, and once more made a critical survey of the girl, 




"5?^JT. 



TJl, 



VISIT TO THE WEST EM), 



145 



from the small brown velvet hat and brown miifj to 
the dainty " best boots " that pattered on beside him. 
The shops, the cai.iages, the trees, the fine ladi.s 
altogether took iMifanv/y's breath away, and she could 
only clasp her hands inside her muff, id 'ejaculate under 
her breath: " Oh, anwl! anwl!" Ihit although slie was 
charmed and elated by the wondrous sights that Tom had 
shown her— so that he almost hoped that they had 
banished leuan from her mind— deep in her heart lav 
the thought, " I shall see leuan to-day ; I shall grasp 
his brown hand, and hear his voice. If he had but 
seen me in my yellow satin, riding on Sullan! but 
perhaps, then, he would never believe I was poor 
Mifanwy ! " And joy took possession of her soul. 

Nevertheless, when Tom pointed to a square they 
were approaching, and said, "There's the house. 
Mifanwy, her heart beat nervously, and she looked 
with intense interest towards the handsome portico 
of the large, white house. While they were draw- 
ing nearer, a carriage drove rapidly past them 
and stopped at the said portico. Then a smart 
footman jumped off the box, and opened the door 
of the carriage, and out of it stepped Sir Glvnne 
Meredith, tall and stalwart as ever. He turned to 
help Lady Meredith, who looked unchanged, if not 
for the better. ^ . • "ui 

Mifanwy recognised them at once, and was a little 
frightened by the gloss of the carriage and the 
champing of the horses. The footman still held the 
door open, and her heart stood still, when a 
young man, stoopin- his tall head, stepped out on the 
pavement, and turned ound to assist a fair nirl from 
the carriage. &,"»•« 

A young man, broaa-shouldcred and tall, with cri n 
brown hair and honest grey eyes, dressed in fashion- 
able, though quiet, apparel ; his open brow and 
ra.hcr large, but well fon.ied, mouth betoken( d a 
straightforward and '^onest firmness. A sUcrht 
moustache shaded his upper lip, and his smilfncr 



146 



A WELSH SINGER. 






ii! 



■ i 
Ml 



1 i 



f [ 



remark, when he handed his cooipanion from the 
carriage, displayed a row of large, but white and even, 
teeth. It was Icuan, but ' uan improved and altered; 
every good point in his appearance had developed, 
and his manly bearing and refinement of looks and 
manner made themselves felt by all who set their 
eyes on him. 

Mifanwy was startled, delighted, disappointed, and 
wounded. It was leuan, but not the leuan of her 
dreams. It was leuan, no longer the simple, rustic 
shepherd and carver of stone, but an ideal image to 
be thought of, and worshipped in the deep recesses of 
her heart, to be wept over in the silent watches of the 
night, to be longed for whenever a strain of music or 
a vision of beauty awoke some tender memories of 
the past. Who was the fair girl dressed in velvet, her 
hat lined with pink satin ? Mifanwy did not ask her- 
self the question ; she recognised her at once. It was 
Laissabeth! Yes, it was Laissabeth, with all her 
charms increased tenfold— dimpling, sparkling, as of 
old. She cast a hasty, haughty glance at Tom and 
Mifanwy while she passed up the broad steps, the young 
man following her, with a roll of music and a yellow 
novel. 

The door closed, the footman climbed up to his 
seat again, the carriage tlrove away and disappeared 
round the corner, and Tom and Mifanwy were left 
standing on the pavement. 

" What shall we do ? Would you like me to ring 
the bell, Mifanwy ? " 

" Oh, no, no ! " replied the girl. " Come home, 
Tom, I am tired." 

And they turned their faces once more eastward, 
Mifanwy with a dull pain gnawing at her heart, Torn 
unable quite to subdue his pleasure at the dif- 
ference between tL'' position of the young man and 
the drooping girl who walked beside him ; he saw 
that she, too, realised this difference; but soon his 
better nature, which was never long asleep, awoke. 



VISIT TO THE WEST END. 



147 



and he began to reproach himself for his heartlessness 
and selfishness, and he scarcely dared to cast a glance 
at the little trembhng grey figure that walked beside 
him. The little " best boots," that had stepped out 
so gaily half an hour before, were now dragging 
wearily along, and both Tom and his companion were 
glad to hail an omnibus going eastward. 

The shops that had delighted Mifanwy on her 
westward journey were the same, but now they had 
no charm for her ; the streets looked faded ; there was 
no brightness in them ; everything wore a dull and 
tarnished look. And what had caused this sudden 
change ? What had turned the hopes and visions of 
the last months — nay, years — into sudden gloom and 
frost and asi;es ? Who can explain the workings of 
a soul ? Who can put into plain words the revelation 
of a moment, the instinctive knowledge that breaks 
in, with the quickness of a lightning flash, on a mind 
obscured with its own imaginings ? 

What came between leu an and Mifanwy in that 
momentary meeting in a London street? Society, 
status, fashion ! The words were unknown to 
Mifanwy; the ideas conveyed by them had never 
dawned upon her mind, and yet the shadow of these 
ideas it was that had suddenly fallen upon her spirit, 
and loomed thick and dark between her and the 
friend of her early years, when she had stood on the 
pavement and looked at leuan and Laissabeth. 

Had her nature been less sensitive, she might indeed 
bavc been dazzled by the fashion and grandeur of the 
scene, but she would not have felt the pain at the 
sudden revelation of the distance between her and her 
foster-brother, at the great gulf that lay between 
them. Without a word or even a look from leuan, 
she had become conscious that he stood many steps 
higher than herself on the " ladder of life," and that, 
if he should look at her at all, it would have to be a 
downward look. Jealousy, too, buried its cruel fangs 
in her loving heart. Laissabeth, who had wronged 




iHil 



! 



!P 






I 



11 



148 



A WELSH SINGER. 



her and caused her to suffer, to be near leuan, in the 
same carriage, probably holding daily intercourse 
with him ! while she, unknown and unthought of, 
drew out her existence far from leuan, and perhaps 
forgotten by him. But no, this suggestion she would 
not harbour ; that he could forget her seemed impos- 
sible, her whole nature revolted from the thought ; 
and, for all her disappointment, a deep-seated trust in 
leuan held her heart. 

" He is mine ! " she said aloud on reaching her little 
bedroom. She bolted the door, and threw herself in a 
wild passion of grief upon her bed. " He is mine ; he 
has promised ! " Deep sobs shook her frame, sobs 
that gradually subsided into faint moans that came 
with every breath. "He is mine!" she said again, 
sitting up and pushing back her thick, black hair; 
" and I am his ; he has promised." There was a long 
pause, in which she sat silent, with throbbing pulse, 
her eyes fixed upon empty space — " and, if he should 
forget his promise for a while, he is still mine ; and 
what if he will never be mine till death comes and 
lays his cold hand upon him ? well, never mind ! " she 
said, rising and standing with raised head and clasped 
hands, " still he will be mine, mine for ever, I know 
it." And she hastily smoothed her hair, and bathed 
away the traces of her tears. 

Tom was seated at the tea-table when she entered 
the room, and at once began awkwardly to make 
conversation with his mother, to hide Mifanwy's dis- 
comfiture ; he had noticed the lagging footsteps and 
the drooping head on their way back from the West 
End ; but, if he thought these signs of sorrow would 
continue, he little knew the force of pride in the Welsh 
nature. It is a very larfjc factor in their daily life, a 
passion of immense energy in the Welsh mind, and, 
for good or evil, it exercises a constant and powerful 
influence over their characters and their lives. It 
adds bitterness to their poverty, it throws a glamour 
ver their pleasures, it causes continual quarrels and 



VISIT lO THE WEST END, 



149 



misunderstandings in their domestic life and affairs ; 
and, though it is often the cause of their poverty, it 
sustains them under its privations, and prevents their 
falling into the degrading custom of begging, which 
they regard as a disgrace, almost a crime ; and they 
will often suffer in silence, even to starvation, rather 
than have their pride wounded by receiving charity, 
however kindly meant and offered. It was this innate 
pride that sustained Mifanwy when she entered the 
little back parlour, and took her seat at the tea-table 
between Willie and Totsie ; her eyes sparkled, her 
pale cheek flushed, and there was rippling laughter 
on her lips, while she recounted to Mrs Pomfrey the 
events of the afternoon. 

"Oh, indeed to goodness!" she said, "you didn't 
tell me half what a lovely place London is ! I used to 
think the streets were paved with gold, and to-day 
the sun shone so yellow on the pavement and on the 
shining streets that it really was like gold ; and the 
horses' harness, and the shop windows, all glittering in 
the sun, oh ! it was beautiful indeed ; and we saw a 
grand house, Totsie, and a fine carriage stopped at 
the door, and ladies and gentlemen stepped out of it 
and went into the house, and one of them was — who 
do you think ? — why, the little boy that used to watch 
the sheep with me on the Abersethin slopes ! " 

Tom looked at her in astonishment ; his blunt and 
straightforward English nature could not fathom this 
hidden depth of Mifanwy 's character. 

" She can't feel it," he thought ; " all the better for 
me," and he spread Totsie's bread with an extra thick 
layer of jam. 

" Lor ! " e.xclaimed Mrs Pomfrey ; " did you speak 
to him, child?" 

" Oh, anwl, no ! " said the girl, laughing. " Would I 
be speaking to a grand gentleman like that? no 
indeed ! " And again there was the light laughter 
that astonished, though it pleased, Tom so much. 

For days afterwards, Mifanwy's voice was heard 



150 



A WELSH SINGER. 



fe-, 

if. 



more frequently singing at her work ; whenever any- 
one was near, she hummed or chatted continually, 
until at last Tom's anxious fears were completely laid 
to rest, and the little episode of the walk to Marbrook 
Gardens became a thing of the past, forgotten by 
everyone, except Mifanwy. 

The w.utcr months dragged heavily on. The circus 
still continued to attract and delight the " East 
Enders," but it was observed that Mifanwy's part in 
the entertainment was not so rapturously received 
as formerly. Her feelings had undergone a subtle 
change. Hitherto, the moving power of her life had 
been the delightful consciousness that she had stepped 
from the low grade of a shepherd girl into that of a 
real accor in London life, an admired and an envied 
woman, who had entered the ideal world of grandeur 
and charm her childish mind had always connected 
with the name of London. Had she not gorgeous 
dresses ? was she not called a " Princess " ? did not 
hundreds of men and women, " gentlemen and ladies," 
as she thought them, at least three times a week, 
stand for hours in gaping admiration, while she rode 
round and round the circus, singing to the strains of 
the band, and bowing gracefully in acknowledgment 
of the cheors that greeted her at every pause? Now 
it was different ; her eyes were opened ; she had had a 
glimpse of the real thing. leuan and Laissabeth did 
not take off" their fine clothes, and subside into ordin- 
ary hum-drum mortals at a certain hour in the evening. 
She saw the satins, and velvets, and tinsels in their 
true li^ht ; she realised almost too vividly the frowzi- 
ness and shabbiness of the whole affair, and she began 
to shrink with new-born fastidiousness from the broad 
and rather coarse suggestions of the songs she had 
before sung, without understanding their hidden 
meaning, for her knowledge of English was st.ll far 
from perfect. 

Mr. Pomfrey, the elder, had once or twice, too, 
ffhown signs of disapproval. 



VISIT TO THE WKST END. 



151 



" Dunno 'ow it is," he said to Mrs. Pomfrey in a 
confidential conversation over his pipe one night, 
"but Kitty Killthorpe seems to pIciNC the people 
better than Mifanwy lately." 

'"Ow's that?" rejoined his better half. 

" Well, I dun' no. 'Er voice is more squeaky, but 
she puts more meaning into 'er words. Mifanwy 
never would wink when she came to that line in the 
second verse. Now, Kitty Killthorpe does ; and it do 
take, I can tell yer! Didn't yer 'ear the roars of 
laughing last night ? Tom, 'e encourages 'er in 'er 
nonsense, 'e Joes ; but I shouldn't wonder if we 'ad 
to put Kitty in 'er place before next season." 

"Lor! wothever should I do without Mifanwy?" 
said Mrs. Pomfrey ; " I've grown that fond of the 
girl." 

" Oh, it won't be just yet," replied Mr. Pomfrey re- 
assuringly. " Mifanwy '11 do very well for the present ; 
but, before next winter, you know." 

Tom noticed the change in her, too, but did not 
rightly divine the cause. " She is finding out her 
powers," he thought, "and will not be satisfied to stay 
at Pomfrey's circus long. Well, .she is right. She 
would make her fortune as an opera or concert singer ; 
and so, Tom Pomfrey, you've got to manage it for 
her ; you've got your work cut out." 

Meanwhile, the subject of their remarks dragged 
wearily on through the drudgery of her work. .She 
was possessed by a great fear ; she, whose one un- 
satisfied desire had been that Icuan could see her in 
all her glory at the circus, was now living in the con- 
tinual dread that he might find her out. Now, her 
one desire was to hide herself away from him. She 
had too little experience of life to know that it was 
almost an impossibility that he should attend an East 
End circus, and it was always a relief to her when, 
her part in the entertainment over, she could ride out 
from the crowded building, and slip off Sultan, and 



i 



152 



A WELSH SINGER. 



with many pats and caresses, whisper a few loving 
words in his car. 

" Oh, Sultan, if we were only out together on the 
hills, how we would fly away from these horrid scenes, 
and this cold country." 

Sultan neighed, and rubbed his velvet nose on 
Mifanwy's yellow satin. 



i* 

i '.5 



CHAPTER XVII. 



OLD MEMORIES, 



On the day upon which Tom and Mifanwy had seen 
him ah'ght at Sir Glynnc Meredith's door, leuan 
followed Laissabeth, or Miss Elizabeth Powys, as she 
was now styled, up the broad staircase into the 
drawing-room, where Lady Meredith was awaiting 
them with loosened bonnet-strings, and gloves laid 
side by side on her lap. He went at once to the 
piano, and arranged the new music upon it, while 
Elizabeth chatted gaily. The young man seemed 
lost in thought, while he stood leaning his elbows on 
the piano. 

" My dear boy," said Lady Meredith, " where are 
your thoughts? You stand there as if you were 
waiting to turn over the music for some invisible 
player." 

leuan started, and crossed the room. 

" I thought Elizabeth was going to try over her new 
music." 

" Oh, after tea/' said Elizabeth, as a servant entered 
and arranged a mall table for afternoon tea. " Did 
you notice the man who stood and stared at us so 
when we got out of the carriage? He positively stood 
still to look at us." 

" To look at you, most likely," replied leuan. " But 
I never saw him ; I did see a graceful, ladylike girl, 
who was passing with someone." 

"Graceful! ladylike!" sniffed Elizabeth, tossing 
her head, "with red ribbon tying her hair out of 
doors!" 

IS3 



* 



154 



A WlCLSH SINfJEK. 



I ?l 






If 



it 
if 



" Isn't that quite comuie il faut, then ? I saw the 
red ribbon, but I thought it looked very effective with 
her grey dress ; but she held her muff up to her face, 
so I could not jud^e wlicthcr she was pretty or not." 

Klizabeth sipped her tea, murmuring something 
about vulgarity, while Icuan made himself generally 
useful. 

When the tea was over, and Lady Meredith had 
retired to take off her things, Elizabeth rose and 
approached the piano. 

"You seem to be really getting on," said leuan. 

"Thank you ; you are very kind to say so, I am 
sure," replied the girl, with a shade of sarcasm in her 
voice. 

" I mean," he resumed, " that you arc really suc- 
ceeding in making a name for yourself in your 
profession. It was only last night that Camperton 
was trying to persuade Miss Tufton to patronise 
next VVedncsday's concert ; but she seemed not to 
care for it until he said, ' Miss Powys is going to sing,' 
when she instantly changed her mind, and said, ' Oh, 
mother, we must go ; Miss Powys is going to 
sing.' " 

" And what did Lady Tufton say ? " inquired Ehza- 
beth, pacified. 

" I don't remember exactly ; but it was compli- 
mentary. Something about your being quite the best 
singer in London at present." 

"Shall you be there, leuan?" she asked, with 
drooping eyelids and a blushing face. 

" Most certainly ; wouldn't miss it for the world," 
he answered readiiy, while he unrolled the music, 
" Here's Lady Meredith ; now let's have this song." 

Elizabeth took off her hat and her bracelets, and, 
sitting down to play her own accompaniment, began 
in clear, silvery tones, " Oh, didst thou know the pangs 
of absent love." It was evident that her voice had 
been thoroughly trained ; to its natural power and 
clearness had been added the finish of brilliant execu- 



1 



OLD MEMORIES. 



«55 



tion. She sang with case and with taste, and with 
perfect confidence in her own powers. 

" Exquisite ! ' said Lady Meredith, as the air 
followed the recitative ; but leuan said nothing. 

The long-forgotten air fell upon his ear like the 
touch of a vanished hand ; the pathetic notes made 
their way into his heart. They laid hold of the 
sleeping and half- forgotten memories, and before his 
mind'h eye passed a vision of a gentle girl with brown 
face and dark eyes, who sang her soul out to the 
darkness in a little dimly-lit church beside the sea ; 
and when Elizabeth's bird-like voice had ceased, and 
the last chords had died away, he woke up from his 
reverie to join in Lady Meredith's thanks and praises; 
but still, while Elizabeth sang song after song, the 
sound o/the sea seemed to mi.\ with it all, the feeling 
of the breezy wind in his hair, and the fluttering of a 
" knot of red ribbon." 

Lady Meredith was delighted ; her protegee bid fair 
to become a complete success in the musical world ; 
her beauty, as well as her brilliant voice, was the sub- 
ject of conversation in many a drawing-room, and 
latterly she had become the prime favourite of the 
public. 

There were some, indeed, who felt that there was 
something wanting in the crystal clearness of the 
notes. 

" Perfect tune, perfect time, perfect tone ; what 
would you have more?" said Lady Meredith one 
evening to a musical critic. 

"Madam, I allow you all those — they are all in 
Miss Powys' voice, and you may add perfect execu- 
tion ; but there is a want of soul. The expression is 
good, but it has been taught, and she has learnt her 
lesson well. We still wait for one who can combine 
all these excellencies with a musical soul ; then we 
shall have found a perfect singer." 

After dinner on that same evening. leuan left his 
host and hostess chati.ing over the drawing-room fire. 



I } 






i ■? 






^ 



If 






156 



A VVELSFI SINOER. 



and retired to the smoking-room, and, having en- 
sconced himself in a comfortable armchair, with h* . 
feet on another, he gave himself up to a " brown 
study." He held his cigar listlessly between his 
fingers, until it had to be relighted ; then in the curl- 
irig wreaths of smoke would appear the vision of a 
girl, bare- footed and unkempt, who ran against the 
wind on the edge of a cliff ; of a boy who leant on 
his crook, and hallooed to her " to come quick " ; of 
two heads bent together over a sea-bird's nest, while 
over the picture stretched the blue sky, and beyond it 
a rippling sea. 

Oh, for a breath of that sea wind ! oh, for a touch 
of that brown hand ! and oh, more than all, for a 
look into those loving eyes! Where was Mifanwy ? 
What had become of her ? She must be thrown and 
altered— not pretty, perhaps, with that brown skin ; 
but certainly not ugly, with those pearly teeth and 
those loving eyes and that graceful figure. And 
what did she think of him ? How solemnly he had 
promised to her, how earnestly she had looked into 
his eyes, how full of faith and trust she was r 

A long pause and a deep sigh, and the cigar went 
out again ; he took another pull at it, and, finding it 
dead and cold, threw it away impatiently. Then he 
rose and unlocked his desk, and from its depths 
rummaged out a letter, thumbed and dirty; he 
looked for, and found, a para;;raph concerning 
Mifanwy. 

" Let me see ; what do they sa>- ? 

" ' We miss you and Mifanwy without ceasing ; but 
we are proud to think you are both settled in good 
places.' " 

He smiled, and went on reading. 

'"Mifanwy is gone to "the Works"; she has a good 
place there, and has sent us money. Between you 
both we are gcttir;^ rich : but when we are dead, it 
will all come back to Mifanwy and you.' 

" ' Mifanwy and you,' ' he murmured, while he folded 



OLD MEMORIES. 



157 



the letter and icplaccd it in the desk. " Mif mwy 
and I ! What would the dear old people feel if they 
knew that sometimes for days no thought of her or of 
them crosses my mind ? How shall I fulfil my pro- 
mise to Mifanwy, and behave like an honourable man 
to Shun and lanto ? I must go and see them ; I 
must travel down to the old home, if Sir Glynnc will 
let me. I must seek out Mifunwy and redeem my 
promise, and when I have found her ..." 

He paced up and down the room in troubled 
thought, picturing himself now meeting her with a 
rapturous embrace on the slopes of Abersethin — now 
walking beside her in awkward embarrassment through 
some fashionable street in London. No, that thought 
was unbearable ! He put out the lights, and left the 
smoking-room, looked into the studio, and then made 
his way to his bedroom, with slow step and firm, set 
lips. How the events of a few hours had changed his 
feelings ; and what events ? Nothing but the notes 
of an old air, the tones of a silvery \ >ice — such small 
things had shaded the last hours of the day. He 
tossed restlessly on his bed, but fell asleep towards 
morning, and overslept himself so much that Lady 
Meredith and her husband had sat long over their 
breakfast in an interesting tCte-ci-tite conversation, of 
which he was the subject, before he appeared on the 
scene. 

" I wonder," said Lady Meredith, e.xamining her 
teaspoon, " who his parents really were ? " 

Sir Glynne's fare flushed ; it was a subject he dis- 
liked ; he loved leuan like a son, and had made up his 
mind to treat him as one, and to make him his heir. 

"VVhatdoes it matter?" he replied; "a beggar, I 
believe, ;i tramp, or something of the kind ; perhaps 
that is what he is thinking oi whcti he looks so 'dour ' 
sometimes. I have never spok.n to him about it, but 
I think I will." 

" You might hear something about I -m," suggested 
Lady Meredith, " from old Catrin HowcUs, at Abcr- 



i5d 



A WELSH SINr.KR. 



n 1 



i ^' 



K 



u 



sethin ; she always seemed to take a special interest 
in him " 

" I ini^jht," rejoined her husband thoughtfully, "but 
I don't want to rake up old memories ; I wish it to 
be forgotten that he is not really my son." 

" Down there it will never be forgotten," answered 
Lady Meredith ; " the story is too well known." 

At this juncture the subject of their conversation 
entered the room. 

" Late for once," said the hostess ; " a wonderful 
thing for you, leuan,' 

" Sat too long over your cigar last night, my boy," 
said Sir Glynne. 

" I did have rather a bad night. You may laugh, 
sir, but you would have been rather surprised had you 
met me last night, as you might have, after twelve, in 
the studio." 

" By Jove ! you wouldn't have caught me there at 
that hour ; but what's up, leuan ? Are you in love, 
my boy? Did the little siren's music keep you 
awake?" ^ ' 

leuan blushed, and Lady Meredith, noticing the 
heightened colour, drew her own conclusions, and, be- 
ginning at once, woman like, to lose herself in a laby- 
rinth of " match-making," dropped the sugar into the 
cream jug instead of leuan's cup. 

" She does sing beautifully," said Sir Glynne, while 
leuan attacked his breakfast with no lack of appetite 
at all events. 

" But, joking apart, leuan, Elizabeth would not be 
the wife I should choose for you." 

leuan leant back in his chair and laughed heartily. 
"A wife for me, sir! let us speak of it ten years hence 
I have much to do first ; a name and a fortune to 
make." 

" Well, you are a lucky dog," said Sir Glynne. " I 
shouldn't wonder if you made both some day. I ex- 
pect your ' Invocation ' will make your name ; it is 
exquisite, Teuan. You know how I have watched it 



OLIJ MF.\fORIES. 



159 



growinp: in beauty, and getting more and more institict 
with life. Yes, it has been like a child to mc for 
months, and I shall have to look tc my laurels when 
leuan Gwyllt enters the lists against me. But come, 
if you have finislicd ; let us go and have a look at it." 
And they left the room together, Sir Glynne 
affectionately linking his arm through Icuan's, and 
Lady Meredith looking smilingly after them. 



,'* 



T 



If 

I' 

i. i 






k i 



i f 



^1 



CHAPTER XVIir, 

A DISCOVERY. 

" I HAVE a favour to ask you, sir," said Icuan, one 
evening on entering the studio. 

" I am glad to hear it," said Sir Glynne. " The 
greatest fault I find with you, leuan, is, that you 
never ask rae for anything, although I have told you 
that I look upon you as a son." 

"And expect me to bother you accordingly. Well, 
indeed, sir, when you leave me with a wish ungratified 
I will promise to appeal to you; you see I am doing 
so now," 

" And what is this great favour, my dear boy ? " 

" Well, will you allow me to go down to Wales to 
sec my old foster-parents ? I fear they think I have 
forgotten them." 

" Why, of course," replied Sir Glynne ; " we have 
all neglected Glanarvon shockingly of late ; and, were 
it not for our coming pilgrimage to Rome, I would 
accompany you, and so, no doubt, would Lady 
Meredith. If wc went now, we should not be back in 
good time for our private view on the second. But 
what's the matter, Icuan ? You look as glum as if I 
had refused your request." 

" No, indeed, I was only thinKmg that, perhaps, I 
ought to tell you that it is not only to sec Shti,n and 
lanto I am going, but also, and principally, to see 
M.fanwy." 

Sir Glynne gave a long, low whistle. " Phew ! is 
that it? Mifanwy, your foster-sister, and why not? 
It is very natural tliat > ju should wish to see her." 

I Co 



f^ : 



A DISCOVERY. 



I6l 



But, Sir stammered leuan, "she is not my sister- 
and I gave her a solemn promise that I would return 
to see her— to~to marry her." 

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Sir Glynne, « this is 
worse than Elizabeth. And. pray, how does your 
lordship purpose to support a wife and family ? " 

leuan burst out laughing. " Indeed, sir, I had 

Sd.-' ^"^ °^ "'''^ ' '^'''^- '^^^ '^^* '« too 

" But you said ' to marry her ' ? " 

"Well some time in the future," said leuan; "not 
now Why I am but little more than a bo; ; but 
just to see her and to tell her that I am prepared to 
keep my promise, if she desires it." 

Sir Glynne took a few long whiffs at his cigar, and. 

for a few moments, there was a cloud upon hi^ face 

^ ^Vk.''^^""*^^ P^"g of grief, saw for the first time. 

1 his IS perfectly unreasonable, and not what I 

fh?fir^ h T' ^l"^"'i' ^"'^^ ^'"^^'"S his cigar into 
the fire, he got up hastily and left the room ; but in a 

few minutes he returned, to find leuan still standing 
"1 the same position by the mantelpiece. Sir 
STi'^'"'^^^ a sparkle in them, and his mouth 
shoulderf ""'"' '""'''' ^^'" ^' ^'^PP^^ h'"'" °" the 
"Now. look here old boy." he said, "just sit down 
and listen while I lay the case clearly before you 
moor th^:'" r ^T^^' "P ^°^^ther on a desoS 
.Tatum'l .7 f "^^"^ ?.^^^' ^""^ther and sister-very 
natural ; they love each other, and quarrel and make 

tTnTM~''''^u "'^^"^^'- ^^^^^ P^^^ on and ^hese 
two chhdren. who have beer, all in all to one another 
are called upon to part ; one remains on the " v ndv 
moor her ideas bounded by that black Za h.Z 

o^Ss^t'^lJ^^ ""'It' •^'^'<- to'jhe very h^e^rt 
rlnA'T^ ' ■^,^^°''*' they part, they shed the usual 
childish tears, and make the isual vows and nVomises 

Lon "Vm r'\^'^''';" ^P'^'-' °^ their prescnrsepa a- 
t.on. Am I right so far ? Very well ; the girl grows 



1^ 



'I' % 



162 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I ?- 



I ; 



f I 



up in ignorance of everything that refines and 
beautifies life ; she is wooed by the neighbouring clod- 
hoppers ; she shares in the hard work of the peasants 
around her, in the hay field and corn field ; she joins 
in their laughter, and hears their coarse jokes- 
Patience, leuan, am I not right again ? " 
"No, sir," cried Icuan hotly; " Mifanwy could 

never — " 

" Of course not, of course not," said Sir Glynne, with 
a superior smile and a wave of his hand ; " but let me 
finish. The boy is taken by a friend, who has him 
educated, introduced to all the softening influences of 
soc:.' life. That boy, having a receptive mind, and 
no evil tendencies, utilises every advantage, and be- 
comes a very fair specimen of a well-bred gentleman, 
with refined tastes and good manners. He re- 
members a boy and girl affair, and feels bound by a 
promise associated with it ; he sacrifices himself to a 
foolish, quixotic idea of honour, and, in keeping a 
childish promise, he lasts his future career, and links 
himself for ever to a woman of low tastes, of vulgar 
ideas, and one wholly incapable of appreciating his 
higher ideal of life ; and, added to this, he bitterly 
disappoints an old and tried friend, who expected a 
different return for his confidence and affection. 
Have I no claim upon you, leuan ?" 

"Oh, every claim, sir; I feel I wholly belong to 
you, for you have instilled into me new thoughts, 
new aspirations, and new ideas ; I am almost a 
creature of your evolving; without your consent I 
will never go to Wales." 

"Listen to me, then," said his friend, taking him 
kindly by the arm ; " I will never forbid your going ; 
you are perfectly free in my house ; but now I am 
going to ask you a favour: will you defer your 
journey to Wales until after we return from the 
Continent ? " 

"Certainly, sir; your wish is my law. How long 
do you think we shall remain abroad ? " 



A DISCOVERY. 



163 
shall 



" A year probably ; this time nrjxt year I 
absolve you from your promise." 

leuan looked thoughtfully down for a moment be- 
fore he answered. " You may depend on me, sir ; but 
may I write ? " 

" Can she write ? " asked Sir Glynne mischievously. 
leuan flushed and stammered, " She was so young 
— no — she could not write then." 

" And probably cannot now," rejoined Sir Glynne, 
" or she would have managed to write to you." 

" Have I your permission to write as usual to my 
foster-parents, and to ask for news of Mifanwy ? " 
" Certainly— why not ? " replied Sir Glynne. 
" Well, sir, I give you my word of honour that I 
will wait until we return from abroad before I take 
any step in the matter." 

" Then, let us drop the subject, my dear boy, and 
let us begin on another equally interesting to me, and 
that will keep us still hovering about the same dear 
place. I have never asked you before, leuan, but 
have you any idea who or what your parents were ? " 
I Again leuan looked much disturbed. 

"Don't think I care a button what they were, 
leuan ; it would make no difference to mc if you told 
me they were beggars." 
" Or tramps, sir ? " 
"Or tramps." 

" Well, I said that, because I had always been told 
my mother was a tramp, till the word tramp, tramp 
had branded itself on my brain. But she was not 
that," he continued, with growing confidence, " though 
she did arrive penniless and forlorn at The Ship Inn 
one night, when the sea was tossing high and the 
wuid roaring. I have pictured it many a time." 

"Where did you hear thus much?" inquired Sir 
Glynne, with great interest, that deepened while 
leuan told his tale. " Catrin Howells told you all 
this?" he asked, as the young man proceeded. " I 
do believe she told me a great part of this history, and 



M 



164 A WELSH SINGER. 

how I came to forget it I cannot imagine. Of course ! 
I remember now her describing the poor woman's 
arrival in the Aden y don one stormy night, poor soul ! 
poor soul ! It would have comforted her, had she 
known how well her son would be cared for in the 
future." 

" It would, indeed, sir ; she was very young, I think 
— quite a girl — a poor, unprotected creature, who fell 
into the clutches of a villain, who had no pity, no 
feeling, no conscience." 

" Do you know who he was too, then ? " asked Sir 
G!ynne, opening his eyes in astonishment. " How 
secret you have been ! Why have you never told me, 
leuan ? You might have known this would all be 
interesting to me." 

" Well, you never asked, and the subject was al- 
ways a sore one to me. I am nut ashamed of my 
mother, though I do not know who she was, but I am 
heartily ashamed and grieved to tell you that my 
father is my old master, John Powys." 

"John Powys!" gasped Sir Glynne ; "by Jove! 
that old rascal ! Indeed, I am not surprised at your 
not boasting of your parentage. If there is a man in 
the world I detest it is John Powys ; but go on with 
your story; the plot thickens." 

leuan proceeded with his tale. 

" I have my mother's letter in that desk ; for years 
I kept it inside my waistcoat, close to my heart, as 
well as I knew how ; but," he continued, smiling, 
" sentiment must give way to a dress shirt ; so now I 
have it safely in my desk. Would you like to see it, 

sir?" 

" I should indeed," replied Sir Glynne, though with 

flagging interest. 

He had heard more than he wanted to know when 
leuan had told him his father's name. But when, 
from the packets of letters and notes, one pale and 
faded was picked out and handed to Sir Glynne, and 



1 * i 



A DISCOVERY. 



165 



his eyes first rested on the delicate handwriting, his 
face visibly paled. 

" Good God ! leuan, where did you get this ? " 

" It is my mother's letter to my father, written that 
stormy night at The Ship Inn, and given to old 
Catrin Howclls, to be delivered to John Powys in 
case of my mother's death before she saw him. She 
did see him, met him in the oak avenue. What re- 
ception she met with we may guess from his for.-ner 
conduct, and from the fact that she was sent at once 
to the barn, where I was born in the course of a few 
hours, and where my unhappy mother died with only 
another stray tramp to attend to her. Can you 
wonder, sir, that I hate that man ? " 

" No, no," replied Sir Glynne, still holding the 
letter in his hand unread ; he seemed strangely un- 
ner\'ed. " May I take it to Gwladys to read, leuan ? 
I will explain afterwards — or, come with me." And 
he hurried from the room, with leuan wondering much 
at the effect of his news. 

They found Lady Meredith at work in the draw- 
ing-room. 

"Whose writing is this, Gwladys?" asked Sir 
Glynne breathlessly, handing her the letter. 

" Oh, Glynne, it is dear Mary's. I should k .ow 
those fine lines anywhere ; and here is the little 
scrolly line at the end of her name that I used to 
tease her about. Where, where did this come 
from ? " 

" It is my mother's writing," leuan interposed. " Is 
it possible that you knew her, and that I shall hear 
something about her at last ? " 

Sir Glynne began to read aloud, interrupted by 
continual exclamations from his wife, who looked 
over his shoulder, while leuan stood speechless, glanc- 
ing from one to the other. 

When he had reached that part of the letter in 
which the unfortunate woman appealed to John 
Powys for permission to die under his roof, Sir Glynne's 



fa 
I! 



If 







\C6 



A WELSH SINGER. 



voice shook, and there was a moisture in his eyes, 
while Gwladys fairly broke down and sobbed. 

" Oh, darling Mary, my old friend, my sister — what 
a fate ! But who was this cruel wretch, this John 
whom she appeals to so pitifully ? " 

And leuan once more told his story as detailed to 
him by Catrin Howells. 

" And who, then, was my mother ? " he said. 

" Mary Meredith, Sir Glynnc's sister, long lost, but 
never forgotten. My old playmate and friend, leuan. 
Oh, what a delightful confusion it is altogether. 
Why, leuan ! you arc our nephew ; think of that ! " 
and she folded him in a warm embrace, while Sir 
Glynne took him by both hands, saying : 

" My beloved sister's boy ! This explains why my 
heart went out to you. But I cannot make it all out, 
my dear fellow. Why did you keep all this to your- 
self so long ? " 

" I never dreamt of such a thing as this," said 
leuan ; " never thought anyone would take an interest 
in my poor story. But are you sure, sir ? There are 
many Marys in the world." 

" True," said Sir Glynne ; " but there is but one 
• Mary ' who could have written that letter. Truly 
the ways of Providence are wonderful ! To think 
that I should have adopted my own nephew, my dear 
Mary's son ! And now, leuan, we have both our work 
cut out for us. Wc will hunt through every church 
and chapel registry in the land till wc find the proofs 
of your father's and mother's marriage." 

" Father and mother ! Must I then accept that 
man as my father? Indeed, I sec plainly I shall be 
baulked of that delightful pommelling I have so often 
pictured myself bestowing upon John Powys. I 
suppose I must not pommel my father, sir." 

" Call me ' uncle,' my dear boy.' 

"And me ' aunt,' " added Lady Meredith. " I begin 
already to feel the responsibility of the title." 

" By Jove ! here's another complication," said Sir 



A DISCOVERY. 



167 



Glynnc; "Elizabeth Powys, why, she's your first 

cousin ! " 

" Well, I hope she will appreciate the honour ; but 

I doubt it." 

And so the happy group sat chatting on till the 
silvery chimes from the mantelpiece warned them of 
the lateness of the hour, when they separated each to 
think over the strange discovery. 

It soon became evident to Sir Glynne that very 
little could be done to elucidate the mystery of his 
sister's marriage before they started for the Continent. 
Their intention was to spend Christmas and the early 
spring in Rome, and to visit Norway before their 
return to England in the autumn of the following 
year. Before leaving England, however, a large 
party of their most intimate friends were invited to a 
private view of Sir Glynne's and leuan's latest pro- 
ductions. The former's " Fireman " was much ad- 
mired, but leuan's "Hymn to the Rising Sun" received 
quite an ovation, and Sir Glynne felt delighted with 
his pupil's success. 

" Upon my word, you'll have to look to your laurels, 
Sir Glynne," said a sculptor, whose name was as well 
known and held in as high estimation as Sir 
Glynne's. 

" I shall, indeed, and I am delighted to think that, 
when I drop out of the lists, my nephew will take my 
place." 

"Your nephew? ah! h'm, yes, of course, Mr. 
Gwyllt is your adopted son, or nephew, is he not ? " 

"He is my sister's son," replied Sir Glynne, " and as 
dear to me as if he were my own ; thus you see it 
will be no pain to me, but a true pleasure, if his fame 
eclipses mine." 

Icuan was sitting on a table near, looking seriously 
and critically at his own work. He had been 
nervously fearful of the great sculptor's criticism. 

Elizabeth was waiting in the drawing-room with 
Lady Meredith for the entrance of the party from the 



/ 



168 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I I 

I- "■ 

T 
.f 



Studio, hovering between the piano and the tea-table 
sparkh'ng with smiles, and endeavouring in every way 
to make herself agreeable both to her hostess and her 
guests. She was quite an acquisition to the party, 
and thoroughly enjoyed the opportunity of a flirta- 
tion with Mr. Camjicrton and Icuan, cleverly manag- 
ing so to arrange her songs and pretty speeches as 
to please both her admirers. Mr. Camperton was 
honestly and deeply in love with her, and leuan, 
though he did fiot love her, still liked her sufficiently 
to be charmed by her grace and sparkle, her exquisite 
singing, and her dazzling complexion. 

"She's a lovely little creature," he murmured to 
himself, as he returned up the broad staircase, after 
wishing her a rather tender good-bye. " We shall all 
be at the concert to-night," he had said ; " I am long- 
ing to hear you siug again." 



yi i 1 



CHAPTER X!X. 



OLD FRIENDS. 



On a wet and windy night in dull November, a thick- 
set, midd'.c-ai^'cd man, with sandy hair and brown 
beard, dressed in the usual garb of a clergymr.n of 
the Church of England, was hurrying up one of the 
streets in the East End, that brought him round a 
corner into the Warkworth Road. He was met by a 
furious gust of wind and rain, that threatened to carry 
away the obstreperous umbrella which, with the 
persistency of a malicious sprite, had opposed his 
efforts to keep it open. 

"Bother this Warkworth Road! "he said, still fighting 
manfully with his foe. " I scarcely ever choose this 
way home, and I never will again ! " 

He had just come up to a crowd of people outside 
a brilliantly-lighted arched entrance, when his um- 
brella was caught by another and more furious gust, 
and turned completely inside out. He was greeted 
by a guffaw of laughter from the crowd, who were 
not over and above partial to ministers of religion, 
and were glad enough to enjoy a laugh at his 
expense. 

" Come now," said the clcrn[yman, good-humourcdly,. 
"which arc you lau-liing at? me or the umbrella P 
for I declare to you I don't know which of us is the 
conqueror. I have fought with him all the way from 
Jiull Street. Now I appeal to you to settle which 
has gained the mastery? " and he flung it away. 

" Dang'd if I don't think you 'ave, sir ! " said a 

i6q 






II 



170 



A WELSH SINGER. 



r, 



i I 



m-y-r 



burly man, fresh from the country, and believing that 
the clergyman wished to gain the entrance, he good- 
naturedly made way for him. 

It was Mr. Rhys Morgan, who had been for some 
time settled in the East End. On nearing the lighted 
archway, he heard strains of music, accompanied by 
a voice, that struck responsive chords in him and 
made him quiver with awakened memory. 

" Who is it singing ? " he said to his closest neigh- 
bour. 

" Woy ! it is the I'rincess of Randelar. 'Avcn't 
you 'card 'er sing ? " 

Before he could reply, again the sweet voice reached 
his ear, and his heart too, for it brought before his 
mind's eye a star-lit sky and a heaving sea, a little 
church built in a cleft in the rocks, a girl with bare 
feet and ragged gown, who sang with folded hands 
and upturned face, as though she sang to listening 
angels. 

" Mifanwy ! " he said, " no one but she could sing 
like that ! " and he began to edge his way manfully 
towards the door. 

'• 'Ere ! " said another member of the crowd, " let 
the parson go in ; 'e knows a pretty girl as well as 
anyone, when 'e sees 'er ! " 

" You bet ! " said another joker in the crowd ; but 
only laughing good-naturedly at their gibes, the 
" parson " pushed forward and paid his shilling at the 
ticket office. He had no sooner made his way into 
the building than his ears were greeted with the first 
strains of the National Anthem, and he saw a jet- 
black horse with long, sweeping tail, ridden by a girl 
in a yellow satin skirt and a scarlet cap, disappearing 
through a side passage, the horse's hoofs resounding 
noisily on the wooden boarding. The audience were 
already moving from their seats, and preparing for a 
general stampede. The performance was over; the 
voice had ceased to sing, and Mr. Rhys Morgan was 
looking round him rather disconsolately, when he was 



, I 



OLD FRIENDS. 



i7t 



accosted by the clown, who strutted up to him with 
his hands in the pockets of his loose pink trousers. 

" What's the next article, sir ? What can I show 
you ? " 

" I want to see the girl who was singing a minute 
or two ago ! " 

" Well I never ! " said the clown, " 'e wants the best 
article in the shop. Won't anything else satisfy you, 
now ? " he continued with a comical leer. 

" Nothing less," said Mr. Rhys Morgan, 

"Well, do you see that passage? Follow your 
nose, and, perhaps, you'll find her." 

Rhys Morgan obeyed. The clown, close behind 
him, with his thumb to his nose, gave him a parting 
imaginary kick, which tickled the audience immensely, 
and caused roars of laughter and exclamations of 
" Good-bye, parson, and good luck to you, old fellow." 
But heedless of all, Rhys Morgan followed the clown's 
advice to such good purpose that he found himself at 
the entrance of a long row of stalls, each occupied by 
one of the beautiful horses, which had just taken part 
in the evening's performance. The grooms were busy 
rubbing them down, spreading the litter for their 
night's repose, and pr viding for each a liberal supply 
of hay or oats. Into the first of these stalls the 
black charger had just entered, and his rider, who had 
slipped silently from his back, was engaged, as usual, 
with her arm round his neck, in bidding him a loving 
"good-night." 

"Good-night, Sultan, bftch anwl ;" and she kissed 
his forehead, while he softly neighed in return. 

Mr. Rhys Morgan was astounded. That lovely 
girl with all the grace of budding womanhood, with 
that pale, clear skin, that glossy shower of hair, these 
gor^'cous garments ; that Mifanwy 1 the little swarthy 
shepherd girl, impossible I But the Welsh words of 
endearment addressed to the horse decided him. 

" Mifanwy ! " he said, " is it you ? " 

The girl started violently ; she had not heard his 



MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI ond ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 




I.I 



I 45 
150 



2.8 
3.2 



^^ 






2.5 
2.2 

2£ 
1.8 




^ APPLIED IM/IGE 



1653 Ei.st Main Str-et 

Rochester. New York 14609 USA 

(716) 482 - 0300 - Phone 

(716) 288 - 5989 - Fa« 










3 ' 



I72 



A WELSH SINGER. 



^ 



entrance into the stable. She turner! round in 
astonishment, and the large black eyes sht; fixed upon 
him told him at once that it was indeed his old pupil. 
He held out both hands, but the girl's manner froze 
his warmth, and frightened him, for instead of placing 
her hands in his, she dropped them silently on the 
satin robe, and a vivid flush of red suffused her neck, 
cheeks, brow; then her head gradually bent lower 
and lower, and the tears welled up into her eyes. 

"What is it, my child?" said Rhys Morgan in 
Welsh. "Oh, Mifanwy, what is it you are so ashamed 
of? What has brought that crimson blush >. to your 
pale cheek ? " 

_ The girl still stood with bent head, and arms han^r- 
ing down, before him. Suddenly she placed her 
hands m his, though with head still bent down. 
, " Oh ! sir, sir ! " she said in her native language, 
" forgive me, for I did not know what I was doing ' 
but now my eyes are open ! " 

Rhys Morgan's heart sank within him. 

" I hoped you'd never find me, for now I know T 
ought not to be here ; but indeed, indeed, I came 
here in ignorance." 

" Tell me everything, Mifanwy. Of what are you 
ashamed ? ^ 

" Only that, sir, being here, what else could I be 
ashamed of? " And with a frank smile, that brou<Tht 
out the httle dimple in her chin, she looked her friend 
straight in the face. 

One look at these guileless eyes, and " e reassuring 
tone, were enough to set at rest the Icars of Rhys 
Morgan ; so, pressing the little hand in his, he said 
joyfully : 

"Now, I see Mifanwy! there is the old smile there 
are the clear eyes, and I have already heard the sweet 
voice. _ I knew it at once, in the niidst of that wind 
and rain, in that crowded street, and with that fiend 
of an umbrella to impede me ; yet the long lost tones 
uf your voice, ciuid, drew me in like a magnet." 



?-9R 







^iii^i^HiHMIlH^HIliHHilliBliiHiiAri 



OLD FRIENDS. 



173 



"Yes, sir," said the girl, ". know how music 
enthrals you, and .1 know how you always loved my 
singing." 

There was not a trace of vanity in the remark, nor 
did Rhys I^Torgan ascribe it to her in his own rnind. 
While they were still talking delightedly in their 
native tongue, a groom appeared, bringing Sultan's 
bed; but, seeing that most unusual sight — a parson in 
the stall—went out again in astonishment, to return 
almost immediately with Tom Pomfrey, who was still 
in his circus attire of flesh-coloured tights with crimson 
and gold adornments. Tom was as much astonished 
as the groom when he saw Mifanwy and Rhys 
Morgan in close and earnest conversation. 

" What is the meaning of this, sir ? What do you 
want here ? " he asked rather sternly. " Strangers are 
not allowed in here." 

Rhys Morgan began to apologise, while Mifanwy 
explained. ^ 

" Oh ! Tom, this is my old friend, who taught me 
to smg, long, long ago, in dear Wales. And, oh, sir," 
she continued, changing to her own language, " this 
is Tom, my best friend here, who has watched over 
me, and been kind to me ever since I came here." 

Rhys Morgan held out his hand, which Tom 
grasped at once. There was something in the 
parson's face that impressed all wiio saw him with his 
honest kindliness ; on his side he was greatly taken 
with Tom's open brow and clear, blue eyes. 

" Beg your pardon, sir, I did not know you were a 
friend of Mifanwy's ; and one has to be careful in 
London, you see ! " 

"I am o!-.ly too thankful," said Rhys Morgan 
"that she has a good friend to watch over her. I 
heard her voice by accident in the street and 
recognised it at once." 

^ "Ah ! you would be sure to do that after once hear- 
ing It," said Tom ; « but will you not come into the 
house, sir, and hear all about her coming here ? " 




■k i 



li ' i 



M' 




174 



A WELSH SINGER. 



" That is just what I should like to do, but it is 
so late, and my landlady is nervous. I will come 
to-morrow." 

" Yes, that will be better," said Tom ; " it is an off- 
day ! If you will come in the afternoon, and take a 
cup of tea with us, we shall be very glad, and my 
mother will feel herself highly honoured. I don't be- 
lieve she has ever had a clergyman to tea before. 
Good people generally fight shy of us 'show 
people.' " 

" I shall be delighted to come," said Rhys Morgan. 
"Good-bye, Mifanwy, I sha" see you to-morrow. We 
shall have much to say to each other." 

Tom escorted him to the door of the circus, explain- 
ing that to-morrow it would be closed, " But our 
private house is in Temple Street, No. 18. It runs at 
the back of the circus, you see." And Rhys Morgan 
went his way. 

" That's a good, honest fellow, I am sure," he said 
to himself, " in spite of the spangles." 

And " That's a jolly good man, I'll be bound!" said 
Tom, " in spite of his long coat-tails." 

On the next afternoon, Mrs. Pomfrey's excitement 
was intense. " A clergyman coming to tea ! " It was 
an absolutely new experience for her, and she dreaded 
it exceedingly. 

" He'll be finding fault with h^verythink," she said. 
" I know 'em ; wc are wrong altogetlier. 'E won't like 
my earrings, nor your long pipe ! " 

" My pipe ! " said Mr. Pomfrey. " I ain't going to 
stop 'ere to be lectured by no parson. I shall make 
myself scarce ! " 

" For goodness sake, Totsie and Willie," said the 
poor woman, " put them picture books away ; arn't 
you got no little 'ymn books, or something of that 
sort.?" 

" Mifanwy gave them to us," said the children, 
looking scared. 

" i don't care who gave theui to you, but, I sez, put 



OLD FRIENDS. 



175 



'em away ! " and she stamped her foot angrily, while 
she cut slice after slice of thin bread and butter. 

Mifanwy laughed merrily when she saw the 
children's scared looks and the excited flush on Mrs. 
Pomfrey's face. 

" Oh ! well, indeed, if he ever comes again, you 
won't be afraid of him." 

"Comes again," said Mrs. Pomfrey, wiping her 
brow ; " let's get through this time safely first ! " 

And when at last a vigorous pull at the front door 
b'^11 announced the arrival of the visitor, it was comi- 
cal in the extreme to watch Mrs. Pomfrey's demeanour. 
She sat down, panting, and at one moment, in the 
character of hostess, wore a genial, not to say jovial, 
appearance, at the next, remembering her guest's 
sacred calling, she endeavoured to adapt her face to 
what she considered an appropriately serious expres- 
sion. Tom, who had been prowling about the street 
door for nearly an hour to welcome his guest, and to 
see that he did not miss his way, here piloted him 
safely into the little back parlour, accompanied by 
Mifanwy, who was talking in Welsh. 

" Here's the gentleman, mother. Mr. Rhys Morgan 
is his name, Mifanwy tells me." 

" Yes, that is my name. Regular Welsh, you see," 
he said, shaking hands warmly with Mrs. Pomfrey, 
who looked so unnaturally serious that Tom could 
scarcely refrain from laughter. Willie and Totsie 
had fairly subsided under the table in their nervous- 
ness, and were with difficulty persuaded to come out 
and shake hands. 

" What a jolly boy ! " said Rhys Morgan, 
bound he can turn a somersault already ! " 

" Yes, I can, backwards ! " said Willie. 

"Wish I could," said Rhys Morgan. 
Totsie," he said, drawing her towards him, 
sure she can fly through a paper hoop ! " 

"Yes, I can." said totsie, "if it's not too hie 



" ril be 



"And 
"I 



am 



h! 



I " 



■There's for you, now," said the parson"; "who 






j 3 • 




. 1 ! 




V * ! 




:■ a 




til . 




f;» 1 




H I 1 




i 1 ' 




^ ' 




is 




I 

I 



w 






r :fj 



176 



A WELSH SINGER. 



knows but you 11 teach me both these tricks before we 
part company ! " 

"Totsie! Willie!" said Mrs. Pomfrey in horror, 
" 'old your tongues, do ! " 

But the children, havinjj got over their timidity, 
were soon busily turning the leaves of their picture 
books for the parson's admiration ; and when they 
drew round the table, and the first cups of tea had 
been handed round, Mrs. Pomfrey had also overcome 
her nervousness, and her features had regained their 
usual smiling expression. 

" Never saw such a nice man," she said afterwards, 
with astonishment ; '"e made himself quite at 'ome with 
us, and I declare I don't care 'ow often 'e comes to 
tea ! " 

When tea was over, she and the children retired to 
the kitchen, leaving Mifanwy and Rhys Morgan to 
themselves. Tom hovered about for a little while, 
then saying, " I must go and attend to the horses! 
I will be back before you go, sir," he, too, left the 
room. Then in response to Rhys Morgan's questions, 
Mifanwy began to relate the story of her joining the 
circus and leaving Wales. 

When she had finished, " My dear child," he said, 
"you have been mercifully protected. I am sure 
these are good, kind people, or I should not have 
found my little pupil the innocent, pure-minded child 
of old." 

"They are good people indeed, sir! especially 
Tom." ' 

" Yes, he seems a fine fellow ; but, Mifanwy, surely 
you are not in love with him, engac[ed, or anvthinr of 
that kind ? " ^ 

" Oh, anwl, no," said the girl, blushing. " No, 
indeed, .". ; I am too young for that, whatever." 

" Well, I am thankful ! " 

" And why so, sir ? " 

"Because I want you to be wedded to your art. 
You must marry ' music ' only ! " 



OLD FRIENDS. 



177 



Mifanwy clasped her hands. 

"Oh, if I could be that indeed, then, perhaps, 1 
should be happy ! " 

" And are you not happy now, child ? " 

The girl hung her head, and did not answer. Her 
eyes filled with tears; Rhys Morgan saw a crystal 
drop fall on her lap, and felt deeply pained. His 
next question was startlingly irrelevant. 

" Have you seen leuan lately ? " 

" Never, never, sir ! only once in the street ; not 
a word from him, never the tone of his voice ! " 

The floodgates were open, and the long pent-up 
sorrow found expression. She leant her head over 
her folded arms on the table, and sobbed with 
the abandon of a child. The parson drew his 
hand over her glossy hair, and did not speak 
for a time, but let the tears flow unchecked, and the 
sobs die gradually away, then he said gently : 

" But I see him sometimes ! " 

The girl started from her chair with a frightened look. 

"Oh no, sir, no! you don't see leuan, do you? 
You will not tell him you have seen me here ; he 
would not like it, he would be ashamed of me, he 
would turn away from me, and that would kill me ! 
No, no, no ! I shall never be happy again, for I shall 
always be afraid that you have told leuan ! " 

" Do you never wish to see him again, then ? you 
two, who were so inseparable." 

" No," said Mifanwy, drawing herself up, " I never 
wish to see him again until I have left this place, and 
have improved myself, and raised myself to be his 
equal ; that is my aim, sir, and if I die before I gain 
my end, I am willing ; but I will never make myself 
known to him until I am his equal. Will you help 
me, sir, for the sake of the dear old times ? Will you 
promise me to keep my secret, and never by word or 
deed let leuan know where I am ? " 

Rhys Morgan took her two hands, and looking 
steadily into her tearful eyes, said : 



178 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I!! 






r- 



h- ■ 



^ I i = 




11 N 

J; I 



"Mifanwy, I promise! Do you want more than 
my word ? " 

" No, no, nothing more, sir ; it is enough ; but I was 
afraid you would not promise." 

" Yes, I promise, child," he answered, in a slow, im- 
pressive tone, " and I agree with you, I think you are 
quite right, and, with God's blessing, I will help you. 
Mifanwy, you shall leave this place; I will find a 
home for you, I will have your voice trained, and I 
will put you in a position to earn your own livelihood, 
and, at the same time, to give the woi d the privilege 
of hearing your voice ; and, as you say, ' for the sake 
of the dear old times,' and because I have always 
loved you, child; for the sake of our dear old country, 
where our fathers and mothers lie buried, and where 
the girl I once loved with my whole soul, and still 
love, lies sleeping peacefully under the old yew tree. 
• Mae'n gorwedd yn dawel yn mynwent Llwyn On!'"^ 

" I did not know, sir." 

" No, you were too young, but now you know." 

" Thank you, master," said Mifanwy, returning to 
her childish mode of addressing him, "my heart's 
best thanks, and, please God, I wil' repay you one 
day, and be a credit to you." 

' Well, leave it all to me, and say nothing about our 
plans until I come and explain." 

" May I not tell Tom, sir ? and ought I not to tell 
Mr. Pomfrey ? " 

" Well, perhaps you ought, Mifanwy ; you can do 
what you think right." 

Here Tom came whistling into the house, and, with 
noisy step, approached the parlour ; he guessed in- 
stinctively that the interview would be a trying one 
to Mifanwy, and so gave her warning of his approach. 

" Well," said Rhys Morgan, " Mifanwy and I have 
had a long and interesting talk. She has told me of 
all your kindness to her ; and, I am sure, if I judge 




I << 



She's peacefully sleeping within the Ash Grove.'' 



OLD FRIENDS. 



179 



you rightly, I shall have your sympathy in whatever 
I can do to help her on her way." 

" On her way ! where, sir ? " 

" Well," said Rhys Morgan, rising and preparing to 
depart, " to fortune and to fame, for I believe both 
may be reached by her. But where is Mrs. Pomfrey? 
I cannot go without thanking her for her hospitality." 

Mrs, Pomfrey came in beaming, and drying her 
hands vigorously on her apron, 

'' Good-bye, sir, and come whenever you like to see 
Mifanwy ; there's always a cup of tea going at five, 
and, if you'll jine us in our 'umble way, we shall 
always be pleased." 

•' Thank you, thank you, I shall be glad to come 
again. Totsie and Willie gone to bed ? Well, tell 
them next time I come they must teach me to turn a 
somersault ! " 

When he was gone, Mifanwy ran up to her own 
room, and, sitting on the side of her bed in the dark- 
ness, indulged in a good " think." " How strange it 
has <nll been, and how providential ! Oh, I will repay 
him one day, I know I will." 

It was strange that she did not disclaim her chances 
of gaining fortune and fame. Her voice was a gift 
which she herself held in sacred reverence, a power 
which she possessed to express the good and beauti- 
ful, and one which she felt it incumbent upon her to 
improve, and make the best of; but never a subject 
of conceited self-congratulation. Fame and fortune 
both were things greatly to be desired; but in 
Mifanwy's eyes they were of value only in so far as 
they would enable her to raise herself to leuan's level 
This was the dream of her life ! 



CHAPTER XX. 



■ »-T -I 4 




GOOD-BYE TO THE CIRCUS. 

It was not many days before Rhys Morgan again 
appeared in Temple Street. Mifanwy had prepared 
her employers for her possible departure. Old 
Pomfrey grumbled a little at first, but Mrs. Pomfrey 
soothed him by remmding him that he had said him- 
self that Kitty Killthorpe was well able to take the 
place of Mifanwy, and, indeed, pleased the audience 
better, and that, the two girls being somewhat like in 
face and figure, few people would notice the differ- 
ence. 

At this Tom shrugged his shoulders. 

" If we were in Wales," he said, "they would notice 
the difference as soon as she opened her mouth to 
sing, but here, perhaps, they won't." 

" Well, I don't hear the difference," said old Pom- 
frey, "and that wink of Kitty's goes down tremenjous 
well." 

"Well, I shall miss her dreadful," said Mrs. Pomfrey; 
" she is always so willing and amiable like. I am 
sure I am as fond of her as if she were my own flesh 
and blood ; but I won't stand in her way of getting 
on. La ! when she comes to be a grand concert 
singer, we'll be proud to say, she began her kireer in 
Pomfrey's circus." 

And so, when the parson appeared with well- 
arranged plans for Mifanwy 's removal to a quieter and 
less public mode of life, the way was made smooth for 
him, and she had none but warm hearts and willing 
hands to help her on her way. Tom, alone, looked 

1 80 



GOOD-BYE TO TFIE CIRCUS. 



I8l 



sad and serious ; he realised thoroughly that the step 
she was about to take, under Rhys Morgan's guidance, 
was one that would remove her from any near com- 
panionship with him. He knew that she would never 
agjain be able to associate with him on the same 
familiar terms as of o»d ; but Tom's was real love — 
that pure love which prefers the happiness of the be- 
loved one to its own gratification, and he rejoiced at 
her brightening prospects, although he felt that, with- 
out her, life would be a bla.ik to him. 

" How can I live without Sultan and you, Tom ? " 
she said, when she bid her favourite his last loving 
good-night. 

Tom did not resent being bracketed with Sultan, 
and, even then, coming second ; it was something 
that she had said she would miss him, and that the 
lustrous eyes were swimming in tears. 

"Are all those tears for Sultan, Mifanwy, or are 
some for me ? " 

" Oh, some for you, Tom — most for you ! Indeed, 
I feel as if I were leaving my two best friends on 
earth. I wish I had not grown so fond of you 
both ! " 

Tom held one hand, while, with the other, she 
caressed Sultan. 

" Will you never love me more, Mifanwy ; as I 
want you to love me — enough to be my wife ? " 

"Never, Tom, never. I want you to understand 
that ; but I am sure, if you could look into my heart, 
and see the deep and true love I feel for you as a 
friend, you would be satisfied." 

Tom made a gesture of impatience. " Well, good- 
bye, Mifanwy, I will be your friend for ever, so help 
me, God." 

He longed to take her in his arms, and press one 
kiss upon her iips— the first, the last ; but, with a 
strong effort, he resisted the impulse. 

Mifanwy, once more kissing Sultan's forehead, 
glided out of the stall ; she became conscious of the 



m 



x'-A 



i F 



182 



A V ''.'I SINGER. 




storm that was working in Toti's breast, and the 
knowledf^e robbed her of her self-control. Placing 
her hands before her face, she walked slowly down 
the corridor, her yellow satin robe trailing behind her; 
at the end she turned to wave hitn a silent " good- 
bye." 

When she had disappeared, Tom stood for a mo- 
ment with folded arms, deep in thought ; then, with 
an extra pat on Sultan's glossy flanks, he left him to 
the groom, went hastily to change his attire, and soon 
afterwards appeared at the supper table, the same 
bright, kindly Tom as usual, 

Mifanwy, jn the contrary, looked sad, and her 
eyes showed traces of weeping, which pleased Mrs. 
romfrcy exceedingly. 

" Cheer up, my gel, it's nat'rel you should feel the 
parting a bit, and so do I, I am sure," she said, blow- 
ing her nose vigorously ; " Tom, 'e don't show 'is 
feelings, but I'll be bound 'e's as sorry as sorry to part 
rt^ith you, as we all are." 

Tom busied himself with the carving, while Mrs. 
Pomfrey continued : 

" Well, London is a big place, but 'tain't so big as 
friends can never meet, and I ain't afraid as you'll cut 
us quite, Mifanwy ; however grand you arc, you'll 
come and see us sometimes, and you'll always find a 
friend in me, my dear, though a 'umble one." 

Mifanwy was crying softly again — the warm Welsh 
heart had opened so freely to these kindly people — 
and now felt bitterly the parting, and launching afresh 
on a new course of life. 

" Yes, indeed, indeed," she said, " I shall be glad to 
feel that I have kind friends here, whatever ; and, 
however large London is, I will find my way here 
sometimes." 

And so it was ; Mifanwy did ohcn find her way to 
that little qui', t b.ack parlour^ where the solace of true 
friendship always awaited her, and where she was in- 
variably greeted with delight. 



GOOD-I!YE TO rHK CIRCUS. 



i«3 



The next day Rhys Morgan came, as arranged, to 
fetch her away, Tom and Mrs. Pomfrey accompany- 
ing her to see her safely settled in her new lodgings. 

" I told Mrs. Roose to have tea ready for four," he 
said ; " we'll all have tea together to-night, to give 
Mifanwy a house warming ; and, if you have no ob- 
jection, we'll ask Mrs. Roose to join us, so that 
Mifanwy and she may make friends." 

Mrs. Pomfrey smilingly nodded, while she con- 
gratulated herself inwardly upon her forethought in 
having brought her best cap, pinned inside the skirt 
of her black silk dress. 

" I know Mrs. Roose well," said Rhys Morgan, 
" she is the daughter of a Welsh clergyman ; she 
married an Englishman, who died some year's ago, 
leaving her rather badly provided for. She has now 
been in London lor about twenty years, but she still 
speaks Welsh fluently, and is quite prepared to tak- 
you to her heart, Mifanwy ; it is but two years since 
she lost her only daughter. I lodge with her sister, a 
few doors off, and am almost as often in Mrs. Roose's 
house as in my own." 

Thus chatting, while the cab rumbled on, he strove 
to cheer Mifanwy's drooping spirits, for it was evident 
to him that she was feeling acutely this drifting away 
from her old moorings, and entering upo*. new and 
unknown scenes. 

It had been arranged between him and Tom Pom- 
frey that they were to advance the sum necessary for 
Mifanwy's board and education, taking her own sav- 
ings, which amounted to about £^0, to satisfy the 
girl's scruples. She was too ignorant of the ways of 
the world to know that £^0 would not go far towards 
her maintenance, but whenever she had said timidly, 
" Will it be enough ? " they had answered reassur- 
ingly, " Oh, yes, for a time, and soon you will be 
earning money yourself." 

Rhys Morgans party was a great success ; Tom 
was the brightest and cheerfullest of guests, while 



1 84 



A WELSH SINGER. 









' "■ ill? 




9^n 






ii|i] 



Mifanwy, though pale and heavy-eyed, was looking 
pleased and interested. 

Mrs. Roose, a quiet, nervous little woman, had suc- 
cumbed at once to her charms, and, when not engaged 
in piling her plate with muffins or marmalade, sat 
gazing at her with a dreamy smile. 

As for Mrs. Pomfrey, she was perfectly happy. 
She had had a secret fear of Mrs. Roose, but this 
completely vanished when she saw the nervous, retir- 
ing little woman, and she pnt on her best cap with a 
happy confidence. 

" I ain't ashamed of it," with a knowing jerk of her 
head, " and I needn't be, by that frumpy one on 'er 
'ead," she said to herself, as she followed that lady 
down the narrow carpeted st s to the front room, 
which was in future to be Mifanwy 's, where, under the 
influence of the steaming tea and the well-buttered 
muffins, she enlivened the company with an unfailing 
fund of repartee. 

" Why, mother," Tom said, " I shall have to take 
you home if you make us laugh any more ; I don't 
know what Mrs. Roose will think of us." 

" Oh, she'll excuse me," said Mrs, Pomfrey patron- 
isingjly. 

" Yes, to be sure," said Mrs. Roose. " I like to hear 
other people laughing, though I am not very lively 
myself." 

" Oh, Mifanwy will brighten you up ; she is the 
merriest little soul in the world when you get her to 
yourself Many's the good larf we've had together, 
ain't we, Mifanwy ? " 

*' Yis, indeed," she answered, " we have." 

Mrs. Roose smiled indulgently at Mifanwy, whose 
heart went out at once to the quiet, sad-looking woman. 

At eight o'clock the cab came to the door, and the 
visitors left with many hearty good-byes. Tom and 
Mrs. Pomfrey drove silently home, while Rhys 
Morgan made his way fully content to his own 
lodgings. 



GOOD-BYE TO THE CIRCUS. 



185 



From this time forth began for Mifanwy the real 
business of life: the deep-seated thirst for knowledge, 
and the means of satisfying that thirst ; but, above 
all, the entrancing delight she found in the culture of 
her voice. Music was her absorbing passion, and she 
left no stone unturned to make herself proficient in it. 
She attended a class for French and Italian, and soon 
astonished her teachers by the ease with which she 
acquired those languages. 

It is a curious fact that a Welshman learns a foreign 
language with great ease. Had her teachers known 
the strong motive that compelled the girl to exert all 
her energies for her own advancement, they would not 
perhaps have been so surprised at her rapid progress. 

Rhys Morgan took her English education into his 
own hands, and it was a delightful hour to him when, 
the tea-things cleared away, and Mrs. Roose sitting 
down to her knitting, Mifanwy brought her well-pre- 
pared papers and lesson books, and, spreading them 
out on the table, sat down for an hour's hard study. 
He was delighted with his pupil, and he was fre- 
quently surprised by the ease with which she grasped 
an idea which he found difficult to explain in v/ords 
she could understand. Certainly they had the ad- 
vantage of two languages in which to clothe their 
thoughts, and often, when they discussed a subject of 
deeper interest than usual, they would glide uncon- 
sciously into their native tongue. 

" Oh, but there's Welsh again ! I can say much 
more in it than English, whatever." 

" Yes — but you mustn't," said Rhys Morgan ; " you 
still have a slight Welsh accent, and we want to get 
rid of that before you begin to sing in public." 

"Yes, indeed. Do you remember I used to say 
* ass wen the dove ' ? I believe I will never be able 
to say it right." 

And again, pushing back her hair from her temples, 
she would pore over her English history with serious, 
puckered brows. 



k^ 



s9 









a i 



- 1? I 

i U ; 



ll^i 



ri 



J <l ; • 




4 i 



'.^:"i.'--'\ 









■■■■ " 4 




1 86 



A WELSH SINGER. 



that will only be 
went at once to 



" Well, indeed, Mr. Morgan," said Mrs. Roose, " I 
think the child is studying too hard ; books — books, 
all day long, or copying music, or singing those ugly 
scales. Caton pavvb ! she will become an old woman 
before her time. Have you told Mr. Morgan, dear, 
that I am going to call you ' Belle,' my dear daughter's 
name?" 

" A very good arrangement," said Rhys Morgan. 
" I was puzzled to find a good name for you as a pro- 
fessional singer — • Belle Roose ' will suit exactly since 
you both agree to it." 

Mifanwy laughed merrily. " Oh, if you only knew 
how happy I am ! " 

" But you must not work too hard, child ; that 
would spoil everything. Now, enough history for 
to-night. Are you too tired to give me a little 
music ? " 

" Too tired to sing ! Ach y fi ! 
when I am dying — no," and she 
the piano, Mrs. Roose delightedly putting away her 
knitting to play her accompaniments ; and, although 
she was no elaborate performer, she played well, and 
with sufficient taste and appreciation of the music to 
make her a good accompanist. 

Rhys Mor(T;an had already made some advances in 
a gingerly fashion towards M. Valpr6, who, being by 
common consent the most successful teacher of sing- 
ing in London, was much sought after, more especi- 
ally by those who intended to make the operatic 
stage their profession. He was brusque and im- 
patient in his manner, but was at heart a good honest 
man Rhys Morgan's first attempts at procuring for 
Mifanwy the advantage of his teaching received so 
peremptory and severe a snub, that he was tempo- 
rarily much disappointed and disturbed in mind, for 
here was a complete downfall to all his hopes. It 
would be usehss to expect a success for any singer 
who had not been trained by Valprc ; and he was just 
debating within himself v.hether or not to make 



'4t%] 



GOOD-BYE TO THE CIRCUS. 



187 



another attempt to persuade him, when help came 
from an unexpected quarter. Tom Pomfrey knew 
that Jack Mowbray — though only the leader of the 
band in the circus — was half-brother to M. Valpre, 
the celebrated professor of music, who was said to 
have, moreover, a great affection for his seedy and 
ne'er-do-weel brother. Learning from Mr. Rhys 
Morgan of the failure of his plans, Tom had applied 
to Jack Mowbray, and had entreated his good offices 
with his brother, with the result that one morning, to 
Mifanwy's intense delight, a note was received by 
Rhys Morgan from the professor, saying, " that, after 
some consideration, he had come to the decision to 
hear the Welsh girl's voice before he decidedly re- 
jected her as a pupil." 

M. Valpre having conceded so much, Rhys Mor- 
gan knew that his point was gained. And so it 
was, for, before another month had passed, Mifanwy 
was enrolled as one of his pupils, and evidently to 
the professor's satisfaction, as well as her own great 
happiness. It was not his way to give much praise ; 
but it was observed by all his other pupils that he 
paid the shy Welsh girl great attention, shaking hands 
with her very warmly at the end of her lesson, and 
sonrietimcs deigning to give a word of commendation 
which, from Valpre, expressed a great deal. 

There was one thing that disturbed Mifanwy not 
a little, and that was the discovery that Elizabeth 
Powys was also one of his pupils ; but she learnt 
with great satisfaction that the term of their connec- 
tion as master and pupil would soon be at an end, 
for Elizabeth was shortly to enter upon her career 
as a public singer. 



w 



I ! ' 



CHAPTER XXI. 



SULTAN AND TOM. 



■'. 4 




iii ': 



im 



The winter weeks sped on swiftly and pleasantly for 
Mifanwy ; she was thoroughly happy, in spite of the 
unsatisfied desire that lurked in her heart, the desire 
to meet leuan once more, for she felt she was tread- 
ing the path that would lead her to him. 

" I am beginning to follow him up the ladder, and, 
when I get high enough, I will call out to him, ' leuan, 
it is I, Mifanwy ; * and he will come down to me and 
take me to the top with him." 

It was thus she soliloquised in the night watches, 
when she allowed her thoughts to wander unchecked 
over the scenes of her early days, her varied experi- 
ences at the circus and her present prospects of hap- 
piness. No doubt of leuan's faithful attachment to 
the Mifanwy of the cliffs and of the moor assailed 
her ; the only thing that threw a shadow over the 
happy pictures of her imagination was the feeling 
that the outward Mifanwy was dead. The great 
change from the life on the breezy cliffs under the 
summer sun and the winter storms to a sheltered, 
indoor life, had so completely altered her appearance, 
that, when she stood before her looking-glass one 
morning in the early spring, tying up her abundant 
coils of brown-black hair, she paused with uplifted 
hands and parted lips to gaze at the reflection of her- 
self; at the drisky brown skin now changed to a soft, 
creamy fairness ; the unkempt locks, now brushed 
straight off the broad white brow and fastened in a 
thick coil at the back of her head — the little ripples 

i88 



SULTAN AND TOM. 



189 



and curls softening the line between hair and fore- 
head ; the well-shaped neck and rounded arms ; the 
graceful lines of the figure. Mifanwy noted all her 
charms, and a happy smile stole over her face ; she 
leant her elbows on the dressing-table, and, peering 
curiously and closely at the reflection in the glass, 
she asked herself aloud and with a serious look, " Am 
I Mifanwy ? Am I the girl who watched the sheep 
and roamed those dangerous paths in the daylight 
and the moonlight? Am I the same girl whom 
leuan loved ? or am I so altered that he will not care 
for me ? " 

" No," she said, after a pause, " I am not altered ; 
these people who flatter me, these scenes of town life, 
these fine clothes, this fair skin, are all outward things 
which cannot touch me, myself ; I am Mifanwy, and 
my home is on the rocks with the sea-birds." She 
went down the stairs to her breakfast, humming an 
old Welsh air. 

After breakfast, she sat down as usual for an hour's 
hard study, her fingers pushed through the thick 
tresses on her temples, ruffling their neatness, while 
she pored over a heavy atlas. 

"Belle, dear," said Mrs. Roose's gentle voice, "such 
a curious thing — two lovely horses in the street ; one 
is ridden by a groom and the other by a gentleman. 
One looks like a circus horse." 

Mifanwy flew to the window. "Oh, Sultan and 
Tom ! " she cried, and instantly was flying down the 
stairs and out through the front door without a hat 
or bonnet. 

Tom dismounted. 

"Oh, Tom, how kind you are to bring Sultan to 
see me ; " and her arms were thrown round the beauti- 
ful creature's neck, to the great amusement of the 
people living on the opposite side of the street ; but 
Mifanwy thought not of them. 

Sultan whinnied and pawed with delight, and 
rubbed his soft nose on the girl's neck, while she, 



A 






190 




f. 't 




-4 ■ 



A WELSH SINGER. 



holding both ears, pressed kiss after kiss on the white 
star on his forehead." 

" Oh, Sultan bach," she cooed, " here you are, as 
glossy and as sleek as ever! Do you miss me. 
darhnjij?" 

"Yes, that 'e do, miss," replied the groom, pulling 
his cap respectfully; "that I can tes-ti-fy. Every 
time as Kitty Killthorpe gets on 'is back, don't 'e fling 
up IS heels, and put back 'is ears ! ' Ain't 'e de- 
lighted ? ' sez Kitty Killthorpe. ' Oh, very,' sez I • " 
and he put his finger to the side of his nose and 
wmked ; " but I know who 'e's thinking of." 

" Darling," murmured Mifanwy in his ear, and he 
snorted with pleasure. " Must he go at once, Tom ? 
Can't you bring him oftener to see me ? " 

"Yes, as often as you like; but he must not stand 
longer in the cold. I am taking great care of him 
and, when you want him, he is yours, remember 
We must not stay now ; but I have a wonderful piece 
of news to give you, too. Jack Mowbray has left the 
circus— married to a rich widow, and a very nice 
woman young, and pretty, and very ladylike. 
M. Valpre, who is his half-brother, you know is 
greatly pleased. Poor old Jack ! I am glad he has 
had a stroke of good luck ; I expect it will make 
another man of him." 

"I am glad, indeed," said Mifanwy. " But you 
Tom, will you come to-night to M. Valpre's concert? 
only a private concert for his pupils, you know just 
to prepare them for public singing." 

_'' I will, indeed, if I may," was Tom's ready answer 
Yes ; and to-morrow come to tea, and tell me 
what you think of Spohr's music." 

" I am afraid it will be above me, Mifanwy ; but I 
will come Now you must go in ; you will take cold, 
iheres Mrs. Roose making signs to you from the 
window. I will come to-morrow." 

"Good-bye, Tom. Good-bye, Si'.ltan anwy! ! " and 
with a few lingering pats, she ran back to the door, 






I' 



SULTAN AND TOM. 



191 



Suitan tossing his head, and looking after her, while 
Tom vaulted lightly into the saddle and rode away. 

" Blamed if Mifanwy ain't purtier than hever," said 
the groom, " if possible." 

Tom frowned. 

" Miss Owen, if you please, Bill. She is no longer 
one of us, remember." And the groom rode on 
sullenly. 

M. Valprd's concert that evening was the first of a 
private series instituted by him for the production of 
a high class of music, and for the practice and pre- 
paration of his pupils for their entrance into public life. 

To Mifanwy it was an event of great disquietude, 
for the reason that she would unavoidably be brought 
face to face with Elizabeth, a meeting she had hitherto 
managed to escape, their lessons coming on different 
days in the week. Although, to Mifanwy, the name 
of Elizabeth Powys, in the list of pupils, was fraught 
with deep interest, to Elizabeth the name of Belle 
Roose suggested nothing. 

To make it something like a concert, M. Valprd's 
intimate friends were admitted as audience, and most 
of the pupils had, by his permission, brought three or 
four personal friends. 

Mr. and Mrs. Jack Mowbray and Tom Pomfrey sat 
side by side with Rhys Morgan and Mrs. Roose and 
Mifanwy's eyes frequently turned to that row of 
friendly faces. She was calm and collected out- 
wardly but inwardly she shrank, with a strong feeline 
of dishke, from meeting Elizabeth. 

Spohr's " As pants the Hart " had been selected for 
the evenmg's performance, and Mifanwy had been 
chosen to smg the solos, to the great indignation of 
older and more advanced pupils ; but, in his own 
concert-room, Valpr^'s word was law, as indeed it was 
almost everywhere where music was discussed. 

Fortunately, Mifanwy was not conscious of the 
anger that M. Valprd's partiality for her roused in the 
hearts of so many of his pupils. 



192 



A WELSH SINGER. 




V'-i • > 




k 1 



1 



" This way, mezzo sopranos," and, when they had 
been placed for the opening chorus, Mifanwy found 
herself standing close to Elizabeth. At the end of 
the chorus she tried to avoid her by retiring to the 
back of the stage, and turning over a piled-up heap 
of music ; but it was not to be. While she was stoop- 
ing over the music, she became conscious of a pink 
figure standing near her, and, raising her eyes, found 
herself face to face with Laissabeth. Her first 
thought was, " How lovely she is I " her second, " Will 
she know me?" 

" Excuse me," said Elizabeth ; " I am looking for a 
copy of the Oratorio. I have been looking over my 
neighbour's ; but I hate that, don't you ? Are you 
Miss Belle Roose ? " 

" Yes," said Mifanwy, rising, and making way for 
her to search the pile of music. 

" You are fortunate in being a favourite of the pro- 
fessor's. It is curious how he takes fancies and dis- 
likes. He is an eccentric man." 

" He is a good musician," said Mifanwy, trying to 
withdraw herself, "and that is all that is important to 
us." But she felt enchained by Elizabeth's eyes, 
which were fixed upon her with a strange, dreamy 
look. Mifanwy bowed, and returned to the front of 
the platform, where they were already making room 
for her solo. 

" Where have I seen her before ? " was Elizabeth's 
thought ; and, all the while Mifanwy was singing, 
this question worried her. Suddenly, however, the 
truth flashed across her mind. " I know ! she is the 
girl who stood and stared at us when leuan and I got 
out of the carriage at Lady Meredith's ; and there's 
the very red ribbon and grey dress. So that was 
Miss Belle Roose ! " 

Meanwhile Mifanwy had forgotten Elizabeth Val- 
pre, and the whole world. She was entering heart 
and soul into the lovely music, and M. Valpr^, baton 
in hand, Wcis listening, well pleased. 



SULTAN AND TOM. 



193 



7 



• •" ^A^u^ ■ .m'^''^ ' " ^^ ^"^^ ' ^"^ the small audience 
joined heartily. 

Tom Pomfrey sat entranced. The music itself was 
a revelation to him; coming from Mifanwy's lips it 
seemed to speak to his heart. He had alvva>s been 
Jond of music, but circumstances had confined his ex- 
periences of i' to the charms of a brass band, the 
singing at a music hall, or, at the highest, the inter- 
ludes at a theatre Concerts of a higher class of 
«TrAl t'^ "°' H the opportunity of attending, 
so that the harmonious phrasing of Spohr's music was 
a new delight to him. He sat on, heedless of Mr. and 
Mrs Jack Mowbray's little flirtations, intent only upon 
not losmg a single note or cadence of the delightful 
strains ; and, when the concert came to an end 
tioiJ" unconsciously received an hour's educa- 

Valpre came up and shook hands warmly with 
Mrs. Mowbray and his brother, who introduce^d h m 

mXv^r :u'y °'^ ^"""^' ^'th a wink intended t^ 
make his brother understand that he had belonged to 

th.nt ' ■^^'''' '^'^ *^^ professor, " every day I 
thank you more and more for my new pupil '' ^ 

siivet bell '' ^ ' "^'^ ^''- Mowbray, «« is the 

assented vl'lnT-'''"'.'^''^ "'"^'•' ^"^ ^^'"y brilliant," 
dent tht n? K Tu ^ ^''P^'^Siug tone. It was ev - 

bX t:s:xiTz""- '"'' ^ ""' ""'^ "°" - 

Mifanwy, too, stepped off the platform and an 
proached her friends, but rather ne?vouslv |he was 
not satisfied that she had acquitted herself welf but 

group, on the platform and in the room she woulH 
have felt no uneasiness on that score. The men. is 

N 



■ i 


^ J 


^. ^ ^' 1 1 






194 



A WELSH SINOER. 



was natural, were loudest in their praises, but they 

were not alone. 

Tom was lost in a dream of pleasure ; the music 
had awakened his tenderest feelings, and, when Mi- 
fanwy drew near with outstretched hand, he wrung it 

with warmth. . , , 

"Oh Mifanwy," he exclaimed, "I have never 
known 'before what music was. Didn't know theso 
classical composers made such music. Spohr lor 

ever ! 

Mifanwy laughed. 

•' Come every fortnit^ht if you like, Tom, and Iiear 

other composers." , , . 1 

" My dear girl," said Jack Mowbray, shaking her 
hand in a familiar fatherly manner, " I am proud to 
think we have sprung from the same root, as 1 may 
say and dwelt under the same tent, so to speak. 

Mrs. Jack Mowbray, too, was very enthusiastic, and 
Mifanwy at last covered her ears laughingly. 

" Oh, dear anwl," she said, ' this is too much praise 
for me You all want to make me vain, but I don t 
think you will do that, for I have never been able to 
shake off the old feeling I had as a child, that it is not 
I who sings, but some spirit of music within me, or 
some second self." 




CHAPTER XXII. 



SINGING TOGETHER. 

When Elizabeth Powys reached home after Valpr6's 
first concert, she was in a decidedly bad humour. 
The fair brow was puckered into an Ufjly frown, her 
little white fists were clenched, and, while she turned 
and turned again, backwards and forwards with un- 
conscious footsteps, an ccasional murmur or mutter 
escaped her lips. 

" Impossible, it cam -t be, and yet that voice ' " 
A long pause. " Then that girl who stared at Icu 
and me was Mifanwy ! " And a cruel light gleamed 
m her eyes. " Well, I hope she enjoved the sight ! 
But how can it be ? The black skin, those hideous 
hanks of hair, that bony face ! And see her now • 
ach a fi ! the horrid thing ! " And, still walking up 
and down, she followed her train of thoughts in 
silence. "Mifanwy to come and thwart me here 
again ; to be a spy upon me, as she was at Abersethin 
I wish It had been herself instead of those stupid old 
sheep that had fallen over the cliffs. But where has 
she sprung from ? How has she learnt to speak 
English ? It IS a mystery. And why does she want 
to hide herself? Ah ! Miss Belle Roose, you thought 
to deceive me, did you ? Well, III keep your secret 
depend upon it. Good Heavens, if leuan knew' but 
he shall not. But I think I must be wrong It is 
impossible, and yet it is Mifanwy." 

And when Mrs. Elliott came in for a short time 
before going to bed, it was to find Elizabeth still 

195 



. ^'. 




V 



■si 



t ^ 



!*• 



I ttf 



196 



A WELSH SINGKR. 



irritable, and with an angry gleam in her eye, and a 
cruel smile on her rosebud mouth. 

Durinfi ihc next fortnight she was on the alert with 
every faculty alive to her own interest, and to the 
danger of Mifanwy's rivalry. She took every oppor- 
tunity of watching her rival. Upon one pretext or 
another she crossed her path continually. Mifainvy 
was quite alive to it, and much disquieted in conse- 
quence. When she looked up she would find Eliza- 
beth's eyes fixed upon her, to be almost instantly 
averted. . 

" She must know mc ! Well, there is nothmg to be 
done. I will not tell a lie about it ; but, if she docs 
not ask me, I need not tell her. Ach y fi ! I wish 
she were not so near me ; she seems to freeze iny 
blood. But, indeed, I am a foolish girl, whatever." 

At last the antagonism between them came to a 
climax ; for, at the next private concert, it fell out 
that Mifanwy and Elizabeth had to sing a duet to- 
gether. Mifanwy's heart sank, and it was noticed by 
everybody that, from the first note to the last, her 
voice trembled as it never had before ; and, im- 
mediately after the last chord, she sat down looking 
pale and exhausted. 

" This will never do ! " said ValprtS when, the con- 
cert over, Mifanwy came up to make her excuses. 
" What was the matter with you, mademoiselle ? I 
never heard you sing badly before ; but this evening 
your voice was as droning as the humming of a bee. 
What was the matter ? " 

"Sir," said Mifanwy, "I earnestly beg you not to 
make me sing with Miss Powys again ; our voices do 
not blenc ; I have to stand so close to her, and it un- 
nerves me. Perhaps you will hink me mad, but, sir, 
it is true ; she kills my voice." 

" I don't think you mad at all, and I will not ask 
you to sing with her again ; it if. only another proof 
to me of the delicate quality of your voice." 

" Oh, no ! it is not that at all," replied Mifanwy, 



SINKING TOGETHER. 



19; 



clasping and unclasping her hands ; " but I cannot 
explain." 

" No need, no need," said the professor, patting her 
patronisingly ; " I will take care it does not happen 
again." 

And that danger was over. During the evening 
she again found Elizabeth turning over the same 
portfolio with her, and still regarding her with that 
dreamy, far-away look. 

" Excuse me, Mi.ss Roo.se," she said, " I daresay 
you wonder why I look at you so often ? " 

" Yes," said Mifanwy, with palpitating heart. 

" Well, it is because your face seems so familiar to 
me. 

Mifanwy flushed a rosy red and then turned pale. 
Elizabeth saw, with delight, that she was able to 
torment her rival; and determined to do so, to the 
utmost of her power. 

" Have I ever seen you before ? I shall remember 
one day, I do remember seeing you once, outside 
Sir Glynne Meredith's house, just when I and a friend 
of mine were getting out of the carriage. Do you 
remember that day ? " 

" Possibly I may have seen you," answered Mifanwy, 
now quite at her rival's mercy. 

"That was my friend. leuan Gwyllt, Sir Glynne 
INIeredith's adopted son ; isn't he handsome ? He is 
Welsh, like myself." And, with a cruel smile, she 
stared at Mifanwy. 

" Is he ? " was all Mifanwy could say. 

" Yes, and do you know, you have a slightly foreign 
accent, Russian, I have been told, but it is very like 
Welsh. How do you think we sang 5ur duet to- 
gether ? " 

"Speaking for myself, badly," replied Mifanwy. 

"Ah! well, never mind; next time we'll .sing it 
better," sai'J Elizabeth. 

" Well, good-bye," said Mifanwy ; " I must go and 
make my excuses to M, Valpre for that duet." 








\^i 



f tM 



ill 



'W 



'"4 



198 A WELSH SINGER. 

" Good-bye, Miss Roose," rejoined Elizabeth, leav- 
ing her still undecided as to how much or how little 
she had guessed. 

" After all," thought Mifanwy, who had seated her- 
self between Tom and Mrs. Roose, listening to a song 
by a rising tenor, " why should I dread her so much ? 
I have done nothing wrong ; I am not in the circus 
now; why should I hide away like a thief? v.nd yet I 
should like to tell leuan myself. I wonder where he 
is, and why I never see nim, here, or anywhere. Oh ! 
I hope Elizabeth will not tell him ; I should like to 
mystify him for a little while, to see his puzzled look, 
to hear the delight in his voice, when he recognises 
me. 

" You look troubled, child," broke in Rhys Morgan, 
speaking in Welsh, " what is the matter ? " 

" I am troubled, master," replied Mifanwy, dropping 
naturallyinto her own language; "you know how much 
I wished to remain unknown until — until — well, until 
I had left the circus farther behind me." 

" Well, what of that ? " he asked. " I quite agree 
with you that it is very desirable." 

" But how can I ? Laissabeth is hers, and has 
recognised mc." 

" Yes, I met Miss Elizabeth Powys, the fashionable 
singer, who is making quite a name for herself, at the 
door when I came in to-day ; she spoke to me quite 
naturally, never alluded to you. Impossible, child, she 
could not recognise you. You are so utterly different 
from the little plain brown girl of the Abersethin 
slopes." 

" Oh, master, was I then really so ugly ? What a 
good thing I did not know it. I was so happy." 

" Ugly, n.y dear child ? no, you were never ugly ; I 
spoke thoughtlessly ; you must forgive a boorish old 
Welshman. But don't tell r.c that^lnyonc wh(j knew 
you only in those days could recognise you nowj look 
at \oiirself in that lonr; mirror. /\h ! I ;ua afiaid i 
need not tell you the difference." 



SINGING TOGETHER. 



199 



•' But my voice, master ? " 

"There indeed is the difriculty; but still, even that 
is so cultivated, refined, polished, that none but a true 
musician would be s.ruv.'- by its similarity to the voice 
of the shepherd girl." 

Mifanwy shook her head dubiously. "Would you 
advise me, master, to make a clean breast of it, and 
confess everything to her ? " 

Rhys Morgan laughed heartily. " Why, Mifanwy, 
one would think you had committed a murder at that 
circus. Certainly not; tell her nothing. I don't 
believe she has an idea who you are." 

Mifanwy looked thoughtful. " Perhaps it has been 
fool /n of me to change my name, to hide my identity; 
but, having begun, I will keep it up now, until I have 
got up a little higher." 

Rhys Morgan smiled. " Got up higher ; where do 
you want to get to, ch-'d ? " 

" I want to be a great singer," replie \ Mifanwy. 
" I feel I have it in me, if only I can go on calmly ; 
there are some things that would utterly spoil me as 
a singer. I can't explain it, sir, but, when Elizabeth 
comes near me, I feel a shrivelling up that makes it 
impossible for me to sing well." 

" For heaven's sake, keep away from her, then," 
said Rhys Morgan. " Such fee^'ngs are very un- 
accountable, but very real. I have my own theory 
wiih regard to these strong likes and dislikes; but 
anyway, in your case, it must not be disregarded. I 
will speak to Valpre about it." And he did, with the 
result that Elizabeth and Mifanwy sang no more 



duets together. 

This was the last of Elizabeth's appearances at 
Valpre's private concerts ; she was now launched on 
the sea of professional life, v/here her brilliant voice 
and sparkling manner, together with her undeniable 
beauty, took the London public by storm. Her name 
was in everybody's mouth, her charms of voice and 
appcar;uicc were discussed at every club, at every tea- 



-S^' 




• ■> 



in] 



200 



A WELSH SINGER. 



table, especially where young men foregathered. 
Engagements poured in upon her, and Miss Elizabeth 
Powys' name on a concert bill ensured a crowded 
attendance. She was delighted with her own success, 
ftted, flattered, admired, and even loved, she went 
on her way like a butterfly in the sun, so engrossed 
with the delights of her existence, that, having ended 
her connection with Valprc and Victoria Mall, and 
never coming into contact with Mifanwy, she ceased 
to trouble herself about her. When, however, she 
remembered her suspicions, an evil gleam cam ; into 
her eyes, and the old cruel smile to her lips. 

Mifanwy, meanwhile, or Belle Roose, being freed 
from the restraint of Elizabeth's presence, pressed on 
her way bravely and indefatigably. Her name was 
already whispered about in musical circles, and in 
one of the leading papers a paragraph prepared the 
musical world for the advent of a new and brilliant 
star. It ran thus : — 

" We are informed on good authority that M, 
Valpre, who has already done so much for musical 
art, will shortly bring out a new singer, who bids fair 
to eclipse any of those who have preceded her, this 
century. Her voice, which is a mezzo soprano of 
great range, and of exquisite timbre, has so delighted 
the professor's heart that he is not afraid to raise in 
musical circles the highest hopes. Miss Belle Roose, 
the possessor of this beautiful voice, will sing for the 
first time in London, at Valpre's concert, at the 
Victoria Hall, on Monday the i6th of May. Her 
debut will be looked for with great interest by all who 
know that gentleman's great experience and thorough 
knowledge of what singing should be." 

Mifanwy blushed vivitliy, and hid her face in her 
hands, when Rhys Morgan came in one morning and 
showed her the paragraph. 

"Oh, master, and what if I disappoint you all, 
when the time comes ? it won't be for the want of try- 



SINGING TOGETHER. 



20 1 



ing to do my best. It is already the 20th of April ; 
how near the time is drawing ! " 

" Yes," he said, taking a letter out of his pocket ; it 
was thin, and had a foreign postmark. " By the by, 
I have a letter here that will interest you ; it is from 
Sir Glynne Meredith." 

A crimson glow rushed over Mifanwy's clear, pale 
face. 

" I will read you the latter part of it; the first is wholly 
taken up with business matters ; he wants me to see 
to the safe removal of his statue, and also that of 
leuan Gwyllt's, from his studio to the exhibition 
rooms, in May." 

" Oh ! " was all that Mifanwy could utter. 

"Here is — let me see — here is what I thought 
would interest you : ' Lady Meredith has had a 
serious attack of fever, and leu-n has also had a 
slighter attack of the same complaint. They are 
both, I am thankfu. to say, convalescent, and will, I 
hope, be well enough to leave here next month ; but 
this illness will prevent either leuan or myself from 
travelling to London at present. We had quite in- 
tended seeing to the removal of the sculpture our- 
selves, and then joining Lady Meredith for a tour 
'ihrough Norway, but our plans will be considerably 
altered, and I cannot say exactly when we shall be 
back in London. I will let you know when we have 
settled.' Then the rest is all about the removal of 
the sculpture. Oh, yes, here is a little postscript. 
' leuan is getting well so rapidly that he actually pro- 
poses to return to London himself, and save you all 
this trouble. A rash proceeding, which I have had 
sternly to forbid.' " 

" Italy," said Mifanwy, " are they in Italy ? " 

" Yes. Didn't you know, child ? " 

" No, I didn't know, indeed. I wondered where 
they were." 

" Well, now, I am going to see Valpre, and show 
him this paragraph." And, humming a Welsh hymn, 



.pi ►■ 



m\ 









202 



A WELSH SINC.ER. 



in 



Rhys Morgan departed, leaving Mifanwy lost 

thought. 

leuan in Italy ! This, then, was why she never 
heard the names of Sir Glynne, or Lady Meredith, or 
of leuan, though she listened eagerly whenever she 
had thought it possible to learn anything of them. 
She thirsted for even a crumb of information, so that, 
somcumes, she had been tempted to ask Elizabeth 
for news; but her Welsh pride had come to her 
assistance, and prevented her. , t ,• r 

"No, never!" she had said, "though I die of 
ignorance ! " But now the whole aspect of affairs was 
changed. Deep in her heart, u onfessed even to her- 
self had been a hope that at dxc concert in May. 
leuan would be present ; but until Rhys Morgan had 
read the extract from Sir Glynne's letter, she had not 
realised how much she had counted upon his pres- 
ence " I thought, perhaps, he would recognise me, 
she thought, "or, if he did not recognise me that 
my voice would .^mind him of Mifanwy, and I should 
watch the surprise in his dear eyes; but now I must 
sing to strangers," and the tears welled up, to be 
hastily dried away. " I must not be foolish," her 
thoughts went on ; " I mean to work to make a name 
for myself, to be a good singer, to gain fame and 
riches ; enough to repay all my kind friends ; enough 
to go home to my beloved rocks and sea-birds, to 
roam the hills as I please, to be out in moonlight and 
the sunshine, on the golden sands, and on the blue 
sea, and to have enough money for leuan as well as 
for myself." 

This was her dream and her r ntinuai aim. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 



On a c^lorious sprintr day, in the first week of May, 
Mrs. lioosc and Mifanwy, having put on their best 
"bibs and tuckers," sallied forth to make their way to 
the Royal Academy, the elder lady in her sober 
black silk, and Mifanwy in a costume of ight grey, 
with a bonnet of tiie same delicate colour, that tied 
under her chin, and showed off to perfection the 
beautiful oval of the face, the velvety brown eyes, and 
the forehead, soft-shaded by its waves of dark hair. 
A bunch of crimson carnations at her neck gave the 
necessary colouring to the quiet dress, and many an 
eye followed the movements of the graceful girl as she 
made her way through the heated atmosphere of the 
thronged rooms into the cooler and less crowded 
space given up to sculpture. She turned the leaves 
of the catalogue hurriedly to the end. 

" Oh, here it is, auntie. ' A Hymn of Welcome to 
the Sunrise,' No. 40. There ! it must be that one ; 
several people are looking at it." 

And by degrees they managed to catch a glimpse 
of it, and sat down patiently to wait for a better view. 
Soon a large party moved on to another statue, 
leaving a clear space between them and leuan 
Gwyllt's work. Mrs. Roose was loud in her admira- 
tion, but Mifanwy sat before it speechless. 

Oil, to think that this exquisite conception was 
leuan's ! To kncnv that slie herself had first suggested 
jf f.> him ! Not i'ltcntinnallv. indeed, but unrnn- 
sciously, one evening when breasting a hi;^,h wind, she 

203 




i 



S; «V 



ii-. 



H 



m 



i i 



204 



A WELSH SINGER. 



had stood on the edge of the cliff and sung " Codiad 
yr Haul," while the sun sank slowly out of sight 
" He is not rising really, Mifanwy, he is departing ; 
but never mind, he is rising somewhere else ! And I 
will carve you just like that — indeed I will try, what- 
ever ! " 

Ah ! how well she remembered that evening. And 
he had carved the little statuette that had first arrested 
Sir Glynne's attention. But t/its .'—this lovely figure, 
instinct with life and grace, she had never thought it 
possible that leuan could have evolved anything so 
beautiful from so commonplace a theme as a song of 
hers. 

" Yes," said Mrs. Roose, " it is beautiful, my dear. 
It is not so much the beauty of the statue as what it 
suggests ; and I am sure you feel the same. The 
sculptor could not wish for a more appreciative 
admirer than you seem tc» be. What does it suggest 
to you. Belle ? " 

" Oh, I see the sea gleaning bright under those 
outstretched fingers ; I can feel the west wind blow- 
ing ; I can hear the sea-bird; calling ; and I see a boy 
and a girl, who are all in all to one another, standing 
together, and drinking in dra lights of beauty from the 
scene." 

" Well, I can't see that," LJid Mrs. Roose, adding, 
by way of excusing her obtuscness, " but I have not 
much imagination." 

Mifanwy smiled. " If we took you at your own 
valuation, you have nothing but faults. Do you 
know, auntie, that / was that girl, and that /suggested 
that lovely statue to leuan Gwyllt? I have never 
told you my story, but now that we have become such 
real friends, I will tell you all of it one evening when 
we are sit^^ing together by the fire — we two." 

"Do, dtor, I should love to hear it. I have often 
wondered how you could have erown up in a 
circus." 

And they sat silently gazing, Mifanwy's hands 






AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 



205 



resting idly in her lap, while her mind was busy with 
reflections of the past. 

She v/as roused from her reverie by the tone of a 
voice, familiar, yet not heard of late. Looking round, 
she saw approaching the statue a girl, followed by 
a young man — Elizabeth, in all the beauty of her 
golden hair, and pink, dimpling face, set off by her 
new spring costume of pink muslin ; and behind her 
leuan, tall and broad-shouldered, with the crisp brown 
hair so well remembered, the face darker and more 
manly, but otherwise unaltered, except for the thick 
moustache. He guided the bright and laughing girl 
protectingly through the crowd, until they stood close 
in front of Mifanwy and Mrs. Roose. 

The long looked-for moment had arrived, when she 
should first see him after their long separation. But 
instead of rushing to meet him with the words, " leuan, 
it is I — Mifanwy ! " she sat immovable on the red 
velvet seat, apparently as cold and inert as one of the 
statues around her. For a moment a sense of giddi- 
ness overcame her, but with a strong effort she pulled 
herself together. 

" Why should I be disappointed ? " she asked her- 
self. " How could I expect him to know me, when I 
am not sure even that he has seen me ? What shall I 
do ? Shall I speak to him ? No ; while Elizabeth is 
with him I cnnot." And she resigned herself to 
await the train of circumstances. 

Elizabeth burst forth into quite a little shower of 
exclamations. 

" Oh, lovely ! Oh, leuan, how beautiful ! " etc., 
etc. " Exquisite ! There is nothing in the room to 
come up to it ! " 

" Oh, there you are wrong, Elizabeth, Sir Glynne's 
' Fireman ' is really much nner." 

" Ah, well ! to me, you know, th.s seems the 
loveliest by far." 

Elizabeth's sharp eye had caught sight of Mifanwy, 
and although she had fears of the probable failure of 



A# 




, 


/ 


t 


i 




['' 




!, 


[•ii 




f 






' 1 



~ I, V 



X 't 

.1^ '- 






206 



A VVKLSII SIN'CF.R. 



her plans to keep lou.in and her rival apart, she 
could not resist the temptation to wound her as much 
as possible. 

"But how delightful that you have broken away 
after all, and returned to London, though it is only 
for a week." 

" Yes," said the well remembered voice, " it was 
ridiculi'us treating me as a convalescent, when in 
point of fact I have been perfectly well fur a fortnight." 

" But you must not rush about too much, leuan. 
What if— what if vou were to be ill again ? What 
should I do ? " 

"Would yuu really care, Elizabeth?" asked the 
young man, looking down at tlie blushing face beside 
him. 

He spoke in a low tone, but Mifanwy caught every 
word, and felt powerless to move. 

"Yes," was Elizabeth's sole reply, while she 
pretended to pore over her catalogue. 

" It is kind of you to say that ; it is delightful to 
feel, when we are roaming about in foreign countries, 
that there are warm hearts awaiting us at home." 

Elizabeth hoped for more, but no more seemed 
forthcoming, so she changed her tactics, and returned 
to her sparkling manner, which she generally found 
fook with men, grave or gay, old or young. 

" Well, and when are you going away anil leaving 
me again?" she said playfully, tapping his arm with 
her parasol. 

" This day week I have promised to rejoin Sir 
Glynne and Lady Meredith. Then we go straight to 
Norway, where we shall remain the whole summer. 
So soon as we return in the autumn, we shall go 
!irect to Wales, for Sir Gl^ nne and I have some par- 
ticular business to attend to there." He paused a 
moment. " And, when I come back, Elizabeth, I 
shall have something to say to you ! " 

" Something I should like to hear ? " she asked, vvith 
innocent blue eyes. 



! 



.-.N UNEXPECri:D MLr.TING. 



207 



leuan hesitalcd. " I- -I hope so ! " 

Here he inadvertently stepped backwards and, 
treading on Mifanwy's dress, detached a grey satin 
bow from the skirt. Turning round to apologise and 
pick up the bow, he caught sight of the pale, sweet 
face, and was .struck by the spirituality of her beauty. 
Elizabeth pretended not to have seen the little mis- 
adventure, and passed on rapidly, hoping to attract 
leuan in her train ; but he stayed a little longer than 
was necessary to return the bow, " and to hope that 
the tear was not irremediable." Mifanwy only bowed, 
a!id busied herself with her dress to hide her face. 

At this moment, most inopportunely, or the reverse, 
her bunch of carnations fell to the ground, and leuan 
returned them with nervous fingers ; there was no 
excuse for further delay, so, with a flushed brow, he 
lifted his hat and passed on, first stooping to pick up 
one of the crimson carnations that had become de- 
tached from the rest, and to place it in his button- 
hole. Elizabeth observed it at once. 

" What a lovely carnation ! Where did you get it ? " 

" Picked it up from the ground," replied leuan. 

" Faugh I " scoffed Elizabeth. But he only smiled. 

" What a lovel)' girl that was ! " he said. " Did you 
see her, Elizabeth ? " 

" No," she answered unblushingly. 

And back into the crowded rooms they \,'ent, to 
crane their necks, to criticise and admire, and, finally, 
to emerge into the bright sunshine. Both were tired, 
though Elizabeth fought bravely with her fatigue, and 
laughed i.-'d chatted brightly to the last. 

Meanwhile, Mifanwy awoke as it were from a 
dream; it had all happened so suddenly. Like a 
vision, leuan had passed before her, and had disap- 
peared before she had had time to realise what was 
happening. Mrs. Roose, unconscious of anything un- 
usual in the little incident, made no remark when she 
had once satisfied herself that the satin bow could 
easily be replaced. 



^■■^ 


W^^ 




U 


• 


'h ' 




■r' ^ 


- -■ - 


;1 1 , 
: ( ■ 



ta.-' 



■if 




1 1 



2o8 



A WELSrI SINGER. 



" But you have lost one of your beautiful carnations, 
my dear. I saw the young man pick it up and put it 
in his button-hole, though he had a lovely rose, which 

he threw away." . . . 

" Did he?" said Mifanwy, fastening the remaining 
carnation more safely at her neck. ^^ 

" Shall we go and see the pictures now, dear ? 
" No. not to-day, thank you, I am so tired." 
She had seen leuan and Elizabeth pass out that 
way and dreaded to meet them again. She had 
heard every word of their conversation, and though 
pained and wounded at his evident admiration of 
Elizabeth, and, it must be confessed, v'lth the cruel 
fan-s of jealousy gnawing at her heart, still she was 
accustomed to that feeling ; it had been present with 
her since the early days, when, in their childhood, 
Icuan had praised Elizabeth's beauty. Even now she 
did not believe that he loved her, and although she 
had heard the words. " Then I shall have something 
to say to you," she did not put Elizabeths construc- 
tion on them. . , , u * u * 
" What could he mean ? I don't now ; but what- 
ever it was, it was not what Elizabeth thought. 

When she reached home, the remaining carnation 
was safely folded up in paper, and placed in her 
dressing-case with a certain piece of red ribbon. 

For the rest of the time between this and the i6th, 
she wMked as in a dream, and it was not altogether 
an unhappy one. Her faith in leuan never wavered ; 
in spite of his not having recognised her. »n spite ot 
his tender manner towards Elizabeth, she still believed 
he was true at heart to the " Mifanwy " of the Aber- 
sethin slopes. Not that handsome, fashionably- 
dressed trcntlcman, with the glossy hat and the 
catalogue in his hand, but leuan hiniself, the true 
inner being would be true to the shepherdess of the 
hiiic_thf "irl of the thin blue frock and the bare feet ! 
Had she known more of the world, or had her 
character been less governed by the love of Nature, 



% 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 



209 



and the spirit of her art, she might not have been able 
to keep her faith so unsullied, and her trust so 
unbroken. 

As the day approached, Rnys Morgan became 
filled with anxious fears; Valprc with excitement; 
and Elizabeth, who was filly aware of the important 
results hanging on Mifai'wy's first appearance in 
public, with anger and evil hopes. 

" She will never take as / have ! She has not had 
sufficient training. Horrid thing ! Why couldn't she 
be satisfied to sing to the sheep and the cows } It 
would suit her better ! " 

Mifanwy alone was cool and collected, and at the 
last rehearsal of her songs, on the evening before the 
concert, she astonished Valpre by her calmness and 
sclf.forgetfulncss. At her own request, her favourite 
air, " As when the dove," had been chosen as one of 
her songs. In this she was thoroughly at home; 
every note brought its sweet memories to her mind, 
and she returned to it always with the confidence of 
a child who repeats his alphabet when he has learned 
to spell long words. 

Valpre's concert— the first of a series of four— bade 
fair, if one might judge by the amount of interest 
shown in it beforehand, to be a great success. But at 
concerts, as in life, it is often the unexpected that be- 
falls, and It is impossible to foretell how things will 
go. Sometimes a cold cloud will hang over the audi- 
ence, a cloud that every efifort on the part of the per- 
formers fails to dissipate. The music is excellent, 
there is no hitch from beginning to end, and yet there 
has been a something wanting, a mysterious, nameless, 
impalpable something, that is an all-important factor 
in the success of a concert. 

This mysterious "something" was certainly not 

M^"*'S^„°"o^^ ^^^"'"- °f ^h^ ^6th of May. when 
Miss Belle Roose was to make her first appearance 
Detore a Lonacp. audience. It wa^ felt in the subdued, 
pleasant hum that accompanied the entrance of a 

o 



^ 





i--i\ 



K- 



-kf 



Ui^ i f 




i t 



2IO A WELSH SINGER. 

thronging audience into the large building; in the 
energetic manner in which a few officials crossed the 
platform, arranging music and instruments ; above 
all, it was felt when the large hall filled almost to 
overflowing. 

The concert evened with an mstrumcntal chorus 
from " Don G: mni." It was beautifully rendered, 
and, being an old favourite, was warmly applauded ; 
and', as one thing followed another, all well received, 
and'evidently appreciated, M. Valprd felt perfectly at 
ease ; everything was going well. 

Among the audience in the front row sat hlizabeth 
and Mrs. Elliott, accompanied by Mr. Camperton, who 
was devoted in his attentions, and evidently in a 
happier frame of mind than usual. 

" The next thing on the programme," he said, " is 
an aria from 'Acis and Galatea,' by Miss Belle Roose, 
the new singer, you know." 

" Yes, I see," said Elizabeth shortly ; " she makes 
me quite nervous." And she laughed a sharp, sarcas- 
tic little lauL. ' which, -f course, drew from Mr. 
Camperton a'torrcnt of flattering comph'mcnts. 

" You nervous ? " he laughed, " s/ie/l be nervous, 
poor thing, if she sees the queen of song so near her. 
By George ! I shouldn't like to be in her place to- 
night ; so much is expected from her that she is safe 
to disappoint ihc audience." 
" Yes, safe," agreed Elizabeth. 
But suddenly there was a silence. Miss Belle 
Roose was being led forward by M. Valpre, who left 
her standing in the front of the platform, while he re- 
turned to rhc piano to accompany her himself. She 
was greeted by the imuiense audience, who had waited 
impatiently for her, with warm applause. Her 
appearance was much in her favour ; she looked 
simple and unaffected in her dress of some soft white 
material, and her beauty, which was an unexpected 
item on the programme (Valpre having carefully kept 
this in the background), had evidently made a good 



'liiL 



m I 






AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 



211 



Impression. She cast one glance over the large 
audience thronging the great hall, but did not see 
those who sat ncart-st to her, and thus was tree from 
the restraint of Elizabeth's presence. 

At the first note there was a dead silence ; then 
note after note, word after word, was listened to with 
deep attcntif)n, which changed into marked apprecia- 
tion as the simple, thrilling air dropped out in clear, 
golden tones from that small throat. She had chosen 
well for her first venture ; from first to last it was 
sung faultlessly; there was no room in it for brilliancy 
of execution, but graceful [)hrasing, harmonious 
colouring, and depth of feeling, were evident through- 
out ; and, when the last note was ended, it was 
followed by a storm of applause that rose again and 
again when the singer endeavoured to retire from the 
platform ; it broke out afresh when the object of its 
enthusiasm, directed by IV . Valpr6, came back to bow 
her thanks. The audience dctcrminately demanded 
an encore, but Valprc was firm in his refusal, and 
made a sign that the next piece of music should be 
prorend^d with. 

In the second part of the programme Belle Roose 
appeared again. This time she sang an impassioned 
song of love and sorrow and returning happiness. 
There was a depth of tenderness in the first part of 
the song, which was listened to with rapt attention ; 
but when the music changed into a light and joyous 
refrain, Rclle Roose was at her best. Loud and 
rapturous encores followed, and 
assented. 

" What shall I sing ? " she asked 
prepared for this." 

" But I have," said Valprc, {.utting into her hands 
the music of a joyous, giosy song, in which the words 
of a little Russian refrain vr -. e often repeated. 

It was brilliant and e; -^n'ng. but Belle Rooce'c 
flexible voice found no diffi' ulty in rendering it with 
the proper grace and brightness. The audience was 



this time Valprc 
I have nothing 




t 1^ ' 



' if 



M 



Vi" 



Ml u 



\V,i ' "i 



i f 



2,2 A WELSH SINGER. 

charmed, and when the long-continued applause had 
died away. Belle Roose's triumph was assured 1 he 
little Russian song had given an impression that she 
was sinking one of her own national airs, an impres- 
Son that perhaps was strengthened by her name and 
her s ightly fordgn accent. When the audience filed 
oSt of the room: appreciative, even enthusiastic, re- 
marks were heard on all sides. 

"Splendid." said a great musical authority whose 
praise was usually difficult to win^ ' I hope_it won t 
be long before we hear La Belle Russ^ again. 

" Russian, is she ? " said his friend. 

And^ovv^MiLnwy never knew, but from that night 
forth the name of La Belle Russe was that by which 
The was generally known. From that night forth also 
her success as a concert singer was assured , she 
sprang suddenly into public favour, and never after- 
wlrdsSost her hold upon it. In a few months she 
had established herself as the first singer in London 
and hopes were whispered about, and even suggested 
by Valpr6, that she would make her debut in Italian 
opera durng the coming season. She was sought 
after and interviewed by the manager of every 
musical company, but she continued f^^thful o Valpr^ 
and refused to make any engagements without his 

'^And"nowhcr dreams of wealth and fame bid fair 
to take substantial form. She and Mrs Roose took a 
house in a more fashionable neighbourhood ; a large 
and comfortable one. but by no means correspondmg 
with her income ; her tastes were simple almost to a 
feult, and she turned with utter distaste from he 
luxu ics and hollow conventionalities of what is called 
Society" Not that she refused to avail herself of 
alT the comf within her reach, for her domestic 
menage was. -led on in an easier style than Mrs. 
Roose'a 'lad \ ^n : -d she drove in her own brougham 
to keVpter en,.:..-nents; but there she drew the 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 



213 



line, and nothing would induce her to enter the ranks 
of fashionable society, although invitations poured in 
upon her. She was heart and soul a "professional 
singer," It was her work, it was also her relaxation 
and delight ; and she would not waste upon the so- 
called " pleasures " of fashion the energies demanded 
by her art. 

Perhaps it was this earnest simplicity of character 
that charmed almost everyone who came wit' ki her 
influence. Not everyone ; there was one pt jcn in 
London, at all events, 'vho . t only displeasure at La 
Belle's success ; this wa'^ '•^.iizabeth Povvys, to whom 
the dclat of the new favourite brought only gall and 
bitterness. Perhaps complete immunity from envy 
could not have been expected of her ; but, sitting in 
her pretty drawing-room alone, on the morning after 
one of Valpr(^'s concerts, at which La Belle Russe 
had scored a greater success than ever, and the 
enthusiasm of the audience had been unparalleled, 
she seemed, in spite of her elegance and beauty, a 
very impersonation of evil, and, being quite alone, she 
made no effort to disguise her feelings. 

She started to her feet and began to pace up and 
down the long room, with head thrown back, and 
hands clasped behind her. 

"Hateful creature! how she has spoiled my life! 
I hated her long ago when she was my uncle's shep- 
herdess. I felt then that she would work me evil ; I 
felt then," dropping her head again upon her breast, 
" that we two could not live in the same world ; and 
now she has followed me here, to steal from me my 
reputation as a singer— my wealth ; and, if she can, 
she will steal leuan's love from me ! but r/iai I will 
never give up ! t/iat I will fight for to the death ! " 

'I Mr. Camperton," said the servant, announcing a 
visitor. And in a moment Elizabeth had smoothed 
her brow and ruffled hair, and, opening a door at the 
further end of the room, had made a silent sign to 
Mrs. Elliott, who entered from her own little sitting- 






1': 

' ■■(■■ 

' 1 i '■ ■ 




214 



A WELSH SINGER. 



f, • : f 






r-; i 


f^ 


i 

! 




lli 


1^ 



room, work in hand, as though she had only left the 
room the moment before. Then, after shaking hands 
with the visitor, she retired to the further end of the 
room ; Elizabeth, as has been said before, being 
particular as to the proprieties. 

Mr. Camperton had brought his usual offering of 
ilowcrs, a lovely bouquet of roses and lilies. 

"Oh! how lovely!" cried Elizabeth, dipping her 
face into the sweet scented flowers, and then lookint,^ 
up with dimpling smile and sparkling eyes. "But 
you mustn't, you know, you really mustn't ! You spoil 
me quite. What shall I do for flowers when you are 
gone ? For you are going, are you not ? " 

" Yes," said the young man, looking distressed. " I 
am sorry to say I have been sent for to my uncle's 
sick-bed. It's a great bore, but I must go, you know; 
it wouldn't do to offend the old boy." 

"No?" said Elizabeth, with innocent, arched eye- 
brows. 

"Well— no— not exactly; I am his heir, you see. 
His death will mean a great change for me— er — er— 
er — 1 mean as regards money, Miss Powys, and— er 
— er — er — I venture to hope in something more than 
money ! " 

Elizabeth looked down, and blushed. "Well, I 
hope your hopes will be realised." 

" Thank you," said Mr. Camperton ; " not that I 
wish the old man to go, you know. By George ! I 
am very fond of him ! but— er— er — er — you know! " 

" Oh ! yes, quite so. What train do you go by ? " 

" Oh ! quite early, first I can get. But let me con- 
gratulate you upon your success last night. Never 
heard such singing! By George! everyone was in 
ecstasies ! " 

And Elizabeth was pacified. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



"'UNEFUL ECHOES. 

Towards tne end of the season, the Merediths 
returned from their visit to Norway, with a fresh stock 
of health and spirits, to find London still alternately 
broiling and steaming ij the summer sun, its denizens 
as busy as ever, in the pursuit of pleasure and of gam. 
Coming, as she did, straight from the beauty and 
serenity of Nature, the ^,ight struck Lady Meredith 
with a force generally blunted by familiarity. 

" Let us get away as soon as we can," she said at 
breakfast, a day or two after her return ; " the season 
will soon be over, and everyone will be gone avyay ; 
but before we go, we must hoar La Belle Russe ! " 

" Certainly," said Sir Glynne, " we won't go away 
without hearing her. What a fuss people are making 
about her, and what a lot of nonsense they talk about 
this wonderful singer, a mere slip of a girl, who leads 
the life of a hermit when off the pla.form, and, when 
on it, sways the multitude before her with a word 
or a tone, or a musical phrase ; declining all in- 
vitations, refusing to make acquaintances, and not 
hesitating to turn her back upon the nobility and 
aristocracy of London, when they kneel before her, 
and cr?ve the honour of her acquaintan^-e. I dor't 
believe half I hear of her, and I'll back our little 
Elizabeth agaimt her, any day. By the way, what 
has become of Elizabeth ? " 

"She has engagements for every evening this 
week," said leuan; "she is announced to sing at 



ill 



w 



si'" 






hi ' 



l^l- i 



■^ t f 



216 



A W 



IJ SINGER. 



Valpr^'s last concert with La Belle Russe, so we 
shall hear them both, and be able to compare them." 

One evening, in the same week, Valpr6 held his 
last concert ; every available ticket had been taken in 
advance ; so that it was only through Mr. Rhys 
Morgan's influence with Valpre that the Merediths 
were able to be present. 

" What a crowded house ! " remarked Sir Glynne, 
looking round the great hall, thronged to its utmost 
capacity. 

" I see La Belle Russe sings only two songs," 
said leuan, " near the end of each part ; and here is 
Elizabeth quite at the beginning. She won't like 
that." 

" Why not ?" asked Lady Meredith. 

"Oh, because the weakest is always given the 
advantage of singing before the best has been heard. 
Ah ! Camperton, old fellow, how are you ? " And 
the newly arrived found his seat was next to leuan's. 

" By George ! awfully glad I chose this seat. 
Splendid treat we are going to have to-night, the two 
cantatrices in the same concert. By- the -by, you 
can't have heard La Belle Russe ? " 

" Never," said leuan. 

" Well, there is no doubt she is a splendid singer, 
but for my part, I prefer Miss Powys ; I like the song 
of the canary bird or the lark, you know, better than 
the nightingale's or the thrush's ; suits me better ; 
and Miss Powys' voice certainly is perfection, you 
know, and what can you wish for better than 
perfection ? " 

" What, indeed ? " assented leuan, with a smile ; 
but further conversation was impossible, for they were 
not far from the platform, and the concert had begun. 
Mr. Camperton having no real love of music, yawned 
and stretched out his legs and gazed about with 
indifference, while the two first items on the pro- 
gramme were gone through. 

" No. 3, ' A Song of Spring,' by M" i Elizabeth 



i L 



, til J 



TUNEFUL ECHOES. 



117 



Powys," read leuan. And Mr. Camperton pulled 
himself together, and stared fixedly at the little red 
door at the side of the platform, from which Elizabeth 
soon emerged, looking radiant and sparkling. Her 
beauty invariably evoked applausp and admiration, 
and Mr. Cimperton continued .j clap his hands 
until the first note of the song fairly broke upon ihe 
It was " A Song of Spring," and the carolling. 



air, 



bird-like notes, soaring higher and higher, rendered in 
perfection the exquisite song of the lark, that they 
were meant to represent ; trills and runs and shakes 
followed each other in rapid succession, until the 
audience fairly lost their breath ; and, when the song 
was ended, they cheered and applauded vociferously. 
Elizabeth, bowing repeatedly, backed off towards the 
little red door again : but there was no encore, except 
from leuan and Mr. Camperton, for everyone was 
waiting impatiently for La Belle Russe, the chief 
attraction of the evening. 

" How beautifully Elizabeth sang," said Lady 
Meredith, " I wonder they didn't give her an encore." 

" Horrid ba " taste ! " observed Mr. Camperton, 
with disgust. 

After a vocal quartette and a violin solo, the little 
red door once more opened, and, amid breathless 
silence. Belle Russe advanced to the front of the 
platform ; but, before she had breathed a note, the 
audience burst forth into long and loud applause and 
greetings. ^ 

Mifanwy was already becoming accustomed to the 
adulation of the public, and, though she felt pleasure 
at the evidence of their high regard for her, she was 
in no wise disconcerted by it ; she smiled and bowed 
her thanks, and then stood waiting patiently with a 
pleased expression until the storm of greeting should 
have passed away. Valpre sat impatiently at the piano, 
playing the prelude to the song over again, and, dur- 
ing this little pause, Mifanwy's eye roamed over the 
large audience ; and in that short glance she saw and 



li ■. 



I1HI 



ft 




. ! 1^ 






2l8 



A WELSH SINGER. 



recognised leuan. For a moment she felt overcome 
but the long-continued cheering covered her confusion, 
and enabled her to begin her sonj; at the proper time. 
The audience were spell-bound. 

What had come to La Belle ? Her singing had 
always been something inexpressibly beautiful, but 
to-night it was a living echo of each person's inmost 
thoughts and feelings. The liquid notes not only 
filled the air with melody, but spoke to the soul of 
every man and woman. To the selfish it seemed to 
say, " Drop your self-seeking," to the untruthful, " I3c 
true " : and to the sorrowful it whispered, " Be com- 
forted " ; to the impure it said. " Be pure." 

There was one amongst that throng who felt him- 
self strangely moved. It was leuan, who sat, out- 
wardly immovable, his eyes fixed upon the slim and 
graceful figure of the girl who, for the moment, held 
in her grasp and under her sway the multitude before 

her. 

Her dress of white satin, devoid <il any ornament 
except a bunch of crimson carnations, fastened at the 
bosom, set off to advantage her pure complexion, 
which, though colourless as cream velvet, looked fresh 
and healthy. Her masses of brown-black hair were 
drawn straight back from the brow. 

leuan sat still and rigid, every sense intent upon 
the music, which seemed to be speaking to him in 
strange and yet familiar tones. He recognised the 
face of the singer at once ; she was the girl he had 
seen at the Royal Academy, and had often thought 
of since ; but it was not this that so much moved him, 
unexpecte Uy pleasant though it was. It was the 
extraordinary train of thought her voice aroused. It 
carried him back to the days of his childhood; it 
spoke to him of the sea, of the crags, of nature in all 
her freshness ; but, above all, it reminded him of 
Mifanwy ; with her ragged blue gown and bare feet 
she came before him. and. fixing her soft brown eyes 
upon him, seemed to say, " leuan, 1 have waited long." 



TUNEFUL ECHOES. 



210 



Tlie words of the song died away. The singer was 
leaving the platform ; yet leuan sat on still and rigid. 
Was she going? this wcman whose song had awakened 
in him a tumult of old memories, regrets, and self-re- 
proach. " It is ridiculous," he said to himself, " but it 
is a fact that this lovely girl reminds me of Mifanwy, 
of those soft brown eyes as dark as night, and of that 
voice, which, in those inexperienced days, I thought 
could never have its equal." He started from his 
dream to find Mr. Camperton addressing him. 

" Oh, yes ! oh, yes ! a lovely voice, no doubt, though, 
as I said before, I prefer Miss Powys," and he chatted 
on good-humouredly, until Elizabeth once more made 
her appearance, when, to leuan's relief, he again sub- 
sided into attentive silence, 

Elizabeth sang with greater brilliancy than ever, 
and the audience greeted her efforts with enthusiastic 
encores, which she rewarded with a little rippling, 
laughing song, that suited her clear voice and spark- 
ling manner to perfection. No sooner had she retired 
from the platform than Mr. Camperton, too, disap- 
peared ; and leuan was glad, for he could now give 
himself completely to the enjoyment of the next song 
from La Belle Russe. 

" What is it ? " asked Lady Meredith, hunting in 
he: programme. " Oh, something from Der Freischutz; 
but I don't know it ; do you, leuan ? " 

leuan could scarcely spare a breath to say " no," so 
intent was he upon the music that once more flooded 
his whole being with ecstasy. Be it remembered, he 
belonged to a race more influenced by music, more 
swayed by its power, than, perhaps, any other in the 
world. 

The girl seemed to sing without effort as naturally 
as she would breathe ; and, while she sang, she seemed 
to hold personal communion with every individual of 
that large concourse. The song came to an end at 
last, and the singer tried in vain to leave the platform 
Ihe applause continued, in spite of Valprc's scowls, 



^1. % 







in 



K ■- 



tii 




t 


1 






;[ 






■ 1 



a^o 



A WELSH SINGER. 



M-.: 



and cries of " La Belle ! La Belle ! encore ! La 
Belle Russe ! " were heard in every direction. It 
was useless to try to stem the tide, so the singer re- 
turned once more to sing a simple country ballad of 
home and love, of sea and sail. Once only she 
mustered courage to turn her eyes on Icuan, but the 
look that met hers was so fixed and sad that the girl 
wondered, and was saddened herself ; she durst not 
look again. When she had retired, and the long, 
thunderous applause had died away, Icuan roused 
himself, and woke once more from the curious state 
of mingled ecstasy and agitation into which the song 
had thrown him. 

" Wonderful ! " whispered Lady Meredith. 

" Exquisite ! " said Sir Glynne. " I don't wonder 
now at the public's making such an idol of her. She 
is charming. I didn't know Russians had such liquid, 
thrilling voices. Wake up, leuan ! you seem be- 
witched." 

leuan laughed, and pulled himself together. 

" Do you think," said Lady Meredith, tapping him 
with her fan, " that you could find Elizabeth for me, 
before she goes, and tell her I shall be glad to see her 
to tea to-morrow ancrnoon, if she can spare an hour 
or two ? " 

" I will see," said leuan ; " but I think it very likely 
she left when her song was over." And he was soon 
threading his way through the passages at the back 
of the platform. " Can I see Miss Powys ? " he asked 
of on official, whom he met on his way. 

" Gone, sir ; she left immediately after her song." 

At this moment a slender figure, cloaked and 
hooded, followed by an elderly lady in black, came 
down the passage. 

" La Belle Russe," whispered the man, and he drew 
leuan a little aside to make room for the lady. 

Yes, there she was ; in spite of the hood, leuan 
would have recognised her anywhere ; that clear pale 
complexion, the velvety brown eyes " put in with 



■i J 



M 



3 



TUNEFUL ECHOES. 



221 



I : 



smutty fingers." A description more expressive than 
dainty. She saw him, and for a moment faltered. 
The official bowed respectfully, and leuan, taking off 
his hat, caught one more glance of those wondrous 
eyes that she raised to his in passing, acknowledging 
his salute with a slight bow. 

Icuan stood transfixed ; he was so close to her 
that he had heard her breathe, and felt the touch of 
her garments while she was passing him. 

" You are fortunate, sir," remarked the man. " This 
is not the way she generally comes out. I don't know 
why she came to-night." 

" I am fortunate indeed. Have you seen Mr. 
Camperton here to-night ? " 

" Yes, sir ; he took Miss Powys and Mrs. Elliott 
down to their carriage ; he generally do, sir." 

"Thank you, good-night." And leuan returned 
to tell Lady Meredith of his fruitless search. 

Arrived at home, leuan made his way at once to 
the smoking-room, and throwing himself into a lounge- 
chair, smoked and dreamed away for two hours. And 
what were his dreams ? Be sure the beautiful singer 
figured largely in the vision. Elizabeth's dazzling 
beauty also came in frequently, but the most vivid 
impression was of Mifanwy treading the dangerous 
sheep paths, the wind circling round her and threaten- 
ing to carry her away ; or roaming bare-foot on the 
yellow sands below and searching the wreaths of 
shells left by the receding tide ; or sitting idly on the 
hilly slopes with Topper at her side ; or singing her 
heart out to the setting sun ; and he himself, a fresh 
and sunburnt lad, shouting to her across the valley 
some important piece of information, as " Herrings 
in the bay," or " Found the puffin's nest," or listening 
with " Robert the Mill," while Mifanwy, looking down 
upon them from the crags, woke the echoes with her 
song. 

Lighting a fresh cigar, he mused, " Why should I 
for ever be haunted by the image of that girl, so long 



•l« 



:.(f 



'i ! 






! 3 . - 



l«f;. 






:^- 



i .i 



!i • ? ir 



322 



A WELSH SINGER. 



gone out of my life ? No doubt married long ago, 
or betrothed to some country bumpkin ! I must be 
a muff to think so much of a boy and girl affair ; 
and vet how sweet she was ! Have I ever met .iny- 
one with such a wealth of love, even Elizabet with 
all her charms ? Well, I must do somethinj,' to lay 
this ghost. We arc going down to Aberscthin, and I 
will try to find her out, to see what she's like ; and I 
will be kind to her, poor girl ; and, if she's married, 
or going to be married, 1 will give her a handsome 
present ; and, if she's nice, and still remembers me, 
well then — we'll have a happy time together ; but 
marry her, good heavens ! it would be a cruel wrong 
to my uncle and aunt." 

One evening, before they left for Wales, Mr. Rhys 
Morgan dropped in to dinner, and during the meal, 
the conversation turned upon the daily increasing 
popularity of La Belle Russe. 

" Yes," observed the parson, " it is most amusing as 
well as gratifying. I have just seen at a shop window 
a gorgeously trimmed hat or btmnet, I don't know 
which, ticketed ' The Belle Russc ' ; and 3 believe 
the 'Belle Russe' cigars have the best sale. It is 
amusing, because the lady herself is one of the most 
retiring and plainly dressed iiTiaginab'e." 

" Do you know her ? " asked Icuan, opening his eyes. 

" Yes." 

" Personally ? ' 

" Yes, personally. " 

" Oh, how delightful ! " cried Lady Meredith ; 
" then you can tell us all about her, and make us 
acquainted with her also." 

" H'm ! well ! I am not so sure of that ; I have 
been besieged with requests for an introduction to 
her, but, as I told you, she is of a very retiring nature, 
leads a simple life, and absolutely refuses to make a 
large circle of acquaintances." 

" Oh, tell me all about her ! Where does she 
live ? " inquired Lady Meredith, " and why does she 



M 



TUNEFUL ECHOES. 



'23 



shut herself up so? I hear she leads the life of a 
hermit" 

"Oh, far from ^hat," replied the parson. "It is 
curious how difficult it is to lead a simple and nat'iral 
life in London, without bcinfj thought eccentric. She 
is the centre of a circle of true friends and admirers, 
and her days arc fully occupied in the study neces- 
sary for her profession. Next spring she will appear 
in the Opera ; that entails a j,'oocl deal of preparation ; 
then she spends an hour or two in rcadin<j to improve 
her mind, her education not having been begun until 
lately." 

" She docs not give you the im[)rcssion of being 
an uneducated woman," observed leuan. 

" Quite the reverse, I should say," put in Sir 
Glynne ; " a thorough lady, I should have thought." 

"So she is," agreed Rhys Morgan, "one of Nature's 
gentlewomen, with a mind refined beyond that of the 
usual present day joung lady ; though not highly 
educated, she is well informed. She has several 
friends in the highest ranks of life, old Lady Win- 
thorpe, for instance, who seems very fond of her ; and 
the Marquis of Evcrsleigh is decidedly quite i^pris ; 
she is very f'iendly with them both, but I honestly 
believe their rank weighs not at all with her ; I don't 
sec a shade of difference between her manner towards 
them and that towards her old friends in a lower 
rank of life. ' 

"How unusual and how delightful! " exclaimed 
Lady Meredith. " You make me wish to know her 
more than ever. But how did you make her ac- 
quaintance ? " 

" Well, quite by accident. I saw her at a circus ; 
you know 1 find myself in queer places sometimes — 
wherever I can find my human brothers and sisters." 

" Yes, indeed," assented Lady Meredith ; " I know 
how you find out everybody who is in distress. But 
did you find this Russian girl in any distress ? " 

" Oh, no — not at all , only rather home-sick, and 




224 



A WELSH SINGER. 



chafing under the roughnesses of circ s life. They 
were very nice people at that circus, though ; and she 
still keeps up her friendship with them," 

Icuan listened and wondered. Where did the girl 
find that strange power to touch the hearts of her 
audience, as she had touched his ? 

" Well, I shall give you no rest till you introduce 
me to her," he said. "I want to find out the secret of 
her power over the hearts of men. It is not only in 
her voice, though that is exquisite." 

" Possibly in her experience of life," rejoined Rhys 
Morgan, "added to her exceptionally candid and 
tender nature. But you had better not inquire too 
closely into that secret : I mean lest she should direct 
her witcheries towards you, and steal your heart ! " 

" I feel much inclined to run the risk," answered 
leuan, laughing. " Will you promise to give me the 
chance when I return from Wales ? " 

"Well, with her consent, I will," replied Rhys 
Morgan. 

" leuan is a general lover," Lady Meredith inter- 
posed ; " and there is safety in numbers, you know." 

" Now, uncle," said leuan, " won't you take my 
part ? Is that a fair character to give me ? " 

" Well, it was rather a sweeping remark, Gwladys. 
I should call him generally proof against the darts of 
Love ; but, if he should be struck, I am inclined to 
think it will be a mortal blow." 

" Oh, this is worse and worse ' I think I had 
better retire, and think out my defence." 



> r 



1 i 



CI I A IT KR X.W. 



om; ausknt. 

A FFAV days later, Iciian was wal'.incj briskly across 
the moors tliat !ay between Glanarvoii and Shan 
and lanto's cottacjc. He and his uncle had arrived 
late the evenini; before, a <;ood deal tired, and a little 
disheartened by the failure of their errand to Chester. 
They had hunted through every register in every 
church in the district, but without success ; nor could 
they get any clue to the mystery of Mary Meredith's 
elopement. 

" Never mind," had remarked Sir Glynne, when 
they reluctantly gave up the search ; " it'does not in 
the least shake my faith. I feel morally certain that 
my dear si.-,ter, your mother, was the legal wife of 
John I'owys. They were married somewhere, if not 
in Chester, and one day wc shall come across the 
proofs." 

The north-west wind blew fresh in from the sea, 
that, blue antl sparkling, stretched out before him. 
There was the blue smoke curling upwards from the 
dear old cottage, buried in its hollow, with only its 
chimneys rising over ihc line of the moor. The sweet 
and luscious odours of the heather and the hurtle 
berries brought back memories of the sunny after- 
noons, when he and Mifanwy had filled their baskc 
with the dainty fruit, that Shan had stewed for the;, 
suppers. There, straight in his path, was the furze 
LJUo.i uvci v.iiicii nc HaCi aiu.ty^, iiilcU rviiiiuiwy when 
she was a child. Mifanwy! Mifanwy !— already .she 
filled his thoughts, already his heart called out for 

225 p 



226 



A WELSH SINGER. 



w m 



m.' 



her " I have never been truly happy since I lost 
her'- for all her bare feet, blue petticoat, and tangled 
hiir; she was sweeter than any girl I have ever met in 

^ W^reThTs^he mused, lanto, his shovel and mat- 
tock on his shoulder, suddenly made his appearance 
from the hollow in which the cottage nest.ed and 
oomed large and sprawly against the line of the 
horSon. On ncaring leuan, he looked with inquinng 
fntcrest at the stalwart form of the young man. who 
oassed him with a nod and a short " Boreu da. 
^ "^reu da chi, sir," replied lanto, pulling his 
slouched felt hat, and passing on. 

leuan had purposely left the time of his visit un- 
dedded, merely saying. " I shall come down o my 
old home before long ;" and the two old people had 
spent many a half hour lookmg across the moor to 
?he highroad, that intersected it: But to-day lanto 
was off his guard ; this tall, broad-shouldered man 
could not be leuan. Suddenly he heard a rebuking 

""""'lanto ! not know me, indeed, not know your own 
boy? Come back for shame, and be scolded properly. 

.'Dear Lord ! " the old man cried, dropping h 
spade, and stooping to pick it up. thereby letting fa 1 
f^s mattock, which leuan picked up and himself 
shouldered. " Dear Lord, not my boy ! 

" It is indeed—indeed, lanto. 

..Yes yes— I sec him now," said the old man. 
grasping his hand ; " but how would I know it was 
?ou. walking like this on your feet, when I had been 
expecting you in a grand carriage? and wearing a 
rough brovvn coat, when I had expected to see you in 

""'And^'yoJ are disappointed, lanto? HI come in 
the cP-riagc one day to please you, and perhaps I can 
forra'e up a velvet coat, too ; but come along and let s 
see whether Shan will have a better memory. 

When thev apnroached the cottage, they saw Shan 



ONE ABSENT. 



227 



emerge from the door, and stand with her arms folded 
in her apron, looking dreamily towards the brow of 
the hollow. 

" Be bound she's thinking of you now, and waiting 
for you," said lanto. 

And so she was, and she took the vision of the 
young man in the brown frieze coat and Tam o' 
Shanter as an answer to her prayers ; and, in a 
moment, he was folded in the faithful old arms. He 
kissed the wrinkled cheek, and felt that here indeed 
was home and love. 

Then came greetings and questions and laughter, 
not unmixed with tears, when the two old people 
realised that they had their boy once more beneath 
their roof 

" And such a fine, handsome man ; look at him," 
cried Shan, turning him round, a movement which 
leuan assisted by turning himself swiftly, as if on a 
pivot. 

" Yes, look at me all round," he said, when laughter 
had subsided a little ; " and come and show me all 
over the place. Where are the hens? Scraping at 
your onion seeds at this moment." 

Shan could not resist a rush to the door, and a 
"shw " with her apron, that caused a general scatter- 
ing over the low, turf hcd^c. 

" Du you tell me now, they didn't see you coming, 
and think I should be too busy to look after them ? 
tliat they did ! But, dear anwl, where's the crochon ? 
I must put the cawl on at once." 

leuan remembered the ways of the household too 
well to suggest that it was too early for dinner, . • to 
mform the active old couple, who had had tneir 
breakfast at seven, that he had only just partaken of 
that meal. 

And soon Shdn was supremely happy in preparing 
the crock of cawl for her dear boy's dinner. It was 
all ready and placed smoking hot upon the old black 




H'5: 





i! iW! 



228 



A WELSH SINGER. 



table at twelve o'clock, and they gathered round witli 
wooden spoons and bowls. .,<:,,* .^, 

" Only one thing is wanting now, said bhan, with 
a saddened look, " Mifanwy ! Don't you miss her, 
leuan ? See her little stool in the chimney corner ; 
her little wooden shoes under it ! I keep them there 
waiting for her ; I know some day she will come over 
the moor as you came to-day ; only, I wish you had 
both come together. Oh, how happy we should he." 

"V/e should indeed," said leuan, looking at the 
stool and the little wooden shoes. " I have missed 
her ever since I came into the house, and have been 
longing to ask about her." 

"Good boy, good boy," answered Shan, drawing 
her horny hand affectionately over his. "Never 
forget Mifanwy, for no sister ever loved a brother 
more than she loved thee." 

" Oh," put in lanto, passing his bowl up for more 
cawl. " He couldn't do that ; he'd have more onnore 
than to forget his sister ; wouldn't thee, my boy ? " 

" Well," said leuan, " I won't say much about 
onnore, lanto ; but I couldn't forget her, even if I 
wished ; especially here, where everything seems to 
speak of her. You must have missed her dreadfully, 

Shan ? " 

" Ach y fi, yes ; nobody but the Almighty knows 
how much. In the morning, when the sun shines in 
and wukcs me, I miss her voice singing at her work, 
and i:i the evening when it gets dark, and lanto arid I 
try to sing our bits of hymns together, oh, don't I 
miss her angel voice, and thine too, my boy ? for I 
will say, though thee couldn't sing like Mifanwy, thee 
could always come in with a good second and fill up 
the chords." 

" Well, but tell me, Shan, where is she now ? " 

" Oh, now," said Shan, spreading out her fingers ; 

" well. I don't know where she is now, but I know it 

must be a good place, for she sends us a lot of money, 

quite as much as thee hast sent us ; but it is all safe." 



ONE ABSENT. 



229 



she whispered, with a wink ; " lanto has it all safe, 
my boy. We never take it out to count it without 
going out first to see that nobody is near," And, 
suiting the action to the \vord, she went out to the 
front garden and looked north, south, east, and west, 
finishing with a peep round the back of the cottage. 
" It's all right, lanto," coming in again, closing the 
door, and pushing the wooden bolt into its hasp, 
lanto rose solemnly and walked towards the large 
open chimney, and, reaching a good way up its brown 
smoky side, drew out from a hole in the wall a stock- 
ing of grrv worsted, and, undoing the string that tied 
it, poured out the contents upon the table. 

" Forty sovereigns ! there's riches ! " cried Sh&n, 
with her arms akimbo; "and all for Mifanwy and 
thee, leuan, when we are dead and gone ; all for thee, 
my boy, and Mifanwy." 

Here a fowl pecked at the door, causing Shan to 
rush to the window, while lanto stuffed the stocking 
into his pocket, and, covering the gold with his two 
hands, sat at the table with a look of placid innocence. 

" Only the fowls," said Shan. 

" Art sure ? " 

" Certain ; they are waiting for their dinner." 

leuan exhibited a satisfactory amount of interest 
and astonishment. 

" But what is the good of it to you if you hoard it 
up there ? " 

" Why, do you thinV we are going to spend it ? 
Ach y fi ! We have too much onnore to spend our 
children's earnings. We buy what we want, and there 
will be enough there to bury us. What more can the 
Queen want ? " 

And, one by one, the shining pieces were put back 
into the stocking, tied up, and carefully replaced in 
their dusty place of concealment. Then the door 
was opened, letting in a flood of sunshine, and, at the 
same time, a ilock of fowls. 

" Now, my boy," said lanto, " it grieves me to leave 






'-^. 




.1,1 1 



ii 




■'» ' 




«f •" 



230 



A WELSH SINGER. 



iii *te' 



thee the first day of thy coming home, but it can't be 
helped. I told John Powys that bed would be dug up 
to-day — I was going there when I met thee — so now 
it must be done ; not but what it could be done as 
well to-morrow, but thee know'st me, leuan ; my word 
is my bond ; I'll be back to tea." And, shouldering 
his tools, the old man took his way up the hollow and 
over the moor. 

" And hast never seen Mifanwy fach, leuan ? " 

"Seen her, Shan? no. How could I •>.':? her? 
Where is she ? " 

" How know I ? '' returned the old woman, sprink- 
ling the wetted meal on the earthen floor, for the 
fowls to peck at. " How can I tell ? Thee might have 
met her in the street, out on the roads, or any where." 

" Is she in London, then ? " 

" Yes, she's in London now ; sue went from here to 
Caer Madoc, and from there to Merthyr. She wrote 
and told us she had a very kind mistress, and had two 
little children to take care of. After that, she went to 
London, and I think she is there now, still with the 
same kind mistress ; and she must be earning very good 
wages," with a shrewd nod, " or she couldn't afford to 
send us all the money that she does. But there, 
wouldn't Mifanwy be worth good wages to any one ? 
But never mind where she is, she's coming home this 
autumn ; any day, wc don't know when. Oh, I wish 
it would be when thou art here." 

leuan started. " What if it should be ? How em- 
barrassing to find her a little, perky London maid-of- 
all-work ! " 

Shan was now reaching something down from a 
shelf at the top of the low doorway : an old, cracked 
black teapot, that always stood there in company with 
a dog-eared Testament, lanto's thick-rimmed spec- 
tacles, and a brass candlestick. 

"Here it is!" cried Shan, panting, " her last letter 
I tied that bit of worsted round thy last letter and hers 
together ; it saves hunting for them." 



ONE ABSENT. 



231 



" Well, I won't take my own," said leuan, " but I'll 
take Mifanwy's down to the slopes with me, and have 
a look at the old paths, and the sheep, and the dear 
old shore." 

" Yes, go, my boy ; that will give me time to tidy up, 
and get the tea ready." 

" All right, Shan ; I told them up at the Hall not to 
expect rae till bed-time to-night." 

It was a dreadful disappointment to Shan to find 
that her boy would not sleep under her roof; until he 
had explained that, even before he left Wales, the bed 
had been considerably too short for him. " And now," 
he added, " I believe not only my feet, but my knees 
would come out at the bottom." 

She laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks. 
" Well ! well ! thee was always a boy for jokes ; but 
thee'U come back the first thing in the morning any- 
way ? " 

" Be sure, Shftn fach, that every moment I have to 
spare I will spend here in my dear old home. Now, 
I will begin my way down to the cliffs." 

But she would not be satisfiea until she had taken 
him at all events to look at the comfortable bed she 
had prepared for him ; up the rough ladder, past the 
rafters where the fowls slept, and into the long bed 
room, divided into two tiny ones, Mifanwy's and his 
own. 

Yes, there were the rows of birds' eggs, the garlands 
of seaweeds, and the row of animals he had carved, 
ranged on the top of the wall, running along under the 
eaves. Shan turned back the bed clothes, tht clean 
sheets and the pink quilt, her special pride. 

" It looks so comfortable, Shan, I don't think I can 
go ba ' to London without sleeping in it once, at all 
events . but," seriously, " I think Lady Glanarvon 
would like me to sleep at the Hall." 

"Yes, go, my boy, it will be grand to have thee 
sleeping at the Hall, and yet drinking thy cawl with 
old lanto and Shan." 



CJl-'-TITT-^ a::Sr 




H = 



232 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Down the ladder afrain they went, Iciian stooping; 
his tall shoulders, his feet almost in the kitchen before 
his head had disappeared below the floor of the bed- 
room. He went out into the August sunshine, up to 
the crest of the hollow, to meet the fresh sea wind, 
and then straight on over the well-remembered paths. 
A flock of sheep were grazing on the slope, and a 
shepherdess lay dozing on the grass, her dog beside 
her; but, alas ! it was not IMifainvy, it was not Top- 
per ! The " little .sea-crows " flew across from one hill 
to another, as of yore, filling the air with their busy 
cawing ; the sea sparkled and heaved in the golden 
sunlight ; the .sea-pinks bloomed as bravely as ever on 
the crags ; the sky was as blue, the breakers were as 
snowy white as they ever had been ; the glorious 
beauty of the summer day was still undimmed, and 
yet he missed something from the scene. It was like 
a beautiful body from which the soul had taken flight. 
Oh, this mystery of life, this void caused by the 
absence of one human being ! The air may be full of 
greetings, we may be surrounded by friends, but 
" one " is absent, and the whole scene is empty and 
deserted. So Icuan felt while looking over the broad 
expanse of sea and sky, of rock and shore. " Every- 
thing is the same," he muttered, " but that simple gir! 
is missing, and without her everything is flat and 
stale. Here is our 'broom-parlour'; it is empty!" 
Then, unconsciously, he took his way along the path 
to Ogo Wylofen. The tide was surging in at the 
mouth of the cave, and leuan, sitting on one of the 
boulders, listened to the mournful sounds that rose 
from the cleavage of the rock. " She was right," he 
thought ; " it is fearfully like the wailing of a human 
being in anguish or distress," and, with a shudder, he 
turned and retraced his footsteps towards the 
shepherdess, who was now awake, and staring at the 
Stranraer. 

" A fine day, my lass. You arc the shepherdess, I 
see ; and these are John Powys' sheep ? " 



ONE ABSENT. 



533 



" Yes ; how do you know ? " rejoined the girl with 
niggard manners, 

" I knew them long ago ; I used to be the shepherd 
on Moel Hiracthog. Who minds the sheep there 
now ? " 

" No one ; they are all here," replied the girl ; 
" and I watch them all together." 

" You've hard work, then ? " 

" Yes, but I get fourpencc a day." 

" Oh, that's grand," said Icuan. 

" Are you leuan Gwyllt, then ? whom I have heard 
my mother talk about ? The shepherd boy who went 
away with the grand people at the Hall, and is living 
with them now, as if he were a son of theirs ? " 

" Yes, I am that boy." 

" I should think you would wish you were back 
here sometimes." 

" Why ? " 

" Oh ! to be so long away from Wales. I shouldn't 
like it, and then to have always to behave like gentle- 
men. I shouldn't like it." 

leuan laughed. " It has its drawbacks, indeed. 
Well, I won't turn you out of your situation just 
yet." 

The girl laughed merrily, showing a row of dazzling 
white and even teeth, her only beauty, for her face 
was freckled and her nose was snubby. leuan threw 
her a shilling, and turning to follow tht- pathway down 
to the shore, he went his way, climbing up Moel 
Hiraethog, and visiting his own old shepherd's hut, 
before he returned. He sat down at the door- 
way, and gave himself up to a long train of reflec- 
tions. 

Mifanwy, Mifanwy, everywhere ; every blade of 
grass, every nodding flower, seemed to speak of her ; 
the sighing of the sea-wind seemed to whisper her 
name. "Now," he f.:\\(]^ drawing frnm his ixicket 
the soiled and crumpled letter Shan had given him, 
" let me read her letter ; no doubt it will put all these 



234 



A WELSH SINGER. 



* i 



fP 



m 



romantic memories of her to flight. Engh'sh, pro- 
bably," he muttered, "without an h. No, indeed, 
Welsh. Ah, she hasn't forgotten her Welsh then." 
He spread the crumpled letter out on his knees before 
him. " Been in Shan's pocket, I expect, with all the 
wonderful collection of things she used to carry in it. 
By Jove ! good writing, round and firm and clear. A 
woman's hand perhaps, but not poor Mifanwy's," and 
he began : 

" My Ever Beloved ShSn and Ianto,— Dc 
}-ou think it is long since I wrote to you ? Three 
months quite ; but you need not my letters to tell you 
that I love you, and that, though I am happy and 
busy here from morning to night, and have plenty of 
kind friends, still my heart is in Wales, and my 
thoughts often fly to dear Abcrsethin. I remembei 
the sea cliffs, and the little sea-crows, the sheep, and 
dear old Topper. How kind of you to bury him in 
the garden ; don't let the fowls scratch his grave. 
Oh, Shun fach, I remember you and Ianto, too, and 
the bright sun shining through my little window in 
the morning, and our sweet songs together when the 
moonlight was so bright that we sat round the hearth 
without a candle. Father, mother, I am saving up all 
my money to come home to you again. I am coming 
some time, but I must first save more money; enough 
to live for ever in the dear old country, and with the 
dear old simple people. And now good-bye, and 
never forget, your loving " MiFANWY." 

leuan folded it up slowly, and replaced it in his 
pocket ; he was relieved to find no mention of his 
name, and yet he was wounded. " Not like a 
servant's letter," he thought ; "but just like Mifanwy. 
If somebody else wrote it for her, she dictated it her- 
self, that rn swear. I wonder when she means t** 
come ! What if she should come now ? If only she 
should come with her blue petticoat and bare feet, I 



ONE ABSENT. 



235 



would clasp her in my arms, and marry her in spite 
of the world ; but a servant, with ribbons in her cap, 
it's altogether upsetting." And for the rest of the 
way home he brooded upon what he thought the 
aggravating way in which fate had treated him. 

The air, when he approached the cottage, was full 
of the odour of the delicious, crisp batter cakes, the 
invariable adjunct of the tea-table in Wales when 
company is present. While he stooped to enter the 
low door, he drew in a long sniff of the appetising 
odour. " Hello ! light-cakes for tea, bravo ! " Shan 
turned her heated, smiling face towards him for an in- 
stant, but quickly resumed the absorbing work of 
turning her thin cakes upon the griddle. An immense 
pile of them already stood simmering in front of the 
fire. 

"There's the last!" cried Shan triumphantly, as 
she flipped it on to the pile and buttered it. " Here's 
lanto in the nick of time. Now, come along while 
they are hot." And round the old oak table they 
gathered, and chatted, and ate their light-cakes, and 
drank their tea. 

" Well," said leuan, " I have been to many a feast 
and banquet, to dinners, and suppers, and balls, but 
never anywhere have I tasted anything that would 
beat your li<;ht-cakes." 

Shan laughed till she showed her toothless gums. 
It was a happy evening, and the sun had long set 
before leuan began his trudge over the moor again. 

" Good-night, my boy," said lanto, " we have only 
wanted one thing this evening." 

" Mifanwy fach ? " asked leuan, laughing. 
" Yes, indeed," said the two old people, " Mifanwy 
fach." 




r?j>^ 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



Till': DEATH CIIAMUER. 



I don't envy you your interview with John Powys," 
said Lady Meredith, on the followinff morninj,', wav- 
ing a good-bye from the hall door to her husband and 
her nephew; "but, if you had not been going on busi- 
ness, I should have liked to accompany you part way; 
I want to go and see old Catrin Howells, and one or 
two more in the village." 

" We will tell her you are coming. Aunt, wait till 
to-morrow, and I will come, too." 

His aunt nodded. " Then to-day I will go and sec 
Shfi,n and lanto. Good-bye." 

Striding down the drive, and out on to the breezy 
moor, the uncle and nephew chatted cheerfully to- 
gether. 

" Gwladys is well out of it, indeed," said Sir Glynne. 
" I hate the idea of speaking to that man, but still it 
must be done." 

" Yes," assented leuan, " we must go through with 
it. I was just thinking of my old childish determina- 
tion that, at the first opportunity, I would give him a 
sound thrashing, and, by Jove! I should enjoy nothing 
better now. And I can't tell what deters me, uncle," 
he added, suddenly brightening up. " Why should I 
not pitch into him, and give him a good pommelling? 
It would do him good, and me, too." 

Sir Glynne laughed heartily, but added seriously, 
" Well, I won't deny that I should like to come ni 
with a few blows myself; but, leuan, he is your 
father, my boy, and that is the reason, and the only 

336 




THE DEATH CHAMBER. 



237 



ik 



reason I can sec, why you should not keep your 

vow." , , .1 ^1 f 

Icuan grunted, and they trudged on silently for 

some time. , ,, 

" Here we come on John Powys land, don t we ? 

asked leuan. r u- 1 j 

" Yes, this long enclosure is a corner of nis land, 
and look here," leuan, surely this is old John 
himself coming across the field." . . , 

" Is it he > " asked leuan, looking over the hedge. 
" If it is, he is very much altered. How he stoops ! 
I wish he would hold up his head, that I might see 
how that cruel face looks." , , . 

The approaching figure had now reached the 
middle of the field, and, standing still, with head bent 
down, and hands deep in his pockets, seemed lost in 

thought. 

" See that bull ?" said Sir Glynne. " If he does not 
hurry his footsteps that creature will be upon him." 
But John Powys did not move. 

The bull, who had been grazing quietly in the 
further corner of the field, had at first only walked 
slowly towards the centre ; gradually he changed into 
a trot; then, all at once, he broke into a furious 
callop, advancing with curled tail and head bent down, 
towards John Powys, who still stood, lost in thought. 

Sir Glynne and leuan shouted with all their might, 
but he only moved slowly forwards, as though he had 
not perceived his danger. 

" Fool," cried leuan, " he will be killed," and they 
shouted again, " Hoi ! hoi ! the bull, the bull ! " 

" The man is deaf!" exclaimed Sir Glynne, waving 
his arms frantically, a movement that caught John 
Powys' eye, though his ear was deaf to th.ir cries. 
Instinctively he looked behind him, and, seeing the 
bull tearing towards him, and close upon him, he 
Etartcd running towards the two men, who now stood 
by the fence, in breathless excitement. His face was 
pale as death, and he ran with wonderful agility for a 



w 



m 



iip 



t ■ - 






238 



A WELSH SINGER. 



man of his age ; but too late ! With a £)ound the 
creature was upon him, his black, ^urly head lowered, 
his tail still flourished over his back ; and John Powys 
fully realised his peril. He ^'ave one cry of despair, 
when the bull's strong, white horns tossed him bodily 
off the ground, on which he fell with a heavy thud, and 
where he remained inert and, as the other two feared, 
lifeless. The infuriated creature rushed at him again, 
goring him and stampinj; him with his feet ; but, at 
this moment, he was .ittnicted by another object upon 
which to wreak his fury. The two men standing by 
the ferce had remained transfixed with horror for a 
moment, while the bull had been making for his 
victim ; but only for a moment. 

" Run to that tree on the right, uncle, and wave 
your red handkerchief" 

In a moment Sir Glynne had run and scrambled 
along the top of the high turf fence to the one gaunt 
tree that grew there. 

The bull was at once attracted by the red silk 
handkerchief, which Sir Glynne waved, with cries and 
shouts ; and, le. ving his victim on the ground, he 
galloped furiously towards it. Sir Glynne had 
climbed the tree, and was out of reach. 

leuan had noticed that a little to the left was the 
gate of the field. He calculated that, if Sir Glynne 
could keep the bull's attention engaged for a few 
moments near the tree, he might have time to make 
a rush for A is father, and carry him to the gate in 
safety. He had run many a race, and won many a 
prize for speed, but never had he run as he did now. 

The bull soon tired of his fruitless efforts to reach 
the red handkerchief, and now began to make his way 
back to his first enemy. leuan iw it all. Already 
he had lifted the old man, who was groaning with 
pain, and was carrying him over his shoulder towards 
the gate. He tried to run, but, with his heavy burden, 
could not make such progress as the bull, who now 
came snorting and tearing after him, followed by Sir 



TMK DEATH CHAMBER. 



239 









Glynne, still shouting and waving his handkcr- 

^ '•'^VVould he escape ? Yes. the bull was still two or 
three yards behind him when he gained the gate. 
Just in time he managed to put his burden over the 
highest bar, letting him drop on to the furze bus! es 
on the other side. The next moment he was climb- 
ing the gate himself; he reached the top and was 
safely ever. Sir Glynne, dropping his red handker- 
chief ran round on the other side of the fence to 
leuan while the bull turned back to wreak his ven- 
ecance on the red silk handkerchief, which he pawed 
and tore and tossed into the air, with loud bellowing 
and roaring. Sir Glynne and leuan now turned their 
attention to John Powys, who had fainted from pain 

and terror. , ., i u *^ 

" Stay with him here, uncle, while I run home to 
Shan, and send her for a cart from Maen Powys." 

" No," said Sir Glynne ; " send her to Glanarvon for 
the break, and tell them to fill it with cushions, for I 
think he is seriously hurt." 

The bull still bellowed in the field, the lark sang 
high above his head, the little yellow crowfoot and 
furze blossoms filled the air with perfume, the sea- 
gulls cried, and in the distance a woman called to the 
cows; and Sir Glynne still watched, and, v/ith a bunch 
of heather, kept the flies from the face of the uncon- 
scious man. 

" Ip '\e dead?" he thought. " Will he never open 

his e ■ i* 

Yes ; there was a little flicker in the breath, a little 
movement in the eyelids, and John Powys slowly 
opened his eyes. For a moment he gazed up to the 
blue sky r bove him ; then gathering his senses to- 
gethr • with a gleam of that sh.ewdness which never 
forsooK him, he gasped : 

" Who is he ? No time to lose." 

" Who ? " asked Sir Glynne gently. 

" The young man who tried to save my life." He 



240 



A WELSH SINGER. 



% = 



,:* 



III ili' 



spoke with panting breath, and with long pauses 
between the words. "He tried — but failed. He 
risked his life ; who is he ? " 

Here leuan returned, and, stooping down, said, 
" Don't try your breath ; you shall talk when you arc 
safe home." 

John Powys fixed his black eyes on his face. 
" Who is he ? " he repeated. 

" He is leuan," replied Sir Glynne firmly, but 
gently ; " m_y nephczv and your son." 

John Powys still kept his dim eyes fixed on the 
young man's face, and at last murmured : 

"It is late — to make reparation. Yes, he is my 
son ; he tried to save me — he r-^ked his life." 

The eyes closed — the lips ceased to move; Sir 
Glynne and leuan watched silently, while, with a last 
struggle, the soul departed. A thin, scarlet stream of 
blood came from his mouth. leuan looked into Sir 
Glynne's pale face. 

" It is no use waiting, uncle ; he is dead." 

" Yes," said Sir Glynne solcnnly ; " may God for- 
give him." 

"As I do," added leuan, "fully, entirely; and miy 
God forgive me for my angry feelings." 

The break came quickly and smoothly over the soft 
grass, and on the cushions, hurriedly thrown in by 
Lady Glanarvon, they stretched the lifeless body of 
John Powys; then slowly they took their way towards 
Maen Powys. 

The front door was wide open, for Mrs. Powvs, 
Elizabeth's mother, had come up to-day for her weekly- 
visit of inspection and house-cleaning. 

The door of the old oak parlour was thrown open, 
and on the stiff, horsehair sofa was laid the bod)' ol 
John Powys. 

When Sir Glynne and leuan turned their ste[)s 
homewards through the old oak avenue, there was an 
uiniuuus creaking of the branches ; the wind had 
changed, and already an army of grey fleecy clouds 



THE DEATH CHAMBER. 



241 



was advancing over the brow of the sombre hills ; and 
when they reached the rustic gateway, the moor be- 
yond looked grey anc' bare, the cotton grass bent its 
white silk tassels all one way, the little pimpernel by 
the gate-post had closed its delicate petals, the cry of 
the peacocks at Glanarvon came down the breeze, 
and the little sea-crows cawed wildly, and flew about 
in great excitement. 

" Who could believe this moor to be the same we 
crossed two hours ago ? " said leuan. "What a differ- 
ence a little sunshine makes." 

" And not only that," replied S'r Glynne ; " but 
how suddenly we passed from the brightness and 
freshness of our walk to that gruesome scene in the 
field." 

"Yes, and on the moor," said leuan. "I shall 
never forgot that last despairing look at me." 

Lady Meredith had already heard the news of 
John Powys' death. 

"How dreadful," she said, meeting them at the 
hall door, " poor old man ! They say he had altered 
very much lately ; he was less gruff, and less sting>', 
and in very bad health. Poor man ! " And, with a 
woman's tenderness, as well as inconsistency, she be- 
gan to white-wash John Powj-s' memory. 

Later in the day. Sir Glynne entered the room with 
an open letter in his hand. " Read that, leuan ; it is 
to Mrs. Powys." 

leuan read it aloud ; — 



"Dear Mrs. PowY-t^,— If in any way Lady 
Meredith or I can be of use to you in the sudden 
catastrophe that has overtaken you— the death of 
your brother-in-law — be kind enough to let me know, 
and you will find us very willing. My nephew, Mr. 
leuan Gwyllt Powys, begs that you will take the 
management of his late father's domestic affairs, 
which you have hitherto so admirably perfornudi 



^ s 



?42 



A WELSH SINGER. 



until after the day of the funeral, which he will attend 
as chief mourner." 

" Oh, by Jove ! uncle, what a farce ! " 

"leuan!" exclaimed Lady Meredith in disap- 
proval. 

leuan fumed, but Sir Glynne carried his point He 
went on reading : — 

" You will be kind enough to arrange the day and 
hour of the funeral to suit your own plans, only letting 
us know the date and time fixed upon. 
" Yours faithfully, 

"Glynne Meredith." 



The letter was sealed and addressed without further 
comment, and was despatched at once by a groom to 
Maen Powys. 

There, in the sombre, shaded house, Mrs. Powys 
was holding a lev^e. The door at the fm\ of the 
long passage, that shut off the old dwelling-house 
from the domestic offices, generally kept closed, stood 
open for the entrance and departure of the many 
visitors to the death-chamber. 

lanto Morgan had been al once commissioned to 
carry the tidings of the accident to every household 
in the neighbourhood, and more particularly to every 
place of worship, so that on the next day, which 
would be Sunday, it might be announced to the con- 
gregations after the sermon ; and he had already 
traversed the country for five or six miles around, 
entering each house with the same formula : 

" I came to tell you that John Powys of Maen 
Powys died this morning at eleven o'clock, killed by a 
bull, and will be buried on Thursday at Pemnynydd 
Church at twelve o'clock." 

Then came exclamations of pity, horror, and 
astonishment. " John Powys ! Well, well, druan 
bach!"^ And round many a hearth of farn:-house and 
cottage were raked up old tales of former Powyses to 

* Poor fellow ! 



THE DEATH CHAMBER. 



243 



the third and fourth generation, always ending wiih 
the same remark : 

" Well, it is a m^rcy it did not happen six months 
ago before he became a member at Beulah," the fact 
of his having become a communicant at the said 
chapel being regarded by all as a guarantee of safety 
in the next world. 

Meanwhile, Shttn was the self-constituted priestess 
of the death-chamber, and Mrs. Powys was well 
pleased with the arrangement. She escorted each 
fresh visitor through the long passage and into the 
darkened room, turning down the sheet that covered 
the dead man's face, and reverently replacing it when 
the visitors had gazed solemnly for a few minutes; 
then, accompanying them back to the room in which 
Mrs. Powys was seated, she placed a chair for them 
in a row with the other callers, who were ranged 
round the walls. Each woman sniffed a little, and 
wiped a tear away with the corner of her best apron, 
the bettermost farmers' wives unfolding a clean pocket 
handkerchief for the occasion, and keeping it clasped 
between their two hands for the rest of the visit, 
never returning it to their pockets until they were 
well on their way home, and out of sight of the house. 
Everyone brought with her or him some substantial 
proof of sympathy, in the shape of provisions, which 
were silently placed on the tabic in front of Mrs. 
Powys, who returned thanks with as much show of 
gratitude as if she had been really in need of 
them. 

"Thank you, Mali fach ! Oh, Gwen fach, how 
kind of you ! I don't know how to thank you all I " 
Mrs. Powys kept exclaiming, with her handkerchief to 
her eyes. 

" No need for thanks, ma'm ; deeply grieved for 
you, said Mali, curtseying ; " and so thankful that 
master had joined us at Roulah." 

" Oh yes, Mali, it is all n^ht with him ; but we who 
are left behind will miss his guiding hand. You .see. 



/W^^ 






244 



A WELSH SINGER. 



#^ 



ihl 



^ i'l 



r 



ff ■ 



If ;i; 



my daughter is so young to manage a great place like 
this." 

At this point, a servant brought in Sir Glynne's 
letter, and there was quite a flutter of excitement 
while Mrs. Powys hunted about for her glasses to 
read it. 

" It is English, I suppose, or I would offer to read 
it for yoi', ma'm," said a young farmer, who had just 
arrived, carrying a large ox tongue in a basket. 

" Oh, English, of course ! " assented Mrs. Powys, 
with a little sniff of pride ; and having found her 
glasses, she began reading it aloud for the edification 
of the visitors. She made several dire mistakes in 
the pronunciation of the words, and had but a hazy 
idea of the purport of the letter, but she read it off 
glibly to show her familiarity with the English 
language. 

" Very kind of Sir Glynne, druan bach," she con- 
cluded, folding up the letter. " Give the man a glass 
of beer, and tell him the funeral will be on Thursday 
at twelve o'clock." 

The assembled company were much impressed, not 
only by the friendliness of Sir Glynne Meredith, but 
also by the ease with which Mrs. Powys had read the 
letter. They guessed it was a letter of condolence, 
and were quite unconscious of the mistakes in her 
pronunciation. 

The whole day, even until ten o'clock, the visits of 
condolence lasted ; so that it was not until late at 
night, when the house had been shut up, and Shan 
and Catrin Ilowells had taken their places in the 
death-chamber to watch beside the dead through the 
silent hours of night, that Mrs. Powys could find time 
to read her letter again, and properly spell out its 
meaning. 

" What can he mean," she wondered, " by that ? 
My nephew, Mr. leuan Gwyllt Powys! His father's 
domestic affairs ! I don't understand, and Laissabeth 
can't be here 11 Tuesday morning. Oh, dear anwl, 



THE DEATH CHAMBER. 



245 



' 



what can it mean ? Well ! I'll keep it to myself till 
Laissabeth comes, whatever." 

Meanwhile, in the chamber of death, ShAn and 
Catrin sat together at one end of the room, while at 
the other lay the silent figure under its white covering. 
They spoke in subdued tones, and each sipped a glass 
of steaming grog which Mrs. Powys had sent in to 
them. 

" Oh ! how the wind howls," said Shfin ; " what a 
storm is rising." And indeed the storm had come in 
all its fury ; every hour had added to the strength of 
the wind, and it was now roaring in the chimneys and 
moaning and whistling in the long passages of the 
old house. 

"Yes, we have not had such a storm since that 
night, do you remember, when the poor woman came 
in to Abcrsethin in the Aden y don ? I kept her 
several days at The Ship, and then she came on here 
and died in the barn, leaving her little boy behind 
her." 

" Oh yes, well I remember the night," responded 
Sh4n, looking furtively towards the sofa ; " when I 
wrapped the dear child in my shawl and took him 
home with me. To look at him now, Catrin, who 
could believe he was that little child ? He and Sir 
Glynne were on their way to see you to-day when the 
accident happened." 

" Well, they had better come soon," said Catrin, 
"for I have a strange thing to tell them. He, John 
Powys, confessed to me, about a month ago, that 
your leuan was his own son, born in lawful wedlock, 
and that that poor woman was his wife." 

Shan held up both her hands in astonishment. 
Caton pawb ! what are you telling me ? leuan his 
son ! and who was his mother ? " 

" That I can't tell you, but she was a lady, and a 
sweet, pretty creature." 

"Well, well, well, indeed, indeed, I never heard of 
such a thing ! What will leuan say ? " 



246 



A WELSH SINGER. 



^ 



" Well I don't know what he will say, now that he 
has acknowledged him— and, Sh-ln, do you see what 
may be when Miss Poppet comes home to take 
possession of her uncle's property ? " 

" VVhv yes, of course ; my boy will meet her and, 
perhaps. 'take a fancy to her; and I shouldn't like 
that at all, nor lanto any more." .^ ^ ^ . ^ , . 

" More than that, you simpleton, said Latnn, takmg 
another pinch of snuff; " if he is his son, won't he be 
hi« lawful heir, and come in to all his property? 

" Anwl, anwl ! " cried Shan. " and is that possible ? 
Well to be sure, the ways of Providence are wonder- 
ful. 'Catrin fach ! do you think these candles will 

last till dawn ? " , , .. , 

They talked on in subdued tones through the long 
hours of the night, the storm still raging outside, the 
windows rattling, and the shutters banging ; all con- 
trasting strangely with the calm repose of the white 

figure on the sofa. . . r 

Shan's nerves were not so strong as Latrin s, tor, as 
the night progressed, Catrin had several short naps ; 
while Shan, with her arms folded up in her apron, sat 
stiff and straight, staring at her stockinged feet in the 
vain endeavour to keep her eyes from roving to the sofa. 
Both women had left their wooden shoes m the 
farm kitchen, as was their custom when entering the 
best rooms of the house, more especially that m which 

a dead body lay. . . ,, ■ 

At last, when the candles were burning low tn their 
sockets, and the storm seemed inclined to subside a 
little, Catrin opened the heavy shutters, and looked 
out towards the east. Yes ! there was the pale dawn 
looking over the hills, there were the black clouds 
scudding hurriedly before the wind, and, every mo- 
ment, the pink flush of sunrise was growing stronger 
over the grey moor. 

" We can go now," said Catrin, snuffing the candles 
out carefully with her fingers, and opening wide the 
shutters to let In the light. 



THE DEATH CHAMBER. 



247 



They went silently out of the room, locking the 
door behind them. 

In the farm kitchen there was soon a blazing fire 
beside which, in the large open chimney, they sat 
down to it. comforting breakfast of hot toast and tea. 



'^ 



' 1 

i 



'It 



CHAPTER XXVII. 







THE l-UNIiRAL. 

On the following Thursday all signs of a storm had 
disappeared, and Nature wore a smiling face. The 
hedges sparkled with dcwdrops ; the flowers, and 
even the birds, seemed fresher for the rain and wind ; 
the sea and sky vied with each other in their tints of 
blue ; and, as the sombre cortege of the funeral train 
passed out from the gates of Maen Powys, and across 
the moor, nothing could have seemed more out of 
keeping with the environment. Behind the hearse, 
with its nodding plumes, came a mourning carriage, 
in which sat Elizabeth and her mother, immediately 
followed by another with leuan and Sir Glynne 
Meredith. 

" Better so, leuan, than make any fuss," said Sir 
Glynne, when the cortege started. " I had no idea 
Elizabeth would be down to the funeral." 

"Nor I," said leuan. "I never thought of it." 
And he fell into a brown study. Was he going to 
work Elizabeth an injury? She evidently considered 
herself next of kin to John Powys, and expected to 
inherit his money. Was he to be the cause of dis- 
appointment to her ? The thought was embarrassing, 
even painful. 

Following them came carriages, closed and open, 
by the dozen, ranging from Colonel Gwythern's hand- 
some brougham to the red and blue painted cart of 
the Welsh farm-yard. After the vehicles followed an 
indiscriminate crowd of people, forming a long, strag- 
gling train nearly half a mile in length. The moor 

24S 






THE FUNERAL. 



249 



1 



was black with people, who gathered from every hill- 
side and valley, from every farm-house and cottage, 
to swell the procession. Down one hill it went, and 
slowly up another, until it reached Pemnynydd 
churchyard, where all that was mortal of John 
Powys was laid to rest in the gloomy vault in which 
so many of his forefathers reposed, 

Mrs. Powys sobbed when the coffin was lowered 
into the vault, and Elizabeth held a deeply-bordered 
handkerchief to her eyes ; while to leuan's mind re- 
turned the memory of that long, last, earnest look 
fixed upon him by the dying man on the moor ; and, 
when the coffin went out of sight, he was conscious 
only of repeating in his heart, " Forgiven, father, fully, 
as I hope to be forgiven ; " and, amongst all those 
assembled round the vault, there was not one who felt 
more kindly towards John Powys than did the son he 
had neglected. 

Meanwhile, at Maen Powys there had been great 
preparations for the dinner that was to follow the re- 
turn of the mourners from the funeral, Mary, the 
head servant, had surpassed herself in the cooking of 
geese and fowls, while Shin— always called in to help 
upon any unusual occasion, whether of joy or sorrow 
— confined her attention to the boiling of legs of 
mutton and ox tongues. 

Sir Glynne offered his arm to Mrs. Powys, and 
leuan found himself following with Laissabeth into 
the sombre dining-room, where the tables were already 
groaning under the weight of the dishes. 

Mr. Gwynne Edwards, the lawyer from Caer Madoc, 
was present at the table, at one end of which Sir 
Glynne Meredith, as the chief guest, had been asked 
to preside. He was now busy carving a large goose. 
Mr. Edwards, bowing gravely towards leuan, ad- 
dressed him across the table. 

"You should have saved your uncle that trouble, 
and sat at the head of the tabic,"' he said meaningly • 
"but I see you are looking after Miss Powys- that's 



250 



A WELSH SINCi£R. 



ii 



i 



right, that's right. You received my note last 
night ? " 

" Yes," responded leuan ; " or I should have gone 
straight home from the funeral." 

" I should have been vexed if you had done that," 
put in Elizabeth, bending her eyes upon her plate. 
" I hope you will stay a day or two, at least. I am 
sure I shall be glad of your advice." 

" Oh, if I can be of any use," stammered leuan, 
looking, as he felt, confused. 

It was quite late in the afternoon when the guests 
left the house. A few distant cousins remained to 
hear the reading of the will, "just out of curiosity," 
they said ; " not that they expected an>'thing " ; and 
Mr. Gwynnc Edwards requested the assembled 
relatives to follow him into the study. 

" I daresay," he said, when they had ranged them- 
selves round the table, " that most of you are aware 
that for many years I have been Mr. John Powys' 
legal adviser. Perhaps it will not surprise you, there- 
fore, to hear that, a short time ago, he instructed nic 
to draw his will. I did so, and that will I have here," 
tapping his finger on the document. " Its contents 
will surprise you all, as it did me ; but I hope you will 
be able also to rejoice with me that, before he died, 
my old friend, John Powys, was strengthened to do 
his duty, and to right a wrong that had too long con- 
tinued." 

" Perhaps," Sir Glynne interposed, " since I am not 
a relative, you would prefer my retiring ? " 

"By no means," replied Mr. Edwards. "Althoiit,fh 
not a relative, and not inheriting anything under the 
will, you will be much interested and gratified with its 
contents." 

" I don't understand what all this iss about," observed 
Mrs. Powys, drying her sharp, red nose with her deep, 
black-edged kerchief. " My poor brother-in-law had 
no one but my daughter, Laissabcth, to leave his 
money to ; and I don't sec what anybody else has got 



THE FUNERAL. 



351 



to do with the matter," and she cast a scornful glance 
at Sir Glynne and leuan, leaving the two distant 
cousins quite unnoticed. 

Mr. Edwards tapped once more on the document, 
which he slowly opened. 

"A few moments will show, madam." And he 
began to read the will. After perusing the usual 
opening formula, he proceeded : 

" I give and bequeath the whole of my real estate 
of Maen Powys, with its lands, tenements, and heredi- 
taments in fee simple to my son, leuan Gwy lit Powys 
(whom I here acknowledge and declare to be my 
legitimate son by Mary Meredith, the only daughter 
of Robert Meredith of Rerthlwyd, she being my law- 
ful wife), and I also dcsTe to express my deep contri- 
tion for the manner in which I have treated my said 
wife, and also for my neglect of, and cruelty to, my 
son, leuan Gwyllt Powys. I also give and bequeath 
to my son, leuan Gwyllt Powys, the whole of my 
personal estate^^ consisting of the sum of ;(f 35,000, now 
lying in the 3% Consols, bringing in an income of 
^1,000 per annum, conditional upon the marriage of 
niy said son, leuan Gwyllt Powys, with his cousin, 
Elizabeth Powys, my niece (being given to under- 
stand that such marriage is the wish of the young 
people). 

" If either my son, leuan Gwyllt Powys, or my niece, 
Elizabeth Powys, should object to the marriage, my 
son, leuan Gwyllt Po ys, is to give out of such per- 
sonalty the sum of ^,"500 per annum to my niece. 
Elizabeth Powys. 

" Signed, JOHN PoWYS." 

It was attested in the u>ual way. 

When the last word had been read, and Mr. 
Edwards was slowly folding up the will again, Mrs. 
Powys' angry feelings could no longer be con- 
trolled. 



252 



A WELSri SINGER. 



1151 



J| -tf 



" Disfjraceful ! I call it. atui I won't believe it, ami 
I don't consider that you, Mr. Edwards, have acted 
the part of an honourable — " 

"Oh, hush, mother," e.xclaimed Lai.ssabeth, who, 
though bewildered and disappointed beyond expres 
sion, was still calm enoujjh and shrewd enough to sec 
that her best policy lay in conciliation ; in spite of the 
frustration of her hopes, there was a delight 'ul sug- 
gestion in the wording of the will, that, if realised, 
would fulfil her most ardent aspirations. 

As for leuan, his embarrassment was equalled only 
by his regret at being the cause of disquietude tt) 
Elizabeth ; and, had it been possible, he would, with 
the impetuous generosity of youth, have there and 
then resigned his rights to her; but, fortunately, Sir 
Glynne was present, and, between his plain, common 
.sense, and Mr. Edwards' legal advice. leuan was per- 
suaded to accept the situation— at all events, for the 
present— insisting only that Elizabeth should receive 
her income from the date of her uncle's death. Thi. 
would in some measure relieve the awkwardness of 
the situation ; to marry Elizabeth Powys ! this 
thought had never seriously entered his head; he 
admired her, he had flirted with her, perhaps; but 
marry her! it would require much thought; and 
would she marry him? Of this leuan was very doubt- 
ful. He knew that Mr. Camperton was deeply in 
love with her, and he was by no means sure that 
Elizabeth did not reciprocate the feeling. Well ! it 
must be all thought out carefully, but not now, while 
Mr. Edwards was busily gathering up his papers, and 
Mrs. Powys was indignantly leaving the room ; while 
the two distant cousins, disappointed, though they 
would not confess it, were following her across the 
passage; not now, while Elizabeth was blushingly 
offering her hand to bid good-bye. It must be con- 
fessed that both the younir peoph- looked, as they felt, 
exceedingly uncomfortable, and the two elder men' 
.sympathised with their embarrassment. 



m 



THE FJNERAL. 



233 



" You need not look so distressed, Mr. Powys ; I 
think your father's will is both just and ycncrous." 
This from Mr. lul wards. 

" I feci as if I had defrauded my cousin of her rij^ht- 
fiil expectations," said Icuan, with a flushed facf, "and, 
altlioujjh I am thankful to have my dear mother's 
name relieved from calumny, and my own birth 'rom 
stain, I could wish it had been done without injury to 
my cousin." 

" That means that you do not iiit'-"nd to carry out 
your father's evident wishes with regard to your 
marriaj^c with her ? " 

" I have no reason to think that Miss Powys would 
ever consent to such a thing, and I certainly have 
never seriously contemplated it myself; in spite of 
our little talk upon the subject once, uncle — " 

" Ah ! I remember," said Sir Glynne. " Well, we 
will leave these matters for the present, I have now 
only to request you, Mr. Edwards, in looking over my 
brother-in-law's papers, to search for the certificate of 
his marriage with my dear sister ; that would set 
everything right." 

" His own statement in his will has already placed 
that question beyond a legal d-jubt, but I will certainly 
attend to your request. And now good-bye, Mr. 
I'ovvys; you quite understand that you are master 
here, and can make any arrangements you choose, 
with regard to living here yourself, or letting Miss 
Powys remain for the present." 

" Oh, I will never turn her out," said leuan, " and I 
hope you, sir, will use your influence to induce Mrs. 
Powys to make this her home, at least for the present." 

"That is a very good arrangement," said Sir Glynne, 
while he and leuan were driving home together ; "you 
will continue to live with us, leuan ; you will not 
desert us ? " 

" No indeed I I owe everything to you, uncle, and, 
so long as you wish me to remain with you, it will be 
my happiness to do so." 



254 



A WELSH SINGER. 



it 



M 



" Well, until you marry," agreed Sir Glynne. 

Icuan shrugged his shoulders with a comical smile. 

"Then," continued Sir Glynne, " I hope you will settle 
down at Maen Powys, and make your name honoured 
and respected in the country." 

Lady Meredith's astonishment was great, when she 
heard of the wording of John Powys' will. 

•' How delightful, my dear boy ! I congratulate you ; 
what a happy ending to all the years of anxiety you 
have had on the subject of your birth and parentage ! 
Poor old John Powys ! I always said he was a good 
man." 

Sir Glynne smiled mischievously. 

" Yes, poor man," said leuan, " I shall never forget 
his last look at me." 

The time slipped quickly by after John Powys' 
funeral. Shan and lanto saw a great deal of their 
boy, and seemed to grow young again, while laughing 
at his jokes, and listening to his tales of London, of 
Rome, and, most wonderful of all, of the mountains 
always covered with snow. 

"Caton pawb!" cried Shan, "Howyr bach!" chimed 
in lanto ; and then they would have their simple, 
though plentiful, sup[)er of milk porridge .ind delicious 
brown bread and butter ; after which the two old 
people would accompany leuan on his way home to 
the Hall, turning back where the moor nr.erged into 
the roadway, ? c returning, arm in arm, in the broad 
mojnlight to their cottage, where they finished the 
day with one of their old Welsh hymns. 

Elizabeth had been obliged to return to London to 
keep a concert cngagcmcMit ; and Mrs. Powys, think- 
ing 'discretion the better part of valour,' had dropped 
her tone of indignation, and did all in her power to 
make things comfortable for leuan, hoping that he 
would follow the suggestion of John Powys' will, and 
that she should yet see her daughter mistress of Maen 
Powys. 

Sir Glynne and leuan returned to London after a 



THE FUNERAL. 



255 



month's stay in Wales ; but, before they left, they 
paid frequent visits to old Catrin and Dan Howclls. 

" Well, it is just as it should be, and just as I knew 
it would be," said Catrin, on one of these occasions, 
" after I had that conversation with him about a month 
ago. Howyr bach ! he changed completely from the 
day Dr. Bevan told him he could not live a year I 
He had some bad Mlncss in his inside ; at first they 
say it made him more bad tempered than ever ; but, 
oh, anwl ! when it comes to the last fight, death is the 
master ; anyway, a month ago he was as meek as a 
lamb, and told me of his own accord that leuan was 
his son ; but he never told me that Miss Mary Mere- 
dith, whom we all thought had died in London, was 
his wife, and the mother of his child. He told me to 
tell Sh&n and lanto when he was dead, and I did ; 
but I never told anyone else. Caton pawb » if Catrin 
Howells were to begin to tell all the secrets entrusted 
to her, Abersethin would be turned topsy-turvy ! " 

" Yes, it has all ended well," agreed Sir Glynne ; 
" and now the only thing is that the certificate of her 
marriage has never been found ; it makes no real 
difference, but it would be a satisfaction to me to " now 
where they were married." 

Here Dan seemed ^o be seized with a fit ; he 
chuckled so continuously, that at last he seemed to 
lose his wheezy breath in laughter. Catrin rose and 
thumped hiin on the back. 

" What's the matter with the man ? Now don't 
you go away, sir, with the impression he is a born 
uiiot, for, HI spite of his funny ways," here she gave 
him another thump, "he is the cutest man in Aber- 
sethin. 

At this juncture Dan had another fit ; and next he 
did a most unheard of thing, he took off his hat ex- 
hibiting to view a bald head no inhabitant of Aber- 
sethin had ever seen. 

Catrin gasped. 

" What's the man doing now ? " 



f» 







25G A WELSH SINGER. 

" It's the very identical hat you used to wear when 
I was a hoy, Dan," said leuan. 

" Yes, and I do bcHcve wnen I was a boy, too," 
addeil his uncle. 

'• No," said Dan seriously, and looking sideways up 
from his chest, on which his chin still rested ; " 'twas 
my best hat then. I took it for every day about ten 
)cars aqo, and I took this," fumblin}; inside the crown, 
" from the lininj^ of my old hat ; there ! " 

And he placed a small slip of yellow faded paper 
on J.\c table ; then subsided, with another chuckle, 
into his usual state of silence. It was only by fjrunt- 
ing answers to Catrin's questions that the history of 
the paper was got out of him. Sir Glynne, rather 
disliking its greasy look, handed it to leuan, who. 
spreac ig it out, read it aloud. 

It was the certificate of the marriage of John Powys 
to Mary Meredith, at a small church in the neigh- 
bourhood of Carnarvon, where John Powys had sjjont 
much of his time before his father's death. 

" Where did you get this, you chuckling fool .' " 
asked Catrin, forgetting her late description of hti 
husband. 

" Ah !" replied Dan, with a knowing wink. 

" You took it from the lining of your old hat," said 
leuan. 

" Yes," grunted Dan. 

" 1 low long had it been in your other hat ? " 

" Since the storm." 

" What storm, man ? " from Catrin. 

" When the woman came." 

" What woman ?" 

Dan screwed his eye round again to look at leu.iii. 
and with a nod, replied : 

" Your mother." 

" Did she give it to you ? " asked Catrin again. 

" No ; it stuck to my glass, and I put it in my h.if 

"And thou hast kept it all these years (lom 
me ? ■' 



THE FUNERAL. 



;57 



Dan chuckled. 

" Didn't I tell you he was cute ? '' said Catrin. 

" Blessed old hat ! " said leuaii. " I have often 
thought of it, but never dreamt it contaiiied anythiiu^ 
so precious ; except yuur head, of course, Dan." 

Here the old man went into such spasms of 
laughter that he nearly lost his breath, and was once 
more silent. 

" Well ! this is a find," said Icuan. " I suppose we 
may have it, Dan .' " 

When he and Sir Glynne were preparing to go, 
Dan seemed to be bursting with a strong desire to 
say something; his whole frame shook, and, after 
opening his mouth two or three times in vain, he burst 
out with : 

" You couldn't have got your property without my 
help ; " and not a word more did he say that day. 

" Well done, Dan," cried Sir Glynne, heartily clap- 
ping him on the back ; " you have done a grand thing, 
my man. Kept this all these years, and brought it 
out just at the right time." 

But Dan was asleep. 

" It would be cruel," .said Sir Glynne, when they 
emerged into the sunshine outside, " to su-gest tiiat, 
if he had brought it out sooner, it would have been of 
more use. Think what a difference it would have 
made, Icuan." 

" Never mind, uncle ; ' let bygones be bj-goncs,' and 
'all's well that ends well,' and lots of other proverbs 
to the same effect ; and I never could wish my past 
to be different from what it has l)cen ; but, as fur my 
.uturc, it seems a perfect maze." 

" I I'm ! " said Sir (Jlyinic, " n(jt much to grumble at, 
I think. I have once or twice interfered with jour 
plans and intentions, Icuan, but, henceforth, I shall 
leave jou to \oursclf entirelj- ; I have {)erfect trust in 
your good sense. My only and last advice i>. don't 
be ill a hurrv." 

rKioK- ihiy Icfl ii iieighbuurhood, i\iary Meretiith s 



If 



M 


I . 


i 


! 




l| 




I 

T 






25S 



A WELSH SINGER. 



remains were removed from the corner of the church- 
yard, where they had hitherto lain in a pauper's 
grave, and placed beside her father and mother, her 
name being added to the simple cross that marked 
their resting-place. 



■. f 



PP J,,; 


*(, 


1 1 ^f 



M'. 



U'li: 



ch- 
ar's 
her 
ced 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 



SIS. 



THE DINNER PARTY. 

MiFANWY and Mrs. Koose had been out shopping 
and were rctmnin.c: home tired out with the question- 
able pleasures of choosin^^ silks and laces and fallals 
generally. They were walking leisurely along, when 
an open carnage, drawn by a pair of handsome bays 
drove past them briskly, but not before Mifanwy had 
recognised .the occupants, Lady Meredith and Eliza- 
beth accompanied by leuan, who at the moment was 
laughmg heartily at some remark of his young com- 
panion s A pang of jealousy shot through Mifanwv's 
heart, and for the remainder of the way she was silent 
and preoccupied. She still felt sure that she could 
win back leuan from Elizabeth; but, to tell the 
truth he did not hold so high a place in her esteem 
as when her faith in his constancy had been unshaken 
She knew that, as La Belle Russe. the admired and 
flat cred favourite ., the public, she could win him 
back ; but his forgetfulness of Mifanwv- the .shco- 
hcrdess wounded her spirit, and took the flavour out 

th\ '■ Y'''^, '^"^ •'"'''^^^^^ '^^'- ^^^^" door, she 
had determined no longer to shun leuan ; and Rhvs 

Morgan was pleased and surprised at the willingness 

with which she acceded to his request that Lady 

Meredith might call upon her; he was still furthe^ 

pleased, a few days later, on receiving an invitation 

Gardes' "^^ ^'"^ ^""^ '' ^•""- ^' M-b-oS 

" That's ricfht." he said nanmn- v«<'- o— «-^-^- ., 
shoulder : - and you are gSng ,S be f ;wl? girfn*' 

259 ' 




26o 



A WFLSJI SINOKK. 



and have no moic mysteries." Mifanwy blushed 
rather guiltily. 

" Have patience with me still, master ; for now I 
really have a little plan, as you once called it ; let me 
sit on this footstool, where you can't see my face, and 
I will confess to you all I have in my mind." 

And then she told him of her determination to 
make leuan's acquaintance as La Helle Russe, .ind so 
to influence him, and remind him of the past, that his 
better nature would be awakened, and he would re- 
turn to his allegiance to the shepherd girl, whom 
he seemed to have forgotten. Rh)s Morgan looked 
serious. 

" Remember, my child, what strength of mind and 
character you require. For a man in his position to 
marry a shepherdess, barefooted and tattered, would, 
without doubt, be a great sacrifice." 

" But," urged Mifanwy, "a man in his position, or 
any position, should be faithful to his promise. 
• Onnore requires it,' as lanto used to say ; let him, at 
least, seek her out, and if he finds her unworthy of 
him, he is not bound morally by his promise." 

" H'm ! " said Rhys Morgan contemplatively, " I 
am afraid you are entering upon a path of thorns, my 
cliild, which will end by piercing you to the heart." 

" Hut, if I succeed, master," disputed Mifanwy, 
looking up into his face, "what will you say to me? " 

" I shall say you have even more power over the 
hearts of men and women than I thought you had." 

" But you will help me, master, by keeping my 
secret still ? " 

" So far as I can, child." 

And when the appointed evening came, and he 
saw Mifanwy enter the drawing-room at Marbrook 
Gardens, he felt how difficult a task she had imposed 
upon herself and him. She was dressed in pure 
white of some soft gauzy material gathered high to 



the 



thi" ' 



liijnrh 



/■-*■, •■•I..- /-\r» /^'irr^-if ir^ti i- 

•_ ; t ; I I -•„*!! V t** ' "tt 



fastened at her neck, and she wore no ornaments ex- 



.»jiT»«iiJP_ 



THE DINNER PARTY. 



361 



cept a necklet of gold with a very handsome pendant 
set with emeralds, a present from M. ValprcS that she 
valued very much. Her brown-black hair was simply 
drawn back above her ears, and fastened in heavy 
coils behind her head; her melting brown eyes, 
fnnged with the long eyelashes, looked darker and 
softer even than usual, and heightened the impression 
of her foreign extraction. Her soft white complexion 
was redeemed from paleness by the small red mouth ; 
yes, no doubt she was a beautiful woman, but though 
not unconscious of her beauty (what woman is ?), she 
was wholly free from vanity and its attendant follies. 
Reality and simplicity ruled her life, so far as the re- 
stramts of society and a professional career allowed. 
"I am so sorry," said Lady Meredith, at dinner, 
that my nephew has not arrived ; he returns from 
Scotland to-day, and was to have been here in the 
afternoon. I cannot think what has detained him." 

Mifanwy had, of course, noted his absence, and be- 
gun to wonder whether Fate would persistently delay 
the.r meetmg. After dinner in the drawing-room, she 
sank into the depths of a luxurious armchair, and 
listened with interest while Sir Glynne and Rhys 
Morgan discussed Welsh politics, and Lady Meredith 
and Mrs Roose the important question of Tricot 
stitch ! She was silent and pre-occupied, when the 
door opened and admitted leuan. He passed behind 
Lady Merediths chair, and sfjopirig over her, kissed 
her forehead. 

;' leuan, my dear boy, I am glad you have come." 
Hullo. leuan, cried Sir Glynne, " better late than 
never ; come and be introduced to Miss Roose" 

leuan bowed low, and Mifanwy returned his greet- 
ing. Rhys Morgan watched her anxiously • it re- 
quired a strong curb upon her feelings to enable her 
to p, through the ordeal without flinching ; .he felt 
certain that one look of recognition in her eyes would 
awaken at once leuan's sle.-pip.r m,.m.^ry• b-t • *-e 
Kept a tight grasp upon herself, and bo "' 



wing cahn 



>■. 



■1 4 



m 



1 n. hi 



262 



A WELSH SINGER. 



though not coldly, she entered naturally into con- 
versation with him. 

" I was detained by an accident to the train before 
mine," he explained. " I have managed your busi- 
ness all right for you, uncle. I will just tell you so 
much to relieve your mind. It is a long tiring 
journey from lulinburgh ; have you ever been that 
way ? " turning to Mifanwy. 

•* Never," she answered ; " I have travelled very 
little ; I hope to go there some time ; I am reading 
Sir Waller Scott's novels for the first time, and am 
longing to see Scotland." 

" I envy you," said leuan, " both your first reading 
of Sir Walter and your first view of Edinburgh." 

"You have travelled a great deal, perhaps," she 

.said. 

" Well, a good deal. I haven't been to Australia, 
or to China, or to the Arctic regions ; so I can't be 
considered a great traveller now-a-days." 

Mifanwy smiled. 

" It is a great privilege to be able to sec the world 
for yourself; I can only dream of it; perhaps my 
dreams would be spoiled were I to see realities." 

" In some cases, certainly," said leuan, and then he 
was silent. 

What was this strange influence that was stealing 
over him niice morc'^ Why did this wiuiiaii's presence 
awake within him the snisc <>f disquit tude ? Tin 
marvellous dejiths of her brown cys enchained him, 
her voice was soft and low, and yet it awoke withii. 
him a feeling of restless distontent. 

Lady Meredith joining the group, he endeavoured 
to interest himself in what she was saying, and tu 
withdraw himself from the subtle iniliiciice of La 
Iklle Russe. Hut it was useless: every ;-;racefid move- 
ment, every tone of her voice, even the fold > of her 

,t ., .■.^.>n ,.,■,.■■ liitn :4iul 



s.ift (itapcry, seeii;-;-'! to 



helpless as a moth about a candle, he couiil nut 
resist the charm of her personality. 



THE DINNER PARTY. 



263 



" 1 asked Elizabeth to dine with us to-night," said 
Lady Meredith, " but she had an engagement ; she 
was going to a conrert. I wonder she does not give up 
singing professionally, now that she is so well provided 
for." 

"Yes, I have said the same thing to her," said 
leuan ; " but she tells mc that she has engagements 
for another year." 

"And besides," put in Rhys Morgan, "now that 
she has tasted the sweets of public praise and flattery, 
I doubt whether Miss Powys will ever be happy with- 
out them." 

leuan was silent, and looked thoughtful. 

" Oh, I don't think she is so wrapt up in her public 
life," he said excusingly ; " what do you think, Miss 
Russe ? You must know more of its seductions and 
delights than almost anyone." 

" Well, it has a certain charm," replied La Belle ; 
" and it grows upon one ; but I think it lies less in 
the flattery and admiration of the public than in 
the feeling of power and influence it gives you over 
your fellow-creatures, the communion it brings about 
between soul and soul. You can convey through 
music what you could not say in words ; I think that 
is its charm to me ; but I could abandon public life 
without regret, if I might keep my voice, and still 
sing to my own friends, and in my own home." 

" liut surely you can do that now ? " 
_ " Very soon I sliall be able to ; but I cannot afford 
It yet. What lovely flowers," she said, pointing to 
some in a vase beside her. 

" Yes, I fancy thi\- came from Wales ; we often 
have them sent up." 

" Dear thinj^s ! " sht^ mi-.rmurcd, drawing them 
nearer, and picturin;j[ the woods and hills around 
Glunarvon. 

" ( '^jrmf w.t-\o o.- - r •» /i _ j .1 • 1 %t 

said leuan. 

" Wh\- do you think so ? " 



I 



$■ 



264 



A WELSH SINGEK. 



•f: 




" You are wearing them." 

" So are you," she answered, with a mischievous 
smile, and pointing to his buttonhole. 

" Yes, it has been my favourite lately ; ever since 
the beginning of May, when you dropped one and 1 
picked it up." 

La Belle blushed, but she took no further notice of 
the remark. " I am very fond of them," she said, 
" but I do not like to say I have a favourite amongst 
flowers. If I say I prefer a rose, I instantly remember 
the beauties of the lil)-, and, if I say a cowslip is my 
favourite flower, a pale primrose rises up and looks 
reproachfully at me. If I were to tell you my real 
reason for wearing carnations, you would laugh at 
me. 

" I am sure I should not — do tell me." 

" Well, I wear them because they arc — they are — 
becoming." 

" There is no doubt of that," looking admiringly at 
the bunch under her chin. 

" Not that I don't love them for themselves, sweet 
darlings, I do," she said, bending her head so that her 
cheek rested lovingly upoii them. 

" What a simple girl .she is," thought leuan, " how 
different from Elizabeth, with her mincing ways antl 
palpable mannerisms ; and yet how charming in her 
simplicity ! " 

Rhys Morgan here approached them. " Lady 
Meredith does not like to ask you to sing, Miss Russe; 
but I tell her you are always ready, and will be 
delighted. Am I ric^ht or wrong ? " 

" Oh, right, indeed ! I will sing with pleasure." 

"Here is my portfolio," he went on; "will you 
choose something from it ?" 

And once more, after several years, Mifanwy's head 
and leu in's bent side by side over the same engross- 
ing ohiert. 

"What is this?" he asked, choosing a song, " The 
Enchantress." 



THE DINNKK PARTY. 



265 



" Oh, yes, my favourite song ; I will sing that." 

" It seems to be your own ; here is your name. 
Belle Russc." 

" Yes, it is mine ; Mr. Rhys Morgan often plays 
my songs for me, and has many of them in his 
keeping." 

And she sang the song she loved so much, pouring 
into it the fulness of her heart. They listened 
breathlessly, while "The Enchantress" wove her 
spells, and s.uig of cloud and tempest and riven s.Tils ; 
then, suddenly changing into soft, melting tones, the 
siren, addressing her human lover, went on, 

" But for thee, no storms shall be, 
But a calm on earth and sea. 
Gentle rivers, teeming mines. 
Golden harvests, fragrant vines, 
And a sunlight bland and warm, 
^nd a moon of dreamy charm. 
For, believe me, love like ours 
Is the power of magic powers I " 

" Oh ! what a privilege to be able to sing like that ! 
No wonder you have delighted and maddened the 
crowd ! " exclaimed Sir Glynne. " No wonder La 
Belle Russc is their idf)l ! " 

leuan had been standing by the piano, with arms 
folded, looking earnestly at the singer ; her tones 
entranced him as they did the others ; but it was 
inexplicable to him, this tumult of feeling that her 
voice raised in him. The wash of the sea seemed to 
be really In his ears ; a vision of the cliffs, and the 
sheep, and the rugged paths, where a boy and girl 
stood close together, rose up before him. Yes! and 
the very sound of his own long forgotten words, " I 
will return to thee, lass ! J last" ever known me break 
a promise ? " 

" It is a beautiful aong," said leuan, when her v(;icc 
had died away. 

" Yes," she said ; " and it carries me away. Did 



(J 

i- 



|! 



MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 



I.I 



1.25 



2.8 



yo 2 "™^ 



|12 

14.0 



1.4 



2£ 
2.2 

1 2.0 
1.8 

1.6 



^ APPLIED INA^GE Inc 

^^ 1653 East Mam Street 

r.S Rochester. Ne« York 14609 USA 

Jg (716) 482 - 0300 - Phone 

^= (716) 288 - 5989 - ran 




266 



A WELSH SINGER. 



you like it ? " looking down with a little flush on her 
face. 

"Like it! That isn't the word," cried leuan 
earnestly. " It enchained me ; it entranced me ; it 
carried me back to the days of my childhood : to the 
sea, to the cliffs, and to the sweet west wind." 

" My song was scarcely of that," she said, with a 
pleased smile. 

" That is the strange part of it," he replied. " Your 
song was of the torn sail and the thunder cloud ; my 
thoughts were of a different scene." 

" So were mine," she answered. 

" Happy man ! " thought leuan. 

"What do you think of Miss Powys' singing?" 
asked Sir Glynne. 

" She has a beautiful voice," replied La Belle, " and 
her trills in that bird song are marvellous, I think." 

" I wish she could have been here this evening," 
said Lady Meredith. " She has not many evenings 
to spare, and this evening, I know, she could not 
come." 

" And you, too, dear," put in Mrs. Roose, " have a 
busy day before you to-morrow." 

" Yes, a lovely day ! " replied La Belle ; " singing 
in the morning, singing in the afternoon, and singing 
in the evening ! " 

Rhys Morgan shook his head reprovingly. 

" Oh, that comes oily once in a way," she laughed ; 
" but I thoroughly enjoy it when it does." 

When the good-byes had been said, and Mrs. 
Roose and La Belle had departed, cloaked and 
hooded, leuan returned from the hall door in time 
to hear Lady Meredith's remarks upon the visitor. 

" What a strange girl ! She seems the very em- 
bodiment of music ! leuan, you don't say anything! 
Lsn't slic lovely ? Wasn't her sinj^ing delicious ? " 

" Yes, aunt, all that you say." 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



A MORNING RIDE. 



M 

'V 



1 « 



j- 



A DAY or two afterwards, when Mrs. Roose and 
Mifanvvy were alone, the door opened, and Tom 
Pomfrey entered unannounced. He dropped in so 
often that he had come to be looked upon by 
Bessie as an habitue of the house. 

Mifanwy threw her work away, and rushed to meet 
him. " Oh, Tom, I am so glad ! Have you brought 
Sultan ? " 

\ " Not to-day. I left him comfortably munching his 

oats." 

" But I am longing to see him, and you too. Tom. 
indeed!" 

"Oh, yes," said Tom, "I am quite aware that I 
come after Sultan ; but I wanted to talk to you about 
mm. 

" There is nothing wrong with him, I hope." 

" Nothing. Wrong, indeed ! No, he is quite fit. I 
would have ridden him to-day, but that Bill could not 
be spared to hold him." 

Here Mrs. Roose was called away on some domestic 
matter. Tom was restless, and seemed to have lost 
his usual placidity. 

" What is the matter ? " asked Mifanwy. " I know 
there is something on your mind you want to tell 
me." 

" Er— er— well, just this, Mifanwy: I don't think 
you have been looking well lately." 

" Oh, I am quite well," she answered, interrupting 
him. 

267 



, 1 1 
■ k' 



id 






■III! 
'I 






i 



'i«J 



t? 






268 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I ■ V 



Kl 






ii. 1 






■m 



" Well, I fancied," continued Tom, " that you were 
not, and I thout^iit I would ask you whether a ride 
every day would not be good for you." 

" A ride ! " she cried, and she clapped her hands. 
" Oh, Tom, how delightful, but—" 

" But what ? " 

" Oh, heaps of buts. First but, I have no riding- 
habit ; second but, I have no time ; and third but, T 
have no one to ride with me." 

" But," said Tom, smiling, " you can buy a riding- 
habit ; and you can surely spare one hour in the day. 
Your third but is the most difificult to answer ; but 
again — surely amongst all your grand acquaintances 
there must be many a. man who would be proud to 
ride with you." 

" Yes," said Mifanwy, looking down contemplatively, 
with her finger to her chin ; " but I could not ask them ; 
and to tell you the truth, Tom, I don't like them. 
Certainly Miss Majoribanks asked me one day to 
ride with her and her brother, but I declined, having 
no horse and no habit." 

" No horse ! You know you have Sultan, the finest 
horse in London, always at your command, and that 
is exactly what I wanted to speak to you about. 
Mifanwy," he went on, laying his hand on her soft 
grey dress, not daring to touch her hand, " you know 
how it is with me. Don't be frightened, I am not 
going to say a word more about my love, but I be- 
seech you to let me have the only happiness possible 
for me while I live." 

" And what is that, Tom ? " she said, looking down, 
distressed. 

" Let me have the happiness of doing all I can for 
you. Do not refuse me anything I may offer you ; 
and if you ever think I am making a sacrifice for you, 
call to mind that it is my greatest happiness." 

" Oh, Tom, it makes me very unhappy to thir.K that 
I am the continual cause of sorrow to you, who have 
been so good to me, and whom I love as if you were 



-I- 



» 1 



A MORNING RIDE. 



269 



my own brother. Yes, indeed, indeed, I feel that 
the time can never come when I should be con- 
tent to lose you out of my life ; and yet — and yet I 
must cause you pain." 

" That cannot be helped ; it is beyond your control 
and mine ; things arc just so with me, and can never 
be altered ; but I do feel a great pleasure in doing 
anything for you. So, now, get your riding-habit at 
once, and on Monday I will send Sultan to take you 
for a ride." 

"But, I cannot ride alone. Now, if fou would 
come with me." 

His face flushed. " Will you have me with you, 
Mifanwy ? Think well, La Belle Russe escorted by 
Tom Pomfrey the circus man ! " 

" No ; Mifanwy accompanied by her best friend and 
brother." 

Tom straightened himself, and said, " Well, so be it; 
but only once, or until you have found somebody else 
to ride with. Here comes Mrs. Roose; let us see 
what she will say to it." 

That good lady, though fully alive to the benefit 
her charge would reap from a daily ride, hesitated a 
moment when she learned that the girl would be ac- 
companied by Tom. He saw her hesitation, and 
guessed the cause of it at once. 

"You think, Mrs. Roose, that, amongst all her 
acquaintances, she might find a better escort than Tom 
Pomfrey. I quite agree with you, and so as soon as 
you have arranged for another escort for her, I will 
retire ; meanwhile, nobody need know who I am ; 
and I think my appea ance is not so different from 
other people's as to attract attention." 

" Well, I don't want to make you vain," smiled Mrs. 
Roose, " but I think there are few better-looking men 
in the Park than you, and I am certain there will be 
no better rider." 

" Oh, that goes without saying for us both, Mifanwy, 
doesn't it ? " 



i'. 

I 



■ V. 



i 



lii 



H 5'' 



11 






I; 



m 



I - T 







270 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Be:^^ 



"Yes, indeed ! and, oh, to think I shall ride dear 
old Sultan again." 

" Monday at twelve, then," concluded Tom, " and 
don't forget the riding-habit." 

On Monday the sun shone out bravely, the air was 
as crisp and clear as London chimneys would allow. 
Mifanwy stood before Mrs. Roose, exhibiting herself 
in her new riding-habit, whip, gloves, and bowler hat 
complete. 

" Well, you do look nice," said Mrs. Roose, putting 
on her glasses ; " fits splendidly, my dear ; not a crease 
or a wrinkle." 

" Oh here is Tom at the door, and here comes 
Sultan led by Bill ; " doesn't he look lovely, Mrs. 
Roose ? " 

" Yes, he is a beauty, and so is Mr. Pomfrey's bay." 

" Ready, Mifanwy ? " inquired Tom, opening the 
door. 

" Yes, quite." And she ran down the stairs before 
him. 

Sultan arched his glossy neck, and when Mifanwy 
kissed his forehead, and spoke a few soft words close 
to his nostrils, he neighed with pleasure, and pawed 
the ground impatiently. She sprang lightly into the 
saddle, and they turned their horses' heads towards 
the Park, Sultan positively dancing up the street, 
until his mistress patted his neck, and said, " Quiet, 
Sultan, quiet ! these curvettcs and caracoles don't suit 
the London streets, old boy. We must both be sober 
and proper here. Oh, but if I once had you on the 
hills in Wales, wouldn't we hav^ a flying gallop ! But, 
Tom, what a lovoly saddle and bridle. I don't 
remember these at the circus." 

" No, they are my present to you, Mifanwy." 

" Oh, you arc too kind to me." 

" Remember our compact ; and here we are in 
Rotten Row. Now let us have a canter." 

And off they went, as handsome a pair as ever rode 
over its well-kept course. Many an admiring glance 



A MORNING RIDE. 



271 



was cast after them, as they cantered on ; especially 
at La Belle, who managed her spirited horse with such 
ease and gracefulness. She was recognised by many 
people. 

"La Belle Russe! I have never seen her ride 
before." 

"What a magnificent horse, and how well she 
manages him ! And who is that handsome man with 
her ? " etc., etc. 

" A lovely day," said Tom, when they stopped after 
their canter ; " as if it were made for your hrst ride, 
Mifanwy. Are you cnjo)ing it ? " 

" Oh, intensely; yon have given me a pleasure ; and 
this beautiful saddle and bridle. How snail I thank 
you properly ? " 

" By using them every day." 

At this moment two gentlemen were seen ap- 
proaching, and Mifanwy recognised Sir Glynne Mere- 
dith and leuan. Both raised their hats, and she felt her 
face flush and her heart beat faster. 

" How many people seem to know you ! " said Tom. 
" Who were those two now ? " 

" Sir Glynne Meredith and Mr. leuan Powys, his 
nephew." 

Tom was silent for a moment, and when he spoke 
again, his face had altered visibly. " You have met 
him, then ? " 

" Yes ; he knows me a little as La Belle Russe, but 
not as Mifanwy." 

" Do you mean to say he has not recognised you ?" 
asked Tom, a little scorn in his voice. 

" No." 

" Well, you certainly are totally different from the 
little ' brown bird ' we first knew, but I think I 
should have known you anywhere, and under an\' 
disguise." 

Mifanv/y both looked and felt embarrassed; she 
could not explain to him the plan she had laid out for 
herself, to win leuan back to his former allefriance so 



'I*. 



\\\ 



n 



?1 i 

I 

1 



'->lk-i<i 



.!| 



I 



I i 
, i 



I f^ 



272 



A WELSH SINGER. 



ih 



!1 







she said nothing, and they rode on in silence, and 
presently out of the gates and homewards ; Tom with 
a little fresh aching in his heart, Mifanwy with a f'-esh 
glow in hers, for she had seen leuan ; she had seen a 
light in his eyes at the sight of her ; and this had been 
the cause of her heightened colour, and the flutter at 
her heart. 

" Who was that with La Belle Russe > " inquired Sir 
Glynne of leuan. " How beautifully she rides ! " 

'• Yes," said leuan, " and what a magnificent horse 
she rode ! A thoroughbred Arab, I should think." 

" And her friend was well mounted too," returned 
Sir Glynne. " They seemed to be on very intimate 
terms." 

" Yes," assented Icuan sulkily, and he added under 
his breath, " Confound the fellow ! " And then, by the 
association of ideas, he remembered the words of her 
song : 

" But for thee my hair shall braided be." 

" Was it for him, I wonder ? Was this the happy mnn 
of whom she was thinking when she sang that song?" 

The next day was dark and wet, so there was no 
ride for La Belle, but Miss Majoribanks and her 
brother came to call. Nothing less than a thunder- 
storm would have kept her at home if she had 
arranged to go out. She lived with her brothei, 
Colonel MajoVibanks, and was governed by one idea, 
vie, that before all men and things, he was to be 
considered. 

" You will come and dine with us on Monda\-, I 
hope ; my brother would like it so much, you know. 
I wish I had got that grey silk instead of the green ; 
my brother would have liked it so much. Of course, 
I am glad, for the sake of the country, that there is 
to be no war after all ; but, personally, I was hoping 
the Government would have been firm, and that we 
should fight out the question ; my brother would have 
liked it so much." 




A MORNING RIDE. 






And now she was calling upon Mifan\v\ to follow 
up her previous proposal that she shoukl ride wilh thorn. 

" I saw you yesterday, my dear, and that you had 
got over the difliculty of the lioise ;uid the ridin;; 
habit, or I wouldn't have proposed it again. I\iy 
brother would like it so much, you know ; wouldn't 
you, Sam dear ? " 

"Oh, certainly; should be delighted to have the 
honour of escorting you. Miss Roose." 

For Colonel Majoribanks had one fixed idea too, 
and that was that his sister was always right ; accord- 
ingly he invariably assented to her plans; it saved 
him the trouble of arranging for himself 

" Well," replied La Belle, " now that I have both 
horse and riding-habit, I will come with pleasure." 

" What a lovely horse you had ; everybody is talk- 
ing about him. Is he your own ? " 

" Yes, my very own ; given to me by a very dear 
friend, who is keeping him for me at present." 

"How nice," remarked Miss Majoribanks, who never 
hesitated to inquire into the minutia; of her friends' 
private concerns. " And you only hire the brougham, 
I am told." 

" Yes, it is always at my disposal." 

" And how much wiser," joined in the colonel ; " for 
a lady living alone, it saves so much trouble." 

And so it was arranged between them that every 
day at twelve o'clock they should call for La Belle, 
when the weather would permit. 

In the afternoon of the day after Miss Majoribank's 
visit, Tom Pomfrey appeared. 

He had come, he said, to see how Mifanwy felt after 
her ride, and also about something else. 

Mifanwy looked embarrassed and unhappy, and 
Tom, with the sensitiveness of true love, quickly 
divined the cause of her discom.fort. 

" Have you found anyone to ride with vou. Mifanwy? 
ior I tear my father would grumble if' I were awav 
every day at noon." 



13 

■ : » ■ 



i: 



i 



ii 



t- 1". 



m^ 



J ''J 



274 



A WELSH SINGER. 









it' 



■^r 



" Ah ! dear friend," she answered, laying her small 
hand on his, " I see throujjh your kind subterfuge ; is 
there anyone like you, Tom, so loving, so true, and so 
unselfish?" 

"Oh, lots, Mifanwy, lots. I hope, for your sake, 
there is one, at all events ; " and he turned laughinj^ly 
to Mrs. Roosc. "Come to my help, Mrs. Roose ; she 
is loading me with compliments, and utterly spoiling 
me with flattery. I am glad tu hear you have founcl 
an escort for her daily rides ; it would be a pity to 
leave them off; and there is Sultan eating his hcaJ 
off in the stable ; you know it would be a kindness tu 
give him a little exercise." 

" Colonel Majoribanks and his sister called yester- 
day and arranged it all, Tom ; but I do hope you are 
not going to cut me altogether ; you will ride with 
me again one day ? " 

"Oh, one day," he replied jauntily; "when things 
are going more smoothly, and when my father is in a 
better humour ; but good-bye now ; I am very busy 
to-day." 

He held out his hand, Mifanwy grasped it in both 
her own, and, with a lingering look into his eyes, said 
slowly and sorrowfully, " Good-bye, dear old Tom ; I 
thank you for everything." 

Tom pressed her hand in return. " Good-bye, dear, 
I understand it all ; don't trouble to explain anything 
to Tom Pomfrey." And he took a hurried and rather 
boisterous departure to hide his feelings, which, in 
truth, required his strongest efforts to control. 

Next day saw Mifanwy again taking her morning 
ride in the Park, accompanied by Miss Majoribanks 
and her brother. It was not lonp- before they saw 
leuan riding alone ; he recognised them at once, and 
joined their party; and thus it came about that 
Mifanwy and he frequently met in their daily rides, 
and to leuan at least it was an hour of unaiioyed 
delight. 

" What a beauty Sultan is," he said one day when 



A MORNING niDE. 



'■/ 3 



they were rkWn^ to;^cthcr, havinff left Miss Mnj^ri- 
banks and her brother with some of th-ir numerous 
acquaintances; "he is the admiration of everybody, 
and I notice that he seems to understand every tone 
of your voice." 

" Yes," a^jrecd La Belle pensively, for she was 
thinking of Tom, "we have been friends for years, 
Sultan and I ! and we understand each other ; don't 
ue, old boy ? and you should sec how deli:(htcd he is 
when I put my arm round his neck and kiss his 
forehead." 

" No wonder," he said. 

La Belle lau;^^hed merrily, and Icuan gazed dis- 
tractedly at the little dimple on her chin the fresh 
young laugh brought out. But the girl became sud- 
denly serious. 

" Do you think it possible," she asked gravely, 
" that there can be any subtle understanding between 
a human being and a dumb animal ? I am almost 
certain that when I touch Sultan, or ride him, he 
understands my feelings ; when I am happy he 
prances and tosses his head, and dances along with 
joy ; and, when I am sad, he walks along so soberly 
and dejectedly ; I have even seen him tremble once 
when I was sobbing." 

" I can quite believe it," agreed leuan ; " but that 
opens up quite a new train of thouc^ht to me. I do 
not like to hear that you are ever sad, but to think of 
your sobbing is real pain to me." 

" Oh, that was a long time ago. I ought not to 
have alluded to it ; it will give you a v/rong impres- 
sion ; it was when my life was not so smooth and so 
happy as it is now." 

" Before you became the admiration and the delight 
of the whole world, as you are nov/." 

" Yes," said IMifanwy simply; " but, do you know, I 



1 p -^ ff^ cj 



•\r:i 






;5 ariu 






the opera season commences here ? I leave all my 
arrangements to M. Valpre. I am not a bit of a bu?i- 



'■■t : 

i ' 

m 



lit 

h 



ii. 



j-X 



r! 



I! 









V f rp* 7 



^1. 



r.-, 



M. 



■r : 



til 'r 



1 * 



iiiLJ: 






K 1 



27f» 



A Wn.Sfl SINGER. 



ncss wnm.m, and he is a true friend to mc ; indeed, I 
am only ashamed of the great sums he insists u[)on 
for my sin;.jin.c[. ' 

" lie is (luitc right ; but \vc cannot spare you long 
from Lont on." 

" Oh, it will all be done in a month." 

" A month ! " cried leuan, " it is a fearfully long 
time ; an age in seme circumstances." 

" Miss Powys will fill my place well." 

" To the public, perhaps, but n *: to me though she 
has a very sweet voice." 

" You see a great deal of her, do you not ? " 

" Yes, she is rather a favourite of my aunt's. She 
is coming to stay with us next week." 

" Then you will have plenty of music. But here 
are the Majoribanks." 

And when her fri- nds came and separated them, 
both Mifanwy and leuan had a happy consciousness 
that each was cognizant of the other's feelings, and 
that the knowledge was not displeasing. 

When Mifanwy reached her own door, where Bill 
was waiting to take Sultan away, she bade her friends 
a rather strained good-bye, and hurried upstairs, pass- 
in^. Mrs. Roosc with only a nod and a smile at the 
drawing-room door, and into her bedroom, where 
Bessie was waiting for her. 

" Thank you, J5cssic, but I don't want help to- 
da>." And the moment the maid had gone she 
bolted the door, and, hastily taking off her hat and 
gloves, she flung herself in her riding-habit on her 
bed ; then, burying her face in the pillow, burst 
into a fit of sobbing. For some time the sobs and 
tears went on unchecked, but gradually they sub- 
sided, and, when Mrs. Roose's gentle knock came 
to the door, she rose at once and opened it. Her 
eyes were still swollen with tears, and her hair was 

" My dear child ! "' gasped Mrs. Roose, " what is 
the matter ? Such a lovely day, too ! and I thought 



She 



A MORNINfi KIDE. 



m 



you were havLicj such a nice ride. What is it all 
ahoat, (larh'iig ? " she went on, in soothin|:j tones, 
drawing her hand over the tan;,'lcd hair. 

"Oh, auntie! " wailed Mifanwy, " I have had quite 
a lovely ride, and such a happy hour ; but, oh ! it is 
Tom, dear Tom ! " and she bej^^an to sob again. 
"Why must I always have something to make me 
unhappy ? " 

" Unhappy, my child, always unhappj' ! You, the 
very brightest nature I have ever known ; alv ays 
calm and gladsome ! Ik-llc, dear, what do you 
mean? Surely, surely, you are not in love with Mr. 
Ponifrey?" 

" In love ! " exclaimed Mifanwy, rising ha. tily and 
beginning to arrange her hair befr^re the mirror. " In 
love ! I hate that \\ ord. \o, I am not in love w ith 
him, as you call it, but I love him ; and, oh : it pains 
me Xs) see how miserable he i.s. He does not know 
that I saw him to-day, but I did — I did. Ju^^t when 
I was happiest and merriest I saw Tom's face, and a 
pang shot through my heart, and it has been here ever 
since. Oh, auntie, I can never be truly happy while 
he is so wretched ; his lips looked white and set, and 
he turned away after seeing me, and walked out at 
the gates ; he walked straight and firm, and broad- 
shouldered as ever, but, oh ! I know his heart is ach- 



ing now. 



" Who was riding with you, dear ? " 

Mifanwy hesitated. " Oh ! nobody in particular ; 
it was Mr. leuan Powys." 

" Oh ! " said Mrs. Roose thoughtfully. She was 
n-)t a dull-witted woman, by any means, and began to 
think she saw " daylight." " Well, come down, dear ; 
you will feel better after lunch." 

So La Belle smoothed her hair and changed her 
dress and went down to lunch with her uiual placid 
demeanour, though her eyes still showed traces of her 
storm of tears. 



Tis 



sweet face," though: 



;..{. 



11:1 



-li^" 



^1 



\^\ 



l&wVx 



Mrs 








J . 



278 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Ronsc ; " no wonder I love her so much. Gravy, 
dear ? " 

La Belle smiled at Mrs. Roose's efifort.s to soothe 
her sorrow. Lunch ! gravy ! here were things to heal 
a trouble which, with the extravagance of youthful 
ideas, she thought could never be relieved. She was 
to sing in the evening at a concert, at which some of 
the best opera singers of the Continent were to take 
part. 

" I am afraid you will not sing so well as usual to- 
night. Belle dear, if you are unhappy." 

" Oh, yes, aunt. Don't you know I am like the 
thrush in the old Welsh song, that always sings most 
feelingly when the thorn pricks his breast ? " 

" Yes," said Mrs. Roose ; " ' Mae geni't newydd 
garw — Pan bo t'in pigo'r drain.*" 

" No, it is another — not just that." 

" Perhaps you are thinking of Shakespeare's 
'Nightingale,' 'Who leaned her breast up till a thorn.'" 

" Perhaps," replied the girl ; " it is the same all the 
world over, I suspect." And, truth to tell, she was 
right. 

In the evening, when she advanced to the front of 
the platform, amidst a hurricane of applause, she wore 
a robe of shimmering white, relieved only with a 
bunch of crimson carnations at the bosom. These 
carnations she had found on her dressing-table, sent 
by some mysterious hand. 

" Where did these come fr )m, Bessie ? " 

" A man left them at the door, an elderly man in 
liverN." 

'■■ Oh ! " 

* You will wear them?" asked I'.essie anxiou;-!}-, 
for, as a rule, Mifanwy did not di'^play the mystericui 
bouquets she so constantly received. 

"Yes," she said, blushing; "they happen to be 
carnations, you know, so I will wear thcin." And 
Bessie delightedly lastcncd them in the folds of ^lik 
and lace. 



\m 






I 



A MORNING RIDE. 



279 



Never had La Belle sung as she sang that night ; 
she took the hearts of her audience by storm. She 
had chosen for her song an old favourite, " The Links 
of Love," and, though there were tears in her voice, 
she delivered the song with such fervency of expres- 
sion, such depth of feeling, that the words were for- 
gotten by the audience in the tender appeal of the 
musical phrasing. 

Her song was followed by rapturous applause, and 
such showers of bouquets, that the platform was 
strewn. 

leuan was present, entranced and delighted ; and, 
further back in the audience, Tom Pomfrey sat and 
listened, his very soul hanging upon the music. For- 
tunately, Mifanwy did not see him, so that the altered 
look in his brave blue eyes did not pa'n her ; but she 
saw leuan, and a little smile of recognition floated 
across her mouth — a smile to be recalled by him with 
rapturous gratitude in the small hours of the night, 
when he lay awake and dwelt on every word, and 
every movement, and, of course, every gesture, of the 
being who had taken complete possession of his 
heart. The disquieting thoughts of Mifanwy the 
shepherdess, that her voice and presence had at first 
awakened in him, had given place to the completely 
natural emotion of a man who has surrendered his 
heart — not only the outposts, but the very inner 
citadel thereof — to the possession of the beloved one. 
He no longer doubted ; he loved this woman with the 
fervid warmth of his Celtic nature. Her beauty had 
enslaved him, her singing had enchained him ; and he 
felt that, without her, his life would be for ever 
incomplete. 

He did not join in the loud applause that followed, 
but sat silent, in a dream of happiness. She had 
worn his flowers ; did she guess he was the sender ? 
And he woke up to find Mifanwy singir.g again, in 
response to the vociferous calls for an encore. 

She sang some simple ballad, a'^d this was received 






> i\] 



i Hi 

^1 



1 !.?■] 

4 

If" 

}f -' 



.} 



!?i 












A WELSH SINGER. 

with even greater enthusiasm than the first rather 
florid song. When it was over, and she had left the 
platform, leuan found himself once more threading 
the passages at the back of the hall, once more he 
waited u.itil he saw La Belle approaching. She saw 
him at once. 

" Ah, Mr. Povvys, is it you ? " and the little hand 
was grasped by leuan's. " Are you waiting for Miss 
Powys ? " she asked mischievously ; and leuan was 
taken aback. 

How could he tell her that he was there only in the 
hope of getting a glimpse of her as she passed ? 

" Oh, no ; she is not s-nging here to-night." 

At the door of the hall, where Mifanwy's quiet 
brougham awaited her, by some accident her cloak 
slipped down, and leuan had the supreme felicity of 
re-arranging it ; and oh, dizzy height of transport ! of 
unfastening an erratic hook from her hair. She 
laughed merrily as she turned to wish him good- 
night. 

" You see that stupid cloak has crushed my bou- 
quet ; but it has brought out the scent." 

" I was so thankful to =ee you wer.r them." 

There was no time for an answer ; the door closed, 
and the carriage rolled away. 

" Just like Mifanwy's smile," leuan thought ; " and 
the brown eyes growing humid when she laughs — it is 
a strange likeness." 

At this evening's concert. La Belle Russe made her 
last public appearance before leaving England to 
fulfil her cngcT^-cments at various continental cities. 

She travelled in company v.'ith M. Valprc and Mrs. 
Roose, Bessie accompanying her as maid. 

leuan had to console himself with such scraps of 
tidings of her as the newspapers afforded. Glowing 
accounts were given of her enthusiastic reception 
wherever she appeared. He noted even the smallest 
incident recnrdf^d, and gloated over the somewhat 
extravagant description of her charms. 



•■' m 



A MORNING RIDE. 



281 



Tom Pomfrey, too, hunted up every item of news 
he could obtain ; and Mr. Rhys Morgan followed her 
progress with the deepest interest. 

Elizabeth Powys did not read the papers. She 
had had the account of La Belle Russe's reception in 
Paris read to her by a kind friend, and she had after- 
wards strictly eschewed all newspapers. 

" Disgusting ! " she had muttered ; " ridiculous ! " 

It was curious how La Belle Russe's personality 
disquieted Elizabeth. The suspicion of her being the 
shepherdess Mifanwy had gradually weakened in her 
mind, and had now almost disappeared. She hated 
her more than ever ; but it was as L? Belle Russe the 
singer, the flattered and caressed ido! of the London 
public, and, above all, as the intimate friend of Lady 
Meredith, and, consequently, the friend of leuan 
Powys. 



' ' 1 



vl 






"J 
i < 'I 



1 ' * 
in 



il 






Mil 

'U 






TIM 















!fj 













CHAPTER XXX. 



THE WEST END. 



One eveninjj during La Belle's absence on the Conti- 
nent, No. I Marbrook Gardens was en fete. Through 
the open doorway the well-h'ghted hall looked bright 
and cheerful, with its shaded lamps and flowers and 
palms. The air throbbed with the sound of music, 
as up the broad canopied steps flocked Lady Mere- 
dith's acquaintances and friends. 

About the middle of the evening, leuan made his 
way towards Elizabeth, who was sitting beside Lady 
Meredith in lively conversation. He saw Mr. Camper- 
ton approaching, and glided in before him, taking an 
empty chair beside her. leuan thought he had never 
seen her look so beautiful ; and, though a vision of a 
still fairer face, with liquid, brown eyes, and dark, 
wavy hair arose before him, he was not insensible 
to the charms of the fair creature at his side. 

" At last ! " he said, while he sank into a chair. " I 
thought I should never have a word with you, Eliza- 
beth. M" aunt had positively written out a list of 
girls ' \v ' must really dance with, you know,' and 

I have jubt got through the last of them. Now I am 
a free man ; will you initiate my freedom by dancing 
this waltz with me ? " 

Mr. Camperton had now reached the point at which 
he had been aiming; but, at that moment, Elizabeth 
had risen, and was gliding away with leuan. She 
took care, however, to look over his shoulder at Mr. 
Camperton with a little " moue" of regret. 

" 1 haven't seen you for days, leuan ; where have 
you been ? " she asked in the pauses of the dance. 

282 



-^^m' 



I 




THE WE3T END. 

" In the studio most of my time. I am working 
hard at my * Sea-nymph.'" 

" But it is work you enjoy ?" 

« Yes ; but I don't find it such a labour of love as 
was my last." 

" That lovely rising sun ? Lord Belmont bought 
that, didn't he ? " 

" Yes, he had ordered it ; but I was sorry to let it 
go. When will you come and see my 'Sea- 
nymph?'" . ^ 

" Any day ; I have been 1onj,nng to sec it ; but, ot 
course, I wouldn't venture into the studio without a 
special invitation." 

" Come to-morrow, Elizabeth, and we'll have a chat 
about old times." 

" Oh, the hateful old times ! I shudder when 1 
think of them ; that frowzy old parlour, where I 
mended Uncle John's stockings, and that dreadful 
buckle strap with which he beat you, leuan. Oh ! " 
and she shudc'^ired visibly. 

" Yes, and j jur tenderness, Elizabeth ! how you felt 
for me and M fanwy." 

" Oh, that brown-skinned girl ? What has become 

of her ? " 

" I don't know," he answered dreamily ; " gone into 
service somewhere, I believe." 

" What a wild creature she was ! " 

" Yes ; but very sweet and charming. Shall we go 
into the conservatory and rest?" And in through 
the shady ferns and heavily-scented flowers they made 
their way to a quiet corner. 

"Charming!" resumed Elizabeth, with a scornful 
laugh. " I never could see her charms ; but men look at 
things through rose-coloured spectacles." 

"Men!" laughed leuan; "I was only a boy. I 
daresay, if I were to see her now, I should not think 
her so charming. A pretty little servant maid in a 
white muslin apron and toy cap, perhaps. We mustn't 
stay too long in here, Elizabeth, < r I shall have 



*1 »* 









.tii 



fiul^firf 1 (it ' 



V:. . 





284 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Camperton calling mc out, ' Pistols for two, coffee for 
one,' you know." 

" Oh, never mind Mr. Camperton. What is he to 
me ? " 

" VVell, if you don't mind, I don't," agreed leuan, 
taking her fan, and fanning her and himself, and 
yielding to the glamour of the moment. 

" You don't think," said Elizabeth, fixing her lovely 
blue eyes upon him, " that I would really care what he 
said or thought, if— if— " and she blushed and looked 
down at her tiny white shoe. 
"If what, Elizabeth?" 

" Oh, if you wanted anything, you know, he wouldn't 
weigh much in the balance," and again the blue eyes 
looked up tenderly, almost wistfully. 
_ leuan began to feel uncomfortable. The conversa- 
tion was becoming rather more sentimental than he 
desired ; but, with the fear of hurting her feelings, he 
replied : 

" You are very kind to say so, Elizabeth ; but I 
have my doubts on that subject. He, I know, is very 
much in earnest, and /, as your nearest relative and 
guardian, as I suppose I may call myself, shall have 
to speak to you seriously on the subject one of these 
days. I have no right, perhaps, to ask you— but— " 

Elizabeth's heart was beating fast. Surely the 
happy mo'neiit for which she had planned, and hoped, 
and manoeuv/cd, had come at last ! 

" Oh, leuan," she murmured, with soft, languishing 
eyes, when Mr. Camperton stood before them. 

" By George ! 1 beg your pardon. I am afraid I 
am intruding." 

" Not at all, my dear fellow," said leuan, rising and 
making room for him. " In fact, we were just talking 
about you. Come and sit here, and finish the conver"^ 
sation. Elizabeth knows I am the ' son of the house,' 
as it were, and must tear myself away to look after the 
rest of the guests." And, with a friendly nod, he left 
the conservatory. 



THE WEST END. 



285 



■II 



" Mil}- I be allowed > " asked Mr. Campcrton, taking 
the chair beside her. 

" Of coiir.~e," she answered with a winnin;[ smile, at 
the same time drawing; her cloudy pink drapery aside 
to make room for him. " It is true we were talking 
about you." 

'• I am highly honoured," he said, still locking- a 
little ruffled. " I have no right to ask the nature of 
your remarks. I dare not hope they were those of 
approval." 

" And why not ? " she asked, with a coquctti -,h 
smile. "Are you conscious of having been a naughty 

boy ? " 

" I am conscious of being so at this present moment, 
for I am full of malice and anger and all uncharitable- 
ness ; it was too bad of Powys to carry you off in 
that off-hand manner, and then to bring you in here, 
you know." 

" Why not ? he is my guardian." 

"Really, is that so?" 

" Well — in a way— really.' 

This was a great relief to Mr. Camperton. It 
seemed to clear the clouds from his horizon and to 
explain the intimate terms upon which leuan and 
Elizabeth stood towards one another. 

" Oh, that makes all the difference," he replied ; 
" I wish I had known that sooner ; it would have 
saved me many a pang." 

"Pang!" repeated Elizabeth, with bewitching in- 
nocence, " pang of what ? " 

" Oh, of envy and jealousy ; for, Miss Powys, you 
must have guessed the state of my feelings towards 
you : you must know I love you, and have only 
been waiting until m.y prospects were more assured to 
tell you of it. Even now that time has not come, 
but I can wait no longer without some crumb of 
comfort : oniv tell m.e that — that — that I am not 
disliked, and that my attentions are not displeasing 
to you." 









*il| 



n- 






I,' I 



i<i I 




f 



If'j-S ■ 



r 







286 



A WELSH SINCFR. 



Elizabeth looked misrhicvoiisly over her fan. 
" Should I be sitting here with you and maixiiij; 
myself so awfully agreeable, if you were displeasing 
to me ? No indeed ; I have a summary way of get- 
ting rid of things displeasing. Ask Colonel , but 

that would be telling tales." 

" Oh, I don't want to hear anything about him ; I 
know you have had lots of offers. By George ! I am 
continually hearing of them, and every man of them 
is more worthy of you than myself, but not one of 
them loves you as I love you ! " 

" And how do you know, pray ? They may be 
broken-hearted now, for all you know, and may be 
seeking for a suitable tree on which to hang them- 
selves ! " 

" Miss Powys ! Elizabeth f you are joking, while I 
am in earnest, in terrible earnest ! Tell me only, may 
I dare to hope that you love me— a little, Elizabeth ? " 
And he took her hand and looked earnestly at her 
downcast eyes; "for Heaven's sake! do not trifle 
with me." 

" I am not trifling ; don't you see how serious I 
am ? but I warn you I cannot be serious long, and 
when you ask me a question I will answer it." 

" I have asked you — I do ask you — do you love 
me ? will you marry me ? will you wait for me a little 
yvhile, Elizabeth ? I hate to appear cruel and grasp- 
ing ; but, while my old uncle lives, you know, I am 
poor ; but he is ninety, and cannot live long, and then, 
you know, I shall succeed to his title and his fortune. 
Will you wait, Elizabeth ? " 

" Which question shall I answer first ? " 

" Will you marry me ? " 

" But there was one before that." 

" Elizabeth, have pity ! Do you love me ? " 

" A weeny bit." 

" Will you marry me ? " 

"Let us leave that question, and proceed to the 
next." 



THE WEST END. 



287 



" Will you wait for me ? " 

" Yes, I will wait," she said, gladly seizing this 
loophole of escape fnjm the necessity of an immediate 
decision. 

The prospective wealth and title of Mr Camperton 
were not without weight in her mind. To marry an 
earl, to be a countess ! to be able to patronise her 
old acquaintances, many of whom she knew disliked 
her, and very few of whom she cared for herself; 
above all, oh, delicious thought ! to triumph over 
La Belle Russe, who was the bitter herb in her " mess 
of pottage," the only thorn in her downy nest ! 
Under that snowy brow and that heaving bosom, in 
its lace and sparkling ornaments, was hidden a flame 
of vengeful jealousy, that grew ever in intensity as 
I the years rolled by. She had not yet fully realised, 

or, at least, had not confessed to herself, that leuan's 
heart was alienated from her ; she dreaded to believe 
it ; she feared herself when the fact should become 
self-evident. Her love for leuan — if her selfish heart 
was capable of such a feeling — had grown with her 
growth, and it had blinded her to the truth that he 
had never loved her. He had been flattered by her 
evident preference for him when surrounded by her 
numerous admirers; he had, alas ! sometimes indulged 
in an innocent flirtation ; there had been a little 
dalliance, a few whispered compliments, and that was 
all ! but these Elizabeth had taken more seriously 
than leuan had intended. Latterly his manner, 
though as friendly and kindly as of yore, had been 
free from all suggestions of love. 

What, she asked herself, was the shadow that was 
falling between them ? Was it the worldly and am- 
bitious plans of Sir Glynne and Lady Meredith ? or 
was it his devotion to his art ? or was it— oh, hateful 
thought !— could it be La Belle Russe ? 

No, she would not believe it ; it could not be that 
that pale, quiet girl should steal from her the love 
that was hers by right. Had she not loved him from 



' f \ n 



]i': 



' 1 



■ fi^ 



U • 



:;r 



Wa 




;S8 



A WELSH SINGER. 



licr babyhood? Had not her uncle, his father, ar- 
ranged his afTairs so as to facilitate their union, and 
even exjMessed the wi^h for it.' lUit, if La Helle 
Russe w MS the cause of Ins altered manner, not the 
whole world should prevent her sufif«;rin;T for it. 

•| In some way or <nher I will reach her," she ex- 
claimed, "and 1 will wreck her happiness, as .she has 
wrecked mine ! " 

And could Mr. Camperton have seen that dimpled 
face, on which he doted with such blind devotion, 
marred by the evil j)assions en.G[enderetl by these 
thou<jhts, he would have paused ere he had laid his 
heart and title at her feet. But he did not see it ; it 
was in the solitude of her own room only that she 
let her natural impulses find expression. At present, 
seated beside him in the softened light of the con- 
servatory, where the air was heavy with the delicious 
scent of flowers, she seemed to him the embodiment 
of all that was beautiful and good ; and he phaded 
his cause with the eloquence of true and un.selfish love. 

" I can bear the waiting, with the comfort of know- 
ing that you are mine, Elizabeth, engaged to me! 
Darling, may I tell Powys, your guardian ? May i 
tell everybody, the whole world, of my happiness ? " 

" Oh, no ! " Elizabeth pleaded ; " I have always felt 
that a long engagement would be a dreadful thing ; 
and how do we know that the dear old earl may not 
live to be a centenarian ? " 

" Good heavens I no, he cannot, poor old man ; for 
the last year he has been dying ! " 

'' He may go on dying for nine years longer," ob- 
served Elizabeth demurely. 

" He is a dear old man, and, 'pon my word ! I feel 
like a murderer when I allude to his death. I am 
very fond of the old man." 

" He may rally," urged Elizabeth, " and your en- 
gagement to me might not please him." 

This idea had never entered Mr. Camperton's mind. 

" By George ! never thought of that. What a wise 




THE 'AF.-T r.N.'. 



2^0 



iittitj head you hav.-, i; < ;.i -i Ijcaut: •"■;1 ; ->'. v- .viil 
V'.''X make our er/^'a^'omf-Tit public at pr-; r-:-.t "her.. ' 

"Why should w. b*: o:',-;a,;-':d a: a.> ' ;r,. .!.:.-':.•! 
E!i::abeth. ''Can n-j n-t tru .t cai.h ■,!/.::• vi'r::.,i.t: 
that ? ' 

-Must I then b«: iatiined 'Atth tii.tt •.v':;:r;^ b'.t of 
love ? ' he sighed. 

■' Ves ; with that teery w.j.-jny crumb -A <: .r;:'-.rt ' " 

But =he endeavoured to make uo A;*h h' •: ■:;. c t'.r 
the ^"raciou.snesi that '.vxt i.tr^A-::-.-' ir. '..■:? v ,r ;;. 

■• Kvt'n that is ;jrt:::i'.'; . t. mi; b*;; ■ r,d ':xr.r'i: ■ .ir n, 
an<i it ^\lll be the aim of my \[u: t ^ o«: v .rr»;> a :t. 
and t'j make it .^r .'.v int..' the -.am<; 'Ico-o \r.d true 
feelin:4 that I have fo^r y.^u. ' 

There was a iittle more talk behind *hi; f ;rr^ a;:d 
flowers, tender on Mr. I'JamiCerton i vide, oj-a.-mir.fj', 
but diplomatic, on Eiizabeth'-;, and. wa, it a por, 

i:r '.vai it a ki.S3 ? befjre titcy r ,se and \r.-~. nore 
joined the dancers. 

When the ;4ue.st.s were do-nartin'^. ard I ;:;an 'va.-; 
arrar.Ljing Elizabeth'-; ci'jak as -,heent;':red h>:r or. -"i-ham, 
slie g'ave a little cry of -urpri-c. 

•' (jh. I have left my ran in the oon^<:n.at:..ry . -vill 
you bring it to-morrow, leuan - ' 

■' But to-raorrijw you ire : '.mir-^ t'O -e;; ny, .-'.•.-a- 
nymph.' " 

■Mjn, I forgot— but that I oar io th- ::(:.c: ■;•. —to- 
morrow you m.iist bring m.y fan . " 

•' Ye.s, and stay :,:• dinner,' lO'l..-: M--. r.'.iiott. 
knowing how best to piea^e Eii.i.vot'n. 

" Yea. and we will sing -..me 'loet.-; af'.ir dinner ; 
tiv.-ie are my orders," c: ntinu.,-; F. ;.;;\0'-*h p;.i--"/n 

■' Those are y'^ur -orders, fasr .ad>- then, ot' course. 

Then leuan turned back. t>v m.eet Mr. './irnpert^-.n 
bre,athles.-iy hurr/ing -tut. 

■' I' ^[i?■s P " u"vs ^one ' Pi .'v t;r^>.omc ! That ".id 
Lady \\ myaTii never ".v',ii iet y^w 
',r. to vou with !'cr int^rminaoie aue-t;on-;. 




I t '■ 



h . 






|v: . 









2Q0 



A WELSH SINC.KR. 



" Ni-vor mind, my dear fellow, I saw her ofT all 
ri.i;ht. I s.iy, Ciinipcrton, that was a pivlly lon^r visit 
ol yorrs tt. the conservatory ! I hope it is all^riRht 
old fellow, and arranged qin"tc satisfactorily." ' 

'• Well, I'owys, I have no ri^T^t to say anything de- 
cided ; but, at least, you may congratulate me on n.it 
navnig been rejected." 

" Oh. thit will do ; it w:!! all come right in time." 

"But, Towys," resumed Caniperton, buttonholiu'T 
hull m turn, "it's a secret at present, yt.u know"^ 
nothnig to be said about it." ' 

" I understand ; you may depend on me ; delighted, 
old fellow! Good-night." 

And so they parted, leuan well pleased with the 
prospect of a happy settlement for Elizabeth ; for he 
had begun to be a little uncomfortable latterly, whcii 
she had shown him any decided signs of preference 

At dinner the next evening he was careful not to 
betray Mr. Camperton's confidence, and flattered him- 
self that Eluabethwas quite unconscious of his know- 
ledge of the situation ; but he ought to have known 
that astute little person better than to think it possible 
that she could be so easily hoodwinked 

After dinner, while they looked over the music to. 
gether and picked out a duet— Mrs. Elliott bein- at 
the far end of the room, intent upon her woolwork 
and " none are so deaf as those who won't hear '- 
Llizabcth said : 

"Of course Mr. Camperton told you last night that 
he had proposed to me ? " 

leuan was embarrassed ; he never could prevaricate 
with ease. 

"He did not tell me that exactly, Elizabeth ; but I 
gathered it from his answer to my question. I chafted 
him a httle, you know, about your long stay in the 
conservatory, and asked him whether you had come 
to an arrangement." 

"And I suppose he said, 'By Geortre ! I do.Vt 
know, you know ' " 



* 'ii -he irr:*.ir :■; ■ 



■..-. -;■ ■'..'■ - > ■.!■ 



~,i* V...::.: ;.:c:ft':-:.;" ; ":*i.r=' 

• A:.: v:;i: .:" I •^.•-.:- 
i:..;.i.;r'.: -.-ct-: .^t: .rr:-- 

* ? '■.!■ i:'.' -'V ' .' J".i'.-'. ' • 



:-i. : . I. 



■ . . '.-liir tr I. 



.'.f. 






- . . -1. - 













'i 








[■% 




■1 


''' '- 





HM' 


;-ef- ; 


Sl^" 


1 


m 


" P; 


if 




:i^ 


' . ^■■, 






-ri -'" 


H'\i- 


■ >, 


k 




'|h 






''It 



IIh 



ftll 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

RECALLING THE PAST. 

A WEEK later on, Icuan was makini; his u-ny through 
the murky afternoon sunshine to Graham Street. Had 
not La Belle Russe returned from the Contment - 

When the drawing-roon. door was opened he 
thought, for a moment, that the room was emuty 
but, at his entrance, La Belle rose from the corner of 
a crimson couch, where she had been sitting sur- 
rounded by silks of different colours, with which she 
was embroidering some piece of work. A gold bruoch 
at the throat, fastening her favourite flower, a dark red 
carnation, was her only ornamem, and when she rose 
from the crimson background of the couch, leuan's 
artistic eyr was filled with a restful sense of happiness 
He held her hand, and the soft, brown eyes drooped 
under their snowy lids before his earnest gaze of love 
and admiration. To hirlc her confusion, she stooped 
to pick up her fallen silks ; and, leuan aiding her, 
their hands met, and this added to the confusion. 

"Auntie is gene out," she faltered at last, in an 
apologetic tone, " but will soon be back ; it is our 
only free day, you know, and she had some shopping 
to do.' ^ '^ 

" Oh, it doesn't matter at all," replied leuan awk- 
wardly. " I am only thankful you have not gone out 
shopping, too." Again there was an awkward pau^e. 
which was broken only when leuan hazarded the 
.somewhat feeble Question : " What- != th^f i-^..piw ..,-.^1- 
you are engaged upon ? " 

She spread out her work before him, a bunch of 

292 



m 



! 



RECALLING THE PAST. 



293 



crimson carnations, with their grey-green leaves on a 
ground of cream-coloured cloth. " You mustn't tell 
secrets. It is a cushion for Lady Meredith." 

" Oh ! " said leuan, " I shall take it under my 
special protection, and woe be to the housemaid who 
touches it with dusty fingers." 

" But I am working it to be used. It will be soft 
for you to lay your head upon, so I hope you will." 

leuan was silent for a few moments while he 
fingered the silks on the table, and looked at the 
brown-black head that Dent over the gorgeous work. 

" Have you really been kind enough to mean to 
put my head upon it ? " 

The head bent lower, and there came no answer. 

" Do say yes." 

She looked up at him with those deep, velvet eyes, 
and a smile on the red lips. " I have thought it pos- 
sible you might." 

" Is that all ? " 

'' That is all," with a mischievous smile. 

" Well, even that is something to be thankful for." 

Oh, of what small nothings are lovers' conversations 
made ! Where lies their charm ? At all events, 
leuan and his fair companion did not seem to find the 
time drag heavily. 

"Do you remember, Mr. Powys, you promised to 
tell me something of your early life? Shall it be 
now ? " 

" Indeed, yes," said Icuan, " if you care to listen. 
It is not very interesting, but perhaps it will surprise 
you to hear that I was born, and lived through my 
boyhood, amongst the lower classes, in a thatched 
cottage away in the most rural, secluded part ot 
Wales, and that I grew up a thorough country lad ? " 

" No, I am not surprised," she murmured, pulling 
out a thread of silk. 

" Something of the clumping clodhopper aboQi me 
still, I suppose ? Is that what you have noticed ? " 

" No, not that, at all ; but still there is something 



% 

An 



.t.i 



; |i 



•g 










294 



A WELSH SINGER. 






m 



i'b 



I. 
i! 



in you different from the other young men I have 
met in London." 

" I dare not ask, is the difference to my advantage, 
or the contrary ? " 

" Suppose I don't tell you which ?" 

'■ That would be cruel," he replied. 

"Perhaps it is kind," she retorted, laughing. "Any- 
way, I am longing to hear all about that early life, so 
different from what one meets in London — all show, 
and forms, and ceremonies." 

"There were : > forms or ceremonies there," he 
said, leaning forward on his elbows, and turning in- 
trospectively to the past. " Out on the bare brown 
hills from morning to night, bathing in the beauty of 
the golden sunrise, or lying full length on the sea 
cliffs in the glory of the purple sunset ; diving under 
the shimmering green sea-waves, with the blue sky 
spread over me like a canopy, and with the call of the 
sea-birds in my ears." 

La Belle dropped her work, and fixed her eyes on 
leuan's earnest face. 

" Go on ; it sounds lovely." 

" Roaming the sea cliffs, bare-footed, from morn to 
night, treading the short, soft turf, watching my sheep 
— for I was a shepherd, and knew the times and 
seasons only from the scenes of Nature around me ; 
the green cornfields iri the early spring, the soft, warm 
lapping tides of the golden summers, the silvery 
herrings shoaling ^n in the autumn, the crimson glov,- 
of the lime-kilns in the winter, and my faithful do- 
my sole companion! Oh, it was life! real liviiii; ! a 
life that I have longed for ever since I left it, and 
I shall never be completely happy till I return to it." 
"You are like me then," La Belle responded, 
beginning a fresh crimson petal, " not satisfied with 
the charms of London society." 

leuan shrugged his shoulders. "Satisfied? no! 
wouiu tiiat I could spirit you away for a moment Lo 
that old life of mine, its never-ending variety of sun 



RECALLING THE PAST. 



295 



and shade, its beauty of outward scenery and inward 
peace ; the calm, even tenor of the peasant life, gliding 
on under those low, thatched cottages, hidden away 
in the hollows and valleys by the sea ; the freshness 
of the morning breezes, the warmth of the mid-day 
sun, which drew up the wild thyme's scent, and burst 
the gorse blossom's seed ; the glow of the sunsets, the 
silver beauty of the moonlight shining in through the 
cottage windows, the quiet evening meal, the smell of 
'he peat smoke, the simple fare on the old oak table ; 
oh, I cannot tell you the charm of everything ! " He 
looked down upon La Belle ; he saw her bosom heave 
and a tear bedew her lashes ; he was startled, and a 
thrill of pleasure traversed him when he saw that the 
scenes so dear to him aroused her interest also. 

" Oh, I see it all so plainly ! " she exclaimed, " you 
have described it all so well ; I am tired of this sordid 
town, I yearn for Nature and the country." And 
there was a little childish quivering of the lip. 

She recalled so well the low, thatched cottage, the 
scent of the peat fire, the patch of silver moonlight on 
the floor, and her heart went out in a great throb of 
hiraeth^ to the old home of her childhood's days, 
and scarce could she res*-rain her tears, but she 
forced down the feeling, for the sweet memories were 
not without a tinge of bitterness ; in all that he had 
said about his former life, leuan had made no men- 
tion of Mifanwy. No, she had glided from his life, 
and faded even from his memory. 

She stilled the throbbing heart, she dried her 
glistening lashes, and, drawing herself up calmly, she 
continued, " But you will never be able to return to 
that past life, however much you may desire it ; you 
may go to the same place, and trer.d the rugged cliffs 
and golden sands again, but it will not be the same to 
you, and you will not feel yourself the same. But go 
on, please; it is very interesting." And she pulled out 



Iff 


1 


■ 1 



•f'J 



-ill 



in 



3 

8 



I 




P:.- ., ill ■ 



K.; 




A WF.r.Sir SINCKK. 

another thread of crimson silk. " Tell mc how you 
came to leave that idyllic life to live in London ? " 

Icuan felt as if a cold shower had suddenly fallen 
upon him ; she had seemed so interested ; he had seen 
the tear-drops in her eyes ; why the description of his 
early life should have caused that hurried breath, and 
that moisture in her eyes, he could not tell, but to know 
It had, had been delii^htful to him, and the contrast 
of her present calmness and self-restraint was corre- 
spondingly depressing. 

" I am tiring >ou with my boyish memories." 
" No, no; go on," she pressed him ; "tell me more 
How came you to leave that happy life ? Was there 
no mother or sister to grieve over your departure ? " 

" I never knew my mother ; she died when I was 
born, and I was brought up by strangers, tender and 
loving though they were, and are to this day ; for I 
still love them, and visit them sometimes, and hope 
and trust to end my days near them." 

Then he went on to relate the story of his first ac- 
quaintance with Sir Glynne, his departure from Wales 
and his subsequent life in London. When he came 
to the history of his relationship to Sir Glynne, La 
iJelle dropped her work again, and gazed at him with 
deep interest in her eyes. 

"How strange ! " she cried, "like a story out of a 
book. Did I not say that you were not quite like the 
other young men around us ? Thank you so much 
for telling me all this ; now I shall feel I know you 
better. Here comes auntie, I think, or is it—" 

The door opened, and admitted Tom Pomfrey. 
straight and tall and broad-shouldered as ever but 
with a haun^-ng look of sadness in his face that I.ad 
not been there of yore ; but leuan, who had never seen 
him before, was struck only with his handsome looks 
and lamiliar manner on his entrance, and when he 
saw La Belle scatter her silks tn the wind- and r^=' 
hastily to grasp Tom's hand in both herown, a stab 
of jealousy pierced his heart. Truth to tell, she was 



RECALLING TFIF. PA.-T. 



297 



little sorrv for the interruption, and it 



'.v; 



the 



con^ciousnes.s of this that troubled her, ar.d made her 
doublv tender in her ^reetin^. 

"Ah, Tom, I thou';;ht you would come to-d.v/ ; \c 



have not seen you 



^^_^ t' ■ ivch a time; this i.s o';.- incnd 

Mr Pcwvs, Sir Glynne Meredith'5 nephcv. ' 

A spa^m crossed Tcm's face at sic^m of leuan ; he 
sa-.v tha^ he had interrupted a a.-.'..'-z-.v>c',^ hut h<; 
managed to hide his pain by stoopin:; to pic;< up the 
scattered silks. In doin^T so, h^; hands came ;nto con- 
tact with Mifanw\-'s, but it cau-ed her no embarrass- 
ment, however it might have afferted Tom. 

" How is Sultan '" she a-sked eagerly. 

•• H'i is well," said Tom : ' he '.vi'.l g-t fat and la,-.- 
if veil don't ride him oftoner. WV.y do ■ ou - ;v^t 
^end r^:r him now ? Bill feels quite n.r. 'octed. ' 

'■ I have been so dreadfully bu,-^;.-. M \ alpr . do^es 
not 'jive me an idle h<jur. I can a.--s.:re you— now that 
the opera season is so close upon us. Of course you 
ha-.e heard, Mr. Powv ;, that ' Lucia' will be the nrst 
ocera : the opening night will be the first of Mav. ' 

""Oh' '-f 'course." a.s.sert2d leuan; • ever, body 
kno'.vs it, and vve are all in a state of p'.easurabie 
anticipation. How do you fe--! about it :^ I s'r.-;u!d 
thi:-k"apoearing for the first t.me in opera mu-t be 
rather nervOus work to anyone ; but such a r.*.:st/-,^3 
of her art a5 yo>u are— 

"Oh! please wait, and do not pay me any com- 
pliments until after the event; f-r. I con!e::S. I im 
ritncr ner-'ou-." 

I'.jan chafed a Tood deal under tise fimi.;ar;ty i 
Tom 3 manner when he -n<:ke to L-i r-.'':..e . cut .1.. 
the conversation drifted to ti:-ng= oerat. ; in-:. n;u- oa; 



,1 



;o general. i;:is genia 
won upon leuan- 
Mr^ Roo^e'-- a 






voice 



iiscont 



.rrival wa~ the signai : '* "^a ou.-;ng 
which, thouch ent'Tinu i:'^o brisk c.,nver ;'';i.n with 
the two la...es. he wa.s rather .t;iT and formal when 
addressing Tom. 'A"hc, keeping -^ ' zht rein on hi3 






* , 




iftip' 1 




K- > ■--.■ 



i 






ili' 



ii 









'98 



A WF'T.Sir sinc;kr. 



fechnj^s, hid under his cheerful talk the weary achin- 
tiiat was g.iawin- at his heartslrin-s. WIhmi int.u- 
ducMig him to leuan. IMifanwv had called him " Mv 
oldest and best friend, Mr. 'Tom I'onifrey;'' and 
leuan had uondcred and felt sore, and when, after 
tea, he left tlie house, he was full of jealous doubts. 
. Do our ways lie together?" he a.sked, when Ton) 
joined htm on the pavenu-nt. 

"No," replied Tom, smilin- " our ways do not lie 
oselacr, but. if you don't object. I will accompanv 
>ou for a httle way ; there is a subject on which I 
'.vishto speak to you. lam a straij^ht man and a 
plam man. and I can .see, by your manner, that you 
are puzzled about my intimacy with La l^clle Russe" 

Icuan drew himself up, and a haughty look swept 
over h,s face. " I have no right," he taid, " to be .sur- 
prised at anything Miss Roose may choose to do 

w ^'VTi-'"^*^* '" ''"^'"S^ "" ^^"^'^ terms with her,' 
and on holding so high a place in her regard ; she has 
spoken of you to me in the highest terms " 

He felt obliged to make this admission, but hated 
the obligation. 

Tom bowed his head unconsciously, and a flush of 
pleasure overspread his face. " Has she .? God blc^s 
her I thank her; " and he was silent for a moment, 
uhile Icuan strode impatiently beside him. 

We !. to our subject, Air. Powys ; as I said bcf.rr 
our paths he in opposite directions, and we arc not 
!'l<e,y to meet often ; but I feel impelled to be quite 
open with you. La Belle Ru ,.e lived in our falnilv 
before sheentered upon her brilliant career as a sin- .1' 
It was in the East End. My father is the owner -ff a 
arge and prosperous circus in the Warkworth Road. 
1 am lorn lomfrey.his eldest son, and the manager 
of his circus. In the summer -ve take our troi^pe 
into the provinces ; on one of these tours, my mother 
hired a poor girl as a nursemaid and hein— th;.t w:^« 
l>a bene, i took a great interest in her, and soon 
discovered ti:at she had a beautiful voice • I persuaded 



iv 



re-:a:.l:v'\ t::?. ^ k.-t. 



ler :c sinn irni r-i;e ;n 'he ::.-:::s, Tho"^ Nlr ;<>y 

be:<:r-i ihe >a(i -.i!:--;r: :!-:; •r\r: ^te-: -,n :!v* .ail.:.:r ' 
iuc;:--:^. I ''^vp^: / :r -a-'-.nar.-/- -in- .r.-ri' :'.' 

;ht' -e:: Tth::' J "''r rrt; :;u*: i '."" ^ i^' :. i v .-'. ':•'<'. 
•vir-n tV-e::!:. .:;n, v".:cr. -■:.^: ^a - ^'n':;ci;- ly ^c:.,'' ::-r; 
■:: Tie r.' .r ^inc^. ir'i v ::;v:;i i ':::rxu:: ■. ry :••; "'it 



;r r,ve. j.r.i-1 ie . ,<;ki^:". -t.\:!J:\t. 



("it; 



i:, in ir^i vv I !iave ':(:::■: :■.■■: -ri-^r.: i;-'! ^r-r. r^r 
'" r ••; ''n^j ".'tar I :e;iir: ■:<: ;t>er '■ ■•...n. . tm 
Md-K:-:. i:m :^.rrttnt 'r ha- ; 'ler •r;;r.:-;':p r,o y.u 
■\ .iMcr vi;" I "e-;! ■ u iw '.:: - 

l.:':.^n stammer;:: ,'-rMi .r.c li :r :r:t :-",-. ■ 
■ :Z .:i :;t:cause I ::!.:c'.': y ii i v ■; .-si' i:-;: . v-rt 
•- ;u :o '.<:'.■ 'V "!:a:. I v-.; y-i V'^.'.. •:;:ar . :'ar: r .'►i 
■:.^c:i :f ::ia: -'ner-: vhom vvi ;;at: :n vie "-■ ry,:'. 
:rear;y :n inother s ■larnine:^:^. 'V;i ;;-ii r:r: -;.: ^e 
-na: -renc. w.d -;cr ::"ii:;:^ m:^ :he :.:ritrr :t tor 

. . C ,'^C:i*ii-i - tiii -Lai*..- i«i- ..*s- .-i..t- - 

•;;-";ai jcsiticn i..-. » -.au'. oe'-tr;. y'/\.x 

vari. ire :c -iches m.i :ame i.::': .iar:-::nvr - • 

.;:;.■- ?a;:t'var^. t.t V'T!-; s. '. lut'.' ir. .. '■"•- - -''''l 
■■.;Tt:j ;.!.'-" to -uCt.;;-~ i:io .lacrt'it'::':- ";.■'. r^-;r" v-^ ^r- 
i" -ttc 'nst: ;■' ±y.:"tr.i itre-: :r-- ; . ^na.: -a>' : '" : 
b' ^ xtic. .IS"; "trr.e ".'ti t. .■•-•!:. .! ve r.^'rr :i> "''u v'l 
\:t 'v ;'ne ic - "~ ? "mt'-i' T:; Tiartac-r ■ r't.""''-' 
" r-tis. inc : 






^^t;:..,- 



R.:-c: : -:'h:i:: 



r -r i -tr:r~en: .; 

"ill:: Ttan. V". " u 
it:..: she-:: nam : 

■■1.. -i,-. ,,..;!, ... 



^'' '1 rt' ' "i" i^'ci no t. 






■y ~^c-< 



toad 



■t 



a '^! 



A WELSH SINGER. 




"My friend too." he said, "if you will have it s,. 
Thank you for telling me all this." And, with the 
Hiitish dislike of a scene, the two men parted with a 
warm clasp of the hand and nothing more. 

" I'omfrey's Circus ! " thou-ht leuan, as he entered 
his club, " the manager of a circus troupe, to be he. 
special friend ! Well, and are not lanto and Shan 
m>- lather and mother; and— and— Mifanwy u/as mv 
sister and friend." 



n 



■■■•.- "^ 



^;-^ 




u 







CH-A?TE? xxx::. 



• Ur'l Tian- 



mnrrv:;: ./ .".;.- ic.:\i^:r.'::.''.:- 



. » . --L .. 



> -' 'he urn 

s.i<.r^:. ''-r. utH'-UiTn iriK :u: :-t :nrer :;ai:n n*.. 

tnar itremed to tcnnect -ne ivfi;; -.:' "hcire -vo — rj-v 
{trcnsjer. ina ^evisji -cur!: ".aat -ler rr..^7/'^. -;n-:-''.n ,ns 
;-=r- thcuijhr, ina ;n:!aenc2r: •11- vncte 3r^:r..^ ^ :r. 

vhai miirnt 3p .ler insw-r :ea.:in :i^ W..-,- xr ;ne ^as 
-f;t:n.; f ^^.: .e:f-:ont^^:^;d " ^n inii.uiai le^rer^ 
ncre ^neciail;- :n tiie :rr;:^t-nc.; .r" -he nan ne x'--rt. 
3rrter. "^r 'ztt'^cr. va^ t -:^C-: ::. r.r.r.:. :ier v:t;v->ur 



t' rrn n 



ir.f. 



■•r'V'ir'ir.". j^.' \ "!a.-.hir. " m:x-. ".r i. 



jj if 



: '■ 



► K 






£l;zac;:;rh. 'Vii. -aw .:r;r :nar:r.^;: 






nnn/ La:!'-' .'■.[t;r.:r::th ; -:T>.ir;r,iis -oorn«? 
.. .^„„„,,^3.^ vTrh r":.^--* - Ar'.d the ^■niiv^TI- 
" ' >?-.» 






in: 



-^ 



:t T1U3IC. "h^r Tiaitf 



rtm 



to I 



. ne 




hj. 






ii ' - 1 



•I 



302 



A WFISII SINGKR. 



of the loveliest and the hrit^ht.-st there was Elizn- 
b.th, and, as she circleil ijracefully ruiind tijc romn 
Mr. Cainperton, who was never far away, folhnveil 
her with looks of love and admiration. She fully 
meant to accept him in the end, and, meanwhile 
managed cleverly to keep him at her side, by all sorts' 
of coquettish, charminc: ways and moods. At the 
same time, she staved off the momentous question of 
"Will you marry mc ? " knowing thoroughly hcv 
complete power over him, and revelling in that 
knowledge. 

La Belle, too, was present, looking, Icuan thought 
more beautiful than ever. She seldom wore anvthiiv- 
but white, but to- night was dressed in pink of a 
delicate shade, that showed off advantageously her 
creamy-white complexion. She had been dancing 
with leuan, and the; had strolled into the large con- 
servatory, opening out of the ball-room, and were now 
seated in the same corner in which, a (ew weeks 
before, Mr. Camperton and Elizabeth had sat. The 
soft light of the shaded lamps, that flickered through 
the wavy ferns, the air laden with the delicious per- 
fume of the flowers, the enlivening strains of music 
from the ball-room— everything combined to throw a 
glamour over them. They were silent from excess of 
feeling ; and on the silence fell the sound of a cooin" 
ring-dove. '^ 

"How sweet," said La Belle. "Where does it come 
from ? " 

" My aunt's pet ring-doves," answered leuan ; " the 
aviary is close by." "Coo, coo!" called the dove 
again. "Yes, it is sweet, but sad, I think." Its 
tender note awoke a slumbering memory in leuan's 
heart— one that was never far away, never difficult to 
recall. "Have you ever heard a beautiful song of 
ILmdel's from ' Acis and Galatea,' called, 'As when 
the dove laments her love ' ? " 

"Yes, I have heard it; it is very beautiful," rejoined 
La Belle with an almost painful throb of memory. 



,u 




S (i lla 



TIIK r:\r.L 



303 



They were both :.lLnt (■,.: a while. 

"I observe that you are not wcan'nf^- fl /Acrs to- 
night. Mi-^i Roose: not even y.ur fav juritc .;,irna- 
tior.s." 

" No ; the exi^^encles of a fa-hior.-ib: : to'lct i*.r'.ar e 
it. My crimson fricno's '.vcre not ~-:o'.c-cd tu • ■-> 
veil ' with my gown." 

leuan was standing be-idc her. lookir.':; do-vn at the 
tiear-cut prof;!e. "I dare not offer y , a a flo-.ver, if 
fiihi'..n f.rbi'I-; it." 

' Oh. inr' cd, I am not a -!ave to fa-hivn." 

" Ma>- I venture then - " And ho ci.t ;V m a lux- 
uriant maiden's Llush rose a p-.Ic pin:< fiov.er, sur- 
rounded by its dark, glossy leaves, and hj', i it towards 
her with trem.bling finders, and love in hi.' eyes. 

She took it silently, and fastenc:! it in the bosom of 
her dress, over — it must be c .nfes.ei — a flutt^rinT 
heart ; but she ignored the sentinnent ot the situation*, 
and answered calmly : 

''You have good taste; even fashion could find no 
fault with this pale pink and •;'. .i-y green. ' 

" Coo, coo I " came again from the aviary, and La 
Belle felt an almost irresistible ces're to break forth 
into song, s<j overpowering were the associations 
borne in upon her memory^ 

_" \yhen v/i'l you go on with the -tory of your early 
life?'' she asked, lowering her eves '-.eforc his earnest 
gaze. 

'• I think I told you all, or all that vv-ou'd interest 
you,'' he answered. 

_" Oh. not nearly all. I want to kno-.v much more. 
What wa- the name of the h::' o.n which you kept 
y:ur sheep' What was > our r: g's name.' And oh, 
many, many tilings. 

Again the ceo of the dove came on the air : and, 
even while in a trance-like dream of happiness in La 
Belle's Dresctlce. a vision ro-.e hf^^'rp h-rr; ?-.• ^ ^.■rr-.z-r-. . 
eyed girl, who looked at him the while she sang : and 
the tender words rang thro-j^h his men-iorv. '"^When 



i' 



I 'J 




tV 1 






% 



m 






3: 

.i-i 



H; 



J- 




i ; 








WEisii sin(;fr. 




he returns, no more she mourns, but loves the 1 
lou'T day," and he .sif;hed while listening' to the do 

'Why do you si.;h?" asked La Iklle, lookin- 
wu •" • "'^'^*'* (love's cooinj,' seems to tn.uble ) 
Why IS it ? To mc his note si)caks only of rest ; 
}x;acc. ' 

"And love." 

" Yes, and love. How docs the song go ? • W I 
he returns, no more she mourns, but loves the li 
long ilay.' " 

" Ves." said Icuan ; " but by some train of thou 
that song recalls to me circumstances of my e.i 
days." ' 

" Sad circumstances ? " 

" N-no ! certainly not ; but there is always a s; 
ncss in looking back." 

'' Always," agreed La Belle ; " I feel it myself." 

"Even though the present may be all that we coi 
desire, as mine is now. Where on the face of i 
(•arth could I be more happy, or more blessed, tli 
here ? " 

" And yet," rejoined La Relic, "you are not happ 
"Happy! happy!" cried leuan ; "yes, happy a 

blessed beyond my wildest dreams. If only I coi 

be .'^ure — " 

"Oh, but," broke in La Belle with a mischicvo 
smile, "you are straying from the subject. You km 
)ou were going to tell me the rest of your story, 
can so well picture the sheep, the shepherd and 1 
dog, the sea— did you say the sea ?" 

" Oh, the sea ; yes, our lives were lived in the si 
wind's breath, for we spent our days on the north-wc 
slopes of the hills, that stood as sentinels each side 
a little golden strand." 

" We ! Do you mean your dog and you ? It mu 
have been a lonely life out on those bare hills, v.ii 
onl\- the sky above >'ou. Was there no other shcohcr 
or shcnherdess ? " 



There was," said leuan. He 



was filled with 



THE r-AI.L. 



305 






stnnffc uneasincs-?, an intense lonjinnc; for rln l,.-; 
tlut seemed so nearly in his gra.p, .md an m.-lcfin-rrl 
dread, as though he u.rre about to ,uffr nu.,- ,|, 
Ins. "There was a :^n'r!, who uat<..n;d her iiu;ej> 
the hill on the opp'>sitc sivie of the strand. " 

" Ah, that was nice for both of vju. Did you ever 
meet?" 

"Yes, frequently; indeed, \vc were often t'.rr,-thrr, 
fjrvve were foster-brother an 1 sister, brou<^ht iip'by the 
same parents under the dear old thatch<;r! roof" 

" Now the picture is complctf," .he ^aid : " uirh a 
companion, life in uch scene^ 'Aoulrl be p<jrfect. And 
what vvas the girl's nanu- ? " 

" Mifanwy.' 

" Mifanwy ! a stran;:je name ; a country name, I 
suppose?" 

" Yes ; a Welsh name." 

" You must have loved each other very rr.uch, beiu^ 
so thrown together in that solitary place." 

" Yes, we were very fond of one an'.ther." 

" Oh, tell me about the girl : \V'a.> iie pretty ' " 

"Oh, no," said r-nan ; " plai.., .jry piam." .\ flu>h 
rose to the girl's pale cheeks. ' .\t lease, e-.(jr>onc 
else th'jught so; but she was my si iter, you see. and 
I thought her beautiful. I supp'jse I k-n-w o<\\\ the 
spirit that looked out through her dark bvyn 'c>r-s, 
and smiled on her red lip>." 

" Was she fair, or dark ? " 

"Oh, dark— black, yoi might a!m.-r call her. f.r 
the sun and rain had so tanned and burnt her ^kin 
that it had become unnaturally dark ot hue. I v. a.-, 
sunburnt and brown, but Mifanu-y -.va. du-ky ar.d 
black. Our fuster-mrjther used to declare that, as a 
baby, her skin was of an un^-uallv delicate texture 
and fairness; but certainly you'v, ..uld v.'-.r. h.:ve 
guc^sed that, when looking at poor Mifanwy's bro\< 

" She must have been like a little br^-wn monkey, 
1 a I!e!l.; ^u;:- ested tentatively. 

IT 



pr 



*f'K 



Hi 



tM^ ^ 






HI .lii 



It . "1 i 



i« i 



ffi' 






I 



ft, if ^B I ! 
"It ■ 



I 



30G 



A WELSH SINGER. 



It was now leuan's turn to flush. 
"Oh, no, not that. She was extremely graceful 
in form and figure. Her movements had a natural 
-suppleness and grace about them that the youn^ 
ladies of fashion .seldom have. She was my boyhood'''- 
companion, and very dear to me at the time ; and is 
now— a sweet memory — that is all." 

" And when Sir Glynne came and took you away 
how did she bear the parting ? " 

" Oh, .she felt it very much, as I did, at the time • 
but she soon got over it, I suspect. Shortly after- 
wards, she also left her home, and went into service 
somewhere or other, and is ncvv, I suppose, a smart 
httle maid with white cap and apro.;. And so ends 
my romance. And now that I have told you all, let 
mo speak of what lies nearest to my heart. You 
know— you must have seen how much I love you • 
sometimes I have dared to hope that you are not 
quite indifferent to me ; but that will not content me 
Miss Roose, La Belle! Ma rdlc!" he cried, taking 
her hand in his, " give me some hope— nay, more than 
that ; tell me that you love me, for, as God is my 
\vitness, my very soul is yours. I hear your voice 
amoi'gst a hundred, when you speak, and, when you 
sing, you sway my very being." 

The colour came and went on La Belle's clear 
features, the pale eyelids drooped, and there was a 
flutter at her heart that moved visibly the little locket 
fa.stened round her neck. She did not withdraw Iier 
hand, but, placing the other over her burning checks, 
sne murmured low : 

" I CiO confess I love you." 

leuan started, and tried to take her other hand • 
but she repulsed him gently, and continued : 
" But — but — I cannot say m.ore." 
" More ! " cried leuan in an ec-l. 
want more? What can life give 1 
than your love? Without ;i I s 



; " what can I 

more precious 

iulf' 'ave gone 



. 1. 



hungry for over ; with it I cnn bear -ur^t' :., •' that" fate 



! i 



Ih 



THE BALL. 



507 



ha 



ve 



ti T ;m 



c. Ma IJclle ! Ma Belle ! you 



:Hght." And again h 



le en- 



may 

have crowr :(1 mv witii o 

deavoured to take her hands in his ; but'shc turned 

her eyes up^'i him <:i(\\y, but, withal, firmly. 

" Mr. Povvys, I confessed I loved you ; but that 
shepherd girl, Mifanwy ! " 

" Oh ! heavens ! " cried leuan, starting to his feet ; 
" Mifanwy, Mifanwy, am I ncv(:r to shake off that 
haunting word ; arc 30U beginning to taunt m*; wit' 
the memory of that foolish boy and girl affair ? " 

"But if she loved you." 

" If she did, she has forgotten me long ago, and 
probably married cither some country lout or some 
town shopman. Am I to be baulked of my heart's 
desire, to be thrust back upon myself, when my whole 
heart has gone forth to you. Belle, because in my 
boyhood's days I thought I loved a girl ; a child you 
may call her, for she was only fifteen when I left 
her." 

" At fifteen a girl may love deeply and for ever ; 
and something tells me that this girl— this Mifanwy' 
was one of those devoted and faithful ones. Mr! 
Powys, I have no right— or have I?" and with be- 
witching tenderness, she raised her eyes to his, who 
now stood leaning moodily against the wall. 

" You have," he said, " you have the right that the 
master has over his slave ; that the king has over his 
subject ; that the owner has over his possessions. 
Oh, Belle ! exercise that right ; tell me only what to 
do to win your consent." 

" Consent ? " she said, " consent to what, Mr. Powys ? 
—well, leuan, then." 

" Consent to marry me. Good God ! why do you 
trifle with me ? Is a man's heart a toy, to be taken 
up and laid down at pleasure ? Why do you keep 
me thus at a distance from you ? You have confessed 
that you love me, you know that I love you ; there- 
•'^re, Vv'iiat power is there in heaven or earth to keep 
us two asunder ? " 



4 






t I 



\ f 



^li 






f 



f 






1 



^¥" : 



•i 



I, 



308 



A WELSH SINGER, 



i f ■ 



"Only Mifanvvy," she answered with droopin 

head ; and surely— surely— that was a tear that fc 

upon her gown. Conflicting feelings were sunnn 

through her heart ; her love for leuan, that had rule 

her benig for so long— indeed, as long as she coul 

remember— was craving for its fulfilment, and th 

happmess for which she had thirsted all her life wa 

now held out to her, only waiting for her to grasp i 

and make it hers. What was it in that stubbori 

Celtic nature that prevented her taking to herself th( 

joy for which her whole being longed ? Just pride 

She could not separate her personality frou- that o 

Mifanwy the shepherdess ; her whole life as Ln ]5ell( 

Russe seemed to her like a dream, and the bitterncs' 

of leuan's neglect of Mifanwy withered the fair flowei 

of his love for La Belle Russe. She did not realise 

that her deception was a cruel wrong to him ; that 

at heart— though unconsciously— he was still faithful 

to Mifanwy, and nat the impossibility of harmonising 

his feelings for two women, who were still one, was 

the cause of all this misery and sorrow. No— he had 

done wrong in forgetting her as Mifanwy, and as 

Mifanwy, she could never be satisfied with his love 

for La Belle Russe. " I cannot marry you," she said, 

"while that poor girl still loves you, and waits for 

you." 

^^ " This is madness ! this is cruel ! " exclaimed leuan. 
" Belle, Belle ! do you know what you are doin"- ? " 
And he determinedly took both her hands in his, "and 
covered them with kisses, while he earnestly pleaded 
that she would reconsider her decision. "Do you 
know," he urged, "that you are trampling on the 
heart of a man, who has never loved but you ? Since 
I came to London I have been surrounded by every 
type of womanhood, from the matron to the girl, but 
I have never felt my heart beat faster, or a throb of 
interest, until I met you. It is true that, as a boy, I 
thought I loved Mifanwy, but I know now that you 
alone rule my destiny ; without you, my life wilf be 



Hi- 



i'i 



THE BALL. 



309 



empty and fraught with misery ; with you, it will be 
full and strong. Oh ! Belle, do not thrust me from 
you ! I could not bear it. If you love me, surely 
you will pity me." 

" I do love you, leuan, as you love me ; but I can- 
not marry you as things are at present." 

" Dearest, wha<- would you have me do, then ? No, 
leave your hands with me ; tell me what to do to win 
you ? " 

" Get this girl's consent ; let her set y u free; find 
her out, wherever she is; if she has forgotten you, 
and sets you free, then come back to me, and if you 
come — oh ! then you can ask me again." 

" And then, you will say — yes — love ? " 

There was a very low "Yes," and a little pause, 
during which Icuan pressed a kiss upon her hand. 
" Coo, coo," chimed in the ring-dove ; and even while 
his lips still pressed her hand, he seemed to hear Mi- 
fanwy's voice, " As when the dove laments her love." 

"But supposing she has not forgotten me, what 
shall I do then ? " 

" The path of honour lies straight before you ; you 
will take that path ; and I— I must bear the con- 
sequences." 

" Honour I honour ! the word was drummed into 
me as a boy ; it was my old foster-father's watchword 
■— 'onnore!' he said with his strong Welsh accent, 
' is better than gold ! ' I never thought then that 
honour would demand of me so terrible a sacrifice." 

"And Mifanwy," said La Belle, "what did she think 
of the word ? " 

" Oh, I think, to her it was as the breath of life." 

"Yes— then she will set ycu free." 

At this moment a flood of melody filhd the air? 
from the ball-room came a louder strain of nusic. 

" We have been here too long," she said ; " will 
you take me back to Mrs. Roosc ? " 

Without a word, he ofifered her his arm. 

And the dream of love and happiness seemed to 



i P-* 



rr- fr hii 

14 ■ ■: ^ 



I 



t 



!1! ! '' 



H' t 



'% 



-i >■ =; 1, 

'* f. l' : i> 



ft I N • ;, 



f ' 






tit: 



I 



3IO 



^ WELSH SINGKk. 



-=n: 



fade away, and, to the eyes of the occupants of the 
ball-room, nothing more interesting than a fashion 
abJy-dressed girl, escorted by a handsome young man 
emerged from under the fern-draped door of the con-' 
servatory. 

When leuan bowed and left La Belle with Mr. 

Koose, a tide of joy rushed through his veins ; noth - 

ng could undo the fact that she^ had confessed hi 

love for him, and, ,f she chose to make no further si-m 

to-night,_he would respect her confidence 

Later in the evening, he found Mr. Campcrton look- 
ing rather downcast. Elizabeth had gone ; La J5ciie 
was going ; should he approach her again and uii'r 
dta;™^: ^°'>^ —ready too late; she had 

. tlR°"'>K^^"'P'":t°"'" '^^ •'^^'d. " I '^m dying to have 
anolLrdan'oa" ^""^ '^ "^ ^"^'"' ""'^'^^ >''^" ^^^ 
"Not I," replied his friend; and, in a few moments 
the two young men were seated in leuan's cosy "den '■ 
confidlnce7 '' '''" ''^'''' ^"' --^anging^mutual 
J Come, Powys," said Mr. Campcrton at last, " what 

^ njfn" h° "'^' ''^'^'^ ^^PP^"^^ ^" that lo. 
;,nn V, conservatory ? I don't want to force 

close aho!f "''' ^"i ^°" r^^ "°^ ^' ^° confoundcdi; 
Ion -r itTrT ^^^"''' °y ^'^^'^^^^ I have seen for I 
long time that you are ' hard hit.' and, by Gcor c' 

Kiesr^lT'' '"^' ""'^^- ' think 'you are t^c 
cep^ed!" ' '" town -of course, myself ex- 

" Am I to congratulate you, then ? " 

Campcrton shook his head. " Can't you per.uadr 

knSw S/ ^'n' t''''''' ^°>' -d uncertain, ; 
know, and /-well, the consciousness that my futi-rc 

nor"ti^l'.\'" ",?'''t''' '''''''^^' ' have neither him 
nprvl ';?'f ^"' ^'h'le my old uncle lives-un- 

nerves me. Only once let me come into mv titl.. 
ana csraie., .uki i will msist on a decided answer • 



£.1. 



THE BALL. 



311 



and, perhaps, she will throw me to the dogs. By 
George ! if she decs, I am a ruined man ! " 

" Nonsense," said leuan ; " she won't refuse you ; 
set your mind at rest on that point. I wish I had as 
little cause to be uneasy." 

" Uneasy ? You ? with the loveliest woman in 
London, one excepted, deeply in love with you." 

" Shut up, Camperton ! Good heavens ! what are 
you saying ? Sometimes, in her presence, I venture 
to hope she is not quite indifferent to me, but when 
once I am away from her, I fall into the lowest depths 
of despair ; in fact, Camperton," rising and throwing 
back his head with the old gesture, " my life lately 
has been one continual strain of conflicting emotions ; 
you may thank Heaven, my dear fellow, that you are 
an Englishman, a cool-headed, .lerve-proof Saxon, 
and that you can take things in a common-sense, 
rational manner, in spite of your recent remark about 
being a ruined man." He was silent for some time, 
then suddenly burst out with, " Camperton, do you 
think it is possible for a man to be in love with two 
women at once ? " 

Mr. Camperton held his cigar away from his lips, 
while he looked in astonishment at his friend. " Two 
flirtations, perhaps," he agreed, " but bona fide in love 
with two ; don't think so." 

" Well," said leuan, with a flushed face and hurried 
breath, "how can you explain my state of mind, then? 
for I tell you, Camperton, though I am heart and soul 
in love with Belle Roose — yes, God knows, if ever a 
man's whole being was enthralled and subjected by a 
woman's power, I am that man ; I feel, Camperton, 
that though I had to give up fame and fortune, and 
even life, for her sak"^, I would do so w ithout a regret, 
and I sometimes dare to hope that I shall, some day, 
gain her iove — yet, invariably, at the moment of my 
most exalted hopes, there comes before me the image 
Oi another woman. I have tried to e.\urci3e the 
phantom, to banish the thought of her. but in vain. I 




i 



9] ■: 







312 



A WKLSH SINC.ER, 



can never dwell upon tlie hope of gaining l^clle 
Roosc's love, or the rapturous memory of a smile or a 
blush that has encouraged me, but, lo ! this tender- 
eyed, sad, sweet face of another woman rises before 
me, and reproaches me. Come out, Camperton ; let 
us have a breath of cool air. I believe it will drive 
me mad. I cannot live without La Belle, yet I am 
always haunted by the memory of another girl." 

Mr. Camperton drew on his overcoat in silence, and 
dejectedly fumbled for his cane, but leuan was too 
much engrossed by his own thoughts to notice him. 
When they had reached the street, he clutched leuan's 
arm. " I did fear this— some time ago, Powys— but, 
by George ! I never realised before that things had 
gone to such a length between Elizabeth and you." 

" Elizabeth ! is there no woman in the world but 
Elizabeth ? I tell you, Camperton, I have no feeling 
for Elizabeth, except that of cousinly affection— take 
my word for it— it is not she ; she is not the only 
woman in the world, as I said before." 

" She i- to me," replied Mr. Camperton, with great 
relief, " and, excuse me, Powys, but I never knew you 
had loved anyone else ; not Ella Breeze, I hope ? I 
remember you did have a little flirtation with her, but 
she is just engaged, and going to be married at once, 
to old Ponsonby— regular old-fashioned fellow — home 
to bed early, slippers and newspaper, and that sort of 
thing, you know, last man in the world I should have 
expected her to choose, but I daresay he will be an 
indulgent husband to the little minx." 

" Hope he will, I'm sure," said leuan, with scant in- 
terest. " I have been a fool to tell you ; you will 
never understand me. I don't think any sensible man 
would understand me, but, Camperton, I tell you there 
is a curious corner between Sir Glynne's rooms and 
mine, where the wind makes a weird moaning when 
il blows from the south ; and, though I know it is the 
wind, I have heard that girl crying and sobbing there!" 

" It is more serinu-^ than I thour^ht, Powys. Have 



¥ 



THE BALL. 



313 



you w united her? Has she reason to hate you, or 
does she still love you ? And who is she ? " 

" Oh, never mind, let her name rest ! " said leuan 
wearily. " I feel that it would be sacrilege to mention 
it, now that I have deserted her, and drifted away 
from her, never to return. It was only a boy and 
girl affair — I was sixteen and she was fifteen — but, if 
ever true and faithful love shone out of a woman's 
eyes, it shone on me from those brown eyes of hers. 
They were the delight of my life in those days, and 
nozv they are my torment. Come, collect your ideas, 
Camperton, and advise me, for God's sake ! what 
would you do ? " 

" Was there a promise on your part ? " 

" Yes." 

Mr. Camperton, who, in spite of his somewhat 
simple manners and appearance, was not without a 
fund of common sense, did collect his ideas, and, tak- 
ing leuan's arm, began slowly and emphatically, and 
without once appealing to his patron saint. 

" Well, Povvys, let us put the matter plainly before 
us. It seems to me like this. You were once in love 
with a girl. Being but r boy yourself, you made her 
a promise which, at the time, you fully intended to 
keep. Time and circumstances have prevented your 
meeting again. Is that so ? " 

leuan nodded. 

" Your love grew cold ; you grew to man's estate ; 
have met another woman to whom you are passionately 
devoted, whom, in fact, you feel you cannot live with- 
out. You have reason to hope that she returns your 
love. You ought to be perfectly happy, but the 
memory of your first love haunts you and wearies you 
with its persistency. ^Vhether from the morbid sensi- 
tiveness of a Celtic temperament, or an overstrained 
idea of honour, you cannot shake off the feeling that 
you have no right to ask one woman to be your wife 
while the other is expecting you to marry her. Isn't 
that so ? " 






f*:fa 



m 








mv\ 







314 



A WELSH SIN(;ER. 



Icuan nodded acjain. 

" Well, then, my dear fellow, it's as plain as a pike- 
staff ! You want to be ' off with the old love, before 
you are on with the new.' Many men would cast 
honour to the winds, and forget all about such a girl 
and boy affair ; but you can't, or won't ; therefore, 
take the bull by the horns ; find out this wonderful 
maiden, and ask her to set you free. Ten to one, you 
will find she has already forgotten you and has 
married somebody else ; at any rate, if you tell her 
your promise is irksome to you, she will release you." 

" And suppose she will not ? " asked Icuan. 

" Then, with your high ideas of honour, you cannot 
marry the other ; but I would never marry a woman 
who tried to force me to keep a promise that had be- 
come galling to me." 

" I believe you are right, Camperlon, and I thank 
you for your advice ; and, if I don't follow it, it will 
be because I am really the weak fool I have lately 
suspected myself to be. I need not say this is all in 
confidence." 

" Of course, of course," agreed Ax. Camperton. 

" Let us drop the subject then," said leuan. " If I 
follow your advice I will tell you how I have fared." 



; ■ --t f 



CHAPTER XXX I II. 

A CONDITIONAL I'KOMISE. 

I EUAN had little sleep that night. His mind was in 
a turmoil of mingled pleasure, disappointment, and 
perplexity ; but, running through all was the golden 
thread of La Belle's admission that she loved him. 
She — the peerless woman he had loved from the first 
moment he l^ad seen her, whose mere presence was 
life to him, the touch of whose garments, even, sent a 
thrill of joy through his being, the sound of whose 
voice was music to him, had confessed it ; and in 
thought he dwelt upon the drooping head, the down- 
cast lids over the soft brown eyes, the trembling ad- 
mission, " Yes, I love you," and the little hand left in 
his own. Then had come the notes of the cooing 
dove 10 disturb the scene, and with them the thought 
of Mifanwy's sad face, and the mysterious unseen 
bonds that seemed to hold him to her against his will, 
in spite of his attempts to burst them, in spite of his 
passion for La Belle. What was the meaning of it? 
Was he possessed by some evil spirit who loved to 
harass and to persecute him at the moment when his 
hopes were strongest, and his prospects of happiness 
at their brightest ? And now, here was La Belle, 
almost in the same breath with the confession of her 
love for him, urging upon him the claims of this 
imaginary being — for surely she was imaginary ! 
The Mifanwy of old, the fleet of foot, the clear-voiced, 
brown-evt?d comoanion of his bovhood was crone ! and, 
though she might have developed into a keen-witted, 
clever, domestic servant, this was not the Mifanwy of 

315 



I isfi 



' M 



mi ^ 



3. ■•■• 



■V, 



CI' •' t'* 

■JBt |S^ t^ 




^ -t 



316 



A WELSH SIN<]ER. 



old. And then his pride revolted at the thouj^ht that 
La Belle had impressed upon him that it was his 
duty to marry a r'rl of inferior position and education 
to his own. Never ! that he would never do ! and La 
Belle's love for him could not be the deep and absorb- 
in;,' passion that was his for her, or she would never 
have thus ur^^cd him to keep a promise made in bov- 
hood. 

" To confess her love to me, and then to thrust me 
away from her I It is unbearable, and to-morrow I 
will make her recall her words." 

But all this troubled thought and restless imager;- 
ended in the rapturous realisation. 

"She loves me, whatever happens, she loves me' 
and no earthly power shall divide us. I will sec this 
girl, this girl with a cap and apron ; I will find out 
whether she remembers the old past time, and still 
desires to hold me to my promise. She shall free mr 
from these bonds, and I will return to La Belle with 
no shadow between us." And he rose in the mornin" 
refreshed and invigorated by this resolution. 

"A letter for you, Icuan," said Sir Glynne, smilin^. 
" The address is in a schoolboy's round hand ; lantu's 
usual amanuensis, I think." 

"Yes, Billy 'The Shop,'" assented leuan, smilin- 
" I have written to tell them I am coming down on 
business for you soon, and this, I suspect, is a welcome 
home ! " 

^ It was in Welsh as usual, and leuan read it aloud 
in the intervals between his coffee and toast. 

"My Beloved Boy,— That is from Shan and me, 
and It is to say how glad your letter has made us ; 
you don't forget your old parents, and we know you 
never will now as long as you live. We will have a 
happy time ; we have a whole stack of peat yet un- 
burnt. and a nice little heap of culm behind the pig- 
sty. The hens are laying plenty of eggs. And Shan 
and I, when we sing in the evenings bv the firelight 



>^JSi 



^l 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISt). 



3'; 



sadly want thy bass to fill up tho tunc. And oh! 
what if Mifanwy happened to come at the same time. 
She has written to say she is coining soon. too. 
There's songs and hymns would go u[) with the smoke 
through our big chimney. You have been parted 
long enough, it is right that brother and sister should 
meet sometimes. ShAn longs to see her ' cream and 

!> » 

« Cream and roses ! " la«ighcd Sir Glyime ; " what 
does she mean by that ? " 

"That is Mifanwy, the shepherdess, my foster- 
sister," replied leuan, with a little awkwardness, 
remembering the conversation in the smoking-room 
with Sir Glynne some years before, when his promise 
to Mifanwy had been the subject of their talk. 

"Cream and roses!" laughed Lady Meredith; 
" that shows how a mother, even a foster-mother, is 
blinded by her love, for I never saw such a little 
brown-faced monkey." 

leuan flushed scarlet. " Aunt," he said reproach- 
fully, " what a word to use ; she was not that though 
she was so dark." 

" No, leuan, I beg your pardon ; and she had a 
lovely voice." 

" Yes," agreed leuan, " I have never heard one like 
it except La Belle Russc's." 

" Well, my dear boy," joined in Sir Glynne, " what- 
ever you do, don't get entangled with this little brown- 
faced songstress. Attend to business while you are 
there, and come back as soon as you can." 

"You may depend on that ; I will go on Monday 
and be back on Saturday, or even sooner, if possible." 
"What a strange thing," thought leuan, as he 
wended his way towards Graham Street in the 
afternoon, " that lanto's letter should have contained 
that bit of news to-day of all days, just when I was 
wondering how I should find this girl and lay my 
case before her, so that she should set me free." And 






if' 



f >,» 






*■» ■ 



b 



318 



A WELSH SINGER. 



w 




Ijis spirits rose with every step that lessened t 
distance between him and La ]5elle. 

"Of curse, the girl has forirottcn me; atanyia 
If she has a trace of the honmir a.ul candour wh, 
-she used to have, she will free mc at oucc from a bo' 
l.at has^ become s , gallinir." And. when he enter 
l.a Helles presence, his happy mood was shown ni I 
sprinfi[y step and kiudh'n- c-ye." 

I.a Jk'lle, on the contrary, seemed more shv ai 
tunid than her wont. She had embarked on a vcntnr 
some undertakin^r, one that might wreck the happinc 
of her life and rob her of the love that was so mccio, 
to her She was standing by the piano when 1 
entered, and flushed all over her face and neck wh. 
he clasped her hand and held it long, gazing wit 
delight at the burning blushes on her face 

"Beloved!" he began, still keeping her han 
imprisoned, " I have come to see whether you arc i 
a kmder mood than you were last night." 

"Kinder!" she echoed, regaining he'r composure 
mdeed I have been thinking that I was too kiin 
and I had to hide my face in my hands when 
remembered those words — you know " 

"What words were they?" asked 'leuan mischiev 
ously. " Say them again." 

She shook her head, smiling, but closing her hp: 
-rthem ■' ''' "°' '^^' ^^'"^ ^^'''" ' you must for 

" Forget them ! " cried leuan. « never, never, never 
Have I not been living upon them and .. peatmo 
them to myself at every moment? Is it likelv 1 
should forget them ? No, no, Ma Belle, never ' And 
J atn come to-day to claim more than you accorded 
me last night. 

.. XT ^^°''! • 'l ''t 'f'"^ ^""'^ ^y^^ ^"^ ^''^ ^OJ" t)it-> first time. 
No indeed, T have no more to g,vc ; you are very 

/'VVell, if I must be satisfied with what vou have 
given me — 



A CONDITIONAL FROMISK. 



310 



"What did I give you?" she interposed. "No 

promise." 

"No promise ? Indeed you did; and a promise 
t!iat I shall insist upun your keeping. Oh, you will 
find mc a hard man at a barf;;ain ; I will not forego 
one jot or one tittle of that promise." 

" What was it then ? " 

Icuan turned uj) the palm of her hand, while, with 
his finger, he dotted dow n the items of his bargain. 
" First you blushed." 

" That means nothing with mc." 

" Next, you said — ' I love you.' " 

" That was conditional." 

" Not at all," said Icuan ; " thf^rc were no conditions 
to that. Then you said — ' I will marry you,' " and 
he marked another imaginary dot on her hand, but 
she hastily withdrew it, and covered her blushing face 
again with both hands. 

" Oh, no, no, I never said that ! " 

" Well, I said, ' Will you marry me ? ' And you 
said, ' Yes.' " 

"Oh, well, that will do; I am quite ashamed of 
that ! " 

"Ashamed?" questioned Icuan. 

" Yes, because — because I do not mean to keep my 
word." 

leuan started ; it was said so calmly and deliber- 
ately. " Not keep your word ? " he gasped. 

" Unless you keep to my conditions, which are, as 
I said yesterday, that you find this girl, Mifanwy. 
They are not hard terms," she said, an imploring 
tenderness in ner tone ; " at least, it is incumbent 
upon you to do what is right, and upon me to bear 
the consequences. You have said that you love me, 
that you would give your life for me ; do this, then, 
for my sake, and I am sure it will be well for 
hnth " 

" But it is more than my life you ask of me, my 
honour ? To marry without love ; and, moreover, a 



r.4 



320 



A WELSH SINGER. 



Sir*' 




Rirl uneducatea and coarse in thought and feelin 
that could never be the path of honour." 

" Coarse and unrefined ! No, if she is that, I w 
not hold you to your bargain ; only find her out ar 
ask her to absolve you froin your pron>ise. If she 
coarse and unrefined she will refuse, and I wou 
think it culpable in you to marry such a woman, 
you find her all that you could wish, refined, faithfi 
and true, then marry her." 

" And you," asked leuan, " ma belle ! my belove( 
Would it bo naught to you ? " 

La Belle did not speak at once, but at last si 
leant forward, and taking leuan's hand, she raised 
tO her lips, and pressed a kiss upon it. " And I," st 
said, raising her eyes to his, "at least, will nev( 
marry any other man." 

They both rose together, leuan roused by excess ( 
feeling, I.3 Belle as if to say good-bye, but he dre 
her nearer and nearer towards him, until her hea 
rested on his breast. 

" I will do what you ask me, my darling, if it b 
possible ; but you will give me one kiss before I go? 
"No, no," gently, but firmly, repulsing him, " no 
until you have sought and found Mifanwy ; the 
come back to me." Then with a return of tendernes: 
she drew near once more and laid her head upon hi 
breast. 

leuan passed his hands tenderly over the brown 
wavy hair. " Let me go then, dearest," he said, gentl' 
leading her to her seat, " for in your presence I can 
not be the cold, calculating man you would seem t( 
have me. It will be easy to find Mifanwy ; see here, 
taking lanto's letter from his pocket, "tuis letter 
which I received this morning, tells me she vill be a 
home while I am there. You know I am scon goin^ 
into Wales ; first to *^he north to see after some pro 
pcrty of Sir Glynne'b, then down to the old home, and 
pray Gnd, . may find Mifanwy happy and forgetful 
Good-bye, beloved ! " 



r4i 



n 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 



321 






" Good-bye, leuan, and God speed you ! I know 
now that you love me." 

She listened breathlessly to his footsteps as he went 
down the stairs and out through the hall. Rising from 
the sofa, she paced up and down the room with 
clasped hands and a face aglow with varying expres- 
sions. " Now, God speed me, too," she said, " and let 
the path of honour be the path of happiness." She 
saw leuan disappearing down the street, and, waving 
a kiss after him, rang out, with a child's glee in her 
voice, " Good-bye, my leuan, but not for long ! " She 
rang the bell. " Come, Bessie," she said, when the 
little maid appeared, " come and help me to pack. On 
Monday I am going away, and to-morrow is my last 
rehearsal, so I shall have no time to spare." And 
soon they were busily engaged in packing, while Mrs. 
Roose sat by advising. 

" This seems a very sudden and mysterious visit," 
she remarked, "and I don't feel at all comfortable 
about your travelling alone ; and, Belle dear, who are 
you going to stay with ? " 

" I have told you, auntie dear, I am going to see 
my old foster-parents ; there is no mystery about it." 
Then to Bessie, " Not that pink silk, nor yet that 
amber satin, only my grey and my white." 

" No parties, then ? " said Mrs. Roose. 

" No, indeed ! " replied La Belle, with a happy 
laugh, " nothing of the kind ; only the peat smoke 
and the cawl under the dear old thatched roof! " 

" Well, I hope the charms of the peat smoke and 
the thatched roof won't dazzle you, so that you forget 
your engagement at the Opera. Remember Wednes- 
day week will be the ist of May." 

" It will be all right, dear," said the girl, with a 
joyful ring in her voice. And when Mrs. Roose went 
down to her tea in the drawing-room, she heard her 
voice, clear and loud, carolling snatches from the opera 
she had been practismg. 

leuan knew that the next evening there would be a 

X 



'-«> 



HI 

,' Mi 



|! 



ill 



IS' 



i i ■'• 



$22 



A WELSH SINGER. 




lit « . 







full-dress rehearsal of " Lucia," and, having Valpre 
card of admission, he determined to be present ; 
it, and then to go forthwith to Wales and face h 
difficulties. •' Surely, surely. La Belle would not r 
sent one day's delay, and surely, too, she would n( 
refuse to accept the dainty gift he had purchased fc 
her." It was a necklet of pearls, very chaste an 
plain, but costly and beautiful withal. 

La Belle was in her dressing-room at the Opei 
House putting the last touches to her toilette, whe 
Mrs. Roose opened the door leading from the sitting 
room or boudoir. 

" Here is Mr. Tom Pomfrey, my dear." 

" I am ready," the girl replied, entering from h( 
dressing-room ; and Tom thought he had never see 
her look so lovely. There was a faint colour in he 
cheeks and a happy sparkle in her c^ycs. 

" Oh, Tom, I am so glad to see you ! It is quit 
nine days since I have seen my brother, and I hav 
so much to tell you. When will you come t 
Graham Street for a long chat ? " 

" One day soon," said Tom, holding both her hand; 
and trying to look calmly into the melting eyes. " 
can guess your news, dear, and I have already con 
gratulated you in my thoughts ; but I will come am 
hear all about it in a day or two." 

" About what, Tom ? Nothing has happened ; a 
least, I mean, nothing to be congratulated upon." 

" Well, I won't stay now, dear ; I came only to wisl 
you good luck this evening. Good-bye." And Ton 
went away with a puzzled look in his blue eyes. 

In a few minutes leuan arrived ; his coming wa 
so unexpected that a bright flush overspread Li 
Belle's face ; and he realised with rapture that it wa 
a flush of pleasure, and that the little nervous flutte 
of the hand she placed in his marked her delight. 

" Mr. Powys, I did not expect you ; I thought—: 
thought—" 

" You thought I had gone down to Wales ; but oh 



rr)^rT'^^^>-:im:i{ 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 



323 



ma belle, how could I go before to-night's rehearsal ! 
To-morrow, since you are so cruel as to thrust me 
from you, I will go by the first train in the morning, 
if that will please you." 

" Now, who is cruel ? " she answered, with a mis- 
chievous smile. 

Here Mrs. Roose appeared in bonnet and cloak. 

" I am going, dear," she said ; " I shall find Mr. and 
Mrs. Jack Mowbray, and Tom. Perhaps you will 
join us, Mr. Powys ? " 

" Yes, in a kw minutes," replied leuan, beginning 
to undo the jewel-case. 

" What is that ? " inquired La Belle ; " not a present 
for me, for I cannot, cannot accept it. I have never 
accepted jewellery except from M. Valpre." But a 
glance at leuan's face showed there such deep disap- 
pointment, such a really wounded look, that she re- 
lented so far as to open the case. " How lovely ! 
they are beautiful indeed ! and oh ! Mr. Powys— 
leuan— I do appreciate your kindness in offering them 
to me. Are you really hurt, and don't you under- 
stand my feelings ? " 

"No, I don't understand your feelings, and I am 
really hurt," said leuan, smiling mischievously, and 
wilfully clasping round her neck the pearls. " Now, 
if you take them off, I will throw them into the 
fire." 

" Oh, how dreadful ! " cried La Belle. " You are a 
dommeering man, I am afraid. The fire indeed ! no, 
they are too lovely to be burnt, and I accept them,'' 
bending her head and lowering her eyes, " and value 
them because they come from you." 
_ "Now you are perfection," he exclaimed, admir- 
mgly ; " and oh, ma belle, let me sit here and gaze 
my fill at you. Remember that to-morrow I am 
gomg." He took her hand in his, and she did not 
draw It away. 

Meanwhile Tom Ponifrey and Mrs. Roose had 
found Mr. and Mrs. Jack Mowbray. 



.<ff 






i » _ 






*j;i 




324 



A WELSH SINGER. 



asked Mrs. Mowbray, " is si 



" How is La Belle ? 
very nervous ? " 

" No, not at all, she is full of the highest spirit 
and quite self-possessed." 

" Bravo ! " said Mrs. Mowbray. 
Tom and Jack Mowbray were chatting behin 
them. 

" Hope to goodness there will be no hitch o 
the first," said Jack ; " poor old Jean has not been a 
all well lately ; I have not been at all happy abou 
him, but he will not go and see a doctor." 

"I have not thought him looking well, myself, 
said Tom, " but I did not know there was anything t 
cause uneasiness." 

Jack shook his head. " I don't think he is a hi 
fit, you know. So soon as the opera season is ovei 
we have settled to go to dear old Dandelo.e, our ok 
home in Brittany, together ; take lodgings there, yoi 
know. Can't you come with us, Tom ? Lounge a! 
day under the apple trees, you know — make hay- 
curds and whey— and all that, you know." 

"Perhaps I will," said Tom. "I feel i want z 
rest myself ; how lovely this overture is ! " 

" First-rate band. Have you heard that Mr. Powys 
is very much smitten with La Belle ? " 

" Yes, and I think she is very fond of him." 
" Phew ! phew ! " said Jack ; and, after a moment's 
silence, he placed his hand on Tom's knee. "Ah! 
Tom, old fellow ! that hurts, doesn't it ? I have seen 
your love for her from the beginning. Wish to God 
it could have been different ! I would give some- 
thing to save you pain, old fellow." 

"Oh, never mind," said Tom wearily; "we'll forget it 
all under those apple trees, Jack. It is a long overture." 
The lights were lowered, and the curtain rose upon 
the first scene. 

Tom Pomfrey, instead of looking at the beautiful 
scene before him, fixed his eyes on Jack Mowbray, 
who was gazing earnestly towards one side of the 



behind 



iSlm 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 

stage. Tom turned, too, but could see nothing to 
explain his friend's strange look of anxiety. 
I " What's the matter. Jack ? " he asked ; but Jack 
still stared fixedly at one of the wings, for he had 
seen a face he knew, but blanched with horror and 
sudden fear. It was Valpr^ ! who, with a bewildered 
stare, had rushed for a moment on to the stage and 
had disappeared again almost instantly. 

"Tom," said Mowbray, speaking as calmly as he 
could, "take Mrs. Roose under your charge, and I 
will take my wife down this way to the front entrance; 
if we can get out quickly, well and good ; if not, God 
lielp us ! " 

" What is it ? what is it ? " cried Mrs. Mowbray, in 
alarm. 

"I don't know, dear." She felt his arm tremble 
while he hurried her out, down the stairs, and into 
the front hall, where already scared officials were be- 
ginning to rush past each other. 

" Now across the street," said Mowbray, " and into 
VVhellock, the chemist's shop, and back again at once, 
Tom. Mr. VVhellock, will you take care of these 
ladies until I come to fetch them ? There is some- 
thing wrong in the Opera House. Good-bye." 

Jack Mowbray rushed back from the doorway, and 
clasped his wife in a warm embrace. 

" Good-bye, my darling, I will come back and fetch 
you soon." 

Another moment, and the two men were running 
past the front of the Opera House round to the side 
entrance into the new wing. Within, quietness had 
been restored by the appearance of M. Valpre on the 
stage; white and hagg-'-'l, indeed, but speaking in 
calm and measured ton«. he assured the frightened 
actors that there was absolutely no cause for alarm. 

" I will speak the plain truth," he said ; " the new 
rooms are on fire, but being only connected with the 
building by one narrow passage, which at present is 
absolutely safe, there is no danger, except from your 




» In 






I 



» 1 { 



^i 







326 



A WELSH SINGER. 



own rashness and excitement. There will be pleni 
of time for everyone to leave the Opera House i 
satety ; so let me implore you to be calm " 

His words had a tranquillising efifect upon th 
actors, who quietly and orderly left the sta/e Ti 
musicians, too, made their escape ; the lights wei 
turned down, and there was a general rush toward 
the new wmg of the building. 

When Tom and Jack Mowbray reached the en 

trance to the second addition to the theatre, in whicl 

'ZVuYi the.dressing-rooms of the prii^a donn! 

and he leading singers, they realised the true natun 

of the catastrophe. The new rooms were on fire 

Ihey could hear the roaring and the crackling of th( 

flames, while they tore up the first broad flight of steps 

Arrived on the first landing, they were met by ^ 

dense cloud of smoke, that seemed to pour with the 

lorce of a whirlwind from some further passage If 

volume was so dense and palpable that the two men 

were struck as though by a living obstacle determined 

?nch backwards; but neither gave way an 

"Let me lead " said Tom ; " I know the way." 
And passing Jack Mowbray, he rushed, blinded and 
choking along a passage ; then turning suddenly to 
the left, they entered another that led straight to the 
rooms allotted to La Belle and Miss Powys. Alonjj 
this It seemed impossible to make way, for. from the 
end of the corridor, a still denser cloud of smoke, 
mixed with flames and showers of sparks, came rush- 
ing towards them, carried by a furious draught from 
the further end. 

For a moment they halted, blinded and almost 
suffocated ; then, to Jack's astonishment, Tom turned 
round, and began running in an opposite direction, 
shouting as he went : 

"Follow me. Jack ! a rope, a covering." 
His voice sounded muffled, as though coming from 
a distance, so thick was the hot and lurid atmosphere: 



».• 






^t: 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 



327 



but Jack followed, trusting to Tom's better knowledge 
of the place. Some time was lost, while they found 
and opened a door, beyond which were piled ropes, 
ladders, buckets, etc., etc. 

Each seized a rope, and Tom dragged from a corner 
a heavy piece of folded tarpaulin, and flung it over 
his shoulder. Thus burdened, they again essayed to 
traverse the burning passage. Nearest to them was 
La Belle's door, and beyond that, at the furthest end 
of the passage, was Miss Powys's. 

Elizabeth had been the first to discover the fire. 
A quarter of an hour earlier, she had been sitting in 
her dressing-room filled with fluttering anticipations, 
mixed with envious heartburnings, anent her rival ; 
but these had all been put to flight by a hurried visit 
from Mr. Camperton with a telegram apprising him 
of the old earl's death. 

" She would be Countess of Marchmont ! Good- 
bye I Good-bye to the opera! Good-bye to La 
Belle, and, alas ! good-bye to leuan ! She would 
sing to-night so as to charm every ear and eye," and 
in a dream of bliss she sat waiting for the call-boy's 
tinkle. 

Suddenly, at an unwonted sound, she started, and 
went closer to the window ; her room was in an angle 
looking on to a courtyard, the bare wall of the theatre 
facing it. What was that light in the window next 
to hers? She peered again through the darkness. 
Her window being in the corner of the square, that 01 
the next room was at right angles to it ; looking at it 
with eager gaze, she became conscious that the dark- 
ness of this window was becoming lighter. She 
watched it spellbound, growing first into a tawny 
grey, and now— yes — she was certain— it was a lurid 
red. 

In a moment she guessed what had happened, and 
thoroughly alive to her danger, she snatched a cloak 
from the cupboard, and clutching her jewel-box, 
rushed madly into the corridor, already filled with 



^;:i! 



It: 



^^i^:Ft\:%^4^ 



t« 



328 



A WELSH SINGER. 



i\ 



¥ ., 



4 ' i i' 



lliil 



curling clouds of smoke. She had no thought but for 
her own escape — to think of anyone else in such a 
moment of peril would have been contrary to Eliza- 
beth's whole nature— so she fled for her life ; but at 
the sight of La Belle's door a sudden feeling of 
vindictive pleasure she could not resist surged tluough 
her heart. 

" She will be burnt, and leuan will be free ! " With 
the rapidity of lightning the thought flashed upon her 
brain. 

By some unlucky chance, the key of La Belle's 
door had been left on the outside, and while Eliza- 
beth was rushing past, a horrible impulse overcame 
her, and almost mechanically she turned the key in 
the lock, and flinging it away, sped onwards. 

On the first landing she met Mr. Camperton, who 
was hurrying, pale and breathless, through the fast 
thickening smoke. He held his arms wide open, 
when he saw Elizabeth approach. 

" Oh, my darling ! thank God ! " he cried, while he 
clasped her to his heart. 

She had flung herself into his arms, and partly 
through terror, and partly from horror of the hideous 
deed she had just committed, she fell into a swoon, 
her jewel-box clattering down the steps before her. 

I\Ir. Camperton raised her tenderly, and picking up 
the box, managed to carry her into the street, which 
was fast filling with the crowd, who were rushing from 
every direction. 

" A cab, a cab ! " he shouted, an d a dozen eager 
helpers at once hurried away, and procured one for 
him. He placed Elizabeth within it, and getting in 
himself, drove her home at once — only remembering 
Mrs. Elliott and her maid, when Elizabeth returned 
to consciousness, and called that lady's name. 

" Mrs. Elliott, where is my jewel-box ? " were her 
first words ; and it was only the sight of the box, 
which Mr. Campeiiun held up to her, that bOothcd 
her into quietness. 



•\-," • 



A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 



329 



Meanwhile, Tom and Jack were battling with the 
smoke and flames, which now filled the passage 
through which Elizabeth had escaped. The door 
connecting the new rooms with the theatre was at 
this moment opened, and a number of the officials 
and employees rushed down a flight of steps, that led 
to the passage in front of La Belle's door ; but they 
were thrust back by the roaring flames, that now, 
sucked up by the freshly-opened door, rushed up the 

staircase. i, n . 

For a moment, the space m front of La iselles 
door was comparatively free from smoke. Tom and 
J;ick seized the opportunity, and made a bolt at the 
door, shouting while they did so, " Fire ! fire ! La 
Belle! LaBeile!" 

When Tom found that the door resisted all his 
efforts, a storm of agony burst over him, and tears 
filled his eyes, and deep sobs shook his frame, while 
he madly strove to burst it open. 

"Again, Jack! together, for God's sake!" And 
once more they flung themselves against the door, 
which at last gave way, though slowly, as if some- 
thing heavy were against it. 

La Belle and leuan had passed the " waiting time ' 
in a dream of happiness ; the fear of Bessie's arrival, 
or a visit from M. Valpre, gave the little episode a 
spice of apprehension that but enhanced its charm. 

To know that this angelic being, in dress of shim- 
mering white, loved him, though she still refused to 
become all his own ! No creature of air or imagina- 
tion, but a living, breathing woman. Yes, her heart 
was his, and his alone ; that he believed firmly now. 

And to know, thought La Belle, that this broad- 
shouldered, clear-eyed, handsome man was Icuan ! 
That he whom she had thought so far removed from 
her was now so near and so devoted to her ! 

They did not speak much — there was no need for 
words ; each knew that the other was living in a bliss- 
ful consciousness of love ! They did not notice that 









i ;! 



1,' 



1 >i 



%^ 



330 



A WELSH SINGER. 



a 



mm 



i~ 



the atmosphere had grown heavy and thick witl 
smoke until La Belle coughed. 

" Is this fog," she asked, "or is it smoke ? " 
leuan looked round. " It is smoke," he said 
"where does it come from?" And, drawing asid< 
the curtains, he peered out into the darkness ; then 
catching sight of the lurid light in the window thai 
Elizabeth had also seen, he dropped the curtain: 
hastily. " Ma belle ! let us go, dearest, at once ; ii 
is fire ! " Then dragging a heavy fur cloak from the 
sofa, he wrapped her in it, and drew her hastily 
towards the door ; already they could hear the roar- 
ing of the flames and the crackling of the burning 
wood. 

" The fire is that way," he continued, pointing with 
his right hand, "and the entrance door is on the 
left, so we can easily escape. Don't be frightened 
darling." 

" No, I am not frightened ; you will save us both. 
But poor M. Valprd- ! it is for him I grieve." 

"How do you open the door? I cannot undo 
it" 

'fOh, quite easily," said La Belle, taking hold of 
the handle ; but no, the door would not open ! " It 
is locked!" she exclaimed, turning deadly pale. 
"Oh, what shall we do?" 

leuan shook the door frantically, and pulled with 
all his might — it would not yield ; and every moment 
the air grew heavier with smoke. He rushed to the 
window, and, opening it, called and shouted till he 
was hoarse, still keeping hold of La Belle's hand, as 
though this dire calamity might part them. In de- 
spair he turned away. She was already gasping for 
breath. He carried her to the open window, and 
held her up ; but the air outside was filled with 
sparks and smoke ; so he closed the window, and 
carried her towards the door. The movement revived 
her somewhat. She flung her arms around his neck, 
and burst into a flood of tears. 




A CONDITIONAL PROMISE. 



331 



"Oh, Mr. Powys — leuan ! Good-bye! I am glad 
we are together." 

He clasped her to his heart. " Oh, God ! can it be 
possible?" he cried. " Oh, must we die? And such 
a death for you, my darling ! " 

"Good-bye, leuan," murmured La Belle once more; 
" you know — I — " 

" Not good-bye, my darling, for we die together." 

While the words were yet upon his lips, he felt her 
slip from his arms, and, in a few moments, he, too, 
had succumbed to the thick, smoky atmosphere. 

It was at this moment that Tom and Jack Mow- 
bray succeeded in forcing an entrance into the room. 
The sight that met their view caused a double pang to 
Tom, for, lying close behind the door, were the figures 
of Icuan and La lielle, and both, to all appearance, 
lifeless. leuan had evidently clasped her in his arms 
in a last embrace before he had become unconscious, 
for she .still lay in them, though their hold had 
loosened. Jack Mowbray at once seized leuan, and, 
though struggling for breath and almost stupefied, 
managed to lift him over his shoulders, and rush into 
the passage, which had, by the uprush to the higher 
landing, become slightly cleared of smoke and flames ; 
and he would, doubtless, have succeeded in saving 
both leuan and himself from injury, had not a sudden 
faintness conquered him when he reached the stair- 
case. The impetus of his headlong speed brought 
him and his unconscious burden violently down the 
stone staircase into the street. They were instantly 
seized by some persons in the crowd, and carried out 
of danger. 

Tom, meanwhile, in the burning room above, had 
spread the tarpaulin he had brought with them on 
the floor, and tenderly, though hastily, had laid La 
Belle upon it, and wrapped it round her. Then he 
raised her on his shoulders, and followed in Jack 
Mowbray's wake. But in the few moments thus em- 
ployed, the fire had made rapid progress, and when 



1 



< ' I 



i 



1^ 
k 

I 

Ira 




*W*' 




S32 



A WELSH SINGER. 



he reached the top of the staircase, blinded and sta 
gering with suffocation, he saw that the outer tloc 
way was blocked by a perfect sheet of flame. 

In desperation he turned to seek some other w; 
of escape ; but in a moment he reah'sed that tlu 
only chance was to make a rush through the flam 
themselves. His breath was failing, and his knc 
were trembling, but, with a supreme effort, he gathcn 
hi-- v/hole remaining strength together. At the san 
moment he felt, even through the suffocating num 
ness, an excruciating spasm as though sonicthii 
within had snapped ; but controlling his agony wii 
his will, he ran down the stairs, and, reaching tl 
.sheet of flame below, rushed madly through it, ar 
headlong on to the roadway as Jack Mowbray hi 
before him. The flames seemed lotii to lose the 
victim, for they now rushed outwards, and seemed 1 
lick the street with their long, scorching tongues ; bi 
some amongst the crow d rushed forward and dragge 
the fallen bodies from the flames. The tarpauli 
burden Tom had carried was quickly opened, an 
within it lay La Belle, smirched and blackened by tli 
smoke and still unconscious, but unharmed. She wa 
recognised by her dross, and carried in to Mr. Whe: 
lock's shop, whence leuan had already been conveye 
to his own home, and Jack Mowbray to the hospital 
whither also poor Tom Pomfrey had been taken. 

Before the next morning dawned, the fire had bee 
completely conquered. The firemen had concentrate 
their efforts upon the new building, and had succeeds 
in extinguishing the flames before they had reache( 
the Opera House itself 




CHAPTER XXXIV. 



TOM rOMFREY. 



When Mifanwy returned to consciousness, she was 
lying in her own bed, and Mrs. Roosc was bending 
tenderly over her. She was a self-contained young 
woman, and did not even say " Where am I ? " but, 
turning her eyes on Mrs. Roose, she waited while 
slowly her ideas collected strength, and memories of 
the scenes of the previous night came crowding to her 

brain. 

"You are awake, dear," said Mrs. Roosc softly. 

Her lips moved, but slic did not answer. 

"Yes," interposed the doctor, "she has been 
conscious some little time ; she is coming to herself 
calmly, like a strong, sensible young woman. Don't 
flurry her with questions." So they waited quietly, 
while the girl thought out the situation. 

She remembered the Opera House; themusic seemed 
ringing in her brain ; the yellow satin furniture of het 
boudoir ; her own white dress, and Icuan coming in 
at the door ; sweet words and looks of love ; and then, 
a roaring, rushing sour', i stifling air, an agony of 
farewell — and — nothing .lore. 

Then she refnembered ; there had been a fire ! and 
leuan, where was he? The soul within her awoke to 
suffering and anxiety. 

" Oh, auntie, where is he ? " 

" Where is who, dear «. lild ? " 

" Oh ! leuan, Icuan, where is he ? " 

"She must mean Mr. Povyys." explained Mrs. 
Roose. 

333 






»*^ 






334 



A WELSH SINGER. 



I- 



:*- I: 



li 



" Yes, yes, leuan Gw^ ilt ; where is he ? we were to- 
gether." 

" If you mean Mr. Gwyllt Powys, he is safe, tny 
dear," replied the doctor; "quite safe and in his own 
home at Sir Glynne Meredith's." 

" Are you telling me the truth ? '' 

" I will tell you the exact truth," said the doctor 
sitting down beside her, and taking her hand. " He 
was carried out from the burning building by some 
brave man ; they both fell down the stairs together • 
the man was taken to the hospital with a broken arm' 
and Mr. Powys was carried to his own home uninjured' 
save for a slight burn on one hand. He soon re- 
covered consciousness upon reaching the fres*-, air 
That is all I have heard, but, if you will be quite still 
I will go to his doctor, and find out exactly how he 
is so soon as I have had some breakfast. There is 
no hurry, my dear, for I assure you it was but a shVht 
injury." ^ 

Mifanwy groaned. 

"Come now," he said, " you can't expect evervone 
to have escaped from a burning building scot fre*" as 
you have— not a hair singed, not a burn on your body 
and, so far as I can see, with such a good constitution' 
that, m a few hours, you will be as well as ever' 
Come now, be calm and still, and to-morrow you will 
be well enough to go and see this fortunate youn^- 
man." ^ ^ 

" I will be quiet and patient," answered La Belle 
" if you will go and see him, and tell me truly how he- 
is." 

" I was so fortunate," he told her, on his return "as 
to find Dr. HamiUon at Sir Glynne Merediths'- he 
assured me that Mr. P.iwys was suffering only from a 
burn on his left hand, that shows every sign of healin;^ 
rapidly. He insists, however, upon his' keeping his 
bed for a few days, for his system has received a shock 
and he must avoid all excitement. To satisfy you, I 
went up to see him with Dr. Hamilton, and, in mv 






TOM POMFREY. 



335 



opinion, the only serious symptom in his case," and 
there was a mischievous twinkle in the doctor's eye, 
"was his extreme anxiety about the lady in whose 
company he was when the fire broke out. That 
anxiety I was enabled to allay, for I gather that you 
are the lady. I told him you had escaped un- 
injured, thanks to the brave man who saved you. I 
told him, further, that you would be quite well in a 
day or two, and that he might come and see you so 
soon as his doctor would allow it. I am sorry to say 
his remarks were anything but respectful to his 
medical adviser. J am not sure that he didn't say, 
'Hang the doctor! I shall get up to-morrow.'" 

" ■> Belle smiled, but rather wearily ; her thoughts 
we. busy with the fire. In the afternoon she insisted 
upon getting iin ; but, when she reached the drawing- 
room, she was glad enough to b'e on the sofa for the 
remainder of the day. Early in the afternoon all her 
fears for leuan's safety were laid at rest by his 
appearance, a little pale, and with his arm in a sling, 
but, otherwise, as well as ever. Mrs. Roose consider- 
ately left the room, when he approached La Belle, 
who lay propped up with cushions ; she stretched out 
both her hands to take his unhurt hand, and though, 
for the moment, her thoughts could find no words, 
leuan somehow was quite satisfied. He drew his 
chair beside her and raised her hands to his 
lips. 

" We have been close to death together ! " \vere her 
first words. 

" We have, indeed," said leuan, " and thank God 
you are safe. Death is always a reveal cr, and, after 
standing so near him side by side, ma belle, no cloud 
or difference can come between us." 

"Never again," and that was all her answer. Then 
a silence of embarrassment fell upon them ; deep 
down in leuan's heart was echoing a song of joy whose 
tones drowned all the fear and horror of the previous 
iiight ; for in the hour of death she had dropped all 



':« '• ■■ 



^:l- 



s^ 



li: 

a 



M' 




eU 



V 




WELSH SINGER. 

disguise, and pressed her lips to his with words 

loving farewell ; and she, although the whole scci 

was like a troubled dream to her, still remcmbcn 

how completely she had revealed her love for hir 

At last, she spoke. 

" Mr. Powys ! " 

" Oh, good heavens ! do not return to that." 

" Yes," she responded, in a firm though gentle voic 
"I must. You must be generous to me; in a momei 
of terror and weakness I forgot myself; be kind I 
me now, and forget my words." 

leuan shook his head. 

" Well, bury them out of sight, until—" 

"Until what?" 

"Until you have been to Wales and foun 
Mifanwy." 

''Surely, surely," pleaded leuan, "you arc nc 
gomg to insist upon this mad project ? " 

" Yes," she said ; " I claim the fulfilment of you 
promise," and she held out her hand. "Good-bye 
the path of duty is plain; if you love me, go! th 
issue is with God." 

"I will go," said leuan, starting up ; " but, befor 
God, I swear to you that no man was ever asked fo 
a more trying proof of love. Good-bye. La ]]clle 
you shall not see mc again until I have executed youi 
behest, and if evil come of it, remember it is not mv 
doing." 

He seized her hand and covered it with kisses 
When he was gone, she buried her face in the sois 
and cried softly. 

leuan's first visit was to the hospital, where he 
learnt that Tom Pomfrey, to his deep regret, was 
suffering from severe injuries, but that Mr. Mowbrav 
was not seriously burnt. lie was undecided whether 
to return and break the sad news to La Belle himself, 
or to leave her undisturbed, in the hope that she mi^'ht 
receive better news in the morning ; but, after a night 
maue rcstiCsis by confiicling emotions, and the pain 



TOM POMFREY. 



337 



arising from his burn, he started for North Wales in 
the early morning. 

La Belle rapidly recovered, and, with the help of 
Mrs. Roose's information, pieced together her memories 
of the preceding day, until she had formed a pretty 
correct idea of all that had occurred. 

" Auntie," she said suddenly, when, towards evening, 
Mrs. Roose appeared with a dainty little tea for both 
of them, " I know who saved me." 

"How do you know, dear?" asked Mrs. Roose, 
looking rather guilty, for she had heard from Mrs. 
Mowbray that, though her husband was suffering only 
from a broken arm and was doing well, poor Tom 
Pomfrey was dying from some internal injury sus- 
tained during his exertions in saving La Belle's life. 
Mrs. Roose had been anxious not to distress or ex- 
cite her patient by any allusion to Tom Pomfrey, 
and was now considerably dismayed at her re- 
mark. 

• I don't know how I know ; but lam sure that it 
was Tom. You say Mr. Mowbray saved Mr. Powys, 
and I am convinced it was no other than Tom who 
rescued me." 

" Well, I daresay it was, dear ; Dr. Goodrich said 
it was some brave man. Two lumps, dear ? Hasn't 
Bessie made these tea cakes well ? She is really quite 
a clever cook. When you get well — " 

" Oh, auntie, never mind the tea cakes ; tell me 
about Tom ; was he hurt ? Where is he ? If he were 
well, I know he would come and see me." 

" Well, I did hear something about his being hurt a 
little, dear, and being taken to the hospital with Mr. 
Mowbray." 

La Belle sighed and put down her cup. '• To- 
morrow I must go to him." 

" Oh ! I don't know what Dr. Goodrich will say to 

" And M. Valpr^, auntie ? Where is he ? " 

" Oh 1 Bejle, dear," answered the poor ladv in f^e- 






-!•■ 






.' % 






ni 



338 



A WELSH SINGER. 



'■% * 



im 



spair " don't ask me questions ; I can only give 
painful answers. Wait till you are better " 
" I need not ask," replied La Belle. « I kno' 

^rthe fiJe •^^''^ ''"°'^" ^" *'°"^' ^' ^^'P'^ "^^'^^ 
"No, dear, no, indeed." said Mrs. Roose, giving^ 
to her tears ; " thank God, he was spared that ' 
was found lying dead on the couch in his priv 
room. He must have felt ill when he came on 
stage to try to calm the actors ; then he must h 
gone straight to his own room, and thrown himself 
th^ouch; It must have been very sudden. Belle, a 
i :ihould think, painless, for his fingers were still 
his waistcoat pocket, holding a little bottle of so 
restorative drops he used to take to relieve the spas 
of the heart, from which he suffered." 

c.^'i^^^'i^^Tu^^^".^'"' ^^'^'^ *^<^"^'" said La Be 
sadly. God has been very merciful to me a 

leuan. But, oh ! auntie, the fire will have taken fr( 
me two good friends." 
" Tom is not dead, dear." 

him^*^' ^ ^'^^^ ^^ ""^^ ^'^^ ' ^' ^"y '^^'^' *'^' ^ ^ 

And, for the remainder of the evening, she lay ve 

than^Ieuan ' thoughts being more with To 

Immediately after breakfast on the followit 
mcrning. a telegram was brought her ; the conten 
she divined at once. 

"It is about Tom," she said ; and so it was. . 
telegram from Mrs. Mowbray— 

" Tom is dying— can you come ? " 

In less than half an hour she was at the hospitj 
nulli? ^T^- She was pale and frightened, bt 
outwardly quite calm, so that the nurse who met he 
did not hesitate to take her at once to the bedside c 
the dying man. The nurse preceded her up a loni 
row of beds to one round which a screen was placec 
When she passed round the corrjer of the screen, th 



TOM POMFREY. 



339 



sight that met her eyes was sad indeed. There lay 
poor Tom, the beauty of his manly form disfigured by 
swathing bandages, his head and face unrecognisable 
from the injuries he had received ; his eyes only 
seemed unhurt, and as La Belle approached, they 
fixed themselves upon her hungrily. A tender- 
hearted nurse was holding up the heavy head. La 
Belle slipped quietly into her place, and, passing her 
arm under the shoulders of the invalid, let him rest 
upon her breast. 

" Is it Mifanwy ? " he panted, in a hoarse whisper. 

" Yes, dearest Torn, Mifanwy, for whom you have 
sacrificed your life." 

" Thank God for that," he said. " He is merciful," 
and, with panting breath and heaving chest, he con- 
tinued, "I never expected .... such happiness as 
this .... to die in your arms. Mifanwy .... you 
will take Sultan with you .... will you not ? " 

" Yes, yes, wherever I go." The tears were stream- 
ing down her face, and her bosom heaved with the 
sobs she vainly strove to check. 

" Are you crying for me, dear ? Shall you ... . 
miss me ... . from your life ? " 

" Oh, Tom, Tom ! " sobbed La Belle, " how can I 
live without you, my beloved brother ? " 

Tom whispered again, "Thank God! Lay me 
down now, and come where 1 can see you." 

She gently laid his head upon the pillow, and, 
kneeling beside him, looked into the fast darkening 
eyes. She stooped towards the disfigured face, and 
kissed the blistered lips. A light flashed in his eyes, 
and he whispered a few words, unintelligible to the 
nurse, but which Mifanwy heard distinctly, and well 
knew their meaning, " Where there is no marrying, or 
giving in marriage." 

There was unbroken silence after this, and Mifanwy 
knew that the brave, patient spirit had departed, leav- 
ing her with an appointment to meet where all aching 
hearts find rest. 



^ ) • 



;-!-i 



jij 



I; 







'■'."-, 



340 



A WELSH SINGER. 



One passionate burst of tears, and La Belle ha 
calmed her storm of sorrow sufficiently to accompac 
Mrs. Roose into an ante-room, where old Pomfre 
and his wife had just arrived. 

They had left Tom, the evening before, a litt 
better, though the nurse knew that the cessation ( 
his pain was only the beginning of the end, and the 
grief was, at first, quite uncontrollable. La Belle 
presence, and her gentle words of sympathy, gradual! 
comforted and soothed them. 

'* Ah ! my boy, my boy ! the best that ever livec 
Well, he shall 'ave a funeral as'll show London wh; 
I thought on him ; yes, that he shall ! A grand pn 
cession and the ' Dead March in Saul ! ' " 

" Oh ! no — no— no i " implored La Belle, in re; 
distress, " Tom would never have liked that. No, M 
Pomfrey, just think what he himself would like, an 
do exactly that." 

" Yes," added Mrs. Pomfrey, through her sobs, " 
wouldn't 'ave liked no grandeur." 

Old Pomfrey looked terribly flustered. "What 
would you like 'im to be buried in a parish 'earse, pe 
haps i and you an me in a cab be'ind ? Not for m 
boy Tom ! " 

Here Mifanwy laid her hand gently on the ol 
man's arm ; she knew his character too well to doul 
that his desire was only to show respect and honoj 
to his son's memory. 

•' Dear Mr. Pomfrey," she said, " have only a qui( 
hearse and two mourning coaches— one for you an 
Mrs. Pomfrey, and the other for me and Mrs. Mov 
bray." 

The old man brightened a little. " Will you com 
my dear ? That 'ud please Tom better than anythic 
else." 

And so it was settled, and in a few days all th; 
was mortal of Tom Pomfrey was laid to rest in 
shady corner of the cemetery at Kensal Green, an 
within a few yards of him Jean Valpr^ also found b 




TOM POMFREY. 



34' 



1 1 



final resting-place. And what matters it, that in this 
solitary comer, while the world goes on its way with 
smiles and laughter, the grass waves green, and the 
boughs bend low, and the flowers bloom over them ? 
Two good men have gone to their rest, or rather, to 
freer life, and greater work and interests I 



: il 

; ..I 



m 



ill 

111! 

r 

'■ tlH 



m 






1 ; 



i kU 



*1 t 




CHAPTER XXXV. 



KKCOGNITIUN, 



After the funeral, La Belle soon became hersel 
having a good constitution, a clear conscience, and 
niind free from cobwebs. Deep in her heart of heart 
she had buried the memory of her faithful friend, an( 
she quite realised that life held out to her many dutie 
as well as pleasures ; and when, in the following weel< 
she waved her last good-byes to Mrs. Roose an( 
Bessie at the station at Paddington, no one wouh 
have guessed that under that calm exterior so man] 
varying emotions strove together. Sorrow for Tom 
pleasant anticipations of happiness in the old cottage 
wondering doubts as to whether the path she was now 
treading would lead to joy or sorrow. leuan had beer 
gone nearly a fortnight, and she had heard nothing ol 
him beyond a casual remark dropped by Lady Mere- 
dith, who had shown La Belle much sympathy and 
kindness d.-ring her late time of trouble. She had 
called several times, and had given her a pressin'^ in- 
vitation to come and stay with her to recruit. '' 

" leuan is in Wales, as you know, my dear." And 
the vivid blush on her young companion's face did not 
escape her notice. " You must not be too cruel to 
him. dear; remember he, too, has suffered lately," 
and she pressed the girl's hand with a meaning look, 
but observing the fluttering breath and the drooping 
eyes, she hastened to change the conversation. "I 
have a wonderful piece of news for you : the Earl 
of Marchmont and Elizabeth were quietly married 
yesterday at St. George's. It is shockingly near the 

343 



,!„: ^i*j;i' 



RECOGNITION. 



343 



old earl's death ; but that is their business, not ours, 
my dear, and, certainly, Mr. Camperton had waited 
long and patiently. They have gone to Paris, I 
hear." 

" I hope they will be very happy," said La Belle. 

" Yes," said Lady Meredith ; " Elizabeth will enjoy 
being a countess. I do wish you would come and 
stay with us." 

But La Belle had her own path to follow, and her 
own plans to carry out, so she quietly declined her 
friend's invitation " for the present ; but I will come 
another time, if you will have me, dear Lady Meredith." 

" Whenever you can come, my dear." 

And so she had felt free to go ; and when, on the 
following Monday, the train had fairly left the station, 
she sank into a corner with a sigh of satisfaction. 
Now she had the threads of her destiny in her fingers, 
and was weaving a pattern long fashioned in her 
mind ; now the flower of her love and leuan's was 
bursting into bud ; now the long frustrated hopes 
would see their fruition ; the night was passing, the 
day was dawning ; her eyes glistened with inward 
happiness. 

On and on, by sunny fields and orchards, by river 
and mountain and wood, until, late in the evening, 
she arrived at the old familiar station at Caer Madoc, 
and impatient to reach home, she hired a carriage to 
take her to her journey's end. She got out at the top 
of the moor, and having paid the driver, told him to 
place her box behind a furze bush, where it would 
have been quite safe until next day, but from whence 
lanto fetched it in his wheelbarrow a little later. 
Once more she ran over the springy grass, light of 
foot, and light of heart. There was the silver sea 
stretching away before her ; the moon already riding 
high in the twilight sky ; the sun had sunk behind 
his watery bed, but had left behind long trails of 
purple and crimson, and a ruddy glow. 

" Oh, I know quite well how he went down," said 



V 



4 

I 



'trj 



s» . 'I 



m 



m 




344 A WELSH SINGER. 

Mifanwy, while she mounted the knoll abov( 
the cottage; "haven't I seen it a hundred time 
in my thoughts, and in my dreams. And here is th( 
dear snug roof, and here is the blue smoke curling up 
Sh&n has a bonnie fire ! And now — to take them b> 
surprise, and make their old hearts rejoice." 

She walked very gingerly round the " pine end " o: 
the house, and on to the tiny window, which was 
glowing with light from the blazing fire of turf. The 
bwdran was simmering in the crock that hung down 
from the chimney, and in the light and shadow of the 
blazing turfs ShAn and lanto sat watching it, and 
singing, with quavering voices, an old Welsh hymn. 

Mifanwy knew it well, and, outside the window, 
joined in softly in her bell-like tones. 

"What is that?" said Sh&n suddenly, and she 
pushed back the handkerchief she always wore tied 
over her ears. 

" I heard nothing," replied lanto. 

" Thee is getting as deaf as a post ! " she snapped. 
" I heard it, I tell thee ! Mifanwy's voice ringing in 
my ears." 

" Oh, I hear it there, too," agreed lanto ; " often and 
often I go to sleep with the sound of her voice in my 
ears." 

"Well, we can sing the second verse before the 
bwdran is ready." And again the old voices were 
raised together, and again the fresh, clear voice out- 
side chimed in. 

" Is it a spirit ? " said Sh&n, in an awed voice. 

" No ! " said Mifanwy rushing in, " it is I, mother! 
Mifanwy, your own Mifanwy, come to sing with you, 
and to hug you, and to have supper with you ! I am 
as hungry as a hunter, and no spirit, I can tell you ! " 
Then there were happy greetings and warm welcomes. 

" Oh, my child, my child ! my ' cream and roses ' 
come again ! Oh, lanto bach, there's a beauty, she 

"Twt, twt," said lanto, drawing his cuff over his 



.-^li 



RECOGNITION. 



345 



eyes, "beauty or no beauty, she is here with us, 
woman, and she is hungry ! " And they were soon 
seated a' the old oak table, questioning and answer- 
ing questions between the mouthfuls of bwdran. 

"Oh that I had got a white loaf for thee, my 
child," said Sh&n. " How can thy dainty teeth bite 
this black bread ? To-morrow I will bake thee a 
wheaten loaf as white as a dog's tooth, and get cream 
from Maen Powys ! " 

" Shin anvvyl ! " cried Mifanwy, " don't let me see 
a white loaf while I am here. I have longed and 
longed for a bit of barley bread, and now here it is, 
soft and sweet, and just delicious ! And what bwdran, 
Shiln ! but yours is always good ? " 

"Well, yes, indeed," srid Shfin : "everyone says my 
bwdran is the best they ever tasted. 1 don't know 
why it is, unless it is because I always sing'O Frynian 
Caersalem' while it is boiling. And to think thou 
shouldst remember the old hymn so \vell, my child!" 

" I remember them all," replied Mifanwy, cutting 
another hunch of bread, " and will sing them all to 
you to-morrow, ii you like. But what is lanto think- 
ing about? " and she playfully patted his rough, horny 
hand with her own white fingers. 

lanto was bursting with an important secret, and, 
after sundry winks and nods from Sh&n, he brought 
it out. 

"What dost think, Mifanwy.? leuatt is coming! 
He will be here on Wednesday, quit • early in the 
morning. What dost think of that, n;^ girl ? " 

"Oh, delightful!" cried Mifanwy. clapping her 
hands, and fully entering into the uid people's glee. 

" He won't be sleeping here, it's true," went on 
lanto. " He'll sleep at the Hall, or pcrhai s at Maen 
Powys, for thee knowest Maen Powys belongs to him 
now ? " Mifanwy nodded. ' But I'll be bound he 
won't spend much of his time there, unless he is very 
much altered. Oh ! thee won't know him, Mifanwy ; 
so grand ! so broad ! so straight ! " And the old man 



I 



"ii' 



■f i 



w -m ^^-'"^ 




346 



A WELSH SINGER. 



drew himself up, and strutted about the floor. " Never 
a smarter man trod the heather, Mifanwy ; but his 
clothes ! rough frieze, Mifanwy ! no better than 
Robert the Mill's on Sunday." 

" And thee'st not very smart, too," said Shftn, look- 
ing critically at the soft grey dress. " But there ! I 
believe if thee hadsi an old red petticoat and ragged 
hat, thee wouldst look a beauty ! " 

" No more compliments, Shan ; let me leave them 
with the grand dresses and the white bread in 
London : " 

" Oh, thee hast grand dresses, then ? " said Shun, 
with growing interest. 

" Oh, plenty ; silks and satins, as many as you 
like ; but down here I shall be happier in my 
plain frocks and my wooden shoes; there they are 
under my little stool. To-morrow I will fit them 
on." 

And then lanto was dispatched to fetch the bo.x, 
which he soon brought trundling down over the 
moonlit moor, while ShSn and Mifanwy chatted by 
the peat fire, the old woman never tiring in her 
devoted attentions to the long-absent child of her 
heart. 

The next day was spent in visiting all the old 
familiar scenes, which had so often filled the girl's 
heart with longing ; first Topper's grave, and then all 
over the cliffs, and round by the winding road, follow- 
ing the stream towards the beach; for Shin, though 
old and wrinkled, was not infirm, and could still do a 
good many miles walking over the moor, to visit a 
friend, or carry her chickens to market ; and now, 
dressed in her Sunday clothes, with the scarlet mantle, 
and black leather gloves well drawn up over her arms, 
and with her beautiful foster-child beside her, she was 
filled with proud content, and stepped out bravely, 
lanto had gone, as usual, in the early morning to his 
work. He had promised to finish a job for Mrs. 
Powys that day, and not even Mifanwy's arrival was 



RE(0(;nition, 



347 



allowed to interfere with his punctual attendance at 
the turnip field; but he repaid himself with the 
pleasure of spread injr about the news of the arrival 
that had brought such happiness tf) himself and Shan 

"Hoi, Twm," he shouted, standing in the middle of 
the turnip field, and recognising a friend who was 
ploughmg on the brow of the hill, "hast heard our 
Mifanwy has come ? " 

" Os possib ! " shouted the man in return. 

lanto stooped to his turnips, but sf)()n glanced 
round in search of someone else to whom he could 
impart his tidin<;s ; but there was no one in sight, ex- 
cept two little ragged urchins, who were gathering 
daisies on the sunny hedge of the turnip-field. 

"Hoi, shemi bach," shouted lanto again, " tell your 
•mother that Mifanwy has come home." And off 
toddled the little ones to spread the news alone the 
road. *• 

It was a g;.la day indeed for ShAn, who took 
MiJanwy into the different cottages which bordered 
the road. In every house there were glad greetings 
for the girl, and congratulations for the old woman, 
who felt her cup of happiness almost too full. 

»*i! il' 'i-^"™ ^^^^'" ^^^^ °'^ ^*'^"'> the weaver's wife, 
that she has come once more before I die I shall 
hear her sing again, and then I shall want no other 
music until I hear the angels' voices." 
II " ^Y'" ?V"^' »"^ced," said Mifanwy, " whenever you 
like. Matt! fach. It will be a delight to me to sing 
to my own dear people, who love and feel music as I 
do myself." 

Together with the tidings of Mifanwy's arrival went 
abroad into every gabled farm and straw-thatched 
cottage the news that she would sing to thom This 
was the greatest kindness she could confer upon this 
musical peope, and at once her popularity was assured 
in her old neighbourhood. 

Pnnf- ^^°"? " u ^t'^^''"* "^^^^^ leaning against Feggi 
i'ants garden hedge, sunning themselves amongst the 



^ 



«J 









^ir^i 



??^ 




m^:-: 


:i. ;^j 


^.■il' 


il:ifv 


t -/^JI 


:?!**' 


' ' ''gUi 


: ' *• 


:>■■. '^* jVH 


.■ ? J '. ' 


* 3 


.._.;Ii!i:' 




t f -^s '-» a.\ 



34« 



A WELSH SINGER. 



! \ ,r ■ - 



daflTodils, and when Shan and Mifanwy approached, 
they cast looks of admiration at the girl. 

"Who's this lass," said Robin Hughes, "with old 
Sh&n ? On my word, she is a beauty ! " 

"So she is, and no mistake," said Dick Penpwll. 
" Who can she be ? Why, it is Mifanwy ! Good 
morning, Sh&n fach ; here's a lovely day, and here's 
a bonny face thou art bringing with thee to shine 
upon us, and to set us ail topsy-turvy." 

" Aha ! my boys," cried Shan triumphantly ; 
"haven't I told you many times that Mifanwy was 
coming one day? and here she is. Aha! Dick 
Penpwll, v/ho will laugh at me now for calling her my 
' cream and roses ' ? " 

" Who, indeed F ." replied Dick, politely taking off 
his cap, an action imitated by the others. 

Mifanwy, amused and pleased, shook hands warmly 
with them all, sending by each some word of greeting 
to mother, sister, or friend. After she had passed on, 
there was a sheepish silence, broken at last by Dick 
Penpwll. 

" Deuce anwl ? who'd have thought she'd have 
grown up such a beauty ? " 

" Let's go up to-night and ask her to sing," sug- 
gested Robin Hughes. 

" She will, she will," said a lad who joined them 
from one of the cottages. " She said she would sing 
to us all, and when wc like." 

"Well, indeed ! th-'rc's nice she is," said the sailors, 
turning away, and, with hands deep in their pockets, 
si uching down the road after the two women. 

' There's straight she walks," said one, " and there's 
red lips she's got." 

" What's the matter, Josh ? " as one of them came 
to a sudden stop, and siappcd his leg vigorously. 

" C)h, drabbitsie ! " said Josh emphatically ; " it's 
all up with us, my boys. Her lips may be red, and 
her skin may be like milk, but she's not for any of us; 
lanto told me last night that Icuan Gwyllt is coming 



# 



RECOGNITION. 



349 



i* 



home on Wednesday ; and, of course, with a gentle- 
man like him in and out of the cottage we shan't get 
a wink at her." 

There was no controverting this reasoning; so, 
after a few squirts of tobacco, there was silence again. 

In the afternoon ShAn and Mifanwy had worked 
their way under the cliffs to Abersethin, the tide 
having gone dov/n and left a strip of yellow sand be- 
yond the boulders, enough to walk upon. 

"We must come back over the hill," said ShAn, 
" for the tide will be in after tea. I sent Billy Pant 
this morning early to tell Catrin we were coming to 
tea ; she likes to have a few hours' notice to get her 
light cakes mixed." 

Catrin Howells stood at her door awaiting them, 
with her arms akimbo. 

" Well, I thought you were never coming," she ex- 
claimed. " Why, it is quite hall-past three. Where 
have you been ? Come here, child, out of the sun- 
light ; my old eyes are dazzled by it. Come in, come 
in." 

And she piloted Mifanwy into the old shady 
kitchen, where Dan Howells still sat on the settle, 
with the little round table beside him, and the empty 
glass. 

" Here she is, Dan," shouted Catrin. He had be- 
come very deaf. " Didst evei' see such a bonnie th'nv^? 
Look at the straightness of Lar, and the whiteness of 
her skin. Why, the fairies must have changed thee, 
child ; must have whisked away the little btown 
maiden, and put one of their own daughters in her 
place." 

;' Not a bit of it, Catrin," laughed Mifanwy ; " my 
skm is v/hiter, because, you see, it was so delicate that 
the sun had more effect upon it than on other 
people's." 

" Well, true," said Catrin ; " I remember as a baby 
thou wert very white.' 

It was a good thinr that Mifanwy was proof 



tf: 






350 



A WELSH SINGER. 






:|; 



against flattery, for everywhere she was met with the 
same admiring compliments. 

" Take off thy hat, lass ; ah ! what a mass of hair ; 
and those are the tangled skeins I used to think 
looked like the dried sea-weed on the sand. Well, 
Shan woman, thou hast more than thy share of 
happiness, for I hear Mr. Powys is coming on 
Wednesday." 

She was careful not to show too much familiarity 
with him, for Mifanwy's appearance had already sug- 
gested to her sharp wits that, with such a temptress 
before him, he might forget his position and fall in 
love with his old companion, 

" W hat sort of a place hast thou got ? " she asked 
Mifanwy. " Dost ever see Mr. leuan Powys in 
London ? " 

Mifanwy had expected this question, and had made 
up her mind that, since secrecy was no longer necessary, 
she would not kf.ep her friends in the dark. 

" Oh, yes," she said, in as calm a voice as she could 
command, " I have seen him sometimes." 

A tell-tale blush spread over her face, that Catrin 
was quick to notice ; but Shan had not observed it. 

" Seen him ! " she cried. " Seen my leuan, and 
never told me a word about it ? " 

" I did not think it worth while telling you, Shan, ' 
replied Mifanwy, conquering her embarrassment, 
" since I was coming down so soon, and leuan, too." 

" H'm ! " muttered Catrin thoughtfully, examining 
the light cake on her plate. " H'm, hast heard when 
he's going to be married ? " 

" No, indeed ; is he going to be married ? " 
" Twt, twt . if thee hast seen him, thee know'st .ill 
about that." 

" Indeed, 1 have not heard it."' 
Shan was satisfied ; but Catrin renewed her ques- 
tions. 

" Hast got a good place, girl ? I see by thy soft, fine 
dress that it is good ; and thy shoes and gioves, anil iliit 



' rp5= 



RECOGNITION. 



351 



black velvet hat, are of the very best materials ; so I 
know that thee hast good wages, and I know that, too, 
by thy kindness to thy old foster-mother. Thee'st a 
good girl, Mifanwy ; but now, take Catrin Howells' 
advice, and, if any of the gentry tell thee thou art 
pretty, don't believe a word they say." 

" I won't, Catrin," said Mifanwy, laughing ; " I'll tell 
them I know better. But I am in no situation ; I 
have left my mistress a long time ago, though I still 
go and see her sometimes." 

" That's right," said Catrin, nodding over her tea ; 
"a good servant is always welcome at an old mistress's 
house. And how dost thou live, child ? " 

" By my singing. I sing at concerts, and get paid 
so much that I have quite enough to live upon for the 
rest of my life ; and I'm soon coming home for good, 
to live with Shan and lanto again." 

" That's right ; merch i, caton pawb ! I must look 
out for a husband for thee at once. I suppose, novv, 
thee'lt expect to have a ship-captain, at least." 

" Oh, at least." replied Mifanwy. taking her banter 
in good part. 

" Well," said Shan, " I have come out to tea to- 
night to hear some news, it seems to me. Well, well, 
I shall have a good deal to tell lanto this evening." 

Dan had not yet spoken, but sat munching silently 
the lij^ht cakes Catrin put before him. When Shan 
and Mifanwy at last rose to go, he straightened him- 
self wonderfully, and, taking the girl's hand, exclaimed 
admiringly : 

" Lodes Ian ! lodes Ian ! " (pretty girl) " mind thee 
marry leuan G' yllt. I have settled it so." 

Fortunately for Mifanwy's blushes, Catrin and 
Shan had already reached the door, a fact that Dan 
was quite cunning enough to be aware of 

"Good-bye, good-bye," cried Catrin at the door. 
" Come down again soon, merch i, and I will tell thee 
which ship-captain I have chosen for thee." 

.T=ii, ijiuvs-u, ^ricu onun, as -■'■.€ tiuo^CQ sturoiiy 



[I 




352 



A WELSH SINGER. 





up the hill, much refreshed by the tea and h'ght cakes 
' the ways of Providence are wonderful ! Who'c 
have thought that my little Mifanwy would ever have 
looked up to a ship-captain for a husband ? " 

When they were seated at supper, the peat-fin 
glowinjT and the moon looking in at the w"ndoA 
Shan said : 

" Now, then, Mifanwy, tell lanto thy wonderfu 
tales." 

" I will tell him everything — you, too, Shan — oi 
one condition, that you promise not to repeat tc 
leuan a word of what I am going to say until 1 have 
seen him and spoken to him myself" 

" Quite fair, lass," said lanto, " and I promise." 

" I promise, too," Shan added, " though it will b( 
very hard." 

"Twt, twt, woman; never mind the iiardnesa 
What is it, lass ? " 

" Well, first, then, I have seen leuan many times ir 
London." 

" And spoken to him ?" 

She nodded. " But he did not know me. Father 
mother — you have heard of La Belle Russe?" 

"Of course," cried the old people in a breath ; "anc 
seen her picture on the almanac in Rhys Thomas' 
shop." 

"Yes, and Mary the Mill's little bird is callec 
Labelrws." 

" Oh, yes," put in lanto ; " everyone has heard o 
her." 

"Well, I am La Belle Russe." 

If a thunderbolt had fallen on the little cottac;! 
table, it would not have created more crmstcrnatioi 
than this announcement. lanto pushed his chai 
back, and stared ; ShAn gasped in astonishment. 

" Labelrws— our Mifanwy ! to be that great .singer 
Why, I have heard that the Queen has been to hea 
her sing!" , 

Mifanwy enjoyed their astonishment tn the luii 



RECOGNITION. 



353 



she had over and over apjain pictured to herself the 
pleasure of this dJncucment, and the reality was in no 
wise less delii^htful than the anticipation ; she felt her 
cup briinmin^t^ over with happiness. To be able thus 
to state in plain words to her foster-parents the fact 
of her success in life! It was better and sweeter to 
the taste than all the plaudits of the London public ; 
it was the crownin;; triumph of her life; and, brooding 
over it all, was the supreme happiness of the con- 
sciousness that Icuan was coming on the morrow ! 

" In the afternoon he will Le here," she said to her- 
self; " to-morrow he will come down the heath, and 
in at the door here." And the words seemed to re- 
peat themselves in her mind, while the old people 
tried to get used to the notion of her greatness. 

" And he didn't know thee ? " asked lanto. " Well, 
to be sure, and what did he say ? Did he talk to thee 
about us ? " 

"Oh, no — of course not, for he never knew it was 
Mifanwy he was speakin;^ to." 

" Well, it was no wonder," put in ShA,n. " How 
should he know thee- -a little brown bush that had 
turned to i pale white lily ? " 

" No, to bo sure," agreed lanto; "and now thee'st 
going to let him come and meet Mifanwy, as he 
thinks, when it is L.ibclius all the time ! Oh, what a 
joke it will be!" And the two old [ oople chuckled 
witli deh''^ht. 

"Well, well, well! There's news we shall have to 
tell the people about here ! " 

"Yes, but not until I have seen leuan ; you pro- 
mised, you know." 

"Oh, yes," said lanto, with a wave of his hand; 
" that is all right. Where would be my onnorc if I 
tokl, after promising not to do .so ? " 

It was well into the night before the little party 
separated, their hearts filled with happy thoughts and 
hopes. Shan and lanto lay long awake," talking 
sta uf glory opened out to them by Milan- 



..C i.! 







354 



A WELSH SINGER. 



m 



wy's advent ; and she heard them chuckling mW 
laughter at the surprise in store next day for leuan 
The girl herself, lying in the moonlight in her owr 
little bed with its pink quilt, was full of bhssfu 
anticipations. 

"Oh, I hope nothing will prevent his coming 
Have I been wrong in keeping him in the dark s( 
long ? But I will make up to him now. Is it pes 
sible that, before this time to-morrow night, I shal 
have told him all— everything ; that La Belle Russi 
is Mifanwy, and Mifanwy is La Belle ? What wil 
he say?" And she tossed over in her excitemeni 
" Will he be vexed ? Will he be angry because c 
the long struggle of confusion and of doubts that 
have seen in him so many times ? No, no, no ! II 
will not be vexed ; he will be happy, happy, happy 
and he will keep the promise he made long ago t 
return to Mifanwy." And with the words—" happj 
happy ! " — on her lips, she fell asleep. 

About noon next day Icuan arrived at Glanarvoi 
having driven from Caer Madoc station in the hig 
dogcart which had been sent from the Hall to me( 
him. The servants were all glad to have the youii 
master at home, his cheerful voice and cordial mann< 
being much appreciated ; and as he covered the groun 
at a spanking rate, over the well-kept, hard, limestor 
road, while keeping a firm hand and a steady eye c 
the spirited horse, he tried to extract from the grooi 
the news of the neighbourhood. Robin was dehghtc 
to impart all he knew. 

" Iss, sir, everything going on as ushul here, si 
Tim Dolvor is gettin' drunk every day, and is bcati 
his wife shockin' ; Mr. Morris, the vicar, is very an-i 
because the Methodists build a chapel close to tt 
churchyard, sir ; and Jones, the preacher, is bawli 
louder than ever, sir ; but I think he do Mr. Mori 
good, because he wass get very sleepy sometimes 

r- . ^ I , U,.'.- .-.Ki;rr..rJ tr\ <ihr\ut a bit. SI 

niS SCrmwIiLi, a::U Vi-'^-w «;<-.- ■■o-'„ -^- -/ ■ . 

or else we will hear Jones, the preacher's, voice qui 




Mimm^'k^^Mik 



RECOGNITION. 



35: 



plain in the church, sir ; and Robert the Mill's wife, 
sir, she got another small child, sir ; that's three now 
for Robert, sir ; and Robert he takes more toll ac- 
cordin', sir ; and Mifanwy Owen is stoppin' with ShAn 
and lanto now." 

" Is she ? " said Icuan bricny. 

" Iss sure, sir, and I have heard Josh Jenkins sayiii' 
.she is the purticst girl ever he see, sir, in England or 
Wales, let alone foreign parts." 

Somehow or other, leuan did not fancy Robin's 
account of Josh's expression of admiration. 

" And how do the new stables get on ? " 

" Oh, first rate, indeed, sir ; till this quarrel begin ; 
good thing you came down to settle it, sir." 

And Robin entertained him for the rest of the way 
with his views of the quarrel amongst the workmen. 

Sitting at his solitary lunch, leuan fell into a deep 
train of thought ; to what a critical point in his 
destiny had he come, and how different was his home- 
coming from what he had anticipated, when as a boy 
he left his native country. He was to gain fame and 
honour and riches, and to bring them all and lay them 
at the feet of his beloved shepherd girl ; and now he 
had gained riches, it is true ; and some fame, as much 
as he could expect ; but — honour, how durst /le speak 
of honour, who, being devotedly attached to cne 
woman, was already feeling a thrf)b of excitement at 
the reflection of his meeting with another. " Obses- 
sion," he said, as he walked' up and down the room, 
leaving his luncheon unfinished, "is there such a thing? 
or what is it that makes mc so diffcaiit from other 
men ? what is it to mc, who am madly in love with 
La Belle Russe, God bless her ! liiat in that thatched 
cottage, whose smoke I now see curling up, a girl is 
livmg who once kept her sheep with mc on the 
mountain side?" lie sat down again at the table. 
" 1 wonder will this go on forevt-r, and can I— dare 
1 — with honour, marry La Ik-Uc, m.i ho!!!-, piy 
darling, while my tiuant heart still huriirs at tlic 









1 i t: 



11 .^- 




356 



A WELSH SINGER. 



sound of MIfanwy's name? Well, well, the time has 
come to solve that problem. I will see the girl, whom 
that cub, Josh, dares to admire. I never liked the 
fellow." 

In less than half an hour he was stooplnrj his tall 
shoulders to enter the low door of Shan and lanto's 
cottage. 

" Hoi, hoi ! " he shouted, finding no one at home ; 
" where are you all gone to ? " 

" Here we are, my boy bach," came Shdn's quavery 
voice, following him in from the sunshine, and placing 
her basket on the table. She enfolded him in a lov- 
ing embrace, and lanto nearly shook his arm off iti 
the warmth of his greeting, 

" Fetching lobsters we have been, for thee, my boy ; 
we knew thce'd come some time before tea, so we put 
the crock on the fire, and the water to boil, while we 
went down to sec what Rhys Thomas had got in his 
lobster pots to-day." And she popped the shining, 
clawing creatures into the boiling water, without a 
shadow of feeling ; so easy is it for long-accustomed 
habits to harden the heart. 

leuan stretched his long legs under the old 
oak table, and looked curiously round the kitchen. 
Everything was as usual, but from under the little 
stool in the chimney corner the wooden shoes were 
gone. He longed, yet dreaded, to ask after Mifanwy, 
but he had not long to wait, for Shan could not resist 
the desire to talk of her great happiness. 

" Oh, to think, lad, we shall have thee and Mifanwy 
at home together." 

"Ah, Mifanwy, where is she?" asked leuan. "I 
suppose I shall not know her; is she altered much?" 

" Ni)t she," said Shun, while 1 into, to hide Iiis 
cmb irra^sment, peeped into the boiling pot; "not sh", 
the me cariad anwl as ever, as kind and as nicny 
as she ever was, and as ready to help her old mother. 
She s tjone to-day to see Robert the .Mill's wife, who 
is ii'-l well ; and Mifanwy told us to tell tlRV .she 



^r^fJ-Uk.U 



RECOGNITION. 



357 



was sorry not to be at home to welcome thee after 
such a long separation ; but she would be at home al 

she wi 1 be in the brr-om-parlour on the cliff at 

o'frnir'"''^" '>f"l '^ ^^^'y '^"^ ^^'" ••« better .she wU 
come home with thee, or. if „ot. she will return to the 

"Splendid! I will go to the broom-parlour at 
cght; she has not lust her h^ht foot. I hipe or ihc 
will never get up there in the dark " ' 

" In the dark ! " cried Shan, " why there is no ch.l- 
these nights; it's most lovely moonii'.ht Jaci '• 
r.fn /Tr''' *''°"Sht leuan; ''but I will not 
return to Glanarvon without knowing my fate " 
1,.L\T h'-^d/etired into the garden to hide a fit of 

" Whv ^.^' P"'"''"^ '^'' •"^^^'■"•'^^ between them. 
Why. Shan you are getting .,uite artistic in your 
old age. said leuan. as his eye fell upon two tastefully 
arranged bouquets of bluebells and primroses iS 
spersed with long blades of grass. They stood'" ^,'; 
n the wooden bowls of everyday use, polished black 
with age and rubbing, but no vase of glass or china 
would have better suited their environment o^e 
Sresser°" " ^''^ vvindow-sill, the other on the 

ha'rd E^ris^rrd'p ^'"' '' ''''' ' " ''''' ^^'^' " ^^^t 

10 my taste, they would be better in the fields • but 
those are some of MifanuyV. pretty wavs '' ' ^"' 

^_ Ah, I thought so," from leuan ' 

sc-irjet m! i\ '"^''""■'u '^°"^'""^^'' ^han. placing the 
Wn 1 V rV^' °". *he table, "is Mif.unvy's Idea • 

sSfach- Anr^'V.t'-' "'^'■^' '^-^him i lobster! 
^:)nan fach. And so I did. and now it has h.d fhJ. 

- i,c. quue cuid. so let us come to tea ; and" there's a 

* Good Lord ! 



rf- 



358 



A WELSH SINGER. 




ft 



l^ 



>$ 



J 




bonnie crab for her breakfast to-morrow, cafon 
fach. » 

" Lome, lanto, sit down," said Icuan, making room 
for the old man, who had by this time regained con- 
trol over his features. 

Icuan felt uneasy and depressed ; everywhere 
around him he saw sif^ns of Mifanwy ; behind the 
door hung a cloak of some silky grey material that 
suggested grace and refinement ; on the window-sill 
beside the flowers stood a little work-basket with 
coloured silks and lace, and under the dresser was a 
pair of the tiniest, prettiest shoes that a woman ever 
wore ; he noted them all, and wondered what sort of 
a girl she was, who held his destiny in her hands. 
At last, when the sun had long set, and the moonlight 
flooded the whole earth with her silver radiance, with 
a strong efibrt at composure, he set off for the 
broom-parlour. When he was safely out of hearing, 
lanto and Sh&n indulged in a hearty fit of laughter. 

" Ho, ho, ho I " roared lanto, " he thinks he is going 
to meet a rough country girl, Shan fach ; I know he 
does, for he has never seen her, like thee and me, since 
those old days when they parted," and Shan held her 
sides with laughter. 

But leuan was in no laughing humour as he 
tramped over the moor towards the broom-parlour. 
It was a nook on the hillside, at the very edge of the 
clifT, where Mifanwy and he had often in the past 
sat to shelter themselves from the fierce wind ; a 
curiously formed round hole or hollow, its floor 
covered with soft, velvety grass, its sides green with 
luxuriant broom bushes. Protecting it on the steep 
side of the cliff was a rocky ledge, over which you 
looked straight down to the rocks and sand below. 
Inside this ledge, and leaning with folded arms upon 
it, leuan was now standing, his eyes fixed anxiously 
on the old mill, at the further end of the beach. He 
could distinctly see a light glimmering in one of the 

* Dear heart. 



RECOGNITION. 



359 



cafon 



windows, and wondered whether Mifanwy had yet 
left the house. 

" Yes, surely there was a figure crossing the strand 
through the moonlight ; " and, with intense eagerness, 
leuan watched it as it approached ; yes, it was a 
woman, slim and graceful, too, and, as she drew nearer, 
the brilliant moonlight enabled him to distinguish the 
colour of her dress, a grey gown tucked up, a scarlet 
petticoat, and something white on her head. 

She drew nearer ; she was looking up to the broom- 
parlour, and, for the life of him, leuan could not resist 
the impulse to wave his handkerchief to her. 

"Why not?" he said; 'after all, is she not my 
sister ? and have not we been parted for years ? It is 
quite natural that I should feel a little excited at 
meeting her for the first time." 

Now she had reached the point at which the path 
up the cliff began, and she had evidently seen leuan's 
sign of recognition, for sh > waved a handkerchief in 
return ; then she disappeared from view, as the 
zig-zag path took her a little way back under the 
cliffs. VVhile waiting breathlessly for her, leuan was 
a little disconcerted at hearing just above him, on the 
side of the slope, the voices of two men, who laughed 
and joked together, their outlines showing clear 
against the dark blue sky. He peered carefully 
round the edge of the hollow, and thought he recog- 
nised Josh Jenkins and Dick PenpwU. They had 
seen Mifanwy cross the beach, and were now waiting 
until she should reach the top of the cliff; finding, 
however, that she did not quickly reappear, they 
imagmed she had followed the path to Abersethin, 
instead of turning up that which led to the top of the 
hill. ^ 

Hark I there was a step on the grass ; leuan bent 
over the ledge ; close below him he saw a grey figure 
and a white sunbonnet ; he felt a strange thumping 
ot h!s heart. In another tiiomeiit Mifanwy appeared 
at the entrance of the hollow ; she, too, had seen the 



^^>^_^^;^^^ 



MICROCOPY RESOIUTION TEST CHART 

(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 



1.0 



I.I 



■^ 12.8 

1^ i^ 


1^ 


if 13. 


iJ£ 




i^ 



1:25 i 1.4 



1.8 



1.6 



A APPLIED IIVMGE Ir 



1653 East Main Street 

Rochester, Ne» forli 14609 USA 

(716) 482 - OJOO - Plione 

(716) 288 - 5989 - Fax 



k/i^ 



^•i/fo^-.-r^"v-H^f.,-' 




WELSH SINr,ER. 



figures on the Hillside, and was glad of the excuse foi 
speaking below her breath. Under the shade of the 
cliff, and in the gloom caused by the broom bushes 
her face was quite hidden under her white sunbonnet: 
but leuan did not fail to notice the trim figure and 
graceful contour of the girl who entered. He clasped 
her hand, and, for a moment, both were silent with 
tumultuous feelings. 

"Mifanwy, lass, is it thee, in.'"ed.'" he said, in 
Welsh ; " I am glad to see thee." 

" And I, Icuan," she answered softly ; " but do not 
speak too loudly, for there are two men on the 
slope." 

" I know," said Teuan ; " sit down here on this rock, 
Dost remember our two seats, lass, when we came 
here to shelter from the wind ? " 

" Yes, I remember," replied the girl, sitting down 
and folding her hands on her lap. She spoke in low 
tones, and bent her head, so that, even if it had been 
daylight, it would have been difficult to catch a full 
view of her face. 

" Why hast never written to nr'e, Mifanwy ? Re- 
member we are brother and sister." 

" I do not forget that, indeed, leuan," replied the 
soft, whispering voice, "and would have written to 
thee long ago, but I was waiting for thee to write 
first." 

" How could I," was his rejoinder, " when I knew 
nothing of thy whereabouts ? " 

" But thee could write to Shan or lanto, had thee 
wished to, and they could have sent it to me." 

" But they did not know thy address, Mifanwy?" 

" No ; latterly, they have always written to Mr. 
Rhys Morgan." 

" Rhys Morgan ! " exclaimed leuan, in astonish- 
ment ; "has he known thine address all this time and 
never told it me ? " 

" Perhaps he did not know thee hadst any desire to 
find it out." 




RECOGNITION. 



3dl 



" Hast ever thought of me, lass ? " 
/'Often, leuan, often; especially lately, I have 
wished to see thee, for I had something to say to 

It y/as not much that Mifanwy had spoken, and he 
had not yet heard her voice above a whisper but he 
was conscious of a change in her manner, suggestive 
of refinement. ''^^ 

" Dost remember the day we parted, Mifanwy ? " 
Yes, she said, bending her head still lower " I 

noT?"^' '' ^^' ' ''"^' ^^"^"' *^ '^ '^'''-' *° •■"^^•' '* 
"No Mifanwy, it is not wise ; but-my heart rebels 
against this cold meeting; it is my fault, I know it is 
Before God I meant to be true to thee, Mifanwy, and 
for years and years the thought of thee was like a 
breath of pure air to me-a breeze wafted from the 
past, that brought peace, and love, and calmness, to 
my soul. ' 

"And now," she said, " it is no longer so ; thou 
leedst not tell me, leuan, for though I hav^ been 
separated from thee by outward circumstances and 
material things, mwardly we have never been divided- 
there is a bond between us that never can be broken' 
a bond of sympathy that has always made me con ' 
scious of thy feelings ; and, lately, I know thou, too 
hast felt that bond, but it has been irksome to thee' 
breakit "" " ^°"^'''' ^°' ^^"^ opportunity to 

Her hand played nervously with her apron strin^ 
Jeuan was silent with astonishment and trouble 
1 rue, too true, there was some invisible link that 
bound him to this girl ; she had read his soul and 
ad known his thoughts with an intuition that could 
be founded ,n love only-deep, true love for him-a 
love he was now going to repay with cold repulsion, 
shall rr ,^? ^^^"^"^^'•'^d, "pity me, girl; v/hat 
decde ' ^"^ ""^ ^^°'y ^""^ ^'^'P """^ tc 





362 



A WELSH SINGER. 



" I will, leuan, even at the cost of my own happi- 
ness." 

"Alas, and must it be so? Must I destroy thy 
happiness, Mifanwy? I wish it could be otherwise." 

"But, leuan, listen to me first and answer me. 
Didst ever love me as I loved thee?" 

" God knows. Mifanwy, I loved thee tenderly and 
truly when I 6 st parted from thee, and, in spite of 
carelessness and neglect, in spite of the fascinations 
of the world that crowded upon me, and dimmed 
thine image for a time, no other woman ever moved 
my heart as thou hast moved it— until lately." 

" And now," she said, with trembling in her voice, 
" thou lovest another woman ? " 

He was silent for a while, but, at last, with bated 
breath, he said : 

" Alas, I do, with all my heart and soul." 

For a short space Mifanwy, too, was silent. Then 
rising, she leant against the ledge, and murmured 
nervously : 

" I, too, have something to tell thee, leuan. There 
is someone who has — " 

" Supplanted me," said leuan, speaking fiercely, and 
rising, too. " Say it out, Mifanwy, I deserve it, 
Another- nore honourable, more faithful than I — has 
taken my place in thine heart ; is it not so ? " 

Her only answer was, " Poor Mifanwy ! poor 
Mifanwy ! say good-bye to her now, leuan," and she 
held out her hand. " Is this the end of all her love 
for thee ? wilt thou cast from thee that faithful love 
that she has nourished in her bosom like a bird ? and 
shall another take it up and prize it with the warmth 
that thou refusest ? " 

leuan was in despair. He had never loved La 
Belle more than at the present moment ; and yet the 
knowledfs of Mifanwy's love, the glamour of her pre- 
sence, threw some spell upon him that made him long 
to take that girlish form in his arms and press her tc 
his heart. 



m i Ml 



RECOGNITION. 



3f>3 



"Let me go, Mifanvvy," he gasped hoarsely; "set 
me free with that nobility which always had so large 
a part in thee." 

"Good-bye then, leuan," she whispered, at the 
same time holding out her hand, "good-bye; I set thee 
free." 

He seized her hand, and raised it to his lips ; then 
pressed upon it a long and passionate kiss. 

" Good-bye, lass ! " But he still held her hand. 
" Mifanwy, wilt not let me see thy face before we 
part ? The men are gone ; come out into the moon- 
light, and let me see that sweet brown face which has 
haunted my memory so often." 

She let him draw her out into the moonlight, but 
still bent her head. 

" Take off thy bonnet, lass ! " 

She slowly obeyed. Untying the strings and un- 
covering the mass of brown-black hair, she raised her 
soft brown eyes to his, and with a smile upon her red 
lips, murmured softly in her natural voice, " leuan." 
It was only one word. The tone of voice, and the 
sweet upturned face in the moonlight, had an extra- 
ordinary effect upon him. 

For a moment he gazed in wide-eyed astonishment ; 
all the mingled and torturing bewilderment of the last 
few months returned in one agonising dread ; he 
clasped his hands across his forehead, and staggered 
against the rocky slope ; a strange dizziness came 
over him. 

" What is it ? " he said, " what is it ? Ami losing 
my reason ? " 

Mifanwy, frightened and repentant, drew near to 
him with reassuring words, and gently loosened the 
hands that were clasped over his eyes. 

" Look at me, leuan," she said tremulously ; " oh ! 

I have done wrong to deceive you ; look at me ! 

It is I — Mifanwy — La Belle — don't you see, 

leuan ? " 

"I see— I see, but I cannot understand. Mifanwy! 



I 



'in t 






364 



A WELSH SINGER. 



H'5 r 




ma belle ! come to me, my darling, and tell me what 
has happened ? " . 

She saw that his recognition of her was mingled 
with real confusion and distress, and the thought 
rushed into her heart, that she had been cruel to him, 
and with a feeling of utter abandonment to love, she 
leant her head upon his breast, and in soothing tones 
she murmured : 

" Listen, and I will explain, Icuan. I have plannca 
and longed for this hour ever since I first met you in 
London. I have deceived you for months and 
months. Oh ! leuan, to think that you did not know 
me! You thought I was another woman, and you 
forgot Mifanwy for her, and I was jealous of myself, 
and vowed to bring you back to me— as Mifanwy. 
It was I, Mifanwy, who sang in the London concerts 
— who listened to the ring-dove with you at Lady 
Meredith's ball. It was I, Mifanwy, called in London 
La Belle Russe, whom you said you loved." 

" Oh heavens!" cried leuan, clasping her in his arms, 
" this is too great happiness ; but tell me, tell me. 
Belle, my darling ! Mifanwy, my beloved ! how have 
you managed to deceive me for so long ? How could 
I have been such a fool? And yet— I was not— I 
was not wholly deceived ; all along I felt a mysterious 
strength in the bonds that drew me to you ; now all 
my sleepless nights, my unsettled mind, my strange 
emotions, my self-reproaches, are accounted for." 

" Poor fellow, poor fellow ! I begin to feel myself 
a culprit. And for all these cruelties that I have in- 
dicted upon you, how will you punish me? " 

" I told you I was a hard man at a bargain," he re- 
plied, " and now I demand for every cruelty— a kiss, 
pjrst — my unsettled mind." 

" Oh ! count them all up at once then, and one kiss 

will do." 

"Not a bit of it; first my unsettled mind, a kiss 
for that — then my sleepless nights, another for them 
then my self-reproaches, two for them." 



I ,.'.- 



Ri^COGNITION. 



SbS 



" Oh ! I will not pay," she cried ; " I will pay no 

more." 

" Then wc will leave the account unsettled for the 
present." And he drew her arm within his own, and 
they began their way across the moor. " Come, 
darling, and tell me everything, and how you have 
brought about this delicious fulfilment of my highest 
hopes. Oh ! Mifanwy, ma belle ! are we walking on 
earth, or are we in fairyland, or in Paradise ? It is 
too beautiful to be true." 

" I knew it would be," looking up into his face with 
love-lit eyes. " I said to myself over and over again 
last night, 'He is full of doubts and anxieties to-night, 
but to-morrow night he will be happy! happy! 

happy ! " 

" Let me look into your face again, beloved." And 
he smoothed her hair from off her forehead with his 
hands. " Of course," examining every lineament and 
feature, "how could I have been deceived so long? 
whose eyes but yours, love, could have been so soft, 
and yet so bright ? and I not to recognise them ! 
But La Belle's lovely cream velvet skin, whence got 
you that, Mifanwy, you who used to be so brown ? " 

"Ah! yes, and so unlovely!" she retorted, with 
childish glee. " Ah ! no one ever so rejoiced to find 
that she was pretty as I have, leuan ! I am horribly, 
incorrigibly, vain." 

" How could I have failed to recognise that dimple 
in your chin, Mifanwy, and those pearly teeth ? But 
tell me why you have kept all this from me so 
long?" 

"It was not La Belle, it was /, Mifanwy, who rose 
up within her, and claimed the fulfilment of your 
promise. Ah ! truant love, as Mifanwy, I cannot let 
you go — and as La Belle, I give you up to her." 

"And I, bewildered, ungrateful wretch, returned 
only to ask you to set me free ! " 

" Yes, and I have a mind to punish thcc, by giving 
thee thy freedom. Wilt have it, leuan?" she said, 



\r{^i:' '"^^'v.r'' 



M \ i 




•S T.' X 



366 



A WELSH SINGER. 



laughingly returning to the childish "thcc" and 
" thou," and she danced before him, walking backwards 
about a yard in front of him, " Wilt have thy freedom, 
leuan ? " 

"No, I will not, thou little will-o'-the-wisp," he 
cried, and he made a vain attempt to catch her ; " not 
shalt thou have thine for long." 

She returned to his side with a demure air of mock 
penitence, 

" Now it is time to be wise," she said ; " let me tcl 
you all from the beginning, leuan, and how I got tin 
little education I have, and how I became a greai 
singer, and how rich I am." 

" Well, no," he answered, " let us leave that till to 
morrow ; to-night is all for love, and what a night ii 
was ever such a moon ? Was there ever such ai 



is 



April? Oh, Mifanwy, beloved, were there ever twc 
such happy people ? " 

" Oh, never, never ! but see the light is out, and th( 
door left open ; Shan and lanto are gone to bed 
Will they not be waiting f' you at the Hall ? " 

" Oh ! no, it is quite early," said leuan, leading he 
away from the cottage ; " I cannot be parted from yoi 

yet." 

And away again under the silvery moon the; 
wandered, hand in hand, with lingering footsteps an( 
tender voices, telling the old, old story so oft-repeatec 
yet ever fresh. And it was quite an hour later whei 
they recrossed the dewy moc r. 

" I hope we have not been out too long on the wc 
grass, Mifanwy, ma belle." 

" I have my wooden shoes, you see ; I put them 01 
the better to deceive you." 

" Ah ! subtle siren ; and yet, with all your deccitfi 
ways, it is hard to part with you. Must I go, then 
Good-night, beloved. I shall lose my way with look 
ing back at the light in your little window under th 
birds' eggs and sea-weed wreaths." 

" Then I shall put it out at once." And before h 




' i'ti I 



RECOGNITION. 



367 



was aware of her intention, she had disappeared 
quietly under the low, thatched door. Then she 
gently drew the wooden bolt, and went up into her 
tiny bedroom, where, peering through the little 
window, she saw leuan standing in the moonlight, 
and waving a last "Good-night." 

Happy, happy sleep ! and stili happier awakening ! 
to life, and love, and joy J 



THE END. 



Printed by Cowan 6= Co., Ltd., I'erth. 



'••1 




