A Word to the Public (1847)
Author: Lytton, Edward Bulwer.
Publication info: A Word To the Public . 60 p. London: Saunders and Otley, 1847.

A Word to the Public. By the Author of “Lucretia,” “Rienzi,” &c
[Page ]
A WORD TO THE PUBLIC. It is not as a retort to attacks, that I write these pages. They are designed, it is true, to remove errors, whether of wilful mis-statement, or honest misconception, on subjects affecting myself. But as those subjects are connected with interests in literature, very general and important, I shall endeavour to preserve the dispassionate tone proper to an inquiry addressed to the candour of the Public, and the consideration of educated men.
I pass by all assaults that may appear to have exceeded the due licence of criticism with the single remark,—that wherever personal motives are strong enough to violate the ordinary decorum of literary censure, the reader must be prepared to expect that they will suffice to corrupt all integrity of statement. Thus extracts will be garbled and misquoted—sentences stripped of the context that explains them,—and opinions, which the writer most earnestly holds up to reprobation, and places in the lips of characters whom he draws but to condemn, be deliberately cited as the sentiments of the author himself. I do not stop to comment on artifices like these;—if, from no broader principle than that of justice to the author, they need rebuke or are capable of discouragement —discouragement and rebuke will come more efficiently from others; nor should I have made even this brief reference to matters not
[Page 4]
immediately essential to my argument, if some temporary injustice to the Author were the only evil such practices could possibly effect; but thus, a work the most innocent can not only be represented as mischievous, but in reality rendered so. Let me forestall the subsequent inquiry, and assume for the moment, that the true moral, whether of “ Eugene Aram ,” or the “ Children of Night ,” be either salutary or harmless, and then let me suppose it gravely asserted in some two or three of those popular journals which penetrate every corner of society, read alike by the educated and the ignorant, the good and the bad —the sole vehicles of literary information to those whom it is most facile and most dangerous to mislead —that the author, a man of some social position, and some acknowledged repute in letters, lends all the weight of his name and authority to the defence and encouragement of crime.—is the author himself the party most seriously aggrieved? The injury done to him may be wholly effaced by the gradual influence of the judicious, and the tranquil investigation of time; but is it so easy to efface the injury effected by garbled extracts, and wilful misrepresentation, upon minds uninstructed and perverted, to which the book itself, with its real lessons, never may arrive, and which only too readily accept the sanction that the newspaper assures them it affords?
So far as concerns myself, I am contented to appeal, from assailants of this kind, to those cultivators of literature with whom I may claim fellowship, and to that Public, who, I trust, have connected gentler associations with my name.
With regard to those purely literary faults and defects which afford the fair questions to criticism, though, some years since, I might have been tempted to enter into the vindication of a few, at
[Page 5]
least, out of the many with which I have been charged, I am not now disposed to intrude upon the public a defence against censures morally unimportant and legitimately made. Good or bad, my works have been written with such care as I could bestow on them; and in all that affects their literary reputation alone, I willingly leave them to that calm and equitable decision between praise and blame which time only can pronounce.
I confine myself to questions of graver moment than those which relate to the mere skill or ability displayed by a living writer in the treatment of the subjects he selects, and if I would borrow something from indulgence, it is only a certain leniency, whenever an earnest wish to correct misconception may render me tedious in explanation. For the charges against me are not limited to a single work; and it is necessary that I should invite an inquiry, from the warrantable conclusions of which, I trust, my entire vindication will proceed—viz., into the recognised principles of fiction, and the fair liberty in the choice of materials, which it is the interest, both of art and the public, to permit to imaginative writers.
In this discussion, I ask, then, but for that patience with which we listen to the most ordinary mechanic, when at home in the subject of a craft to which his toil and life have been applied. For several years, I have studied the art of which I treat; and it is but reasonable to suppose that I should speak with some knowledge of the principles which, applied to practice, have gained me whatever reputation I possess. I will presume that the reader enters on the consideration of the matters which he is called upon to adjudicate, not with a mind steeled against conviction, and determined to resist, but rather with a juryman's sincere desire to judge for himself, and
[Page 6]
exclude from the trial all that he has heard out of court;—regretting generously if, at the close, he is obliged to condemn, rejoicing honestly if his reason and his conscience allow him to acquit. And if there be many who come to this inquiry with minds so prepared, amongst them there may be those who unthinkingly have done me wrong, and who, after hearing the evidence I shall adduce, and more carefully considering the laws by which I should be judged, may depart from the hearing with a manly desire to repair an injury —small indeed, if it were as lightly felt as it is heedlessly inflicted!
It is not so easy, as at first it may appear, to decide upon the moral tendencies and designs of a writer. Upon no conceivable subject have more signal mistakes been made; and none affords us a more memorable warning to judge of others with modest charity and cautious deliberation. It would take a large catalogue to contain the titles of those books which have been denounced as immoral and mischievous, and which are now universally acknowledged as the sources of harmless pleasure or ethical instruction. From the father of poetry himself, who has been charged “with degrading the gods, and demoralizing man”—“sanctioning perjury and avarice,”—“holding up even parricides to reverence”—“teaching what is wicked, and debasing what is good”—through the long order of his illustrious children,—we can find few whom we now recognise amongst our most genial civilizers, and our gentlest teachers, who have not, at one time or another, been subjected to the common charge of immoral tendency and pernicious effect.
Since the good Bishop Heliodorus saw his tale of
[Page 7]
Theagenes and Chariclea condemned by a synod, as prejudicial to the young; since Mahomet denounced in the Koran those harmless tales, of which the Arabian Nights are a sample, novelists have been treated, if possible, more harshly than their elder brothers the poets. There is no novel we more willingly give to the schoolboy, than Don Quixote , yet Cervantes has been driven to find in Sismondi a defence “against those who consider Don Quixote the most melancholy book ever written,” and (adds Mr. Hallam) “who no doubt consider it also as one of the most immoral, as chilling and pernicious in its influence on the social converse of mankind, as ‘ The Prince ’ of Machiavel is in their political intercourse.” 1 There is no tale that with safer conscience we submit to the simplest understanding, than the Rasselas of Dr. Johnson, and yet it has been charged with instilling the same, more than doubtful, moral, that freezes men's hopes in the mockery of Candide. 2 Philosophers the most earnest, moralists the most rigid, have been as liable to this erring accusation, as the wildest of poets, and the most careless of romancers. Locke presides over our academies, yet he has been denounced as the founder of a sect of materialists. Cudworth is received amongst the holiest champions of religion, yet Warburton informs us that he never published the second part of his work, because of the malignity that had visited the first. In the same painful and warning mistake of shallow judgments, our divines themselves have been assailed, and the twin lights of our religious literature, Tillotson and Taylor,
[Page 8]
calumniated—the one as a Socinian in disguise, the other as a schismatic in design.
Time brings justice at the end, and vindicates the name if it preserves the work. Happy he, whose justification comes before the hand has forgot its cunning, and the tomb shut out the sweets of the atonement from the bitterness of the wrong! Happy he, too, who, early inured to calumny, grows indifferent to its sting! He will not, at least, die a lunatic, like Ritson, “stabbed by assassins in the dark,”—nor like Cummyns, waste away “in the slow fever produced by an anonymous assault.” 3
Do not let me be suspected of so egregious a conceit, as implying a claim to association with the lofty names that I have cited. I but use the argument the citations suggest, to establish the simple truth which literary history affords to a more intelligent, and I trust, a more liberal age—viz., that the public should receive with great caution rash accusations against the motives of authors and the latent immorality of works. For, easy to the lowest understanding is this general charge of immoral tendency and object— and tempting it is to malice, when it cannot deny the literary reputation which it envies—to assail the moral design, because that (always more or less complicated) needs some effort beyond the commonplace indifference of the public to perceive and to defend. Of whatever is plainly obscene and licentious, of whatever openly assails the acknowledged principles of religion, or saps the moral foundations of society, all men may judge; and on these, at least in our own age, no differences of opinion are likely to exist. But the wise and the honest will be wary of ascribing to writers secret tendencies and objects at variance, not only with
[Page 9]
the designs they announce, but the reputation accorded to them by judges, whether at home or abroad, uninfluenced by personal predilections, or political bias. And I fear that the writer, the most really dangerous to society is to be found in the critic, who bids the young and unthinking search, amidst the most popular forms of literature, for excuses to vice and sanctions to crime, which the author himself never intended, and which, without such directions, no reader would have suspected. It is critics like these who would pervert to poison the most innocent intellectual nutriment; who would interpret the exhortations of St. Augustine into an appeal to the passions, or the “whole Duty of Man” into a libel on one's neighbour. Shortly after Addison's “ Cato ” had appeared upon the stage, an unhappy person destroyed himself, leaving upon his table a paper with these words—
                                         “That must be good
Which Cato did and Addison approved.”
One must mournfully regret this poor man's perverse misconstruction of “ Cato; ” yet who can say, for that reason, that “ Cato ” is dangerous, or that Addison sanctioned suicide? But, suppose that Addision had lived, and “ Cato ” been produced, in our day, and suppose that some writer in one of our popular journals had, after some prelude upon ‘morbid idiosyncracies and the frequency of suicides,’ instead of removing from such ‘morbid idiosyncracies’ the dangerous impression that Addison approved self-slaughter—preferred rather to gratify a spleen against the poet, in asserting that the design of the tragedy and the purpose of the author were devoted to the mischievous vindication of suicide—would not that writer have incurred the gravest responsibilities, afforded to
[Page 10]
‘morbid idiosyncracies’ the very stimulus it was his duty to withhold, and encouraged the very error it was his duty to expose? Let the editor of every influential journal weigh well the considerations this reflection should suggest, and perhaps he may confess that the more readily an author's intention may be misconceived by sickly or ignorant minds, the more the popular reviewer, whose opportunities give him the quickest and readiest facility towards correcting such mistakes, should seek not to confirm but dispel the dangerous misconception.
It is not given to all to have genius—it is given to all to have honesty of purpose; an ordinary writer may have this in common with the greatest—that he may compose his works with sincere and distinct views of promoting truth and administering to knowledge. I claim this intention fearlessly for myself. And if, contrary to my most solemn wishes, and my most thoughtful designs, any one of my writings can be shown by dispassionate argument, to convey lessons tending to pervert the understanding, and confound the eternal distinction between right and wrong, I will do my best to correct the error, by stamping on it my own condemnation, and omitting it from the list of those it does not shame me to acknowledge.
Every reader, who has honoured my books with some attention, must long since have recognised in their very imperfections as works of art— the favourite and peculiar studies of their author; some, especially, of the companions of my youth, must often have traced to those inquiries, which we pursued together through the labyrinth of metaphysics, and amidst the ingenious speculations of writers who have sought by the analysis of our ideas to arrive at the springs of our manifold
[Page 11]
varieties in conduct, that over-indulgence of moralizing deductions, and those often tedious attempts to explain the workings of mind, which have weakened the effect of my characters, and interrupted the progress of my plots. But no man can have made the study of the great investigators of human conduct his passion and his habit, and ever consciously and wilfully meditate a work at variance with morality; —more likely is it that he will err in the opposite extreme, and undertake no work, however light, without a purpose too sharply definite. —Even in the object on which he is most intent, it is true that he may err,—the gravest moralists, the wisest divines, have so erred; human judgment cannot be infallible:
                                         “Tacere
Tutum semper erit.”
‘If one would be safe, one has no resource but to be silent.’ But an error of this kind is one only of mistaken, yet honest intention, and may surely be exposed, without heated invectives, and calumnious personalities.
What is the charge that has been brought against me—urged and re-urged, in words which I will not trust myself to repeat, and in a spirit which I will not pause to expose? I state its broad substance, I believe fairly in this, ‘That I have had a morbid and mischievous passion for treating of crime and guilt—that it is the prevailing character of my books to make heroes of criminals and felons.’
Now it is the interest of all writers, from the greatest poet to the meanest novelist, that the due licence of fiction in the materials it selects, should be clearly laid down and generally admitted. And it is no less to the interest of the public, that writers should not be scared by tacit acquiescence in charges most painful to honourable
[Page 12]
men; from whatever exposition of evil as it exists—whatever investigation of the human mind, in its sublimity or its baseness, its virtues or its guilt, the uniform example of received authorities in literature, has proved it to be salutary or safe to permit to the scope of the poet, and the purpose of the teacher.
I shall proceed to show that, if the delineation of crime did afford the ordinary and favourite subject of my works—if criminals or felons were made what is called the heroes (that is, the leading characters) in all or most of them,—such a charge would only prove the ignorance of those who advance it, whether of the most acknowledged privileges of fiction, or the scope of the moral which writers the most blameless have been left at liberty to develop and enforce. But the charge itself is so utterly untrue, that a single glance over the list of my publications will suffice to refute it. I annex that list as my reply:
Pelham.
The Disowned.
Devereux.
Godolphin.
∗ Paul Clifford.
The Pilgrims of the Rhine.
∗ Eugene Aram.
The Last Days of Pompeii.
Rienzi.
The Conquest of Grenada.
Ernest Maltravers , 1st Part.
Ernest Maltravers , 2nd Part; (first printed as Alice )
Night and Morning.
Zanoni.
The Last of the Barons.
∗ Lucretia
[Page 13]
So that out of a list of sixteen works of fiction, (besides five Plays, the Essays called “England and the English,” and “The Student,” a History of Athens, and a volume or two of poems, 4 ) the three to which I have prefixed an asterisk, are the only books in which felons or criminals have been made the heroes. In works professing to treat of human life in all its complexities, this is surely but a small proportion assigned to the express delineation of human crimes. And this list alone, to those who have read the works, is a sufficient answer-to the charge—that it has been my habit as an author to select criminals and felons as my heroes. Five of the fictions I have cited are devoted to the historical illustration of former times, with whatever images, fair or noble, the age might afford, or the progress of the narrative present; six to those circles of modern society, in which it was difficult to avoid the opposite reproach of dealing exclusively with the more polished or more frivolous classes, and forgetting, that beneath the surface of manners, grave and stern lessons are to be found—yes, even in the guilt and the woe, which are at work within the deeps; and two out of the number (“Zanoni” and “The Pilgrims of the Rhine,”) are dedicated to fancies which may be called, if you please, too visionary and unreal, but are wholly remote from that grosser and more actual world of evil and sin, to which I am accused of having morbidly confined my invention, or monotonously directed my research.
In each and all of these, no doubt, there are (could they paint life without, or has any novelist
[Page 14]
attempted to do so?)—characters good and bad. But in none of my books (save the three before mentioned) has crime been made the leading agency, or a criminal the predominant character. In most of them, indeed, the fairer and gentler side of human nature, has been not unfavourably exhibited; in most of them, I believe, the characters that remain the more vividly clear in the remembrance of an impartial reader, will be associated with such qualities as dignify or endear our species.
To only three fictions out of sixteen , then, does the charge so indiscriminately made against all, shrink in its application;—viz., that ‘I have sought materials in crime, and heroes in criminals.’ We come, then, at once to a question, which common sense and universal authority ought long since to have decided—viz., ‘How far the delineation of crime is a legitimate object of fictitious composition.’
It would seem from the hackneyed repetition of the same accusation against me, and the vehemence with which it is accompained, that I had had the discredit to introduce into fiction some hideous innovation, opposed by the greatest writers or at variance with the usual privileges of my calling. But what is the fact? Has not the delineation of crime, in every age—been the more especial and chosen thesis of the greatest masters of art quoted to us as authorities and held up to us as models? The parricide of Œdipus, furnishes inspiration to the all-perfect and all-polished genius of Sophocles; Medea murders her children; Clytemnestra her husband, Orestes his mother; Phædra woos her step-son. I grant all that may be said as to differences of ancient manners and habits of thought; but these very same subjects have been readapted to the modern stage, adorned by the greatest geniuses of France,
[Page 15]
in an age when she especially prided herself on the purity of her drama, and the humanity of her audiences. They are enrolled amongst the masterpieces of Racine, Corneille, and Voltaire. They are incorporated with the drama of Italy. In England they furnish plots to the authors who were listened to as Reformers of the Stage from its ruder barbarities and grosser licence.
Turn to the titles in the earlier editions of Shakespeare's plays, and they even seem to invite attention by the promise of the crimes they are to depiet. What are we to say of the—
“Tragedie of Kynge Richard, conteyninge his treacherous plots against his brother Clarence, and the murther of his innocent nephewes in the Tower; wythe the whole course of his detested life;” or of
“Hamlet, Prince of Denmarke, wythe his just revenge on the adulterous Kynge Claudius, and the poysoning of the Queen Gertrude.”
Or, “The Tragedie of Macbeth, showing how, by treachery and manyfold murders, he obtained the crown of Scotland.”
Or, “Othello the Moore of Venice, his deathe and strangling the fair Desdemona.” 5
I attach no weight to these titles themselves, of
[Page 16]
which Shakespeare is, doubtless, innocent; but they certainly do not exaggerate the crimes which the plays depict. Crime, in fact, is the essential material of the Tragic Drama. Take crime from tragedy, and you annihilate tragedy itself. Whatever aims at the tragic effect, whether on the stage or in more sober narrative, cannot dispense with the evil which works to mischief—excites to terror —involves the innocent in its own ruin, and conduces to the tragic passions of our pity and our awe. 6 You may say at once, and literally of nearly all tragic writers ‘that they have sought in crimes their materials, and in criminals their heroes.’
Mr. Burke has probably in much accounted for this sombre selection of character and subject, in those remarks, not the least subtle and profound, in his memorable treatise, wherein he demonstrates that, as power is a source of the sublime, so power to be sublime, must be suggestive of terror, and associated with attributes of destruction.
“Whatever,” he says, “is fitted in any sort to excite the ideas of pain or danger—that is to say, whatever is in any sort terrible, or is conversant about terrible objects, or operates in a
[Page 17]
manner analogous to terror, is a source of the sublime:” 7
Again, “that power derives all its sublimity from the terror with which it is generally accompanied, will appear evidently, from its effect in the very few cases in which it may be possible to strip a considerable degree of strength of its power to hurt,—when you do this, you spoil it of every thing sublime, and it immediately becomes contemptible.” He proceeds to compare the OX, strong but innocent, and therefore the idea of which is not grand, with the bull, which, precisely because its strength is often destructive, has frequently a place in sublime description. “We have continually about us animals of a strength that is considerable, but not pernicious; amongst these we never look for the sublime. It comes upon us in the gloomy forest and in the howling wilderness —in the forms of the lion, the tiger, the panther, or rhinoceros.” 8
Without absolutely going to the extreme of the principle this eminent thinker has enforced, or asserting, that strength, to be sublime, must be necessarily pernicious; it is undeniable at least, that the association of power with destruction is one of the most obvious sources of the sublime. And, as guilt in Man, when accompanied with intellect or daring, contains a power infinitely exceeding the brute force of the mere animal, so crime is the customary material for tragic art, and furnishes the tremendous instrument for moving the human heart by the agency of terror.
Other reasons might be adduced to show why crime has been made an essential element on the stage;—how it has afforded to the master of human nature his amplest scope for investigating
[Page 18]
the most subtle and hidden recesses of character and passion, unravelling the skein of intellectual error, and holding up to a thoughtless world those striking and solemn warnings in which the more direct morality of tragic composition may be said to consist. Perhaps the old Greek Platonist who eloquently defended Homer from the accusations of his master, has made some remarks on this part of our subject not unworthy of attention.
“It appears to me,” he says, “that whatever is tragical, monstrous, and out of the common course of nature in poetical fictions, excites the hearers in all imaginable ways to the investigation of the truth, attracts us to recondite knowledge, and does not suffer us through apparent probability to rest satisfied with superficial conceptions, but compels us to penetrate into the interior parts of fables, to explore the obscure intention of their authors, &c.” 9
Enough, then, has been said to show that crime is an admitted and necessary element of tragic fiction, an agency employed by the greatest poets, and to be vindicated by the plainest principles of their art; and so popularly is this understood, that the very statue of the tragic muse is represented with the dagger in one hand, the poison bowl in the other.
But then it is implied, if not openly contended, that, though the presentation of crime is allowable on the stage, it is to be condemned in a novel. Much is said about the weak minds of circulating library readers—“the young” and “impressionable,”
[Page 19]
&c. As if there were no weak minds in the pit and the gallery of Drury-lane—as if only sages and stoics were to be found in the boxes—as if a dramatic audience were not, upon the whole, a far more miscellaneous class than that of subscribers to a circulating library, comprehending far lower degrees of instruction, and a more general admixture, both of rank and of age 10 —as if, too, after all, literature were a kind of medicated farina, to be adapted with the daintiest nicety to the digestion of the weakly and diseased —as if any man of education and vigour, no matter whether he writes a novel or a history, must not take it for granted, that he addresses readers of ordinary understanding and healthful comprehension! Is there, in fact, a book in the world that could ever have established a fame, if it had not mainly addressed itself to strong heads and clear intellects?
Much, too, is said of the example of former novelists, who were contented with exhibiting manners, and ridiculing folly—as if all prose fiction were to be narrowed into a single classification, or as if all grave purpose and tragic end were forbidden to the compositions of fiction, because they are divided into chapters, not compressed into acts! What is the fair source of terror in one composition may be as readily resorted to in another. What is free to the imagination, if put into five acts, does not become reprehensible, if employed in three volumes. Each, the narrative or the drama, is bound but by its own peculiar modes of relation or expression.
[Page 20]
And since, whatever our varieties of appeal to the passions, all are traceable to springs in the human mind, to which all who treat of the passions must apply—the narrator is not only privileged, but absolutely constrained to come to the same sources as the writer for the stage. Pause to consider how moral terror in tragic composition is obtained. The more you examine, the more you will find that moral 11 terror is never excited except by images of evil or punishment—by some destroying or dangerous agency. Look a little deeper, and you will find that there are only two kinds of this agency —the first, supernatural, such as Fate, a ghost, a witch, a fiend, an oracle, &c., in which the images from another world are summoned to exercise evil influence over this; the second agency is human crime. Search, I say, all tragedies, all fictions, and you will find that moral terror is never produced, but by some evil or destroying power, and that that power is never to be found, except in the two agencies I have named—viz., the supernatural or the criminal. Grant, then, what you cannot deny, that the narrator is in the exercise of his undoubted right, to attempt, if he can, to create the passion of terror, and you are compelled to grant him the only means by which he can effect his object—viz., the supernatural or the criminal. This is so evident a truth, that it would be unnecessary to say a word further on the subject, if it were not that the public are less familiarized to representations of guilt in the narrative fiction, than they are in the dramatic; and hence the comparative unfamiliarity has given a readier
[Page 21]
reception to shallow criticism of the romance, than common sense and daily custom would permit to be applied to the drama. But this only proves what is undéniable—viz., that the tragic prose romance is of very recent date in literature, and has hitherto been sparingly cultivated. I believe that Richardson's “ Clarissa Harlowe ” was the first prose fiction, attaining permanent celebrity, that resorted for interest to the elements of tragedy. I need not say, that the plot of that work is founded on the progress and perpetration of a crime equally odious and base, conducted through scenes, abetted by characters, and consummated by means which the public would probably not permit to a writer in the present day. Yet, of Richardson, our great moralist could say with truth ‘that he taught the passions to move at the command of Virtue.’ The next tragic fiction that won fame from the public, was the “ Julia de Roubigné ” of the gentle hearted Mackenzie. It closes in murder and suicide; and those who would fly at higher game than the living, may find, perhaps, something to say against the dead great author, who holds up as the ideal of chivalrous honour —high, though erring—the jealous assassin, who poisons his wife, and escapes by self-slaughter the penalties and shame of his deed. Yet who, amongst the true judges of literature, would deny to Mackenzie the praise he deserves as a writer of the purest intentions, and the mildest humanity? Not long after this, with some tragic purpose, (though I do not include it amongst the fictions that we recognise as critically tragic,) came the “ Zeluco ” of Moore—the gloomy portrait of a hero whom no moral sentiment ennobles, no genial impulse ever warms—but justifying the author by his aim to show in the maturer life of
[Page 22]
his hero the errors of early education, and the absorbing debasement of cultivated egotism. Nor has any man ventured to deny, that Dr. Moore in his writings has deserved the reputation for virtuous purpose, which, more than his genius, obtained him the favour of the public.
To these succeeded the truly tragic fiction of Godwin's “ Caleb Williams ,” in which, as in “ Julia de Roubigné ,” a murderer is made the hero, with false honour for his tempter, while his remorse and his terror supply both analysis and incident. Yet, whatever may be said of Mr. Godwin's speculative opinions, on political and other subjects, all will admit that his aims were those of a philosopher, who sought, in his own way, the inculcation of morals. And while his more erroneous expositions of doctrine have sunk into oblivion, “Caleb Williams” lives yet, and will, perhaps, live while our language lasts, as a monument of genius, on which is graven admonitions to error.
Thus it will be perceived, that in all the classic tragic prose fictions preceding our own age, criminals have afforded the prominent characters, and crime the essential material.
Since the production of those works, prose fiction has yet more extended its ancient limits. 12 It has entered with Goethe the domains of speculative thought; it has been enlarged to almost boundless extent by the energies of Scott. But while that last-named and illustrious writer enriched the realms he had won with the stores of
[Page 23]
the historian, and from the mines of the poet— while in mere form, more than any one, he relieved and animated the progress of narrative, and the delineation of character with the dialogue and action of the stage, of tragic fiction, rigidly so called, he has left but one signal masterpiece, “ The Bride of Lammermoor .” 13 In this, to create his effects of awe, though human evil is unquestionably introduced, he rather resorted to the old Greek instrumentality of fate —a means which (for an obvious reason that I shall state hereafter) he could not have continued to employ if he had more generally directed his genius to tragic compositions. But, though the “ Bride of Lammermoor ” suffices to show that Scott's power in the sterner narrative surpassed all before him and since, the more habitual tendencies of his mind did not lead his choice to the regions over which awe and terror preside,
“Di quibus imperium est animarum umbræque silentes
Et Chaos et Phlegethon, loca nocte silentia late;”
Still to the adventurer whom those regions invite, it is permitted to add—
“Sit mihi fas audita loqui: sit, numine vestro,
Pandere res altâ terrâ et caligine mersas.”
The tragic fiction is conceived—it has taken growth—it may be destined, amidst the comparative neglect of the stage, to supply the lessons the tragic drama has, for awhile, abandoned. Do not fetter its wanderings from free search after truth through the mazes of society, and amidst all the
[Page 24]
contrasts of nature. If it is to be a voice to the heart, an interpreter of the secrets of life,—you cannot withhold from it the broadest experience of the struggle between good and evil, happiness and woe.
“Hune igitur terrorem animi, tenebrasque necesse est.”
But I am told, somewhat more definitely and precisely, that though crimes of a lofty order, rendered high and solemn by ancient tradition, and clad in the pomp of history, are fitting subjects for fiction, the crimes which occur in our own day and finish their career at the gallows or the hulks, are wholly to be banished from recital. ‘Such things may be: leave them to their own ignominy. Why elevate vulgar felons into heroes, and take us for interest to the Old Bailey?’
This, I believe, is a correct quotation from the kind of censure with which (stripped of its grosser personalities) I have had to contend. Once for all, I will seek to answer it as seriously as if it were an argument, not a declamation; a friendly remonstrance, not a hostile and heated assault. And while replying to my assailants in the Press, I address calmly and respectfully my argument to those on whom attacks so frequently and passionately urged may have produced an impression which it pains me most deeply to think any work of mine should create on one honourable and impartial mind.
I have already, I trust, shown that the charge of habitually selecting criminals for my themes is in itself untrue. I proceed now to the question, how far the crimes of our own days, the crimes of Tyburn and the Old Bailey, may be admissible to the licence of art in fiction, and conducive to the moral it should inculcate.
I will grant at once that for the purposes of
[Page 25]
poetry, high tragic effect may be more readily produced, and may usually create a grander or less distressful sentiment of awe, when it is sought in the ancient treasure-house of history or fable; and in some of my works I have reverently drawn from such elder and remoter sources. But one region of art does not exclude the other. The past cannot monopolise the sorrows and crimes of ages. While we live, we ourselves become a past. And we are unquestionably warranted to consult the Book of Time, in the page which is spread before our eyes. Can we do so faithfully if we strike out all passages that pain or perplex us? Can we give any fair idea of the record, if we confine all our extracts to what we instinctively approve and readily comprehend? No, every one concedes to me at once, that a writer is at liberty to search amidst the materials afforded to him in modern life, for the subjects and characters of fiction. The comic writer takes fearlessly whatever in the errors and vices of mankind adapts itself to the comic result of exciting our ridicule, and moving our contempt:—
    “Licit, semperque licebit
---dicere de vitiis.” 14
‘It ever has, and ever will be, lawful to speak of the vices,’ which it is the province of Comedy as of Satire to expose. The Tartuffe of Moliere, the Blifil of Fielding, the Squire Thornhill of Goldsmith, (a scoundrel, perhaps the vilest and the most sparingly punished in comic fiction,) the whole spirit in Le Sage, the whole object in Swift, are uniformly directed to the exposure of the meaner and more vicious propensities of men. Folly and error, vice punished by ridicule, constitute the main materials of the comic writer, whether he employ them in a drama or a novel.
[Page 26]
Must we not grant to the writer who seeks for the elements of tragedy that exist in his own time, the equal licence to seek for the materials to which tragedy must apply? What are those materials, but the passions and the crimes of men,—as, for comedy, the materials are drawn from the humours and the vices? Terror and compassion are the sources of the tragic writer's effects; the destructive or pernicious power of intellect corrupted into guilt, affords him the natural means of creating terror for the evil, and compassion for its victims. To say that the criminals he is thus compelled to employ as the agents of his plot, are unfit for his purpose because they may be classed amongst the prey of Newgate and the Old Bailey, is but to lay down the preposterous principle, that we must not extract tragedy from times in which laws are carried into effect; it is simply to say, that, because men in our day are transported and hanged for guilt. the guilt of our day it is improper to analyse and depict. All crimes now, if detected, must obtain the notoriety of the Old Bailey, or reap their desert in Newgate; and to contend that Newgate and the Old Bailey unfit them for the uses of the writer of fiction, is virtually to deprive him of the use of all crimes punished by modern law and enacted in the modern day; as if there were no warning to be drawn from sins that are not ennobled by ermine and purple; as if there were no terror in the condemned cell, no tragedy at the foot of the gallows! And yet how hackneyed is the aphorism, that the human heart, and the tragedy to be drawn from it, remain the same in every age! Unless, then, we deny altogether that we are to seek for the sources of tragedy amidst the times which we must necessarily know the best, amongst the characters on
[Page 27]
which the broadest and steadiest light can be cast, amidst the warnings the most immediately useful to us, we cannot reject to the writer of modern fiction the materials of modern tragedy, even though they are drawn from the records of the prison-house, and the judgments of the law. The materials must be open to choice, with certain stipulations as to the treatment, into which we shall enter later.
It has long, indeed, been the opinion of many minds the most thoughtfully bent upon the alliance between humanity and art, that we have too much neglected the deeper and graver characteristics of our own age; too much contented ourselves with surveys of the surface, delineations of manners, fashions, and foibles; and turned to the past for that sterner poetry which is not less sensibly to be found in the sorrows and the guilt of the life around us. Thus, towards the close of his life, Schiller, whom, at that time, no man can accuse of rash and unconsidered tamperings with the legitimate end of genius, meditated a drama that would seem least poetical to the shallow, but was intended to extract poetry from the very sources which it seems we are now forbidden to explore. His proposed subject was “The French Police;” and I need not say, that the conception could not fail to comprehend the evils, the abuses, and the crimes, of modern civilization.
Good men there are, no doubt, who would interdict altogether the presentation of actual crime as painful and revolting—as administering to a passion for diseased excitement; I respect their scruples. But, without here pausing to examine what weight can be attached to them, is the prohibition even possible? Crime meets us as a fact everywhere; you cannot open a newspaper, you cannot refer to statistics, you cannot
[Page 28]
mix in the ordinary world—but crime is forced daily and hourly on your notice. You must close up for purity and youth all history, sacred and profane; you must shut out from the calendar of life the tyrant and the martyr; you must seal up the fountains of literature, and silence the long succession of poets from Sophocles to Dante, from Dante to Shakspeare, from Shakspeare to the last song that has thrilled through the world— if you seek to exclude from the mind the dark certainties of guilt. Even then you will fail. Man has but to live, to know that crime is the foe man must brave. Could you instruct him what he should resist and abhor, if you could leave him ignorant of its existence and its chastisement? You cannot, like the Emperor of China, live in a fancied succession of triumphs and security, and receive congratulations on the felicity of your reign and the impregnability of your dominion, while the enemy are blockading your ports and sailing up your rivers. The essential characteristic of this age and land is publicity . There exists a Press which bares at Once to the universal eye every example of guilt that comes before a legal tribunal. In these very newspapers which would forbid a romance writer to depict crime with all that he can suggest to demonstrate its causes, portray its hideousness, insist on its inevitable doom, are everywhere to be found the minutest details of guilt,—the meanest secrets of the prison-house are explored, turnkeys interrogated, and pages filled with descriptions of the personal appearance of the felon, his dress at the bar, his courage at the gallows. To find the true literature of Newgate and Tyburn, you have only to open the newspaper on your table. That reports thus sent abroad to all quarters of a motley civilization, read aloud in
[Page 29]
the lowest alehouse, and in the vilest resorts of outcasts and thieves—the only literary food (as newspapers are) of the most uneducated classes;— that such may do harm, I am ready to confess, and this from the careless tone and the base detail—the obtrusion of a criminal notoriety unaccompanied by a single lesson—gorging the curiosity and familiarizing away the solemnity of guilt. 15 But how different this from the narrative of a writer of fiction, who presents no single portraiture of crime to monopolize the morbid fancy— who contrasts it with images of purity and innocence, who analyses the workings of the heart, and thus checks its progress to corruption—who accompanies the crime, as by its shadow, with the darkness of its own deformity—who exerts all the power he possesses to accumulate terrors round its consequences and chastisements—whose work by its literary treatment, (if the author possess but ordinary scholarship,) to say nothing of its mode of publication, is not destined to penetrate, like the newspaper, amongst the most ignorant and perverted—the accomplices and imitators of the guilty—but is almost necessarily confined to classes of a certain education, which would render the imitation as untempting as the guilt itself is abhorrent. The fiction supplies the very lessons the newspaper cannot give. If the reader doubt this, let him only compare the impressions made upon his mind by a crime brought before the courts of law with those produced by a crime which some imaginative writer has depicted;—I am greatly mistaken if he does not own, at once,
[Page 30]
that the last are infinitely more grave, more forcible, and more enduring.
Analysis of the darker or coarser crimes of society is not intended to reform the criminals—them it does not reach. It is not as a curb to tyrants that “ William Tell ” is effective. It is not to reform an Appius that we express our sympathy with Virginius. It is not to breathe virtue into burglars that “ Jonathan Wild ” was composed, or to prevent men from poisoning their wives, that Mackenzie wrote his “ Julia de Roubigné .” Limited, indeed, would be the moral uses of fiction, if confined to the peculiar idiosyncrasies of character it selects. Nor is it only by the catastrophe itself that fiction reaches the heart, but yet more by the mental dissection which it admits, that it corrects our errors, in developing their causes. It is by the tendencies to which terror or compassion in the tragic form, ridicule and contempt in the comic, are the agents, that we confirm social enthusiasm for virtue, and unite the reason with the passions in detestation of crime. And all this can be equally effected, whether we resort for materials to the past or to the present, to the vices of the great or to those of the mean. It is the treatment that ennobles, not the subject. Grant that the characters are what convention calls low —in birth, station, instruction; born in a cellar, dying on the gibbet, they are not one jot, for those reasons, made necessarily low to art. Art can, with Fielding, weave an epic from adventures with gamekeepers and barbers. Art can, with Goethe, convert into poetry the most lofty, the homely image of the girl condemned for infanticide, and confine the vast war between spirits and men, to the floors of her felon cell. Rightly has the most majestic of poets placed at the Portals of Dread, not those fiends which are the tempters
[Page 31]
of the great and deluders of the wise, but rather the demons of the ruder multitude, ‘Fear, and illadvising Hunger, Labour, and shameful Want.’
“Et Metus, et malesuada Fámes. et turpis Egestas;
Terribiles visu formæ—Letumque, Laborque.” 16
To sum up, I think, then, we must allow—
1st. That crime, however great and heinous, is an admitted and necessary agency in tragic fiction, warranted by the employment of the greatest masters, and the sanction of all ages.
2ndly. That it is equally admissible in the narrative fiction as the dramatic.
3rdly. That we may seek for the materials of terror in crime, or destructive power , amidst the present as the past—that we are limited neither to particular periods, nor conventional gradations of rank—that wherever we find the facts that furnish the passion of terror, 17 and the characters that permit the analysis of motive to conduct, (the cause to the effect)—we are at full liberty to use them.
I said that we have a right to demand certain stipulations as to treatment and selection.
1stly. We have a right to demand that, whatever interest the author bids us take in the criminal, we should never, by any metaphysical sophistry, be seduced into admiration of the crime—that even where, as usually in the drama, the criminal is invested with attributes that enforce respect, or is induced to an offence at war with his general character by circumstance and temptation—still the crime itself should be shown clearly as a violation of eternal laws, and be condemned, not only by the result
[Page 32]
in the fiction, but the reason of the beholder. We are not forbidden to sympathize with Othello in his jealousy, nor to admire the nobleness which contrasts an infirmity ordinarily mean and egotistical; for we see that the crime to which it urges him entails its own direful punishment, and no compassion for the murderer lessens our horror of the murder.
2ndly. The crimes depicted should not be of a nature to lead us through licentious scenes, nor accompanied with descriptions that appeal dangerously to the senses. There is one class of evil which shocks and revolts us—there is another class of evil to which the most perilous ally is in our own nature. There is nothing to corrupt us in the delineation of murder and violent wrong; our instincts recoil at once from the idea of imitation. There may be much to corrupt us in the delineation of an adulterous love, though the moral it is meant to convey may, in itself, be excellent. And, therefore, it is safest not to make prominent or minutely to detail crimes of a nature which less openly revolts us than insidiously allures. 18
3rdly. In dealing especially with the coarser and more violent crimes least idealized by remote tradition, least dignified by history above vulgar associations, the author is bound to have some object in view, belonging to the purer and more thoughtful principles of art, to which the means hes employs are subordinate and conducive. If in “ Jonathan Wild ,”
[Page 33]
Fielding takes us almost solely among thieves and pickpockets, it is not merely, and objectively, as it were, to familiarize us with their principles and habits. In describing the actual meanness, he is aiming his satire at false greatness. It is not because a man is a felon and a criminal that therefore he furnishes a fitting theme for the drama or the narrative. I guard myself especially against appearing to sanction so preposterous a conclusion. But if there be anything so peculiar in his guilt, or the circumstances attending it, as to afford fair scope for artistic purpose, suggest useful reflections, or inculcate a salutary lesson,— then it is not because he is a criminal or felon that he becomes an unfit instrument for those ends to which, indeed, (as we have seen,) the agency of crime is essential. If, therefore, the author make use of the actual and more violent guilt that forms one element of the society around us—we have a right to expect that it will be introduced, not in wanton levity, but for some thoughtful purpose— tending (to the best of his judgment) to illustrate some serviceable truth.
These, I believe, are the main restrictions which we must impose upon the liberty of the author, in granting him all the privileged resources of his art.
I venture to assert, that by these restrictions I have been bound. Throwing myself on the indulgence of the candid for an egotism, rendered necessary by the direct personality of the attacks, and without which the reader must be sensible that these remarks would be desultory and incomplete; and assuming merely, that the three works I am called upon to defend have been read by those to whom I address myself, I proceed to challenge for them the severest application the impartial can bestow, of
[Page 34]
the rules I have laid down for the proprieties of treatment.
And first, as to “ Paul Clifford .” 19 The object of “Paul Clifford” ought to be sufficiently apparent. It was written at a time when capital punishment was still in this country indiscriminately impolitic and severe—when society was not employed, as it is virtuously now, in seeking to reform the circumstances which engender crime in the masses; but was content with punishing by severity the offences it had in much caused by neglect. To quote from the short preface to the edition of 1840, it was my design, therefore, “to draw attention to two errors in our penal institutions—viz., a vicious prison discipline, and a sanguinary criminal code—the habit of first corrupting the boy by the very punishment that ought to redeem him, and then hanging the man on the first occasion, as the easiest way of getting rid of our own blunders;”—it was “a satire on the short cut established between the house of correction and the condemned cell.”
Paul Clifford himself is thus represented as one of the very numerous class to which all practical philanthropists are now inviting our attention; exposed in boyhood to the contagion of evil companionship—sent to prison for an offence he does not commit—escaping from it by the dexterity of one of those confirmed rogues, with whom a prison brings him into familiar association —and afterwards, almost necessarily driven for a livelihood into defiance of the Law, which had already expelled him from its pale. Paul Clifford offends, and he is punished—he is an exile for ever from his country; but as his offence is
[Page 35]
extenuated by circumstances—as society in itself is in some measure a partaker of it—as some good qualities, that show him capable of reform, belong to his character, and as he has been led into none of the darker crimes of cruelty, revenge, and bloodshed—so he is not punished to the extent of the gallows. He is allowed to work out his redemption by repentance and atonement. In all this, the Novelist does but second the improved disposition of Society itself. He does but advocate in a fiction the principles which are now enlightening our journals and ameliorating our laws.
To guard against danger of imitation by the modern invaders of property, (if such a book could ever reach them,) Paul Clifford is not represented —as certain parties choose unblushingly to assert—as a mere pickpocket and thief—he is taken out of the range of existing subjects for the Old Bailey. His offence is that of the obsolete, and now impossible nature, which characterized what was satirically called the “Gentleman Highwayman;” and has passed away from our well-regulated roads and enclosed commons as entirely as the band of Robin Hood has passed from the glades of Sherwood. It can now be imitated no more than adventurous youth can imitate the Locksley and the Rob Roy of Walter Scott. And with quite as much justice in the last-cited novel may its great and healthful author be accused of exalting a robber into a hero, and weaving round him a dangerous and immoral interest, as the humbler writer, now put upon his defence, of such a design in the moonlight rides of Paul Clifford, the Highwayman. 20 If exception
[Page 36]
be taken to the mere lowness of scenes and characters occasionally introduced in the book, but by no means forming the principal part of it, I may observe, that as they contain nothing obscene or licentious, nothing to incite or inflame, and are not introduced for themselves, but for satire upon the real vulgarity often found beneath the mere conventional polish they travesty or burlesque,—so whatever may be said against such an introduction on the score of art, it is free, at least, from all tendency to corrupt. And in this, since I cannot claim the merit of originality, I have at least the sanction of authorities the most respected—not only in the disputed morality of the “ Beggar's Opera ,” or the nobler precedent of “ Jonathan Wild ”—but in the “ Beggar's Bush ” of Beaumont and Fletcher, which does not disdain to put slang into verse—in the “ Guzman D'Alfarache ” of Le Sage—in the “ Sharper ” of Quevedo—and in the innumerable scenes in what is called ‘low life,’ which are never cited in reproach of our greatest novelists.
I think, therefore, that I may fairly dismiss “ Paul Clifford ” to the acquittal of any impartial jury upon the capital charges that, without evidence and against precedent, have been laid to its charge.
In “ Eugene Aram ” the case was wholly different, demanding graver treatment and more awful chastisement; here, at least there was no vulgar offender, nor here was there any victim to the errors and neglect of society. Here was one of those startling phenomena in human conduct
[Page 37]
which had arrested the attention of the historian, claimed the muse of the Poet, which had been more than the nine days' wonder in the age in which it had occurred, and remained in the record and memories of men, as containing the problems, and exciting the terror, of a completed tragedy in itself. The picture of a laborious and self-taught student, apparently of a life the most blameless, a character the most humane, locking within his conscience the secret of a dark and inexplicable crime, not to be explained by intelligible motives—attributed to what seemed essentially opposite to his nature and pursuits, (viz. the mean desire of gain)—brought to light after many years, by a series of circumstances, regular and coherent as the links in a Drama, is surely not to be classed amidst the vulgar and commonplace offences of Newgate records; and if ever Crime be admissible in fiction, I confess that I know of few within that wide history in which it finds its place, more set apart and marked out for tragic analysis and delineation. Not in the various subjects it has been my fortune to select, though they have dealt with larger and more complicated interests of mankind, not in Pliny's fearful account of the flaming mountain and buried city, not in the failing attempt of Rienzi, to resuscitate the corpse of Roman grandeur, recorded in the annals of Italy, not in the wild and gloomy struggle in which our own Chroniclers have tracked, amidst the Wars of the Roses, the sanguinary transition from the feudal to the social age, can I recognise a theme more adapted to Tragic purposes than the image of that solitary mind, silent and bowed down beneath the weight of its solitary crime. I was not singular in my belief that this subject was appropriate to the purposes to which I presumed to apply it. Mr. Godwin assured me that
[Page 38]
he had often meditated a fiction, of which Eugene Aram was to be the hero; and I am informed, by a high and indisputable authority, 21 that Sir Walter Scott expressed his surprise that a crime so peculiarly adapted to tragedy or romance, had been so long untreated by either.
I venture, then, to assume that the choice of my subject was sufficiently legitimate. And I addressed myself to its execution with an earnest study neither to palliate the offence, nor diminish the terror of the chastisement. Here, unlike the milder guilt of Paul Clifford, the author was not to imply reform to society, nor open in this world atonement and pardon to the criminal. As it would have been wholly in vain to disguise, by mean tamperings with art and truth, the ordinary habits of life and attributes of character, which all record and remembrance ascribed to Eugene Aram, as it would have defeated every end of the moral inculcated by his guilt, to portray in the caricature of the murderer of melodrame, a man immersed in study, of whom it was noted that he turned aside from the worm in his path, 22 so I have allowed to him whatever contrasts with his inexpiable crime have been recorded on sufficient authority. But I have invariably taken care that the crime itself should stand stripped of every sophistry, and hideous to the perpetrator as well as to the world. Allowing all by which attention to his biography may explain the tremendous paradox of fearful guilt in a man aspiring after knowledge and not generally inhumane—allowing that the crime came upon him in the partial insanity, produced
[Page 39]
by the combining circumstances of a brain overwrought by intense study, disturbed by an excited imagination, and the fumes of a momentary disease of the reasoning faculty, consumed by the desire of knowledge, unwholesome and morbid, because coveted as an end, not a means, added to the other physical causes of mental aberration—to be found in loneliness, and want verging upon famine;—all these which a biographer may suppose to have conspired to his crime, have never been used by the novelist as excuses for its enormity, nor indeed, lest they should seem as excuses, have they ever been clearly presented to the view. The moral consisted in showing more than the mere legal punishment at the close. It was to show how the consciousness of the deed was to exclude whatever humanity of character preceded and belied it from all active exercise—all social confidence; how the knowledge of the bar between the minds of others and his own, deprived the criminal of all motive to ambition, and blighted knowledge of all fruit: Miserable in his affections, barren in his intellect.—clinging to solitude, yet accursed in it—dreading as a danger the fame he had once coveted—obscure in spite of learning, hopeless in spite of love, fruitless and joyless in his life, calamitous and shameful in his end;—surely such is no palliative of crime, no dalliance and toying with the grimness of evil! And surely, to any ordinary comprehension, any candid mind, such is the moral conveyed by the fiction of ‘Eugene Aram!’
I come now to the last of the three works of which I have undertaken the defence. But before I speak of the object really intended in the romance of “Lucretia,” I must clear up a very signal and general mistake on the part of my critics. In the preface to “Lucretia,” it will be
[Page 40]
observed that I speak much of an intention I had long entertained of depicting the influences of money upon modern civilization, and exposing what I held as a vice of the day, in impatience or dislike to the slow returns of legitimate toil, whether in pecuniary speculation or intellectual ambition. And upon this, with the exception of two or three reviewers, there has been an outery of simultaneous discovery that the design announced in the preface was not borne out in the execution of the book; and accordingly that the book was a failure, because the author had not accurately defined what the book was intended to convey. If these gentlemen will do me the favour to correct in themselves that ‘impatience’ which I took the liberty to denounce, and look with a little less haste at that unfortunate preface, they will, perhaps, convince themselves that I never professed “Lucretia” to be the fulfilment or carrying out of the purpose which I said I had once meditated in an earlier design. What I stated, I thought with sufficient distinctness, was, that when I half implied my farewell to the character of a novelist, I had imagined that an attempt to illustrate the influences of money might be best worked out upon the stage; that that design, with which I wished to couple some exposition of the popular vice of impatience, I afterwards thought I could best treat in a novel; but that while meditating such a conception, I became acquainted with the lives of two criminals, so remarkable as to engage my examination and analysis; and, that this second design had supplanted the first, I thought I had made abundantly clear by the following remarks:—
“I could not resist the temptation of reducing to a tale the materials (viz., the lives and letters of the said two criminals) which had so
[Page 41]
engrossed my interest and tasked my inquiries; and, in this attempt, various incidental opportunities have occurred, if not of completely carrying out, still of incidentally illustrating my earlier design.” And, a few lines farther, I expressly observe, “that the delineation of the darker crime formed the staple of my narrative,” proceeding to remark, that in that delineation “the less obvious moral must be found in those uses to which poets have applied the portraiture of gigantic crime.”
Therefore, any impartial person will perceive at once, that even at the commencement of my book its object has been, to say the least, carelessly misrepresented;—that what made the purpose of an earlier and suspended design, only furnished incidental illustration to the present—and that that illustration was the less noticeable in the agencies of the greater crime which formed the staple of the narrative, and in which another moral must necessarily be sought.
“The incidental opportunities” to which I limited my engagement, occur chiefly in the minor agents of the fiction. William Mainwaring with a competent fortune, and abilities calculated, with steady perseverance, to gratify ambition by an honourable repute, finds his tempter in the undue desire of gain, and the rash impatience for distinction. Without these enemies in his own breast, Lucretia had been powerless against him. On the other hand, Walter Ardworth, represented as honest in his impulse and generous in his sympathies, loses character for want of due regard to the prudence in preserving, which is the counter error to greed in acquiring; and too impatient, even in the social and generous tendencies which attach him to liberty as the advancement of his species—to study the application of theory to practice, sinks into a shallow declaimer,
[Page 42]
as useless to his cause, as unprofitable to himself. In contrast to both these, meant to unite the talents of the one with the sympathies of the other, is sketched in outline the character of John Ardworth—energetic but not rash—uncovetous, but self-denying—valuing money at its just standard, and looking to steadfast labour as the surest means of success. Incidentally (if only incidentally) the secret and sinister influences of money upon conduct, are also suggested in the mechanical avarice of Beck—the habitual degradation of Grabmore— incidentally they even apply to the career of the two arch criminals themselves—covetousness and impatience are twin elements in the grasping, hollow, character of the scoundrel Varney, “alieni appetens, sui profusus,” with the cold heart of the miser—the rank lusts of the spendthrift. Impatience to attend to the end, which her selfish love for Mainwaring suggests, is the first cause of those criminal desires in Lucretia, which are the germs of her criminal deeds, and by which she first permits herself to encourage the contemplation of a human life as an obstacle in her way. And with all her constitutional indifference to money in itself, so much is money mixed up with men's fellest, as their noblest designs, that it is for the coveted inheritance of her son, for the power money can bestow, that her crowning and most hideous guilt is principally conceived and accomplished. If it be said that these are not the patent and obvious influences of money, I reply that, even in my earlier design, such direct influences were not those which I stated it to be my intention to depict. The broad characteristics, whether of a Harpagon , a Beverley , or an Heir of Lynn , have been sufficiently portrayed. I spoke emphatically of a former design to trace rather “the strange and secret ways in which that arch civilizer, familiarly called
[Page 43]
money, insinuates itself into our thoughts and motives, our hearts and actions.” But all I professed in this work, was to take advantage of incidental opportunities of suggesting such lessons —and I have now shown, that I have fulfilled my intention to the extent of my engagement.
The deeper, sterner, and more tragical design to be found in the crimes that form the staple of the narrative, I did not detail in my preface, partly because I trusted it might be sufficiently obvious to the more intelligent reader, partly because it could not have been explained without impertinently forestalling the plot, and could not well have been understood till the volumes were closed, and the mind could look back upon the whole. I was mistaken, it seems, in my first reason for silence, and I have no longer the motive for the second. Here let me pause for a moment, and endeavour to remove from the mind of the reader the principal obstacle, I apprehend, in the way of his candid judgment.
Colley Cibber tells us in his amusing autobiography, that in his time actors did not like to represent the parts of villains, ‘lest in some sort they should be confounded with the persons represented,’ and, indeed, that the audience themselves ‘were shy of giving applause to Iago, lest they should be looked on as abettors of the wickedness in view.’ Nay, ‘the Master of the Revels, who then licensed plays for the stage, would strike out whole scenes, where a vicious and immoral character was introduced, however visibly it were shown that it was to be afterwards punished or reformed.’ Once, much to poor Colley's dismay, this wise Master of the Revels struck out the whole of the first act of Richard III., ‘without leaving a line of it.’ In vain was the prayer, ‘for a speech or two, that the other four
[Page 44]
acts might limp on with a little less absurdity.’ The Master of the Revels was obdurate, ‘and so the play was positively acted for some years without the first act at all!’
Now something, perhaps, of this prejudice still exists in the public; when the author has presented some character of villany to their eyes, perhaps they are still shy of their applause, ‘lest they be looked upon as abettors of the wickedness described.’ Nay, perhaps, the more life-like and truthful the villany, the greater the dread of being entrapped into owning the faithful colours of the author, and the easier, by some artful foe in the house, they may be led into venting on the writer some part of the resentment which he designedly raised against his creations. This is like beheading Dr. Guillotine by the very machine he intended, out of the least truculent motives, for the more artistic decapitation of felons. I must entreat, however, the reader to lay aside that prejudice which, however amiable, is certainly unjust, and dissociate entirely the idea of what is due to the author, from the sense of what is due to the characters whom the author has purposely submitted to abhorrence. He does not the less hate the crimes, because he has sought, in presenting, to deduce from them what warnings they may convey; and he is about now more clearly to explain what moral, perhaps not unprofitable, may come, clear and fair, from the guilt it has shocked the good to behold.
When the chief materials for the gloomier part of this tale were submitted to me, in the lives, writings, and correspondence of the two persons represented under the names of Lucretia and Varney, that which made upon me the deepest and most startling impression was the degree of intellectual cultivation which accompanied and
[Page 45]
heightened their ineffable guilt. We are so accustomed to consider crime the hideous offspring of ignorance, that when we find it accompanied by much literary instruction, it startles the wonder of the indifferent, and rouses the inquiry of those who love to explore the workings of the human mind.
The person whose guilt is certainly not exaggerated in Varney, was an artist, a musician, a critic, and a writer of liveliness and versatility. In his correspondence, he appears to have skimmed the surface of a large and various reading—speaks familiarly of Kant, and hints at a translation of Schelling. In the correspondence of the original from which is drawn the Lucretia of the fiction, are apparent a cultivation more elaborate, and faculties more formidable. These were facts not to be got over. Some lesson, like all facts, they must convey. And I searched for that lesson as a physician may watch some fearful disease, so rare indeed in itself, that his deductions might never be applied to one precisely similar, but which, if comprehended and detailed, might add to the general stores of pathology, and unravel some of the more mysterious complications of the human frame. It is ever painful to believe in the union of mental cultivation with cruel propensities or moral depravity; still, the fact of such a union rises out from every page in the varying chronicles of history. Sometimes the most ruthless exterminator is found in one who has armed himself against his kind, with all the learning of his age; and the accomplishments of a woman have been interwoven with the ferocities of a savage. The most sanguinary tyrant of ancient Greece so cultivated the reasoning faculties he perverted, as to induce the popular error to class him amongst the sages;
[Page 46]
Nero had stored his cruel and sensual mind with the very accomplishments supposed most to humanize and soften; everything that his time could teach him, refined into system the atrocities of Cæsar Borgia; Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, surpassed the most ruthless in an age of barbarity; yet “with his head,” say the chroniclers, “fell half the scholarship of England;” Richard the Third brought to the fierce, unlettered struggles of his day the arts of Italy and the learning of Utrecht. Happily, the moral to be drawn from these colossal criminals is, the utter failure of the very intellect so perverted and misused. And as, whatever our inclination to the contrary, we cannot deny that in private individuals the same discordant and dismal union of cultivated intellect and corrupted conscience does sometimes, though rarely, exist, let us deduce from biography and fiction the same salutary truth that consoles us in history. History makes clear the fact, and loud the warning. Is it wrong for fiction, that history of the inner heart, to do the same? To show the nothingness and impotence of intellect, even in the attainment of its own intellectual aims, when it once admits crime as its agency—to show how useless, nay, pernicious, to the guilty possessor is the very mental power he thus desecrates and perverts—to show that goodness and genial affection are essential to the triumph and fruitfulness of all that mind may plot for, and force would command—for these lessons, it might be as permissible to dive into the guilt of Lucretia as into that of the Prince of Valentinois—and expose in the humbler villain of our own day the same attributes of character, the same alliance of the sensual and the cruel, the effeminate and unsparing, which may startle us in the imperial poisoner and
[Page 47]
parricide of old. It is only “the property-man” of the stage that sees grandeur but in the crown or the toga. Strip off the externals. We have a right to compare men with men.
I wished, then, to show the fate of intelligence abused to the ends of guilt. Somewhat of this had already been shadowed out, as I have said, in the tale of “Eugene Aram.” I sought now to follow the inquiry it suggested into wider tracks, and into yet more comprehensive results. With two out of the three great divisions of human intelligence, facts supplied me; I drew from invention for the third.
In Dalibard, the intention was to portray the wary, calculating, and laborious intellect. which, rightly directed, leads to science; in Varney, the versatile, lively, impressionable fancy, which, purified and guided, may conduct to art; in Lucretia, the energy and active will, which, nobly stimulated and trained, may lead to eminence and success in the outward concerns of life.
All these intellects had but to be honest to succeed. Each of these intellects divorces itself early from all interests but its own. Each works and plots solely for objects identified with itself. Each admits crime for its agency; and from that moment all three, so essentially distinct, are merged in one common infamy and degradation,—from that moment, every effort of the intellect itself becomes a failure; and time and justice, and the truth of things, crush them beneath the Alps they themselves have created. In the minutiæ of treatment, all ground for such mischief, as the most cautious might apprehend, in instructing depravity (if depravity such a book should ever reach,) as to the materials at its command, has been so studiously
[Page 48]
avoided, that the reader will perceive the uniform care with which the possible attainment of those materials has been placed out of the reach of the guilty; the temporary success that attends the poisons employed by the murderers is made to depend solely on their selection of no drug to be procured by common-place villany—in the secrets of chemical compounds, which at no shop could be purchased, of which no hint is conveyed, except that only by chemistry, the most erudite and skilful, they can possibly be combined. Rather than incur, however innocently, the possibility of supplying to one ‘morbid idiosyncrasy’ the agencies at the service of these modern Borgias, I have willingly invited the much more plausible accusation of far-fetched and impracticable devices, if ever existing, wholly lost to the invention, wholly out of the command, of guilt in the age in which we live.
I said in my preface that the originals from whom I had drawn had as little as imagination can conceive to redeem their guilt. And this, I trust, I have sternly kept in view. I have never once held them up to compassion. I have left them that degree of ability which was justified by facts; not elevated into the genius, with which, as in history, we find such criminality is not accompanied. It has been even reproached to me, that I have not given them genius, and that all their cunning, instruction, or audacity avails them not for worldly success. Why, that was precisely one truth that I aimed at! The Borgias and the Richards fall short of genius, but have ability sufficient to have won them some distinction in good, and powerful only for destruction when applied to evil. I have never suffered ability so debased to pass into the command of admiration—I have shown how impotent it was to lessen one atom
[Page 49]
of our detestation, though sufficient, (if such art be in the writer,) to accompany detestation with terror. Pressed into the service of Death, Mind itself grows grim and hateful as the king that it serves.
                                         “Black it stands as Night,
Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell,
And shakes a deadly dart!”
These Children of Night, by the paths they themselves have chosen, are conducted to catastrophes, which, while punishing them the most in the sin each had most favoured, was that which each (could the soul have foreseen it) would have regarded as the most fearful and appalling. Dalibard, the coward and the calculator, shrinking from all physical danger, and using his holiest relationships but as tools to his purpose, is betrayed at the hearth he had desecrated, and butchered by the dull ruffian he had duped. Varney, who had prostituted the perfection of his physical senses to their vilest gratifications, luxurious amidst his infamy, effeminate in despite of his animal audacity, is sentenced to the coarsest of hardships, the vilest of labour, chained to the most loathsome of malefactors, doomed to all that the senses, most pampered, would shudder from the most, all that the fancy, so perverted, could body forth of horror and despair. Lucretia, who had made on earth no god but the intellect—is cursed in the intellect—smitten down below the brutes, but with the consciousness of the mortal— retaining, amidst the ruins of all the past, only the image of her crime, standing face to face with it, as a visible thing.—Surely these punishments are as appalling and as appropriate to the guilt as poetic justice can command! And beside them the gibbet is mercy and reprieve.
The delineation, then, of these three arch criminals,
[Page 50]
was not the indulgence of any idle or morbid affection for the contemplation of guilt in itself, it was but undertaken for an honest and serious purpose. And a thoughtful reader will perceive, that even the more subordinate images of evil introduced, were in accordance with one earnest and elaborate design. The dull and villanous brutality of the grave-stealer, for instance, forms no superfluous figure on the gloomy canvas, nor, in chaining that sordid ruffian to the more pampered miscreant, is the idea of befitting punishment to the last, alone enforced. But in confounding in one lowest abyss of human degradation the man in whom no nobler faculty has ever been awakened, and the man to whom all faculties sufficing for the perception of good have been given, and by whom they have been voluntarily perverted to odious and execrable ends, it was sought to convey a truth, suggestive of no unprofitable reflexions.
That wise man, Dr. Slop, in discussing Yorick's Sermon, contends that the Roman-catholic Sermons “have greatly the advantage, that they never introduce any character below a patriarch or a patriarch's wife, or a martyr, or a saint. ‘There are some very bad characters in this, however,’ said my father, ‘and I do not think the sermon is a jot the worse for 'em.’ ”
Perhaps Mr. Shandy in this was a better judge than Dr. Slop.
I contend, then, and I think that I have proved, that the design of this book of the “Children of Night,” was conformable to the laws of fiction and the truths of history; that the moral it enforces is serious and impressive; not the less for the pain it bequeaths; that it can but deepen the horror of guilt, and the dread of its consequences; that it
[Page 51]
can but preach wholesome lessons to the intellect, and awaken lively self-examination in the heart; that there is not a single attempt to create for the criminals any interest save that of terror and suspense in their deeds, 23 or to pervert for one instant the channels of sympathy from their legitimate source. I have sought even in Helen less to create an isolated pathos at war with the general and more absorbing terror, which the facts I have drawn ought to create, than to harmonize her interest with the general moral of the design. I have avoided to weave around the victim too extreme a compassion for that fate which neither the ancient Stoic nor the living Christian should be taught to regard as the greatest of calamities— viz., a guiltless grave. And for this purpose, and not for the vulgar object of ‘fine writing,’ or in the mysticism of pseudo-philosophy, which the vulgarest criticism has imputed to me, I have drawn her as one whose imagination is more excited by reveries on the life to come, than the happiness of earth—I have suffered her to feel, and to imply to the reader, a conviction that earthly love did not suffice to occupy her whole heart, or bound her dreams of felicity. She dies innocent, her murderers live on in guilt, and the death of the innocent is no affliction so terrible as the living on of the guilty. He who describes poetic justice must find it in the laws of the divine, must throw down the mœnia mundi , the walls of the actual world, and extend the realm of justice over the Infinite and Eternal. Rightly has Schiller placed
[Page 52]
this prerogative in the hands of art; 24 —a prerogative to restore harmony to the jarred chords of creation, and fulfil the circle of destiny, closed abruptly upon the visible eye, through the space and shadows of the Future.
I have been told, indeed, that, though these dark social phenomena may exist, they are too peculiar, too rare, for moral or artistical treatment. Perhaps, such critics would never have made the charge, had they been aware of the compliment it implies. Every man really a critic in art, knows that rare truths are more important than frequent ones. “The teaching of Nature,” says one who has throughly mastered the subject he treats of, “is as varied and infinite as it is constant, and the duty of the painter is to watch for every one of her lessons, and to give (for human life can admit of nothing more) those in which she has manifested each of her principles in the most striking and peculiar way. The rarer his phenomena, the more valuable his works will be.” 25 Not, indeed, that we must delineate the rare
[Page 53]
alone. “Both the frequent and the rare are parts of the same great system; to give either exclusively is imperfect truth.” If these “Children of Night” are happily rare deviations from the order established below, they do not occupy the whole of my canvas, and they are surrounded with images more bright, and I believe, more frequent. Is there nothing innocent in Helen? nothing frank and pure in the youth of Percy? nothing honest and upright in John Ardworth? nothing benevolent in Fielden? nothing amiable and genial in Sir Miles St. John? And as the general disposition and tendencies of an author are not to be judged by one work alone, so I may venture to invite those who have really read me, to add to the contrast of the gloom and guilt depicted in “ Lucretia ,” whatever of gentler fancies they may remember in the “ Pilgrims of the Rhine ,” of attempts to symbolize the beauty of Art in the romance of “ Zanoni ,” or to embody the steadfast virtue of practical life in the Mordaunt of “ The Disowned .” And if they will permit their thoughts to wander for a moment through the whole range of my writings, they will own at least that, whatever their faults, they are not to be accused of sameness in the characters, or monotony in treatment.
“ Lucretia ” I confess to be a painful book; all delineation of fearful crime, and the ruin it eutails, must necessarily be so. If, in its treatment, I have overstepped the true limits of terror, that may be an error in art , but not one, (be it remembered and distinguished,) in moral tendency and design. I could not have made it less painful, without weakening (perhaps losing altogether) the impression that such guilt ought to make upon the mind. Had the innocent been
[Page 54]
wholly spared, and the close been bright and happy, the reader might justly have complained that his feelings had been shocked for no adequate end,—that he had been led, but for the result of comedy, to all that tragic horror can suggest of evil and distress. Had the guilt itself been only shown in the deed,—had you seen only some image of force and power, and passed without detail to the destruction it effects, much that is painful and revolting would have been unquestionably avoided; but the bold image of the power, the brief shock of the deed, would not have sufficed for that deep and lasting execration which phenomena so dreadful should enforce. And where, all the while,—had the dark details been withheld, and the hearts of the two master criminals not been laid bare through the long process of time, and from the first germs of the evil,—where would have been the lessons we can derive only from the workings of the passions, and the deeps of the mind?
There is this distinction between the old tragedy and the new. With the Greek, Fate was the main instrument of woe and crime;—so with the Greek, there was little need of mental analysis —little need to show from what errors of his own, man suffered and sinned. Fate stalked across his way, or stood upon his hearth—his fell and irresistible foe. An oracle declared he should murder, a god led his steps to his doom. But, with us, guilt or woe has its source in ourselves. Our conscience is our oracle, our deeds shape our fate. And though, in a few rare instances, modern writers have still had recourse to the iron deity of old, it is obvious that unless the instrumentality of a power which we cannot influence and control be most sparingly and cautiously employed,
[Page 55]
we should seem to sanction the dangerous principle that we are the passive and unconscious tools, not the active and reasoning contrivers, of the evil that conducts us to the abyss. Hence arises the imperious necessity, for those who resort to the sources of tragedy, and trace from them the channels of woe or guilt— to search narrowly and patiently (often, it may be, with distaste to themselves) into all that is dark and hidden in the mechanism of the mind for the causes of evil, and the links between the thought and the sin. And thus in proportion to the crime they depict, and the destruction it effects, must be the gloom of the impression they create, and the degree of pain they inflict. If, in the narrative of these “ Children of Night ,”—if, as some assert, “its horror is burlesque,” and its treatment “excites rather ridicule than awe,”—if, as I am assured by others, it is “dulness upon dulness,” “nothing graphic in the pictures,” “nothing striking in the incidents,”—then, though its moral cannot be pernicious, I have certainly failed to render it instructive. But if it bequeaths (as the facts on which it is founded should enable it to do) the effect of tragedy thoroughly in earnest—a sensation of terror that oppresses the more from the conviction that reality lies beneath the fiction—a relief in the heartfelt detestation of the crime from which the terror proceeds—a dread of “the destructive power” which is the essence of the hateful combination between intellect and guilt, and a desire to rush for escape to the cheerful atmosphere of good,—then does this book come, at least, within the allotted limits of the art that is built upon terror, and sanctions its connexion with pain and distress, 26 and then does it attain to those moral
[Page 56]
effects which are produced by the means of the passions.
The moral conveyed in all works of the imagination, is in part distinct and immediate, in part also it is untraceable, distant, and indirect. And this latter part is perhaps the most really valuable and efficient. Ask any thoughtful and educated man, what works have produced the most marked and recognised influence on his conduct, and I believe he will never name a fiction or a poem. Next, and unspeakably subordinate, to the more sacred monitors whose counsel he reverently obeys—he will tell us, perhaps, of some homely treatise, or some artless biography. But ask that man to dissociate from the general influences on his conduct, whatever he may have learned from the pages of poetry and fiction, and he will doubtless tell you it is impossible. He will acknowledge how much, yet how insensibly, they have strengthened his moral impressions—how much they have suggested reflexions that brighten his perceptions of truths—how much they have added to that general knowledge of the heart which has set emotion on its guard, and animated into generous passion his love for the noble and the
[Page 57]
good—his scorn for the sordid and the evil. And this it is, I presume, that some writer intended to express when he finely asked, “Who amongst us now living can tell what he would have been if Shakespeare had never existed?”
None of my readers will ever, I know, have to resist one temptation to a villany, a millionth part so hateful as that described in “ Lucretia ” as a monstrous phenomenon. But in the struggles of life, the minor seductions of evil are often repelled by the lively horror derived from the doom which poet or tale-teller has assigned to concessions to the greater. If this were not so, the gigantic and unfamiliar crimes depicted on the heroic stage, would be but idle exaggerations. Who amongst the audience that listen to Macbeth will have to wade through blood to a throne, yet who may not have some selfish object his ambition would promote, and be tempted by the meaner “juggles of the fiend?” In the picture of a crime dwells the warning to an error. Divers and specious are the allurements to attain to ends coveted by the intellect, through means more or less disapproved by the conscience; and not unsalutary may be the true lesson to be derived from “ Lucretia ” if the impressions it bequeathes, though vague and unanalyzed, serve to quicken the instantaneous conviction, that all which defiles the conscience defeats and defrauds the intellect.
“The first step passed, compels us on to more.
And guilt proves fate , which was but choice before.”
A task reluctantly undertaken is now fulfilled. I have shown that it is uncharitable and rash to decide in haste against the moral purposes of writers who have no object to deprave—I have shown the laws and examples which render justifiable
[Page 58]
in fiction, the delineations of crime—I have exposed the falsity of the charge so reiterated against myself, that habitually, and by preference, I have made criminals my heroes—I have shown that, out of sixteen fictions, to three only can this charge be applied. I have, I trust, made it manifest, that each of these three will bear the test of the strictest reference to the due restrictions to be placed upon their treatment and design; that no sophistry has been employed to vindicate the crime; that the crime has not been of that nature in which the narrative needs, or has found, inflammatory appeals to the more tempting passions —obtruding the presentation of licentious images, and clothing itself in a garb which rather allures than revolts; and, finally, I trust I have made it clear to the reader, that such stern and sombre subjects have not been undertaken without the befitting gravity of thoughtful and earnest purpose.
If I have not entered at length into the subjects of my other works, it is because such self-criticism would have been unpardonable, unless for the imperative necessities of self defence— each singly considered, their moral tendencies and objects have been tacitly admitted, or only vaguely assailed; and the reader will acknowledge, that in mainly confining myself to those works in which criminals have been made the predominant characters, I have fairly and honestly met the gravamen of the charge that has been urged against me. The rest of my writings, therefore, I confidently leave to the recollections of the general reader; and though, amongst works so numerous, commenced at so early an age, and comprehending delineations of life, with its manners and its passions, so widely various, there
[Page 59]
may occur, unavoidably, some errors of judgment, some passages too lightly considered,—(and what writer could bear a malignant research through more than forty volumes, made with a design of interpreting every sentence to the worst?)—yet I am convinced that the result of any candid survey would establish the fact, that all those works were conceived with the heartfelt desire to minister, however humbly, to truth and good, and executed with a reverent care to unsettle no man's mind as to the clear principles of religion—or the broad distinctions which the conscience has established between what we should aspire to, and what we should avoid.
This vindication, which, I think, has been conducted in that fair spirit of dispassionate argument which I prescribed to myself at the commencement, shall be sent to those whose charges, less temperately made, have called it forth. It is at their option to treat it with silence—or, if it so please them, in the same tone, and with recourse to the same arts, by which they have previously sought to pervert my meaning, and degrade my name; or why should I think so ill, even of enemies, as not to hope that some amongst them, at least, while retaining fairly their opinion of the literary demerits of my writings, may retract what alone I have the right to complain of—viz., heedless and unconsidered misstatements as to their honest tendency and design? Be this as it may—though the wrong that has been done me may not, and cannot, be readily and lightly repaired—though I am aware that many who never read my works have yet read, and may be long impressed by, the attacks of their assailants—that many more, who have read both the works and the attacks, will never read
[Page 60]
this explanation of the one and this reply to the other—nay, even though these pages, like the works that preceded them, may be garbled and distorted from their meaning,—yet I am immovably persuaded that, from few to more, from the segment to the circle, the main truths I have stated will gradually, but surely, penetrate and extend; and that, whatever literary faults and blemishes in my writings may be justly condemned, soon or late, the author will be held to have given an unanswerable vindication of the legitimate selection of his materials, and his conscientious sense of his more serious responsibilities.
NOTES
1 Hallam's History of Literature, vol. iii. p. 156.
2 Voltaire congratulated himself, indeed, that Candide had appeared before Rasselas, so that the scoffing wit might not be accused of plagiarizing his moral from our serious and sturdy Doctor.
3 Disraeli. Curiosities of Literature.
4 Including a translation of Schiller, to which I could have had no reasonable inducement to devote the labour of more than two years, except that of rendering more familiar to my countrymen a collection of Poems, universally considered to create, upon the whole, moral impressions peculiarly pure and elevating.
5 To say nothing of “Titus Andronieus,” which is, probably, not Shakespeare's, or his only in part, but which we admit into our collections with no fear of demoralizing weak minds, or poisoning the purity of youth by the successions of crimes and atrocities, murders, rapes—amputating hands, plucking forth tongues, hewing off heads—stabbing with a joke of “Weke, weke, so cries a pig”—cutting throats on the stage, while Lavinia between her stumps holds a bason for the blood, serving up to a mother her children baked in a pie, &c. &c. Why is not this play, (no matter whose it be) to be banished from our collections? Because, here, time has brought healthful discernment; because, whatever the defective art which introduces such gratuitous horrors in “Titus Andronicus,” every one knows that they do not contaminate the moral sense; the image of crime, made execrable, may pain and revolt us, but, for that very reason, it does not allure or corrupt.
6 Nothing can be more unsatisfactory than all definitions which have sought to limit the author's liberty of selection from criminal agencies and instruments. “The only circumstance,” says one critic, “which elevates the crime into a subject for the poet or the dramatist, is the influence under which it is committed, the object which it is to attain, the nature of the impelling necessities which lead to it,—when these spring from causes not base or ignoble in themselves, when they come, for instance, from a combination of wrong not otherwise to be redressed, murder becomes a poetic subject; it is that which is dignified as a ‘tragedy,’ and distinguished from mere felony.” Words, signifying nothing! The crimes of Iago are base and ignoble in themselves—they come from no ‘combination of wrong not otherwise to be redressed;’ neither do those of Richard III., nor those of Phædra, of Clytemnestra, of the daughters of Lear, and the mother of Hamlet, and the wife of Macbeth.
7 Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful, Part I. sect. vii.
8 lb., Part II. sect. v.
9 Taylor's Translation of Proclus in the “Apology for the Fables of Homers” I prefer adopting his translation, though not so forcible as I could wish, to any attempt of my own. I have taken, however, the liberty of substituting for the word unnatural,’ the paraphrase, “Out of the common course of nature,” which is certainly the true meaning of Proclus.
10 These poor circulating library readers are a little too superciliously treated. Say what we like about them. they still from the ordinary mass of the reading public, and comprehend all. its varieties of intellect and instruction. They certainly cannot be said to exclude the refined and scholastic few, while they as certainly do not embrace the lowest orders in mental cultivation.
11 I say moral terror. though even the physical terror caused by representations of bodily pain and danger can scarcely be artistically produced, without tracing it to moral evil, either in those who endure, or those who inflict it.
12 Thus, indeed, a class of composition has arisen, for which as yet we have no definite name; it corresponds not with our associations of the novel, nor yet with those of the romance. It does not belong precisely to either. We cannot justly call “Wilhelm Meister” or “Anastasius,” “Undine” or “Picciola,” “Atala” or “René,” nor even “Caleb Williams” and “Julia de Roubigné,” either novels or romances. In England the word fiction has thus crept into use, for want of one less general and vague.
13 Unless we admit, as perhaps we ought, the more mixed and less gloomy romance of “Kenilworth,” in which I need not say, that all which is effected of terror is produced by the agency of guilt; in fact, wherever Walter Scott has produced terror without employing supernatural means, it will always and unavoidably, from the causes stated in the text, be found in connexion with crime.
14 Hor. Sat. 4, 1. 1.
15 This is the necessity of the newspaper press, rather than a reproach to it. That press but obeys the imperious demand for publicity which the age enforces. Its business is to deal with facts; and it can only partially and briefly convey the deductions which the author of a fiction writes volumes to explain.
16 Virg. Æn. vi. 276, 277.
17 I should apologize for the fatiguing repetition of the word terror, throughout this inquiry. But I could not avoid it without obscurity and circumlocution. I must make the same excuse for the repetition of the word art.
18 And this principle of treatment, be it observed, holds as good in the delineation of virtue as in the exhibition of guilt. Pamela, for instance, is intended to celebrate the triumph of virtue in a woman,—Caleb Williams depicts the guilty fall of a man. Yet which of the two fictions would a father prefer to trust to his children? The design of Richardson is eminently virtuous, but, by an error in art, the treatment obtrudes scenes and suggests ideas of very questionable safety.
19 The real hero of this book is perhaps rather William Brandon than his son; but I take the responsibility created by the title selected.
20 Rob Roy defies the law, plunders the traveller, ravages the border, spares not life, if in his way, and is represented on the whole as an amiable and gallafit character, and dismissed without punishment, to the doubtful approbation of the reader. In all this the assailers of “Paul Clifford” see nothing to call for the charge of raising robbers into heroes, or bestowing interest upon criminals. And they are right. Let them be but consistent. If this miserable jargon is to be employed at all, let them use it impartially.
21 Our distinguished diplomatist, Sir Hamilton Seymour.
22 The Rev. Mr. Hinton said, ‘he used frequently to observe Aram, when walking in the garden, stoop down to remove a snail or a worm from the path.’
23 By a strange inconsistency, the very parties that reproached me for blending some redeeming good qualities with the offences of Paul Clifford and the crime of Eugene Aram, reproach me for the opposite fault of leaving the wickedness of Varney and Lucretia utterly unredeemed.
24 “Doch in den grossen Wertenlauf, Ward ener Ebenmaass zu fruh getragen. Als der Geschikes dunkle Hand. Was sie vor eurem Augen schnürte, Vor eurem aug' nicht auseinander band, Das Leben in der Tiefe schwand, Eh es den schönen Kreis vollfuhrte, Da fuhrtet ihnaus kühner Eigenmacht. Den Bogen weiter durch der Zukunft Nacht.” Schill. Die Künsiler. Scott (Introduction to “Ivanhoe,” in the first collected edition of his works) very truly observes, “that he thinks a character of a highly virtuous or lofty stamp is degraded, rather than exalted, by an attempt to reward virtue with temporal prosperity. Such is not the recompence which Providence has deemed worthy of suffering merit.”
25 I could accumulate ample authorities in support of the propositions here ably and briefly stated; but they are apparent to the slightest reflection.
26 In quoting the following passage, it is not with the presumption of advancing any claim to the high attainment of which mention is made, but simply to show that, in the judgment of a very eminent critic, art finds in distress one ingredient of the sublime; and though, of course, an effect is not sublime because it is distressing, yet at least it is not an offence to art that the sensation of distress is occasioned. Though a writer may make no pretence to the sublime, he may still apply for such effects as his degree of power permits him to produce to whatever are suggested as its sources. “Of feeling, little more can be said, than that the idea of bodily pain in all the modes and degrees of labour, pain, anguish, torment, is productive of the sublime, and nothing else in this sense can produce it.”—“Its strongest emotion, (that of the sublime,) is an emotion of distress and no pleasure from a positive cause belongs to it.”—Burke “On the Sublime and Beautiful,” part ii. sect. 22.
$$$
