Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



% 






Prof .Austin Warren 



-i 



fcoOK?lU£fgSSTAnoN?Rs1 

Lj£^ii5ISQ.^0ST0M.I 



% 






Prof ■ Austin Warren 



■^^^^^^B^n 



▲ TH.B.CIARKE c - 
I 26828 TREMONT ST. 8/ ( 
. 1 30 COURT SQ..BngTA^>.] 



h 






Prof •Austin Warren 




H 



t 
11 



'^.B.CIARKE ccT^ 

zeazaTRCMONTST.a 

30 COUR T Sq.,BOSTON.{ 



% 






BELCHAMBER 



BELCHAM BER 



BY 

HOWARD OVERING^TURGIS 

AUTHOR OF 
*T1M,' 'ALL THAT WAS POSSIBLE* 



G. p. PUTNAM'S SONS 

Bonion 
ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE & CO., LTD. 

1905 






Edinburgh : T. and A. Constable, Printers to His Majesty 



i 












TO 

WILLIAM HAYNES SMITH 



CHAPTER I 

Belchamber is one of the most beautiful places in England. 
The name, if not the house, dates from days when Norman- 
French was the polite language of our kings; the reigning 
monarch, some early Henry or Edward, alighting for the 
night, as was the habit of reigning monarchs, at the house of 
his vassal, and having been especially pleased with something 
about the apartment prepared for his use, is said to have 
remarked in high good humour, ^Pardie! iu as Ih une belle 
chambre.* Something of old-world scandal hung about the 
legend (which in its authorised form is just a little bare and 
dull for the nucleus round which gathered the fortunes of a 
noble family), tales of frail beauty not insensible to a royal 
lover, of feudal complaisance, not to be more overtly acknow- 
ledged than by this gracious allusion to the belk chambre^ 
from which the domain was to take its name. 

The house, as the humblest tourist may see for himself on 
certain days of the week, is an grqiiigi»<> Jn^^tbfan gtrnrtijrr 
borrowing largely from the Renaissance palaces of Italy, yet 
with a certain solid British homeliness about it, that specially 
fits it for its surroundings, the green undulations of an English 
park. The view from the front is sufficiently extended, and 
behind it, the various Dutch and Italian gardens are inter- 
spersed with water-works and statues like a miniature 
Versailles. Great oaks and ashes and Spanish chestnuts 
stand in the park, and four large avenues of elms draw their 
straight lines across it to the four points of the compass. The 
little river, which in the woods and meadows is a natural 
shallow trout-stream with loosestrife and ragged robin fringing 
its banks, is pressed in the gardens into many curious uses — 

A 



ft fiELCHAMfi&R 

fountains and cascades, and oblong rectangular fish-ponds, 
where old carp and goldfish circle in and out among the 
stalks of foreign water-lilies sunk in hampers. The huge lawn 
behind the house is shaded by cedars of Lebanon, that are 
such a characteristic feature of Restoration places, and there 
is one that disputes with the famous tree at Addington, and I 
dare say with half a dozen others, the doubtful glory of being 
the oldest cedar in England. 

Of the thousands of acres of which the property consists, 
the farms and manorial rights, the livings in the gift of the 
owner, it is not necessary that I should give a catalogue ; it is 
not the business of the novelist to value for probate, but if 
possible to convey a vague but imposing impression of wealth 
and position. Suffice it that the Lord of Belchamber is 
ground-landlord of the greater part of three large parishes, 
and that in the county of his residence alone no less than 
three beneficed clergymen sit in their comfortable rectories by 
the grace of a sickly young man of no very definite religious 
beliefs, without counting his lordship's domestic chaplain, 
who ministers to the spiritual needs of a small army of in- and 
out-door servants and their families in the little tame church 
that is, so to speak, tethered on the lawn. 

Belchamber has suffered but little at the hands of restorers; 
the family have always taken a sort of lazy pride in the beauti- 
ful house, which luckily seldom rose to the point of desiring 
to improve it. The third marquis, to be sure, had some 
formidable projects for remodelling the building, of which the 
plans remain in a great Italian cabinet in the hall ; but his 
two favourite pursuits combined to save his home, for he lost 
so much money at cards that even he drew back before the 
large expense involved, and while he still hesitated, a bad fall 
out hunting cut short his building projects with his life. 
That was more than a hundred years ago, when gambling and 
unpaid debts were indispensable parts of the ideal of a 
gentleman. 

If Charles James, third Marquis and eighth Earl of Bel- 
chamber, lost large sums at the club gaming-tables when he 



BELCHAMBER 3 

came up to the House of Lords, and died as he had lived, in 
the hunting-field, his successor, George Frederick Augustus, 
the fourth marquis, in no way fell short of his respected 
parent's example. He played as high, drank as deep, and 
rode as hard as his father, while he imported into his excesses 
just that flavour of vulgarity which the bucks of the Regency 
copied so successfully from their master and pattern. He 
kept two packs of hounds, and several establishments in 
addition to his acknowledged and legitimate residence ; and 
if he did not break his own neck, he at least broke his wife's 
heart, not to mention such unconsidered trifles as his word, 
and a large quantity of beautiful old china, when in liquor. 
Belchamber saw him but little; he preferred London and 
Brighton, and one of his smaller places which was in a better 
hunting-country ; and here once more the very vices of its 
owners seemed to conduce to the preservation of the beautiful 
louse and its treasures. The i^^^i^^j^f^ ^^i^k>«»^/1 AT-j^y^/i^rTroe^ 

[and the pai nted ceilin gs suffered somewhat from want of flres ; 
but neglectlias neveroeen so fatal to works of art as atten- 
tion, and if the pictures cracked and faded a little, at least 
they were not burnt, or repainted, or buried under a deposit 
){ coachbuilder's varnish. 

To the poor lady, who was occasionally brought from the 
seclusion of her lord's hunting-quarters to be exhibited at a 
drawing-room in the family emeralds and diamonds, a son and 
heir was born, who received in common with so many of the 
children of that date the names of Arthur Wellesley. This 
was the fifth marquis and tenth earl, and the grandfather of 
the hero of this book. Marquis Arthur differed from his 
father and grandfather only in his mode of getting rid of 
money. If he played less, he made up for it by losing large 
sums on the turf, and by a generally luxurious and extrava- 
gant style of living. He w ag a not^pou^ beautv. and had a 
straight nose, and an immense bushy pair of wiiiiSkCl'l>, ivlikh 
were fatal to the peace of mind of great numbers of the fair 
sex ; he was inordinately vain, and a woman had only to tell 
him she was in love with him, and that she had never seen a 



4 BELCHAMBER 

man with such small feet, to get anything she wanted out of 
him. He frittered away more money over bouquets and 
scent and ugly jewellery than his father and grandfather had 
lost in their longest nights at Crockford's. His triumphs over 
female virtue were so numerous and notorious that many 
thought he would never give a hostage to fortune in the shape 
of a wife of his own. But when the nets of the fowler had 
been spread for many years in the sight of this volatile bird 
of gay plumage, he surprised every one by bringing home a 
bride from across the Channel. 

If report said true, this beautiful young woman revenged 
the wrongs of her sex, and of many husbands, most thoroughly 
on her whiskered lord, who was not her master. At first it 
was impossible to Lord Charmington (as he then was) to 
believe that any woman he honoured with his affection could 
fail to be madly in love with him; then as the conviction 
grew upon him (and ideas came to him slowly), there were 
furious scenes of recrimination, anger, and jealousy on his 
side, and cold contempt and indifference on hers. More than 
once they were within a short distance of the divorce court ; 
but his vanity never could be reconciled to the thought of 
appearing coram populo in the character which to him seemed 
always the most ludicrous and humiliating possible. His 
wife soon discovered this weakness, and traded on it freely. 
If she was not a very clever woman, he was a more than 
ordinarily stupid man, so that he learned to dread her tongue 
almost as much as the ridicule that must attach to him in case 
of a scandal. He also began to take a certain pride in her 
position both in London and Paris. She was certainly for 
many years one of the most conspicuous figures in the society 
of both capitals; and if the more particular and old-fashioned 
ladies held up their hands in horror at the stories told of her, 
she had a large share in introducing a different standard of 
morals for the younger set, in which she was always a leader. 
When no longer in her first youth, she was one of the galaxy 
of beautiful women who adorned the Second Empire, and 
though at the severer Court of St. James she was less smiled 



BELCHAMBER 5 

upon, there were not wanting circles in the land of her 
adoption hardly less august, and infinitely more congenial, . 
where she was not only received, but highly popular. 

Through long years which converted her contemporaries 
into invalids or grandmothers, in which her husband grew fat 
and coarse^ and took to drink and low company, in which 
children were born to her, two of whom died in infancy, in 
which her eldest son and one daughter grew up and married, 
in which her grandsons were born, and her son died, she re- 
mained always ' the beautiful Lady Belchamber,' always in the 
world, and of the world, immutably 'gay,' and fast, and 
frivolous, following the same dreary round of fashionable 
existence year in and year out, bedizened in jewels not always 
virtuously come by, dressed and head-dressed in the latest 
mode, and absorbed in the newest craze or pastime with 
women who might have been her daughters, and men who 
were sometimes the sons of her early lovers. As her natural 
charms faded, they were of course replaced by art; the raven 
locks that had been admired by Louis Philippe at first only 
took on an inkier black, then grew a little brown, and passed 
through dull burnished copper to a rich golden red, while the 
cream-white skin grew more and more rosy in sympathy. 
Gradually, as fashion artfully disarranged the hair of its 
votaries, and the wig-makers' art developed and improved, so 
much of her ladyship's elaborate coiffure came to be false, 
that it could be almost any colour she chose without incon- 
venience, and was even known to vary with her gowns. 

As for her husband, the flattery of women being as the 
breath of his nostrils, it was only natural that the older and 
less attractive he became, the lower he went in the social • 
scale in search of it. The poor little feet that had stepped / 
so nimbly on the hearts of many frail ones, began to spread f 
in the vain attempt to support the Silenus-like body, and, 
cramped in tight boots, carried their tottering owner into 
very queer byways indeed. The beautiful nose swelled and 
grew purple, the Hyperean curls, much thinned at the temples, 
were still carefully oiled and arranged, and with the famous 



6 BELCHAMBER 

whiskers became more hyacinthine in hue with each advancing 
year. When I was a yoimg man, this poor, foolish, wicked 
old marquis was still strutting about Fall Mall, and ogling 
the women, with a few other bucks of his own generation, 
padded, laced, and dyed. I dare say there are bad old men 
still, but they are bald, and have grey beards, and are some- 
how not so ridiculous as Lord Belchamber and his peers 
were. He and his wife met but seldom, and though he 
sometimes grew quite eloquent over the way she treated him, 
he was not really unhappy ; after all, he was leading just the 
same life he always had, and if his companions were coarser 
and commoner, his taste had coarsened too, and the dull, 
bloodshot eyes had lost their keenness of vision and grown 
less critical. He outlived his son, and did not die till after 
the Franco-Prussian war. Almost the only remark of a purely 
sentimental nature he was ever known to make was on the 
subject of the siege of Paris and the fall of the Empire. 
' Poor old Paris ! ' he said. ' I 've had many a good time in 
Paris, though I did meet my wife there, damn her ! but I 
shouldn't care to go there again, hanged if I should, with 

everything so changed, and all that ' 

We shall have nothing more to do with him in this work, 
except to bury him, which, by and by, we will do with 
befitting pomp. Of direct influence he never had the 
smallest on any living creature, but who shall say what 
mysterious legacy of evil tendencies he may have bequeathed 
to his descendants? The question of heredity is very 
fashionable just now, but remains not a little obscure ; and 
perhaps it is safer in the interests of morality that we should 
not know too exactly how little responsibility we have for 
our bad actions, and how much we can shuffle off on to our 
grandfathers and grandmothers. Whether it was the result 
of heredity or education, or a mixture of the two, the children 
of such a couple did not start in life with the best chance 
of being quiet, reputable people, and the two who survived 
the disorders of infancy were left to bring themselves up 
very much as fortune willed. Lady Eva was a very pretty 



J 



BELCHAMBER 7 

girl who seldom saw her mother, left entirely to French 
maids and governesses, and mainly educated on the novels 
of that country, which she abstracted from her mother's 
boudoir and read on the sly, generally with the connivance 
of her instructress, on condition that she passed them on to 
her. Lady Belchamber used sometimes to see this official, 
when she thought of it, for five minutes while her hair was 
being done. 

' Lady Eva se comporte bien ? ' 

* Parfaitement, ma'm la marquise.' 

* Qu'est-ce qu'elle apprend ? voyons.' 

*Lady Eva 6tudie, en ce moment, comme geographic, 
I'Asie orientale, la Chine, le Japon; comme histoire, le 
dix-septibme si^cle, les guerres de Louis xiv., la guerre 
civile en Angleterre, la restauration de Charles 11. ; comme 
langues, Italien, / Promessi Sposiy Allemand, la Maria 
Stuart de Schiller, Frangais, Le Cid de Corneille; comme 
math^matique ' 

* Assez, assez ! ne faites pas trop ^tudier cette p'tite, vous 
en ferez un bas bleu . EUe va bien ? ' 

'Parfaitement, milady. D^sirez-vous voir Lady Eva?' 

* Pas ce soir ; je n'ai pas le temps.* 

Once, some one asked the little girl to give her mother a 
message. *I will write to her,' the child said, *it will be 
quicker.' They were living in the same house. 

When in due course she was presented and made her 
appearance in the world, she was very much admired. At 
nineteen she was engaged to two men simultaneously, and 
got out of the difficulty by running away with a third, a 
rather shady hanger-on of her father, called Captain Morland, 
who not long afterwards had to disappear from society, owing 
to an unfortunate difficulty that he experienced in confining 
himself to the strict laws of the game, at cards. Thenceforth 
they lived mostly abroad, and little was heard of them. Lady 
Belchamber, who was not an unkind woman, used to write to 
her daughter sometimes, and send her old dresses and hats ; 
and the old lord^ when on the continent, would have thQ 



8 



BELCHAMBER 



couple to live with him, and give them money. He had a 
sneaking kindness for Morland, which he never quite got 
over, finding him a congenial companion ; and his son-in-law 
was very patient in listening to his tender confidences. Lord 
Charmington, who was two years older than his sister, had 
the better chance that comes to boys of being sent away 
to school. Unfortunately for him, the one thing he did not 
inherit from his parents was the naturally strong constitution 
that was common to them both. Lady Belchamber, though 
herself a marvel of strength and vitality, came of an extremely 
old family, of which the blood, enfeebled by much marrying 
of cousins, had had time to run very thin indeed ; and though 
the Chambers stock was originally strong and healthy, the 
excesses of the last three bearers of the title had not 
tended to the transmission of a fine physique to their 
descendants. 

From his childhood poor Charmington was a rickety, 
feeble lad, and more than once came within a tittle of sharing 
the fate of his younger brothers, instead of surviving to be 
the father of our hero, in which case this book would never 
have been written. If he could have stayed out his time at 
Eton, it might have done much for him, for he was not 
without some naturally kindly qualities, though he was as 
stupid as an owl, and never could learn to spell the simplest 
words. In those days there existed no ruthless law of super- 
annuation, and he might have remained contentedly in fourth 
form till he was nineteen, had it not been for his unfortunate 
health: he was always ill, and always having to be taken 
away and sent to the seaside, or abroad, in the care of any one 
who could be got to go and look after him. This employ- 
ment fell as often as not to his future brother-in-law. Captain 
Morland, than whom a worse companion for a growing lad 
could hardly be found, and where he could be, Morland 
found him, and introduced him to his charge. By the time 
he was twenty, the lad was an accomplished little rip, gambler, 
and spendthrift, and had materially impaired his already 
feeble constitution. He was bought a commission in the 



BELCHAMBER 9 

household cayaby, but at the end of a few years, having 
come to the end of everything — health, money, credit, and 
the limits of his father's patience — ^he was thenceforward lost 
to the service of his country. 

After a severe haemorrhage of the lungs, he was ordered 
to winter abroad, and by way of retrenching and building up 
his strength, he selected Nice as a quiet inexpensive winter 
resort, with the chance of a little congenial amusement, in 
the nearness of the tables at Monte Carlo. Here he found 
his sister and her husband (whose little trouble at the club 
had befallen the year before) hanging on to the fringe of 
society. But here, too, he encountered that veteran states- 
man, the Earl of Firth, who with his wife and two daughters 
was recruiting his strength after his retirement from public 
life at a villa in the neighbourhood. The Morlands were 
established at Monaco, where the Firth party never set foot, 
so Charmington had no difficulty in keeping his disreputable 
brother-in-law out of sight of his new acquaintances. He 
began to frequent the villa of the old Scottish peer with quite 
surprising assiduity. Just what there was in either Lady 
Sarah Pagley or her surroundings to attract a man like 
Charmington will always remain a mystery. Perhaps the 
jaded, invalid young man found something of the home 
atmosphere he had never known among these prosy folk; 
perhaps the blameless dulness of their lives was rather restful 
to him ; or it may be that he took refuge with them from 
Morland's incessant appeals for the money of which he himself 
was so sorely in need. It has been suggested that he paid 
court to Lady Sarah from mercenary motives, but to a man of 
his tastes and traditions her modest ;;^i5,ooo would have 
seemed a very trifling price to receive for the surrender of 
his liberty ; and if a rich marriage had been his object, there 
were wealthier maidens scattered along the Mediterranean 
shore, who would not have despised the suit of a marquis's 
only son. He himself explained his choice to a wondering 
friend by saying that she was the woman most unlike bis 
mother that he bad ever met, 



lo BELCHAMBER 

With mere carnal charms the Ladies Fagley were somewhat 
scantily equipped. They were both fairly well-grown young 
women, healthy and vigorous ; Lady Sarah, as she was the ^ 

elder, was also slightly the taller of the two. Both wore \ 

their smooth brown hair divided in the centre and brushed 
plainly down behind their ears, a fashion from which Sarah 
has never departed to this day. Both were badly dressed, 
and either, in whatever part of the world she was met, would 
unhesitatingly be pronounced to hail from the British Isles, 
by people who had never seen an Englishwoman before. 
Sarah was religious, Susan political, each following the bent 
of one parent, for Lord Firth had been a member of several 
Cabinets, and divided his time between nursing his gout 
and studying blue-books, whereas Lady Firth dosgd her 
body with quack mftHlifirif><^ fnH t^pr soul wi th evangel 

old lord had the ingratitude to prefer 
the^aiighter who reflected her mother's tastes. * They are 
both dour women to tackle, my daughters,' he would say; 
' but Sally 's not unkindly in matters where religion is not in 
question, whereas Susie has no bowels, none at all.' Lady 
Susan was a great talker, and loved argument for its own 
sake; but Lady Sarah was reserved, silent, and really very 
shy for all the grimness of her aspect. If it did not seem 
profane to think of beauty in connection with either of them, 
who considered it so little, I should say that Susan was 
the prettier of the two, having a better complexion than her 
sister, and hair of a brighter, redder shade of brown. 

There never were two girls more predestined by nature for 
old maids, or better fitted to meet the cold world single- 
handed; and yet they both married, and married what is 
called ' well,' while many of their fairer and more eager sisters 
were left ungathered on the stem. Susan was led to the altar 
by a West Country baronet and M.P., Sir Charles Trafford, 
while Sarah, to every one's surprise, became in due time 
Lady Charmington. If it will remain a puzzle what drew her 
husband to her, it is still more insoluble what attraction she 
fouad in him. Old Lady Firth, for all her piety and her 



BELCHAMBER ii 

sermons, was not above a little worldly gratification that her 
plain elder daughter at sevenrand-twenty should marry the heir 
to a marquisate and a historic house ; but I honestly think Lady 
Sarah was little swayed by these considerations. She may 
have felt a thrill at the thought of the power her position 
would one day put into her hands, but for its own sake she 
valued that position very lightly. Perhaps poor Char's 
weakness appealed to her strength, and his wretched state of 
health stirred that pity that was so carefully concealed in her 
proud heart. Perhaps her missionary zeal awoke at the 
thought of plucking from the fire a brand that was already 
little more than an ember. No doubt both these feelings 
worked for him, but I am inclined to think that his most 
potent advocate was the fact that he was the first man who 
had ever made love to her. No woman hears those magic 
accents for the first time unmoved, and if she has reached 
Lady Sarah's age without the faintest breath from the wing of 
Romance^ the effect of them is not thereby lessened. Be 
that as it may, this sick dissipated boy, who was three years 
her junior, and whose past life had been made up of every- 
thing of which she most disapproved, succeeded where a 
better man might have been very likely to fail, and they were 
married with great splendour during the ensuing season in 
London, the occasion being one of the few on which her 
husband's parents were ever seen together in public. Lord 
Firth and his son. Lord Corstorphine, looked very sulky at the 
wedding, but Lady Firth was all tears and benedictions, and 
old Belchamber, after much champagne at the breakfast, 
became quite maudlin over the consideration of his son's 
respectable connections. ' It '11 be the making of Char,' he 
hiccoughed into the ear of the sympathetic Lady Firth. * Ah, 
if I 'd had such a chance, now ! if I 'd married a different kind 

of woman, she might have done anything with me ' The 

lady with whom he had just been celebrating his silver 
wedding was radiant in sky-blue silk and white lace fiounces 
and a Paris bonnet all Marabout feathers and humming-birds. 
' I don't envy Char,' she wrote to her daughter, who did not 



^h^fc^^ia ^^^^ ^ ^M^^ — ■ il^TiM^ ■ ■ ^ . •-. _> -n«a- 4. % — ft_^- . 



12 BELCHAMBER 

come over for the wedding. ' Dieu I what people those 
Firths ! Heureusement^ they won't want to see much of me,^ 

Very likely Lord Belchamber was right, and Sarah might 
have made something out of the unlikely material she had 
taken in hand. Her influence over Charmington was enor- 
mous, and he both loved and feared her. She nursed him, 
ruled him, and generally watched over him, protecting him 
alike from the scorn of her kinsfolk and the bad influence of 
his own ; she rigorously kept both wine and money from him, 
doling them out in infinitesimal doses. If she allowed no 
questioning of her authority, she accomplished the miracle of 
awakening some glimmerings of self-respect in him, and she 
bolstered up his shattered constitution so that he lived four 
years with her, during which she bore him two sons ; but his 
lungs were too seriously affected for the imperfect science of 
the sixties to heal, and in spite of all her care he did not live 
to be thirty, dying, as has already been said, while that 
elderly Adonis, his father, was still figuratively wearing the 
family coronet 



CHAPTER II 



The world is like a huge theatrical company in which half 
the actors and actresses have been cast for the wrong parts. 
There are heavy fathers who ought to be playing the lover, 
and young men on whose downy chins one seems to see the 
spectre of the grey beard that would be suitable to their 
natures. Perhaps the hardest case is theirs who by their sex 
are called upon to ' have a swaggering and martial outside,' 
'a gallant curtle-axe upon their thigh,' and yet, like Rosalind 
in her boy's dress, start and turn faint at the sight of blood. 
The right to be a coward is one of the dearest prerogatives of 
woman. No man may be one with impunity, and it is pre- 

j cisely the women who are the first to despise him if he be. 

/ Those who are born with the gift of personal courage (and 
they are happily the greater number) have no adequate idea 
of their blessing. To be in harmony with one's environment, 
to like the things one ought to like — that surely is the supreme 
good. If that be so, then few people have come into the 
arena of life less suitably equipped for the part they had to 
play than the subject of this history. 

Charles Edwin William Augustus Chambers, Marquis and 
Earl of Belchamber, Viscount Charmington, and Baron St. 
Edmunds and Chambers, for all his imposing list of names 
and titles started in life without that crowning gift — ^wanting 
which all effort is paralysed — a good conceit of himself. And 
in fact, except for the gewgaw of his rank, which sat on him 
as uneasily as a suit of his ancestral armour, he had not much 
that would win him consideration from the people among 
whom his lot was cast. From his father he inherited his 
feeble constitution, his irresolution and want of moral courage^ 

18 



■■ ■ ■ 



14 BELCHAMBER 

from his mother her sallow complexion and lack of charm, 
her reserve and shyness, and the rigid conscience which a 
long line of Covenanting ancestors had passed down to her, 
and which in him, who had none of their counterbalancing 
force of character, tended always to become morbid. In his 
babyhood he had been called Lord St. Edmunds, as was 
the custom in the family for the eldest son's eldest son ; his 
father in half derisive affection had abbreviated the title into 
'Sainty,' and Sainty he always continued to be to all who 
were intimate enough and to many who were not. He was 
only three when his father died, and his baby brother, Arthur, 
was not yet two. Even in those early days the contrast was 
strongly marked between the brothers. Sainty was a pale 
nervous child who cried if spoken to suddenly, while Arthur 
was as fine a pink and white fat baby as you could see in 
a picture-book, who crowed and gurgled and clapped his 
hands and liked his bath and took kindly to his food, so that 
the nurses adored him. When he had a stomach-ache or was 
thwarted in his wishes he roared lustily for a minute or two 
and then returned to his usual placidity, whereas poor Sainty 
if anything ' put him out,' as his nurse would say, whined 
and fretted, and kept up a little sad bleating cry for hours. 

He could not remember his father, but with the help of the 
large coloured portrait in uniform that stood on a gilt easel in 
the corner of his mother's room he had built up for himself a 
shadowy heroic figure, strangely unlike poor Charmington, 
which in his imagination did duty for this departed parent. 
He never spoke of him to any one but Arthur, but to him he 
talked with such conviction of 'Papa,' that the child, not 
very attentive and perhaps not greatly interested, gathered an 
impression that the elder boy was drawing on his memory for 
his facts, and indeed he almost thought so himself, until one 
day Lady Charmington, hearing some such talk between the 
two, sharply rebuked poor Sainty for telling falsehoods to his 
little brother. His earliest impression of his mother was in 
her black dress with the gleaming white on head and throat 
and wrists, a dress that lent a dignity to Lady Charmington'i 



BELCHAMBER 15 

somewhat commonplace figure. When she left off her cap, it 
was of the nature of a blow to him. Though he could not 
have described his sensations, she seemed somehow discrowned 
with her sleek, bare head. 

Grandpapa's funeral was a different matter from these early 
fleeting impressions. That he remembered clearly, for he 
was seven when it happened, and had a little black suit of 
knickerbockers and black stockings and gloves, and led 
Arthur by the hand similarly attired. Every incident 
of that frightening, gloomy, yet strangely fascinating and 
exciting day, remained engraved in his recollection. He 
remembered the crowd in the churchyard, the murmur 
that greeted his own appearance, the staggering of the 
bearers under that long heavy burthen, the gloom of the 
church full of people in black, and the great yawning hole in 
the chancel pavement. What he did not grasp until very 
long afterwards, and then only most imperfectly and by 
degrees, was the difference the event of that day made in his 
own position ; but his mother realised it fully, and indeed it 
made much more difference to her than to the meek little 
boy accustomed from earliest infancy to swallow distasteful 
puddings and nauseous drugs at her command, and anxiously 
to examine his conscience, if some remnant of the old Adam 
ever led him to question her decrees. Henceforth Lady 
Charmington entered into her kingdom, and it must be 
confessed that on the whole she ruled it well and wisely, and 
entirely in the interests of her children. Almost the only 
sensible thing the old lord had ever done was to appoint 
her and her brother the guardians of his grandchildren, and 
under the careful management of his daughter-in-law, aided 
by the wise advice of Lord Corstorphine, the property was 
nursed through his grandson's long minority back to a 
tolerably healthy condition. 

As to Lady Belchamber, nothing would have bored her 
more than being cumbered in any way with the guardianship 
of her grandchildren. She carried off what her daughter-in- 
law declared to be a most ridiculously disproportionate 



x6 BELCHAMBER 

jointure, and the furniture of her private apartments, in which 
some valuable china and cabinets, that she had certainly not 
brought into the family, somehow found themselves included 
at the time of the move. She even showed a decided in- 
clination to keep the famous emeralds which, as Lady 
Charmington said, everybody knew were heirlooms; but 
these she was made to send back, by her second husband, 
the Duke of Sunborough, one of the oldest and most faith- 
ful of her admirers, whom she married just a year after her 
lord's death. On the other hand, she generously abandoned 
all claim to a damp and mouldy dower-house in which she 
had a right to reside for life, which, considering that the 
duke had a palace in London and five country seats, was 
very handsome of her. Three generations of gambling and 
extravagance leave their mark on the most imposing fortunes, 
and if the Belchamber estates did not come to the hammer, 
it was due to the action of the last person who might have 
been expected to save them, in marrying a hardheaded Scots- 
woman and dying before his father. To get the estate into 
order was Lady Charmington's prime object in life. To this 
end she inaugurated a rigid system of economy, and made 
a clean sweep of the heads of almost every department under 
the old rkgime^ toiling early and late to make herself mistress 
of many details of which she was ignorant; for this, she 
endured the dislike of the poor, whom she benefited in her 
own autocratic manner, and much hostile comment from 
her equals. She was rigidly just, and generous too in her 
own way ; only prodigality and waste she would not tolerate, 
nor look with a lenient eye on the small peculations which 
those who serve the great come to regard as quite within the 
pale of honesty. 

If the mother spared neither time nor labour that she 
might be able to hand over his property to her son free of 
encumbrances when he came of age, she was not less eager 
and indefatigable in her efforts to fit him for the position she 
was making for him ; and this task she found incomparably 
the harder of the two. It was not that he was naughty or 



BELCHAMBER 17 

insubordinate. A meeker, more obedient child did not live. 
The difficulty was far more intangible ; it is easier to drive 
a slightly pulling horse in crowded thoroughfares than one 
with so light a mouth that he never will go properly up to 
his bit ; and Lady Charmington had not the blessed gift of 
light hands in conducting the education of a child, whatever 
she might have on horseback. As a girl she had ridden a 
good deali and even hunted ; and though she gave that up 
after her marriage, she still found it possible to keep a more 
effectual eye on all comers of the huge estate from her square 
seat on the back of a substantial cob than from any other 
coign of vantage. No farmer ever rode more diligently and 
thoroughly about his fields ; and on these excursions it was 
her pleasure that the boys, and especially Sainty, should 
accompany her. Arthur had a natural seat, took to horses 
from the first, and wanted to gallop his pony and make him 
jump before the family coachman had thought fit to abandon 
the leading-rein. With poor Sainty it was far otherwise. He 
rode, as he ate rice pudding, because he was told to; but he 
was cold for an hour beforehand, and he sat his pony, as his 
mother remarked, like a sack of potatoes. The smallest 
thing unseated him; he was always rolling ignominiously 
off. 

On this and similar shortcomings, he received many 
admonitions from his mother and uncle, from which the 
chief impression he derived was a rooted bdief in the 
immense superiority of his younger brother. * At the worst 
there will always be Arthur.' When and under what circum- 
stances had he overheard that remade ? He never was quite 
sure that he had not formulated it for himself. Be that as it 
might, it early became the burthen to which his life set itself. 
Far from resenting the point of view, he drew from it a 
certain consolation under his abiding sense of his many 
imperfections. He was still quite a small boy when he 
decided that his rdle in life would be to die young, and make 
way for the younger brother who was so eminently fitted 
for the position that suited himself so ill ; and be found a 

6 



i8 BELCHAMBER 

certain gloomy satisfaction in settling the details of pathetic 
deathbed scenes. I fear an element in these imaginings 
which was not without attraction for him, was the thought 
of exhorting Arthur with his latest breath on matters in 
which his brother's conduct did not always square with his 
own more evangelical standard, such as a certain looseness of 
statement, and somewhat lax ideas of property. If Arthur 
could not find his own cap, or bat, or riding-whip (and his 
things were generally tossed about the great house, wherever 
he happened to be when he last used them), it was always 
less trouble to take Sainty's, which were sure to be in the 
right place, than to go and look for his own. He also on 
occasion carried the juvenile habit of untruth rather further 
than mere thoughtlessness warranted ; but he told his stories 
with so open a countenance, and such a fearless gaze, that 
he was invariably believed, as against poor Sainty, whose 
knitted brow and downcast eyes, while he sought in his mind 
for th e_exact truth, had all the appearance of an effort after 
invention. * Arthur is very thoughtless and tiresome,' Lady 
Charmington would say, * but there *s one comfort about him, 
I can always depend on his telling me the truth if I ask him. 
I wish I could say the same for Sainty; I am sometimes 
afraid he is rather sly. I try not to be hard on him, for he is 
timid, and I don't want to frighten him into telling untruths ; 
but I do wish he was a little more straightforward, and would 
look one in the face when he talks.' 

Many such hints, all showing a like perspicacious insight 
into the characters of her sons, were given by this con- 
scientious lady to the governess she had engaged to assist 
her in moulding their dispositions. Alice Meakins was the 
. ll i r I f f tor of Gioat C ttafriiington, and had the 
prime recommendation in her employer's eyes of being her 
humble slave and completely under her orders. Had she 
been a little less in awe of Lady Charmington, and less 
impressed with the enormity of differing from her, she might 
perhaps have enlightened her on many matters concerning 
the little boys. Her mild rule, while it galled his more 



BELCHAMBER 



19 



spirited brother, sat very lightly on Sainty, who worshipped 
the governess as the most talented and accomplished of 
mortals. *But I like her, I'm fond of her; I don't want to 
do what she tells me not,' he pleaded to the indignant Arthur, 
as usual incensed by his brother's want of pluck, in refusing 
to join in some plot against the authority of their instructress. 
'Hp, ho, Miss Moddlecoddle, you can't ride, you've got no 
seat and no hands ; Bell said so. You 're jolly bad at games, 
and you like to sit and suck up to an old governess, and^jiflu^ 
nee dlework with her, like a beastly girl. V m a man, and I 
shaJfTt do what she tells me. What businesTE'as she to order 
me about ? she is only a servant like the others.' 

Sainty was shocked. 'O Arthur! you do say horrid 
things,' he said. It was true that he did like sitting with the 
gentle Meakins, and acquiring the modest arts of which she 
was the mistress. She had many little manual dexterities such 
as governesses impart to children, whereby the world is filled 
with innocent horrors, kettleholders in cross-stitch, penwipers 
faintly resembling old women with cloth cloaks and petticoats, 
and little black seeds for faces, and book-markers in the 
shape of crosses with many steps, plaited of strips of gilt and 
coloured paper. In all these manufactures Sainty soon be- 
came proficient. He also illuminated texts, ' Be thou faithful 
unto death,' and 'The greatest of these is Charity,' which 
were presented to Lady Charmington on her birthday. On 
the subject of the texts and the little plaited crosses Lady 
Charmington had a word to say to Miss Meakins in private, 
as being rather too papistical in tendency ; but she was not 
displeased with the simple presents, on the whole, until her 
anxious maternal eye was led to detect the danger that might 
m cross -stitch by some petulant remarks of Arthur's, 
who wanted Sainty to come out and play Red Indians in the 
long shrubbery. *Muvver,' he cried, bursting into the 
boudoir, where his mother was busy with some farm accounts, 
'isn't Sainty howid? He won't come out, though he's done 
his lessons, 'cos he will stick in and do beastly woolwork.' 
One of Arthur's many charms was a babyish imperfection of 



I 



BELCHAMBER 




% 



speech. He nevj 
quite grown up. 

* What is it he's doing?' asked Lady Charmington. 
Y Oh^ hrastly nrj^nlTrnrlr ; he 's got two-fwee fings he 's 
mVkin', and he likes to sit like a girl, instead of coming out 
anU playing.' 

A shade of annoyance crossed the mother's face. ' I wish 
you wouldn't use such words as " beastly," Arthur,' she said 
severely, but the severity was really addressed to the absent 
first-born and ^ ^ f i fffimi^^^y 'gf hir i tiit r i; nn d the school- 
room was presently visited by the mistress of the house, and 
Sainty duly turned out to distasteful recreation. When he 
had gone forth to be scalped by the fraternal savage, his 
mother turned to the instructress. 'I think, Alice,' she 
said, holding up the offending kettleholder, ' that it is a pity, 
on the whole, to teach Sainty to work ; he's quite sufficiently 
effeminate by nature, without having that side of him 
encouraged. I will speak to him about it. I shall tell him 
I don't approve of his working ; it 's not manly.' She was 
surprised, when she carried out this intention, by meeting 
with passionate tears and protestations. 

' O mother, I love my work ; it 's the only thing I do 
enjoy, except botany, and reading, and some lessons (not 
'rithmetic or spelling) ; and I have to do so many things I 
don't like, cricket and riding, and — and — all the dreadful 
things that men and gentlemen have to do,' the little boy 
concluded, quoting a formula frequently used for his en- 
couragement. 

Though not habitually distrustful of her own judgment, no- 
thing so confirmed Lady Charmington in a view she adopted 
as any opposition to it ; and the kettleholders became taboo 
from that day forward. Poor Sainty's confession of dislike 
for the manlier sports that, as he said, were considered a 
necessary part of the education of a gentleman, was perhaps 
the most unfortunate argument he could have chosen, for it 
naturally convinced his mother that the mischief lay deeper 
than she supposed, and suggested to her the advisability of 



BELCHAMBER 41 

transferring the boys from petticoat government altogether; 
that is, of course, as far as the subordinate powers were con- 
cerned. The particular petticoat that typified her own sway 
remained in undisturbed possession of the throne in all her 
plans for the future. 

'I think the boys are getting too much for poor Miss 
Meakins/ she said to her brother, on his next visit. ' She is 
an excellent girl, though a little inclined to be high church ; 
but they ought to be unoer a mani'Tieel sure.* ' "^ 

* Don't tell me that Sainty is becoming insubordinate? ' said 
Lord Corstorphine. 

' No ; but Arthur hasn't the smallest respect for her. With 
Sainty the danger is of a different kind ; he is perhaps too 
fond of women's society.' 

'Not a precocious passion for the governess! I can't 
believe that.' 

Lady Charmington looked resigned. 'I don't deny, 
Corstorphine,' she said, 'that you have been a great help to 
me in the management of my fatherless boys ; that is why I 
am consulting you on the present occasion. But it is no help 
to be flippant and funny. What I mean is that Sainty is quite 
sufficiently inclined by nature to be a milksop, without living 



perpetually with women, and adopting their ways. He likes 
better than any game to sit indoors with Miss Meakins on 
fine days, and do^ 

* Have him out, Sarah, by all means,' returned her brother. 
' I can't help being a little pleased at his liking reading. A 
Chambers who occasionally opens a book, and is tolerably 
well behaved, will be an agreeable variation of the type. But 
it 's bad his not wanting to be out, and playing games ; it 

ijtnatural.' 

Lord Corstorphine felt that he was as near normal as it 
was possible to be, without becoming commonplace, and that 
those whose tastes differed widely from his own must always 
be more or less blamably eccentric. Still his greater com- 
merce with the world had given him a wider toleration than 
either of his sisters, who had been known to call him a 



ft2 BELCHAMBER 

Laodicean, and Sarah once went so far as to draw a parallel 
between her brother and Gallio. But though she affected to 
be shocked at the looseness of his views, his known modera- 
tion made her lean the more confidently on his judgment 
The knowledge that her opinion was backed by one whom 
the world praised for common - sense, gave a pleasing 
security that her own noble zeal was not hurrying her into 
extremes. It was invariably she who initiated every change 
in the education of her sons. But, though it may be doubted 
how she would have borne opposition from her fellow- 
auardian, his agreement was always a comfort to her. 
/ So Alice Meakins, with he r little crosse s and penwipers, 
/returned to the paternal rectory,^witB' ThV highest testi- 
/monials from her dear Lady Charmington, to look out for 
/ another situation. 

I Poor Sainty could not be comforted. To be sure, no one 
tried much to comfort him. For the first time he felt a 
rebellious bitterness towards his mother. Though he could 
imagine nothing so dashing as active disobedience, he 
cherished a dark determination to be very cold and reserved 
^towards the new tutor, with the natural result that Miss 

/ Meakins's successor, a youth fresh from Oxford, and also of 

I the children of the clergy, conceived a great liking for Arthur, 

I and favoured him prodigiously. 

^ This young man, who had been selected mainly for his 
reputation as a cricketer, left Lady Charmington nothing to 
desire in the matter of sport, and was quite ready to ride any 
horse in her limited stable ; nor need she fed anxiety as to 
his holding extreme views in religious matters. It is true he 
attended family prayers with exemplary punctuality, and 
accompanied his charges to service twice on Sundays; but 
she could detect no sign of the interest in matters ecclesias- 
tical which she looked for in a son of the' Church, and his 
waistcoats and riding-boots had a decidedly worldly air. 

Under Mr. Kirkpatrick, Sainty early proved the cynical 
dictum that life were endurable but for its pleasures, the hated 
pastimes, in which his sex and position in life inexorably 



BELCHAMBER 23 

demanded that he should find enjoyment. He stood like a 
martyr at the stake, to be bowled at with the Englishman's 
fetish, fr>iq» ^^'^'blr ^ig^ ^ g^^'^ L>aiiw>r which he knew he 
should not hit, but which not infrequently hit him ; and he 
would unhesitatingly have indorsed Mr. Pinchbold's remark 
that ' the horse was a fearful animal.' He was so painstaking, 
however, and anxious to do what was expected of him, that 
he might possibly have attained in time to some sort of pro- 
ficiency in these alien arts, had his efibrts been greeted with 
a little more encouragement, and a little less ridicule ; but 
the race is not yet extinct of those who hold that the best 
way to teach a child to swim is to throw him into the 
water. 

Meanwhile a new terror arose on Sainty's horizon. When 
Mr. Kirkpatrick had been at Belchamber eighteen months, 
he one day intimated to Lady Charmington that he had been 
offered a mastership in a public school, and could not afford 
to remain much longer with his pupils. It was therefore 
suggested that, as they were both p reg^"<-^Y t" C^ *^ T7>/mt^ a *x 

few years at a private school would not be undesirable as a 
preparation. Even Arthur was a little daunted at the pro- 
spect, while rather fascinated by it ; but to Sainty it loomed 
black as the final end of all brightness, closing in the vista of 
his life and blotting out the sun. It seemed to him that each 
step in the via dolorosa of his existence was fated to be more 
awful than the last. When his beloved Miss Meakins had 
been replaced by the hated Kirkpatrick, he thought to have 
tasted the dregs of bitterness ; but now a new prospect had 
come to make life in the familiar places that he loved with a 
catlike fidelity appear the one thing desirable, even shadowed 
by the tutor and his cricket-ball. I suppose it seemed a 
hard thing to our first parents when the Serpent was intro- 
duced into Eden ; but life in Paradise, even with a snake in 
the garden, was a very different thing from the flaming 
sword that drove them out into an unknown world of work 
and briars. Sainty said little to earthly ears, but he prayed 
nightly with intense fervour that he might die before the day 



24 BELCHAMBER 

came to go to school, which seemed the only escape to his 
poor little hunted mind. 

But there was another way, which, if he could have foreseen 
it, would have taxed his courage with a far more genuine 
fright than that vague abstraction, death, for which we all cry 
aloud so readily in our youth when things do not go as we 
wish. Arthur went to school alone when the time arrived, 
and this was how it came about. 

It was a beautiful day at the end of March. Mr. Kirk- 
Patrick was to leave at Easter, and the dreaded exodus was 
only a month away. It was a late spring, and the snow still 
lay on the north side of the hedgerows. But it had rained in 
the night, and there was that indefinable sense of spring 
in the air that sometimes comes quite suddenly. The 
primroses were beginning to gem the coppices, the birds to 
sing late in the long twihghts. Daffodils waved in the fields 
where the young lambs were bleating. 

'What are you and the boys going to do this after- 
noon, Mr. Kirkpatrick?' asked Lady Charmington at 
lunch. 

The tutor looked inquiringly at the boys. ' I '11 do what- 
ever they wish, Lady Charmington. What should you like?' 
he asked of Sainty. 

* I should like to go to One-tree Wood, and get primroses/ 
Sainty answered, after the usual slight struggle that it always 
cost him to express a wish or an opinion. 

* Get Gwanmuvvers I ' burst in Arthur. * Bovver pwim- 
woses ; you don't care about 'em, do you, Mr. Kirkpatrick ? 
I want to wide ; Bell says the gwound's in quite good order 
to-day, after the wain. We 've hardly widden at all lately, 'cos 
it's been so hard.' 

As usual, Arthur had his way, and poor Sainty was con- 
demned to ride. Generally he gained confidence when he 
had been out a little while, but to-day somehow everything 
went wrong. He began by rolling ofi* at the hall door, because 
his stirrups were too long, and the pony moved on unex- 
pectedly while they were being taken up. He was much 



BBLCHAMBER ds 

chaffed for this misadventure by his companions, and he did 
not like chaff. Then the pony was fresh and inclined to shy, 
after the inaction of the long frost, so that he had a bad time 
of it altogether; but he managed to stick on somehow until 
they were on their way home. 

They had been round by Little Charmington, and their 
way lay through one of the high woods. When they came to 
the gate that led into the park, they found it locked. 

'I never knew this gate locked before,' said Elirkpatrick, 
pulling feebly at it with his whip. * I don't suppose either 
of you have got the key by any chance ? ' 

'Jaggins must have locked it. He's got some young 
pheasants further up the wood,' said Arthur ; ' he told me so.* 

' I suppose we must go back,' said Kirkpatrick, ' but it 's 
an awful long way round. We shall be late for tea, which your 
mother doesn't like, and you 've got some more work to do 
afterwards. There's a gap in the hedge a little way along 
here,' he added more hopefully. 'I suppose you couldn't 
jump the ditch ? It would save us a good two miles, and it 's 
really nothing of a jump.' 

' Of course we can jump the ditch. Hurray ! what ftm ! ' 
cried Arthur, and without more words he wheeled his pony, 
put him at the gap, and the next moment was careering 
about on the turf beyond, in a great state of excitement and 
jubilation. 

' You see, it 's quite easy,' the tutor said, turning to Sainty, 
whose pony was already beginning to fidget, excited by the 
trampling about on snapping twigs and the rush past of the 
other. Sainty was very white. 

'You know I can't jump, Mr. Kirkpatrick,' he said, 
gulping tears. ' I 'm sure to fall off if I try ; I always do.' 

'Not you,' the young man replied encouragingly. 'You 
see your little brother has done it I should be ashamed to 
have him ride so much better than me, if I were you/ The 
poor man was rather in a fix, with one pupil already across 
the obstacle and the other resolutely declining to follow. 

' See,' he said, ' I '11 give you a lead. It 's as easy as easy ; 



26 BELCHAMBER 

youVe only to sit well back, and give him his head/ 
And so saying, he put his horse at the gap, and followed 
Arthur into the park. * Come on,' he called. 

* Jump, Sainty, jump,' piped Arthur. ' I wouldn't be such 
a funk.' 

Whether Sainty would ever have found the courage to 
attempt the jump is doubtful, if the pony at this stage of the 
proceedings had not decided matters by bolting at the gap. 
But bothered and bewildered by the tugging of his rider's 
despairing hands, he swerved just at the jump, and, slipping 
on the trodden earth where Kirkpatrick's horse had taken off, 
he came to the ground ; then struggling to his feet, galloped 
off through the wood by the road they had come. 

The young man was horror-stricken when he saw the 
accident ; he was off his horse, and by the side of the fallen 
boy in a second. Sainty was unconscious, that was all he 
could tell. 

*Now, Arthur,' he cried to the younger boy, who was 
beginning to tremble and cry, ' this is the moment to show 
the stuff you 're made of. I must stay here with Sainty, but 
you must get home across the park as hard as you can go, so 
as to tell your mother what's happened, and save her the 
shock of seeing Donald come home without his rider. And 
then send people here to carry Sainty in ; he may be more 
hurt than we think.' 

Arthur waited for no more, but galloped off in the direction 
of the house, glad to have something definite to do, instead 
of staring at poor Sainty. 

Lady Charmington had come home sooner than she 
expected, and was taking off her hat, when she saw Arthur 
come galloping across the park alone. She looked with 
pride at the boy, thinking how well he sat his pony ; and 
she gave a little sigh at the half-formed thought that just 
crossed her mind, * What a pity he wasn't the elder ! ' The 
next minute her heart stood still; she had caught sight in the 
far distance of a speck, which as it drew nearer she recog- 
nised with sickening terror as Sainty's pony, riderless, and 



BELCHAMBER 2j 

with his saddle turned under his belly. 'Not that way, 
my God ! I did not mean tAat,' Was it possible that God 
was punishing her for her rebellious thought? could He have 
thought that she desired the death of her first-born ? And 
she prayed with all the intensity of her soul that whatever 
had happened her boy might not die. ' Maimed, crippled, 
or an idiot, if so it must be ; only let him live.' This was the 
cry of her heart, again and again repeated, as guided by the 
child, she stumbled across the park with the men who were 
to bring him home. Arthur could tell her little, except that 
Sainty had had a fall and was hurt. Perhaps even then her 
child was lying dead, while she was wishing in her sinful 
heart that his brother had his heritage. 

But Sainty was not dead, and did not die. The pony had 
kicked him in its struggles to rise, and he had fainted. 
There were long nights and days of pain to be borne, and he 
bore it as nervous people often do, who can stand anything 
but anticipation. 

At first he made sure that the death he had asked for had 
come to him, and even, one day, when he was a little better, 
attempted to bring off one of the beautiful scenes with 
Arthur, which he had so often rehearsed. But somehow it 
was not a great success. Arthur did not do his part at all 
nicely. He only sadd, * Oh ! bovver, dear old Sainty. You 
ain't going to die ; what 's ve good of jawing ? ' and went off 
to more congenial pursuits. 

Though his life was not in danger, Sainty's injury was a 
grave one; the hip was broken, and the great London 
surgeon who was called down, did not conceal from Lady 
Charmington that the boy would probably always be more 
or less lame. 

On one of his visits, Sainty astonished the great man not a 
little. 

'Sir John,' he said, 'I want you to tell me something. 
Shall I ever be able to walk and run again ? ' 

The famous surgeon had boys of his own, and his heart 
smote him at the pathetic question. ' Yes, my boy, yes,' he 




BELCHAMBER 

said; * certainly to walk. As to running, oh I well, you won't 
be very good at running, not for some time ; we mustn't go 
too fast, not too fast, you know. Walking comes first; we 
must get you on your legs first.' 

'But I shan't ever be able to play games, shall I ? not like 
other boys, I mean.' 

*0h! well, never 's a long word. I can't say, I'm sure. 
Not for a long while, I fear. But we never know, we never 
know ' 

'Well, at any rate, I shan't be able to ride, shall I?' per- 
sisted the patient 

Poor Sir John hated to extinguish hope ; but thus pushed 
into a corner, he admitted, ' Oh ! well, ride, you know — I 
don't know. I doubt if riding would be advisable. My poor 
little man, if you must know, I 'm afraid you mustn't count * 
on riding again.' 

To his surprise, the boy heaved a sigh of unmistakable 
relief. ' Ah I well, that 's a comfort, anyhow/ he said. 



CHAPTER III 

Probably nothing is less calculated to make a man feel at 
home in another's society than the knowledge that he owes 
him a debt which he cannot pay. Custom enables a 
number of people to support this awkwardness with tolerable 
equanimity, but I suspect that even the habitual debtor feels 
a certain nameless uneasiness under his equable shirtfront; 
while to a person whose boast has always been that directness 
of gaze celebrated in the Village Blacksmith, to have to look 
shiftily beforeTB5'"eye'~bf a creditor must be peculiarly 
galling. 

Something of this consciousness had become the daily 
burthen of poor Lady Charmington with regard to her first- 
born son. Certainly nothing was further from claiming 
damages than Sainty's attitude, for it never entered his head 
to hold his mother in any way responsible for his accident. 
But in the long weeks in which he lay so uncomplainingly 
bearing pain, and the inaction which to young creatures is 
worse than pain, she could not look at him without a very 
distinct twinge of remorse. She was even glad to see the 
once forbidden needlework cheating the weary hours of some 
of their dulness. Once when he thanked her for the with- 
drawal of the interdict on this pastime, her breath caught in 
her throat like a sob. 

* You must find the time very heavy,' she said, smoothing 
back the boy's hair with an unusually tender touch. 

'Oh no!' Sainty said, 'I don't* I can't help thinking 
what a good thing it was it happened to me and not to 
Arthur. Think how A^ would have hated it. I've never 
minded keeping quiet. And then it'll always be such a good 

S9 



30 BELCHAMBER 

excuse for not doing things. Before, when people said " Why 
can't he be like other boys?" there wasn't anything to say. 
Now you can say "Well, you see, poor boy, he's lame; he 
met with an accident." ' 

He delivered this piece of consolation quite seriously, and 
with no ironic intention, but it may be doubted if it cheered 
his mother as much as he intended. 

Poor Kirkpatrick, overwhelmed with remorse, had wished 
to give up his public school mastership and devote himself 
to Sainty's education, but the sacrifice had not been accepted. 
I^y Charmington, who, in spite of ber hard head, was 
not without some very feminine weaknesses, could not bear 
the sight of the young man who was incurably associated 
with the most awful hour of her life. 

In her compunction, she made an attempt at regaining the 
services of Miss Meakins, but the governess had without 
difficulty obtained a situation in the household of one of 
those gorgeously dressed little dark women who drive about 
the north side of Hyde Park in such well-appointed carriages. 
They are of Lancaster Gate to-day, but who knows if to- 
morrow they may not be giving laws to fashion from a palace 
in Park Lane? Miss Meakins, with the stamp of the aristo- 
cracy upon her, was quite an important person in this 
opulent Tybumian mansion and the beautiful villa at K.oe- 
bampton, with its velvet lawns and blazing parterres. 

'Tell us about the little marquis and his brother, and the 
big park at Belchamber, and the deer,' her little charges 
would ask of her, as they walked on Wimbledon Common. 
They had targe eyes, and beautiful gentle manners, and that 
look of ineSable worid-weariness that is common to the 
children of their race. Sainty would have been astonished 
to know what an object of interest he was to these other 
children. 

lust have been her uneasy desire for compensation that 
Lady Charmington give to a suggestion of her sister- 
that she and her 'fatherless boy' should pay Bel- 
er a visit, a very different reception from that which 



BELCHAMBER 31 

she would otherwise have accorded to it Lady Eva had 
lost the embarrassing Morland, and was inclined to returh 
to her native land and see what she could get out of her 
kinsfolk. She went first to her mother, who received her very 
graciously, and was really pleased to see her. Her daughter 
brought the duchess a whi£f of her beloved Paris, and enter- 
tained her immensely with anecdotes of a world quite unlike 
that in which she herself had formerly figured. The younger 
lady, finding her noble relatives in the Faubourg rather in- 
clined to cold-shoulder her, had gone in for being a sort of 
Muse, and surrounded herself with all the youngest and 
most modern of the new school of poets and painters. She 
wore indecent clothes, with a rope of turquoises round her 
waist, and lay on a white bearskin, smoking a narghile, while 
they recited their verses to her. They spoke of her as * la 
petite Morland ' and ' la belle Eve.' Her portrait by a young 
American of genius had been the great clou of the salon, 
she told her astonished step-father. 'It really was kpatant\ 
he painted me at full length on the sofa in straight per- 
spective, my feet away from you, and my head hanging over 
the end, so that my face looks out at you upside down. I 
have my turquoises in my teeth, and the whole is lit by 
Chinese lanterns. It is amazing de viritiy and will make his 
reputation.' 

* And what about yours ? ' asked the duke, who thought he 
was rather a wit. 

The duchess was much amused with this talk, and all went 
well, until she and her daughter happened unfortunately to fix 
their affections on the same young man, who was a good deal 
the junior of either, when a violent quarrel ensued, and Sun- 
borough House having become much too hot to hold her. 
Lady Eva was seized with a sentimental desire to ' show the 
home of her childhood to her boy,' and wrote intimating 
this wish to her sister-in-law. Lady Charmington knew very 
little of the lady, beyond the fact that she had made an 
unfortunate marriage and was now a widow with an only son. 
The early surroundings of this boy must have been deplor- 



32 BELCHAMBER 

able ; but while she trembled for the effect he might have 
upon her sons, she licked her lips at the thought of the 
influence she might be privileged to acquire over him. Lady 
Eva's cleverly insinuated hint that she did not find the 
atmosphere of her mother's house congenial, did much to 
open the doors of Belchamber to her ; but perhaps her best 
ally was the thought that his cousin might be a companion 
to Sainty during Arthur's absence. Sainty at least was not 
likely to get any harm from unfortunate lads who had been 
brought up in an atmosphere of papistry or atheism — the 
two words meant much the same to Lady Charmington — 
and then who could tell what they might be able to do for 
him\ 

Claude Morland was between two and three years older than 
Sainty and extraordinarily grown up for his age. He was a 
handsome boy, but of quite a different type of beauty from 
Arthur, who had the fair curls and florid complexion of the 
Chambers family, whereas Claude had inherited his colourless 
white skin, thick, straight black hair, and large dreamy eyes 
from his French ancestors. He was not unlike what his 
grandmother had been as a girl, but with a certain heaviness 
of make and feature that came from his lamented father, 
and might easily become coarseness as he grew older. He 
seemed to Sainty like some strongly scented hothouse flower, 
white with a whiteness in which there was no purity, and 
sweet with a strong sweetness that already suggested some 
subtle hint of decay. As the flowers which his cousin 
recalled to him were among the things he did not like, his 
first feeling towards him had been one of vague repulsion ; but 
to a naturally shy and silent person, any one with Claude's 
ready flow of talk and perfect self-possession must prove 
attractive in the long-run. Then Claude had charming 
manners when he chose. To Sainty, accustomed to Arthur's 
scornful affection and undisguised contempt, the little atten- 
tions and deferential politeness of this older boy were 
bewildering, but strangely pleasant. Claude's smile was a 
caress, the grasp of his hand an embrace ; in later years a 



BELCHAMBER 33 

lady once said of him that she always felt as if he had said 
something she ought to resent when he asked her how she did. 
But at thirteen this latent sensuality only made him like 
some charming feline creature that liked to be stroked and 
well fed, to lie in the sun and purr. A boy who spoke French 
as easily as English, and German and Italian a little, and 
read mysterious foreign books for pleasure, could not fail to 
be impressive to a small home-grown cousin ; while the dis- 
covery that this gifted creature had never played cricket in 
his life, and, though an excellent rider, had not the smallest 
wish to hunt, made him at once sympathetic and puzzling. 

* Uncle Cor hunts,' Sainty said, ' and Arthur is dying to, 
as soon as ever he is allowed. / can't, of course ; but then 
I shall never ride any more. But all the men I know hunt — 
our neighbours Mr. Hawley at Hawley Park and Sir Watkin 
Potkin at the Grange, and everybody, even the farmers, when 
they can afford to. I thought all men who rode wanted to 
hunt as a matter of course.' 

*Well, / don't want to,' Claude answered. 'I like riding, 
and the manige^ and all that ; a gentleman should of course 
be a good horseman. But to get up early, and gallop all day 
across country after a wretched little vermin, merely cela ne 
me dit rien.^ 

* Ah I you 're sorry for the poor fox ; I 'm glad of that,' said 
Sainty. * I can't help feeling it 's cruel. I think of all it 
must feel when it hears the dogs getting nearer, and knows it is 
out of breath and can't run much farther. And yet very good 
men hu^t, even clergymen. None of our own clergy, because 
mother doesn't approve of it ; but some of those from the 
other side of the county, who, I believe, are quite good men. 
I asked Uncle Cor, who is very kind to animals, about it, 
but he said if it were not for hunting, the foxes would all 
have been exterminated long ago, and he didn't suppose 
they 'd have liked that any better.' 

'There is certainly something in that,' replied his cousin 
gravely ; ' but I 'm afraid I wasn't considering the matter from 
the fox's point of view. I hate getting tired, and wet, and 

c 



34 BELCHAMBER 

muddy, and to kill a wietcbed little yellow animal doesnt 
seem worth so much fuss and trouble. P'iaili touf. In 
France, if the foxes eat the poultry, they shoot them ; it is 
much more simple.' 

' Then what do you like to do in the way of exercise and 
games and that?' asked Sainty. 

' I like the lawn tennis fairly well,' said Claude. ' It is not 
such a good game as the real tennis, the^>w depoMme, I have 
played that a little, but not muchj it was too expensive; but 
lawn tennis is very well. That, and riding, and fencing have 
been my principal amusements. But we have moved about 
so much ; my mother is very restless. We have never stayed 
anywhere long enough for me to settle down and really ^e 
to anything seriously.' 

'And cricket?' asked Sainty, almost under his breath; 
■ ' have you never played cricket ? ' 

'MonDieul no. A game that takes three days to play I 
Those stupid stepsons of grandmamma took me to see a 
match at — what do you call it? — "Lord's," when I was in 
London. It went oo all day, and nothing happened. I 
yawned myself hoarse. I can never do anything for more 
than two hours at a time.' 

Here was some one who was not apologetic or ashamed 
that he could not play cricket, who spoke of it even with 
contempt, as of a pastime for fools. Stunty was dumb- 
foundered. He wondered what Arthur would say to such 
heresy. What Arthur did say when presently he came home^ 
was that his cousin was a 'bounder,' and 'like a beastly 
foreigner.' It was a curious fact that though Claude acquired 
a considerable influence for harm over Arthur, the latter 
always continued to speak slightingly of him, and never 
really liked him ; whereas Sainty, who was not influenced by 
him in the least, and after the first discoveries of superficial 
ement, found that they differed essentially in their views 
Llmost every subject, cherished a sneaking regard for his 
;in, which died hard even when Claude bad done his best 
ill it Arthur's mind could accept nothing that was not 



BBLCHAMBBR 35 

traditional; and this surprising outcome of shady foreign 
watering-places and Parisian ateliers lay altogether outside of 
his traditions. 

Their aunt was as much of a surprise to the boys as their 
cousin. Lady Eva modified herself considerably, with a view 
to conciliating her pious sister-in-law ; but in spite of extra 
tuckers, the first sight of her when dressed for dinner was a 
severe shock to Sainty, accustomed to the modest dicolletages 
of the neighbouring clergywomen who dined from time to 
time with Lady Charmington, and the little square of his 
mother's neck, which barely accommodated the large oblong 
locket of black enamel, like a baby's coffin, with which she 
decorated herself for these festive occasions. 

Luckily for Lady Eva, Lady Charmington was not of the 
intimate order of women, and never invaded a guest's bed- 
room, or she might have been a little scandalised by the tone 
of some of the literature she found there; but she would pro- 
bably have been still more bewildered, as she had kept up 
scarcely a bowing acquaintance with even ordinary French. 
' I have read Madame Craven's Eicit tune Scsur,^ she said, 
^but I read few novels in any language; it does not seem 
to me very profitable. I was once recommended Feuillet's 
Histaire de Sibylle as quite unobjectionable, but I found it 
very papistical. It did me no harm, but I shouldn't have 
given it to any young person to read in whom I was 
interested.' 

M don't remember to have read either of the romans you 
mention,' said her sister-in-law wearily. 

The two women found it increasingly difficult to talk to 
each other; neither of them seemed to take the faintest 
interest in anything which occupied the other. Lady Eva 
dwelt much on the disadvantages of her bringing-up, finding 
that a subject on which her hostess was much inclined to be 
sympathetic, and also on her maternal anxieties about her 
boy's future. She and Claude laughed a great deal at the 
good lady behind her back, and smoked a great many 
cigarettes together in the long shrubbery, when Sainty was 



35 BELCHAMBER 

having his daSy drive, and Lady Charmington was busy about 
her farms. Arthur caught them at it one day, but was bribed 
to silence by being lured into participation in the crime. 

* Tell me, Eva,' said Lady Charmington, when the ladies 
were sitting alone together, 'you are not, I trust, a Catholic, 
are you?' 

*No; oh no!* answered her sister-in-law, with perf^t 
truth ; though she might have added that she had at one time 
been a very devout one, and had since tried several other 
atUeSf of which the last had been some queer Parisian form 
of esoteric Buddhism. ' Oh no ! I have seen too much of 
Romanism ; I have lived abroad too much.' 

Lady Charmingtoii was delighted. ' I have no doubt they 
tried to pervert you,' she said, fairly beaming on this martyr 
to the faith. 

'Tried ! ' repeated Lady Eva with an eloquent gesture. 

*And your boy?' continued Lady Charmington. *He 
must have been much exposed in those countries. I trust 
you have managed to keep his faith untouched ? ' 

* I have done my best,' said Lady Eva meekly. * Poor boy! 
he has had to knock about the world very young, and to see 
and hear much that he should not. I have felt that he had 
only his poor weak mother to stand between him and — and 
— ^well — all sorts of things. He has not had the advantages 
of your dear boys, Sarah — a good home, and peaceful, virtuous 
surroundings, nor such a good mother, I'm afraid.' And 
Lady Eva cast down her fine eyes, on the lids of which she 
had not been able to deny herself a faint tinge of blue, on 
learning that Lord Corstorphine was expected, though she 
had been trying not to paint at Belchamber. 'You know 
how my own youth was neglected,' she added presently. 
' But I had rather not talk of that After all, the duchess is 
my mother, and in her own way has meant to be kind to me, 
I think. Only, I have dreamt of something very different for 
my Claude. Such influences as he finds here are exactly what 
I have wished for him, and what I have all too seldom been 
able to give him.' 



BELCHAMBER 37 

•Well, now we have got him here, we must try and keep 
him, and see what we can do for him,' said Lady Charmington, 
much gratified. * Have you thought at all what you are going 
to do with him ? You are not going back to France? ' 

'Oh no 1 I want to stay in England — at home^\ and Lady 
Eva gazed tenderly at her surroundings in a manner which 
hinted plainly that an invitation to consider Belchamber in 
that light might not be unwelcome. Lady Charmington, 
however, was in no hurry to give it, but she debated in her 
own mind many plans for the benefit of her nephew. She 
got but little encouragement from her brother, who by no 
means seemed inclined to take a friendly view of these 
interlopers. 

'That's a horrible woman,' he remarked, with brutal frank- 
ness of the * belle Morland'; 'and just the sort I should 
have thought you would have hated, Sarah.' 

*I can't honestly say I exactly like her. Cor,' his sister 
answered ; * but I 'm sorry for her and for the boy. Think of 
her deplorable bringing-up; think what a mother she has 
had, and what a husband ! The poor body seems to have 
some glimmerings of a desire for better things, if she had any 
one to take her by the hand; and I must say it's to her 
credit to have kept by her faith, exposed as she has been to 
the darts of the enemy. But what touches me most about her 
is that she evidently wants to do well by her boy. She 's not 
a bad mother, whatever else she may be; and, after all, she's 
poor Char's sister, you know.' 

Lady Charmington very seldom delivered herself of so 
long a speech, and still more rarely made any allusion to her 
dead husband. Corstorphine was surprised and touched. 
Perhaps some likeness to her brother in Lady Eva, some 
trick of speech, or expression that recalled him, had gone to 
the not very accessible heart of her sister-in-law, and rein- 
forced the adroit flattery which had been offered to her pet 
prejudices. Perhaps mother's heart really spoke to mother's 
heart in some language he did not understand ; the woman, 
with all her faults, might have a genuine wish to do the best 



^8 fiELCHAMBBIt 

for her brat. He could have checked his sister's nascent 
inclination to befriend her husband's kinsfolk with a word, 
but it seemed an ungracious task. After all, Sarah was not 
too often in a melting mood, and if she could do something 
for this wretched lad, whose best chance was that he was 
fatherless, why should he seek to restrain her ? 

* I don't like the boy either,' he couldn't help saying; 'he's 
a deal too smooth and civil spoken. He 's no business to have 
such finished manners at thirteen, and be such an accom- 
plished little man of the world. But if you think you can do 
anything to prevent his turning out such a blackguard as hia 
deceased parent, pray do ; it 's a Christian act All I say is, 
consider whether he is likely to harm your own boys in any 
way. 

* I 've thought very much of that. Do you suppose it wasn't 
my first thought ? ' his sister answered. ' But one mustn't let 
anxiety for one's own stand in the way of snatching a brand 
from the burning. Something tells me this boy has not been 
sent here for nothing.' 

'Well,' said Corstorphine, 'and what particular form of 
charity do you think he was sent for ? ' 

Lady Charmington ignored the scoff. 'I was thinking 
whether I mightn't offer to send him to Eton, if he could be 
got in,' she said; 'he won't be fourteen till November. I 
know his mother can't afford it. Then he is very gentle with 
Sainty, and the child seems to like him; and I thought if 
later on Sir John thought Sainty could go to Eton, it might be 
a help to him to have a cousin who had been there a year or 
two, and could look after him a little. He can never be quite 
like other boys, you know.' 

Corstorphine smiled grimly. It tickled his not unkindly 
cynicism to find his pious sister had so human a thought for 
her own offspring nestled under her zeal for her nephew's 
soul. 

'Well, I agree,' he said, 'that the best chance the youth 
can have is to see as little as possible of his mother and 
grandmother. Perhaps if he gets well kicked at Eton, and yott 



BELCHAMBER 39 

have him here mostly for his holidays, he may not turn out so 
ill. It would take an i8-horse power profligate to corrupt 
Sainty, it is true ; but how about Arthur? ' 

'Arthur doesn't like Claude; he makes no secret of it; so I 
don't think he can do him any harm. Besides, when the boys 
are at home I have them so constantly under my own eye, I 
should know in a minute ; and by the time Arthur goes to 
Eton, Claude will be almost leaving.' 

* Or if he turns out badly, he may even have left,' said Lord 
Corstorphine. 

So the matter was broached to Lady Eva, who, you may be 
sure, was profuse in a mother's blessings and tears. She was 
fond of her son in a way, and honestly wanted the best that 
was to be had for him in life. She had been ruefully reflecting 
that she would never be able to send him to a good school, 
except at the cost of decided privations to herself; and there 
was no doubt he would be dreadfully in her way in London. 

Lord Corstorphine proposed himself for a Sunday to a 
great friend among the Eton masters, and found that his host, 
having an unexpected vacancy for the next half, was delighted 
to do a good turn to any one in whom he was interested. 
The duchess, when she heard what was on foot, suddenly in- 
sisted on helping, and promised to pay half of her grandson's 
expenses ; and though her contribution was frequently several 
terms in arrear, she generally paid up in the end, unless she 
had been unusually unlucky at cards. 

So, though Lady Eva had failed to extract from her sister- 
in-law that general invitation to regard Belchamber as her 
country-home, which she had hoped for, she left for town with 
a comfortable feeling that her visit had not been wasted. 
Claude was practically off her hands ; he would go to Eton 
at no expense to her, and spend most of his holidays at Bel- 
chamber. * Dear Belchamber, where poor Char and I spent 
our happy childhood, and of which I have always carried the 
picture in my heart, through all my wanderings,' she said to 
Lady Charmington the day before her departure. 

* Indeed,' said Sarah, with a little dry cough, 'I always 



40 BELCHAMBER 

understood from poor Char that he had hardly ever been here 
as a child. He said, when we first came here in the old 
lord's time, that he hoped his son wouldn't feel such a 
stranger here as he did, when he grew up.' 

'Ah well,' said Lady Eva hurriedly, 'my happiest times, 
almost the only happy ones of my neglected childhood were 
here, so I suppose they bulk large in my memory. I have so 
little reason to remember most of my youth with pleasure.' 

* You said. Aunt Eva,' Arthur burst in, * vat you wemem- 
bered every corner of ve place, blindfold, but you soon lost 
your way even in ve shrubbery, and you thought One-tree 
Wood was the other side of the village.' 

'Ah, traitor!' cried his aunt, playfully embracing him, 
'have you so little gallantry as to try to convict a lady of 
making mistakes?' 

' You were a little rash, dear mamma,' Claude said to her 
afterwards, 'in remembering your happy childhood at Bel- 
chamber so well, unless you took a little more trouble to get 
up the subject' Claude for his part was quite willing to go 
to Eton and try how he liked it Almost the only principle 
that had been early instilled into him was that it was always 
worth while to accept anything expensive that could be 
enjoyed at another person's expense. It was rather absurd, 
no doubt, for so finished a gentleman to go to school; but 
experience had taught him that it was always quite easy to get 
sent away from educational establishments, if one did not 
happen to like them ; and what was the use of his precocious 
knowledge of the world if it did not insure him an easy 
victory over such simple people as schoolmasters and school- 
boys ? As a matter of fact his astuteness did save him from 
paying the extreme penalty for many peccadilloes that would 
have cut short the career of less sophisticated youths under 
' Henry's holy shade.' His tutor's attitude towards him was 
a curious alternation of attraction and distrust But though 
never cordially liked by either boys or masters, he was still 
there, as an overgrown youth in 'lower division,' when Sainty 
hobbled into the school, a pale, gloomy little boy with an iron 



> 



BELCHAMBBR 41 

boot and a stick, and was even keeping a precarious footing 
when Arthur appeared a year later, and of course took the 
place by storm with his frank and friendly manners, hatred of 
books, love of games, and perfectly obvious and understand- 
able type of beauty. 

Whether Claude really did much for his cousins on their 
arrival at Eton may be doubted, but he certainly managed to 
impress Sainty with the belief that he had been of incalculable 
service to him. To Claude, Sainty meant Belchamber with 
all its comforts, horses to ride, pheasants to shoot, good food, 
luxurious quarters, and presents at Christmas; things his 
shelterless childhood had taught him to consider in a way 
that boys to whom they had always been matters of course 
could not understand. It never occurred to Sainty that his 
cousin's attentions proceeded from anything but a naturally 
kind heart compassionating the limitations of a cripple and an 
invalid. He soon learned to disapprove of Claude, and to dread 
his influence over Arthur, and on several occasions screwed 
himself up almost with torture to the point of speaking very 
plainly to his senior, a thing especially difficult among boys ; 
and the indulgent good nature with which his strictures were 
received, where they might easily have been resented, gave 
him an uncomfortable sense of obligation towards one to 
whom his conscience forced him to say such disagreeable 
things in return for uniform kindness and affection. 

'Dear Sainty,' Claude would say, *you do look so sweet 
when you 're angry and solemn, for all the world like an old 
hen with all her feathers up in defence of her chick. Of 
course I 'm a wicked unprincipled hawk, but I promise not to 
devour your bantling.' He generally managed to refer again 
to these conversations when Arthur was present, knowing 
that nothing enraged the younger brother so much as the 
idea that Sainty, for whom he always entertained the sublimest 
contempt, had dared to give himself the airs of looking after 
him. 

It early dawned on Sainty that a loving heart was not an 
unmixed blessing, unless one had the gift of imposing one's 



4^ fiBLCHAMBER 

views on the object of one's aflfection. Had he not been fond 
of Claude, it would be nothing to him that he disapproved of 
him ; if he did not love Arthur, it would not have been a 
daily grief to him to see so clearly what his brother ought and 
ought not to do, while he was destitute of the smallest shred 
of influence over his actions. 

*You know, dear,' Claude said to him once, 'there is 
nothing so easy as to get rid of me. I am horribly mcU vu by 
the authorities. If tutor hadn't stuck up for me like a brick, 
I should have been sacked long ago ; he has told me pretty 
plainly that if there are any more rows he shall say he thinks 
they had better take me away. A hint to him that I am cor- 
rupting his pet lamb, and a word to your mother, and neither 
Eton nor Belchamber will be troubled with me much longer.' 

Such a speech hurt Sainty like a lash. 'Don't you see,' he 
cried, 'that it is just the knowledge of what you say that 
makes it impossible for me to do anything? I am help- 
less.' 

See? Of course Claude saw; no one better. 'Dear 
generous old boy ! ' he said, with one of his sudden pretty 
changes of manner, throwing an arm lightly round his cousin's 
shoulder ; ' who should know what an angel you are, so well 
as your poor scamp of a cousin, who owes everything to 
you?* 

'Don't,' Sainty said, wincing; 'you do things you know I 
hate, and teach Arthur to do them, and then you manage to 
make me feel a brute, and put me in the wrong.' 

Claude shrugged his shoulders, almost the last of his little 
foreign tricks of manner that he had not lost at Eton. ' You 
are impossible, dear Saint,' he said, and went his way, quite 
secure that what he had let fall of the ease with which his 
cousin could get rid of him would effectually tie his hands. 

The day came, however, when without any intervention of 
a schoolfellow, the measure of Claude Morland's ill-fame over- 
flowed, and the College of the Blessed Mary numbered him 
no longer among her children. 

That summer half was ' long remembered' at Eton (almost 



fiELCtlAMBElt 4i 

eighteen months) for what Claude called a 'great massacre 
of the innocents/ We are not concerned at this distance of 
time to inquire into the nature of this old story. As usual, it 
was not the most guilty who were sent away; there were angry 
mothers in many counties of England who declared their 
darlings had been most unjustly used, and that ' there was a 
boy called Morland who was much worse than poor Tom, 
Dick, or Harry, who had only had to leave at the end of the 
half, and with no blame attached to him.' 'Claude was more 
or less mixed up in rather a painful affair,' his tutor wrote to 
Lord Corstorphine. * He did not know how much he was to 
blame, but it would be best for the boy himself if his friends 
were to remove him. Personally he liked him, but • • . '; 
and Sainty tried hard not to feel a certain relief at his cousin's 
departure. He atoned for this unchristian want of sympathy 
by making the best of the matter to his mother and guardian, 
and begging that it should make no difference in the culprit's 
footing at Belchamber. What he never mentioned at home 
was that Arthur had come very near being implicated, and 
that he, Sainty, had strained his conscience to the utmost, in 
solemnly pledging his word to his tutor for his brother's 
innocence. Arthur accepted this as he did everything else 
from Sainty. ' What is vere to make a fuss about ? ' he said. 
' I 'd have done as much for you, or for vat matter, for any 
over chap who wasn't my bwover. You jaw about your con- 
science, and not being sure, and tell me to see what I've 
made you do. I don't call that lying. Of course, if a fellow 's 
asked point-blank if anover fellow's done a fing, he's got to 
say he hasn't. Don't be such a pwig.' 

Sainty did not stay very long at Eton himself. In spite of 
constant staying out, and much sick-leave, he really was not 
strong enough for the life there ; nor was it a great grief to 
him to go. He did not make friends easily ; his shy reserved 
manner, his studious habits, and inability for athletics, not 
less than his austerely high standard of ethics which his 
minor found so unnecessary, were not calculated to make 
him popular with his schoolfellows; and he resented their 



44 BELCHAMBER 

familiar abbreviation of his title into * Belcher.' He stayed 
long enough to see Arthur launched on a course of prosperity, 
and in a fair way to become a 'swell/ and then sang his 
Nunc dimitiis. Arthur remained, alone of the three, and 
flourished like a green bay-tree. He did just enough work 
to get through his various examinations with a little cribbing, 
and found plenty of people ready to do all the rest for him. 
He was quite selfish, self-indulgent, easy-going, good-natured, 
and happy, and was as popular with the masters as with the 
boys. The elastic code of schoolboy honour fitted him like 
a glove, and he had the makings in him of a first-rate 
cricketer. 




CHAPTER IV 

Lord Corstorphine had been an Oxford man, but some 

curii 

send 

thought to the vicinity of Newmarket, but, as she truly said, 

that hardly seemed a danger to Sainty ; and as Arthur was to 

read for the army when he left Eton, there was no question of 

the University for him. 

Sainty went to college, as he did most things, from the 
habit of obedience, but with no great hope of personal 
enjoyment. Anticipation to him was rarely pleasurable; 
he had not the sanguine temperament. He looked on 
Cambridge as a larger Eton, a new field for unpopularity 
and isolation in the midst of a crowd, but he soon began to 
be aware of an atmosphere of wider toleration than he had 
known at school. 

It is true he was a dreary failure among his peers, the 
gilded youth who went to Newmarket, kept hunters, and 
spent their evenings at the card-table; and he was ignomini- 
ously blackballed for a certain fashionable dining-club for 
which some one was so ill-advised as to put him up. His 
college, however, was large enough to contain men of all 
sorts, and among some of the more thoughtful he found 
congenial society and kindly appreciation, especially in the 
little knot of undergraduates who gathered round a young 
don called Gerald Newby. 

Sainty was just ripe for some one to worship, and Newby 
supplied the object beautifully. In all his reserved, unhappy 
boyhood, he had never known the joy of that falling in 
friendship, so to speak, which is one of youth's happiest 



46 BELCHAMBER 

prerogatives. The only two companions for whom he had 
felt much affection, his cousin and his brother, had certainly 
given him more pain than pleasure. The generous delights 
of an enthusiastic admiration had hitherto been withheld 
from him. This young man, sufficiently his senior to speak 
to his troubled soul with a certain authority, yet near enough 
to his own age for discussion on equal terms, excited such a 
feeling in the highest degree. 

It is difficult for older people not to smile at very young 
men's estimates of themselves or of one another. Newby 
had opinions, splendid opinions, on all sorts of subjects, 
which his disciple imbibed with rapture. Sainty took his 
young mentor quite seriously, and Gerald, it need hardly be 
said, took himself quite seriously ; and between them they 
were sublimely earnest and high-toned, and perhaps, if the 
truth must be told, just a trifle priggish. 

For one thing, of course, Sainty had ' doubts.' It is not 
to be supposed that a youth with a morbid conscience, a 
tender heart, a keen mind and delicate health, reared in 
Lady Charmington's school of extreme Calvinistic theology, 
should have reached the age of eighteen without many 
searchings of heart. 

Little as this profane page may seem the place for the 
discussion of such subjects, it would be impossible to give 
an adequate notion of Sainty's life at Cambridge or his 
relations with Gerald Newby, without a passing reference 
to the topics that kept them from their beds far into the 
small hours of many a chilly morning. 

Young men of Gerald Newby's stamp can conceive of 

nothing that is not the better for being 'threshed out,' as 

/ he would have called it. He held that if the old creeds 

I were ' outworn,' it was no reason for abandoning faith — that 

/ there was to be evolution in belief as in other things ; and 

/ he had dreams of an universal Church freed from strangling 

I dogmas, in which all sincere seekers after truth should meet 

I in a common brotherhood. Perhaps he was a little vague 

} as to what was to be left as the object of belief, when every- 

I 



BELCHAMBER 47 

thing had been eliminated in which the controversially 
inclined could find matter for discussion, but that did not 
trouble him in the least. 

'What we want,' he said to Sainty, 'is more light All 
churches in all ages have been alike in the mistake of 
endeavouring to stifle discussion of their doctrines. Discus- 
sion is the breath of life; unquestioning acceptance is 
death.' 

'But once one begins questioning things, one is so apt to 
find one doesn't believe them ' 

'Then let them go. Depend upon it, what won't bear the 
investigation of reason cannot be worth keeping. The truth, 
and the truth only, must emerge clearer and purer from every 
test to which it is submitted ; and it is the truth we want. 
Why, when in all other departments of knowledge our under- 
standing becomes truer and stronger every year, should we 
seek to stultify ourselves and shrink from all growth in the 
highest science of all, that which deals with the fount of all 
knowledge, and the spring of all conduct?' 

'But suppose,' Sainty asked, 'one should find in the end 
that one believes nothing ?' 

' Then believe nothing,' said Newby grandly. ' But I won't, 
I can't, suppose any such thing ; it is belief that comes of 
inquiry, not the negation of belief.' 

Sainty was very much impressed. He had never before 
had any one to whom he could unburthen himself on these 
subjects. His mother, he knew well, would have revolted in 
horror from any questioning of the doctrines she herself 
accepted, and his uncle would not have approached the 
discussion in that serious spirit which alone he thought 
befitting. But the lads who assembled evening after evening 
in Newby's rooms had no angelic fear of treading on any- 
thing, and talked everlastingly on all subjects, religious doubt 
or belief among the rest If they found the world out of 
joint they by no means shared Hamlet's distress at being 
'born to set it right,' or doubted for a moment their perfect 
ability to do so* These boys who so confidently settled the 



48 BELCHAMBER 

af&irs of the nation, the world, the universe, are getting 
middle-aged men now, hard-working public officials, clergy- 
men, schoolmasters, and would probably smile at their own 
Ku. youthful enthusiasms. Many of them are married and 
/ fathers of families. Newby himself is senior dean of the 
I college,, a^^fi a very different person ffom tKe^fJ^tit aposile^of 
^ universal belief and brotherhood to whom Sainty brought so 
k many of his perplexities. 

/ Belchamber spent an immense amount of time in the young 
/ don's comfortable rooms. A ^^'^i fif ff*"*^''^fl1 ^"^tPfify *^°'-^^^ 
the place, something cloistral and monastic, yet with a touch 
of art and luxury. Pale autumnal sunlight, or the soft glow 
of shaded lamps, lingered lovingly on the backs of well-bound 
books, some large framed photographs of early Italian 
Madonnas, and a reproduction of a Neapolitan bronze. A 
great many teacups reflected the fire, while a permanent faint 
smell of tobacco just gave a masculine character to the 
mellow warmth of the atmosphere. Several armchairs and a 
huge sofa seemed always trying, by the sad colour and severe 

f pattern of their coverings, to conceal the fact of their depth 
and softness, just as their owner, who had a handsome 
refined face and a well-knit frame, affected a slouch and wore 
shabby clothes to show he was not vain. 

If Sainty poured himself out to Gerald when they were 
alone, he took but little share in the general discussions, 
when other people were present. To express himself was 
always a difficulty to him ; he lay, as it were, on the margin 
of the pool of talk, into which one eager speaker after another 
dashed past him while he was still trying to summon courage 
for the plunge. It would sometimes happen that at the end 
of a long evening he had not opened his mouth, and he was 
taken to task more than once on the subject by his friend. 
* You really should try and talk more ; men take your silence 
for ungraciousness. It looks as if you didn't think them even 
worth disagreeing with, you know. Locke asked me to-day 
if you weren't very proud ; he said you sat all the time he was 
talking about the essential Christianity of Shelley's point of 



BELCHAMBER 49 

view, the other night, with a little supercilious expression 
which said plainer than words that you thought him a 
fool.' 

<0h dear! and I was so much interested,' Sainty cried. 
' I had nothing particular to say about it ; to tell the truth, I 
had never thought of Shelley exactly from that point of view, 
but I liked it all so much.' 

'Well, you should have told him so; you see, you didn't 
convey that impression to Locke.' 

Geiald ^"fl hT "^ TTIfijir*' ^' Iways tender yith t^ i<^ prng^^TytP. 
He had great belief in his own powers of sympathy — (*I 
understand,' he used to say in a meaning way to those who 
laid bare their difficulties to him) — but he was quite capable 
of ' smiting friendly and reproving' when the occasion seemed 
to demand it ' I shouldn't be your friend, if I didn't say . . .' 
was a favourite formula with him, and he constantly invited 
an equal frankness in others, though it is doubtful how he 
would have liked the invitation to be accepted. 

' I have been thinking a good deal,' he said, pausing in the 
act of making tea, and turning to Sainty with the kettle in 
one hand, ' about what you said the other day of shunning 
uncongenial society. Of course there is a great deal of truth 
in it, and nothing obliges one to live habitually with people 
with whom one has nothing in common, but one has a duty 
to the outside world as well as to oneself.' 

*I can no more be myself with certain people,' Sainty 
objected, 'than I can write my own handwriting on paper I 
don't like.' 

'Of course we all feel that,' responded Gerald rather 
brutally, ' but there are two things to consider : in the first 
place, there 's the danger to one's own character of getting 
narrow and cliquey; and in the second, unless you have 
something to do with men who are your inferiors in aim or 
culture, how are you to influence them for better things ?' 

* I don't say they are my inferiors,' said Sainty humbly ; * I 
only say they are so unlike me in their habits and point of 
view that I can't talk to them. They may be quite as good 



50 BELCHAMBER 

fellows as I am; probably they think themselves much 
better ' 

* Yes, hut you don't think so; you know you don't,' insisted 
his mentor sternly. ' Ah ! you are looking at that Giotto ; it 's 
from the Arena Chapel at Padua ; it 's a jolly thing, isn't it ? 
iThe meekness of the Virgin's expression is so wonderful. 
Those fellows lost so much of the religious feeling when they 
ceased to be archaic Probably you don't cordially like or 
approve even of all the fellows you meet here. I don't 
altogether myself. But it is one of my principles to welcome all 
sorts of men. It is not only that I think they may get good 
from us, but they teach us too. We must try to be broad, to 
keep our sympathies open on all sides, to be in touch with 
every kind of person, if we hope to do any good.' 

* Yo u are like St. Paul' said Sainty quite seriously ; * it is 
very ^wonderful 6{ you.***f wish I was more adaptable, but 

Newby smilingly deprecated the likeness to St. Paul, but 
in his heart he thought it quite true. 'Take Parsons, for 
instance,' he said ; ' do you suppose I am not often shocked 
by things he says ? Yet I think he keeps us fresh, as it were ; 
he is bracing, stimulating, useful, if only as keeping alive in 
us the wholesome reprobation of some of the views he thinks 
it necessary to advocate. And look at the matter from his 
point of view. It is far better he should come here, and find 
his own level, and meet with wholesome disagreement, than 
be driven into thinking himself a social pariah persecuted for 
his opinions, or surround himself with a little set of duller 
men, who would take what he says for gospel, and on whom 
his influence would be wholly bad.' 

* I don't like Ned Parsons,' said Sainty simply. ' I know 
he's clever and amusing and all that, but I think he's rather 
a beast' 

They were interrupted by the arrival of several under- 
graduates, including the subject of their discussion, the 
pursuit of which had therefore to be postponed to a more 
fitting opportunity. 



BELCHAMBER 51 

* Yes, Newby,' said Parsons, settling himself luxuriously in 
the deepest armchair, * I will take a cup of tea, though I 
should prefer a whisky and soda. And what might we be 
going to improve ourselves with to-night? the religious 
opinions of Swinburne, or the relation of the Ego to the 
non-Ego ? ' 

*You are incurably flippant, Ned,' said Gerald, with an 
indulgent smile. 

*Here we all are, burning to be enlightened,' continued 
Parsons. 'Pray don't deny us the tonic of stimulating 
conversation.' 

* I 've been wondering,' innocently struck in a large rowing 
man, whom Ned described as having ' aspirations after higher 
things,' *what it is that keeps us all together, when we've so 
little in common, and I 've come to the conclusion it must 
be our sense of humour.' 

* Quite right, Og ; no doubt it is,' said Parsons approvingly. 
' And you and Newby are specially rich in it ; and so is Sainty 
over there in the corner, though he is funny by stealth and 
blushes to find it fame.' 

The room was growing full of smoke and of the buzz of 
voices ; Newby was holding forth to a small knot of admirers. 
' The Radicalism of Mill,' he was saying, ' is as dead as the 
<lodo j all the things that were vital to his generation have 
been attained ' 

^ How about female suffrage ? ' Parsons asked. 

* But there is a newer Radicalism,' Gerald went on, with- 
out paying any attention, ' which is not incompatible with 
Imperialism in its best forms ^ 

*A11 Radicalism,' said the rowing man sententiously, with 
the air of making a valuable contribution to contemporary 
thought, ' tends to Socialism ' 

* Well, yes, in a way you may say it does,' assented Newby 
politely; *but that in my mind is not altogether an objection. 
The word Socialism used to be a bugbear to frighten children 
with;; but there is a new Socialism as there is a new 
Radicalism. If you come to think of it, all interference by 



^ 



St BELCHAMBER 

the State is a form of Socialism ; it is the commtinity at work 
for the good of the community, instead of the individual 
making weak and isolated effort for his own good ' 

' Poor dear Mill ! ' interjected Ringwood, a young man who 
in those days would have been called * aesthetic,' Mt is a pity 
he is so vieuxjeu \ he had such a nice refined face, and learned 
Greek as a baby, and it was so nice and unconventional of 
him to want women in parliament. Perhaps in time parlia- 
ment may come to be all women, and men be free to look 
after things that really matter.' 

* Such as old china,' said Parsons. 

'Women,' said the rowing man, 'should stick to woman's 
province; her home and children should be enough for any 
woman.' 

'And suppose she hasn't got any ? ' asked Ned. 

' But I see what Ringwood means,' said the rowing man. 
'Of course politics are very important and all that; far be it 
from me to deny it. For my part I 'm a Conservative, and I 
don't care who knows it. But the thing that really matters 
is no doubt the intellectual life.' 

Even Newby smiled discreetly. 

'No doubt, no doubt,' he said. 'There is a great deal in 
what you say ; but it is essential that politics should not be 
left to inferior men, or what becomes of the nation ? Look at 
America with her venal professional politicians, and see what 
it has brought her to. Depend upon it, it is the intellectual 
element in parliament that leavens the lump. Our thinkers 
must not shut themselves up from public life; we must go 
down into the arena and put the result of our thought into 
action, if we hope to do any good in our generation.' 

This magnificent sentiment was applauded as it deserved 
to be, but Newby had not nearly had his innings. He had 
much more to say about the new Radicalism and the new 
Socialism, and he talked so beautifully of the wickedness of 
being a hermit that Sainty resolved to widen his horizon by 
asking Ned Parsons to lunch next day, and proceeded at 
once to ' put the result of his thought into action.' 



A 



BELCHAMBER 53 

It was not often that he indulged in the luxury of enter- 
taining. He had none of that genial desire for presiding 
which to many a man makes the top of his own table such 
an exciting position ; moreover, he had been trained in the 
practice of the most careful economy, and had been accus- 
tomed to hear his mother condemn unnecessary profusion as 
hardly less sinful than irreligion. 

The question of his allowance had been carefully discussed 
between his guardians, and the sum eventually decided on, 
although it would have been treated as quite inadequate by 
most young men of his position, seemed to him so ridiculously 
large that he was always endeavouring to conceal the amount 
of it from his poorer companions. He did so entirely from a 
feeling of delicacy ; but it need hardly be said that his motives 
were frequently misconstrued, and he was firmly believed by 
many to be of a penurious and miserly disposition. As a 
matter of fact, if little of it went in ostentatious hospitality, 
he spent still less upon himself. Arthur early discovered 
that his brother was ' a safer draw for cash than the mater,' 
and Claude, if he asked for help less often and with more 
circumlocution, also found Sainty a convenient banker. 
Lady Eva's son was studying with a well-known coach for 
diplomacy, and though he lived with his mamma, ' found life 
in London,' as he wrote to his cousin, * horribly expensive.' 
*I wear my gloves till people look sympathetic when they 
shake hands with me, thinking I am in mourning, and should 
as soon think of taking a hansom as a coach and four. But 
cigarettes I must have ; they are literally the breath of my 
nostrils, and no matter how skilfully I hide them, mamma 
will find them and smoke them when I 'm out. If it were 
not for Sunborough House, I believe I should starve. How, 
when, and where my revered parent feeds I am wholly unable 
to discover ; but there is never anything to eat at home. 
Luckily, I am in high favour with grandmamma. I tell her 
she is the most beautiful woman in London, and that if I 
wasn't her grandson I should be frantically in love with her, 
and she swallows it all. We are the best of friends, but I 



54 BELCHAMBER 

don't get much out of her, except food and an occasional 
back seat in her opera-box ; and of course I have to make 
her little presents de temps en temps, I ask myself, my dear 
Saint, how on earth all the young men I see about, smiling 
and spruce, contrive to live in this wicked costly place. They 
can't all be millionaires.' This was the burthen of many 
letters. Belchamber smiled indulgently; he couldn't help 
being amused by them ; they were certainly better reading 
than the ill-spelt scrawls in which Arthur announced he was 
* infernal hard-up.' * What with subscriptions, and one thing 
and another, a fellow had such lots of expenses at Eton, it 
was perfectly beastly, and the mater kept him so precious 
tight, and always seemed to think because you were at 
school you were a kid, and had no need of money.' Unlike 
as were their styles, the upshot of all the letters ^z& the same : 
the youthful writer was in pressing need of funds, and would 
'dear old Sainty' kindly supply the deficiency ? And 'dear 
old Sainty ' usually did. 

It is no doubt a very bad thing to be in want of money, 
but it is almost worse to be the quarry at which the impecuni- 
ous let fly all their shafts ; to know when you see a beloved 
handwriting on an envelope, that it is^ .hunger and not love 
that has set the pen travelling, and dictated the letter that 
lies within. It is an experience that only comes to most of 
us later in life ; boys of Sainty's age are not often called upon 
to taste that half humorous bitterness. This was one of the 
few troubles about which Sainty did not consult Gerald 
Newby. He knew instinctively that his virtuous friend 
would have little sympathy with his supplying the funds of 
luxury and extravagance. The double drain, of which neither 
the amount nor the recurrence could ever be accurately fore- 
told, kept the boy perpetually anxious about money matters. 
Perhaps it really did tend to make him, as people thought, 
unduly careful in his daily expenditure; and, though he took 
infinite pains to conceal the fact, he liked to be able to help 
humbler unfortunates than his brother or cousin. 

Another eccentricity which showed his unfitness for the 



BELCHAMBER 55 

state of life to which he had the misfortune to be born, was 
his exaggerated propensity for work ; he had a real aptitude 
for scholarship, a love of erudition for its own sake. No 
pains seemed too great to him, no research too profound, for 
the illustration of a curious expression or the elucidation of 
an obscure passage. There was a danger that his health, 
never robust, might suffer from such close application. * If 
you were a poor student,' Newby said to him, ' with your way 
to make in the world, having come up from Glasgow with a 
bag of oatmeal, I should think it most meritorious of you to 
peg away as you do, but for you to go injuring your health by 
overwork is worse than unnecessary — it 's wrong.'' 

' My health does not seem to me such an unusually fine 
specimen that all risk of injury to it must be avoided at any 
cost,' Sainty answered. * Besides, what am I to do, if I don't 
work ? I know few people, and the men I do know are all 
busy. I can't play games or ride ; when I am not working I 
loaf, and you are always inveighing against loafing as the root 
of all evil.' 

'You should come out more, have more air,' persisted 
Gerald. 

'In the summer I am out a good deal, as you know,' 
Sainty answered, 'but at this time of year I can't sit out, 
and I can only do a very moderate amount of walking with- 
out getting tired.* 

'Why don't you start a cart and pony?' his friend 
asked. 

Sainty looked scared. ' It costs such a lot to keep a cart 
and pony,' he said. ' I do hire one sometimes.' 

' What nonsense ! ' Newby protested. ' In your position it's 
absurd to talk as if you couldn't afibrd a trifling thing like 
that. That 's the sort of thing that makes fellows say you 

are screwy ' He stopped rather abruptly, having said 

more than he intended. 

Sainty froze instantly. ' Oh I they say that, do they ? ' he 
said, with an expression which would have recalled Lady 
Gharmington to Newby, had he enjoyed the privilege of hei 



56 BELCHAMBER 

acquaintance. * Perhaps I am the best judge of what I can 
afford.' 

Like many people who are theoretically in favour of inde- 
pendence, Gerald resented it in his disciples. ' For all your 
false air of humility,' he said, ' one has only to scratch you 
to find the aristocrat.' 

It seemed to Sainty one more proof of the irony of fate 
that even such qualities as his application to study and care- 
ful ordering of life's economy, which would have been held 
as highest virtues in many of his fellow-students, by a 
curious process of inversion became almost faults in him, 
faults too for which he must be rebuked by the mouth of 
Gerald Newby, the great apostle of industry and frugality, 
and the one person in the University whose praise would have 
been sweet and valuable to him. 

' The things you reproach me with are hardly aristocratic 
vices,' he said, with a sad little smile ; ' but are you quite con- 
sistent? You lecture Parsons on his laziness, and Ringwood 
on his extravagance, and then you come and try to drive me 
into being an idler and a spendthrift, who have no gifts in 
those directions.' 

' Of course, if you resent advice,' Newby said, ' I 'm sorry ; 
I have no business to lecture you at all.' 

*Ah Gerald !' said Sainty, stretching a protesting hand; 
but Mentor was nettled and would not immediately be 
mollified. It was on the tip of Sainty's tongue to explain his 
need of economy, but the story of his mother's long struggle 
to restore its solvency to their house seemed too sacred and 
intimate to be told even to his dearest friend. The unveiling 
of his own soul was only a personal immodesty, but his 
mother's thrift and Arthur's premature dissipation could not 
be touched upon without a sense of disloyalty to them from 
which he shrank. 

' Let us go and get a trap and have a drive,' he said. 

* Thanks ; I 'm busy ; I 'm afraid I haven't time,' Newby 
said stiffly. ' Did you think I was hinting that I wanted to 
be taken out driving? 'and the offended sage strode across 



BELCHAMBER 57 

the court to his own rooms. Sainty heaxd the man in the 
rooms below him, to whom a scholarship was a dire neces- 
sity, being dragged forth to football by clamorous com- 
panions who would take no denial. * Well, I won't go and 
drive in an east wind and get neuralgia all alone,' he con- 
cluded, as he turned again to his table piled up with learned 
commentaries. 



CHAPTER V 

In spite of his untoward mania for study, or rather because 
of it, the years spent at Cambridge were the happiest of Sainty's 
life. He allowed himself to be dissuaded from going in for 
a scholarship, which he had much wished to do, on the 
ground that, as he would certainly have got it, it was grossly 
unfair to men to whom it was of real importance. Balked in 
this ambition, he concentrated his efforts on his aegree, but 
here he encountered a new difficulty. 

It happened that his second year at the University was 
also the twenty-first of his life, a coincidence which to most 
of his fellow-students would have been productive of no 
derangement; but it became apparent that in the very 
middle of the long vacation, just when he hoped to go up to 
Cambridge and do his most valuable and undisturbed work 
for the tripos, he had got to be present at a horrible function 
known as ' coming of age.' 

Nothing like serious hospitality on a large scale had been 
attempted at Belchamber during the two-thirds of his life in 
which he had been the nominal head of his family, but Lady 
Charmington was conscientiously anxious that this event 
should lack no befitting pomp and ceremony. Unfortunately, 
fourteen years of ceaseless watchfulness and economy are not 
a good training for lavish display when the time demands it ; 
so the poor lady found herself much exercised in mind over 
many details, and not a little perturbed at the thought of 
what it was all going to cost. By no means a diffuse or 
prolific correspondent at ordinary times, she began early in 
the May term to rain letters upon her son about the selec- 
tion of the house party for the great occasion. * Your Uncle 

68 



BELCHAMBER 59 

Cor/ she would write one week, * says that we must ask your 
grandmother and the duke. Of course I am only anxious to 
do what is right, and I suppose we must have them, though 
the duchess has never shown any particular interest in you 
or Arthur. Tell me what you think about it.' The next 
it would be, ' I am told there must be a ball, that there has 
always been a coming-of-age ball ; the county will expect it. 
Such things are not much in my line, as you know, but I 
shouldn't like anything to be wanting that ought to be done, 
or that people expect.' 

To Sainty the whole thing loomed an unmitigated horror. 
What pleasing anticipations, for instance, could the prospect 
of a ball awaken in a young man, one of whose legs was 
shorter than the other, and to whom a highly polished floor 
was nothing but a danger? He came to dread these letters 
of his mother, each one of which contained some new detail 
of the approaching martyrdom ; such alarming obligations as 
the necessity of a speech at the tenants' dinner sprang 
suddenly on him at the turn of a page, and left him 
gasping. 

*You have rather a cold nature,' his mother wrote, *not 
very imaginative, so I don't feel I need fear your being carried 
off your balance by all this fuss. If you were excitable and 
emotional like Arthur, I should feel more anxious. In your 
case the danger is more that you will take the whole thing as 
a matter of course, and not realise fully the importance of 
this epoch in your life, and all the new responsibilities it 
entails on you.' Characteristic passages like the above, 
scattered up and down the letters, seemed to give Sainty the 
measure of his exact knowledge of his mother, and cast a 
flickering light into the depths of her abysmal ignorance of 
him. The sense of a somewhat unfair advantage bred in him 
by these revelations of his superior insight brought into his 
love for her an element of almost pitying tenderness which 
alone was wanting to rivet the chains of his early acquired 
habit of obedience to her will. 

'Are you afraid of your mother?' Gerald Newby asked 



6o BELCHAMBER 

him once, with some scorn, in reply to his repeated assertion 
of the impossibility of going counter to her wishes. 

*I am very fond of her,' Sainty answered, with gentle 
dignity. He had an almost painful intuition of her sacrifices, 
her hopes, her frustrate ambitions for him, and of the dis- 
appointment he must inevitably be to her ; he probably read 
into her not very complex emotions, fine shades of sensibility 
from his own consciousness, after 'the manner of tender- 
hearted ladies with their dogs, which made his sympathy for 
her a little exaggerated. It was this habit of deference to her 
lightest wish that sent him forth sorely against his will to 
make a solemn call on a youth whom Lady Charmington had 
indicated for this attention. 'My friend Lady Eccleston 
has been staying here,' she wrote, 'with her daughter, and I 
have asked them to come in August for your coming of age. 
She tdls me her son Thomas is at Cambridge, I didn't 
know he had left Harrow, but it seems he has been at the 
University two terms. She said it would be very kind of you 
to call on him,, and I hope you will, as his mother is a friend 
of mine. If you find the young man agreeable, you might 
ask him to come with his mother and sister in the vacation. 
A propos^ of course you will ask any of your own friends 
you would like \ we shall want some young men ; there will 
be Cissy Eccleston and the two de Lissac girls — only let me 
know in good time how many you ask.' 

On his way to show a grudging civility to Tommy Eccleston, 
Belchamber revolved in his mind his mother's parting in- 
junction to provide a band of youths for the feast. Luckilyi 
here lay one ready indicated to his hand, but as he ran over 
the restricted roll-call of his intimates, they did not strike him 
as ornamental. Young Lord Springald and Sir Vaux Hunter 
and their friends would have been the very people for the 
occasion. They would have been voted * nice, gentlemanly 
young fellows,' or * fine, high-spirited lads,' according as they 
were shy and dull, or noisy and rowdy; but then, unfor- 
tunately, he did not know them. He could not ask men 
whom he had spent two years in avoiding, and who had 



BELCHAMBER 6t 

blackballed him for their club, but his terrible habit of 
appreciating other people's points of view showed him how 
unsuitable his own friends would seem in the eyes of the duke 
and duchess. Gerald of course he wanted, and Gerald 
would be at home and imposing anywhere. His uncle 
Corstorphine at least, who had many friends among the in- 
telligent obscure, could be trusted to appreciate Gerald ; but 
he inwardly hoped that his friend might not select Lady 
Charmington as the recipient of his views on revealed 
religion. Apart from Newby, his progress towards the com- 
pilation of a list had been purely one of elimination up to 
the time of his arrival at Mr. Eccleston's lodgings. In 
response to his knocks the voice of some one who evidently 
spoke with a jersey over his head made muffled answer from 
an inner apartment. 

* All right, damn you, wait a sec, there's no hurry. I'm 
changing,'and a moment after the owner of the rooms appeared, 
a pleasant commonplace pink youth struggling into a college 
blazer, with one shoe on and the other dangling by its strings 
from his teeth. 

* Hulloa ! beg pardon,* he remarked ; *I thought you were 
Johnson, who was coming to go down to the river with me. 
I thought as he was so quiet he was probably smashing some- 
thing,' and he held out a blistered palm of welcome. 

* Oh I er — how d' ye do,' said Sainty, laying his own in it 
with no unnecessary cordiality. *My name's Belchamber. 
My mother asked me to call on you ; she knows your mother, 
don't you know. I should have come sooner, but I didn't 
know you were up.' 

* Oh, it doesn't matter ; awfully good of you,' answered 
Tommy. *Sit down, won't you; have some lunch?' A 
piece of cold pressed beef and a boxed tongue, with a pot of 
marmalade, showed that the host had himself recently par- 
taken of that meal. 

*No thanks, I 've had lunch,' said Sainty. * But I oughtn't 
to keep you ; you are just going out.' 

'Oh no, not at all; there's no hurry; I haven't got to 



69 BELCHAMBER 

be at the river for half an hour. Besides, I 'm waiting for 
Johnson ; he said he 'd come and go down with me.' 

Then there was a moment of uneasy silence, broken with 
an effort by Sainty, 

' Your mother and sister have been staying with my mother, 
he remarked. 

* No, really ? ' said Tommy, with the faintest possible show 
of interest. 'My mother stays about a lot; she's awfully 
popular.' 

There was another pause, during which he finished putting 
on his shoes. 

* I say, are you sure you won't have some lunch ? ' he cried 
suddenly, with quite a show of eagerness. * Do. I 'm afraid 
I haven't got any cake or anything, 'cos I'm in training. 
Have a whisky and soda, won't you? ' 

* No thanks, really not ; I 've just lunched. But I 'm sure 
I 'm keeping you in.' 

'Oh, that 's all right,' Tommy responded genially, and added, 
not very consistently, ' I can't think where that ass can be ? ' 

The conversation seemed in danger of collapsing altogether, 
when the long-looked-for appearance of Johnson came as a 
welcome relief to both. 

* Tommy, you brute^ why ain't you ready ? ' 

'Well, I like that, when I 've been waiting half an hour for 
you.' 

Sainty got up. 

* Well, I mustn't keep you,' he said. 

' Beg pardon ; didn't know you 'd got any one here,' said 
Johnson. 

'Oh! Lord Belchamber — Mr. Johnson,' said Eccleston, 
getting very red over the fearful embarrassment of an in- 
troduction. Then to Sainty, who remained standing, ' Must 
you go ? Awfully good of you to come ; wish you 'd have 
had some lunch.' 

* Good-bye,' Sainty said. ' I hope you '11 come and see me — 
D, Old Court. Come to lunch or tea or something; or look 
me up in the evening if it suits you better.' 



BELCHAMBER 



«3 



V 



Sainty reported this conversation verbatim to Newby. 

* You see,' he said, * how hopeless it is for me to try and be 
gracious to people with whom I have nothing in common. 
If you could have seen how hard that poor boy struggled to 
look pleased to see me, and the grimness with which I sat 
and scowled upon him, you would have felt sorry for us 
both ; you couldn't have helped it.' 

* Of course, if your idea of being gracious is to sit and 
scowl at people ' Newby said. 

*I didn't mean to; I wanted to wreathe my unfortunate 
features in smiles, but it was not a success. I am sure I 
feel as kindly towards my fellow-creatures as most people 
do ; but I apprnflrl] thpm w^frh invinrihip terror ; and there is 
no such sure way of making a dog bite you, as to think he is 
going to.' 

* Then don't think so,' Newby said. * Have you no control 
over your apprehensions? Strengthen yourself in any way 
you like. If you can do it in no other way, say to yourself 
that you are a great personage and that most men will be 
only too glad of your attentions.' 

* Oh ! but f^at is a way that I should nof like,' Sainty cried 
in horror ; * the one thing that finishes me completely is any 
idea that people may think / think they could want to know 
me for such a reason.' 

* "The ideajhatpeople may think that you think,'" Gerald ; 
repeated. * My dear i3elchamber,'^hls ' is very morbid. Do / 

)le.' Like^jJX rlniborpfply gy^^- hetical peopT ^T^S^ 
fewby was always preaching simplicity and a return to 
nature. 

* And the sad part of this individual failure,' Sainty con- 
tinued, * is that I particularly wanted it to be a success. I 
had a purpose in calling.' 

* And what dark designs had you on this innocent fresher ? ' 

* My mother told me to ask him to the horrible business in 
August; his people are coming. By the way, she suggests 
that I should provide other victims, and I can't think of 
any one who would not be hopelessly inappropriate and 



^ I' 



y 



64 BELCHAMBER 

bored to death. None of our friends could take the thing 
seriously, except, perhaps, Og.' 

* Well, he 's no use to you, as Providence haring unkindly 
made him nearly your twin, he has got, in a small way, the 
same business on, at home, and he takes it seriously enough, 
I promise you. I happen to know, because he has done me 
the honour to ask me to stay for it.' 

Sainty gave the cry of a thing in pain. *You haven't 
accepted ? ' 

'Well, I didn't commit myself; I'm really not quite sure 
yet where I shall be this Long. I rather want to go abroad, 
and perhaps do some climbing. Holmes and CoUinson want 
me to coach them part of the time, and I thought we might 
combine the reading and the exercise, and drop down to the 
Italian lakes in the autumn.' 

'And I had so counted on your being there, Gerald,' 
Sainty said. ' You are just the one person I did want. I 
felt there would be something human about it all if I had 
you with me.' 

* You never said so, you know,' Newby interjected. 
Sainty felt the hot pricking sensation at the back of his 

eyes which was the nearest he ever got to tears. He had so 
intensely desired that Gerald should be at Belchamber in 
August, that it had not occurred to him to put his desire 
into words ; they had talked the subject over so often that he 
took it for granted his friend would know that he looked for 
his help on the occasion. 

* I thought — ^ he began, * I hoped — I suppose you would 

feel ' He couldn't express just what he meant at the 

moment. 

'You see, you didn't ask me,' Newby persisted, 'whereas 
Og did.' 

'Oh! go to Og, or Switzerland, or Hell, as far as I'm 
concerned,' Sainty broke out. 

Gerald laid a kind restraining hand upon his shoulder. 
' My dear boy, you needn't lose your temper and swear at 
me,' he said ; ' I haven't said I wouldn't come. I only said 



\ 



BELCHAMBER 65 

you haxln^t asked me, and I couldn't be expected to assume 
that I was invited to your coming of age, unless you said 
something about it' 

Sainty was trembling all over ; his little gust of passion had 
passed and left him humbled and ashamed. How could he 
have spoken so to his friend ? 

*Ohl forgive me,' he cried. *I suppose I felt in my 
heart such a need of you, that I couldn't but fancy you 
would know it.' 

Newby coughed uneasily. ' For Heaven's sake, don't let 
us be sentimental,' he said, in his little, prim, dry manner. 

'My mother says I am cold and unimaginative,' Sainty 
answered sadly, 'and you accuse me of hysteria. You can't 
both be right ; but anyway, I suppose I^m wrong. After all, 
why should I assume that just because I wanted you I was 
certain to get you ? I haven't so often got what I wanted in 
life. I should have remembered that though you are nearly 
everything to me, I am to you only one of a hundred men 
your kindness has helped.' 

Gerald smiled. Like all Englishmen he had been 
frightened by the indecency of a glimpse of naked emotion, 
but he was always prepared to accept any amount of solid 
adulation soberly offered. 

' You make too much of anything I may have been able to 
do for you,' he said graciously. 'And affection is a great 
gift ; I 'm sure I 'm very proud that you like me and feel I 
have been of some use to you. I have no doubt I can 
manage to make it fit in.' 

Sainty was profusely grateful; he really felt that Gerald 
had conferred a tremendous favour on him, which is probably 
what Newby meant he should feel. 

His other invitations were less successful. Even Ring* 
wood, whom at last he decided to ask, though he knew his 
mother and Arthur would say he was an affected ass, had 
pledged himself to the rival celebration. 

Tommy Eccleston, to be sure, accepted. ' Oh, thanks ! ' 
he said, ' very good of you ; I shall like it awfully.' 

£ 



66 BELCHAMBBR 

So Sainty wrote and announced this meagre harvest to 
Lady Charmington, who forthwith responded : ' Do you mean 
to say that out of all the young men you must know at 
Cambridge, you can only get two ? Try and find two more, 
or we shall be more women than men. Johnny Trafford is 
coming, and I have asked Algy Montgomery, and of course 
there will be Claude, but none of the other Trafford boys can 
come, and I know so few young men. You see, we are such 
a lot of women. There is grandmamma (my mother, I 
mean), and your Aunt Susie, and Lady Eccleston and her 
daughter, and Alice de Lissac writes that her husband, she is 
sure, won't come, so there are three more women. And now 
the duchess insists on my asking Lady Deans, whom I don't 
know, and your Aunt Eva wants to bring a friend of hers. 
I counted on your having lots of friends you would want 
asked, or I should not have agreed.' 

At last, in despair, Sainty had recourse to Tommy Eccleston 
again, who seemed sociable and friendly, and was the only 
person who had accepted with anything like cordiality. 
'You haven't got any friend you'd like to bring, have you?' 
Sainty asked. 

'I think Johnson would come, if he was asked,' said 
Tommy thoughtfully. 'You see, between you and me, he's 
rather sweet on my sister.' 

It only wanted two days to the end of the term, when the 
list was finally completed in the most unexpected manner. 

Sainty was hobbling disconsolately across the court one 
evening, when he almost ran into Parsons. Since he had 
invited this gentleman to lunch as an attempt at greater 
catholicity, they had frequently met, and something like 
friendship might by a little stretch of imagination be said to 
exist between them. Sainty, feeling how very little strain their 
intercourse would bear, was always careful not to tighten it 
unduly. 

' I hear you are coming of age,' Ned remarked, ' and have 
got a regular corroboree in honour of the event at the family 
fried-fish shop. I can't think why you haven't asked me.' 



BELCHAMBER 67 

The intention was evidently humorous, but Sainty was a 
little taken aback. The fact was that Parsons was the only 
man of whom he saw anything like as much, whom he had 
not tried as the possible fourth demanded by the necessity 
for sexual symmetry. 

' Should you care about it ?' he asked, a little doubtfully. 

'My dear fellow,' Ned answered candidly, 'don't ask a 
poor devil like me to a place like Belchamber ; I should be 
ludicrously out of place. Besides, you know, you don't really 
like me. Of course I was only joking.' 

Sainty was touched. Perhaps he had done Ned injustice 
He certainly had never been very civil to him, and Parsons 
had borne no malice. 

' Will you come ? he said. 

* Do you mean it ? ' said Ned. ' Of course I will' 

As Sainty wrote to announce this last recruit to Lady 
Charmington, he could not help smiling at the thought of 
three out of the four who were to represent his chosen 
intimates and cronies on the great occasion. 



CHAPTER VI 

During the long years of Sainty's minority there had been 
but a moderate establishment kept at Belchamber. Lady 
Charmington had been anxious the boys should be brought 
up there, and have the early associations which alone make a 
place a home, though it would have been simpler and much 
more comfortable to have lived in the dower-house, and some 
of her relations had blamed her for not doing so. 

Sainty had hardly ever been into the great central body of 
the house, where what were called the State Apartments seemed 
only to exist to be shown to tourists by the housekeeper. A 
whole wing of guests' and servants' rooms had been per- 
manently closed, and was only occasionally aired and 
inspected. Sometimes, when the boys were little, they had 
played at hide-and-seek in the long vista of empty chambers ; 
but for the most part the family lived entirely in the west 
wing, much like royal pensioners to whom a set of apartments 
had been granted in some unused palace. Sainty had exactly 
the intense love for the place, not unmixed with awe, which 
might have been felt by the child of a custodian. His 
mother's long habit of unquestioned and unquestioning 
authority, not less than her constant inculcation of a sense 
of stewardship and responsibility to a certain abstraction 
known as ' the estate,' had combined with his natural modesty 
and self-effacement to eliminate all sensation of personal 
ownership. 

In the stable one pair of carriage horses, Lady Charming- 
ton's cobs and favourite hack, the boys' old ponies, and a 
riding horse or two, had sufficed for all their needs ; and old 
Bell the coachman had never wanted more than the groom 

68 



J 



BELCHAMBER 



69 



and a couple of stable-lads under him, cheerfully doing much 
of the work himself. The butler, who had been with them 
fourteen years, was perhaps rather practical than ornamental, 
but could turn his hand to anything, and the two footmen 
were lads from Lady Charm ington's own bible-class in the 
village, released by their proficiency in the scriptures from the 
necessity of following the plough, to wear the badge of servitude 
upon their shining buttons. The housekeeper and her lady- 
ship's maid hel d sound evangelical views, and the morals and 
health of the under-servants were looked after with equal care 
and sternness. Lady Charmington was thoroughly versed in 
the spiritual state of the odd man, and could have told without 
a moment's hesitation the date of the third^housemaid's con- 
firmation, or when the scullery-maid last had a quinsy. 

Now, however, all was to be changed. Sainty came home 
to an atmosphere of expansion and innovation. He found 
his uncle, Lord Corstorphine — whom in future we must 
remember to call Lord Firth, the old earl having been dead 
some years at the date of his grandson's majority — in constant 
consultation with his mother, consultations in which, to his 
extreme embarrassment, he was expected to take part. He 
discovered that he had absolutely no views as to the proper 
functions of a groom of the chambers, or the relative unde- 
sirability of keeping a lot of young men unemployed when 
you were alone, or having extra liveries into which, on the 
occasion of a large party, temporary hirelings could be hastily 
inducted ; about whom, as Lady Charmington truly remarked, 
you could know nothing, and who might steal the spoons and 
flirt with the maids. Old carriages that had not seen the 
light of day for years were dragged from their retirement and 
unveiled before him, while all the horse-dealers in the county 
brought animals for his inspection of every shade of unfitness 
for the duty of drawing them. Lord Firth's political engage- 
ments made his presence necessarily intermittent ; he could 
but seldom be there ; and in his absence Lady Charmington 
would look anxiously at her son, hoping for sbme expression 
of opinion from him, but Sainty's ignorance was only equalled 



\ 



70 BELCHAMBER 

by his indifference. He tried in vain to care whether, sup- 
posing the carriages were worth doing up at all, they should 
be sent to London or confided to a provincial renovator. 

As to the horses, as Bell scornfully told him, he ' had never 
knowed one end of a 'oss from the other.' On general 
principles he was on the side of the least expenditure. If he 
had said what he really felt, it would have been * Why need 
we live any differently because I shall be twenty-one next 
month than we did when I was twenty? We have always 
had all we wanted ; why spend all this money on things that 
are not going to give me the smallest pleasure — rather the 
reverse ? ' But these are the things one must not say. He 
looked at his mother's wistful face and strove manfully to 
show the interest in all these questions which was expected 
of him. 

Arthur, when presently he came home, having just left 
Eton for good, flung himself into the whole business with very 
different gusto. The spending of money, either his own or 
other people's, was always a genuine pleasure to this young 
man, and the horse-coping afforded opportunities for display- 
ing to an admiring audience a knowingness quite amazing in 
one so young, and a pair of irreproachable riding-breeches. 
Once when Sainty was walking in the shrubbery that masked 
the stable-yard he overheard the dealer from Great Charming- 
ton expressing himself to Bell with a freedom in which he 
would not have indulged had he known who was behind the 
wall. 

' I 'd a deal rather have to do with Lord Arthur,' he was 
saying, 'than with either my lord or my lady. His lord- 
ship, he don't want no horse at all ; Lady Charm ington, she 
knows a good horse when she sees 'im, but she don't want to 
pay for 'im ; but Lord Arthur, he wants a good article, and 
he 's willing to pay a good price. He 's a gentleman, he is.' 

* Ah ! ' answered Bell, * it 's a pity 'e wasn't the eldest; 'e 'd 
'ave made something like a markis, 'e would.' 

It was the old old story ; the one thing poor Sainty seemed 
able to do was to stand between his younger brother and 



BELCHAMBER 71 

the position for which the very stablemen saw his superior 
fitness. 

Arthur had been allowed to stay at Eton over his nineteenth 
birthday that he might once more represent his school at 
Lord's. A finer-looking young fellow it would have been 
hard to find at this time, tall and fair and ruddy, of athletic 
proportions and agreeable manners, a most attractive per- 
sonality, and as Sainty felt sadly, admiringly, but without a 
touch of envy, a most complete contrast to his elder brother. 
No one but Sainty, and he only imperfectly, knew the selfish- 
ness, the carnal appetites, the imperious need of enjoyment, 
the lack of moral sense, that lay beneath that smiling surface, 
or suspected the rock of primitive obstinacy above which the 
floating growth of apparent pliability waved so prettily in the 
tides of circumstance. Arthur had not been at home a week 
before the usual demand for money made its appearance. 
There is no doubt the younger brother had been extremely 
useful to the elder just then ; his happy presence had eased 
the strain between Lady Charmington's strenuous eagerness 
and Sainty's incompetence, and lent quite a spice of amuse- 
ment to the fearful upheaval in house and stable. The boys 
were together in what had been their common sitting-room 
ever since it had been their schoolroom. Sainty had had 
thoughts of asking for a study of his own, having much need 
of somewhere to work undisturbed ; but it seemed ungracious 
to ask for the one thing that would have added to his comfort, 
when so much was being done for him that gave him no 
pleasure whatever. 

Arthur, nrn^'fii in n n rw pair of yellow b oots, spotless 
white 'flannels,' and a lov g lv pir^ jf s^iX-, ^^^ whigtling the airs 
from the latest musical farce while oiling his favourite bat and 
sadly shaking the table at which Sainty was trying to write a 
treatise on Epictetus. 

* I don't suppose, dear old boy,' he said suavely, ' that you 
could oblige your little bwuvver with a small sum of money ? ' 

Sainty looked up quickly. *Why, Arthur,' he said, rather 
Sternly, * I hea,rd you t^ll another you didp't owe a penny 



7a BELCHAMBER 

now. You know she offered to pay any debts you had at Eton 
when you left, and you said you had given her a complete 
list.' 

' So I did, poor dear, and it made her hair curl. I even 
took my bill and sat down quickly and wrote fifty,' which was 
a hint I had got from the passage of scripture she had read 
to us at prayers, so as to have a little to go on with ; but the 
fact is, dear boy, I 've been cursedly unlucky * 

•Arthur! you haven't been betting?' 

* Yes ; you see that 's just what I have been doing. Damn 
it all, Sainty, don't look as if I 'd been robbing a church. 
Every fellow has a little something on his favourite horse : 
it 's not a crime.' 

Sainty stared aghast. He had often wondered how Arthur 
managed to get rid of so much money at Eton, where, as he 
knew, though the boys were absurdly extravagant, the oppor- 
tunities for spending were not unlimited. Now he under- 
stood, and a bottomless gulf seemed to open at his feet. 

* Of course it 's only a temporary thing,' Arthur went on. 
' I made a good thing over Ascot, but I 've been unlucky 
with the Eclipse ; one can't always win, you know. Unfor- 
tunately these things have to be paid up, don't yer know. 
My bookie 's a very good sort of chap, but he 's got to pay his 
losses, and he naturally wants his money. You can call it a 
loan, if you like. I 've got a splendid tip for the Leger ' 

Sainty looked down at his paper. Epictetus seemed to 
have gone a long way off and become suddenly very unim- 
portant since he had looked up from it. He knew how 
useless it would be to expostulate ; but he wanted time to 
adjust his mind to this new terror. 

* How did you come to know ^w to bet ? * he asked ; * I 
mean the machinery of the thing. Who introduced you to a 
bookmaker ? ' 

Arthur laughed aloud. * Upon my word I don't remember,' 
he said ; ' but I assure you it 's not difficult. Half the fellows 
I know have a book on all the meetings. I rather think it 
was CUudQ told m^ of this chap ; he 's a very good sort. The 



BELCHAMBER 73 

man I went to before when I won a pony over the Derby 
wrote and said my telegram had come too late. I wasn't 
going to stand that kind of thing, so I cut him, naturally ' 

Of course Arthur got what he wanted; it wasn't, as it 
happened, a very large sum. But Sainty was left with an 
abiding dread. He wondered sometimes how it was that he 
saw so clearly the dangers that menaced his brother, while 
Arthur himself remained so sublimely unconscious and 
untroubled. The mention of Claude's name in the matter, 
too, had reawakened an old anxiety. He had supposed that 
after his cousin left Eton Arthur would not be likely to have 
much to do with him except at Belchamber, and under his 
own eye. Claude's was an influence he particularly dreaded 
for his brother, and it was evident that they had at least been 
corresponding. He wondered if he ought to say anything to 
his cousin about it, but he remembered the small effect such 
interference on his part had always produced. 

The Morlands were among the first to arrive for the coming- 
of-age festivities. Lady Eva had said, when she proposed it, 
that there must be heaps of things to attend to, and she 
should love to be of use. It need hardly be said that she 
was not. Her notion of offering assistance was to look in 
when Lady Charmington was busy, and say, 'Dear Sarah, I 
see I should be dreadfully in the way just now ; you will do 
much better without poor silly me. I will take a book out 
under the trees.' 

Claude, on the other hand, was extraordinarily helpful. He 
was capable, when it suited him, of taking immense pains, 
and he had a genius for order and detail which was of incal- 
culable service to his aunt and cousin. He helped Lady 
Charmington and the housekeeper to arrange the long dis- 
used rooms, he settled who should occupy each, and wrote 
out lists of every kind of thing and person, in a beautiful, 
neat, clear little handwriting. He was gay, tactful, amusing, 
good-humoured. Sainty was overcome with gratitude, and 
felt it more than ever impossible to take this smiling, affec- 
tionate person to task for such a little thing as introducing 



74 BELCHAMBER 

Arthur to a bookmaker. After all, it was not his first intro- 
duction to a gentleman of that profession, and apparently all 
his cousin had done was to substitute an honest for a dis- 
honest member of the ring. 

Claude's attentions to his grandmother had not proved 
fruitless, for when he failed, no one quite knew why, to pass 
his examinations for diplomacy, she had persuaded the duke 
to take him as his private secretary ; and his experiences in 
that capacity made him now of incalculable use in coping 
with the new groom of the chambers, a young man of 
Olympian beauty, with a sepulchral voice and manner, who 
had been the duchess's footman, and in keeping the peace 
between him and the butler, who regarded this recent acquisi- 
tion with unconcealed distrust and aversion. The establish- 
ment was now more or less on its new footing, the unwieldy 
machine beginning to act, with much creaking and groaning 
and a need of all the oil that Claude and Sainty could supply 
between them. 

Old Lady Firth had been for some time installed in the 
warmest spare bedroom in the family wing, with her maid 
next door to her, and her son came down as soon as the 
session was over, giving up the * Twelfth ' with a sad heart, 
but promising himself to fly to the golf-links and moors of 
his native land as soon as he had done this last duty for his 
ward. Sainty appreciated the sacrifice his uncle was making 
for him, and much wanted to thank him for it, but only 
succeeded in feeling and looking embarrassed. 

* I 'm sure it 's very good-natured of you coming here for 
this boring business. Uncle Cor,' he said suddenly one 
evening. ' I feel sure you 'd rather be in the north.' 

< I don't know, my dear boy,' answered his uncle patronis- 
ingly, 'why you should not give me credit for a natural 
interest in being present on what is really rather a big 
occasion in your life.' 

' It is so ungracious of Sainty,' said Lady Charmington, 'to 
persist on looking on the whole thing merely as a bore, when 
we are all doing our utmost to m^k our sense of the event,' 



BELCHAMBER 75 

*My dear mother,' Sainty cried, 'don't think I don't 



appreciate ' 

' Oh, I don't want to be thanked,' his mother made haste 
to interrupt ; * nor, I 'm sure, does your uncle. We are only 
doing what we feel is our duty ; but it would be pleasant to 
know you took a little interest I believe no one takes so 
little interest in your coming of age as you do yourself.' 

'It does sometimes seem about the worst thing I could 
have done,' Sainty said bitterly, a remark not calculated to 
soothe his mother's susceptibilities. He wondered why, 
whenever he tried to express any kindly feeling, it always 
appeared that he had said something disagreeable, with the 
result that by the end of the conversation he generally had 
actually done so. 

*Who comes to-morrow. Aunt Sarah?' inquired Claude 
tactfully. ' I declare I 've forgotten, though w« went through 
them only this morning.' 

'Let me see,' said Lady Charmington, swiftly reabsorbed 
in her duties as mistress of the house ; ' Ecclestons, three ; 
de Lissacs, three ; my sister Susan and Johnny, two ; and a 
young man Firth has asked, Mr. Pryor. Algy Montgomery 
has written that he can't come till Monday; he will come 
with his father and the duchess and the Rugbies. When do 
your Cambridge friends come, Sainty ? ' 

•Johnson comes to-morrow with the Ecclestons, mother: 
he 's Tommy Eccleston's friend more than mine ; Parsons on 
Monday ; Gerald Newby, I 'm afraid not till Tuesday.' 

It will be seen that a tolerably large party was being 
gathered together. The actual festivities were to occupy two 
days — Wednesday, which was Sainty's birthday, and the fol- 
lowing day ; and not only was Belchamber being once more 
filled with guests, but Hawley and the Grange, and even 
some bigger houses further afield were preparing to bring 
over large contingents for the garden party and ball. 

* Do you think we had better dine in the big dining-room 
to-morrow night ? ' Lady Charmington asked. 

* Oh| not till Monday,' Sainty pleaded ^ ' surely that 11 be 



76 BELCHAMBER 

time enough, mother. This room is quite big enough for 
to-morrow's dinner.* 

Lady Firth, who was dreading the draughts in the great 
banqueting-hall, and secretly wondering if she would not 
dine upstairs the first night it was used, and let the rest of 
the party air it for her, was strongly of Sainty's opinion. 

* Do let's stay a family party as long as we can,' said Lady 
Eva. 'With mamma's advent on Monday we shall inevitably 
become very mondain. Who are all these smart people she 
has insisted on adding to the party ? ' 

' The Nonsuches are cousins and old friends,' Lady Charm- 
ington answered grimly; ' but your mother wished Lord and 
Lady Dalsany asked, and Lady Deans; I confess I don't 
quite see why. I suppose she thought she would be bored 
here unless she provided her own company.' 

Lady Eva laughed as if her sister-in-law had said something 
witty. 

*0h! is Vere Deans coming? That will be nice!' 
exclaimed a young lady who had come with Lady Eva. Amy 
Winston dabbled in literature, and spelt her name Aimee. 
She always wore black, white, or yellow, and still looked 
remarkably handsome in the evening. 'She is a dear, and 
so clever,' Lady Eva had said of her ; * writes, you know, and 
dresses so well on simply nothing. You would love her.* 

If Lady Charmington did love Miss Winston, she dis- 
guised the feeling with perfect success. * Is Lady Deans a 
friend of yours ? ' she asked coldly. 

'Oh no!' said Miss Winston; but I'm simply dying to 
know her. She 's so handsome, and has such splendid jewels, 
and they say she 's so wicked.' 

' I hope not,' Lady Charmington returned, with an increase 
of severity ; ' but if she were, it seems a strange reason for 
wishing to know her.' 

Every day now some of the renovated carriages rolled up 
from the station, bringing recruits to the house party, in one 
of whom the reader will be pleased to recognise an old friend. 
The Mrs. de Lissac, of whom mention has several times been 



BELCHAMBER 77 

made, was no other than Sainty's former governess, Miss 
Meakins. Outwardly in rustle of silks and flash of diamonds, 
and the deference with which the world treated her, Alice de 
Lissac was a very different person from Alice Meakins, but 
inwardly she was just the same kindly, tender, sentimental 
creature as ever. Riches, which have such a corroding effect 
on some people, had left that shy gentle heart quite untouched; 
they represented to her only delightful means of doing good 
to her less fortunate brethren, and she was still wondering 
why all the great ones of the earth were so kind to a poor 
humble little creature like herself. It has been related in a 
former chapter how this kind lady had entered the service of 
a Jewish family, when she left Belchamber, as governess to 
two little girls. 

Mrs. Isaacs, her new employer, was a little, fiery, black-eyed 
woman of immense social ambition, which grew with the 
steady growth of her husband's carefully accumulated wealth. 
She would have been the Napoleon of London society, had 
she only lived, so instinctively did she grasp the market value 
of her possessions in the exchange to which she brought them. 
She had already effected the removal of the family from Lan- 
caster Gate to Grosvenor Square, and the metamorphosis of 
Isa acs into de Lissac, when Death, who, alas ! is no respecter 
of even tiie largest fortunes, put a term to all her hopes. It 
seemed as though the very energy that spurred her to ever 
fresh exertions was a fever burning in her blood, and sapping 
while it stimulated her vital forces. Poor Madame de Lissacl 
— as she insisted on being called — she died within sight of 
the goal. To the end she fought her illness, and would stand 
with trembling limbs and head aching under the weight of a 
huge tiara, while the names of half the peerage shouted in her 
staircase gave her strength to bear the pain that was killing 
her. Her widower remarked truly, between his sobs, that it 
' would have been a comfort to Rachel ' to have seen the cards 
that snowed on the hall table for days after the funeral. 

He, poor man, cared little for all this. He had been glad 
Rachel should have it, just as he liked to give her superb 



/ 



78 BELCHAMBER 

presents on her birthday, and anything else his money could 
buy for her. Personally, his interest was in his work ; he did 
not like the great people who had eaten his food and been 
rude to him. After a hard day in the city, he wanted his 
carpet slippers, a big strong cigar, and a volume of Schiller by 
the fire, or perhaps a sonata by Mozart or Beethoven. 

Alice Meakins was an angel in the bereaved household ; the 
little girls adored her, and gradually Mr. de Lissac found 
that he could not do without her. The girls were just coming 
to an age when most of all they needed the care of a mother; 
if she, of whom they were all so fond, abandoned them, what 
would become of them ? Poor Alice had a terrible struggle. 
She was sincerely attached to the good man who had been 
the most generous and considerate of employers, and she 
loved her charges with all her heart. The great luxurious 
easy house had been the kindest home to her. How could 
she turn away from all this warmth and affection ? ' You know 
— ^you know how I respect, how I love you, if I may say so,' 
cried the poor girl, with tears in her eyes; 'and I 'd lay down my 
life for the children. But oh ! Mr. de Lissac, feeling as I do 
about things, I couldn't marry any one who wasn't a Christian.' 

And now the most wonderful thing came to pass. Her 
principles inspired this shyest and humblest of human beings, 
who blushed if she had to correct a pupil's mistake, and to 
whom a difference of opinion was almost a physical pain, with 
something of the spirit of the early martyrs. She herself 
always considered that she had been miraculously aided; 
perhaps a certain pagan divinity, whose assistance she would 
have made haste to repudiate, counted for something in the 
matter. But certain it is, that she was the means of leading a 
whole family after her into the fold, and it may be imagined 
the excitement she was to Lady Charmington under the cir- 

tcumstances. Mr. de Lissac had not been a very fervent Jew, 
and he made a most unenthusiastic Christian; but he was 
nominally converted. Instead nfnntjTjJrnfling thr lyrm^rtfiif j 
he nQwstayed aw av from church, and that satisfied his not 
very exacting helpmate, to whom the permission to bring up 



BELCHAMBER 79 

her stepdaughters in her own faith gave the last brimming 
happiness in her cup of blessing. They at least supplied all 
the warmth and devotion she demanded. An eminent co- 
religionist of her husband's, in the city, remarked to a friend : 
' Isaacs can shanshe his name, and shanshe his religion, but 
he cannot shanshe his nose.' Neither could he change his 
habits. He accompanied his wife once to the rectory, and 
once to Belchamber, where the rejoicing of the angels embar- 
rassed him to the point of regretting that he had not stayed 
in the wilderness ; but his wife mostly made her excursions to 
the scenes of her youth without him, and the present occasion 
was no exception to the rule. 

Mrs. de Lissac was always fluttered and excited when she 
came to Belchamber, and Sainty's coming of age was just the 
sort of occasion to appeal to her imagination. The young 
ladies were fine-looking girls: the eldest. Gemma, whose 
biblical name Jemima had been thus abbreviated about the 
time of the removal to Mayfair, was tall and slight, with a 
clear olive paleness and almond eyes. Nora was more like 
her father, shorter, and with more pronounced features, but 
with her mother's brilliant colour and black burning orbs. 
They were both a marked contrast to Cissy Eccleston, who 
was the fairest, pinkest, and whitest creature imaginable, with 
a little button of a nose, a more refined etherealised edition of 
her brother Thomas. Lady Eccleston, too, had been fair, 
but had grown a little red and wrinkled with time. She had 
an astonishingly slight and youthful figure, with rather an 
elderly face. He r hair, haviiig_a ^oice in the matter, had very 
naturally elected to stay young with her waist rather than 
grow old with her countenance ; indeed, its adherence to the 
party of youth seemed to become more marked with each 
succeeding year. 

This lady was slightly known to Sainty as a rather unlikely 
friend of his mother ; she was, in point of fact, of the nature 
of a favourite sin to Lady Charmington. Her late husband, 
Sir Thomas Eccleston, K.C.B., had been a permanent official 
in one of the Government offices, and had left her with a 



1 



8o BELCHAMBER 

moderate competence, and a colossal visiting-list. She was 
essentially in and of London, a Belgravian to the marrow of 
her bones. Nothing but insufficiency of income could have pre- 
vented her living in Eaton Square. As it was, she worshipped at 
its temple, the church of St. Peter, and lived as immediately 
round the corner as her means permitted. She shopped 
in Sloane Street, she had her books from Westerton's, she 
visited a ward in St. George's Hospital ; she also took a fashion- 
able interest in a poor East-end parish. In short, she mingled 
religion and philanthropy with the punctual performance of 
her immense social duties in exactly the proportion demanded 
by the society of which she was a living, breathing, integral 
part. Much in so mundane a personage was at first rather 
alarming to Lady Charmington ; but they met in the com- 
mittee rooms of charity, who, among the multitude of sins 
she covers, could surely spare a corner of her mantle for the 
few venial transgressions of such a respectable devotee as 
Lady Eccleston. The very worldliness of her relations made 
her a powerful factor for good works. She might always be 
confidently relied upon for a duchess or minor royalty to head 
a list of patronesses, or a rich friend ready to lend a big house 
for drawing-room meetings ; and even her deplorable habit of 
asking theatrical people to dinner on Sundays had been 
proved to have its good side, the professional gentlemen and 
ladies being very useful in giving their services in aid of many 
deserving funds. No one was a more practical hand at 
organising bazaars, concerts, tableaux, the various conduits 
which brought to the objects of her own interest the fertilising 
stream of other people's money. She and Mrs. de Lissac and 
their families had travelled from town together. Alice was 
made for Lady Eccleston, who feasted at her expense, used 
her carriage, copied her bonnets, directed her charities, and 
revised her visiting-list They were allies in many good works. 
The girls adored Cissy as only dark girls can adore a creature 
composed of rose-leaves and sunlight, though they were a 
little shocked at the triviality of her ideals, and the way she 
occasionally spoke of her mother. 



BELCHAMBER 8i 

The visitors arrived about tea-time. Five o'clock tea had 
never been the institution at Belchamber that it is in most 
country-houses, the domestic altar where the high priestess 
makes her little daily sacrifice of blue spirit flame and 
fragrant herb. Lady Charmington did not drink tea as an 
everyday thing; being a rigid abstainer, she kept it for a 
stimulant when she was tired, which was not often. When 
there was company, a tray of half-cold cups ready poured out 
used to be handed round by one of the footmen, the other 
following with cream and sugar, and the butler bringing up 
the rear with a plate of bread and butter and some sponge- 
cakes in a silver basket. 

For the present party, the wonderful Claude had brought 
about a charming revolution. A pleasant table with its white 
cloth and gleaming silver was spread under the cedars, at 
which he and Arthur and Aimde Winston dispensed good 
things to the tired and dusty travellers. 

'How good tea is after a journey,' Lady Eccleston re- 
marked, beaming on the company. 

*I never touch it,' said Lady Firth, with a shudder; *it is 

destruction to the nerves. Th is habit of fiv e o'clock tea is 

_ havimg th^ m n^ deplorabl f ppv>^«- ^ry xi\:^Jf>^^^^^r''^^rmTr^ 

^jtioxL. My maid, who has been with me five-and-twenty 

years, always brings me a glass of taraxacum and hops at 

half-past four ; it is wonderfully strengthening.' 

'Oh dear! it is very dreadful of me to like tea so 
much,' cried poor Lady Eccleston. * And I so agree with 
you, t^^T T^ij jy^ Firth; we do all live on our nerves so 
much, too much, nowadays. I declare now you put it 
like that, I shall be quite afraid to drink it; but taraxa- 
cum ' 

* Let me send for some for you,' said Lady Firth earnestly; 
'you can't think the good it does you. I gave some to the 
dear bishop of Griqualand, after that drawing-room meeting 
at my house, when he spoke for two hours and a half, and 
was quite exhausted.' 

Hardly was Lady Eccleston able to escape the proffered 

F 



8a BELCHAMBER 

refreshment by tender and well-timed inquiries after the dear 
bishop and his mission. 

Sainty, by reason of his lameness, was not expected to hand 
about eatables. He sat, as he usually did, a little drawn 
back from the circle about the table, talking little, noticing 
everything — Lady Eccleston's striving after cheap popularity, 
Mrs. de Lissac's parted lips as she listened to his mother, 
for whom she had retained all her old reverential admiration, 
his uncle Firth's bored expression as his Aunt Susan Trafibrd 
held forth on some small bill that had been too hastily passed 
at the end of the session, and the easy grace with which 
Claude moved about among the groups, dispensing sugar 
or fruit, and saying little laughing nothings to every one. 
'Really, he is marvellous,' Sainty thought; 'it is impossible 
not to love him.' Claude was solemn, brief, and official with 
Sir John Trafford, the young M.P., knowing and mysterious 
with Austin Pryor of the Stock Exchange, playful with 
Arthur, empressh with the young ladies, and kindly civil 
to Tommy Eccleston and Johnson, who were very shy, while 
always ready to fill the teapot for Miss Winston, or hand a 
third cup to Lady Susan, who, like all great talkers, was 
a thirsty soul. 

But something else seemed vaguely perceptible to Sainty, 
watching from his low chair under the cedars, a sense of 
some secret bond or understanding between his cousin and 
the tea-maker. What gives these sudden intuitions ? What 
silent, mysterious voice speaks to what inner sense, when 
with all our outward senses we are receiving quite different 
impressions ? Claude failed in no shade of pretty deferential 
politeness to Miss Winston ; his manner had just that touch 
of insolence which it had to all women, and which many of 
them take as a compliment. They were the centre of a large 
party, and bathed in the clear golden light of a summer 
afternoon. Sainty intercepted no meaning glance between 
them, no contact of monitory fingers, yet he felt as if a 
curtain had been momentarily withdrawn from some secret 
thing that he should not have seen. 



BELCHAMBER 83 

He roused himself with a start that was almost guilty, to 
find that Miss Eccleston, who was sitting near him, had 
addressed a remark to him which he had not heard. 

* I beg your pardon,' he said ; * I didn't know you were 
speaking to me.' Cissy laughed a little, clear, bubbling 
laugh. 

* You were a thousand miles away,* she said. * I wonder 
what you were thinking of; but I am not so indiscreet as to 
ask ; it was evidently none of the present company. I hope 
I haven't broken into some important thing you were think- 
ing out. I 'm told you 're awfully clever and deep, and read 
a lot' 

'You mustn't believe all the harm you hear of people,* 
Sainty said, with a weak attempt at persiflage. He was 
thinking how pretty this fresh young creature was, the 
childish face shaded by a great hat, the small head rising 
flower-like from among the laces at her throat. No young 
monk in his cloister had had less to do with girls than 
Sainty ; it was a curious fact that in his generation there were 
none in the family. Lady Susan Trafford, like her sister and 
Lady Macbeth, had ' brought forth men children only.' No 
early intimacy with sisters or girl cousins had taught him any 
of their ways. 

'You must have had a hot journey down,' he remarked 
politely. 

*0h! it was unbearable,* cried Cissy; *the carriage was 
like a furnace. You can*t think how fresh and sweet it all 
seems here, after London.' 

*We were on the Montagues' yacht for Cowes, and did 
Goodwood from it ; you can't think how delightful it was,' 
said Lady Eccleston in a slightly raised voice to Lady Eva. 
•They wanted us to go on a cruise with them afterwards, 
but there were so many things I had to see to, I was 
obliged to go back to town for a day or two before 
coming here, and I wouldn't have missed this visit for 
anything.' 

Cissy drew her chair a little nearer to Sainty, and dropped 



84 BELCHAMBER 

her voice to a confidential whisper. * Isn't that like mamma? 
She heard me say we had come from London, and all that 
was put in for fear you should think we had stayed in town 
after the season was over.' 

*For fear / should think?' Sainty repeated, slightly be- 
wildered. 

* Oh ! you or any one else,' said Cissy. ' Mamma would 
die if any one thought she hadn't more invitations than she 
could accept. I do wish she wouldn't listen to me when I 'm 
talking to men ; it makes me furious.' 

'I'm sure you never say anything you would mind her 
hearing,' said Sainty rather priggishly. 

' I wouldn't answer for that, you know,' rejoined Cissy, with 
an arch expression of something not unlike contempt. 

If Sainty had been old Lady Firth, he could not have felt 
himself more outside the sphere of the ordinary attraction 
of man to maid. When his eye rested with admiration on 
Cissy Eccleston, his first thought had been what a charming 
couple she and Arthur would make. He thought it very 
kind of this pretty young lady to take pity on his disabilities, 
but he felt that it was hard on her to be left to talk to 
him ; he didn't want to monopolise her, and he looked round 
to see if some more suitable companion were not within 
reach. As if in answer to his thought, Claude came towards 
them at the moment. 

'It is cooler now, Miss Eccleston,' he said. 'Some of us 
are going to the kitchen-garden in search of gooseberries ; do 
you care to come, or do you despise gooseberries? ' 

Cissy rose with alacrity. ' I love 'em,' she said simply. 

Sainty was quite inconsistently annoyed at the sight of the 
two standing there before him. Had Arthur or one of the 
other boys come for her, he would have been glad, but 
he felt on a sudden that in the light of what he had half 
surprised between his cousin and Miss Winston, Claude 
had no right to come making eyes at this fair young 
creature. An impulse stirred in him to snatch her away, 
to save her from he did not quite know what He rose too. 



BELCHAMBER 85 

*I am sure Miss Eccleston is tired,' he said; 'it's a long 
way to the kitchen-garden; she had much better come in 
and rest.' 

*0h, I'm never tired, except when I'm bored,' said 
Cissy. 

' I know who ts tired/ said Claude, with affectionate solici- 
tude. ' You look quite done up, old chap ; you ought to 
lie down before dinner. Remember you've a lot before 
you.' Sainty saw in a second how silly and unreasonable 
he was being. 

* Yes, you 're right,' he said ; * I am tired. I '11 go in.' 

Claude and Cissy moved off in the rear of the little pro- 
cession of young people that was beginning to stream across 
the lawn, and Sainty stood a moment watching them. As he 
turned towards the house, he saw Miss Winston, who had 
not gone with the others, also looking after the retreating 
couple. 



CHAPTER VII 

The Duchess of Sunborough had not revisited her former 
home since she left it after the death of her first husband. 
Sainty had paid one or two duty visits to his grandmother on 
the rare occasions of his being in London, sometimes with 
his mother, sometimes alone. He had always found the 
duchess smiling and debonair, very civil and entirely indif- 
ferent, a most mysterious personality, both in her strange 
spurious youthfulness and her entire detachment from family 
ties. She returned on the present occasion as cheerful, 
as amiable, and as unembarrassed as though she were paying 
a first visit to some distant acquaintances, in a place that was 
entirely new to her. She was accompanied by her husband* 
his eldest son and daughter-in-law, Lord and Lady Rugby, 
and one of his younger sons, Algernon Montgomery, a 
young officer in the Life Guards. The duke was a well- 
preserved, clean-shaven, spick-and-span old gentleman, whom 
people were fond of citing as a typical nobleman, and indeed 
among the dukes he made a very creditable appearance. 
Had he been the senior partner of some large commercial 
house he would have passed unobserved in a crowd of 
equally respectable-looking contemporaries on any suburban 
railway. In his youth he had been a gambler and a rake, 
and had made his first wife (the mother of his children) 
thoroughly unhappy by his devotion to many ladies, chief 
among whom had been his present duchess ; but having at 
seventy outgrown his taste for youthful pleasures, he was 
spoken of as a pillar of the State and a model of all the 
virtues. In the year of Belchamber's majority, a Tory 
government, of which his grace was an inconspicuous 

8d 



BELCHAMBER 87 

ornament, was busy making Great Britain what she is among 
the nations. The Chamberses, as far as they had a political 
creed, belonged, it is needless to say, to the same party. 
Lord Firth's family, on the other hand, had always been 
Whigs, and the old lord, as well as the present one, had 
been a member of more than one Liberal cabinet. It was 
Lady Susan in her younger days who had given vent to the 
sentiment that she would as soon have married the footman 
as a Conservative ; but a recent cataclysm among the Liberals 
had driven this ardent lady as well as her cooler brother 
into antagonism to their own party, though they had not as 
yet been absorbed into the other. There was a political 
flirtation going on between the duke and Lord Firth, who 
found themselves in novel agreement as to the line their 
young relative ought to take in politics. * When the Union 
is threatened, all minor differences must be sunk,' the duke 
said graciously ; ' when the ship has sprung a leak, no matter 
what are our views of the way she should be sailed, we must 
all take a hand at the pumps'; which made Claude call his 
revered chief the * Pompier.' 

The guests were assembled before dinner in the great 
saloon, which even in August had a chilly suggestion of not 
being habitually used. 

* I hope,' Lord Firth said, with an inviting side glance at his 
nephew, 'that Belchamber will be able to help Hawley's 

election. I don't know exactly what his views are * and 

here he paused long enough to give Sainty an opportunity of 
making a profession of faith if he were so minded. Nothing, 
however, was further from Sainty's intention. 

* I think Mr. Hawley's election quite safe,' he said ; * it is 
fifty years since the county returned anything but a Conser- 
vative,' and he moved away to take Ned Parsons, who had 
arrived since the other guests had gone to dress, and present 
him to Lady Charmington. 

Sainty had been a little apprehensive how Ned would fit 
into the picture. Parsons had grafted on to the slovenliness 
that was either natural or affected at Cambridge a rather 



88 BELCHAMBER 

aggressive splendour; though a rebel tuft waved defiance 
on his crown, and his shirt-front was a little crumpled, his 
collar and tie were of the moment, his pumps were new 
and glossy, and he wore a gardenia in his buttonhole. Lady 
Charmington was talking to Lord and Lady Rugby. Lord 
Rugby was explaining with tactful grace that it was lucky 
Sainty had been born in the summer, otherwise he, as a 
M.F.H., could not possibly have been present on the oc- 
casion. From Easter to the beginning of the cub-hunting 
he was, so to speak, at leisure, and had nothing to do 
but talk of last winter's hunting. Lady Rugby, though also 
a keen sportswoman, was capable of other forms of amuse- 
ment, and said for her part she liked a ' bit of season,' but 
'poor Rug was so bored in London it was a terror to see 
him.' She was dressed with the uncompromising neatness 
affected by hunting-ladies ; her complexion had that bricky 
tint that results from much exposure to the weather at the 
covert side, and fashion decreeing undulation, her naturally 
straight brown hair was crimped into a series of little ridges 
and furrows, whose hardness of outline and mathematical 
regularity suggested corrugated iron. Somewhat to Sainty's 
surprise, Ned fell into easy conversation with this horsey 
person, rather suggesting, though he did not actually say it, 
that he spent his life in the saddle. 

But now the duchess appeared in all her glory, and dinner 
being announced, Sainty offered his arm to his grandmother 
and headed the long procession to the dining-hall. 

'Well, my dear boy,' she began, when they were seated, 
'and how have you been lately? You don't look strong; 
you must take care of yourself. What do you drink? you 
look as if you wanted red wine. My doctor has put me upon 
whisky. I hate it, but he says I am goutteuse. They call 
everything gout nowadays ; too silly, isn't it ? ' 

* I am sorry you haven't been well, gr ' 

Sainty paused, and ' grandmother ' died in his throat. It 
seemed so ludicrously inappropriate to this festive apparition 
at his side. He glanced with quite a new tenderness to 



BELCHAMBER 89 

where old Lady Firth sat huddled in shawls and then back 
to the lady on his right. Above the thick frizzle of sherry- 
coloured chestnut that descended to the carefully pencilled 
brows shone one of the duchess's smaller tiaras — the great 
Sunborough family crown was being kept for the ball on 
Thursday — the little nose gleamed unnaturally white between 
the tired eyes heavily rimmed with paint and the puffy 
cushions beneath them that merged into the vivid carmine of 
the cheeks. The wrinkles under the chin were gathered 
tightly into a great collar of diamonds and pearls sewn on a 
broad black velvet. Below it the shoulders sloped away in 
their still beautiful curves, displaying to the world with the 
indifference of long habit their great expanse of lustreless 
pallor. The little of her grace's dress that was visible above 
the line of the table-cloth was of a delicate peach colour 
embroidered in silver, and a huge bunch of purple orchids 
cut with an almost brutal contrast against the excessive 
whiteness of the flesh. She sat erect, placid, exhaling a 
faint sweetness, not unlike the idol of some monstrous 
worship. 

'Do you like the smell of my verveine?* she asked. 'I 
think every woman should have her own par/um. I have it 
sewn into all my corsages. I never could bear strong coarse 
scents. My daughter has rather brutalised herself, and is 
quite capable of using patchouli. Horror I ' 

' I 'm afraid I don't like scent at all,' Sainty avowed peni- 
tently ; ' it makes me feel rather sick always.' 

'And now, tell me who every one is,' continued the 
duchess affably. ' Who is the champagne blonde with the 
iridescent perlage trimming next your brother ? ' 

'That is Lady Eccleston,' said Sainty. 

' Oh ! of course, she has been at Sunborough House at 
parties ; one sees her everywhere. I ought to have remem- 
bered her'; and the duchess sent a gracious smile towards 
Lady Eccleston. ' And the pretty girl that Claude is flirting 
with is her daughter — one can see the likeness. Elle est tris 
biefiy lajeunefilU; charming. Madame de Lissac I know: 



90 BELCHAMBER 

she is richissime and very generous ; and your mother tells 
me she was your governess once ; that is very romantic. The 
black girls are not her daughters, tiest-ce pas}^ 
' Her step-daughters.' 

* Ah yes. And the men? Pryor I know; they say he is 
making money and will get on. The pink boy is encore a 
(what did you say ?) Eccleston. They resemble each other 
like peas, that family. And the untidy young man who is 
amusing Aim^e Winston so much ? By the way, how came 
she here ? With your Aunt Eva, of course. She is not a 
nice girl.' 

The duchess delivered this condemnation with a most 
majestic air of virtue. ' I do not like a girl to be talked 
about,' she continued; ' afterwards, /; ne dispas\ but before 
marriage a girl cannot be too careful. She always succeeds 
with men, however. The duke declares she is very clever ; 

and one can see she is pleasing Mr. Who did you say 

he was?' 

' He is a Cambridge friend of mine ; his name is Parsons.' 
'He seems a nice fellow,' Lady Rugby cut in from the 
other side of Sainty. 'I wonder if he is anything to do 
with the Leicestershire Parsonses. My old uncle, Sir Tom 
Whittaker, who hunted the Scratchley for years, married a 
widow, and one of her daughters married a Parsons. I know 
it used to be a great joke in the family because he was a 
Parson, don't yer know.' 

* I couldn't say, I 'm sure,' Sainty answered ; * you will have 
to ask him.' Really, Ned was fitting in beautifully, and if 
only his relationship to Lady Whittaker could be established, 
he felt he need trouble no more about him. 

The duchess yawned. ' They are all charming, no doubt,' 
she said; ' but, my dear boy, none of these people give much 
kclat to your coming of age. I felt you must have a few 
people whose names people would know, just to put into the 
Morning Post And your mother has lived so long out of 
the world she knows no one — but no one. I believe she is 
angry with me for insisting on the Dalsanies and Vere Deans; 



BELCHAMBER 91 

but I am used to that ; she has always been angry with me.' 
This was getting on dangerous ground. 

' It is very good of you to take an interest,' Sainty said in 
his stiffest manner ; but the duchess did not in the least wish 
to be treated as family ; she thought it was good of her. 

' Oh ! du iout^ she said suavely. ' Besides, it was not all 
unselfish. Ella Dalsany plays piquet with me, and Dalsany 
takes a very good hand in the duke's whist. I suppose,' she 
added tentatively, ' your mother would not allow a baccarat ? ' 

' Good gracious 1 ' cried Sainty, much alarmed, ' I don't 
suppose there is a card in the house.' 

' Oh, I always travel with my little box,' said his grand- 
mother. ' But we must respect the prejudices of the cMte- 
laine ; we will only play whist.' This was before the days of 
the tyranny of bridge. 

The duchess glanced at Sir John TrafTord, who was sitting 
at her right, and seeing his attention engaged by the lady 
whom he had taken in, she leaned a little towards her grandson, 
and sinking her voice confidentially she murmured, ' When I 
knew that your cousin here was coming, I felt it was only 
kind to ask the Dalsanies ; and if Ella had her cavalier, then 
poor Dalsany must have /a belie comtesse to amuse him ; he 
couldn't be left out in the cold, poor dear.' 

'Scandal, Helo,' Lady Rugby called out— (the duchess 
liked the younger members of her family to call her by her 
Christian name). ' When you have on that expression, and 
I can't hear what you say, I always know you are taking away 
some one's character.' 

' Whose character is the duchess taking away ? ' asked Sir 
John; 'not mine, I hope'; and this struck her grace as so 
humorous that she almost choked. 

Sainty sat bewildered and vaguely pained. In the mouth 
of an old woman, and that old woman his dead father's 
mother, the playful innuendoes, which to the duchess seemed 
only the ordinary small change of dinner-table talk, struck 
him as signs of a monstrous depravity. He glanced round 
the great room with its ceiling by La Guerre, and heavy gilt 



92 BELCHAMBER 

decorations, and the rows of portraits by Vandyke and Lely, 
down the long table with its lights and flowers and massive 
plate, at the two rows of flushed, eagerly talking people stretch- 
ing away on either hand, and his heart failed him. He 
wondered sadly why Ned Parsons, who was one of six 
children in a little shabby rectory, and the de Lissac girls, 
whose grandfather was said to have been a rag and bone 
merchant, should seem perfectly at home among all these 
splendours, while he, the founder of the feast, the owner of 
the house, who had been born and bred in it, felt so curiously 
ill at ease at the head of his own table. Arthur, just fresh 
from school, was chattering away to Lady Eccleston and 
Nora de Lissac, between whom he sat, with the ease and 
assurance of an old London diner-out. It was neither birth, 
breeding, nor custom, then, which made people feel at home 
in society. Whence came this horrible sensation of being 
out of place? After all^ these people, who together pro- 
duced such a dazzling effect of glittering festivity, were 
individually nothing but relations, old friends, under- 
graduates, schoolboys. His mother, his grandmother, his 
uncle Cor, his aunts, his former governess, his cousins, his 
brother; he had sat down with each and all of them to a 
score of meals without feeling like the lady in Comus. He 
feared it was very snobbish of him to be so disagreeably 
affected by dining in an unaccustomed room and with an 
unusual number of guests. Perhaps it was the duchess, with 
her shocking old shoulders and naughty hints, and the little 
scent bags sewn into her bodice, who brought such a dis- 
turbing atmosphere of the great world into his life. If so, 
how much worse was it going to be next day, when she would 
be reinforced by these threatened strangers of her own 
undoubted fashion and loose morality ? The thought of all 
these guilty married people, cynically invited ' for ' each other, 
filled him with horror. No doubt he exaggerated, and took 
the whole matter more tragically than the circumstances 
warranted, but he was very young and very unsophisticated, 
and things that were not right appeared to him terribly and 



BELCHAMBER 93 

portentously wrong. He felt as though the home of his 
mother, of his own innocent childhood, were being turned 
into a house of ill fame. 

But Tuesday, if it brought this last brimming influx of 
unwelcome strangers, brought with them one supreme com- 
pensation in the person of Gerald Newby. Gerald, who was 
making a cross-country journey, was arriving at a diflerent 
station from the other guests, several miles in an opposite direc- 
tion, and Sainty decided to drive his own confidential pony to 
meet his friend. His mother looked grave when she heard 
of it, and asked if he did not think it would be more civil for 
him to be there to receive the Dalsanies and Lady Deans. 
' Oh no, mother ; the last person they would care to see is 
their host,' Sainty said. * You will be here, and Uncle Cor 
has promised to be about ; he knows them all. I shan't be 
missed.' 

For once Sainty had his way, and drove off rejoicing in his 
escape. He was generally nervous of driving alone, 
lameness makinffhjfp fip ^HnlnTin in fitn of nn nerirti nt^ but 
to-aayJTRarllTsconversation with his friend might be quite 
free, he would not even take a groom with him. He had so 
much to say to Gerald, so much which he could say to no 
one else, that he wanted to pour it all out unchecked by fear 
of listening ears. As he drove to the little roadside station 
in the shimmering heat of the August afternoon, by great 
fields of waving corn, and under the thick sleepy woods 
knee-deep in fern where he could hear the pheasants scuttling 
and clucking, he felt a weight lifted off his heart; now at 
last he would have some one to talk to, some one who 
understood. The train was late, and the flies bothered the 
pony dreadfully, but at last the long wait came to an end, 
and Newby, bronzed by foreign suns and very cindery and 
dusty, emerged smiling from the station, and climbed into 
the cart beside him. 

'Ohi you have come yourself,' he said; 'that was very 
kind. Where 's your man ? ' 

'I came alone,' Sainty answered; 'I wanted to talk« I 



94 BELCHAMBER 

wanted you all to myself, and your portmanteau must sit 
behind ; there was no room for the groom.' Something in 
Gerald's face made him add playfully, 'Did you expect a 
coach and four? Am I not receiving you with sufficient 
ceremony ? ' 

* Oh, me t ' said Newby, with a little deprecating gesture of 
quite false humility. 

Sainty wanted to hear all that his friend had been doing, 
of the countries he had visited, the walks he had taken, the 
peaks he had climbed ; but for once Newby did not seem to 
be inclined to talk about himself. He leaned back, beaming 
lazily on the passing landscape. 

' After all,' he said, ' one may go where one will, to the 
grandest of Swiss peaks, or the sunlight and flowers of Italy, 
but there is nothing like this English country in the summer; 
it is so prosperous, so established, at once homelike and in- 
effably high-bred, like the best of our old landed aristocracy.' 

* O Lord ! ' Sainty cried. * That same landed aristocracy 
is smothering me. Wait till you see the awful specimens who 
have come together to rejoice in a new recruit to their ranks.' 
And he launched out into a tirade, as enthusiastic young 
people will, on the barbarism of the English upper classes, 
their want of education and refinement, their inability to 
appreciate intellectual pleasures, their low standard of morality, 
and, above all, their entire self-satisfaction and conviction of 
their own perfect rightness.' 

'Look at the duke,' he said; 'there's a man who owns 
the finest private library in England. I don't believe he 
knows even its chief treasures by name. If it was sold 
to-morrow, and the shelves fronted with sham book-backs, 
like the doors in the library at Belchamber, it wouldn't 
make the smallest difference to him. Rugby could keep 
his collection of riding and driving-whips in them; I 
am told it is unique. He is a kind of centaur; he can, 
and will, recount to you every run of last winter, with- 
out omitting a fence or a ditch ; but if you ask him the 
simplest question about the history or archaeology of the 



BELCHAMBER 95 

country he hunts over, he will stare at you as if you were a 
madman. What have I in common with such people ? By 
what curious freak of nature have I been born among 
them ? ' 

^Lord Rugby is the Duke of Sunborough's eldest son, 
isn't he? ' asked Newby. * And the present duchess, if I 'm 
not mistaken, is your grandmother. I like to know who the 
people are that I 'm going to meet.' 

* My grandmother !' said Sainty tragically. * Well, she 's my 
father's mother, and I mustn't say how she affects me; but 
oh ! heavens, Gerald, wait till you see her ! And she has asked 
some other people, whom I don't even know, but who all 
seem to be in love with each other's wives, and to have to be 
asked to meet each other as you would engaged couples. It * 
sickens me, I tell you. It 's an atmosphere I can't breathe.' 

Somehow Newby, whom he had often heard give vent 
to sentiments of a lofty and republican purity, and in whose 
mouth a favourite phrase was *the aristocracy of intellect,' 
did not seem to enter as sympathetically into his feelings as 1 
he had hoped. He continued smiling peacefully on the , 
prospect around him. 

*And where do you begin?' he asked presently, a little 
inconsequently. 

'Where do I begin? How do you mean?' Sainty 
stammered. 

* I mean your property, your land. When do we come to 
your boundary ? ' 

*0h! the property,' Sainty answered. 'It's pretty well 
all Belchamber all the way, except just for a bit on the 
left of the road soon after we started, where the Hawley 
woods cut in, in a sort of wedge.' 

Gerald nodded placidly, as if the thought gave him 
' pleasure. 

' I expect you 're tired after your journey, this hot weather,' 
Sainty said, finding his friend so languid. 'Shall we shirk 
all the crowd, and go and have some tea in the schoolroom 
when we get in ? ' 



1 



96 BELCHAMBER 

'Whatever you say, my dear boy/ Newby agreed. 'I am 
entirely in your hands.' 

Sainty was aware of the slightest, most impalpable change 
in his friend's manner towards himself, just the faintest tinge 
of something that might almost be called deferential in a 
person so naturally authoritative as Newby ; and this seemed 
to accentuate itself with every acre of Chambers land across 
which they drove. It made him vaguely uncomfortable ; his 
denunciation of his peers seemed somehow to dwindle and 
lose force in such an unfostering atmosphere. He had still a 
great deal on his heart of which he longed to unburthen 
himself, but Gerald was perversely interested in the size of 
the park and the number of deer, and paid but a polite and 
perfunctory attention to his host's exposition of the sins of 
the British aristocracy. Later on, when they joined the rest 
of the party, and Sainty, having been himself presented to the 
newcomers, proceeded to perform the same office for Newby, 
he noted with terror something that in any one else he would 
almost have called obsequious in his friend's attitude. He 
resolutely shut his eyes to it; it was of course out of the 
t question that a person of Newby's commanding intellect and 
I noble independence of character could be in any way affected 
I by the mere, baubles of wealth or rank in the people with 
whom he came in contact He wondered he could be so 
snobbish as to think of such a thing, even to deny it ; but he 
couldn't help seeing that Gerald's manner to the duke and 
even his uncle Firth and Lord Dalsany was not absolutely 
frank and unembarrassed. 

'He is trying to make himself agreeable for my sake,' 
Sainty thought. 'A man whose whole life has been spent 
in a bracing atmosphere of noble thought cannot feel af home 
in the exhausted receiver that is called "society"; but if he 
only knew how much better he appears with his own natural 
manner, though it is a little dictatorial, he would not try 
and soften it even for the sake of being civil to my guests.' 
What with trying not to observe that Newby smiled and 
bowed too much, and not to watch for indications of the 



BELCHAMBER 97 

good understanding at which his grandmother had hinted 
as existing between certain members of the party, Sainty 
spent an even more miserable evening than he had done 
the night before. 

When the duke and Lord Nonsuch had smoked their 
elderly cigars and gone to bed, he succeeded in persuading 
Newby that he was tired, and leaving the rest of the party 
listening to Lord Dalsany's Irish stories, he accompanied his 
friend to his room, bent on having out the rest of the talk 
of which he had been defrauded in the afternoon. 

' It is awful, simply awful ! ' he burst out, as he shut the 
door, ' all this horrible display and waste of money ! I feel 
like Nero, sitting through these long steamy dinners with 
too much to eat and too much to drink, and thinking of the 
thousands of starving people who could be fed for months on 
the money we waste on a meal.' 

'That is very good of you, my dear lad,' Newby answered, 
stretching himself luxuriously in the armchair which he 
wheeled up to the open window, ' but not at all what Nero 
would have felt.' 

'Don't laugh at me, Gerald,' Sainty said piteously. 'I 
know it 's absurd to rant and be highflown ; but it nauseated 
me to hear Lady Deans talking about these new clubs and 
restaurants and saying what a mercy it was to have some 
place where one could get decent food. I thought of that 
woman never spending less than a pound on her dinner, and 
thinking it was a merit, while people were starving a few 
streets off. My bookseller told me he wanted her to buy 
a six-shilling book the other day, and she said she couldn't 
afford it, she should get it from the library.' 

'That tall lady on your left with the black pearls wtis the 
Countess Deans then, whom one hears so much about,' said 
Newby. ' I didn't catch her name when you introduced me, 
but I thought it was she from her photographs, though they 
don't do her justice.' 

' Grandmamma says she and Lord Dalsany are au mt'eux. 

Good God 1 what does she mean? And that Lady Dalsany 

G 



98 BELCHAMBER 

Faugh ! I can't stir about this dirt. Is this just their silly 
way of talking, or are they all really people whom decent folk 
oughtn't to ask into their houses ? ' 

' Oh, you exaggerate,' said Gerald, waving his hand gently. 

* You have lived the life of an anchorite. These Londoners 
have their shibboleths, and understand each other; the 
badinage of a great city is not meant to be taken literally.' 

* What ^^w must think of it all ! ' cried Sainty affectionately. 
He had an uneasy feeling that Newby was not as much 
horrified as he ought to be. ' I hoped,' he went on, ' that 
you might have found some congenial companionship in 
my uncle; but Uncle Cor disappoints me. When he gets 
with all these smart people, he seems to sink to their level. 
I can't make him out. Seeing him to-night you would never 
guess what real convictions he has. I have looked up to him 
all my life, but this evening he appeared frivolous and 
cynical ; I could hardly believe it was he talking.' 

' I thought Lord Firth charming,' Gerald replied, with real 
conviction. ' His talk seemed to me in just the right tone 
of easy playfulness for light social intercourse, with ladies 
present. He was not in his place in the House of Lords ; 
nothing called for a profession of faith.' 

'And I hate all this Unionist business,' Sainty continued. 

* I never thought I should live to see Uncle Cor, who has 
always been a Liberal, and from whom I imbibed all my own 
politics till I met you, making up to that old Tory duke. 
They tried to get some expression of agreement out of me 
last night, but I wouldn't say what was expected of me. You 
know I 'm a Radical, and a Home Ruler.' 

•That is all very well for me^ Gerald answered, *but, my 
dear child, doesn't it seem a little absurd in your position ? 
Oh, don't mistake me. I don't want you to deny your 
convictions, but there are so many things one believes with- 
out flourishing them in the face of the public. You wouldn't, 
for instance, care to tell your mother just how you feel about 
the doctrines of revealed religion ' 

Sainty drooped with discouragement. 'It is true; it is 



BELCHAMBER 99 

hideously true,' he said. *One is tied and bound with the 
chain of a hundred shams. Shall I never be able to say 
what I really think ? To-morrow, for instance, nothing would 
content my mother but that the performances should begin 
with a sort of thanksgiving service at Great Charmington. 
It is meant as a solemn dedication of me. If I were really 
brave and honest, I should refuse, but I think it would break 
my mother's heart.' 

*You are quite right, quite right; and why should you 
refuse ? I am sure you do dedicate yourself to the principle 
of good which rules the universe. What more do you mean, 
what more need you mean ? ' 

*My mother will take it as meaning much more, and I 
know that she does, and so will Mrs. de Lissac and her 
dear old father ; they will look on it as giving in a solemn 
adherence to all their doctrines.' 

'You take things too seriously, my Sainty,' said Gerald, 
with an indulgent smile. 

'But it is you who have always exhorted me to take things 
seriously ; I have heard you inveigh a hundred times against 
the careless flippancy that is the curse of our generation.' 

* Good heavens I ' said Newby, suppressing a yawn ; * have 
I invented a Frankenstein monster, who is going to turn and 
devour me ? ' 

* I don't know you to-night, Gerald,' Sainty said reproach- 
fully. * You are like my uncle ; you seem changed somehow. 
Surely if there is ever a time for serious thought and serious 
talk, it is the vigil of one's twenty-first birthday.' 

*Ah yes,' said Newby solemnly. 'Don't think I minimise 
the importance of all to-morrow means to you. You are 
coming into your kingdom, and must rule it wisely and well ; 
but I don't want you to make your first appearance in arms 
tilting at windmills, my dear fellow, and alienating all the 
people who are your natural allies.' 

'I wanted to consult you,' Sainty said, 'about my speech 
to the tenants, but you are tired and sleepy ; it is a shame to 
keep you up.' 



too BELCHAMBER 

•Not at all, not at all/ said Newby politely, with the most 
transparent effort at interest, 

* I was going to show you some heads I had put together, 
but I think I won't bother you ; there is only just one thing 
I want to ask you. Ought I to tell them what I really think 
and feel about things, about Home Rule, for instance? Some 
sort of utterance will be expected of me about politics, I 
feel sure/ 

* Your uncle was talking most sensibly to me after dinner 
about that very thing. " My family," he said, " have always 
been Liberals, but this is a Coilservative county, and the 
agricultural population is always Conservative. I have had, 
as you know, to differ from the chiefs of my own party. It 
is a painful position. Luckily for Belchamber, he has not 
been required to make the choice that I have found so hard ; 
he inherits his politics as he inherits his estate, both, I 
flatter myself, the better for a little enlightened handling by 
his mother and myself. He will not be a worse statesman 
for having come under some Liberal influences in his youth." 
It struck me as admirable.' 

*Then you would have me be merely colourless, indulge 
in a few platitudes, instead of saying what I think?' 

'What good could you effect by starting in to preach 
Radicalism to a tentful of Conservative farmers merry with 
beef and ale, supported on one side by a duke who is a 
member of a Tory government, and on the other by a 
Unionist earl ? * 

Sainty sighed. * You know it is always fatally easy to me 
^ to hold my tongue and let people think that I agree with 
them,' he said bitterly ; * courage has never been my strong 
point/ He had looked to his friend for counsel, for support, 
for the strength to tell the truth in the face of all the world, 
the strength in which he felt himself so sadly lacking. He 
left him baffled and discouraged, and all at sea as to what he 
would do and say on the morrow. 

As he passed down the long corridor of bedrooms, he saw 
the last door before the staircase open noiselessly a very little 



\ 



BELCHAMBER loi 

way, as if some one were looking out. When he came quite 
near to it, it was swiftly, but still silently, closed again. The 
hinted scandals that had oppressed him came crowding to 
his mind, thoughts of shameful, illicit things being done in 
the great silent, dark house. He could not resist the curiosity 
that made him lift his candle and read the name on the little 
ticket on the door : it was Miss Winston's. 

Sainty and Arthur still kept the rooms they had occupied 
as boys, which, with the old schoolroom and another that 
had once been the tutor's and was now Claude's, formed a 
small pavilion adjoining the west wing, and consequently at 
the opposite extremity of the house from the guest chambers. 
To regain his own room he had to cross the whole great 
central part, now black and quiet as the grave. Just as he 
reached the door that shut off the family wing, he heard some 
one behind it. No doubt the tapping of his stick had warned 
whoever it was of his approach, for as he opened it he saw a 
figure swiftly vanish into the room on the right. His first 
impulse was to pass on and take no notice ; then it struck 
him that it might be a thief, and with the sudden courage of 
nervous people he went into the room holding his light high, 
and cried * Who's there?' He found himself face to face 
with his cousin. The stable clock struck two at the moment. 

* Good heavens ! Sainty,' said Claude, with an uneasy 
laugh, * who expected to find you prowling about the house 
at this unearthly hour ? ' 

*I have been sitting up talking to Newby,' Sainty said 
rather sternly. * What are you doing dodging into rooms in 
the dark ? ' 

*We have only just left the smoking-room. I came in 
here to get a book to take up to your friend Parsons ; he said 
he should like to see it.' 

* Vour candle is out ; shall I give you a light ? ' said Sainty. 
*So it is,' said Claude; *the draught from the door, no 

doubt. How lucky I met you. Good-night, dear old man.' 
' Good-night,' said Sainty. 









CHAPTER VIII 

Whether or not there was truth in what Lady Charmington 
had said, that no one took so little interest in the festivities 
of his coming of age as Sainty himself, it certainly came about 
that hardly any one took so little part in them. 

The memory of his birthday remained with him as a 
shifting phantasmagoria of painful images that partook of the 
nature of a nightmare. To be the principal figure in any 
pageant must always have a charm for the imagination of 
youth, if combined with the ability to play the part becom- 
ingly ; but it is a very different matter for one conscious in 
every nerve of his own inadequacy to be set up a butt for 
disappointment, and a peep-show for ridicule. 

The day had begun with a message from his mother that 
she would like to see him before prayers. He found her in 
her private sitting-room, where the picture of his father which 
he had worshipped as a child was enthroned on its gilt easel 
in the corner. Lady Charmington was clean and cool from 
her morning toilet, her hair even smoother and tighter than 
usual. She was dressed in her Sunday black silk, and seated 
in a high-backed chair beside a little table, with the air of 
a pri*>cf^c gj- fiia nji^pr ttot- large serviceable hands were 

crossed on the Bible on her lap. They had big knuckles and 
ma ny rin^s, someofw hir^, hnving ^fifin ^^'^ ^^^^ v>iicKqnH>g^ 
were ^more massive .^^]!fJl^.^llgl!^J_^" fl woman 'r Saiht/s 
quick eye noticed that a signet she habitually wore was not 
among them. He also saw that on the table beside her was 
an imposing pilfi nf ledgers, a small morocco box, and a book 
which, from iLs LeiAg liOUlid in black with depressing-looking 
soft flaps folding over the edges of the leaves, he rightly 
conjectured to be a work of devotion. 

102 



BELCHAMBER 103 

Lady Charmington was not a demonstrative woman, and 
she was a very shy one. She drew her son towards her, and 
gravely kissed him on the brow, by no means a daily occur- 
rence or matter of course between them ; then she plunged 
rather nervously into a little speech she had prepared for the 
occasion. 

* This is a solemn day for both you and me, Belchamber ' 
(he noticed that she did not call him by the familiar nick- 
name), *and one to which I have long looked forward. I 
have worked hard,' and she glanced at the pile of account- 
books beside her, * in your interests. God forgive me if it is 
wrong, but I fear it is not without pride that I come to you 
to-day to give an account of my stewardship.* 

Sainty gently pressed his mother's hand, which he still 
held. * Dearest mother,' he said, * I know well how hard you 
have worked, and all you have done for me. I assure you I 

appreciate ' But Lady Charmington withdrew her hand, 

and held it up in deprecation. 

' I do not wish to boast or to be thanked,' she said, ' but I 
think I may truly say I have spared neither time nor labour. 
It has been my object to be able to hand over the estate 
to you free of debt and unencumbered, and I can do so. 
To-day my stewardship ends.' 

* But oh, mother I ' Sainty broke in, * it mustn't end to-day, 
nor, I hope, for many days to come. You know how utterly 
inexperienced I am, and then I have got to go back to Cam- 
bridge till I have taken my degree. You won't refuse to go 
on looking after everything just as you have always done, will 
you?' 

Lady Charmington had lost the thread of her discourse; 
she looked rather anxiously at her son. 

*We have no time to-day to go into accounts,' she said; 
' but some day, when all these people have gone, you must 
give me an hour or two, and we will go through everything.' 

'Very well,' said Sainty. 

* Before we go down,' his mother went on, * I must wish 
you many happy returns, which I haven't done yet, and give 



104 BELCHAMBER 

you my little presents. The new set of harness for your cart 
is with the other things ; you saw that : Arthur says your old 
one is a disgrace; but, besides that, here is your father's 
signet-ring, which I want you to wear,' and she produced from 
the morocco case the ring he had missed from her finger. 
' And this is a little book I want you to use every morning 
and evening ; you will find it very helpful.' 

Sainty just touched the ring with his lips before he slipped 
it on his finger, and glanced with passionate tenderness at the 
simpering image in the corner. Then he began turning over 
the leaves of the little book with its limp cover that reminded 
him of French plums. He was wondering if honesty obliged 
him to say that he did not use such aids to devotion, did not, 
in fact, very often pray at all. Finally, he decided that he 
had not the courage to say anything of the sort, so he accepted 
the volume without much enthusiasm, and put it in his pocket. 
Then, detaining his mother as she was preparing to leave the 
room, 'I want to tell you, mother,' he said, 'that, though I 
don't say much, I do really value all you have done for me, 
and been to me, and Uncle Cor too. Between you, you have 
almost done away with the disadvantage that every boy must 
be under who has no father.' 

Lady Charmington was faintly stirred — probably she was 
pleased. 

' There are many things, my son, that I should like different 
about you,' she said, 'and especially I wish you stronger. 
But no one can say you have ever been anything but a good 
boy.' They went downstairs, both a little moved by having 
performed the operation so difficult to the British race, of 
displaying feeling. 

At breakfast the question had arisen of which of the party 
would attend the service at Great Charmington parish church. 
This part of the proceedings did not seem to find favour 
among most of the company, and Lady Charmington's brow 
grew dark as one after another excused himself. The duchess 
was of course out of the question, as she seldom appeared 
before lunch, her elaborate construction being a thing of time 

/ 



BELCHAMBER 105 

and caution. To Lord Nonsuch, communion after breakfast 
was nothing short of sacrilege ; he was a leading light in the 
High Church party, and this was his first appearance at 
Belchamber since a memorable occasion many years before, 
when he had said Lady Charmington was an Erastian, and 
she had called him a Jesuit. 

'/should love it^ dear Sarah,' said Lady Eva, * but a poor 
literary hack's time is not her own. I must work this 
morning, to be free this afternoon.' 

* What has your mother got to do ? ' asked Cissy of Claude. 
* Is she writing a book ? ' 

* Didn't you know mamma was " Mai die," who does " the 
girls' tea-table " in the Looking-glass ? She has very nearly got 
the sack because she never gets her article ready in time ; but 
she takes herself very seriously as a journalist, I assure you.' 

The Dalsanies were Roman Catholics, and Lady Deans 
nothing in particular; and Gerald Newby, when he found 
that the people of higher rank were shirking, discovered that 
he had letters to write which could not be put off; but the 
climax of Lady Charmington's displeasure was reached when 
Arthur announced he would rather stay at home and play 
lawn-tennis with Parsons. Lord Firth had not intended to 
go, but he sacrificed himself to mollify his sister. His religion 
was of that comfortable, rational kind in which there is more 
state than church, and which is firs;^ousin.tq agnosticism, 
but infinitely more respectable. He took a great interest in 
the distribution of bishoprics and the proper conduct of the 
service, which, however, he rarely felt called on to attend, 
except in such cathedrals and college chapels as gratified his 
fastidious taste and fondness for sacred music. 

Finally, a dozen people had been got together, and made a 
sufficiently imposing appearance. Old Lady Firth, Mrs. de 
Lissac and the girls, and Lady Eccleston went as a matter 
of course. Claude went to please his aunt, Cissy because 
Claude did, Johnson because Cissy did, and Tommy because 
his mother told him to. *I never have any trouble about 
church with my boys,' Lady Eccleston said. ' I never have 



io6 BELCHAMBER 

made them go, even when they were little. I let them play^ 
tennis or do whatever they like, till the time comes \ if I 've 
time I play with them. Then I just cheerfully say " Now, 
boys, who 's for church ? " and they nearly always say, " All 
right, mother, we '11 go," unless they *re ill.* 

Lady Charmington, sore over Arthur's defection, was in no 
mood to admire the success of this plan. ' Do you mean 
to say you play lawn-tennis on Sunday?' she asked frigidly; 
and Lady Eccleston discovered she 'must fly and put her 
bonnet on, or she 'd be late.' 

Through the service in the church, and the subsequent 
ceremony of presenting him with a silver salver and an 
address from the tradesmen of Great Charmington, the 
headache with which Sainty had most inopportunely begun 
the day grew steadily worse. The thought of all these poor 
men putting their hard-earned pounds together to give a great 
ugly useless thing to him, who had already so much more 
than he wanted, unmanned him ; the tears were in his eyes 
as he tried to thank them. Nor was he less cruelly em- 
barrassed by the discovery that the guests in the house had 
all thought it necessary to come laden with gifts. In his 
life no one but his mother and uncle had ever given him 
anything ; he was not accustomed to presents, and received 
them with an awkward sense of obligation. 

Belchamber being peculiarly rich in beautiful old plate, 
Arthur presented him with a huge heraldic claret-jug of 
monumental hideousness, for which long afterwards he paid 
the bill, when settling his brother's debts. The duchess 
gave him a cabinet inlaid after the manner of Sheraton, in 
which a whole army of tumblers and sodawater-bottles, 
lemon-squeezers, spirit-cases, and cigar-boxes rose and sank 
and manoeuvred with incredible ingenuity on innumerable 
springs. Down to Lady Eccleston, who brought the latest 
fashionable invention for tearing the leaves of his beloved 
books, no one was missing from the list; even Lady Deans 
and the Dalsanies contributed their tale of paper-knives and 
cigarette-cases. 



BELCHAMBER 107 

The only person whose gift showed any care or knowledge 
of Sainty's tastes and wants was Claude, who had taken the 
trouble to get from Paris a really beautiful cane, a true 
Malacca, strong enough to be a support, with toijt QLseshell 
crutch encrusted with little gold stars, and an indiarubber 
snoe'Tb prevent its slipping on the floors of the house. 
Sainty flushed with pleasure at sight of the charming thing, 
which seemed to adorn his lameness with a certain elegance. 
He wondered why his cousin, who was full of such pretty 
little cares and tendernesses, should be so wanting in moral 
sense. His heart yearned over him. ' Ah Claude,' he said, 
and could say no more. 

' Dear old boy,' said Claude, pressing his hand, ' what do 
I not owe you ? There is nothing that a pauper like me can 
give to you ; but such as it is my little present brings real 
affection and heartfelt wishes for your happiness.' 

Sainty's head was by this time aching cruelly, his temples 
throbbing like sledge-hammers; he was feeling worn out 
mentally and physically, ravaged by conflicting emotions. 
Having what was very rare with him, a slight flush, he looked 
less ill than usual, and nobody thought of his being tired ; 
but it was at the tenants' dinner that he set the seal on the 
ignominy of his failure. 

In consideration of the fact that this was a long and 
crowded day for one who was not robust, it had been settled 
that he should not preside at the meal, but merely come in 
and take the chair, for the healths and speeches, when the 
solid business of feeding had been satisfactorily disposed oC 
It was between three and four o'clock, the hottest part of the 
afternoon ; and though the sides of the tent had been opened 
here and there, the atmosphere was stifling, heavy with the 
odours of meat and drink and the acrid exhalations of 
humanity. Sainty almost reeled on entering, and had to 
steady himself by Arthur's arm. There were some seventy or 
eighty men present of all ages and degrees of stoutness, all 
very hot, and mostly somewhat red in the face. Many of 
them were intimately known to Arthur, who stopped several 




io8 BELCHAMBER 

times in the progress up the tables to shake hands right and 
left. He met them at the covert side, he shot over their 
farms, he played in cricket matches with them. Sainty would 
have given anything for a touch of that happy graciousness, 
that power of being hail-fellow-well-met. Circumstances had 
combined to make him almost a stranger to the men who 
were on such friendly terms with his younger brother. He 
knew that in his heart he had far more real brotherhood with 
these sons of the soil, a much more jealous respect for their 
manhood and independence ; but his very sense of equality 
made him feel the falseness of his position, whereas Arthur's 
easy familiarity sprang from a firm conviction of his own 
unquestionable superiority. Sainty was only too well aware, 
as he took his seat in gloomy silence, that his grave bow in 
answer to their friendly greetings, would be set down to pride 
by most of the people present. When, after loyally drinking 
the Queen's health, the guests were once more seated and 
their glasses filled, the oldest tenant rose to propose the 
toast of the occasion. He began by complimenting the 
young man on attaining his majority, spoke shortly of his 
attachment to the place and the family, and at great length 
on the badness of times and the difficulties of the agricul- 
turist, which he seemed in some mysterious way to attribute 
to Mr. Gladstone. The voice went droning on, monotonous 
by reason of its very emphasis, until Sainty felt almost 
hypnotised by it and by the buzzing of the numberless wasps 
and flies that were hovering over the remnants of food and 
drops of beer on the table-cloths. Sainty had quite ceased 
to attach any meaning to the sounds, when suddenly the 
voice stopped ; the old man was sitting down ; the audience, 
which had been dozing, shook itself and sat up alert, and all 
eyes were turned on the hero of the occasion. For weeks 
past Sainty had given anxious thought to what he should say 
to his tenants. He had never before had to make a speech, 
and he had rehearsed many alternative utterances in the 
privacy of his chamber. He had felt somehow that this was 
going to be his opportunity, the electrical moment when he 



BELCHAMBER 109 

was to make himself known to those for whom it was of such 
importance what manner of man he was. He would let 
them see that he was not an indifferent invalid, still less a 
selfish pleasure-seeker, a careless eater of the produce and 
neglecter of the producer ; he would tell them how much he 
had their welfare at heart. In carefully prepared sentences he 
would allude to his great obligations (which incidentally were 
theirs also) to his mother's long laborious stewardship, his 
uncle's enlightened economic teaching. He had devoted 
hours to the consideration of just how much it would be well 
to hint at his political convictions ; sometimes he had been 
pleased to fancy himself electrifying his hearers by a militant 
profession of faith, but in calmer moments more moderate 
counsels prevailed. 

Now the time so anxiously anticipated had actually arrived. 
With a great shuffling of feet the company got to its legs ; 
some one started * For he 's a jolly good fellow ' rather shakily, 
which was promptly taken up and cheerfully shouted in a great 
variety of keys, and then all settled down to await the 
answering speech. 

Sainty rose unsteadily and passed his hand across his fore- 
head j for a second he stood silent, while the guests greeted 
his rising by drumming on the tables with their knife-handles. 
Then it seemed as though a crushing weight descended 
through the top of his head to his brain, the hum of the 
insects swelled to an organ roar in his ears, the hundred faces 
before him seemed to float and swim in a mist, and with a 
kind of gasping cry he sank back unconscious in Lord Firth's 
arms. 

After this there could be no question of his appearing at 
the monster f<§te and garden-party which had been organised 
for the afternoon. The distant braying of a band, the sounds 
of many voices and laughter, and the scrunching of innumer- 
able wheels upon the gravel were borne to him on the 
summer breeze, as he lay prostrate upon his bed. He had 
not yet come back to any sense of shame or distress ; for the 
moment, pure physical pain was almost a relief, a restful half- 



no BELCHAMBER 

consciousness that, with no effort of his, a solution had been 
found, a way out of all difficulties and disagreeables. 

Not till late next day did he crawl downstairs, feeling very 
weak and battered, to receive the hollow sympathy and polite 
inquiries of his guests, and apologise with what grace he 
might for having failed so lamentably in his duties as a host. 

Arthur had got up a cricket match. * You needn't worry, old 
man,' he said cheerfully, as he carried out his bat and found 
Sainty among the group of spectators. 'You weren't missed 
a bit. The duke made a speech after dinner, and proposed 
your health, and I returned thanks for you, and said all sorts 
of nice things about you, which you never could have said for 
yourself. I did it much better than you could have done, 
because I was rather drunk, which you would never have 
been.' 

'O Lord Arthur! how can you say Lord Belchamber 
wasn't missed ? ' cried Lady Eccleston. * We all missed you 
dreadfully, didn't we, Cissy ? But your brother did do his best 
to supply your place, and really made a delightful speech \ 
and I do hope your head is better; it was too bad your 
breaking down, and we were all quite miserable about you.' 

' I wanted to send you some really wonderful nerve tonic 
Dr. Haslam gave me,' said Lady Firth. ' I 'm sure it would 
have done you good, but your mother said you had everything 
you wanted.' 

Sainty insisted on showing himself at the 'treat' for the 
children and the labourers ; this was the one part of the ' rejoic- 
ings ' in which he took a personal interest ; but after a very 
brief appearance he was forced to go and lie down again till 
dinner, if he hoped to receive the guests at the great ball 
which was to wind up the proceedings of the second day. 

The ball was a very grand affair indeed ; there must have 
been over five hundred people present. Every woman there 
had put on her most gorgeous raiment, and the best of her 
jewellery. The duchess positively shone in white and gold 
brocade, hung in ropes of pearls, and with a great crown upon 
her head. Even Lady Charmington had had what she con- 



BELCHAMBER iii 

sidered a low-necked dress made for the occasion, and had 
withdrawn the Belchamber emeralds from their twenty years' 
seclusion at the bank for the pleasure of wearing them before 
her mother-in-law. Sainty's share in the entertainment was 
strictly limited to standing by his mother, under the portrait 
of his great-great-grandfather, leaning with his left hand on 
the crutch stick which his cousin had given him, while his 
right was shaken by a long procession of people, who all one 
after the other said : * I must — er — congratulate you, Lord 
Belchamber, on this auspicious occasion. Sorry to hear you 
weren't well yesterday; hope you 're all right again.' To which 
he had to reply, ' Thanks awfully, very good of you ; so glad 
you could come ; you '11 find the dancing through that next 
room, straight on.' 

By the time he had repeated this phrase between three and 
four hundred times, and the guests had all defiled before him, 
he felt so sick and giddy that he had to be helped to bed by 
his valet, where he lay awake hour after hour, listening to the 
distant strains of the dance music, and picturing the scene in the 
great saloon to himself. He thought how nice it would be to 
be an ordinary normal, healthy, courageous young man. He 
did not desire to be exceptionally gifted, strong, or beautiful, 
only just like any one of a hundred youths who were at that 
moment whirling in his ballroom, or eating his supper. 
Surely, he thought, no one had ever got so little fun out of 
his own coming-of-age ball before. He thought how pretty 
Cissy Eccleston had looked, all in delicate pale green, with a 
sort of white butterfly of some shimmering stuff just poised 
on her bright curls for only ornament — not a jewel on her 
beautiful neck or arms. He fancied her, aglow with dancing, 
sitting to rest under the great palms and banana-trees of the 
winter-garden, and perhaps Claude ensconced beside her in 
one of those nooks that he had watched his cousin arranging, 
'for flirtations,' as he said. 

It was in these sleepless hours of the early morning that he 
decided to say something to Claude Morland which he had 
had on his mind for two days, and the first time he got him 



112 BELCHAMBER 

alone, he put his head down, dug his nails into his palms, and 
said, 'Claude, may I ask you something?' 

* Of course ; what is it ? ' 

Sainty gulped and was silent. He had made up his mind to 
speak the first time he got an opportunity, but he had been 
genuinely relieved by every interruption, and was conscious 
that he had even purposely avoided being alone with his 
cousin. \ 

* It is rather a queer question,' he said, *and one which you 
may resent* 

Claude was lolling in a deep chair with a book ; his hat 
tilted over his eyes left little of his face visible but his 
moustache and the soft curve of his chin. 

'How could I resent anything from you, old chap?' he said 
sweetly, but without looking up. *For which of my many 
sins am I to be taken to task ? Fire away.' 

' I know I Ve no right to ask such a question, but I wish 
you would tell me if there is anything between you and Miss 
Winston.' 

Claude gave an almost imperceptible start, and sank lower 
into the deep chair. Sainty was conscious that under his air 
of supreme nonchalance he was suddenly tensely on his guard. 
* Between us ? ' he murmured interrogatively. 

If Sainty were going to be indiscreet, his cousin obviously 
did not intend to make it easy for him. 

* I mean, are you in love with each other, or engaged, or 
anything?' Sainty persisted. Claude gave a little laugh; he 
was evidently trying to keep a certain relief out of his voice 
as he answered in his usual soft tones, ' I would not be so 
rude to our dear Aim^e as to say I was not in love with her ; 
I have been in love with her any time these two years ; as to 
being engaged^ you really do ask the most simple-minded 
questions. Will you tell me just what you think I have to 
marry on? Am I in a position to think of marrying, especi- 
ally another pauper like myself? ' 

'That's just what I was coming to,' said Sainty eagerly. 
' I didn't ask from mere idle curiosity. But if you are in love 



BELCHAMBER 113 

with Miss Winston, of course you want to marry her, and you 
think you ought not to propose, because you are not in a 
position to support a wife — isn't that so ? ' 

'Well — no, dear boy,' answered Claude slowly; *to be 
honest, I don't exactly know that it is. Aim^e and I under- 
stand one another perfectly,' he added, after a little pause. 

' Do you think she does understand ? Don't you think you 
may have given her the impression that you mean more than 
you do?' 

' I am not the first man Miss Winston has met,' said Claude, 
turning rather an ugly grin upon his cousin; 'the dear 
creature was having her little flirtations before I went to 
Eton.' 

' Of course, if you don't want to, and you are sure she 
doesn't want to, there is no more to be said. I only wanted 
to say that if you were being held back by want of money, 
perhaps I — perhaps we — you know — I mean, that part might 
be arranged, don't you know,' and Sainty blushed hotly. 

Claude reached out a long white hand, and very gently 
pressed Sainty's knee. 'You really are more kinds of an 
angel than any one I know,' he said, laughing softly, ' but you 
need not worry about Aim^e Winston ; she has no vocation 
for matrimony ; if she ever makes up her mind to marry it 
will be some one who can give her a far larger share of this 
world's goods than even you could spare for my dot. And 
as for me^ if I should ever find myself, either throilgh your 
kindness or in any other way, in a position to take to myself 
a wife, she would be a very different person from la belle 
Aitnie; elle n^ est pas de celles que Ton kpouse^ 'y and Claude 
turned again to his book in such a way as to intimate that 
the subject was closed. 

By the time that the opportunity for this singularly abortive 
conversation presented itself the house-party had dwindled 
sensibly. Those who came to please the duchess, to meet 
each other, and to lend the support of names well known to 
the chronicles of fashion, had fled the day after the ball. 
They had come for an ' occasion,' and the moment existence 

H 



114 BELCHAMBER 

at Belchamber threatened to resume a course remotely 
resembling home life, they departed to other 'occasions/ 
with all their baggage and camp-followers. Lord Nonsuch 
could not spend a Sunday where the services were conducted 
according to the ideas of Lady Charmington ; and by the 
Monday all had gone except old Lady Firth, the Morlands, 
the Traffords, and the Ecclestons, who somehow or other 
contrived to stay on till they should be due at another 
country-house. 

Lord Firth, ere he departed for Scotland, had a talk with 
his nephew. * It has all gone off very well, my boy, on the 
whole,' he said, * considering how new you and your mother 
were to anything of the sort. Your breakdown was unfortun- 
ate, of course, but it couldn't be helped. You had better 
come up to Fours for a bit next month ; it '11 do you good ; 
and in November you ought to have another party here, for 
the covert shooting. You will have to live suitably in the 
place in future; all these new servants will get lazy and 
demoralised unless you give them something to do.' 

* But I shan't be here in November,' said Sainty, * I shall 
be back at Cambridge, you know.' 

* Your mother and I were thinking that perhaps you 
wouldn't want to go back to Cambridge now you are of 
age,' said his uncle. 

'Not go back to Cambridge!' Sainty interrupted, with 
unfeigned horror; ' not take my degree 1 ' 

' Many people don't, you know ; and in your case, though 
it was no doubt right for you to have a little taste of uni- 
versity life, there seem to be claims which call for you more 
urgently elsewhere.' 

* Don't ask this of me. Uncle Cor,' Sainty said earnestly. 
* You and I have both been workers ; in my way I have worked 
as hard as you. You can understand what it must be to be 
told when one is in sight of one's goal that one must give it 
up and not try for it. I gave up the scholarship because I 
saw that it was a shame to take it from men who needed it ; 
but this is different. I stand no chance with Cook; he 



BELCHAMBER 115 

deserves to be senior classic, and is safe to be; he has 
nothing to fear from me, or any one ; and if I beat any of the 
men who come next, well, it Won't hurt them ; they will have 
their first class all the same, and it makes no difference to a 
man if he is second, third, or fourth.' 

* Do you care as much as all that ? ' asked Lord Firth. 

* Yes, I do,' said Sainty. 

His uncle appeared to consider. * Well,' he said, after a 
pause, * I don't see, if you want to go back and take your 
degree, why you shouldn't ; but couldn't you come down for 
a week, say, for the pheasants ? ' 

* Uncle Cor,' said Sainty, * why should I come down, just 
in the middle of my work, and idle away a whole week, in 
order that other people should shoot pheasants? I don't 
shoot, myself; I hate the sound and sight of shooting.' 

* Don't you think you could get to like it ? Of course it 's 
out of the question for you to hunt, but you could quite well 
shoot, with a quiet pony and little cart, or even from a 
campstool, if you couldn't walk.' 

* I don't want to shoot ; I should hate it. And in my 
case, the one excuse, the tramping, the manly exercise, would 
be wanting. I should seem to myself a kind of monster, 
dragged out to the work of slaughter in some form of machine; 
sitting down to butchery, like Charles ix. firing on Huguenots 
out of a window.' 

* Well, I only thought it would give you something more 
in common with your fellow-men, make you more like other 
people.' 

'Oh yes, I know; it's the old story, my unlikeness to 
other people, my hopeless incurable unfitness for my position 
in life. I do so hate my position in life.' 

* Many people would be glad to change with you, my boy,' 
said his uncle gently. 

* I wish they could, with all my heart,' said Sainty. * Oh, 
I fully realise, no one more, what an anomaly I am. If only 
some one of the hundreds of nice impecunious young men 
with a public school education and no taste for work could 



ii6 BELCHAMBER 

have it all instead of me ! Arthur, for instance, would be 
ideal. He would hunt, shoot, play cricket, captain the 
Yeomanry, be popular, successful, suitable, and enjoy the 
whole thing immensely into the bargain.' 

*My dear boy,' said Lord Firth, taking refuge behind 
Providence with a simple piety worthy of his sister, * does it 
never occur to you that if it had been intended that Arthur 
should have your birthright, he would have had it ? * 

'Oh, if you come to what was "intended,"* Sainty 
answered, ' I give up. I don't pretend to understand.' 

* It comes down to the simple old rule that you learned in 
your catechism,' said Firth, in a more natural manner ; ' " to 
do my duty in that state of life unto which it shall please 
God to call me." (I quote from memory.) You can surely 
understand Ma/?' 

'Oh yes,' said Sainty, 'I can understand thai right 
enough, as a principle ; but it is when you come to the ques- 
tion of just what is one's duty that the difficulty comes in. 
For instance, I don't believe that it is a duty incumbent on 
me from any religious point of view to sit in a chair and 
shoot tame pheasants, nor to waste money in expensively 
feeding a whole tribe of people with whom I have no sym- 
pathy whatever.' 

*We must "use hospitality,"' quoted Lord Firth a little 
half-heartedly. 

' Oh, if you quote Scripture on that matter,' said Sainty, 
not without malice, * I think you would find I was enjoined 
to entertain a very different class of person from the duke, 
or Lady Deans, or the Dalsanies. Indeed, I am not without 
the highest authority for selling all I have and giving to the 
poor ; I sometimes think it would be the best solution, as it 
would certainly be the simplest.' 

'And how about the entail?' asked his uncle. 

The wholesale disposal of his property being thus declared 
out of the question, Belchamber had to try and find some 
other answer to the riddle of life. For the present he was 
contented to have carried his point about going back to 



BELCHAMBER 117 

Cambridge ; the terrible coining of age was safely past, and 
the danger of his university career being cut short averted. 
As he had not gone up till he was nineteen, he had still 
a year of happy college life before him, a year of peaceful 
study, of stimulating discussions, of congenial society, a year 
of hard work for a definite object. With a sigh of relief he 
found himself once more in his old rooms, surrounded by 
the dear familiar shabbinesses, his accommodation a bedroom, 
sitting-room, and Gyp-closet bounded by a battered 'oak'; 
his establishment the tenth part of an old woman in a sat- 
upon black bonnet, and a twenty-fifth share in the services 
of a Gyp, but lord of his own soul, and free to follow his 
own bent, an undergraduate among undergraduates, and 
not the slave of a cumbrous estate and an unwieldy 
palace. 



CHAPTER IX 

Sainty did not think it necessary to go home for the covert 
shooting, and it is doubtful if he was much missed. Young 
Traffords and Montgomeries came as usual, Lord Firth 
brought an older man or two, and Arthur acted as host, not 
without a few skirmishes with his uncle, who had been 
accustomed to appear in that capacity on such occasions. 
Arthur was now at a crammer's preparing for the army, but he 
had none of Sainty's objection to breaking in on his studies 
for a little sport, and every one thought it quite right and 
natural that he should do so. It might be all very necessary 
that he should help to slaughter his fellow-men by and by, 
but the immediate duty was the destruction of pheasants; 
and whatever might be the shortcomings of the absent lord 
of the mansion, Arthur and the guests assembled at Bel- 
chamber had a proper sense of their responsibilities in this 
respect. 

Sainty only wished that his brother would take his other 
duties in life as seriously; there was permanently at the 
back of his mind an anxiety about Arthur, which, like some 
latent poison in the blood, might lie dormant for months, 
but was liable to stir up and give pain at any moment. A 
certain sense that his own existence, unreasonably prolonged, 
was, as it were, keeping his brother out of his inheritance, 
added poignancy to all Sainty's feelings about him. But for 
the unfortunate accident of his own eighteen months' 
seniority, Arthur would have stepped naturally into his 
appropriate position, and found congenial occupations, 
duties, pleasures ready to his hand. He felt that anything 
that might go wrong with his brother before bis own death 

118 



BELCHAMBER 119 

made tardy restitution, would be almost his fault. It did not 
occur to his morbid apprehension that with superior means at 
his command all Arthur's vicious tendencies would have 
increased a hundredfold ; he only saw the boy who had no 
aptitude for study obliged by circumstances to work that he 
might pass examinations, and driven from healthy and 
innocent recreations at Belchamber into a world of dangerous 
companions and temptations which he lacked self-control to 
resist. Sainty appeared to himself as an unwilling Jacob, 
who by no act or fraud of his own stood possessed of the 
birthright which was only a burthen to him, and who yet had 
no appetite for the pottage for which a younger Esau's full 
red mouth watered so hungrily. As in the nursery days when 
he had decided to die young that his brother might succeed 
him, he still cherished an undefined feeling that he was only 
occupying for a time. He would never marry ; all must 
eventually go to Arthur and to Arthur's children ; but he was 
possessed of an ever-growing terror lest meanwhile, before 
this desirable end should be reached, his brother might steer 
the frail bark of his good behaviour to some irreparable 
shipwreck, commit himself irrevocably in some way that 
should disqualify him for the position ere it should come 
to him. 

Sainty mused much on abdications, on men who had cast 
aside rank and wealth for the peace and seclusion of the 
cloister ; the monastic calm of his beloved courts drew him 
like a spell ; had he been born in the turbulent times of his 
fighting ancestors he would probably have been violently 
dispossessed and immured in some convent of holy monks. 
He began to wonder whether in spite of all the boasted 
progress of the centuries they had not managed things in 
a simpler and more effectual manner in the middle ages. He 
even went so far as secretly to consult a solicitor as to 
whether a peer could legally renounce his title and estates 
in favour of the next heir entail, with the discouraging result 
that he learned that while he lived no act of his, short of high 
treason, could make him other than Marquis of Belchamber 



120 BELCHAMBER 

in the eye of the law, or bestow that title on any other human 
being. 

'It seems hard,' he said to Newby one day, 'that a man 
can be bom into a position with no act or consent of his own 
and bound in it for life ; struggle as he will he cannot free 
himself.' 

* Are we not all alike in that respect ? ' asked Gerald. ' Are 
not circumstances, as they are called, the fetters that each 
man wears ? We delude ourselves with a phantom of free- 
will, but I suspect that men are really bom as irrevocably 
parsons, doctors, politicians, as you are a peer. Who shall 
free himself from the bonds of fate ? ' 

' You are strangely inconsistent, Gerald. I can fancy no 
one less of a fatalist than yourself.' 

'The doctor varies his medicines according to the disease 
of the patient,' said Newby sententiously. 'When men 
come prating to me of fatality as an excuse from all effort 
and responsibility, I have a very different word to say to 
them ; but in your case, when you complain of being fettered 
by your position, I wonder whether some of those who 
perhaps think they would like their path thus plainly marked 
for them, may not really, by inherited tendencies and a 
hundred other intangible threads, be as truly constrained 
in their life choice as yourself.' 

' " All men are born free," ' quoted Sainty. ' There never 
was a more deplorable fallacy ; for my part, I feel like the 
ghost in Dickens's story, who had to drag that chain of 
cash-boxes and keys and deposit-safes wherever he went. 
Perhaps it is my lameness which accentuates this sense of 
being hobbled. I can't take a step without feeling the pull 
of the whole Belchamber estate ; it is hung round my neck 
like the Ancient Mariner's albatross.' 

'You certainly have a most deplorable trick of mixing 
your metaphors,' said Newby. 'But,' he added, with the 
mild awe of which Sainty had been so disagreeably sensible 
at Belchamber, ' yours is certainly a great position, a grave 
responsibility.' 



BELCHAMBER 121 

* If I might have gone in for a scholarship, like you, and 
stayed and got work in the college till I could try for a 
fellowship!' Sainty sighed. 'The life would have suited 
me down to the ground.' 

* There are many leading that life who would be glad to 
change with you,' Gerald answered with conviction. 

'That is just what my uncle says, "many people would 
be glad to change with you." It is the old saying of our 
nursery days — "Many a poor man in the street would be 
glad of that nice pudding." Do you think it makes un- 
palatable food more savoury to feel that one is keeping what 
one does not like from some one to whom it would perhaps 
be an escape from starvation ? It is the strangest doctrine.' 

'Nevertheless Lord Firth is a very sensible man,' said 
Newby ; ' and I don't feel disposed to pity you overmuch,' 

' I don't think I want pity,' said Sainty, * I want help. It 
seems too deplorable that there should be no way out of an 
undesirable position. I think it is this sense of being shut 
in that drives men to suicide far more than great grief. Is 
any situation really hopeless, unalterable by human effort? 
If any one were once persuaded of that, he must go mad. I 
suppose the pistol or the overdose of chloral is the last 
supreme refusal to accept such a belief. "What!" you 
say, "no way out of this impasse? Well, there is always 
this."' 

'How theatrical!' said Newby. 'You are talking clap- 
trap. Who ever heard of a man committing suicide to avoid 
a marquisate and ;^5o,ooo a year? ' and he resolutely led the 
talk into other channels. 

Arthur hadn't been a month at his crammer's before he 
began to justify his brother's anxiety. Of course he broke 
all the rules of the establishment, came and went as he 
pleased, drove tandem, and hunted several days a week. 
Then there were complications about dogs, of which he kept 
a perfect kennel of all sorts and sizes, which raided the 
reverend gentleman's poultry-yard, killed his cat and his 
children's pet rabbits, and harried his wife's old pug. Sainty 



123 BELCHAMBER 

had always wanted a dog, but had never been able to haye 
one because Arthur's perpetually changing menagerie had 
kept Lady Charmington's powers of endurance stretched to 
their easily reached limit. 

In the Christmas vacation Arthur had already stigmatised 
the establishment to his brother as a ' damned hole,' where 
a gentleman couldn't live, and obliged him with graphic 
accounts of his many differences of opinion with its principle. 

'But doesn't he mind youx setting your dogs on his pig?' 
Sainty asked. 

* Mind ? of course he minds ; it makes him wild. But you 
should see the old woman ; she gets twice as mad as he does. 
She's always telling us we are *'no gentlemen," and that we 
shouldn't do the things at home, and why don't we treat her 
as we would any other lady.' 

' And why don't you ? ' asked Sainty, with delicate irony. 

* What, her ! ' with fine contempt ; * the fellows say she was 
the old man's cook, and that he had to marry her, 'cos he 'd 
got her into trouble. You should see her in the evening in 
a greasy old black satin and a sham diamond locket ; she 's 
awfully particular about our dressing for dinner, so Wood 
came in the other evening in muddy shooting-boots. She 
asked if he wanted to insult her, but he said he was awfully 
sorry but he couldn't find his pumps, and glanced signifi- 
cantly at her toes that were sticking out of her gown : she 
has enormous beetle-crushers, and had sported a brand-new 
pair of patent-leather shoes. She fairly cried with rage.' 

Sainty saw the futility of trying to suggest the poor lady's 
side of the question ; Arthur was never very quick at seeing 
other people's point of view. 

* I just don't pay 'em any attention,' he said ; ' the old 'un 
is always at me about not working. Says I shall never pass 
my prelim., and objects to my hunting. I tell him it's 
necessary for my health.' 

'And how often do you hunt?' 

' Oh, well, not more than two days a week mostly, never 
more than three. You see, I've only got two hunters there; 



BELCHAMBBR 133 

it's so infemallf expensive keeping 'em at livery, and I have 
to pay for the man's keep too. It runs into a devil of a lot 
of money.' 

After several such conversations, Sainty was not altogether 
surprised to hear from his mother that a three days' absence 
without leave to attend a race meeting had brought matters 
to a crisis, and that the care of his brother's education had 
been transferred from the church to the army. Arthur went 
to this new place with only a pony cart and a bicycle, 
promising great things; the hunters had been suppressed 
and the kennel cut down to two fox-terriers and a bob-tailed 
sheep-dog. Sainty was rather surprised at hearing nothing 
from him for several weeks — not even the familiar demand 
for money had broken the silence between them — and the 
day he came home for the Easter vacation he made haste to 
ask for news. 

He was sitting in Lady Charmington's sitting-room, where 
she had conceded a cup of tea to his fatigue after a journey, 
but was rigorously abstaining from refreshment herself. Sainty 
was drinking his tea and eating cake, while his mother hastily 
ran through some farm accounts she was going to submit 
to him. 

* How does Arthur get on at Colonel Humby's ? ' Sainty 
asked. 

Lady Charmington looked up from her ledger with an 
abstracted air and her mouth full of figures. ' Thirty-seven, 
forty-two, fifty, fifty-six, fifty-six pounds, seven and fourpence 
halfpenny,' she murmured. ' Didn't I tell you he 'd moved ? ' 
and she noted the sum at the bottom of the page and turned 
over. 

' What I again ? ' cried Sainty in dismay. 

*He said he couldn't get on there; he felt he wasn't 
making any progress, and he didn't seem to like the men 
there ; apparently they weren't a very nice set' 

' He '11 never pass his exams, if he keeps chopping about 
like this, a month in one place, a month in another. I 'm 
afraid as long as he's expected to do any work, he'll never 



124 BELCHAMBER 

find a coach who quite suits his views. Where has he gone 
now?' 

* His friend, young Hunter, who was with him at 
Oxbourne, had gone to that man in London they say is so 
wonderful * 

* Mother ! you haverCt let him go to London ? ' 

* Why not ? The boy seemed to think he should do better 
at Monkton's; it is such a new thing, as you say yourself, 
for Arthur to want to work, that it seemed a pity to balk his 
good intentions.' 

* But surely you must see — London ! Dear mother, won't 
there be many more distractions there for a boy of Arthur's 
temperament than at a dull place like Hog's Hill ? ' 

*He said that was one trouble with Colonel Humby's 
place, that it was so dull ; there was never anything to do 
there. If he wanted any amusement, he always had to go 
away for it, and this broke into his work, interfered terribly 
with it, in fact.' 

* And so you think he'll be likely to do more work when 
the things that break into it are under his hand ? Oh ! why 
didn't you ask me before agreeing to this ? ' cried Sainty in 
genuine distress. 

This being his first day at home, Lady Charmington only 
smiled indulgently at the suggestion. She was not in the 
habit of consulting other people before making up her mind, 
and least of all Sainty. *• My dear boy,' she said, ' you are 
scarcely older than your brother, and in some ways have 
really seen less of the world. Why should you think you can 
settle things for him so much better than he can for himself? 
or, for that matter, than I, who have been accustomed for 
years to arrange your lives for both of you ? ' 

Sainty felt despairingly that there was nothing to be done 
with his mother in that direction. He had come to know 
the signals, and to recognise Lady Charmington's 'no 
thoroughfare expression' as though it were written on a 
notice-board. He wondered sometimes if she were really 
as much at ease about her younger son as she seemed, but 



BELCHAMBER 125 

he never dared try to find out, for fear of awakening in her 
heart the uneasiness that oppressed his own. It was incred- 
ible that a woman so shrewd and far-seeing in most of the 
relations of life as his mother, should really feel a restful 
confidence about Arthur. To be sure, she was ignorant of 
many things that he knew only too well, such as the younger 
boy's habit of betting and constant appeals to his elder for 
money ; on the other hand, Arthur took but little pains to 
conceal his views of life, and occasionally delivered himself 
in his mother's presence of remarks which, it seemed to 
Sainty, could not fail to enlighten a much more obtuse 
intelligence than Lady Charmington's. 

When he came to breakfast next morning he found her 
entrenched behind the zareba of teapots and kettles, under 
the shelter of which she habitually partook of that meal. 
She looked up from her letters with a certain air of triumph 
to say, * I have a letter from Arthur ; he is working so hard 
that he will not even come home for Easter; he says he 
might run down just for the Sunday and Monday, but he 
thinks it would only break into his work, and that on the 
whole it is best for him not to come away at all.* That 
was all the voice said, but the eyes said quite plainly, 
' You see ! ' 

Sainty said nothing. He went and peeped into the dishes 
on the sideboard, and picked himself out a poached egg with 
no great appetite. This habit of his of saying nothing when 
he had nothing to say was called ' rudeness ' by some people, 
by others * pride * or ' indifference.' If he had spoken out 
his real thought to his mother she would have told him he 
was suspicious and could never believe any good of his 
brother, and would probably have exhorted him to watch 
against such an unamiable disposition. 

The breakfast, the day, the weeks passed in this silence 
between the two, a silence eloquent of disagreement, yet 
broken only by a few words on indifferent subjects, except 
when the presence of guests made necessary some form of 
conversational rattling of peas in a bladder. 



126 BELCHAMBER 

Whether it was duty or pleasure that kept Arthur away, the 
house seemed strangely empty and silent without him, even 
when some of the inevitable family party were gathered 
together in it — perhaps most so then, for though Arthur 
put himself out for no man, the mere fact that his pursuits 
were those of the normal young Englishman made him an 
important help in the entertainment of cousins. Sainty took 
endless trouble, but sent the men after rabbits who were 
secretly pining for the last meet of the season, and mounted 
the only Trafibrd who hated horses and had come down 
burning to throw the first fly of spring. Claude made things 
easier when he arrived a little later, but now that he was the 
duke's private secretary, his presence was generally required 
at one of his grace's numerous country-houses on the festivals 
of the Church, so that he was much less at Belchamber 
than formerly. 

' I 'm worried about Arthur,' Sainty said to him the first 
time they were alone. ' You know he 's left the second place 
he went to, and my mother has let him go to London to read 
at Monkton's. They don't even board there, you know ; he 
has rooms somewhere near.' 

Claude's eyebrows arched themselves, and he gave vent 
to a low but expressive whistle. 

* Yes,' said Sainty, ' that 's what / think ; I feel sure he 
must be in mischief, he's keeping so quiet. He wouldn't 
even come home for Easter ; it 's incredible that a woman of 
mother's cleverness should really believe that it springs from 
excessive devotion to work.' 

' Have you told your mother what you think? ' 

*I've tried, but there's the difficulty. She thinks it is 
only my base jealousy and suspicion. I wonder why she so 
readily believes all good of him, and never gives me credit 
for even decent feelings. I 've tried all my life to please her, 
studied her, thought what she'd like, and I don't believe 
Arthur has ever done or given up one single thing for her 
sake; yet she cares more for his little finger than for my 
whole body.' 



BELCHAMBER 127 

*0h, the secret of Arthur's favour is not hard to guess. 
In the first place^ he 's got nothing, and you We got everything. 
On the face of it, that seems like an injustice to him; so, 
with true woman's logic, she takes it out by being thoroughly 
unjust to you.' 

* Got everything ! Heavens I Do you suppose I wouldn't 
rather be tall and strong and straight like Arthur, be liked 
by men and admired by women, than own half England and 
be fifty Lord Belchambers ? ' 

' Very likely ; though a woman of my aunt Sarah's respect 
for "plenishing" is not likely to appreciate that point of view. 
But the real reason of her partiality is that Arthur is just the 
one person in the world who isn't afraid of her. Oh yes, 
you are afraid of her; it's not the least use your saying 
you 're not, and so am I, and so 's every one about the place. 
Whereas Arthur doesn't care a damn w/ia^ she thinks; he 
does jolly well what he pleases, and, mattresse-femme as she 
is, she can't help admiring him for it.' 

' Well, never mind about that ; I didn't mean to complain ; 
that any one should prefer Arthur to me is not a phenomenon 
that needs explanation. I only deplore this particular result 
of her devotion to him for his sake. What am I to do 
about it?' 

'It's a good thing you mentioned it to me; I must see 
what I can do. Perhaps I shall be able to keep an eye on 
Master Arthur to a certain extent' 

It is true that his cousin's influence had hitherto been 
unmixedly bad, yet he seemed so sympathetic, so anxious 
to help, so entirely at one with him in his desire to keep 
Arthur from making an ass of himself, that Sainty went back 
to Cambridge vaguely consoled, and with a feeling that 
Claude, being on the spot, might really perhaps be able to 
exercise some kind of .check on the object of their common 
solicitude. 

This was his ninth and last term, the term of his tripos 
exam, and his degree, and he was so busy that he had but 
little time for thinking of his brother. Lady Charmington 



128 BELCHAMBER 

mentioned him but rarely in her letters, beyond a casual 
observation that Arthur was as hard at work as ever. Arthur 
himself wrote even less than usual, but he did vouchsafe 
a few brief notes, saying he was *all right,' and 'sapping 
like the devil,' and ending with the usual demands. In 
spite of his close attention to business, London seemed by 
no means an economical place of residence. ' His landlady 
robbed him shamefully; he was told they all did; and 
though he was sure of the fact, he kne'w too little about such 
things to be able to spot her.' 

One day Sainty showed one of these epistles to Newby, 
and hinted at his uneasiness. 'You remember my brother 
Arthur ? ' he added, seeing Gerald look a little vague. 

'Remember him? of course I do. A nice lad, a very 
jolly lad; an awfully charming type of healthy English 
boyhood.' 

'Oh yes, he's all that,' Sainty assented; 'but I wish he 
wasn't knocking about in lodgings in London by himself. 
He 's very young, and awfully fond of pleasure, and hasn't a 
great deal of self-control.' 

' Let him alone, my dear boy,' returned Newby airily. ' He 
must sow his wild oats, like another; but he won't go far 
astray. Bon sang nepeut mentir,^ 

'Oh, can't it?' groaned Sainty; but his friend wouldn't 
hear of any danger. 

' That kind of healthy well-bred English lad always comes 
out all right in the end,' he said. 'You can't ride a thorough- 
bred with a curb.' 

'Dear me, how sporting you've become; you're as horsey 
as Ned Parsons when he talked to Lady Rugby.' 

'Talking of Ned, have ^oujbeard about his book?' 

' No — what book ? ' ^^"^'"'^ 

* Why, he 's written a book which they say is going to be 

/the success of the year ; it ought to be out by now. I saw 

I some of the proofs, and thought it deplorably flippant and 

vulgar, as anything by him was sure to be, but undeniably 

clever in a way.* 



BELCHAMBER 129 (j 

* Is it a novel ? ' 

* Yes, a novel of society — as if Ned knew anything about 
society ! ' 

* How came you to see the proofs ? Did he show them to I 
you?' ^ 

Newby's pale cheek took on a faint flush. 'Well, some 
one told me he had put me into it ; there is a young don in 
the story, and of course some one who wanted to be clever 
immediately decided it was meant for me, so I just taxed 
Parsons with it the first time I met him, " I hear you Ve 
been putting me into your book," I said.' 

* And what did he say ? ' 

* At first I thought he looked a little queer, then he laughed 
one of those irritating insolent laughs of his and said he 'd 
send me the proof-sheets of the chapter where his young don I 
was described, and I could judge for myself.' 

'Well?' 

* Oh, of course, as soon as he offered to show it to me I 
knew it must be all right, and directly I saw it I found as I 
expected the character wasn't the least like me. The fellow 
was a most egregious prig, and not only that, but a snob ; 
and whatever my faults, thai^s a thing my worst enemy 
couldn't say I was, could he ? ' 

' I 'm glad it was all right,' said Sainty. ' It would have 
been too caddish of him to return all your kindness in that 
way, and somehow I don't think Ned 's a bad sort at bottom.' 

As the tripos drew nearer Sainty had less and less time for 
anything outside his work. It may be said at once that he 
took a very good degree. In country rectories and cheerful 
middle-class households from which the clever son of the 
family had been sent to college at the cost of some privation 
and not a little grumbling, a place among the first six in the 
Classical Tripos would have been acclaimed with grateful 
pride and rejoicing. In Sainty it was accounted an innocent 
eccentricity to care what degree he took, or whether he took 
one at all. Lord Firth, who was the most understanding 
among his kinsfolk, wrote a kind little note of congratulation. 

I 



I30 BELCHAMBER 

Lady Charmington was mildly gratified to find that her boy 
had brains and the grit to work for a desired end, but she 
frankly acknowledged that she could see no use his first class 
would be to him in after life, nor how it would help him to 

/' manage his estates. Arthur said ' his brother was the rummest 
devil he ever came across, he was hanged if he could under- 
f stand him.' They would all have been infinitely better 
pleased had Sainty taken his uncle's advice, bought a gun and 
gone shooting in some form of movable go-cart. It was 
the more remarkable that he should do so well, as he was 
. always more and more preoccupied about Arthur. Once the 
examination was over, and his mind at ease on that score, 
the old anxieties came crowding back upon him, and he 
decided to go to London and try and find out for himself 
what his brother was about. He would come up again for^ 
his degree. Meanwhile, his work was done and he bad kept 
his term, so there was no difficulty about getting an exeat for 
a day or two, and he wrote to his uncle to ask if he could put 
him up. 

After old Lord Firth's death his widow had given up the 
house in Bryanston Square and retired to Roehampton with 
an elderly companion, an elderly maid, and an 
"nil uliaim Bpnnifil ^ and the present peer had bachelor quarters 
somewhere near Whitehall, close to the House of Lords, and 
with a sidelong squint at the river if you got very close to the 
windows. 

Having arrived and ascertained that his uncle would 
probably not be in till dinner-time, Sainty went westwards 
in search of his brother. The educational establishment, 
familiarly known to candidates for the army as ' Monkton's,' 
was situated in the wilds of South Kensington, and in order 
to be handy for his place of study Arthur had taken rooms in 
the same respectable region. But neither at the crammer's 
nor his lodgings did Sainty find trace of him. At the former 
he heard that his brother had been there in the morning, but 
had not returned since lunch, and his rooms seemed an even 
more unlikely place to obtain tidings of the studious youth. 



BELCHAMBER 131 

* Oh yes 1 ' the maid said who opened the door, * 'is lordship 
'as rooms 'ere right enough, but 'e isn't often in 'em; 'e 
generally either calls or sends for 'is letters most days, and 
once in a way 'e '11 sleep 'ere, but it isn't often. Sometimes 
I don't clap eyes on 'im for days together.' 

Neither this information nor the fact that his brother's 
ideas of ' sapping like the devil ' were consistent with taking 
the whole afternoon, from lunch on, for amusement, struck 
Sainty as very reassuring. However, there was nothing to be 
done except to write on a card a request that Arthur would 
come and see him at his club on the morrow, and trust that 
it might be one of the days when * 'is lordship called or sent 
for 'is letters.' 

As his hansom bore him eastwards again, he could not help 
having his mind diverted from his anxieties by the rush of 
London life at five o'clock of a day in the season unrolled 
before him like a picture-book. The streams of vehicles of 
all sorts flowing in either direction made progress necessarily 
slow, and gave ample time for studying their occupants. He 
was not yet twenty-two, and had hardly ever been in London; 
the whole pageant was absolutely new to him, and it is small 
wonder if he found much to interest and amuse him. The 
great toppling vans and omnibuses were interspersed with 
equipages beside which the renovated carriages of Belchamber 
seemed suddenly rustic and old-fashioned. Little victorias 
slid past, bearing beings in shining raiment and crowned with 
improbable headgear. Family landaus containing no less 
gorgeous matrons, and perhaps a brace of pink-cheeked 
sulky-looking daughters in clouds of blue and white feathers, 
or small parterres of roses nodding in the summer breeze, 
made stately progress towards the park, or to fetch papa from 
his club. One of the prettiest of the passing girls leaned 
forward in sudden recognition and touched her companion's 
arm, and Sainty found himself responding to a volley of 
smiles and bows from Cissy Eccleston and her mother, which 
at a touch made him part of the great glittering show, and no 
longer a mere onlooker and outsider. It occurred to him 



132 BELCHAMBER 

with a little thrill that it only rested with himself to come in 
and take his place among all these people, the place that was 
his by right of birth. Already invitations had poured in, 
more or less unheeded, on such an eligible young man. 
Unversed as he was in the ways of the world, he knew enough 
to be aware that a fatherless peer with a long minority behind 
him, an unencumbered rent-roll, and one of the show places 
of England, would not be forced to take the lowest room at 
the various feasts to which all these votaries of fashion were 
so eagerly pressing. 

But this unusual uplifting of his horn was of brief duration. 
One glance at the little mirrors on either side of the cab in 
which he rode, and he would have bartered all his advantages 
for the health and good looks of the poorest of the well- 
groomed, broad-shouldered youths in shiny boots who trod 
the pavement of Piccadilly with floating coat-tails and such a 
happy insolence. At one point where the throng was thickest, 
Sainty*s attention was arrested by a tall and very showy- 
looking young person in a smart private hansom going in the 
opposite direction from his own. She was much dressed in 
the height of the prevailing fashion, and wore what is called a 
' picture hat ' adorned with a great number of nodding plumes. 
Her charms, deftly enhanced by art, were of the more obvious 
order, and she scattered smiles broadcast among the throng 
of young men, where dogskin-covered hands flew up to many 
a burnished hat as she passed, enjoying a sort of triumphal 
progress with the western sun shining full on her flashing 
gems and dazzling complexion. As the two cabs came almost 
abreast of one another she leaned back to say something to 
fihe man beside her, and with a clutch of the heart Sainty 
/ recognised in the slim youth leaning lazily back with his hat 
I tipped over his eyes, who logkeiL-SCLjdistressiQgly boyish 
I beside all this full-blown beauty, his brother Arthur, 

! 
( 
\ 



CHAPTER X 

Belchamber's first feeling was that it was a judgment on him 
for having allowed his mind to wander to worldly frivolities 
and thoughts of personal amusement Certainly he had been 
brought up with a round turn. His next was one of bewilder- 
ment as to what it behoved him to do under the circumstances. 
Ought he to let his mother or Lord Firth know what he had 
seen ? He recoiled with all the force of schoolboy traditions 
from the idea of telling tales. Had Arthur recognised him ? 
he wondered, and would he come to the rendezvous at the 
club next day, even supposing that he got his message? He 
had been on his way to call on his grandmother, and, as he 
omitted to give the driver any fresh instructions, he presently 
found himself at Sunborough House. Having ascertained 
from the porter that the duchess was out, he was turning 
away when he saw some one signalling to him from one of 
the ground-floor windows, and Claude came running bare- 
headed down the steps. 

'My dear old boy! this ts nice,' he said. *I'd no idea 
you were in town. I saw you from the window of my room. 
Come in and have some tea, and I '11 tell them to let us know 
when grandmamma comes in.' 

Sainty was drawn affectionately into a large room near the 
front-door, which Claude explained was his peculiar sanctum. 
'It used just to be a sort of waiting-room, and was much 
wasted, so I got the Pompier to let me have it for mine. That 
bell rings from his study, so he can get at me whenever he 
wants me.' 

It was a pleasant room, with two high windows draped with 
some sombre, respectable, woollen fabric. Its original fumi- 

18S 



134 BELCHAMBER 

ture consisted of a large writing-table with a gallery, and a set 
of green leather chairs, two high-backed mahogany book- 
cases with brass lattice-work in their doors, and several good 
old engravings on the walls, the duke's father, mother, and 
grandfather, after Lawrence, Mesdames Taglioni, and Fanny 
EUsler, Count d'Orsay, the Queen on horseback, and the 
Duke of Wellington. On this severe ground Claude had, so 
to speak, embroidered a fantasia of more modern objects — 
little tables, low easy-chairs, cigarette-cases, a vase or two of 
flowers, several books, reviews, and paper-knives, and a vast 
quantity of signed and framed photographs of all shapes and 
sizes. With the exception of an eminent man or two, and a 
J^ rIppTt Vf>""p[ peers, they all represented beautiful ladies — 
ladies looking^over their shoulders, with their hands behind 
their backs, ladies with sheaves of lilies and baskets of flowers, 
ladies looking out of paper-mullioned windows wreathed in 
sham ivy, ladies with children in lace frocks, ladies in ball 
dress, court dress, fancy dress, or simply what may be called 
photographic dress, consisting of the sitter's best loy-necked 
gown and a hat, a combination which no one could be 
expected to believe was ever worn outside the studio. 
Three large official dispatch-boxes with paper tags hanging 
out of their ends stood on the writing-table, and a receptacle 
like a good-sized dog-basket bulged with letters for the post 

His cousin was so cordial and affectionate, did the honours 
of his official residence with such charming grace, that Sainty 
felt impelled rather against his will to tell him of his late 
encounter. Perhaps if circumstances had not thrown him so 
immediately in his way, he might not have selected Claude as 
his confidant ; but he desperately needed help and counsel, 
and here was some one ready with both, some one whom to 
tell would have none of the grave, official importance of a 
report to Lady Charmington or his uncle. Warmed by tea 
and his cousin's enthusiastic welcome, he had not been ten 
minutes in the room before he had confided to its occupant 
all his uneasiness and its latest cause. 

'Really! Arthur is an assl' was Claude's comment. 



BELCHAMBER t^ 

' What strikes me first of all is the infernal imprudence of the 
whole thing. Why can't he go and see the lady quietly, 
instead of flourishing about Piccadilly in a hansom with her 
at five o'clock in the afternoon? He's just as likely as not 
to meet grandmamma or your uncle as any one else, and 
then all the fat will be in the fire.' 

There was a ring of very genuine annoyance in Claude's 
voice; and Sainty, though he smiled at the aspect of the 
matter that so characteristically presented itself to Morland 
as the important one, felt that he had not brought his troubles 
to an indifferent or unsympathetic person. 

'But who do you suppose it is?' he asked, 'and where 
can Arthur have made her acquaintance? Perhaps it may 
not be — what I fear; but she looked rather — well, 
rather ' 

'Yes,' said Claude, laughing; 'I should say it was ten to 
one she was " rather." ' 

'It's no laughing matter,' cried Sainty. 'It was bad 
enough when I thought he was only neglecting his work, and 
just idling and amusing himself; but this makes it all much 
more serious. But Claude, can't you help? Can you not 
guess who it might be ? ' 

' Oh, it might be any one of a dozen people,' said Claude 
indifferently. *It doesn't so much matter who it is,' he 
added ; ' the great thing is to try and get him not to make a 
fool of himself. You know, dear Saint, it is useless to expect 
the high moral view from pte. What you want is that Arthur 
shan't go and do anything idiotic, isn't it ? Well, I 'm much 
more likely to prevent his giving the whole show away than 
you are, ain't I ? You leave it to me ; I '11 see what can be 
done.' 

It was on the tip of Sainty's tongue to say that the eye 
which Claude had promised him at Belchamber to keep on 
Arthur, could not have been peculiarly vigilant ; but he did 
not wish to alienate the one person who might perhaps help 
him, so he expressed gratitude and a confidence he did not 
wholly feel; and just then a footman came in to say that 



136 BELCHAMBER 

''Er grace had come in, but was dining oat, and must rest 
before dressing, and she 'oped Lord Belchamber would come 
to luncheon next day/ 

'By the way, yes,' said Claude, when the man had left 
thenL * To-night is the dinner at the French Embassy, and 
then there is the ball at What 's-their-names, and grand- 
mamma must shed her day-skin and give the new one time 
KJto harden.' 

I j 'What do you ca// her, Claude?' asked Sainty. *I never 

/ Ifeel as if I amid call her " grandmamma." ' 

j I 'Oh, I never call her that to her face, ^n eniendu. It 

f / was a dreadful question at first. I ^^"^^*'^m11 her F^^^ *"' 

I her stepsons do ; but I 've hit on a lovely plan. I call her 

I * Grace,' suggesting facetiously * Your grace,' do you see ? and 

I it sounds like a cross between a Christian name and a sort 

of compliment, grace personified, that kind of business. Well, 

good-night, old chap, if you must go. Don't worry about the 

little blessing ; you had much better let me see what I can 

do. Right you are. And for the Lord's sake, don't say a 

word to your uncle or any of 'em.' 

'Don't worry,' that was still the burthen of such very 
various counsellors, as Gerald Newby and Claude Morland^ 
and more or less the line his mother took, who was again so 
unlike either of them ; and meanwhile he was expected to 
stand by and see Arthur drifting to ruin under his eyes. 
However, he so far obeyed Claude's injunctions as to say 
nothing to Lord Firth on the subject, when they presently 
dined together, though his principal object in coming to 
town had been to ask his advice. 

'Have you seen Arthur?' his uncle asked in the course of 
dinner, and Sainty only said, ' I called at Monkton's and at 
his lodgings, but I didn't find him.' 

' It was a rum idea of your mother's, letting him come to 
London, but it seems to be working, and so does he. I 've 
asked him once or twice to come and dine, but he hardly 
ever comes. He says the evening is one of the best times he 
has for work.' 



BELCHAMBER 137 

Sainty had but little chance of private talk with Claude the 
next day, when he lunched at Sunborough House. His 
cousin drew him gently to a window when he arrived, while 
the numerous chance guests were awaiting the appearance of 
their hostess. 

*IVe thought of who it very likely was,' he said, with 
engaging frankness. ' If it's the person I think, she's a good 
girl, and won't do him any harm. You know you can't 
expect to keep Arthur away from women; the important 
thing is that he shouldn't get into bad hands, and I '11 drop 
him a hint to be more careful and not to go and afficher him- 
self. Hush! here's our respectable ancestress. Well, Grace, 
here's your good boy come to see you, to make a change 
from your bad one.' 

Sainty never knew whether it was circumstances or design 
that made it impossible for him to get another word alone 
with Claude. He did not feel that Morland's help would be 
exactly of the kind or in the direction that he wanted, and he 
was more than ever anxious to see his brother himself, and 
try and find out just how much was wrong. He went early in 
the afternoon to a club in St. James's Street, of which he had 
lately become a member, so as to be sure not to miss Arthur 
if he should come there. To his surprise, the porter handed 
him a letter as he went in, which proved to be a note from 
Lady Eccleston asking him to dine the same evening. He 
thought it would be pleasant to accept, but decided to keep it 
till he had found out if Arthur had any plans for the evening; 
so he put it into his pocket, and turned into a room on the 
ground floor, where some of the latest publications were dis- 
played on a long table. 

A group of young men who were laughing uproariously 
over a book desisted rather suddenly on his entrance, as one 
of them, in whom he recognised the young stockbroker Pryor, 
looked towards him and whispered something to the rest. 
They faced round and stared at him much as sheep look at a 
dog, while Austin Pryor came forward holding out his right 
hand, with the book still in his left. 



138 BELCHAMBER 

' I say,' he said, ' how odd you should come in just this 
minute ! Have you seen this book of your friend Parsons' ? 
It's only out to-day, and they say you can't get a copy for 
love or money. Wasn't he that untidy chap with a fishy eye 
who was at your coming of age last year ? I 'm blowed if he 
hasn't gone and stuck the whole show into his book, only he 's 
made your brother the hero instead of you, he 's turned you 
into a girl, a great heiress with rather jimmy health and a cork 
leg, who 's in love with the villain. But the rest of us are 
there, even down to poor little me. Your mother, your uncle — 
oh ! and the duchess — he 's touched the old duchess off to the 
life, even to the colour of the gowns she wore at dinner. 
Well — he's made his fortune. They say he's been offered 
ten thousand for his next book, if he '11 only guarantee two 
well-known people bein' in it. It's better biz than the House; 
here am I come away at three-thirty; absolutely nothing 
doing, I give you my word. I haven't made a fiver this 
account Here — would you like the book ? I 've got to go 
out, and some one '11 grab it like a shot if you don't lay hold 
of it.' 

The other youths seemed to have melted away during this 
speech, so that when Mr. Pryor, convinced that he had made 
himself most agreeable, handed him the fortunate novel of 
the season, and hurried away to gossip about it in as many 
drawing-rooms as he could work in before dressing-time, 
Sainty found himself alone with the book in his hand. He 
sat down to wait for Arthur, and began turning over the pages. 

So it was for this that Parsons had wanted to come to Bel- 
chamber. Now he understood. As Pryor had said, they 
were all drawn to the life. ' Well, it doesn't demand much 
imagination to write a book in that way,' he thought. Pre- 
sently he came to the passage about the young don, and 
found he was smiling in spite of himself at Newby's happy 
confidence that the character could by no possibility have 
been drawn from him. The portrait was one-sided and most 
malevolent, but quite unmistakable. A year ago he would 
have been beyond words indignant at this ill-natured cari- 



BELCHAMBER 139 

cature of his friend and hero. Now he could not repress a 
faint feeling of amusement. What had happened to him in 
the meanwhile, he wondered ; he felt ashamed of his want of 
loyalty. * Lord Arthur Chambers askin' for you, m' lud,' a dis- 
creet club waiter murmured in his ear ; and he remembered 
with a start that in life as in Ned Parsons' story, the pro- 
tagonist of the moment was not himself but his younger 
brother. 

* Infernally thirsty weather,' Arthur remarked, as he dropped 
gracefully into a chair. * May I have a whisky and soda ? — 
thanks.' Then to the waiter, without allowing Sainty time to 
answer, ' A large whisky and soda, please, with some ice and 
a slice of lemon. Well, old chap,' he continued, turning 
again to his brother as the man departed, 'and what 's'brought 
you to town ? ' 

* You,' answered Sainty severely. 

*0 God! old man, not a jaw,' Arthur pleaded wearily; 
*it'stoohot.' 

* Did you see me yesterday ? ' Sainty asked suddenly. 

* No, old boy — where? ' said Arthur, with slightly awakened 
interest. 

•About five o'clock, in Piccadilly. You were in a 
hansom.' 

Arthur flushed crimson all over his handsome face. * The 
devil ! ' he said simply, in a manner which told more plainly 
than words that he had not seen his brother. 

'Think of the imprudence of it,' Sainty remonstrated 
(quoting Claude, rather to his own surprise ; it was not in the 
least what he had meant to say). ' You might just as likely 
have met Uncle Cor as me, or some one who knew you, and 
might have written to mother.' He did qot like to name 
Lady Eccleston, who was the person he had in his mind. 

*I wasn't doing anything I was ashamed of,' Arthur 
answered doggedly. 

Then there was a little pause, during which the waiter 
reappeared with a long clanking tumbler, and the brothers 
sat and looked at one another gloomily. 



I40 BELCHAMBER 

* Well?' asked the younger, as he sipped his refreshment. 

* Do you often drink between meals ? ' Sainty asked. ' Are 
there none of the stereotyped bad habits that you haven't con- 
tracted yet ? ' 

'An occasional whisky and soda when one's thirsty doesn't 
make a man an habitual drunkard * 

After a second pause, * I suppose you want to know who it 
was ? ' Arthur suggested, with another blush. 

'I don't know that I do,' Sainty answered. 'It was 
evident enough the sort of person ' 

But Arthur cut him short. ' I won't hear a word against 
her,' he said hotly. 'Of course she's an actress, and that's 
enough to make people say deuced ill-natured things; but 
she 's as good a girl ' 

*Do you mean to say ' Sainty was beginning, when 

Arthur suddenly melted, leaned forward, and laid an affec- 
tionate hand on his. 

'Look here, old man,' he said, 'of course I don't mean 
that she 's immaculate ; but she 's told me a lot about herself, 
and I 'm sure she 's more sinned against than sinning, you 
know, and all that. And I 'm awfully in love with her ; you 
may as well know it first as last. And I can't stand hearing 
her talked about as if she was just a common woman. What 
are you doing to-night? I've persuaded her to come to 
supper with me, and asked some of her pals ; will you come 
to the theatre with me and see her act, and come and meet 
her at supper? You '11 see for yourself how awfully respect- 
able and jolly and all that she is.' 

Sainty's mind flew to the little note in his pocket; he 
would much rather have dined with the Ecclestons, but per- 
haps it was his duty to go and inspect the syren who had 
captured his brother, and he was not without curiosity as to a 
side of life with regard to which he was as ignorant as a girl. 
' How can I help him,' he thought, ' if I know no more of his 
life and temptations than mother does ? ' And he shuddered 
to think of the light in which Lady Charmington would view 
his acceptance of the proffered supper-party. 



BELCHAMBER 141 

'You had better dine herewith me first,' he said resignedly; 
* Uncle Cor is dining out.' 

Arthur was so delighted at the ease with which he had 
brought his brother into line with his plans, and so excited 
by the anticipation of the evening's amusement, that Sainty 
found it impossible to get anything out of him as to the 
extent to which he had been neglecting his work. All mere 
prosaic questions of that sort seemed to the enamoured 
swain so entirely trivial that Sainty himself b^an to wonder 
why he attached such undue importance to them. Under the 
influence of what seemed almost like an unselfish passion, 
Arthur appeared so much more amiable than usual, that he, 
who had come to lecture, came perilously near remaining to 
sympathise. He learned that the lady of the hansom was Miss 
Cynthia de Vere, who was performing in a piece called ^Africa 
Limited^ or the Day of All Jetrs^ a really rattling piece, in 
which she was perfectly ripping, that she had a not very 
important rbky as far as words went, which was of course due 
to professional jealousies, but she was on the stage nearly all 
the time, and wore some 'clinking' costumes. 

' By the way,' Sainty inquired, just as Arthur was about to 
leave him, *how did you come to meet Miss de Vere?' 

' Oh, Claude introduced me to her, one of the few good 
things I owe him.' 

* Claude I' Sainty bounded. He could only gasp, as the 
full measure of his cousin's duplicity forced itself upon him. 

'You needn't think the worse of her on that account,' 
Arthur said. 'She doesn't like our slimy cousin; she told 
me so. She says he 's a bad lot, and so he is. Between you 
and me, I think he's behaved badly to her in some way. 
She said she 'd no cause to love him, but of course I couldn't 
ask her anything about it. Tata, old chap ; see you later. 
I must go and tell a certain person you 're coming ; she'll 
be awfully pleased.' 

Africa Limited was one of the first of those musical farces 
which have revolutionised the English stage ; it had a great 
quantity of characters, and no particular plot. The first act 



i4t BELCHAMBER 

took place in England, the second in what was suppdsed to 
be Algeria, and was represented by a mixture of the tropics 
and a pantomime transformation scene. There were any 
number of songs and dances, that could be introduced or 
omitted at will, and the time of day was morning, sunset, 
limelight, or back to high noon, with bewildering rapidity, 
and a total disregard of the ordinary sequence of the hours. 
There were a pair of serious and lyrical lovers, who dis- 
coursed sentimental ballads and duets ; a pair of secondary 
lovers, more facetious and less sentimental ; an excruciatingly 
funny comic man from the halls, who assumed every kind of 
disguise for no particular reason ; a barbarous potentate, who 
turned out to be Irish, and the comic man's long lost grand- 
father ; several dancers of pas-seuls^ and last, but not least, a 
number of extremely handsome young ladies, who did not 
seem to have much connection with the story, but who turned 
up in the most unlikely places, always gorgeously dressed, 
and had each three sentences to say in the course of the 
evening. It was one of this frolic band whom Arthur shyly 
indicated to his brother as Miss Cynthia de Vere, and in 
whom Sainty without much difficulty recognised the damsel 
he had seen in Piccadilly. Across the footlights and out of 
the pitiless sunshine of a summer day, she made a striking 
and picturesque appearance enough. She smiled affably at 
the brothers, and at several other acquaintances in the stalls 
and boxes, and took a most^ perfunctory interest in what was 
going on upon the stage. 

A rather rechercht dandyism was at that moment the 
correct style for young men about town, and Arthur was got 
up to kill, with a vast expanse of shirt-front illuminated by a 
single jewel, white kid gloves, and a cane, his fair curls 
cropped, flattened, and darkened as near to the accepted 
model as nature would allow, and his face very pink and 
solemn over his high collar. He went out between the acts 
'to smoke a cigarette,' and returned with a new buttonhole 
and a peculiarly fatuous smile never produced by tobacco. 

As they drove to the restaurant where they were to sup, he 



BELCHAMBER 143 

obliged Sainty with a catalogue raisonnS of the guests. 
'Charley Hunter's coming, and Agnes Baines, the girl next 
but two to Cynthia, because Charley 's awfully mashed on her; 
Mabel Hodgson, that handsome girl at the other comer from 
Cynthia; and I had to ask that little cad Harry Atides, 
because he won't let her go anywhere without him ; they say 
he beats her. Cynthia has such an awfully good heart ; she 
asked me to ask her, because she has such a dull life. I don't 
see why she stays with that little beast. Then there is Elise 
Balbullier, the French girl — she 's awfully amusing and clever; 
Clara Bingham, one of the chorus girls — she's a pal of 
Cynthia's ; and Colonel Hoby — he knows all the girls, and 
they like him, and he chaffs 'em, don't you know.' 

Some of us not yet in our dotage can remember when it 
was by no means an easy thing to find a place in London 
whereat to sup ; but about the time that pieces of the type of 
Africa Limited came into fashion, the play-going public dis- 
covered that it was unequal to the intellectual effort of 
witnessing them without the support of two dinners, and the 
first house of entertainment to cater for this new need was the 
Hotel and Restaurant Fritz, so called after its enterprising 
manager. Everything was on a scale of hitherto unprece- 
dented luxury and proportionate expense; the waiters, of 
every conceivable nationality, wore short jackets and white 
aprons like those in a French cafe. A real chef directed an 
army of myrmidons in the adjoining kitchen. There were 
shaded electric lights, and little vases of flowers on the tables, 
among which dignified head-waiters walked like dethroned 
potentates in irreproachable evening dress, while a string- 
band made conversation appear a superfluity. A negro in a 
fez made Turkish coffee at a sort of altar in the midst, and 
the decorations suggested the saloon of the most expensive 
Atlantic liner. 

The brothers had to struggle to the cloak-room through a 
crowd of all ages and sexes, the women with fresh powder on 
their noses pulling out their crushed laces, the men settling 
their ties and stroking their back hair. Among these latter 



144 BELCHAMBER 

they suddenly found themselves face to face with Claude. 
Arthur pushed past him with a sulky nod. Claude jerked 
his head after him. ' So you 've got hold of the culprit,' he 
said; ^is it all right? have you got anything satisfactory out 
of him ? ' 

* I have got the most surprising things out of him,' answered 
Sainty witheringly, looking his cousin straight in the eye. 

Claude did not seem to notice. ^ I 'm waiting for Lady 
Deans and Lady Dalsany,' he said. ' Women take such an 
infernal time prinking. Have you seen your cousin Traflford? 
He *s supposed to be supping with us, or rather we with him ; 
but what are you doing in this unlikely place ? ' 

' Oh, I'm supping in quite a different mondey said Sainty 
in a low vibrating voice, which he tried to keep very steady 
and sarcastic; 'my brother has invited me to meet the girl 
of his heart. I really must offer you my sincerest thanks for 
the admirable way you 've looked after him for me.' He was 
swelling with righteous indignation and a consciousness of 
having driven a nail of incisive bitterness through the 
counterfeit coin of his cousin's sympathy, as he rejoined 
Arthur and delivered up his hat to the attendant. 

Possibly with some touch of quite new prudence born of 
his conversation with Sainty, but much more probably with a 
view to doing proper honour to his fair guest, Arthur had 
retained a private room, rather, as it appeared, to the dis- 
appointment of the ladies, who had looked forward to seeing 
and being seen in the big restaurant, but immensely to the 
relief of his elder brother. The table was profusely decked 
with long trails of smilax and a quantity of those florists' 
roses that are all of one size and shape and colour, and 
seem to have been manufactured by the dozen, ready packed 
in cardboard boxes, having no more suggestion about them 
of growth by any natural process than the little red silk 
shades on the electric lights. 

Miss de Vere, resplendent in green velvet, with a vast 
number of diamond ornaments, hearts, stars, crescents, 
arrows, and even frogs and spiders, pinned into the front 



BELCHAMBER 145 

of her gown, sat on Arthur's right and between the two 
brothers. 'She just touched a string of pearls at her throat, 
smiling archly on her host, as she took her seat. Long 
afterwards, Sainty had the opportunity of verifying his 
surmise that it was a present from that open-handed youth, 
when, in settling his brother's outstanding liabilities, he came 
across it in Messrs. Rumond & Dib/s little account in 
company with the claret jug that had figured on the occasion 
of his own majority. 

Seen at close quarters, the fair Cynthia was a little coarse 
looking, and it seemed to Sainty that a person to whom the 
art of painting her face must be professionally familiar, ought 
to have acquired more delicacy of touch. Her eyes were 
very large, and what the French call d fleur de iUe\ her lips 
were too full, too red, and seemed to show too much of their 
linings ; and her teeth, which had flashed so brilliantly across 
the footlights, were less dazzling on a nearer inspection. 
Her figure and carriage were superb, but her hands, though 
unnaturally whitened, were not pretty, and her nails were ill- 
cared for and perhaps a little bitten. She was extremely 
gracious to Sainty, and evidently anxious to impress him 
with her tenue and the elegance of her manners. 

' I met Lady Deans in the cloakroom,' she began ; ' isn't 
she a handsome woman? I do admire her. Isn't it odd, 
her Christian name's Vere, and so's my surname? and we're 
both so tail Some one once said we might be sisters, but 
of course that 's nonsense. I know she 's a great deal better 
lookin' than me.' 

' It had not occurred to me that you were alike ' Sainty 

was beginning, but Arthur cut in. ' Rats,' he said. ' You 
know she isn't a patch on you,' for which gallant speech he 
was rewarded by a rap on the knuckles from his enslaver's 
fork. Though he gazed enraptured in her face, she paid him 
very little attention, and continued to address her conversation 
to Sainty. 

*We had a little supper at my place last night ; I wish I 'd 
known you were in town ; your brother was there. Oh, all 

K 



146 BELCHAMBER 

very quiet, of course; only a little soup, and lobster cutlets, 
and nothing else hot but the fowls; a few little things in 
aspic, and some plover's eggs, that 's all ; but we were very 
jolly. Straddles came, the famous comique^ and sang some 
of his songs and made us roar ; and one or two other people 
sang, and then we cleared away the furniture and had some 
dancing. We kept it up till four o'clock. I declare I'm 
quite sleepy ; ain't you, Clara ? ' 

Miss Bingham, a little, heavily painted black and red lady, 
replied from the other end of the table that she couldn't keep 
her eyes open. ' Lor ! we did have fun, though,' she said ; 
'how was the poor piano this morning, after those boys 
pouring the champagne into it ? ' 

* Oh, don't speak of it,' said Miss de Vere. * You know 
that lovely new drapery I'd got for it, plush and Liberty 
silk ; they completely ruined it. I was really cross. I don't 
see any fun in spoiling people's things.' 

* What a shame I ' said Arthur. * May I give you a new one ?' 
No, naughty boy, don't you be extravagant. Why didn't 

you come?' she added, turning to Miss Hodgson, the 
beautiful statuesque lady who sat on Arthur's left with a fixed 
smile on her lovely mouth that recalled the hairdresser's 
window. She was eating a good deal, but not adding much 
to the conversation. Thus appealed to, she glanced towards 
the little Greek, still with the same amiable absence of 
xpression, and nodded gently. 
' Do you mean I wouldn't let you go ? ' snarled Mr. Atides. 

* Oh no,' she cooed. 

*Then why the devil didn't you go? /don't know ' 

^ Petit monstrcy murmured Miss BalbuUier to Sainty. 
Est-il insupportable/ V*IA longtemps que je Vaurais plantk 

Id si fktais MabeL 'Oby, what is "planted there" in 

English?' 

* Chuck 'im, give 'im the mitten,' promptly responded that 
gallant officer. 

Sainty wondered just what kind of weird irregular regiment 
could once have been commanded by this blue-nosed veteran, 



BELCHAMBER 147 

with his dyed moustache and damp grizzled curls ; his hands 
and eyes were so much older than anything else about him, 
as to give an uncanny suggestion of magic, as of some im- 
perfectly transformed Faust. 

' Tiensl la mitainef I ignore the phrase/ said mademoi* 
selle. 

Mr. Atides continued to growl into his plate with a very 
evil expression, like a dog over a bone, and Agnes Baines, a 
very pretty fair girl with a pronounced Cockney accent 
pursued an eager conversation across him with Miss Bingham, 
as though he were an empty chair. 

* 'E 's given 'er a tiara,' Sainty heard her say ; * none of your 
little 'undred-pounders, a real fine one with big stones in it.' 

•Isn't Agnes vulgar?' Cynthia murmured to him, very 
impressive and supercilious from the heights of her superior 
gentility. * She 's had so few advantages, poor girl 1 but she 
iV pretty, don't you think?' 

* They say he 's goin' to marry 'er,' Miss Baines continued. 

' Your English girls are so kveer,' the French lady remarked 
to Sainty; *zay sink of nozzing but gettin' married. To me 
zat seem so sorrrdid.' As Mademoiselle Elise was credited 
with having already ruined three young men during the 
brief period of her sojourn on these shores, without any 
thought of ceremonial formalities, this sentiment was perhaps 
not so disinterestedly high-minded as it sounded. 

Charley Hunter, who had been vainly trying to attract Miss 
Baines' attention — though perhaps more of her conversation 
was addressed to him than he realised — and gnawing his 
beardless lips at the ill success of his manoeuvres, here turned 
his back squarely on her and addressed himself to Arthur. 

'They say they're going to raise the standard; isn't it 
beastly? as if the damned exams, weren't hard enough as 
it is.' 

•My little feller from Aldershot says they are going to 
make 'em so stiff that none of you Johnnies will be able to 
pass unless you jolly well buck up,' remarked Miss Bingham 
cheerfully. 



148 BELCHAMBER 

*I hope you will use your influence with my brother to 
make him work,' Sain ty said, turning to Cynthia; 4t's vexy 
important he should pass.' 

'He's a bad boy,' said Miss de Vere playfully, 'but I'm 
alwajTS at him not to be so idle.' 

This speech being greeted with derisive laughter by some 
of the company, the lady indignantly demanded if they didn't 
believe her. 

'There were no exams, in my day,' cried Colonel Hoby, 
'and damn me if I think they turned out less good officers 
than the damned spindle-shanked round-shouldered crew of 
short-sighted asses you have in the army nowadays. They 
ought to be parsons.' 

' Hear, hear 1 Fiddmarshal,' said Arthur. ' I wish we had 
you in Pall Mall; there 'd be a lot more good fellows in the 
army than there are, if you were Commander-in-chief.' 

Sainty was growing weak with the effort of trying to find 
something agreeable to say to either of his neighbours. He 
was oppressed with a sense of the dreariness of the whole 
function. He had come prepared to be a little shocked, but 
half hoping for a touch of reckless gaiety. If this was the 
sort of entertainment Tannhauser found in the Venusberg, 
he thought the pilgrimage to Rome must have been an 
exhilarating change. He found himself almost wishing for 
the young men who had poured champagne into Miss de 
Vere's piano, to lend some semblance of liveliness to the 
proceedings. With its banal unimaginative luxury and sordid 
second-rate chatter, this one excursion of his into Bohemia 
was as dull as one of his mother's religious dinner-parties. 
And to think that it was for the privil^e of frequenting this 
sort of society that dozens of young men of Arthur's stamp 
ruined themselves yearly, on the very threshold of life! 
Uncle Cor might not be very exciting, but he surely was 
better company than Atides or Colonel Hoby. But then 
Sainty was constitutionally unfitted to give its due importance 
to love's young dream. 



CHAPTER XI 

Sainty rather expected a letter with some attempt at exculpa- 
tion from his cousin ; but Claude was evidently aware that in 
many awkward positions there is no course so expedient as 
silence. Had circumstances made a meeting with Sainty 
seem imminent, he might have thought otherwise; but, as 
things were, having nothing to say, he said nothing, and 
trusted to time to take the edge ofif the situation. Sainty 
composed several very withering answers to the possible 
letter, but as it never came he had no occasion to send 
them. 

He had not contrived to get a word with Arthur after the 
memorable supper. * Hope you won't mind, old man, pro- 
mised to see Miss de Vere home ; only civil,' the boy had 
murmured, as he slipped into the little hired coupS that was 
waiting. Mademoiselle BalbuUier had hinted that a like 
attention would not be unwelcome from himself, but finding 
her hints disregarded, had driven off in a hansom with Miss 
Bingham, laughing very shrilly at some joke that seemed to 
tickle them hugely. 

Sainty returned to Cambridge more than ever persuaded 
that if anything was to be done for Arthur it must be done 
quickly. He had for some time had a scheme in his head, 
which had been germinating slowly, but for it to come to 
blossom, let alone fruit, he needed above all things the co« 
operation of Gerald Newby. He therefore made haste to 
seek his friend and lay his plans before him. He found 
Newby for a wonder alone. 

'So you're back,' Gerald said, pushing the papers together 
on his desk and pulling the blotting-paper over them, a 



ISO BELCHAMBER 

little trick of his which always exasperated Sainty, who 
would rather have died than look at anything not meant for 
him. 

' Are you busy ? ' he asked. ' I 've got something special 
U> talk to you about' 

/ ' I 'm not too busy to be at the service of any one who wants 
ime,* said Newby. ' Mere college work never seems to me as 
{important as real human needs.' 

> ' Ah ! I 'm so glad to hear you say that ; it gives me a 
better hope in what I have to say to you.' Sainty had 
thought so much over the scheme he had to propose — it 
was so important to him — that now it was trembling on the 
threshold of utterance he feared lest he should not put it 
before Newby to the best advantage. 

There was so long a pause that the young don came round 
from his writing-table to a position from which he faced 
and dominated his interlocutor. 'Well,' he said, 'I'm all 
attention.' 

* First of all about my brother,' Sainty began, with some 
hesitation. 'You must know that I've found things even 
worse than I expected ; it 's not merely idleness and waste of 
time, as I feared ; there 's a woman in the case.' 

Newby frowned. He had an almost feminine prudery. 
The fact was he knew very little of such things, and what he 
did not know always seemed to him dark and dangerous, 
a subject to be as much as possible avoided in conversation. 
* I am very little qualified to advise ' he began. 

' Oh ! that 's not what I wanted your help about,' Sainty 
assured him; /at least, not directly; but you know I've 
often told you how I wished I could get rid of my most 
unsuitable part in life.' 

Newby made an almost imperceptible gesture of im- 
patience, as who should say, ' We are back to that old game, 
are we ? ' 

* It was not mere talk,' Sainty went on. * I have thought 
and thought about it, till I really have evolved something ; I 
have once or twice wanted to speak to you about it, but have 



BELCHAMBER 151 

been afraid. Why I mentioned Arthur just now, was that a 
great factor in my desire for a change of life was that I 
thought I saw my way to helping him, perhaps to saving him ; 
and what I've seen in this visit to London convinces me 
that I 've no time to lose.' 

*You interest me,' said Newby patronisingly. He went 
across and fastened his outer door. ' If what you have to say 
to me is so important,' he said, ' we may as well secure our- 
selves against interruption.' 

'Ever since I was a child,' Sainty began again, 'it has 
been borne in on me that my brother was as pre-eminently 
fitted for my place in the world as I was un^Xiod for it. I 
used to think I was sure to die young, and that so matters 
would adjust themselves naturally without my intervention. 
Well — I'm nearly twenty-two, and I seem to get stronger 
every year. I don't say I 'm a tower of strength, but I fancy 
I'm less likely to die than many more robust men. For 
one thing, I do no dangerous things. You can understand 
that the idea is not a pleasant one to me that my one 
business in life is to keep my brother out of his birth' 
right.' 

' It isn't his birthright ; it 's yours.' 

'That 's as you happen to look at it ; it 's not my view. I 
can't feel as if I had any right to what is only a hindrance 
and clog to me, and would be such a help to him.' 

' But you can't change places with him, however much you 
may wish to.' 

* Legally and physically, no ; virtually, yes. For ever so 
long I 've been hatching a pet scheme, but I can't carry it 
out without your help. I've not the health, the will, nor 
the intellect necessary; but you would be the ideal person 
to do it, and you would help and cheer me when I failed.' 

' May I know what this wonderful idea of yours is ? ' 

* I can't make him Lord Belchamber — I wish I could ; but I 
can practically give him the position, if I hand over the 
place and income to him. He would be able to marry some 
nice girl^ hq is one of those who ought to marry young. 



152 BELCHAMBER 

With a healthy, out-of-door life and plenty of innocent con- 
genial occupation, and the influence of a good woman at his 
side, all that is kindly in him would have room to develop. 
He is not naturally vicious, only weak and incurably head- 
strong and obstinate.' 

'And what do you propose to do with yourse/f}* 

* Ah ! that is it ; that 's where you come in. The whole 
thing hangs on you.' Sainty looked appealingly in his friend's 
face. ' I 'm half afraid to put it to the touch,' he said ; ' I 
have it so much at heart.' 

* I can't give you my views on your Utopia unless you tell 
me what it is.' 

Sainty detected and grieved at the faint sneer in the use of 
the word ' Utopia.' 

* You don't encourage me,' he said. 

'How can I, till I know what you propose?' 

'I thought we might go, you and I, into one of those 
East End parishes and start a place something on the lines 
of Toynbee Hall, a sort of university for the poor, a centre of 
culture and light and civilisation in the middle of all that 
dreariness and barbarity ; I to find the money, and you practi- 
cally everything else, with me for your lieutenant to work 
under your orders.' 

Sainty brought it all out with a rush, when once he had 
come to the point, and then paused breathless to hear how 
his idea would be received. Newby sat silent for a moment 
or two ; at least he took the matter seriously. 

' Have you thought at all what it will cost ? ' he asked. 

* Yes,' cried Sainty eagerly, * I 've gone into all that rather 
a^refuUy. Say that it costs ;^2o,ooo to build the place — it 
could be done for that, very simple and plain ; a big hall to 
begin with, and perhaps a cloister, and a few sets of rooms 
like college rooms. After the initial expense I don't think it 
could cost more than ;;^2ooo or ;£^3ooo a year. Of course 
we should live in the simplest way — there would be no 
luxury ; and gradually I should hope the place would begin 
to help pay for itself; it wouldn't be a charity, you know,' 



BELCHAMBER 153 

'And the land?' asked Newby; Ms that included in your 
;^2o,ooo ? You would want a good big plot, for the heart of 
London, to put up such buildings as you propose.' 

'Oh, that could be managed. I might pay for half and 
raise the other half by mortgage on the property, or even the 
whole. There need be no difficulty about the money part of 
it ; /'d see to that. The question is, will you help ? All the 
rules, all the details of the working of the thing would have 
to come from you. You would be absolute master. I 
thought,' he added a little piteously, * that it would appeal to 
you as an opportunity of carrying out some of your ideals. 
It would, of course, be entirely undenominational ; people of 
all creeds should be invited to explain their views. It might 
be the beginning, the nucleus of your idea of universal belief 
and brotherhood.' 

The pleading eyes fixed on his face seemed to make Newby 
vaguely ill at ease. While Sainty was talking he had shifted 
his position, got up and walked to the window, and sat down 
again at his desk, on which he drummed a little with his 
fingers. Now he rose and came back to his friend. There 
was a touch of embarrassment and something like compunc- 
tion, as he said — 

' My dear fellow, it 's impossible, simply impossible.' 

Sainty, glancing round the charming room with its air of 
dignified calm and severe luxury, saw suddenly how sham 
was its austerity, how real its comfort. 

' I am asking a great deal of you,' he said ; ' too much, I 'm 
afraid.' 

* Don't say that,' said Newby eagerly. 'Don't think I 
would hesitate at any little personal sacrifice ; that is indeed a 
low view of me. But^ believe me, I see the impracticability 
of the whole thing.' 

For a few seconds there was an uneasy silence. The 
summer breeze from the open windows faintly stirred the 
pictures on the wall. Voices softened by distance and 
pleasant outdoor sounds came wafted to them where they sat 
It occurred to Sainty that it was not necessary for a young 



154 BELCHAMBER 

man to ' have great possessions ' ' to go away sorrowful ' when 
confronted by the opportunity of the supreme sacrifice for 
others. No one knew better than he that Newby's way of 
life would have been far harder for him to give up than his 
own ; and this knowledge lent a great tenderness and humility 
to his voice as he asked, ' Why impracticable if we are both 
willing ? ' 

* Take yourself to begin with/ Newby answered ; * think of 
your people, your mother, your uncle, the duke and duchess — 
what would they say to such a scheme ? ' 

' Oh, they 'd be horrified at first ; but I don't think they 
would offer any very strenuous opposition to such a simple 
plan of disposing of me in favour of Arthur.' 

* Then, think how / should appear in the matter. What 
would they say of me ? — that I had acquired a great influence 
over you, and then used it to make you devote yourself and 
your money to the support of myself and the furtherance of 
my crack-brained schemes. It 's ten to one against their even 
allowing me any sincerity ; far more likely they would think 
my one object was to advertise myself while living at your 
expense.' 

* And do you care so greatly what people say of you ? * 

* Yes, I do. My dear boy, you are one of the great ones 
of the earth and can afford to be thought eccentric if you 
please ; but I am a poor scholar — my good name is every- 
thing to me.' 

* You said once that we could never hope to do anything 
unless we were prepared to be misunderstood ; that no man 
could really be good for anything of whom the commonplace 
respectable people spoke well.' 

' Good heavens ! ' cried Newby, with not unnatural exas- 
peration, * I wish you wouldn't cast snatches of things I may 
have said in some quite dififerent connection in my teeth.' 
He made another excursion to the window and stood looking 
out for a second or two. Presently he turned and said in a 
much more chastened manner, * Then there 's what I 'm doing 
here. You yourself can bear witness that I am not without 



BELCHAMBER 155 

influence on a number of young men, an influence you have 
told me was good. Have I a right to give up my work here, 
my power of influencing unnumbered young lives towards 
higher and purer ideals, for a quite problematical chance of 
doing good to costermongers, and incidentally enabling your 
brother to stand in your shoes ? ' 

For a few moments neither spoke. 

' Then you refuse ? ' said Sainty almost under his breath. 
* Is it quite, quite irrevocable ? ' 

* My dear boy, some day you will see the matter in its true 
light and will thank me for having saved you from following 
the will-o*-the-wisp of your own too precipitate philanthropy. 
The idea is purely fanciful ; believe me, it would never work. 
In the first place, the mortifications, the disappointments, the 
roughness of the life, would kill you in a year.' 

* And if meanwhile my money and my feeble efforts had 
served to start a really useful work, to launch you on a career 
of helpfulness, what would that matter ? Would it not even 
be the simplest solution of all ? Arthur would then step into 
the place in which it is so much my object to establish 
him.' 

' Qui method of suicide the machinery is cumbrous and 
expensive,* said Newby, with dreary facetiousness ; * and you 
can't seriously expect me to aid and abet you in committing 
the happy dispatch.' 

They talked much longer, Sainty still pleading for his idea, 
though without much hope of success, Newby, gaining assur- 
ance from the sound of his own voice, pouring more and 
more cold water on the project and abounding in excellent 
reason. Sainty could not but see the sense of much that 
Gerald said ; yet he came away from the interview not only 
depressed and disappointed at the ruthless killing of his 
cherished scheme, but with an uncomfortable sense of having 
caught a glimpse of his idol's clay feet, always one of the 
saddest experiences of life. He felt too a certain closing in 
on him as of fate ; his attempts to mould events or to avert 
catastrophes had met with singularly little success. Was all 



I 



156 BELCHAMBER 

straggle useless, then ? was it true that we were only poppets 
in the iron grip of destiny ? To a person of his temperament 
it was only too easy to belieye it, yet yoyth's everlasting 
as sertion of f r^yoU dies hard in oar twenty-second yeaf,lDid- 
it was not without many searchings of heart that Belchamber 
settled down to the conviction that there was nothing to be 
done. To say that his brother was never out of his thoughts 
would be an exaggeration. Happily for us, there is no such 
thing as complete absorption in one idea. When we have 
lost all that made life worth having, if we were honest we 
should own that at certain moments the roost trivial of daily 
preoccupations drove our grief completely out of our minds. 
There is no evidence to show that the inhabitants of Hercu- 
laneum were other than cheerfully busy ; and we all pursue 
a hundred frivolous objects, though lying every one of us 
inexorably under sentence of death. 

In the year that followed Sainty thought much and 
anxiously of Arthur, but he also thought of many other things. 
For one thing, the management of his estate was beginning 
to interest him. Having originally turned his attention that 
way purely to please his mother, he had gradually come to 
some appreciation of what he could do for his fellow-creatures 
over an area for which he was more or less responsible. 
Whatever his views might be as to the position of the land- 
owning class, while he held such a position it undoubtedly 
entailed many duties and responsibilities. Whether his land 
were eventually to pass to the State or be cut up into peasant 
properties, as long as it remained his it was clearly better that 
the people on it should live in well-drained, weathertight 
houses, than in insanitary hovels ; that they should be as 
far as possible provided with regular employment, educated, 
amused, kept from the public-house. While Cambridge and 
his work for the tripos held him, he had thought less of all 
these things, secure in the conviction that his mother and 
uncle were giving them careful attention. To tell the truth, 
he had a little feared to absorb himself in them while he still 
cherished a hope that his work in life might lie in far other 



BELCHAMBER 157 

fields, that all this might be Arthur's business, not his. In 
his immediate neighbourhood there was no very terrible 
distress to stir his imagination; by the poor on the place 
Lady Charmington had scrupulously done something more 
than her duty, and hard as were the lives of the agricultural 
labourers, at least their lot had fallen to them in pleasant 
places — their work was done in the pure air of heaven. It 
was for the huddled degraded masses of the great cities, and 
especially of London, that his soul felt the overwhelming 
sickening pity which had threatened to drive him out into the 
wilderness. Now that he personally seemed to be barred 
from efifort in that direction, that his long-cherished hopes of 
seating his brother in his place had proved quite impracti- 
cable, and all the fabric raised by his dreams on that 
foundation had fallen in ruins about his ears at the blast 
of Newby's inexorable common-sense, the plain duties that 
lay immediately around him presented themselves as some- 
thing to be clutched with an almost despairing intensity. 
Here, at least, was work ready to his hand, and he promised 
himself it should be done thoroughly. He absorbed himself 
in his mother's big ledgers, her detailed and carefully kept 
accounts of all the workings of the great property, with the 
same student's passion for mastering his subject that he had 
brought to his Cambridge studies. Had Lady Charmington 
been a less conscientious woman, the thought that her power 
was passing from her might not have been without a sting ; 
but she had talked so much of 'giving an account of her 
stewardship,' and so often lamented Sainty's want of interest 
in his own possessions, that, whatever slight pangs she may 
have had to stifle, she had not the face to express anything 
but pleasure at his changed attitude. So far, too, he was 
still her pupil, eagerly learning all she had to tell, and 
accepting her word as final It is possible that she took a 
genuine pleasure in introducing him to his duties, and she 
may well have been forgiven some moments of pride in 
displaying to him both the quantity and quality of her work 
during his minority. Sainty, on his side, began to understand 



1S8 BELCHAMBER 

all that his mother had done for him, and his wonder was 
only equalled by his gratitude. 

Lady Charmington's confidence in Arthur's application to 
his studies began to be shaken about this time by his 
ignominious failure to pass his examination ; and here it was 
she who turned to Sainty for help — Sainty who, impossible as 
it seemed, had been right where she was wrong. 

' I can't make it out at all/ she would say ; ' he seemed to 
be working so hard. You recollect he wouldn't even come 
home last Easter ; and then in the summer he went off on 
that reading party.' 

Arthur, in fact, after a fortnight at Belchamber — a fortnight 
during which he had been moody, restless, unlike himself, 
and had carefully shunned all possibilities of private or 
personal talk with either his mother or brother — had left 
hurriedly on a mysterious * reading party.' 

Sainty wrote often to the London lodgings, but seldom 
got any answers, and doubted whether many of his letters 
ever reached the person to whom they were written. It 
became increasingly difficult to pacify Lady Charmington, 
who passed by a rapid transition from her serene optimism 
to the depths of the gloomiest apprehension. Sometimes 
for days she would hardly talk of anything else, expressing 
wonder, surprise, disappointment, all of which Sainty had 
more or less to pretend to share, with a sense of deceit when 
he reflected how little surprised he really was, and how much 
he could have enlightened the poor lady. 

At Sainty's earnest request Arthur came again to Bel- 
chamber in November for the shooting, his last visit, as it 
proved, for many a long day. Sainty argued, remonstrated, 
implored. 'What was he doing? What did he intend to 
do ? Didn't he want to go into the army ? He must know 
he could never get in if he didn't work or pass his exams.' 
It was all to no purpose. The boy took refuge in a surly 
silence. He had two such terrible scenes with his mother 
that for the first time in his life he spent Christmas away 
from home. ' I 'm going to the Hunters,' he wrote. ' If I 



BELCHAMBER 159 

come to Belchamber there will only be a repetition of the 
ghastly rows I had with mother in November, and what's the 
good ? I hate rows ; jawing never did me any good yet' 

Lady Charmington appealed to her brother. Lord Firth 
saw Arthur when he came up for the meeting of parliament. 
Sainty could never learn accurately what passed between 
them, but his uncle, that most amiable gentleman, said he 
would not willingly speak to the boy again. 

The spring wore away miserably in sickening suspense. 
Arthur was still nominally working at 'Monkton's,' but 
several letters had come from the principal of the establish- 
ment, complaining of the slackness of his attendance, which 
bad not tended to soothe his mother's feelings. 

It was getting on for a year after the supper at the Hotel 
Fritz, when Sainty, seeing a number of letters, most of which 
had a bill-like look about them, on the hall table for Arthur, 
took them to his room to re-direct. He was just about to 
do so, when he noticed that they had all originally been sent 
to Monkton's, and had been forwarded from there. The 
postmarks of some of them were several weeks old, from 
which it was evident not only that Arthur had not been at 
the crammer's at all for some time past, but that the people 
there believed him to be at home. The pen dropped from 
Sainty's hand, and he sat staring at the envelopes^ shuffling 
them idly from behind one another, as though they were a 
hand at cards. Finally, shutting them sharply together, he 
thrust them into his pocket, and went in search of his mother. 

Since his defection at Christmas and the failure of Lord 
Firth to bring the culprit to reason. Lady Charmington had 
talked much less of her second son ; for the most part she 
maintained a grim and offended silence. Sainty wondered 
sometimes what this changed attitude might mean. He 
was certain that she did not think less of Arthur, or worry 
less about him. Was it possible that she had begun to 
distrust his co-operation for any reason, and was trying to 
find out something for herself without his help? Her 
manner, when he spoke to her on this particular day, was 



i6o BELCHAMBER 

stranger than ever, and she looked at him with a sudden 
hard scrutiny which chilled him, when he asked if she did 
not think it might be well for him to go to London and look 
Arthur up. 

*He never writes, and we don't know what he may be 
doing,' he said. 'I can't let things drift in this way any 
longer.' 

He said nothing of the letters in his pocket Lady 
Charmington looked as if she were on the point of saying 
something, and then decided not to. 

' Very well,' she answered quietly ; ' how long shall you be 
gone?' 

' I don't know ; it will depend on what I find. Mother,' 
he added, 'don't you agree? don't you think it will be well 
for me to go ? ' 

Again his mother looked at him as if she would have read 
his soul ; it was the old glance that had made him stammer 
and look down as a child, the look that said more clearly than 
words that she thought him a liar. He had never been able 
to meet it. Instinctively he looked away. 

' Go, by all means,' he heard her say, and he knew that 
her eyes were still upon his face, the eyes of a judge, almost 
an accuser. ' Go and see what you can do. You may have 
means of getting at the truth not open to me.' 



CHAPTER XII 

Without seeing any one at Monkton's but the servant, or 
even disclosing his identity, Sainty was able in a very few 
words to establish the correctness of his surmises. Arthur 
had not been there for weeks. 'I can get you 'is address, 
if you'll wait a minute,' the man said; *'e's down at 'is 
own 'ome ; I forwarded some letters to him a day or two 
back.' 

* Oh, thanks ; if he 's there, I know the address and need 
not trouble you,' and Sainty turned again to his hansom. 
He reflected that to find Miss de Vere was to find his 
brother, and supposed, in his innocence^ that he had only 
to apply at the theatre to learn the young lady's address. 
But when he presented himself at the stage-door and blush- 
ingly demanded it, he was informed that Miss de Vere was 
not acting at present, and that, in any case, they were strictly 
forbidden to give the private address of any of their ladies or 
gentlemen. A letter sent to the theatre for Miss de Vere 
would be forwarded. 

This was an unlooked-for check, and he wondered blankly 
what he was to do next. He sent away his cab and began to 
wander slowly westward again; he could think better on 
foot. He was walking sadly along Pall Mall, when he was 
passed by a young man with wonderfully broad shoulders 
and a wonderfully small waist, who paused, looked at him, 
and finally held out his hand. Sainty recognised Algy 
Montgomery. 

' Hulloa ! ' said the guardsman, with the smileless gloom of 
the fashionable London young man. ' Where are you off to ? 
I 'm just on my way to call on my stepmother; I understand 

L 



i62 BELCHAMBER 

she says I never come near her. Why don't you come along 
and see your revered grandmother ? ' 

Sainty had been trying to make himself go and ask Claude 
for the address he wanted ; he had not once set eyes on his 
cousin during the past year, and to appeal to him again for 
help was a bitter pill. Think as he would, he could evolve 
no other way of arriving at his end, and this chance meeting 
and invitation to Sunborough House seemed like a leading. 
He would go and see the duchess — what more natural ? and 
if Claude happened to be there, how could he help it ? 

* All right,' he said ; * I don't mind if I do.' 

The pair walked in silence for a few seconds. Lord 
Algernon trying to accommodate his long stride to his com- 
panion's limp. 

* Come up to look after your young brother ? ' he asked 
presently, through the cigar which he held tightly between 
his teeth. ' He 's making no end of an ass of himself with 
Topsy de Vere ; he never leaves her for a minute ' 

To talk casually to a comparative stranger of what was 
gnawing his vitals was gall ana wormwood to Sainty, but he 
grunted some sort of an assent, and then asked as indiffer- 
ently as he could, * You don't happen to know Miss de Vere's 
address, do you ? ' 

Lord Algy laughed. * No, for a wonder, I don't,' he said ; 
* but I tell you who ought to — your precious cousin Morland. 
I fancy he knew his way there quite well at one time.' 

* Oh ! did Claude ' 

* Got tired of the lady ; or perhaps found her rather too 
expensive (I suspect his grace don't do his secretary par- 
ticularly well), so passed her on to the little cousin. Sharp 
fellow, Morland.' 

The duchess, whom presently they found having tea in 
company with Lady Rugby and Lady Eva, had also a word to 
say of her prodigal grandson. 'Arthur s'encanailley she 
remarked. * He is bad form ; he lets himself be seen every- 
where with cocottes ; the young men of to-day have no tenue 
—none. Formerly, yes, I don't say men were any better — 



BELCHAMBER 163 

they have always been monsters; but they did not throw ces 
demoiselles in the face of the world.' 

Lady Eva murmured something to the effect that Arthur 
was a dear, and dropped a platitude about wild oats. 

' Oh, I don't want a boy to be a merle blanc^^ her mother 
rejoined. * Sainty would be all the better if he were just a 
little naughty, wouldn't you, my child? I don't suppose 
Algy here, or your own boy, are models of virtue, but there 
are ways of doing things. By the way, where is Claude? 
Ring the bell, Algy, and we will see if he is in ; he will like 
to see his cousin.' 

Sainty did not feel at all sure that he would, but when Mor- 
land presently appeared in answer to the duchess's message, he 
was as easy and unembarrassed as usual ; it was Belchamber 
who was awkward and ill at ease. There was, perhaps, just a 
shade of reproachful tenderness in Claude's greeting, an 
eloquent glance, a silent pressure of the hand, as who should 
say, ' You may be as cantankerous and unreasonable as you 
like, my patience with those I love is practically inexhaustible.' 
At the merest hint from Sainty that he had something to ask 
him, he carried him off to his own room, and when the request 
for Miss de Vere's address had been stammered out, produced 
a little address-book from a locked drawer, and began to search 
in it with a great appearance of assiduity. 

* Here it is — no, let me see, she left there, that 's her old 
address \ how stupid of me. Ah ! this is it, a flat she took ; 
I remember now. But she's always moving, I don't guarantee 
that you '11 find her there \ but they '11 be able to tell you if 
she's flitted again.' His voice was dry and businesslike; 
Sainty wanted an address, he was trying to help him to it, as 
he would try to do anything he wanted. Why he had need of 
it was no affair of his. Claude prided himself on his power 
of implying much that his tongue never uttered. 

He wrung Sainty's hand at parting. * Good luck to you,' 
he whispered. * / could do no good ; may you be more for- 
tunate ! And oh ! by the way, I wouldn't mention me there ; 
I 'm not popular in that quarter. Cynthia has taken one of 



i64 BELCHAMBER 

those absurd unreasoning dislikes to me that half-educated 
people do, and has set Arthur against me. I suppose she was 
afraid I might try and get him away from her. It 's a bad 
business. Well, addioy and best wishes.' 

Oddly enough, Claude was right in his surmise that Mis^ de 
Vere might have moved, but Sainty did at last discover her 
present abode, and arriving there about noon of the following 
day, found that she had gone to a rehearsal, ' but the gentle- 
man was in.' Sainty was not sorry to find Arthur alone. The 
boy was at first of course very much on the defensive ; the 
elder brother had to walk most warily among the eggshells of 
suspicion and susceptibility, but he soon discovered that his 
coming was not ^together unwelcome. Arthur did not 
attempt to disguise the fact that he was living with Cynthia; 
*he had made her give up her fiat, and had taken these rooms 
for her; they had the whole house, and the people of the 
house looked after them ; it saved the bother of servants ; he 
was answerable for the rent and the housekeeping ; naturally 
he couldn't live at her expense; otherwise she wouldn't take a 
penny from him, she was very high-minded ; it was as much 
as ever she would let him give her a little present now and 
then. Anything she made professionally was no business of 
his ; she had gone about a new engagement this morning.' 

' But how do you do it ? Surely to take a whole house like 
this on the footing of lodgings is the most expensive arrange- 
ment you can make.' 

< It ain't done for nothing, I can tell you,' Arthur said rue- 
fully. He was not sorry to unburthen himself a little to his 
brother. Sainty had had no idea to what extent a young man 
of family could live on credit in London, for a time at least. 
By carefully never paying ready money where it was not abso- 
lutely necessary, it was astonishing what a lot you could do. 

'But what's it all going to lead to?' Sainty asked. *Do 
you propose to give up the army, never do anything — ^just 
live on here with her from day to day ? Even supposing you 
were me, and had all the money you wanted, would this life 
satisfy you ? ' 



BELCHAMBER 165 

* I believe you, my boy,' said Arthur heartily. 

'It may for a time; it won't, it can't, for long,' Sainty 
said eagerly. *And mother? Don't you care about her? 
Mother 's awfully cut up about your not passing your exam. 
There 's another coming on in the autumn ; it '11 be your last 
chance. Don't you mean to try? ' 

Arthur's brow grew dark at the mention of his mother. 
By Jove ! ' he said, 'you don't know the things she said to me. 
She can let you have it, when she isn't pleased, the mater 
can.' 

' Well, you must admit she had some reason not to be 
pleased,' said Sainty. 

' Lots of fellows muff the first time,' said Arthur lamely. 
* I've got another try.' 

'But are you any more likely to pass the next time? Are 
you doing a stroke of work for it?' And he narrated to 
Arthur how it had come to his knowledge that he had not 
been at Monkton's for weeks. 'I happened on these,' he 
said, producing the letters he had found in the hall at Bel- 
chamber, 'but mother might just as well have found them. 
She doesn't know yet that you 've dropped work altogether, 
but she must find it out soon. Monkton may write to her 
any day and ask when you are coming back.' 

' Damn it all 1 I hadn't thought of that' 

' No. You never think of anything half an hour ahead, do 
you?' 

Then Sainty told him how people were talking about him 
— ^his grandmother. Aunt Eva, Algy Montgomery (he did not 
mention Claude). ' Don't you see that in a dozen ways the 
whole thing may come out to mother at any moment? ' 

Arthur was very stubborn, took refuge in the reiteration 
of his devotion to Cynthia and his determination not to 
be parted from her. Once or twice Sainty almost lost 
patience. 

' You say you wonU leave her, and you wonU do this or 
that or anything you don't choose,' he said with some warmth ; 
' but what are you going to live on ? You own you 're up to 



i66 BELCHAMBER 

your ears in debt, and that people are getting impatient. 
What can you do if mother cuts off your allowance?' 

* I 'm of age ; I 've got my own money.' 

* Five hundred a year ! You can keep up this sort of life 
so easily on that, can't you ? You know you can't touch the 
principal. I don't suppose the next two years' income would 
begin to pay what you owe now.' 

Arthur looked doubtful ; he began to see the weakness of 
his position. He tried a few platitudes about ' working his 
fingers to the bone for ^r,' at which Sainty, miserable as he 
felt, couldn't help laughing. 

* You 've never done a stroke of work in your life^' he said, 
'and you would find it so easy to get employment, wouldn't 
you ? You would be so valuable in a house of business ! ' 

He wisely refrained from any suggestion that the lady's 
affection might not be proof against the trials of poverty. 

Finally, after long argument and entreaty, Arthur was per- 
suaded to say he would go to a new crammer in the country 
till after the next examination, and would do his best to pass. 
'It is no good my trying to work at Monkton's,' he said 
candidly ; ' I should always be bolting back to Cynthia. You 
can't think how good she is ; she 's always telling me I ought 
to work and pass my exams, and please you. Don't try and 
make me give her up or say I won't have anything more to 
do with her, or any rot of that sort.' 

Sainty, too glad to have carried his point about the work, 
was ready to promise anything — payment of debts, help in 
the support of the lady, in short, whatever Arthur liked to 
demand. 'And first of all,' he said pleadingly, 'you will 
come down home for a few days before you go to the new 
place. Poor mother 's sore and wretched at the way you 've 
treated her. She doesn't show much, but she feels a lot, and 
you 've always been her favourite. Come and be nice to her 
for a bit before you take up your work again.' 

'By Jove! you make me do everything you want,' said 
Arthur tenderly. Sainty could not help smiling at the thought 
of how very far this was from being the case, but he was 



BELCHAMBER 167 

thankful for small mercies. He reflected that he had been 
lucky in hitting on a propitious moment, when the narrow 
matters of the house had begun to press rather importunately 
on Miss de Vere's lover. To grant a favour, accepting the 
money he needed as a condition, was in every way pleasanter 
to Arthur than having to sue for help. 

Sainty declined to stay and lunch and see Miss de Vere. 
' I want to get home this afternoon,' he said. ' Mother '11 be 
so glad to know that you are going to work and do your best 
to pass; and also that you'll come home for a bit. You 
haven't been at Belchamber since November, and this is 
May j I don't think you 've ever been away for so long at a 
stretch before.' 

He travelled down to the country that same afternoon 
with a lighter heart than he had carried for many months, 
pleased to find he still had some influence over his brother, 
glad to be reconciled to Claude, and rejoicing in the pleasure 
he should be able to give his mother in the announcement of 
Arthur's visit and his promise of industry and reformation. 
He pondered anxiously on the question how much he need 
say of the temptations and distractions of London life, to 
explain Arthur's desire to leave Monkton's and once more 
try a country crammer's, and concluded that there was no 
necessity to breathe a word of the nature of the occupation 
that had kept his brother from working in town. He only 
trusted other people might be equally reticent. He had tele- 
graphed, before leaving London, to his mother that he would 
be back to dinner, and as soon as he arrived at Belchamber 
he was met by a message that she would like to see him at 
once in her own room. It was in vain that he told himself 
she was naturally impatient to hear what news he brought ; it 
was with an uneasy foreboding that he approached her door, 
and he had to pause and brace himself before he summoned 
courage to turn the handle. 

His first glance at his mother confirmed his worst anticipa- 
tions. She was walking up and down the room, so that her 
back was towards him as he entered ; but the white set face 



i68 BELCHAMBER 

she turned on him as he closed the door showed him at once 
that she knew everything. It was terrible to see this silent, 
dignified woman so ravaged and shaken out of her habitual 
self-control. Even at that moment he noticed with surprise 
the curious staginess of her movements and method of speech. 
It was true, then, that people in times of strong emotion did 
really behave in this way; and these gestures and phrases 
which he had always supposed to be pure literary and theatrical 
conventions derived from something in nature after all. 

* So,' she cried, sweeping round upon him, ' I find what I 
have long suspected was true: my boy, who, if he was 
thoughtless and a little idle, I thought was a pure-minded, 
healthy boy, has been degrading himself with loose women ; 
and this has been going on for a year past; it has been 
common talk; every one has known it; every one but his 
poor blind idiot of a mother. We must never know any- 
thing, of course ; our sons may be drifting to perdition, but 
there is no one who will come and tell a poor woman. People 
stand by and laugh ; I suppose they think it funny ; all the 
godless, indecent, modern books say so. No one, no one 
will say a word till it 's too late, too late to do any good.' 

She was in a white heat of rage, tearless, tragic, almost 
distraught, all the mother and the puritan in her crying out 
in revolt against the eternal mystery of the flesh, the triumph 
of the senses in the young male. Yes, in the abstract she 
knew of it, recognised that men were sinners and full of 
carnal appetites ; but that her boy, her child whom she had 
nursed and tended, whom but a few years back she had held 
upon her knee, that this pure, bright young creature should 
voluntarily turn from her to smirch its white raiment in the 
slough of sensuality — it was not to be believed. If sacred 
art represented the mother of the one sinless son with seven 
swords in her heart, what symbol can adequately depict the 
woes of the mothers of men ? 

Sainty, with his quick sympathy, divined something of all 
this in the awful moments that he stood for the first time 
face to face with his mother. His curious, guarded, sheltered 



BELCHAMBER 



169 



youth, his unhealthy, abnormal perception of other people's 
feelings, as well as the something feminine and maternal in 
his relation to his robuster brother, combined to give him a 
vision of an agony vouchsafed to few of his sex. He saw his 
mother, his cold, chaste, proud mother, stricken at once in 
her motherhood, her pride, her chastity, and yet he under- 
stood the situation as she could never understand it, as it 
could never be possible for him to make her understand. 
His whole heart yearned over her with a pity he seemed to 
have been specially created to feel in its full force. He made 
a step towards her with his arms held out, but she turned on 
him as if she would have struck him. 

'And you^ she cried, blazing with denunciation, ^yau 
come to me with a lying pretence of sympathy; you who 
have talked to me a dozen times of your anxiety about your 
brother, and seemed at one with me, so unselfishly, nobly 
distressed about him. You have known of this all along, 
have aided and abetted him in his infamy. You, w ho are too 
TnjjGii iinrl poAr n, tirfnt"''^ ^ h?iY^ known his temptations, 
nave helped him in cold blood to his undoing, and with this 
in your heart have come to me to consult what was best to be 

done for him. Oh ! y^M ^firfi P^'^^y?! f^}\ T^^ ^1 ^^f" 
you were hardly more than a baby.' 

* Mother, mother! for God's sake stop; you don't know 
what you 're saying. What do you mean ? ' 

* Oh I you don't know, do you ? Do you deny that you 
have known this all along? A year ago, didn't you go up 
and sup and carouse in this creature's company and that of 
her vile companions? Answer me that. Yes or no? Did 
you, or did you not ? You see, you can't deny it. For all I 
know, you have been with them often. Is it from her house 
you have come to me now? to me, the mother of you both !' 

* Perhaps I have been wrong, mother, but I don't deserve 
this at your hands. I have done what I could. I have just 
come from Arthur. You know he is not very manageable ; 
I have not had an easy part to play. And I have got him to 
promise to come away ; he will come home and ' 



\ 



I70 BELCHAMBER 

'Has he said he won't go back?' She flashed it at him 
like a whiplash, and her gesture spoke impatient contempt as 
he answered — 

' No, I can't make him say that, but I hope much from 
home influences ; when we get him here, surrounded by all 
that will speak to him of his childhood, of all he owes to 
you ' 

She cut him short. *You temporise with evil. Your 
arguments are those of the worldly wise.' She was regaining 
her calm ; argument was steadying her, and the old habit of 
rebuke brought back the judicial tone to her voice. * There 
are only two ways,' she said, * right and wrong. You cannot 
palter and hold diplomatic parleys with vice. I am willing — 
I should like — to believe that your motives have been good, 
but I hope you see the harm you have done by your attempts 
at compromise. Why, oh why,' she broke out again, * know- 
ing all this, haven't you told mel Surely /was the person 
to know, to be consulted on the subject.' 

' I wanted to sparie you, to save you pain. I may have 
been mistaken; I haven't seen very clearly what was best, 
but I hoped to get him away, and that perhaps you might 
never have the sorrow of knowing. I knew how bitter it 
would be to you.' 

* Oh ! this eternal deceit ! When will you learn that there 
can be no question of "not seeing what was best"? My 
early training of you must have been strangely defective, 
if at your age you can't tell good from evil. How can it evei;. 
be anything but right to tell the truth ? * 

' It is no new burthen I've had to bear,' Sainty answered, 
' to be alone in my knowledge of what was going on. For 
years I 've stood between Arthur and your knowledge of the 
scrapes he was in.' 

'You have, have you! So there has been a conspiracy 
between you to keep me in the dark. I don't want to be 
unjust to you ; you have not a strong or courageous character ; 
you may have honestly believed you were being kind; but 
see what has come of your duplicity. Had I known, I might 



BELCHAMBER 171 

have said a word in season. Arthur would always listen 
to me! 

Sainty thought of the tempests that had raged when Lady 
Charmington had said a word in season in the autumn on 
a much less ticklish subject, but he forebore to press this 
home. 

* Well/ his mother resumed, with a certain grim ferocity, 
* I Ve written now. / am not subtle or diplomatic, I have 
borne my testimony quite simply and faithfully.' 

Sainty's heart sank. He thought of his long and anxious 
contest, of how hardly at length he had prevailed. Of his 
mother's methods of plain dealing he had just had a specimen; 
he knew, none better, Arthur's impatience of the smallest 
interference, and the spirit in which he would receive even 
the tenderest animadversion on Cynthia. 

* Mother ! ' he cried, * what have you said ? ' 

* Said ! What should I say ? / haven't temporised and 
beat about the bush. I have said plainly that he was living 
in mortal sin, and imperilling his soul ; and I 've bidden him 
leave that woman at once, or never see me again.' 

Sainty sank into a chair and covered his face with his 
hands. He saw all he had striven for, all he had effected, 
swept away at a touch ; he saw too that the mischief was 
done, and irrecoverable; there was no good in saying a 
word. The despair his attitude expressed must have touched 
some tenderer chord in his mother. She came across to 
him, and laid her hand, not unkindly, on his shoulder. 

* Pray,' she said sternly. ' Pray to God for help ; He alone 
can turn this wretched boy from his evil courses. Vain is the 
help of man.' 

Sainty never knew how he got through the next two days. 
He had put a strain upon himself far beyond his feeble 
strength; the two railway journeys would in themselves have 
told on him,^ but the unresting hurrying hither and thither 
in London, the emotion of meeting Claude again, the terrible 
nervous excitement of his long argument with his brother, 
and then, on the top of all, when he was worn out in body 



179 BELCHAMBER 

and mind, the shock of sedng his mother as he had never 
seen her, the bitter disappointment of finding all he had 
done rendered useless at a blow, cmshed him utterly. He 
was glad to take refuge in physical stupor and exhaustion 
from the bitterness of his own reflections. 

In the morning of the third day, when he was gradually 
coming back to a sense of what had happened, his mother 
came to his room with an open letter in her hand. Her face 
was grey and drawn, and she seemed suddenly to have 
become an old woman. Her voice was hollow and un- 
naturally quiet. ' Read that,' she said, and tossed the letter 
on to his bed. Then raising her hand, which shook as she 
hdd it up, ' I curse him,' she said, still in that same even, 
horrible tone. 'Remember that you have heard me curse 
my son ' ; and she went slowly out of the room. 

With trembling hand Sainty drew the paper to him; he 
recognised Arthur's schoolboy scrawL The letter was meant 
to be very dignified. 

* My dear mother,' the boy wrote, * I have received your 
letter ; I will not notice your insults to a woman I love. You 
say I am living in sin. Very well, then — so be it I will do 
so no longer. I came of age last week and am my own 
master, and curse me if I '11 take it from you or any one. I 
have to announce to you that I was married yesterday at 
the registry office in Mount Street to Miss Cynthia de Vere.' 
He had begun another sentence, 'Till you are prepared,' 
but apparently thinking anything more would weaken the 
effect of what he had said, he had run his pen through the 
words. The letter wound up, ' I am your son, 

'Arthur Wellesley Chambers.' 



CHAPTER XIII 

No one can live at the height of great crises. After the 
storm, when the wind has sobbed itself to sleep, the sun 
comes peeping shyly to count the damage done, the draggled, 
flattened flowers begin to lift themselves and look about, the 
fallen trees are sawn up and carted away. 

Sainty might take to his bed, and lie there groaning at 
the wreck of all his hopes and plans for his brother. Lady 
Charmington might say dreadful violent things, and indulge 
in the cheap gratification of cursing her son. But sooner or 
later Sainty must get up and dress, must come downstairs 
and see the agent and the butler, and his mother must wash 
her hot eyes and flatten down her hair, must order dinner, 
and scold the maids, and sit at the head of the table as though 
nothing were amiss. And it is just this that saves us from 
madness; the more we have to do, the less time we can 
aflbrd for sitting down with our sorrow in darkened rooms, 
the better for us. Kings and business men, and the labouring 
classes generally, whose work must be done no matter what 
happens, have a great advantage over leisured mourners. 
Sainty crept out, battered and disheartened, to face a new 
world which yet had a great deal in common with the old 
one. He had to provide himself with a new set of motives, 
desires, objects in life. But outwardly nothing was changed. 
The very book he had put down when he left the library to 
find the letters for Arthur in crossing the hall, was still on 
the same table with his paperknife laid between the leaves 
to mark the place. 

He never knew how his mother had come by her informa- 
tion. Sometimes he thought of Lady Eccleston, sometimes 

178 



174 BELCHAMBER 

of the duchess. Her reference to the sapper and his own 
presence at it had suggested a sickening suspicion of a new 
treachery on the part of Claude, but he finally decided that 
this was unlikely. A dozen other people might have seen 
him going in, and gossiped about his presence. Claude had 
mentioned that he was supping with Johnny Trafford; it 
might have come round through his aunt Susie. He did not 
want to think any worse of his cousin than he need, and he 
did Claude the justice to recollect that if he never shrank 
from doing a mean action when he had anything to gain by 
it, mere purposeless mischief was not in his traditions ; indeed, 
he would rather take trouble to keep things straight. He 
was not one of those who turned explosive truths loose in 
the world — who 'thought people ought to know'; on the 
contrary, on general principles he was all for people not 
knowing, especially awkward facts about their own relatives. 
On the whole, the causes of the catastrophe seemed to Sainty 
far less important than the consideration of what, under the 
circumstances, was left for him to do for his brother. 

Lady Charmington, on his screwing up courage to ask if 
she had any views on the subject, forbade him peremptorily 
to mention Arthur's name to her. 

Lord Firth said the young ass had done for himself 
irretrievably, but agreed that he couldn't be left to starve. 
He was much inclined to think, however, that the younger 
brother's;;^ 5 GO a year, which was all to which he had a legal 
claim under his grandfather's will, was quite enough for him. 
* If you give him any more, he '11 only chuck it away.' 

'Uncle Cor,' Sainty said, 'what's the good of talking like 
that? You know as well as I do that Arthur will never 
live on ;£soo a year. I see nothing to be gained by pre- 
tending that he will /could easily, but he never will. And 
do you suppose I could serenely sit in this huge house, and 
spend y^So,ooo a year, and know my brother was in want? ' 

'Whatever you give him, you may be sure he'll spend 
double,' said Lord Firth; 'so I should recommend your not 
beginning with too large a sum ; you had better keep some- 



BELCHAMBER 175 

thing for the debts you will assuredly be called on to pay 
from time to time.' 

* I 'd so much rather give him a decent allowance to start 
with, one that he could live on and not get into debt.' 

* You rebuked me just now,' his uncle replied blandly, *for 
not looking facts in the face. Might I suggest that the 
aspiration you have just put forward is based on a hypo- 
thesis quite as visionary as my proposal that Arthur should 
live on ;^5oo a year.' 

Sainty was forced to admit the contention. He wrote, 
therefore, a letter from which he tried as far as possible to 
banish all useless recrimination, offering to pay his brother's 
debts if he would send him the bills, and to allow him a 
thousand a year ; to which Arthur in due course returned a 
most characteristic reply, beginning with a magnificent 
declaration that he wanted nothing of people who were not 
prepared to recognise or receive his wife, and repetitions of his 
readiness to ' work his fingers to the bone for her,' and end- 
ing with a bitter complaint of his brother's meanness in not 
making him a larger allowance. In due course, however, 
the bills arrived, and made Sainty gasp; nor did he find 
when he placed the first quarter's allowance to his brother's 
credit that it was returned to his own. 

There is a certain repose in the fact that the worst which 
one has dreaded has happened. To some temperaments 
anxiety is far harder to bear than sorrow, and the mother 
who killed her baby because she was so dreadfully afraid 
that it would die, presented only an extreme case of a not 
uncommon frame of mind. 

The sun shone, the birds sang, the early and late summer 
were not less glorious than usual on the great well-kept lawns 
and terraces of Belchamber. The places that have known 
us do not put on mourning for our departure unless it with- 
draws from them some fostering care, and Arthur's effect 
upon a garden was mostly written in broken branches and 
footprints on the flower-beds. When people have been 
more than usually disappointing, we turn with an added 



176 BELCHAMBER 

tenderness to things, and Sainty, whose regard for his 
beautiful inheritance had always been sentimentally great, 
b^;an to take a more intelligent interest in the possessions 
he had been so anxious to renounce. Since it seemed that 
he could not shake off his responsibilities, he would embrace 
them with fervour. He found himself wandering about the 
great historic house and eagerly learning all he could of the 
treasures it contained; and he started to rearrange and 
catalogue the huge library, which had been much n^lected 
and had got sadly out of order. Soon finding this a task 
utterly beyond him without expert help, he imported as 
librarian a young prottgjk of Gerald Newby from the library 
of his college, with whom he spent long mornings exploring 
chests and closets where dusty folios had been ruthlessly 
heaped together and left to rats and spiders. They made 
the most wonderful finds of whole boxes of manuscripts, 
family papers, parchments, letters. Among other things, 
they discovered one day the original plans on which the 
grounds had been laid out, signed by Perrault, and though 
there had been many subsequent alterations, Sainty was 
delighted to find how much the main lines had remained 
intact The oraugery with its enclosed garden, the bowling- 
green by the canal with its formal pleached alleys, and the 
whole system of waterworks, ponds, cascades, and fountains, 
were all more or less as the great Frenchman had designed 
them. Here and there his long sweeping vistas across the 
park had been cut by stupid little plantations of conifers, 
coverts for game, and these Sainty was eager to remove, 
reopening the grand perspectives. He planned, too, to restore 
the dignified simplicity of the forecourt, with its great oval 
expanse of turf and five statues of Flora and the Seasons, 
according to the original drawing. The statues had been 
removed and dotted without method up and down the 
long shrubbery, the great wrought-iron grille and gates 
carried away to one of the lodges, the turf broken up with 
flower-beds and terracotta baskets. It would be delightful to 
put everything back in its proper place. 



BELCHAMBER 177 

To these and many other schemes his mother lent an in- 
dulgent ear. She had that curious instinctive taste in gardens 
and houses which so many of her countrywomen combine with 
an utter absence of the aesthetic sense in all that concerns 
the fine arts or their own personal adornment; she was 
quite incapable of real sympathy with his joy in musty old 
documents and letters, but alterations in the garden were 
more in her line, and if she did not always think what he 
proposed an improvement, at least it was natural and 
normal that a man should take pleasure in his own posses- 
sions, instead of wishing to give them away and live in the 
East End. Sainty consulted her about everything, not 
merely from long habit of deference, but from real respect 
for her judgment. 

A more powerful bond of union than any alterations in 
house or garden were certain schemes for the benefit of their 
fellow-creatures. In their more radical youth Lady Charm- 
ington and her brother had started many such, a co-operative 
dairy-farm, settlements of model cottages, schools, benefit 
clubs, and a system of old-age pensions that should not 
lessen the self-respect of the recipients. Sainty's interest 
in all these matters was no new thing, though he had 
formerly rather carefully repressed it. Now he took them 
up with a zeal not even second to Lady Charmington's own. 
It was not to be expected that he and she should be always 
in absolute agreement, but on the whole they worked surpris- 
ingly well together. There were concessions on both sides. 
On his they had the ease of long habit, and he was 
astonished by a quite new tendency in his mother to consult 
his wishes and defer to his opinions. 

Though she never mentioned his brother's name, Sainty 
had a conviction that she knew by some means or other what 
he had done for Arthur, and was silently grateful to him for 
defying her resentment. She helped him to establish himself 
in the west pavilion, now become uninterruptedly his own, 
and to arrange his few personal possessions that had come 
from Cambridge^ The old schoolroom became his study; 

M 



178 BELCHAMBER 

he turned Claude's room into a workroom and place for extra 
books, with a writing-table for the librarian if he wanted him 
near him ; but Arthur's chamber was left by a tacit agreement 
as it had always been, and sometimes Sdnty would wander in 
there and look disconsolately on the sporting prints, the 
school groups, the faded blue cap dangling from a nail, the 
old Eton bureau decorated by a red-hot poker with its 
owner's name, a very large * Chamb ' and a very small * ers,' 
owing to the artist's miscalculation of the space at his 
command. Sainty did not want Claude in the old school- 
boy quarters, and explained to that accommodating person 
that he needed more space for his books, and thought his 
cousin would be more comfortable in one of the many guest- 
rooms. 

By and by other people besides Claude began to occupy 
these apartments again. There were no regular parties 
during the year after Arthur's marriage, but gradually Lady 
Charmington took to asking a few people at a time; his 
Aunt Susan and her sons^ the Rugbies, the Ecclestons, Alice 
de Lissac and her step-daughters. His mother even sug- 
gested that Sainty should invite some of his own friends, and 
Newby came several times and was satisfactorily interested in 
his many undertakings. 

* I like to see you taking your proper place,' he said com- 
placently, with the air of an artist contemplating his own 
work; but the old spring of grateful devotion no longer 
gushed responsive to Newby's lightest word of commenda- 
tion. To begin to grow away from a friend is a terrible 
experience, and few things are harder than to keep up the 
pretence that no such change is taking place ; but when the 
friend in question has been less the equal comrade than the 
Gamaliel at whose feet one has sat, the strain of preserving 
the old attitude is increased to infinity. There is no furniture 
so encumbering as a fallen idol; we trip over it a dozen 
times a day. Already the blush of shame had tinged the 
corner of Sainty's smile at Parsons' lampoon, and now he was 
constantly to experience similar compunctions. Gerald took 



BELCHAMBER 179 

a great fancy to Claude and held forth to him unsparingly on 
many subjects. 

* Your cousin is a real Prince Charming/ he would say to 
Sainty; 'very refreshing, and such quaint views of things, 
without the university flavour one gets so sick of; he is of 
immense use to me.' 

Morland listened to Newby's lucubrations with an air of 
grave sympathy, but made fun of him behind his back. Sainty 
was exasperated all round ; he hated Gerald's making an ass 
of himself, hated Claude's gibes at his expense, hated himself 
for being amused by them against his will. Cissy Eccleston, 
on the contrary, was always ecstatically giggling at the young 
man's witticisms. 

The Ecclestons had begun to be a great deal at Belchamber ; 
Lady Charmington seemed to have endless philanthropic 
projects to discuss with her friend, which needed the latter's 
constant presence. 

' I have asked Lady Eccleston to run down for a few days,' 
became a recognised formula ; ' I want to ask her about the 
G.F.S. meeting'; or, 'She has got to consult me about the 
concert at Middlesex House for Lady Stepney's Home for 
Inebriates ; she wants the duchess to be a patroness.' And 
Lady Eccleston ' ran down,' always taking care to thank 
Sainty effusively for ' letting her come ' ; 'I had heaps to 
talk over with your mother, and it saves such a lot of tire- 
some letter-writing ; it is good of you to have us.' In Lady 
Eccleston's train came Lady Eccleston's daughter, and 
sometimes a son or two. Sainty had come to have quite a 
friendly feeling for Tommy ; he was such a good soul, so 
reposefully commonplace, and so unfeignedly happy and 
grateful at Belchamber. 

' You don't know what it is to a chap to get out of that 
damned London,' he said fervently. Poor Tommy, not 
being very good at examinations, had had to bow his neck 
under the yoke of a house of business, for which, after the 
manner of English boys, his whole previous training had 
most elaborately unfitted him. Sainty was glad to give him 



i8o BELCHAMBER 

the pleasures which would be no pleasures to himself, and 
Tommy responded with a sort of wondering gratitude made 
up in about equal parts of admiration and contempt. Once 
he rather tactlessly tried to express his regret over Arthur. 
The Ecclestons were at the moment the only guests, and 
Sainty said something about its being very dull for him 
having to go out shooting alone. 

' Oh, that 's all right,' said Thomas ; ' though, of course, I 
miss your brother. Awfully good chap, your brother. I was 
deuced sorry he went and muckered the whole show like that. 
Hard luck on all of you.' 

Sainty winced, but he liked the boy for liking Arthur, and 
silently pressed his arm. 

* Beg pardon,' said Tommy, getting very red. * Stupid of 
me to say that. The mater would comb my hair if she knew.' 

Lady Eccleston indeed was almost distressingly tactful on 
the subject, stepping round it on elaborate tiptoe, as some 
people go about a death-chamber. 

She and Cissy were full of interest in all Sainty's under- 
takings. They watched with breathless excitement the 
works for reinstating the grille and the statues, and allowed 
themselves to be patiently bored by long readings from some 
of the old documents which Sainty was editing for publication 
by the Historical Society. 

When there were no other young people in the house, 
Sainty felt it no less than his duty as host to try and entertain 
the young lady, and she was always ready to accompany him 
on his drives about the place and visits to the outlying farms 
and cottages. He thought of himself so little in the light 
of a young man for whom a girl could possibly entertain a 
warmer feeling than friendship, that it never occurred to him 
to imagine any possibility of objection to these long expedi- 
tions, practically tite-it'tiie^ with only a stolid little groom 
as chaperon; and indeed the two mammas smiled very 
indulgently on them as they drove off. He showed Cissy all 
over the co-operative dairy-farm and explained the system 
of its working, and if her remarks did not display a very 



I 



I 



I 



I 



BELCHAMBER i8i 

thorough grasp of its aims, she listened with the politest 
attention to his explanations. Whether the two widowed 
mothers, when left alone, confined their conversation exclu- 
sively to topics of external benevolence may be doubted ; 
but anyway they always seemed to have plenty to talk about, 
and to be quite able to spare their children ; and meanwhile 
Sainty drove along the avenues of the park, or the roads and 
lanes of the countryside, with Cissy tucked in beside him and 
chattering like a sparrow. The girl had a certain sense of 
humour, strictly limited in scope, but diverting as far as it 
went. It is true that it mostly took the form of personal 
ridicule, and Sainty was rather scandalised at the frequency 
with which it was turned upon her mother, but he couldn't 
help laughing at some of the revelations. 'And, after all,' 
he thought, ' she would not make fun of her if she did not 
love her ; it is the light-hearted thoughtlessness of a child.' 

'Mamma is very low to-day,' Cissy said, bursting with 
laughter. ' You know, she takes the Exchange and Mart and 
is always swopping something or other. I don't think she 
does very good business, but she likes the fun of writing to 
people she don't know, and the bargaining. Well, she 's got 
an old black silk gown, quite good still, it was a good silk ; 
she bought it at Woolland's at a sale (she goes to all the 
sales), but she's worn it three seasons and it's old fashioned, 
and every creature we know is sick of the sight of it, so she 
has been trying to get rid of it in the Exchange^ and what 
do you think she was offered for it this morning? A goat! 
Think of us in Chester Square with a goat ! Tommy says we 
can keep it in the back-yard and he '11 milk it, and it will save 
the dairy bill ; but mamma is not amused.' And Cissy went 
off into peals of laughter in which Sainty could not help 
joining. 

This power of making him laugh was the great secret of 
his pleasure in her society. At most times they might not 
have had much in common, but after all he had been 
through, her irresponsible frivolity was very restful. His 
morbid conscientiousness seemed overstrained and absurd by 



i83 BELCHAMBER 

comparison, and he was ashamed to be frightened by life in 
the presence of a creature who took it so lightly, displaying 
such a careless front to the slings and arrows of a quite 
insufficient fortune. With more humour than delicacy she 
gave him glimpses of many of her parent's little economies 
and contrivances. * I 've got to be turned out smart, you 
know, and we give awfully nice teas, lots of teas — even the 
little Sunday dinners ain't badly done ; but no one dropping 
in unexpectedly to lunch — no thank you ! and if she and I 
dine out it 's cold mutton for the boys and none too much of 
it. You 're awfully good to Tommy ; it 's just heaven for 
him being here, poor boy ! ' 

* It 's delightful being able to give any pleasure to any one. 
I have never been able to make any one happy though I 've 
tried.' 

* Oh, come, cheer up ! I assure you, you are giving a lot 
of pleasure to the Eccleston family at this moment ; it really 
is ripping of you asking the whole family. Did you know, 
by the way, that your mother has said the two boys could 
come next week when Harrow breaks up, and that we might 
all stay over Christmas ? ' 

' Yes, of course I knew, seeing that it was I who suggested 
it I thought if you had your little brothers here it would 
not be so dull for you, and my friend Newby will be here, 

and Claude ' The vivid colour came and went so quickly 

under the fair skin that Sainty could not be sure if it 
were Claude's name that called up the faint flush. It might 
have been caused by the pleasure Cissy's next words 
expressed. 

' Oh, it was you ! How angelic of you 1 As for me, I 
don't think my young brothers add much to my enjoyment of 
life, nor I to theirs ; besides, I am quite happy in this dear, 
beautiful place, and going all about your improvements and 
things with you is so jolly ; but I 'm awfully grateful to you 
all the same, and you will be more in mamma's good books 
than ever ; and with mamma, you must know, '' good books " 
is not a mere phrase. She has a red book in which she 



BELCHAMBER 183 

enters all her friends according to what they have done for 
her; not an ordinary visitor's-list. She puts down "Lady 
So-and-So — ^asked us to her squash, but gave a dance and did 
not ask us " ; or " Mrs. Snooks — dined with us, but didn't ask 
us back : Mem. — not again till she does," and so on. It's 
capital reading ; if I can get hold of it some day I '11 show it 
to you.' 

' Do you mind if we get out at the end of the shrubbery 
and walk home ? ' Sainty asked ; ' I want to see how they are 
getting on with moving one of the statues.' 

'Oh, do let's! I should love to see Spring (isn't she 
Spring, the fat woman with the sort of trumpet with the 
apples? Oh no, of course. Autumn) swinging in mid-air. 
They had just got the thing rigged up yesterday afternoon 
when I walked my parent round there. I do hope they 
haven't got her into the cart yet.' 

They visited poor Autumn, whose head was reposing in 
rather a ghastly manner in a heap of straw on a trolly, while 
her trunk and cornucopia hung perilously from the pulleys, 
and her legs still graced a florid Dutch pedestal. 

'Isn't she sweet?' Cissy said. 'I do think it's so clever 
of you putting them all back where they belong. I should 
never have had the energy to take all this trouble once they 
were here and established.' 

*The worst of it is,' Sainty admitted, 'that now the thing 
is decreed, I feel almost sacrilegious tearing them from the 
places where I have always known them. If I had known 
what a business it was going to be, and what a lot it would 
cost, I should never have had the courage to undertake it.' 

' It must be lovely to have lots of money to spend,' Cissy 
interjected almost under her breath. 

' What I can't understand,' Sainty went on, ' is the frame of 
mind of the person who spent such sums on destroying a good 
design ; he must have disturbed his own early associations as 
much as I am doing, yet without the same reason for doing 
so. 

' I suppose he thought he was improving things, just as you 



i84 BELCHAMBER 

do,' said Cissy cheerfully. 'All the things people give such 
heaps for nowadays are what our grandmothers put in the 
garrets. Probably the people who come after you will think 
Faith, Hope, and Charity, or whoever the ladies are, would 
look much nicer in the park, or on the roof, or at the bottom 
of the big pond.' 

* The people who came after him ! ' The phrase struck 
cold upon his ear. Who was there to 'come after' him? 
LadyArthtir? Good heavens! Sainty shuddered to think 
what her notions of the aesthetic might involve. He had a 
fleeting vision of Belchamber rearranged according to the 
standard of taste suggested by the plush piano drapery so 
fatally baptized in champagne. 

This question of who was to enter into his labours and 
gather the fruits of all that he was doing contained within 
itself the germ of paralysis. The works for the outward 
beautifying of the place were the smallest of his preoccupa- 
tions; but what would his successor care for all his other 
hopes, his projects^ for bettering the condition of the ' poor 
about his lands ' ? The thought that whatever he might effect 
would pass with his own feeble and precarious life, and leave 
no trace behind it, was one of the sharpest darts in the 
quiver of his familiar fiend. 

They walked back to the house almost in silence, Sainty 
revolving these unhappy thoughts. Cissy, for once, not 
chattering. Sainty stole an occasional glance at his com- 
panion, wondering at her unusual quiet. Her eyes had a 
far-away look, which gave a great sweetness to her face ; he 
feared to intrude on some tender maiden thoughts which he 
felt tolerably sure had little to do with him or his concerns. 
As they came out upon the lawn they saw Lady Charmington 
approaching from the village, bearing a small tin-lined basket 
in which she conveyed cold slabs of pudding to some of her 
dependants. Cissy waved her muff and ran forward, insisting 
on relieving her from the burthen which she was perfectly 
capable of carrying on one stalwart finger. Miss Eccleston's 
manner tQ h^r hostess was the perfection of pretty girlish 



BELCHAMBER 185 

deference and service, and Lady Charmington's grim counten- 
ance relaxed at sight of her. 

'Have you had a pleasant drive?' she asked. 'I hope 
Sainty has taken good care of you.' 

'Lord Belchamber has been delightful,' Cissy answered, 
'and shown me all sorts of interesting things. We came back 
by the shrubbery, to look at one of the poor ladies who has 
had her head cut off. Now I must go and tell mamma we are 
back. I will leave your basket in the little hall for you, dear 
Lady Charmington, I know just where it lives.' 

Lady Charmington turned to Sainty as the girl skipped 
away. ' Give me your arm, my son, I am a little tired,' she 
said. Now Sainty was well aware that his mother was never 
tired, and would rather have died than own it if she had been. 
'Good heavens, mother, aren't you well?' he asked in alarm. 

'Oh yes, dear, quite well; but I am getting an old 
woman. It is a good thing that you have begun to look after 
things yourself. What you ought to do for me now is to give 
me a nice young daughter-in-law to look after me, and some 
dear little grandchildren to pet and spoil.' 

Sainty was startled ; it seemed almost as if Lady Charm- 
ington were answering the thoughts that had oppressed him 
on the way home. He smiled parenthetically at the vision of 
his capable energetic mother in the character of the feeble old 
lady cared for by pious children; nor did he see her 'petting 
and spoiling ' any one. 

'I am not likely to marry,' he said. 'With the best will 
in the world, I might find it difficult. Fairy princesses do 
not marry the yellow dwarf! ' 

Lady Charmington's unwonted mildness fell from her 
miraculously. 'You are almost bound to marry — «^zi;,'she 
said, the last word pronounced with a sudden sharp inspira- 
tion that told how much the reference cost her. 

'Dear mother,' Sainty said gently, 'who could possibly fill 
your place here? Who would do all that you do, or do it 
nearly as well ? ' 

'I can't live for ever. As I tell you, I am getting old; 



i86 BELCHAMBER 

already I can't do all that I could. The thought of that 
woman in my place gives me fever. Do you want her to 
succeed me — do you?' And Sainty felt the hand on his 
arm tighten to a clutch. 

'We have both got to die before that happens, mother. If 
you are not in your first youth, you are very strong, and if I 
am not a tower of strength, at least I have youth on my side; 
we may both have more vitality than many younger or stronger 
people.' Alas ! that his chances of long life, once so fiercely 
resented, should have come to be the buckler on which he 
counted to interpose against the speedy succession of his 
brother, which in those days he had so ardently desired I 



CHAPTER XIV 

It was natural that with other people in the house Sainty should 
see less of Cissy ; he told himself so several times a day, yet 
the thought was not altogether a pleasant one that she only 
welcomed his society as a refuge from solitude or Lady 
Eccleston. The frost had put a stop to the works in front 
of the house, and a bad chill and sharp attack of neuralgia 
warned Sainty to discontinue his drives until milder weather. 
Skating on the big pond became the amusement of the 
moment, a pastime in which his lameness prevented his join- 
ing. Gerald Newby, in a straw hat, spent hours upon the ice, 
and fell down with Spartan perseverance in his determination 
to accomplish figures of eight. 

•Why is it a necessary part of the make-up of the good 
young man to wear a straw hat in the.winter ? * Claude asked ; 
' I notice that serious youths always do, curates and school- 
masters. Is it a mark of asceticism, as being obviously not 
the comfortable thing to do, or to give the impression that 
their brains are overheated with excess of thought ? ' 

Claude, who skated, as he did everything else that he 
attempted, with elegance and precision^ had undertaken to 
instruct Cissy in the art, and Sainty had to watch them glid- 
ing about together, both her hands tightly clasped in his, and 
even a sustaining arm occasionally flung out when the maiden 
was more than usually wobbly. It was all perfectly natural ; 
there was not the smallest ground for objecting. Lady 
Susan Trafford and her sons, Claude's mother, Newby, and 
Cissy's three brothers were all on the ice the whole time; the 
pond, though a good-sized sheet of water, was visible from 
end to end ; there were no corners or islands behind which 

187 



i88 BELCHAMBER 

the flirtatiously-inclined could disappear; yet the sight of 
those perpetually clasped hands became a constant irritation 
to Belchamber, and it was quite vain for him to reiterate that 
with her mother and brothers in the house, it was less than no 
business of his how Miss Eccleston amused herself. ' Had it 
been any one else but Claude/ he thought, 'he should not 
have minded.' 

It soon became evident to him that he was not alone in the 
apprehension with which he watched the growing intimacy 
between Cissy and his cousin. Lady Eccleston, it was plain, 
viewed it with quite as little favour as he did. Swathed in 
furs, and with a blue nose, the poor lady fluttered on the 
bank, in a manner strongly suggestive of a hen whose duck- 
lings have taken to the water. One day, having invited him 
to take her for a walk, while the hoar frost crackled under 
their feet in the winding mazes of the shrubbery, she quite 
unexpectedly unburthened herself to him on the subject. 

* I can talk to you, dear Lord Belchamber,' she said, 'as I 
would to an older man ; you are so good, so pure, so unlike 
the others, and I am so sorely in need of advice.' 

' Good gracious ! Lady Eccleston,' said Sainty, with hypo- 
critical surprise, 'what's the matter? How can I help 
you ? ' • 

' I 'm so afraid you '11 think it strange of me to talk to you 
on such a subject, but, as I say, you are not like an ordinary 
young man ; you have always been so serious for your age, 
and then, you know your cousin better than any one; you 
have been boys together.' 

'Claude?' 

' Yes, Mr. Morland. How kind of you to understand and 
help me out ; but you are so sympathetic, more like a woman 
in some ways, I always say.' 

Sainty was only partially pleased by this equivocal compli- 
ment. ' What about Claude ? ' he asked. 

' I will be quite frank with you ; you won't misunderstand 
me, I know. A mother's solicitude ; and, after all, what can 
be more natural? Left so early a widow, and with these 



BELCHAMBER 189 

young ones to guide and bring up. If my dear husband bad 
lived it would all have been so different ; but I have no one 
to turn to. Tom is a mere boy, really no more help than 
the young ones. Ah 1 Lord Belchamber, children are a sad 
responsibility.* 

'Yours seem to be very good ones,' said Sainty. 

' You do think so ? \ am so glad. Yes, I think they are, 
but of course I feel a mother is not a judge — her great love 
blinds her ; but they are good children, I must say they give 
me very little trouble. Only the high spirits of youth are 
always a pitfall. And Cissy — she 's a dear, good girl, and 
we haven't a secret from one another; we are more like 
sisters. Yet it is for her that I sometimes feel the greatest 
anxiety.' 

•Yes?' 

*Some people think her pretty; again, of course, my 
partiality prevents my judging ; but lots of people have told 
me she was pretty. Do you think her pretty ? ' 

*• I should think no one could help admiring Miss Eccleston,' 
said Sainty. 

*Ah! that's it. There's no denying it. I can't help 
seeing it; why should I pretend I don't? The girl does have 
a lot of admiration ; I do hope it won't turn her head. She 's 
as good as gold, but London 's an awful place. I 've done all 
I can to keep her from all knowledge of evil, and so far, 
thank God 1 the child is a thoroughly healthy-minded, pure 
girl. Doesn't she strike you so ? ' 

* Oh, certainly ; but what ' 

*You were going to say "What has all this to do with 
Mr. Morland?" You won't mind my talking to you quite 
frankly ? it is such a comfort Well — any one can see your 
cousin admires Cissy immensely. And of course she's 
pleased by his attentions. I must admit he is charming; 
but is he the kind of young man a mother would like to give 
her daughter to?' 

' Have you any reason to suppose your daughter cares at 
all for Claude?' 



I90 BELCHAM6ER 

'Oh no, no, no! don't misunderstand me; I'm qoite 
sure she doesn't. But girb are so thoughtless; the more 
innocent they are, the more imprudent. If I so mach as 
try to venture a hint to her to be a little more circumspect, 
she says, ''I don't know what you tnean^ mother," and 
she looks at me in such a way I'm quite ashamed, I 
really am.' 

'Of course Miss Eccleston is all that is delicate and re- 
fined, but if you are certain she does not at all return my 
cousin's partiality ^ 

'Oh, of that I 'm sure, she's such a mirror of candour — 
if she had the very smallest feeling she would have told me 
— but your cousin is most fascinating, that I must admit, 
and she might get to think she cared. Now, I ask you, who 
know him so well, is he just the sort of man in whose hands 
a very pure-minded girl with high ideals would be happy? 
I know my child so well ; if she were ever to find out that 
the man she married had been at all fast, it would simply 
kill her. And the young men of the day are so wicked, or 
so they tell me. One can't help hearing things de temps en 
temps in London, no matter how much one hates gossip, and 
no one hates it as I do.' 

Sainty thought he knew some one who hated it at least as 
much as her ladyship. He was wondering what Claude 
really felt for Cissy. In the light of their conversation about 
Miss Winston, he found it difficult to believe that his cousin 
was courting a portionless girl with a view to marriage ; but 
he could not catechise him as to his intentions towards every 
young woman with whom he ever saw him, especially after 
the scanty encouragement he had met with on that occasion. 
Were he to answer Lady Eccleston truthfully, there could be 
little doubt of what he must say ; but the thought of acting 
secret police in this fashion was not agreeable to him. 

* You must see ' he began. 

'Oh! I do, I do,' cried the lady; 'I see just how 
unpleasant it would be for you to have to say a word against 
your cousio, and, dear Lord Belchamber, do let me say how 



BELCHAMBER 191 

much it makes me like you, though, to be sure, that wasn't 
necessary, for I Ve always said you were my ideal young man. 
Cissy and I have so often agreed in talking over some of the 
young men we know, Tom's friends, and the men we see at 
balls, and others, that there is no one quite like you.' 

'No, I'm well aware that I am £iot like other young 
men ' 

* Ah ! be thankful you're not, dear Lord Belchamber ; the 
young men of the day, I 'm sorry to say, are not nice. And 
thank you so much for listening to me so patiently, and 
telling me just what I wanted to know. I can't tell you the 
comfort this little talk has been to me. You see, I have no 
one to turn to, and I do think it so sweet of you not to want 
to say a word against Mr. Morland.' 

Sainty wondered a little afterwards just what the informa- 
tion was for which Lady Eccleston was so grateful, for though 
the interview was nominally sought with a view to consulting 
him, while he had received a number of interesting con- 
fidences, he could not recollect having expressed any opinion 
at all. Lady Eccleston, however, had apparently found him 
a satisfactory counsellor, for the next day she returned to the 
subiect. 

* You remember what I said to you yesterday about Cissy 
and Mr. Morland,' she whispered, dropping down beside him 
on one of the seats in the winter-garden after lunch. ' I 'm 
more than ever convinced she doesn't care for him; it is 
foolish of me to take fright as I do, but there is just one 
point I do want to put myself right with you about. I was 
so afraid afterwards you might think — and yet — no, come to 
think of it, I'm sure you wouldn't; but I should like just to 
say that I hope you didn^t think what I said had anyi\xmg 
to do with Mr. Morland being poor, or what the world would 
call not a good match. As long as he was a good man, and 
a man of principle, and some one in her own monde^ I 've 
always said I didn't care who my girl married. No one 
can say I'm mercenary. My poor dear husband and I 
married on next to nothing, and there never was a happier 



i9a BELCHAMBER 

marriage. I wish you had known Sir Thomas, you would 
have loved him.' 

Sainty expressed a suitable regret at having missed the 
pleasure of Sir Thomas's acquaintance. 'Some people,' 
Lady Eccleston continued pensively, 'some people think 
I'm wrong. Only last week a dear friend of mine said to 
me that it was all very well to despise money, but that other 
things being equal, it was a great power, and that in this 
age of the world it was impossible to get on without it. 
I said "You may be right, dear, and I don't deny that for 
my children's sake I 've sometimes wished I had a little more 
of it, but money isn't everything. It can't give happiness."' 
And her ladyship raised her eyes to a statuette of Venus in a 
cluster of palms, with the expression of a dying martyr 
regarding a crucifix. 

' No, Lord Belchamber, if a man 's a gentleman and a good 
man, for me, he may be as poor as — ^as he pleases — that isn't 
what I fear ; but though Cissy seems such a child, she has 
a very strongly marked character, and intensely deep feelings, 
and were she to marry a man she could not respect, she 
wotdd never know a moment's happiness. What she needs 
above all is a man of strict principles, of high ideals, and 
with a pure mind and life, and where is such a man to be 
found? But forgive me for boring you with all this; it can't 
interest you. George, dear,' to her second son, who passed 
at the moment, 'are you going skating? Do you know 
where Cissy is ? Is she going with you ? I want to speak 
to her ' ; and with a little nod of good understanding to her 
host. Lady Eccleston skipped with her usual amazing agility 
off the ottoman, and departed with her arm twined about the 
boy's waist. 

Belchamber pondered much on these conversations. ' The 
ordinary clever man,' he thought, ' who prides himself on 
knowledge of human nature, would be sure that Lady 
Eccleston was trying to "hook him" for her daughter, and 
would, as usual, be wrong. If the lady is not a monument 
of wisdom, at least I give her credit for not being so obvious 



BELCHAMBER 193 

as that No; she s treating me, as women always do, as a 
creature removed from all thoughts and hopes of love, a 
sexless being set apart like the priest in Catholic countries 
to be the safe recipient of tender confidences in which he can 
have no personal concern.' Still he sometimes dreamed (as 
who may not at twenty-three ?) of what life might come to 
mean if Love should breathe on its dry bones and bid them 
live ; if it were possible that some maid more discerning than 
her fellows should see with the eye of the soul, beneath 
his dreary, unattractive exterior, the wealth of love that was 
waiting like the sleeping princess for the awakening kiss! 
' Perhaps I might even have the luck of the unhappy monster 
in L^ Homme qui rit^ and meet with a blind girl ! ' Hideous- 
ness, even deformity, was no bar to the love of woman, that 
he knew. He thought of Wilkes, of Mirabeau, of many 
others who had been more passionately loved than your 
pretty fellows. Deep in his heart he knew his real disability; 
it was not his lack of personal beauty, nor even his lameness 
that was the bar, but his miserable inherent effeminacy. 
A man might be never so uncouth, so that the manhood 
in him cried imperiously to the other sex and commanded 
surrender. 'More like a woman in some ways.' Had not 
Lady Eccleston said it? There lay the sting. And yet — 
who could tell ? Might not a miracle be worked ? Might he 
not some day find himself face to face with this stupendous, 
unhoped-for happiness ? 

He wrote many poems at this time, poems not addressed 
to any concrete personality, but to that ' not impossible she,' 
the divine abstraction who should recognise and respond to 
what lay hidden in his heart. He felt very sure that Cissy 
Eccleston, with her frank pagan enjoyment of life and the 
moment, was not the lady of his dreams. Those little curved 
lips of hers might seek the red mouth of a lover, but would 
never bestow the heroic salute that should cleanse the leper, 
or restore his true form to the enchanted beast. Yet, for- 
asmuch as he had seen so few girls, his Beatrice sometimes 
came to him clad in something of the outward semblance, 



194 BELCHAMBER 

the virginal candour and freshness of this sojourner within 
his gates. He found himself wondering if Lady Eccleston's 
account of her daughter's ermine-like recoil from all contact 
with moral impurity had any foundation in fact, or whether 
this fancy portrait of the girl dying of a stain on the premarital 
robe of her husband were not as purely fallacious as some of 
his mother's theories about Arthur. It had been borne in on 
him that mothers were not always infallible in what concerned 
their children's characters; he was farther rendered a little 
sceptical as to the young lady's excessive innocence by some 
of her own conversation, and notably a certain curiosity dis- 
played with what seemed to him a lack of delicacy on more 
than one occasion as to his unfortunate sister-in-law. 

' Of course one knew all those girls by sight,' she remarked, 
with engaging candour, 'but I'm not sure just which was 
Cynthia de Vere ; it was the tall one with the beautiful legs 
and the rather big mouth, wasn't it ? I told Tom so, and he 
said it wasn't ; but I 'm sure I 'm right, ain't I ? ' 

On another occasion she startled him by the plainest 
possible reference to the relations of Charley Hunter and 
Miss Baynes. 

'I didn't know young ladies knew anything about such 
things,' Sainty said rather severely. 

'They do now,' said Cissy, 'whatever they used to; but 
I suspect they always knew more than they let on. There was 
a friend of mine who married Teddie Hersham last season ; 
I was one of her bridesmaids; she was awfully proud of 
taking him away from Totty Seymour; she used to boast of 
it to all her friends.' 

'I can't bear to hear you talk like that,' Sainty answered. 
'It would give people who didn't know you such a wrong 
idea of you.' 

' I '11 try not to, if you don't like it ; but it isn't easy for me 
to pretend to be different to what I am.' 

' I don't want you to. I only ask you to be true to your- 
self, and not say things that I am sure are quite foreign to 
you for the sake of startling people.' 



BELCHAMBER 19S 

•Well, I must own I do enjoy shocking you. You are so 
awfully proper, you know ; but why should you care what I 
do or say ? ' she added, with a little arch glance. 

* I don't know, I 'm sure, but I do. I suppose I — I like 
you too well not to mind your behaving in a way I don't 
think worthy of you.' 

What wonder if Miss Eccleston found Claude Morland a 
more amusing companion than his cousin ? Sainty was the 
first to admit the likelihood. He was well aware that Claude 
would not hare offended her by championing her innocence 
against herself, or have made any difficulties about gratifying 
her girlish curiosity as to that other world of which she knew 
so little. The thought of Morland's long, deft fingers deli- 
cately removing the bloom from this young creature irritated 
him unaccountably. Oh no! it was not jealousy; that, 
again, was what the stupid, knowing people would think ; he 
could never care for this empty-headed little thing in that 
way, and knew only too well how much more impossible it 
was that she should care for him. Only, he did not want her 
to suffer, nor to coarsen and deteriorate. 

He was revolving some such thoughts as these as he walked 
by himself one day, perhaps a week after his conversation 
with Lady Eccleston, when he was startled by loud cries from 
the neighbourhood of the pond, and made all the haste he 
was able in that direction. The air was certainly milder; 
there had been unmistakable premonitions of a thaw. He 
remembered the discussion at breakfast as to whether the ice 
would still bear, and the eager affirmations of the young 
Traffords and Ecclestons that it was as sound as ever. Bertie 
Traflford and Randolph Eccleston had been sliding all over 
it, and had even stamped in places to see if it would give 
way ; but Mr. Danford, the agent, had come in in the course 
of the morning to say that it had a damp look about the 
edges he did not like, and to advise them to keep off it. 
Sainty had not been greatly interested; the pond, though 
large, was mostly artificial, and nowhere more than three or 
four feet deep, and if the boys liked to risk a wetting, it did 



196 BELCHAMBER 

not seem to him to matter much. Now his thoughts flew to 
Cissy ; he wondered he had not thought of her before, and 
the next moment he turned a corner, and found himself one 
of an excited group, the centre of which was Claude, hatless, 
dishevelled, and very wet, bearing in his arms the inanimate 
form of Miss Eccleston. Her eyes were closed, and every 
trace of colour was gone from her face ; her lips were blue, 
and the water ran in streams from her clothing. The boys 
crowded round, all talking at once, and making a number of 
foolish suggestions. 

' Is she drowned ? Is she dead ? ' wailed little Randolph, 
and was sternly bidden by George not to be an ass unless he 
wanted to get kicked. 

' What is the matter ? What has happened ? ' asked Sainty, 
and was conscious of saying the silly thing even before Claude 
answered with studied politeness, 'Don't you see? Miss 
Eccleston has caught fire, but we have luckily extinguished 
the flames.' 

Claude was seldom cross, but he hated scenes and emotions 
and spoilt clothes. * If some one would help me to get her 
up to the house it would be some use,' he added ; ' and can't 
any one lend a dry coat to wrap round her? Mine's no 
good, it's as wet as a sponge. Oh! not you, Sainty, you^ll 
catch cold.' 

A little way from the house they encountered Lady 
Eccleston, who had got wind of the catastrophe, and was 
hurrying to meet them ; and Sainty was struck by the change 
in her manner in face of emergency. Her foolish flightiness 
seemed to have dropped from her like a garment that an 
athlete throws off. She had all her wits about her, and gave 
the most sensible directions. She had her daughter upstairs 
and in bed between warm blankets in less time than it takes 
to write it down, and by the afternoon she was able to report 
to them that Cissy was quite comfortable, only a little feverish 
and upset by the shock; but she did not think she would be 
much the worse for her wetting. 

Cissy, however, was a most unaccountable time in getting 



BELCHAMBER tgj 

over that shook. Lady Eccleston expressed herself as 
amazed that her daughter should take so long to recover 
from so small a thing. 

* Really, Lord Belchamber, I'm ashamed; you'll think 
you are never going to get rid of us ; but the doctor says 
positively that the child mustn't come down yet. I can't 
understand it at all, for the chill she has ^ut'^e got over. Of 
course she had a dreadful feverish cold, and at first we 
thought it would settle on her lungs, but, thank God! all 
danger of that seems at an end. Then I ask what is the 
matter? and Dr. Lane says, "It's the shock to the nervous 
system." But I 'm mortified. I really am. Do you know 
how long we 've been here ? ' 

* I don't want to know, Lady Eccleston. I only know we 
are too glad to keep you as long as you can stay, and I am 
sure my mother feels as I do about it' 

' Oh 1 you are too kind about it, both of you ! But one 
has some compunctions, you know. And after all your 
goodness about the boys and all 1 ' 

George and Randolph had returned to Harrow, and Tom 
to his hated office in Throgmorton Avenue, Claude's presence 
had been once more required by his respected chief, and the 
rest of the party had melted like the snow that had followed 
the long frost ; but still Cissy lay in a most becoming pink 
dressing-gown in a small boudoir that had been arranged for 
her next her bedroom. It took Lady Eccleston days of 
modest trepidation to bring herself to admit Sainty to these 
sacred precincts. 'Was she very unconventional? Well, 
she supposed she was — people always said so — but she was 
weak where her children were concerned, and Cissy had said, 
*^ Why sAou/dn*t Lord Belchamber come to see me, mamma?" 
Not for worlds would she have introduced the ordinary young 
man ' ; and then Sainty was once more assured of his * differ- 
ence,' his purity, the perfect confidence an anxious mother 
could repose in him. 

' Her brothers are gone, you see, and she misses them so, 
poor child. And though we are such friends, an old woman 



iqS belchamber 

is doll company pour tout potagCy and then my wretched 
throat gives out ; I am no good for reading aloud. Now it 
would be angelic of you, if you would read to her a little ; 
would you? Oh ! how kind ! She is a perfect baby about 
being read to; and you are so clever; you will know just 
what to read; you have such literary taste; everybody says 
so/ 

Thus Sainty found himself installed as reader to the 
invalid, and spent many hours a day by her sofa. At first 
Lady Eccleston was always there; then, when they were deep 
in their book, she would sometimes slip away to her volumin- 
ous correspondence or long consultations with her maid over 
the endless transmutations of her wardrobe. Sometimes 
Lady Charmington would look in, with a few words of grim 
tenderness, and lay a large cool hand on Cissy's hair. Gradu- 
ally the young people came to be left alone for longer and 
longer intervals. Belchamber rather wondered, himself, at 
the relaxation of all watchfulness on the part of their cha- 
perons. 'It is the old story,' he told himself gloomily; 'I 
am cert^nly not considered dangerous.' 

One day Lady Eccleston was much perturbed at breakfast 
over her letters. 

*I don't know what to do,' she cried, *it is most unfor- 
tunate; do advise me, dear Lady Charmington. There are a 
dozen things I ought to be in London for. I have a com- 
mittee on Tuesday; they say they can't do without me; and 
things seem to be all at sixes and sevens at home: poor 
Tommy writes that he is most uncomfortable; he says the 
maids are always out, and he believes the cook gives parties ; 
that there are— what is it ? Oh ! yes, here — " sounds of 
revelry by night"; he is always so absurd, poor dear; but it 
is hard on him. I really fed we ought to go, and Cissy is 
just beginning at last to be a little better.' 

' Why don't you run up for a day or two, and do what you 
have to, attend to your committee, and give an eye to things 
in Chester Square? ' said Lady Charmington. 'Leave Cissy 
to us, if you will trust us ; we will take every care of her.' 



BELCHAMBER 199 

*0 dear Lady Charmington, I couldfCt\ that would be an 
imposition. Of course she would be ever so much better 
here, and she is so happy, poor child ; Chester Square is so 
noisy, and of course directly she gets back to London, people 
will begin to want her to do things, and I shall never keep 
her quiet. But I simply couldn't ; it would be monstrous to 
put on you to such an extent.' 

'Nonsense,' said Lady Charmington. 'It is a thousand 
pities to take her back to town just when she is getting on so 
well ; a few weeks more of good air and rest will do every- 
thing for her ; she must come downstairs first, go out for a 
few drives, before she thinks of a journey. Don't you agree 
with me, Sainty ? ' 

' Of course we shall be only too glad, if you think Miss 
Eccleston would not be dull ' Sainty began. 

'Ah! dear Lord Belchamber! dear Lady Charmington 1 
how good you both are ! ' cried the tender mother. ' I am 
ashamed, positively ashamed, but what can I say ? She will 
be overjoyed. She had to gulp down a big lump in her 
throat when I told her we must go home; she was so 
good, she wouldn't say anything, but / could see; love 
sharpens our wits when it is a question of our children's 
happiness, doesn't it, dear?' 

'It is generally not difficult to see through young people,' 
said Lady Charmington. Sainty was wondering if the 
necessity for Lady Eccleston's presence in London had 
arisen out of the letters she had received since she came down- 
stairs, when she could have had the conversation on the sub- 
ject which had brought the lump into her daughter's throat, 
but he was too polite to inquire. 

The conclusion of the whole matter, as might have been 
foreseen, was that Lady Eccleston departed to London, 
leaving Cissy at Belchamber, and the readings were con- 
tinued with even less supervision than before. 

Cissy's literary taste was decidedly undeveloped, and it 
may be doubted if some of her host's finest reading was not 
merely an accompaniment to the thinking out of new hats; 



200 BELCHAMBER 

but Sainty enjoyed immensely introducing a novice to his 
best beloved authors, and the new sensation of being able to 
minister to a sufferer, and lighten the long hours of some 
of their dullness and depression. He wasted an immense 
amount of care and thought on the selection of suitable gems, 
passages that should be characteristic and of the highest 
beauty, and yet milk to the intellectual babe. Sometimes he 
almost forgot his listener in the pleasure of voicing things 
long dear to himself, especially poetry, and he read a 
good deal of poetry. Cissy displayed but little enthusiasm ; 
she always thanked him very prettily when he finished, 
if she was not asleep, and * hoped it didn't bore him 
awfully,' but she made few comments, and listened for 
the most part in silence and often with her eyes closed. 
Sainty put down her apparent indifference to the languor of 
convalescence. Once, indeed, she startled him by the energy 
of her appreciation. He was reading Maud to her, and she 
had several times disappointed him with a calm ' very pretty' 
when he had paused after some exquisite lyric that left him 
vibrating like a harpstring. When, however, he came to — 

' Oh that 'twere possible 
After long grief and pain 
To find the arms of m j true love 
Ronnd me once again 1 ' 

her quickened respiration showed her interest; and at the stanza 
beginning ' When I was wont to meet her,' she half raised 
herself, saying eagerly, 'I like that; read that bit again, 
please; do you mind?' and on Sainty's complying, she 
repeated dreamily to herself, as though the words called up 
some image that gave her pleasure, 

* We stood tranced in long embraces, 
Mixt with kisses sweeter, sweeter 
Than anything on earth.' 

* Who did you say wrote that ? ' she asked. * Oh ! of course, 
yes, Tennyson,' and with a great sigh she sank back on her 
cushions. Then she looked suddenly at him, as though she 



BELCHAMBER loi 

feared she had betrayed something, and flushed crimson. 
' Go on/ she murmured ; * beg pardon/ and relapsed into her 
habitual expression of polite endurance. Next day she asked 
him to lend her the book^ as she wanted to copy some of it 
out 
Sainty was delighted, but surprised. 



CHAPTER XV 

Lady Eccleston's business kept her in London longer than 
she expected. Each day brought hurried notes from her, full 
of regrets and apologies, compunction for all the trouble they 
were giving, but joy that her dear child was in such good, kind 
hands, and a plentiful supply of a mother's blessings. She 
was a swift and copious letter-writer, economising time by the 
ruthless excision of articles, pronouns, and other short words. 
Tommy always declared that his mother could write two 
letters at once, one with each hand, and interview the cook 
at the same time. 

Breakfast in bed was the last lingering trace of Cissy's 
mysterious ailment, by the time her parent reappeared upon 
thek scene. 

'What have you done to my little girl?' cried Lady 
Eccleston in a transport of gratitude; 'she is a different 
child.' And truly it would have been hard to find a more 
blooming specimen of girlhood. Indeed, when you come to 
think of it, six weeks is a liberal allowance of time for a 
perfectly healthy young woman to get over the effects of a 
momentary immersion in cold water. 

'You have been so kind to my darling,' Lady Eccleston 
said to Sainty. ' She has been telling me of all your delight- 
ful talks and readings; it is just what she needed, a little 
intercourse with a really cultivated mind. She has always 
felt the dissatisfaction of the frivolous life of society; there 
has been the desire to improve herself, the love of reading, 
but no one to guide her taste, or put her in the right way. 
Now, if you would draw up a little table of reading for her, 
tell/ her what to read, and in what order and connection, it 



BELCHAMBER 203 

would be just everything for her; and perhaps even her 
ignorant old mother might find a little leisure now and then 
to profit by your help. One is never too old to learn, you 
know.' 

So Sainty drew up tables, lent books, and marked passages, 
Jike the simple little pe dant th at he wa s, but without produc- 
ing any very marked impression on Cissy's fundamental 
ignorance. Sometimes he wondered if the girl were not very 
dull at Belchamber, and how it was that people who had 
always seemed to have so many engagements could spare so 
much time to one house. It is true that Lady Eccleston was 
perpetually threatening departure, but she was as often per- 
suaded to remain by the very mildest expostulation that 
civility demanded. 

At last a date was definitely fi^ed, and Sainty had to 
acknowledge to himself that he would miss the charming 
companion of his walks and drives. He felt tolerably sure 
that he was not in the least in love with Cissy, but he had 
come to feel a sort of tender protecting friendship for her, an 
interest in her welfare, and a desire to shield her from evil 
and unhappiness. Thus, one day, when he had heard raised 
voices and rather excited talking as he passed Lady Eccles- 
ton's door, and Cissy had appeared at lunch with red eyes, he 
burned to know what was wrong, and if possible to help and 
comfort her. Sorrow seemed so inappropriate to this bright 
young creature ; yet, during the last few days of the Eccles- 
tons' stay, the air was heavy with suppressed tears. It was 
like the weather when people look each evening at the 
clearing heavens and say, 'There must have been a storm 
somewhere ' ; an actual shower would have been a relief. To 
a person of Sainty's temperament such a state of things was 
unendurable. He could not ask Cissy what was wrong ; she 
who had been so ready to walk, or drive, or read, seemed 
suddenly to have become unapproachable. 

One day he watched the mother and daughter returning 
from a walk. They were talking excitedly in low hurried 
voices and with a good deal of gesture ; it was obvious even 



\ 



404 BELCHAMBER 

at a distance that they were discussing no ordinary topics, 
and what is more that they were having a decided difference 
of opinion. Lady Eccleston seemed to be appealing urgently 
about something. Sainty saw her lay her hand not too gently 
on her daughter's arm, but the girl threw it off with an 
impatient gesture, broke from her, and fairly ran towards the 
house. 

So swift and unexpected was her coming that Sainty had 
no time to withdraw, and they met in the hall. Cissy's face 
was working, her eyes dry and burning. 

* Miss Eccleston — Cissy,* said Belchamber, * what is wrong? 
Can I do anything ' 

At sight of him she started away like a shying horse. 

' Oh, let me alone ! ' she cried, and hurried upstairs, and 
Sainty could hear her sobbing as she went. At that moment 
Lady Eccleston appeared upon the scene, with heightened 
colour and decidedly out of breath. An indefinable change 
came over her expression as she saw the young man, a certain 
exultation seemed to leap in her eyes, to be immediately 
extinguished in a confusion which had every appearance of 
being genuine. 

* Lady Eccleston,' said Sainty, moving eagerly to meet her, 
'what is the matter with Cissy ? ' He did not notice that in 
his excitement he had twice called the girl by her Christian 
name. 

' O Lord Belchamber, how unfortunate ! I would have 
given worlds not to have met you just now. Give me a 
minute or two, I 'm all upset.' 

Sainty opened the door of the morning-room and ushered 
the agitated lady in there. His heart was beating uncom- 
fortably ; he felt something decisive was going to happen. 
Lady Eccleston sank into a chair and struggled with emotion, 
giving vent to a series of little sniffs and hiccoughs, and 
dabbing her eyes and mouth with her pocket-handkerchief. 

'To-morrow we should have gone, and you need never 
have known,' she said at last in broken accents. 

* Known what? I don't understand.' 



BELCHAMBER 1105 

'I blame myself/ Lady Eccleston went on, not heeding the 
interruption. ' It was my fault ; I ought to have had more 
foresight and discretion ; I see it all now. If Sir Thomas 
had only been spared it would never have happened ; he had 
such sterling sense.' 

' Won't you tell me what *s wrong ? ' Sainty asked. 

' I alone am to blame,' Lady Eccleston repeated tragically. 
*0f course I see it now. You are both so young, so pure- 
minded, so unsophisticated ; and dear Lady Charmington 
has lived so long out of the world ; but /ought to have seen. 
Oh ! I am inexcusable. But I did hope at least you would 
never know'j and like Agamemnon she once more veiled 
her grief. 

* I might have known, I might have been sure,' she con- 
tinued after a pause. ' Heaven knows I have enough reason 
to know how malicious people are, but my belief in my fellow- 
creatures is incurable. I can not bring myself to realise the 
love of scandal in evil-minded people.' 

'Good heavens!' said Sainty, now thoroughly alarmed. 
* What can you mean ? Surely no one has presumed ' 

* People have talked,' Lady Eccleston mourned. * Cissy 
being here so long, and my leaving her here, and all. It 
seems people have drawn all sorts of silly conclusions. I 

have been asked I can't say it ; you can guess what ; 

and the poor child has had letters, hints, and congratulations, 
and all that ; you can fancy it has upset her terribly ; she is 
almost beside herself; I can do nothing with her; you saw 
her just now ' ; and Lady Eccleston took a little side-glance 
at Sainty behind her pocket-handkerchief. *0f course, 1 
understand perfectly, and so does she; but I see how it 
would strike outsiders. Oh ! why is one always wise after the 
event ? Now you see why I am so angry with myself.' 

Sainty was much perturbed. 'This is monstrous, mon- 
strous 1 ' he cried ; ' that she should be annoyed, distressed in 
this way, is horrible. I hope. Lady Eccleston, you don't think 
that I have behaved badly, that I have taken any advantage 
of the confidence with which you have honoured me.' 



2o6 BELCHAMBER 

* Oh dear no, Lord Belchamber ; you have been kindness 
itself, and so has your dear mother. I never can forget all 
yoUr goodness. I knew how absolutely I could trust j^^w; 
but I ought to have thought, to have remembered. Well, I 
had hoped and meant that at least we alone should bear the 
burthen. This is an ill return to make to you for all your 
sweetness and hospitality. You will wish you had never 
heard our name.' 

' Believe me, I am not thinking at all about myself. The 
one question is, how is Miss Eccleston to be shielded from 
any annoyance in the matter? It is intolerable that she 
should have to suffer.' 

' How like you ! always so noble and unselfish,' said Lady 
Eccleston fervently. * I shall always remember how splendidly 
you have behaved. I don't blame you for a single instant, 
but I can never forgive myself. It is so like me ; I am so 
impulsive. I thought only of the immense benefit it would 
be to her intellectually, the intercourse with such a mind as 
yours. I should have recollected there were dangers ; that 
at her age the intellect plays but a very small part beside the 
heart ' 

' Good gracious ! you don't mean that she has thought me 
capable of pestering her with my attentions ? I knew well 
enough that I was only allowed such liberty because — because 
I was different from other men.' 

*No, no; I don't think she thought anything of it. / 
should have known that it was only your kindness to a poor 
little invalid, your desire to instruct a little ignoramus. But 

Cissy is very young ; she may have fancied Oh ! I 

don't know what I 'm saying.' 

Sainty had grown very pale ; he had to hold on to a table 
for support. 

*Lady Eccleston,' he said in a low voice, *you can't mean 
to imply that Miss Eccleston could possibly care for me in 
that way.' 

' Lord Belchamber, this is unfair,' cried Lady Eccleston, 
starting up. ^You have no right to try and force the child's 



BELCHAMBER 1107 

poor little secret from me. You found me all unstrung after 
a terrible talk with her, and I have let out far more than I 
should. I have told you I entirely exonerate you from all 
blame ; I appreciate that your motive was pure kindness. Is 
not that enough for you ? If people have been tiresome and 
tactless it is not your fault, still less hers, poor girl. I blame 
my self y as I say, more than I can tell you, but that has nothing 
to do with you. If I have been foolish I am more than 
punished; but I only regret that I cannot bear all the 
punishment ; we never can. The fault or folly, call it what 
you will, was mine, but much of the price must be paid by 
my poor innocent child — that is the thought that unnerves 
me ' ; and her ladyship once more had recourse to her pocket- 
handkerchief. * She has no father,' she wailed ; * her brothers 
are mere children in knowledge of the world; and I, her 
mother, who should have shielded her from trouble, in my 
blind, foolish desire to procure her a little intellectual advan- 
tage, have brought on her the bitterest trial of her life.' 

Sainty was twisting his stick in his fingers in great agitation. 
' It is too bad, too bad,' he said, ' that she should be pestered 
like this and made unhappy. I would do anything in my 
power to repair the harm of which I have been the unwitting 
cause. But if the trouble is, as I suppose, only what stupid 
people have been saying or writing to her, I don't see what I 
can do. Poor child ! I can well understand how her pride 
and delicacy must have been hurt.' 

' No, no ; there is nothing to be done, nothing,' said Lady 
Eccleston. 'I never meant that you should know; and, 
Lord Belchamber, promise me one thing: never refer to 
this to Cissy ; she would die of shame, if she thought I had 
told you. We are going to-morrow; try and forget what 

I have said, especially — especially ' and she broke off 

abruptly, and made a stumbling grope at the door-handle, 
as though she would leave the room. 

* Stop a minute, please,' Sainty cried, interposing. * Don't 
go. I don't want to be indiscreet, but you said something 
just now which seemed to hint Oh ! I know it *s 



2o8 BELCHAMBER 

incredible ; but don't you see, it would make all the differ- 
ence whether her distress came only from the mortification 
of people having coupled our names, or if it was possible that 

she could look on me as — ^as ' 

^ Say no more, say no more. I understand you perfectly,* 
interrupted Lady Eccleston. ' You are the soul of punctilious 
honour. You are capable of any sacrifice, if you thought 
that even, as you said just now, unwittingly you had made 
a poor girl care for you ; but I have not said it, and I will 
not say it. I have pride for her, as I should have it for 
myself. I would never admit it. You are perfectly justified 
in believing that her distress arises solely from what people 
have said,' and this time the lady, with a magnificent 
gesture of renunciation, really did get to the door, and left 
Sainty in a whirl of conflicting emotions. Was it possible that 
he had touched the heart of this beautiful young creature ? 
It was inconceivable that she should be in love with him^ 
and he turned with a pathetic smile to the long glass 
between the two tall windows. Yet her mother had seemed 
to hint it If it were so, then there was nothing simpler than 
saving her from trouble. A word would do it. But it could 
not be ; the thing was unthinkable. And he fell to wonder- 
ing if he wished to think it, or not. What was his feeling 
towards her? Was this protecting, pitying tenderness, this 
longing to interpose between her and sorrow, was this love ? 
It was very unlike what he had dreamed it to be. But was 
not everything in life strangely unlike our young idea of it ? 
And ought he to consider his own feelings in the matter at 
all? If, however innocently, he had led her to think he 
cared for her, if in her youth and inexperience she had 
mistaken his friendship, his interest in her studies, for a 
warmer feeling; above all, if the inscrutable workings of 
the female heart had led her for some mysterious reason to 
return it, was he not in honour bound to think only of her 
happiness in the matter ? If a young and beautiful woman 
had done him this honour, was it for him, him of all people, 
to feel anything but humblest gratitude? The thought wa^ 



/ 



BELCHAMBER ^cg 

not without a certain sweetness that a woman had recognised 
the qualities of his head and heart, to the extent of forgetting 
his lack of all Jhat women most prized in man, strength, 
courage, virility. He acknowledged that a man could not 
have done so, that had the positions been reversed, had he 
been handsome, vigorous, physically attractive, she ugly, 
misshapen, unhealthy, no beauties of the soul would have 
stirred in him the wish to make her his wife. He bowed 
his head in awe before the greater spirituality of woman ; 
even a thoughtless London girl brought up among worldly 
surroundings and low ideals was capable of higher flights 
than the most refined and least carnal of men. And he had 
presumed to patronise, almost to look down on her, because 
she had not dulled the edge of her originality with much 
reading. After all, why did he hesitate ? Had he not dreamed 
of some such possibility as this, yet hardly dared to hope 
for it ? Was it likely that two women would be found willing 
to overlook his many deficiencies? was not this precisely 
the one chance of his life? His mother had said she wished 
him to marry. His mother! Strange that he had not 
thought of her sooner ! He would go and consult his 
mother ; she would know better than any one how to advise 
him. 

Lady Charmington listened indulgently to his recital. She 
did not seem surprised. 

'I thought all that poetry reading would come to some- 
thing of the sort,' she said. 

'I can't make out now,' said Sainty, 'whether what is 
troubling her is anything more than resentment of idle 
gossip, the natural repulsion of a delicate-minded girl from 
having her name coupled with a man's.' 

'Oh, I suspect it is more,' said his mother. 'But you? 
Are you fond of the girl on your side ? ' 

' I don't know that I am in love with her, even now, and 
I certainly never dreamed of the possibility of her being in 
love with me,* 

'Well, her mother certainly gave you to understand that 

o 



216 BELCHAMBER 

she was ; it is unfortunate if you have made the poor girl 
care for you, and don't feel you can return it' 

* Good heavens, mother ! If it were possible that such a 
creature had really stooped to love me, I ought to thank her 
on my knees.' 

'I don't quite see that] but I should be sorry to have 
any one able to say that you had trifled with her. You see, 
her mother left her in my charge ; and I suppose I ought not 
to have let you be so much alone together.' 

* But surely,' cried Sainty, * you don't think I am capable 
of taking advantage of the confidence reposed in me, to — 
to Oh ! the idea is ludicrous ; you must see its absurdity.' 

* I must say you have given the girl every reason to think 
you liked her,' said his mother judicially. * I have never 
seen you show the same desire for anybody's society before ; 
it is not surprising if she mistook the nature of your atten- 
tions. Pretty girls are not in the habit of having young men 
so devoted to the improvement of their minds.' 

* I would not " behave badly," as people call it, for worlds,' 
said Sainty. * I only can't get over the extreme grotesque- 
ness of its being possible for me to do so. In spite of both 
you and Lady Eccleston, it still seems to me quite incredible 
that I should rouse any such feeling in her.' 

'There is a very simple way of finding out,' said Lady 
Charmington. 

* But how if in her kindness and inexperience she is mis- 
taking pity, gratitude, affection — call it what you will — for 
Love ? It is possible even (God forgive me for thinking of 
such a thing !) that the surroundings, the place, the name, 
the whole business may have acted on her almost un- 
consciously, and helped her to mistake her own heart.' 

Judge not,' said Lady Charmington, with all the air of 
one who had never done such a thing in her life ; ' I should 
be sorry to think so badly of the poor child as that.' 

' Oh, I didn't mean to blame her. I am sure she would 
not consciously hd,YQ let such considerations weigh with her; 
but it seems so abnormal that any woman should feel any'> 



BELCHAMBER 3ix 

thing like love for me, that I am still trying to find some 
explanation to fit the facts.' 

Lady Charmington laid her hand on his shoulder. ' My 
dear boy,' she said, ' you are not called upon to understand 
her feelings ; what you have got to do is to try and under- 
stand your own. It has been the dearest wish of my heart 
to see you happily married ; especially since your brother's 
behaviour has brought such bitter sorrow and disgrace upon 
us all. Here is a nice, good girl, well brought up, and I 
think she loves you. The question is whether you like her 
well enough to make her your wife.' 

Sainty shook his head. * The question is whether I could 
make her happy,' he said; *what have I to give her in 
exchange for the priceless treasure of a good woman's 
love ? ' 

Dinner that evening was a cheerless meal. Lady Charming- 
ton, never a great talker, was more than ordinarily silent. 
Belchamber made several attempts to start a conversation on 
indifferent subjects, and Lady Eccleston chattered feverishly, 
with one eye on him and one on her daughter, who sat sullen 
and defiant and ate nothing. Sainty's heart smote him as 
he looked on her. Whether their two mothers were right 
or not, he would speak to her after dinner. If she took him, 
he would consecrate his life to her happiness. If, as he still 
thought far more likely, their wishes had misled them, and 
she did not care for him, she had only to refuse him, and 
her pride was healed. Then, when her friends said, *We 
thought you were going to marry Lord Belchamber,' she 
would only have to say, * He wanted me to, poor man, but 
I couldn't do it.' That he was thinking entirely of her 
happiness showed how little he was really in love with her, 
but that neither affected his decision nor seemed to him to 
matter in the least. 

Lady Charmington was a skilled and experienced knitter, 
and Lady Eccleston, who kept a bit of property crochet to 
hook at when she was with other women who worked, became 
surprisingly interested in the intricacies of the garment on 



212 BELCHAMBER 

which her friend was engaged. Her yoluble inquiries and 
apologies for her own stupidity kept up a running accom- 
paniment to the click-clack of the needles and Lady Charm- 
ington's occasional terse explanations. Cissy had withdrawn 
to the extreme other end of the long room in which they sat, 
and pretended to immerse herself in a book. Sainty drew a 
chair up to hers, so as to interpose the view of his own back 
between her and the two older women. 

' Miss Eccleston,' he said, ' I have got something I want to 
say to you.' 

Cissy looked up from her book. 'Yes?' was all she said. 
Her attitude expressed only weariness ; she did not appear to 
be at all fluttered. 

'You are worried, unhappy,' Sainty went on. 'I am afraid 
you have been annoyed by people gossiping about your stay 
here, about the relations between you and me.' He spoke in 
a low voice, for her ear alone ; he was looking into her eyes, 
trying to surprise some indication of what effect his words 
had on her. Cissy did not look down or betray any em- 
barrassment. 

' I suppose mamma told you that? ' she said. 

' I can't bear to see you like this, and to know that, how- 
ever unintentionally, I am the cause.' 

' Oh ! that 's all right ; I am sure you meant nothing but 
what was kind.' 

* Miss Eccleston — Cissy, I want to tell you I am quite well 
aware of the extreme unlikelihood of your being able to care 
for me. I understand that you should be angry and sore 
at vulgar people's mistaking the nature of our friendship. I 
am not silly or vain enough to suppose that you would be 
willing to marry me; but remember if any one ever says 
anything more to you about this, your position is quite 
simple ; you have only to say you have refused me * 

Cissy never shifted her calm, level gaze. 'Lord Bel- 
chamber,' she said quietly, ' am I to understand that you are 
proposing to me?' 

' I don't for a moment expect you to accept me ; I just 



BELCHAMBER 213 

want you to know, and other people to know, that if you 
don't it is entirely because you don't wish to.' 

' I see ; you mean you will make me a sham proposal, on 
the distinct understanding that I say "no," so that I may 
have the satisfaction of telling my friends that I might have 
been a marchioness if I 'd liked ; but you 'd be awfully sold if 
I said "yes."' 

* You know I don't mean anjrthing of the sort,' said Sainty. 
' But I know how hopeless it is that a girl like you should 
care for a man like me, and I wouldn't insult you by sup- 
posing that anything I have to offer could make any differ- 
ence. I don't want to add to your troubles the pain of 
thinking I had hoped you might accept me and that you 
have got to disappoint me.' 

' Then it ts a bond. fide offer that you are making me ? ' said 
Cissy sardonically ; her tone expressed anything but exulta- 
tion, and though she still looked at him her eyes seemed 
to be looking at some one else a long way off. 'It's the 
queerest proposal, I should think, any one ever made,' and 
she gave a little dry laugh. 'Take care I don't accept it. 
Whatever you may think, a little pauper like me might well 
be tempted by what you have to offer, as you call it.' 

' I don't like to hear you talk like that,' Sainty said. ' I 
know it is only a joke, but there are things I don't like joked 
about. That 's the way you used to talk, but you 've been so 
different lately.' 

'Lord Belchamber,' said Cissy, 'let's understand one 
another. If you are making me an offer out of chivalry, that 
I may have an answer to people's malicious chatter, I can 
only say I 'm very much obliged to you ; but if you really 
want me to marry you, I 'm quite ready to do so. I can't 
say fairer than that, can I ? After all,' she added in a softer 
tone, 'quite apart from worldly considerations, I think I 
might do much worse for myself ; you 've been very good to 
me, and you 're a much better sort than — than most of the 
men I 've met,' and for the first time she looked away, and 
gave a little sigh. 



214 BELCHAMBER 

Sainty was much moved. ' Cissy,' he said, ' do you really 
mean that in spite of everything you think you could love 
me a little?' and he tried to take her hand; but at the 
touch of him the girl flung herself back into the furthest 
corner of the big chair in which she sat, and her glance 
once more crossed his, steel-bright like a rapier. 'Do I 
understand,' she asked, 'that I have your authority to 
announce our engagement to our respective parents?' 

Sainty stared blankly ; he could only nod. Cissy wheeled 
her chair sharply back, and called out, 'Mamma! Lord 
Belchamber has proposed to me, and I have accepted him.' 

Lady Eccleston was across the room in two bounds. 'My 
darling, what a way to tell me such a thing ! You really are 
the strangest child. What can Lord Belchamber and Lady 
Charmington think of you ? Dear Lady Charmington, you 
must forgive my Cissy ; she 's so excitable, I think happiness 
has turned her head a little ; and mine too, for that matter, 
for it would be useless to pretend I 'm not delighted, only 
it is all so sudden, so unexpected,' and she clasped her 
daughter to her heart, and kissed and wept over her in the 
most approved fashion. Cecilia did not return her mother's 
kisses; she looked at her with a very queer eye indeed, 
before which Lady Eccleston's effusiveness drooped a little. 
She turned to her future son-in-law and held out both her 
hands. 'Dear Sainty (I may call you Sainty?), I must kiss 
you too,' she cried. 

As Sainty submitted to the threatened salute, it struck him 
as grimly humorous that it should not be his intended who 
kissed him, but her mother. 

Cissy crossed the room, and picked up the ball of wool 
which Lady Eccleston had shed in her rapid transit, and 
by which she was still fastened like a spider to the place 
where she had been sitting. ' Lady Charmington,' she said, 
'mamma has adopted your son with great readiness; have 
you nothing to say to me? Are you not pleased ? ' 

Lady Charmington had risen and laid aside her work. 
'Of course I am pleased/ she said; 'I have wished, of all 



BELCHAMBER ais 

things, to see Sainty married; but, my dear,' she added, 
something in the girl's manner seeming to strike her as 
peculiar, 'I hope you are not taking this solemn step 
lightly; have you examined your heart, and asked God's 
blessing on what you are doing? Are you sure you love 
my son enough to be happy with him, and to make him 
happy?' 

But Lady Eccleston was a whirlwind of tears, protestations, 
laughter, and congratulation; she caught them all up, and 
swept them away in the current of her rejoicing. No one else 
was allowed to say anything. 

Sainty also had drawn near, and now stood before his 
mother. She took a hand of each of the young people in 
hers, and said solemnly ' God bless you, my children.' 

At the moment Sainty had a vision of the intensity with 
which she had cursed her other son, on a like occasion, and 
thought irresistibly of the fountain that ' sent forth sweet water 
and bitter.' The context rang in his head like a knell: 
' My brethren, these things ought not to be.' 



CHAPTER XVI 

The wedding was fixed for the first week in June. As Lady 
Charmington said, there was no reason for delay, though it 
must be owned that neither of the young people seemed very 
eager to press on the date. Lady Eccleston could not have 
borne a wedding in Lent, and Lady Charmington had a 
lingering old Scottish superstition, of which she was heartily 
ashamed, against May marriages. All things considered, the 
beginning of June seemed plainly indicated. Everybody 
would be in town then, and it was to be a London wedding. 
Cissy grumbled a good deal at having to miss the season ; 
but her mother affected to treat her lamentations as a joke. 

'Of course she doesn't mean it,' she said, in answer to 
Sainty's expression of his willingness to consult Cissy's wishes 
in everything. 'You know how absurd my children are; 
they always must make a joke of everything, but it doesn't 
mean that their hearts are not in the right place ; under all 
their nonsense, which I never check, for I do so love to see 
them merry, they have very serious feelings about all the big 
things of life.' ^ 

A cousin of Lady Eccleston's, who was married to a newly- 
made peer with a large income, and who had never before 
shown the slightest inclination to do much for her poorer 
kinsfolk, expressed her approval of Cissy's brilliant match by 
offering the use of her house for the occasion. 

'It is very good of dear Louisa,' said Lady Eccleston, 
' and I must own we should have been sadly squashed in our 
little bicoque. Still, if we hadn't always been as sisters, I 
couldn't have taken it from her. Poor dear! It is such 
a bitter regret to her having no children of her own. Natur- 



BELCHAMBER 217 

ally, mine are a great deal to her; and I can quite understand 
her pleasure in having Cissy married from her house. Don't 
think I 'm ungrateful to the dear creature, Sainty, but I own 
in my heart I would rather hare had the girl go to her bridal 
from her own and her mother'^ little home; but that is 
entre nous, my dear boy; I wouldn't hurt poor Louisa's 
feelings for worlds.' 

Sainty found being engaged very different from anything 
he had read of it. Things seemed so little changed with 
him, that he wondered at times if it could really be he who 
was to be married in a few weeks. Was it possible that at a 
date definitely fixed, and not very far distant, his whole being 
was to undergo this tremendous transformation, was hence- 
forth to be linked in closest union with a creature of whom 
he knew practically nothing, and that not for a season, like 
any other circumstance in life, but as long 'as they both 
should live,' 'till death did them part'? The prospect 
terrified rather than attracted him. 

Sometimes he tried to feel elated at the thought that he 
was to join the ranks of normal happy people who love and 
are loved, was to lead about a wife like other men, and hold 
up his head among his fellows. He told himself that this 
supremest gift was far beyond anything he had dared to hope. 
It was to no purpose. He might be flattered, grateful, 
touched, but he was conscious of none of that blissful thrill 
that is said to transfigure existence and make a heaven on 
earth. Sometimes he wondered how it had all come about 
so suddenly. Everything he had done had seemed not 
only natural, but inevitable at the time. He had walked 
into the situation as simply as going in to dinner ; yet now 
there were moments when the thought of what they had 
both undertaken appalled him. He was as frightened for 
Cissy as for himself. Did she know what she was doing, 
what it meant? A dozen times a day he recalled the scene 
in the library, her hard, unflinching gaze, the mocking 
tones of her voice. Was that the way that a woman made 
the 'irrevocable sweet surrender' to a man who had won 



3i8 BELCHAMBER 

her heart? If she had made a mistake, if she did not love 
him, ought she not still to be saved from the fate she had 
accepted, even at the eleventh hour ? 

He saw extremely little of his betrothed. He had never 
had much to do with engaged couples, but he had an 
impression that they were generally left a good deal alone 
together, that people and things combined to respect the 
privacy of mutual love ; yet from the day of his engagement 
it was no exaggeration to say that he had hardly seen Cissy 
alone for five minutes. It is true that she had not actually 
left Belchamber next morning; but after their surprising 
freedom from other claims, both she and her mother seemed 
now all impatience to be gone, and during the time that 
they remained, they were mostly shut up in their own rooms 
announcing the event to a hundred correspondents, or 
dashing off their thanks for the congratulations that arrived 
by every post. ' She must really get home, and begin to see 
about clothes ; there was none too much time, and this was 
such a bad time of year; just when every one was busy.' 
Cissy was sure, if she delayed another day, she ' shouldn't 
have a decent rag to her back, and should have to be married 
in her petticoats.' 

From the day they went to town there began a round of 
shoppings and tryings-on, of scribbling notes, unpacking, 
cataloguing, and rapturously thanking for wedding-presents, 
which, as Cissy was marrying a rich man with a house full 
of beautiful things, were, of course, far more numerous and 
costly than if she had married a curate, or a captain in 
a marching regiment. Then the list of people to be invited 
to the wedding had to be discussed ad infinitum^ at first 
with regard to the size of the house in Chester Square, 
and after the cousin's offer, to be enlarged, amended, and 
corrected. With every fresh batch of presents, the number 
swelled of those whom it was deemed indispensable to ask, 
till it seemed to Sainty that there was not a stranger in the 
whole great indifferent city who had not been called in to 
assi3t at his nuptials. 



BELCHAMBER 219 

He also had come to town, as in duty bound, and was stay- 
ing with his uncle Firth, but though he spent several hours 
a day in Chester Square, he found himself horribly in the way 
there. Lady Eccleston and Cissy sat squashed sideways by 
the open drawers of their respective writing-tables, like people 
playin g^ a pe rpetual duet on two organs with all the stops 
pulleoout me absuraiyThadequate pieces of furniture on 
which women transact business became so littered with lists, 
letters, acceptances, refusals, the drawers so bulged with 
stacks of silver-printed invitations and stamped envelopes^ 
that the little hands with the scratching pens seemed by 
their perpetual movement to be feverishly preserving an ever 
narrowing space for themselves, as ducks keep a hole open 
in a rapidly freezing pond. 

Of happy interchange of rapturous feelings, murmured 
talks in quiet comers, or those long palpitating silences that 
lovers know, too blissful to be marred by talk, our engaged 
couple had no experience. Though Sainty was far too 
delicate-minded for the mere physical aspects of courtship 
to appeal strongly to his imagination, it did occur to him 
that an occasional embrace was not inappropriate between 
people about to be married ; but on the one occasion when 
he attempted anything of the sort, he had been repulsed with 
such energy and decision that he had immediately desisted. 
He had a conviction that Cissy thought him a fool for accept- 
ing defeat so easily, but to struggle for a kiss like an 
enamoured costermonger was repugnant to all his ideas. So 
he continued to meet and greet his promised bride as though 
she were the most indifferent of strangers. 

One morning at breakfast he asked his uncle if he ought 
not to make his betrothed a present. Lord Firth came out 
from behind the morning paper with a bound. 

*My dear boy! do you mean to say you haven't done so? * 

*Not yet,' said Sainty ; 'but I supposed, of course, I should 
have to.' 

' Not even a ring ? ' asked Lord Firth, Sainty was forced 
to admit it. 



220 BELCHAMBER 

• Why, the very day she accepted you, you ought to have 
given her a ring ; if you hadn't got one fit to offer her, you 
should have telegraphed to town at once for some. You 
must get one at once and take it to her ; and, of course, 
you must give her other things too, a tiara or necklace or 
something really handsome, and a bag or dressing-case. You 
know the kind of thing. Find out from her mother what she 's 
got, and which she would like, and get the duchess to help 
you choose things; she knows what's what. They must 
think it very odd that you haven't done it already.' 

'There are the emeralds,' said Sainty. 

' Of course she '11 have them to wear,' said his uncle, * but 
you can't give them to her, because they are heirlooms. As 
it happens, the one thing you are rather poor in is jewellery. 
Your grandmother had a lot, but it was her own, and you 
may believe she didn't leave any behind her ; your mother 
never cared for it, and never had much. She will probably 
give your wife, or leave her, what she has ; but of course 
you must see that she has the proper things, and do the 
thing well. Don't be stingy about it.' 

The duchess was delighted to help, and echoed Lord 
Firth's astonishment at Sainty's dilatoriness in the matter. 

'You really are the most extraordinary boy,' she said. 
'I'm just going for my walk; we'll go round to Rumond's 
at once and see what he 's got.' 

'We've been expecting a visit from your lordship,' said 
the great jeweller unctuously, * ever since we heard the happy 
news. May I be permitted to offer my congratulations on 
the event? We have always had the honour of supplying 
your family, and hoped that on such an occasion you would 
not desert us. I was remarking to Mr. Diby only the other 
day that I had been wondering we did not get a telegram to 
go down to Belchamber — either he or I would have been 
delighted ; but you preferred to wait till you came to town : 
quite right, quite right' 

They were ushered into a little sanctum, where presently 
on a mat of dark blue velvet were displayed treasures which 



BELCHAMBER 221 

made Sainty blink, and of which the prices gave him cold 
shivers down his back. The duchess handled and appraised 
the gems with the sangfroid of long habit ; but her grandson 
had never in his life had occasion to buy any jewellery, and 
had not the faintest idea of what such things were worth. 
To deck the bright curls of a woman with the cost of a 
hospital, or hang the price of a working-men's college round 
her neck, seemed to him absolutely vicious ; it had a horrible 
flavour of that life into which he had obtained his only 
glimpse at Arthur's supper-party — poor Arthur, whom almost 
alone he would have cared to have near him on his wedding- 
day, and who he knew would not be there, because his wife 
could not be asked. 

He left the shop with a horrible sense of guilt, and a feel- 
ing that the act which in him would be applauded as a fitting 
generosity was very much in the same category with his 
brother's prodigalities, not differing in kind, but only so 
much more blameworthy as it was so much greater in degree. 
Arthur, he felt sure, would not have hesitated to hang the 
girl of his heart in jewels, nor have wasted a thought on 
what it cost, and again he wondered whether his qualms were 
the result of his well-known parsimony, or one more proof 
that he was not really in love with her who was to be his 
wife. 

It was soon clear that Cissy did not share his views on 
these subjects ; the evening on which his presents arrived in 
Chester Square was the only occasion since their betrothal 
on which she expressed anything resembling affection for 
him. Her eyes sparkled like the diamonds in her little 
crown as she tried the things on, and pirouetted about the 
room with them. She waltzed up to Sainty and dropped 
him a deep curtsey. ' How does my lord and master think 
Hook?' she said coquettishly j and then in a sudden gust 
of gratitude she caught his hands in hers, and for the first 
time bent forward and kissed him. Sainty blushed hotly; 
this kiss, which spontaneously given would have meant so 
much to him, was like the stamp on a receipt for cash value 



1 



221 BELCHAMBER 

received ; and it was the last, as it had been the first, of their 
singular courtship. 

As the weeks passed, Cissy grew stranger and more unlike 
herself. The intervals of feverish gaiety, which had marked 
the earlier stages of her engagement, became rarer, and were 
succeeded by fits of gloom and depression that seemed 
utterly foreign to her nature. Whatever she might be at 
other times, that came to be the mood in which she invariably 
received Belchamber. She never willingly addressed him, 
and there were days when it seemed beyond her power to 
speak peaceably to him. Sometimes she was so rude that 
Lady Eccleston would playfully remonstrate, or Tommy 
would burst out with, * Hang it all, Cissy, you Ve no right 
to speak to Sainty like that. If I was him, I'm jiggered if 
I 'd stand it.* 

They had never from the first been allowed many un- 
witnessed interviews, but now it seemed to Sainty that it was 
Cissy herself who carefully avoided any occasion of finding 
herself alone with him, and if ever she could by no means 
escape, she would take refuge from his attempts at conversa- 
tion in sullen monosyllables, and sometimes even in absolute 
silence. 

One day he asked her in desperation if she felt she had 
made a mistake — if she wanted to be released. 'It is not 
too late,' he said, 'but it soon will be; if you repent of 
what you have done, if you want me to give you back your 
freedom, in mercy to yourself, to me, speak while there is 
yet time.' 

'Cissy,' he pleaded, after waiting in vain for any answer, 
' if you don't feel that you love me enough, don't do a thing 
that will ruin both our lives.' 

' Do I seem as if I loved you ? ' she asked brutally. 

' So little, that I can't help feeling that the idea of marrying 
me is repugnant to you. If so, never mind me; have the 
courage to put a stop to the whole thing ; a word from you 
will do it' 

' Oh ! will it? It is not as simple as all that' 



BELCHAMBER 223 

* I will help you in any way I can ; I will do anything you 
want' 

Cissy continued to stare into the fire in silence ; she had 
never once looked at him. * I don't know what I do want,' 
she said at last, hopelessly. 

Sainty was about to say more, but at that moment, with a 
great admonitory rattling of the door-handle, Lady Eccleston 
hurried in, with her arms full of parcels. 

* More presents, children,* she cried gaily ; * here, Sainty, 
come and take this top one off, or I shall drop it. That 
makes three hundred and seventy-nine. Ouf ! I 'm glad I 've 
no more daughters to marry.' 

'Listening! I thought so,' cried Cissy, starting up, and 
without a glance at the gifts from which her mother was 
beginning to remove the wrappings she left the room. At 
No. 379, fans and smelling-bottles, and even small articles 
of jewellery, were becoming a drug in the market. Lady 
Eccleston got very red, but took no notice, affecting to be 
absorbed in undoing a bit of ribbon that had got into a knot. 
*"With best wishes, Mr. and Mrs. Bonham Trotter,"' she 
read ; ' really very good of them. We hardly know them, and I 
hadn't meant to ask them. It is the seventeenth pair of paste 
buckles, but they are pretty though not old, and they come 
in for shoes. Who 's this ? " Every good wish, Mr. Austin 
Pryor." What a beauty 1 It is the prettiest fan she has had ; 
really charming! What can this be? A pincushion! 
** Fondest love from Miss Henrietta Massinger." What 
rubbish. I wish people wouldn't send all this trash. Give me 
the gr^en book on my writing-table, Sainty, and let 's enter 
them before I forget it. Three more notes for that poor child 
to write, and she 's tired out ; any one can see it.' 

' Lady Eccleston,' said Sainty, * do you think Cissy 's only 
tired ? To me she seems very unhappy ' 

* Tired, my dear boy, worn out ; her nerves are in fiddle- 
strings ; I shall be thankful for her sake when it 's all over,' 
and she murmured as she wrote, 'Pair of paste buckles, 
Mr. and Mrs. Bonham Trotter, 377. Tortoiseshell fan| 



2^4 BELCHAMBER 

Watteau subject, Mr. Austin Pryor, 378. Embroidered 
velvet horseshoe pincush * 

' Do stop writing a minute, and listen to me/ said Sainty. 
'It's your daughter's happiness that is at stake. Tell me, 
truly, do you think she loves me ? ' 

* Loves you ! My dear Sainty, what a question ! Of course 
she loves you,' cried Lady Eccleston. ' Miss H. Massinger, 
^o* 379/ ^nd she looked up with a bright smile, as she 
rubbed energetically on the blotting-paper. * Have you been 
having a lovers' quarrel ? ' she asked. 

' No, no, nothing of that sort ; but you yourself must have 
seen how oddly she behaves. She never will be alone with 
me for a minute if she can help it ; she hardly ever speaks to 
me, and if I speak to Jur^ as often as not she doesn't answer 
me. It is the queerest way of showing love.' 

Lady Eccleston smiled again, a little indulgent smile full 
oifinesse, 

' My dear child,' she said, ' is that all ? How little you 
know girls. Can't you understand that to a girl of Cissy's 
temperament, so absolutely pure and modest, marriage repre- 
sents the unknown, the terrible ; the prospect of it fills her 
with a thousand tremors and apprehensions. Believe me, a 
girl who can approach her wedding-day with calm nerves and 
a cheerful, smiling face, is either a cow, and has no sensi- 
bilities, or else she knows a great deal too much.' 

'But she looks at me really as if she hated me,' Sainty 
persisted. ' If she has mistaken her feelings, if the idea is 
repugnant to her, if she feels that, having once given her 
word, she is bound, either out of consideration for me, or 
fear of all the talk, to go through with things, is it not our 
duty, yours and mine before all others, to save her from 
herself while there is yet time ? ' 

' Dear modest fellow ! Every word you say makes me love 
you more, and convinces me how exactly you are suited to 
such a nature as Cissy's ; I see how well you will understand 
her ; how patient, how gentle you will be with her. As to 
her behaviour to you^ I know ; I feel for you a dozen times 



BELCHAMBER 325 

a day ; but you must not doubt her affection. Good gracious ! 
I treated my poor dear husband a thousand times worse when 
we were engaged. My mother used to say she didn't see 
how he stood it ; but the dear man had endless patience ; he 
never doubted ; and he soon succeeded in reconciling me to 
my fate,' added the lady, with a modest simper, ' when once 
we were married.' 

'Maidenly tremors are all very well,' said Sainty, 'but 
Cissy's behaviour gives me the impression of a much deeper 
seated repugnance. Don't, for pity's sake, let her wreck her 
life if she isn't sure she cares enough for me to marry me.' 

'You are generous, considerate, unselfish as ever,' cried 
Lady Eccleston. ' But trust me who know her so well. My 
dear Sainty, do you suppose if I were not absolutely sure 
this marriage was for my child's happiness, that I, her 
mother, who must have her welfare at heart, should not be 
the first to oppose it ? ' 

After that there seemed nothing more to be said. Still 
Sainty was not satisfied, and he determined to carry his per- 
plexities to his uncle, on whose sterling commonsense he 
had often leaned comfortably in boyhood. 

Lord Firth looked grave, and pursed up his mouth 
judicially. 

'This is awkward,' he said, ' infernally awkward. Do you 
mean to say you want to get out of it ? ' 

' Oh no ! not for myself at all. I don't say I 'm desperately 
in love ; but I don't know that I ever should be. As long as 
I thought Cissy cared for me, I was very much honoured, 
and ready to devote my life to making her happy ; but as the 
time comes nearer, I am more and more convinced that she 
does not love me. She may have felt sorry for me ; she may 
have let herself be dazzled by what she would gain in a 
worldly way. I don't pretend to understand why she took 
me ; but I am sure that she repents what she has done, that, 
if it could be managed for her, she would be glad to be 
released.' 

' Have you told her so ? Have you offered to release her ? ' 

p 



226 BELCHAMBER 

* Yes.' 

* Well, what did she say ? ' 

' She said nothing. When I pressed her she said she didn't 
know what she wanted. Then her mother came in, and 
Cissy went out of the room.' 

'Did you say anything about it to the old woman ?' 

* Yes ; I said what I Ve just told you.' 

* And what did she say ? ' 

'Oh, she said girls were always like that, that I didn't 
understand them — which God knows I don't — that a modest 
girl was always in a funk before marriage, and that she would 
be all right afterwards.' 

' Hm,' said Lord Firth. ' Well, I 'm an old bachelor, and 
don't know much about them either ; they 're queer creatures. 
I always vaguely distrust that Eccleston woman ; but I 've no 
reason for supposing she would sell her daughter, and I must 
say the girl never struck me as being particularly under her 
mother's thumb. On the contrary, she 's always been rather 
pert to her when I 've seen her.' 

' I can't make it out ; it all seems a hopeless tangle,' said 
poor Sainty. 

'The whole business struck me, when I heard of it, as 
being rather rash and ill-advised,' said his uncle. ' If I had 
been consulted, I should have suggested you had better both 
have been a little surer of your own feelings before announc- 
ing the engagement. I suspected your mother and Lady 
Eccleston of cooking up the affair when I heard of the 
Ecclestons being so much at Belchamber, but I didn't feel 
called upon to interfere. It was obviously desirable that you 
should marry, and if you fancied Miss Cissy, I knew nothing 
against the girl, though I don't much care for the mother. 
Besides, you are of age, and capable of arranging your own 
life without the interference of a guardian.' 

'Then you think there is nothing to be done?' 

'I don't see what. You say you've offered the girl to 
break it off, and she didn't seem to wish it, or at least wasn't 
sure, and that her mother assured you she was only shy. 



BELCHAMBER 227 

What more can you do ? If you want to back out, it 's 
another matter. Though it would look very bad so near the 
time, I suppose it might be done.' 

As a last resort, Sainty wrote to his mother, though he felt 
sure what her answer would be; and sure enough Lady 
Charmington wrote with no uncertain pen. ' If you had any 
misgivings you had better not have been in such a hurry to 
propose. Now it is altogether too late to go back on your 
word. I consider that you are bound in honour almost as if 
you were already married. It would be abominable to throw 
the girl over at the eleventh hour, when she has got her 
things, and all the invitations are out for the wedding. Think 
of the mortification to her, of the scandal it would cause. 
People might even say you had found out something against 
her. It would be enough to prevent her making another 
match, for every one would know of it, and talk about it.' 

Sainty was struck for the hundredth time with the inevita- 
bility of his mother's misapprehension. She passed over in 
silence all question of Cissy not caring for him, which was 
the one point on which he had insisted, and instantly assumed 
that his misgivings arose from nothing but the fatal weakness 
of his character, which made flight his one impulse in face of 
any decisive act. 

Sainty had made his last effort, and proceeded to drift 
resignedly with the stream. There was just one other person 
to whom he had momentarily thought of applying for counsel 
and help^ and that was his old friend Mrs. de Lissac ; but 
Alice had behaved rather strangely, he thought, about the 
whole matter. On first coming to London, he had gone to 
see her as a matter of course ; but though she had made a 
grand dinner for him and Cissy in honour of the engagement, 
and had showered magnificent presents on them both, the 
old cordial welcome was somehow lacking. She seemed ill 
at ease with him, and had fluttered hastily away from all 
attempts on his part to talk about Cissy, displaying positive 
terror if he showed any disposition to become confidential. 

Nothing was easier than to discourage Sainty from talking 



228 BELCHAMBER 

about himsel£ If his confidences were not met, as Alice de 
Lissac had always hitherto met them, more than haif-way, 
they died a natural death. 

The day of Belchamber^s nuptials dawned ineritablr in its 
turn. No convulsion of nature destroyed Lord Firth's com- 
fortable bachelor quarters, or buried the north side of Chester 
Square in ruins. Sainty got through the morning somehow, 
in a sort of waking dream, listening abstractedly to Gerald 
Newby, who had come up from Cambridge at his request 
to act as his * best man/ and had much to say on many sub- 
jects, from the marriage-service of the Church of England — of 
some parts of which he strongly disapproved — to the tyranny 
of custom which imposed the high hat and frock coat, 
garments neither comfortable, convenient, nor aesthetically 
beautifuL 

Lady Charmington, who was staying at Roehampton with 
old Lady Firth, brought her mother in for an early lunch as 
the wedding was fixed for half-past two. 

At the appointed time Sainty found himself planted by a 
great bank of palms and heavy-scented white flowers that made 
him feel sick. From where he stood the whole great church 
was visible. Dimly, as through a mist, he could descry his 
mother, straight and stem, in puritanical drab, beside the 
huddled white chuddah and nodding plumes of his grand- 
mother, the duchess strapped into a petunia velvet, with a 
silver bonnet whose aigrette seemed to sweep the skies, his 
Aunt Eva in a Gainsborough hat, taking rapid notes for the 
Looking-glass^ and Claude, slim, cool, and elegant, his beauti- 
fully gloved, pearl-grey hands crossed upon his cane, which 
he had rested on the seat beside him as he stood sideways 
looking for the bride. Behind them a sea of faces, mostly 
unknown, of light colours and black coats, of feathers, 
flowers, and laces, stretched back to where, in a cloud of 
pink and white, the bridesmaids clustered round the door, 
holding the great bouquets of roses he had so nearly forgotten 
to order for them. 

The organ boomed, and the knowing-looking little choristers 



BELCHAMBER 229 

in their stiff surplices went clattering down the aisle followed 
by a perfect procession of smug ecclesiastics, among whom 
Sainty caught a fleeting glimpse of dear old Meakins from 
Great Charmington. Lady Eccleston, emotional, devotional, 
and gorgeous as the morning, rustled hastily to her place in 
the front pew where George and Randolph were already 
nudging each other and giggling. Then the little white- 
robed boys began to come back, shrilly chanting, and as the 
choir separated to right and left Sainty could see Tommy, 
very solemn and as red as the carnation in his buttonhole, 
and on his arm a vision of soft shrouded loveliness, coming 
slowly towards him. All the riddle of the future was hid in 
that veiled figure. How little he really knew what was in the 
little head and heart under all that whiteness ; was it happi- 
ness or misery she was bringing him? an honoured, dignified 
married life, an equal share of joys and sorrows, * the children 
like the olive branches round about their table'? or a 
loveless existence, the straining bonds of those unequally 
yoked, the little sordid daily squabbles that eat the heart, 
perhaps even shame, dishonour. . . . ? What thoughts for a 
bridegroom stepping forward to meet his bride at the altar ! 
But who is master of his thoughts ? 



CHAPTER XVII 

Thb Duke of Sunborough having only a castle in Scotland, a 
palace in the Midlands, a detached house with a garden in 
the centre of London, a shooting-lodge in the north of 
England, and an old manor-house on the border of Wales, 
had acquired in his stormy youth a little place in Surrey 
some twelve or fifteen miles from town, a villa with terraces 
and cedar-trees and hothouses and shady lawns sloping to 
the river, where, if Rumour may be credited, there had some- 
times been fine goings-on, but which was now only used on 
rare occasions for what it has become the fashion to call 
'week-end parties.' 

This modest retreat, which would have seemed to most 
people a good-sized country-house, had been lent to the 
young couple for their honeymoon, and thither they repaired, 
for greater state and privacy, in a large closed carriage with 
four horses and postillions, their two new dressing-bags sitting 
solemnly opposite to them on the back seat, while the servants 
and luggage went by train. 

Cissy, attired in the latest fashion and the palest hues, 
with a very white face and very red eyes and nose, sat huddled 
in one comer and stared out of the window, occasionally 
dabbing her features with a little damp ball of a pocket- 
handkerchief. From the other end of the long seat, on 
which a third person could easily have found room between 
the little bride and bridegroom, Sainty watched her com- 
passionately. He contrasted the woebegone aspect and silent 
aloofness of his companion with the cheerful garrulity of the 
same young lady when she had driven about the country 
with him only a few months before. Then, had she seemed 

depressed or unhappy, he would not have hesitated to ask the 
sao 



BELCHAMBER 331 

cause of her melancholy, to offer help or at least consolation. 
Why, now, was he afraid to attempt to comfort or even to 
make a movement towards her? The explanation seemed a 
strange one : then she had been an acquaintance, now she 
was his wife. His wife ! The words struck with a certain 
irony on his startled consciousness. It was that half-hour in 
church which was to make them ' one flesh ' which had thrust 
them so far asunder. 
At last the silence became unendurable. 

* Cissy, he said suddenly, * are you very miserable ? ' 

His voice breaking in on the monotonous sounds of their 
progress startled himself hardly less than his companion. 
Cissy shook herself and raised her head. 
' Yes,' she said defiantly, without looking round. 
'Because of me?' 

* Yes — because of you.' 

* Why, what have I done ? ' There was a relief in speech. 
If she would only talk, no matter what she said ; she might 
abuse him, accuse him — anything was better than that horrible 
mute damp woe. But Cissy would not answer. 

* Won't you tell me how I have offended you ? What have 
I done that you don't like ? ' 

'You've married me,' she snapped at him. 

'Isn't that a little unjust?' 

' Most likely it is, horribly unjust. I don't care if it is. 
I hate myself and you and everybody, and I wish I was dead.' 

'Cissy, Cissy,' cried Sainty, dreadfully pained, 'don't say 
such things.' 

' Then why did you ask me ? ' she retorted ; ' why can't you 
let me alone?' 

Sainty told himself that if there was ever a moment for 
patience it was now ; so much might depend on what he said 
next. He made a motion as though he would take her hand, 
but at that there flashed out of her face a look so evil, such 
a genuine naked horror as civilisation seldom lets us show. 
Sainty fell back appalled ; he felt that he had seen in her 
eyes the very bottom of her feeling towards him, and viewed 



23« BELCHAMBER 

in the light of that revelation the whole hopelessness of their 
future relations stood momentarily clear before him. He lay 
back dazed and frightened, thankful as a man to whom 
lightning has shown the danger of his surroundings for the 
friendly darkness that once more veils them from his sight ; 
and for the rest of the drive neither occupant of the carriage 
said a word. 

When at last they drew up at their destination the house 
was on Cissy's side, and as soon as a bowing servant had 
opened the carriage-door she jumped out before Sainty could 
offer her any assistance. A little shower of rice that had 
lodged in the folds of her gown fell pattering from her in the 
precipitancy of her flight, which caused a discreet grin on the 
damp, red faces of the postillions and of the duke's under- 
butler, who had been sent down to help Sainty's valet with the 
service. 

Belchamber caught a glimpse of an inscription framed in 
laurel leaves stretched across the lintel, of which all that was 
clear to him were the words * happy pair,' as he followed his 
bride into the hall. Here the women who had charge of the 
house were drawn up together with Cissy's new maid and his 
own valet 

The housekeeper had embarked on a little speech, evidently 
prepared with care. * May I be permitted,' she was saying, 
*on behalf of myself and fellow-servants, to welcome your 
ladyship on this auspicious occasion, and to wish you and the 
marquis every happiness, and I am sure we shall do our very 
best to make you comfortable, and his lordship too.' Seeing 
that Cissy stared at the woman with a dull eye, Sainty came 
to the rescue. 

*I am sure we are both very much obliged to you all,' he 
said, ' but Lady Belchamber is very tired, and would be glad 
to see her room, if you will show it to her.' Cissy started at 
the sound of her new name in the mouth of her husband, but 
moved o£f in the wake of the housekeeper, who had dropped 
from the monmnental tone of her welcome into a more 
comfortable colloquialism. 'I am sure your ladyship must 



BELCHAMBER 233 

be tired — it's a most trying day; and you'll like to see your 
room, and would you like a cup of tea or anything after your 
long drive? Dinner isn't ordered till eight, and it's only 
half-past six. Tea is set out in the morning-room, but it will 
be quite easy to bring it up to you. I have tried to think of 
everything, but, of course, anything your ladyship wishes 
altered . . .' Sainty heard her voice growing fainter down the 
corridor as Cissy and the maid followed her to the staircase. 
He watched the little procession out of sight and then turned 
Vearily into the first room he came to and dropped with 
a long sigh upon the gaudy chintz flowers of a comfortable 
easy-chair. For him, too, the day had been * trying ' in more 
ways than one. 

His man brought him a cup of tea and said that ' her lady- 
ship ' was having hers in her room and was going to rest till 
dinner-time. He had not yet been four hours wedded, and 
he noted with shocked surprise the distinct relief with which 
he hailed the prospect of being free for a little from the strain 
of his wife's presence. Four hours I The morning seemed 
a hundred years ago ! For the rest of his natural life had he 
got always to face this mute resentment? And for what? 
He had not forced her to marry him ; indeed he had adjured 
her not to. It was unheard of that she should treat him as a 
criminal ; he examined his conscience and found that so far 
from having anything with which to reproach himself, he had 
behaved to her throughout with the most scrupulous consider- 
ation. Could Lady Eccleston be right, and might Cissy's 
behaviour be nothing but the natural nervousness of a modest 
young woman ? Were girls always so terrified in presence of 
the bridal mysteries? If that were all, she might count on 
his perfect sympathy. No girl could be more of a stranger 
to all that side of life than he, or approach it with more 
invincible shyness. In all their talks it had seemed to him 
that the balance of true modesty had been rather on his side 
than hers ; he had often been shocked by things she had said, 
but he could recollect no occasion on which any remark of 
his had appeared to embarrass her in the least. 



234 BELCHAMBER 

Tired nature must have come to rescue him from his many 
perplexities, for he w^s recalled to consciousness from a doze 
by the clock striking a half-hour, and finding it was half-past 
seven, he decided to go upstairs and get ready for dinner. 
He bad no difficulty in finding his room. Through almost 
the first door on the upper landing he saw his new brushes 
adorning the dressing-table, his clothes laid out upon the bed. 
As he turned in, he noticed the sharp click of a key in 
another door from that by which he had entered, and which 
evidently communicated with the next room, for behind it he 
could hear sounds of people moving about, the opening and 
shutting of drawers and cupboards, and occasionally Cissy's 
voice speaking to her maid. That he heard all these sounds 
but indistinctly was presently explained to him. Having 
changed his clothes he tapped discreetly, and receiving no 
answer proceeded to turn the handle; to his pleasure it 
yielded; he had been mistaken then; she had not the dis- 
trust of him he had fancied. But his gratification was short- 
lived ; there were double doors between the rooms, and the 
inner one was quite securely fastened. 

* Who 's there ? ' cried Cissy sharply. 

• I hope you 're rested,' Sainty called in a voice which he 
tried to make pleasantly indifferent ; ' I 'm going down, shall I 
tell them to get dinner, or are you not ready ? ' 

' I '11 be down in a minute. Don't wait for me,' she called 
back, but made no offer to undo the door. 

Dinner was not a cheerful meal, when presently Cissy 
appeared in a smart new tea-gown, and took her place 
opposite to him. She crumpled her bread and drank a great 
deal of water, and played with the wine-glasses and her 
rings and the lace upon her dress. The meal passed almost 
in silence, the two men gliding softly about and handing the 
dishes. Cissy ate nothing, and Sainty felt obliged to break 
and taste a long succession of undesired meats. 

'They have given us much too much,' he said. 'We must 
tell that good lady to-morrow that we don't want all these 
things.' 



BELCHAMBER 135 

Cissy assented indifferently. 

'You're not eating anything/ Sainty ^d, after a pause. 

* I 'm not hungry. I had tea so late.' 

Sainty found himself talking to the servants, and asking for 
things he did not want, to break the oppressiveness of the 
atmosphere. 

If Cissy ate nothing while the servants were present, she 
made up for it when they had left the room, by piling a whole 
dish of strawberries on her plate, covering them with cream, 
and eating them voraciously. Sainty watched her uneasily, 
with a sudden dread that she might be going mad. 

Things were not much more lively after dinner. The 
smiling housekeeper had explained that she had not had 
the drawing-room lit up as she thought they would be more 
• cosy ' in the * boodwar.' Cissy sank deep in a big armchair, 
and appeared to be immersed in a novel she had brought 
with her. Sainty tried to read too, but his attention 
wandered ; his eyes fell first on his companion, the swirl of 
diaphanous drapery that escaped from the arms of her chair 
and flowed out upon the floor like water between the piers of 
a bridge, the little foot in its bead-wrought slipper, the hands 
flashing with new rings that held the gaudy book-cover like a 
shield between her face and him. From her they roved to 
her surroundings. The room in which they sat had been 
decorated about the year i860 by Italian artists. Trellised 
grape vines were painted on the walls, mixed with roses and 
large blue flowers of the convolvulus family. Birds of gay 
plumage and highly imaginative butterflies were sprinkled 
about them, and here and there a plump cupid in a pink loin- 
cloth stood poised on one foot among the foliage, swinging a 
basket of flowers. Cupids, indeed, were everywhere ; several 
of them floated round a hook in the sky-coloured ceiling, and 
made believe that it was not it, but they, who supported the 
glass chandelier. They crawled in white marble all over the 
bulging sides of the low flamboyant mantelpiece. On the 
French clock above it, a gilt Eros perpetually clasped his 
Psyche, while from the console between the elaborately 



236 BELCHAMBER 

draped windows, a biscuit representation of the same divinity 
held his finger discreetly to his lips. 

The note of old-fashioned gaiety which is somehow lacking I 

in our more correct modern apartments seemed specially to ^ 

fit the place to be the frame of love. Its amoretti and 
impossible flowers, its white marble and gilding and pale 
silks, suggested accustomed complicity. In presence of what 
human kisses had those little ormolu lovers continued their 
indifferent embraces? What scenes of passion had been 
multiplied in endless reproduction by those tall opposing 
mirrors? Perhaps in that very room, Sainty thought, his 
grandmother might have been tempted towards the breaking 
of those same vows he had that day taken on himself. He 
came on her portrait presently in a book of beauty, bound 
with much tooling in faded crimson calf, which he was idly 
turning over on the red velvet centre-table. He took it over 
and showed it to Cissy. 

* Look at grandmamma,' he said ; * wasn't she beautiful?' 

Cissy took the picture and stared at it with no answering 
smile. It seemed to have a curious fascination for her. 
* How like ! ' she murmured. * How very like ! ' 

' Oh ! come,' said Sainty, glad to get her to talk about any- 
thing. ' I can't say I think her grace looks much like that 
nowadays.' 

'I didn't mean that it was like the duchess,' said Cissy 
with a hysterical gulp. ' But don't you see the extraordinary 
likeness to CI to your cousin Mr. Morland?' 

Sainty could not have explained why the sudden mention 
of Claude was displeasing to him. 

' He is thought like our grandmother,' he said shortly, 'but 
he is not nearly so good-looking ; the duchess was a great 
beauty in her youth.' 

Cissy did not discMSs the question, but she kept the book 
absently in her lap, and when Sainty had returned to his 
reading, he could see her turning the pages. 

As the long hours wore away, Belchamber became intoler- 
ably weary, and he suspected Cissy of being not less so ; but 



BELCHAMBER 237 

when taxed with fatigue, she eagerly repudiated the idea, 
and professed a tremendous interest in her book. * I must 
see how it is going to come out,' she said; *it's awfully 
exciting.' 

Sainty ached all over, but he could not insist. He 
returned to his own reading, which he found less stimulating 
than Cissy seemed to find hers. After a while he noticed 
that she had moved into a harder and more upright chair. 
She was struggling against sleep ; in half an hour she had not 
turned a page of the work she found so enthralling. Finally, 
towards midnight, he saw the book waving to and fro, the 
fair head bowed almost down on it. He went softly over to 
her, and touched her. With a cry she started to her feet ; 
the book fell on the floor with a bang. 

* You must go to bed. Cissy/ Sainty said kindly ; * you 're 
dropping with sleep.' 

*I'm not tired; I'm not sleepy,' she cried. *I must 
finish this — it 's so interesting.' 

* Nonsense. I 've been watching you ; you haven't read a 
page in half an hour ; you can't keep your eyes open.' 

Her eyes were open enough now, wide and strange, like 
those of a hunted animal. She made a gesture with her 
hands as though to thrust him back. *I can't — I won't,' 
she panted. 'You shan't make me. Keep away. Don't 
touch me.' 

* My poor child,' Sainty said, * what are you afraid of? Do 
you think I would do anything you don't like? You can't 
sit up all night. You are dead tired, and must have rest. I 
won't come near you, if you don't wish it.' 

She looked at him but half reassured. ' Do you mean it ? ' 
she said doubtfully. ' Can I trust you ? ' 

* I am not accustomed to lie,' Sainty answered. * Do you 
think I would take advantage of you by a shabby trick ? ' 

She sighed, and half turned away, then suddenly faced him 
again. ' It is not enough,' she cried. ' It is not only to-night. 
You may as well know it first as last. You are odious to me 
— horrible. I can never — never ' 



238 BELCHAMBER 

* Hush, hush ! ' Sainty interrupted her. * Take care what 
you say. You are tired, excited, overwrought. So am I. 
Go to bed now, in God's name. You know you have nothing 
to fear. We will talk of this some other time, calmly if we 
can, but not to-night, not to-night' 

* Yes, now, to-night,' she insisted. 'Why put it oflf? It's 
got to be faced, and why not at once? I tell you you are 
repulsive to me. I can never be your wife in anything but 
name. I thought I could, but when it comes to the point, 
I can't do it. It's stronger than me. It's no use.' She 
spread her hands with the gesture of one who renounces a 
struggle. On her finger blazed the ring he had given her, 
and below it shone the plain gold hoop which he had placed 
there that morning, the outward and visible sign of the 
obligation she was repudiating. 

Sainty staggered as though she had struck him in the face. 
* I don't understand,' he whispered. * If you feel like this 
towards me, if I am repulsive, loathsome to you, why did 
you marry me ? ' 

' Oh, it 's simple enough,' she answered, with a little cruel 
laugh. * You had so many things that I have always wanted, 
money, position, rank, everything I have been brought up to 
think desirable. Since I can remember, not a girl has been 
married among our friends that the first question has not 
been, was she making a "good" marriage? which meant, 
was she getting a big enough share of all these things in 
exchange for herself? No one could say I wasn't. I've 
made the match of the season. There isn't a girl I know, or 
a mother, who isn't green with envy of me. You can't say it 
wasn't a temptation.' And she laughed again hysterically. 

* But feeling as you did about me, as you must before the 
end have known you felt, why in heaven's name didn't you 
turn back, when I gave you the chance, before it was too 
late?' 

* Do you think I was allowed a minute to think ? Wasn't 
my mother there every minute of the day ? At the very time 
you speak of, wasn't she listening at the door, and didn't she 



BELCHAMBER 239 

come hurrying in before I 'd time to answer ? If for a moment 
I ever forgot the title, and the money, and the jewels, the big 
house, all the things I 'd set my heart on, she was always 
ready to talk about them, to dangle them before me. If I 
ever wavered, she would tell me what a slur it was on a girl 
whose engagement was broken off, how no one would ever 
believe I had given up all these things of my own free will, 
how people would say there was something against me, and 
how I should never marry. There wasn't an oldish poor girl 
we knew, losing her looks, and still tagging about to balls, 
and trying to pretend she was cheerful, that she didn't remind 
me of. Never directly, mind you. They were just casually 
mentioned. O Lord ! if I so much as suggested to her that 
she wanted me to marry for money, she was all virtuous 
indignation.' 

'How ghastly!' Sainty whispered in horror. 'I've read 
of such things, of mothers selling their daughters, bullying 
them into marrying men they couldn't love for the sake of an 
establishment ; but I 've always thought it was exaggerated, 
not true to life. I didn't think a mother could condemn her 
own child to lifelong misery.' 

'Oh, you mustn't be too hard on mamma,' Cissy said. 
' She thought she was doing the best thing for me. Remember 
she has the very highest opinion of you, and was quite sure 
you would make an excellent husband ; and she knew how 
much I wanted all the other things. If marriage were nothing 
but that, nothing but living in the house with a person who 
was good-natured and never interfered with one, and provided 
all the good things of life for one, it would be well enough. 
That is what every one in England always talks to girls as if 
it were. Mamma would have thought it most indelicate to 
suggest there was another side. You are made to forget that 
as much as possible. Oh, of course I knew^ because I 'm not 
a fool, and girls are not such ninnies as people think them ; 
but I tried to forget, and when I didn't see you, I did forget. 
That was why, when I did see you, I was always so beastly to 
you ; for I 'm quite ready to admit I wc^s beastly to you.' 



240 BELCHAMBER 

As Cissy's terror abated, her engaging frankness began to 
return to her. Sainty couldn't help liking her for it. He 
began to be so full of sympathy with her point of view, so 
sorry for all she must have suffered, that he almost forgot the 
cruel wrong she had done him. 

* Mamma knew I should never be happy with a poor man,' 
she went on. * She knew how I cared for all the things you 
could give me. She was quite right, I did want them; I 
wanted them awfully; I want them still as much as ever: 
only when it comes to the point I can't give the price. I 
thought I could, but I can't. Mamma was so far honester 
than me. She never supposed that once the bargain was 
made I should hesitate to pay. It's so like me to want 
things dreadfully, and not to have the courage to do what's 
necessary to get them.* 

Sainty was appalled by her cynicism, even while he admired 
her straightforwardness. What became of his dreams of 
romance, of the eye that had seen beneath his unattractive 
exterior, and loved him for the beauties of his soul ? The 
blue eyes had seen nothing but the sparkling of diamonds. 
In her vision of married life he had been only the necessary 
evil, the odious, inevitable condition to which she must sub- 
mit, if she would have his name and money, as the princess 
in the story had to kiss the swineherd to get possession of the 
toys she coveted. Still the princess had kissed the herd, and 
even after all that she had said he thought he would make 
one last appeal to her. If she realised how much he felt for 
her, how entirely he understood her unwillingness, how 
patient, how gentle he was ready to be, perhaps she might 
be touched, might learn to think of him with something less 
of horror. To him who had all his life wished for nothing 
but to make other people happy, it was iatolerable to think 
of himself as the brutal gaoler, the tyrant before whom this 
young thing paled with terror. 

In the eagerness of her explanation. Cissy had come nearer 
to him. They were standing quite close together, face to 
face. 'Cissy,' he said gently, *is it quite, quite impossible? 



BELCHAMBER ^41 

Do you think that if we lived together for a long time, you 
might in the end get used to me, even come to care for me a 
little?' But at that she sprang back from him again with 
an Ainmistakable gesture of repugnance that said more than 
woMs. * No, no, no — never,' she cried hurriedly. * I Ve told 
you it 's no good. I can't help it, my mind 's made up. I 'd 
rather give up everything, face anything, for of course I can't 
expect you to keep me. You can send me back to my 
mother. Life 11 be hell upon earth, but it'll be better than 
that: 

With all his desire to be fair to her, Sainty could not but 
be struck by her intense egotism, her inability to appreciate 
any point of view but her own. She was evidently unaware 
of the brutality of her attitude towards him. To his morbid 
self-depreciation her undisguised horror of him appeared only 
too natural. Still, no one likes to be told these things quite 
so bluntly. 

*You have nothing to fear,' he said a little loftily. 'After 
what you have said, you may be sure I shall never ask the 
smallest thing of you. It is a little unfortunate that you 
didn't make up your mind rather earlier, as you have made 
it up so irrevocably now. Had you but been as sure of your 
feelings a month, a week, even twenty-four hours ago, you 
might have saved us both from what I hardly dare look 
forward to.' 

' I can go home ; I had better go home,' Cissy whimpered. 
Of course the sight of distress melted Sainty at once. 

'Don't you see,' he said, 'that to go home now would 
make just five hundred times the talk and scandal that you 
felt you couldn't face if you had broken off your engage- 
ment?' 

* It can't be helped,' Cissy sobbed. 

'You have brought us both into a horrible situation,' 
Sainty answered, ' and I frankly don't see just now what is 
best to be done ; but I 'm sure that further talk will do no 
good just now. It is long past twelve o'clock, and we are 
both tired out ; you can't go back to Chester Square to-night| 

Q 



if you want to ever so much. If I were you I shouldn't get 
up to breakfast. Good-night.' 

Some compunction seemed to seize Cissy as she got to 
the door. She turned. * I 'm awfully sorry, you know,' she 
said. ' I suppose, when you come to think of it, I haven't 
treated you any too well ; and — and — of course what I said 
wasn't very civil, but I thought it best to be honest ' 

* All right, all right,' Sainty answered hastily ; ' please don't 
say any more about it' 

As he lay sleepless and uncomfortable on his lonely bed, 
he wished that the necessity for honest dealing had impressed 
itself on his wife a little sooner. He thought of the night 
three years before, when he had lain awake (as he lay now) 
listening to the sounds that celebrated his coming of age. 
Somehow the great festal days of his life did not seem to 
bring him personally much enjoyment 



CHAPTER XVIII 

The Belchambers took possession of their new town-house 
just in time for the opening of Parliament in the ensuing 
year. It was only partially furnished as yet, and most 
uncomfortable ; but, as Lady Eccleston remarked with great 
originality, ' the only way to get the workmen out of a house 
was to move in yourself/ The first-floor rooms still echoed 
with shouts and hammerings, but the upper part of the house 
was more or less ready, and so were the dining-room and 
some back rooms on the ground-floor, which Cissy had 
reluctantly decided should eventually be given up to Sainty. 
It was astonishing how swiftly she had 

* Shaped her heart with woman's meekness 
To all duties of her rank,' 

except the vulgar and obvious one which she would have 

shared with the humblest of wives. Having once made it 

quite clear that she was to receive everything and give 

nothing, she soon ceased to talk of returning to her mother, 

and Sainty was amazed at the ease with which she adapted 

herself to the awkwardness of the situation. In her place, 

he felt sure, he would not have rung a bell, or asked for a 

postage stamp, but it never seemed to occur to Cissy that 

there was anything curious in the arrangement; she annexed 

all her husband's possessions without scruple or hesitation 

as soon as she discovered that no embarrassing condition 

attached to doing so. 

In spite of her son's entreaties that she would stay with 

them, Lady Charmington had retired to the dower-house 

immediately after the marriage ^ and they had barely returned 

sa 



344 BELCHAMBER 

from their brief and dismal honeymoon in the duke's villa 
before Cissy began to dispose of everything at Belchamber 
as if it had all been hers from earliest childhood. There 
had been some talk of a wedding-journey on the Continent, 
but Cissy had no desire to prolong the tite-dntite with Sainty, 
which she did not enjoy. It was England, which she knew 
and understood, that was to be the scene of her triumphs ; 
and the sight of strange lands had no charms for her com- 
pared to the fun of swooping down as mistress on the great 
house, where she had been an unconsidered little guest, 
settling which should be her own rooms, having them re- 
decorated according to the taste of the latest fashionable 
upholsterer, and moving into them whatever took her fancy 
in other parts of the house. 

She was so happily busy that she almost forgot to regret 
the Season, and gave up Ascot without a sigh, contenting 
herself with Cowes and Goodwood, which she did with great 
klat from a friend's yacht, while Sainty enjoyed a fortnight of 
peace and seclusion. 

Congenial as she found the task of establishing herself in 
her husband's ancestral home, it was nothing to the delirious 
enjoyment of selecting, decorating, and furnishing a big 
London house, regardless of expense ; and all the time she 
could spare from entertaining shooting parties in the autumn 
was devoted to the feverish prosecution of this new delight 

Of course every one agreed that they must have a town- 
house. The duke and Lord Firth were not less convinced 
of its necessity than the large circle of acquaintances who 
hoped to be entertained in it. Even Lady Charmington, 
while she winced at the recklessness of the expenditure, 
was partly consoled by the sight of her son taking what she 
considered * his proper position in the world.' She consoled 
herself with the thought that it was her long years of careful 
management that made all this profusion possible. Sainty 
must attend the debates in the House of Lords, and though 
she was rather scandalised by his Radicalism, she reflected 
that the limited number of peers on that side, since the 



BELCHAMBER 245 

Home Rule split, made some small office not improbable 
for him, when the Liberals came in again. 

And Sainty, though he cared for none of these things, had 
no heart to refuse them to the girl whom he had married. 
The fact was that the more he thought about the matter the 
sorrier he felt for his wife. For his part, he told himself, 
he was not made for love, had never expected it to play any 
part in his life, and was no worse off than he was before. 
The disadvantage of taking a consistently humble view of 
one's own attractions is not without its compensations ; thus 
the wound to his self-love, of which a vain man would almost 
have bled to death, was to Sainty, who had no vanity and 
very little self-love, only in the nature of those scratches 
which smart and feel sore, but rob us of no drop of heart's 
blood. Life was not perceptibly more unpleasant to him 
than it had been before, and he had still the same sub- 
stitutes for a more active happiness with which he had been 
accustomed to fill it, his studies, his schemes of beneficence, 
the management of his property. But this poor child, so 
well fitted by nature to love and be loved, whose one chance 
of rising above the empty frivolity of her surroundings might 
have lain in the ennobling influence of a great passion, for 
something how much less satisfying than a mess of pottage 
had she bartered her birthright, a handful of tin counters, a 
paper crown ! In spite of what he considered her generosity 
in taking the blame on herself, he was more and more 
inclined to regard her as the victim of her mother's worldli- 
ness, enmeshed like himself in the toils of that careful 
schemer. It was not in nature that a creature so young 
and fresh should be so greatly influenced by considerations 
of wealth or rank ; he could not think it. These things had 
been dangled before her eyes till she had been dazzled by 
their false lustre. She was too innocent, he reflected, to 
realise to what extent she had sacrificed all chances of 
woman's best happiness to gain them. The question was 
how to shield her from the consequences of her own act, 
to save her from the bitter repentance only too likely to 



246 BELCHAMBER 

follow. To do so might not be permanently in his power; 
but meanwhile, if she so keenly desired the undesirable as 
to be ready to risk the ruin of her life for it, what was simpler 
than to give it to her? Jewels, clothes, a house in town, 
the means to feed the thankless rich, the power to walk out 
of the room before older women — if these things could 
make her happy, as £eu: as they were his to give, let her take 
them in full measure. They were freely hers. He had no 
particular use for them himself. 

Perhaps the spectacle of the ease and gusto with which she 
flung herself into her new rdle of the great lady was not with- 
out a certain satiric amusement for him. 

One day he would find her on the pavement before the 
house, attended by Algy Montgomery and a grave pro- 
fessional gentleman who looked the ideal of a racing duke, 
while a pair of high-stepping bays were driven up and down 
for her inspection. ' Haven't we more horses than we know 
what to do with?' Sainty would ask. 

'My dear boy!' Cissy cried, 'a parcel of old screws. 
Jane Rugby was saying only the other day that we hadn't a 
decent pair o' horses in the stable.' 

On another, she would be busy comparing designs for 
carriages. 'Those old bathing-machines at Belchamber,' she 
remarked loftily, 'are all very well for the country; but in 
my position it would be too grotesque for me to be seen 
driving about London in them. The duchess has been 
awfully kind about advising me. It was her idea to send for 
the old chariot and see if it can't be done up for drawing-rooms. 
She says unless it has got dry-rot or anything, that a couple 
of hundreds spent on it ought to make it as good as new ; 
and of course I don't want to waste money on a tiresome 
thing one would never use on other occasions, if by spending a 
little on the old one it can be made to do. But I must have 
a decent brougham and open carriage at once ; you must see 
yourself there are no two ways about it. And, come to think of 
it, you ought to have a brougham of your own. We are sure to 
clash and want it at the same time, if we try and do with one/ 



BELCHAMBER a47 

* Perhaps one of the bathing-machines from Belchamber 
might do for me^ suggested Sainty, not without malice, 

* Well,' said Cissy quite gravely, * I don't know that it 
mightn't' 

*• Who told you of these people ? ' Sainty asked, examining 
the neatly painted little pictures. 

'Oh, they make all the duke's carriages, and they are 
always smartly turned out. Your cousin Claude told them 
to send me these sketches, and he has promised to go with 
me to Longacre to see what they have in the shop.' 

Since she married, Cissy had ceased to mention Claude as 
'Mr. Morland,' and the prefix 'your cousin' was bridging 
the narrow chasm between that and calling him 'Claude.' 
Morland was able to be uncommonly useful to the pretty 
new cousin; not only at the coachbuilder's were his taste 
and knowledge invaluable, but at the upholsterer's, the 
bric-d-brac shops, the sales at Christy's, and he had even been 
called on to give his views (and very sound views too) in the 
more intimate province of the modiste and the dressmaker. 
Sainty was obviously of no assistance. What could be more 
natural, if the lady needed counsel in such matters, than to 
turn to a near kinsman of her husband, and one so well 
qualified to help ? It is true that Lady Eccleston was more 
than ready to assist her daughter in mounting her establish- 
ment on a suitable scale, and would very willingly have 
accompanied her to the shops, not, perhaps, without a hope 
of gleaning a few scattered ears on her own account from 
the harvest Cecilia was reaping with so large a hook; but 
that unnatural young person seemed to prefer almost any 
advice or companionship to her mamma's. Ill as he thought 
of her, for the manoeuvres with which she had compassed his 
union with her daughter, Sainty could not help a secret 
sympathy with the poor lady, who bore her pitiless relegation 
to a back place with a smiling stoicism worthy of a Red 
Indian. The old fiction of the perfect confidence and 
sisterlike relation between herself and her daughter was still 
gallantly maintained even to him, and when he reflected 



248 BELCHAMBER 

what potentialities of tearful complainings she had heroically 
foregone, he came near to feeling actual gratitude. But he 
need have been under no apprehension of plaintive con- 
fidences ; anything natural or direct had long ceased to be 
possible to Lady Eccleston. 

' I cannot have mamma dropping in to lunch whenever it 
suits her,' Cissy remarked ruthlessly. ' I have told her she 
must not come more than once a week, unless she 's asked.' 

' But I thought you said you meant to let people know you 
were always at home for lunch ? ' 

* So I do ; it is a very convenient way of seeing my friends. 
That's just why I've had to speak to mamma. I should 
have her here every day if I didn't. And it would bore a 
lot of younger women, who don't know her particularly well, 
like Vere Deans or Ella Dalsany, to find her here perpetually — 
not to speak of the men.' 

Sainty did not retort that Lady Deans and Lady Dalsany 
were not so very much younger that Lady Eccleston. It was 
no affair of his; and it soon became evident that Cissy's 
mother was not the only relation whom it bored her friends 
to meet at her luncheon-table. Sainty had been brought up 
in a certain old-fashioned code of manners. His mother, 
seeing that he was shy and awkward in company, and being 
not less so herself, had insisted rather unduly on the cere- 
monial side of social life. He had been taught that hospitality 
demanded that he should receive and take leave of guests 
with some form, accompanying them to their carriages, and 
putting on their cloaks, which the groom of the chambers, 
who was much taller and unencumbered with a stick, would 
have done much better. But he was not long in discovering 
that these attentions were by no means demanded by the 
ladies of the set into which the duchess and Claude had 
made haste to introduce his wife. 

If Cissy's friends found Sainty tiresome, it must be 
admitted that he found them no less so. The repulsion was 
certainly mutual. He wondered sometimes what had become 
pf all the people she ha4 Icnown $^d lik^d, sind from whom 



BELCHAMBER 249 

she had received kindness, during the three or four seasons 
that had preceded her marriage; they seemed to have 
vanished like smoke. She was absorbed in a little knot of 
married women, for the most part considerably her seniors, 
much in the world's eye, and none of them exactly qualified 
for the rble of Caesar's wife. Their conversation was ex- 
tremely esoteric, and the minute fragments of it which were 
intelligible to him shocked him profoundly. Occasional 
paragraphs in the papers assured him that 'young Lady 
Belchamber,' or 'pretty little Lady Belchamber, who was 
among the most attractive of last season's brides,' was ' very 
smart ' or ' quite in the innermost set ' ; from which he was 
fain to derive such comfort as he might. He once ventured 
to ask Cissy why she never saw anything of the de Lissacs ; 
he had hoped something for her from Alice's influence. ' I 
thought you and the girls were very intimate,' he said. 

'Oh ! girls bore me,' she answered; 'and besides, they are 
not the least in it ; they wouldn't have anything in common 
with the people they'd meet here. Of course with their 
money they might have done anything, but poor dear Mrs. de 
Lissac has no flair^ don't you know ; she simply doesn't take 
any trouble. I '11 ask them, if you like, some day when I 'm 
having a duty dinner.' And she did. 

'Why do we never see anything of you?' Sainty asked of 
his old friend on that occasion. ' I had hoped that when we 
came to town we should be much together.' 

' Well— here we are ! ' said Alice, with rather frosty playful- 
ness. 'And you know,' she added more gently, 'how 
welcome you always are in Grosvenor Square.' 

'Cissy is always at home at lunch, you know,' Sainty 
persisted. ' Why don't you come in sometimes ? ' 

'Lady Belchamber has never told either the girls or me 
that she was at home at lunch,' said Alice, freezing again, and 
went on hurriedly to praise the beauty of the house and the 
taste of its mistress. Sainty looked round him. ' Cissy has 
a genius for spending money,' he said gloomily. ' Wait till 
you see the drawing-rooms ; these rooms are nothing to the 



250 BELCHAMBER 

plunges she is making upstairs.' Before Mrs. de Lissac 
could answer, they were swooped upon by Lady Eccleston 
bringing Lady Deans with her. 

'Dear Alice/ she cried, 'Lady Deans fears you don't 
remember her; you met at Belchamber. She is going to 
have a stall at the World's Bazaar, and this is such an 
opportunity to have a little quiet talk about it. I have been 
telling Lady Deans that you are one of our very kindest 
helpers, and that you have given the most superb things ; a 
few really good things that can be raffled for are such a help, 
and one can always raffle the same things two or three times 
over — no one ever knows.' 

* Why shouldn't we have a lottery ? * asked Lady Deans. 
' I mean a real lottery, not for sofa-cushions and things, but 
for money prizes like they have abroad. I 'm sure it 'Id catch 
on.' 

' But I thought lotteries were illegal,' Sainty objected. 

'Oh I not at bazaars, or for a charity,' cried Lady Eccles- 
ton. 'I know dear Father Stephen of St. Rhadegund's, 
Houndsditch, told me they had a most successful one for 
their parish room and made heaps of money. I think Lady 
Deans's is a lovely idea.' 

* Well — it 's gambling, you know,* said Sainty. * I suppose 
you wouldn't allow a roulette table ' 

' Why don't you have a Derby sweep while you 're about 
it?' suggested Algy Montgomery. 'You could sell the 
tickets at the bazaar, and as the Derby won't be for a good 
couple o' months later you could forget to draw it at all. 
People would only suppose some other fellow had won, don't 
yer know.' 

Lady Eccleston was enchanted with the notion. 'Dear 
Lord Algy ! Could you work it for us ? ' But Mrs. de Lissac, 
inured as she was to bazaar morality, was, as a clergyman's 
daughter, a little alarmed at any connection with the turf. 
'How are you getting on with the people for the Caf(6 
Chantant ? ' she asked, to change the subject. 

Lady Eccleston rattled off a list that seemed to contain 



BELCHAMBER 251 

every one of any celebrity in the theatrical or musical 
world. 

* And have you got them all ? ' asked Lady Deans. 

^ Well, I 've written to a good many of them, and one or 
two have answered,' said Lady Eccleston ; ' but I shall pop 
them all down — their names will look splendid on the 
programme.' 

'But will they come?' asked Sainty. 

*Oh dear no, they won't come; very few of them will 
come. But some will ; I shall make sure of one or two, and 
we can get some really good amateurs ; and every now and 
then some one can get up and say that Ellen Terry regrets 
she couldn't manage it at the last moment, or something. 
We shall let people in for ten minutes at a time in batches ; 
they '11 think they just missed some of the best people——' 

'Seems to me you will '' let 'em in," ' chuckled Lord Algy. 

' Do you think,' asked Lady Deans, ' there would be any 
chance of getting Lady Arthur to sing or dance, or anything? 
I suppose. Lord Belchamber, you couldn't ask her for us ? ' 

'But she never could sing or dance, or do anything,' 
interposed Lord Algernon. 

' Oh ! that wouldn't matter, as long as she would appear. 
You see, all the story of her marriage and everything made 
her a celebrity.' 

' But it was all two years ago,' Lady Eccleston interrupted. 
' People have forgotten all about it,' and she deftly piloted 
the discussion to other projects, so that Sainty was spared 
the necessity of making any answer to this astounding 
proposition. 

The bazaar in connection with which so many happy 
suggestions had been offered was one of Society's periodic 
sacrifices to philanthropy. Certain fair ones, to whom no 
form of self-advertisement came amiss, were ready to dress 
up in the cause of charity and display themselves to a wider 
public than that which usually had the opportunity of admir- 
ing them, on the understanding that none of the trouble of 
organisation should fall upon them, and that the date should 



35a BELCHAMBER 

be fixed for before Easter, when there wasn't much else going 
on. On these conditions, Lady Eccleston and a little band 
of zealous fellow-workers had secured a most imposing list of 
stall-holders. It was calculated that the suburbs and the 
Stock Exchange would come in their thousands to see and 
converse with the ladies whose names and doings Lady Eva 
Morland made weekly familiar to them in the pages of 
* Maidie's Tea Table ' in the Looking-glass. The proceeds were 
to be handed to a charity in which a very great personage was 
interested, and the bazaar was to be opened on at least two 
of its three days by different members of the royal family. 
Lady Eccleston was in her element, and running the whole 
concern. If it was not she who had the brilliant inspiration 
of making the various stalls represent the countries of the 
earth and dressing the fair vendors in national costume, at 
least she took the credit for it In spite of his mother-in- 
law's repeated injunctions to him to attend the opening, 
Sainty had not the slightest intention of doing so. Indeed, 
he had hoped, by liberal contributions, to get off altogether, 
but Alice de Lissac had reinforced Lady Eccleston with 
gentle persistence. 

' I think you should put in an appearance,' she said, * just 
to support your wife, you know ; it will look queer if you don't, 
when she and her mother are so much interested. / should 
have thought you would come to the opening ' ; and finally 
Sainty was fain to buy immunity from being present at this 
ceremony with a promise to visit his wife's stall in the course 
of one afternoon. It was not till somewhat late on the last 
day of the three that he brought himself to redeem his given 
word. 

By the time he arrived, the whole show, though brilliantly 
lighted and to his perception still disagreeably crowded, had 
become a little the worse for wear. The stalls were denuded 
of half their contents, the air had a vitiated second-hand 
taste, and a fine impalpable dust, raised by the passing of so 
many feet, hung like a light haze over everything. Tired 
dishevelled girls, looking curiously sham in their fancy dresses 



BELCHAMBER 253 

by the side of people in everyday garb, and flushed under 
the rouge that had been thought a necessary part of their 
costume, moved among the crowd making a last effort to 
dispose of the remainder of their wares, excited by competi- 
tion to perilous lengths of flirtation with unknown and rather 
common young men, with whom on no other occasion they 
would have thought of exchanging a word. 

Sainty was patiently elbowing his way like Parsifal among 
the flower-maidens, and meditating on the mystery of what was 
and was not permitted to the London girl, when he was 
suddenly confronted by Mr. Austin Pryor. Every buttonhole 
of the young stockbroker's neat frock-coat was decorated with 
faded vegetation and his arms loaded with a number of quite 
useless purchases. 

* Well, Belchamber,' he began, * I Ve got a bone to pick 
with your wife ; too bad of her, I call it. I 'd an awful good 
time here yesterday with her, and she made me promise to 
come again to-day and bring a lot of our fellows from the 
city. I told 'em all how ripping she looked in her Polish 
get-up, and now they've all come and she isn't here; she's 
gone and given us all the slip. Most unprincipled of her, 
I call it.' 

Sainty, while expressinjg suitable distress at the faithless 
behaviour of his spouse, was secretly not sorry to be spared 
her encounter with the gallant Lotharios of Throgmorton 
Street, when he thought of the fragments of conversation he 
had already overheard in passing. 

' I don't know what has happened to her, I 'm sure,' he 
said politely ; ' I expected to find her here myself.' 

When at last he arrived at the lath and canvas pavillion, 
much bedraped with liberty muslin and flags, across the front 
of which a scroll displayed the legend, ' Poland — Marchioness 
of Belchamber,' he found only the de Lissac girls and another 
maiden, clad in little hussar caps and dolmans hung coquet- 
tishly on one shoulder, resentfully eyeing the ebbing tide of 
custom, while Alice and Lady Eccleston, aided by her obedient 
son Thomas, were feverishly tying parcels in the background. 



^ 



254 BELCHAMBER 

* Have you written on that one, Tommy,' Lady Eccleston 
was saying, 'Mrs. Brown, Elm Lodge, Streatham? Oh 
dear, which parcel is the big yellow cushion ? I am sure that 
was the one she bought. Well, never mind, this is a cushion 
anyway, it feels soft ; that '11 do. Ah, Sainty, you 've come \ 
a little late, dear. Everything is over.' 

* What 's become of Cissy ? ' Sainty inquired. 
The young ladies were evidently not in the best of tempers, 

and this innocent question served to open the floodgates of 
their wrath. 

' Cissy 's gone,' Norah de Lissac said crossly, ' and left us 
in the lurch. She said she was tired, but / think she was 
only bored. When it got dull and shabby and all the nice 
people had gone it didn't amuse her any more.' 

' It puts us in such a foolish position,' Gemma chimed in. 
' People naturally come here to see her, and when they don't 
find her they are not best pleased. One man asked me if I 
was Lady Belchamber, and when I said I wasn't, he said, 
" Then which of you is ? " Of course I had to say we none of 
us were, and then he was quite rude and said " Then you 've 
no business to put her name up over the stall." It wasn't at 
all pleasant.' 

Norah took up her parable again. 'She didn't even take 
the trouble to put on her costume to-day, just came in her 
ordinary clothes, and of course we looked like dressed-up 
fools beside her. If she had just sent us word she wasn't 
going to we wouldn't have put ours on either.' 

' Oh, dears, it would have been a great pity,' said Lady 
Eccleston, emerging from a pile of brown paper with her 
mouth full of pins. ' You look charming in your dresses ; 
they really suit you better than Cissy; and it would have 
been so flat if none of you had been in costume, for there 
really iVn't much in the stall itself to suggest Poland, I must 
admit. I think Cissy really was tired, you know ; she has 
had a hard two days of it.' 

'Well, we were tired too,' said the implacable Norah. 
' She 's not the only person who has had a hard two days* 



BELCHAMBER 955 

Can't we go home now, at least, and get off these ridiculous 
clothes ? ' she asked, turning to her step-mother. Alice looked 
distressed and murmured something about 'not deserting 
Lady Eccleston.' 

' Oh, don't think of me,' cried that lady. ' You and the 
dear girls go. Tommy and I can soon finish whkt 's left to 
do. The people are thinning fast, and we Ve done very well. 
I can^t thank you enough for all your splendid help ' ; and 
she embraced the whole party with a last galvanic effort at 
cheerful enthusiasm. 

Sainty saw the de Lissac party to their gorgeous equipage, 
and was just turning away from the door when a small voice 
at his elbow demanded, ' Shall I please to call the kerridge, 
m'lord?' and looking down he had a vision of two large 
appealing eyes and a white kid forefinger pressed tightly to 
a curly hatbrim. He recognised the diminutive boy who 
decorated Cissy's coach-box when she rode abroad. 

* Yes,' he said; *if the brougham is here, I may as well 
take it. Lady Belchamber has gone home.' 

In the course of the drive he wondered why he had taken 
the trouble to come to the bazaar, and who had been benefited 
or pleased by his visit 

He had hardly got to his room and sat down to his 
book by the fire, with a sigh of relief^ when a servant came 
to him. 

' If you please, my lord, Gibson wants to know if there are 
any more orders for the carriage.' 

' Not for me,' Sainty answered, his mind on what he was 
reading. ' Ask her ladyship.' 

The man looked surprised and still lingered doubtfully. 

* Well,' said Sainty, 'what is it?' 

* If you please, my lord, my lady hasn't come in yet.' 

* Oh, I think she must have ' Sainty was beginning but 

stopped himself. He saw no reason for discussing Cissy's 
movements with the servants. 'Then you must wait for 
orders till she does,' he said. 

He wondered a little why, if she left the bazaar because 



I 

\ 
356 BELCHAMBER 

she was tired, she had not come home. But after all, Norah's 
explanation was probably the correct one. She was bored 
with the whole thing and took the shortest cut for freedom; 
it was not Cissy's way to allow herself to be bored. ' In any 
case it is no affair of mine,' he thought, as he turned again to 
his booL 



s»i 



CHAPTER XIX 

After Easter, when Cissy had a morning-room and a 
boudoir, and the drawing-rooms were practically finished, 
Sainty entered into undisputed possession of his two back 
rooms, and spent more and more of his time in them. Only 
faint echoes of the turmoil in which Lady Belchamber had 
her being penetrated to that peaceful seclusion. Evening 
after evening Cissy would dine out with a few of her special 
cronies and their attendant swains, and go to the theatre or 
the opera till it was time to begin the round of balls or parties, 
from which she returned in grey summer dawns, far too tired 
for there to be any question of her coming down to break- 
fast next morning. Sometimes Sainty did not set eyes on her 
for days together. Gradually he slipped back into his old 
studious life, snatching sketchy little meals from trays, 
when he remembered to eat anything, and as little a part 
of the life of the house as if he were in lodgings round 
the comer. 

In May, Lady Charmington came to town, to attend the 
meetings of the ^ Ladies' No Popery League,' of which she 
was a leading member. 

' My mother writes me she is coming to London,' Sainty 
said. ' Of course she will come to us.' 

'Well, she can, if you wish it,' Cissy answered ; 'but I warn 
you you 're preparing trouble for yourself. She won't like the 
way we live, and when she doesn't like a thing, she is not 
always silent and accommodating. She'll expect a family 
breakfast at 9.15, with prayers at 9. I don't suppose she ever 
breakfasted in her room in her life. I don't know where you 
breakfast, but /certainly shan't come down.' 

R 



ds8 BELCHAMBER 

'I suppose you couldn't, just for the time she's here?' 
Sainty suggested. 

'I'm not such a humbug as to alter my way of life to 
please her. She may as well find out first as last that I am 
not cut on her pattern.' 

' I think she has pretty well made that discovery already,' 
Sainty retorted. 

* Well,' said Cissy, ' she can come if she likes, and if you 
want her, but she must take us as she finds us. I told you 
she wouldn't like it. She 'd be a great deal happier at Roe- 
hampton with Lady Firth. She could come in to her 
meetings, and if she wanted to lunch here any particular 
day, I could always tell people to keep out of the way.' 

' You can't say I interfere with you much, or often ask you 
to do anything to please me,' said Sainty earnestly ; 'but when 
we have a great house here, and my own mother wants to come 
up, I do think it would look strange for us not to take her in.' 

'Well, please yourself. After all, I was only thinking of you. 
/can generally hold my own, but if your mother gets her back 
up, as she inevitably will, you '11 have the devil of a time of it' 

Sainty had presently occasion to prove the accuracy of his 
wife's forecast. Acting on Cissy's hint, he dutifully appeared 
each morning to give Lady Charmington her breakfast. The 
first day, she lingered before sitting down, as though she were 
waiting for something. 

' Won't you make the tea for me, mother ? ' Sainty asked, 
* It 's like old times, you and I having breakfast together.' 

'You don't have prayers, I see,' Lady Charmington 
remarked, as she took her seat 'Or were they earlier? I 
can quite well come down sooner, if you wish it.' 

' Well, you see. Cissy never comes down to breakfast, and, 
as you know, I am not a great eater, so when we are alone^ I 
generally have a cup of tea and an egg in the study.' 

'Why doesn't your wife come to breakfast? is she ill?' 

'Oh no, she's well enough. But she's out late at parties 
and things every night, and I 'm glad she does rest a little in 
the mornings ; it 's the only time she does.' 



BELCHAMBER 959 

*I confess I 'm a little disappointed in Cissy/ Lady Charm- 
ington remarked, after contemplating the toast-rack judicially 
for a time in silence. ' I never thought her a very deep or 
earnest nature, but I did not expect to find her so entirely 
given up to worldly pursuits.' 

' Cissy 's young and pretty, and people make a great deal of 
her. After all, it 's natural at her age that she should like to 
enjoy herself.' 

Lady Charmington sniffed. ' Enjoyment ! People nowa- 
days seem to think of nothing but enjoyment. We were not 
put into the world to enjoy ourselves.' 

* Well, most of us fulfil the object of our being pretty 
thoroughly then,' Sainty said, ' and yet every one seems to 
want to be happy ; and it is a good deal to expect of the few 
who have it in their power that they should voluntarily 
forego what most people fail to obtain.' 

' I don't like to hear you talk like that, my boy ; you don't 
seem to have a proper sense of your blessings. You have very 
much to be thankful for.' 

Lady Charmington saw nothing incongruous in finding 
fault with some acrimony if things were not to her liking, but 
she was always swift to rebuke a complaining spirit in others. 

' Her poor mother, who, if a little too fond of society, has 
a very sincerely religious side to her, must be sadly distressed 
at her daughter's light-mindedness.' 

The thought of Lady Eccleston as a pious matron wounded 
by her child's care for earthly matters was too much for 
Sainty. 

' Why, Lady Eccleston goes wherever a candle 's lighted,' he 
said ; ' or if she doesn't, it 's because she 's failed to get an 
invitation.' 

'Censorious, censorious!' replied his mother. 'Who art 
thou that judgest another man's servant ? You should watch 
against that spirit; it'll grow on you.' 

Sainty was only too glad to have diverted the precious 
balms to his own head, which had been accustomed to that 
form of unction for too many years to be easily broken. He 



26o BELCHAMBER 

saw his mother off to the first of her meetings before there 
was the smallest chance of her encountering her daughter-in- 
law, and then betook himself to his own rooms to read the 
papers. As he drew near to the fire that his languid blood 
demanded in this uncertain season, his eye fell on the letters 
he had not as yet thought of opening. As a rule his corre- 
spondence was not exciting. It consisted mainly of advertise- 
ments and begging letters. The first that he took up this 
morning had such a family look of these last, that he opened 
it with a weary certainty of his correspondent's need for ;^3, 
5s. 6d. to prevent the bed being taken from under his sick 
child ; but though it was written on cheap paper in a hand 
carefully made to appear illiterate, its contents were far other 
than he had expected. 

* Ask your wife where she was on the third afternoon of the 
World's Bazaar. A friend.' 

Sainty had never in his life received an anonymous letter, 
and the experience was distinctly unpleasant. He shook it 
off into the fire as St. Paul did the other venomous thing, but 
failed to get the poison out of his system so cheaply. In 
case it should not work, his nameless ' friend ' took care to 
repeat the dose, and several other communications of a like 
tenor followed the first, but none of them produced in him 
the unpleasant sensations of that chilly May morning, when 
he stood watching the sparks run along the blackened paper 
and the gray ash writhe and twist for its final flight up the 
chimney. After a time he came to regard them as more or 
less in the natural order of things, and even ceased to read 
them; but the writer showed such skill in varying the address, 
that in no case was he able to detect one without opening it. 
Some contained but a single sentence, others were much 
longer, but all suggested doubts of his wife's conduct, and 
recommended a surveillance of which the very notion was re- 
pugnant to him. Of course he could take no notice of such 
things. He wondered if he ought to speak to Cissy about 
them, only to dismiss the idea as impossible. Still less could 
he mention them to any one else. Eventually he decided 



BELCHAMBER 261 

that there was but one way to treat an anonymous letter, 
which was to behave as if it had not been received. None 
the less they stirred in him a vague uneasiness. The feeling 
that somewhere about one an unknown enemy is watching for 
a chance to hurt, fills life with an unpleasant sense of ambush. 
He could think of no one who had cause to wish him ill. 
The enmity, then, must be to Cissy. A disappointed rival ? 
He needed no reminder of the extreme unlikelihood of any 
one's grudging her the possession of his affections. But how 
if the rivalry were for the possession of some one else's affec- 
tions? That possibility was not without its sting. For him 
there could be no question of jealousy, in the ordinary sense 
of the word ; but he began to apprehend the possibilities of 
scandal, to understand that his acceptance of the anomalous 
part which his wife had thxust upon him by no means 
exhausted her power of injuring his happiness or his honour ; 
in short, that he was saddled with an obligation to guard what 
he did not possess. 

Meanwhile he found himself in the no less ironical position 
of having to champion her many doings, which in his heart 
he disliked, against his mother, with whom he secretly sym- 
pathised. Lady Charmington was far from having said all 
her say on that first morning at breakfast. Cissy's prediction 
of her disapproval of their London life was amply verified. 
Occupied with the matters that had brought her to town, and 
going into a totally different world from her daughter-in-law's, 
she was as ignorant as her son of the things that would most 
have stirred her wrath ; but she found quite enough to rebuke 
in the house itself. Cissy's idleness and dissipation, her late 
hours, her card-playing, her neglect of her household duties, 
and the consequent waste and profusion, her Sabbath-breaking, 
and the completeness with which she ignored her husband 
and her home (not to speak of her guest and mother-in-law) 
were each and severally the subjects of the elder lady's severe 
animadversions to the offender herself when occasion offered, 
but far more often to the patient ears of poor Sainty, who 
had to defend the culprit as best he might. 



262 BELCHAMBER 

Another fruitful topic of maternal discontent was Lady 
Belchamber's failure to provide an heir to the property. 
This, it may well be supposed, was not an agreeable topic to 
Sainty, nor one on which he had any ready rejoinders at his 
command. 

'You have been married close on a year,' said Lady 
Charmington, * and I see no signs or hope of a child. I said 
something to Cissy about it one day, and she laughed dis- 
agreeably, and said she was glad of it. I asked if she didn't 
think she had any duty to the family in the matter. I am 
almost ashamed to tell you what she answered : that a baby 
was a great tie and a nuisance, and she hoped if she had to 
have one, it would be at a convenient time of year, when^ it 
didn't interfere with things.' 

* I don't suppose very young women ever want to have a 
baby,' Sainty said doubtfully, feeling something was expected 
of him. 

' Cissy is not so young as all that. She must be two- or 
three-and-twenty. I can't imagine any woman marrying and 
nof wanting to have a child. I am sure when I married I 
prayed most fervently that I might give my husband a 
son.' 

* Well, you know, the answer to your prayer was not quite 
all you could have wished,' suggested Sainty. 

Lady Charmington ignored the interruption. ' It is not as 
though she were not a perfectly normal healthy young woman,' 
she said, * for I never was taken in for a minute by all that 
business of the shock to her nervous system at Belchamber. 
Constant dissipation, racketing about morning, noon, and 
night, and tight lacing are not the ways to go about having 
an heir. I only hope she mayn't do anything else, if she's 
so afraid that the duties of a wife and mother will cut her out 
of a party or two.' 

' O mother 1 ' Sainty expostulated. 

* If she is not going to have any children, what was the use 
of your marrying? ' continued his aggrieved parent. ' We are 
just where we were with regard to that other woman. She 



BELCHAMBER J63 

has children fast enough ! Cissy seems to think she has come 
into the family merely to have what she calls a good time, 
and spend tl^ money that I pinched and scraped together for 
you for so many years. I have never seen such sinful waste 
as goes on in this house.' 

Lady Charmington was only putting into words what her 
son had often, with some bitterness, asked himself. What 
was the use of his marrying? He had not perhaps quite so 
crudely admitted, even in his inner consciousness, how much 
he had been influenced in making up his mind to such a step 
by the thought of excluding the children of Lady Arthur from 
the succession to his name and estates, but it had none the 
less been a powerful motive with him. Had his brother 
passed his examinations, gone into the army, and in due 
course married some commonplace, unobjectionable young 
lady, it is more than doubtful if even Lady Eccleston would 
have succeeded in dragging Sainty into matrimony. For one 
thing, she would have had to reckon with Lady Charmington 
as an enemy instead of an ally, which would have put a quite 
different complexion on the affair. The young man reflected 
sometimes with dumb rage on how his life was turned topsy- 
turvy, haled from familiar field and woodland to this hated 
city, that a girl, who was really no more to him than any 
other, should junket from morning till night with a set of 
people he could not endure, and squander money, with which 
he might have benefited millions of his fellow-creatures, on 
her senseless, unoriginal pleasures. And all for what ? Sooner 
or later the children of his undesirable sister-in-law would sit 
in his place, and inherit his patrimony as surely as if he had 
followed his natural bent, and led a peaceful, laborious life 
remote from all connection with Lady Deans and her play- 
fellows. And with it all Cissy had not even the common 
decency to avoid the tongue of scandal, as these odious 
anonymous letters showed him. He really did think she 
might have spared him that. Day after day he thought of 
saying something to her on the subject, and always he was 
prevented by lack of courage or opportunity, or else some 



264 BELCHAMBER 

unfortunate speech of his mother drove him back into the 
position of his wife's involuntary champion. 

* Cissy tells me she is going away for Whitsuntide/ Lady 
Charmington announced one day, with the sniff that indicated 
much more than met the ear in this apparently simple 
announcement. 

'Is she?' said Sainty, anxious not to commit himself. 

'Has she not even deigned to let you know?' inquired 
her ladyship scornfully. 

' I think she did say something about the Suffords having 
asked her there.' 

'Werej^^i^ not included in the invitation?' 

* I really don't know ; I never asked. I didn't want to go. 
I suppose Lady Sufford went through the form of asking me, 
but she probably knew I shouldn't come. It would be too 
terrible if I were obliged to go wherever Cissy does.' 

'The arrangement seems to suit her perfectly,' said Lady 
Charmington ; * but I can't see why you shouldn't go.' 

' It would add to no one's pleasure, and take away con- 
siderably from mine,' said Sainty promptly. 

'Always pleasure!' cried Lady Charmington. 'The in- 
variable argument ! no thought of duty ! ' 

' If a thing which is purely a question of amusement doesn't 
amuse one, why make a duty of it ? ' argued her son. 

' Well, if it is not your duty to go about with your wife, I 
should have thought it was hers to stay at home with you. Of 
course I quite understood that she mentioned her plans to me 
with the delicate intention of letting me see that she could 
not keep me beyond next week ; but she need not trouble ; I 
had settled to go to mother on Tuesday in any case. She 
has failed very much lately, and I shall have to be with her 
more. By the way, I found she was rather hurt that Cissy had 
never once been to see her since she came to town in February, 
nor asked her to come in and see your new house.' 

' Dear me ! ' said Sainty, ' I ought to have thought of it. 
Of course we should have been only too delighted to see 
granny, if I had only thought she would care to see the 



BELCHAMBER 265 

house ; but she seems always so absorbed in other things, it 
never occurred to me. It was very stupid of me. I 've been 
several times to see her, but she always talks as if it was such 
a business to drive into London. I never dreamt of asking 
it of her. And she says her sight has got so bad, that I wasn't 
sure how much she would see if she came.' 

* She would probably see a great deal that would shock her, 
as I have,' said Lady Charmington. ' Have you ever calcu- 
lated at all what this house is going to cost you by the time 
it is finished ? ' 

* Oh, I 've kept pretty good track of the expenses. I 've 
paid for a good deal of the work as it went along. It has all 
been done much more extravagantly than I thought necessary. 
Indeed, as far as I am concerned, I shouldn't care if we had 
no London house at all ; but Uncle Cor seemed to think it 
indispensable, and he doesn't consider that we have done 
much we need not. He is always afraid that, with my saving 
tendencies, I shall fail to do myself credit. He needn't be 
uneasy as long as Cissy is on hand to provide the antidote.' 

' There is a great difference between having things suitable 
to your position and being foolishly and wickedly extravagant,' 
remarked Lady Charmington. 

'Perhaps I have deliberately rather given Cissy her head 
about this house,' Sainty answered, 'to keep her hands off 
Belchamber ; there was a great deal she was thinking of doing 
there, but I hope I have put a stop to that.' 

'Belchamber!' cried out his mother in horror. 'What 
could she want to do there? It was always kept in perfect 
repair; there wasn't a door knob missing nor a tap out of 
order, and when you came of age there was an immense 
amount of money spent in cleaning and restoring. I always 
thought it quite unnecessary her doing up those rooms in 
that ridiculous way last summer. They looked to me more 
like an improper person's apartments than like anything in an 
English lady's house.' 

'Well, I can't say I always admire Cissy's taste, myself; 
there 's a little want of knowledge about it.' 



266 BELCHAMBER 

Sainty did not judge it necessary to tell his mother how 
far reaching had been Cissy's plans for the remodelling of 
Belchamber; he had surprised them by an accident, and 
had promptly and firmly opposed them. He could not 
bear the desecrating touch of fleeting fashion on anything 
so artistically and historically complete as the home of his 
childhood, and had been glad to purchase its immunity 
from the threatened changes by larger concessions in the 
matter of the London house. Perhaps, even so, Cissy would 
not have abandoned her projects without a struggle, but 
for the appearance of a most unlooked-for ally to her husband 
in the person of Claude Morland, who had supervened in the 
height of the discussion and thrown all the weight of his 
authority into the scale for the saving of Belchamber. 

* Sainty is perfectly right,' he said, with his most pontifical 
air ; * it would be vandalism. There isn't a more beautiful 
specimen of its period in England than the great saloon or 
the Vandyke dining-hall; they are perfect. And the red, 
yellow, and green rooms, though they are later and not so 
pure, have a great cacAef of their own, and are perfectly de 
rkpoque as far as they go. No, no, my dear Cissy, it would 
be a sin. I am all for your using the rooms, and living in 
them ; but, believe me, you mustn't touch them. Do what 
you like here ; you have a clean slate to work on ; but don't 
attempt to "improve" Belchamber.' 

Sainty was astonished at the meekness with which Cissy 
abandoned her cherished schemes, but much too grateful 
to Claude for backing him up to resent this evidence of 
his cousin's greater authority. He knew, too, that he owed 
it to him that the London house, if a little over-decorated 
and too obviously costly, was, on the whole, harmonious and 
in good taste. 

By dint of unremitting vigilance and almost superhuman 
tact, the date of I^dy Charmington's departure had almost 
been reached without any more serious encounter than a few 
skirmishes between her and her daughter-in-law; but one 
afternoon, having heard his mother come in, and gone in 



BELCHAMBER 267 

search of her, Sainty saw at a glance that a battle royal was 
raging. Cissy was lolling exasperatingly calm and con- 
temptuous among the piles of cushions she delighted to heap 
upon the furniture, while Lady Charmington sat stiffly erect, 
an ominous light in her eye, and a pink spot burning in the 
centre of each sallow cheek. Her son heard her voice as 
he entered, and quailed at the familiar tone of it. ^ 

* I am well aware,' she was saying, * that nothing / say will 
have the smallest influence on your behaviour, but none the 
less I feel it my solemn duty to protest, when I see things 
going on of which I entirely disapprove.' 

* Why trouble, if you are so sure that you will produce no 
effect ? ' asked Cissy. 

' Because / have some consideration for my son's honour, 
to which you and he seem to be equally indifferent' 

* Oh ! His honour ! ' protested Cissy. 

*Yes; his honour,' persisted Lady Charmington. *When 
I was first married, a young woman of your age, a young 
wife not a year married, who received men alone, sprawling 
about on sofas in that kind of indecent clothing, would have 
been considered to have lost her character.' 

* Mother ! ' interposed Sainty. 

' Oh, it 's largely your fault for allowing such things,' his 
mother flashed out at him. ' If you were more of a man, 
your wife would never dare treat you as an absolute nonentity 
in your own house.' 

'But what's it all about?' asked Sainty. 'What has 
Cissy been doing ? ' 

'I'm sure / don't know,' answered Lady Belchamber. 
* You had better ask your mother.' 

' I came in just now,' said Lady Charmington, 'and found 
her with that flimsy rag she calls a tea-gown half off her 
back lolling about among the cushions there with Algy 
Montgomery. I don't call it decent.' 

'Why, Algy's a sort of relation, you know,' answered 
Cissy; 'his stepmother's Sainty's grandmother; it makes 
him a kind of uncle.' 



268 BELCHAMBER 

'Kind of fiddlestick! a good-for-nothing young rip in the 
Life Guards, of six- or seven-and-twenty at the outside.' 

* Do you suppose, if I were doing anything that wasn't per- 
fectly innocent, that I shouldn't have taken jolly good care that 
you didn't come spying in ? * inquired Cissy, with lofty scorn. 

Lady Charmington choked. * It is not my habit to spy,* 
she cried, ' and I am not accusing you of actual misconduct ; 
but it's not only to-day that I object to. It's your general 
mode of going on. Yesterday you were shut up for ever 
so long with that vulgar little Mr. Pryor, and you drive 
Claude all over London in your brougham. No honest 
woman should take any man in her brougham, no matter 
who it is, that isn't her husband or her brother.' 

'Would her grandfather be admissible?' asked Cissy 
sweetly. ' I must say for a high-minded person who angrily 
repudiates the idea of spying, you seem to be strangely well 
informed as to all my movements.' 

* Cissy ! ' expostulated Sainty. 

'Well, what is it?' she asked, turning to him politely. 

* I have been deceived in you, very much deceived,' Lady 
Charmington broke out. *When you wanted to marry my 
son, you were all sweetness and honey to me; now you've 
attained your object, you insult me. From the day I arrived 
here you have studied in every way to let me see I was 
unwelcome ; there wasn't an attention you could have paid 
me you didn't pointedly omit, or a possible slight that you 
neglected to put upon me. I can well see that a mother-in- 
law in the house by no means suited your book.' 

* Even such a sweet affectionate one ? ' interposed Cissy. 
'Mark my words,' continued the exasperated dowager, 

* you will come to grief. You are playing a dangerous game, 
my lady. You have no conscience, no principle, no sense 
of duty to restrain or save you. If you forget God and go 
after your own vain amusements from morning till night, you 
will assuredly make shipwreck in the end.' 

' Well, at least you will have the satisfaction of thinking 
it was not for want of being warned.' 



BELCHAMBER 269 

'Your sarcasms will never prevent my speaking my mind. 
I have seen nothing in this house against which I do not 
think it incumbent on me, not only as the mother of your 
husband but as a Christian woman, to bear testimony — 
luxury, waste, riotous living, and indelicate behaviour. I 
am going away, and I know you will be glad to be rid of me, 
but I couldn't have reconciled it to my conscience to go 
without speaking.' 

* I must say you have eased your conscience very thoroughly, 
and most agreeably. Is there anything else your sense of 
duty impels you to mention before you go ? ' 

At this. Lady Charmington fairly lost her temper. She 
strode over to Cissy, and Sainty flung himself between them, 
afraid that she was going to strike her. ' You little minx ! ' 
she cried. * You little selfish, vulgar minx ! You have lied 
and wheedled your way into this family, and grabbed all you 
could lay your hands upon, and what have you done in return ? 
The one thing that was asked of you, to bear a child, and 
give the house an heir, you have most lamentably failed in 
doing.* 

Cissy sprang to her feet, a curious evil look in her face, 
and for a moment the two women looked into each other's 
eyes. 'Oh! in the matter of a baby, take care I don't 
astonish some of you yet,' she cried. 



CHAPTER XX 

'But you will come to my ball/ said the duchess with 
decision. The * but ' was in answer to Sainty's assertion that 
he did not go to balls. * Vims vous faiies ridicule^ mon 
enfant That you shouldn't accompany your wife everywhere, 
that I can see ; it would be silly ; but equally it is not right 
never to be seen at all. People ask if anything is wrong with 
you that you can't appear, if you are half-witted or have fits.' 

*It is very kind of them to occupy themselves with my 
affairs,' said Sainty. ' I shouldn't have supposed that most 
people remembered that I exist.' 

* But it is perhaps as well they should remember it some- 
times,' said his grandmother, with a significant glance at Cissy. 

'I should have thought the one form of entertainment 
from which a lame man might have been held excused was a 
dance,' Sainty persisted. 

' Ah ! there are dances and dances,' replied the duchess. 
' This is not a dance ci^ ton dansera^ it is a serious entertain- 
ment. I don't say it will be amusing ; I don't give this kind 
of thing for my own amusement or for other people's ; there 
will be ministers, public men, royalties; enfin sl solemn 
thing, and you are of the family. You must come, mustn't 
he, Cissy?' 

*0h, certainly, if you wish it, dear,' Cissy answered 
lightly. ' I should think it would just suit him. He will 
find people to whom he can talk about the housing of the 
working classes. You know how I always iove coming to 
Sunborough House, but not to tAts kind of thing ; you have 
said yourself how it bores you.' 

Sainty smiled at his wife's complete assumption of equality 

f70 



BELCHAMBER 371 

with his grandmother, both in age and position. He couldn't 
help reflecting how enchanted Lady Eccleston's daughter 
would have been a short year ago at the prospect of attend- 
ing the function of which she now spoke so slightingly as 
being for the uninitiated. 

'Well, you will both come, like good children,' said the 
duchess easily. * We don't live only to amuse ourselves, you 
know.* 

And so it came about that Belchamber found himself 
attending the ball in question, and very much lost in that 
glittering throng. At first he had been amused by the show, 
as he might have been by a scene in a pantomime. The 
pompous men, bearers of great names or high positions, stuck 
about with orders, the indecent bejewelled women, the lights, 
the flowers, the music: it all made an effect of some 
gorgeousness, with the really stately beautiful house as a 
background. But after an hour or so he became aware of a 
sense of intolerable weariness. He had taken it for granted 
that he and Cissy would be entirely independent of each 
other, and that after he had shown himself to his grandmother 
and the duke, and amused himself for a little while with the 
pageant, he would be free to depart whenever it pleased him ; 
but to his astonishment Cissy had remarked that she had no 
intention of staying late and she would be very much obliged 
if he would take her home in his brougham. * I want Gibson 
early to-morrow morning,' she explained, ' so I don't want to 
take him out to-night, and I haven't been in bed before three 
one night this week. We can just show ourselves, and then 
slope.' 

Once at the ball, however, she seemed to find it less dull 
than she had anticipated, for Sainty several times caught 
sight of her dancing, which she had announced that she 
certainly should not do, and had quite failed in his endeavour 
to get speech of her to tell her that he would walk home and 
leave the carriage for her. The night was fine and his own 
house not five minutes away. Any one but Sainty would 
simply have gone and left his wife to find it out. But this 



272 BELCHAMBER 

was a course which his invincible conscienf ioasness forbade 
his taking. As he hung forlornly about, hustled by the 
people who crowded in and out of the rooms, he thought 
that surely no sound in nature was so ugly as that of a 
quantity of human voices all talking at once and endeavouring 
to dominate each other. He came presently on Mrs. de 
Lissac, who always soothed his exasperated nerves ; but after 
all he need not go to a ball to see her, 'We could have had 
a much pleasanter talk in your house or mine, without having 
to try and outshout a hundred other people,' he said. 

* I never can quite get over the strangeness of being here 
at all,' Alice answered. ' It always seems rather like a fairy 
story to me, when I think of my very simple bringing-up at 
the rectory, that I should come to rub shoulders with all 
these grandees.' 

' It is a fairy story in which you have certainly been the 
good fairy,' said Sainty warmly. ' I can't tell you the differ- 
ence it has made to me having you in London to come and 
talk to sometimes.' 

' It is dear of you to say that. I like to think that to you 
I am not the rich woman and possible subscriber or hostess, 
but just your old govey that you loved when you were a little 
boy. Sometimes, dear,' she added, with a timid look of great 
tenderness, ' I fancy you are not much happier now than you 
were then.' 

Sainty passed the back of his hand wearily across his eyes. 
* Happy,' he said; *is anyone happy? Think of the lives 
that are being led within a mile of us to-night ; can any one 
be happy with the cry of those millions in his ears ? Certainly 
not these people with their eternal desperate pursuit of amuse- 
ment who are afraid of being left for five minutes in company 
with their own thoughts.' 

* Poor boy I you certainly are not happy or you would not 
be so bitter. It is dreadful to think of those poor people. 
I often wonder if we have a right to be so rich when there 
are so many starving; but my dear husband says this is 
Socialism, and if we weren't rich we couldn't give away so 



BELCHAMBER 273 

much, and certainly he is very generous ; and he says that all 
these things that I feel as if it was wrong to spend so much 
on give employment to lots of poor people to make, who 
would be out of work if there were no rich people to buy 
things.' She brought out this time-honoured piece of argu- 
ment with such a triumphant pride in her spouse's wisdom 
that Sainty thought of nothing less than combating it. 

' There is one form of happiness that you ought to enjoy in 
perfection,' he said, ' that of being and doing good.' 

Alice blushed. ' Oh, you mustn't call me good,' she said ; 
'but I was going to say, if there is a lot of misery and 
poverty, I 'm sure there has never been so much done towards 
relieving it as nowadays.' 

* The " World's Bazaar," for instance,' said Sainty. 
•Well— yes, dear — that and other things. And I'm sure 

if, as you say, being and doing good makes us happy, you 
ought to know it too.' 

* I ! ' cried Sainty. * Whom do I make happy ? ' 

' Oh, you are always doing kind things for people, and see 
how happy you make your wife.' 

*My wife's happiness is very much independent of me; 
indeed, I am rather the principal drawback to it' The words 
slipped out almost before he was aware. Even to this kind 
old friend he had never spoken of his relations with his wife, 
and this seemed neither the time nor the place he would have 
chosen to do so. Mrs. de Lissac looked pained, but she 
took advantage of his little outbreak to say, * I have some- 
times wanted to speak to you about your wife, but have not 
quite liked to. I think you and she should be more to- 
gether. You leave her too much to herself. She is very 
young and pretty to be so independent, and perhaps a little 
thoughtless.' 

'Talking of Cissy,' Sainty interrupted, 'can you tell me 
where she is 7 As a beginning of acting on your advice, you 
see we have come into the world together to-night, and I am 
actually waiting to go home till she is ready.' 

A sinuous young lady, clad in a sheath of some glittering, 

s 



274 BELCHAMBER 

shimmering blackness, turned at the words and held out her 
hand. * How d' ye do, Lord Belchamber ? ' she said. * I 
don't believe you remember me. Are you asking for Lady 
Belchamber? I saw her not five minutes ago with Mr. 
Morland.' 

With a start Sainty recognised Amy Winston. The unre- 
lieved black of her dress, and of a long pair of gloves that 
were pulled up to her elbows, lent a baleful pallor to her face 
and neck, and above her brow there shone in her dusky 
tresses a single diamond star which, if real, was a very 
remarkable ornament to belong to a single woman said mainly 
to support herself by the manufacture of magazine tales and 
occasional verse. At sight of this siren good Mrs. de Lissac 
fell back into the crowd, while the young man to whom Miss 
Winston was talking, after a half glance at Sainty, made off 
not less hastily, so that they were left facing one another. 

*I remember you perfectly, Miss Winston,' Sainty said, 
* although we have not met very lately. You were kind 
enough to say you had seen Lady Belchamber. I wish you 
would tell me where I should find her ; she wanted to go 
home early to-night, and I think may be looking for me.' 

'She didn't appear to be,' replied the young woman, with 
the faintest suspicion of insolence ; ' nor, I must say, did she 
seem in any particular hurry to get home. She was going 
into the garden with le beau cousin. Didn't you know the 
garden was lit up? it is one of the great features of the 
Sunborough House parties. Let 's go and look for them.' 

Sainty couldn't well refuse. He was thinking how much 
more indecent a very low-necked bodice was on a thin woman 
than on a fat one. 

'Wasn't that Ned Parsons who left you just now?' he 
asked, as they made their way towards the staircase. 

'Yes. He has become very fashionable since his book 
was such a success ; he goes everywhere now. By the way,' 
she added, with k little laugh, 'I suppose that's why he 
bolted at sight of you ; he thinks you haven't forgiven him 
for the liberty he took with your coming-of-age party.' 



BELCHAMBER 975 

' I should have thought he had quite as much reason to 
fear my grandmother ; yet I find him at her house.' 

* Oh, well — a great ball like this is hardly being at people's 
house, you know ; it doesn't count. But as a matter of fact 
he and the duchess have quite made it up. They met at 
Lady Eva's, and the duchess prepared to crush him. "I 
hear, Mr. Parsons," said she, in her most regal manner, "that 
you have put me in a book." " Who can have told you such 
a thing ? " Ned asked, with touching innocence. " The duchess 
in my book is old and ridiculous; how could she be meant for 
you ? " ' 

Sainty couldn't help laughing. As they emerged into the 
cooler and less crowded garden, his guide waited for him to 
come up beside her. Hitherto she had preceded him, worm- 
ing her way through the crowd with a deftness bred of long 
habit, at which Sainty marvelled, and talking lightly to him 
over her shoulder. 

* One doesn't often see you at this sort of thing,' she said. 

' It is only the second ball of my life,' Sainty answered. 
•You were at my first too.' 

'Ah! the famous ball immortalised by Parsons. Is it 
possible that it can be three years ago ? ' 

* Nearly four now.' 

'Good heavens! so it is. How old we are all getting! 
Your wife was there too ; it was the year she came out. How 
little any of us thought what was going to happen, except per- 
haps dear Lady Eccleston. I shouldn't wonder if s^ had 
had an inkling even then.' 

Sainty did not like his companion's tone, but hardly knew 
how to resent it. He had hoped by a rather stifif silence to 
intimate his want of appreciation of her particular form of 
humour, but she continued to chatter quite unabashed by his 
unresponsiveness. 

' Cissy is quite a success,' she continued ; ' it is astonishing 
how quickly she has caught on. I don't know any one who 
has more admirers, unless perhaps it 's Mrs. Jack Purse, and 
she 's been much longer on the scene of battle.' 



276 BELCHAMBER 

* And who may she be ? ' Sainty asked, hoping to divert the 
stream of Miss Winston's malevolence from his own vegetable 
patch. 

*Lord Belchamber, where have you lived? I wish she 
could hear you ; she 'd die of it. Why, Mrs. Jack is smartest 
of the smart. She knows hardly any one but Jews and 
royalties. I was quite astonished to find her at the Suffords' 
at Whitsuntide. Hylda Sufiford said she couldn't imagine 
why she came to her, but I think the Guggenheim's party for 
the prince falling through had something to do with it* ^ 

*My wife didn't tell me she met you at the Suflfords'.' 

< Oh, I don't know how I came to be asked, but I was.' 

*And did you amuse yourself?' 

*0h, we had great fun. One night we all dressed up 
for dinner. Hylda was a harlequin and Ella Dalsany the 
columbine.' 

'Do you mean to say that Lady Sufibrd came down to 
dinner in tights before the footmen ? ' 

'Gracious, yes! And Gladys Purse was Mephistopheles 
and Lady Deans Marguerite ; but we all thought Cissy had 
the best idea.' 

'And what was that?' asked Sainty nervously. He had 
neither asked nor received any account of the Suffords' 
country-house party. 

' Why, she just put on her best frock and all her diamonds, 
and said she was the Traviata.' 

Sainty was not sure that this inspiration of his wife's 
exactly appealed to him. He walked in gloomy silence. 

' Didn't she tell you about it ? ' asked Miss Winston. ' She 
had a tremendous success. Mrs. Jack, with her red legs and 
cock's feather, was nowhere. Cissy has one immense pull 
over Gladys Purse as far as the younger men are concerned. 
It's terribly expensive to admire Mrs. Jack; whereas a 
charming but impecunious youth like Claude Morland gets 
many little advantages by the way from his devotion to his 
pretty cousin.' 

In spite of an effort to keep her talk on the level of 



BELCHAMBER 977 

impartial ill-nature, Miss Winston could not quite help a 
touch Qf scornful bitterness in her mention of Claude. 

Scattered images had been loosely grouping themselves in 
Sainty's brain as she talked, half-forgotten incidents of his 
coming-of-age party, the softly opening door, his encounter 
with his cousin in the sleeping house, his examination of 
Claude as to his feelings for this same lady — it seemed to him 
that he began to detect a certain method in the apparently 
purposeless gossip with which she was favouring him. And 
then, blinding in its sudden illumination, there flashed across 
his mind the recollection of the anonymous letters. Here 
was the key to their authorship thrust suddenly into his mind. 
He felt the quick instinctive recoil of a man about to tread 
on something nasty, and then a sort of shuddering pity for 
what the creature at his side must have suffered. None knew 
better than he how they were wounded who put their trust in 
Claude Morland. He wanted to turn and hurry from her, or 
at least to find something that should stop the flicker of her 
evil tongue. He found nothing better to say in the shock of 
the moment than ' Do you think you ought to talk to me so 
about my wife ? ' 

Sunborough House has, for the heart of London, a 
relatively large garden, which being cunningly illumined with 
Chinese lanterns and little coloured lamps, the next day's 
papers were already reporting that the effect was * fairy-like.* 
Despite these beauties and the somewhat chilly allure- 
ments of an English summer night, only a few of the 
most flirtatiously inclined had been persuaded to drag their 
expensive skirts over the sooty London grass, and Sainty and 
his companion had the further end of the enclosure, which 
they had now reached, practically to themselves. As he made 
his feeble protestation, they came, round a tree, upon the 
glass doors of a sort of little summer-house which backed up 
against the high railing that divided the garden from the Park. 

Miss Winston gave one glance into the lighted interior. 
* I think we are de trop here,' she said, turning to Sainty, and, 
slipping nimbly from his side, she vanished in the soft 



278 BELCHAMBER 

shadows of the shrubbery. Almost at the same moment the 
door was opened from within with such suddenness that 
Sainty, who had not the agility of the fair Aimee, could only 
save himself from being struck by throwing himself back into 
the angle formed by the tree and the railing, and in this small 
space he now found himself made a close prisoner by the 
open door, which was firmly held in position by the broad 
back of a man, as he could see through the glass. He 
reflected that his position was not a dignified one, that as the 
inmates of the summer-house were evidently leaving it, he had 
only to stay quiet till they were gone, and then push the door 
and follow them at his leisure; and they need never know 
how nearly he had been tricked into playing the spy upon 
them. Miss Winston had evidently counted on finding her 
quarry there (perhaps from personal knowledge of his cousin's 
habits), and had hoped that she could so excite his jealousy 
that he would not be able, once there, to resist the temptation 
of looking. He had no doubt as to whom he would have 
seen, even before he recognised Claude's voice. He was re- 
lieved to hear that there was nothing lover-like in it. Morland 
spoke in brief business-like tones through which pierced a 
scarcely disguised note of annoyance. ' Then you won't see 
him ? ' he said, pausing against the door, evidently continuing 
some discussion they had been having. 

' I daren't,' Cissy answered. ' I 'm sure it would kill me.' 

'Then you must do the other thing; there are not two 
ways about it; and the sooner the better. If you're right, 
you 've no time to lose. But are you quite sure ? ' 

' Oh yes, quite. I wasn't at first, but I am now.' 

'It's cursedly unfortunate ' 

They spoke low, and as they moved off he could hear no 
more. 

Sainty pushed the door, and stepped out from his tempor- 
ary prison. Of the fragment of dialogue that he had over- 
heard he did not understand a word; indeed, he did not pay 
it any particular attention at the time; he supposed it to 
refer to some of the many plans the two were always discuss- 



BELCHAMBER 279 

ing. He was accustomed to Cissy's use of needlessly strong 
language. ' I should simply die of it ' was a common phrase 
with her for expressing dislike of the most trivial things. It 
was not till months after they were spoken that the words 
came back to him with a new significance. 

He followed the retreating figures up the garden, his feeling 
one of relief at the failure of an ill-natured plot of which he 
had been meant to be the victim. Miss Winston's motive 
was not difficult to guess. It all seemed like something in a 
novel or a play, curiously theatrical and unlike life ; but at 
least the denouement had been essentially undramatic. 

When he reached the front hall, he found Cissy already 
cloaked among the group of people who were waiting for 
their carriages. 

* Where have you been?' she said. 'I've been looking 
everywhere for you. I told you I wanted to go home early. 
I thought you must have gone.' 

* I was looking for you,' Sainty answered. * I was told you 
had gone into the garden, so I went there after you ; but we 
must just have missed.' 

In the brief transit to their own door neither spoke. Sainty 
was wondering if he ought to say anything to Cissy of the 
ill-will that was dogging her footsteps, to put her on her 
guard against evil tongues. A woman in her exceptional 
position could not be too careful to furnish no weapons to 
scandal. Yet it was not only Miss Winston's vengeful 
jealousy that had warned him to look after his wife. Had 
not kind little Mrs. de Lissac tried to suggest that he left her 
dangerously unguarded ? Even the duchess had hinted the 
advisability of his being more with Cissy. It was evident 
that she was being talked about. Cissy herself seemed to 
provide him with just the necessary opportunity for speech, 
so difficult to find in their divided lives. To his surprise, 
instead of going immediately upstairs on arriving at home, 
she followed him into his rooms on the ground-floor. His 
study, though of Spartan simplicity compared to the rest of 
the house, had the indefinable pleasant air of rooms much 



28o BELCHAMBER 

lived and worked in. Everything in it was meant for ose^ 
and daily used. Books seemed to accumulate round Sainty 
like some natural growth. The one lamp with its plain 
green shade lighted the comfortable litter on the big, service- 
able writing-tabley and on another table near it was the 
humble appliance by help of which, as in his college days, he 
sometimes refreshed himself with a midnight cup of tea if 
he was working late. 

'How cosy you are in here,' Cissy said, looking about her. 
' I must have spent five times as much on my boudoir, but 
with all its silk walls and cushions and frills and furbelows 
it doesn't look as homey as this.' 

* You 're never in the house for long enough to do more 
than scratch off a dozen notes,' said Sainty, ' unless you have 
people with you. Nothing ever looks like a home in which 
people don't live.' 

'I think it's the books,' Cissy went on. 'They are 
wonderful furniture. I really must get some.' 

She lingered, wandering about the room looking at one 
thing and another. ' What 's this for ? ' she asked, coming to 
the old kettle with its lamp. 

'Sometimes I like a cup of tea if I'm working. It's a 
bad habit I got into at Cambridge.' 

* How shocking for the nerves, my dear,' cried Cissy, with 
a lifelike imitation of old Lady Firth. 'Well, you might 
have a decent-looking kettle and teapot I shall have to 
give you one. Do you mean you could make a cup of tea 
now, this minute ? What fun ! Do make me one. I 'm cold 
and famished. It will be lovely.' 

Sainty obediently set about lighting the spirit-lamp and 
preparing the demanded refreshment. He was not a little 
puzzled by this latest caprice of his wife. 

Cissy went to the door, and called the butler. 'You 
needn't sit up,' she said. ' Give me a candle, and then put 
out the lights and go to bed.' She came back, and flung 
herself into an armchair, her summer wrap of satin and lace 
billowing foamlike round her. 



BELCHAMBER 381 

Sainty, as he made the tea, was wondering how he could 
introduce the subject on which he wanted to speak. It was 
not once in six months he would have such an opportunity. 
He must not let it slip. And yet he was unwilling to sermonise 
when for once she was in so friendly a mood. He brought 
the cup of tea to her, and stood looking down at her as she 
gulped little teaspoonfuls of the hot liquid. 

' You hare never told me anything about your visit to the 
SuffordsV he said. 

Cissy looked up suddenly. 'What about it?' she asked 
distrustfully. 

' I mean about the dressing up for dinner and all that. 
Was it amusing?' 

'Oh, that I* said Cissy indifferently, but with an air of 
relief. ' I didn't suppose it would amuse you to hear about 
such nonsense. Who told you?' she asked, with a return of 
suspicion. 

' Miss Winston. I met her to-night. I hadn't seen her 
for years.' 

'That's a nasty cat,' Cissy remarked with conviction. 
' She hates me.' 

'Oh, you know it?' 

' Know it ? Of course I know it. Why——' She seemed 
to think better of what she was going to say, and checked 
herself. ' What did she say about me ? ' she asked. 

' She spoke in a way I didn't like,' Sainty answered. ' For 
some reason that woman is your enemy, and I wanted to tell 
you to be on your guard against her.' 

'Oh, thanks, that's all right. I'm not afraid of Aim^e 
Winston,' and she smiled a little cold smile at her own 
thoughts. 

'Don't you think,' said Sainty, with some hesitation, 
'that you are a little imprudent sometimes? a little care- 
less of appearances ? that, in fact, you rather give a horrid 
woman like Miss Winston occasion to take away your 
character?' 

'Oh, my character!' said Cissy lightly. She had set 



282 BELCHAMBER 

down her tea-cup, and was pulling off her long gloves, and 
rubbing her round white arms softly over each other. 

*I think, you know,' Sainty went on, *you are beginning 
to be talked about a little. It was not only Miss Winston, 
but some one else, a nice woman, who ' 

* Mrs. de Lissac, for a fiver ! ' interjected Cissy. * There's 
another woman who don't love me, though not for the same 
reason.' 

'Well, it was Alice, as it happens,' Sainty admitted; 'but 
she only said the kindest things, that you were too young and 
pretty to be left so much to yourself. You know even the 
duchess implied that I ought to be seen with you sometimes.' 

'Well,' said Cissy imperturbably, 'why aren't you? It 
seems to me that it is you who are failing in your duties, 
according to all these ladies, not me.' 

The coolness of the retort took Saint/s breath away for 
the moment. 

' But you know,' he stammered, ' that there is nothing you 
would like less. I have never pretended to any right to con- 
trol your actions. You know you are free to amuse yourself 
as you like. All I ask is that you won't compromise yourself, 
won't get talked about, and — and all that' He ended rather 
lamely. He half expected an outburst. To his surprise she 
leaned towards him, and laid her hand very gently on his. 

' Don't you think,' she said, and her voice was kind, ' that 
you are rather to blame perhaps ? HI am talked about, isn't 
it partly your fault? Can I help it if other men admire me?' 
She had unclasped her cloak, as the tea warmed her, and 
now, as she rose, it slipped from her and fell into the chair. 
She was standing very close to him, a beautiful woman, her 
beauty enhanced by everything that dress could do for it 
Her breath was on his cheek, the faint heady fragrance of 
her garments troubled his nostrils, the dazzling fairness of 
her bare shoulders was close under his eyes. He drew 
back a little, bewildered. 'I don't understand,' he mur- 
mured. 'I have tried not to annoy you. You remember 
wtiat you said. After that I naturally could not trouble you.' 



( 

I 



BELCHAMBER 283 

Cissy sprang suddenly away, and caught up her cloak. 
There was in her movement something of the recoil of a 
spring that has been forced too far in one direction and has 
suddenly escaped. 

*Ah, no,' he heard her whisper, *I can't ' and then 

aloud, with a sudden scornful flash, ' No, of course you can't 
understand,' she said. * Heavens 1 it 's nearly three . . . and 
I, who meant to go to bed early. There 's a fate against it. 
Give me my candle. Good night — or what 's left of it.' She 
hurried past him, almost snatching the candle from his hand. 
The feeble flicker of it had vanished from the great well of 
the staircase, while he still stood in the doorway dumbly 
wondering. 

What had she meant? Was it possible that she repented 

of her cruelty, that she wished For a moment it had 

seemed so. Yet he could not believe it. Vividly he recalled 
the night of their wedding, her agonised repetitions that she 
never could be his. And yet her following him to his room, 
her words, still more her looks. He stood there long irresolute, 
wondering if he were losing a great opportunity. Once he 
started to go and seek her. He looked up at the skylight 
far above, where the first faint coming of morning was making 
a pale twilight. He listened, but in all the silent greyness of 
the big house he could hear no sound but the innumerable 
ticking of clocks. A breath of chill discouragement seemed 
to steal down to him where he stood. He had a vision of 
the grotesque figure he should cut, misled by his own fatuity, 
and meeting closed doors, or the half concealed impertinence 
of a waiting-maid, and slowly he turned back into his own 
rooms and shut the door. 



CHAPTER XXI 

From the time of their coming to London it had required 
no effort on their part for the Belchambers to be very little 
together, but after the ball at Sunborough House, Sainty was 
aware that they avoided each other. On the rare occasions 
when they met, he was conscious in his wife's manner of a 
more thinly veiled contempt, while on his side he felt a shy- 
ness with her which was the beginning of dislike. 

There was something almost frightening to him in the 
absolute quality of her egotism. In the scene of which he 
had been a horrified witness between her and his mother, 
Lady Charmington had by no means displayed a conciliatory 
courtesy, but if she had been rude she had at least lost her 
temper in a thoroughly human manner — she had cared. Had 
Cissy shown heat in return, he could easily have understood 
it. What revolted him in her attitude was the complete 
indifference as to what her mother-in-law thought of her, or 
whether they were on good terms or ill. The way in which, 
when she wanted nothing more of them, people simply 
ceased to exist for her, seemed to him monstrous. She had 
summarily declined to make any overtures towards peace, 
alleging, not without justice, that she was the injured party. 
' Lady Charmington had insulted and abused her in her own 
house, and she had taken it with the meekness of a lamb. She 
really could not see what there was for her to apologise about j 
she was quite ready to accept an apology if her mother-in-law 
wished to make one ' ; but that lady, oddly enough, showed 
no signs of any such desire. She had departed next day 
without so much as seeing Cissy again, merely mentioning 
to her son before she left that he would probably suffer the 

284 



BELCHAMBBR 285 

curse of childlessness, as a punishment for his ¥rife's be- 
haviour and his own inability to guide and chasten her. 

So the young couple drifted more and more apart, Sainty 
realising with a terrified fatalism the extent to which this 
creature, at once so hard and so capricious, who bore his 
name and spent his money, yet had never been his wife and 
had become almost a stranger to him, had it in her power to 
injure him irretrievably. 

After the duchess's ball he received no more anonymous 
letters, which confirmed him in his theory of their authorship. 
Miss Winston, having played her trump card in the disclosure 
she thought she had made to him, evidently judged it useless 
to continue the letters which were meant to lead up to it. 
One day, however, the post brought him an envelope which, 
at first sight, he made sure was the beginning of a new series. 
He was on the point of destroying it, unopened, when he 
was aware of his own coat-of-arms and crest gorgeously 
emblazoned on the back, and a closer inspection proved that 
the illiterateness of the handwriting was not feigned but 
perfectly genuine. It was from Lady Arthur, and contained 
the unwelcome news that his brother had been ill, more 
seriously than she had at first imagined, and a request that 
he would come and see him. 'He won't make the sign,' 
she wrote, * and I expect he 'd be very angry with me if he 
knew I was writing, but all the same I know it would be a 
comfort to him to see you. He's worrying about money 
matters. You see, being so ill has made him think if he 
was to die what would become of me and the children.' It 
was put rather crudely, but Sainty admitted that it was a 
legitimate cause for solicitude, and hailed this proof that 
Arthur was taking thought for others. Even if it were the 
others who were taking thought for themselves, a poor 
woman could not be blamed for wishing to secure the future 
of her helpless offspring. He decided that he must go down 
and see his brother. He was sorry Arthur had been so ill; 
he never remembered him ill in his life, since the measles 
and chicken-pox of early childhood. 



286 BBLCHAMBER 

Sainty did not judge it necessary to say anydui^ to Cissy 
about his expedition; it reqoiied no difdomacy on his part 
to conceal any of his movements; if he should be absent for 
a week, she would neither know nor cai^ and be found by 
consultation of Biadshaw that he could go and return in the 
long summer day. It was a relief to him that he need not 
spend a night in the house of kinsfolk idiom he did not 
receive in his own. The situation was awkward and un- 
pleasant, and when he thought of all that Arthur^s marriage 
had made him do and suffer, it must be confessed that he 
approached his brother's home and wife with invincible 
repugnance. 

The Chamberses had taken up their abode (of course in 
a hunting country) in an old vicarage from which a victim 
of shrunken tithes had been glad to move into a smaller 
house. Arthur had added new and magnificent stables that 
had cost Sainty a pretty penny before they were completed. 
The house itself might have been transplanted bodily from 
the heart of Belgravia. It was of such commonplace and 
uncharacteristic architecture that even the process known to 
Lady Arthur as * Smartenin' the old place up a bit' had failed 
materially to disfigure it It was approached through all the 
dignity of a lodge gate and 'carriage sweeps' which swept 
round a mound of damp laurels opposite the front door, and 
deposited Sainty at a small Ionic portico of stucco pillars. 
Having confided his name and business to a dingy man in 
a shiny dress-coat who opened the door to him, Belchamber 
was told "is lordship was expecting of 'im, and would 'is 
lordship please to walk this way,' and followed the butler 
upstairs to Arthur's room. He smiled to see how exactly 
the interior of the house corresponded with his anticipations : 
everything was modem, ugly, expensive, and already shabby. 
A great litter of caps, gloves, sticks, and hunting-<:rops en- 
cumbered the hall, together with a female garden-hat orna- 
mented with huge red bows and faded muslin poppies. 
A strong smell of cooking pervaded the staircase, and from 
some of the many open doors came the sound of women's 



BELCHAMBER 287 

Toices in dispute, and high above all else the shrill wailing 
of a baby. 

It was with a conflict of feelings that Sainty found himself 
once more face to face with Arthur, whom he had not seen 
since his fruitless attempt to detach him from the woman 
who was now his wife. They had parted as boys, they met 
again as married men, and with no particularly happy ex- 
periences behind them. Sainty noted with pained surprise 
how much of his brother's good looks had been what the 
French call * the devil's beauty.' That boyish freshness was 
gone for ever, and the face had gained nothing of manly 
dignity in its place. 

The young man was sitting propped with pillows in a big 
easy-chair, arrayed in a gorgeous silk dressing-gown. His 
recent illness had given him a pinched bluish-white look 
about the nose, but the colour had set and hardened on the 
cheek bones, and the eyes had a tired shifty look. The 
beautiful curls were already worn a little thin at the temples, 
and an absurd little fair moustache seemed to be ineffectually 
trying with its waxed points to conceal the two lines that ill- 
temper had traced beside the nostrils. 

* Very good of you to come,' he said, as he held out his 
hand. 

* I 'm so sorry to hear you 've been ilL What was it ? ' Sainty 
asked, as he sat down beside him, struggling with a lump that 
would rise in his throat. 

*I fancy I've been pretty bad,' Arthur answered. *Some 
superior form of mulligrubs. I don't believe the damn fool 
of a doctor knows quite what was the matter. I think he 
was frightened himself. He gets into corners with Topsy 
and whispers, till I want to break his head. I've pulled 
through all right, but, of course, another time I mightn't, 
you know, and that 's what I wanted to see you about' 

There was no suggestion that he wanted to see him for 
any other reason. They met after two years of absence and 
estrangement, and after what seemed a very fair chance that 
they might never meet again. The elder brother was husky 



288 BELCHAMBER 

with emotion, the younger as unmoved by any thought of 
their common past as though it were his solicitor whom he 
had summoned to the discussion of a matter of business. 

His coldness reacted on Sainty, and helped him to steady 
his voice as he answered, ' Your wife intimated in her letter 
that you were troubled about money matters.' 

' That 's it. You see, as long as I live I Ve got this cursed 
pittance. A fellow can't live like a gentleman on it, but at 
least we don't starve. But as the missus pointed out to me, 
if I was to hop the twig, there 'd be just nothing for her 
and the kids ; so I made her write and tell you I was ill ; I 
thought I owed it to her. She grumbles a good deal, and 
she's a damn bad manager, and we have our rows, but she's 
not a bad sort of an old girL Last winter she went without 
a pony for her shay, so as I could keep another hunter. 
Now that was rather decent of her. I 'm not very partial to 
the kids myself; it's unbelievable how they yell; but I 
shouldn't like 'em to be left in the gutter, you know.' 

' Do you know me so little, Arthur, that you could suppose, 
if anything happened to you, I shouldn't provide for your 
wife and children ? ' 

•Well, you were never a particularly free parter, you 
know, old man, and then you didn't approve of the con- 
nection. How was I to know? ' 

* Of course, in case of your death, I should continue the 
same allowance to your widow.' 

'Would you now? Well, /Ito/'j all right. But I say, 
suppose you were to kick? you're not so remarkably strong, 
you know, yourself.' 

' In that case, your boy comes in for the whole thing, and 
of course the trustees would make a suitable provision for 
his mother.' 

* Oh, gammon ! we don't count on that, you know. What 's 
to prevent your having children yourself? By the way, isn't 
Lady Belchamber showing any signs yet?' 

' Er — no ; as a matter of fact — not ' 

'Well, she'd better look sharp, or we shall begin to 



BELCHAMBER 389 

indulge unholy hopes. But, bar chaff, you couldn't put it in 
writing, could you, about the allowance going on in case we 
were both to what the papers call "join the majority"?* 

' If it will be any comfort to you I can, but I should think 
you could trust me ; and in case I should ever have an heir, 
I promise at once to add a codicil to my will, providing for 
your children.' 

'Well, let's have that in writing too; then there can't be 
any mistake about it, and Topsy'll let me alone. She's 
got her damned old mother with her (she's an old vulgarian, 
I tell you), and the two of 'em have nagged my life out of me 
about this. I never will have old Mother Mug here, but I 
was going to town for a lar— on business, if I hadn't been 
taken ill, and so I said she could have her to keep her 
company while I was away, and I 'm blowed if the old devil 
didn't turn up, just the same.' 

* How do you like this place on the whole?' Sainty asked. 

'It isn't bad in the winter; just between two packs, you 
know; and one or two of the people round have given 
me some shooting. But at this time o' year it's simply 
infernal ; not one blessed thing to do. As I told you, if it 
hadn't been for this cursed illness, I was going to town for 
a bit ; if I didn't get away now and then I should rot and 
burst.' 

' Is there nobody you see or like in the neighbourhood ? ' 

Arthur winced. 'Well, you see,' he said, 'most of the 
huntin' lot go away in the summer, and the regular county 
sort of set ain't particularly lively; and then the women jib 
a bit at Topsy. One or two of 'em have called, but not 
many. Our parson and his wife toady her freely ; they ain't 
particular as long as she's my lady, and will give 'em money 
for the school treat. I assure you she 's becoming quite the 
charitable religious lady ; nothing else to do, poor girl. But 
most of these county women are a damned stiff-backed lot; 
they ain't like Londoners.' 

At this point in the conversation the dingy butler, who 
looked like the 'heavy father' of a not very prosperous 

T 



290 BELCHAMBER 

travelling company, came to say that 'lunching was served, 
and Lady Harthur Chambers 'oped Lord Belchamber would 
do 'er the honour to come down.' He also brought Arthur's 
meal on a tray, over which the invalid let fly a volley of 
curses : * the napkin was dirty, the soup was cold, the bread 
was stale ; he could take it back to the damn cook and tell 

her, her, if she couldn't send up a decent basin of broth 

to a sick man, her, and her, she'd better 

well go.' 

To this rolling accompaniment, Sainty got himself out 
of the room, saying he would come up again after lunch, and 
was conducted by the seedy retainer into the presence of his 
sister-in-law, who received him with much state. 

The three years that had elapsed since their last meeting 
had not treated Lady Arthur more kindly than her husband. 
They were in her case three years considerably nearer to the 
term of youth. In the days of the supper at the Hotel Fritz 
she had been a decidedly handsome young woman, if a little 
over-florid. In the interval she had grown more florid and 
less handsome, and suggest^ an impression of having run to 
seed. A growing tendency to corpulence was resisted by 
violent compression, with disastrous results to the com- 
plexion, imperfectly corrected by a plentiful application of 
dldnc deperle. Her attire was gorgeous beyond the needs of 
the occasion, but left somewhat to be desired in the matter 
of tidiness, and exhaled a heavy scent of musk that made 
Sainty feel sick. She presented him to her mother, a terrible 
warning of what she was on the highroad to become. This 
lady was a shorter and twenty years' older edition of Lady 
Arthur, more coarsely painted, more frankly vulgar, more 
consentingly fat, and she wore an olive green wig of Brutus 
curls. 

*Do you like the country, Mrs. de Vere? ' Sainty asked, as 
they sat at meat together in heavy silence. 

* Muggins,' the lady corrected, with a giggle. ' De Vere 
was Maria's — I mean Cynthy's — stage name.' 

' My Nong de Tayartcr^ said her daughter, with a warning 



BELCHAMBER 391 

look at the dingy man, who was handing the potatoes with 
an air of forced abstraction. 

'Well/ said Mrs. Muggins, * I was connected with the pro- 
fession myself when I was young; there's nothing to be 
ashamed of in it. It's an art, and nowadays very highly 
considered. But you was askin', my lord, if I liked the 
country. For a little visit like this, I don't say, but to live 
in, year in, year out — no thank you. It may be all very well 
for them that were born to it, but give me London. I like 
to see my fellow-creeturs. I should think Cynthia 'd die of 
the mopes in this place. I should, I know, if I was her.' 

* It isn't very lively,' assented her daughter. 

' I can't think whatever you find to do all day,' said the 
elder lady. 

* I have my children,' said Cynthia, with the air of a 
Cornelia, * and I 'm getting quite interested in the village and 
the poor people.' 

*Well, it wouldn't amuse w^,' said her mother. *I call it 
cruel of your brother, my lord, to keep her mewed up in a 
place like this. Such a winter as she 's had. It 's all very 
well for him, 'untin' five days a week, and shootin' with 
Squire this, that, and the other, but what fun does s^ get out 
of it, poor child? Their stuck-up wives don't even come 
and see her, and the moment the 'untin' and shootin"s 
over, my lord was off to London and Newmarket, if he 
hadn't been took ill. He was hardly here a week last 
summer. Does he offer to take her? — not him, not if he 
knows it.' 

'Three weeks at the sea was all the change /got last year/ 
said Lady Arthur. 

' And that I had to make you insist upon, or you wouldn't 
have got that/ chimed in mamma. 

' It was more for baby's sake than my own,' said Cynthia ; 
' the child needed sea air.' 

' Dear little Arthur was baby then,' explained Mrs. Muggins , 
* the second little dear wasn't even expected. Now there 's 
two of 'em they '11 want a change more than ever.' 



291 BELCHAMBER 

* You have two children ? ' Sainty sai A ' Are they both 
boys?' 

*Both of 'em,' assented Lady Arthur proudly. *Poor as 
we are, there 's many people would be glad of my two little 
boys, or even one of 'em,' and she pointed this delicate 
allusion by a side glance at her mother, as who should say 
* I had him there.' 

The ill-concealed hostility of these people, the way they 
abused his brother to him, his sister-in-law's hint at the want 
of ease in their circumstances, all combined to make Sainty's 
visit thoroughly uncomfortable. 

'What's been the matter with Arthur?' he asked, to 
change the subject. 

* Eating and drinking too much,' responded Mrs. Muggins 
readily. * And so I told him. *' Arthur, my boy," I says to 
him, ** you mark my words : you 're digging your grave with 
your teeth."' 

Lady Arthur simpered. ' It 's rather awkward to talk about 
insides to gentlemen,' she said ; * but it was of that nature. 
The doctor said he had had a narrow squeak of — ^what was 
the word? — perrynaitis, or perry taitis or something. I told 
him he couldn't expect ladies to remember his long Latin 
names, but it was some kind of inflammation from what he 
said.' 

'What she don't tell you,' put in the irrepressible Mrs. 
Muggins, ' was how she nursed him. Three nights she never 
went to bed nor had her clothes off her, and, as often as not, 
sworn at for her pains.' 

' I only did my duty,' said Cynthia nobly ; ' but I hope I 
shan't often have to do the same again.' 

'What she wants,' said Mrs. Muggins, 'after being shut up 
so much, and the anxiety and all, is a good change. Why 
don't you come up and stop with me a bit, when I go back, 
and see the theatres and the shops ? The spring fashions are 
very pretty : sunshades are very tasty this year, I must say.' 

' I do want a new sunshade,' Lady Arthur admitted, 'and 
for that matter, lots of things ; but Arthur don't care Aew I 'm 



BELCHAMBER 993 

dressed, noWy and she removed a discoloured tear with the 
untorn corner of an imitation lace handkerchief. 

* As they were leaving the dining-room, she detained Sainty 
a moment to whisper in his ear, ' Has Arthur spoken to you 
about what I wrote?' 

'Oh yes,' said Sainty, 'we have talked about it I assured 
him that would be all right.' 

Lady Arthur looked relieved. *What should I have?* she 
asked. 

* Oh I — er — the same as now,' Sainty gasped. 

'You'll think me very mercenary, I fear,' said his sister-in- 
law, with an attempt to climb back into the grand manner from 
which she had so swiftly descended. * I don't care for myself, 
you know ; I 've worked for my living before, but a mother 
must think of her children ; even a bear will fight for its cubs.' 

The * cubs ' were presently produced, of course. The baby 
was a mere bundle of lace and ribbons ; but the elder child, 
who appeared to be nearly two, and had been most carefully 
combed and starched and decorated for the occasion, was set 
upon two chubby legs within the door, and stared stolidly at 
his uncle. Sainty tried hard to see something of Arthur in 
the little boy who would probably be his heir, but the younger 
Arthur was a most unmistakable miniature edition of Mrs. 
Muggins, with the same prominent eyes and hanging lower 
lip, and even his 'oiled and curled Assyrian locks ' suggested 
a sort of childish imitation of the Brutus wig. His grand- 
mother was fully aware of the likeness, and evidently thought 
it must be a cause of unmixed gratification to Lord Bel- 
chamber. 

'He favours our side of the family,* she said proudly, 'and, 
though I say it that should not, a handsomer little picture of 
a cherub I don't think you 'U easily find.' 

' Give uncle a sweet kiss, dearie,' said the proud mother ; 
but on Sainty's stooping to receive the embrace, the amiable 
infant set up such a piteous howl, in which the baby promptly 
joined, that both children had to be conducted into retirement. 

' I think,' said Sainty, ' if you '11 let me, I '11 go up and see 



294 BELCHAMBER 

my brother again for a few minutes. I see I must be leaving 
in about half an hour, if I am to catch the afternoon train ap. 
I told the fly to come back for me.' 

'Well, if yon must go,' said his sbter-in-law, 'there's no 
good pressing yon to stop. I'm afraid the Innch iras not 
what you're accustomed to. No doubt yoa have a French 
cook and every luxury, but we have to cut our coats according 
to the cloth, you know. I may not see yon again before you 
go, I 'm going to take mamma for a bit of an airing. I hope 
Lady Belchamber is welL She has no children, I think.' 

'Well,' said Arthur, when Sainty returned to him, 'what 
do you think of old Mother Mug? She*5 a beauty, isn't 
she?' 

'She seemed to think you were a little inconsiderate 
about your wife, that she needed a certain amount of change 
and amusement ; and, indeed, that poor woman must have 
a dull life, so very different to everything she has been 
accustomed to.' 

' No doubt the pair of 'em have been abusing me finely, 
and, of course, you take their part. What the devil 's she 
got to complain o^ I should like to know? Haven't I made 
an honest woman of her, and jolly well muckered my own 
life by doing it? I suppose she expects me to give up the 
little fun I do get, and take her to London and show her 
round. Don't you marry your mistress, old man. You can 
take it from me, it isn't good enough. But there ! — you are 
married, and you haven't got a mistress.' 

Sainty did not escape without the usual demand for money, 
which Arthur irritated him by calling a loan. 

' What 's the good of talking like that ? ' Sainty said. ' You 
know you haven't the slightest intention of repaying it. As 
you are always nibbing it into me that you can't live on what 
I give you, is it likely that next quarter, or next year, you 
will be able to save the amount you require out of the same 
insufficient allowance?' 

'You don't suppose I enjoy having to ask you for every 
dirty penny I want?' retorted the invalid sullenly. 



BELCHAMBER 295 

•Then why don't you try to live within your income, and 
then you wouldn't have to ? ' 

' I must say you always make it as unpleasant as possible.' 

* Well, don't let 's wrangle about money ; I give it just the 
same. I '11 send you a cheque. Good-bye, and I hope you '11 
soon be better.' 

*And these are the people who are to come after me I' 
Sainty said to himself bitterly as the train took him back 
to London. He had a vision of Belchamber, his beloved 
Belchamber, overrun and ravaged by these barbarians ; of 
Cynthia *smartenin' the old place a bit,' with the aid of 
Mrs. Muggins's suggestions as to what would be 'tastey'; 
of Arthur cutting down the trees and selling the books and 
pictures to buy more horses and lose bigger bets; of that 
unattractive child with its stiff curls and goggle eyes coming 
in turn to make final havoc of the ruin its parents had left. 
And it was for this end that he had given his name, his 
future, his honour, into the keeping of a beautiful parasitic 
creature without heart or conscience, who obeyed no law but 
her own imperious appetites 1 



CHAPTER XXII 

Although Belchamber had become a very different place 
firom the home of his childhood, it was still a relief to Sainty 
to get into the country. It must be confessed that the parties 
with which Cissy delighted to fill the house were extra- 
ordinarily unexacting in the attention they demanded from 
their host, so that he was able, as in London, to lead very 
much his own life, undisturbed by his wife or her guests. 
Except at dinner, or in occasional passage meetings, as he 
slunk from the library to his own sacred quarters in the 
western pavilion, he seldom met any of them. 

Moreover, the young couple were, for the moment, nearly 
alone. Most of the society which Lady Belchamber specially 
affected was either at Cowes and Goodwood, or devoting a fort- 
night to the care of its property and the reception of its school- 
boys before the annual round of Scottish visits. Sainty had 
been passingly surprised at Cissy's decision to forego a very 
gay house-party in Sussex, and return quietly to Belchamber 
at the beginning of August. The young woman did not seem 
to be in her accustomed health; indeed, she admitted she 
was quite done up, and needed rest; there had even been 
a talk of 'waters.' She had begun to be not quite herself 
before they left London, and then there had been the curious 
incident of her fainting at her own party. 

Quite early in May, before Lady Charmington's unfortunate 
visit, Cissy had announced her intention of giving some kind 
of entertainment, but the difficulty of deciding on what form 
it should take, and the impossibility of finding an evening 
when it would not interfere with something else she wanted 
to do, had combined to defer the execution of the plan till 



BELCHAMBER 297 

nearly the end of the season. She found it so much easier 
to go to parties which other people had the trouble of arrang- 
ing than to take the trouble to arrange one for herself, that 
Sainty had begun to hope the whole thing might fall through, 
when she suddenly fixed a date, called in Lady Eccleston to 
assist her, and telegraphed to Rou mania to offer a fabulous 
sum to a celebrated violinist, who had not been heard in 
England that summer. By eking out this star with the only 
two expensive singers who had not yet left the opera, and 
rigorously excluding from her invitation-list any one to whom 
it could be a pleasure or excitement to be present, she man- 
aged to have a very brilliant and select little gathering indeed, 
which, but for the unfortunate contretemps above mentioned, 
would have been an unqualified success. The right dowagers 
were slumbering in the front row, the right younger people 
were jostling and chattering in the doorways, the talented 
performer was executing his most incredible calisthenics, 
when Sainty, jammed into a far corner of one of the big 
rooms, became aware of a bustle and commotion near the 
door of the boudoir. People moved and heaved and whis- 
pered, and ceased to bestow even a perfunctory attention on 
the music, which came rather abruptly to an end. He saw 
Claude Morland elbow through the crowd with a bottle and 
a glass, and some one near him said ' Lady Belchamber has 
fainted.' 

Among the many duties thrown unexpectedly on him by 
the catastrophe, appeasing the anxiety of the guests and 
soothing the susceptibilities of the artists, he was startled by 
the speech, accompanied by a meaning pressure of the hand, 
with which Alice de Lissac took leave of him. ' I am so glad,' 
she whispered ] * naw^ I feel sure all will come right.' En- 
lightenment as to her meaning came most unexpectedly from 
his mother-in-law next morning when he inquired of her after 
his wife's health. Lady Eccleston, who had been the last to 
depart the night before, arrived at an amazingly early hour, 
and after a long visit to her daughter was still able to appear 
in Sainty's apartments almost before he had finished his 



2gS BELCHAMBER 

breakfast. She was evidaidj in hi^ gDod-lmmoiir and 
began by embracing him tenderly. 

'How did yoafind Cissy?' Sainty asked. ' I haven't sent 
to ask after her yet for fear of disturbing her. She seemed 
qoite worn ottt last night; I think she has been doing mach 
too modi.' 

'She is not /%' said Lady Ecdeston, with a world of mean- 
ing. *1 will not allow that she is iZT.' 

*I am ^tad to hear it,' said Sainty. ' I thought she looked 
▼ery seedy last night, I most say.' 

'She will admit nothing,' continued her ladyship. 'I 
think I have told yon Aimr delicate and reticent she is on 
certain subjects. Even to me, her mother, andyoo know we 
have always been like sisters, she will tell nothing. Do yon 
know what I think? she will tell no one till she has told>0«. 
That's it ; you may be sure that 's it She will run no risk of 
your hearing it from any one but her. For heaven's sake 
don't let her know I have even hinted at anything ' 

'What da you mean. Lady Eccleston?' Sainty gasped, a 
supposition of which only he knew the full grotesqueness 
beginning to dawn on hinu 

' Dear, sweet, innocent Sainty ! ' cried Lady Eccleston, in a 
transport of archness. 'You aod my girl are made for one 
another. You are like a pair of child-lovers in a fairy-tale. 
I have told nothing, remember that; I will tell nothing. 
I will not rob dear Cissy of the joy of announcing it herself. 
Besides, as I say, I can only conjecture; she has absolutely 
refused to admit it.' 

' Dear Lady Eccleston,' cried Sainty, in great perturbation, 
'I can't pretend to misunderstand you; but, believe me, I 
think you are wrong. I am sure — I am almost sure — it can- 
not be as you suspect.' 

Lady Eccleston shook her head and pursed her lips 
mysteriously. 'A mother is not deceived/ she said. 'But 
recollect I have told you nothing. Cissy would never forgive 
me. I will not even congratulate you till you tell me. Mean- 
while I shan't breathe a word, not a word. Trust me'; and 



BELCHAMBER 399 

she again folded her son-in-law to her heart. ' It was the 
one thing wanting to our happiness,' burst from her, as it were 
involuntarily, as she hurried away, leaving Sainty too much 
bewildered to protest. 

Two days later they went into the country. Cissy was 
certainly not feeling well. She asked Sainty if he would mind 
going sooner than had been settled; she thought rest and 
country air would set her up. No, she wouldn't see a doctor ; 
there was nothing wrong with her. ' I 'm just knocked up 
with being on the go, morning, noon, and night, for months.' 

'Your mother suggested the weirdest explanation,' said 
Sainty. 

Cissy flushed crimson and then grew so pale that he feared 
she was going to repeat the performance of the night before. 

' Mamma really is a bigger fool than I thought,' she said 
hotly. ' I didn't think she would have had the idiotcy to 
carry that nonsense to you. What did you say ?' 

' What could I say ? I told her it was impossible, but she 
would listen to nothing.' 

* Of course it 's impossible ! no one should know that 
better than^^i^.' 

On the afternoon of his first day at Belchamber Sainty 
ordered his little cart and drove as in duty bound to pay his 
respects to his mother. He had not seen Lady Charmington 
since she had left his house in wrath, and though he had 
written to her several times he had received only the briefest 
and coldest answers. It was not, therefore, with any very 
pleasing anticipations of the coming interview that he set out 
to visit her. 

It was one of those perfect, cool autumnal days which | 
English people mistake for summer. The open spaces of 
the park were dappled with pleasant temperate sunlight like 
the flanks of the deer that fed there. Hundreds of rabbits 
squatted in the familiar glades or tilted themselves hastily 
into covert as he passed. Never had his home looked lovelier 
or more peaceful, or appealed more strongly to him. The 
woods and coppices called to him with a thousand voices, 



I 



300 BELCHAMBER 

and his poor heart, starved of all human emotion, answered 
as only the lonely and despised among her children can 
answer to the great cry of Nature the universal mother. 

Then, as he drove along the smooth green alleys, there 
came to him the recollection of his brother and of the woman 
his brother had married. Ever since his visit to them Sainty 
had thought much about his sister-in-law, and had striven in 
his own mind to do her justice ; terrible as she was to him 
aesthetically, he was forced to admit that she was a better sort 
than her husband. She did think of her children and do her 
duty by them according to her lights, whereas Arthur thought 
of no one but himself. After all, were Cissy's ideals in life, 
except superficially, much less vulgar than Lady Arthur's? 
He sometimes wondered if it were not better to have been 
frankly improper before marriage and settle down into an 
irreproachable wife and mother, than to be a frivolous little 
worldling, refusing to live with her husband, and lending 
numberless occasions to the tongue of scandal. 

Argue as he would, and rigidly impartial as he strove to 
make his mental attitude, the thought of his successors 
poisoned the beauty of the day for him and blotted out the 
sunshine. It was vain to tell himself that Cynthia's standard 
of personal conduct was higher than Cecilia's. Her ghastly 
veneer of gentility shocked his taste more than even her 
mother's frank vulgarity or Arthur's callous selfishness. To 
think of her and her shiny-faced babies at Belchamber was to 
profane his most sacred associations. 

He soon found that he need not have doubted his mother's 
welcome. She received him with what, for her, was almost 
cordiality. On the rare occasions when Lady Charmington 
assumed a staid and humorless jocosity, she was wont to affect 
a Scottish accent and manner of speech, and Sainty noted with 
surprise this mark of unusual hilarity. ' Come ben the house, 
man,' she remarked ; * the sight of ye is good for sair een.' 

'How pretty you have made everything,' said Sainty. 
' Your borders are lovely. There is no one like you for a 
garden, mother.' 



BELCHAMBER 301 

Lady Channington looked round her with a certain pride. 
*Yes, I think I've improved the place,' she said. *Doye 
know these late-flowering delphiniums ? this is the only kind 
that blooms as late as this. I thought at one time my 
hollyhocks were going to have the disease, but I Ve brought 
them through it.' 

'They are lovely ; and how beautiful these roses are.' 

'That's the pink Ayrshire; it's not so common as the 
white. You know the big bush in the corner of the west 
wing, I brought it from Scotland with me soon after I 
married ; these are some cuttings from it I took a few 
years ago, and last autumn I moved them here; haven't they 
grown?' Thus talking on safe subjects, they entered the 
house, where Sainty's admiration was claimed and freely given 
for various ingenious arrangements and improvements. 

'And how's Cissy?' asked Lady Charmington presently, 
a certain subdued excitement in her look and manner. 

' It is very good of you, mother, to ask after her so kindly,' 
Sainty answered. ' She doesn't seem to me very well ; she 's a 
little knocked up with all her gaieties, I think, but she won't 
admit there's anything wrong with her which a little rest and 
country air won't set right.' 

'Wrong with her! certainly not; what should ail her? 
cried Lady Charmington, with the same curious air of meaning 
more than she said. 

' I hope,' Sainty began awkwardly, ' that you won't remember 
her rudeness and bad behaviour to you last May ; it would 
be terribly painful to me to have you on bad terms with one 
another. I quite admit she behaved shockingly to you, but I 
hope you will overlook it I feel sure if you will come and 
see her you '11 find her ready to meet you more than half-way.' 

' I bear no malice,' said Lady Charmington, with bewilder- 
ing good-humour; 'and indeed I could find it in my heart to 
forgive her at this moment worse things than a little incivility 
to myself.' 

' That 's very kind of you,' Sainty said ; ' but why specially 
at this moment? ' He was beginning to feel uncomfortable. 



jM BELCHAMBER 

Ladf ChanningUm ieatied §anaad and looked dmpiyiii 

'Is it ponUe joo leaDj don't knov?' die sud. 'Yoa 
aie the queerest coa^ I ever caune across. I made sore 
yoo had come here to annomice it to me^ and I didn't vant 
to take the wind out of joor sails by lettii^ joo see that I 
kneir it alieadj/ 

'Know what? annoonce what?' died Saintj. He was 
beginning to divine his mothei^s meaning; his mind reverted 
to his co n v e r sa tion with Lady Eodeston. Why did all these 
women persist in mocking him with congiatnhuions on the 
impossible as thoogh it were an accomplished hct? *Have 
yon heard from Lady Ecdeston?' he asked, with apparent 
inelevance. 

Lady Charmington poonced on the implied admission. 

'Oho! So yon are not quite as ignorant as yon pretend! 
But why should yon try to keep it from me, when yon must 
know it is the bit of news idiich it woold give me more 
pleasure to bear than anything in the world ? ' 

' Dear mother/ said Sainty, 'do yon suppose if I had any 
such news to tell as you seem to imagine, that I shouldn't 
have rushed to you with it ? But it 's not sa It can't be so.' 

' But why shouldn't it be so ? ' asked Lady Charmington. 

'Believe me, it's impossible,' Sainty was beginning, and 
then recollected that he couldn't tell his mother wAy it was 
impossible. 'I don't know what's come to everybody,' he 
said lamely. 

'Why did you ask if I had beard from Lady Eccleston? 
It shows you guessed what I meant' 

* Because she too has run away with the same idea, and 
when I told her that she must be mistaken, she only became 
more positive.' 

' You see,' said Lady Charmington triumphantly, ' her own 
mother thinks so, and sA€ ought to know.' 

* But really, really, I feel sure you are all wrong. I don't 
want you to build on this, mother, because I know what a 
disappointment it will be to you.' 



BELCHAMBER 303 

'Do you mean to say your wife is not going to have a 
baby?' 

' I certainly think not ; she said herself her mother had 
been talking nonsense. Did she tell it to you as a fact, in 
so many words ? ' 

'Lady Eccleston's style is sometimes a little involved, but 

I certainly took her letter to mean Oh yes — there's not 

a doubt of it ; she carCt have meant anything else.' Lady 
Charmington turned over a pile of letters on her writing- 
table, and selecting one began to mumble through it. * Um, 
um, London emptying fast, just on the wing myself, cannot 
go till I 've found some one to read to my dear blind . • , 
um, um, um. Ah ! here it is : "I cannot refrain from giving' 
you a hint of the great news. I know how it will rejoice your 
heart. But don't betray me till the dear children tell you 
themselves. I should not say a word about it, only they are 
both so absurdly reticent and sensitive ; it is quite possible 
they may neither of them mention it. Dear Cissy was almost 
angry with me ; she tried to make out I was mistaken, but a 
mother's eye ! you and I know when . . ." Well, we needn't 
go into all that ; but you see, her mother's convinced.' 

' Well,' said Sainty, ' I can only set on the other side that 
Cissy denies it herself.' 

'How about her being taken ill at the party?' It was 
evident that Lady Eccleston had gone into details. 

' People may faint without being in that condition,' pro- 
tested Sainty; 'no one should know that better than L 
Believe me, you are all building too much on that momentary 
loss of consciousness, which may as likely as not have come 
from tight lacing.' 

Lady Charmington shook her head impatiently. 'Her 
mother says she has never been known to faint before in 
her life ; and any one can see with half an eye she has always 
laced . . .' 

After this the conversation languished perceptibly. It was 
obviously futile to go on discussing the prospects of an heir, 
when the parties principally concerned agreed in denying 



304 BELCHAMBER 

that there were any prospects. Lady Charmington, 'con- 
vinced against her will/ was very much 'of the same opinion 
still'; but balked of the topic on which she burned to 
dilate, she resolutely declined every other which her son 
brought forward. Sainty's well-meant efforts to extract in- 
formation on local or farming subjects were killed by the 
stony indifference she opposed to them, so that he presently 
took his leave, without obtaining more than a very qualified 
and doubtful agreement to his suggestion that she should 
come and see Cissy. 

At first the pertinacity of their two mothers in attributing 
miraculous offspring to Cissy and himself had seemed only 
a peculiarly galling mystification. Sainty never knew at 
just what moment a horrible solution of the puzzle had 
begun to suggest itself to him as possible. Had he fought 
against the conviction from the first, or did it come to him 
slowly and insidiously as his mother marshalled the reasons 
for her belief against his repeated denials? He could put 
his finger on no point in time when the suspicion had flashed 
into his brain; but by the time he reached his own door 
again, it seemed to him that there had been no hour of his 
unhappy married life when this terror had not sat grinning 
behind every trivial incident. He determined to see his 
wife, to know the worst at once. He asked for her, but 
learned she was out. ' Her ladyship had gone driving late, 
after tea, and had not come in yet.' He had no chance of 
speech with her through the evening, but when at last she 
went to her room, he followed boldly, hardly waiting for the 
answer to his knock before entering the room. 

Cissy had thrown herself on the sofa, and the loose sides 
of the tea-gown she had worn at dinner had a little fallen 
back. At the sound of the opening door she started up, 
and drew her draperies so swiftly about her that Sainty could 
not be sure if he had noticed or only imagined a slight change 
in her figure. 

' You 1 ' she cried. 

' Yes/ he said, in as steady a voice as he could. ' I want 



BELCHAMBE& 365 

to speak to you, and I could find no other chance of seeing 
you alone.' 

Their glances crossed and he read in her eyes a confirma- 
tion of his worst suspicions. Still he must be sure, must 
hear it from herself. She had looked startled, almost 
frightened, as she faced him, then her face took on a 
dogged sulky expression. 

• Well ? ' she said. 

' I went to see my mother this afternopn,' Sainty began. 

'Your mother,' Cissy broke in. 'Oh ! she^s been making 
mischief.' 

'On the contrary, she was all amiability and delight, 
ready to make it up with you, to forgive everything *'at this 
moment," as she said.' 

* That 's very kind of her ; but why ? ' 

'She was bursting with congratulations and excitement; 
she had had a letter from your mother.' 

Lady Belchamber muttered something very unfilial about 
her parent. ' And what dxAyou say ? ' she inquired. 

' I ? What could I say ? I said they were both mistaken. 
That you had told me it was not true ; and of course it isn't 
— it cat^t be ; I don't need to be told that.' 

He was pleading against his own certainty ; from the time 
he came into the room, he knew what he should hear before 
he left it. Yet with his whole heart he was begging her still, 
if it were possible, to deny the shame that had come upon 
his house. He stood mute and suppliant before her, and 
she looked at him almost pityingly. Then with a little 
discouraged gesture she turned away and sat down again on 
the sofa. 

'ItiVtrue,' she said quietly. 'You may as well know it 
first as last. In any case I couldn't conceal it much longer ; 
and now that mamma has guessed it, she will have told it to 
at least fifty people already. She little knows what she's 
doing,' she added, with a hard laugh that jarred on Sainty's 
overstretched nerves. 

He had been sure of it, had known it. Yet now that the 

u 



3o6 SELCHAMBfiR 

words were spoken, that the fact confronted him, admitted} 
undeniable, irrevocable, he staggered with the blow. 

' You are going to have a child ? ' he gasped. 

She nodded, and for all answer threw back the covering 
she had pulled across herself. 

' But it is not mine.' 

* Yours ! ' impatiently. * How should it be ? ' 

* Good God ! ' 

There was a silence. Sainty moved restlessly about, as 
agitated as though it were he who was making the confession. 
Cissy was far the more self-possessed of the two. She sat 
upon her sofa watching his agonised motions with a faintly 
inquisitive distaste, as a person of imperfect sympathies 
might observe the contortions of some creature he had 
unwittingly injured. 

'I suppose,' she said presently, 'you want to know whose 
it is?' 

* No, no ! ' cried Sainty shudderingly. * That least of all. 
For God's sake don't tell me ! ' and he made a step towards 
her, as though he would have choked back the name he 
feared to hear. 

Cissy stared. ' Queer ! ' she ejaculated. 

There was another pause. A clock struck midnight, and 
was echoed loudly or faintly by others near or distant. Sainty 
counted the strokes^ and was conscious of irritation when one 
began before another finished and embroiled his counting. 

It was again the woman who spoke first, and the question 
was characteristic, severely practical. 

* What are you going to do about it ? * 

*I don't know — I can't think. Give me time — ^give me 
time to think.' 

Cissy looked at him with undisguised contempt. */ 
should know what to do,' she said. After a while she added, 
* Of course I can't stay here now.' 

*I don't know — I don't know,' Sainty kept repeating. 
'We must do nothing in a hurry. Think of all it means» 
all the consequences*' 



I 



BELCHAMBER 307 

Cissy shrugged her shoulders. 'It seems rather late for 
that/ she remarked. ' Besides, we can't keep it to ourselves 
indefinitely, you know.' 

'At least give me to-night to get my ideas into some sort 
of order,' Sainty pleaded. ' You can't be surprised if this 
is rather a shock to me, can you?' he added, almost 
apologetically. 

Cissy laughed. 'I wonder if any man ever took this 
announcement in just the same way ?' she said. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

To Sainty, sitting alone in his old room in the western 
pavilion, it seemed that there was no bitterness left untasted. 
Far into the night he sat, his elbows on the table, his head 
buried in his hands. At first all seemed mere chaos and 
horror; he was stunned and could not think. But for the 
haunting consciousness of misery, he could almost have 
fancied that he had slept Gradually, however, definite images 
began to emerge from the bewildered trouble of his brain. 

What was this thing that had come on him, through no 
fault of his own? He had done no wrong, snatched no 
forbidden pleasure ; it was those other two who had sinned 
and enjoyed. Why must he be pilloried with them, share 
the scandal and the punishment? He, with his morbid 
shrinking from publicity, to have his private life turned inside 
out to the scorn and laughter of the vulgar ! He knew well 
enough how little sympathy he had to expect ; in all times 
and countries had not the betrayed husband been a butt for 
mirth ? He wondered why. It seemed hard to him that of 
the three characters in the eternal drama of adultery, it should 
always be the one innocent person that was selected for 
satire. Surely it was the most elementary justice that punish- 
ment should fall on him who injures his fellow, not upon the 
injured. Yet of they three, who would suffer most? He, 
without a doubt, who had the greatest capacity for suffering. 
He saw, as in a dream, the dingy scene of the divorce-courty 
the headlines in the papers, his name dragged in the dirt. 
He pictured to himself the long martyrdom of cross 
examination, the bar pathos, the bar wit; he knew how he 
should flinch and writhe at the stake. 






BELCHAMBER 309 

In his case, moreover, the situation was complicated by the 
coming child. He had not only to proclaim his dishonour 
to the world, but must lay bare to every grinning idiot the 
grotesque story of his married life. If the husband whose 
rights had been invaded was absurd, what of him who had 
not even been able to obtain those rights. And he must 
stand up in open court and tell this thing of himself, he who 
felt the mere idea of marriage too sacred for spoken words ! 
The cruel irony of it all! Was there no other issue but 
through that horrible sordid ordeal ? What did men do in 
his position? What was the deau rdle for the injured 
husband? He thought of Dumas's ^Tue-laP and wondered 
how it would have advanced matters if he had murdered 
Cissy, supposing he had the strength and courage to do it. 
It was only to shift the scene; another court, an added 
horror, but the same publicity, the same scandal, the same 
story to tell, the same agony to undergo. 

He almost regretted the foolish old fantastic code of 
honour which would have made it incumbent on him to 
challenge the seducer, and as likely as not be killed by him. 
Death might have been a solution, but there was no such 
easy way out of the situation as that. The hand that had 
done him so much wrong would not render him that 
supremest service. 

Hitherto he had succeeded almost without conscious effort 
in keeping the inevitable third in this grim trio almost an 
abstraction. Yet he remembered how passionately he had 
refused to know, when his wife had offered him the name 
of her lover. Now the figure was beginning to take shape 
against his will ; a tall figure with a false air of slenderness, a 
figure that by the languid grace of its movements counter- 
acted the slight tendency to heaviness in the hips and 
shoulders. How well he knew that back, the sinuous curves 
of the waist, the sidelong persuasive droop of the head ; he 
had seen it walking away beside Cissy on the afternoon of 
their very first meeting. It had been pressed against the 
glass door that held him an unwilling witness on the night 



3IO BELCHAMBER 

of the ball at Sunborough House. How clearly the im- 
pressions came back to him, the dusky garden speckled 
leopard-wise with lanterns, the lithe, shimmering blackness of 
the figure at his side trying to instil the doubts he would not 
harbour, the swift swing back of the door, the words so 
clearly overheard, that then had held no meaning for him. 
Still it was only a back, he had not seen the face, the gentle, 
kindly, sly, mocking face. He pressed his icy fingers tight 
against his hard straining eyeballs as if he could shut it out, 
that face he would not see. Not he I not he of all men ! 
Had not his mother mentioned other men with whom her 
imprudence was compromising Cissy ? Oh ! but that back 
was unmistakable. And then the voice ! low and soft, but so 
distinct ; he could hear it, could hear the words, counselling 
the horrible meanness of which he had so nearly been the 
dupe. He understood now the secret of her mysterious 
behaviour in the library that night. Surely such baseness 
was unbelievable ; even Cissy had recoiled from carrying out 
the scheme. 

For one brief moment he wished she could have done it — 
that he might have been deceived. 'I need never have 
known ! ' he cried, and his voice speaking aloud in the silence 
of the night startled him like the cry of a creature that is 
being killed. 

He raised his head and looked about him. The candle he 
had brought had burnt almost to the socket; he rose and 
lighted two others from it, and blew it out. The chill of the 
fireless summer night made him shiver, but there was that 
which lay so cold about his heart that he welcomed the 
physical discomfort as almost a relief. He moved about the 
room for a little, but soon tiring, went and sat down again. 

The same procession of black thoughts kept up their weary 
circle through his head ; round and round he followed them, 
yet came no nearer any light, nor any decision of what it 
behoved him to do under the circumstances. Was this the 
end of all his dreams, all his sacrifices, all his endeavour for 
others, all he had hoped to accomplish ? Was everything to 



BELCHAMBER 311 

go down in this whirlpool of a disgrace greater even than that 
which Arthur's marriage had brought upon them? It was 
Arthur's marriage that had been the origin of all his troubles. 
Oh yes, he saw it clearly enough now; however he had 
deceived himself at the time, he had married, had taken on 
himself the most sacred obligations, for no object but the 
mean one of excluding his brother. Perhaps this was his 
punishment. 

He saw what a puppet he had been in the hands of two 
strong-willed women, an instrument to satisfy the vulgar 
ambitions of the one, the angry revenge of the other. What 
a failure, what a dreary failure he had been all through 1 For 
years he bad had but one thought, one object in life, to steer 
Arthur past the rocks and quicksands of youth, and anchor 
him safe in the harbour of property and responsibility, and 
with what result ? What had come of all his plans, his careful 
tact, his delicate manipulation of his mother and brother? 
Arthur's marriage afforded a comment of grimmest' irony on 
his efforts in that direction. Since then, as ardently as he 
had once longed to renounce his birthright in favour of his 
brother, he had striven to preserve it from that contaminating 
touch, to keep that brother's wife from sitting in their 
mother's place; and, once more, with what result? To 
instal in the innermost shrine of all he held most sacred a 
woman no less wanton than her sister-in-law, only without 
her redeeming qualities and the excuses of her early training, 
one who would make his home a wilderness, his name a 
by-word! Shame, then, shame either way, and nothing 
accomplished ! 

It is not to be supposed that he thought these things out 
for himself, coldly, sententiously, in order, as, for the sake 
of the reader, they have to be written down. They were the 
residuum of all sorts of wild and whirling fancies, flung up at 
him, as it were, out of a seething cauldron of black wretched- 
ness, which was rather sensation than thought. Not once, 
moreover, but a thousand times, did each and all of them 
appear and vanish in a kind of witches' d^CQ to his weary 



312 BELCHAMBER 

brain, without perceptible sequence or connection. He 
seemed somehow to be outside his own consciousness, to sit 
and watch these images, as, one by one, some demon held 
them up for his tormenting, yet all the while every nerve in 
him tingled with the apprehension of how intimately they 
were part of himself. 

As he sat gazing stonily at despair, there came a soft 
stirring of the stillness, a murmur, a breath; then from 
without, a faint chirping. 

' • • • as in dark summer dawns,' 

he quoted mechanically, and was aware of a vague irritation 
that he could not remember the beginning of the line. 

'The earliest pipe of half-awakened birds 
To dying ears, when unto dying eyes 
The casement slowly grows a glimmering square.' 

He looked. The chintz curtains that veiled the windows 
were growing ghostly and transparent. It was the dawn. 

All through the night he had sat with his trouble, yet the 
morning found him as helpless and undecided as ever. 

' To dying ears, when unto dying ^yes,* he repeated dully. 
' Ah ! if it were but that ! Death ! how easy to die 1 What 
a rest, what an escape I It was life, not death, life with its 
hideous decisions and responsibilities that he had got to 
face. 

The candle flames became more spectral as the light slowly 
broadened, the light of a new day, the day in which he would 
have to make up his mind, to take a line, to act There was 
no way out — none. Once more he was confronted with the 
inevitable, the pitiless future coming every moment nearer, 
with all it held of suffering and shame, the fruitlessness of all 
his efforts, all in vain, in vain ! 

Then suddenly, as if some voice had spoken, came the 
question * Why?' Why need it be in vain? The solution, 
sfter all, lay ready to his hand. He had only to hold his 
tongue. It was all so simple. ' Their strength is to sit still,' 



BELCHAMBER 313 

he thought. Why, among all that had passed through his 
wretched head, had this never struck him ? He had wished 
for a child to bar his brother and his brother's sons from the 
succession. Well ! here was the child, his wife's child, born 
in wedlock, legally, lawfully his. Who could ever say it was 
not? No one but they two, and of their silence he could be 
tolerably sure. 

At first he put the idea from him with horror. It was a 
cheat, a fraud. He, with his fastidiously high standard of 
conduct, to cozen his brother out of his inheritance by a 
shabby trick. Impossible 1 The thing was impossible. 

He got up, and put back the curtain, and stood looking 
out into the silence of the growing morning. Over opposite 
to him, the grey sky was beginning to flush with palest rose, 
in which the last stars were growing dim; but as yet the 
great quadrangle lay all in black shadow, out of which the 
restored statues stood vaguely up like shapes of evil menacing 
the eastern glory. No, no, no. Better the talk, the scandal, 
the publicity of the divorce court, than to stand convicted 
before the tribunal of his own conscience. Whatever else 
went down in the shipwreck of his life, let him at least keep 
his self-respect. * What did it profit a man to gain the world, 
and lose his own soul?' Yet how often in the old days, in 
his talk with Newby, had he inveighed against the selfishness 
of the Puritan idea, which would make the saving of one's 
soul the object of conduct. Surely the only rational motive 
was the consideration of how one's acts afiected others. In 
the present instance who would be the worse for his silence? 
No one would be hurt or disappointed. These people did not 
expect to succeed ; they had given up all hopes of it when he 
married. Had they not told him so themselves? On the 
other hand, there was his mother, his mother who had done 
so much for him. He remembered how he had found her, 
when she had first learned the truth about Arthur, and terror 
mixed with his grief at the mere conjecture of what she might 
say and do with the marriages of both her sons thus ending 
in shame. Their talk that afternoon had shown him how 



314 BELCHAMBER 

much her hopes were centred in the birth of an heir to 
Belchamber. The mere prospect had blotted out the very 
recollection of her quarrel with Cissy, and Lady Charmington 
was not a forgiving woman. His fear of her had always gone 
hand in hand with his love of her, and both made him wince 
at the thought of her disappointment. Had he the right to 
bring this fresh blow upon her^ who had suffered so much, 
merely to salve his own conscience? After all, had he any 
self-respect to sacrifice? Was it possible for him to have a 
meaner opinion of himself than he had always entertained? 

At that moment the sun topped the mass of the eastern 
wing, flooding with light the broad spaces of grass and gravel 
at his feet, and casting a long ray over the tall, stately fofode 
of the beautiful house. And at the thought of all that was 
symbolised by that pomp of hewn and fretted stone, the 
aristocrat that lurked so deep within him, so overlaid with 
fine theories of brotherhood and equality that he was uncon- 
scious of his very existence^ stirred and claimed his own. 
' For the credit of my houses' he murmured uneasily, as he 
turned away from the window. 

He did not yield at once, or without a struggle, but he 
knew from the first that it would come to that. From the 
moment the idea leaped full-grown like Athene from his brain, 
it was fully armed to meet every point that had distressed 
him. He feared scandal. There need be no scandal. He 
shrank from the ignominy of a divorce case. There need be 
none. Did the thought of unveiling to the public eye the 
bitter humiliation of his married life revolt him ? Here was 
a means not only of secrecy, but actual disproof. Did it 
break his heart to think of inflicting such a blow upon his 
mother? He had only to be silent to crown her dearest 
wishes, and make her the happiest woman in England. Had 
he married, enduring all that marriage had brought him, that 
he might keep his sister-in-law and her children from the 
heritage of his name and home? Here, too, was the one 
thing necessary for that end. And to attain all these desired 
objects there was nothing to do, no word to say, no lie to telL 



BELCHAMBER 315 

He had only to let things take their course. It was the line 
of least resistance, so easy, so fatally easy 1 

To a man of his character and disposition, what a tempta- 
tion, what a terrible temptation ! He was weakened by his 
long vigil, the little stock of vitality that he could ever call to 
his assistance, worn almost to a thread with watching and 
misery. He knew he should give in. To all the arguments 
in favour of it, what had he to oppose but one poor little 
scruple of personal honour? 

He wondered if his wife had known what he would do 
before he had thought of it himself? Had she traded on her 
certainty of his cowardice? At such a suspicion, he almost 
grew strong again ; but no — she had seemed to entertain no 
doubt that he would repudiate her. He fancied she had 
even felt a certain relief at the prospect of being rid of the 
semblance of a connection with himself, and the freedom to 
claim openly the protection of the man whom, in her way, 
she loved. If so, here was another argument in favour of 
silence. By it he could thwart and punish her. 

He wandered into his brother's old room, next his own. 
Here the drawn blinds made still a glimmering twilight, and 
lent an unreality to the familiar objects. He went and looked 
at the old school photographs. There was one of Arthur in 
a group of the cricket eleven, which had always been his 
special favourite. The figure stood squarely on its legs, the 
brawny arms bare to the elbow and crossed upon the chest, 
a boyish grin lighting the handsome face, from which the cap 
was pushed back by the strong upward spring of the hair 
above the brow. It was the image of youth, and life, and 
happiness. Long he stood motionless before it, and then he 
bent forward and pressed his poor pale lips to the cold glass. 
'Arthur,' he whispered. 'My little Arthur, you are dead, 
and so is your miserable brother who loved you so. You are 
no more that brutal, querulous egoist that I saw the other 
day, than he is the wretch who can stoop to crime to rob 
you.' 

Distant sounds showed him that the household was beginning 



3i6 BELCHAMBER 

to be astir. Before his man came to wake him he must 
have removed the signs of his long vigil. He returned 
hurriedly to his own room, once more drew the curtain across 
the window, extinguished the lights, and, hastily undressing 
himself, crept into bed. Already the sense of having some- 
thing to hide stung him with a terrible self-contempt. He 
had caught sight of his drawn, haggard face as he passed the 
mirror. It was the face of a coward. 

He did not leave the pavilion all day. He sent word he 
was ill That at least was true enough, but late in the 
evening, as he was lying on the sofa in his study, there came 
a knock at the door, and Cissy entered. Though perhaps a 
shade paler than usual, nothing in her appearance suggested 
a guilty wife come to hear her sentence. 

* I have come to return your visit of last night,' she said, as 
she stood looking down on him. 

Sainty groaned and hid his face. At sight of her, the desire 
to brand her as what she was almost conquered, where con- 
science and sense of honour had failed — almost, but not 
quite. 

Cissy kept her indifferent pose, playing with the ornaments 
she wore. 

'Well?' she asked at last 'Have you made up your 
mind yet ? * 

'Yes.' His voice came mufRed and strange. 

Lady Belchamber started. 'What are you going to do?' 
she demanded, with slightly quickened interest 

' Nothing.' 

There was a pause. 

'Do you mean to say,' she asked at last, 'that you are 
going to acknowledge the child ? ' 

' Yes.' 

She turned away from him with a half-stifled exclamation. 
Was it relief or disappointment ? he could not tell. After a 
time she flung a word over her shoulder : ' Why ? ' 

' Because it happens to suit me,' he said doggedly. 

The silence was broken by the little laugh he hated. 



BELCHAMBER 317 

' I suppose I ought to be very grateful to you,' she sneered. 

Sainty sprang from the couch. ' I have ceased to expect 
gratitude or any other kindly feeling from you,' he blazed out 
at her ; but his wrath fell as quickly as it had flared. 

Her puny disdain was powerless to hurt him, merged in 
the measureless ocean of his self-contempt. There would be 
lies enough, acted, looked, and lived, if not spoken. At 
least to her there need be no pretence of an attitude ; if not 
with an accomplice, with whom may one permit himself the 
luxury of being honest ? 

* After all, why should I scold at you?' he said wearily. 
'You have nothing to thank me for. Don't suppose, if I 
stoop to this incomparable baseness, that it is with any 
thought of pleasing you! 

Cissy stared at him, cowed by the dim apprehension of a 
tragedy she was incapable of understanding; and it was not 
without a certain satisfaction that he saw in her eyes the 
vague terror of the incomprehensible beginning to permeate 
her habitual scorn of him. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

Though the birth of an heir to the house of Belchamber might 
naturally be supposed a festive occasion, it brought little 
satisfaction to those principally concerned. It is true that 
Lady Charmington talked broad lowland for weeks ; nor was 
Lady Eccleston, who kept a supply of conventional sentiment 
always on tap, likely to be wanting at such a time ; but in 
spite of every grandmotherly effort to impart a correct sense 
of rejoicing, a certain flatness attended what should have 
been such an auspicious event. Cissy, entirely preoccupied by 
terror of physical suffering, insisted that her confinement 
should take place in London, where she would be within 
reach of the best professional aid, to the extreme disgust of 
her mother-in-law, who had decided that Belchamber was the 
appropriate scene on which the newcomer's eyes should first 
open. Sainty, being appealed to, expressed the most com- 
plete indifference on the subject ; he said he didn't suppose 
it mattered to the baby where it was born, or that it would be 
likely to retain the smallest recollection of the event. ' It 
will be a great disappointment to everybody,' Lady Charm- 
ington remarked. ' Besides, it will mean your not being here 
at Christmas. How do you expect your people to rejoice in 
the birth of an heir, if you slink away and let it happen in 
London, like anybody else's child ? ' 

* How do you know it will be an heir ? ' Sainty said. * Why 
shouldn't it be a girl ? ' 

His mother disdained to notice such a preposterous sug- 
gestion. 

' It ought to be here,' she kept repeating. 

' /wasn't born here,' Sainty said. 

US 



BELCHAMBER 319 

* That was quite different ; Belchamber wasn't our home in 
those days. Your father and I hardly ever came here in the 
old lord's time; for that matter, they weren't here much 
themselves. Besides, I wanted to be with my mother; there 
is nothing to prevent Cissy having her mother with her here ; 
things are very different for her from what /had to put up 
with. I should like to have seen my mother-in-law allowing 
me to be confined in her house ! but your poor father felt it 
very much.' 

'Well,' Sainty said at last, 'you can settle it with Cissy; if 
you can persuade her^ you 're welcome to; /never can, and 
in the present case I don't care to.' 

Every allusion to the coming event was the turning of a 
sword in his heart. His mother's restrained eagerness was 
not less terrible to him than Lady Eccleston's loud jubilation. 

He never knew if Lady Charmington availed herself of his 
suggestion that she should appeal to Cissy. Certainly, if 
she did, it was with no success, for long before there was 
any possibility of the child making its appearance. Lady Bel- 
chamber removed to London, taking her parent with her. 
Cissy, as usual, when frightened or needing help, turned to 
' her mother, for whom, as we know, she cherished no very 
profound respect at other times; and Lady Eccleston was 
not even permitted to return to her own house in Chester 
Square, but must take up her abode with her daughter, who 
considered it a great concession if she allowed her to go out 
for an hour's shopping. It is not to be wondered at if 
mamma became a little important under the circumstances, 
and gave herself airs in writing to the other dowager, who must 
have hated having to stay and eat her heart out at Belchamber, 
with no hand in what touched her so nearly. 

Poor Lady Charmington abounded in strange recondite 
lore, and gave much advice which was a little out of date at 
the stage proceedings had reached. 'On no account let her 
mother coddle your wife,' she wrote to Sainty. 'If she 
wants a son, make her take exercise and not be too, luxurious 
or over-eat herself*' 



320 BELCHAMBER 

Every day the letters came, advocating a Spartan rSgime} 
but the messages never reached their destination. Sainty 
would have cut his tongue out sooner than address a word 
to Cissy on the subject, who, none the less, produced in due 
course an infant of the desired sex. 

Lady Charmington hurried up to Roehampton, and actually 
dragged poor old Lady Firth into London to visit her great- 
grandson. The old lady, who had become nearly blind, and 
now hardly ever left her o?m fireside, peered curiously at the 
baby through two pairs of spectacles. 

* I don't know who he is like,' she said. ' You have a look 
of your father, Sainty, but you are more like our family ; this 
little lamb i^'t like either. No, certainly not a bit like you, 
nor yet like yout wife, who is so fair. I don't know, I'm 
sure, who he takes after.' 

'Does it matter much, grandmamma,' Sainty asked, 'as 
long as he is strong and healthy ? ' 

His mother turned on him promptly. 'Oh I you never 
think anything matters. Can't you even take an interest in 
your own first-born son ? ' 

' Come, mother, it doesn't follow that I take no interest 
because I don't think it matters who he looks lik^' Sainty 
protested meekly. 

He had several occasions to curse the propensity common to 
the whole female sex, when brought into the presence of a 
newborn babe, to hunt down and fix a likeness for it to some 
one or other of its kinsfolk. It seemed as though the one 
important thing to do for the little Lord Charmington was to 
determine this vexed question of resemblance. The child 
was of a marked type, too, with long-lashed dark eyes, and 
an unusual quantity of very black hair, as far removed from 
Sainty's sandy insignificance as from the delicate fairness of 
his wife. 

At last the matter was set at rest quite unexpectedly, and 
Sainty breathed more freely. The duchess, who had come to 
town for a little Christmas shopping, called to inquire after 
Cissy, and requested to be shown the baby. 



BELCHAMBER 321 

*Eh bien I vous voili fire/^ she remaxked, looking rather 
quizzically at her grandson, as he piloted her upstairs. 
* My compliments I And how is Monsieur Bihi ? Is he 
pretty, at least? brown or blond, a Chambers, a Bigorr, 
or,' with the faintest pause of indescribable insolence, 'an 
Eccleston ? ' 

Belchamber took dexterous advantage of opening doors, 
giving warning of steps, and such small attentions, to avoid 
giving any direct answer, but he might have saved himself 
the trouble. The eternal topic was at once brought up by 
the monthly nurse, as she proudly displayed her charge. 

'We can't think who he is like, your grace,' she said, 
folding the flannel back from the tiny face. 'Just look at 
his beautiful great eyes, and did ever you see such a head of 
hair on a babe ? ' 

Sainty could have throttled her. ' That 's the one thing 
every one seems to think of,' he said rather testily. 

'Like?' said the duchess. 'There can be no question; 
he 's like me. You know the miniature of me as a little girl 
— the child is the image of it.' 

Sainty started; he had so entirely forgotten that her 
grace was ever dark, that the resemblance had escaped him, 
but once pointed out it was salient. He felt like a criminal 
who discovers that the detective he has been dodging is on 
the track of some one else. After all, she was his grand- 
mother too 1 

' Of course ! ' he cried, ' how stupid every one has been not 
to think of it' And the next time the unwelcome subject 
was mentioned in his presence (by his mother^ who had been 
showing the precious infant to Alice de Lissac), he said quite 
naturally, ' Oh, we 've settled that question. He 's just like 
the miniature at Sunborough House of the duchess when she 
was a child.' 

Lady Charmington, who loved her mother-in-law no better 
than Cissy did hers, was most unwilling to admit the likeness, 
but could not deny it ; and there being no doubt that baby 
derived his appearance from the member of the family she 



323 BELCHAMBER 

least wished him to resemble, was in future as averse as her 
son could desire to all discussion of what had occupied her 
so much. 

Lady Eccleston, on the contrary, who loved all great 
people, was enchanted to point out the likeness to every 
member of her huge acquaintance. ' Isn't he like the dear 
duchess ? ' she would cry. * It is so clever of him to have 
picked out the most beautiful of all his relations to take 
after, bless him ! ' 

As time went on, the shortlived interest in the hope of the 
Chamberses rapidly waned. The bonfires in his honour had 
hardly burnt themselves out before this poor little scion of a 
noble house found himself in as much danger of being alto- 
gether neglected as if he had been of quite humble birth. Lady 
Charmington returned to the country, and Lady Eccleston, 
having provided a grand nurse and nursery-maid with unim- 
peachable testimonials out of one of the most aristocratic 
nurseries in the land, gradually allowed herself to be re-absorbed 
by her numerous avocations, social and philanthropic. 

Cissy has been most inadequately represented if it need be 
stated that the very last person to trouble her head about the 
poor little thing was its mother. She was entirely at one with 
the fashionable accoucheur who attended her, in his opinion 
that to nurse the child would be far too great a strain on her 
constitution. After the briefest period of seclusion which the 
same authority could fa^ got to say was sufficient for her own 
restoration, and a flyir^ visit to the seaside, she seemed to 
have but one object in life, to make up by extra assiduity for 
the weeks she had been compelled to sacrifice from the 
engrossing occupation of amusing herself. If before she 
had been much out of her own house, she was now hardly 
ever in it. The only limit to the number of her engagements 
was the fear lest she should be betrayed into doing something 
that was not * smart ' ; and even with this important restric- 
tion, they were far too numerous to admit of her having any 
time to bestow upon her son. 

As for Sainty, he hardly ever saw her. In so large a 



BELCHAMBER 323 

house, with a perfectly mutual desire to keep apart^ it was 
not difficult to avoid meeting. He had had one necessary 
interview with her after the birth of the boy, in which he had 
told her some very plain truths. 

' You may as well understand the situation quite clearly,' 
he said. 'In return for the various things you enjoy as a 
result of being believed to be my wife, I have hitherto asked 
nothing of you ; after what has happened, I would not take 
it if you offered it on your knees. I made just one condition, 
which you have not thought fit to observe, that there should 
be no scandal ; to avoid it, I have sacrificed my last shred of 
self-respect. Don't, therefore, think that you can count on 
a like cowardice on my part in the future. I pretend to no 
sort of control over your actions. What you do is of no con- 
sequence to me ; but on just this one thing I insist : I must 
never hear you talked about, and, above all, there must be 
^no repetition of this — this occurrence.' 

' I see,' said Cissy. * Having by hook or by crook got the 
heir for which you and your mother were so anxious, you 
have no further use for me, and will seize the next opportunity 
to get rid of me.' 
V Sainty looked at her a moment, so antagonistic, so hard, 
so insolent in her youth and beauty, to which her late 
recovery lent a character almost ethereal. Bitter as her taunt 
was, he could not deny its substantial truth. 

* Precisely,' he said, and left her without another word. 

While Cissy immersed herself in social frivolities, Sainty 
was trying to find in work forgetfulness of the child he was 
ashamed to remember. He devoted long hours to humble 
toil and study, of which the only result would be a paragraph 
in the report of some learned society, read by no one but its 
own members. He attended the debates in the House of 
Lords with unparalleled assiduity, and came to be a familiar 
figure in the gallery on important nights in the other House. 
The scarcity of Radical peers gave him an extrinsic value 
for the leaders of his party, while his patience, powers of 
work, and known interest in all schemes of beneficence, 



r. 



324 BELCHAMBER 

marked him as specially designed by Providence to serve on 
Parliamentary Committees. 

There was one important point of difference between the 
couple. While Cissy's absorption in her favourite pursuits 
was quite natural and genuine, and she found no difficulty 
whatever in forgetting her maternal duties, it was only by 
consistent effort that Sainty succeeded in shutting out the 
recollection of his shame. The image of the baby, with its 
tell-tale dark eyes, was perpetually between him and the page 
he was writing or the pamphlet on which he was trying to 
fix his attention. 

As we know, his rooms were on the ground-floor of the ■ 

London house, while the nurseries were up three flights of i 

stairs ; it seemed impossible that any echo should penetrate 
from them to his study, yet he was always fancying that he 
detected faint sounds of crying from the upper regions of 
the house. Sometimes he would stop in his work and listen, 
and then, convinced that his imagination had played him a 
trick, turn again to his reading or writing, only to be haunted 
by this illusive wailing as before. 

One day in the early spring, the child being then some ( 

three months old, this impression was more than usually ( 

persistent. At last, exasperated by his inability to fix his 
mind on what he was doing, Sainty pushed away his papers 
and went out upon the back stairs to listen. This time there 
was no question of imagination. Perhaps some door usually 
closed had been left open, but whatever the explanation, there 
was no doubt that a most real and material lamentation, such 
as the human infant alone is capable of producing, was echoing 
through the house. He returned to his table and sat down 
again. ' I suppose babies of that age always yell,' he said to ^ 

himself, and he recalled Arthur's complaint of that tendency 
in his own offspring. Why, of all people in the world, need 
the baby's crying make him think of his brother? The recol- 
lection of that stucco rectory in the shires, where the birth 
of the little Lord Charmington must have aroused anything 
but enthusiasm, made him start and tremble like a felon. 



BELCHAMBER 325 

For a moment he fancied the noise had ceased, but a 
second visit to the landing convinced him such was not the 
case. He looked at the clock. It was almost time for him 
to go down to Westminster ; he would go out and walk a 
little first — sometimes he thought he did not have enough 
fresh air — it would do him good. He put away his papers, 
gathered together some loose sheets of notes that he wanted, 
and left the room. 

What made him turn to the stairs instead of the front door 
he never quite knew. Some occult power seemed to draw his 
feet. He couldn't go out to do battle for the children of the 
poor with that lamentable wailing ringing in his ears, and 
make no inquiry into what ailed the child under his own roof. 

He had not mounted to these upper floors since he had 
conducted the duchess thither, but if he had been in any doubt 
about the room, the cries, which seemed to redouble in force 
as he drew nearer, would have been a quite sufficient guide. 
Through the wide open door Sainty could see the interior 
of the nursery before he entered. Lady Eccleston had given 
the rein to her grandmotherly fancy in the provision of all 
things needful and luxurious for the young heir. He was 
at least sumptuously lodged ; the walls were gay with sanitary 
illustrations of juvenile literature from Miss Greenaway's 
charming designs; buttercups and daisies sprinkled the 
window hangings ; everything streamed with pale blue satin 
ribbon, and the very powder-box, of choicest ivory, had the 
mystic word 'Baby' slanting in turquoises across the lid. 
But nothing was ranged, or ordered, or in its proper place. 
The costly little garments so lavishly provided were tossed 
about with careless profusion, damp cloths trailed over the 
floor, a common enamelled saucepan for heating the child's 
food had been set down on a lace robe, and half-washed-out 
feeding-bottles mingled on the table with the materials from 
which the nurse had evidently been manufacturing a new hat 
for herself. 

The room was bare of human presence save for the emitter 
of the howls, who was lying alone in his cot, roaring himself 



326 BELCHAMBER 

purple in the face. He had kicked himself free of his wrap- 
pings, and his poor little legs were quite cold to the touch. 
Without attempting to cope with the complication of integu- 
ments, Sainty loosely pulled the coverlet over the child, and 
then looked with horror and anxiety at the convulsed face. 
What was to be done ? * Don't ! ' he said imploringly, in no 
particular expectation of being understood, but from a general 
instinct to say something. * Please don't 1 ' 

Whether the sense of a human presence was of some 
comfort to the baby, or it was only startled by the sound of 
an unfamiliar voice, it is certain that it intermitted its scream- 
ing, and slowly unpuckering its face, allowed the hidden eyes 
to appear. They were all wet and shiny with tears, their long 
lashes glued into points like a series of tiny camel's-hair paint 
brushes. 

Sainty wondered if be dared wipe them. ' It can't be 
comfortable to have one's face all slobbered over like that,' 
he thought, and taking out his handkerchief began, as lightly 
and tenderly as he could, to remove some of the superfluous 
moisture that seemed to exude from every feature. The 
baby, far from being sensible of this attention, showed 
unmistakable signs of being about to resume its lament. 
Sainty swiftly desisted from his endeavours, and once more 
implored its forbearance. 

The baby, with its face all made up for a fresh howl, 
paused suddenly when, so to speak, half-way there, and once 
more opened its eyes. It stared solemnly at Sainty and 
Sainty stared back at it. What dumb interchange of intelli- 
gence passed between them it would be hard to say, but 
presently a faint windy smile flickered across one side of the 
baby's face leaving the other immutably grave. 

Sainty was transported with gratitude; he nodded and 
smiled repeatedly at the baby and tried to think of pleasant 
noises to make to it. One of the little hands had broken 
loose from under the coverlet and was beating the air — spar- 
ring at life with the aimless hostility of infancy. Very 
gingerly Sainty laid his forefinger against the palm, and 



BELCHAMBER 327 

instantly the absurd fingers closed round it and held him 
prisoner. 

Long he stood beside the cradle gently swaying the hand 
that held his own back and forth and contemplating the baby, 
which, soothed by the rhythmic movement, seemed inclined 
to sleep. Since it ceased crying, its face had become a much 
pleasanter and more normal colour, and, as the suffusing 
crimson died away, Sainty could notice how the poor chin 
was chafed and red where it had rubbed on the wet unchanged 
bib; the tiny nails, too, were edged with black, and surely, he 
thought, a carefully tended baby ought not to smell as sour as 
this one did. It was being borne in upon him that the child 
was neglected, a thought which made him not less indignant 
that he could not feel wholly without blame in the matter. 
True, the child was not his, but by acknowledging it he had 
accepted responsibility; he knew far too well how little 
reason there was to expect that its mother would occupy 
herself with such matters to think of sheltering himself 
behind the plea that it was her business. It was monstrous 
that the sins of its parents should be visited on this helpless 
creature. The queer little claw still grasped his finger, and 
he was still swinging it and crooning gently, when the nurse 
hurried into the room and was visibly taken aback at sight of 
her master. At once she was voluble in explanation and 
excuse. 

' That was the worst of these girls, you never could trust 
'em ; her back wasn't a minute turned that that Emma wasn't 
off to her own affairs. She hadn't but just stepped down- 
stairs to give the orders herself about his lordship's milk, 
which, it was surprising, with all these lazy servants in the 
house, never could be sent up at the right time, and had 
particularly told the girl not to leave the room for a second 
till she came back . • •* with much more to the same 
effect. 

Sainty grimly eyed the artificial roses she was whisking out 
of sight with clumsy dexterity, in her attempt to bring order 
out of chaos, with one hand, while with the other she made 



328 BELCHAMBER 

playful passes at the baby, crying 'Did he?' and *Was he, 
then?' and *Nana's here, precious.' 

Neither Sainty nor the baby was in the least taken in by 
this transparent comedy. 

' I think this child is not properly looked after/ the former 
said sternly. 

'Not looked after!' Nurse was outrs^ed in her finest 
feelings. ' Not looked after ! She didn't know what his lord- 
ship meant. She was never away for a minute all day and 
often up half the night with the little darling ; not that she 
grudged it, not she ; she was well aware it was but her duty 
and what she was paid for, but it was hard after all to be told 
she didn't look after the dear child, and she did think no one 
who hadn't done it had any idea what it was to be with a 
young infant at night. . . .' 

And just then the peccant underling returning from her 
own private expedition in neglect of her duty, she made a 
diversion by falling on her and smiting her figuratively hip 
and thigh in a frenzy of righteous wrath. 

The baby's official guardians having for the time being 
returned to their posts, Sainty did not judge it necessary to 
remain and enter into details in which he might easily betray 
his ignorance. Having made his sweeping indictment and 
seen his heir restored to tranquillity by a bottle, he returned 
to his own neglected duties, feeling a little as if the Lord 
Chancellor might address to him some of the scathing 
reproaches he had just heard flung at the head of Emma. 

He tried to immerse himself in his usual employments, but, 
do what he would, he was haunted for the rest of the day and 
far into the night by the vision of the piteous, dirty baby left 
to howl by itself in the midst of its luxurious surroundings, 
and felt the cold clasp of the tiny fingers growing gradually 
warm and moist upon his own. 



CHAPTER XXV 

The interview last recorded between Belchamberand his heir 
was to have momentous consequences for both of them. The 
principal gain was at first to the baby, as the immediate result 
was the dismissal of his neglectful attendants. Cissy, for her 
part, first delicately expressed surprise at Sainty's interesting 
himself in the matter at all, and then adopted the simple plan 
of refusing to believe a word against the nurse, whom she 
eventually passed on to another young mother, with as strong 
a recommendation as she had received of her, adding in 
explanation : * My husband took a dislike to the woman, and 
so, of course, she had to go.' 

Lady Eccleston was full of concern and astonishment. ' I 
caf^f understand it,' she cried. * Lady Quivers gave her the 
very highest character, and before that, she was four years in 
the nursery at Branches, first as nursery-maid and then as 
under-nurse, and I went to see dear Lady Olave myself, who 
couldn't say enough about her. I catCt think she would 
really neglect the darling.' 

Sainty repeated his experience, and * Go and see for your- 
self,' he said. 'The child is ill-cared for; he isn't even kept 
clean.' 

Grandmamma went to inspect, and returned declaring the 
angel was as neat as a new pin. ' You can't, no matter haw 
careful you are, prevent their dear little chinnywinnies from 
getting a wee bit chapped if they dribble much,' she said. 

' No doubt he was clean enough after my unexpected visit,' 
Sainty answered ; ' but I assure you / didn't find him so ; his 
hands were dirty and nothing about him was fresh. I don't 
know much about babies, but I 'm sure they ought not to 



330 BELCHAMBER 

smell so nasty. He was hungxy and cold too, poor little 
chap ! and left all alone to yell himself into a fit.' 

'Nurse declares she wasn't gone five minutes; she was 
dreadfully distressed that you should have found the child 
alone. I feel sure one can trust that woman ; I can always 
tell by people's faces and the way they look at one; and 
Lady Quivers said she was 5^ devoted to her last, and I know 
it was a very delicate little thing.' 

For once, however, her son-in-law was inexorable. * The 
woman may have been all you say when she came,' he said; 
' but it is not surprising if the best of nurses grows neglectful 
when the mother sets her the example.' 

This was taking the matter to very unsafe ground, where 
Lady Eccleston felt that it behoved her to walk warily. * I 
can want nothing but the darling baby's good,' she said 
hastily. * I hold no brief for nurse, and if you are dissatisfied 
with her, dear Sainty, of course she had better go, though I 
don't see what precautions we can take more than we did in 
getting this one.' 

It was Alice de Lissac who finally discovered a successor 
to Lady Quivers' treasure, and imported a pet lamb from her 
mother's bible-class at Great Charmington to act as nursery- 
maid. 

Once the treasure was gone, the other servants abounded 
in evidence, which more than justified her removal, though 
they would apparently have had no difficulty in reconciling 
their consciences to perpetual silence had she remained. 
It transpired that it was her frequent habit to administer 
narcotics to her unfortunate charge, in order that she might 
fulfil evening engagements of her own, from which she had 
sometimes not returned till the small hours of the morning; 
yet when Sainty felt it his duty to impart this information to 
her new employer, he was very civilly shown the door, with 
profuse thanks, but a polite intimation that his interference 
was not required; from which he was forced to conclude 
that Cissy was not as exceptional among fashionable mothers 
as he, in his ignorance, had imagined. 



BELCHAMBER 331 

He carried the child off to Belchamber, where he knew 
that Lady Charmington would keep a lynx eye on the new 
nurse and her acolyte, and where, indeed, it soon began to 
improve visibly in condition. 

Since its mother seemed to be without the common 
instincts of the animal kingdom, he imposed it on himself as 
a duty to see that the poor little creature was at least warmed 
and fed, and not poisoned with drugs. The duty was at first 
rather a painful one, involving as it did a constant recollection 
of what he would fain forget ; but, as the months went by, 
like other things originally taken up from the sternest sense 
of responsibility, it came to have for him a decided interest. 

It has been somewhat cynically said that to be under an 
obligation to a man is the beginning of dislike ; be that as it 
may, there is no doubt that any one to whom, in a world of 
frustrated effort, we have been able to do a tangible service, 
establishes thereby a distinct claim on our gratitude. 'This,' 
we say to ourselves with a pardonable glow, ' is our work ; 
here is something accomplished, some one better or happier 
for our existence.' And it is impossible not to have a kindly 
feeling towards the person who has procured us such a 
pleasing reflection. 

Sainty found his mind constantly running on his small 
charge; he dwelt with pleasure on the prospect of seeing it; 
he even began to make excuses for more frequent visits to 
Belchamber, where it was astonishing how often his presence 
and personal supervision seemed to be required. 

In addition to the baby, there was now another person 
there, on whom he had the pleasure of knowing he had con- 
ferred a benefit ; he had rescued his brother-in-law, Thomas 
Eccleston, from the hated thraldom of the broker's office, 
and placed him with his agent, Mr. Danford, who was 
beginning to feel, as age stole upon him, the necessity for 
help in managing the huge property. 

The good Tommy, his legs permanently gaitered, his 
honest pink face burnt to a healthy brickdust colour, and his 
hands hardened by much congenial outdoor labour, was as 



33« BELCHAMBER 

happy as a rabbit in a vegetable garden. To initiate this 
neophyte into his duties, and at the same time keep things 
smooth between Danford and the pupil in whom his jealousy 
could not but scent a possible successor, called for many 
visits from the master. Sainty made time for them gladly, 
half ashamed to admit even to himself how much the new 
tenant of his old nurseries had to do with his alacrity. It 
surprised him to find how eagerly his eyes would scan the 
walks and lawns for the distant gleam of white in the 
perambulator. 

Week by week, and month by month, the little life was 
expanding and developing like an opening flower in the sun- 
shine, and Sainty noted the changes, watching with reverent 
awe the miracle of the dawning intelligence. He brought 
wonderful toys, heads in fancy costume that could by a turn 
of the wrist be made to gyrate on a handle to a feeble lute- 
like accompaniment; wonderful parti-coloured acrobats in 
the attitude of St. Andrew on his cross, who shook their 
extended limbs with a great tinkling of bells; white furry 
animals that emitted strange squeaks when pressed in the 
abdominal regions. 

It must be confessed that the toys left the baby rather 
cold; sometimes he looked at them with solemn and con- 
temptuous eyes, sometimes with an indulgent smile; more 
often he swept them from him with a downward sabre-cut 
action of the right arm. Whatever he did seemed to Sainty 
an indication of unusual capacity. He thought with a pang 
of fierce hatred — ^was it envy ? was it contempt ? — of the men 
who begot such marvellous beings, and grudged an occasional 
moment from their low toils or pleasures to glance impatiently 
. at them and order them from the room. Of a mother who 
( could bring forth a child and leave it to take its chance of 
uife or death in the care of hirelings, he dared not trust him- 
self to think at all. 

A hunger of paternity possessed him. How he could have 

lored a child of his own ! His own ! Was this child not 
hV own? To whom did it rather belong? the father who 



tf^ 



BELCHAMBER 333 

disowned, the mother who neglected it, of to him who had 
tended and cared for it, and was learning to love it? And 
the crowning wonder of all was that the child was learning to 
love him. It was not a merry baby — *a solemn wise-like 
thing,' the nurse called it — looking out upon the world with 
grave mysterious eyes, and that peculiarly detached, far-off 
expression that belongs only to babies and cats ; but at sight 
of Sainty the rare smile never failed to light up the little 
white face, the legs would jump and kick against the nurse, 
the arms be held out for his embrace. 

A baby's partiality has as little cause or meaning as its 
aversions, and it is as unreasonable to be flattered by the one 
as to be hurt by the other ; but a man must be of a sterner 
temper than our poor Sainty to resist a certain mild elation 
when a little creature hurls itself into his arms with such 
confident self-surrender. To him, moreover, the novelty of 
the experience made it doubly dear. His mother had doubt- 
less loved him in her own grim way, because he was her son ; 
others, as his uncle, had pitied, or done their duty by him ; 
others again might have paid him attention for what they 
hoped to obtain from him ; but never in the course of his 
existence could he remember that any living thing had been 
simply attracted to him by the magnetism of his own person- 
ality ; and no one can suspect a baby of any complexity of 
motive. So, when his coming was greeted with jubilant 
laughter and dancings and outstretched arms, a warmth 
crept about his heart, and he owned to himself with humble 
gratitude that out of what had seemed his greatest afiliction 
had come the best happiness his life had ever known. 

Of course he did not arrive at this height of devotion all at 
once ; it was the growth of many months, and every time he 
came to Belchamber, the little tendrils wound themselves 
more closely round his heart. At the end of the session, he 
established himself there with a more joyful sense of home- 
coming than he had known for years. 

To those who have experienced how rich in possibilities is 
the intimacy of a baby of six months, it were unnecessary to 



334 BELCHAMBER 

describe it; they who have not would hardly credit it, how- 
ever cunningly set forth. There is something intangible 
about it that must necessarily evaporate in the mere attempt 
to put it on paper. Sainty fell into the habit of having the 
child almost constantly with him ; often it slept on the sofa 
in his study, or in its perambulator under the great cedars 
while he read or wrote beside it, and the sense of its 
nearness at once soothed and stimulated him; even if it 
woke, it was so gentle and quiet that it hardly disturbed 
his work. 

He abandoned his little cart in favour of a larger open 
carriage in which the nurse and baby could accompany him 
on his drives. Not infrequently they would start by way of 
the dower-house, where Lady Charmington would be a 
willing addition to the party. Sainty and his mother were 
brought very close together by their common worship of the 
child ; at no previous time, and on no other subject, had her 
son been in such constant need of the good lady's advice. 
Exactly what the baby had suffered at the hands of the 
'treasure' remained in doubt, but certainly its internal 
economy was none of the strongest, and many changes of 
diet had to be tried, which its two guardians discussed by the 
hour. Then it began to cut its teeth exceptionally early, with 
all the usual accompaniments of heaviness, loss of appetite, 
and restless nights. Without his mother's rocklike common- 
sense to lean upon, Sainty would have worked himself into 
a fever of anxiety; her experience of the frailty of his own 
early days was of inestimable comfort to him. 

* I tell you, this child is a tower of strength to what you 
were,' Lady Charmington would say. *I've been up night 
after night with you when you were teething.' 

' But was I as hot and restless as baby ? ' 

' Hot and restless ? I should think you were ! twice as bad, 
and croupy into the bargain, which this child, thank God I 
hasn't a symptom of.' 

So Sainty took heart, and when, after a time, he was made 
to feel with his finger two tiny white points in the red gum, 



BELCHAMBER 335 

this also seemed to him an almost supernatural achievement 
on the part of one so young. 

He had come to regard the precious infant as so entirely 
his charge, that he did not bestow much thought upon its 
recreant mother. Cissy had started on a round of visits at 
the end of the Season, hardly going through the form of 
inquiring if Sainty thought of accompanying her. It was a 
shock to him to find how completely she had gone out of his 
existence, when she presently announced that she was coming 
to Belchamber; she had spent a day or two there, before 
going North, to get some country clothes and give her maid 
a chance to repack, but had not seen the baby more than 
two or three times, nor appeared to take any particular 
interest in what was being done for it It never occurred to 
Sainty as likely that she would in any way occupy herself 
with the child or its relation to him; it was therefore no 
small surprise to him to discover, before she had been many 
days in the house, that it was a distinct irritation to her to 
see them together. 

The first time she found it under the cedars with him, she 
inquired, with a perceptible shade of annoyance in her voice, 
where the nurse was, and why she hadn't taken it out. 

' Baby generally spends most of the morning with me here 
if it 's fine,' Sainty said. ' The doctor likes him to be in the 
open air as much as possible, and it gives nurse a chance to 
do various little things for him.' 

' Nonsense ! it 's her place to be with him ; she '11 get utterly 
spoilt if you do her work for her ; she has got a girl in the 
nursery. If she can't manage, she had better have another. 
There 's no earthly reason for you to do nursery-maid.' 

'I like having baby with me, and this woman doesn't 
neglect her duties ; at least she doesn't leave the child alone, 
when he 's not with me, like the one your mother got for him.' 

'You were always unjust about that poor woman. Ah! 
here you are, nurse. You had better take baby and walk him 
about. You shouldn't leave him here to worry his lordship.' 

'Begging your ladyship's pardon, my lord partick'larly 



336 BELCHAMBER 

wished for the child to be left with him/ retorted the nurse, 
as she wheeled the perambulator viciously away, quivering 
with suppressed indignation. 

' You see the results of your spoiling that woman,' Cissy 
remarked. * If she 's going to be insolent to me she '11 have 
to go.' 

* No — by heaven 1 I 'm hanged if she shall,' Sainty burst 
out. ' She 's devoted to the child, and takes very good care 
of him, and he isn't very strong. It would be monstrous, 
after never giving him a thought from the time of his birth 
till now, if you undertook to sack the people who do look 
after him, because you considered they didn't sufficiently 
kowtow to you.^ 

' It 's precisely what you did to her predecessor.' 

* On the contrary, I sent her away because she neglected 
him, which was, no doubt, what gave you a fellow-feeling for 
her.' 

'Oh! well, don't let me interfere between you and your 
prottgie, I don't even pretend to inquire what terms you are 
on with her ; but I must confess I can't see what particular 
pleasure you derive from the constant presence of a nother 
man's child.' 



[ushl' Sainty said, casting a swift, frightened glance 
around to see if any one was within earshot. ' Be careful 
what you say. Remember the child is mine. He has got to 
be mine. Your remark was in your usual excellent taste, but 
on that particular subject you will have to forego the pleasure 
of wounding me. If you are so fond of reminding me that 
I am not his father, you will say something one of these days 
before others that you will regret' 

It gave him a horrible sense of complicity to be obliged to 
entreat her discretion a feeling that, bound by their guilty 
secret, let them hate each other as they would, they dare not 
quarrel. Probably Cissy was not less aware of this necessity 
than her husband, for though her object remained the same, 
she altered her tactics. She would try to keep the child from 
him by little underhand manoeuvres, sending it out when she 



BELCHAMBER 33J 

thought him likely to want it, and even going so far as to 
take it with her when she drove ; but she did not risk another 
face attack. 

Sainty, on his side, did nothing to provoke an encounter. 
He saw the child not less, but as it were by stealth, and this 
introduction of a slightly clandestine element into their inter- 
course only heightened his love for it. Not that it required 
any great exercise of tact or ingenuity to evade Cissy's notice. 
Lord Charmington would have fared ill had he been dependent 
on the fitful attentions of his mamma for care and comfort. 
Even the amiable desire to deprive her husband of his one 
pleasure could not make a domestic character of Lady Bel- 
chamber. She was much away, and when at home constantly 
surrounded by guests who absorbed her attention. It was 
only at rare intervals that she found any leisure to bestow on 
the separation of her husband and her child. 

She had a trick of arriving when least expected, swooping 
suddenly into visible space like a comet, and, like a comet, 
followed by her train ; though to speak of her appearances as 
comet-like gives a false impression of something periodical 
and calculably recurrent, whereas no one could foretell when 
Cissy might take it into her head to entertain a party, which 
seemed to be her only idea of the uses of a home. 

Once, when he thought she was safely launched on a round 
of country-houses, Sainty had asked his old friend Gerald 
Newby, for whom she entertained no great regard, to pay him 
a visit. They were at tea on the lawn, when, preceded at 
a short interval by a heralding telegram, her ladyship 
descended on them with a few friends, and the announce- 
ment of a further contingent for the morrow. 

Lady Charmington had come over from the dower-house, 
and Tommy had dropped in for tea and to play with his 
nephew, about whom he was almost as weak as Sainty. 

No one looking at the group under the cedars would have 
guessed that he was witness of anything but the most delight- 
ful scene of domestic felicity. The stately ancestral home, 
the superb trees, the great stretches of smoothly mown turf, 

y 



338 BELCHAMBER 

the young married couple with their baby between them, 
surrounded by all that wealth and great possession could 
give, the adoring grandmother, the loving uncle, the admiring 
friends, the glow of flowers, the cheerful, intimate little meal, 
all combined to make the picture complete. It appealed 
strongly to Newby, who beamed indulgently on the party. 

' Our dear Sainty appears in a new and most amiable light,' 
he said ; ' I am not accustomed to see him as Kourotrophos. 
It is the epithet applied to Hermes in his character of the 
child-tender,' he added explanatorily to Cissy, who looked 
rather blank. 

'I can't think why nurse doesn't fetch baby,' that lady 
remarked ; ' or, for that matter, why she brought him down 
at all. I 've always told her not to when any one was here. 
Whatever one may think of one's own children, one has no 
right to bore other people with them.' 

'/ asked to see the child,' said Lady Charmington, the 
light of battle waking in her eye. 

' Mother had settled to come over before I knew you were 
coming,' Sainty said quietly. ' When I got your telegram it 
was too late to stop her, and as she had come on purpose to 
see baby, I couldn't refuse to send for him. No one need 
bother about him ; he will be quite good with me.' 

' Dear little man ! ' said one of the ladies who had come 
with the fond mother. ' I 'm so glad you didn't stop him. 
Lord Belchamber. I love babies. I 've been trying to think 
who he reminds me of. He 's not a bit like you or Cissy.' 

* We think him like my ^andmother ' Sainty began. 

' I n cyr r rowld i n o thnf hn was 1 ^7 likr th f i d ufih r gSj' Lady 
Charmington cut in. 

'T(^ me he's th e image of Claude Morland,' remarked the 
lucklessTTommy. 

There was a sudden hush that may have lasted some five 
seconds ere it was broken by Newby inquiring, * What has 
become of your charming cousin? I liked him so much, 
and hoped I might meet him here.' 

'We see very little of Claude now,' Lady Charmbgton 



BELCHAMBER 339 

responded. ' He never seems to come here. I suppose he 
finds other places more amusing. He was glad enough to 
come in old days.' 

* I fancy,' said Sainty, ' as the duke gets older that he is 
more dependent on him. He very seldom gets away.' 

He had| in fact, for some time been conscious that Claude 
came much less to the house than formerly, and was acutely 
aware of a like consciousness in Cissy, though each was 
careful to say nothing about it to the other. 

' By the way, that reminds me,' said Lady Charmington to 
Sainty. * I had almost forgotten. Alice de Lissac writes she 
is coming to her father for a little, and she is very anxious to 
see baby. May I bring her over some day?' 

'Why should Claude remind you of Mrs. de Lissac?' 
Cissy asked, with a little laugh, her desire to score off her 
mother-in-law getting the better of her prudence. ' I never 
knew they had much in common.' 

'Only because Alice says in her letter they have seen a 
good deal of him lately. He seems to have been several 
times to Roehampton ; and mother mentioned his coming in 
to see her one day with one of the girls.' 

'Morland's a deep 'un,' ejaculated Tommy. 'Shouldn't 
wonder if he was after one of the heiresses. Those girls '11 
have a devil of a lot of money. The mater was always egging 
me on to be civil to 'em. Do you remember the World's 
Bazaar, Cissy ? Oh my ! ' 

' I wonder if he can be thinking of Gemma,' said Lady 
Charmington thoughtfully. 'Alice doesn't say so, but ' 

'It's not true,' Cissy burst out; then, seeing awakened 
curiosity in several surrounding pairs of eyes, she added 
more indifferently, ' I know Claude well enough to feel sure 
he would never be attracted by that black Jewess.' 

' He might be by her blond sovereigns,' suggested Tommy. 

Cissy became suddenly solicitous for the comfort of her 
guests. ' I am sure you want to see your rooms,' she said. 
'Wouldn't you like a bath after that dirty journey?' and 
swept them into the house. 



340 BELCHAMBER 

'Cissy don't seem to fancy the idea of Morland being 
sweet on the dark lady/ Tommy giggled. *She used to flirt 
with him herself once. I remember mater * 

'Tommy,' said Sainty, 'do, like a good soul, ask nurse to 
fetch baby.' 

He felt sick and frightened. The contrast between the 
appearances of life and the ghastly things that were so thinly 
overlaid by them suddenly appalled his spirit. Almost 
unconsciously he picked up the baby, and clasped it closely 
to him. It was on that same spot, and on much such an 
afternoon, that he had first seen Cissy five years before. 
With the clearness of a picture thrown on a screen, he saw 
her standing as she had stood that day with Claude beside 
her, her girlish beauty bathed in soft golden light, and recalled 
the prophetic pang with which he had watched them turn 
away together under the baleful gaze of Aimde Winston. As 
he sat holding their child to his heart, the permanent dweller 
in his cupboard seemed to grin out at him with a more than 
usually fiendish malignity* 



J 



CHAPTER XXVI 

One morning early in October, Thomas Eccleston appeared 
in his brother-in-law's study with a shade of distress deepening 
the habitual ruddiness of his open countenance. 

It has already been intimated that Sainty cherished a very 
real affection for this young man, holding a character so manly 
and direct to be little short of miraculous in a child of Lady 
Eccleston. 

* What's the matter, Tommy?' he asked. 'You look per- 
turbed. Have you and Danford been coming to blows ? ' 

'Oh no, Danny's all right; it so happens I'm rather in 
his good books just now. But the fact is, I 've had rather 
a queer letter, and I didn't quite know what to do about it, 
so I thought the simplest thing was to bring it to you, though 
it 's not by any means what he intended me to do.' 

•Who's "he"? Danford?' 

* No ; I tell you it 's nothing to do with him.' 
*To begin with, then, who's your correspondent?' 
*Well, if you want to know, it's your brother.' 
Sainty started. * Arthur ? What can he want of you ? ' 

* I think the best way would be for you to read it,' Tommy 
said, holding out the letter. 

Sainty hesitated a moment, then took it and read : 

* Dear Eccleston — I expect you '11 be rather astonished at 
hearing from me, and still more at what it 's about. The fact 
of the matter is, I want you to do me a good turn. I was 
awfully glad to hear my brother had got you at Belchamber, 
and it suddenly occurred to me you would be just the chap to 
do what I want. To cut a long story short, I want to come to 
Belchamber. I suppose it 's very undignified of me, but I 'm 



342 BELCHAMBER 

badly in want of a little amusement, and I thonght if they 
were going to have a shoot, and it wasn't a very big party, 
yon might suggest to your sister to pop me in as one of the 
guns. You may think it funny that I don't write straight to 
my brother, but I know he'd be infernally snifiy, and say I 
bad no proper pride ; and Cissy always seemed a good sort, 
and so did you, and I thought between you, you could work 
it for me. I know they won't ask Lady Arthur, and I don't 
ask it of 'em. At first I was afraid she mightn't take it kindly, 
but she 's been all right about it ; she says she don't want to 
go where she isn't wanted, but don't mind my going without 
her. Do yon think you can work it through your sister? Do, 
if you can, aud oblige yours ever. — A W. Chahbeks.' 

'Oh! hffw like Arthur!' Salnty murmured, as he refolded 
this characteristic letter. 

'I thought,' said Tommy, who had been watching him 
uneasily as be read, and fiddling with the things on the 
writing-table, ' that it was better to come straight to you than 
to go to Cissy about it.' 

' So it is, and I 'm very giatefiil to you, dear b<qr, for all 
your loyalty ' ; and Sainty Xaii a thin claw in Thomas's large 
red hand. The sub-agent pressed it fervently. 

'What had I better say?' he asked. 'It puts me in such 
a deucedly awkward posish, don't yer know.' 

' Of course he had no business to write to any one but me,' 
Sainty said. ' Well — you needn't answer ; I II write to him 
myself.' 

Tommy looked much relieved. 'Hope I didn't do wrong,' 
he said doubtfully. 

'On the contrary, you did more than right,' Sainty said 
warmly. 

' Shall you ask him ? ' Tommy ventured, after a pause. 

'I can't say straight off; I must talk to Cissy about it, and' 
n ill-concealed tremor) 'to my mother.' 
y made no objections. Arthur was a pleasant, good- 
r fellow, and a man you could ask without his wife was 
d as a bachelor. Rather to Sainty's surprise. Lady 



BELCHAMBER 343 

Chaxmington was not less willing. She hardly ever men- 
tioned Arthur. Since the day when, liyid and furious, she 
had solemnly cursed her younger son, Sainty could almost 
count on the fingers of one hand the times when she had 
spoken his name ; but when, with some trepidation and much 
uncertainty, he approached her on the subject, he was met 
quite half-way. 

*Unto seventy times seven,' she remarked, *the Scripture 
tells us we must forgive. That woman I will fiever receive, but 
as long as he is willing to come without her, I see no reason 
you shouldn't have him at Belchamber ; and — and — you may 
tell him I am willing to see him too, if he likes.' And Sainty 
read in the sudden suffusion of the hard eyes, the tale of the 
poor woman's long silent yearning for a sight of her favourite 
son. 

So Arthur had his wish, and came once more to Bel- 
chamber. There was, no doubt, a certain awkwardness in 
the situation, and Sainty was surprised and touched to find 
that, though he certainly felt it much the most, Arthur was 
not without a perception of it, too. He was decidedly sub- 
dued during the first days of his visit, and Sainty's ready 
sympathy went out, as usual, to any one who was ill at ease. 
Had Arthur been in his accustomed mood of complete self- 
satisfaction, he would have felt less tenderly towards him, but 
seeing him so humbled and brought low, on the footing, as 
it were, of a guest and poor relation in the home of their 
common childhood, was almost more than he could bear. 

Perhaps Arthur intentionally rather accentuated this note, 
conscious of the effect it would have on his brother. He 
would pointedly ask leave to do the most obvious things. 
* There 's a spare gun in the gun-room,' he would say ; * the 
keeper says he doesn't know whose it is. Should you mind 
if I took it, old chap ? I 've only one here, and it got so 
hot yesterday I could hardly shoot with it.' Or it would be, 
' Tommy and I are going to practise a bit ; may I use this 
old bat ? I fancy it must once have been mine, but I 'm not 
sure.' Or^ * Would it be copvenient for me to h^ve a horsQ 



344 BELCHAMBER 

this morning? I was thinking of riding over to see the 
mater.' Formerly, whatever the house afforded was as freely 
his as Sainty's. If he was not the owner, he was something 
more than an ordinary heir, and guns, bats, and horses were 
so emphatically his natural property, that it was unthinkable 
his asking permission to use them. 

On the first morning of his visit, the brothers had wandered 
out together, and Arthur had commented on the new arrange- 
ment of the forecourt. 

'You've fetched all the old statues out of the shrubbery, 
I see,' he said. 'What did you do that for?' 

Sainty explained, almost ap ologeticallv. tha t it was an 
attempt to return to TeiafBuaA^^mgmal plan. 

'Is it so long since you were here?' he said. 'I had 

forgotten ' Then, as the other remained silent, gloomily 

sucking at his pipe, * I 'm afraid you don't like it,' he suggested 
meekly. 

' Oh I well, of course, it 's none of tny business. I must say 
I think they looked better where they were, but I'm not 
much of a judge. Naturally, don'tcherknow, I liked 'em 
where I've always seen 'em. I can't bear changes in the 
place.' 

' I 'm sometimes half sorry I did it, myself,' Sainty admitted. 
As he spoke he was aware that the moment had come which 
he had been dreading ever since his brother's arrival, the 
first appearance on the scene of the baby, who was being 
tab^n out for his morning's airing. 

/And so this is the son and heir, is it?' said Arthur. 

'MuUoa! li ttle *un. how do ynn dftf I'm your uncle. You 

/ook very Solemn, but it would be more natural if I did. 

/You don't know the difference your small existence makes 

to me and mine.' 

The baby, as usual, at sight of Sainty, began making 
demonstrations of welcome, doubling himself forward over 
his restraining strap, and giving vent to a note like that of 
the nightingale, which is conventionally represented in print 
as * Jug-jug-jug,' and a cry of 'A-da^ A-da-da, A-da,' which 



BELCHAMBER 345 

was a sort of sound of all work with him for the expression 
of his varying emotions. 

* He wants his dada,' said the nurse, eager to display her 
charge's precocity, and, at the same time, gratify her master. 
'He says *'Dada" quite plain, my lord, and it's the first 
word he's said.' 

'It's a wise child that knows his own father,' said Arthur 
jocosely. 

Sainty could not restrain a hasty glance at him, but he was 
evidently innocent of any special or personal application of 
the often-quoted adage. 

They walked on for a little beside the child, Sainty resting 
one hand lovingly on the edge of the little carriage, the baby 
squirming round and looking up into his face, wrinkling its 
nose and gurgling to attract his attention. When their ways 
divided, the parting was not effected without a burst of 
protest from the infant, which Sainty soothed and diverted as 
skilfully as the professional attendant. 

'The little beggar seems to like you,' Arthur remarked. 
' I don't remember either of mine ever yelling for f^.' 

'You have probably never taken as much notice of them 
as I do of baby.' 

' You we re alwavs a kind of ol d granny; you'll probably 
spoil that T)rat. Have you done" aftytfeiag.. to the stables 
since I was here ? ' 

Once received, the prodigal brother came several times to 
Belchamber in the course of the winter. He liked the luxury, 
the magnificence, the good food, the gentlemanly licence of 
the conversation, the fine horses to ride (he soon ceased to 
ask if he might take one), better than the shabby gentility 
of the stucco rectory, the half-trained grooms, the half-lame 
hunters, the half-refined wife of his own home. It sometimes 
seemed to Sainty that he almost forgot he was a husband and 
father at all, and there were not wanting among the ladies of 
Cissy's surrounding some who were quite willing to help him 
to this pleasing oblivion. 

'I like Lady Dee^ns,' h^ would say confidentially ; 'she's 



346 BELCHAMBER 

rare sport, and there's no nonsense about her; she don't 
care what she says, and you haven't got to think twice about 
what you say to her. Now if I were to say half the things 
to Topsy I do to her, she 'd bridle and shy and look as sour 
as if she'd been brought up by a bishop. And when you 
think — oh my ! ' and the sentence would end in a long puff 
of cigar smoke, or the burial of the speaker's nose in a tall 
whisky and soda. 

Arthur was a decided success with the members of the 
softer sex. The story of his romance cast quite a halo about 
him, and the very few mothers of grown-up girls who were 
tolerated in that gay company felt almost tenderly towards 
a detrimental who had put it out of his own power to marry 
their daughters. 

As for Cissy, she and her brother-in-law got on capitally. 
She pressed him to come whenever he liked, partly, no doubt, 
because she divined that his presence was a constant un- 
happiness to her husband. The sight of him in juxtaposition 
with the baby kept a keen edge on all Sainty's feelings of 
remorse; nor was Arthur likely to be restrained by a 
fastidious delicacy from all allusion to the change which 
the birth of an heir had made in his own position. His 
remarks on the subject were not always in the best possible 
taste; he affected jokes about the Babes in the Wood, 
referred to himself as the 'wicked uncle,' and * wondered 
Sainty was willing to trust him in the house with the precious 
infant.' Such pleasantries, of a slightly sub-acid jocularity, 
went through and through Sainty in a way that the speaker 
could neither have guessed nor intended; he probably 
thought, on the contrary, that he was taking his blighted 
prospects with an easy amiability which did him infinite 
credit. He was not indeed without certain touches of kindli- 
ness towards his nephew. *When he gets a big boy, you 
must let his poor old uncle teach him to ride and shoot,' 
he would say. ' We must make a good sportsman of him, 
and you know j^^w won't do much in that line for him, old 
rnaxi*' Sainty wondered if he wajated the boy to be a sporty 



BEDCHAMBER 347 

man. His personal hatred of taking life extended itself to 
this nurseling of his affections. Must those tiny fingers be 
taught to curl round a trigger, that innocent heart learn to 
find its pleasure in slaughter and destruction? Yet he 
desired all forms of perfection for his darling ; he hated to 
think of him at the same disadvantage among those with 
whom he would have to live as he himself had always been. 
He would have him strong and brave and daring, trained 
in all arts and exercises that became a gentleman; for 
instance, there could be no doubt that a certain proficiency 
in horsemanship was desirable for the ideal youth, but he 
recalled with horror his own early efforts to attain it, and 
shuddered to think how he should tremble, when, in course 
of time, the child came to an age to face these dangers. 

He began to see how ill-fitted he was to be the trainer of 
a young man. Hitherto he had imagined himself only as 
a nurse of callow infancy, shielding the little one with his 
greater insight and sympathy from the misunderstandings 
that had made his own childhood unhappy. Somehow he 
had fancied the child would be like him, timid and shrinking, 
needing protection ; but now it struck him that there was 
no reason why it should resemble him at all, and he recoiled 
with sudden terror from the thought of what unlovely 
qualities the offspring of two such parents might have 
inherited. How would he be able to bear seeing the 
treachery of the one, or the hard egotism of the other, 
reproducing itself in the being he loved best in the world? 
Had he the firmness needed for correcting such tendencies? 
Could he ever steel himself to the necessity of punishment ? 

On the other hand, it was hardly to be desired that the 
little boy should grow up on his pattern. He was not so 
conspicuous a success in his position that it was an object 
to educate a successor on the same lines. He began to 
understand the kind of problems his own bringing up had 
presented for solution to his mother and uncle; he re- 
membered how futile had been the efforts of these two 
strong natures, with all the advantages of example, to instil 



348 BELCHAMBER 

into his feeble soul a more virile attitude towards life, and 
the sum in proportion of what difficulties he would have to 
encounter in a like endeavour was not a hard one to work 
out. If Lady Charmington, absolutely sure of what she 
wanted, and with her bull-dog tenacity of purpose, had 
failed so lamentably of her object, what kind of a creature 
would he turn out, assailed by a hundred doubts, fears, 
and indecisions, and desiring simultaneously quite irreconcil- 
able ideals ? 

He recognised that the child had become the chief pre- 
occupation of his life, its health, its food, its education — for 
he already tormented himself with questions that, by their 
very nature, could not have to be faced for years to come ; 
and the more he troubled himself about the little thing, the 
more he loved it, the greater his love grew, the greater grew 
the desire to do his duty by his charge, the greater the 
anxiety as to what that duty might be. 

So far, however, his troubles were only those common to 
all parents and guardians who took their responsibilities 
somewhat morbidly; his special self-torture began where 
theirs left off. When all was said and done, the thousand 
dangers that dog the steps of youth safely passed, the pitfalls 
on either hand successfully avoided, the boy trained to all 
perfection of manly virtue and delight—^what then ? To what 
purpose, and for what end, should he have fashioned this 
splendid creature? To be the means by which he was to 
rob his nearest kinsfolk of their birthright ! If his remorse 
was constantly awakened by Arthur's presence, and the 
things that he said, it yet addressed itself less to Arthur 
than to the child. It was not so much the injury to his 
brother and his brother's children that was becoming an 
hourly torment to his conscience, as the injury to this 
innocent accomplice in making him the instrument of wrong. 
Was that, then, the best that he could do for the son of his 
heart, the being who was daily becoming more and more 
the centre of his existence, dearer than are the children of 
their loins tp ordinary fathers, to use him as the unconscious 



BELCHAMBER U9 

weapon of his own fraud? There was no way out, no 
turning back ; he could not now disavow him if he would. 
The crime was committed, irremediable, to go on breeding 
injustice, perpetuating wrong to the last chapters of the 
history of his race. 

He saw in imagination the little boy passing from child- 
hood to youth, from youth to manhood, growing tall and 
strong and beautiful, in his turn marrying, and begetting 
children to become links in the long chain of falsehood and 
carry on the consequences of his lie. And he would have 
to live and watch this happening, always alone, always in 
silence, with no one to whom he could unburthen his heart. 
There would only be two who shared his knowledge, and to 
neither of them could he say a word on the subject, though 
hideously, eternally aware that they knew, and were watching 
with himself. And then a new terror assailed him. When a 
secret was already the property of three people, could he be 
certain that no breath of it would ever reach the person 
principally concerned? He had plenty of experience of how 
recklessly Cissy could talk on occasion, what rash and terrible 
things the desire to wound could make her say, and he 
trembled lest in some fit of sudden anger with her son, 
some momentary loss of self<:ontrol, she might turn and 
crush him with the story of his birth. The word once 
spoken could never be recalled ; he saw the poor boy coming, 
white and stern, to ask him if this thing were true, and felt 
by anticipation the agony of his own inability to deny it. A 
dozen times a day he lived through the misery of that con- 
fession, and watched the love and respect die out of those 
dear eyes, as his unwilling hand dealt the final blow. 
Perhaps it would be some fair growth of young romance, 
the prospect of an innocent, happy marriage with a good 
girl, that he would have to blast with that terrible avowal. 
He heard himself condemning the boy to sterile loneliness 
or the devious byways of illicit love, to make a tardy repara^ 
tion, and restore the stolen heritage to its rightful owners. 

These thoughts were with him day and night ; they went 




350 BELCHAMBER 

to bed with him, and got up with him ; they followed him 
about the place ; they sat with him beside the sleeping baby, 
and looked at him out of its great solemn eyes when it woke. 
Truly * the Lord his God was a jealous God,' that fastidiously 
high standard of conduct and personal honour, his one sin 
against which was to be ' visited upon the children, unto the 
third and fourth generation.' 

And then on a sudden the end came, and he learned the 
futility of his crime and his remorse alike. The poor little 
life that had been to him a source of such happiness and 
such self-torture came to an end as independently of any 
act of his as it had come to its beginning. It may have 
contained from the first the germs of some mortal disease, 
or perhaps the practices of its former nurse had left behind 
more fatal results than any one suspected. It is probable 
that too rapid teething had something to do with it. A 
baby's life is at best but such a newly kindled flame, feeble 
and unsteady, that a pufif of wind will make it flicker and go 
out. The whole thing did not take a week. The child was 
flushed, heavy, restless, as it had so often been before. * He 
is cutting another big tooth,' the nurse said. 'It's no 
wonder he's a little fractious, poor lamb ! It's the third in 
a fortnight.' Lady Charmington was appealed to, and 
repeated, for the twentieth time, her comfortable assertions 
of how much more Sainty himself had suffered during the 
same anxious period ; by constantly reassuring her son with 
them, she had finally almost persuaded herself that the baby 
was as strong as she wished it. She declared it was ridiculous 
to send for the doctor. * Have him, if you like,' she said ; 
'but I know just what he '11 say. Baby has been exactly like 
this so often, and each time you always think it is something 
dreadful. Nurse knows exactly what to do for him, don't you, 
nurse ? ' 

On the third day Sainty grew restive, and sent for him all 
the same. The doctor, if not as well satisfied as Lady 
Charmington, yet seemed to think there was no particular 
cause for anxiety. He detected a little sound in the 



BELCHAMBER 351 

bronchial pipes, and asked if the child could have got a chill 
in any way. * It might all very well come from the teeth,' he 
said. * The little fellow is feverish ; you had better keep him 
in for a day or two.' 

He came once or twice more, a little uncertain, very non- 
committal ; and then, one day, there was a swift unexplained 
rise of temperature, a convulsion or two, and, before even 
Sainty^ with his genius for prophesying disaster, had fully 
realised the danger, all was over in this world as far as the 
baby was concerned. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

My little boy, my poor little boy ! You were conceived in 
sin, and your birth was a lie. Your father never owned you, 
your mother never loved you. It was left to me, who should 
have hated you, to tend and cherish you. It was little 
enough that I could do for you^ but God only knows what 
you have been to tne. It was no fault of yours, my baby, 
but my misdoing, that would have made your innocent 
existence an injury to others. I might have knovni that you 
could do no harm, that you would go away before your life 
could wrong them.' 

Sainty was murmuring broken phrases, his face bowed 
upon the face of the dead child. The tiny coffin, almost like 
a toy, was supported on two chairs facing each other, and on 
a third chair beside it he had sat almost continuously since 
the room had been put in order and the people turned out of 
it. His mother had said it was bad for him, but, with that 
single exception, there was luckily no one who cared enough 
to try and take him away, and so he had remained, hour after 
hour, steeped in the great quiet that surrounded that little 
figure. 

The pale diffused daylight came sifted through the lowered 
blinds, giving an unreal look to common objects, turned 
suddenly useless, and ranged against the walls. Sainty him- 
self had helped to order the room, and to deck it with 
flowers. He would allow no heavy fragrance of white funereal 
blossoms, but all the greenhouses of Belchamber had been 
ransacked for the unseasonable roses of winter, and to this 
day the smell of roses brings back to him the little white 
waxen face, barred with its black-fringed lids, at which he 

- 862 



BELCHAMBER 353 

gazed so long in those sacred hours of communing with the 
dead. 

It was his first experience of death. His father had died 
when he was a mere baby, and both his grandfathers in his 
early childhood; since he had been able to reflect or 
remember, he had never lost a friend. It struck him as 
strange that he, who had tasted so many sorrows, should 
have had no experience of this the supremest and commonest 
that man is called upon to bear. It was different from any 
other trouble he had ever known, deeper, more awful, more 
hopeless, yet somehow for that very reason more bearable 
too. There was no element of meanness in it, nothing petty 
or small. Such grief was large, calm, august, and above all 
very still; in presence of this perfect peace he could not 
strive nor cry. Shelley's words about the Niobe came back 
to him as he sat there, and he kept repeating them to himself, 
* Her tender and serene despair.' Despair, then, was * tender 
and serene'; how true it was! He was not even very 
unhappy. The consciousness of the aching void in his life 
would come later; but, for the moment, the bitterness of 
parting was lost in the relief of seeing his darling free from 
the suffering it had been torture to watch and know himself 
powerless to allay. He understood why David had arisen 
and washed his face and taken food, when they told him that 
his child was dead. 

The baby hands were folded, and held a bunch of violets ; 
and as he bent over them, laying his parched lips upon their 
marble coldness, the comforting promise seemed to steal 
down to the sources of his being, that at last, far off, after 
all the fever and the pain, this rest on which he looked was 
waiting for him, as for every one. 

A discreet tap on the door jarred the silence like a drum- 
beat, and Sainty went across and opened it. A servant stood 
there wearing the decorous expression of those officially 
connected with mourning which is not a personal grief to 
them. 

z 



354 BELCHAMBER 

'Her ladyship has been inquiring for you, m'lord,' the 
man said, 'and the post has come. I have put your lord- 
ship's letters on your writing-table/ 

Sainty came out into the passage, and locked the door 
behind him, slipping the key into his pocket. ' You can tell 
her ladyship she will find me in my study,' he said ; * or if 
she prefers, and will let me know, I will come to her.' 

He wondered what Cissy could have to say to him; he 
felt a sure foreboding that it would be nothing he should care 
to hear. What more was there for her to say to him hence- 
forth, for ever ? 

He went to his study in the old western pavilion and sat 
down at his writing-table ; it was heaped with a great pile of 
letters ; the morning's mail had been added to those which, 
yesterday, he had had no heart to open. They would have 
to be gone through some time, he supposed ; it was a task he 
could not well leave to his secretary. Why not attack them 
at once while he was feeling calmed and strengthened? He 
drew a few towards him and nerved himself for the ordeal of 
reading them. He thought he knew so well what they would 
contain, yet in the very first that he took up he found matter 
quite unexpected, which even at that moment arrested his 
attention. 

' Dear old Sainty/ he read : ' I don't at all like the idea 
of intruding my happiness on your grief; but I equally don't 
want you to hear of it from any one but me, which you would 
be sure to do if I didn't write at once. And first let me just 
stop and tell you how awfully sorry I am for you and Cissy 
losing your little boy. I can't bear to think of you with your 
sensitive nature. The only thing to be said is that it was 
better than if he had been older, when you would have 
missed him so much more ; you can't personally have seen 
very much of him at that age. But to come back to myself. 
I hope I am the first to tell you (as you are almost the fir^t 
that I have told) of my engagement to Gemma de Lissac. 
You who know my Gemma, and the admirable woman to 
whom she owes so much, will realise without any words of 



BELCHAMBER 355 

mine what a lucky fellow I am. I need not say I am 
tremendously in love, and absurdly happy. Mr. de Lissac 
has been most awfully good about it, and very generous. Of 
course, a wretched pauper like me could never have married 
a girl who hadn't got something. For myself, as you know, 
my wants are few, but I couldn't have asked Gemma, who 
has always had every luxury since she was a baby, to give up 
all she has been accustomed to, especially her thousand and 
one good deeds. Mr. de Lissac wants me to chuck my 
P. S.-ship and go in for parliament, and the duke has been 
very kind in promising his help. Forgive such a long letter 
about myself when you are in trouble, but happiness is 
always egotistical, and I can't help hoping that mine won't be 
indifferent to you. As I have written you such a yarn, and 
have so many letters to write, will you please tell Cissy, with 
my love, and ask her to forgive my not writing to her 
separately. I haven't written to Aunt Sarah either, as I 
think Mrs. de Lissac is writing to her. Wish me joy, old 
man. There is no one whose good wishes I shall value 
more. Your affectionate cousin, Claude Morland. 

'P.S. — I don't offer to come to the funeral. I know you'll 
feel just as I should about it, and want to keep it all as quiet 
as possible.' 

Sainty read the letter through twice. He had hardly 
finished his second perusal of it, when the door opened, and 
Cissy stood before him. She was dressed in hastily im- 
provised mourning of incongruous showiness. The black 
clothes enhanced her fairness, and accentuated the slim 
girlishness of her figure, but her face had no youth in it, and 
her eyes glittered with an unnatural brightness. 

' You wanted to see me ? ' Sainty asked. 

' Yes,' she said. * I have got something to say to you, and 
I may as well say it first as last' Then, as he stood waiting 
in silence to hear her, 'You and I have got to have an 
explanation,' she added. 

' Is it the moment, with the child lying dead in the house?' 
Sainty asked, with a gesture of protest 



356 BELCHAMBER 

' Yes,' she said eagerly, ' it is just that I wanted to speak 
about. As long as he lived, I hare stayed for my child's 
sake.' 

Sainty gave a convulsive laugh. ' You have done a great 
deal for the child's sake ! ' he said. 

' Now,' she went on, ' I have no reason for remaining. I 
have come to tell you that after the funeral I am going away. 
I can't keep it up any longer. We hate each other, you know 
rm do ^-^^f^ t^gf^^h c T hian h i r n m r i n tnl rnhlr ' "^ 

*Life together!' Sainty repeated. *Do you call it life 
together? To me it seems that we could hardly be more 
apart. In Kamchatka I should not be further from you.' 
And indeed she seemed so far away, that he felt as if his 
voice could hardly reach her ; he wondered how she could 
ever have affected him for pain or pleasure. He looked at 
her across a chasm in which lay the dead child. 

'And where do you propose to go?' he asked indiffer- 
ently. 

' I shall go to the only man I have ever really loved,' Cissy 
said dramatically. 

' I thought we were coming to that.' It all seemed no 
business of his, not to affect him in any way ; he even felt a 
little sorry for her under the blow he was going to deal her. 
He found himself casting about in his mind for the best way 
of telling her. How strange that that letter should just have 
come (or was it, perhaps, not wholly a coincidence ?), that he 
should have selected that hour for opening it, that it should 
have been the first one that he had read ! He still held it in 
his hand, and without saying anything he moved it so that 
the writing might attract her attention. 

' What have you got there ? ' she cried, turning suddenly 
very white. * Let me see it. Is it from Claude ? ' She 
sprang upon it, and snatched it from him before he could 
give it to her, and he heard the two sheets rattle against each 
other with the shaking of her hands. 

' There is a message for you in it,' he said, as he turned 
away. He did not want to pry into her misery. He felt no 



BELCHAMBER 357 

exultation, only a sick contemptuous pity, pity in which there 
was no love. 

Presently, hearing her give a sort of hoarse cry, he looked 
round. She had sunk into a chair, with one arm laid along 
the table, her other hand, clenched, rested on her knee. 
The letter had fallen on the floor. She sat looking straight in 
front of her, and her mouth moved as if she were speaking, 
but no sound came. She had evidently forgotten his presence 
altogether. She was frightening like this, her lips drawn back 
a little from her teeth, her face set in a grimace that made 
her almost monkey-like, ugly as strong emotion always is. 
After a time she began to beat on the edge of the table with 
her hand. ' Blackguard ! Blackguard ! ' she kept repeating 
under her breath. 

Sainty was longing for her to go and leave him alone with 
his grief. The presence of this other misery which, by the 
nature of the case, he could do nothing to soothe only 
aggravated his own ; it seemed to bring him down to earth, 
to drag him back to the sordid and base, from the regions to 
which he had risen in the chamber of death. What had he 
to do with this woman's fierce resentment, balked of her 
earthly passion, he who had been so near the borders of 
eternal peace ? 

He went over to her and spoke very gently. * I think we 
should be better apart,' he said, ' each with his own sorrow. 
We can do nothing to help each other.' 

She seemed hardly to understand what he said, but she 
nodded dully and rose, and he held the door open for her to 
pass. 

It was nothing to him, he reflected, whether she went or 
stayed, whether she played out the dreary farce of their 
married life to the end, or broke away to follow her own 
devices. The shame, which had seemed so unendurable that 
he had bartered his personal honour to avoid it, appeared to 
him now as a thing of no importance. He wondered how he 
had ever cared about it. Let her go, in heaven's name, if she 
had a mind to ! He almost wished that she would, but he 



(58 BELCHAMBER 

/knew in his heart that Claude's letter had done its work; 

/ there would be no more talk of her going. He stooped and 

/ picked up the crumpled papers, smoothing them out and 

I looking at the beautiful neat little handwriting, not an 

\ erasure, not a correction. Whatever the writer might say of 

\haste and want of time and pressure of correspondence, that 

I^ter had dot been written in a hurry. 

'It's so complete,' he said to himself; *the last touch. 
Nothing was wanting but this.' He found himself almost 
admiring the absolute quality of his cousin's villainy, so 
rounded and finished, with no loose ends. 

In a few seconds his mind flew back over all the stages of 
his connection with Claude, the first coming to Belchamber 
of the large pale boy, with his dreamy eyes and curious fasci- 
nation, the old Eton days, his baleful influence on Arthur, 
the story of his connection with Aimde Winston, the double 
treachery of his behaviour about Cynthia. . . . But when he 
came to the part Morland had played in his own married life, 
his imagination shuddered and winced, he could not, dare 

not, think of it. ' And now, to crown all, this * And 

his hand struck the pages with their rippling conventional 
expressions of happiness and affection, their bland pretence 
of sympathy offered and demanded. For a moment the 
room swam round him, and he had to clutch the table for 
support. Could he let this thing be? Ought he to allow 
this girl to be sacrificed, and not make an effort to save her ? 
But almost simultaneously he recognised the futility of any 
such attempt. He thought of Gemma, conceited, headstrong, 
self-confident, and at the same time superlatively sentimental, 
and imagined the reception he should meet with if he were to 
tell her the man into whose hands she had just surrendered 
her existence, was — ^what ? The lover of his wife, the father 
of his child. How could he tell this thing, and that he had 
known it and accepted it in silence? No wonder Claude had 
dared to write as he did ; he knew well enough that from 
Sainty at least he was safe from all attack. 
Should he have to answer, to thank, to congratulate, to 



BELCHAMBER 359 

'hope they would be happy,* to send gifts? At least he 
would not have to go to the wedding ; his mourning would 
save him from that — his mourning for the child of the bride- 
groom ! He felt a wild longing to get back to that upper 
chamber where all these mad thoughts were stilled. What 
had he to do ? The letters. Why should these people steal 
the little time he had left to be with his lost darling? With 
a sigh of ineffable weariness he sat down once more, and 
hastily tore open two or three. The same little phrases 
recurred in all. ' Sincere condolences/ ' heartfelt sympathy/ 
'God's will/ 'Consolation where alone it may be found.' 
He remembered employing some of them himself on like 
occasions. Why make these attempts to plumb the unfathom- 
able ? As well smear ointment on a door behind which a 
man lay wounded. 

As he turned over the heaps of still unbroken covers in 
search of a handwriting that promised at least the relief of 
tears, his eye was caught by one unfamiliar, yet not unknown. 
He took the letter from the rest and held it poised upon his 
palm, trying to fix the memory it recalled. The anonymous 
denunciations of his wife ? Ah ! no, that was impossible. 
Yet as he broke the seal he realised why his only other sight 
of this writing was associated with that time. It was from 
his sister-in-law. 

' Dear Lord Belchamber, — I know you have never liked 
me, and did not approve of your brother marrying me ; but 
though it is little kindness or notice I Ve ever received from 
you or yours, I am a mother myself, and I know what it 
would be to me to lose either of my little darlings ; and so I 
feel I must write a few lines of condolence with you and 
Lady Belchamber in your great sorrow, for I really do 
sympathise with you in the death of your dear little boy. I 
know you think me a common, grasping woman, but I don't 
give a thought to any difference it may make to us, and, as 
Arthur says, what is to prevent your having others ? I have 
a heart (indeed it was me made Arthur write and offer to 
come to Belchamber without me, and he'll come to the 



