Edinburgh University Press 
Chapter Title: BIZARRO 
Book Title: The Siege of Malta and Bizarro 
Book Editor(s): J. H. Alexander, Judy King, Graham Tulloch 
Published by: Edinburgh University Press. (2008) 
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.3366/j.ctt1r267h.6 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at https://about.jstor.org/terms 
Edinburgh University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Siege of Malta and Bizarro   
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC 
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
BIZARRO 
    
  
Know ye the land where the Cypress and Myrtle 
Are emblems of deeds that are done in their clime, 
Where the rage of the vulture, the love of the turtle, 
Now melt into sorrow, now madden to crime? 
Know ye the land of the cedar and vine, 
Where the flowers ever blossom, the beams ever shine; 
Where the citron and olive are fairest of fruit, 
And the voice of the nightingale never is mute: 
Where the tints of the earth, and the hues of the sky, 
In colour though varied, in beauty may vie, 
And the purple of Ocean is deepest in dye; 
Where the virgins are soft as the roses they twine, 
And all, save the spirit of man, is divine? 
’Tis the clime of the East; ’tis the land of the Sun— 
Can he smile on such deeds as his children have done? 
Oh! wild as the accents of lovers’ farewell 
Are the hearts which they bear, and the tales which they tell. 
Chapter One 
I     , and in consequence of the mutations, menaces, and struggles which have agitated almost every corner of the universe, except Britain itself, that Calabria has come to arrest the general attention. This has been for reasons which, in some respects, are peculiar to the age, and, in others, partake of the situ ation in which the country has been placed, and this to a degree perhaps more extensive than, though in most particulars resem bling, other parts of the Peninsula of Italy, which have been disorgan ized, and almost reduced altogether, by a dislocation of whatever resembled civil society. 
It requires little apology for applying to Calabria the superb lines which our Byron composed for the land which he loved too dearly, and for which he died but too early. Its numerous objects of beauty 
159 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
160  
and interest have not, it is true, escaped the notice of those who admire the romantic beauties of Nature, or the remnants which the art of an ancient period has imposed upon these parts of the globe, as specimens earlier in date, apparently, than that claimed for the Eternal City herself by the most brilliant of her antiquities. It is true they were long comparatively neglected, and perhaps we have still to wait the classical elucidations of Sir William Gell, ere we avail our selves of many curious circumstances that give us the means of tracing to the genius of ancient Greece a system of architecture first put in practice in the provinces, which, early settled and colonized, became known under the general title of the Larger Greece. 
In relation to this intricate department of ancient history, the majestic ruins of Paestum are upon a scale so massive as to remain altogether unmatched in Italy, or indeed in the world. So slow has public curiosity been in tracing forth the best objects of its own interest, that, within these fifty years or little more, Paestum merely shewed the tips of its gigantic colonnade out of a grove of trees, by which it was then skirted and in part concealed, in so much that I rather think that Goethe may be the first literary person who called attention to the classic range of pillars, which, one would think, must have been long before examined, measured, traced to their bases, so far as possible explained, and compelled to apply their unwieldy strength to the hypothesis of some learned traveller. But— ‘habent et sua fata libelli’—the crime of Paestum was that the temple should long outlive the recollection of the deity to whom it was dedicated, and the mode of worship by which it was designed to propitiate him. 
There survived remnants in Calabria of a kind which is infinitely more attractive than even Art itself can stamp in the most fortunate state of its infant invention, and which has the imprint of Nature herself in her more romantic moods. These various beautiful extra vagances are exhibited in the mountain and its combined cinctures formed out of the living rock, with the coronet of splintered granite its interesting crest, and with its cloak of vivid green, dark red, and yellow, which the varied forest has hung around the landscape, as it were in wild mockery. The river, too, adds its natural beauty, in all its various moods, whether spreading its silver and stainless mirror in placid dignity before the spectator, or whether projecting its stream from the summit of an immense cliff, or impelling it with less violence to find its course through the sequestered valley, where it alternately replies to the yells of the rock and the milder sighs of the trees, crowds of which it sweeps underneath, echoing their complaints as it flows down its wildered channel. 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 161 
To close in quiet mood a passage which we have begun in Cam byses’ vein, we have only to add in plain terms our opinion that no district of Italy, ransacked as they are for natural beauties, has more richly rewarded those who have sought for them than Calabria. Nei ther has it been found less interesting by those philosophers who, in gazing upon the phenomena which cause the wild and surprizing changes of nature, are desirous to trace the operation of those tre mendous agents, storms, electricity, the volcano, and the earthquake. No country in the globe exhibits more awful marks of the changes which it has undergone from the influence of the volcano and earth quake, which have imprinted their ravages in a manner the most indelible as well as remarkable. Changes more singularly fanciful than Calabria has suffered under their mighty agency are nowhere to be witnessed, and we are constrained to wonder at the effect, while the consequence of its resistless force compels us to dread the awful source of a power little mentioned in the world when the extent of its might is considered. 
The general effect of volcanic activity has added another peculiarly interesting feature to the scenery of Calabria. The fearful character of a power, which by a single operation alters the site of lakes and floods the vales with waters which were unknown to them, lowers the lofty rocks and raises the vallies in their stead, is consequently remarkable for affording to the inhabitants of this country, particu larly those who possessed it during the middle ages, very many oppor tunities for the foundation of such castles as the taste of the age loved to rear—castles which, almost balanced in the air as the nests of the hawk or eagle, conform with the idea of the ædifice, and the wondrous tales recounted of the dwellers by tradition. 
Nor do those lovers of the olden time, who seek to dispel the mist with which antiquity has clothed such remnants of feudal grandeur, find their efforts unsuccessful. This is proved satisfactorily from the first volume of a tour in Calabria by Mr. Keppel Craven who, we understand, designs this next summer to publish the second volume, for which he has had long in preparation the drawings of many pieces of antiquity, made for the first time the subjects of the pencil, and a variety of anecdotes and illustrations which the author’s long study of the history of Italy, particularly during the middle ages, has enabled him to collect in numbers. I trust the publication of Mr. Craven’s work will soon justify the claim I put in, on the part of Calabria, founded both on picturesque and literary interest, to be one of the most striking portions of the globe, and possessing beauties such as are generally attractive to the inhabitants of these countries. 
Nor, taken as a whole, are the natives of this favoured country less 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
162  
estimable for their natural and moral qualities, than for the circum stances which give attraction to their country and climate. As the latter are genial and beautiful, the former present to the observer a race remarkable for personal beauty, and for the most amiable social qualities. There is no people with whom social glee and cheerfulness is a more welcome and natural guest than the inhabitants of southern Italy. If you happen to have a quarrel with one of them, and have maintained your own side with something more than the licence of usual stricture, the inferior person, however offended at the mode with which you have treated him, is instantly pacified by your slightest attempt to give the dispute a jocose turn, and explains as a jest the affront which the stranger has given him. Excepting perhaps the lower natives of Ireland, there is no people with whom a jest will go farther in extracting from a debate every sentiment which looks like rancour. That odious ingredient which, it would seem, on some occasions, their temper early associates with and retains long, gives way in general to a gleeful, mirth-loving spirit, by which it is qualified and disarmed even in its heat of mood. 
Virtue, it is said, becomes herself more lovely in a lovely form, and certainly the lively temper, and obliging and mirthful disposition, of a young Italian never appears to you more pleasing than when it laughs from among the rich dusky tresses, and through the piercing dark eyes, of the national features, presented to you by a youth or maiden of the country. It is true that the experienced soldier may somewhat, by the loveliness of the exterior, be led to promise to himself, as the Italian’s tutor in the art of war, a success which the result does not always justify, occasioning a mortifying and unexpec ted disappointment. A better authority for this severe judgement can hardly be quoted than that of the great Nelson. Although to less interested judges the imposing appearance of the Neapolitan army seemed to give an absolute assurance of success, or at least of an exertion to gain it, and notwithstanding the accuracy with which they performed the Austrian discipline, in which they had been care fully instructed, the experienced Nelson, who sought not to judge by the nerves or sinews of a man, and even less by the merits of his Sunday’s jacket, pronounced at once that, however well furnished and well looking, the Neapolitan forces had not acquired that discip line which qualifies the soldier to make a stand against danger. He was at no loss to discover the effect produced on the common soldier by a system which excluded him from promotion, the best incentive which can be proposed to him who shall distinguish himself. He saw also how disgusted the soldiers were under a scheme which called on them for the extent of military obedience under the most severe 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 163 
penalties, and reserved the rewards, which fell most naturally to them, to the officers, who, claiming an exclusive title to them on the grounds of birth only, were perhaps in some degree become indiffer ent to vindicating their title to promotion through desert. 
Whether these cursory remarks have been in the whole or in part justly assigned as the cause of the indifferent success of the Neapol itans during the last war, it ought not to be ascribed to anything peculiar in their national character, than which none in Europe stands, or has formerly stood, higher for that which is indeed a natural attribute of mankind in almost every nation upon earth—I mean personal valour. For a display of this resolution we need only refer to the three days’ defence of Naples by the Lazarone, or lower class of its citizens, at such odds that it is thought they have never revived from the great slaughter to which their obstinacy and improv idence, against a force so formidable as a regular French army, exposed them. Many instances of former times might be quoted to show that the common character of these people has been too rashly and generally formed, or at least that they are only liable to the errors of inexperienced troops, from occasional panics, novelty of situation with respect to the enemies to whom they are opposed, and inferiority in position, arms, consciousness of manhood, and opinion of their own skill and that of their officers. Let it however suffice to say that the state of the Neapolitan army under the present young king assures a numerical amount perfectly adequate to the purposes of the Kingdom, and a force in character sufficiently alert to answer the call to arms with the practical enthusiasm which may be expected with a popular monarch. 
Without going back to the remote age of Masaniello and other periods when, whatever might be awanting to the Neapolitan charac ter, the quantity of their personal courage certainly abounded, we may shortly observe that the instances of failure, which have been quoted as affecting the character of the Italian common soldier, flow in general from a timidity rather the consequence of a distrust of their commander, their officers, their comrades—of all or anyone sooner than of themselves. 
The case which has often been quoted as a refutation of the charge of want of courage, too generally and too rashly brought against the younger citizens of Naples, is one which, if it is sufficient to repel the accusation we treat of, has, on the other hand, a tendency to afford room for charging them with an inclination to pillage and brigandage, and also one which must be admitted as vindicating their courage only at the expense of the reputation for honour, hon esty, humanity, and other properties that ought to be at least more 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
164  
dear to a people with which these virtues preserve the necessary respect. 
The very naming this cause must put every one in mind how often, and under how many forms and excuses, a general system of brigandage has sprung into action, making the errors or unpopularity of the government a reason to absolve the subject from any violence committed against persons or property which it may enter into their imagination, and the times may place it in their power, to commit, with the apology common in most states which are suffering violent changes. 
These disturbances were thus followed by the reviving of a crime which, in its very essence, struck at the basis of civil society, yet failed not to justify itself to others, and perhaps to the perpetrators themselves, under excuses such as that of the celebrated Robin Hood of England, that he took from the opulent only to secure the means of bestowing upon the poor, or under one which was no less effectual in changing the name and motive of their offence: “Mi chiamano sbandito,” said one of these chiefs, defending himself to an English lady to whom he introduced himself, “ma sono royalista.”* 
But though many in the modern day stated and pled upon these pretensions, and thereby put in their claim to a reputation in history more refined, yet in fact they occupied a part under the avowed character of brigand, which had in many periods of Italian history been known and considered as something less odious than the corres ponding name in any other language. Whenever political causes dis turbed the internal quiet, the party who had come off as weakest were banished from their native city, and those who possessed means very readily formed an inclination to waylay high roads, seize on places of strength, and make a war of banditti against their political enemies, which was avenged upon them or pardoned as a necessary consequence of their situation, as their strength recommended a gentle, or their weakness promised a severe, treatment. 
These troops, assembled in greater or less numbers according to the fame of their leaders, will be readily recognized by those who have bestowed some pains on perusal of the history of Masaniello, when many hundreds of them came into Naples under their chiefs and readily promised, or rather offered alternately, their services both to the popular party and either to the Spanish Government or the Italian nobility, which, as far as can be judged, constituted the 
* “They call me an outlaw—but I am a royalist and loyal to the King.” I must say that this person, who was at such pains to vindicate his character, behaved himself in a most generous manner as far as the English lady was concerned, and was said in many respects not to be unworthy of the name which he adopted. 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 165 
other two parties. One group of them gave the people of Naples a specimen of their profession, firing a salvo upon Masaniello with their carabines loaded with ball. The people, not imputing him escaped (for he was not even wounded), rushed on the unfortunate banditti with fury and took a summary vengeance, slaying many on the spot. At other times several gangs are mentioned, so powerful as to be courted alternately by the populace, who maintained possession of Naples, and by the nobility, who held, in virtue of the feudal right, various strong places of force in the provinces. In fact, they appear to have claimed and received from both parties alternately the treat ment due to a body of soldiers, the subjects of a foreign chief, and commanded by their own officers. On other occasions they were made prisoners and disposed of as a gang of assassins stained with a thousand crimes, and whom everybody that could lay hold upon them had a right to punish. 
In later periods, and down to more modern days, the habits of brigandage still subsisted, though the bands were neither composed of such numbers, nor their leaders distinguished by such talents, as we have seen with their predecessors. They were marked by a fanciful and showy dress, rich in its materials and at the same time fantastic in its fashion, and supposed to possess such influence over the minds of those who adopted it, that the component parts of the costume of a brigand were in various countries declared unlawful, and its effects upon those who wore this distinguishing and romantic dress, even in a masquerade, found to be stimulating to such a degree in practice as to lead to the conversion of the masqueraders into bands of actual assassins. 
Although, however, the impression derived from youth and a wild and handsome uniform may be supposed to have its effect on the minds of young men, a more rational, as well as general, source of establishing and augmenting these gangs of banditti was the fre quency of the warm passions fostered by the heat of the southern climate and rendered easy in their perpetration by the strong and romantic nature of the country. It is only needful to mention these causes in order to judge of their effect. 
Among the characteristics assigned to the Italians through all the different states of the Peninsula, jealousy of one species or another is commonly accounted peculiarly inherent in the national character, and as it leads almost instantly, when indulged, to the use of the knife in following his revenge, a rash deed, often merely the dictate of an unfortunate opportunity, determines at once the fate of the criminal, who is seduced by the occasion and commits a crime which obliges him to fly to the mountains, whither few are willing to pursue, 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
166  
and there probably lurk, until the association of fugitives expelled from society like himself, suggests the forming a league to make war upon a society which has renounced them, and renders their embody ing themselves as brigands a precaution of necessity rather than choice. 
Thus in every age, but chiefly in such where the reins of govern ment are apt to hang somewhat slack in the hands by which they should be restrained, gangs of banditti have been generally estab lished in Italy, especially where the country abounds, as is the case in Calabria, with crags that are almost impassable, pathless woods, and impenetrable thickets. Their existence and occasional peculation were a great evil to the peaceful inhabitants, the lowest of whom, however, learned, as is usually the case with those in their situation, to indemnify themselves by packing and peeling, as it is called in the old Scottish Statutes, or developing that sort of connexion between guilt and innocence which cannot subsist without the latter becom ing sullied by the communication. Those who were thus the hosts, unwilling hosts perhaps, of these robbers became in this manner glad to pay them protection money in proportion to their property, which on that condition their guests spared. Or they observed heed fully the secrets of their route, which otherwise could hardly be easily concealed from them. Or they bought the plunder which the brigands collected in the district, rendering their crimes beneficial and availing to them; and thus, by degrees destroying all the nicer distinctions between guilt and innocence, the brigands prepared the inhabitants to be on occasion the recruiting place of their band. But, although, owing to this multiplicity of reasons, these associations in guilt were at all times known to exist in Calabria more numerously than elsewhere, it was not until the long and various wars which followed upon the French Revolution, that once more, as in the time of Masaniello, the brigands assumed the honourable title of insurgent, while the French endeavoured to suppress this wide-wast ing plague infesting their new pretended kingdom, by military execu tion of the banditti who chanced to fall into their hands. Many of these perhaps might claim the protection of the legitimate govern ment under which they fought, and perhaps, where quarter was refused to themselves, they might under the stern laws of war refuse it to their opponents. 
But the person of whom it is my purpose to tell the following extraordinary story flourished in Calabria within these seven or eight years before the present date of 1832, and his memory is strongly immortalized in popular tradition. He possessed few of those nobler qualities by which many of his profession have achieved their 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 167 
redemption from the character of a vulgar ruffian, with which he was generally stigmatised. He was impetuous, fond of plunder, and careless in all respects how he came by it. Assuming in general the character of a partizan of the Bourbon, because such was more popu lar among the country-people, he yet made war as well upon the one party in the state as on the other, with unscrupulous regard excepting to that which should afford the richest booty, and that which should be most easily compassed. I am not acquainted with the circum stances which determined him to embrace the hazardous life of a captain of brigands with the name of Bizarro, which it was his fate to render celebrated. 
Chapter Two 
Raised by those arts by which bold villains rise, 
And reach the heights that better men despise. 
I   , from the hasty records preserved by public tradition and containing many a deed of violence and slaugh ter, to select the first which distinguished our hero among persons of his own description, or conferred upon him the honourable nom de guerre of Il Bizarro, by which was understood a ruffian, not only characterising him for the shrewdness and address by which this bravo’s enterprizes were marked, but the audacity and bravery, as well as the daring inhumanity, with which they were hatched and conducted to their terrible determination. Let it suffice to say that the reputation which this man had formed to himself, frightful as it was for the crimes he had committed with a sort of scheme unnatur ally and unnecessarily hideous, had only to be recounted to excite a sense of cold-blooded atrocity dextrously contrived. However the scenery of his exploits is not indifferent, nor are the incidents them selves, to the lovers of the wonderful and romantic, to which we are compelled to add the vulgar appetite for the horrible and the atro cious. But the minute accuracy of time and date, and such like details, give a trouble of a tiresome kind to “the spinners and the knitters in the sun” by whom the tales are preserved, or add grace to the dull and prosaic garrulity of talkative old age, when he endeavours to preserve the memory of the legends by blending them with a number of cir cumstances relating to his own humble labours and domestic annals, but altogether foreign with the incident, except by the mnemonic associations of his own recollection. 
Without attempting, therefore, to arrange the history of Bizarro in its proper order, we shall relate one incident which bore deep upon 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
168  
his character, and appears to have actually proved decisive of his fate. 
This man, who, even at the time I mention, was distinguished as the leader of a formidable band of freebooters, had spent the first years of his early youth in the harmless and ordinary employments and pleasures of an Italian hamlet, with its unimportant occupations and its busy gaiety. During this innocent and happy period of life, Domenichino was only marked among the youth of the village as superexcellent from the address and strength which he exhibited in all country pastimes. The maidens of the hamlet distinguished him for the cordial and heartcheering laugh with which he took the lead. This hilarity of disposition, united to a handsome exterior, is almost sure in this country to create a favourite of the fair sex, which the taste of the people renders a character of which young men of all classes are as ambitious as in France itself, though perhaps they less frequently aspire to, or actually attain, in early youth at least, the rank of a bonne fortune between the parties, even when placed in the circumstances which in France frequently terminate in such a connexion of gallantry. 
It is enough to say that the future bandit was, during the younger, more innocent, and unquestionably the happier period of his life, an agreeable, if not an admired, a striking, if not a captivating, young man, and a young man whom none could reject as profligate or worth less, though age might shake its grey locks with disapprobation, and augur from the whispered tattle of the village that Domenichino was infected with more than a just proportion of the national vice of idle ness, that his temper was susceptible of sudden inflammation upon slight causes, and his revenge, when provoked, was persevering in its rancour and deadly in its explosion. The inference was a caution from age to youth, and experience transmitted to those who might have the worst of it, to beware how they engaged themselves by affording countenance to one whose character might be compared to an even ing closing, in his own mountains of Calabria, and sinking into a host of dark and variegated clouds, which, while they provide a mix ture of the most peculiar colours blended in the most splendid mass, and resting on the ridge which closes the landscape in ominous prodigality, announce that they are certain ere sunset to burst into a tempest. 
Such were the cautions, founded on Domenichino’s character, which were disseminated by the aged and the prudent in his native village, and youth, in proportion to its mixture with discretion, lis tened to and was guided by the voice of experience, while those of more thoughtless temper ridiculed the warning voice, as if based 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 169 
upon jealousy arising from the envy of youthful accomplishments. Meanwhile, Domenichino went on playing the character of the thoughtless gallant with every damsel in the village, and, it is said, became to some of them the cause of the loss of their reputation, while, with respect to others, his assiduous attentions only extended so far as to excite suspicions for which there was no real ground, although they easily found credit when applied to the believing heart of a jealous lover. 
“Santo Stefano,” said Hubert, an inferior keeper of the district called the forest of Apri, a small chase preserved for the royal exercize of shooting. “The forest, I think, is bewitched. I have lost there two of the most stately of the stags within my walks, without being able by my vigilance to discover who has done me an injury, which, were it to be judged strictly, would cost me my office on the hour it should become known to the Cacciatore Maggiore. Sapperment! How can my own eyes, and those of the knaves which I keep to assist me, have betrayed me so egregiously? Antonio, you young rogue, you, or some of your companions, who owe me the very bread you eat, must have been colloguing together to play me a trick which might have proved so fatal. Nay, good fellow, do not hold up thy hands and make ready to damn thyself by denial of what I cannot charge upon thee as a positive fact. But the King himself will come hither next week, the Cacciatore Maggiore will look into the condition of the chace, and, rely upon it, Antonio, the thing must be explained.” 
This speech was addressed by the old keeper of the forest to the young man who accompanied him in passing through the walks, maintaining, however, the respectful distance which good breeding, in all countries, expects a dependant to observe in discharge of a duty which their occupation requires of them both to perform. When addressed in a harsh and imperative voice, to which the usual good nature of the old keeper rendered his deputies in ordinary cases a great stranger, the young man’s features shewed no common degree of emotion, and his justification, though made willingly and with spirit, was nevertheless attended with a species of uncertainty which his master did not expect from him, and to understand which makes it necessary that the words of both should be here repeated. 
“My worthy and kind master, I know you would blame me if I added more solemn attestations than my own word to deny the charge which has been supposed possibly to have had its source in my negli gence of duty. Whenever, or by whomsoever, I may be interrogated, I must answer decidedly, or according to the phrase of your country, ‘ein wort, ein man!’ Upon the word, therefore, of a man who has never trifled with it, although I am aware of some heads of game 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
170  
stolen from the forest, and have done my best, with the assistance of my companions, to trace the offences committed, yet I have not been able to follow the fact beyond the existence of gross suspicion, on which I know you would think me too rash to bring a charge against any of my countrymen.” 
“That may be very right, my son,” replied the old huntsman, “but upon this occasion an oath sanctioned by the most sacred rites of your religion will be exacted from you, and, while it requires from you the truth and the whole truth, it places in the power of your superiors the task of ascertaining the extent to which punishment is to be awarded against the suspected person, depending on how far the fact can be declared only from your oath to be proved against him or how far it can only be rendered a matter of gross suspicion. And this much you must know of our habits, that neither the Cacciatore Mag giore nor his royal master would unduly enforce against an innocent man a transgression of which he is suspected, by less than the most indubitable evidence.” 
“I am well aware of that, my worthy sir,” replied Antonio. “I am sensible of the respect I owe to the Cacciatore Maggiore, and the still more implicit obedience to his royal master. But to yourself, most worthy sir, I can but intimate what I have owed you since you adopted me, a wandering orphan strolling through this forest, taught me to carry and to use a carabine and most other manly weapons of chace, and ensured my subsistence at your hospitable board.” 
“Stop there, Antonio,” said the good-tempered old man. “You cannot as yet even guess how far my good will extends to you. I am taught by the encroachments of these rascals that I have no longer the alertness necessary for my very responsible situation, since they dare adventure so impudently to interfere with the duties of my office. I have therefore no doubt that I can find interest with His Majesty to associate an assistant so active as thou art with the tasks which I am no longer alone able to discharge. Nor is this all. I have watched you, Antonio, and my daughter Monica since you have dwelt in the same household, and it has not escaped the old man with what eyes you have regarded each other. With respect to my daughter, it is natural I should make such a choice for her as may ensure her happiness in life, and such I think, honest Antonio, she is willing, when time fits, to receive in thee. Thou art not likely, I apprehend, to object to Monica, who will continue her superintendance of the family, in which thou hast resided for so many years without ever appearing to tire of it; for provision and revenue, which is in many a marriage a trouble, we have the exercise which we love, which is the same which princes chuse for sport; and I trust we already possess 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 171 
the confidence of our superiors; and you are fortunate to enjoy, owing to your own good qualities, and grounded upon them, a desireable situation, without any greater qualifications than being an honest man and a sure stag-shooter, gifts which you owe only to your own dexterity.” 
“And your instructions, my noble master,” answered the lover, in an extasy, when he heard his master touch upon the wish he had long brooded over as nearest to his heart. When he had devoured his rapture as far as possible, he attempted to offer his thanks in a reply which might in some degree express his enthusiasm. 
“My noble master,” said he, putting one knee on the ground, “if all the holy saints had bestowed upon you the power which they possess of ascertaining and granting the desires of a poor mortal, it would be scarce possible for omnipotence itself to sum them up in such few words, or to render their fulfilment more effectual. The blessings which you hold forth to me seem to be proffered as a species of bribe to induce me to betray the transgressors in the forest, considered in which point of view, it is rather a point of my bounden duty, which I ought to seek no compensation for performing. These blessings, therefore, rise not as an objection to telling you all you ask, but as leading to certain dangers of which you, sir, are a greatly better judge, who have lived a life of experience, than I, who am only beginning one.” 
“Speak out, my son,” said the old man. “I cannot conceive any thing which can, or ought rationally, to give you alarm on the subject of these poaching villains, unless, what I would not willingly suppose, you, who never miss a stag within five hundred feet, should entertain terror for the feats of a poacher. At a word, young friend, what is the name of this Rodomont of yours?” 
“It is one which you, sir, have heard before now—Domenichino Castiliogne,” answered Antonio, “and so the murther is out.” “And why do you charge him with the crime of stealing these two stags from the forest?” 
“Having no means of judging of him, I must necessarily take his own description as an unerring shot, who has it in his power to take revenge for slight offences, and who has said openly that he will consider the man who shall claim Monica’s hand as the person who shall afford him the most mortal offence which he ever received in his life.” 
“And is it the threats of a braggadochio ruffian like this that move you so much, when I think that my offer might afford you something else to think of?” 
“Not so, by Heaven,” answered the young man, “but I know this 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
172  
Domenichino, though it is on your account, and that of Monica, that I may be allowed to compute the difficulty of protecting you from such a person as a marksman, during the time when I must be neces sarily absent performing the rounds in the forest.” 
“By Saint Stephen,” said the keeper, “thou wouldst make me die of laughing were I able to do so from a disposition to be angry. Doest thou think that with my daughter’s hand I intend to give up to thee the right of protecting my own head, or that I intend to consign to your care my trusty companion?” (Here he slapped, as if with fondness, a short carabine which accompanied him in all his walks.) “And for my daughter Monica, though thou hast lived in my house hold for this eight or ten years, yet thou knowest her as little as my dog, Aetna, knows a bitch wolf. She is well accustomed to the use of such masculine tools as she is wont to see you and me go armed with, and neither hesitates nor trembles when there is occasion to fire her carabine with a ready and regular aim. Lord love thee! do thou but take care of thyself, and keep thy dogs in the habit of beating the distant bushes, to prevent the accidental chance of a long shot, and have no fear of Monica while she herself and I are in the country to defend her.” 
The pair of friends now extricated themselves from the walks of the forest, in which the wildness of the times compelled them to divide their thoughts with a general concern for their personal safety, until they entered the more wide and practicable roads, which they traced with more uninterrupted security. Here they permitted their conversation a less broken flow, no longer disturbed by attention to the motions of their dogs, who left no thicket which they traversed run past, but explored them with seemingly as much sagacity of purpose as the patrols of an army would, in a similar occasion, have secured the march of their main body, and given them ready notice of any intended ambush lying in wait for them. 
Chapter Three 
A life Arcadian was these peasants’ lot, 
The same their frugal fare, their simple cot; 
Simple its pleasures, simple was its toil, 
The vineyard labours in the genial soil. 
T     which traversed the forest led through a country which naturally exposed its guardians, as in every region, to assaults from the malevolence of those who were in the custom of setting at defiance those offences against the game which they had the duty of preserving, but these disputes were seldom 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 173 
blown into intense animosity, for the keepers of the forest were at all times, when the country was at peace, chosen with qualities which made the office respected, and the poachers or free shooters were likely to suffer most if they ventured to enter into open warfare. Their quarrels, therefore, were generally less violent in their causes and their consequence than in other countries, where the rights of the nobles were more strenuously exerted, and particularly those in Great Britain itself. 
On the other hand, disputes arising from this cause were often exasperated into serious and even bloody conflicts, by the jealousies occurring in the little society of the youth of the same community. The danger, therefore, which the young assistant hinted at as likely to arise on the part of Domenichino, was fully understood by the old keeper, but he had been too often subject to such quarrels in the course of long and courageous practice of his office, and was too much accustomed to be victorious in them, to entertain at his age any apprehension of danger to himself or his family through means of Domenichino. Antonio, on the other hand, if he had felt such anxiety in a stronger degree, would have been ashamed to confess it, for he might have, by doing so, sunk in the good opinion of his intended father in law or, what had been still more mortifying and humiliating, that of his beloved. The high road to the casal, or village, which was their common residence, now lay before the two friends, and led up a small hill, where it varied its breadth, and assumed occasionally a mantle of the olive, the elm tree, and the vine, trained by the inhabitants so as they might, in their different capacities, produce the fruits in their seasons, and give their cultivators the full advantage which could be afforded by the generosity and genial qual ities of the soil. The executing these necessary tasks as their season comes round is the principal labour of the peasantry of both sexes, as is the charge of their flocks, in which are found the goats and the wild buffaloes—an animal conceived to be peculiarly suited to the wild salt marshes which lie within the reach of the ocean, where immense herds of them are bred up, and add their produce to the dairy of the farmer. These and similar kinds of rustic labour, which in less favourable climates are appropriated to the male sex alone, are in these countries supposed not to be in any degree too severe for the females, many of whom are, from their strength and capacity of enduring toil, as capable of bearing them as the lovers and hus bands with whom they share them. 
It may render this tale more intelligible to take some notice of the manner in which Monica Wegweiser had been brought up from her infancy, and the unusual degree in which she had shared in both the 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
174  
labours and amusements of her father and her family, even those which seemed least suitable to her sex. 
Old Wegweiser himself was of German extraction, and had origin ally been preferred to his superintendance of the forest, in which we found him taking his accustomed promenade, as being an old soldier of established good behaviour, come of a profession which, in all countries, is supposed to deserve trust and promotion, and who, by his past services, had merited the preferment now bestowed on him, while the name of his native country was everywhere proverbial for courage, honesty and fidelity. He possessed also the favour of the nobleman who held the considerable and honourable appointment of Cacciatore Maggiore, whose discharge of his duty with respect to the forest must be more or less gratifying to the King, in so far as the subordinate duties of this his deputy were faithfully discharged. 
Wegweiser was at first regarded with some suspicion in the village and its vicinage, as a stranger generally is when he obtains a position conferring some degree of wealth and power, to which the natives believe him to have no natural title. But if the preferment of Hubert Wegweiser attracted any such animosity, the mode which he selected of attaching himself to the country, and forming a connection which should unite him with its interests, was not long of occurring to him. A man he was, as may be inferred from his history, somewhat stricken in years, yet that was not so much as to induce him to despair in the plan which he formed to lay suit to the heart of the prettiest damsel in the village, famous as well for their steadiness as for their fidelity in affairs intrusted to them. 
The person on whom he had set his affections was a young woman, an only child, the sole heiress to a little property, which she trans ferred to the tall and comely German, influenced by such motives as had placed him under the protection of the King himself and his immediate superior. If the favour shewn to the keeper by the liberal heiress excited some dislike and contempt towards the fortunate German, it was not long of being qualified by a train of family misfor tune which rendered him the object, not of censure and jealousy, but of compassion. His new fellow citizens, and those who had looked suspiciously and cruelly towards his rapid rise and his interest with the young and beautiful damsel, were moved when Fortune, having filled his chalice to the brim, was relentless enough to dash it from him when the hour arrived that it ought to have been raised to his lips. 
The year of the marriage was hardly complete when Wegweiser was deprived of his new mate in the period most interesting to the hopes of a doting husband, and left but the blossom of the promised 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 175 
fruit to console him, in some degree, for the loss of happiness which he had naturally expected for himself, and for which he had been envied by his neighbours. When he was able, by dint of stern resolu tion, to resume his ordinary avocations in the forest, the deep melan choly, which was the consequence of his loss, tainted and infected the tenor of his life, and each of the active occupations which devolved upon his office, or which, with the assistance of his departed com panion, he might have executed in respect to the farm which was his marriage portion, mingled for a length of time with gall and bitterness. 
In consideration of instances of misfortune, to which we are all liable and which we must receive submissively at the hand of the great arbiter of our destiny, who distributes among us evil or good at his pleasure, a man thus suffering under an unexpected and severe stroke of fate, if his temper is kind and beneficent, becomes naturally among his neighbours the object of that pity which is akin to, and leads to, the general forgiveness of those particulars of good fortune which might render him the envy of others. 
Wegweiser was a man of an emphatic and ardent spirit, who bore not the great calamity which he had sustained as an apology for withdrawing himself from the combat with the blast, and laying him self down in that state of hopeless inaction which affliction imposes on less active minds. On the contrary, he neglected no duty which his office or his general mode of life demanded of him, and the gravity, or even severity, impressed upon his countenance and the whole tenor of his life made more for awe than for affection in those who sometimes ventured an unlicensed walk in the forest. Indeed, they suffered more from the apprehension inspired by the silent, serious, grave and melancholy keeper than they had formerly nour ished affection for Wegweiser himself when he lived among them as a gay, laughter-loving member of their little society, and were studi ous so far as possible to avoid detection of offences which he would necessarily be obliged to bring to justice. Thus Wegweiser, in the discharge of his official duty, escaped some of those feuds which it was calculated to excite against him. His character for devotion and the general belief in his fairness aided him in gaining this desirable exemption. We can, for example, easily understand how devotion came to the aid of the spirit of a just man, who had suffered under the shafts of fortune and whose temper directed him to secure a refuge there. The natural and laudable resort to this support in his distresses gained him the good esteem of the society in which he lived, and failed not to render him generally respected. 
The most severe part of his task, in which for some time the grave man felt an awkwardness which he did not willingly suffer to interfere 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
176  
with his duty, was the discharge of his attentive care to the little Monica, to whom in some respects it fell to him to pay the attention of a mother as well as a father. In this particular, in which a widower usually chiefly feels his desolation, Wegweiser was far from finding himself so desolate and helpless as many in his situation. His deceased wife had many in the village who were through her allied to the little orphan in friendship and propinquity, and several of these offered their ready and willing assistance to perform those domestic tasks which the custom of the country imposed on women. It is true that, of these sympathizing damsels who shewed a willing ness to instruct Monica in all kinds of useful knowledge in which her situation was like to call upon her, none was able to teach her how to assist her father in tasks and in amusements which gave her a remarkable bias to the sports and employments of the male sex, a predilection which distinguished her through the whole course of her life, but especially during her earlier years. 
As her mother and father were both above the ordinary height, it was no wonder that she should bear a resemblance to them in size of person, and in the personal strength by which it is usually attended. Even when Monica was a mere child, she was accustomed to trot about after her father in the forest, and to witness and admire his frequent and dextrous shooting exploits, until at length she became a judge so expert, that her approbation appeared to the old keeper of such consequence that he could not help to some degree instructing her in an art for which she shewed such a fancy. The tall form of the maiden was arrayed in a gay dress, which partook both of the costume of the youth and that which was peculiar to the maiden. She bore habitually on her shoulder a carabine fit for her use in the occasional part which she took in that exercise. A Neapolitan bonnet, with a green plume drooping to the left side, shaded, though it did not altogether obscure, a countenance which the fierce sun had kissed somewhat too roughly. A corset of mulberry-coloured velvet fitted close to her shape and came down to her wrist, and boasted, at least upon festal occasions, a small quantity of rich silver lace, which adorned the seams of the back or the verge of the bosom. A rosary of silver beads, with a crucifix of the same metal, terminated the holiday attire of a lighthearted lass, the wealth of whose father, which exceeded that of those of the middle rank, and his doating kind ness, furnished her with the ready means of procuring whatever articles of finery the beauties of her class usually found expensive to aspire to. 
I ought not, in the equipment of Monica Wegweiser, to have neg lected the sandals peculiar to Calabria and resembling those which 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 177 
we see, upon the ancient heroines and goddesses, bound across the foot and ancle of the wonderful statues in whom human genius has endeavoured to body forth immortality. If the village was not very famous for its classical remains, it did at least afford beauties of the present day akin to those reliques of ancient idolatry, which the parishioners of the dismantled town loved to recognize in a native of the place. 
Partly from natural disposition, partly from the influence of general melancholy, Wegweiser naturally fell into an error most fre quent amongst those whose fireside has been, by decree of fate, reduced to a single individual whom they over-indulge, and in con sequence the darling and excessive favourite becomes somewhat unsuited for its general intercourse with the world. Poor Monica, considering the portion of her own will with which her father happily indulged her, was sometimes led into the common error of chusing a line of conduct formed exclusively upon her own wishes, and, though the youth of the village were unanimous in the approbation of Monica’s beauty and housewifely skills, yet it always turned upon the saving clause, “But the poor girl has been too much used to have her own way—her father’s fault, a good honest man. A motherless child should be led with a tighter rein, and the man who marries her, or rather whom she shall please to marry, will have work enough to bit her to her duty as the mistress of a family.” Such was the frequent speech of some village dame, who was the oracle of the hamlet, and was perhaps vexed that her daughters could not aspire to the gaiety of apparel which Monica Wegweiser displayed at church, or in festive dance upon a holiday; and those to whom such depreci ations were addressed greeted them with applause, and received them partly as village scandal is always received, and partly as the fortunate points of a character like Monica’s are supposed to be subject to the criticism and scandal of the vulgar. 
We return now to the scene in which we left the keeper Wegweiser wending homeward in conversation with his assistant Antonio, the son of a poor widow woman, whom he had brought up, not without a view to his succeeding him in his office if he should after a certain time appear deserving of the situation. 
Chapter Four 
T    , as I before intimated, placed the keeper and his assistant in an open country at the bottom of a steep hill, the ascent of which rose up from every side, and the 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
178  
central height seemed to be crowned by a mass of partly fallen walls, the remains of those which had once figured as a set of surrounding fortifications, probably designed as defences of the village itself. The road upwards to the village, the ruins, as it seemed to be, of a place once thought worthy of active defence, ran up the hill between the remains of two walls half dilapidated, now preserving a regular dis tance from the walls themselves, and now receding from them to an extent which seemed to have been occupied by the graves of the dead. These, as provided by the Roman law, were not permitted to be erected within the limits of the town, but formed a street consisting of various buildings and extending between the walls, thus providing what seemed towers or turrets of various shapes, which preserved the memory of the dead by their half-mouldering inscriptions. 
Something also very particular struck the spectator in the architec ture of the walls of the city, both where they were still permitted to exist around the town and where their remains still survived as to enchase the solemn avenue which bore the name of the Street of Tombs. The stile of architecture had apparently been in what has been termed the Cyclopean or Pelasgian, a stile supposed to be introduced by some of those roving Greeks who, long before the Romans had borrowed from them the arts, or emulated their perfec tion, had, with few men and limited means, carried to strength and completion the arts of architecture and sculpture, so that, at the first glance, the structure appeared to have been raised on a plan which altogether dispensed with the polish of the chisel. For the walls had been erected by piling together, as it rose, a number of loose stones, and leaving them to dry, after having roughly united them with cement. The many-angled stones, although, placed in this way, they gave each other wonderful support, had, in the course of later ages, been rendered considerably stronger by enclosing them with cases of freestone, polished so as to complete the junction. This Cyclopean stile of building, which was formerly a cause of great debate, has of late been considered as that of the Pelasgians, or others who chanced to build the principal cities first founded in that portion of Greece which the inhabitants, gifted as they were with an early knowledge of the mechanic arts, termed Magna Græcia. However, the later inhabitants partly pulled down, and partly dis guized with their own fashions, the temples and public buildings of the Grecians, hardly leaving to them the honour of having been their teachers. 
Hubert Wegweiser and Antonio went straight up the hill, talking together with much anxiety and troubling themselves little about the original of these long walls, contented to ascribe them to the ancient 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 179 
inhabitants of the island of Sicily, whom they had learned to distin guish by the name of Cyclopeans. 
“Look you, master,” said the young man, “I have heard huntsmen who have obtained leave for shooting in this forest neglect both buck and doe, and black game, to run into foolish disquisitions and expatiate on them.” 
“Ah, my child, you do not know these Ingleses, as they call them selves, Zingari, as we nickname them. I have seen them here and in Germany and, Corpo di Bacco! I will not take upon me to say that they are bad marksmen—on the contrary, I have seen many who hit what they held out against like other men—but some of them are certainly a singular set, and wander the country catching colics and colds in quest of old walls and ruins, to which they annex an immense value, and, still more surprizing, they think the more broken they are, the more valued. 
“But they are, with all this madness, a goodnatured people, and tremendously rich, though, considering how they lay it out, it is wonderful they should have a quattrin to spare. They are very gener ous to the poor people of this country, and, if you assist them in procuring particoloured stones, such as are flung among the lava of an eruption, or stone figures, such as our great folks set a value upon, it is endless the money which the Zingari will load you with in return. I have often been tempted to think that gold and silver grew in their mountains, and that the plentiful stock of the precious metals which they possess lost estimation among them, and induced them willingly to barter them for the coloured stones which our Mongibels throw out of their entrails, or are cleared out of old ruins. Of late, since the country has been more lawless than formerly, these people have been sometimes stopt by bands of brigands tempted by the idea of their great wealth, and, although this may be a less evil than destroying the royal game, yet I hold it a foul act of theft to take either the property or life of an innocent set of fools, who come to offer their purses to our hands of their own accord, and have hardly wit enough to tie a knot on them. Besides these peculiarities, the Zingari have this characteristic, that, when they are involved in war with their neighbours and are unwilling to fight themselves, as is generally the case, they hire armies from the princes of Germany, where every man is a soldier and every soldier is a hero, to fight their battles and gain their victories in their stead.” 
“There is more cunning than courage in that fashion,” said the youthful assistant. “I begin to have less esteem for the Ingleses than I formerly entertained, for I have seen several among them shoot well, walk well, and bring home enow of game in the pouch, and I 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
180  
remember one so good a judge of a girl’s features that he made Monica a present of five gold zecchins, as if they had been five wild turtle’s eggs.” 
“All that he would think of as little consequence as you might think five quattrins. Nevertheless, I cannot but say to you, my son, of my loving daughter, that you will do well to let no such flies meddle with your honey-pots. I will answer for my Monica if she is not beset with gifts and temptations but, for zecchins and schillings and such like, a wise man would scarce become security for the mother that bore him. But I see you are not attending to me, and I see what you are thinking about. Your eyes are fixed on Monica at the village fountain, whither she has come with her water pail, and where that rogue Domenichino is chattering to her.” 
“Yes,” said the lover, ”I know well enough what they are talking about, and I am glad I have told you of his tricks in the forest before his tricks with your daughter.” 
“Nay, my son, my daughter is one thing and my duty is another. I will tell her my mind about Domenichino and you, and whom I will have her keep company with. She has been all her life a good girl, and I have but to intimate my pleasure for it to be her law. But, until I make it known to her, I cannot complain that she behaves civilly to the youth of the village, and gives them her hand in the ring and her voice in the song, till her father has announced his intention to bestow her or otherwise.” 
“Certainly, my dearest and kindest father, since you have been so good as allow me to make pretension to Monica’s hand, I will not push on my suit elsewhere or otherwise than is agreeable to you.” 
He had hardly said this before Domenichino and Monica Weg weiser, quitting their interview, which had seemed that of a youthful couple who took an interest in each other, advanced towards Antonio as a comrade and the old German, and were received frankly by both. 
Wegweiser took Domenichino’s arm, and leading him a little apart from Antonio and his daughter, said, “I was at this moment wishing to see you, my good neighbour, and chance has thrown you oppor tunely into my way.” 
“If it is to let me know, my good neighbour, any point, command me without scruple.” 
“Nay, my friend, my wants are but few and they are amply provided for. But I am old, my friend Domenichino, and nature warns me that it is time to settle my daughter Monica in some manner suitable to her possessions and expectations.” 
Domenichino listened with a throbbing heart, but, although the 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 181 
dialogue had hitherto pointed as if the choice of the father might perhaps settle upon himself, yet the circumstances on which they stood together were far from rendering that probable. Domenichino knew that the old keeper suspected him of trespasses against the game, which, like most men in his profession, he failed not to reckon an unpardonable offence, and he was aware that a long term of orderly behaviour would hardly induce him to overlook what touched him so nearly in his character. Yet this present opportunity had some thing which opened a way for reconciliation with the old German, and he resolved to make an attempt to avail himself of it. Domeni chino was fond of the chace, and vain of the skill in that exercise. Monica was generally accounted the prettiest girl in the town and Domenichino was one of smartest lads in the village, as they would tell themselves. “Now, look you, father,” he said, “if I were acceptable to you for a son-in-law, I would make your duty an easy one, for I would neither shoot venison in the forest, nor allow others to do so, and should it be otherwise, Pozzo di Bacco, father, you are not so young as you have been, and I have the best of my days to run. Plain speaking is best. Leave me to win Monica’s consent if I can boast of yours.” 
“You are a clever fellow, Domenichino,” answered the keeper, “but, at once, and with the plain dealing you are pleased to boast of, you cannot be my son-in-law upon these or any other terms. I am, at one word, none of these keepers who will betray his charge and play with poachers, and, if you think you are one of these poachers who can frighten an old man out of the discharge of his duty, by Saint Hubert, you will find you have the wrong sow by the ear. You have forfeited any claim to my indulgence, and therefore look what ground you have chosen to plant yourself upon, for Monica will be married in a month, and, having destined her to a man of her own choice, I as little fear your anger as a Calabrian sheepdog fears the sheep who follow at his heels, or the wolf who prowls around to make a prey of them.” 
Hitherto Domenichino had not betrayed any passion, but now his dark eye flashed and a ruddy tint gleamed across his embrowned visage, like what is exhibited by a sunset which threatens the coming storm. Old Wegweiser glowered, and they would probably have soon come to extremities. But the sullen look of the young man evaporated in the exclamation, “Do not forget this, old man—tu mi pagh erai——” The old man laughed his threats to derision, though per haps not greatly pleased with the open terms of defiance on which he now stood with one of the most dangerous men in the village. 
Meanwhile he lost no time in proposing to his daughter the match 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
182  
he had projected betwixt her and his assistant Antonio, and Monica, who saw herself provided with a handsome, active, young husband, and, above all, with one who was likely to allow her as much of the direction of the household as Italian wives were usually in the habit of claiming, and which Antonio was accustomed to see her enjoy, acceded to the authority of her father, and offered no kind of objec tion. Their marriage was celebrated a few weeks afterward with the general approbation of the villagers, who saw Monica, an heiress in her way, bestown in marriage, and that on one of their own youth, together with a reversion of a good office, in which he possessed a power of doing good and harm in the neighbourhood, which they were rejoiced in seeing conferred on Antonio, more especially as the sway of old Wegweiser in the forest had sometimes been reckoned a little severe. 
The marriage of Monica and Antonio was deemed a matter of such consequence, that it did not soon sink into a common piece of intelligence, but continued the subject of conversation among the peasants for an unusual length of time. There was a debate concern ing the auspices to be derived from the union. Some, arguing on such reasons as we have just quoted, augured all the good things which can be predicated in such a case, while others insisted that Monica, having dismissed such a lad as Domenichino, was not unlikely to be punished in a signal manner by a lover whom, they scrupled not to say, she had jilted, especially as he was well known to be a man of quick passions, and likely to take a rash occasion of vengeance. 
But none of those events took place which were likely to presage any act of dire revenge. On the contrary, the discarded lover seemed to have taken the resolution to sit down quietly under his disappoint ment, or seek for consolation elsewhere. It was not, indeed, long before he felt some consequence from the forest courts, where he was proceeded against for a penalty of which, considering his poverty, it was thought he could not easily make payment; but, to the sur prize of the judges as well as the procurator, Domenichino drew out a purse of doeskin which seem reasonably filled, and discharged the fine. 
As the delinquent paid his fine almost with an air of triumph, he said, across the audience, in a sort of whisper so as to be overheard by the old keeper, “I told you to have your eyes about you and to beware of me,” and the tone in which he said it was remarked by many to be, as Hamlet says, miching Malicho, and to mean mischief. When morning, however, shone on the peaceful hamlet, one of the neatest cottages of the town was found to have been broken open in 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 183 
the night time and the inhabitants murdered with circumstances of great atrocity. Suspicion fell naturally upon Domenichino, who was the rather the object because those with whom he kept company of late days were strangers, or desperate men hanging loose upon soci ety, and supposed to be prepared for any wickedness. The Sbirri, or peace officers, exerted themselves in drawing up a proces verbal of the manner in which the crime had been committed with a singular audacity. The statement of their paper was of the following tenor. 
Chapter Five 
Thus, when a peaceful land is stained with crime, 
Justice, fierce bloodhound, comes through flames, 
Opens upon the scent with fatal quest, 
And strives to wake her hunters on the prey. 
T    disgusting and dreadful, and the fate of the poor sufferers seemed to have been that of midnight assassina tion against the defence of three persons (for Monica might from her habits have been entitled as one of the garrison), possessed, if they had been aware of their danger, of both strength and means of resistance. To assist the researches of the Sbirri, a French officer of infantry gave his attendance, and offered the service of his regiment to arrest the alleged culprits, for the purpose of making it mani fest what advantages might be derived from the energy and vigilance of the French troops in a country which was daily becoming more lawless. 
Every thing tended to shew, as well to the Sbirri, or ordinary officers of justice, as to the French Colonel Larchant, that the crime had been committed by a considerable number of persons. They had entered by a window, which was in the back part of the house, from which there was a view to the outside of the town. It was access ible by a passage leading through one or two fragments of the ancient ruins, which time had defaced into a confused mass, in which the children of the village used to play at hide and seek and other childish games. Several urchins were compelled to confess that, a few nights since, they had admitted Domenichino at least once to this sport, in the course of which he had an opportunity of tampering with the decayed frame of the window, and facilitating the entrance into a species of ware room in which Wegweiser was wont to keep the produce of his garden and other fundible property, in order to be at hand when he wanted to use it. This apartment corresponded with his own bedroom, furnished with a comfortable bed for himself and others for reception of friends, who were always accommodated 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
184  
with carabines. Within this was the bridal chamber of Antonio and Monica, alike ready to obtain help, or to give assistance to the old keeper, whichever necessity might require. 
It would seem that, on the night in which this miserable murder took place, the evilly disposed perpetrators had disturbed the old man by an entrance through the window of the store room, which had proved somewhat more noisy than they had expected. The alarmed keeper had jumped from his bed, but ere he obtained a light, or probably conceived with whom he had to do, he had been encoun tered in the dark by one or two persons armed with the knives which, until a period not much later than that of which we write, were the constant companion of a Neapolitan, and of which, when their passions were up, they were universally accustomed to make fatal use. This murder was not, and could not be, carried into effect without noise. But, though Antonio had warning enough to start up and take to his defence, and either he or Monica appears to have wounded some one with his carabine, yet he, too, had fallen under the knives of numerous assailants, who seem to have meditated making a boast of their revenge. For they had cut the head of the unfortunate keeper’s assistant from his body, and skewered fast to his forehead a placard to this purpose: “Behold the head of Antonio Mutela, a teller of tales to His Majesty to the prejudice of his faithful subjects.” 
This head they doubtless intended to expose in some public part of the town. But time, or perhaps the cries of Monica, had interrupted them, though it had not prevented them from dragging with them one whom they had deprived of father and husband. Circumstances gave them no time to boast of their atrocious cruelty, and with an almost unanimous voice the byestanders who heard the particulars of the crime joined in hoping it might be speedily visited by condign punishment. 
Others, however, there were, both young men and maidens, who extended their censure so far as to suppose that Domenichino had been the favoured lover of Monica until she learned that he was informed of her father’s intention to disinherit her, upon which she not only dismissed her lover as pretending to her hand, but kept up a course of secret correspondence, which might well end (although God forbid any one should presume to spread such a report without proof) by Monica herself becoming conscious of the cruel intended murder of her father and husband to clear the way for a lover of her own selection. This opinion, however derogatory to Monica, still received encouragement among her townsfolks owing to the insinu ations of some of her old friends, who took pleasure in seeing farther into a dark affair, or into a millstone as we say in common parlance, 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 185 
than their plain-dealing neighbours. But the injunctions on every person to come forward, and communicate whatever was known to them concerning this hideous crime, produced the following information, which served in some degree to render improbable the idea that Monica, with whose character, indeed, it was little congru ent, had an accession of any kind, more or less direct, to the murder of her husband and her father, and in so far relieved the friends of a person who had a good deal of a masculine disposition in her charac ter, which might sometimes surprize her companions but could not infer a suspicion so atrocious. 
According to the deposition of Gaspar Giusto, a shepherd of Calabria and a person of undoubted fame, and his wife Julia Littina, they had occasion upon a day specified, being the morning, to be proceeding into the mountains by the narrow defile called the Devil’s Gorge, when they saw a party of armed men advancing towards them. “We were a good deal alarmed at a sight so uncommon,” said the shepherd’s wife, “and began fearing whether we might be permit ted to pass, without robbery or insult, a body who were likely to have assumed these arms contrary to the law, by which is proscribed a dress so like to that of the brigands who infest the country at present, and who are often incivil to the country people. Upon reflection, however, we agreed it was better to pass them boldly without intimat ing any suspicion, in which case they were unlikely to afford us any ground of complaint. Taking up, therefore, a stout heart, and reflect ing that we must not express either surprize or annoyance if the brigands deprived us of a few goats, which we drove before us with one of our great sheepdogs, whose name was Cyclops, and who was as large and fine a dog as is in our mountains, we advanced and met on both parts in the middle of the pass, where it is so narrow that it is bordered by a steep cliff on one side, and on the other so precipitate that it may be termed the road to the next world, for he who missed his foot on it was very unlikely ever to stir again in this. As we met, the brigands arranged themselves on the safe side of the road, while they left us the open precipice, so that we were afraid to think they might have the intention of pushing us over the edge, which had no parapet to defend us. So terrified enough we were when we came to pass them, a set of men who seemed to wear the habit and bear the manner of brigands, carrying carabines, pistols, knives, daggers and other such like weapons, which again frightened my old man and myself.” 
“Did you know any of them, good woman?” said one of the magis trates in a stern voice. “How now, are you deaf? You heard well enough just now. Or are you frightened to give testimony against the 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
186  
brigands? Are you aware that to assist in concealing them is a capital crime against the King and the good subjects of the country?” “May heaven prosper your excellence, I have no doubt it is as you say, but talking of men in colours and dresses such as these men wore is what no man wishes to do who ever thinks to sleep soundly in his own bed. I am sure if my good man ever knew the names of their dresses and weapons he has forgotten them long ago. There is deafness for you, an you talk of deafness—I doubt if he will be able to hear the blessed saint Gabriel when he sounds the trumpet at the last, far less any questions on this side of the grave.” 
“I tell you, good woman, if you proceed in refusing to the King’s magistrate what it is his duty and right to demand of you, I will send you over in chains to Palermo, and your husband for company, and you shall keep the jail there with the rest of the misdoers, till he recover his hearing, and you your recollection, in which you both appear strangely deficient.” 
The honest old woman broke out into desperate complaints of the hardship of such treatment, and openly protested that the officers should be able to protect them against the power and threats of the brigands, before insisting that they should offend them by lodging informations or accusations against them; and this topic she pursued with the volubility of the south of Italy, and an eloquence of exposition of which that country possesses no ordinary share. 
An old officer of the Sbirri, in compassion for the woman’s distress, or willing to shew his ingenuity in making her speak out, asked per mission to put a question or two to her in her own way, to which he had no doubt she would return satisfactory answers. “You are afraid, good woman, lest, if you and your husband were sent to undergo your examination at Palermo, your property in Calabria might be exposed to the ravages of these banditti, and thus your means of subsistence would be destroyed in the one country, while your per sons were strictly detained in another.” 
“In troth,” replied the old lady, “and your Honour has some right to understand these things, and I will not say but you have hit on the exact reason. I have as much regard for His Majesty the King as any of his subjects in Calabria—but I can ill afford to lose my property, and less to lose my life.” 
“Both of which you conceive to be in danger if you answer the questions of His Majesty’s officers with truth and frankness,” said the officer. The woman gave a significant nod. “Very right, old woman,” said the officer of the police. “Keep to that manner of answering to such questions as I shall ask, and I will venture to give thee the King’s word that no harm shall happen to thee.” 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 187 
“Nay, nay,” answered she, “if I am not asked to swear to you to the prejudice of any of my neighbours, I know no harm can fall to me if I answer your questions by signs and mummery, in the way country folks talk to each other at a fair.” 
This bargain made, the police officer proceeded with the question, “Which person did you know among those whom you met in the Devil’s Gorge, arrayed like brigands?” The woman under examina tion drew her hand sharply through the air about the height of five feet ten inches from the ground. “A young man about five feet and ten inches tall, called, if I mistake not, Domenichino?—You shake your head as if denying that he bore such a name. Take care that you play the game fair between you and me. You persist in saying that you never knew this young man, whom you met in the Devil’s Gorge, elsewhere under the name of Domenichino?” 
“I did not mean to say so,” answered the old country woman. “The truth is he now bears another name, under which, I fear, the country will long remember him; and, to show you how little he was afraid of bearing it, he bid me tell you that if I heard of an atrocious storm conjured up in your hills, you might set it down to his accompt.” 
“And you understood, dame, that by this storm he alluded to the late slaughter of Wegweiser, the under keeper of the forest near which he lived?” Again she nodded in the affirmative. 
“And you would not conceive yourself safe,” continued the officer, “if it were known that you had given information against Domeni chino to such purport as might affect his life?—You shake your head as if to intimate you might expect the worst.—You smile and nod as if to say you are so far willing to put your trust in me.—Well, rely on the utmost exertion in my power.” The female dropped on her knees, as if beseeching protection and mercy for herself, and the officer promised that he would give no knowledge to any one that some facts of importance concerning this Domenichino, otherwise called Il Bizarro, had been lodged at any of their meetings for enquir ing into the perpetrators of the late cruel murders. Being answered to her satisfaction so far as concerned herself, she cast an oblique glance upon her husband, who had remained doggedly silent during the whole scene, her features becoming at the same time disturbed by a slight convulsion. 
The officer readily understood the nature of such an appeal, and felt how little had been done for the poor woman. She who had hitherto been protected by the judge against the vengeance of the criminal could hardly have been blamed for not having said more about the crime, unless a similar protection were extended to her husband. He therefore assured her of his protection. “Nay, trusting 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
188  
to that,” said the shepherd’s wife, “I care not if I tell you that these brigands, as I understood them to be, took from us the whelp whom we meant to breed up with the flock, and, though he was a very fine dog, having come of a noble race which the old German keeper of the forest bought from Allen Bracian, the poacher, yet my old acquaintance took him from us by force and led him off with his party.” 
“So far is well,” said the officer, “and we find this lad in possession of plunder. But you must lead us a step farther, and then stop if you will. Remember the promised protection, which I will not use in such a manner as to compromise you with your acquaintance of the mountains. Did you then—and it is in the King’s name I ask it—see any of your female acquaintance among those you took for brigands?” 
The old woman, after drawing a long breath, answered more freely than she had hitherto done. “I must needs own I saw along with them Monica Wegweiser, the wife of young Antonio, the assistant of her father.” 
“Did she seem their companion willingly, or was she carried along with them by force?” said the Lieutenant. 
“If one woman is a judge of another’s sobs and tears, she was carried with them by force, and felt like one who had sustained a deep injury; and I was sorry for the poor child, and would have helped her if I had dared, but I dared not for my life, and there was no one to aid me but my poor old man.” 
“How was she carried?” asked the officer. 
“On an ass—I think I have seen her father lead such a creature during the vintage season. Her countenance had been overspread with showers of tears, which had been dried up by the dust of the road and the heat of the sun, so that she was plainly led into captivity, as the Capuchin friar, good Father Joseph, preaches to us. And the men surrounded her as so many wolves surround a stray sheep, and at this moment an old friar came down the pass, and when he saw the party before him, he turned back and would have fled, but two or three of the young men set off in pursuit of him and soon brought him back, where he accosted the principal party present. 
“‘What means this, my son? Why did you call me from my service to meet you in this wild place, and what means this melancholy, desperate looking wretch? Can she be the bride, whom you were to meet in the Devil’s Gorge this morning, come to unite herself to you as a wife?’ 
“‘Even so, father,’ said Domenichino, for to him the speech was addressed.” 
This content downloaded from 170.140.142.252 on Mon, 25 Apr 2022 20:32:17 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms