■^^ 

^ <^-'^ 

%. ^ 




IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 




1.0 



I.I 



':Miiia iM 

■ ■" IIIIIM 

li? 12.0 



1.8 





1.25 1.4 


1.6 

S : 




^ 6" - 




► 



% 



<^ 



/}. 



% 



,s 






"/// 



# 



%:" 




^/. 



% 




/^ 



'/ 




Photographic 

Sciences 
Corporation 



73 WEST MAIN STREET 

WEBSTER, NY. 14580 

(7161 873-4S03 




^"^ % 



f/a 



:\ 



\ 



lV 






CIHM/ICMH 

Microfiche 

Series. 



CIHM/ICMH 
Collection de 
microfiches. 




Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions / Institut canadien de microreproductions historiques 





Technical and Bibliographic Notas/Notaa tachniquaa at bibliographiquaa 



Tha Inatituta haa attamptad to obtain tha baat 
original copy availabia for filming. Faaturaa of thia 
copy which may ba bibliographically uniqua, 
which may altar any of tha imagae in tha 
raproduction. or which may aignificantly changa 
tha uaual mathod of filming, ara chackad balow. 



D 



D 



D 
D 



n 

D 



D 



Colourad covars/ 
Couvartura da couiaur 



I I Covara damagad/ 



Couvartura andommagAa 



Covars rastorad and/or laminatad/ 
Couvartura raatauria at/ou paliiculAa 



r~~| Covar title miaaing/ 



La titre da couvartura manqua 

Colourad maps/ 

Cartas gAographiquas »n couiaur 



Coloured ink (i.e. other than blue or black)/ 
Encre de couleur (i.e. autre que bleue ou noire) 



□ Coloured plates and/or illustrations/ 
Planches et/ou illustrations en couleur 



D 



Bound with other material/ 
ReliA avec d'autres documents 

Tight binding may cause shadows or distortion 
along interior margin/ 

La reliure serr^e peut causer de I'ombre ou de la 
distortion la long da la marge intirieure 

Blank leaves added during restoration may 
appear within the text. Whenever possible, these 
have been omitted from filming/ 
II se peut que certainas pages blanches ajoutAes 
lors d'und restauration apparaissent dans la texte, 
mais, lorsque cela Atait possible, ces pages n'ont 
pas ix6 filmies. 

Additional comments:/ 
Commentaires supplAmentaircs: 



L'lnstitut a microfilmi la mailleor exemplaire 
qu'il lui a AtA poasibia da se procurer. Les details 
de cet axemplaira qui aont paut-Atre uniques du 
point de vue bibliographique. qui peuvent modifier 
une image reproduite, ou qui peuvent exiger une 
modification dans la mAthode normale de f ilmage 
sont indiquis ci-dessous. 



r~| Coloured pages/ 



D 
D 



Pages de couleur 

Pages damaged/ 
Pages endommagtes 

Pages restored and/oi 

Pages restauries et/ou peliiculies 

Pages discoloured, stained or foxe< 
Page» dAceSordes, tachetias ou piqu6es 

Pages detRchad/ 
Pages ddtach6as 

Showthroughy 
Transparence 

Quality of prir 

Qualit^ in^gala de I'impression 

Includes supplementary materii 
Comprend du materiel supplimentaire 



T 
t( 



I I Pages damaged/ 

I I Pages restored and/or laminated/ 

Pages discoloured, stained or foxed/ 

I I Pages detRchad/ 

I I Showthrough/ 

I I Quality of print varies/ 

I I Includes supplementary material/ 



T 

P 
o 
fi 



O 
bi 
tf 
ai 
ol 
fii 
ai 

Ol 



Tl 
ar 
Tl 

w 

M 
di 
an 
ba 

rifi 

re( 



Only edition available/ 
Seule Edition disponible 

Pages wholly or partially obscured by errata 
slips, tissues, etc., have been ref limed to 
ensure the best possible image/ 
Les pages totaiameni ou partieliement 
obscurcies par un feuillet d'errata, una pelure. 
etc., ont M fiimtes A nouveau de fapon h 
obtenir la maiileure image possible. 



This item is filmed at the reduction ratio checked below/ 

Ce document est film* au taux da rMuction indiquA ci-dessous. 



10X 








14X 








18X 








22X 








26X 








30X 


























y 


































12X 








16X 








20X 








24X 








28X 








32X 


i. 



B 

hails 
s du 
lodifier 
r una 
Image 



Tha copy filmad hara has baan raproducad thanks 
to tha ganarosity off: 

National Library of Canada 



Tha imagas appearing hara ara tha bast quality 
possible considering the condition and legibility 
of the original copy and in icaeping with tha 
filming contract spaciffinations. 



Original copies in printed paper covers are ffilmed 
beginning with the front cover and ending on 
the last page with a printed or illustrated impres- 
sion, or the back cover when appropriate. All 
other original copies are filmed beginning on the 
first page with a printed or illustrated impres- 
sion, and ending on the last page with a printed 
or illustrated impression. 



The last recorded frame on each microfiche 
shall contain tha symbol — ^> (meaning "CON- 
TINUED"), or the symbol y (meaning "END"), 
whichever applies. 

Maps, plates, charts, etc.. may be filmed at 
different reduction ratios. Those too large to be 
entirely included in one exposure are filmed 
beginning in the upper left hand corner, left to 
right and top to bottom, as many frames as 
required. The following diagrams illustrate the 
method: 



L'wvi}'^iB\n film* fut reproduit grAce k la 
gAnArbi; t* de: 

BibliothAque nationala du Canada 



Las imagas suivantes ont AtA reproduites avec le 
plus grand soin. compta tenu de la condition at 
de la nettet* de rexemplaira film*, et en 
confformit* avec les conditions du contrat de 
filmage. 

Les exemplaires originaux dont la couverture en 
papier est imprimte sont filmAs en commen^ant 
par le premier plat et en terminant soit par la 
darniAre page qui comporte une empreinte 
d'impression ou d 'illustration, soit par la second 
plat, salon le cas. Tous les autres exemplaires 
originaux sont fiimAs en commenpant par la 
premiAre page qui comporte une empreinte 
d'impression ou d'illustration et en terminant par 
la darniire page qui comporte une telle 
empreinte. 

Un des symboles suivants apparaftra sur la 
dernlAre image de chaqua microfiche, selon le 
cas: le symbols -^ signifie "A SUIVRE". le 
symbols V signifie "FIN". 

Les cartes, planches, tableaux, etc.. peuvent Atre 
filmAs A des taux de reduction diff«rents. 
Lorsque le document est trop grand pour Atre 
reproduit en un seul ciichi. il est film* A partir 
de Tangle supArieur gauche, de gauche A droite. 
et de haut an bas. en prenant le nombre 
d'images nAcessaire. Les diagrammes suivants 
illustrent la m6thode. 



trrata 
to 



pelure. 
n A 



□ 



32X 



1 


2 


3 




1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 



r 



BOB, SON OF BATTLE 



oa 



0\VD BOB 



THE GREY DOG OF KENMUIR 



r 






(rs" 



BT 



ALFRED OLLIVANT 



TORONTO 
GBORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY. UMmo 

1900 



QLl9f 
05 7 








TO 

MY MOTHER 



i 

« 



an 






CONTENTS 



Part I: The Coming of the Tailless Tvke 



CHAH. 

I. The Gkey Dog's Ca' 
II. A Son of Hagar 

III. Cutty Sahk . 

IV. In the Devil's Bowi 
V. First Blood . 



Part II : The Little Man 



VI. A Man's Son . 
VII. A Lad's Father 
VIII. The White Winter . 
IX. M'Adam and his Coat 



/i- 



Part III: The Shepherds' Trophy 



X. Rivals . . , . 

XI. In the Pass . . ^.v^ .* 

XII. We Twa . . ^ . 

XIII. The Fight in the Flood " . 

XIV. Red Wull holds the Bridgk 
XV. The Passing of the Cup 



Red and Grey 



Red and Grey 



Part IV: The Black Killek 



XVI. 
XVIL 

xviii. 



.\ Mad Man . 
Death on the Marches 
The Black Killer . 
XIX. In the Fog 
XX. The Witch's Lap 



'AOK 
XX 

ao 
3« 
38 
45 



55 

«4 
7a 
8i 



95 
X03 

109 

"5 

134 

«34 



'43 



'55 
i6a 
170 
179 

'85 



iv'-' 



8 



CONTENTS 



! 



CHAP. 

XXI. Threats of a Storm 

*% XXII. The Storm Breaks . 

XXIII. Horror of Darkness 



Part V: Own Bob o' Kenmuir 



XXIV. A Man and a Maid. 
XXV. The Chase in the Dark 
XXVI. A Shot in the Night 
XXVII. The Shepherds' Trophy 



Part VI : The Black Killer 



XXVIII. Red-handed . 
XXIX. For the Dkfence 
XXX. The Devil's Bowl 
XXXI. The Devil's Bowl 
XXXII. The Killer at Bay 
Postscript 



rAot 

307 
ais 



aas 

338 
346 



• . . . , 


. 871 




. a8i 




390 




398 




• 30s 




. 3x8 



Part I 
TheKIoming of the Tailless Tyke 



^v. 



>1' 



\ 



%\RT I 

The Coming of the Tailless Tyke 



CHAPTER 1 

THE GREY DOG'S CA' 

WITHOUT, the slow rich stillness of a summer's 
morning; the wickering m-a-a-a of sheep; 
the stealthy hail of curlews ; the hum of bees ; and the 
whole sleepy murmur of a sluggard summer day. 

Within, a cold dead room, uncared, unkempt, barren 
with all the bleak discomfort of a womanless home ; and 
on the floor, huddled his length, a little man. 

Lying there in the dust and deadness, on the edge of 

a slant sunbeam, he slept noisily. His shirt, open at 

the neck, discovered a meagre throat ; one careless arm 

shrouded his face ; and the black mask of a bottle, 

glinting from his pocket, betrayed him. At his head, 

lying in a pond of sun, absorbing light as only a dog 

knows how, was a veteran collie, whose grey-flecked 

muzzle lay along the boards, while her eyes blinked 

large, eternal love, as they rested on their God, Hero 

Ideal of the Perfect Being, thus sleeping off* his debauch. 

11 



12 



OWD BOB 



h , 



I ) 

i 



!i 



M 



From without there came the sound of stealthy feet. 
The old dog's ears leaped to attention. 

The door gaped softly, and a fair young face peered 
in. Another moment and a boy had entered. His 
shoes were in his hand, and he stole across the floor, 
naked-footed, frowning a warning at the old dog, who lay, 
motionless yet alert, eyeing the intruder with cold hostility. 

Contempt sat all conspicuous on the boy's frank 
features as he bent over the sleejUr. 

" Artna' 'shamed, peg? and afoor yer dog and a' ! " he 
muttered, rootling at the prostrate figure with his toe. 
" A pretty piece to call a man's father ! " And bend- 
ing, he smote the prone form with his slipper. 

The drunkard in the dust opened one eye, and 
frowned portentous. 

" That's ree' ! hit a man when he's doon — Englishmen 
a'!" he muttered mistily. Then, glaring up corner- 
wise -T»- " Davie ! " he wailed, in grieved wonder-tone ; 
*' Davie ! oh, wae is me ! Ha' ye no reshpec' for yer 
father ? Oh, peetiful ! peetiful 1 " He wept a tear, 
and was again asleep. 

When all was still, the boy advanced afresh. But a 
low-grumbled protest from the old dog halted him. 

" Fool, Cutty Sark I " he hissed. " Does ta' think it's 
a fit ? " But Cutty Sark made no reply. Hers was to 
deal^with consequences ; others might inquire the cause. 
This chronic ill overtook her master. As often as it 
held him, it was for her to see no harm befell him. And 
loyally she did her part, and her love bated no wit. 

Outside the door the boy resumed his shoes. Then 
he launched into the light and ran down the hill, making 
for the Muir Pike and Stony Bottom ; blithely whistling 
as he pierced the morning from very joy in his young 
limbs, the air, the sun, his exploit. 



h 



THE GREY DOG'S CA' 



13 



And within the lead room the little man and nobler 
brute were left together. 



Then 
iking 
5tling 
oung 



Away in the West, over the Marches, the thin air 
sweltered in the Pass. On the other hand, through the 
village, the Mere turned a lazy silver side like a salmon 
dozing. Linking the two, a thin-drawn wire lying along 
the lowest hollow of the Dale, ran the Wastrel. The 
stream pattered between the village on the one side and 
the bluff bald face of the Muir Pike upon the other ; 
between squat alders, many-shimmering birch ; until, a 
mile from the Mere, a plank-bridge spanned it. 

There, half-hidden behind the swell of the gpround, a 
hoar farmhouse lay in the staring silence ; solemn stacks 
peered over the brink and frowned at the stream flirting 
in the meadow-bottom ; while a long array of out-build- 
ings reflected the sombre glare of the opposing Pike. 

In the stackyard two men were deeply engaged in 
idleness. One, perched high upon a ladder, wren-like, 
was craning over the crest of a rick into the distance, his 
old nut-face glowing with excitement. The other, on a 
lower level, was a solid Dalesman of huge hands, hairy 
arms, and an immutable melancholy. 

In the distance were three figures on the lowland lips 
of the Pike : a grey dog and a black-faced ram engaged 
in fateful duel, and on a mound, something apart, the 
tall form of a man watching, motionless. 

" Noo, Bob ! " screamed the veteran on the ladder, and 
held his breath as the warrior ram made a last huge 
onslaught. " Stan' till her ! Heart oop, lad ! Noo, noo 
he's com in' ! Ma wud ! a despart fratch ! . . . Ah-h-h ! " 
— smiting the ladder in red-hot ecstasy — " Weel done, 
oor Bob ! See owd Staggy run, Sam'l ! see ur' 'op ! Ma 
sarty, if that doesna bang a' ! . . . Ah, if iver I seed a 



r) 



H 



OVVD BOB 



'^ t 



good tyke. . . . He's a reet 'un ! He's a rare 'un ! A 
proper Grey Dog, I's uphod thee ! A reg'lar — reg'lar — 
Rex, son o' Rally ! " 

The other's resolute melancholy refused to be thus 
dissipated. 

" And what coom to Rex, son o* Rally ? " he asked, in 
dismal, grave-deep tones. 

Tammas clucked irritably. 

" Hod tongue o' thee, Sam'l Todd ! " he ordered. 
" Art' niver 'appy without . thoo's makin' thysel' 
miser'ble. I niver see thy like — nor niver wush to. 
Coom, Sam'l, coom ! Man thyself! " 

" What coom to Rex, son o' Rally ? " the other pursued, 
dogged as a fell tip. 

" He won Cup, did Rex, that's what he did ! " Tammas 
replied, as stubborn. " Twice he won it, did Rex : the 
last o' the Grey Dogs as browt Shepherds' Trophy to 
Kenmuir — eh, dearie ! fifty year sinsyne — fifty year ! " 
lachrymose in his turn, as he looked back along the 
years. 

Sam'l was not to be outdone. 

" Gay weel thoo kens what coom to Rex," he cried, 
righteously wrath ; " but thoo's far ower cowardly to 
say it. Took he was — took in the pride of his prime, 
ower the 'ills and far away." He chanted the words like 
a death-song, rolling his eyes in unctuous enjoyment of 
his misery. " And mark me, Tammas Thornton ! Oor 
young Bob — poor Bobbie ! . . . he'll gang same gate — 
gang 'ome — ower thrills, and " — 

Tammas turned. H||^ 

*• Thoo lives in graves, Sam'l Todd ! " he cried 
furiously. " Wilt' niver be 'appy, for sure, till thoo's 
dead ; and then it's like thoo'll be grumblin'." He 
struck at the big man's face with his booted hfmi* 



' 



THE GREY DOG'S CA' 



15 



" Thoo earse-'orse, thoo ! thoo wormy willain ! thoo 
melancholy maggot ! " 

*' Gie owre, Tammas Thornton I " bellowed the other 
querulously. " Let be wi' yon girt *oof o' thine I Let 
be, I say, or I'll brong thee seccan a dander as'll like to 
be f end o' thee." 

The old man ceased suddenly, and fell upon his work. 

A tall, gaitered man, with cold, lean, austere face and 
the steel-blue eyes of the hill-country,strode into the yard ; 
and trotting soberly at his heels, a Grey Dog of Kenmuir. 

No man can mistake the type. A Grey Dog of 
Kenmuir is as little indistinct as a Raphael's Madonna. 
Outside a radius of twenty miles from Kenmuir he is 
never met. Money cannot win one, neither love ; for a 
Moore would as soon think to sell his child as part with 
a Grey Dog. 

But should you, while wandering in the wild sheep- 
land about the twin Pikes, happen on moor or in 
market upon a very perfect gentle knight clothed in 
dark grey habit, splashed here and there with rays of 
moon ; free by right divine of the guild of gentlemen, 
strenuous as a prince, lithe as a rowan, graceful as a 
girl, with high king-carriage, motions affid manners of a 
fairy queen ; should he have a noble brtadth of brow, 
an air of still strength born of right Ipnfidence, all 
unassuming ; last, and most unfailing tewof all, should 
you look into two snowcloud eyesM:alm, wistful, 
inscrutable, their soft depths clothed^n with eternal 
sadness — yearning, as is said, foOte soul that is not 
theirs — know then you look ujjdBc - of the line of 
most illustrious shesjOjjdpgs of the North. 

Such is one ; such are all. And such w?s Owd Bob o* 
Kenmuir — owd, young though he was, by reason of that 
sprinkling shower of snow upon the dome of his head. 



t<- 



^^ 



T 



r 



f 



i6 



OWD BOB 



t. ■ 



* f 



\'\ ' 



" If you worked as mickle as ye talked it's like I'd be 
better sarved," said the tall man sternly. 

Tammas, with the privilege of long service, put the 
rebuke aside. 

" A proper mak' o' Grey Dog ! " he mused, gazing down 
into the sweet, sagacious face uplifted. " His father's 
own get, surely ; his varra spit and pictur' ; sma' yet big, 
leet to get aboot on backs o' his sheep yet not owre 
,Ieet, cannie yet cantie ; and wi' them sorrerful eyes on 
him as niver gangs but wi' a good 'un. Amaist he 
minds me o' Rex, son o' Rally." 

Sam'l groaned ; but the old man continued. * 

" Did ye hear tell o' him and that lil gob o' wicieusness, 
Adam M' Adam, Maister ? " he inquired. 

The Master of Kenmuir shook dissent. 

"Whey," Tammas pursued, "it seems t' lil by-spel 
coom sneakin' around the farm to catch David. Buv 
the lad see his father, slipped ahint stack, and set Bob 
here on till him." 

James Moore's brow lowered as he hearkened. 

" I wunna ha' M'Adam lay in wait for t' lad at Ken- 
muir," he said in hard incisive tones. " If he mun beat 
t' poor boy it shallna be on ma land, and that's plain." 

The plank-bridge below rang to the patter of feet 

" Here is t' lad ! " said Tammas, glancing routid. 
" Late this morn an' a' ; it's like he's bin havin' a bit of 
an hay-bay wi's dad." 

A fair-haired boy spurred up the slope, his face 
rosy as the morning. The young dog dashed oft* to 
meet him. Togeth^^e two raced back into the yard. 

" Mom*, Maister Moore ! Morn', Tammas ! Mom', 
owd Worrit-t'- worms ! " panted the boy, raced across the 
straw -strewn yard, round the stables, and into 
the house. 



^»-.- 



THE GREY DOG'S CA' 



17 



In the kitchen a frail-faced woman was bustling about 
her morning business. To her skirts clung a sturdy 
boy ; while at the central table a girl with soft brown 
eyes was seated at her morning meal. 

" Whey, Davie ! where's ta bin the morn ? " the 
woman cried, and greeted him with a tender, motherly 
salutation. " I thowt ye couldna be comin*. Noo clap 
doon beside A^aggie." And soon he, too, was engaged 
on a task twin to the girl's. 

"Did thy father beat thee last night, Davie?" 
Maggie inquired in low voice, after a long munching 
pause ; and a shade of anxiety clouded the soft eyes. 

" Nay," the boy answered ; " he fain wu4i but he was 
far ower fou o' lear to catch me." ^ 

" What for was he g^in' to bang thee, Davie ? " asked 
Mrs. Moore from the outer kitchen. 

" What for ? " the boy cried, and laughed bitterly — 
" Why, for comin' home thro' Kenmuir, and for the fun 
o' seein* me squiggle." 

" Ye shouldna speak so o' yer dad, David," reproved 
the other, as severely as was in her nature. 

"Dad! a famish dad! I'd dad him an I'd the 
chance," the boy muttered. Then turning, " Us should 
be startin', Maggie," he said, and going to the door, 
" Bob ! Owd Bob, lad ! art' coomin' along ? " 

The grey dog came plunging up, and the three started 
for school together. Mrs. Moore stood in the doorway, 
holding the child Andrew by the hand, and watched, 
them go. 

"Poor bit laddie!" she murmured softly. 

• • • • • • a 

Six hours later. A slumberous silence held the farm. 
Of a sudden, like a thunderclap in a vault, a deep 
tremendous " Wough ! " woke the stillness. 



iS' 



OWD BOB 



^ 



J;. 



Straightway the whole farm leaped from its sleep. 
Scuttling feet; hangings of hurrying men: the whole 
disorder of a startled community. 

" Ma wud ! The Grey Dog's Ca' ! " came Tammas's 
slirill scream. And any fool can tell you that 'tis not 
for nothing that a Grey Dog calls. 

James Moore started to his feet, and hurled out into 
the yard. 

" This gate I " yelled Tammas. " In t' coo-hoose." 

Hard behind, the Master followed. As he crossed the 
yard, from the building in front there came a shower of 
curses, clash of steel, and slatter of slight evasive feet. 

Then a quivering scream jagged' the air. 

" Come on, ye devil 1 

' Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled, 
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led'— 

Come on, Englishmen a'! Ye sail hrxe a taste o' the 

steel — 

* Welcome to your gory bed, 
' Or to victorie ' I " 

The Master swung round the doorpost. Glaring into 
the half darkness, he caught the glint of steel ; rnd then 
discerned a 'small dark figure at bay upon a truss of 
straw, jabbing madly with a pitchfork, and sloganing 
forth his shrill war-cry ; while, right in the very flash of 
the steel, with the light heart and gay demeanour that 
has always characterised a Grey Dog in time of peril, 
was Owd Bob, baying him dumbly. 

"M'Adam!" called the Master, in his hard voice. 
" Come oot of it." 

" Then call aff the grey devil ! " panted a small, uneven 
voice. 

" Bob, lad, coom in ! " and as the grey dog obeyed — 
"Noo, M'Adam." ' 



I 



1 ^! 



1 I 



■^ 



Ml 



I 



THE GREY DOG'S CA* 



19 



'»• 



Out the intruder shuffled, blinking for the light: a 
little miserable man, bonnet awry, weapon still in hand. 
He was shaking, his face was blenched, bat; the lig^t of 
battle yet enthused his eyes ; while about him still clung 
the wretched heat and circumstance of a late debauch. 

" What was ta' doin' in theer ? " the Master asked, 
eyeing him sternly. 

" Fightin' for ma life agin yon grey devil ! " the little 
man replied furiously; and turning all in a crack, he 
lunged at Owd Bob. The dog lightly evaded the 
thrust, and James Moore had wrenched away the 
weapon ere it could be repeated. 

" Ha* a care, M'Adam ! " he ordered, his eyes flashing. 
" I've teirt thee afoor a Grey Dog'll bide no bang but 
fra* a Moore. Noo, what was ta* doin* in coo-hoose ? " 

The little man calmed slowly. Soon a smile wreathed 
his lips. 

" I e'en thocht to surprise the dear lad,*' he replied softly. 
" Hide in byre and then loup out on him like an angel 
unawares, and say, ' Davie, dear lad, I've somethin* for 
ye — he 1 he I * ** He giggled as he spoke, and bending, 
picked up a long ash-plant which was lying at his feet. 

A dark flush heated the Master*s cheek. 

" An* that's what ye come for, M'Adam," he said — 
" you gang ! " He pointed to the gate. 

The little man turned. 

"I'm aff,'* he said vindictively; "and ye may tell 
David I'm awaitin* him.*' 

He backed out of the yard, his eyes never lifting from 
the grey dog, who followed him with cold courtesy to 
the gate. 

Safe outside he paused. 

" James Moore,** he called earnestly, " that dog has a 
devil I I see it first time iver I clapp't een on him." 



;> 



If 



I 



\ 



:t 






i 



'■) 



m 



CHAPTER II 



A SON OF HAGAR 



IT is a lonely country, that about Wastrel -dale. 
Parson Leggy Hombut will tell you that his is 
the smallest church in the biggest parish north of 
Trent; and that his cure numbers more square miles 
than parishioners. Of fells and ghylls it consists, of 
screes and crag; with here a scattered hamlet and 
there a hill sheep-farm. It is a country in which sheep 
are paramount. Every other Dalesman is engaged in 
that profession which is old as Abel. And the talk of 
tne men of the land is of wethers and gimmers ; of tup- 
hoggs, ewe -tegs -in -wool; of four-crops, two-tooths; 
and ever of the doings or misdoings, the intelligence 
or stupidity, of their subalterns, the sheep-dogs. 

Of all the Dale-land the country from the Black 
Water to Grammoch Pike is the wildest. Above 
Wastrel -dale the Muir Pike nods. Westwards, the 
Mere Marches, from which the Sylvesters' great estate 
derives its name, reach away in mile on mile of sheep- 
infested, curlew- haunted heather-land. Beyond this 
bleak moor barrier is that twin Dale where flows the 
Silver Lea. And it is there, in the paddocks behind 
the Dalesman's Daughter, that in the late summer 
months the famous sheep-dog Trials of the North are 
held : there that the battle for the Dale Cup, the world- 
known Shepherds' Trophy, is fought out. 

80 



A SON OF HAGAR 



21 



Past the inn the turnpike road leads to the market- 
centre of the district, Grammoch-town. Behind the 
little alehouse, at foot of the paddocks, a plank-bridge 
ci'osses the Lea; and beyond, the Murk Muir Pass 
crawls up the sheer side of the Scaur on to the Marches. 

At its neck, just before debouching on to the wind- 
swept moors, the Pass swells and droops into that 
snake-hooded hollow, shuddering with gloomy possi- 
bilities, the Devil's Bowl. In the centre of the Bowl, 
right beneath the shadow of the Red Screes, lies the 
Lone Tarn. 

It was beside that black water, across whose frozen 
surface the storm was swirling in white snow-wraitlis, 
that many, many years ago (and not in this century) 
old Andrew Moore came upon a collie, heavy in whelp 
and nigh spent. 

He carried her home over the Marches and nursed 
her tenderly. It was of no avail. She died ; but not 
till she had paid her debt of gratitude, and earned her 
immortality as mother of the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir. 

In the North everyone who has heard of the Muir 
Pike — and who is there has not? — has heard of the 
Grey Dogs of Kenmuir ; everyone who has heard of the 
Shepherds' Trophy knows their fame. In that country 
of good dogs and jealous masters the pride of place 
has long been held, unchallenged. Whatever line may 
claim to follow, the Grey Dogs always lead. And there 
is a saying in the land : " Faithfu' as the Moores and 
their tykes." 

On the dresser to the right of the fire in the kitchen 
of Kenmuir lies the family Bible. At the end you will 
find a loose sheet — the pedigree of th6 Grey Dogs ; at 
the beginning, pasted on the inward side, a similar 
sheet — the family register of the Moores of Kenmuir. 



22 



OWD BOB 



i 



Those two yellow sheets should be studied together, 
side by side. For since the days of Grey Grip, first of 
the line, the history of the Moores would be no true 
history without that of their dogs, so deeply have the 
two been dove- tailed. 

If you can induce James Moore to take down that 
well-thumbed volume and comment on the entries, you 
will hear many a tale to kindle your blood and rouse 
the man within you. Only, twice you will come upon 
a name so indelibly erased that nothing but a great 
black blot tells of some dog's sin. Of that James 
Moore will not speak, and do nut ask him. There are 
things best left unexplained ; and the Moores have 
always held the good name of their dogs second only 
to that of their blood. And in the code of sheep-dog 
honour there is written a word in stark black letters ; 
and opposite it another writ large in the colour of blood. 
The first is Sheep-murder ; the second Death. Every 
sheep-dog knows it, and every shepherd. 

Running your eye on past those ill blots, once, 
twice, and again it will be caught by a small red cross 
beneath a name ; and beneath the cross the one word, 
Cup. Lastly, opposite the name of Rex, son of Rally, 
are two of those tell-tale badges. The Cup is the 
renowned Dale Cup ; Champion Challenge Dale Cup, 
open to the world, aptly called the blue riband of 
the heather. Had Rex won it but once again, the 
Shepherds' Trophy, which many men have lived to 
win and died still striving after, would have stayed for 
ever in the hoar farmhouse below the Pike. 

It was not to be, however. Comparing the two 
sheets, you read beneath the dog's name a date and a 
pathetic legend; and on the other sheet, beneath the 
name qf Andrew Moore, the same date and same 



fr 



A SON OF HAGAR 



23 



legend. From that day James Moore had been Master 
of Kenmuir. 

So past Grip and Rip and Rex and Rally, past Beck 
and Brock and Tup and Tally and a hundred more ; 
until at the foot of the page you come to that last name — 
Bob, son of Battle, last of the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir. 

Now any shepherd will tell you that the son of a 
sheep-dog is a sheep-dog from his birth. Trainin^^ is as 
superfluous as to teach a duck to swim. It is in the 
blood. And so it proved with Ov/d Bob, scion of a 
hundred sires. 

From the first he took to his work in a manner to 
amaze even James Moore. Rarely had such fiery ^lan 
been seen on the Pike ; and with it the young dog 
combined a strange sobriety, an admirable patience, that 
justified, indeed, the epithet Owd. Silent he worked 
and resolute as the Grey Dogs always have ; quick and 
dashing, as one whose labour lies amongst the* wild 
black-faces of the fells must be ; while already he had 
that famous trick of tact of his — seeming to coax the 
sheep to do his wishes — which later made his name a 
household word through half two kingdoms. In short 
he blended, as Tammas the phrase-maker put it, "t* 
brains of a man and t* way of a woman/' 

Parson Leggy, who was reckoned the best judge of a 
sheep 'twixt Trent and Tweed, summed him up in the 
one word — "Genius." And James Moore himself, 
cannie man, was more than pleased. While even David 
M'Adam, who was at that age when criticism of every- 
thing, from a sermon to a sow, is possible and necessary, 
acknowledged himself as satisfied. 

" Ay, ay," he replied to an anxious inquiry of 
Maggie's ; " reck'n he's better'n some I've seen. jAnd ye 
can tell yer father I said it.** 






rjnpi 



24 



OWD BOB 



I 



•in 



In the village the Dalesmen, who took a personal 
pride in the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir, began to nod sage 
heads when "oor" Bob was mentioned. Jim Mason, 
the postman, whose word went as far with the villagers 
as Parson Leggy's with the gentry, reckoned he'd never 
seen a young un' as so took his fancy ; and others — for 
every Dalesman is competent to judge in such a matter 
— corroborated the report. 

That winter, when they had gathered of a night round 
the fire in the Sylvester Arms ; the wind in the chimney, 
the gale without ; it was a rare thing but Rob Saunder- 
son must inquire — 

" Weel, Mr. Thornton, and what o' oor Bob ? " 

Whereat Tammas would always make reply, shaking 
his head in maiden diffidence, 

" Oh, ask Sam'l Jheer. He'll tell thee better'n me," 
and was waist-deep in a yarn ere the big man had time 
to groan. 

And the way in which, as the story proceeded, 
Tupper of Swinsthwaite winked at Ned Hoppin of 
Fellsgarth, and Long Kirby, the smith, nudged Jem 
Burton, the publican, and Sexton Ross said, " Ma wud, 
lad 1 " spoke more eloquently than many words. 

One man only never joined in the chorus of admira- 
tion. Sitting alone in the cold background, little 
M'Adam would hearken with an incredulous smirk 
upon his face. Sometimes he would content himself 
with the oft-muttered comment : " The dog has a devil ! " 
more often he mocked in opener fashion. 

" Lost all his sheep in the market-place, I pnder- 
stand, Mr. Thornton, and then found them agin — found 
them all but the maist part o' them ! Oh, ma certes ! 
The devil's in the dog 1 It's no' cannie ava 1 " Whereon 
Tammas would arise and smite ; and for awhile was chaos. 



I 



■# 



! 



m 



'{ 



A SON OF HAGAR 



25 



I 



In the Dale-land it is rare to see a stranger's face. 
Wandering in the wicked land about the twin dales, 
with shy curlew for comrade, the black-cock's bubble- 
note for company, the heather beneath you, and a hen- 
harrier soaring speck-large in the blue above, you might 
have met at the time of this story Parson Leggy strid- 
ing along, varmint terriers at heel, and Cyril Gilbraith, 
whom he was teaching to tie flies and fear God, beside 
him ; or Jim Mason, postman by profession, poacher by 
predilection, honest man and sportsman by predestina- 
tion, hurrying along m^ ' oag on shoulder, rabbit in 
pocket, and the faithful Betsy her measured yard 
behind. Besides these, you might have hit upon a quiet 
shepherd and a wise-faced dog ; Squire Sylvester going 
his rounds ; or — had you been lucky — sweet Lady 
Eleanur bent on some errand of mercy. 

It was while the Squire's lady was driving through 
the village on a visit to Tammas's slobbering, week-old 
grandson, that M'Adam, standing in the door of the 
Sylvester Arms, a twig in his mouth, a sneer fading 
from his lips, made his ever-memorable remark. 

" Sail I " he said, speaking in a low, rapt voice. " 'Tis 
a muckle wumman ! " 

" What ? Whatsta' sayin,' man ? " cried Jem Burton, 
startled from a beery muse. 

M'Adam turned sharply on the publican. 

'• I said the wumman wears a muckle hat ! " he 
snapped. 

Deleted as it was, the observation still remains — a 
tribute of honest admiration. Doubtless the Recording 
Angel did not pass it by. That one statement anent the 
gentle Lady of the Manor is the only personal remark 
ever credited to little M'Adam not born of malice and all 
uncharitableness. And that is why it is ever memorable 



26 



OWD BOB 



The little Scotsman with the sere, sardonic face had 
been the tenant of the Grange these many years ; yet 
he had never grown acclimatised to the land of the 
Southron. With his shrivelled body and weakly legs, 
he looked among the sturdy, straight-limbed sons of the 
hill-country like some brown wrinkled leaf holding its 
place amidst a galaxy of green. And as he difiered 
from them physically, so he did morally. He neither 
understood them, nor attempted to. The north-country 
character was to him an unsolved mystery still, 
and that after ten years* study of it. " One half o' 
what ye say they doot, and they let ye see it ; t'ither 
half they disbelieve, and they tell ye so," he once 
declared. And therein lay the explanation of their 
mutual relations. 

From the first he had stood apart ; for his wa« one of 
those natures which isolate themselves and then are 
prone to think they are being isolated. Yet, during his 
wife's life, his aloofness had been let ^ patent. It was 
not till a while after her death that he had drifted into 
such an apartness from his fellow-men that now he 
could honestly declare, and not without a certain touch 
of proud defiance, that they were all agin him. 

He stood entirely alone : a son of Hagar, mocking. 
His sharp ill-tongue was rarely still and always bitter. 
There was hardly a man in the land, from Langholm 
How to the market-cross in Grammoch-town, but had 
at one time known its sting, endured it in silence, for 
they are slow of speech these men of the fells and dales, 
and was nursing his resentment till a day should bring 
that chance which always comes. And on an occasion, 
Tammas's epigrammatic summary — " Drunk, wilent ; 
sober, wicious," met with an applause to gratify the 
blas^ heart of even Tammas Thornton. 



A SON OF HAGAR 



27 



once 
their 



Yet it had not been till his wife's death that the little 
man had allowed loose rein to his ill-nature. With her 
firmly gentle hand no longer on the tiller of his life, 
his spleen had burst into fresh being. And alone in the 
world with David, the whole venom of his vicious 
temperament was ever directed against the boy's head. 
I': was as though he saw in his fair-haired son the 
unconscious cause of the ever-living sorrow of his life. 
All the more strange this, seeing that during her life 
the boy had been to poor Flora M'Adam as her heart's 
core. And the lad was growing up the very antithesis 
of his father. Big and hearty, with never an ache or ill 
in his sturdy young body ; of frank open countenance ; 
while even his speech was slow and burring like any 
Dale-bred boy's. And the fact of it all, and that the 
lad was palpably more Englishman than Scot, — ay, and 
gloried in it, — exasperated the little man, a patriot before 
everything, to blows. While, on top of it, David evinced 
an amazing pertness such as to have tried a better man 
than Adam M'Adam. 

On the death of his wife, kindly Elizabeth Moore 
had more than once offered such help to the lonely 
little widower as a woman only can give in a house 
that knows no mistress. On the last of these occasions, 
after crossing the Stony Bottom and toiling up the 
hill to the Grange, she had met M'Adam in the door. 

" Ye mun let me fettle up yer bit oddments, Maister," 
she had said shyly ; for she feared the little man. 

'* Thank ye, Mrs. Moore," he had answered, with the 
sour smile the Dalesmen knew so well ; " but ye maun 
think I'm a waefu' cripple." And there he had stood, 
grinning sardonically, opposing his small bulk in the 
very centre of the door. 

Mrs. Moore had turned down the hill, abashed and 



28 



OWD BOB 






I 



■1 



:f 



hurt at tiiis reception of her offer ; and her husband, 
proud to a fault, had forbidden her to repeat it. 

Nevertheless her motherly heart went out in a great 
tenderness for the little orphan David. She knew well 
the desolateness of his life, his father's aversion to him, 
and its inevitable consequences. It became an institu- 
tion for the boy to call every morning at Kenmuir, and 
trot off to the village school with Maggie Moore. And 
soon the lad came to look on Kenmuir as his true 
home, and James and Elizabeth Moore as his real 
parents. His greatest happiness was to be away from 
the Grange. And the ferret-eyed little man there 
noted the fact, bitterly resented it, and vented his 
ill-humour accordingly. 

It was this, as he deemed it, deliberate trespass on 
his authority which was the motive of his animosity 
against James Moore. The Master of Kenmuir it was 
at whom that sneer of his was aimed — " Masel', I aye 
prefaire the good man who doesna go to Chufch, to 
the bad man who does. But then, as ye say, Mr. 
Burton, I'm peculiar." 

The little man's treatment of his son, exaggerated 
as it was by eager credulity, became at length such a 
scandal in the Dale that Parson Leggy felt called 
upon to intervene. 

Now M'Adam was the Parson's pet antipathy. The 
sturdy old minister with his bluff manner and big heart 
would have no truck with a man who was alv/ays in 
liquor and never in church ; who never spoke well of 
his neighbours and always did ill by his son. While 
the little Scotsman with his mocking face and satirical 
replies had the knack of irritating the old man, quicker 
of temper than tongue, almost to blows. And, indeed, 
in this case the interview had barely been in progress 



A SON OF HAGAR 



29 



two minutes ere the Parson found his fingers already 
itching. 

"You, Mr. Hornbut, wi' James Moore to lend ye a 
hand, see to the lad's scul ; I'll tend his body." 

The little man was standing in the door of the Grange, 
sucking his eternal twig ; while Cutty Sark glared out 
from between the crooked arch of her master's legs. 

The Parson's passions were rising fast 

"And which d'you think the more important, soul 
or body? Oughtn't you, his father, to be the first to 
care for both ? Answer me. Sir 1 " 

The little man sniggered. 

"Ye're right, Mr. Hornbut, as ye aye are. But my 
argiment is this : that I get at the lad's soul best thro* 
his leetle carcase." 

The Parson brought down his stick with an angry 
thud. 

" M'Adam, you're a brute, sir ! a brute ! " he shouted. 

The little man leant against the door, shaking with 
inward merriment. 

" A fond dad first, a brute, aiblins, afterwards. Ah, 
Mr. Hornbut, ye 'ford me vast diversion, ye do, indeed, 
* my lov'd, my honour'd, much respected friend ! ' " 

" If you paid as much heed to your boy's welfare as 
you do to the poetry of that profligate ploughman " — 

The little man stopped him. 

"D'ye ken what blasphemy is, Mr. Hornbut?" he 
asked smoothly. 

For the first time in the altercation the Parson was 
about to score, and was calm accordingly. 

" I should do ; I fancy I've a specimen of the breed 
before me now. And d'you know what impertinence 
is, M' Adam?" 

" I should do ; I fancy I've a — I wad say it's what 



* 



30 



OWD BOB 



i 



gentlemen aften are unless their mammies whipped 'em 
as lads." 

The Parson strode forward. 

" M'Adam," he roared, " I'll not stand your insolence ! " 

The little man turned, scuttled indoors, and in a 
moment came running back with a chair. 

"Permit me!" he said, bowing over it like a hair- 
dresser to a customer. 

The other turned away. At the gap in the hedge he 
paused. 

"I'll only say one thing more, M'Adam. When 
your wife, whom, I think, we all loved, lay dying in that 
room above, she said to you in my presence " — 

It was the other's turn to be indignant. He took a 
step forward with burning face. 

"Aince and for a', Mr. Kornbut," he cried passion- 
ately, "onderstand I'll not ha' you and yer likes 
lay yer tongues on ma wife's name whenever it suits 
ye ! Say what ye will o' me — lies, sneers, snash ; and 
I'll say naethin'. I think ye might let her bide where 
she lies in the kirkyard yonder. She never harmed ye, 
puir lass. Tho' she is dead, she's mine." 

Standing there with flushed face and burning eyes, 
the little man looked almost noble in his indignation. 
And the Parson, striding down the hill, was conscious 
that with him was not the victory. 



1 i 



n 



CHAPTER III 



CUTTY SARK 



SAM'L'S gloomy forebodings came to nought. Owd 
Bob lived and prospered, and his fame went 
abroad. Tammas, whose stock of tales anent Rex, son 
of Rally, had, after fifty years' hard wear, grown thread- 
bare despite annual alterations and repairs, found no 
lack of new material now. 

Of market-days there was always a cluster of Dales- 
men in the door of the Border Ram at Grammoch-town 
watching this, the latest of the Grey Dogs, handling his 
pack ; gentle, judicious, slow to anger, quick to action : 
a grey commanding figure motionless on the back of 
the hindmost sheep, or running lightly over the woolly 
floor to whisper a stern command in the ear of some 
patriarch of the flock. 

They thought well of him, these men who loved the 
Grey Dogs, yet not so well as did James Moore, who 
was father to them every one. 

" Happen he'll mak' summat yet," was all he would 
allow, cannie man ; but, of late, a certain silver Cup, 
cradled in shepherds' crooks, a Cup which he 
remembered to have handled reverently in childhood, 
had risen very instant to his view. 

Only M*Adam never tired of spiteful depreciation of 
the grey dog. And this ever-living resentment served 
for a while to alleviate David's lot ; for the heat of his 



jm-. 



M ifci M iiii i^B li wj liw V i; .— ..■' ■- 



32 



OWD BOB 



I < 

1 



father's animosity against the grey devil of Kenmuir 
distracted his attention from its habitual butt. Indeed, 
for a while there was almost peace at the Grange. The 
father's interdict against his son's visits to Kenmuir 
seemed withdrawn. The long - enduring guerilla war- 
fare betwixt sire and son seemed flickering to its de- 
cline. Soon, however, it was to flame into fresh being. 
And Owd Bob, as he had been the unconscious cause 
of the some-time armistice, was to prove an equally 
innocent occasion of renewed hostilities. For David, 
heartened by long immunity, made bold on his return 
from school of evenings to invite the young dog's com- 
pany to the very doors of the Grange, ostentatiously 
advertising the event the while. 

For some time his father endured the unspoken insult, 
strangely patient. Standing with Cutty Sark upon the 
hilltop, he would watch the two climbing towards him 
from the Stor Bottom. No word would he utter; 
only a flickering light in the dim eyes and a droop of 
the thin lips betrayed him. It almost seemed that he 
was learning the habit of restraint from his antipathy. 
For on these occasions Owd Bob's attitude was a perfect 
lesson in the art of conduct amongst enemies. No cur 
expression of spleen marred his bearing. To the man 
he never wavered in shy courtesy ; neither avoiding nor 
seeking, making no advance, desiring none, only requir- 
ing as his due that measure of toleration which one 
^:,-;<''-- man demands as his right from another. While 
♦ i . .. :> Sark he bore himself with a tender deference 
ti'nvt : atted his yet young years and her grey hairs — 
' : • ;aed respect that won the old lady's all-unwill- 
ing heaiL ; for well she knew her master's sentiments, 
and held herself guilty accordingly. 

But this was not to last. David, indeed, thinking 



CUTTY SARK 



33 






that his action had failed of its sovereign purport of 
annoyance, was on the brink of desistance, when the 
tardy veto fell. 

" David, ye're no' to bring yon grey dog with ye o' 
neets." His father spoke in calm small voice, with 
none of the furious insistence of his wont, 

" Why ? " the boy asked. 

" I dinna like the look of him." * 

" Then ye can look anudder way." And he parted, 
and into the house. 

For two more nights the boy persisted in his wrong. 
On neither did his father appear to enforce obedience. 
On the third, as he entered the house, a smooth, deadly 
voice called from the kitchen — 

"David!" 

"What?" 

" Ye brought that grey devil alang ? " 

"What if I did!" 

" I'll no' thole it, that's a'. Mind, ma lad, I'm in 
earnest." 

" What for not ? " 

" The dog has a devil." 

The boy scoffed. 

" Aweel, Davie," carelessly. " But, see here, ma lad" — 
he shot a look across his shoulder — " ye'll bring him aince 
ower aften gin ye bring him aince agin." He spoke 
calmly ; but there was a faint shiver in his voice and a 
cruel green-glint in the dim eyes that David knew well. 

At least he was enough impressed to render obedience 
for the nonce. For five successive days he dismissed 
his escort at the Bottom ; for five successive days 
M'Adam, standing in the darkness of the door with 
Cutty Sark's eyes two yellow disks in the black behind, 
watched. 

3 



34 



OWD BOB 



On the sixth, as the boy entered the house, he met 
his father. 

A wry smile of contemptuous triumph wreathed the 
sardonic face. The eyelids drooped to hide a jeer ; the 
lips, eloquent in silence, sneered — " Ye daurna." 

" Wait till t' morn I " the boy muttered savagely ; and 
passed on, braced to battle. 

The following evening Owd Bob crossed the barrier. 

No sooner was the thing accomplished — his father 
defied — the daring done — than a sense of dread over- 
whelmed the boy. He glanced around, suspecting all 
things. The evening was far spent. Dusk was shroud- 
ing the land. The night was full of flitting shadows. 
Peering forward, he thought to see a little secret form 
retreat before him into the doubtful darkness. 

A sudden fear clapped on him. 

" Hie away home, lad ! " he cried in startled whisper. 
The young dog paused, looked up at his comrade as if 
loth to desert him in his peril, then turned and swung 
back into the night. 

David held on, his heart at gasp ; probing the dark- 
ness, fearful of he knew not what. 

A great while it took him to the house. As he 
passed the window of the kitchen, the room flamed into 
light. Close at his elbow, his father's face loomed 
against the pane, peering out, haunted, it seemed to 
the boy, with a terrible fear ; and withdrew. 

David entered the house. As he opened the door 
something brushed against him. He checked a scream 
on the verge of his lips ; then entered. 

The door into the kitchen was ajar. Praying to 
escape attention, he crept by. 

It was not to be. 

" David ! " called a husky voice. 



I P 



V 



f 



CUTTY SARK 



35 



to 



The boy entered. Across the room his father was 
sitting, a bottle beneath his hand. It still seemed to 
David that a horror held the little man. His face was 
blenched. He shook. 

" Ha' ye onythin' to say for yersel' ? " his father asked, 
in ghastly whisper, 

David remained dumb. 

" Yer school ended-d-d at four o' the clo-ck ; it's noo 
after s-six." His stutter rendered the whisper more 
fearful still. " David, ye walk slowly ! " 

David pursed his lips. It was the old quarrel 
cropping up again, it seemed. 

" Aiblins I could stimulate ye ! " His father pointed 
with tremulous forefinger to the familiar strap upon the 
wall. 

David reached it down. 

" Aflf wi' yer coat ! noo yer shirt ! " And again the 
boy obeyed. 

M'Adam fingered the strap, yet made no motion to 
rise. He spoke on again at large — slow, dropping 
nonsense. It was plain his soul was in his ears. 
Listening — listening — listening. He was talking against 
time. He knew not what he said. And the wet stood 
on his face like the dew on the Pike without. 

David, his coat slung about his naked shoulders, 
thought to escape. 

"Dinna gang!" There was almost entreaty in the 
tone. He stayed, wondering. 

The little man still talked on, all disconnected, in 
snatches ; talked for company. 

David was himself again. 

" I hear Andra' Moore's to school noo." 

The boy's tongue was in his cheek. 

A pause. 



I t 



36 



OWD BOB 






" They're sayin' that — that — I'm forgettin' what." 

" Weel done ! " in ironical applause. 

Another interval. 

" I'm tell't— it's like that— that we s'll ha' rain." 

"Famish-h!" 

A sudden resolution seized the little man. He leaped 
to his feet. 

" It's no* too late I " he gasped with prayerful earnest- 
ness. 

A stifled groan from beneath the window answered 
him. 

The little man clapped back into his chair, his face 
ghastly. 

" Ma God forgie me ! " 

In the heat of hate and liquor he had done this 
thing — he who had a tenderness for the brute creation 
exceeding his love for his own begotten ; and now he 
was a murderer, self-abhorrent. 

Another of those awful groans beneath the window ; 
a long, moaning sob ; then piteous whines and scrabbling 
nails, as of one entreating sanctuary. 

David was beside himself 

" Father, let me gang see ! " he begged, in a tremble 
of tears. 

M'Adam was emptying the bottle down his throat. 
Then he flung it away, leaped to his feet, and raved 
round the room, screaming prayers, drinking-songs, 
entreaties in horrible medley; his fingers in his ears, 
sealing the gateways to his soul, smothering sound. 

Outside, the night groaned with horror : long-drawn 
moans as of dead men beneath the weight of earth ; 
tiny, whimpering notes of suffering children; huge 
gasps of giants in agony; the deathly struggle of a 
spirit warring with the trammelling clay. 



COTTY SARK 



37 



David, his head buried in his coat, cowered in a 
corner, stamping to help overwhelm the sound. 

At length — a long, long at length — was silence. 
But still the little man raved about with blind eyes, 
dead ears, drowning with his uproar noises that were 
not. 

At length he stayed, and, fingers yet in ears, looked 
into his son's eyes, his own all murder-haunted. 

"Is it finished?" 

The boy nodded. 

The little man withdrew his sealing fingers warily, 
and listened, on edge. Then he lit a candle, his hand 
shaking as with a palsy, and went out, locking the door 
behind. 

From the window David watched, his coat about his 
naked shoulders. 

The door of the house opened fearfully. He saw his 
father peering forth, his face ghastly in the twittering 
flame. He saw him plunge into the black, the yellow 
flame swalinrj in the night. He saw him stoop, light 
held lov^ He saw a dark body at foot. 

Then the candle quenched as though dropped. 

A flash of revealing summer lightning ; a little erect 
figure battering his head ; a glimpse of a stricken face 
uplifted : and such a scream in his ears as shocked him 
from the window. 

" God 1 Ma God I Ma sin has found me out ! " 

For at his father's feet lay Cutty Sark — dead. 



CHAPTER IV 



IN THE devil's HOWL 



! 






A dour man was M'Adam for long thereafter. No 
jest crossed his lips. He shunned his fellow- 
men, glowering from downward eyes. Parson Leggy 
declared the curse of Cain was on him. 

In the Dale they gave him sympathy ; for in such a 
sorrow even Adam M'Adam had their hearts. But 
little might be said. His seemed a wound that would 
endure no touch. And did they dare to compassionate 
him, he turned and snarled upon them with such dumb- 
glaring savagery as compelled their silence. 

Only David dimly guessed the tragedy behind, and, 
wise for once, kept silence. And well he did ; for in 
the North 'twere better to attempt the shepherd's life 
than the dog's. Only at Kenmuir he told of lonely 
passions in the night ; of hour-long steps pacing far 
into the morning ; of a little voice raised in an agony 
of tears — " Eh, Cutty Sark, Cutty Sark ! forgie me ! 
And me wha lo'ed ye as ma life." 

But the Master suspected nothing ; and, one of few 
who dared it, crossed the Stony Bottom to offer the 
bereaved man a whole-souled sympathy. 

" M'Adam," he said, in the short, cold manner that 
served to cloak a warm heart, " I'm grieved for thee." 

The little man turned as though to rend him. 

" Why lee, James Moore ? why lee ? " he cried, with 



f 



IN THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



39 \ 



4 



sudden, surprising animosity. " D'ye think I dinna ken 
that my sorrow is your joy? D'ye think I'd no' ha' bin 
blithe as a lavrock gin the same had fallen on yon 
grey devil ? " And he was seized with such a sudden, 
shaking frenzy as his eyes fell on Owd Bob, who stood 
a little apart, regarding him with soft, womanly com- 
passion, that the Master was amazed. 

Another moment, and the little man was outwardly 
himself again. 

" James Moore," he said, with queer flickering smile, 
" next time that dog comes on ma land, he marches aff 
agin — a corp." 

The Master's eyes steeled ; for next to their blood the 
Moores have always loved their dogs. But he answered 
nothing, thinking the other's balance overset by his 
great grief, and withdrew. 

Now a shepherd without a dog is like a cart without 
wheels. The one is to the other indispensable. And so 
M'Adam set himself, perforce, with aching heart and 
bitter tongue to repair his doggy widowhood. 

In the choosing of his dog, a shepherd must exercise 
as fully fastidious a care as in the choosing of his wife. 
For the one may be his better, but the other is his 
business half. In pair-harness they have to earn their 
daily bread ; share ambitions, perils, sorrows, joys, sun, 
and snow ; and in the end they grow to be rather one 
divided than two conjoined. 

Discretion in the matter is, then, to be applauded. 
But with M'Adam to see was to reject. He loathed 
the obligation of his task. He revolted against each 
new offering partner, as some late widow who, in the 
night season, compares a new and heart-hated lord with 
her lion love of old. As he handled each succeeding 
candidate, a veteran lady, regarding him with clouded 



40 



OWD BOB 



reproachful eyes, loomed instant on his view; and 
forthwith the sneer deepened on his face, his tongue 
shot its forked sting with hateful zest, and the dim eyes 
joyed in their all-ill-revealing stare. And at length, 
little loved as he had been aforetime, he became the 
target of a single-hearted resentment in the country- 
side ; and Tammas, whose forte lay in alliteratior and in- 
vective, apostrophised him as " a wenomous one ! " and 
" a wirulent wiper ! " to the applause of clanking pewter. 

Having rejected every aspirant within his own near 
neighbourhood, M'Adam on a day crossed the Marches 
to Grammoch-town to inspect another claimant to the 
invidious honour. 

This proved a hopeful customer : a workman, young, 
yet not lacking of experience, with brains and character, 
mirled in colour, and with orthodox wall-eye. For tvr^ 
hours his owner expatiated on his virtues ; and for two 
hours more. And still M'Adam made no sign, seeming 
for once all acquiescent. 

Early in the fifth he turned away. 

" Ay, ay, a braw tyke enough ; but he's no* for me." 

The drover was astounded ; wished to be struck 
dead ; blasphemed at large; nnd finally inquired the cause. 

M'Adam prevaricated ; lied glibly ; and at last out it 
came : he didna baud wi' grey dogs. 

The drover hoped he might die! Why, s'op his 
Sammy ! there was only one good colour, and that 
mirl-grey; hard, fashionable, workmanlike. There never 
yet was a wall-eyed mirled 'un but he was a good 'un. 
Why, bless his blue eyes ! weren't the very dogs of 
Kenmuir grey ? " 

At that M'Adam turned. 

" Ay, ay," he said, " ye're there the noo. Good-day 
to yet" 



i^ 



IN THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



41 



Then at last the drover spoke his whole mind. 

M'Adam heard him cut, nodding in critical approval 
at the more purple passages ; then he took his turn and 
withered his luckless adversary with that stream of 
mordant irony that had m^ide for him an enemy of 
every man between the Pike and the market-cross ; 
calmly sucking his twig the while, picking his words, 
revelling on in scathing intellectual debauch till it was 
time for the police to intervene. 

In all he was in a happier frame of mind than ever 
since the catastrophe, when he turned out of the Dales- 
man's Daughter on his homeward journey. 

That is at any time a heart-dulling tramp : over the 
Silver Lea, up the never-ending Pass, through the 
Devil's Bowl, and on to the Marches. To the weary, 
little man it seemed eternal, as he toiled up the white, 
strait way wreathed in the windless glare; the gaunt 
Scaur reaching up from his right hand, the naked void 
to left, and, above, the molten blue. 

As hd topped the last pitch and entered the Devil's 
Bowl, which forms the ante-room to the Marches, he 
was panting. 

There he paused, mopping his brow, and looked 
around. Before him the hollow swelled out cobra- 
hooded-wise, darkling still despite the sun-glare. All 
around low hillocks squat in hag-like circle, and croon 
the whole day through of murder done. The Lone 
Tarn lifts a leprous face as one long dead ; and the 
Red Screes sheers up from the water in abrupt, black 
pinnacle against the sky ; while all the year through 
the ghastly water whines about the shore, seeking 
absolution for its crimes. 

It is a hollow which cries aloud of tragedy. Each 
lichened boulder tells a bloody tale. The rushes shiver 



¥ 



42 



OWD BOB 



I' 



I! 



as they listen, and the hags around crouch closer. No 
smile ever lights its gloom ; no laugh of children has 
it heard ; only everlastingly the death-long ripple of the 
Tarn, and croaking of the ravens of the Reiver's Lovvp. 
Even the unimaginative sheep shun the spot for the 
taint of blood is in the air; preferring, it seems, the 
deathlier incline of the Red Screes slanting, though it 
does, down into those black-glass deeps, and upwards 
into that sheer curtain of rock they call the Reiver's 
Lowp. 

Across the tragic hollow M'Adam flitted, tightening 
his heart-strings. For though he was no cur, this 
Devil's Bowl ever clutched him with the cold fingers of 
fear ; a shadowy harbinger, it sometimes seemed to him, 
of some dread fate awaiting him there in time to come. 

So he fled fastly ; now glancing fearfully at the dead 
Tarn beside him, now at the scarred face of the Screes 
dotted here and there with smut-faced sheep. 

A curlew hailed him ; a sheep began its fool ma-a-a- 
ing; and he thanked them for their company. And 
then again the eternal silence of the moors. 

He seemed alone in a huge oven-like void ; around 
him the skinny hillocks ; above, the brazen blue ; 
beside him the blind face of the Tarn ; and afar, the 
long-reaching Marches with here a screen of coppice- 
wood against the sky and gloomy pine, solitary, sentinel. 

As he gripped his sense of loneliness to smother it, 
over the brim of a hollow on his right there came 
bowling a wind-battered hat. It trundled towards him 
with drunken, devious course, lurched hard by him, 
rolled into the black water and stayed. 

M'Adam was half- aghast, so weird, sudden, and 
unaccountable seemed this strange thing rolling out 
of no«-hingness, all unpropelled. 



\l 






I 



IN THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



43 



No 
has 
the 

the 

the 

h it 

ards 

ver's 






Almost unwillingly he turned, and mounted the ridge 
to see. 

There below him, in a scoop of the ground, crouched a 
hump- backed boulder in hideous deformity; huge, grey, 
uncouth, like the back of some stranded Leviathan, 
flinging a deathly shade far across the green. And as 
he looked he was aware of a black form fluttering 
about it; the creak of wings, and muffled grunt and 
cackle of a raven in excess of agitation. 

All around the boulder fluttered the ominous bird, 
dabbing, darting, retreating, croaking, like a witch 
flirting. M'Adam could see the shut-shears beak, the 
little lusty eye, the low head screwing round to gaze r.t 
him, and hunching shoulders ; and he wondered. 

Then something arose, flapped, and fell again. It 
was the lappet of a man's coat. Staring intently, he 
now discerned a long, prone, ragged figure beneath the 
grey-glooming boulder. 

Such a resemblance to the dead had the sleeper, that 
for a moment a sudden dread fell on him. And as the 
evil bird stooped lower and fluttered furiously, eager 
to strike and yet afraid, he yelled — 

"Houts, awa' wi* ye, blasphemin' corbie!" and 
advanced to wake the sleeper. 

There was no need. The beggar had his guard. 

As the bird stooped, a tiny yellow bomb burst from 
the sleeper's rags, and the bird wheeled away in hideous 
bustle. 

The guardian dragged back to his position with 
drooping tad-pole head, tongue out, and the heavy 
legs of puppyhood ; and a bloody gash upon his neck 
revealed that the unequal combat had been long 
sustained. 

The little man advanced with alluring thumb and 



f 



44 



OWD BOB 






finger to coax the puppy to him. But the fire-eyed 
defender, cornering back among the rags, would have 
none of him ; and, as his antagonist drew nearer, he 
bared his little teeth, raised his little bristles, and 
growled a hideous menace — type of brute baby at bay. 

Finally, as this fresh assailant still drew on, he dashed 
out, but fell, pitifully spent ; and lay watching, his head 
along his paws, too weak to move, but resolute while 
he had life to fulfill his charge. 

M'Adam bent and raised him tenderly. The puppy 
gurgled and slobbered in desperate fury, and then 
hung limp A few weeks' baby, yet like his master 
an outcast, more wolf than dog: large, wicked head, 
cropped ears, and for tail a yet raw red button — no 
more; while the stark ribs and jagged spine were 
wearing through their owner's yellow coat. 

" Why, wee one ! " cried M'Adam with wrathful pity, 
" ye're nigh to starvit." And turning on the shred-robed 
sleeper at his feet — 

" Man I " he called angrily, " hoo daur ye starve yer 
dog ? Ha' ye no peety ? Wak', man ! " and he kicked 
him in the ribs. 

The man's arm fell away and discovered his face. 
And then M'Adam knew there was no more waking for 
the gaunt starveling at his feet ; knew by the evidence 
of a nibbled crust that this drawn-faced dead had given 
his last to the puppy, and died for want of the where- 
withal to feed himself. 

In the ground beside him was a cleft stick ; and in the 
cleft a paper. On it, in the hand of one whose grim 
humour forsakes him not in death — 

" Beware the dog I " 

And that, as any man in the Dale-land could tell you, 
is the story of the coming of the Tailless Tyke. 



T 



i 



CHAPTER V 



FIRST BLOOD 



YOU and I, Wullie, you and I. You for me ; I for 
you — it's clear ordered." And so the puppy 
seemed to think ; for he resigned himself forthwith, 
recognising perhaps his destiny. 

Thenceforth Adam M'Adam and his Red Wull grew 
as it were together. Theirs was the comradeship of a 
common misanthropy ; jaundiced their outlook on the 
world ; genial their mutual surliness. 

The two became inseparable; for the wee dog had 
transferred his fealty utterly whole-hearted, and bristled 
defiance over his new lord as he had done over the 
lately dead. Once even in the Sylvester Arms he 
attacked Long Kirby with a cold-blooded fearless fury 
that routed his big antagonist and afforded Tammas 
and his brother topers a side-shaking topic for a week. 

Many were the stories David told at Kenmuir of the 
truculent mite ; of his savagery, his devotion to his 
master, his already deathless hate for him (David). 
Very soon this mutual antipathy led to the inevitable 
event. For on a morning the boy woke to find himself 
pinned murderously by the nose, and a smutty red face 
scowling into his. He yelled, and freed himself with 
difficulty. Red Wull, bent on blood, attacked again. 
A scuffle ensued, and in the middle M'Adam burst in, 
all disarrayed. Straightway h^ flew into a frenzy, 



■Bi 



46 



OWD BOB 



\ 



caught up the puppy, clouted David up and down ; and 
finally, as a more effectual penance, imposed perpetual 
interdict on the lad's visits to Kenniiuir. 

It was on the day succeeding this affair that James 
Moore first encountered Red Wull. He was crossing 
the plank-bridge below the farm, Owd Bob and a pack 
of sheep before him, when midway between banks the 
grey dog paused, peered over the side, and stiffened 
in cold displeasure. 

The Master followed snit, and beheld M'Adam lying 
in the shadow of th-". btl:.^-t, at play with a red puppy. 

" What arta' doin' theer, M'Adam ? " he asked sharply, 
resolved that the litde ir- ^n s'" h M deviate no inch from 
the public path which crosses Kenmuir. 

M'Adam looked up, benignly smiling. 

" Waitin' for the dear lad," he answered. 

" I thought ye'd forbad him to come this gate ? " 

" So I have : flat forbade him. That's why I'm here." 

The Master was puzzled ; and his face betrayed it. 

"It's vera simple," the other continued. "When I 
wush to tryst wi' Davie, I say, * Davie, positeevely I 
forbid ye to be at sic-and-sic a place at sic-and-sic a 
time.* And then a while afore I go and hide there, and 
when he comes, I hop oot, a smile on my gab, the love- 
light in my een, a stick in my hand, and cry, * Weel, 
Davie, and hoo's a* wi' ye the day ? ' And then whiles 
I argie wi' him." He smiled tenderly as at some sweet 
reminiscence, and suppled the ash-plant between his 
fingers. 

James Moore affected not to understand. 

" Is yon the dead man's dog ? " he asked, nodding at 
Red Wull, who had climbed to the top of the bank, and 
now stood scowling at Owd Bob and the flock on the 
meadowside above. 



FIRST BLOOD 



47 



\-t 



" Na," the little man replied, sucking his twig. 

" Hoo did ye coom by him then ? " 

"Found him in ma stockin* en ma birthday. A 
present from ma leetle Davie for his auld dad, I doot." 

" Liar agin ! " came a shrill voice from up the sldpe. 

M' Adam rose to his feet and looked about ; but no 
one could be seen. 

" Thank ye, dear lad, thank ye ! " he called kindly. 
"I'll no' forget ye, niver fear. . . . Ah, James Moore" — 
turning to the Master — " I'll leave ma mark on ma son if 
ever dad did." 

But James Moore was now far away up the slope, 
speeding to his subaltern's assistance; for the flock 
above was in sudden^ commotion. The sheep clustered 
in very act to break, in fearful head-proud disorder ; 
while all amongst them scoured a small insidious figure, 
red-rocket-wise, snapping, snatching, snarling. But for 
the authority of their grey leader, his quick prescience, 
his commanding presence, panic must have seized the 
pack. 

" M' Adam ! " the Master tossed across his shoulder, 
^" your dog's amang t' sheep." 

"Niver fash," the little man replied, sucking his 
eternal twig, " he'll tak' no hurt." 

At the moment, a tup broke away down the hill. 
Hard behind, the tailless puppy scurried in red wrack. 
An instant's interval ; the Master's voice in sharp 
command ; and a grey figure foamed against the green. 
In a flash this third of the three had caught the pursuer, 
shot past him, and was already on the heels of the 
pursued as he rattled over the plank. Another moment 
and he had rounded off the fugitive and herded him 
back to the bridge. But there now a wee red warrior 
was awaiting, resolute to hold passage against all comers. 



48 



OWD BOB 



M'Adam was chuckling. 

" I'll lay the grey dog dinna get him ower in face o' 
ma wee Wull ! " he cried. 

"A pity to make ill blood atween 'em, and they 
neighbours," the Master replied. 

" Ah-h ! douce man, James Moore." 

The sneer stung the other into unwilling acquiescence. 

"As ye will. But mark me! a Grey Dog doesna 
forget." 

" And mark me ! Red Wull dinna forgie." 

" So be it then." 

Thus lightly was enterprised that feud which was to 
endure for years ; to break one heart and crack two 
others; thus was begun that long vendetta whose 
bloody trail may yet be traced in the bleak moorland. 

Tammas and Sam'l had now joinet^ the other pair ; 
along the wall above was a row of heads — David, Maggie, 
and others : all silent, intent on the contest in the green 
arena beneath. 

The challenge accepted, the duel began. 

At the bridge-head the tup paused and looked away. 
Red Wull snarled defiance and made as though to 
attack. The tup essayed retreat. In vain : the grey 
dog held him forward, gentle, implacable withal as 
smothering snow. 

At length the compulsion from behind grew irresistible. 
With myriad misgivings the tup made his attempt ; was 
attacked forthwith by the bomb in yellow ; and turned, 
whimpering dismay. 

M'Adam was in ecstasy. 

" I tell't ye ! I tell't ye ! Good for you, Wullie ! 
Keep him aff, lad ! ' Come on ! ' says he. * All o' ye, 
ony o' ye. Englishmen a', come on I ' . . . Weel done, 
Wullie— he! he!" 



Hi 




FIRST BLOOD 



49 



Thrice the grey dog drove his charge at the obstacle ; 
thrice the woolly cur refused. At the third failure Owd 
Bob abandoned his tactics, and took the bridge in 
person. 

M'Adam's ecstasy found pause. 

" He'll no' hurt ma wee Wull ; he daurna ! " he 
muttered, on tip-toe of apprehension. 

" He's far ower kind," said the Master. 

" He's far ower coward," snapped the other. 

The grey dog swirled across the bridge, swept up the 
tawny obstacle as a yacht-prow lifts the opposing sea, 
and cantered up the slope; patient, tender, magnani- 
mous as a great-souled woman, while Red Wull, in 
pendent ignominy, cursed like a vixen baby in its 
mother's arms. 

Tammas was convulsed ; the Master grimly amused ; 
while on M'Adam's face sat a dangerous calm. 

The grey dog cantered up and laid his burden at the 
little man's feet. For all answer M'Adam struck at 
him viciously; but the Master, ever-alert, frustrated 
his intent. 

" It's yer own doin', M'Adam," he reminded him. 
"Fair's fair a' the world thro'." And the little man 
ordered himself with difficulty. 

The grey dog now set himself afresh to the business 
in hand. Rounding up the tup, he took him hot-foot at 
his Rubicon. But there again, right in the way, stood 
the warrior of the bridge petrified now in fell frenzy of 
passion. 

" Ye'll beat him yet, Wullie ! He's fear't o' ye ! Keep 
him aff, lad ! Death or victorie ! " came the burning 
voice from the hillside, heating him on to huge 
temerity. 

Again the grey dog trotted on to the plank. 
4 



50 



OWD BOB 






James Moore was grimly silent, Tammas winking to 
himself, Sam'l groaning ; while M* Adam was shivering 
on a tempest's abrupt brink. 

"Hands aff, ye devil!" he muttered, his fingers 
working. " Wad ye daur touch ma Wullie ? Na, na ; 
ye haena the spunk, tho' he is no bigger nor yer ain 
pat." 

His face was blazing; his emotions scarcely bridled. 

"Mind. M'Adam, it's yer own doin'!" came the 
Master's hard voice at his elbow. 

Red Wull was now backing up the hill, teeth to the 
foe. As well Achilles might defy the lightning. The 
grey dog swooped, parried a thrust, overset his 
enemy, gathered him, motherly, and turned, captive in 
mouth, for the stream. 

For a moment M'Adam looked ; then loosed himself. 

"Devil!" he yelled, hurling down the hill in hot 
pursuit. " Ye black-hearted murderer, drap him 1 Tames 
Moore ! " he flung the words over his flying shoulder — 
" Call him aff", man ! Call him afif, curse ye ! " 

The grey dog galloped on to the plank-bridge, halted 
in the middle, leant over, and dropped his burden. 

The far-thrown protest of the stream was drowned 
in a roar of derisive applause from the on-lookers above ; 
and that again was lost in a hollow resounding souse as 
M'Adam in a whirlwind of spray and oaths leaped out 
into the stream. 

A moment, and he had rescued the puppy and was 
wading back, the waters surging about his waist. Red 
Wull limp as a wet rag in his hand. His bonnet was 
gone ; his face ran ; his clothes betrayed the meanness 
of his manhood ; and his eyes were as red-hot embers. 

He sprang on to the bank, and in cyclone fury stormed 
down on the grey dog. 



FIRST BLOOD 



51 



" Stan' back, or ye'll have him at yer throat I " shouted 
the Master, thundering up. " Stan' back, I Say, tha fule ! " 
And as the other still came madly on, he reached forth 
a lean brown hand and hurled him backward ; and 
simultaneously buried the other hand down in the sea- 
deep depths of Owd Bob's neck. And well he did ; for 
if ever the flame of battle flared in grey eyes, 'twas in 
the grey dog's then. 

The little man tottered, toppled, and crashed down. 

At the shock, the blood spouted from his nostrils, and 
bound his chin about with vague, red, dripping streamers ; 
while Red Wull, jerked afar, lay still. 

For a second he sat erect, leaning on his arms ; then 
he leaped to his feet, his face motleyed grey and ghastly, 
the running red about his jaw. 

" Curse ye ! " he howled, and flung at the Master. 
" Curse ye, for a cowardly Englishman ! " 

But Sam'l interposed. 

" Easy, lil man ! " he said, holding him off" with large 
fending hand. " Eh, but art' a tearin' spit-cat, surely ! " 

James Moore stood breathing deep, his hand still lost 
in the grey dog's depths. 

" If thoo'd touched him," he panted, " he'd ha' mauled 
thee afoor iver I could ha' had him off. It's bad for any 
man but a Moore to handle a Grey Dog to his hurt." 

" Ma wud ! that it be ! " corroborated Tammas, speak- 
ing from the experience of sixty years. And, indeed, it 
is notorious that a Moore may flay a Grey Dog alive 
while another may not so much as flout him. 

The little man turned away. 

" Ye're all agin me ! " he said in small, quaking voice 
and bent over Red Wull, who lay at his feet like a dead 
thing. 

At the touch of his master's hands, the puppy opened 



5a 



OWD BOB 



his eyes, and glared with devilish hate at the grey dog 
and group with him. 

The little man lifted him tenderly and turned on to 
the bridge. Half-way across he stopped. The plank 
shivered feverishly beneath him, for he still trembled 
like one palsied. 

" Man, Moore 1 " he called, striving to quell the agita- 
tion in his voice, " I wad shoot yon dog." 

Across the bridge he turned again ; his face grey, 
dead lights smouldering ; the blood about his jaw ; and 
the dank red devil cub nursed in his arms. 

" Man, Moore ! " he called and paused. ..." Yell no' 
forget this day 1 " 



f dog 



on to 

plank 
nbled 

igita- 

grey, 
; and 

11 no' 



Part II 
The Little Man 



58 



■ s 



; \ 



Part II 
The Little Man 



CHAPTER VI 



A MAN'S SON 



THE Storm having burst, M'Adam allowed loose 
rein to his implacable hostility for James 
Moore. 

The two often encountered. For the little man was 
wont to return home by the footpath across Kenmuir. 
It took him out of his course, indeed ; but he preferred 
it for the opportunities it offered of harrying his enemy. 

Now he haunted Kenmuir like some evil familiar. 
When clumsy Sam'l slashed a valuable ewe in the 
shearing and was repairing the damage with tow and 
tar, a yellow mask, wreathed into the semblance of 
sympathy, crowned the farm wall. 

" Oh dear ! Oh dear ! " came a mocking voice, aft 
solicitous. " Send for oor Bob ! Fetch auld Bobbums. 
He'll kiss it and mak'it"— A flash; a crash; a grey 
figure skimming the wall ; and the little man was fleeing 
for the public path and his life, amidst a tempest of 
jeers. And that was the not infrequent climax of his 
darings. 

66 



less! 



mssam 



.6 



OWD BOB 



i : 



' 



Pi 



There were two attempts to patch up the feud. Jim 
Mason, who went about the world seeking to do good, 
tried in his shy way to mend matters. But M'Adam 
and his Red Wull soon put him and Betsy to rout. 

" You mind yer letters and yer wires, Mr. Poacher — 
postman. Ay, I saw 'em baith : th'ane doon by the 
Haughs, t'ither in the Bottom. . . . And" — a tender 
smile breaking over his face — "there's Wullie, the 
humoursome chiel, takin' a feel at Betsy's throat." 
There, indeed, lay the faithful Betsy, suppliant on her 
back ; while Red Wull, now a great-grown puppy, stood 
athwart her with wrinkled muzzle and savage wheeze, 
awaiting a movement as pretext to pin. " Wullie, let 
the leddy be. Ye've had yer dinner." 

Parson Leggy, by right of his office, was the other 
would-be mediator. First he tackled James Moore on 
the subject ; but that laconic person cut him short with, 
" I've nowt agin t' little man," and would say no more. 
And in truth the quarrel was none of his making. 

When the Parson approached M'Adam on the matter, 
the little man stood sucking his eternal twig and 
listening with an ominous calm upon his face. . 

" There's no ca' for the interference o' the Church in 
this business, and thank ye, Mr. Hornbut," he said at 
length sourly. Whereat the Parson, had he been wise 
as well meaning, would have desisted ; but did not. 

Of the wrangle that ensued ; the heat of the one ; the 
cynical indifference of the other, changing as it did to 
sudden, impassioned earnestness ; of the calm succeed- 
ing ; of the intervention of Cyril Gilbraith to hinder 
the angry old minister from assaulting his adversary ; of 
the little man's parting shot — " Wullie, let the gentleman's 
legs their lane, and come ben. Corbies and clergy are but 
shot right kittle ! " there is no need to tell. But there- 
after the vendetta must pursue its own sinister course. 



f 



A MAN'S SON 



57 



David was now the only link between the two farms. 
In the flagrant face of his father's interdict the boy 
clung to his intimacy with the Moores with a doggedness 
that no thrashing could overcome. Not a minute of 
the day when out of school, holidays and Sundays 
included, but was passed at Kenmuir. It was not till 
late at night that he would sneak back to the Grange, 
and creep up to his tiny, bare room in the roof — not 
supperless, indeed ; motherly Mrs. Moore had seen to 
that. And there he would lie awake and listen with a 
ferce contempt as his father, hours later, lurched into 
the kitchen below, lilting liquorishly — 

" 'We are na fou, we're nae that fou, 
But just a drappie in our e'e ; 
The cock may craw, the day may daw', 
And aye we'll taste the barley bree ! '" 

And in the morning the boy would slip quietly out of 
the house while his father still slept; only Red Wull 
would thrust out his savage head as the lad passed and 
snarl hungrily. 

Sometimes weeks would pass thus and no word 
spoken between father and son, no glance passed. And 
that was David's aim — to obliterate himself. It was his 
cunning at this game of evasion that saved him many a 
thrashing; though still during his father's relapses into 
soberness a reign of terror was wont to intervene. 

The little man seemed devoid of all natural affection 
for his son. He lavished the whole fondness of which 
his small nature appeared capable on the Tailless Tyke : 
for so the Dalesmen called Red Wull. And the dog 
he treated with a careful tendeness that made David 
smile, the Parson fume, the villagers sarcastic, and their 
wives indignant. 

The little man and his dog were as alike in moral 
attributes as they were contrasted physically. Each 



M 



y 



1 1 



58 



OWD BOB 



owed a grudge against the world, and was determined 
to pay it. Each was an Ishmael amongst his kind. 
Each was alone save for the other ; and their desolate- 
ness wrapped them the closer. The ill-humour of the 
one found expression in his tongue, of the other in his 
teeth. The dog was the incarnation of brute strength, 
the man of human weakness. 

Soon the two earned an evil notoriety in the country- 
side. For they shoved through the world together 
with sour looks and surly actions, utterly regardless of 
any save the other. You saw them thus, or standing 
apart, leper-like, in the turmoil of life, and it came as a 
revelation to happen upon them on the hill below the 
house of sober summer evenings, playing together, each 
wrapped in the game, innocent, tender, forgetful of the 
hostile world. 

The two were never apart except only when M'Adam 
came home across Kenmuir. After that first misadven- 
ture he never allowed his twin-soul to accompany him 
on the journey through the enemy's country : for well 
he knew that sheep-dogs have long memories. 

To the stile on the lane Red Wull would escort his 
master. There he would halt and stand, his villain 
mask grinning through the gate, and watch his master 
out of sight ; then he would turn and trot, self-reliant 
and defiant, sturdy and surly, down the very centre of the 
road through the village — no playing, no enticing away, 
and woe to that man or dog who tried to stay him in 
his course ! past Mother Ross's shop, past the Sylvester 
Arms, to the right by Kirby's smithy, over the Wastrel 
by the Haughs, to avvait his master at the brink of the 
Stony Bottom. 

The little man, when thus crossing Kenmuir, often 
encountered Owd Bob. But on these occasions he 
passed discreetly by ; for though he was no coward, 



! 



:*■% 



''A 



A MAN'S SON 



59 



yet it is bad, single-handed, to tackle a Grey Dog of 
Kenmuir. While the dog trotted soberly on his way, 
only a steely glint in the snowcloud eyes betraying his 
knowledge of a foe. As surely, however, as the little 
man in his desire to spy out the nakedness of the land 
strayed off the public path, so surely a grey figure, 
seeming to spring from out the blue, would come 
fiercely, silently, hurling down on him ; and he would 
turn and run for his life, amidst the loud-voiced con- 
tumely of any who were witness to the meeting. 

On these occasions David vied with Tammas in 
facetiousness at his father's expense. 

" Wheer away, little 'un ! " he roared from behind a 
wall, after one such incident. 

" Ma sarty, but he can scut and run 1 " yelled 
Tammas, not to be outdone, " Hoo fends-ta', M'Adam ? 
— gaily, eh ? " 

" Look to his knees a-wamblin' ! " from the undutiful 
son in ecstasy. "If I'd knees the marrer o' them, I'd 
wear petticoats." 

As he spoke, a swinging box on the ear brought the 
young reprobate to his knees. Turning, he found 
James Moore behind him, his heavy eyebrows lowering 
over his eyes. 

"Tak' shame to thysel', David M'Adam. Does ta' 
think God gave thee a dad for thee to fleer at? Ye 
should be 'shamed. Serve thee reet if he does thrash 
thee when ye get home." 

Luckily M'Adam had not distinguished his son's 
voice. But the little man had an unwitting revenge ; 
for on the following morning he said to his son — 

" David, ye'll come hame after school to-day." 

"Will I ?" said David pertly. 

"Ye will." 

"What for?" 



if 



ft 



60 



OWD BOB 



" Because I tell ye to, ma lad." And that was all the 
reason he would assign. Had he told the simple fact : 
that he needed help to drench a " husking " ewe, things 
might have gone differently. As it was, David, stung 
into defiance, turned down the hill. 

The afternoon wore on ; schooltime was long over ; 
and still there was no David. 

The little man waited at the door of the Grange, 
fuming, hopping from one leg to the other, talking to 
Red Wull, who lay at his feet, his head on his paws, 
like a tiger waiting for his prey. 

At length the little man could hold himself no 
longer. He started running down the hill, his heart 
red-hot with indignation. 

" Wait till we lay hands on ye, ma lad," he muttered. 
" We'll warm ye, we'll teach ye." 

At the edge of the Stony Bottom he left Red Wull. 
Crossing it himself, and rounding Langholm How, he 
soon espied James Moore, David, and Owd Bob walking 
away from him in the direction of Kenmuir. The grey 
dog and David were playing together, wrestling, racing, 
and rolling. The boy had never a thought for his father. 

The little man ran up behind, unseen and unheard, 
his feet softly pattering on the grass. His hand had 
fallen on David's shoulder before the boy had guessed 
his approach. 

" Did I bid ye come hame after school, David ? " he 
asked, concealing his heat beneath a suspicious suavity. 

" Mebbe. Did I say I wud come ? " 

The pertness of tone and words alike fanned the little 
man's resentment into a blaze. In a burst of passion 
he lunged at the boy with his stout ash- plant. But as 
he smote, a grey whirlwind struck him fair on the chest, 
and he fell like a snapped stake, and lay half-stunned, 
with a dark muzzle hovering at his throat 



A MAN'S SON 



6i 



"Hod back, Bob!" shouted James Moore, running 
up. "Hod away, I tell thee!" He bent over the 
prostrate figure, propping it up anxiously. " Art' hurt, 
M'Adam? Eh, but I am vexed. He thowt ye were 
for strikin' t' lad." 

David had now run up, and he, too, bent over his 
father with a very scared face. 

" Art' hurt, dad ? " he asked, his voice trembling. 

The little man rose unsteadily to his feet afid shook 
off his supporters. His face was twitching, and he 
stood all dust-begrimed looking at his son. 

"Ye're content, aiblins, noo ye've seen yer father's 
grey head bowed in the dust," he said. 

" 'Twas a mishap," pleaded James Moore ; " but I am 
sorry. He thowt ye were goin' for to bang the lad." 

" So I was ; so I will." 

"Ifony'sbeat it should be ma Bob here, though he 
nobbut thought he was actin' reet. . . . An' ye were aff 
t' path." 

The little man regarded his enemy, a sneer mantling 
his lips. 

"Ye canna thrash him for doin' what ye bid him, 
James Moore. Set yer dog on me if ye will, but dinna 
beat him when he does yer biddin' ! " 

" I didna set him on thee, and well thoo kens it ! " the 
Master replied warmly. 

M'Adam shrugged his shoulders. 

" I'll no' argie wi' ye, James Moore," he replied. " I'll 
leave you and what ye call yer conscience to settle 
that. My business is not wi' you. . . . David ! " turning 
to his son. 

A stranger might well have been lost to distinguish 
of these two men the boy's father. For the lad stood 
now holding the Master's hand; while a few paces 
above them was M'Adam, pale but resolute, his 



62 



OWD BOB 



■ 



;i^' 



•r 






expression betraying his consciousness of the irony of 
the situation. 

" Will ye come hame wi' me and have it noo, or stop 
wi' him and wait till ye get it ? " he asked his son. 

" M' Adam, I'd like thee to "— 

" None o' that, James Moore. David, what d'ye say ? " 

David looked up into his protector's face. 

" Gang wi' thy father, lad," said the Master at last 
thickly. The boy hesitated and clung tighter to the 
shielding arm ; then he walked slowly over to his father. 

A bitter smile spread over the little man's face, as he 
marked this new test of his son's obedience to the other. 

"To obey his frien' he foregoes the pleasure o' 
disobeyin' his father," he muttered. 

Then he turned homewards and the boy followed. 

James Moore and the grey dog stood looking after 
them. 

" I know ye willna pay afif yer spite agin me on t' lad's 
head, M* Adam ! " the Master called, almost appealingly. 

" I'll do ma duty, niver fear, James Moore, wi'oot 
respect o' persons," the little man cried back, never 
turning. 

So father and son walkea away, one behind the other 
like a man and his dog, and there was no word said 
between them. Across the Stony Bottom, Red WuU, 
scowling with bared teeth at David, joined them. 
Together the three went up the hill to the Grange. 

In the kitchen M'Adam turned. 

" Noo, I'm gaein' to gie ye the gran'est thrashin' ye 
iver dreamed of. Tak' aff yer coat." 

The boy obeyed and stood up in his thin shirt, his 
face white and set as a statue's. Red Wull seated 
himself hard by on his haunches, ears pricked, licking 
his lips, all attention. 

The little man suppled the ash-plant in his hands 



A MAN'S SON 



63 



ye 



inds 



and raised it. The expression on the boy's face 
arrested his arm. 

"Say ye're sorry and I'll let ye afif easy." 

" I'll not." 

" One mair chance — yer last ! Say ye're 'shamed o' 
yersel'." 

" I'm not." 

The little man brandished his cruel weapon, and Red 
Wull shifted to obtain a better view. 

" Git on wi' it ! " ordered David angrily. 

The little man raised his stick again and — threw it 
into the farthest comer of the room. It fell with' a 
rattle on the floor, and M'Adam turned away. 

" Ye're the pitifullest son iver a man had ! " he cried 
brokenly. " And gin a man's son dinna baud to him, 
wha can he expect to ? — no one. . . , Ye're ondootiful, 
ye're disrespectfu', ye're maist ilka thing ye shouldna 
be ; there's but ae thing I thocht ye werena — a coward. 
And as to that, ye've no' the pluck to say ye're sorry 
when God kens ye might be. ... I canna thrash ye the 
day. But ye shall gang nae mair to school ! I send 
ye there to learn. Ye'll no' learn — ye've learnt naethin* 
except disobedience to me — ye shall stop at hame 
and work." 

His father's rare emotion, his broken voice and 
working face, moved the boy as all the stripes and jeers 
failed to do. His conscience smote him. It dimly 
dawned on him that maybe his father, too, had some 
ground for complaint; that perhaps he was not a 
faultless son. 

He half turned. 

" Father "— 

" Git oot o' ma sight !" M'Adam cried. 

The boy turned and went ; and another swelled the 
huge sad host of Lost Opportunities. 



CHAPTER VII 



A lad's father 






m 



I ; 



THENCEFORWARD David buckled to work at 
home. And in one point only father and son 
resembled — industry. A drunkard M'Adam was, but 
a drone, no. 

The boy worked at the Grange with tireless, in- 
domitable energy ; yet he could never satisfy his 
father. The little man would stand, a sneer on his 
face, his thin lips contemptuously curled, and flout 
the lad's brave labours. 

" Is he no' a gran* worker, WuUie ? 'Tis a pleasure 
to watch him, his hands in his pockets, his eyes turned 
heavenwards ! " as the boy snatched a hard - earned 
moment's resL. " You and I, Wullie, we'll brak' oorsel's 
slavin' for him while he looks on and laffs." 

And so on, the whole day through, week in, week 
out ; till the lad sickened with weariness of it all. 

In his darkest hours David thought sometimes to 
run away. He was miserably alone on the cold bosom 
of the world. The very fact that he was the son of 
his father isolated him in the Dale-land. Naturally of 
a reserved disposition, he had no single friend outside 
Kenmuir. And it was only the thought of his friends 
there that withheld him. He could not bring himself 
to part from them ; they were all he had in the world, 
and he cherished them accordingly. 

64 



A LAD'S FATHER 65 

So he worked on at the Grange, miserably, doggedly, 
taking blows and abuse alike in burning silence. But 
every evening, his work over, he stepped off to his 
other home beyond the Stony Bottom. And on 
Sundays and holidays — for of these latter he took, 
unasking, what he knew to be his due — all day long, 
from cock-crowing to the going down of the sun, he 
would pass at, Kenmuir. In this one matter the boy 
was invincibly stubborn. Words or blows, tongue or 
strap, alike proved impotent to wean him from this 
vice. He endured it all with white-lipped. silent forti- 
tude, and held on his course. 

Once past the Stony Bottom he threw his troubles 
behind him with a courage that honoured him. Too 
proud to voice his woes, of all the people at Kenmuir 
two only ever dreamed the whole depth of his unhappi- 
ness. James Moore suspected something of it all ; for 
he knew more of M'Adam than did the rest. While 
Owd Bob knew it all as did no other. He could tell 
it from the touch of the boy's hand on his head ; for 
the story was writ bold in each caress for a dog to 
read. And he would follow the lad about, compassion 
in his sad grey eyes ; giving him all of that most 
tender comfort — a dog's dumb sympathy. 

David might well compare his grey friend at Ken- 
muir with that other at the Grange. 

The Tailless Tyke had now grown into a huge 
Cerberus. Deep-chested as a barrel ; legs like Gothic 
arches ; great bull-head ; lower jaw reaching per- 
petually forward as if for prey ; eyes scowling always 
askance ; cropped ears perking mouse like on a round 
bald skull ; a coat like coir ; and back running up 
from shoulder to loins, abruptly terminated by the 
knob-like tail ; and when he regarded you his eyes 

5 



66 



OWD BOB 



rolled round and his head moved not at all. In all, 
he looked like the Satan of a dog's Hell. 

And he looked only less wicked than he was. lie 
feared neither man nor dog nor devil. He never 
attacked unprovoked ; but a challenge was never 
ignored, and he loved insults and sought for them. 
Already he had nigh killed Rob Saunderson's Shep ; 
Long Kirby glanced round uneasily at the muffled 
slop-slop of his coming ; ay, he had even fought a 
round with that redoubtable trio, the Wexer, Wenus, 
and Wan Tromp ; and not been worsted. 

More than once he and Owd Bob had essayed to 
wipe out mutual memories, Red Wull in this case 
always the aggressor. As yet, however, while they 
fenced for that deathly throat-grip, the value of 
which each knew so well, James Moore had always 
intervened. 

" That's right ; hide him ahint yer petticoats," sneered 
M'Adam, on one such occasion. 

"Hide? 'Twillna be him I'll hide, I's uphod thee, 
M'Adam 1 " the Master answered grimly, as he twirled 
his good oak-stafif between the would - be duellists. 
Whereat was a derisive laugh at the little man's 
expense. 

It seemed there were to be other points of enmity 
between the two than memories. For in the matter 
of his business — the marshalling of sheep — Red Wull 
bid fair to be second only throughout the Dale-land 
to the Grey Dog of Kenmuir. Their styles, indeed, 
were all antithesis : the one quiet, persuasive, a woman 
in tact, a Solomon in wisdom, a Very Bayard in action ; 
the other terrific in his truciuence, strong as Samson, 
violent as Saul. 

And M'Adam was patient and painstaking in the 



^ 



A LAD'S FATHER 



67 



training of his Wullie in a manner to astonish David. 
It would have been touching, had it not been so un- 
natural in view of his treatment of his own blood, to 
watch the fond discretion with which the little man 
moulded the dog beneath his hands. 

After a promising display he would stand, twig in 
mouth, hands clasped, dreaming of the rosy future 
as near content as man may be. 

" Weel done, Wullie ! " he would murmur. •* Bide a 
while, and we'll show 'em a thing or two, you and I, 
Wullie. 

' Tlie warlil's wrack we share o't, 
The warstle and the care o't.'" 

And the dog would lift himself, place his fore-paws 
on the other's shoulders, and stand thus, ears back, 
skull round against the sky, grinning love into his 
master's face. 

From the first David and Red Wull had been open 
enemies. Under the circumstances, indeed, there could 
be no alternative. The two were never at peace. 
Sometimes the great dog would slink at the lad's 
heels with surly, greedy eyes, never quitting him from 
sunrise to sundown, till David could hardly hold his 
hand. 

So matters continued for a never-ending year. Then 
the inevitable climax came. 

On a day throughout which Red Wull had dogged 
him thus hungrily, David, his work over, went to pick 
' p his coat, preparatory to wending KenmuirwaiJs. 
Lying upon it he found Red Wull. 

" Git off ma coat ! " the boy ordered angrily. 

The gr'^at dog made no move. The curtain of his 
lip hovered and disclosed a wall of woman-white ; that 
cruel under-jaw reached for its prey ; and he sunk low 



mm 






68 



OWD BOB 



{ 



i i 



i-^ 



and lower in the ground, his head on his paws, his eyes 
burning beneath his brows. 

Now, what between masteir and dog, David had 
endured to his utmost that day. 

" What ! ye willna, girt brute ! " he shouted, snatched 
a corner of the coat, and attempted to jerk it away. 

At that. Red Wull rose, shivering, and with a gurgle 
sprang at the boy. 

David, quick as a flash, dodged ; bent ; and picked up 
an ugly stake lying at his feet. Swinging round all in a 
crack, he dealt his antagonist a mighty buffet on the head. 

Dazed with the blow, the great dog fell ; then 
recovering, with a terrible deep roar he came again. 
Then it must have gone hard with the boy, fine-grown 
young Titan though he was: for Red Wull was now 
in the first bloom of that great strength which earned 
him afterwards an undying notoriety in the land. 

As it chanced, however, M'Adam had watched the 
scene from the kitchen. And now out he plunged 
headlong, shrieking commands and curses at the com- 
batants. As Red Wull sprang, he interposed between 
the two, head back, eyes flashing. His small person 
received the full shock of the charge. He staggered 
but recovered, and in an imperative voice ordered the 
dog to heel. 

Then he turned on David, seized the stake from his 
hand, and began furiously to belabour the boy. 

" I'll — teach — ye — to— strike — a puir — dumb — harm- 
less — creetur, ye — cruel — cruel — lad ! " he cried. " Hoo 
daur ye strike — ma — Wull? yer — father's — Wull? 
Adam — M'Adam's — Red — Wull ? " He was panting 
from his exertions, and his eyes blazing. " I pit up as 
best I can wi' all manner o' disrespect to masel', but 
when it comes to 'tackin' ma puir Wullie, I canna thole 



A LAD'S FATHER 



69 



it. . . . Ha' ye no heart ? " he asked, unconscious of the 
irony of the question. 

"As mickle as some, ! reck'n," David growled, his 
face white. 

" Eh, what's that ? what d'ye say ? " 

" Ye thrash me till ye're blind, and it's nobbut yer duty, 
but if ony dares so mickle as to look at yer Wullie, ye're 
mad," the boy answered bitterly. And with that he 
turned away defiantly and openly in the direction of 
Kenmuir. 

M'Adam made a step forward ; then stopped. 

" I'll see ye again, ma lad, this evenin*," he cried, with 
cruel significance. 

" I doot ye'U be far ower fou to see owt — except, 
happen, your bottle," the boy shouted back, and 
swaggered down the hill. 

At Kenmuir that night the marked and particular 
kindness of Elizabeth Moore filled to overflowing the 
boy's cup. Overwhelmed by the contrast of her sweet 
motherliness, he burst into a rare storm of invective 
against his father, his home, his life, the universe. 

" Dunnot, Davie ; dunnot, dearie ! " cried Mrs. Moore, 
much distressed. ** Dunnot take on that gate. He'll 
mend, I warrant he will." And taking him to her, she 
soothed the gieat, sobbing boy as though he were a child. 

At length he lifted his face and looked up ; and 
seeing the white wan countenance of his dear comforter, 
was stricken with fond remorse that he had given way 
and pained her whom he knew so frail herself. 

Mastering himself with an effort, for the rest of the 
evening he was his usual cheery self. He teased Maggie, 
chaffed stolid little Andrew, and bantered Sam'l Todd 
until that generally impassive man threatened to bash 
his snout for him. 



iltl 






y ■' 



B 



I 



!'•:( 



70 



OWD BOB 



Yet it was with a great swallowing at the throat that 
later he turned down the slope for home. 

James Moore and Parson Leggy accompanied him to 
the bridge, and stood a while looking after him as he 
disappeared into the summer night. 

" Yon's a good lad," said the Master, half to himself 

" Yes," the Parson replied, " I'm sure of it. Look at 
the affection between him and Owd Bob ; and I'd take 
a wise dog's estimate of anyone before many a man's. 
Certainly there's none of the old Adam about the 
boy. . . . Ah, I wish his father *d give the lad a chance. 
As it is, he's paving the way for a nasty business at the 
Grange in the future." 

" If it com' to murder one o' these days," answered 
the Master quietly, " I'd hardly blame t' lad." 

David slipped up into his room and into bed, unseen. 
Alone with the darkness, he allowed himself the rare 
relief of tears. And soon pitiful sleep folded him in 
her arms. 

He woke to find his father at his bedside. The little 
man held a dip-candle in his hand, which limned his 
sallow face in crude black and yellow. In the doorway, 
dimly outlined, was the great figure of Red Wull. 

" Where ha' ye been the day ? " the little man asked ; 
then looking down on the stained face beneath him, 
added quickly, " If ye like to lee, I'll believe ye." 

David was out of bed and standing up in his night- 
shirt. He looked at his father contemptuously. 

" I's bin at Kenmuir. I'll not lee for you or your 
likes." 

The little man shrugged his shoulders. 

" * Tell a lee and stick to it,' is my rule, and a good 
one, too, in honest England. I for one '11 no' think ony 
the worse o' ye should yer meniory play yer false." 






A LAD'S FATHER 



71 



" Doesta' think I care a kick what you think o* me ? " 
the boy asked brutally. " Nay ; there's 'nough leears in 
this fam'ly wi'oot me." 

The candle trembled and was still again. 

" A lickin' or a lee : tak' yer choice ! '" 

The boy looked scornfully down on his father. 
Standing on his naked feet, he already towered half a 
head above the other and was twice the man. 

"Doesta' reck'n I'm fear'd o' a thrashin' fra' thee? 
Lord o' me ! " he sneered, " why I'd as lief let a wench 
lick me for all I care." 

A reference to his physical insufficiencies fired the 
little man as surely as a lighted match powder. 

" Ye maun be cauld, standin' there so. Rin ye doon 
and fetch oor little frien'. I'll see if I can warm ye." 

David turned and stumbled down the unlit, narrow 
stairs. The stone-cold boards struck like death against 
his naked feet ; while at his heels followed Red Wull, 
his hot breath fanning the boy's legs. 

So into the kitchen and back up the stairs, and Red 
Wull always following. 

" I'll no' despair yet o' teachin' ye — tho' I kill masel' 
in doin' it — to honour yer father ! " cried the little man, 
and seized the strap from the be -'s numb grasp. 

When it was over, M* Adam turned away breathless. 
At the threshold of the room he paused and looked 
round: a little, dim-lit, devilish figure framed in the 
door ; while from the blackness behind Red WuU's eyes 
gleamed molten. 

Glancing back, the little man caught such an expres- 
sion on his son's face, that for once he was fairly afraid. 
Banging the door, he hobbled actively down the stairs. 



r 



CHAPTER VIII 



THE WHITE WINTER 



M'ADAM, in his sober moments, at least, never 
touched David again. Instead, he applied him- 
self to the more congenial exercise of the whip-lash of 
his tongue. And he was wise ; for David could, if he 
would, have taken his father in the hollow of his hand 
and crumpled him. Moreover ^vith the subtler weapon 
the little man could always wring a wince. And so the 
war was carried on none the less vindictively 

Meanwhile another summer was passing. It proved 
a brazen, merciless season ; the whole land from 
Thames to Tweed was brown with thirst, its lips cracked 
and crying out in pain ; and Sexton Ross so bitterly 
bemoaned the hardness of his labour that Sam'l turned 
on him one night in the Arms and offered to relieve 
him of his job for good and all. Whereafter the old 
Sexton never missed an opportunity of laying a gnarled 
hand on the big man's knee and remarking — 

" A do reck'n as AVe twenty year o* hole-hoickin' 
afoor me yet, Sam'l.*' 

To which the other as invariably replied — 

" Niver no tellin', Mr. Ross. Thoo's niver bin the 
same man to ma thinkin' since thoo'd that there noo- 
moanin' in yer innards two winters gone." 

That year Roderick Dhu, splendid Highland 
gentleman, carried away the Shepherds' Trophy into 

78 



Vlli 



THE WHITE WINTER 



73 



the far North. James Moore still refused to run the 
grey dog, and that though Owd Bob o' Kenmuir was 
now amongst the faculty a name to conjure with. 
Parson, Squire, and even Lady Eleanour essayed to 
shake the Master's decision ; but he proved quite 
immutable. He had failed so often, he said, that he 
wished to make sure of victory ; and to his mind, wait- 
ing was winning ; for, as he explained, no sheep-dog is at 
his best till his brain is at its best ; and the brain, as in 
the human, is a long while maturing. 

Of all the dwellers in the Dale-land the Master's 
determination gratified only one — Adam M'Adam. 
And at the news that little man winked and rubbed and 
chuckled, " Next year, Wullie — he ! he ! We twa, lad, 
we twa." 



Meanwhile the summer ended abruptly. Hard on 
the heels of a sweltering autumn the winter came down. 
In that year the Dale-land assumed very early its white 
cloak. The Silver Mere was soon ice-veiled ; the 
Wastrel rolled sullenly down below Kenmuir, its creeks 
and quiet places tented with jagged sheets of ice ; while 
the Scaur and Muir Pike raised hoary heads against 
the blue. 

It was the season still remembered in the North as the 
White Winter; the worst, they say, since the famous 1808. 

For days together Jim Mason was stuck with his bags 
in the Dalesman's Daughter ; and there was no com- 
munication between the two Dales. The lean hill-foxes 
assumed an almost wolfish ferocity, hunting in packs, 
pulling down great-grown sheep at the very gates of the 
folds. On the moors the only break in the eternal 
white would be a carrion crow flapping along, coal-black 
against the snow ; a grouse, sentinel at a burrow's 
mouth ; and the dark screens of night-capped wood. 



74 



OWD BOB 



On the Mere Marches the snow massed deep and 
impassable in thick, billowy drifts. In the Devil's Bowl 
men said it lay piled some score feet deep. And sheep, 
seeking shelter in the ghylls and protected spots, were 
buried and lost in their hundreds. 

That is the time to test the hearts of shepherds and 
sheep-dogs, when the wind runs ice-cold across the waste 
of white, and the low woods on the upland walks shiver 
black through a veil of snow, and sheep must be found 
and folded or lost : a trial of head as well as heart, of 
resource as well as resolution. 

In that winter more than one man and many a dog 
lost his life in the quiet performance of his duty, gliding 
to death over the slippery snowshelves, or overwhelmed 
beneath an avalanche of the warm suffocating white : 
"smoored," as they call it. Many a deed was done, 
many a death died, recorded only in that Book which 
holds the names of those — men or animals, souls or 
no souls — who Tried. 

They found old Wrottesley, the Squire's head- 
shepherd, lying one morning at Gill's Foot like a 
statue in its white bed, the snow gently blowing about 
the venerable face, calm and beautiful in death. And 
stretched upon his bosom, her master's hands, blue and 
stiff, still clasped about her neck, his old dog, Jess. She 
had huddled there as a last hope to keep the dear, dead 
master warm, her great heart riven, hoping where there 
was no hope. That night she followed him to herd sheep 
in a better land. Death from exposure, Dingley, the vet, 
gave it ; but as little M'Adam, his eyes dimmer than 
their wont, declared huskily, " We ken better, Wullie." 

Cyril Gilbraith, a young man not overburdened with 
emotions, told with a sob in his voice how, at the terrible 
Rowan Crags, Jim Mason had stood, impotent, dumb, 
big-eyed, watching Betsy — Betsy, the friend and partner 



«M 



THE WHITE WINTER 



75 



of the last ten years — slipping over the ice-cold surface, 
silently appealing to the hand that had never failed her 
before — sliding to Eternity. 

In the Dale-land that winter the endurance of many 
a shepherd and his dog was strained past breaking- 
point. From the frozen Black Water to the white- 
peaked Grammoch Pike two men only, each always 
with his shaggy adjutant, never owned defeat, never 
turned back, never failed in a thing attempted. 

In the following spring Mr. Tinkerton, the Squire's 
agent, declared that James Moore and Adam M'Adam 
— Owd Bob, rather, and Red Wull — had lost between 
them fewer sheep than any single farmer on the whole 
March Mere estate — a proud record. 

Of the two many a tale was told that winter at way- 
side inn and lonely cottage. They were invincible, 
incomparable : worthy antagonists. 

It was Owd Bob who, when he could not drive the 
band of Black-faces over the narrov/ Razor-back which 
led to safety, induced them to follow him across that 
ten-inch death-track, one by one, like children behind 
their mistress. It was Red Wull who w^as seen coming 
down the precipitous Saddler's How shouldering up 
that grand old gentleman. King o' the Dale, whose leg 
was broken. 

The grey dog it was who found Cyril Gilbraith by 
the White Stones with a cigarette and sprained ankle, 
on the night the whole village was out with lanterns 
searching for that well-loved young scapegrace. It was 
the Tailless Tyke and his master who one bitter evening 
came upon Mrs. Burton lying in a huddle beneath the 
lea of the fast-whitening Druid's Pillar with her latest 
baby on her breast. It was little M'Adam who took off 
his coat and wrapped the child in it; little M'Adam 
who unwound his plaid, threw it like a breast-band 



76 



OWD BOB 



across the dog's mighty chest, and tied the ends round 
the clemm'd woman's waist. Red Wull it was who 
dragged her back to the Sylvester Arms and life, strain- 
ing like a giant through the snow ; while his master 
staggered behind with the babe in his arms. When 
they reached the inn it was M'Adam who, with a smile 
on his face, twig in his mouth, told the landlord with wry 
dry stinging bonhomie what he thought of him for send- 
ing his wife across the Marches on such a day and on 
his errand. To which — " I'd a cauld," pleaded honest 
Jem. 

For days together David could not cross the Stony 
Bottom to Kenmuir. His enforced confinement to the 
Grange led, however, to no more frequent collisions than 
usual with his father. For M'Adam and Red Wull 
were out at all hours in all weathers, night and day, 
toiling at their work of salvation. 

At last, one afternoon, the boy managed to cross the 
Bottom at a point where a fallen thorn-tree gave him a 
bridge over the soft snow. He stayed but little while at 
Kenmuir, yet when he started for home it was snowing 
again. 

By the time he had crossed the ice-draped bridge 
over the Wastrel, a blizzard was raging. The wind 
roared past him, smiting him so that he could barely 
stand. The snow leaped and whirled and flashed and 
blinded him. But he held on doggedly, slipping, 
sliding, tripping, down and up again, with one arm 
shielding his face ; on, on, into the white darkness, 
blindly on, sobbing, stumbling, dazed. 

At length, nigh dead, he reached the brink of the 
Stony Bottom. He looked up and he looked down, 
but nowhere in" the suffocating mist could he see the 
fallen thorh-tree. He took a step forward into the 
white morass, and sank up to his thigh. He struggled 



•^,.:- 



THE WHITE WINTER 



77 



feebly to free himself, and sank deeper. The snow 
wreathed twisting round him like a white flame, and he 
collapsed, softly crying, on that soft bed. 

*' I canna, I canna," he moaned. 

Mrs. Moore, her face whiter and frailer than ever, 
stood at the window looking out into the storm. 

" I canna rest for thinkin' o' t' lad," she said ; then 
turning, saw her husband, his fur cap down over his ears, 
buttoning his pilot-coat about the throat, while Owd 
Bob stood at his feet, waiting. 

" Ye're not goin', James ? " she asked, anxiously. 

*' But I am, lass," he answered. And she knew him 
too well to say more. 

So those two went quietly out to save life or lose it, 
nor counted the cost. 

Down a wind-shattered slope, over a spar of ice, up 
an eternal hill — a forlorn hope. 

In a whirlwind chaos of snow, the tempest storming 
at them, the white earth lashing them, they fought a 
good fight. In front, the dog, snow clogging his long 
coat, hair cutting like lashes of steel across his eyes, his 
head lowered as he followed the finger of God ; close 
behind, the man, his back stern against the storm, 
stalwart still, yet swaying like a tree before the wind. 

So they battled through to the brink of the Stony 
Bottom, only to arrive too late. 

For just as the Master, peering about him, had sighted 
a shapeless hump lying motionless in front, there 
loomed across the snow-choked gulf, through the white 
riot of the storm, a gigantic lion-like figure forging 
doggedly forward, his great head down to meet the 
hurricane, his giant chest iron-bound, coat dripping 
black icicles. And at his heels, buffeted and bruised, 
stiff and staggering, a little dauntless figure holding 
stubbornly on, clutching with one hand at the gale, 



i 



78 



OWD BOB 



and a shrill voice, whirled away on the trumpet tones 
of the wind, crying — 
" Noo, Wullie, wi' me — 

' Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled I 
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led ! 
Welcome to ' — 

Here he is, Wullie — - 

• Or to victorie.' " 

The brave little voice died away. The quest was 
over ; the lost sheep found. And the last James Moore 
saw of the couple was the same small gallant form 
dragging the rescued boy out of the Valley of the 
Shadow and away. 

,David was none the worse for his adventure. On 
reaching home, M'Adam produced a familiar bottle. 

" Here's something to warm yer inside, and " — ^ 
making a feint at the strap on the wall — " here's some- 
thing to do the same by yer — But, Wullie, oot again ! " 

And out they went — unwritten heroes. 

It Wc.s but a week later, in the very heart of the bitter 
time, that there came a day when from grey dawn to 
greyer eve neither James Moore nor Owd Bob stirred 
out into the wintry white. And the Master's face was 
hard and set, as it always was in time of trouble. 

Outside, the wind screamed down the Dale ; while the 
snow fell relentlessly, softly fingering the windows, block- 
ing the doors, and piling deep against the walls. Inside 
the house there was a strange quiet ; no sound save for 
hushed voices, and upstairs the shuffling of muffled feet. 

Below, all day long, Owd Bob patrolled the passage 
like some silent grey spectre. 

Once there came a low knocking at the door ; and 
David, his face and hair and cap smothered in the all- 
pervading white, entered in with an eddy of snow. He 
patted Owd Bob, and moved on tiptoe into the kitchen. 



THE WHITE WINTER 



79 



tones 



To him came Maggie, shoes in hand, big-eyed, white- 
faced. The two whispered anxiously awhile like brother 
and sister as they were ; then the boy crept softly away, 
only a little pool of water on the floor, and wet treacher- 
ous foot-dabs towards the door testifying to his visit. 

Towards evening the wind died down, but the mourn- 
ing flakes still fell. 

With the darkening of night Owd Bob retreated to 
the porch and lay down on his blanket. The light from 
the lamp at the head of the stairs shone through the 
crack of open door on his dark head and the eyes that 
never slept. 

The hours passed ; and still the grey knight kept his 
vigil. Alone in the darkness, alone, it almost seemed, in 
the house, he watched. His head lay motionless along 
his paws ; but the steady, grey eyes never flinched or 
drooped. 

Time tramped on on leaden foot, and still he waited ; 
and ever the pain of hovering anxiety was stamped 
deeper in the grey eyes. 

At length it grew past bearing. The hollow stillness 
of the house overcame him. He rose, pushed open the 
door, and softly pattered across the passage. . 

At the foot of the stairs he halted, his fore-paws on 
the first step, his grave face and pleading eyes uplifted, 
as though he were praying The dim light fell on the 
raised head ; and the white escutcheon on his breast 
shone out like the snow on Salmon. 

At length, with a sound like a sob, he dropped to the 
ground, and stood listening, his tail drooping and head 
raised. Then he turned, and began softly pacing up 
and down like some velvet-footed sentinel at the gate 
of Death. 

Up and down, up and down, softly as the falling 
snow, for a weary, weary while. 



8o 



OWD BOB 



Again he .stopped and stood listening intently at 
the foot of the stairs ; and his grey coat quivered as 
though there were a draught. 

Of a sudden, the deathly stillness of the house was 
broken. Upstairs, feet were running hurriedly. There 
was a cry and again silence. 

A life was coming in ; a life was going out. 

The minutes passed ; hours passed ; and, at the 
sunless dawn, a life passed. 

And all through that night of age-long agony the 
grey figure stood, still as a statue, at the foot of the 
stairs. Only when, with the first chill breath of the 
morning, a dry quick-quenched sob of a strong man 
sorrowing for the help-meet of a score of years, and a 
tiny cry of a new-born child wailing because its mother 
was not, came down to his ears, the Grey Watchman 
dropped his head upon his bosom, and with a little 
whimpering note crept back to his blanket. 

A little later, the door above opened and James 
Moore tramped down the stairs. He looked taller and 
gaunter than his wont, but there was no trace of 
emotion on his face. 

At the foot of the stairs Owd Bob stole out to meet 
him. He came crouching up, as though guilty of the 
deadly sin, head and tail down, in a manner no man 
ever saw before or since. At his master's feet he 
stopped and whined pitifully. 

Then, for one short moment, James Moore's whole 
face quivered. 

" Weel, lad," he said, quite low, and his voice broke 
— " she's awa'." 

That was all : for they were an undemonstrative couple. 

Then they turned and went out together into the 
bleak morning. 



>it 






CHAPTER IX 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



meet 
)f the 

man 
it he 

/^hole 

)roke 

[uple. 
the 



TO David M'Adam the loss of gentle Elizabeth 
Moore was as real a grief as to her children. 
Yet the boy manfully smothered his own aching 
heart and gave himself to comforting the mourners at 
Kenmuir. 

In the days succeeding Mrs. Moore's death, the lad 
recklessly neglected his duties at the Grange. But 
M'Adam forbore to rebuke him. At times, indeed, he 
essayed to be passively kind. David, however, was 
too deeply sunk in his great sorrow to note the change. 

The day of the funeral came. The earth was throwing 
off its ice-fetters ; and the Dale was lost in a mourning 
mist. 

In the afternoon, M'Adam was standing at the 
window of the kitchen, contemplating the infinite 
weariness of the scene, when the door of the house 
opened and shut. Red Wull raised himself on to the 
sill and growled ; and David hurried past the window, 
making for Kenmuir. M'Adam watched the passing 
figure indifferently ; then with an angry oath sprang to 
the window. 

" Bring me back that coat, ye thief ! " he cried, tapping 
fiercely on the pane. "Tak' it aflf at onst, ye muckle 
gowk, or I'll come and tear it aff ye. D'ye see him, 
Wullie? the great coof has ma coat — ma black 



82 



OWD BOB 



m 






I 



coat, noo last Michaelmas ; and it rainin' fit to melt 
it!" 

He threw the window up with a bang and leaned out. 
" Bring it back, I tell ye, ondootiful, or I'll summons ye ! 
Tho' ye've no respect for me ye might have for ma 
claithes. D'ye think I had it cut for a elephr^nt? it's 
burstin', I tell ye. Tak' it aff! Fetch it here! or I'll 
e'en send Wullie to bring it." 

For answer, David set to running down the hill. 
The coat was stretched in wrinkled agony across his 
back ; his big red wrists protrud^-d like shank-bones 
from the sleeves; and the little tails flapped wearily 
in vain attempts to reach the wearer's legs. 

M'Adam, bubbling over with indignation, scrambled 
half-through the window. But a sense of humour is 
,^any a man's salvation ; and tickled at the amazing 
impudence of the thing, he paused, smiled, dropped to 
the ground again, and watched the uncouth retreating 
figure with chuckling amusement. 

"Did ye ever see the like o' that, Wullie?" he 
muttered. " Ma puir coat — puir wee coatie ! it gars 
me greet to see her in her pain. ... A man's coat, 
Wullie, is aften unco' sma' for his son's back ; and 
David, there, is strainin' and stretchin' her, nigh to 
brakin', for a' the world as he does ma forbearance. 
And what's he care aboot th' ain or t'ither? — not a 
finger-flip." 

As he stood watching the disappearing figure, there 
began the slow tolling or the minute bell. Now near 
now far, now loud now low, its dull chant rang out 
through the mist, like the slow - dropping tears of 
a mourning world. 

M'Adam listened almost reverently as the bell 
tolled on, the only sound in the quiet Dale. Outside 



■B 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



83 



a drizzKng rain was falling ; the snow dribbled down 
the hill in muddy tricklets ; and trees and roofs and 
windows dripped, dripped. 

And still the bell tolled on, calling up relentlessly 
sad memories of the long ago. 

It was on just such another dreary day, in just such 
another December, and not so many years gone by, 
that the light had gone for ever out of his life. 

The whole picture rose as instant to his eyes as if it 
had been yesterday. That dead insistent bell brought 
the scene surging back to him : the dismal day ; the 
drizzle ; the few mourners ; little David decked out in 
black, his fair hair contrasting with his gloomy clothes, 
his face swollen with weeping ; the Dale hushed, it 
seemed, in Death, save for the tolling of the bell — and 
his love had left him and gone to the happy land the 
hymn-books talked of » 

Red Wull, who had been watching him uneasily, now 
approached and shoved his muzzle into his master's 
hand. The cold touch brought the little man back to 
earth. He shook himself, turned wearily away from 
the window, and went to the door of the house. 

He stood there, looking out ; and all round him was 
the eternal drip-drip of the thaw. The wind lulled, 
and again the minute bell tolled out clear and inexor- 
able, resolute to recall what was and what had been. 

With a choking gasp, the little man turned into the 
house and ran up the stairs and into his room. Beside 
the great chest in the corner he dropped on his knees 
and unlocked the bottom drawer. 

In it he searched with feverish fingers, and produced 
at length a little paper packet wrapped about with a 
stained yellow ribbon. It was the ribbon she had used 
to weave on Sundays into her soft hair. 



84 



OWD BOB 



i 



Inside the packet was a cheap, heart-shaped frame, 
and in the frame a daguerreotyped photograph. 

Up there it was too dark to see. The little man ran 
down the stairs, Red Wull jostling him as he went, 
and hurried to the window in the kitchen. 

It was a sweet, laughing face that looked up at him, 
demure yet arch, shy yet roguish ; a face to look at 
and a face to love. 

As he looked, a wintry smile, half tears, all tender- 
ness, stole over the little man's face. 

" Lass'e," he whispered, and his voice was infinitely 
fond, "it's lang sin' I've daurd look at ye. But it's 
no' that ye're forgotten, dearie." 

Then he covered his eyes with his hand as though 
he were blinded. 

" D'nna look at me sae, lass ! " he cried and fell on 
his knees, kissing the picture, hugging it to him, and 
sobbing passionately. 

Red Wull came up and pushed his face compassion- 
ately into his master's ; but the little man shoved him 
roughly away, and the dog retreated into a corner, 
abashed and reproachful. 

Memories swarmed back on the little man. 

He recalled the days when he had worked at ola 
M'Leod's, up in the heather-hills he often longed for ; 
and his courtship of Flora M'Leod. How she would 
tease him and he would leave her, swearing never to 
see her again ; for then as always he was quick to 
anger. And next day she would come to him, tripping 
through the heather, her skirts kilted to show the 
slenderest ankles in the countryside, demureness on 
her lips, the mischief dancing in her eyes, and he would 
love her more than ever. 

How at last he had asked her, humbly and fearfully, 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



85 



to be his wife, and she, the acknowledged queen of all 
the lasses round, had accepted him — miserable, sour- 
tempered Adam M'Adam, when she might have had 
the pick of the countryside. 

Yet of them all he had been her choice, and he never 
ceased to wonder at it. 

The little man, down on Vis knees, held the photo- 
graph from him, and looked at the face in the frame 
through tear-bleared eyes. " But ye took me, lass — 
God ble - ye for 't ! " 

From that he fell to thinking of the leaving of 
Scotland ; the coming to the Grange ; the advent of 
David and his wife's insatiable pride in the great 
be s; f; had born, until he had fairly raged with 
jealousy. 

" Is he no' a buirdly callan ' ? " she would ask, fondly 
dandling the child's big limbs. 

" Ay, he'll no' tak' after his father," he would answer 
bitterly ; and then she must coax him back into good- 
humour. 

Those were the best days of his life, when his wife, 
himself, and son had lived together in sober happiness 
in the little house on the hill. 

But the end soon came. 

It was more than a decade ago now, and yet he 
dared barely think of that last evening when she had 
lain so white and still in the little room above. 

" Pit the bairn on the bed, Adam, man," she had said 
in low tones ; ** I'll be gaein' in a wee while noo. . . . 
It's the lang good-bye to you — and him." 

He had done her bidding and lifted David up. The 
tiny boy lay still a moment, looking at this white-faced 
mother whom he hardly recognised. 

" Minnie ! " he called piteously ; then, thru.sting a 




86 



OWD BOB 



IH 



small, dirty hand into his pocket, pulled out a grubby 
sweet. 

" Minnie, ha' a sweetie — ain o' Davie's sweeties ! " He 
held it out anxiously in his warm, plump palm, thinking 
it a certain cure for any ill. 

" Eat it for mither," she said, smiling tenderly ; and 
then — " Davie, ma heart, I'm leavin' ye." 

The boy ceased sucking the sweet and looked at her, 
the corners of his mouth drooping pitifully. 

" Ye're no' gaein' awa', mither ? " he asked, his face 
all working. " Ye'll no' leave yer wee laddie ? " 

" Ay, laddie, awa' — reet awa'. He's callin' me." 

She tried to smile ; but her mother's heart was near 
to bursting. 

" Ye'll tak' yer wee Davie wi' ye, mither ? " the child 
pleaded, crawling up towards her face. The great tears 
rolled down her cheeks, and M'Adam, at the head of 
the bed, was sobbing openly. 

" Eh, ma bairn, ma bairn, I'm sair to leave ye ! " she 
cried, brokenly. " Lift him for me, Adam." 

He placed the child in her arms ; but she could not 
hold him. So he laid him on his mother's pillows, and 
the boy wreathed his soft arms about her neck and 
sobbed tempestuously. 

Thus the two lay together. 

Just before the end she had turned her head and 
whispered, 

"Adam, ma man, ye'll ha' to be mither and father 
baith to him the noo," and had looked at him with 
tender confidence in her dying eyes. 

" I wull ! afore God, as I stan' here, I wull ! " he 
had cried passionately. Then she had died at peace. 

■ •*•••• 

" Mither and father baith ! " 



kHi 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



87 



The little man rose to his feet, and flung the photo- 
graph from him. Red Wull pounced on it; but 
M'Adam leaped at him as he mouthed it. 

" Git awa', ye devil ! " he screamed, and picking it up, 
stroked it lovingly with trembling fingers. 

" Mither and father baith ! " 

How had he fulfilled his love's last wish ? 

" O God ! " and he fell upon his knees at the table- 
side, hugging the picture, in a tempest of tears. 

Red Wull cowered in the far corner of the room, and 
then crept whining up to where his master knelt. But 
M'Adam ignored him and the great dog slunk away 
again. 

There the little man knelt in the gloom of the winter's 
afternoon, a miserable penitent. His grey-flecked head 
was bowed upon his arms ; his hands clutched the 
miniature ; and he prayed aloud in gasping, halting 
tones. 

" Gie me grace, O God ! * Father and mither baith, 
ye said, Flora — and I haena done it. But 'tis no' too 
late — say it's no', lass. Tell me there's time yet ; and 
say ye forgie me. I've tried to bear wi* him mony and 
mony a time. But he's vexed me, and set himself agin 
me, and stiffened my back, and ye ken hoo I was aye 
quick to tak' offence. But I'll mak' it up to him — mak' 
it up to him and mair. I'll humble masel' afore him, 
and that'll be bitter enough. And I'll be father and 
mither baith to him. But there's bin none to help me ; 
and it's bin sair wi'oot ye. And — but, eh, lassie, I'm 
wearyin' for ye." 



It was a dismal procession that wound in the drizzle 
from Kenmuir to the little Dale church. At its head 
stalked James Moore, and close behind, David in his 



r 



II 



II 



i 



88 



OWD BOB 



meagre coat; while last of all, as if to guide the 
stragglers in the weary road, came Owd Bob. 

There was a full congregation in the tiny church 
now. In the Squire's pew were Cyril Gilbraith, Muriel 
Sylvester, and, most conspicuous, Lady Eleanour. Her 
slender figure was simply draped in grey, with grey fur 
about the neck, and grey fur edging sleeves and jacket ; 
her veil was lifted, and you could see the soft hair 
about her temples, and her eyes big with tender 
sympathy as she glanced towards the pew upon her 
right. 

For there were the mourners from Kenmuir: the 
Master, tall, grim, and gaunt ; and beside him Maggie, 
striving to be calm, and little Andrew, the miniature 
of his father. 

Alone in the pew behind was David M'Adam in 
his father's coat. 

The back of the church was packed with farmers 
from the whole March Mere estate, friends from Silver- 
dale and Grammoch-town, and nearly every soul in 
Wastrel-dale, come to show their sympathy for the 
living and reverence for the dead. 

Tammas was there, grave for once ; Sam'l Todd, 
blubbering ponderously ; Job Maddox,'Enry Farewether, 
and the other workers from Kenmuir. Behind them. 
Mother Ross, Melia Ross and Liz Burton, side by side, 
and little Mrs. Burton, sobbing audibly for the best 
woman friend she had known. Even old Ross's battered 
countenance was less grimly complacent than usual as 
he pottered about his business. 

At the bottom of the church were Londesley of the 
Home Farm, Teddy Bolstock, Rob Saunderson, Jim 
Mason, Tupper of Swinsthwaite, Long Kirby, John Swan, 
of the Border Ram, Big Bell, and as many more as the 



I 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



89 



little church would hold : all grave-faced, stern, aiTected, 
and determined to disguise it. 

And outside, lying patiently in the yellow-puddled 
snow, a host of dogs : Saunderson's Shep, Tupper's big 
blue Rasper, Londesley's Lassie, and apart from the 
rest, their grotesque Maori-wrinkled masks strangely 
inter-writhed, the three fair sisters, the Vexer, Venus, 
and Van Tromp. While in the door throughout the 
service stood Owd Bob, like some esquire keeping his 
vigil on the eve of knighthood. 

• • • • • • • 

Parson Leggy, his tanned face contrasting with the 
whiteness of his surplice, read on in his steady, earnest 
voice. The harmonium, fingered lovingly by the 
Squire's eldest daughter, groaned out its part. But the 
voices which joined in were few and fewer : the sniffling 
of Mrs Burton, the shuffling of old Ross : for the rest 
almost a silent congregation. 

James Moore stood with his lips tight and head up, 
only an occasional surging at his throat betraying his 
emotion. David's lips moved, indeed, but there issued 
no sound. And Maggie was crying quietly. 

And when it came to that most heartening of all our 

hymns — 

"A few more years shall roll, 
A few more seasons come," 

Lady Eleanour's sweet voice rang out alone, clear and 
calm and inspiring, like some herald angel singing as 
he bears a soul to Paradise. 



le 



At last the end came in the wet dreariness of the little 
churchyard. Slowly the mourners departed. At length 
were left only the Parson, the Master, and Owd Bob. 

The Parson was speaking in rough, short accents, 



90 



OWD BOB 



1 1 






M 



<l»ggi"g nervously at the sopping ground. The other, 
tall and gaunt, his face drawn and half-averted, stood 
listening. By his side was Owd Bob, scanning his 
master's co;mtenance, his sad grey eyes clouded with 
the dark ptin of pity — compassionate with that deep 
sympathy of silence which only a dog can rightly 
tender ; while close by, one of the Parson's terriers was 
nosing in the grass. 

Of a sudden James Moore, his face still turned away, 
stretched out a hand. The Parson broke off abruptly 
and grasped it. Then the two men strode away in 
opposite directions, the terrier hopping on three legs 
and shaking the rain off his hard coat. 

So another was added to the long list of Moores 
already sleeping in the quiet God's acre beneath the 
Pike. 

A plain stone tablet tells the simple tale: 

Elizabeth Moore, 

Dearly loved wife of James Moore of Kenmuir. 

December 2nd, i8 — . 



David's steps sounded outside. M'Adam rose from 
his knees. The door of the house opened, and the boy's 
feet shuffled in the passage. 

" Da\^i'l ! " the little man called in tremulous voice. 

He stood in the half-light, one hand on the table, the 
other clasping the picture. His eyes were bleared, his 
thin hair tossed, and he was trembling. 

" David," he called again ; " I've somethin' I wush to 
say to ye." 

The boy burst into the room. His face was stained 
with tears and rain ; and the new black coat was mud- 
slimed down the front, and on the elbows were green- 



•smrnrmmmr 



.^IIWJM 



was 



M'ADAM AND HIS COAT 



91 



brown blots. For, en his way home, he had flung him- 
self down in the Stony Bottom just as he was, heedless 
of the wet earth and his father's coat, and lying on his 
face, thinking of that second mother lost to him, had 
wept his heart out in a passion of tears. 

Now he stood defiantly, hand upon the door. 

"What?" 

The little man looked from him to the picture in his 
hand. 

" Help me, Flora — he'll no'," he prayed. Then, rais- 
ing his eyes — " I'd like to say . . . I've bin thinkin* . . . 
I think I should tell ye . . . It's no' an easy thing for 
a man to say " — 

He broke off short The self-imposed task was 
almost more than he could accomplish. 

He looked appealingly at David. There was no 
glimmer of understanding in that white, set countenance. 

" O God, its 'maist mair than I can do ! " the father 
muttered ; and the perspiration stood upon his forehead. 
Again he began — " David, after I saw ye this afternoon 
steppin' doon the hill " — 

Again he paused. His glance rested unconsciously 
upon the coat. David mistook the look ; mistook the 
dimness in his father's eyes ; mistook the tremor in his 
voice. 

" Here 'tis ! .tak' yer coat ! " he cried passionately ; 
and tearing it off, flung it down at his father's feet. 
'* Tak' it — and — and — curse ye." 

He banged out of the room, and ran upstairs; and 
turning the key, threw himself on to his bed, and 
sobbed. 

Red Wull made a movement to fly at the retreating 
figure ; then turned to his master, his stump-tail vibrat- 
ing: now again things were as they should be. 



92 



OWD BOB 



But M'Adam was looking at the coat which lay in a 
limp bundle at his feet. 

" * Curse ye ! '" he repeated softly. " * Curse ye ' — ye 
heard him, Wullie." 

A bitter smile crept across his face. He looked 
again at the picture, now crushed within his hand. 

"Ye canna say I didna try; ye canna ask me to 
agin," he muttered, and slipped it into his pocket. 
" Niver agin, Wullie — not if the Queen were to ask it ! " 

Then he went out into the gloom and drizzle, still 
smiling the same bitter smile. 



That night, when it came to closing time at the 
Sylvester Arms, Jem Burton found a little grey-haired 
figure lying on the floor in the tap-room. At the little 
man's head lay a great dog. 

" Thoo parfet beast ! " exclaimed the righteous 
publican, regarding the figure of his best customer with 
fine scorn. Then catching sight of a photograph in the 
little man's hand, 

" Eh, one o' that mak' are ye, Foxy ? " he leered. 
" Gie us a peep at 'er ! " and he tried to disengage the 
picture from the other's grasp. At that the great dog 
rose, bared his teeth, and assumed such a diabolical 
expression, rolling his eyes dreadfully upward, that the 
big landlord retreated hurriedly behind the bar. 

" Two on ye," he shouted viciously, rattling his heels, 
" beasts baith I 



^^i^ 



Part III 
The Shepherds' Trophy 



'■ll— l -»v~ 



,f'* 



w 






V'^. 







IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 













V. 



V 



1.0 



I.I 



If us 1^ 

"-• lii II 2,2 

i «:£ lllllio 



1.25 ill 1.4 



1.6 



■7 



<^ 



/J 



'^ 



C?-m. ■ 0% ^'^ 









v: 



"i ,;> 





'/ 




% 

/I 



Photographic 

Sciences 
Corporation 




33 WIf * MAIN STREET 

WEBSTER. NY. 14580 

(716) 873-450J 






<5* 



*"■ 



■'> 









1 



Part Hi 
The Shepherds* Trophy 

chapter x 

RIVALS 

M'ADAM never forgave his son. After the scene 
on the evening of the funeral there could be no 
alternative but war for all time. The little man had 
attempted to humble himself and been rejected ; and 
the bitterness of defeat, when he had deserved victory, 
rankled like a poisoned barb in his bosom. 

Yet the heat of his indignation was directed not 
against David but against the Master of Kenmuir. To 
the influence and agency of James Moore he attributed 
his discomfiture, and bore himself accordingly. In 
public or in private, in tap-room or market, he never 
wearied of his villain invective. 

" Feel the loss o' his wife, d'ye say ? Ay, as muckle 
as I feel the loss o' my hair. James Moore can feel 
naethin', I tell ye, except, aiblins, a mischance to his 
meeserable dog." 

When the two met, as they often must, it was always 
M'Adam's endeavour to vex his enemy into an unworthy 
self-betrayal. But James Moore, man of iron self- 



96 



OWD BOB 



restraint, never gave way. He met the little man's 
sneers with a quelling silence, looking down on his asp- 
tongued antagonist with such a contempt flashing from 
his steel-blue eyes as hurt his adversary more than 
words. 

Only once was he spurred into reply. It was in the 
tap-room of the Dalesman's Daughter when there was 
a goodly gathering of farmers and their dogs in the 
room. M'Adam was standing at the fireplace, Red 
Wull at his side. 

" It's a noble pairt ye play, James Moore," he cried 
loudly, "settin' son against father, and dividin' hoose 
against hoose. It is worthy o' ye wi* yer church-goin*, 
and yer psalm-singin', and yer godliness." 

The Master looked up from the farther end of the 
room. 

" Happen, ye're not aware, M'Adam," he said sternly, 
"that if it had not bin for me David 'd ha' left you 
lang syne — and 't /ould nobbut ha' served ye reet, I'm 
thinkinV 

The little man hitched his trousers, smirked, and 
changed front. 

" Dinna shout so, man : I have ears to hear. Forbye, 
ye irritate Wullie." 

The Tailless Tyke, indeed, had advanced from the 
fireplace, and now stood, huge and hideous, in the very 
centre of the room. There was distant thunder in his 
throat, a threat upon his face, a challenge in every 
wrinkle. And the grey dog stole gladly out from 
behind his master to take up the gage of battle. 

Straightway there was silence: tongues ceased to 
wag, tankards to clink. Every man and every dog was 
quietly gathering about those two. Not- one of them all 
but had his score to wipe off against the Tailless Tyke ; 



RIVALS 



97 



not one of them but was burning to join in, the battle 
once begun. And the two gladiators stood staring 
glassily past one another, muzzle to muzzle, each with 
a tiny flash of teeth glinting between his lips : the one 
type of scarred criminal, the other of the high-bred 
gentleman. 

But the fight was not to be. For the twentieth time 
the Master intervened. 

" Bob, lad, coom in 1 " he called, and grasped his 
favourite. 

M*Adam laughed softly. 

"Wullie, Wullie, to me!" he cried. "The look o' 
you's enough for yon braw callant." 

"If they get fightin' it wunna be Bob here 111 whang, 
I warn thee, M'Adam," said tiie Master grimly. 

" Gin ye sae muckle as fingered Wullie, d'ye ken what 
I'd do, James Moore?" asked the little man very 
smoothly. 

" Ay : sweer," the other answered, and strode out of 
the room amidst a roar of derisive laughter at M'Adam's 
expense. 

In James Moore the little man found no easy target 
for his attacks ; but with David it was different. Insults 
directed at himself the boy bore with a stolidity born of 
long use. But a poisonous dart aimed at Kenmuir 
never failed of its purpose. And the little man evinced 
an amazing talent for the concoction of deft lies respect- 
ing his enemy. 

" I'm hearin'," said he one evening, sitting in the 
kitchen, twig in mouth ; " I'm hearin' James Moore is 
gaein' to git married agin." 

"Ye're hearin' lies— or mair like tellin' 'em," David 
answered carelessly. 

" Seven months sin' his wife died," the other continued 

7 



98 



OWD BOB 



musing. "Aweel, I'm only 'stonished he's waited sae 
lang. . . . Ain buried anither come on, that's James 
Moore." And he was left chuckling to Wuilie as the 
boy burst angrily out of the room. 

David had now a new interest at Kenmuir. In 
Maggie he found an endless source of wonderment. It 
seemed to him that the girl had sprung up in a night 
from a winsome child into a woman. And very soon 
he discovered that Maggie, Mistress of Kenmuir, was 
wholly changed from his erstwhile comrade and slave. 
They were on different footing now. She was queen 
where he had been king ; hers was to command, his to 
obey ; and consequently there was perpetual war, as he 
battled vainly to regain his lost sovereignty. Yet, blinded 
though he was by prejudice, the boy could not but allow 
that Maggie performed her new part, young though she 
was, with a sweet, wholly surprising discretion ; whether 
in the sterner matters of household work, or in f^nderly 
mothering the baby. Wee Anne. 

This latter labour of love she only shared with Owd 
Bob ; and, sure, no nurse ever had trustier assistant 
There he would lie at the cradle-side, watching his 
charge, fond, wise, careful, the mute eyes softly sad, as 
he dreamed on this last tender trust bequeathed him by 
the dear dead mistress ; while the child would bubble 
and bounce and bathe fat hands in his silver deeps, or 
scream in petulant delight as the dark muzzle stole over 
the side of the cot and thrust her back, softly remorse- 
less, into security. 



Owd Bob had now attained well-nigh the perfection 
of his art Parson Leggy declared roundly that his like 
had not been seen since the glorious days of Rex, son 
of Rally. Amongst the Dalesmen he was an heroic 



RIVALS 



99 



the 



favourite. The Grey Dogs of Kenmuir have ever been 
worshipped in the land ; their prowess and gentle ways 
winning them friends on every hand ; and now the 
Dalesmen's confidence in the latest of the line was 
immutable. Sometimes on market-days he would exe- 
cute some unaccountable manceuvre, and a stranger 
drover would inquire — 

" What's the grey dog at ? " 

To which the nearest Dalesman — 

" Nay, I canna tell thee. But he's reet enough. Yon's 
Owd Bob o' Kenmuir." Whereat the stranger would 
cock his ears and watch attentively ; for at that time 
there were few in the profession but had heard of the 
new star risen in the North. And never in such case 
did the grey dog betray the confidence reposed in him. 

They loved hin, one and all, for his own sake ; loved 
him for his sweet manner, his bhy courtesy ; loved him 
for his loud-clanging deeds ; loved him for his noble 
rage when rouseu, his continence fine as his master's; 
and most of all they loved him, for that he was the 
antithesis, antagonist to the death, of the Tailless Tyke. 

Barely a man in the countryside but owed a grudge 
against that ferocious savage ; not a man of them all 
who dared pay it. Once, indeed. Long Kirby, full of 
beer and valour, had tried to settle his account Coming 
on M'Adam and Red Wull between Grammoch-town 
and the Dalesman's Daughter, he leant over and with 
his thong dealt the dog a terrible sword-like slash that 
raised a ridge of red from hip to shoulder ; and was 
settled to his gallop ere the little man's shrill yells struck 
his ear, whelmed in a dreadful bellow. 

Standing up, he lashed the colt. But glancing over 
his shomlder he saw a hounding form behind, catching 
him as though he walked. His face blenched chalky 



if 



>*■*' 



100 



..?■ 



OWD BOB 



hue ; he screamed, flogged, looked back. Right beneath 
the tail-board was the red devil in the dust; while 
racing a furlong behind on the turnpike road the mad 
figure of M'Adam. 

The smith struck back and flogged forward. In vain. 
With a bound the avenger flung on to the flying trap. 
At the impact the colt was thrown violently on his side ; 
Kirby tossed over the hedge ; and Red Wull pinned 
beneath the debris. 

M'Adam rushed up in time to save a tragedy. 

"I've a mind to knife ye, Kirby," he panted, as he 
bandaged the smith's broken head. 

After that the Dalesmen preferred to swallow insults 
oflered rather than risk their lives; and you may be 
sure their impotence only served to fan their animosity 
to white glow. 

Yet, however the heat of their hate might prejudice 
their judgment, they were compelled to confess that in 
the matter of his own work Red Wull owned but one 
superior in the land — Owd Bob o' Kenmuir. And those 
two, conspicuous a head and shoulders above the ruck, 
were thrown of necessity into eternal antagonism. The 
admiration for the one was only increased by the 
challenging ability of the other. The known feud 
between their masters added point to the rivalry, and 
competition by comparison — deadliest of jealous strifes 
— waxed more vehement day by day. 

The working methods of the antagonists were as 
contrasted as their appearances. In a word, the one 
compelled ; the other coaxed. His enemies said the 
Tailless Tyke was rough, not even Tammas denied he 
was ready. His brain was as big as his body, and he 
used them both to some purpose. "As quick as a 
cat, with the heart of a lion, the strength of Anak, 



RIVALS 



lOI 



and the temper of Nick's self," was Parson Leggy's 
specification. 

What determination could effect that could Red 
Wull ; but achievement by inaction — supremest of all 
strategies — the art of performance by suggestion was 
not for him. Self-suppression might be for amiable 
incompetents; for the Tailless Tyke, Action, always 
Action. In matters of the subtlest handling, where to 
act anything except indifference was to lose; with 
sheep restless, fearful forebodings hymned to them by 
the wind, panic hovering unseen above them, when an 
ill-considered movement spelt Catastrophe — then was 
Owd Bob o' Kenmuir incomparable. 

Men still tell how, when the Squire's new thrashing 
machine ran amuck in Grammoch-town, and for some 
minutes the market-square was a turbulent sea of 
blaspheming men, yelping dogs, and stampeding sheep, 
only one flock stood calm as a mill-pond by the bull- 
ring, watching the riot with almost indifference. For in 
their full face, lying conspicuous at his ease, was a quiet 
grt:y dog, his mouth stretched in a capacious yawn : to 
yawn was to win, and he won. 

When the worst of the uproar was over, many a 
glance of triumph was shot first at that one still pack 
and then at M'Adam, as he waded through the disorder 
of huddling sheep. 

" And wheer's Wullie noo ? " asked Tupper scornfully. 

" Weel," the little man answered with his inscrutable 
smile, " at this miiiit' he's killin' your Rasper doon by 
the pump." Which proved indeed the case; for big 
blue Rasper had interfered with the great dog in the 
performance of his duty and had suffered accordingly. 

That tale is but one amongst a multitude. There 
were others with a different hero. Jim Mason told 



\i 



1 02 



OWD BOB 



how, once, Red Wull's flock, frightened by a galloping 
cart, bolted do>vn the steep Swine's Slope which ends 
abruptly in the new railway cutting. To gallop in front 
was to split, not stop them. The one chance was to 
turn them together. And the great dog, racing 
alongside the leaders, shouldering, shoving, snarling, 
bore them round by sheer bodily strength; and the 
whole swept to the left, still at the gallop, ten yards 
from the brink of death. 

So things went on : Owd Bob backed by the many. 
Red Wull by the one. And the near coming of the 
Dale Trials, when the two great rivals would wrestle 
foot to foot in the fight for the Shepherds' Trophy, set 
the match to the long-smouldering powder-train. 



?! 



i| 



r 

I 



rds 



11 



CHAPTER XI 

IN THE PASS 

THE Dale Trials had their source a hundred years 
ago in a local competition. The meeting became 
annual. It grew in worth and dignity, until very soon 
the battle for the Shepherds' Trophy became the head 
and chief event of the pastoral year. And ever since 
its supremacy has been maintained unchallenged. 

It is good to be hailed victor of the Cambrian Stakes 
at Llangollen; it is better to carry off in roaring 
triumph the famous Ram's Head of the Highland 
meeting ; but to have your dog's name and your own 
engraved on the fair white sides of the mighty Cup is 
to win an envied immortality. Ay, in the North we 
fix the year as " Jock's," '* the black cur betch's," " Rex, 
son o' Rally's," and the like. 

It was nigh fifty years since that illustrious s€ion of « 
the line had won his final victory ; fifty years since the 
Cup had been brought back to the land that gave it 
birth. And now two aspirants to highest honours had 
arisen — a Grey Dog and another. 

Proud is that countryside which for the year reflects 
the burning lustre of the Cup ; high-stomached he who 
hails from the winner's neighbourhood ; yet rather than 
see this upstart interloper usurp his laurels from their 
grey champion, rather than hear ten thousand shepherd 
folk acclaim the Tailless Tyke triumphant on thunder's 



I04 



OWD BOB 



Mi 



! 



I 



voice, no Dalesman but affirmed with emphatic fist 
that he preferred to see it borne back to the Highland 
North. 

As the summer sweltered away and the day drew 
nigh the ferment surpassed power of pen. Whole- 
hearted animosity for the one rival and fervent loy?ilty 
to the other shook hands at every corner, and excite- 
ment as to the event reached such a pitch as Parson 
Leggy hardly could recall. 

Down in the Sylvester Arms there was nightly a 
long-drawn bout of words between M'Adam and 
Tammas Thornton, the spokesman of the Dalesmen. 
From these duels Tammas was wont to emerge second 
best. His temper would get the better of his tongue ; 
the cynical debater was lost in the hot-mouthed 
partisan. Only, when their champion was suffering 
shameful rout all along the line, and it was time for 
strength of lung to vanquish strength of logic, Rob 
Saunderson and the rest joined in right lustily and 
roared the little man iown with Babel voice, for all 
the world like the gentlemen who rule the empire at 
Westminster. 

" Aweel, I ken James Moore'd liefer ha* lost his wife 
nor his grey dog." 

" His dog is his dog and his wife is his wife," from 
Tammas, stubborn as a tup. 

"Ay, ay, and a man shouldna treat his wife as a 
dog, and his dog as a wife, as they say our friend " — 

Then they arose as one and would have murdered 
him, but that the Tailless Tyke lay as always at his 
master's feet, in hideous one-eyed watchfulness, praying 
aloud for blood. 

In Tammas and David, M'Adam found gratifying 
targets for his tongue. But with the Master it was 
altogether other. The fortress of the strong man's 



* 



i 
t 

1.. 



( 



IN THE PASS 



»o5 



I 



self-restraint seemed impregnable. The little man's 
undying animosity was now fresh-fired by the unani- 
mous hostility evinced towards him in the big matter 
of the Cup, and no less unanimous advocacy of his 
enemy. He waged against his foe a petty perpetual 
war. He tried him with aggravation, insult, calumny — 
all in vain. The man of iron was as proof against his 
venomous darts as an armour-hided battleship against 
an adder's onslaught. It was only when presuming on 
the other's long-enduringness, M'Adam trespassed by 
an inch upon his just due that he found the ^.'.i^'ter took 
his stand immovable upon the rock of his rights. 

Then, indeed, the two clashed; and 'hen M'Adan 
tasted of defeat. For spite in the wrong is but ?. poor 
weapon Ai.h which to oppose might in the rigrr. 

It was this immutable resolve on the Master's part 
not to cede one tittle of his rightful claims, that led to a 
collision the issue of which was to send M'Adam on 
his way in a tremble of exultation ; and that though 
smarting under the sting of a repulse. 

It happened thus. The Murk Muir Pass, before 
debouching into the Devil's Bowl, narrows a space. 
This strait and perilous part is known as the Neck. 
There three men linked arm-in-arm may walk abreast ; 
one treading eternity, the other rubbing the rock-face. 
Were two flocks to encounter here, disaster might 'veil 
ensue. And so expediency has made her rule: that 
the flock descending gives the road to the flock upon 
the upward grade. It thus becomes the business 
of the down-going shepherd to assure himself that 
no up-climbing pack holds the way. Such is the 
acknowledged, all-inviolable rule. 

Now on a day in that late summer James Moore had 
already entered the Neck, his pack solid before him, 
when over the brink of the Bowl a host of slow, black, 



I06 



OWD BOB 



'M' 



II ' 



horn-crowned faces loomed on the skyline and began 
the descent. The Master holloaed, gesticulated — in vain. 

A little wizened figure shot up against the sky, a lion 
form slouching at his side; paused, gazed, and then 
held on his downward course. 

" The blame is his," the Master muttered, and pursued 
his upward way. 

Slowly the two came together, closing in to inevitable 
collision like the march of opposing fates. 

Within a hand's cast the leading sheep checked, 
stared, greeted timorously, and advanced. 

Face to face they halted, shy, gauche, ill at ease ; 
then tried to turn. But the ruthless compulsion from 
behind whelmed them forward ; and they pressed and 
huddled, whimpering still, like slaves placed in the 
fore-front of the battle. 

Across the yellow, ma-a-ing huddle, the two men re- 
garded one another ; the Master grim, M'Adam sardonic. 

" I'm grieved ye should ha' to turn, James Moore," 
the little man called civilly. 

" Nay ; that's for thee to do, M* Adam," the other 
answered, herding his sheep on. 

*' Aweel," said the other leisurely, " aweel. We must 
wait till the clouds roll by, WuUie," and he leaned 
against the rock- face and began to suck his twig. 

The Master pressed his line on. Two tups in front 
dropped their heads and butted doggedly. The Master 
waved a wordless command. The grey dog stole like a 
cloud over the backs of his flock. Red Wull marked his 
enemy, his eyes flamed red, and he rumbled hugely. The 
two sheep butted, butted. A crack opened in the yellow 
crush. Like a fairy the grey dog dropped into it 
Gentle, slow, persistent, he shoved along the rock-face, 
cleaving a hard way between wall and sheep, looking 
back to see if his children followed. 



» 



* I 



IN THE PASS 



107 



other 






" Cannicly, lad ! canniely ! " urged the Master, herding 
the flock into the opening wedge ; apprehensive all the 
while lest Red Wull should contest the advance. 

But no. A sheep-dog's duty — his first duty and always 
his first — is to his sheep. Private wrongs, personal 
vendettas, all yield to the inexorable call of the pro- 
fession. And now Red Wull, shivering with the hate- 
lust though he was, assumed his rightful position at the 
danger-point, poised on the grim brink of the abyss ; a 
firm and formidable bannister between his dependants 
and the deathly blank. 

It was at best a precarious manoeuvre, and not facili- 
tated by the bristling antipathy of Red Wull, and his 
master's ill-hidden rancour. Still, men and dogs, at 
the acme of alertness, achieved the thing at length. 

As the convoys formed afresh and the two men 
passed, ^ach bending instinctively to grip his dog, 
M'Adam shot a sneer at the other: for even in the 
trifles of the world to be bested by his foe mortified 
him. 

" I see what ye're at, James Moore," he cried, in ugly, 
tremulous voice. " Better luck next time." 

" What ? " asked the other, uncomprehending. 

"Why, just a bit of a tip to Wullie while he hung 
on the cliff— and the way's clear for yon grey devil for 
the Cup." 

The Master looked at the sinister-smiling malignant, 
amazement at the man's ill-imagining lost in his scorn 
for the matter of it 

He passed on, paused, and turned. 

" As to that, M'Adam," he answered, " I'm not runnin' 
ma Bob," and turned on his way. 

M'Adam drew an abrupt breath. 

" You lee I " he gasped, as one in shock of sudden 
breathlessness. 






4 



-ii 



io8 



OWD BOB 



The Master swung about, thunder in his face; and 
then again passed on. 

M'Adam watched him. He was trembh'ng in his 
agitation. The flame of suppressed excitement burned 
in his eyes. 

" Hie, man ! " he called, following. " I'll withdraw 
that. I'll pit it at, I think that you lee ! " 

His concession of grace failed to move. The other 
still strode away at the tail of his sheep. 

M'Adam watched him ; marked the stern tall form 
clothed in its sombre garb, marked the mourning band 
upon his arm, and in a flash bethought himself 

An ugly smile puckered his lips. In any other man 
such evidence of tender reverence for a late-dead wife 
would have touched him ; in the Master of Kenmuir it 
seemed merely self-seeking hypocrisy. 

" Noo I see," he sneered. " He thinks to get a 
reduction o* rent by sic a display o* proper feelin'." 

Then James Moore turned, and in such a white blaze 
of wrath that M'Adam was aghast 

"Thank God, M'Adam, on your bended knees this 
neet," he cried, his voice thrilling, "that He's seen 
good to fashion ye as He has. It's bin yer salvation 
this day." And he turned again. 

A moment's pause; then a small, set voice came 
echoing after him. 

" James Moore ! James Moore ! . . . I'm sorry I spoke 
that last bit" 

The Master held on, still too deeply moved to trust 
himself 

" And noo " — after a second's respite — " I'm sorrier 
still I ever said I was." 

And his act of grace done and undone, the little man 
darted after his pack, his heart a whirl of emotions. 



.211 



CHAPTER XII 



WE TWA 



get a 



i 



OWD BOB was not to run for the Cup. 
The announcement fell like a thunderbolt, 
scattering dismay broadcast. Y6t no remonstrance 
could be attempted. Indeed there could be no word 
but of commendation for the Master's motive. And 
such a self-denying ordinance speaks more for the 
reality of a man's love for a lost one than many a 
lordly cenotaph. 

Still to the people of the Dale-land from the Muir 
Pike to the market -cross in Grammoch-town, the 
draught was none the less bitter. They had set their 
hearts on the grey dog's success ; had thought to have 
the Cup amongst them after fifty long years. That, 
indeed, might yet be. But to have the trophy brought 
home by other than a Grey Dog of Kenmuir revolted 
their Tory senses. Under no circumstances could it be 
seemly ; but the thought that the Tailless Tyke— this 
infernal, saturnine parvenu— n*:ght well wear the laurels 
that should have been their favourite's, set wven the 
children in the street.^ a-swearing. 

And M'Adam's b aring embittered the blow three- 
fold. He was plunged into a very frenzy of delight by 
that news which was death to them. Their misery was 
his delight, and he told them so and revelled in the 
telling. For to win the Shepherds' Trophy was now 

109 



no 



OWD BOB 



the goal of his ambition. David was less than nothing 
to the lonely little man, Red Wull his all-in-all. And to 
have that name immortalised, emblazoned in the ranks of 
the world's most famous sheep-dogs, was his soul's desire. 
As Cup Day drew near, the little man, his fine-strung 
temperament attuned to the highest pitch of nervous 
anticipation, was tossed on a sea of dread and doubt. 
His hopes and fears ebbed and flowed on the tide of 
the moment. His moods were various as the winds in 
March. At one minute he paced the barren kitchen, 
his face already flushed with the glow of victory, 
chanting his battle-song. At the next he was down at 
the table, his head in his hands, his whole figure con- 
vulsed, as he cried in choking voice, "Eh, Wullie, 
WuUie ! they're all agin us." 



ji 



All things end save eternity. And when at length 
the little man found himself in the presence of the 
reality, he was calm, confident, palely resolute to achieve 
his Wullie's glory. 

Cup Day is always a general holiday in the North. 
Shops are shut ; every soul crowds to Silver-dale ; and 
soon the paddock below the Dalesman's Daughter 
teems with the crowd of sportsmen and spectators come 
from far and near to see the battle for the Shepherds' 
Trophy. 

There stood the great Kenmuir wain. Many an eye 
was directed on the young couple therein: Maggie 
looking in her simple print frock as sweet and fresh as 
any flower; while David's fair face was all overcast. 
In front of the waggon was a cluster of Dalesmen 
discussing M'Adam's chance. In the centre stood 
Tammas, declaiming vehemently. 

"A man, Mr. Saunderson? — a h'ape, I calls 'imi 



I 



WE TWA 



III 



A dog? — more like an *og, I tell thee!" About the 
old orator were Rob Saunderson, Kirby, Burton, Jim 
Mason, and others ; while on the outskirts stood Sam'l 
prophesying rain and M* Adam's victory. 

All about was a mass of seething heads ; to right 
and left a long array of carriages and carts ; behind, 
bookmakers' stools, booths, Aunt Sallies, and all the 
tawdry panoply of such a meeting ; while on the far 
bank of the stream, beneath the shadow of the Scaur, 
was a bevy of men and dogs, observed of all. 

The Juvenile Stakes had been run and won ; 
Londesley's Lassie had beaten Rob's Shep for the 
Local Cup; and the fight for the Shepherds' Trophy 
began. 

When at length Red Wull came out to run his 
course, he worked with the savage fury that always 
characterised him. His method was his own ; but the 
result was beyond cavil. 

" Keeps right on the backs of his sheep," said Parson 
Leggy, watching intent. " Strange they don't break ! " 
But they didn't. 

There was no waiting ; no coaxing : it was ^drive and 
devilry all through. The dog brought his sheep along 
at a terrific rate, never missing a turn, never faltering, 
never running out. And the crowd applauded, for the 
crowd loves novelty. While little M'Adam, hopping 
agilely about, his face ablaze with excitement, handled 
dog and sheep with a masterly precision that compelled 
the admiration even of his enemies.^ 

^ For the Dale Trials are a test less of the d<^ than of the shepherding 
machine — of the two, man and d(^, who together make the perfect one. 
And if you tell a Dalesman that in the silly South, the shepherd at such 
meetings must be tethered to a stake lest he aid his dog over much, he will 
smile slow scorn, and maybe remark, " Parfet sumphs, to be sure, them 
Londonen t " 



I 



I 



112 



OWD BOB 



"M'Adam wins!" roared a bookmaker. "Twelve 
to one agin the field ! " 

" He wins, dang him ! " muttered David. 

" Wull wins ! " said the Parson, clenching his lips. 

" And deserves to," said James Moore. 

" Wull wins ! " hummed the crowd. 

" We don't," said Sam'l gloomily. 

And in the end there were none save Tammas the 
bigot, and Long Kirby, who had lost a great deal of 
his wife's money and a little of his own, to challenge 
the justice of the verdict Only Sam'l evinced a 
tempered joy*. 

"'Course, I niver knows nowt, Tammas Thornton. 
The wery worms in the h'earth know more'n 5"am'l 
Todd!" 

The win had but an icy reception. At first was 
faint cheering ; but it sounded like the echo of an echo, 
and soon died of inanition. To get up an ovation there 
must be money at the back, or a few roaring fanatics 
to lead the dance. Here was neither: ugly stories; 
disparaging remarks. And the thousands who did not 
know caught the contagion and took their tone as 
always from the one who said he did. 

M'Adam could but remark the absence of enthusiasm 
as he pushed through the throng to the committee tent. 
No single voice applauded him ; no friendly hand 
smote its congratulations. Broad backs spurned him; 
contemptuous eyes impaled him; spiteful tongiibs 
scalded him. Only the foreign element looked curiously 
at the little bent figure with the glowing face, and 
shrank back at the size and savagery of the great dog 
at his heels. 

But what cared he ? His Wullie was crowned King 
— the best sheep-dog of the year ; and the little man 



'i 



i 



WE TWA 



"3 



] 



was happy. They could turn their backs on him, but 
they could not alter that ; and he laughed to himself. 

" They dinna like it, lad,— he ! he ! But they'll e'en 
ha' to thole it. We've won it, Wullie, won it fair." 

In the ring he took his stand with Red Wull ; doffing 
his hat with almost courtly deference to Lady Eleanour. 

Chill silence held the multitude in thrall. Lady 
Eleanour for once seemed ill at ease. The thing was 
uncannie, unprecedented, ominous. She glanced up 
at the ring of lowering faces hemming them all around. 
There was no reponse to her dumb appeal; and 
her gentle heart bled for the forlorn, little man before 
her. 

Then David from the rear flouted his father ; Tammas 
shot a jeer ; uproar followed ; and the storm broke. 

The mob went mad. They howled, hissed, hooted, 
surging dangerously about the ring. They clamoured, 
cursed, every passion let loose ; then a stentorian voice 
called above the din for cheers for Owd Bob, and they 
gave them thrice and thrice again ; and the strangers, 
though they did not understand, caught the madness, 
and roared too. And all the while the little man stood 
in the vortex of the tempest, sourly smiling; while 
Red Wull fronted defiantly that black-deep tempestuous 
wall, shivering with desire of war. 

It needed Lady Eleanour at last, standing in the 
nanow circle, the flush on her cheeks, the flame in her 
^es, like a Queen at bay, to scorn them into shame, 
lash them to order. 

In the end it was in a sullen silence that she pre- 
sented the Cup. The flash was yet in her eyes, and 
her bosom heaving ; but she so smiled on the little 
man and spoke to him such words as more than 
compensated him for the outrage he had endured. 
8 



114 



OWD BOB 



1 b 



>. 



Cap in hand, he smiled, blushed, bowed, and took 
the Cup tenderly. 

"It shall no' leave the estate, or ma hoose, yer Leddy- 
ship, gin Wullie and I can help it," he said emphatically. 

Lady Eleanour retreated. The crowd swarmed over 
the ropes and round the little man. Long Kirby laid 
irreverent hands upon the Cup. 

" Dinna finger it." 

" Shall." 

" Shan*t. Wullie, keep him aff." And the big man's 
sudden rout evoked laughter, and served to restore the 
mob's self-respect. 

Amongst the last, James Moore was borne past the 
victor. At sight of him M'Adam's face assumed an 
expression of intense concern. 

" Man, Moore!" he cried, all solicitous — " man, Moore ! 
ye're green — positeevely verdant. Are ye in pain?" 
Then catching sight of Owd Bob, he started back in 
horror. " And ma certes ! so's yer dog ! Yer dog as 
was grey is green." Then in bantering tones, "Ah, 
James Moore, godly man, ye shouldna covet " — 

" He wunna meed to covet lang, I's uphod ! " inter- 
posed Tammas's shrill accents. 

"And why for no?" 

"Becos next year he'll win. Oor Bob'll win it fra' 
thee, HI man. Why ? that's why." 

The retort was greeted with a yell of applause from 
the Dalesmen in the crowd. 

But M'Adam swaggered away into the tent, head high, 
the Cup beneath his arm, Red WuU guarding his rear. 

" First of a' ye'll ha' to beat Adam M'Adam and his 
Red Wull I " he cried back proudly. 



;i« 



t 



;H 



■i^'g^--^^^ 






"Ah, 
inter- 



CHAPTER XIII 
THE FIGHT IN THE FLOOD 

M 'ADAM'S pride in the Cup that now graced his 
kitchen was more than motherly. It stood 
conspicuously alone in the very centre of the mantel- 
piece beneath the bell-mouthed blunderbuss upon the 
wall ; the only ornament in the room, it shone out in 
silvery chastity like the moon in a bleak night. 

So long as the little man could gaze upon it, the 
desire of his eyes was more than sated. 

"Adam M' Adam's Red WuU! Adam M'Adam's 
Red Wull ! Champion — Challenge — Dale — Cup ! " he 
would repeat and linger on the words lover-like ; then 
in a whisper — "Should we win it agin, Wullie, once, 
twice, 'twill be oors for iver. Think o't, Wullie, think 
o't 1 " And that was the haven of his hopes. 

M'Adam indeed was now an altered man. Since his 
mother's death, David had never known such peace. It 
was not that his father became kind ; rather that he 
omitted to be unkind. Almost the little man forgot 
his animosity against James Moore and the grey devil. 
And he was a seldom visitor at the Sylvester Arms. 

" Soaks at home instead," suggested Tammas. 

"Far ower fou to get so far," said Long Kirby, 
kindly man. 

" I reck'n the Cup is kind o' company to him," said 

Jim Mason. " Happen it's lonesomeness drives him 

lis 



ii6 



OWD BOB 



here so often." And happen you were right, charitable 
Jim. 

In fact, the little man spent all his empty hours with 
the Cup between his knees; burnishing, polishing, 
crooning of the glorious future to Wullie. 

He was very jealous of his treasure. David might 
not so much as handle it, and if he approached too near 
was ordered harshly off. 

So it was that M'Adam, on entering the kitchen on a 
day, was consumed with hot resentment to find the boy 
desecrating the forbidden object; and the manner of 
his doing it added a thousand-fold to the offence. 

He was lolling indolently against the mantelpiece ; 
his fair head was hard against the Cup, his breath 
dimming its lustre ; while his big raw hands revolved it 
before his eyes. 

Bursting with indignation, the little man crept up 
behind. David was reading down the Cup's glory- 
scroll. 

" Theer's the first on 'em ! " he muttered, his tongue 
as indicator. "'Andrew Moore's Rough, 178-.' And 
theer agin — 'James Moore's Pinch, 179-.' And agin — 
'Beck, 182-.'^ Ah, and theer's 'im Tammas tells on — 
' Rex, 1 83-, and Rex 183-.' Eh, but he mun ha* bin a 
rare 'un, by all accounts ! " He broke ofif abrupt. His 
eye had fallen on the latest added name. " M'Adam's 
Wull ! " he read with blighting contempt, and deleted 
the words with large blasphemous thumb. " M'Adam's 
Wull! Lordo'me!" 

But a little shoulder was into his side ; two small fists 
were hammering him; a shrill voice was yelling — 
"Devil! devil! stan' awa'!" and he was tumbled pre- 
cipitately against the side-wall. 

The precious Cup swayed on its ebony stand. Yet, 



i 



T 



- THE FIGHT IN THE FLOOD 117 

beside himself as he was, the little man's first instinctive 
impulse was to steady it with hurried hands. 

Then he turned on the boy, clutched him by the 
collar, and rattled him to and fro. 

" M' Adam's Wull ! I wish he was here to teach ye, 
ye ox-limbed, snod-faced pror.eegit!" he screamed, 
tossing to and fro, as a man w\o thinks to shake an 
oak. " So ye're hopin' that James Moore will win ma 
Cup awa' from me — yer ain dad. I wonder ye're no' 
'shamed. Ye live on us; ye suck oor blood; Wullie 
and me, we brak' oorscl's to keep ye in hoose and hame 
— and what's yer gratitude? ye plot to rob us of our 
rights." 

He dropped the boy's coat and stood back. 

" No reets about it," said David, calm still. 

"If I win is it no' ma right as muckle as ony 
Englishman's ? " 

Red Wull now entered, scowled at David, and took 
his stand beside his master. 

" Ay, if you win," said David, edging towards the door. 

" And wha's to beat us ? " 

David affected large surprise. 

" Owd Bob's rinnin'," he said blankly. 

« And what if he is ? " 

The sneer on the boy's face was eloquent in reply. 

His father could not fail to comprehend. 

" So that's it," he cried ; then in a scream, with one 
finger pointing to the great dog — "And what o* him? 
What'll ma Wullie be doin' the while?" 

David edged on towards the door. He little liked 
the aspect of affairs ; for the Tailless Tyke was bristling 
on tiptoe of battle alertness. 

" What'll Wullie be doin', ye chicken-hearted brock ? " 

"'Im?" said the boy, now close upon the door. 



T 



ii8 



OWD BOB 



I 



hi: 
Ml i 

11 



PI 

Iti! 



"'Im?" he cried, with a slow contempt that stiffened 
the red bristles on the dog's neck. " Ho, lookin' on, I 
should reck'n, lookin' on. What else is he fit for? I 
tell thee oor Bob "— 

" ' Oor ' Bob ! " screamed the father, darting forward. 
" ' Oor ' Bob ! I'll ' oor '— Wullie ! Wullie I "— 

But the Tailless Tyke needed no spur. With a roar 
he launched to the engage, only to crash against the 
thwarting door. 

In another second a mocking finger tapped at the 
window. 

" Better luck to the two on ye next time ! " laughed a 
scornful voice ; and the boy shot down the hill for 
Kenmuir. 

• •••««• 

From that hour the fire of M'Adam's jealousy raged. 

At home David might hardly enter the room sanctified 
by the presence of the Trophy. 

" I'll no' ha* ye nigh ma Cup, ye ill-begotten wastrel ! 
Wullie and me won it — you'd naught to do wi' it. Go 
you to James Moore and his dog." 

" Ay, and shall I tak' Cup along o' me ? or wilta' bide 
till it's took fra* thee ? " And so the two went on. 

In the Dale the little man endured a thousand-fold 
the things he had inflicted a year before. The hearts 
of the Dalesmen were adamant against him. To a man 
they were for the grey dog and his master. And 
utterly alone, bereft of any sympathy, distraught with 
day-and-night long agony of jealous fear, the little man 
became the Adam M'Adam of his later years. Every 
man was his enemy, not one but was hell-deep in a 
black conspiracy to rob him and his Wullie of their 
rights. Whereas once at the Sylvester Arms his shrill 
ill tongue had shot its venom tireless; now he main- 



m 



'M 



T 



the 



THE FIGHT IN THE FLOOD 119 

tained uncannie silence. Crouched away, hag-like, in a 
corner, with his huge familiar blinking red eyes, impass- 
able bulwark between him and the world, the little man 
sat dumbly, dreadfully glowering as the Dalesmen talked 
of the grey dog's coming victory. 

Sometimes he could endure it no longer. Then he 
would spring to his feet, a little swaying figure, and 
denounce them passionately in almost pathetic 
eloquence. And always these appeals concluded in 
set fashion. 

" Ye're - ' agin us ! " the little man would cry. 

" We are that," from the complacent Tarn mas. 

Then a long sobbing silence ; and at length a cry 
touching in heart-whole bitterness. 

'• Eh, Wullie, Wullie, they're all agin us 1" 

The little man became full of ill-imaginings. At his 
enemy he glared stealthy murder. No action of the 
Master's but in it he discerned some dark intrigue ; 
some hideous plot to best him. And his deadly 
earnestness to proceed to any length in the guarding of 
his treasure was well displayed by an incident in the 
late spring of the year. 

The winter had tarried long, but of late there had 
been heavy rain ; and the tardy snow, dribbling from the 
hills, had swollen the Wastrel into flood. 

M'Adam and Red Wull were down at the red- 
swinging water's edge. In the churchyard, across the 
flood, were Parson Leggy and Cyril Gilbraith. 

As the three watched the stream, wondering at its 
strange violence, there came tumbling down the hill 
towards them a truant fairy. 

" Wee Anne ! " said the Parson. 

"Babbles!" cried Cyril. 

" * Lassie wi' the lint-white locks,' " quoted M'Adam. 



11 



il 



i i ;. 



t1 



I20 



OVVD BOB 



I 



i f 
i i 

! 
I 



ilE . 

If' 

m 
'iii''t 

1 •! 



ilil 



As the fairy staggered on, a grey galloping figure 
spun over the crest in pursuit The fairy looked back, 
screamed delight, toddled faster, looked back again, 
stumbled, caught at the air, screamed a child's terror 
scream ; and the greedy water had clutched her and 
swirled her away. 

Cyril yelled and plunged in. The Parson followed. 

M'Adam heard, looked up, and saw the wreck-waif in 
the flood. 

" The wean's in, Wullie. . . . After her ! " There was 
no need : Red WuU was already on his way. 

Simultaneously the grey dog hurtled through the air 
and crashed far into the flood. 

It proved a race between the rivnls. The bull-like 
mask of red and the dark head of grey were closing in 
from either side upon their prize. Each kept one eye 
on the other, one on the bundle in fmnt ; each left an 
eddy in his trail from the fury of his swimming. 

For M'Adam this chance race for a life typified the 
struggle soon to be. In tii"^ outcome he saw the issue 
of the great event. 

" Yours, Wullie, mind ! " he ordered, hopping along 
the bank, thrilled and thrilling. " Weel done, Wullie ! 
On wi' ye ! Ye're leavin' him ! Weel done, laddie ! " 

The Tailless Tyke first reached the prize, swung 
about, and struck for the bank. 

" Come on, Wullie ! " cheered his master. " Weel 
done for you. YeVe left him agin." 

The stream was running like a tide-race, and the 
child was all dead-weight. But the great dog fought 
through the flood, striking out like a horse trotting ; his 
cropped ears back, teeth clenched on his burden, and 
nostrils wrinkled from the effort. While hard on his 
trail swam the grey pursuer, tail broad-cast on the water. 






I 

I!"- I: 



- I ; I 



THE FIGHT IN THE FLOOD 121 



A huge log came lumbering down upon the leader. 

" Ha' a care, Wullie ! on yer right ! " screamed 
M'Adam. 

The dog saw but could not avoid. He turned his 
head to save the child, and took the blow full on the 
shoulder. At the thud of the impact, the little man 
gasped. 

" Eh, puir, puir laddie ! A sai** knock ! . . . But 
baud to it, Wullie! Wullie never says die! Scots 
wha hae! we've whipped him agin." 

He waded into the stream, took the child from its 
rescuer, and splashed back to the bank. 

At the moment, David, issuing from the house, 
marked the commotion and came blundering down 
the hill. 

" What's oop ? Whativer is t' fuss ? " he cried ; then 
catching a gHmpse of the flower-like face in his father's 
arms, "What the blazes art' doin' wi' oor Anne?" 
he roared. 

" Droonin' her, of course," his father replied. " Fetch 
us a brick and a bit o' string, will ye, lad? She 
winna sink, deil tak' the hissie!" 

Two score paces lower down Owd Bob had landed. 

Wee Anne, his Anne, had been wrested from him 
by the Tailless Tyke. He beheld her now in M'Adam's 
arms, and that little man making for the 'Grange. 
Splashing through the shallow water, he came like a 
thunder-bolt ; coat dripping, eyes lurid, with the silent 
bloody fury of the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir. 

M'Adam turned to meet him. His face was deathly ; 
but he stood his ground like a hero. 

"Wullie! Wullie! to me!" 

The great dog's shoulder had been nigh to smashed ; 
yet at the call, at the sight of his master's distress, and 



I 22 



OWD BOB 



I 'I 



K ': 



m 



I 






i! • 

I, 



the onslaught of his blood-foe, he came limping terrific 
through the water like some dread Leviathan, every 
bristle aghast, mad for fighting. 

He would have been too late. M'Adam must have 
gone down before that hurricane attack, had not 
David interposed. 

"Back, Bob!" he called, wrestling madly with the 
grey dog. " Mr. Gilbraith ! gie me a^hand, wilta' ? " 

"Keep him aff, or tak* the consequences!" cried 
M'Adam, breast heaving. Then as Red Wull lurched 
furiously up — " Wullie, heel ! heel, I say ! " 

Then he turned and trotted up the hill, his burden 
in his arms. After him panted Parson Leggy, dripping 

"Well done, M'Adam I Well done you and Red 
Wull! I— I'd"— 

" Not too close, Mr. Hornbut ; Wullie's a wee vexed." 

" I'd never have — I mean — you of all men " — 

" Tho* I am a heathen, I may ha' a heart" 

" But d'you know whose child " — 

The little man looked up. 

" I dinna war wi' weans, Mr. Hornbut," he said, 
with quiet quenching scorn. 

It was M'Adam who stripped her icy garments off 
the child ; M'Adam who wrapped her in hot blankets ; 
M'Adam on whom the wee thing smiled . when first 
she found her stolen senses. 

In the end — 

" Can I do anything to help ? " asked the Parson 
humbly. 

" Ye can shift oot o' this," the little man replied. 

Wee Anne was soon recovered, and passed a pleasant 
hour, her plump fist in Red Wull's mouth pumping his 
tongue vigorously to and fro, while she compared him 
and her Bob to her new friend's disadvantage. 



n 



THE FIGHT IN THE FLOOD 1.-3 

That evening David carried the child back to 
Kenmuir. 



Early next morning, James Moore with Owd Bob 
crossed the Stony Bottom for the first time for years. 

M'Adam was at work at the top of the hill. At the 
sound of the other's coming he looked up. 

Straightway his eyes started. He turned, darted 
into the house, his face ghastly over his shoulder, as 
though at last in face of some long-anticipated fear. 

The door slammed ; a bolt rang home ; feet clattered ; 
an upper window slasiied wide. Then a shirt-sleeved 
figure leant out ; there was the flash and glint of a 
gun-barrel sweeping round : and the whole in a crack. 

"Bob! ahint me!" 

The grey dog leapt ; the gun-barrel swept ; the click 
of flint in a pan ; and there towered, stern, cold, im- 
perturbable, a bulwark of six-foot flesh between death 
and its object. 

So for a while ; then the white face along the barrel 
lifted a little, grinning horribly- 

"Weel, James Moore?" 

The other answered calm as though this was the 
reception he had looked for. 

" I com', M'Adam, to thank you " — 

" Man ! man ! d'ye think I dinna ken what ye're 
spyin' after? Na, na; ye'Il e'en ha' to bide a while 
yet. Ye've to win it first ; ye've to beat Adam M'Adam 
and his Red Wull— he I he ! " 



rr. 



CHAPTER XIV 

RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 

AND always the rivals, red and grey, went about 
seeking their opportunity. But the Master was 
ever too quick for them. 

Towards the end M*Adam, silent and secret, would 
urge on the red dog to battle; until, on a day in 
Grammoch - town, James Moore turned on him, eyes 
flashing steel. 

" Does ta' think, thoo HI fule ! " he cried, in his hard 
voice, " that onst they gat set we should iver git owder 
of them afif alive ? " 

The words pierced right home; for thereafter the 
little man was ever foremost to oppose his small form, 
buffer-like, between the would-be combatants. Indeed, 
it was no unmoving sight to see M'Adam, when the 
great dog's lust for war had overstepped right bounds, 
chastening him with a straw and crying reproachfully, 
" Wullie, Wullie, wad ye ? " While the Tailless Tyke, 
who knew not what fear was, cowered into the ground 
as the fairy blows descended ; scut hard down, eyes 
rolling upwards, craving grace less for the sin committed 
than for the master offended! 

Curse as M'Adam might, threaten as he might, when 
tlie time came Owd Bob won. 

The styles of the rivals were well contrasted: the 

IM 



'1 



It about 
3ter was 

i, would 

day in 

m, eyes 

lis hard 
t owder 

rter the 
ill form, 
Indeed, 
len the 
bounds, 
ichfully, 
s Tyke, 
ground 
rn, eyes 
nmitted 



it, when 
ed: the 



RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 125 

patience, the insinuating eloquence, the splendid dash 
of the one ; and the infernal bully fury of the other. 

The issue was never in doubt. It may have been 
that the temper of the Tailless Tyke gave in the time 
of trial ; it may have been that his sheep were wild, as 
M'Adam declared; assuredly not, as the little man 
alleged in choking voice, that they had been set aside of 
deliberate intent to ruin his chance. Certain it is that 
the great dog's tactics scared them into panic madness ; 
and he never got them together again. 

As for Owd Bob, his dropping, his driving, his 
penning, aroused the loud-tongued admiration of crowd 
and competitors alike. Patient yet persistent, quiet 
yet resolute, he allured his charges in the way with 
all his own inimitable tact. 

When at length the verdict went forth, and it was 
known that, at long-last, after an interval of half a 
century, the Shepherds* Trophy was won again by a 
Grey Dog of Kenmuir, there was such a scene as has 
been rarely witnessed on the slope behind the Dales- 
man's Daughter. 

Great fists were slapped on mighty backs ; great feet 
were stamped on the sun-dried banks of the Lea; 
stalwart lungs were strained to their uttermost capacity ; 
and roars of "Moore!" "Owd Bob o' Kenmuir!" 
"The Grey Dogs!" thundered up the fell-sides and 
were flung thundering back. 

Even James Moore was visibly moved as he worked 
through the cheering multitude ; and Owd Bob, trotting 
by his side in quiet dignity, seemed to wave his silvery 
brush in acknowledgment. 

Lady Eleanour, her cheeks flushed, waved her parasol. 
Parson Leggy danced an unclerical jig and shook hands 
with the Squire till both those fine old gentlemen were 



,ft« 



mmim 



126 



OWL) BOB 



purple in the face. Long Kirby selected a small man in 
the crowd and bonneted him. While Tammas, Rob 
Saunderson, Tupper, Hoppin, Londesley, and the rest 
joined hands and went raving round like so many 
giddy girls. 

But of them all, none was so uproarious in the mad 
heat of his enthusiasm as David M'Adam. Standing 
in the Kenmuir waggon beside Maggie, a conspicuous 
figure above the crowd, he roared in hoarse ecstasy, 
" Weel done, oor Bob ! Weel done, Mr. Moore ! Thoo's 
knocked him ! Knock him agin ! Owd Bob o' Kenmuir ! 
Moore ! Moore o' Kenmuir ! Hip ! hip ! " until the 
noisy young giant attracted such attention in his 
boisterous delight, that Maggie must needs restrain him. 

Alone on the far bank stood the vanquished pair. 

The little man was trembling ; his face was still wet 
from his exertions ; and as he hearkened to the ovation 
accorded to his conqueror, there was a piteous grin upon 
his face. In front stood the defeated dog, lips wrinkling, 
hackles rising, gazing across the stream like Satan cast 
from Paradise, as he, too, saw, heard, and understood. 

" It's a gran' thing to ha' a dutiful son, Wullie ! " the 
little man whispered, watching David's tossing figure. 
" He's happy — and so are they a' — not sae muckle that 
James Moore has won as that Adam M'Adam and his 
Red Wull are beat." 

Then, breaking down for a moment — 

" Eh, Wullie, Wullie ! they're all agin us. It's you and 
I alane, lad." 

Again, seeing the Squire followed by Parson Leggy, 
Viscount Birdsaye, and others of the gentry, forcing 
their way through the press to acclaim the victor, he 
continued — 
. " It's good to be in wi' the quality, Wullie. Niver 



RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 127 



mak' a friend of a man beneath ye in rank, nor an 
enemy of a man aboon ye ; that's a soond principle, gin 
ye'd thrive in honest England." 

He stood there, alone with his dog, watching the 
crowd on the far slope as it surged around the com- 
mittee tent. Only when the mass had packed in forest- 
thick phalanges about that ring, wherein, just a year 
ago, he had stood in very different circumstances, and 
was at length stiii, a wintry smile played for a moment 
on his lips. He laughed a mirthless laugh — 

" Bide a wee, WuUie — he ! he ! bide a wee : 

'The best laid schemes o' mice and men 
Gang aft aglee.'" 

As he spoke, there can... down to him, above the 
noise of the many, a cry of wrathful dismay. The 
cheering ceased abruptly. A moment of blank silence : 
then there burst on the stillness such a tornado of indigna- 
tion as rocked the air. 

The crowd surged forward, then turned. Every eye 
was directed across the stream. A hundred damning 
fingers pointed at the lone figure there. Hoarse yells 
were raised, " Theer he be ! Yon's him ! What's he 
done wi' it ! Thief ! Throttle him ! " 

The mob came lumbering down the slope like one, 
thundering their imprecations on a thousand throats. 
They looked dangerous, and their wrath was stimulated 
by the knot of angry Dalesmen in the van. There was 
more than one white face amongst the women at the 
back, as they watched the crowd blundering blindly down 
the hill to the overwhelming of that small solitary. 
There were others besides Parson Leggy, the Squire, 
James Moore, and the police, in the thick of it all, 
striving frantically with voice and gesture, ay, and stick 
too, to stem the advance. 



128 



OWD BOB 



In vain. The dark wave rolled on, irresistible. 

On the far bank stood the little man, motionless; 
awaiting them with a grin upon his face. And a little 
farther in front was the Tailless Tyke, his jagged under- 
jaw shot forward in horrid invitation, his back and neck 
like a new-shorn wheat-field, as he rumbled a vast 
challenge. 

" Come on, gentlemen ! " the little man cried. " Come 
on ! I'll bide for ye, never fear. Ye're a thousand to 
one and a dog. It's the odds ye like, Englishmen a'." 

And the mob with murder in its throat, accepted the 
invitation and came on. 

Then from the slope above, clear above the tramp of 
the multitude, a great voice bellowed, " Way ! Way ! 
Way for Mr. Trotter ! " 

The advancing host checked and opened out to let the 
Secretary of the meeting bundle through. 

A small fat man, fussy at any time, and perpetually 
perspiring, he was now crimson with rage and running. 
He gesticulated wildly ; vague words bubbled forth ; and 
his short legs twinkled down the slope. 

The crowd paused to admire. Someone shouted a 
witticism, and the crowd laughed. For the moment the 
situation was saved. 

The fat Secretary hurried on, unheeding ot any insult 
but the one. He bounced across the plank-bridge, and 
as he came closer M'Adam saw that in either hand he 
brandished a brick. 

" What's this ? What's this ? " gasped the Secretary, 
puffing up, pudding-wise. 

" Bricks, 'twad seem," the other answered. 

" Where's the Cup ? Champion, Challenge, etc.," the 
Secretary jerked out. " Mind, Sir, you're responsible ! 
wholly responsible 1 Dents, damages, delays ! What's it 



' 



. 1 1» 



RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 129 

all mean, Sir ? these — these monstrous creations wrapped, 
as I live, in straw, Sir, in the Cup case, Sir ! the Cup case ! 
No Cup ! Infamous ! Disgraceful ! Insult — me — meet- 
ing — committee — everyone. What's it mean, Sir ? " 

He paused to pant. 

M'Adam approached him with one eye on the 
crowd which was heaving forward again, ominously 
silent now. 

" I pit *em there ! " he whispered, and drew back to 
watch the effect of his disclosure. 

The Secretary gasped. 

" You — you not only do this — amazing thing — these 
monstrosities " — he hurled the bricks furiously down — 
" but you dare to tell me so ! " 

The little man smirked. 

" ' Do wrang and conceal it, do right and confess it,' 
that's Englishmen's motto and mine, as a rule. But this 
time I had ma reasons." 

" Reasons, Sir ! No reasons can justify such an extra- 
ordinary breach of all the — the decencies. Reasons? 
the reasons of a maniac — a melodramatic maniac. Not 
to say worse, Sir. Fraudulent detention — indictable 
offence, I say. Sir! ... What were your precious 
reasons ? " 

The mob, with Tammas and Long Kirby at th'^ir 
head, had now attained the plank-bridge. For the 
most part dangerously dumb, there were still isolated 
cries of — 

" Duck him ! " 

" Chuck him in ! " 

"An'thedorg!" 

" There are my reasons ! " said M'Adam, pointing at 
the forest of menacing faces. " Ye see I'm not beloved 
amang yonder gentlemen, and " — in a stage whisper in 
9 






m 



I30 



OWD BOB 



I 



the other's ear — " I thocht maybe I'd be 'tacked on 
the road." 

Tammas, foremost of the crowd, had now his foot 
upon the bridge. 

"Robber! thief I Bide till we set hands on thee!" 
he yelled. 

M'Adam turned. 

" Wullie," he murmured, " keep the bridge ! " 

At the order, the Tailless Tyke shot gladly forward, 
and the leaders on the bridge as hastily back. The dog 
galloped on to the rattling plank, took his post fair and 
square in the centre of the narrow way, and stood 
facing the hostile crew like Cerberus guarding the gates 
of hell : his bull-head was thrust forward, hackles up, 
teeth glinting, and an earth-shaking rumble in his 
throat. 

" Thoo first, ole lad I " urged Tammas, hopping agilely 
behind Long Kirby. 

" Nay ; t' old 'uns lead," cried the big smith, his 
face grey-white. And wrenching round, he pinned the 
veteran by the arms, and held him forcibly before him 
as a covering shield. There ensued an unseemly struggle 
between the two valiants ; Tammas bellowing* in the 
throes of mortal fear and Long Kirby. 

"Jim Mason '11 show us," he panted, at last. 

" Nay," said honest Jim, " I'm none of a brave man." 

Then Jem Burton 'd go first ? 

Nay ; Jem had a lovin* wife and dear little kids 
at 'ome. 

Rob Saunderson, happen ? 

Rob thowt not. 

Then a tall figure came forcing through the crowd, a 
formidable knob-kerry in his hand. 

"I'sgoin'!" said David. 






RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 131 



•* But thoo's not," answered burly Sam'l, gripping the 
boy with arms like the roots of an oak. And the sense 
of the Dalesmen was with the big man, for, as Rob 
Saunderson put it, " I reck'n he'd liefer claw on to thy 
throat, lad, nor ony o' oors." 

As there was no one forthcoming to claim the 
honour of the lead, Tanimas came forward with 
cunning counsel. 

The strangers in the crowd were to be allowed the 
honour of the lead. Once on the bridge, the Dalesmen 
were to follow up, and keep a-shovin' and a-bovin on 
'em forr'ad. " Then comes oor turn, sista'." 

The wisdom of the serpent prevailed. Those who 
knew the Tailless Tyke were to wait on those who 
didn't. But these were in no hurry for the job. The 
grisly aspect of the gaunt wolf-warrior of the bridge 
more than sated them. Besides, there were ugly tales 
abroad. 

By now there was a little naked space of green round 
the bridge-head. Round this the mob hedged; the Dales- 
men in front striving knavishly back and bawling to 
those behind to let be that shovin*; and these latter 
urging valorously forward, yelling jeers and contumely 
at their coward leaders. 

And as they wedged and jostled thus, there stole out 
from their midst as gallant a champion as ever trod the 
grass. 

He trotted out into the ring, the observed of all, 
and paused to gaze at the holder of the bridge. The 
sun lit the sprinkling of snow on his head ; one fore- 
paw was uplifted ; and he stood there, royally alert, 
with his airy grace, gallant insouciance, scanning his 
antagonist. 

" Th' Owd 'Un I " v/ent up in a roar fit to split the 



132 



OWD BOB 



I I 



air as the hero of the day was recognised. And the 
Dalesmen gave a pace forward spontaneously, as the 
grey knight-errant stole across the green. 

"Oor Bob '11 fetch him!" they roared, their blood 
leaping to fever-heat, and gripped their sticks, deter- 
mined in stern reality to follow now. 

The gentleman in grey trotted up and on to the 
bridge, and paused. The silver standard of his line 
was waving high, his majestic frill clouding his neck like 
a Herd wick's ruflf. And the holder of the bridge never 
moved. 

Red and grey stood thus, face to face, the one gay 
yet resolute, the other petrified, his grim head slowly 
sinking between his fore-legs. 

There was no shouting now : it was time for deeds, 
not words. Only, above the stillness, came a sound 
from the bridge like the snore of a giant in his sleep, 
and, blending with it, a low, deep, purring thunder like 
some monster cat well pleased. 

"Wullie," came a solitary voice from the far side, 
" keep the bridge I " 

One ear went back, one ear was still forward ; the 
great head low and lower, that under-jaw clamorous for 
its prey, the molten eyes rolling upwards so that the 
watchers could see the murder o^!s white. 

The gentleman in grey advanced. 

Then for the second time that afternoon, a voice, 
stern and hard, came ringing down from the slope 
above. 

" Bob, lad, coom back." 

" He 1 he I I thocht that was comin'," came the 
answering sneer from over the stream. 

The grey dog heard, and checked. 

Again the Master called. 



h •' 



RED WULL HOLDS THE BRIDGE 133 

" Bob, lad, coom in, I say." 

At that the dog swung round, and marched slowly 
back, gallant as he had come, dignified still in his 
mortification. 

And Red Wull threw back his head and bellowed 
a pxan of victory : challenge, triumph, scorn, all blended 
in that bull-like, earth-shaking blare. 



side, 



the 



In the meantime M'Adam and the Secretary had 
concluded their business. It had been settled that the 
Cup was to be delivered over to James Moore not later 
than the following Saturday. 

" Saturday, see, at the latest ! " the Secretary cried, as 
he turned and trotted off. 

" Mr. Trotter," M'Adam called after him, " I'm sorry, 
but ye maun bide this side the Lea till I've reached the 
foot o' the Pass. Gin they gentlemen should set hands 
on me, why — Wullie has little sense o* humour ! " and 
he shrugged his shoulders significantly. " Forbye, he's 
keepin' the bridge." 

With that the little man strolled off leisurely ; now 
dallying to pick a flower, now to wave a mocking hand 
at the thwarted mob ; and so slowly on to the foot of 
the Pass. 

Then he turned and whistled his shrill, peculiar 
call— 

" Wullie, Wullie, to me ! " 

At that, with one last threat thrown at the thousand 
he had held at bay, the Tailless Tyke swung about and 
galloped heavily after his lord. 



CHAPTER XV 

THE PASSING OF THE CUP 

ALL Friday M'Adam never left the kitchen. He 
sat opposite the Cup, hands on knees, staring 
with dim eyes : so a fond husband may sit for the last 
time beside the comrade of his life. And Red Wull 
watched with him. 

Saturday came, and still the two kept their vigil. 
Towards night the little man rose all in a tremble, 
took the Cup tenderly in his arms, and sat down again. 

Rocking like a mother with a dying child, he hugged 
it to him, crying silently. And Red Wull sat upon his 
haunches and weaved from side to side in mute 
sympathy. 

As the dark was falling, David looked in. At the 
sound of the door the little man swung round, the Cup 
nursed in his arms, and glared sullen, noiseless, suspicious, 
yet seemed to recognise the boy no wit. In the half- 
h'ght David could see the tears coursing down the 
izened cheeks. 

" Ton ma life, he's gaein' daft," was his comment, as 
he turned away for Kenmuir. And the mourners 
were left to mourn. 

"A few hours noo, Wullie," the little man wailed, 
"and she'll be gone. We won her, Wullie — won her 
fair. She's lit the hoose for us, she's saftened a' for us 
— and God kens we needed it; she was the ae thing 



THE PASSING OF THE CUP 135 

we had to look to and love, and now they're takin' her 
awa', and 'twill be night agin." 

He rose to his feet, and the great dog rose with him. 
His voice shrilled to a stream, and he swayed with the 
Cup in his arms till it seemed he must fall. 

" Did they win her fair, Wutlie ? Na ; they plotted, 
they conspired, they worked ilka man o' them agin us ; 
and they beat us. But they shallna ha' her. Oor's or 
naebody's, Wullie ! oor's or naebody's ! " 

He banged the Cup down and darted madly out. In 
a moment he was back again, brandishing an axe. 

" Come on, Wullie ! Noo's the day, and noo's the 
hour ! " 

On the table before him shone the Trophy, serene and 
beautiful. The little man fell upon it, swinging his 
weapon like a flail. 

" Oor's or naebody's, Wullie ! Come on ! Lay the 
proud usurpers low ! " He aimed a deadly buffet ; and 
the Shepherds' Trophy — the Shepherds' Trophy which 
had won through the hardships of a hundred years — was 
almost gone. It trembled as the blow descended. But 
the cruel steel missed, and sunk into the wood, clean and 
deep as a spade in snow. 

Red Wull had leapt on to the table, and in cavernous 
voice was grumbling a chorus to his master's yells. 

The little man danced up and down, tugging at the 
axe-shaft. "You and I, Wullie ! you and I ! 

' Tyrants fall in every foe ! 
Liberty's in every blow ! ' ' 

The axe-head was immovable as the Pike. 

"•Let us do or die.'" 

The shaft snapped, and the little man tottered back. 
Red Wull jumped from the table, and in the act over- 



'If /' 



i 



136 



OWD BOB 



threw the Cup. It toppled on to the floor, and rolled 
tinkling away. And the little man fled out of the house, 
still screaming his war-song. 

• •••••• 

When late that night he returned home, the Cup was 
gone. 

Down on his hands and knees, he traced its plain path 
in the dust, and marked the spot where it had rocked to 
sleep. Beyond that there was no sign. 

At first his loss stunned him. Then he caught him- 
self up and swung about the room like a derelict ship 
in a storm. He cursed ; he screamed and beat the walls 
with fevered hands ; he invoked a dreadful doom on 
James Moore, the grey dog, and his persecutors ; he 
called on the hosts of heaven and hell to avenge him on 
his enemies, to damn them eternally, and in a breath 
implored Christ to right his wrong. 

At length, wholly spent, he collapsed into a corner, 

" It's David, Wullie, ye may depend ; David that's 
robbed his father's hoose. Oh, it's a gran' thing to ha' a 
dutiful son ! " And he bowed his grey head. 

• •••••• 

David it was. He had returned to the Grange 
during his father's absence, and taking the Cup from its 
grimy bed, had marched it away to its rightful home. 
For that evening at Kenmuir James Moore had said to 
him — 

" David, your father's not sent t' Cup. I shall coom 
fetch it the morn." And David knew he meant it. 
Therefore, in order to save a collision between his father 
and his friend — a collision, the issue of which he dared 
hardly contemplate, knowing, as he did, the unalterable 
determination of the one and the lunatic passion of the 
other — the boy had resolved to fetch the Cup himself, 



THE PASSING OF THE CUP 137 



3 rolled 
e house, 



I!up was 

ain path 
)cked to 

rht him- 
iict ship 
he walls 
oom on 
ors ; he 
5 him on 
a breath 

orner. 
d that's 
to ha' a 



Grange 
from its 
il home. 

said to 

all coom 
leant it. 
lis father 
le dared 
ilterable 
n of the 
himself, 



then and there, in the teeth, if needs be, of his father 
and the Tailless Tyke. And he had done it. 

When he reached home that night, contrary to his 
wont he marched straight into the kitchen. 

There sat his father facing the door, awaiting him, 
hands on knees. For once the little man was alone; 
and David, brave though he was, thanked Heaven 
devoutly that Red Wull was elsewhere. 

For a while father and son kept silence, watching one 
another like two fencers. 

" 'Twas you as took ma Cup ? " asked the little man 
at last, leaning forward in his chair. 

" 'Twas me as took Mr. Moore's Cup," the boy replied. 

" You took it — pit up to it, nae doot, by James Moore I " 

David made a gesture of dissent. 

" Ay, by James Moore ! " his father continued. " He 
daurna come hissel' for his ill-gotten spoils, so he sent 
the son to rob the father — the coward ! " his whole 
frame shook with passion. " I'd ha' thocht James 
Moore 'd bin man enough to come hissel' for what he 
wanted. I see noo I did him a wrang — I misjudged 
him. I kent him a heepocrite, ain o' yer unco gudes ; 
a man as looks ae thing, says anither, and does a third ; 
and noo I ken he's a coward. He's feared o* me, sic as 
I am." He rose from his chair and drew himself up to 
his full meagre height. 

" Mr. Moore had nowt to do wid it," David persisted. 

" Ye're lyin* — Jarnes Moore pit ye to it. Ye'd ha' bin 
willin' enough wi'oot him, if ye'd thocht o't, I grant ye. 
But ye've no' the wits. All there is o' ye has gane to 
mak' yer muckle body. Hooiver, that's no matter. I'll 
settle wi' James Moore anither time. I'll settle wi' you 
noo, David M'Adam ! " 

He paused and looked the boy over from head to foot. 



138 



OWD BOB 



" So ye're not only an idler ! a wastrel ! a liar ! " — he 
spat the words out — " ye're — God help ye ! — a thief! " 

"I'm none of a thief!" the boy returned hotly; "I 
nobbut gave to a man what ma father — shame on him ! 
— kept from him." 

"Shame?" cried the little man, advancing with 
burning face. 

" 'Twas honourably done, keepin' what wasna thine to 
keep, holdin' back his reets from a man ! Ay, if ony 
one's the thief it's not me, it's thee, I say, thee ! " and he 
looked his father in the face with flashing eyes. 

" I'm the thief, am I ? " cried the other. " Tho' ye're 
three times ma size I'll teach ma son to speak so to me." 

The old strap, now long disused, hung in the chimney 
corner. As he spoke the little man sprang back, ripped 
it from the wall, and, almost before David realised what 
he was at, had brought it down with a savage slash 
across his shoulders, and as he smote he whistled his 
shrill, imperative note — 

"Wullie, Wullie, tome!" 

David felt the blow through his coat, like a bar of hot 
iron across his back. His passion seethed within him. 
In a minute ho would wipe out, once and for all, the 
score of years ; for the moment, however, there was 
urgent business on hand ; for outside he could hear the 
quick patter of feet hard-galloping, and the scurry of a 
huge creature racing madly to a call. 

With a bound he sprang at the open door ; and again 
the strap came lashing down, and a wild voice — 

" Quick, Wullie ! for God's sake, quick ! " 

David slammed the door. It shut with a rasping 
snap. At the same moment a great body from without 
thundered against it with terrific violence, and a deep 
voice roared like the sea thwarted of its prey. 



THE PASSING OF THE CUP 139 



with 



" Too late, agin ! " said David, breathing hard ; and 
shut the bolt home with a clang. Then he turned on 
his father. 

" Noo," said he ; " man to man ! " 

" Ay," cried the other ; " father to son 1 " 

The little man half turned and leaped at the old 
musketoon hanging on the wall. He missed it, turned 
again, and struck with the strap full at his son's face. 
David caught the falling arm at the wrist, hitting it 
aside. Then he smote his father upon the chest, and 
the little man staggered back, gasping, while the strap 
dropped from his numbed fingers. 

Outside, Red Wull whined and scratched, but the two 
men ignored him. 

David strode forward: there was death in his face. 
The little man saw it : his time was come ; but his 
bitterest foe never impugned Adam M' Adam's courage. 

He stood huddled in the corner, all dishevelled, 
nursing one arm with the other, entirely unafraid. 

" Mind, David," he said, quite calm, " murder 'twill 
be." 

" Murder 'twill be ! ** the boy answered in thick voice, 
and was across the room. 

Outside, Red Wull banged and clawed high up on 
the door with impotent pats. 

Of a sudden the little man slipped his hand into his 
pocket, pulled out something, and flung it. The missile 
pattered on David's face like a raindrop on a charging 
bull, and he smiled as he came on. It dropped softly 
on the table at his side ; he looked down and — it was 
the face of his mother which gazed up at him. 

" Mother," he sobbed, stopping short — " Mother 1 
ma God, ye saved him — and me ! " 



140 



OWD BOB 



He stood there, utterly unhinged, whimpering. 

It was a while before he had pulled himself together ; 
then he walked to the; wall, took down a pair of shears 
and seated himself at the table, still trembling. Near 
him lay the miniature, all torn and crumpled, and beside 
it the deep-buried axe-head. 

Picking up the strap, he began to snip it into little 
pieces. 

" Theer ! and theer ! and theer ! " he said, with each 
snip ; " it ye hit me agin there may be no mother to 
save y ..." 









)gether ; 
r shears 
'. Near 
i beside 

to little 

th each 
'ther to 



Red and Grey 



141 



RED AND GREY 



TIME has rolled on. 
In the kitchen of Kenmuir the firelight rollicks 
on red-tiled floor, on dark shutters, and great oak 
press. Before the blaze sits James Moore, unchanged 
despite the whirligig of time. On his knee dances Wee 
Anne, the ruddy firelight in her hair, battering at the 
lean cheek above her. The Master's grim mouth is 
relaxed ; love mellows the austere face. It is only at 
such moments that you see James Moore as he is : a 
stern, cold man, with a very tender nature deep hid 
beneath a veil of ice. 

From the back of the room Maggie, a woman now in 
face and figure, looks up to laughingly remonstrate with 
her father for spoiling the child ; while beneath the 
table, young Andrew whittles at a bludgeon. 

Above the mantelpiece hangs a bright - barrelled 
musket, with flask and powder-horn. Beneath again a 
painting of a grey dog's head. Crude it is, unsatis- 
factory, yet the painter has caught a little that wistful 
languor of the sad-clouded eyes that only appertains 
and always, to a Grey Dog of Kenmuir-Rex, son of 
Rally. And worthily placed beneath the old hero's 
portrait, challenging the eye in that homely kitchen as 
a diamond strung on a necklace of pearls, in large 



[l 



l; 



144 OWD BOB 

chaste majesty, is the Shepherds' Trophy. On its 
glory-scroll the last three names — 

A. M'Adam's WuU 

J. Moore's Bob 

J. Moore's Bob 

And there beneath his master's chair, his dark head 
peering out, his two soul-lights now softly shuttered 
now shining out again like beacon-fires, lies Owd Bob 
o' Kenmuir — the best sheep-dog in the North. 

One more tremendous victory on the banks of the 
Silver Lea, one last, and the Dale Cup, which for a 
hundred ''^ears had wandered homeless from North to 
South, from South to North again, would find a final 
resting-place in the hoar farmhouse beneath the Pike. 

It was on the occasion of his second victory that old 
Lochrae, most critical of captious Scots, declared 
roundly in a lull in the cheering — 

" The best sheep - dog in the North, as I live ! " 
Whereat the uproar was renewed ten-fold. 

" And why not the best in the world, my lord ? " asked 
Parson Leggy, as soon as he could make himself heard. 

"An' why not that, owd Cod-fish?" asked a shrill, 
fierce voice from the crowd. (It was Tammas — alack- 
the-day! — Tammas Thornton, drunk with victory and 
other things.) 

The old lord had his answer pat. 

" Aren't the sheep-dogs of the North the best in the 
world ? " he cried, and straightway found himself the 
best-loved man among ten thousand. It was after 
the presentation of the Cup that Lochrae, cannie man, 
offered James Moore one hundred pounds down for the 
grey dog; and when that was refused handed him a 
blank cheque, remarking resignedly, " Do what you 
like with it." 



■»' 



m. 



. ijiijtf.i. 



RED AND GREY 



Us 



" Then, my lord," said the Master drily, " I'll do this 1 " 
and tore the paper into little pieces. Whereat there 
were roars of — ** Faithfu' as the Moores and their tykes ! " 
— "Mak' him eat it!" — "Stuff it down t'owd lad's 
gizzern ! " and more to the same effect. It was then 
that James Moore had said, " We've never parted wid 
oor dogs and I'd be the last to part wid the best." 

Since that day the one burning question discussed 
in every tap-room from the Black Water to Grammoch 
Pike had been: Would oor Bob— «Th' Owd 'Un," 
as they loved to call him — win again — win outright? 
Could he, owd as he was in truth now, beat but once 
again that other ? of whom after the last battle Teddy 
Bolstock had heard one judge to another, "But for 
the turn at the ghyll Red had won." 



in the 

If the 

after 

man, 

)r the 

urn a 

you 



Owd Bob o' Kenmuir. 

Mention that name to any man within a score mile 
radius of the Muir Pike ; ask him if he has ever known 
or heard tell of a name to be paired with that. At 
first he will look you up and down in that slow, critical 
way these Dalesmen have, as if to gauge your earnest- 
ness. Satisfied on that point, he will laugh you to 
scorn ; and finally, if he thinks to have a ready listener 
will yarn for hours about the doings of the " best sheep- 
dog as ever was or will be." 

And many are the stories of him : some heavy with 
the solemn interest of life and death, some light as 
laughter ; some dealing with his own profession — shep- 
herding; some touching on wider and graver issues. 
Only, in hearing them, you must ever be prepared for 
that inevitable corollary, "An' I mind me hoo, as it 
med be just then, Adam M'Adam and his Red Wull " — 

The old dog's feats were the one subject on which 



lO 






I 






I 



146 



OWD BOB 



James Moore waxed sometimes almost voluble. " Get 
him on about Th' Owd 'Un, and, 'pon my life, he's 
quite the orator, eh, eh ! " said Squire Sylvester. 

" Yes," agreed Parson Leggy ; " the two of them are 
more like a man and his familiar friend than master 
and dog. Only yesterday he said to me, ' Tve had a 
mort of the Grey Dogs in ma time and yet none has bin 
the same to me as t* owd lad here.* And I believe him." 

Yet a stranger, seeing the two together, might never 
have guessed the bond between them, so undemon- 
strative were they. Of that silent, subtle sympathy 
there could be no doubt, however, did you watch them 
at work ; quiet, resolute, swift to action, slow to anger. 

And the Dalesmen were bursting with pride in that 
dog whose reputation had spread through half two 
kingdoms. 

"There's no* the marrer of him in t' land," they 
would affirm ; and were fierily jealous for his claim as 
peerless. 

In those days it was bad to depreciate the best sheep- 
dog in the North anywh re between the Scaur and the 
White Stones. Jim Mason, a man of peace, chased a 
scoffing stranger all down the High, ran him to ground 
in the blind Butcher's Alley, and thciC instilled the truth 
into his bosom as he sat upon it. Tupper banged 
and danged a huge Yorkshireman in the market-place 
for mentioning Owd Bob and spitting on the ground in 
the same breath. The Tyke had no insolent intent, at 
least so he afterwards declared, but — well, he sinned 
and he suffered, and what would you more? Whilst 
even Sam'l Todd, a hard man to rouse, but, once 
roused, harder still to stop, offered at the Border Ram 
to flatten any man's snout who dared to impugn the 
grey dog's supremacy — a standing challenge which was 



( 

m^ 



r\ 



RED AND GREY 



M7 



never taken up — except, indeed, by little M'Adam ; and 
him Sam'l met with, '• Iss, but thoo goes for nowt, thoo 
does : I said a man — not a maggot." Whereat M'Adam 
smote him in the face — which is not this tale. 

• >«•••• 

On some defeat has an inspiring effect, on some the 
reverse. In the case of Adam M'Adam and his Red 
Wull, it seemed to bring out the best and the worst 
that was in them. 

Amongst the Dalesmen, fear, intense yet never intense 
enough, hate, bubbling daily to the boiling-point, and 
jealousy of this little man they said was mad, and the 
great dug they alleged was bent on murder, were tinged 
with an unwilling spice of admirati jn for the pair who 
would not own defeat, whose deeds were only second 
to one other couple's. 

And the little man, day by day more dangerous, 
hourly arousing bitterer resentment, cursing them all 
and James Moore in particular as agin him and his 
Wullie, would many a time have been handled to his 
hurt but that the Tailless Tyke was always there, 
praying aloud for blood. 

As a sheep-dog, the Dalesmen to this day have 
nothing but abuse for Th' Owd 'Un's rival, so bitter is 
the old antipathy, so jealous their loyalty to that other 
name. But as the "Terror o* th' Border," the most 
terrific punisher who ever slew his foe, many a man 
still cherishes a sneaking pride in the Tailless Tyke. 

You may yet hear in the land of lakes how he dealt 
with that terrible trio, the Wexer, Wenus, and Wan 
Tromp ; those three fair sisters of whom John Swan 
declared, tears in his eyes, as he looked upon their ruin, 
" I did reck'n my three could tackle any livin' thing as 
showed teeth." 



w 



>}f 



148 



OWD BOB 



I 



Yet with that ferocity which won him an infernal 
notoriety through three countries, men who would then 
have murdered him for a song will now confess that he 
combined a certain rude chivalry, a savage nobility that 
scorned to take advantage of an adversary. Not even 
Long Kirby could call him bully; not even Tammas 
Thornton could deny him courage. Never — with 
always one exception — was he the aggressor. 

Like his master's, his personality invited antipathy. 
He was outlawed amongst his kind as M'Adam amongst 
his. Barely a dog in the countryside, barring only 
the little draggle-tailed lady of the Border Ram, but 
had at some time bowed before his teeth, and was 
nursing his revenge till a day should bring his chance. 
Yet — always with the one exception — he never attacked. 
One by one they sought him in battle, and he pinned 
them, shook them, and let them go ; and they never 
came ag'a,in. Now, when he followed his master into a 
tap-room, where M'Adam established himself there did 
he ; and the other dogs, ousted if necessary from their 
place, gathered together, scowled, bristled, and yet 
dared nothing : for they knew their lord, and, wise in 
their generation, waited. 

It was all on behalf of the little lady of the Border 
Ram that he fought the bloodiest battle of them all — 
his great fight with the Lion Dogs of Wood's travelling 
circus: Wilhelm an' Bismarck, that truculent pair, 
who nightly walked t' > stage in charge of Great Caesar of 
the mighty mane. 

" On to him, Bissy ! Eat him, Wilhelm ! Mince the 
joker for his insolence — ha ! ha ! " laughed young Wood 
as the fray began. 

And " He I he ! " giggled M'Adam, biting his nails ; 
but his face was dead-white. 



■p»l" 



RED AND GREY 



149 



" Separate 'em ! " cried a stranger in the fast-hurrying 
crowd. 

" Oh, ay," said M'Adam, leaping aside as the fighting 
three nigh swung him off his legs ; " the sand from the 
sea 1 " And his face was wet as the grass in the 
morning. 

Down the High-street they fought ; up the market- 
place; past the clock-tower; to the Hangman's Field 
without the town. Silent, murderous, lurching, swing- 
ing, heedless of the dumb mob hemming them all 
around. 

It was the only time, they say, but once, the Terror 
fought in earnest, fought to kill.^ It was the only time, 
but once, Red Wull was ever really roused, fighting it 
to a finish, exerting his whole gigantic strength in the 
bloody silence of that struggle. Certainly the only time 
he had every Dalesman present at his back. 

And all through, from the noisj'' grapple to the noise- 
less end, a little white-faced figure pattered round and 
round betwixt the combatants and crowd. 

" Here ! that'll do : he'll be hurt ! " blustered Wood, five 
minutes from the onset. 

" Oh, ay," said M* Adam, like a man in a trance ; " he 
will." And the perspiration rained off his face as he 
held on his revolving way. 

Another five minutes and — 

" Call him off! " roared the showman. 

(* Bellerophon, indeed, he killed because it was his duty. The slaying 
of the Mammoth was, I still believe, a mere mischance ; for he meant that 
truculent mastiff no real harm — only to quell his braggadocio. While the 
Vexer and Van Tromp, great-hearted Amazons, would allow him no 
alternative, preferring death rather than defeat ; and you may be sure that 
the Venus, fairest of the brindled three, would never have survived her 
sisters had she not been *'op«^cd" at the onset with cracked jaw and 
broken skull.) 



ISO 



OWD BOB 



liii 



"Oh, ay," muttered M'Adam, never pausing in his 
run ; "Wullie, come aff." 

Another pause and then — 

« It's murder ! " yelled Wood. " He'll kill 'em ! " 

" Oh, ay," came the little voice ; " he will." 

"I'll summons ye, by , I will!" screamed the 

other. "Call him off! Fetch a gun someone! Hi! a 
quid for a gun ! " 

" Oh, ay," said M'Adam, dodging round ; " * ullie 
come aff." And they heard him gasp as Wilhelm took 
a deeper hold. 

" They're worth two hundred pounds the pair ! " 
shrieked the showman. " They're my livelihood ! " 

" Oh, ay," said M'Adam, never taking his eyes off the 
battle ; *' Wullie's my life." And they say his white- 
lipped agony, as Red WuU slithered and almost fell, was 
pitiful to behold. 

Another pause. 

Bismarck was down ; and Wilhelm going under. 

The showman rushed in. 

" I'll stop it, by 1" 

" Back, thoo madman ! " panted the crowd ; and 
someone jerked him off. " He'll do for thee else when 
he's done thy dogs." 

When at length it was over, and Wilhelm and Bismarck, 
never again to be admired of emperors, never again to 
be caressed by queens, were borne slowly off the field. 
Wood swearing and crying alternately, a little man 
sat by the roadside, bathing the bloody head between 
his knees, and whispering, " Wullie, Wullie, bad dog ! 
ye play sae rough." 

• • « « • • • 

So through those years one seems to see that pair — 
Adam M'Adam and his Red Wull — forcing their way 



RED AND GREY 



151 



through the hostile crowd, doing great deeds and 
undoing them, indomitable : the little man, who was a 
hero and thought he was a martyr, with the face of a 
fanatic, mad eyes, and twitching fingers, plotting 
revenge, babbling of conspiracy, shouting his challenge ; 
the great dog, saturnine, sinister, scowling defiance : the 
two facing their enemies always alone and always 
together. 

And ever and anon a dark sad face comes softly on 
the scene. A dash ; an uproar ; a little, darting, heroic 
figure; a shrill voice, "Call him aflf, James Moore!" 
then a hand uplifted ; a straw descending ; a huge 
cowering form ; and again that voice, " WuUie, Wullie, 
wad ye ? " 

In season, out of season, they were always at it, those 
two. Often and oftener that straw was in request. 
Again and again the fight that must some day be was 
staved off by a miracle. At length M'Adam only saved 
it by turning on Jem Burton and assaultinf: him. 
" Wullie ! Wullie, to me ! " he cried, in voice of last 
extremity — "They're on me! Murder!" At the cry 
the great dog turned ; the fight was again postponed ; 
and Jem Burton, with a face like the moon and the 
agility of an athlete, was up the ladder and into the loft. 

And so, it seems to me, those two go down the vale — 
Red and Grey wrestling in mortal rivalry: the one 
vengeful, vindictive ; the other courteous still, gallant as 
always, ready, ay, and willing ; each always outdoing 
the other ; each in his way unapproachable : both 
awaiting the end. 



mmm 



i 



Part IV 



The Black Killer 



K4 l.Z ■ 




Part IV 
The Black Killer 



CHAPTER XVI 



A MAD MAN 



TAMMAS is on his feet in the tap-room of the 
Arms, brandishing a pewter. 

" Gen'lemen ! " he cries, his old face flushed — " I gie 
ye a toast. Stan' oop ! " 

The knot of Dalesmen round the fire rise like one. 
The old man waves his mug before him, reckless of the 
good ale that drips on to the floor. 

"The best sheep-dog i' t' North — Owd Bob o' 
Kenmuir ! " he cries. 

In an instant there is uproar : the merry applause of 
clinking pewters ; the stamping of feet ; the rattle of 
sticks. Rob Saunderson and Jim Mason are cheering 
with the best. Tupper and Ned Hoppin bellow each 
into the other's ear ; Long Kirby and Jem Burton bang 
one another valorously ; even Sam'l Todd and Sexton 
Ross are roused from their habitual melancholy, 

" Here's to Th' Owd 'Un ! Here's to oor Bob ! " yell 
stentorian voices ; while Rob Saunderson has jumped 
on to a chair. 



156 



OWD BOB 



I 



"Wid t' best sheep-dog i' t' North I gie ye the 
Shepherds' Trophy ! — won outreet, as will be." 

Instantly the clamour redoubles. 

«T' Dale Cup and Th' Owd 'Un !— t' Trophy and 
oor Bob ! — 'Ip, 'ip for the Grey Dogs ! — 'Ip, 'ip for t' 
best sheep-dog as ever was or will be ! — 'Ooray, 'ooray ! " 

It is some while before the noise subsides. Slowly 
the enthusiasts resume their seats. 

" Gentlemen a' 1 " 

A little unconsidered man is standing up at the back 
of the room. His face is aflame, and his hands twitch 
spasmodically. In front, with hackles drawn and 
greedy-gleaming jaw, a gaunt red-grizzled dog of war. 

" Noo," cries the little man, " I daur ye to repeat that 
lie ! " 

" Lie ! " screams Tammas ; " lie ! I'll gie 'im lie ! 
Lemme at 'im, I say ! " 

The old man in his fury has nigh surmounted the 
encircling ring of chairs before Jim Mason on the one 
hand and Rob Saunderson on the other can pull him back. 

" Coom, Mr. Thornton ! " soothes Rob, " let un' bide. 
Ye're not angered by the likes o' him, surely ? " and he 
jerks contemptuously towards the solitary figure at his 
back. 

Tammas resumes his seat unwillingly. 

The little man behind remains mute, waiting for his 
challenge to be taken up. In vain. And as he looks 
at the range of broad, impassive backs turned on him, 
he smiles bitterly. 

"They dursen't, WuUie, not a man of them a'. 
They're one — two — three — four . . . eleven to one, 
Wullie, and yet they dursen't. Eleven of them, and 
every man a coward! Long Kirby — Thornton — 
Tupper — Todd — Hoppin — Ross — Burton . . . and the 



A MAD MAN 



'57 



lie! 



rest, and not one but's a bigger man nor me and yet — 
Weel, we might ha* kent it. We should ha' kent 
Englishmen by noo. They're aye the same and aye 
have bin. They tell lies, black lies " — 

Tammas is half out of his chair, and only forcibly 
restrained by the men on either hand. 

" — And then they haena the courage to stan' by 'em. 
Ye're English, ivery man o' ye, to yer marrow." 

The little man's voice rises to a sob. He snatches up 
a tankard. 

" Englishmen I " he cries, waving it before him : 
" Here's a health I — The best sheep-dog as iver penned 
a flock — Adam M'Adam's Red Wulll" He pauses, 
pewter at his lips, and regards his audience with 
flashing eyes. There is no response from them. 

" WuUie, here's to you ! " he cries. " Luck and life to 
ye, ma trusty fier' ! Death and defeat to yer enemies 1 

* The warld's wrack we share o't. 
The warstle and the care o't.' " 

He raises the tankard and drains it to the lees. 

Then drawing himself up, he addresses his audience 
once more. 

" An' noo I'll warn ye aince and for a', and ye may 
tell James Moore I said it : he may plot agin us, 
Wullie and me ; he may threaten us ; he may win the 
Cup outreet for yon grey devil ; but there was niver a 
man or dog yet as did Adam M'Adam and his Red 
Wull a hurt but in the end he wush't his mither hadna 
born him." 

A little later and he walks out of the inn, his faithful 
retainer at his heels. 

It is then that Rob Saunderson says — 

"The HI man's mad; he'll stppt.at,,nat(i^n'j!J^nd-^p- 

3— "Nay ; not'eveii ttui-ai.**^ i . Uh 

.-.CARBORO 

PUBLIC LIBRARY. 



Tammas who answers- 



158 



OWD BOB 



M'Adam had aged much of late. His thin hair was 
altogether white ; his eyes like flames ; and his hands 
were always twittering, as though he were in everlasting 
pain. 

After the grey dog's second victory he had become 
morose and moody. At home, he would often sit silent 
for hours, drinking and glaring at the place where the Cup 
had been. Sometimes he talked in low, eerie voice to 
Red Wull ; and twice David, turning suddenly, had 
caught his father glowering stealthily at him with such 
an expression on his face as chilled the boy's blood. 
The two never spoke now ; and David held this sur- 
reptitious deadly enmity far worse than the old-time 
perpetual warfare. 

It was the same at the Sylvester Arms. The little man 
sat alone with Red Wull, exchanging words with no man, 
drinking steadily, brooding over his wrongs ; and ever 
and anon galvanised into sudden despairing eloquence. 

Other people than Tammas Thornton came to the 
conclusion that M'Adam would stop at nothing in the 
undoing of James Moore or the grey dog. They said 
drink and disappointment had turned his head ; that he 
was mad and dangerous. And on New Year's Day 
matters seemed coming to a crisis ; for it was reported 
that in the gloom of a snowy evening he had drawn 
a knife on the Master in the High-street, but slipped 
before he could accomplish his fell design. 

Parson Leggy confessed candidly that he should be 
thankful when the last great struggle was over, and the 
Trophy won outright or lost for ever. He didn't want 
a cause calibre yi his parish : — Leaded headlines : 
Murder on the Moors — Dogged by a Dog — The Parson 
Interviewed — Suspicions I Ugh-h 1 ^ 



A MAD MAN 



159 



Most of them all, David was haunted with an ever- 
present fear. For he had heard his father when the 
drink was in him screaming, battering in the deadly 
silence of the night ; calling on God to avenge him on 
his enemies, to up and smite, to overwhelm them in 
awful catastrophe — had heard and feared. The boy 
even went so far as to warn his friend against his father. 
But the Master only smiled grimly. 

" Thank ye, lad, thank ye. But I reck'n we can fend 
for oorsel's, Bob and I — eh, Owd *Un ? " 

Anxious as David in fact was, he was not above pre- 
suming on the existing apprehension to take advantage 
of Maggie's fears. One Sunday night he was escorting 
her home from church, when, just before the larch-copse, 

"Goo' sakes! what's that?" he ejaculated, in horror- 
laden tones. 

" What, Davie ? " cried the girl, shrinking to him in 
a tremble. 

"Couldna say for sure. It med be owt, or agin it 
med be nowt. But grip thoo my arm, I'll grip thy waist." 

Maggie demurred. 

" Canst see owt ? " she asked, stili in a flutter. 

«Be'indth"edge." 

"Wheer?" 

" Theer," pointing vaguely. 

" I canna see nowt." 

"Why, theer! lass. Doestna see? . . . Pit your head 
along o' mine — so — closer — closer yet!" then in 
aggrieved tones, "Whativer's gotten to thee, wench? 
I med be a leprosy, surely." 

But the girl was walking away, her head high as the 
snow-capped Pike. 

"So long as I live, David M'Adam, I'll niver go to 
church wid thee agin." 



i6o 



OWD BOB 



A retort so obvious could not be passed by. 

" Yes, but you will though — onst," he answered low. 

Maggie whisked round, superbly indignant. 

" What doesta' mean, Sir — r — r ? " 

" Thoo kens what I mean, lass," he Replied, sheepish 
and shuffling before her queenly anger. 

She looked him up and down and down and up again. 

"I'll niver speak to thee agin, Mr. M'Adam," she 
cried, " not if it was ever so. . . . Nay, I'll walk home by 
myself, thank you. I'll ha' nowt to do wi' thee." 

So the two must return to Kenmuir, one behind the 
other, like a lady and her footman. 

David's audacity had many times already been nigh 
to causing a rupture. The occurrence behind the hedge 
set the cap on his impertinences. That was past 
enduring, and Maggie by her bearing let him know it. 

David endured the girl's new attitude for twelve 
minutes by the kitchen clock. Then, "Sulk wi' me, 
indeed ! I'll teach her ! " and he marched out of the 
door, " niver to cross it agin, ma wud ! " But afterwards 
^he relented so far as to continue his visits to Kenmuir, 
always, however, pointedly excluding from his favour 
the sweet offender, who in her turn would proceed about 
her business all rosy with chin-tilted disdain. 



The suspicions that M'Adam cherished dark desiprn*^ 
against James Moore were somewhat confirmed it that, 
on several occasions in the bitter dusks ^nuary 

afternoons, a little insidious figure was a lurking 
amongst the farm-buildings of Kenmuir. 

Once Sam'i Todd caught the little man fairly. .am'l 
took him up bodily and carried him down the slope to 
the Wastrel, shaking him gently the while. Across the 
stream he put him on his feet. 



A MAD MAN 



i6i 



" If I catch thee cadgerin' aroun' the farm agin, HI 
man," he admonished, with warning finger, " I'll tak' 
thee and drap thee in t' sheep-wash, sista' noo? I'd 
ha' done it this time an thoo'd bin a bigger and a 
younger mon. But theer! thoo's sic an atomy bit 
Noo, rin away home." And the little man slunk off. 

For a time he appeared there no more. Then, one 
evening, James Moore, going the round of the out- 
buildings, felt Owd Bob stiffen against his side. 

"What's oop, lad?" he whispered, halting; and, 
dropping his hand on the old dog's neck, felt a ruff 
rising beneath it. 

" Steady, lad, steady I " he whispered. " What is't ? " 

Peering forward into the looming night, at length he 
discerned a little familiar figure huddled away in the 
crevice between two stacks. 

" Thee is't, M'Adam ? " he cried, and bending, seized 
a wisp of Owd Bob's coat in a grip like a vice. 

Then in a great voice, moved to rare anger, 

" Oot o' this afoor I do thee a hurt, thoo miserable 
spyin' creeturl Ye mun wait till dark cooms to hide 
ye, ye coo'ard, afoor ye daur coom crawl in' aboot ma 
hoose, skearin' t* women-folk, and up to yer devilments. 
An thoo's owt to say to me, coom like a man in the open 
day. . . . Noo pack 1 afoor I lay ma clutches on thee." 

He stood there in the dusk, tall and mighty, a terrible 
figure, one hand pointing to the gate, the other still 
grasping the grey dog. 

The little man scuttled away in the half-iighc, and 
out of the yard. 

On the plank-bridge he turned and shook his fist 
at the darkening house. 

" Curse ye, James Moore ! " he sobbed. " I'll be even 
wi' ye yet" 
II 



I 



! i 



;* 



CHAPTER XVII 



DEATH ON THE MARCHES 



•s 



m 



ON the top of this there followed an attempt on Th' 
Owd 'Un. At least there was no other account- 
ing for the affair. 

In the dead of a long - remembered night James 
Moore was waked by a low moaning beneath his room. 
He leaped out of bed and ran to the window to see his 
favourite dragging about the yard, the dark head down, 
the proud brush for once lowered, the supple limbs, 
wooden, heavy, unnatural — altogether pitiful. 

In a moment he was downstairs and out. 

" Whativer's gotten to thee, Owd 'Un ? " he cried, in 
anguish. 

At the sound of that dear voice the old dog tried to 
struggle to him ; could not, and fell, whimpering. 

In a second the Master was with him, examining 
him tenderly, and crying for Sam'l, who slept above 
the stables. 

There was every symptom of foul play : the tongue 
was swollen and almost black ; the breathing laboured ; 
the body twitched horribly; and the soft grey eyes 
were blood-streaked and straining in agony. 

With the aid of Sam'l and Maggie, drenching first 
and stimulants after, the Master pulled him round. 
And soon Jim Mason and Parson Leggy, hurriedly 
summoned, came running hot-foot to the rescue. 

162 



I 



•^ 






I' ' 

I' ^ 



DEATH ON THE MARCHES 163 

Prompt and stringent measures saved the victim, 
but only just. For a time the best sheep-dog in the 
North was pawing at the Gate of Death. And as tbey 
doctored him in the kitchen it almost seemed that the 
great silver Cup upon the mantelpiece quivered in its 
anxiety. It was a close thing : Owd Bob o' Kenmuir 
was nigh gone. In the end, as the grey dawn broke, 
the danger passed. 

The attempt, if attempt it was, aroused passionate 
indignation in the countryside. It seemed the cul- 
minating point of the excitement long seething. 

There were no traces of the culprit; not a vestige 
to lead to incrimination. But as to the perpetrator, if 
there were no proofs there were yet fewer doubts. 
Parson Leggy, who was seldom hard upon his fellow- 
men, declared to the Squire with an emphatic shrug of 
his shoulders, "You know the motive and you know 
the man." Whilst amongst the Dalesmen suspicion 
amounted to certainty. 

At the Sylvester Arms, Long Kirby asked M'Adam 
point blank for his explanation of the matter. 

" Hoo do I 'count for it?" the little man cried. "I 
dinna 'count for it ava." 

" Then hoo did it happen ? " asked Tammas harshly. 

" I dinna believe it did happen," the little man 
replied. "I haud it's a lee o' James Moore's — a 
charactereestic lee." 

Whereat they chucked him out incontinently; for 
the Terror for once was elsewhere. 

Now that afternoon is to be remembered for threefold 
causes. Firstly, as has been said, M'Adam was alone. 
Secondly, a minute after his ejectment, the window of 
the tap-room was thrown wide and the little man 
looked in. He spoke no word, but those dim. 



T 



164 



OWD BOB 






■% 



•ii 



i : 



smouldering eyes wandered from face to face, jesting 
for a second on each as if to burn them on his memory. 

" I'll remember ye, gentlemen," he said at length, shut 
the window and was gone. 

Thirdly, for a reason now to be told. 

On this day, James Moore, leaving the old dog behind 
to rest and resume his outraged vitality, had crossed to 
Grammoch-town. On his way home he met Jim Mason 
with Gyp, the faithful Betsy's unworthy successor. 
Together they started for the long tramp home. And 
that journey is marked with a red stone in this story. 

All day long the hills had been lost in mist. Through- 
out there had been an accompanying drizzle ; and in the 
distance the wind had moaned a storm-menace. To the 
darkness of the day was added the sombreness of falling 
night as the three began the ascent of the Pass. As 
they emerged into the Devil's Bowl, it was altogether 
black and blind. But the threat of wind had passed, 
leaving utter stillness ; and the splash of an otter on 
the far side of the Tarn clanged in the silence as they 
skirted that darkling water. When at length the last 
steep rise on to the Marches had been topped, a breath 
of soft air smote them lightly, and the curtain of fog 
began drifting away, leaving behind luminous night. 

The two men swung steadily through the heather 
with that reaching stride the birthright of moor-men 
and Highlanders. They talked but little: a word or 
two on sheep and the approaching lambing-time ; 
thence on to the coming Trials ; the Shepherds' Trophy ; 
Owd Bob and the attempt on him; and from that to 
M'Adam and the Tailless Tyke. 

" Doesta' reck'n M' Adam had a hand in't ? " the post- 
man was asking. 

" There's no proof." 



- 



*,■ 



DEATH ON THE MARCHES 165 



I 



" 'Ceptin' he's mad to get shut o' Th' Owd 'Un afoor 
Cup Day." 

" 'Im or me ; it mak's no differ." 

Jim looked up at his companion. 

" Doesta' think it'll coom to that ? " he asked. 

"What?" 

"Why; murder." 

" Not if I can help it," the other answered grimly. 

The fog had quite cleared off by now, and the moon 
was up. To their right, on the crest of a rise some 
two hundred yards away, a murk cloud of wood bristled 
against the sky. As they passed it, a blackbird rose 
up screaming ; and a brace of wood - pigeons winged 
noisily away. 

" Hullo 1 hark to the yammerin'!" muttered Jim, 
stopping ; " and at this time o' neet too I " 

Some rabbits, playing in the moonlight on the out- 
skirts of the wood, sat up, listened, and hopped back 
into security. At the same moment a big hill-fox slunk 
out of the covert. He stole a pace forward and halted, 
listening with one ear back and one paw raised ; then 
cantered silently away in the gloom, passing close to 
the two men, yet observing them not at all. 

" What's oop, I Wv der ? " mused the postman. 

" The fox set *em clackerin', I reck'n." 

" Not he ; he was skeared 'maist oot o' his skin," the 
other answered ; then in tones of suppressed excitement, 
with his hand on the Master's arm, " And sitha' ! theer's 
ma Gyp a-beckonin' on us ! " 

There, indeed, on the crest of the rise beside the 
wood stood the little lurcher, now looking back at his 
master, and then stealing forward. 

" Ma wud 1 theer's summat wrong yonder," cried Jim, 
and jerked the postbags off his shoulder. "Coom on 



w 



1 66 



OWD BOB 



I 



Master ! " and he set off running towards the dog ; while 
James Moore, himself excited now, followed hard. 

Some score yards from the lower edge of the spinney, 
upon the farther side of the ridge, a tiny beck tinkled 
in its black bed. The two men, as they topped the rise, 
noticed a flock of black-faced sheep clustered in the dip 
'twixt wood and stream. They stood marshalled in 
close array, facing half towards the wood, half towards 
the new comers ; heads up, eyes glaring, handsome as 
sheep only look when scared. 

On the crest of the ridge the two men halted. The 
postman stood with his head a little forward, listening 
intently. Then he dropped in the heather like a dead 
man, pulling the other with him. 

" Doon, man I " he whispered, clutching at Gyp with 
his spare hand. 

"What is't?" asked the Master, now thoroughly 
roused. 

"Summat movin' i' t' wood," the other whispered, 
listening weasel-eared. 

So they lay motionless for a while ; but there came 
no sound from the copse. 

" Happen 'twas nowt," the postman at length allowed, 
peering cautiously about. " And yet I thowt — I dunno 
reetly what I thowt." Then starting to his knees, with 
a hoarse cry of terror, " Save us ! what's yon theer ? " 

Then the Master raised his head and noticed, lying 
in the gloom between them and the array of sheep, a 
still, white huddle. 

James Moore was a man of deeds. 

" It's past waitin*," he cried, and sprang forward, heart 
in mouth. 

The sheep stamped and shuffled as he came, and yet 
did not break. 



I 



.■' 



,AV 



DEATH ON THE MARCHES 167 



" Ah, thanks be ! " he cried, dropping beside the dull- 
glimmering heap ; " it's nobbut a sheep." As he spoke, 
his hands were wandering deftly over the carcase. 
" But what's this ? " he called. " Stout " she was as me. 
Look at her fleece — crisp, close, strong ; feel the flesh — 
firm as a rock. And ne'er a bone broke, ne'er a scrat 
on her body a pin could mak'. Healthy as a man — and 
yet dead as mutton 1 " 

Jim, still all a-shake from the horror of his fear, came 
up and knelt beside his friend. 

" Ah, but theer's bin devilry in this ! " he said ; " I 
reck'ned they sheep had bin badly skeared and not so 
long agone." 

"Sheep-murder, sure enough," the other answered. 
" No fox's doin' : a girt-grown two-shear as could 'maist 
knock a h'ox." 

Jim's hands travelled from the body to the dead 
thing's throat. He screamed. 

" Odswinge, Master ! See theer ! " He held his hand 
up in the moonlight. It dripped red. " And warm — 
yet warm ! " 

"Tear some bracken, Jim," ordered the other; "and 
set a-light." 

The postman did as bid. For a moment the fern 
smouldered and smoked, then the flame ran crackling 
along and shot up in the darkness, weirdly lighting the 
scene: to the right the low wood, a block of solid 
blackness against the sky; in front the yellow wall of 
sheep, with spurting breath and eyes shining in the 
gloom ; and as centrepiece that white, ghastly corpse 
with the kneeling men and lurcher sniffing tentatively 
round. 

The victim was subjected to a critical examination. 

* Stout— hearty. 



u/ 



1 68 



OWD BOB 



i^ 



t r- 



The throat, and that only, had been hideously mauled ; 
the flesh hung in shreds from gaping wounds ; on 
the ground all about were little pitiful dabs of wool, 
wrenched off in a struggle ; and crawling amongst the 
fern roots, a snake-like track of red led down to the stream. 

" A dog's doin' and no mistakin' that," said Jim, at 
length. 

" Ay," answered the Master, with slow emphasis ; 
" and a sheep-dog's, too, and an old *un's, sista' ? or I'm 
no shepherd." 

" Why that ? " the postman asked, puzzled. 

" Becos," the Master answered, " 'im as did this killed 
for blood — and for blood only. If it had bin any other 
dog — g-reyground, bull, tarrier, or even a young sheep- 
dog — d'ye think he'd ha' stopped wid the one? Not 
he ; he'd ha' gone through 'em, and be runnin* 'em as 
like as not yet, nippin' 'em, pullin' 'em down, till he'd 
mebbe killed the half. But 'im as did this killed for 
blood, I's uphod. He got it — killed just the one, and 
nary touched t' others, sista', Jim?" 

The postman whistled long and low. 

"It's what owd Wrottesley 'd tell on," he said; "I 
never nobbut half-believed him then — I do noo, though. 
D'ye mind what t' owd lad 'd tell. Master?" 

James Moore nodded. 

" That's it. I've never seen the like afoor myself, but 
I've heard ma grand-dad speak o't gay often. An owd 
dog '11 get the cravin* for sheep's blood on him, just the 
same as a man does for t' drink ; he creeps oot o' neets, 
gallops afar, hunts his sheep, doons 'er, and satisfies the 
cravin'. And he nary kills but the one, they say, for he 
kens the valie o' sheep same as you and me. He has 
his gallop, quenches the thirst, and then he's for home, 
mebbe a score mile away, and no one the wiser i' t' 



DEATH ON THE MARCHES 169 



morn. And so on, till he comes to a bloody death, the 
murderin' traitor." 

" If he does," said Jim. 

" And he does, they say, nigh always. For he gets 
bolder and bolder wi' not bein' caught, until one gay neet 
a bullet lets leet intil him ; and some man gets knocked 
nigh endways when they bring his best tyke home i' t' 
morn, dead, wi' t' sheep's woo' yet stickin' in his gab." 

The postman whistled. 

" It's what owd Wrottesley 'd tell on to a tick And 
he'd say, if ye mind, Master, as hoo the dog 'd niver 
kill his master's sheep — kind o* conscience like." 

" Ay, I've heard that," allowed the Master. 

Jim Mason rose from his knees. 

" Ma wud ! " he said, " I wish Th' Owd 'Un was here. 
He'd haply show us summat.** 

" I nobbut wish he was," said the master. 

As he spoke there \^as a crash in the wood above 
them ; a sound as of some big body bursting furiously 
through brushwood. 

The two men rushed to the top of the rise. In the 
darkness nothing could be seen ; only, standing motion- 
less and holding their breaths, they could hear the faint 
sound, ever growing fainter, of some creature splashing 
in a hasty gallop over the wet moors. 

" Yon's him ! Yon's no fox, I'll lay ! And a parlish big 
*un, too; heark to him ! " cried Jim. Then to Gyp. who 
had rushed off in hot pursuit, " Coom away back, chuckle- 
*ead ! what's use o' you agin a gallopin' 'potamus ? " 

The sounds died away and away, and were no more. 

" That's 'im, the devil ! " said the Master. 

" Nay ; the devil has a tail, they do say," replied Jim 
thoughtfully. For already the light of suspicion was 
focusing its red glare. 



1 



ll ' I ' 



CHAPTER XVIII 

THE BLACK KILLER 

THAT was the first only of a long series of such 
crimes. 

Those who have not lived in a desolate country like 
that about the Muir Pike, where sheep are paramount 
and every other man engaged in the profession pastoral, 
can hardly imagine the sensation aroused. In market- 
place, tavern, or cottage, the subject of conversation 
was always the latest sheep-murder and the yet un- 
detected criminal. 

Sometimes there would be a lull, and the shepherds 
would begin to breathe more freely. Then there would 
come a stormy night, when the heavens were veiled in 
the cloak of crime and the wind moaned fitfully over 
mere and marches, and another victim was added to 
the lengthening list. 

It was always such black nights, nights of wind and 
weather when no man would be abroad, that the 
murderer chose for his bloody work. And that was 
how he earned his ominous name — the Black Killer. In 
the Dale-land they still call a wild, wet night a " Black 
Killer's neet"; for, say they, " His ghaist'll be oot the neet" 

There was hardly a farm in the countryside but was 
marked with the seal of blood. Kenmuir escaped and 
the Grange ; Rob Saunderson at the Holt, and Tupper 
at Swinsthwaite ; and those four only. 

170 



THE BLACK KILLER 



171 



. 






As for Kenmuir, Tammas declared with a certain 
grim pride, "He knows better'n to coom wheer Th* 
Owd 'Un be." Whereat M'Adam was seized with a fit 
of internal spasms, rubbing his knees and cackling 
insanely for half an hour afterwards. And as for the 
luck of the Grange — well, there was a reason for that, 
too, so the Dalesmen affirmed. 

Though the area of crime stretched from the Black 
Water to Grammoch-town, there was never a sign of 
the perpetrator. The Killer did his bloody work with a 
thoroughness, a devilish cunning, that defied detection. 
It was plain that each murder might be set down to the 
same agency. Each was stamped with the same un- 
mistakable sign-manual : one sheep killed, its throat 
torn into red rags, and the others untouched. 

It was these strange concomitant circumstances, the 
cold-blooded calculating nature of the crimes, which 
aroused the general interest. For the matter created 
a sensation far outside the Dale-land. 

In the journals devoted to flock -and -stock interests, 
each new murder was faithfully catalogued, and its 
attendant circumstances described in the minutest 
detail. There was a lengthy and heated correspon- 
dence in the Fell on the subject ; the general tendency 
being towards the incredulous. Those who gave them- 
selves out as authorities declared at first that the whole 
thing must be a hoax. Reluctantly convinced at length 
that the crimes were, in fact, no myth, these knowing 
ones were aroused to an ecstasy of ridicule by the 
assertion — originating in James Moore, upheld by 
Parson Leggy and every Dalesman — that the Black 
Killer was a sheep-dog. 

In the end Parson Leggy wrote a long letter to the 
Felly setting forth his reasons for the belief. But the 



172 



OWD BOB 



i I 



editor was not to be convinced. In a footnote he 
thanked the Parson for his " romantic and interesting " 
letter ; but dismissed the explanation as preposterous ; 
for, said he, " We have never heard of such a case." 

It was at the instigation of Parson Leggy that the 
Squire imported a bloodhound to track the Killer to 
his doom. Set on at a fresh-killed carcase at the One- 
Tree Knowe, he carried the line a distance in the 
direction of the Muir Pike ; then was thrown out by a 
little bustling beck, and never acknowledged the scent 
again : afterwards he became unmanageable. The 
Master of the Border Hunt lent a couple of foxhounds, 
who effected nothing. Jim Mason set a cunning trap or 
two, and caught his own bob-tailed tortoiseshell, and a 
terrible wigging from his missus ; Ned Hoppin sat up 
with a gun over a new-slain victim ; and Londesley of 
the Home Farm poisoned a carcase. But the Killer 
never returned to the kill and went about in the midst 
of them all, carrying on his infamous traffic, and laugh- 
ing up his sleeve. 

Meanwhile the Dalesmen raged and swore vengeance ; 
their impotence, their unsuccess, and losses, heating 
their wrath to madness. And the bitterest sting of it 
all lay in this : that though they could not detect him, 
they were nigh to positive as to the culprit. 

Many a time was the Black Killer named in low- 
voiced conclave ; many a time did Long Kirby, as he 
stood in the Border Ram and watched M'Adam and 
the Terror walking down the High, nudge Jim Mason 
and whisper — 

" Theer's t' Killer, oneasy be his grave I " To which 
practical Jim always made the same retort — 

" Ay, theer's t' Killer, but wheer's t' proof? " 

And therein lay the crux. There was scarcely a 



THE BLACK KILLER 



'73 



man in the countryside who doubted the guilt of the 
Tailless Tyke, but, as Jim said, where was the proof? 
They could but point to his well-won nickname ; declare 
that he was a byword throughout the land for his 
ferocity ; tell how he slew the Vexer and Van Tromp, 
and like tales ; say that magnificent sheep-dog as he 
was, he was notorious even in his work as a rough- 
handler of stock ; and last, remark significantly, that 
the Grange was one of the few farms that had escaped 
unscathed — not evidence enouq[h, as Parson Leggy 
declared, on which to drown a fiea, much less impeach 
a sheep-dog on such a charge. 

The judgment of the Dalesmen may, indeed, have been 
distorted by prejudice ; for no one of them but bore on his 
own person or his dog's the mark of that huge savage. 

" Look here ! " cries Saunderson, and discovers a 
ragged wound on Shep's throat; "that's t' Terror — 
black be his fa' 1 " 

" And, see, thiccy — his work ! " continues Tupper, and 
shows the yet raw scars on Rasper's neck. 

** And he near killed ma Lassie I " cries Londesley. . 

" And he did kill the Wexer !" 

" And Wan Tromp ! " 

" But old Wenus '11 pay 'im yet, I's uphod ! " says 
John Swan with bitter confidence, and pulls out that 
fair smiling Amazon, battered past recognition, yet 
dreaming always and still dreaming of her revenge. 

" Ah," says Tammas, " tykes love him nigh as mickle 
as we do. Watch noo ! " 

The old man rises and trots out of the inn. 
A minute's pause, and then from down the road 
comes the tap of a stick, the shuffling of uncertain 
steps, and blending with these the heavy velvet 
pad-pad of huge hushed feet. Straightway every dog 






174 



OWD BOB 



•i 



in the tap-room starts from deep-seeming slumber. 
Tupper's big bob-tail rises to his feet and scowls fear- 
fully ; the Venus stands four-square, petrified, grinning 
her hope ; old Shep, Lassie, and the rest cluster round 
these two, moving slow, stiff, wooden, eyes rolling 
askance to watch the door. 

The shuffling steps draw nigh; the slow-cadenced 
hush-hush-hush of those ghostly whispering feet thrills 
the silence. 

The dogs stand now motionless; heads shot far 
forward, lips lifting, teeth that grin in deadly tiers, and 
eyes glassy — picture of cowed rage; and there swells 
and sinks and swells again a noise as of the far sea, 
muffled, tremendous, booming, such as to shake the room. 

A hand rattles the lock ; a stringy voice quavers, 
" Squats he — he in Wallace's bed ! " Tammas's nut-face 
grins round the door ; and the dogs resume their former 
attitudes — scowling, suspicious, sulky at being thus 
duped. 



Meanwhile over M'Adam, all unsuspicious of these 
suspicions, a change had come. Whether it was that 
for the nonce he heard less of the best sheep-dog in 
the North, or for some more occult reason, certain it is 
that he became his old self His tongue wagged as 
gaily and bitterly as ever ; and hardly a night passed 
but he infuriated Tammas to blows with his insidious 
sarcasms. Asked by Long Kirby if he had any 
explanation of the Black Killer mystery, "Why blackf" 
M* Adam asked earnestly ; " why black mair than white^ 
or grey, we'll say ? " It was not the only time he put 
the identical question in that identical form ; and in the 
end Tammas and the more far-seeing ones opined there 
must be something behind it, though they knew not what. 



THE BLACK KILLER 



175 



David, too, marked the difference in the little man. 
For his father nagged at him now with all the old 
spirit. At first he rejoiced in the change, preferring this 
outward and open warfare to that aforetime stealthy 
enmity. But soon he almost wished the other back ; 
for the older he grew the more difificult did he find it 
to endure these everlasting bickerings. 

For one reason he was truly glad of the altered 
condition of affairs ; he believed that for the nonce, at 
least, his father had abandoned his ill-designs against 
James Moore; those sneaking night-visits to Kenmuir 
were, he hoped, discontinued. 

Yet Maggie Moore, had she been on speaking terms 
with him, could have undeceived him. For one night 
when alone in the kitchen, on looking up she saw to 
her horror a dim, moon-like face glued against the 
window-pane. In the first mad panic of the moment 
she almost screamed and dropped her work ; then — a 
true Moore — controlled herself, and sat feigning to 
work, yet watching all the while. 

It was M'Adam — she recognised ^hat : the face pale 
in its framework of black ; the hair lying dank upon 
his forehead ; the white eyelids blinking, slow, regular, 
horrible. She thought of the stories she had heard of 
his sworn vengeance on her father. Her heart stood 
still, and yet she made no move. Then with a gasp of 
relief she discerned that the eyes were not directed 
upon her. Secretly following their gaze, she saw they 
rested on the Shepherds' Trophy ; and on the Cup they 
remained fixed immovable, while she sat motionless, 
and watched. 

An hour, it seemed to her, elapsed before they shifted 
their gaze and wandered round the room. For a second 
they dwelt on her ; then the face withdrew into the night, 



176 



OWD BOB 



ih 



m 



Maggie told no one what she had seen. Knowing 
how terrible her father was in anger, she deemed it 
wiser to keep silence. And as for Mr. David M'Adam, 
she should never speak to him again ! 

Nor for a moment did that young man sun. • 
whence his father came, when, on the night in question, 
M'Adam returned to the Grange, chuckling. David of 
late was growing accustom'jd to these fits of silent, 
causeless merriment ; and when his father began to 
giggle and mutter to Red WuU, at first he paid no heed. 

" He ! he I Wullie, aiblins we'll beat him yet. 
There's many a slip 'twixt Cup and lip — eh, Wullie, 
he! he!" and bj made allusions to the flourishing of 
the wicked aru their fall ; ending always with the same 
refrain — " He ! he ! Wullie, aiblins we'll beat him yet." 

So he continued, until David, his patience exhausted, 
asked roughly — 

"What is't ye're mumblin' aboot? Who is it ye'll 
beat, you and yer Wullie ? " 

The lad's tone was as contemptuous as his words. 
Long ago he had discarded any semblance of respect 
for his father. 

M'Adam rubbed his knees and giggled. 

"Heark to the dear lad, Wullie! Listen hoo plea- 
santly he addresses his auld dad." Then turning on 
his son and leering ; " Wha is it, ye ask ? Wha should 
it be but the Black Killer? Wha else is there I'd be 
wushin' to hurt ? " 

"The Black Killer?" echoed the boy, and looked at 
his father in amazement ; for well he knew what rumour 
said. 

" T' Bla«k Killer ! What do you know o' t' Killer ? " 

"Why d/ack, I wad ken? Why black}'' the little 
man asked, leaning forward. 



THE BLACK KILLER 



177 



" What would ye have him then ? ** the boy asked — 
"Red — yaller — muck — dirt colour?" and he stared 
significantly at the Tailless Tyke. 

The little man ceased his rubbing and eyed the boy. 
David shifted uneasily. 

"Well?" he said at length, gruffly. 

The little man giggled, and his two thin hands took 
up their task. 

"Aiblins his puir, auld, doited fool of a dad kens 
mair than the dear lad thinks for, ay, or wushes. Eh, 
Wullie— he ! he ! " 

" Then what is it ye do know, or think ye know ? " 
Uavid asked irritably. 

The little man nodded and chuckled. 

"Naethin' ava, laddie, naethin' worth the mention. 
Only aiblins the Killer '11 be caught afore sae lang." 

David wagged his head in offensive scepticism. 

" Ye'll catch him yersel', I s'pose, you and yer Wullie? — 
tak' a chair on to t' Marches, whistle a while, and when 
t' Killer coom?, vvliy i pit a pinch a salt upon his tail — 
if he has oner 

At the last words, heavily punctuated, the little man 
stopped his rubbing as though shot. , 

" What wad ye mean by that ? " very softly. 

" What wud I ? " 

A long silence. 

" I dinna ken for sure ; and it's aiblins just as well 
for you, dear lad," — in fawning accents, — " that I dinna." 
He began to rub and giggle afresh. " And yet, despite 
oor facetious lad there, aiblins we will ha' a hand in the 
Killer's catchin', you and I, Wullie, he ! he ! " and the 
great dog wagged his stump-tail in acquiescence. 

David rose from his chair and walked across to his 
father. 
xa 



178 



OWD BOB 



"If you know sec a mighty heap," he shouted, 
" happen you'll tell me what ye do know." 

M'Adam looked up. 

"Tell ye? Ay, wha should I tell if not ma dear 
David? Tell? Ay, 111 tell ye this,"— with sudden, 
snarling bitterness, — " that you'd be the vairy last person 
I wad tell." 



CHAPTER XIX 



IN THE FOG 



THE Black Killer pursued his bloody way. The 
public, always greedy of a new sensation, took 
up the matter. In all the great Dailies, articles on the 
Agrarian Outrages appeared. Controversy raged high ; 
each correspondent had his own theory and his own 
solution of the problem ; and each waxed indignant as 
his were discarded for another's. 

Locally, strenuous were the efforts made to effect a 
capture or conviction. The magistrates held meetings ; 
watchers, armed, were posted in likely spots with orders 
to shoot on sight ; John Swan's famous trail-hound, 
Reiver, was twice tried and twice failed ; while the police 
were energetic to perspiration, and effected, in accordance 
with the most sacred traditions of that force, nothing. 

With immunity, the criminal's audacity grew. He 
attempted and achieved amazing darings. On the 
Windy Brant he killed and gutted his sheep not a 
cat-lowp from the shepherd's hut. Ned Hoppin's 
tarrier-dog, who must have come upon him in the act 
and forthwith fallen on him — little great-heart ! — he slew 
and meagrely buried at his master's fold-gate. 

Still, despite it all, there was no clue. He seemed 
invulnerable ; clothed upon with invisibility. Jake 
Burton, indeed, vowed he had fought an Homeric 
battle with the creature in the Devil's Bowl, and des- 

179 



i8o 



OWD BOB 



cribed him with minute particulars — " a monstrous mak' 
o' beast, big as a h'elephunk — 'orns and all ! " And in 
proof of his tale he showed the mud-stains on his 
breeches where, it seems, he had sat down exhausted 
after the rout of his adversary. But there were found 
those unkind enough to mimic the sudden staggering 
collapse of the dreadfully drunk. 

It was this recklessness of the Killer's that in the end 
failed only by a mere mischance of his undoing ; and 
even then it might have served to incriminate but for 
an unhappy coincidence. 

In this matter the Master figured principally. He and 
Owd Bob were crossing the Marches with a flock : a wind- 
less day ; the whole vast moorland shrouded in mist. 

Slowly the convoy advanced through the still noon. 
The mist fell thick and thicker. The gaunt Scaur, 
signal-post in front, was lost to view ; the low-lying 
osier brakes melted away and were no more seen. 

Then the fog clapped on them like a hood, white, 
wet, impenetrable. The Master called a halt. In vain : 
the sheep surged on, and in a moment were lost to him. 

For a while the old dog formed a link between him 
and the flock. A cold, encouraging muzzle thrust into 
his hand would warn him that all was as yet well. 
Seeing, however, that it was futile to persevere, 

" Keep wid t' sheep, lad," he ordered. The wet nose 
quitted his hand, and he knew himself alone. 

He sat down in the heather to wait. A great while, 
it seemed, he lay there, head pillowed in his hands, 
musing at large : of the coming fight for the Trophy ; 
of David and Maggie and their long-time feud ; of the 
Killer and Red Wull. 

Unseeing and unseen he lay there, the sleepy 
moorland life all round him. Gradually the drone and 
lethargy of it overcame him. The cropping of invisible 



IN THE FOG 



i8i 



nose 



eepy 

and 

sible 



sheep ; the rasping of torn grass ; the close bubble of a 
blackcock; and a far curlew's call, blended into one 
low lullaby; and soon he fell away into sleep. 

He woke with a start, his heart checking in a beat. 
A sudden hush had fallen on the moor. The sheep had 
ceased to nibble ; the blackcock crooned no more ; the 
curlew was mute ; even a tiny tinkling burn he had 
heard close by was silent. He who had known no fear 
for two score years experienced afresh the panic of 
childhood in the night. That dreadful silence ; the 
hollow blank ; the impotence of sight, overwhelmed 
him. Alone in that white gloom, the dumb blindness 
engulfing him, he felt as one lost in a living tomb. 

A curlew hailed, low and stealthy. Ghostly feet 
brushed softly by. There loomed in the vague a large 
stealing form ; stayed, stared, and faded again. 

Then the silence v.'as broken. Tnere came the swish 
of a large body rushing through the heather ; then the 
scatter of a routed host and all about him in that 
white night fast shadows flitting past and gone. 

The Master looked every way, dismayed. He was 
toppling on the verge of apprehension. 

Then right in his ear there rang of a sudden an 
agonized m — a — a — ing ; followed a scrambling thud ; 
the flap and desperate struggle of a creature fighting 
death ; then a hideous, smothering worry, and silence. 

The Master stood quite still. He was quivering like 
a steel-blade hard tried. The noises in the gloom told 
their own fell tale. Here was the bloody miscreant at 
his work within hand's touch ; here was this poor victim 
done to death at his very door ; and he impotent utterly ! 

The man's whole soul rebelled against inaction. His 
veins thundered to 1 



»g 



up 



doing. 



daring, the devilry of it all — here at his very feet!- 
lashed the cold-continent man to rare fury. 



l82 



OWD BOB 



If . 



\ 



I 1 
fi 

■ f t 



• i 



I;;- 



i I 



He tried to still himself, to think. But his mind, 
a-quiver like his body, refused reflection. Act — act — 
act, he must ! if only because he could not stand. Yet 
how to strike and where ? 

He was muffled in the fog as in a blanket. It was 
in his eyes like cataract, hooding him round. There 
was no sound ; nothing to guide him. The murderer 
must now be rapt in his red revelry. 

He could see nothing, could hear nothing, but still 
his soul dragged him forward, and his body lagged not 
behind. So he plunged into his blind man's night, 
slow, tapping, tentative ; lifting his feet to clear the 
heather. Once he paused to hearken. The moorland 
was wrapped still in awful silence ; no sound save the 
stealthy curlew, and the blood buzzing in his fingertips ; 
and on he went again, tapping, tentative. Then there 
rose before him a low, living wall, horn-tipped ; and he 
knew it for the rallied sheep ; knew he had lost himself; 
and, turning, plunged again into the white. 

The strong man was gasping, his impotence racking 
him. The wet was bowling down his face ; his hands 
chill as the fog. The minutes were slipping away: 
soon the Killer would be gone. 

Then his heart shocked to a halt. Away at his back 
there rose a huge, reverberating din ; deep raging against 
deep ; terrific thunder-voices like lion-kings in combat ; 
the two clashing, clanging, like warring breakers. 

Hope gripped his heart and shouldered it. Some 
dog had chanced upon the murderer ; had challenged 
him. The Killer was at bay. Gorged, he might well fall 
victim, and that though he should prove the Terror's self. 

Hope rowelled him. The noise of battle lashed his 
blood. He plunged forward ; and stayed. 

The sound of roaring had taken on a peculiar rollick- 
ing savagery, like the roll of musketry along a charging 



IN THE FOG 



183 



Hck- 



line. Well he knew what that foretold : a running fight 
was forward. The combatants were striking as they 
galloped, and drawing ever towards him. 

Nigh and nigher flung the battle, raging mad. The 
fog like some sounding-board tossed and magnified the 
noise, until it became deafening as heaven and hell's 
artillery at duel. 

The fight swung hard by him, roaring in the fog; 
then turned and came back upon him ; and still he could 
not see. 

Then all around him the battle raged ; all around 
him the tumult rose and swelled and shook in bellowing 
discord ; all around him the fight stormed and wracked ; 
all around him thundered the infernal elements: the 
whole din and dreadful sa^ dgery of the Dogs of War. 
The firmament swayed ; the fog rocked ; the ground 
surged. And he stood there impotent, vortex of it all, 
like some blind man lost in Niagara ; swinging slowly 
to always face the noise ; arms folded, nails biting deep, 
trembliiig like a grass-blade in a storm. 

Of a sudden, silence : each had at length his everlast- 
ing hold. 

Still the fight rolled on around, dreadful now by 
reason of its noiselessness. Still the fog hemmed him 
about like some white wall. Still he slowly swung to 
face the dumb battle, like the hub of a silent, revolving 
wheel — a Samson doomed to hearken while worlds war, 
nations topple, and he may nothing. 

On and on the fight rolled around ; noiseless, save for 
the splash and surge as the fighters heaved through 
moss-flowes, the crackle of bracken, clank of whin- 
stones, thuds, grunts, gurglings as of two combatant 
giants ; on and on, noiseless still, eternally on ; until at 
length, strong man as he was, the Master knelt down 
lest he should fall. 



^1 



■■ : 



1 84 



OWD BOB 



Eyes shut, hands clamping his ears, he tried to 
gather himself. 

For a long while he knelt so ; then he unlocked his 
ears. 

There was silence. 

He looked up. The fog rent before his gaze. Hard 
before him lay a huddle of slow-moving flesh, death- 
locked. 

He started up ; stole forward, hand tossed to strike ; 
stumbled and crashed into a dream. 



( 



i 



He woke to find himself beneath the clear-lit night. 
All about him the moorland rolled away: shadows, 
black woods, and here the wet glint of moss-hags ; and 
in his nostrils the smell of carrion. 

The cause was not to seek. His hand lost itself in a 
coarse carpet of wool. He turned his head. Beside 
him lay a lion-maned fell tip in a pond of red ; throat 
gaping, head thrown back, horns glistening, and even 
the white hoofs dabbled red. It was the murdered 
sheep had saved his murderer. 

The Master closed his eyes. Slowly he recalled it 
all : the fog ; the coming of the Killer ; the giddy fight ; 
his agony of impotence ; and fall at that last revealing 
moment. 

As he lay thus in thought, a tender finger wetted his 
brow. He looked up. A sweet, dark face was peering 
into his ; two great grey eyes, distressed, were watching 
him ; and a long grey scarf brushed his cheek. 

" Eh, Owd 'Un ? " he murmured sleepily, and raised 
a hand to caress. 

Two warm drops splashed upon his fingers. 

He looked. 

The; drops were red. 



CHAPTER XX 



THE witch's lap 



THE matter was plain. Th' Owd 'Un had come 
upon the Killer in the fog, had fought him up 
and down, a terrific battle, and had been rough-handled. 
Only the old dog's unfathomable ruff had saved him 
deep hurt, while a brazen-studded collar, which Wee 
Anne in prankish mood had clasped about his neck, 
was rung and riven as though by lightning. And of a 
surety the Killer had not escaped unscathed. 

There was grim joy in the Master's heart that 
morning as he entered Grammoch-town. The criminal 
was branded now. He wore the proof that should 
destroy him. Whoever bore upon his person the hall- 
mark, unmistakable, of a Grey Dog of Kenmuir, was 
damned past all hope of salvation. Not though 
M'Adam swore to have blood for blood, should Red 
Wull escape his doom if stamped with that deathly 
seal. 

But fat 3 thwarted the Master. As he turned into 
the market-square, he noticed a crowd beneath the 
pump ; and as he looked, it opened out. Tupper, black 
of brow, emerged, bob-tailed Rasper slinking at his heels, 
his shag coat all ripped and red and dripping. Behind, 
followed John Swan, the Venus struggling in his arms. 

There was blood on the brindled lady's lips; her eyes 
were red-shot ; and she was whimpering to be let down. 

186 



1 86 



OWD BOB 



I 



Behind again came Saunderson and Shep — the old dog 
tattered as a storm-rent sail. Then the crowd closed 
and cleft once more. This time M'Adam emerged, the 
Terror at his side in leash of gory rag, his small eyes 
rolling upwards from beneath a large bandana that 
swathed his head ; bloody, scowling, sinister from his 
latest Victory. 

The Master was undone. Any trace of recent duel 
must be lost inevitably in these fresh scars. And the 
Dalesmen knew no more than that the three had attacked 
the Terror in the yard of the Border Ram ; that he had 
fought them round the Croft, through the Butchery, up 
the market-hill, and finished them beneath the pump. 
No man could say whether, previous to the onset, the 
tawny-grizzled coat had shown traces of late war. 

• • t « « I • 

The Killer had reigned already three months, when, 
with the advent of lambing-time, matters assumed a yet 
more fatal aspect. The loss of one sheep had been 
serious enough, but the harrying of a flock incidental to 
the slaughter of that one— the scaring of these woolly 
mothers about-to-be out of their fleeces — spelt for the 
small farmers something akin to ruin, for the larger 
ones a loss hardly tolerable. 

Many a shepherd during that time patrolled the night 
through with his dogs only to discover in the dawn 
that the Killer had slipped him and havocked in some 
secluded portion of his beat. Such a season had never 
been known. Loud were the curses ; deep the vows of 
revenge. Of a certainty, M'Adam would have waked 
one morning to find his VVullie stark in the yard, had it 
not been that the great dog slept now within the house, 
as all men knew. 

Then in the very height of the lambing-time there 



THE WITCH'S LAP 



187 



dog 
>sed 

the 
lyes 
that 

his 



came the seven days, still notorious in the land as the 
Bloody Week. 

On the Sunday the Manor was marked with the red 
cross. On Monday Ned Hoppin suffered. 

On Tuesday — a black night — Tupper came upon the 
murderer at his work : he fired into the darkness, with 
no effect ; and the Killer escaped with a fright. Next 
night Londesley lost a shearling ram. Thursday alone 
was blank ; for on the Friday Tupper again was visited 
and punished heavily, doubtless in revenge for that shot. 

On Saturday afternoon a mass meeting was held at 
the Manor. The Squire presided; gentlemen and 
magistrates were there in numbers, and every farmer in 
the countryside. To start the proceedings a windy 
letter from the Board of Agriculture was read. After- 
wards Viscount Birdsaye rose and proposed that a 
reward more suitable to the gravity of the case than the 
paltry five pounds of the police should be offered, and 
backed his proposal with a twenty-five pounds cheque. 
Several others spoke, and, last of all, Parson Leggy rose. 

He briefly summarised the history of the crimes; 
reiterated his belief that a sheep-dog was the criminal ; 
and concluded by offering what he hoped would prove 
at least a temporary preventive, simple though it was, 
he said, to laughableness : — that every man jack of them 
who owned a sheep-dog should tie him up at night. 

The farmers were allowed half an hour to consider 
the suggestion. They gathered in knots and talked it 
over. Many an eye was directed on M'Adam ; but that 
little man seemed all unconscious. 

"Weel, Mr. Saunderson," his shrill voice could be 
heard, " and shall ye tie Shep ? " 

" What doesta' think ? " asked Rob, eyeing the man 
at whom the measure was aimed. 




IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 




4p 



^A^ 




^ 



1.0 !f» 



I.I 



21 112.5 



I" Ui |22 

^ i:£ IIIIIM 



1.8 



1-25 1.4 |||.6 




M 


6" 


► 



V] 



<^ 



/} 



'^ 






// 



">/ •> 




y 






/<^ 



Photographic 

Sciences 

Corporation 




d 



V 



iV 



:ij» 

4 




23 WEST MAIN STREET 

WEBSTER, NY. 14580 

(716) 873-4503 



lV 



ft 



^ ^ 

.>,' 
k 





6^ 



<<• 



^> 



40 



^^^ 
^\> 



;V 



(s 



i88 



OWD BOB 



"Why," the little man replied, "it's this way, I'm 
thinkin' : gin ye haud Shep's the guilty one, I wad by 
all manner o' means — or shootin' 'd be aiblins simpler. 
If not? why" — he shrugged significantly ; and, having 
shown his hand, departed. 

James Moore stayed to see the Parson's resolution 
negatived unanimously ; then he, too, left the hall. He 
had foreseen the result, and previous to the meeting 
had warned the Parson how it would be: for to any 
Dalesman to acquiesce in such an edict would seem a 
tacit confession that his dog might be the culprit — an 
inference no shepherd for a moment would permit 

" Tie up I " the Master murmured, as the old dog 
came to his whistle ; " I think I see mysel' chain in' 
thee, owd lad, like any murderer 1 " 

At the lodge-gate he passed M'Adam, who was for 
once without his grisly familiar. The little man was at 
play with the lodge- keeper's child ; for he loved all 
children but his own, and was beloved of them. 

" Weel, Moore," he called, as the other passed, " and 
are ye gaein' to tie yon grey devil ? " 

" I will if you will yours," the Master answered grimly. 

"Na," the little man replied, tossing the child in 
air, " it's Wullie as frichts the Killer aff the Grange. 
That's why I left him there noo." 

" It's t' same wid me," the Master said. " He's not 
coom to Kenmuir yet, nor he'll not so long as Th' Owd 
'Un's loose o' neets, I's uphod," and he passed on. 

"Has he bin fightin' again?" the little man called 
after him. 

" Nay ; not sen his fratch wid t' Killer." 

" Ah ; weel for the Killer — he ! he 1 he ! " and a long 
giggling laugh pursued him far down the road. 



# 



THE WITCH S LAP 



189 



The night was clothed in crape when the Master left 
the Dalesman's Daughter. Crossing the Silver Lea he 
slung over that arena where, in a few monthr> now, 
the last great battle for the Trophy would be fought, 
and began the ascent of the Pass. 

His thoughts turned upon M'Adam ; he pondered on 
the little man's hintJ, his significant manner of late ; 
and could make nothing of them. From that he passed 
to the Killer and Red Wull ; wondering whether, indeed, 
the two were one. Then he set to musing on David 
and Maggie: this fool quarrel had endured too long; 
he would warn the boy it must cease, tell him to play 
the man and make his amends; for though Maggie 
affected scornful indifference, her father knew right well 
that the long-lasting feud was wringing her tender heart. 

Thinking thus he entered the Devil's Bowl and began 
to skirt the Lone Tarn's edge. The night fell black 
and blacker ; the ghostly water lappered at his feet ; all 
about, those dreadful hillocks humped round backs, 
closing him in ; while across the whining deeps the 
Screes flaunted, a black flame against the night. 

Now this Devil's Bowl, awesome to all else, is dear to 
every Moore with heart-swelling memories. Is it not 
hallowed to every one of them for ever, from that day 
on which he first can struggle so far to be shown the 
spot where his forebear came upon the mother of the 
Grey Dogs ? Does not the Red Screes scowling across 
the Tarn ring in his ears for ever after by reason of 
the great daring of Grey Rip's, which then first he 
hears ? Was it not from a never-to-be-forgotten dawn, 
thrice fifty years ago, that the Reiver's Lowp had had 
its name? 

At a well-known spot by the water's edge, forenenst 
a hump-backed boulder, the Master paused and stared 



190 



OWD BOB 



across the Tarn. The Screes was now nothing but a 
sable flare against the night ; yet he could see it as in 
clearest day : the seared hillside slanting up from the 
satin depths into that sheer curtain of rock, the Reiver's 
Lowp; at the summit of the Lowp that darkling 
hollow — not twenty yards acro.«is — they call the Witch's 
Lap ; and those two white sheep-trods, the only means 
of access to that little dell, crawling dangerously up 
between the sheer wall on the one hand and the sheer 
fall on the other. 

Staring across the Tarn, lost in the vast silence c^the 
night, he pictured the tale as many a time before : the 
grey morning, the grey rock-wall, the seared Screes and 
those two dark specks clinging like flies upon a pane. 
He thrilled as he thought upon it, and looked down for 
the grey head at his knee — scion of the hero of that 
day ; yet could not see him, so thick hung the pall 
of night 

Then he began again the oft-told tale, aloud, for his 
unse.n comrade's sake: 'Twas in the year 17 — , Owd 
'Un, at the time that the dark is longest. In t' dead o' 
neet, old Andra' was wak'd by the Grey Dog's Ca'. He 
leaped to the window. Outside there loomed agen t' 
snow a lock o' ponies, torchleets in t' fold, and a girt 
mak' c^ a feller on harseback thunderan orders. Than 
he kent this was the long-threatened comin' of the 
Black- 
So far in the tale, when there burst on his ear the 
myriad patter of galloping feet. He swung about, half 
apprehending a bevy of phantom moss-troopers upon 
him ; and at the second, a swirl of sheep nigh bore him 
down. It was pansy-black, and they fled furiously by ; 
yet he dimly discerned, driving at their tails, a vague, 
hound-like form. 



THE WITCH'S LAP 



191 



" T* Killer, by thunder ! " he yelled, and struck down 
at that last pursuing shape — only to miss and almost 
fall. 

" Bob, lad ! " he hoarsed, " follow on ! " 

The chase swept on into the night. There was a 
splash and clatter at the far end of the Tarn, and he 
knew the sheep were cutting through the shallow water 
for the Screes. The dark water surged towards him in 
unwonted waves |^ it betrayed the fugitives' route in 
hurrying musketry of sound ; a fleeting shower of light 
splashed up against the black ; and in the distance the 
water flashed and darted like a thousand sword-blades 
in the night. A last floundering crash : then silence ; 
and again he could hear the rattle of flying feet on the 
opposing Screes, and tinkle and tiny plunges as 
dislodged pebbles fell and found a watery grave. 

The Master started in pursuit. He prayed that Th' 
Owd 'Un was on the miscreant's heels ; he prayed for 
the moon. As though in answer the white -faced 
woman of the night peered round the shoulder of the 
Scaur, and lit the dour face of the Screes. 

The Master looked up as he ran. The sheep had 
broken apd were scattered now over the shimmering 
steep. In the rout one pair of darting figures caught 
and held his gaze: the foremost dark, dot-like, speeding 
upwards ; the other hard behind, swift, remorseless 
as eternity. He looked for a third pursuing form: 
none could he discern. 

" He mun ha' missed him in t' dark," he muttered, 
the sweat on his brow, his eyes straining across the 
Tarn, and still with long strides running on. 

High and higher sped those two dark specks ; up 
and up; until of a sudden the sheer rock dropped its 
relentless barrier in the path of the fugitive; away 



I 



192 



OWD BOB 



scudding along the rock-wall ; she struck the familiar 
track, and up i), nigh spent. 

" He'll dobn her in t' Lap ! " cried the Master hoarsely, 
now rounding the head of the Tarn. " Owd 'Un ! Owd 
*Un! wheeriver arta' gotten to?" 

As he had foreseen, just as they reached the summit 
the two black dots were one ; and down they rolled 
together into the Lap, out of his ken. At the same 
instant the moon, loth to watch tlie climax of the 
bloody play, veiled her face. 

His long hound-lope had brought him to the Screes* 
foot. Up the face of it he sped, never pausing, girding 
his loins for the struggle; on and«.on in the darkness: 
his heart thundered against his ribs; he was gasping 
painfully ; the steep slithered away beneath him ; yet 
he held on, running still, until the rock-wall barred 
his way too. 

There he paused and whistled a low call. Could 
he despatch the* old dog up the o .e path to the Lap 
while himself took the other, the iiiurderer's only road 
to safety would be blocked. He waited, all expectant ; 
but no cold muzzle shoved into his hand. Again he 
whistled. A pebble from above dropped (^ him, as 
if the criminal up there had moved to the brink of the 
Lowp to hearken ; and he dared no more. 

Waiting till all was still again, he crept catlike along 
the rock-foot and hit, at length, the track. Up that 
rugged way he crawled on hands and knees. The 
perspiration rolled off his face ; one elbow brushed the 
rock perpetually ; one hand plunged ever and anon 
into emptiness. 

He prayed that the moon might keep in, that his 
feet might be saved from falling, where a slip might 
well mean death — certain destruction to his chances of 



THE WITCH'S LAP 



193 



along 
that 
The 

id the 
anon 



success. He cursed his luck that Th' Owd 'Un had 
missed him in the dark ; for now he must trust to 
chance, his own great strength and good oak stick. 
And as he climbed he laid his plan : to rush in on the 
Killer as he gorged and grapple with him ; if in the 
darkness he missed — and in that narrow arena that was 
improbable — the murderer might still in the panic of 
the moment (orgft the one path to escape, and leap 
over the Lowp to his doom. « 

At length he reached the summit, and paused to 
draw breath. The black void before him was the 
Witch's Lap, and in its bosom — not ten yards away — 
must be lying Killer and killed. 

He crouched against the wet rock-face and listened. 
In that dark silence, poised 'twixt heaven and earth, 
he seemed a million miles apart from living soul. 
Above him hung the luminous night: far below the 
black-glinting water lapped, lapped. 

No sound ; and yet the murderer must be there. 
Ay ; there was the tinkle of a dislodged stone ; and 
again, the tread of hushed feet. 

The Killer was moving ; alarmed ; was off! 

He rose to his full height; gathered himself; and 
leaped. 

Something collided with him as he sprang ; some- 
thing wrestled madly with him ; something wrenched 
from beneath him ; and in a clap he heard the thud 
of a body striking ground far below, and the slither 
and splattering of some creature speeding down the 
Screes and away. 

** Who the blazes ? " roared he. 

" What the devil ? " screamed a little voice. 

The moon shone out. 

" Moore ! *' 

«3 



^: 



194 



OWD BOB 



" M'Adam ! " 

And there they were still struggling over the body 
of a dead sheep. 

In a second they had disengaged and rushed to the 
edge of the Lowp. In the quiet they could still hear 
the scrambling hurry of the fugitive far below ; then a 
resounding splash reverberated up the hill; and a V- 
shaped wave of moving light stole death-like across the 
satin deeps : the Killer was swimming the Tarn. They 
watched the long bars of white converging to the dark 
apex ; they marked the sudden sparkling shower of light 
as he shook on landing; almost they could hear the 
accompanying flappeting of loose skin. 

The two men turned and eyed each other : the one 
grim, the other sardonic ; both dishevelled, suspicious. 

"Well?" 

"Weel?" 

A pause ; and careful scrutiny. 

" There's bluid on your coat." 

" And on yours." 

Together they walked back into the moonlit hollow 
There lay a hoarj'-faced old wedder in a crimson pond* 
Plain it was to see whence the marks on their coats 
came. 

The two men stood back and eyed one another. 

"What art' doin' here?" 

" After the Killer. What are you ? " 

« After t' Killer." 

" Hoo did you come ? " 

" Oop this path. Hoo did you ? " 

"Up this." 

Silence : then again — 

" I'd ha' had him but for thee." 

"I did have him but ye tore me aff." 



THE WITCH'S LAP 



'95 



body 



A pause again. 

" Where's yer grey dog ? " This time the challenge 
was unmistakable. 

« After t' Killer. Wheer's your Red Wull ? " 

" At hame, as I tell't ye at the Manor." 

" Ye mean ye left him there ? " 

M'Adam's fingers twitched. 

" He's where I left him." 

James Moore shrugged ; and the other began — 

" When did yer dog leave ye ? " 

" When t' Killer com' past." 

" Ye wad say ye missed him then ? " 

" I say what I mean." 

"Ye say he went after the Killer. Noo the Killer 
was here," pointing to the dead sheep — "Was your 
dog here too?" 

" If he had been, he'd been here still." 

" Gin he didna gang over the Lowp ! *' 

" That was t'^ Killer, thoo fule." 

" Or your dog." 

" There was nobbut one beneath me — I felt him." 

" Just so," said M'Adam, and laughed. 

The other's brow contracted. 

" An' that was a banger ! " he said. 

The little man stopped his cackling. 

" There ye lee," he said smoothly. " He was sma' — 
I swear it* 

They fronted one another full. 

" It's a matter of opinion," said the Master. 

" It's a matter of fact," said the other. 

The two stared, silent and stern, each trying to 
fathom the other's soul ; then they turned again to 
the brink of the Lowp. Beneath them, plain to see, 
was the splash and furrow in the shingle marking the 



196 



OWD BOB 



Killer's line of retreat. They looked at one another 
again: then each departed the way he had come to 
give his version of the story. 

"We mulled it atween us," .said the Master. "If 
Th' Owd 'Un had nobbut kept along o' me I should 
ha' had him for sure." 

And— 

** I tell ye I did have him, but James Moore pulled 
me aff. Strange, too, his dog not bein' wi' him 1 " 



: 



CHAPTER XXI 



THREATS OF A STORM 



AN immense sensation this affair of the Witch's Lap 
created. It spurred the Dalesmen into fresh 
endeavours. James Moore and M'Adam were examined 
and re-examined as to the minutest details of the 
encounter — the latter viciously as hostile witness in the 
law-courts. The whole country was placarded with 
huge bills offering one hundred pounds reward for the 
capture of the criminal, dead or alive ; while the vigilance 
of the watchers was such that in a week they bagged a 
donkey, an old woman, and two amateur detectives. 

In Wastrel-dale, the near escape of the Killer, the 
collision between James Moore and M'Adam, and Owd 
Bob's unsuccess, who was not wont to fail, aroused a 
very ferment, with which was mingled a certain anxiety 
as to their favourite ; for when the Master reached home 
that night he found the old dog already there ; and a 
thorn must have pierced his foot in his blind pursuit, for 
he was deadly lame. Whereat, when it was reported at 
the Sylvester Arms, M'Adam winked at Red Wull and 
burst into such a smothered tempest of giggles that 
Tammas sharply inquired the cause. 

" Naethin', naethin'," the little man replied ; " a man 

may laff." 

"Thoo's olas laffin'," snapped the other. "Thoo'll 

m 



198 



OWD BOB 



|H 



laff t' udder side o' that ugly mug o' thine one o' these 
days." 

The next day, M'Adam called at Kcnmuir. As he 
entered the yard, David was standing outside the 
kitchen window, as glum and miserable as Adam seeking 
readmittancc at the gate of Eden. On seeing his 
father, however, the boy leaped to alertness. 

" What's ta' want here ? " he asked, all suspicion. 

•' Same as you, dear lad," the other giggled, rubbing 
his hands. " I come on a visit." 

" Yer visits to Kenmuir are mair often paid o' neets, 
I've hard tell," David sneered. 

At the moment the Master came into the yard. Owd 
Bob was limping behind him, while Wee Anne was tug- 
ging at the old dog's brush, bubbling at the humour of 
her ;oke. At sight of the visitor, the grey dog's ruflf 
clouded out like a dancer's skirt ; involuntarily he 
stopped and stiffened. 

M'Adam was hurrying forward. 

'* I did but come to ask after the tyke," he said. " Is 
he gettin' over his lameness ? " 

James Moore looked surprised ; then his stern face 
relaxed into a smile. Such generous anxiety as to the 
welfare of Red Wull's rival was a new characteristic in 
the little man. 

" It's gaily kind in thee to coom and ask, M'Adam," he 
said, almost cordially. "Ay, he's doin' niceish, thank 
ye." 

" Is the thorn oot ? " asked the little man, with eager 
interest, shooting his head forward to stare at the 
other. 

"It com* oot last neet wid t' poulticin'," the Master 
answered, returning the other's gaze, calm and steady. 

" I'm glad o' that," said the other, still staring. But 



THREATS OF A STORM 



199 



his yellow grinning mask said as plain as words, 
" What a liar ye are, James Moore ! " 



"Is 



:ager 
the 



David and Maggie, meanwhile, were drifting farther 
and farther apart. James Moore had spoken to the 
boy, had warned him plainly what the issue of his pride 
might be ; and the lad had heartened himself for his 
penance. Indeed, he longed for a reconciliation ; he 
longed for that tender sympathy the girl had always 
extended to him when his «. rubles with his father 
were heavy on him. The quarrel had now endured for 
months ; and he was weary of it and utterly ashamed, 
well knowing that the blam . tvas his nnd his only. Yet 
for a while the bitterness of the . >'deal — to ask pardon 
of this slip of a girl — seemed Xuo much for him ; and he 
held on his old miserable way. 

Consequently he was seldom at Kenmuir and mo^-e 
often at home, warring with his father. Of late the 
little man had surpassed himself in that in which he had 
no peer ; his tongue was now never at rest, shooting its 
glad venom, searching out sores, stinging, piercing. He 
had torn a leaf from his son's book : David's target had 
long been Red Wull ; his was now Maggie Moore. The 
very leer and wink with which he soiled the girl's name 
set the boy's blood seething. And the more effective he 
saw his shots to be the more persistently he plied them. 

" Is't true what they're sayin', that Maggie Moore's 
nae better nor she should be ? " he asked one evening 
with anxious interest. 

" They're not sayin' so, and if they were *twud be a 
lee ! " the boy answered hotly. 

M'Adam nodded. 

"Ay, they tell't me gin ony man knew 'twad be 
David M'Adam." 






200 



OWD BOB 



David strode across the room. 

" Noo, nae mair o' that ! " he ordered. " Ye sud be 
'shamed, an owd man like yc!j, to speak so o' a lass." 

The little man edged up to his son and looked up 
into the fair flushed face above him. 

" David," he said smoothly, " I'm 'stonished ye dinna 
strike yer auld dad." He stood with hands clasped 
behind him, daring his giant son to raise a finger against 
him. " Ye maist might noo. Ye maun be sax inches 
taller and four stane heavier. Hooiver, aiblins ye're 
wise to wait. Anither year or twa I'll be an auld man, 
and Wullie here '11 be gettin' on, while you'll be in the 
prime o' yer strength. . . . Then, I think, ye might hit 
me wi* safety to yer person and honour to yerself." 

He backed away, smiling. 

"Father," David answered huskily, "one day yc'll 
push me ower far." 

The boy was now no longer a passive target. In- 
heriting his father's bitter turn of tongue, he gave as 
good as he got. The two slashed and parried, utterly 
unsparing, with no thought except to wound. Day by 
day the conflict waxed more bitter. The final crash was 
coming sojn, inevitable. 

The little man marked his son's more frequent 
presence at home, and commented on it in his usual 
spirit of raillery. 

" What's come to ye, David ? Yer auld dad's head is 
nigh turned wi' yer condescension. Is James Moore 
fear'd ye'll steal the Cup fra' him as ye stole it fra' me, 
that he'll no' ha' ye at Kenmuir ? or what is it ? " 

" I thowt I could mebbe keep an eye on t' Killer if I 
stay't here," David replied, and leered at Red WuU. 

The little man stared at him in long silence ; then 
pattered softly across the room, tip-toeing obtrusively. 



THREATS OF A STORM 



20I 



yo'll 



" I wad not go too far, David ! " he whispered in the 
boy's ear. 

David shoved him roughly away. 

•' I wish you'd gang a gay bit farther," he cried ; 
" shovin* yer girt snout into ma face ! " 

The little man regarded these everlasting innuendoes 
as merely the accustomed coin of filial intercourse. 
That in very truth anyone could be found to think this 
thing of his Wullie, seemed to him for long incredible. 
Yet warnings that something was awry were seldom 
wanting. The sudden stop and silence that ensued 
upon his entering the Arms, the sullen eyes glowering 
all together at Red Wull, might well have admonished 
him that something sinister was forward. Yet for long 
he refused to be convinced. Long Kirby was at last the 
means of rousing him. 

"And doesta' reck'n t' Killer is a sheep-dog, 
M* Adam ? " the smith asked, after the crime on Oxenby 
Fells. 

" I do," the other replied with conviction. 

" And that he'll spare his own sheep ? " 

" Niver a doubt of it." 

" Then," said the smith, cackling nervously ; " t' Killer 
can't help but be " — 

M'Adam's eyes had turned on him, glassy. 

"Yes, Kirby . . . be"— 

The smith stuttered, grinning ghastly. 

" Be— be *— 

Those dim eyes held him still. The silenceappalledhim. 

" Be-tween, I mean, you s.nd " — He collapsed like a 
«pent bladder. There was no other farm in the country- 
side but had paid its bloody toll. His daring had landed 
him in this impasse ; and now his imagination refused 
to rescue him. He could only sit and sweat. 



I 



202 



OWD BOB 



A long staring pause ; then at length the little man 
leant forward and tapped him on the knee. 

"Kenmuir, ma friend," he said, "Kenmuir: that's 
the one ye'd forgotten." 

" So it was," guffawed the smith, in noisy relief ; " so 
it was — ha ! ha ! " And all the topers were moved to 
huge mirth. It was Kenmuir had been forgotten — 
ha ! ha! Th' Owd 'Un the alternative to Red Wull— 
ho! ho! 

It was after this that Long Kirby, who was always 
for war when someone else was to do the fighting, 
proposed that David should take an ultimatum to 
his father. But Jim Mason squashed the proposal, 
remarking that there was too much bad blood already 
between father and son ; while Tammas suggested with 
a sneer that the smith should be his own agent in the 
matter. 

Whether it was Tammas's remark which stung the 
big man into action, or whether it was that the heat of 
his hate aroused in him rare valour, anyhow, a day 
later, M'Adam caught the blacksmith lurking in the 
loft of the Grange. The little man cannot have guessed 
the intruder's murderous intent, else had it gone hard 
with him; yet the blacksmith's white-faced terror, as 
he crouched away in the darkest corner, could hardly 
have escaped remark. 

"Hullo, Kirby!" said M'Adam cordially, "ye'll stay 
the night?" And the next thing the big man heard 
was a giggle on the far side the door, and clank of 
padlock and chain; then, through a crack, "Good- 
night to ye, Kirby. Hope ye'll be comfie." And there 
he had to stay — thirty-six hours in all — with swedes 
for his hunger and the dew off the thatch for his thirst ; 
and thought himself happy to escape thus lightly. 



THREATS OF A STORM 



203 



The day after his release, M'Adam met him in the 
village. 

" Kirby, man ! " he called softly, and beckoned with 
crooked, uncannie forefinger. 

The smith came to him, his apprehension ill-concealed 
behind a grin. There was a white gleam about the 
little man's face that was not encouraging. 

" Well ? " he asked, stopping over against him. 

The little man produced an ill-gleaming sheath-knife. 
He balanced it on a palm that trembled ever so little. 
The gleam was on his face, and the glint in his eyes. 

" D'ye ken what I'd ha' done gin I'd found this when 
you were wi' me ? " he asked, ever so softly. 

"Whey, what?" stammered the smith, essaying 
hollow mirth. 

" Weel," soft and shivering as the west wind in a 
birch, " I'd ha' locked ye into the parlour wi' WuUie — 
boarded up the window — and tell't him all about it 
thro' the crack ! " 

The smith had done his work, and well. C.-e 
lighted, the little man's suspicions flared like dry 
matchwood. And very shortly the Dalesmen had a 
lurid glimpse of Adam M'Adam as he might be if 
wounded through his Wullie. 

On a certain market-day in Grammoch-town, about 
the time when the Killer was working his wickedest, Rob 
Saunderson was he centre of interest in the Border 
Ram. For on the previous night Rob had lost a sheep 
to the Killer ; and, far worse, his Herdwicks had been 
gallopeo ^vith disastrous consequences. 

The old man was telling with tears in his eyes how, 
on four successive nights, he and Shep had been up to 
guard against mishap ; and on the fifth, worn out with 
double labour, had fallen asleep at their post. But a 



204 



OWD BOB 



very little while he slumbered, yet when in the dawn he 
woke to hurry on his rounds, he quickly came upon a 
mangled sheep and the relic of his prized flock. A relic, 
indeed ! for slW about were cold wee lambkins, and their 
mothers dead and dying of exhaustion and their unripe 
travail — a slaughter of the innocents. 

The Dalesmen were clustered round the old shepherd 
listening with lowering countenances, when a dark grey 
head peered in at the door and two wistful eyes dwelt 
for a moment on the speaker. 

" Talk o' the devil ! " muttered M'Adam ; but no man 
heard him. For Red Wull, too, had seen that sad face, 
and, rising from his master's feet, had leapt with a roar 
at his enemy, toppling Jim Mason in the fury of his 
charge." 

In a second every dog ir the room — the battered 
Venus, Tupper's big Rasper, Saunr'erson's old Shep — 
was on his feet, bristling to have at the tyrant if the 
grey dog would but lead the dance. 

It was not to be, however; for Long Kirby was 
standing in the door, a cup of coffee in his hand. 
Barely had he greeted the grey dog with, " Ullo, Owd 
'Un I " when hoarse yells of " Ware, lad ! t* Terror 1 " 
mingled with Red Wull's roar. 

Half turning, he saw the great dog launching to the 
assault. Straightway he flung the contents of his cup 
full in that fiendish mask. The burning liquid swished 
against the huge bull-head : blinding, bubbling, scalding, 
it did its fell work well. With a bellow of agony. Red 
Wull checked in his charge. From without the door 
was banged to ; and again the duel was postponed ; 
while within the tap-room a huddle of men and dogs 
were left alone with a mad brute and a madder man. 

Demented, agonised, the Tailless Tyke thundered 



THREATS OF A STORM 



205 



about the room ; gnashing, snapping, over-setting ; 
men, tables, chairs, swirled off their legs as though 
they had been dolls. He spun round like a monstrous 
teetotum ; he banged his tortured head against the 
wall ; he burrowed into the unyielding floor. And all 
the while M'Adam pattered after him, clasping him 
only to be flung aside as a terrier flings a rat ; now up, 
now down again, now tossed into a corner, now dragged 
upon the floor, yet always following on and crying, 
" Wullie, Wullie, let me to ye ! let yer man ease ye ! " 
and then with a scream and a murderous glance, " By 
, Kirby, I'll deal wi' you later ! " 

The uproar was like hell let loose. You could hear 
the noise of oaths and blows, as the men fought for the 
door, a half-mile away. Long Kirby was the first out 
of that murder-hole. After him the others toppled one 
by one — men and dogs jostling in the frenzy of their 
fear: Tupper, Hoppin, Jim Mason, Teddy Bolstock, 
white-faced and trembling, and old Saunderson they 
pulled out by his heels. Then the door was shut with 
a clang, and the little man and mad dog were left alone. 

In the street was already a big-eyed crowd ; while 
at the door was James Moore, seeking entrance. 
" Happen I could lend t' HI man a hand," said he ; 
but they withheld him forcibly. 

Inside was pandemonium: hangings like the doors 
of hell ; the bellowing of that great voice ; the patter 
of little feet ; the slithering of a body on the floor ; and 
always that shrill beseeching prayer, "Wullie, Wullie 

let me to ye ! " and in a scream, " By , Kirby, I'll be 

wi' ye in a crack ! " 

Jim Mason it was who turned, at length, to the 
blacksmith and whispered, ** Kirby, lad, thoo'd best 
skip it." 



206 



OWD BOB 



! 



The big man obeyed and ran. The stamp, stamp 
of his feet rang on the road above the turmoil. As the 
long legs vanished round the corner and the sound of 
the fugitive died away, a panic seized the crowd. 

A woman shrieked ; a girl fainted ; and in two 
minutes the street was as naked of men as the Strand 
in plague-time : here a white face at a window ; there a 
door ajar ; and, peering round a far corner, a frightened 
boy. One man only refused to run. James Moore 
walked down the centre of the road, slow and calm, 
Owd Bob trotting at his heels. 

It was a long half-hour before the door of the inn 
burst open, and M'Adam came out wi h a run, flinging 
it behind him. 

He rushed into the road ; his sleeves were rolled at 
the wrist like a surgeon's ; and in his right hand was a 
black-handled jack-knife. 

" Noo, by ! " he cried, in a terrible voice, " where 

is he?" 

He looked up and down the street, darting his fiery 
glances everywhere ; and his face was whiter than his 
hair. 

Then he turned and hunted down the whole length 
of the High, nosing like a weasel in every cranny, 
stabbing at the air as he went,uand crying — 

" By , Kirby, wait till I lay hands on ye I " 



t 



CHAPTER XXII 



THE STORM BREAKS 



THERE ensued a Saturday long to be remembered 
by more than David in the Dale. 

For that young man the day started sensationally. 
Rising before cock-crow and going to the window, the 
first thing he beheld in the misty dawn was a gaunt 
gigantic figure hounding up the hill from the Stony 
Bottom. His heart leaped to his throat. Here at last 
was a substantial something to build upon. 

The dog was travelling at a long slouching lope. As 
he rapidly approached, David marked his flanks splashed 
with red, tongue out, and the foam flying from his jaws : 
far he myst have come and fast. Slinking up to the 
house, the great dog leaped on to the sill of the back- 
kitchen, pushed with his paw at the cranky old hatch- 
ment, and in a second the boy, straining far out, heard 
the rattle of boards as he dropped to the floor. 

For the moment, excitipd as he was, David held his 
peace. Even the Black Killer took second place in his 
thoughts that morning. His father's gibes had at last 
knocked the cap off his pride and forced him up to 
penance point. All through the week M'Adam had 
plied his lash with a rare relish of cruelty, as though to 
pain another eased his own haunting agony, until David 
could endure no more and had resolved to end the 
matter one way or the other ere worse came of it. If 

W7 






208 



OWD BOB 



the girl would receive him back to favour, well — that 
should only be the prelude to the asking of another 
boon ; if not, he would leave the Grange and all its 
misery behind and plunge into the world. 

All through the week he had been steeling himself to 
this end ; and so when, as he quitted the house on his 
errand of humiliation,his father turned and said abruptly — 

"David, ye'll tak' the Herdwick draft o'er to 
Grammoch-town at onst," he answered — 

"Ye mun tak* *em yersel' if ye wish 'em to gang to-day." 

"Na," the other answered; "WuUie and me we're 
ower thrang the day." 

"If they bide for me they bide till Monday," David 
replied, and marched out of the house. 

" I see what 'tis," his father called ; " she's gie ye a 
tryst. . . . Oh ye randy, David ! " 

"You tend yer business, I'll tend mine!" the bdy 
answered hotly. 

Now it happened that he carried in his pocket a 
photograph of Maggie, with intent to return it if the 
girl would have none of him. As he left the room, it 
droi-ped to the floor. The boy passed on, unheeding 
his loss ; but his father pounced. 

" He ! he ! WuUie, what's this ? He ! he ! gin it isna 
the jade hersel' ! " He peered into the picture. " She 
kens what's what, I'll tak' oath, Wullie. See her eyes — 
sae saft and languishin' ; and her lips — such lips, Wullie!" 

He walked out of the room still sniggering, and 
chucking the face inanely beneath its pasteboard chin. 

In the door he collided against David. The boy was 
hurrying back for his treasure. 

" What* s ta' gotten theer ? " he asked quickly. 

" Only the pictur' o' some limmer-leddy," his father 
answered, absorbed in chuck-chucking. 



41 



THE STORM BREAKS 



209 



" Gimme it ! " fiercely. " It's mine." 

" Na, na ; it's ma duty to keep ma douce Davie from 
sic queans as this." 

He turned, still smiling. 

"Here, Wullie ! Tear her — the Jezebel 1" He 
threw the photograph to the dog. 

Red Wull sprang forward, defiled the picture with a 
dirty pad in the very centre of the face, tore it in half, 
and gnashed it with unctuous slobbering gluttony. 

David dashed forward. 

" Touch it if ye daur, ye girt brute ! " he yelled, 
rushing to the attack ; but his father withheld him. 

" ' And the dogs o' the street,' " he quoted. 

David turned furiously. 

" I've a gay mind to fetch thee seccan a dander onder 
t' lug as'll knock thee fair endways I " 

" Whist, David, whist ! 'Twas but for yer ain good 
yer auld dad did it. 'Twas that he had at heart as he 
aye has. . . . Rin aflf wi' ye noo to Kenmuir. She'll 
mak' it up till ye ; she's leeberal wi' her favours, I hear; 
ye've but to wheestle and she'll come " — 

David seized his father by the shoulders. 

"If you gie me mickle mair o* your sauce" — he roared. 

" Sauce, Wullie," his father echoed gently. 

" — I'll twist yer neck for ye ! " 

" He'll twist my neck for me." 

" I'll gang reet away and leave you and yer Wullie to 
yer lane, that I will I " 

The little man set to whimpering. 

" It'll brak' yer auld dad's heart, lad," he protested. 

"Nay, ye've gat none. But 'twill ruin ye for good 
and a', please God." 

His father burst into an agony of tears. 

" Waesucks, Wullie ! d'ye hear him ? He's gaein' to 
14 



IP 



210 



OWD BOB 






son o' my bosom ! my Benjamin I my 

At the Stony Bottom 



hill. 



leave us — the 
little Davie ! " 

David turned down the 
he turned again. 

" I'll gie thee one word o* wamin' ! " he shouted back : 
" Keep a close eye to yer Wullie's gangings on o' neets." 

In an instant the little man had ceased his fooling. 

** Why that ? " he asked, following down the hill. 

" Ah," jeered his son, " ye'll likely hear afoor neet." 

And with that he crossed the Bottom. 

An hour it took him from the Grange to Kenmuir — 
an hour which had wont to be a quarter. As he dragged 
across the yard with heavy feet, his father, the Black 
Killer, Red Wull, were far behind him, and he drove his 
destiny before him to lay it at the feet of this girl-child. 

Maggie was in the kitchen, alone, over against the 
fireplace, knitting as she stood. 

David took his stand in the door. His eyes dwelt 
lovingly on the slim unconscious figure ; the half-averted 
face ; the thatch of pretty brown ; and slender ankles 
peeping modestly from beneath her frock. 

" Meg ! " he called at length, all low. 

She turned, the quick blood in her cheeks, and turned 
again, stony as a statue. 

" Meg ! " humbly appealing. 

No answer. The steel blades clicked quicker; the 
steel heart moved not at all ; only the human shoulders 
quivered a little. 

A long pause. 

"Bairn!" he pleaded, using the old term ot fond 
familiar intercourse. 

She knitted on, inexorable. The click-click of the 
needles in the silence stifled a mute tiny noise that 
betrayed a brimming soul. 



THE STORM BREAKS 



311 



the 
Iders 



tbnd 

the 
Ihat 



" Wiltna speak to me, lass ? " imploringly. 

No reply. 

The boy's heart hardened. He was hurt ; amazed ; 
resentful. This was not the old-time tender Maggie. 
Anger scorched his cheeks ; then a sob rose to his 
throat and quencied the fire. He had endured so much 
of late that his v ;h:le soul had gone out in longing for a 
woman's sympathy : a look, a word, a mute caress, such 
as he had hardly known since his second mother died. 

He had hoped so much, and now, reft of all hope, 
there was nothing before him but the unmotherly world. 
The end was come ; he could no more. 

It was a long while ere he could trust himself to speak. 
The boyish face was grey, there were tears in his voice. 

"Fares ta' weel then, lass. I's aff o' Munday. 
There's nowt to keep me longer. I canna bide at t' 
Grange a day more. So long as I'd Kenmuir to a 
home, I could just abide it. Noo there's no place for 
me anywheres. I's'll pack afoor worse comes on't." 
He paused, his voice quaking. " I'm behodden to thee, 
Meg, and a* o' you for yer kindness to me. Kenmuir's 
bin ma home these ten years ga'en. I'm parlish griev'd 
it sud ha* coom to this. . . . An* I'd like to say, lass, 
as I've niver had a happy hour sen — sen this quarrel 
began. I was in t* wrang o't, I ken weel. Tve often 
wish*d coom say I was sorry and a' — but — but ye ken 
as I'm a bit — a bit " — 

The girl sat down abruptly, buried her face in her 
apron, and let loose the water-gates of her soul. 

David was beside her in a minute, tenderly bending 
over her. 

" Eh, Maggie," he cried, his Lt-it a-flutter, "but I am 
sorry, lass." 

" I hate thee!" shewailed,in high-pitched, shaking voice. 



212 



OWD BOB 



" Nay, ye dunnot, lass " he pleaded, and gently 
removed her hands from before her face. "Say ye 
forgie me." 

" I don't ! " she cried, struggling. " I think you's t' 
hatefulest lad as iver lived." 

He drew back slowly, releasing her wrists ; then of a 
sudden he stepped forward, lifted the wet, drooping 
face, and, holding it between his big hands, kissed it 
twice. 

"Thoo coo'ard!" she cried, her cheeks crimsoning; 
and she struggled to be free. 

" Ye used to let me, Meg," he reminded her. 

" I niver did ! " she cried, the truth submerged in her 
indignation. 

" Yes, ye did — when we was bits o* things : that is, 
you was olas for kissin', and I was olas agin it. And 
noo " — bitterly — " I mayn't so mickle as glime at ye ower 
a stone-wall." 

He was gliming at her from closer range now, and 
in her position — for he held her still — she could not 
help but glime back. He looked so humble — penitent 
for once, yet reproachful, his own eyes moist, and, 
withal, the old, audacious David, that in her own despite 
her anger waned. 

" Say ye forgie me," he pleaded, " and I'll let ye go." 

" Niver I " But there was less conviction at heart than 
in voice ; and the boy seemed to recognise the fact. 

" Show me then," he pleaded. " There's other things 
besides words." 

" Tak' yer hands away I " she ordered imperiously. 

" Nay ; not till ye've showed me." 

"Hoo daur ye?" she cried through her tears, 
attempting hollow indignation. 

He was remorseless. 



THE STORM BREAKS 



213 



" Do'ee, Davie ! " changing her tone to pretty supplica- 
tion, and raising wet eyes. 

" Do'ee," he coaxed, and did her bidding now. 

The sweet face drooped. 

There was an hour-long pause. 

"Megl" 

" It's no manner o' use, Davie." 

" Yes, 'tis." 

The pause again. 

"Niver." 

" Please." 

A long, pulsing interval. 

" Impidence ! " she murmured, and looked up, her 
face all rain-washed, and ripe lips tilted to taste of his. 

" Ay," he answered, drinking deep. 

" I wonder at ye, Davie ! " she whispered. 

Then for a while was silence only broken by the 
low whispering of the lips of love. 



ars, 



And thus they were situated when a low, rapt voice 
arrested them — 

" * A dear-lov'd lad, convenience snug, 
A treacherous inclination.' 

Oh, Wullie, I wush you were here ! " 

It was little M'Adam. He was leaning in at the 
window, leering at the young pair. 

" The creetical moment ! and I interfered. . . . David, 
ye'll never forgie me." 

The boy jumped round with an oatli ; Maggie, her 
face flaming, started to her feet. The tone, the words, 
the air of the little man at the window were alike 
insufferable. 

" Odswinge ! I'll learn thee to come spyin' on me ! " 
roared the lad. Above him on the mantelpiece blazed 



^w^ 



214 



OWD BOB 



I 



■■*>■ 



the Shepherds' Trophy. Searching any missile in his 
fury, he reached up a hand for it. 

** Ay, gie it me back. Ye robbed me o' it," the little 
man cried, and held out his arms as if to receive his 
treasure back. 

" Dunnot, Davie ! '' pleaded Maggie, with restraining 
hand on her lover's arm. 

" Od quite him ! I'll give him summat ! " yelled the boy. 

Close by there stood a pail of water. He seized it, 
swung it, and slashed its contents at the leering face 
in the window. 

The little man started back ; but the dirty torrent 
caught him and soused him through. The bucket 
followed, struck him full on the chest, and rolled him 
over in the mud. After it with a rush came David. 

" I'll let him know spyin' on me ! " he yelled. 

Maggie, whose face was as white as it had been 
crimson, clung to him, '..^mpering him. 

" Dunnot, David, dunnot ! " she implored. " He's 
yer own father." 

"I'll father him! I'll larn him!" roared the boy, 
half-through the window. 

At the moment Sam'l came floundering furiously 
round the cart shed, followed by 'Enry and oor Job. 

"Is he dead ?" shouted Sam'l, seeing the prostrate form. 

•* Ho ! ho ! " went the other two. 

They picked up the draggled little man and hustled 
him out of the yard like a thief, a man on either side 
and a man behind^ 

As they forced him through the gate he struggled round. 

" By Him that made ye ! ye shall pay for this, David 
M'Adam, you and yer" — But Sam'l's big hand 
descended on his mouth, and he was borne away before 
that last ill word had flitted into being. 



CHAPTER XXIII 



HORROR OF DARKNESS 



IT ivas long past dark that night when M'Adam 
staggered home. 

All that evening at the Sylvester Arms his impre- 
cations against David had made the hardest shudder : 
James Moore, the grey dog, Red Wull's peril, were for 
once forgotten as in his passion he cursed his son. 

The Dalesmen gathered fearfully away from the 
little dripping madman. For once these men, whom 
no such geyser outbursts were wont to quell, were 
dumb before him ; only now and then thiy shot furtive 
glances at one another, as though on the brink of some 
desperate enterprise of which he was the objective. 
But M'Adam noticed nothing, suspected nothing. 

When, at length, he lurched into the kitchen of the 
Grange there was no light and the fire burned low. So 
dark was the room that a white riband of paper on the 
table escaped his remark. 

The little man sat down heavily, his clothes still 
sodden, and resumed his tireless anathema. 

" I've tholed mair fra' him, Wullie, than Adam 
M'Adam ever thocht to thole from ony man ; and noo 
it's gane past bearin'. He struck me, Wullie! struck 
his ain father. Ye see it yersel', Wullie! Na; ye 
werena there. Oh, gin ye had but bin, Wullie! Him and 
his madam ! But I'll gar him ken Adam M'Adam ! " 

216 



2l6 



OWD BOB 



He sprang to his feet, and, reaching up, took down 
the old bell-mouthed blunderbuss that hung above the 
mantelpiece. 

"We'll mak* an end to't, WuUie, so we will — aince 
and for a*!" and he banged the weapon down upon 
the table. It lay right athwart that slip of still, con- 
demning paper, and still the little man saw it not. 
Resuming his seat, he prepared to wait. 

His hand sought the pocket of his coat and fingered 
tenderly a small stone bottle. He pulled it out, 
uncorked it and took a long draught ; then placed it 
on the table by his side. 

Gradually the grey head lolled ; the shrivelled hand 
dropped and hung limply down, finger-tips brushing 
the floor ; and he dozed off into a heavy sleep ; while 
Red Wull watched at his feet. 



It was not till an hour later that David returned 
home. He was happy as a man is only once in a long 
life — returning, triumphant, from the winning of his love. 
His night had passed away ; light reigned supreme ; the 
glory of his love victorious flushed his veins; and he 
brimmed over with large charity. Ay, at Maggie's in- 
stigation, he had determined even to interview his father, 
and ask pardon for that blow, telling him the whole 
story ; and surely if one spark of humanity yet flickered 
in the old man's breast, he would be moved to forgive. 

The lightless house stood in the darkness like a body 
with a spirit fled. Entering, he groped to the kitchen- 
door, and opened it ; then struck a match and stood at 
the threshold, peering in. 

" Not home, eh ? " he muttered, the tiny light above 
his head. " Ma sarty ! 'twas a lucky thing I didna lay 
ma clutches on him this evenin' — I med ha' kill't him." 



HORROR OF DARKNESS 217 

He held the match above his head. 

Two yellow eyes, glowing like cairngorms in the 
gloom, and a small dim figure bunched in a chair, told 
him his surmise was wrong. Many a time had he seen 
his father in such case before, and now he muttered 
contemptuously, 

" Drunk, the HI swab ! sleepin' it aff, I reck'n." 

Then he saw his mistake. The hand that hung 
above the floor twitched and was still again. 

There was a clammy silence. A mouse, emboldened 
by the quiet, scuttled across the hearth. One mighty 
paw moved : a lightning tap ; and the tiny beast lay 
dead. 

Again that hollow stillness : no sound, no move- 
ment; only those two unwinking eyes fixed on him 
immovable. 

Then a small voice from the fireside broke the quiet. 

" Drunk — the — leetle — swap ! " 

Again a clammy silence, and a lifelong pause. 

" I thowt ye was sleepin'," said David, at length, 
lamely. 

" Ay, so ye said — * sleepin' it aff' ; I heard ye." Then, 
still in the same small voice, now quivering imper- 
ceptibly, " Wad ye obleege me, Sir, by lectin' the 
lamp? ... Or d'ye think, Wullie, 'twad be soilin' his 
dainty fingers? They're mair used, I'm tell't, to 
danderin' wi' the bonnie brown hair o' his" — 

" I'll not ha' ye talk o' ma Maggie so ! " interposed 
the boy passionately. 

" His Maggie, mark ye, Wullie — his ! I thocht 'twad 
soon get that far." 

"Tak' care, dad! I'll stan' little mair!" the boy 
warned him in choking voice ; and began to trim the 
lamp with trembling fingers. 



2X8 



OWD BOB 



M'Adam forthwith addressed himself to Red Wull. 

" I suppose no man iver had sic a son as him, Wullie. 
Ye ken what I've done for him, and ye ken hoo he's 
repaid it. He's set himsel' agin me ; he's misca'd me ; 
he's robbed me o' ma Cup ; last of all, he struck me — 
struck me afore them a'. We've toiled for him, you 
and I, Wullie ; we've slaved to keep him in hoose and 
hame, and he's passed his time, the while, in riotous 
leevin' ; carousin' at Kenmuir, amusin' himsel' wi' his " — 

He broke off short. The lamp shone out : that strip 
of paper, pinned on to the table naked and glaring, 
caught his eye. 

"What's this?" he muttered, and unloosed the nail 
that clamped it down. 

This is what he read — 

"Adam Mackadam yer warned to mak an end to 
yer Red Wull will be best for him and Sheep. This 
is the first yoll ave two mare the third will be the 
last." 

It was written in pencil ; the only signature a dagger, 
rudely limned in red. 

M'Adam read the paper once, twice, thrice. As he 
slowly assimilated its meaning, the blood faded from 
his face. He stared at it and still stared, with whiten- 
ing cheeks and pursed lips. Then he stole a glance at 
David's broad back. 

" What d'ye ken o' this ? " he asked, at length, in dry 
thin voice, reaching forward in his chair. 

"O'what?" 

" O' this," — holding up the slip. " And ye'd obleege 
me by the truth for onst." 

David turned, took the paper, read it, and laughed 
harshly. 



HORROR OF DARKNESS 219 

"It's coom to this, has it?" he said, still laughing, 
and yet with blenching face. 

" Ye ken what it means — I daresay ye pit it there ; 
aiblins writ it. Ye'll explain it." The little man spoke 
still in the same small, even voice, and his eyes never 
moved off his son's face. 

" It's plain as day. Ha' ye not hard ? " 

" I've heard naethin'. ... I'd like the truth, David — 
if ye can tell it." 

The boy smiled a forced, unnatural smile, looking 
from his father to the paper in his hand. 

"Ye shall have it, but ye'll not like it. It's this: 
Tupper lost a sheep to the Killer last neet." 

"And what if he did?" 

The little man rose smoothly to his feet. Each 
noticed the other's face — dead-white. 

"Why, he — lost — it — on — Wheer d'ye think?" 
He drawled the words out, dwelling lovingly on each. 

"Where?" 

" On— the— Red— Screes." 

The crash was coming — inevitable now. David knew 
it, knew that nothing could avert it, and braced himself 
for the shock. The smile had fled from his face, and 
his breath fluttered in his throat like the wind before 
a thunderstorm. 

"What of it?" The little man's voice was calm as a 
summer sea. 

" Why, your Wullie was on t' Screes last neet." 

" Go on, David." 

" And this " — holding up the paper — " tells you that 
they ken, as I've kent long, that your Wullie — Red 
WuU— the Terror"— 

" Go on." 



220 



OWD BOB 



" Yes." 

"The Black Killer!" 

It was spoken. The frayed string was snapped at 
last. The little man's hand flashed to the bottle that 
stood before him. 

" Ye — liar ! " he shrieked, and hurled it with all his 
strength. 

David dodged, ducked, and the bottle hurtled 
across his shoulder. 

Crash! it whizzed into the lamp behind, and broke 
on the wall beyond. For a moment, darkness ; then 
the spirits met the lamp's smouldering wick and flared 
high. 

By the sudden light David saw his father across the 
table, pointing with crooked fore-finger. By his master's 
side Red Wull was standing alert, hackles up, yellow 
fangs bai'ed ; and at his feet lay the wee brown mouse, 
still and lifeless. 

"Oot o' ma hoose! Back to Kenmuir! Back 
to yer"— 

The unpardonable word hovered on his lips like 
some foul bubble ; and never burst. 

" No mother this time ! " panted David, racing round 
the table. 

"Wullie!" 

The Terror leaped to the attack, but David overturned 
the table as he ran — the blunderbuss crashing to the 
floor: it fell, opposing a momentary barrier in the 
dog's path. 

" Stan' aff, ye ! " screeched the little man, seizing 

a chair in both hands. " Stan' aff, or I'll brain ye ! " 






David was on him. 

"Wullie, Wullie, to me!" 

Again the Terror came with a roar like the sea. 



But 



HORROR OF DARKNESS 221 



mm 



But 



David with a mighty kick, catching him full on the jaw, 
repelled the attack. 

He gripped his father round the waist and lifted him 
from the ground. The little man, struggling in those 
iron arms, screamed, cursed, and battered at the face 
above him. 

" The Killer ! wad ye ken wha's the Killer ? Go and 
ask 'em at Kenmuir ! Ask yer " — 

David swayed slightly, crushing the body in his arms 
till it seemed every rib must break ; then hurled it 
from him with all the might of passion. The little man 
fell with a thud and a gp'oan. 

The blaze in the corner flared, flickered, and died. 
There was hell-black darkness ; silence of the dead. 

David stood igainst the wall, panting, every nerve 
tightstrung as the hawser of a straining ship. 

In the corner lay the body of his father, limp and still ; 
and in the room one other living thing was moving. 

He clung close to the wall, pressing it with wet hands. 
The horror of it all ; the darkness ; the man in the 
corner ; that moving something, petrified him. 

" Father ! " he whispered. 

There was no reply. A chair creaked at an invisible 
touch. Something was creeping, stealing, crawling 
closer. 

David was afraid. 

" Father ! " he cried in hoarse agony, " art' hurt ? " 

The words were stifled in his throat. A chair over- 
turned with a crash ; a great body struck him on the 
chest ; a pestilent breath volleyed in his face ; and wolfish 
teeth were reaching for his throat. 

" Come on, Killer ! " he screamed. 

The horror of suspense was past. // had come, and 
with it he was himself again. 



222 



OWD BOB 



Back, back, back, along the wall he was borne. His 
hands entwined themselves around a hairy throat ; he 
forced a great head with liquid lightsome eyes away 
and away ; he braced himself for an effort, lifted the 
huge body at his breast, and heaved '.t from him. It 
struck the wall and fell with a soft thud. 

As he recoiled, a hand clutched his ankle and sought 
to trip h'm. He kicked back and down with all his 
strength : there was one dreadful groan, and he staggered 
against the door and out. 

There he paused against the wall to breathe. 

Striking a match, he lifted his foot to see where the 
hand had clutched him. 

God ! there was blood on his heel. 

Then a great fear laid hold on him. A cry was 
suffocated in his breast by the panting of his heart. 

He crept back to the kitchen door and listened. 

Not a sound. 

Fearfully he opened it. 

Silence of the tomb. 

He banged it to. It opened behind him, and the fact 
lent wings to his feet. 

Turning, he plunged out into the night, and ran 
through the blackness for his life. And a great owl 
swooped softly by and hooted mockingly — 

" For your life ! for your life ! for your life I ** 



■^ > 



Part V 
OwD Bob o' Kenmuir 



»8 






Part V 
OwD Bob o' Kenmuir 



CHAPTER XXIV 



A MAN AND A MAID 



X 



IN the village even the Black Killer and the murder 
on the Screes were forgotten in this new sensation. 
The mystery in which the affair was wrapped, and the 
ignorance as to all its details, served to whet the general 
interest. There had been a fight; M'Adam and the 
Terror had been mauled ; and David had disappeared : 
those were the facts. But what was the origin of the 
affray no one could say. One or two of the Dalesmen 
had, indeed, a shrewd suspicion : Tupper looked guilty ; 
Jem Burton muttered, " 1 knoo hoo *twud be " ; while as 
for Long Kirby he vanished entirely. %l 

Injured as he had been, M'Adam was yet sufficiently 
recovered to appear in the Sylvester Arms on the 
Saturday following the fight. He entered the tap-room 
silently with never a word to a soul ; one arm was in a 
sling and his head bandaged. He eyed every man present 
critically ; and all except Tammas, who was brazen, and 
Jim Mason, who was innocent, fidgeted beneath the stare. 
Maybe it was well for Long Kirby he was not there. 
IS 



226 



OWD BOB 



** Anythin' oop ? " asked Jem, at length, rather lamely 
in view of the plain evidences of battle. 

" Na, na ; naethin' oot o' the ordinar','* the little man 
replied, giggling. " Only David set on me and me 
sleepin'. And " — with a shrug — ** here I am noo." 

He sat down, wagging his bandaged head and 
grinning. 

** Ye see he's sae playfu', is Davie. He wangs ye o'er 
the head wi a chair, kicks ye in the jaw, stamps on yer 
wame, and all as merry as May." And nothing further 
could they get from him, except that if David re- 
appeared it was his firm resolve to hand him over to the 
police for attempted parricide. 

" * Brutal assault on an auld man by his son ! ' 'Twill 
look well in the Argus — he ! he ! They couldna let him 
aff under two years, I'm thinkin'." 

M'Adam's version of the affair was received with quiet 
incredulity. The general verdict was that he had brought 
his punishment entirely on his own head. Tammas, 
indeed, who was always rude when he was not witty — 
and, in fact, the difference between the two is only one 
of degree — told him straight — 

" It sarved thee gaily weel reet. An' I nobbut wish 
he'd made an end on thee." 

" He did his best, puir lad," M'Adam reminded him 
gently. 

" We've had enough o' thee," continued the uncom- 
promising old man. " i'm fair grieved he didna slice 
thy gizzern while he was at it." 

At that M'Adam raised his eyebrows, stared, and then 
broke into a low whistle. 

" That's it, is it ? " he muttered, as though a new light 
was dawning on him. " Ah ! noo I see." 



A MAN AND A MAID 



227 



The days passed on. There was still no news of the 
missing one, and Maggie's face became pitifully white 
and haggard. 

Of course she refused to believe that David had 
attempted to murder his father, desperately tried as she 
knew he had been. Still it was a terrible thought to 
her that he might, at any moment, be arrested; and 
her girlish imagination was perpetually conjuring up 
horrid pictures of a trial, conviction, and the things 
that followed. 

Then Sam'l started a wild theory that the little man 
had murdered his son, and thrown the mangled body 
down the dry well at the Grange. The story was, of 
course, preposterous ; and coming from such a source, 
might well have been discarded with the ridicule it 
deserved. Yet it served to set the cap on the girl's 
fears ; and she resolved, at whatever cost, to visit the 
Grange, beard M'Adam, and discover whether he would 
not allay her gnawing apprehension. 

Her intent she concealed from her father, knowing 
well that were she to reveal it, he would gently but 
firmly forbid the attempt ; and on an afternoon, some 
fortnight after David's disappearance, choosing her 
opportunity, she picked up a shawl, threw it over her 
head, and fled with palpitating heart out of the farm 
and down the slope to the Wastrel. 

The little plank-bridge rattled as she tripped across 
it ; and she fled faster lest anyone should hear and come 
to look. And, indeed, at the moment it rattled again, 
and she started guiltily round. It proved, however, to 
be only Owd Bob sweeping after her ; and she was glad. 

"Comin' wid me, lad?" she asked, as the old dog 
cantered up ; thankful to have that grey protector with 
her. 



228 



OWD BOB 



Round Langholm How fled the two conspirators, 
over the summer-clad slopes of the Pike, until, at length, 
they reached the Stony Bottom. Down the bramble- 
covered bank of the ravine the girl pHd, picked her way 
from stone to stone across the streamlet tinkling there, 
and scrambled up the opposing bank. 

At the top she halted and looked back. The smoke 
from Kenmuir was wreathing slowly up against the 
sky ; to her right the low grey cottages of the village 
cuddled in the bosom of the Dale ; far away over the 
Marches towered the gaunt Scaur ; before her rolled the 
swelling slopes of the Muir Pike ; while behind — and 
she glanced timidly across her shoulder — was the 
Grange squatting on the hilltop like some monster toad. 

Her heart failed her. In her whole life she had 
never spoken to M'Adam ; yet she knew him well 
enough from all David's accounts, ay, and hated him for 
David's sake. She hated h'm and feared him too, 
feared him mortally — this terrible little man. And 
with a shudder she recalled the dim face at the 
window, and thought of his notorious hatred of her 
father. But even M'Adam could hardly harm a girl 
coming, broken-hearted, to seek her lover. Besides, was 
not Owd Bob with her ? 

And turning, she saw the old dog standing up the 
hill looking back at her as though he wondered why 
she waited. 

"Am I not enough ? " the faithful grey eyes seemed 
to say. 

" Lad, I'm afear't ! " was her spoken reply. 

Yet that look determined her. She clenched her 
teeth, drew the shawl about her, and set ofif running up 
the hill. 

Soon the run dwindled to a walk ; the v.'alk to a 



L 



""> 



A MAN AND A MAID 



229 



her 
up 



crawl ; and the crawl to a halt. Her breath was 
coming painfully, and her heart pattered against her 
side like the beatings of an imprisoned bird. 

Again her grey guardian looked up, encouraging her 
forward. 

"Keep close, lad!" she whispered, starting forward 
afresh. And the old dog ranged up beside her, shoving 
into her skirt, as though to let her feel his presence. 

So they reached the top of the hill. The house 
stood before them, grim, unfriendly. 

The girl's face was now quite white, yet set: the 
resemblance to her father was plain to see. With 
tight lips and breath quick -coming she crossed the 
threshold, treading softly as though in a house of the 
dead. There she paused, lifted a warning finger at her 
companion, bidding him halt without; then turned to 
the door on the left and tapped. 

She listened, her head buried in the shawl, close to 
the wood panelling. There was no answer: she could 
only hear the drumming of her heart. 

She knocked again. From within came the scraping 
of a chair cautiously shoved back ; then a deep- 
mouthed cavernous growl. 

Her heart stood still, but she turned the handle and 
entered, leaving a crack wide behind. 

Across the room a little man was sitting. His head 
was swathed in dirty bandages, and a bottle was on the 
table by his side. He was leaning forward ; his face 
was grey ; there was a stare of naked horror in his 
eyes. One hand grasped the great dog, who stood with 
head thrown forward and muzzle hideously wrinkled ; 
the other pointed a palsied finger at her. 

" Ma God ! wha are ye ? " he cried hoarsely. 

The girl stood hard against the door, fingers still 



^.J 



230 



OWD BOB 



upon the handle, trembling like a leaf at the aspect of 
that uncannie pair. 

That look in the little man's eyes petrified her : the 
swollen pupils ; lashless lids, yawning wide ; the broken 
range of teeth in that gaping mouth, froze her very 
soul. Rumours of the man's insanity tided back upon 
her. 

" I'm— I "— the words trembled forth. 

At the first utterance that shivering hand dropped ; 
the little man leant back in his chair and gave a soul- 
bursting sigh of relief. 

No woman had crossed that threshold since his wife 
had died ; and, for a moment, when first the girl had 
entered, silent-footed, aroused from dreaming of the 
long ago, he had thought this shawl-clad figure, with the 
pale face and peeping hair, no earthly visitor ; the spirit, 
rather, of one he had loved long since and lost, come to 
reproach him with a broken troth. 

"Speak up — I canna hear," he said, in tones mild 
compared with those last wild words. 

" I— I'm Maggie Moore," the girl quavered. 

" Moore ! Maggie Moore, d'ye say ? " he cried, half 
rising from his chair, a Rush of colour dull upon his 
cheek. "The dochter o' James Moore?" He paused, 
glowering at her ; and she shrank, trembling against 
the door. 

The little man leant back again. Gradually a grim 
smile crept across his countenance. 

" Weel, Maggie Moore," he said, half amused, " ony 
gate ye're a good pluck'd 'un." And his wizened 
countenance looked at her almost kindly from beneath 
its dirt}' crown of bandages. 

At that the girl's courage flooded back. After all 
this little man was not so very terrible. Perhaps he 



A MAN AND A MAID 



231 



would be kind. And in the relief of the moment, the 
blood swept into her face. 

There was not to be peace yet, however. The blush 
was still hot upon her cheek, when she caught the 
patter of soft steps in the passage without. A dark 
muzzle, flecked with grey, pushed in at the crack ; two 
anxious grey eyes followed. 

Before she could wave him back. Red Wull had 
marked the intruder. With a bellow he tore himself 
from his master's restraining hand, and launched across 
the room. 

" Back, Bob ! " screamed the girl ; and the dark head 
withdrew. 

The door slammed with a crash as the great dog 
flung against it, and Maggie was hurled, breathless and 
white-faced, into a corner. 

M'Adam was on his feet, pointing with shrivelled 
finger, his face distorted. 

" Did you bring him ? did you daur bring t/tat to ma 
door?" 

Maggie huddled in the corner in a palsy of trepida- 
tion. Red Wull was now beside her, snarling horribly. 
With nose to the bottom of the door and busy paws, he 
was trying to get out. While, on the other side, Owd 
Bob, snuffling also at the crack, scratched and pleaded 
to get in. Only two miserable wooden inches divided 
the blood-foes. 

" I browt him to protect me. I — I was afear't" 

M'Adam sat down and laughed abruptly. 

" Afear't ? I wonder ye werena afear't to bring him 
here. It's the first time he's bin here this three year, 
and t' had best be the last." He turned to the great 
dog. "Wullie, Wullie, wad ye?" he called. "Come 
here. Lay ye doon — so — under ma chair — good lad ! 



232 



OWD BOB 



Noo's no' the time to settle wi* him. We can wait, 
WuUie, we can wait." 

Then, turning to Maggie, " Gin ye want him to mak' 
a show at the Trials two months hence, he'd best no* 
come here agin. Gin he does, he'll no' leave ma land 
alive — Wullie'll see to that. . . . Noo, what is't ye 
want o* me ? " 

The girl in the corner, scared out of her senses by 
this last incident, remained dumb. 

M'Adam marked her hesitation, and grinned sardonic- 
ally. 

" I see hoo 'tis," said he : " yer dad's sent ye. Aince 
afore he wanted somethin' o' me, and did he come to 
fetch it hissel', like a man ? . . . Not he. He sent the 
son to rob the father." Then, leaning forward in his 
chair and glaring at the girl — " Ay, and mair than that ! 
the night the lad set on me he cam'" — with hissing 
emphasis — " straight from Kenmuir ! " He paused and 
stared at her, intent ; and she was still dumb before him. 
"Gin I'd bin killed, Wullie 'd ha' bin disqualified from 
competin' for the Cup. With Adam M'Adam's Red Wull 
oot o' the way . . . noo d'ye see ? noo d'ye onderstan' ? " 

She did not, and he saw it and was satisfied. 

What he had been saying she neither knew nor cared. 
She only remembered the object of her mission ; she only 
saw before her the father of the man she loved ; and a 
wave of emotion surged up in her breast. She advanced 
timidly towards him, holding out her hands. 

" Eh, Mr. M'Adam," she pleaded, " I com' to ask ye 
after David." The shawl had slipped from her head, 
and lay loose upon her shoulders ; and she stood before 
him with her sad face, her pretty hair all tossed, and 
eyes big with unshed tears — a touching suppliant. 
"Will ye not tell me wheer he is? I'd not ask it, I'd 



A MAN AND A MAID 



233 



d. 



not trouble ye, but I've bin waitin' a waefu' while, it 
seems, and eh! i'm wearyin' for news o' him." 

The little man regarded her curiously. 

" Ah, noo I mind me," — this to himself. " You're the 
lass as is thinkin* o' marryin' him ? " 

" We're promised," the girl answered simply. 

" Weel," the other remarked, " as I said afore, ye're a 
good pluck'd 'un." Then, in a tone in which, despite 
the cynicism, a certain indefinable sadness was blended, 
" Gin he mak's you as good a husband as he mad' son 
to me, ye'U ha' made a maist remarkable match, my 
dear." 

Maggie fired in a moment. 

" A good father mak's a good son," she answered 
almost pertly ; and then, with infinite tenderness, " and 
I'm prayin' a good wife '11 mak' a good husband." 

He smiled scoffingly. But the girl never heeded the 
unspoken sneer, so set was she on her purpose. She 
had heard of the one tender place in the heart of this 
little man with the tired face and mocking tongue, and 
she resolved to attain her end by appealing to it. 

"Ye loved a lass yersel' once, Mr. M'Adam. Hoo 
would you ha' felt had she gan away and left ye ? Ye'd 
ha' bin mad and a', ye know ye would. And, Mr. 
M'Adam, I love t' lad yer wife loved ! " She was kneel- 
ing at his feet, her hands upon his knees, looking up at 
him. Her sad face and quivering lips pleaded for her 
more eloquently than any words. 

The little man was touched. 

"Ay, ay, lass, that's enough," he said, trying to 
avoid those big, beseeching eyes which would not be 
avoided. 

" Will ye not tell me ? " she pleaded. 

" I canna tell ye, lass, for why, I dinna ken," he 



234 



OWD BOB 



answered querulously. In truth he was moveu to the 
heart by her misery. 

The girl's last hopes were dashed. She had played 
her last card, and failed. She had clung with the 
fervour of despair to this last resource ; and now it was 
torn from her. She had hoped; and now there was 
no hope. In the anguish of her disappointment she 
remembered that this was the man who, by his persistent 
cruelty, had driven her love into exile. 

She rose to her feet and stood back. 

" Nor ken nor care ! " she cried bitterly. 

At that all the softness fled from the little man's face. 
Ve do me a wrang, lass, ye do indeed," he said, 
looking up at her with an assumed ingenuousness which, 
hnd s^^ known him better, would have warned her to 
beware. "Gin I kent where the lad was I'd be the 
vairy first to let you — and the p'Hce, ken it — eh, VVullie, 
he ! he I " He chuckled and rubbed his knees, regard- 
less of the contempt blazing in the girl's face. 

" I canna tell ye where he is noo, but ye'd aiblins care 
to hear o' when I saw him last." He turned his chair 
the better to address her. " 'Twas like so : I was sittin' 
— in this vairy chair it was — asleep, when he crep' up 
ahint and lep' on me back. I knew naethin' o't ava, 
till I found masel' on the floor and him kneelin' on me. 
' Your time's come, dad,' says he, ' I'm fair set on finish- 
ing ye.' * Spare me ! ' says I, * spare me, dear Davie, — 
for yer neck's sake ! ' * Don't ye wish it ? * says he, and 
began hammerin' me head agin the floor. * Gimme 
time for a bit prayer, dear lad,' says I " — 

The girl waved to him, superbly contemptuous. 

" Ye're leein', ivery word o't." 

The little man hitched his trousers, crossed his legs, 
and yawned. 



A MAN AND A MAID 



235 



legs, 



" An honest lee for an honest purpose is a matter ony 
man may be proud of, as you'll ken when you've my 
years, ma lass." 

The girl crossed the room. At the door she turned. 

"Then ye willna tell me wheer he is?" she asked, 
with a heart-breaking trill in her voice. 

"On ma word, lass, I dinna ken!" he cried, half 
passionately. 

" On your word, M'Adam ! " she said, with a quiet 
scorn in her voiv,e that might have stung Iscariot. 

The little man spun round, an angry red dyeing his 
cheeks. In another moment he was suave and smiling 
again. 

" I canna tell ye where he is noo," he said ; " but, 
aiblins, I could let ye know where he's gaein' to." 

** Cansta* ? Wilta* ? " cried the simple girl ; and in a 
moment was across the room and at his knees. 

" Closer, and I'll whisper." 

The little ear, peeping from its nest of brown, 
tremblingly approached his lips. 

M'Adam leant forward and whispered — one short, 
sharp word ; then sat back, grinning, to watch the effect 
of his disclosure. 

He had his revenge — an unworthy revenge on such 
a victim. And watching the girl's face, the cruel dis- 
appointment merging in the heat of her indigna^^ion, he 
had yet enough nobility to regret his triumph. 

She sprang from him as though he were unclean. 

" And you his father ! " she cried in burning tones. 

She crossed the room again. At the door she paused. 
Her face was white and she was quite composed. 

" If David did strike you, you drove him to it," she 
said, speaking in calm, gentle accents. "You ken — 
none so well — whether you've bin a good father to him 






r 



236 



OWD BOB 



— and him no mother, poor laddie ; whether you've 
bin to him what she'd ha' had ye be. Ask yer con- 
science, Mr. M'Adam. An' if he was a bit aggravatin' 
at times, hed he no reason? He'd a heavy cross to 
bear, had David, and you ken best if you helped to ease 
it for him." 

The little man pointed to the door; but the girl 
held on. 

" Doesta' think when you were cruel to him, jeerin' 
and fleerin', he niver felt it — because he was ower proud 
to show ye ? He'd a big, saft heart, had David, anonder 
the varnish. Many's the time when mother was alive, 
I've seen him throw himself into her arms greetin', and 
cry, 'Eh, if I'd nobbut mother! 'Twas different like 
when mother was alive — he was kinder to me then. 
An' noo I've no one — I'm aloan.' And he'd sob and 
sob in mother's arms, and she, greetin' sair hersel', 
would comtort him, while he, bit laddie, would no' be 
comforted, cryin' broken-like, * There's noan to care for 
me noo — I'm aloan. Mother's left me, and, eh! I'm 
prayin' to be wid her.' " 

The clear, girlish voice shook. M'Adam, sitting with 
face averted, waved to her, mutely ordering her to be 
gone. But she continued, gentle, sorrowful, relent- 
less — 

" An' what will you say to his mother when you meet 
her, as ye must soon noo, and she asks you, ' An' what 
o' David ? What o' t' lad I left wid you, to guard and 
keep for me, faithful and true, till this day ? ' And then 
ye'll hae to speak the truth — God's truth ; and ye'll hae 
to answer, ' Sen' the day ye left me I niver said a kind 
word to the lad ; I niver bore wid him, and niver tried 
to ; and in the end I drove him by persecution to try 
and murder me.* Then mebbe she'll look at ye — you 



A MAN AND A MAID 



237 



..-^ > 



best ken hoo ; and she'll say, * Adam, Adam ! is this what 
I deserved fra' thee ? * " 

The gentle, implacable voice ceased. The girl slipped 
softly out of the room ; and M'Adam was left alone to 
his thoughts and his dead wife's memory. 

" Mither and father, baith ! Mither and father, baith ! " 
rang remorselessly in his ears. 



CHAPTER XXV 



THE CHASE IN THE DARK 



THE summer was passing, marked throughout with 
the bloody trail of the Killer. 

Nightly you might still hear at the Arms that asser- 
tion stamped home with dogmatic fist, " It's t* Terror, I 
tell thee ! " and as often that irritating, inevitable retort, 
" Ay ; but wheer's t' proof? " While often at the same 
moment, in a house not far away, a little lonely man sat 
before a low-burnt fire, rocking to and fro, biting his 
nails, and muttering to the great dog whose head lay 
between his knees — 

" If we had but the proof, Wullie ! if we had but the 
proof! I'd give ma right hand aff my arm if we had 
the proof to-morrow." 

Sometimes there would be a cessation in the crimes ; 
then a shepherd, going his rounds, would notice his sheep 
packing in unaccustomed squares. A raven, gorged to 
the crop, would rise before him, and flap wearily away ; 
and in a little bloody-dabbled hollow he would come 
upon the murderer's latest victim. 

The Dalesmen were in despair. There was no proof; 
no hope ; no seeming likelihood that the end was near. 
While as for the Tailless Tyke, the only evidence to 
incriminate him had flown with David. Every effort had 
proved futile alike : the one hundred pounds reward had 
brought no issue ; the police had done nothing ; a special 

28S 



\ 



THE CHASE IN THE DARK 239 



at with 

asser- 
error, I 
I retort, 
le same 
nan sat 
ing his 
jad lay 

but the 
we had 

crimes ; 
is sheep 
rged to 

away; 

, come 

) proof; 
as near, 
ence to 
brt had 
ard had 
special 



Commissioner from the Board of Agriculture had been 
equally successful ; after the affair in the Witch's Lap 
the Killer never ran a risk, yet never missed a chance. 

Then, as a last resource, Jim Mason tried his hand. 
He took a holiday from his duties and disappeared into 
the wilderness. Thr^'e days and three nights no man 
saw him. On the morning of the fourth he reappeared, 
haggard, unkempt, a furtive look haunting his eyes, 
sullen for once, irritable, who had never been irritable 
before — to confess his failure. Cross-examined further, 
he answered with unaccustomed fierceness, " I seed nowt, 
I tell thee. Whaur's the liar as said I did ? " 

But that night his missus heard him in his sleep 
conning over something in slow, fearful whisper, " Two— 
on — 'em: one — ahint — t'udder. The first — big — bull- 
like ; t* second " — at which point Mrs. Mason smote him 
a smashing blow in the ribs, and he woke in a sweat, 
crying terribly, " Who said I seed " — 

• ••••«• 

The days were slipping away ; the summer was hot 
upon the land, and with it the Black Killer was forgotten ; 
David was forgotten ; everything sank into oblivion 
before the all-absorbing interest of the coming Trials. 

The long-anticipated battle for the Shepherds' Trophy 
was looming close ; soon everything that hung upon 
the issue of that struggle would be decided finally. For 
ever the justice of Th' Owd 'Un's claim to his proud title 
would be settled. If he won, he won outright — a thing 
unprecedented in the annals of the Cu^ , i^ he won, the 
place of Owd Bob o' Kenmuir as first in his profession 
was assured for all time. Above all, it was the last 
event in the six years' struggle 'twixt Red and Grey. 
It was the last time those two great rivals would meet 
in battle. The supremacy of one would be decided 



240 



OWD BOB 



finally. For win or lose it was the last public appear- 
ance of the Grey Dog of Kenmuir. 

And as every hour brought the great day nearer, 
the ferment in the countryside surpassed all precedent. 
The heat of the Dalesmen's enthusiasm was inten- 

sified by the fever of their apprehension. Mimy a man 
would lose more than he cared to contemplate were Th* 
Owd 'Un beat. But he'd not be I Nay ; owd, indeed, 
he was — two years older than his great rival ; there 
were a hundred risks, a hundred chances ; still, " What's 
the odds agin Owd Bob o' Kenmuir? I'm takin' 'em. 
Who'll lay agin Th' Owd 'Un?" 

And with the air saturated with this perpetual talk of 
the old dog ; these everlasting references to his certain 
victory ; his ears drumming with the often boast that 
the grey dog was the best in the North, M'Adam became 
the silent, ill-designing man of six months sinc^ norose, 
brooding, suspicious, muttering of conspiracy .otting 
revenge. 

At the Sylvester Arms he would sit alone in a far 
corner, silent, glowering, shunning companions like a 
dog in the fir t stage of rabies. Sometimes he would 
burst into a paroxysm of insane giggling, slapping his 
thigh as at some huge jest, and muttering, " Ay ; it's 
likely they'll beat us, Wullie. Yet aiblins there's a wee 
somethin' — a somethin' we ken and they dinna — eh, 
Wullie, he! he! he!" 

He seemed like one hatching eternally some secret 
enterprise. Now he babbled low and rapid in Red 
Wull's ear ; now he exploded into a clatter of hushed 
tittering ; then clapped into sudden silence, casting 
stealthy eyes around, glaring, and nibbling at his nails 
in a fury of apprehension. 

He resumed his ancient practice of haunting Ken- 



'' 



THE CHASE IN THE DARK 241 

muir. The women dared hardly leave the yard for 
fear of him. Now. from behind a wall, now through the 
bars of a gate, now down through a veil of branches, 
the yellow mask would peer. Sam'l informed Maggie 
that doubtless the little man was looking for the ghost 
of his murdered son. 

The Master at first inclined to scoff at these reports. 
But soon he had cause to change his tone. Passing the 
larch copse in the doubtful dusk of a summer eveninj^, 
there struck on his car a click as of a cocking trigger. 

He looked round : nothing could he .see. He 
hearkened: silence. He peered into the darkness of 
the wood ; and at length discerned a still face screwing 
round a tree-boll to watch him. 

" M'Adam ! " he called, n mazed. 

Detected, the little man emerged. His hands were 
behind him ; but the stock of a protruding gun did not 
escape the Master's eye. 

" What's ta' doin' here wid t' goon ? " he asked sharply. 

"Waitin'." 

" For what ? " 

"The Black Killer." 

The Master stared. 

" To shoot him ? " 

« Ay." 

The Master was ill-pleased. 

" I'd liefer ye waited elsewhere. Ye med shoot ma 
Bob here by accident." 

" Ye need fear no accident, James Moore. When I 
shoot, it'll be deleeberate." 

The Master turned to go. 

" Ye'll not catch Killer here, I tell ye. He's not ower 
fond o' Kenmuir." 

" That seems so, James Moore," the little man replied, 
16 



IP 



242 



OWD BOB 



stopping him. "And hoo d'you count for yer luck — 
that you alane should escape him ? " 

The Master swung round and pointed at the grey 
dog who stood close by listening in the half-night. 

" There's my luck ! " he said. 

M'Adam laughed harshly. 

" So I thought, so I thought. And I suppose ye're 
thinkin' that yer luck" — nodding at the grey dog — 
" will win ye the Cup for sure a month hence ? " 

" I hope so." 

" Strange if he should not ! " mused the other. 

The Master's eyes flashed. He recalled the many 
rumours he had heard ; M'Adam's perpetual presence 
about Kenmuir ; and the attempt on the old dog early 
in the year. 

"I canna think ony one'd be coo'ard enough to 
murder him 1" he cried, his voice thrilling. 

M'Adam leant forward : his eyes were glittering. 

" Ye'd no' think ony one 'd be coo'ard enough to set 
the son to murder the father. Yet someone did set 
the lad on to 'sassinate me. He failed at me, and noo, 
I suppose, he'll try at Wullie." The thin voice rang 
vindictive in the gloom. "One way or t'ither, fair or 
foul, Wullie or me, ain or baith, has got to go afore 
Cup Day — eh, James Moore, eh ? " 

The Master shoved past him. ' 

" I'll stop to hear no more, M'Adam, else, mebbe, I'd 
get fine and angry wid ye. Noo, hod bye ! " And he 
passed a' ' into the night. 

Yet t i interview served to rouse his alarm. And 
when two days later Sam'l reported that, having been 
up atop of the big stack, he had found in the hay a 
form, clearly defined, as of where a man had lain, he 
looked grave. 



THE CHASE IN THE DARK 243 

In the thick of the following night, Watch, the black 
crossbred chained in the yard, challenged raucously. 
It was as though the Master had been waiting the 
signal; for while the night still echoed he emerged 
from the house, lantern in hand. 

At the same moment, Tammas and Sam'l came down 
the steps from the loft. 

" Owd 'Un ! " the Master called. 

There came no answering form. 

" Owd 'Un!" again. 

No reply. 

"Wheeriver's he gotten to?" whispered Tammas, 
peering into the porch where the old dog was wont to 
sleep. 

"Not far, I'll lay," said the Master, and turned 
to the business in hand. "Noo, oop wid t* 
ladder!" 

They leaned it against the stack. The Master began 
to ascend, lantern in mouth. His head on a level with 
the top of the stack, he peered round, casting the rays 
of light over the floor of hay. 

"Sitha' owt, Master?" asked Tammas in anxious 
whisper. 

The other made no reply ; he was climbing cautiously 
on to the stack. 

" Th' Owd 'Un com' back yet ? " came his voice from 
above, after an interval. 

"Nay." 

" Then gang t' top o' croft and ca'." 

Tammas obeyed. Thrice his whistle pierced the 
night; then he returned. 

" Owd 'Un ! Owd 'Un ! " he called—" Wheeriver arta' 
gotten to ? " 

The answer came from an unexpected quarter. Far 



# 



244 



OWD BOB 



away over the Marches there resounded a deep booming 
battle-cry. 

Tarn mas gasped. Sam'l gaped. The lantern flashed 
downward through the night and crashed to the ground. 

The two men below looked at one another. Neither 
spoke. It was the Grey Dog's Ca'. 

"Mebbe — mebbe," began Tammas, and stayed, at 
utter loss for explanation. 

The Master was creaking down tb ' idder. 

" Nowt theer," he said shortly ; a: . j his voice seemed 
unsteady. 

He joined the others. The three stood silent at the 
foot of the stack. The night was as still as a cathedral. 

Then of a sudden there sounded a crash in the 
distance, and, hard on top of it, a second, as of two 
steeplechasers bursting through a hedge. 

The three listened. Another moment, and there 
struck on their ears, clear in the calm of night, the 
rattle of feet hounding furiously towards them. 

Sam'l was shaking. 

" Two on 'em I " 

*' Ma wud I and in a rare pooder too. Hark 1 " 

The words were barely out when the yard-gate 
rattled and rattled again as if struck by flying feet. 
Two phantom shapes, one on the other's heels, slung 
by them. Across the yard they flung like a storm of 
hail, hound and hounded ; flashed away over the wall ; 
then a terrific slatter on the hard slope, as of drums 
beating a charge ; the plank-bridge clanged and clanged 
again : then silence. 

Watch was waking the night. The three men were 
trembling. The thing had burst on them like a 
tornado; swept past and gone. Barely a minute had 
elapsed since that first thunder-call upon the Marches. 



THE CHASE IN THE DARK 245 

" Whativer ? " gasped Tammas. 

" Bogles baith ! " Sam'l hazarded. 

Only the Master stayed silent. 

Sam'l shuffled away; the others followed. Doors 
banged ; bolts rang : and the small figure, hanging rat- 
wise in the crevice between two stacks, dropped to the 
ground and pattered away. 



w 



ill 



f 



^1 



CHAPTER XXVI 

A SHOT IN THE NIGHT 

IT was only three short weeks before Cup Day that 
one afternoon Jim Mason brought a letter to 
Kenmuir. The Master opened it as the postman still 
stood in the door. 

It was from Long Kirby — still in retirement — begging 
him for mercy's sake to keep Th' Owd *Un safe within 
doors at nights, at least till after the Trials. 

This was how the smith concluded his ill-spelt note — 

" Look out for M'Adam i tell you, i ^now hel tri at 
thowd un afore cup day — failin im you, if the ole dog's 
bete i'm a ruined man i say, so for the luv o God keep 
yer eyes wide." 

The Master read the letter aiid handed it to the 
postman, who perused it carefully. 

" Sitha' here noo," said Jim at length, speaking with 
an earnestness that made the other stare, " I wish 
thoo'd do what he asks thee : keep Th' Owd *Un in o' 
neets that is." 

The Master shook his head. 

"Nay," said he, " M'Adam or no M'Adam, Cup or 
no Cup, Th* Owd 'Un has the run o' ma land same as 
he's had sen* a puppy. Why, Jim, the first neet I shut 
him up, that neet the Killer comes, I'll lay ! " 

The postman turned wearily away, and the Master 

846 



A SHOT IN THE NIGHT 247 

stood looking after him, wondering what had come of 
late to his former cheery friend. 

Those two were not the only warnings James Moore 
received. During the weeks immediately preceding 
the Trials, the danger signal was perpetually flaunted 
beneath his nose. 

Twice again did Watch hurl a brazen challenge on 
the night air. Twice did the Master, with lantern, 
Sam'l, and Owd Bob, sally forth and search every hole 
and corner on the premises — to find nothing. Vi'let 
Thornton, the dairymaid, gave notice, avowing that 
the farm was haunted ; that, on several occasions in 
the early morning, she had seen a bogle flitting down 
the slope to the Wastrel — a sure portent, Sam'l declared, 
of an approaching death in the house. While once a 
shearer, coming up from the village, reported having 
seen, in the twilight of dawn, a little ghostly figure, 
haggard and startled, stealing silently from tree to tree 
in the coppice by the lane. The Master, however, 
irritated by these constant vain alarms, dismissed the 
story summarily. " One thing I'm sartin o'," said he : 
" There's not a crittur moves on Kenmuir at neets but 
Th' Owd 'Un kens it." 

Yet, even as he said it, a little man, draggled, weary- 
eyed, smeared with dew and dust, was limping in at the 
door of a house barely a mile away. 

"Nae luck, Wullie, curse it!" he cried, throwing 
himself into a chair, and addressing someone who was 
not there — "nae luck. An' yet I'm sure o't as I am 
that there's a God in heaven." 



M'Adam was an old man now. But little more than 

fifty, yet he looked to have reached man's allotted years. 

His sparse hair was quite white ; his body shrunk^c^^d 

nO - ERT . 01 

- UiiLlG LIBRAK 



r 



111 



248 



OWD BOB 



bowed ; and his thin hand shook like an aspen as it 
groped to the familiar bottle. 

In another matter, too, he was altogether changed. 
Formerly, whatever his faults, there had been no harder 
working man in the countryside. At all hours, in all 
weathers, you might have seen him with his gigantic 
attendant going his rounds. Now all that was different : 
he never put his hand to the plough, and with none to 
help him the land was left utterly uncared ; so that men 
said that, of a surety, there would be a farm to let on 
the March Mere estate come Michaelmas. 

Instead of working, the little man sat all day in the 
kitchen at home, brooding over his wrongs, brewing 
vengeance. Even the Sylvester Arms knew him no 
more ; for he stayed where he was with his dog and his 
bottle. Only, when the shroud of night had come down 
to cover him, he slipped out and away on some errand 
on which not even Red Wull accompanied him. 

So the time fled on, till the Sunday before the Trials 
came round. 

All that day M'Adam sat in his kitchen, drinking, 
muttering, hatching revenge. 

*' Curse it, Wullie ! curse it ! The time's slippin' — 
slippin' — slippin*. Thursday next — but three days 
mair ! and I haena the proof — I haena the proof ! " and 
he rocked to and fro, biting his nails. 

All day long he never moved. Long after sunset he 
sat on ; long after the dark had eliminated the features 
of the room. 

"They're all agin us, Wullie. It's ;ou and I alane, 
lad. M'Adam's to be beat somehow, onyhow ; and 
Moore's to win. So they've settled it, and so 'twill be — 
onless, Wullie, onless — but curse it ! I've no' the proof ! " 
and he hammered the table in the agony of his impotence. 



A SHOT IN THE NIGHT 249 

At midnight he arose, a mad, desperate plan looming 
through his fuddled brain. 

" I swore I'd pay him, Wullie, and I will. If I hang 
for it, I'll be even wi' him. I haena the proof, but I 
know — I knowV^ He groped his way to the mantel- 
piece with blind eyes and swirling brain. Reaching up 
fumbling hands, he took down the old blunderbuss from 
above the fireplace. 

" Wullie," he whispered, chuckling hideously, " Wullie, 
come on ! You and I — he ! he ! " But the Tailless Tyke 
was elsewhere. At nightfall he had slouched silently 
out of the house on business he best wot of 

So his master crept out of the room alone, on tiptoe, 
still chuckling. 

The cool night air refreshed him, and he stepped 
stealthily along, his quaint weapon across his shoulder : 
down the hill, across the Bottom, skirting the Pike, till 
he reached the plank-bridge over the Wastrel. 

He crossed it safely, that Providence whose care is 
drunkards placing his footsteps. Then he stole up the 
slope like a hunter stalking his prey. 

Arrived at the gate, he raised himself, and peered 
over into the moon-lit yard. There was no sign or 
sound of living creature. The little grey house slept 
peacefully in the shadow of the Pike, all unaware of the 
man with murder in his heart laboriously climbing the 
yard -gate. 

The door of the porch was wide, the chain hanging 
limply down unused ; and the little man could see 
within, the moon shining on the iron studs of the inner 
door and the blanket of him who should have slept 
there, and did not. 

" He's no' there, Wullie ! he's no' there ! " 

He jumped down from the gate. Throwing all 



11 ' 



250 



OWD BOB 



caution to the winds, he reeled recklessly across the 
yard. The drunken delirium of battle was on him. 
The fever of anticipated victory flushed his veins. At 
length he would take toll for the injuries of years. 

Another moment and he was before the good oak 
door, battering it madly with clubbed weapon, yelling, 
dancing, screaming vengeance. 

" Where is he ? what's he at ? Come and tell me that, 
James Moore ! Come doon, I say, ye coward I Come 
and meet me like a man ! 



* Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled, 
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led— 
Welcome to your gory bed, 
Or to victoric — c ! ' " 



The soft moonlight streamed down on the white- 
haired madman screaming his war-song. 

The quiet farmyard, startled from its sleep, awoke 
in an uproar. Cattle shifted in their stalls ; horses 
whinnied ; fowls chattered, aroused by the din and dull 
thudding of the blows ; and above the rest, loud and 
piercing, the shrill cry of a terrified child. 

Maggie, wakened from a vivid dream of David 
chasing the police, hurried a shawl around her, and in a 
mmute had the baby in her arms and was comforting 
her ; vaguely fearing the while that the police were 
after David. 

James Moore flung his window up. Leaning out, he 
looked down on the dishevelled, dancing figure below 
him. 

M'Adam heard the noise, glanced up, and saw his 
enemy. Straightway he ceased his attack on the door, 
and running beneath the window, shook his weapon at 
his foe. 



A SHOT IN THE NIGHT 251 



At 



were 



" There ye are, are ye ! Curse ye for a coward ! curse 
ye for a liar ! Come doon, I say, James Moore ! come 
doon — I daur ye to it ! Aince and for a' let's settle oor 
account" 

The Master, looking down from above, conjectured 
that at length the little man's brain had gone. 

"What doesta' want?" he asked, as calmly as he 
could, hoping to gain time. 

" What is't I want ? " screamed the madman. " Heark 
to him ! He crosses me in ilka thing ; he plots agin 
me ; robs me o* ma Cup ; he sets ma son agin me and 
pits him on to murder me. And in the end he " — 

" Coom then, coom ! I'll " — 

" Gie me back the Cup ye stole, James Moore ! Gie 
me back ma son ye've took from me! And there's 
anither thing: what's yer Grey Dog doin'? where's 
yer "— 

The Master interposed again. 

"I'll coom doon and talk things ower wid ye," he 
said soothingly. But before he could withdraw M'Adam 
had jerked his weapon to his shoulder, and aimed 
it full at his enemy's head. 

The threatened man looked down the thing's great 
quivering mouth, wholly unmoved. 
" "Ye mun hold it steadier, little man, if ye'd hit," 
he said grimly. " There, I'll coom help ye." He with- 
drew slowly ; and all the time was wondering where 
the grey dog was. 

In another moment he was downstairs, unbarring the 
door. On the other side stood M'Adam, blunderbuss 
at shoulder, finger trembling on the trigger. 

" Hi, Master ! hod back or thoo's dead ! " roared a 
voice from the loft. 

" Father ! Father ! back wid thee ! " screamed 



252 



OWD BOB 



Maggie, who saw it all from the window above the 
door. 

The warnings came too late : the blunderbuss went 
off with a roar, belching out a storm of sparks and 
smoke. The shot peppered the door like hail, and the 
whole yard seemed for a moment wrapped in flame. 

"Aw! ah! ma gummy! 'Elp! Murder! Eh! Oh!" 
bellowed a lusty voice, and it was not James Moore's. 

The little man, the cause of the uproar, lay quite 
still upon the ground, with another figure standing 
over him. As he had stood, finger on trigger, waiting 
for that last bolt to be drawn, a grey form, shooting 
none knew whence, had silently attacked him from 
behind, and jerked him backwards to the ground. 
With the shock of the fall the blunderbuss had gone 
off. 

The last bolt was thrown back with a clatter, and 
the Master emerged. In a glance he took in the whole 
scene: the fallen man; the grey dog; the still smok- 
ing weapon. 

" Thee was't. Bob, lad ? " he said. " I was wonderin' 
wheer you were. Ye com' just at the reet moment, as 
ye aye do." Then, in loud voice, addressing the dark- 
ness, " Ye're not hurt, Sam'l Todd — I can tell that by 
yer noise : it was nobbut t* shot aff t* door warmed thee. 
Coom away doon and gie me a hand." 

He walked up to M'Adam, who still lay gasping on 
the ground. The shock of the fall and recoil of the 
weapon had knocked the breath out of the little man ; 
beyond that he was barely hurt. 

The Master stood over his fallen enemy, and looked 
sternly down at him. 

" I've put up wid mair fra' thee, M'Adam, than I 
would from ony other man," he said. "But this is 



A SHOT IN THE NIGHT 



^53 



the 



far ower mickle — comin' here at neet wi* loaded arms, 
scarin' t' women and childer oot o' their lives, and I 
can but think meanin' worse. If ye were half a mak' 
o* man I'd gie ye the finest bangin' ever ye had ; but 
as you ken weel, I could no more hit you than I could 
a woman. Why ye've gotten this doon on me you 
ken best I niver did you or any other man a harm. 
As to the Cup, I've got it and I'm goin' to do ma best 
to keep it — it's for you to win it fra' me if ye can o' 
Thursday. As for what ye say o* David, it's a lee. 
As for what ye're drivin* at wid yer hints and mysteries, 
I've no more idee than a babe unborn. . . . Noo I'm 
goin' to lock ye up — ye're not safe abroad. I'm thinkin' 
I'll hae to hand ye ower to the p'lice." 

With the help of Sam'l, he dragged the stunned little 
man across the yard; and shoved him into a tiny 
coal-hole at the end of the cowhouse. 

"You think it ower that side, ma lad," he called, 
as he turned the key, "and I will this." And with 
that he retired to bed. 

Early in the morning, he went to release his prisoner. 
He was a minute too late ; for scuttling down the slope 
and away, was a little black-begrimed, tottering figure 
with white hair blowing in the wind. 

" Happen it's as well," thought the Master, watching 
the flying figure. Then, " Hi, Bob, lad ! " he called ; 
for the grey dog, ears back, tail streaming, was hurling 
down the slope after the fugitive. 

On the bridge M'Adam turned, and seeing his 
pursuer hot upon him, screamed, missed his footing, 
and fell with a loud splash into the stream — almost in 
that identical spot into which, years before, he had 
plunged to save Red Wull. 

On the bridge Owd Bob halted and looked down at 



254 



OWD BOB 



the man struggling beneath him. He made a half move 
as though to leap in to the rescue of his enemy ; then, 
seeing there was no necessity, he turned and trotted 
back to his master. 

"Ye nobbut served him reet, lad, I'm thinkin'," said 
the Master. " Like as not he com' here wi' the intent 
to mak' an end to ye. Weel, after Thursday, I pray 
God we'll ha' peace. It's gettin' above a joke." 

The two turned back into the yard. 

But down below them, along the edge of the stream, 
for the second time in this story, a little dripping figure 
was tottering homewards. The little man was crying ; 
the hot tears mingling on his cheeks with the undried 
waters of the Wastrel. 



i 



I! i 



nove 
then, 
3tted 



said 
itent 
pray 



CHAPTER XXVII 



THE shepherds' TROPHY 



earn, 
gure 
ing; 
Iried 



i 



CUP Day. 
It broke calm and beautiful, no cloud on the 
horizon, no threat of storni in the air ; a fitting day on 
which the Shepherds' Trophy must be won outright. 

And well it was so. For never since the founding of 
the Dale Trials, had such a concourse been gathered 
together on the north bank of the Silver Lea. From 
the Highlands they came ; from the far Campbell 
country ; from the Peak ; from the county of many 
acres ; from all along the silver fringes of the Solway, 
assembling in that quiet corner of the earth to see the 
famous Grey Dog of Kenmuir fight his last great battle 
for the Shepherds' Trophy. 

From the break of day, the good pike-road from 
Grammoch-town groaned with traffic. By noon, the 
gaunt Scaur looked down on such a gathering as it had 
never seen. The paddock at the back of the Dalesman's 
Daughter was packed with a clammering, chattering, 
multitude : animated groups of farmers ; bevies of 
stolid rustics ; sharp - faced townsmen ; loud-voiced 
bookmakers, thrown together li'"2 toys in a sawdust 
bath ; whilst here and there, on the outskirts of the 
crowd, a lonely man and wise-faced dog, come from 
afar to wrest his proud title from the best sheep-dog in 
the North. 

255 



256 



OWD BOB 



At the back of the enclosure was drawn up a formid- 
able array of carts and carriages, varying as much in 
quality and character as did their owners. There was 
the Squire's landau, rubbing axle - boxes with Jem 
Burton's modest moke - cart ; and there Viscount 
Birdsaye's flaring barouche side by side with the red- 
wheeled waggon of Kenmuir. 

In the latter, Maggie, sad and sweet in her simple 
summer garb, leaned over to talk to Lady Eleanour ; 
while golden-haired Wee Anne, delighted with the 
surging crowd, trotted about the waggon, waving to her 
friends, and shouting from very joyousness. 

Close by was the gathered host of Dalesmen. Long 
Kirby was there, returned from his retirement ; Jim 
Mason, sallow-faced and dull-eyed; Tammas, cynical 
and self-contained ; Sam'l, prophes^ang defeat ; while 
old Ned Hoppin, centre of the thickest knot, was telling 
how, on the Saturday previous, he had lost a sheep to 
the Killer, and asseverating his conviction as to the 
identity of the criminal. 

Across the Silver Lea was a little group of judges, 
inspecting the course. 

The line laid out ran thus. The sheep must first be 
found on the Fells to the right of the starting flag ; 
then up the slope and away from the spectators, round 
a flag and obliquely down the hill again ; through a 
gap in the wall ; along the hillside, parallel to the 
Silver Lea ; abruptly to the left through a pair of 
flags — the trickiest turn of them all ; then down the 
slope to the pen, which was set up close to the plank- 
bridge over the stream. 

The proceedings began with the Local Stakes, won 
by Rob Saunderson'p veteran, Shep. There followed the 
Open Juveniles', carried ofif by Ned Hoppin's young 



i 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 257 

dog. It was late in the afternoon when at length the 
great event of the meeting came on. 

In the enclosure behind the Dalesman's Daughter 
the clamour of the crowd increased tenfold, and the 
yells of the bookmakers redoubled. 

" Here I am, gen'lemen ! here I am ! ole Jack, the 
man you know. Liberal odds and you'll get your 
money . . . Bob ! what price Bob ? I'll take seven to 
four Grey — even money Red. Five to one bar two! 
Any money some on 'em I " 



i 



Across the stream is clustered about the start- 
ing - flag the finest array of sheep - dogs ever seen 
together. 

" I've never seen such a field, and I've seen fifty ! " is 
Parson Leggy's verdict. 

There, beside his master, stands Owd Bob, observed 
of all. With curtseying quarters, silver-waving brush, 
and dark head proudly high, he scans his challengers. 
Over against him that mean, light-limbed, terrier-like 
black is the unbeaten Pip, winner of the Cambrian 
Stakes at Llangollen — as many hold, the best of all the 
good dogs that have come from sheep-dotted Wales. 
Beside him, the splendid sable collie, with the 
tremendous coat and slash of white on throat and face, 
is the famous MacCallum More, fresh from his victory at 
the Highland meeting. The grizzled bob-tail with 
high curt quarters and blue eyes staring through 
their shaggy veil, iS the champion of the Southern 
Downs — Sir Galahad. That wolfish black-and-tan is 
Jess, on whom the Yorkshiremen are laying as though 
they loved her : she, they affirm, can catch a hare in a 
fair course. Besides these, Tupper's big blue Rasper is 
there, Londesley's Lassie, and many more — too many 

X7 



258 



OWD BOB 



to mention : big and small, grand and mean, smooth and 
rough — and not a bad dog amongst them. 

And alone, his back to the others, stands a little, 
bowed, conspicuous form — Adam M'Adam ; while the 
great dog beside him, scowling incarnation of defiance, 
is Red Wull, the Terror o' th' Border. 

The Tailless Tyke had already run up his fighting 
colours. For MacCallum More, advancing to examine 
this forlorn great adversary, had conceived for him a 
violent antipathy, and straightway had spun at him 
with all the fury of the Highland cateran, who attacks 
first and explains afterwards. Red Wull had turned 
on him with savage, silent gluttony ; bob-tailed Rasper 
was racing up to join the attack, and in another second 
all three would have been locked inseparably ; but just 
in time M'Adam intervened. 

Then one of the judges came hurrying up. 

" Mr. M'Adam," he cried angrily, " if that brute of 5^ours 
gets fighting again, hang me if I don't disqualify him 1 " 

A dull flush of passion swept across the little man's 
face. "Come here, WuUie!" he called. "Giii yon 
Hielant tyke attacks ye agin, ye're to be disqualified." 

He was unheeded. The battle for the Cup had 
begun, little Pip leading the dance. 

On the opposite slope the babel had subsided now. 
Hucksters left their wares, and bookmakers their stools, 
to watch the struggle. Every eye was intent on the 
moving figures of man and dog and three sheep across 
the stream. 

One after one the competitors ran their course and 
penned their sheep : there was no single failure. And 
all received their just meed of applause save only Adam 
M'Adam's Red Wull. 

Last of all, when Owd Bob trotted out to uphold his 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 259 

title, there went up such a roar as made Maggie's wan 
cheeks to blush with pleasure, and Wee Anne to scream 
right lustily. 

His was an incomparable exhibition. Sheep should 
be humoured rather than hurried ; coaxed rather than 
coerced. And that sheep-dog has attained the summit 
of his art, who subdues himself and leads his sheep in 
pretending to be led. Well might the bosoms of the 
Dalesmen swell with pride as they watched ; well might 
Tammas pull out that hackneyed phrase — " the brains 
of a man and the way of a woman " ; well might the 
crowd bawl theiv enthusiasm, and Long Kirby puff 
his cheeks, and rattle the money in his trouser pockets. 

But of this part it is enough to say that in the end 
Pip, Owd Bob, and Red Wull were selected to fight 
out the struggle afresh. 

The course was altered and stiffened. Beyond the 
stream it remained unchanged : up the slope ; round a 
flag ; down the hill again ; through a gap in the wall ; 
along the hillside ; down through the two flags ; turn, and 
to the stream again. But the pen was now moved from 
its former position, carried over the bridge, up the near 
slope, and the hurdles put together at the vciy foot of 
the multitude. 

A stiff c. Tse if ever there was one ; and the time 
allowed, ten chort minutes. 



i 
#' 



The spectators hustled and elbowed in endeavours 
to obtain posts of vantage. And well they might ; for 
about to begin was the finest exhibition of shccp- 
handling any man there was ever to behold. 



Evan Jones and little Pip led off. 



26o 



OWD BOB 



Those two, who had won on many a hard-fought 
field, worked together as they had never worked before. 
Smooth and swift, like a yacht in Southampton Water ; 
round the flag ; through the gap ; down between the two 
flags — accomplishing right well that awkward turn ; and 
back to the bridge. 

There they halted: the sheep would not face that 
narrow way. Once, twice, and again, they broke ; and 
each time the gallant Pip, his tongue out and tail 
quivering, brought them back to the bridge-head. 

At length one faced it ; then another and — it was too 
late. Time was up. The judges signalled ; and the 
Welshman called off his dog and withdrew. 

Out of sight of mortal eye, in a dip of the ground, 
Evan Jones sat down and took the small dark head 
between his knees ; and you may be sure the dog's 
heart was heavy as the man's. "We did our pest, 
Pip," he cried brokenly, " but we're peat — the first time 
ever we've been." 



No time to dally. 

James Moore and Owd Bob were off on their last run. 

No applause this time ; not a voice was raised : 
anxious faces ; twitching fingers ; the whole crowd tense 
as a stretched wire. A false turn, a wilful sheep, a 
cantankerous judge, and the grey dog would be beat. 
And not a man there but knew it. 

Yet over the stream master and dog went about their 
business, never so quiet, never so collected ; for all the 
world as though rounding up a flock on the Muir Pike. 

The old dog found his sheep in a twinkling ; and from 
the first it was evident they were a wild, scared trio. 
Rounding the first flag, one bright-eyed wether made a 
dash for the open. He was quick ; but the grey dog 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 261 



was quicker : a splendid recover, and a sound like a sob 
from the thousands on the hill. 

Down the slope for the gap in the wall. Below the 
opening James Moore took his stand to stop and turn 
them. A distance behind loitered Owd Bob, seeming 
to follow rather than to drive, yet watchful of every 
movement and anticipating it, one eye on his master 
the other on his sheep ; never hurrying them, never 
flurrying them, yet bringing them rapidly along. 

No word was spoken ; barely a gesture made ; yet 
they worked, master and dog, like one divided. 

Through the gap, along the hill parallel to the 
spectators, playing into one another's hands like men 
at polo. 

A wide sweep, for the turn at the flags, and the 
sheep wheeled as though at the word of command, 
dropped through them, and travelled rapidly for the 
bridge. 

" Steady ! " whispered the crowd. 

" Steady, man ! " muttered Parson Leggy. 

" Hold 'em for God's sake ! " croaked Kirby huskily. 
" Ah-h-h ! d ... I knew it. I seed it comin' ! " 

The pace down the hill had grown quicker — too quick. 
Close on the bridge the three sheep made an effort to 
break. A dash, and two were checked ; but the third 
went away like the wind, and after him Owd Bob, a 
grey streak against the green. 

Tammas was cursing silently; Kirby white to the 
lips ; and in the stillness you could plainly hear the 
Dalesmen's sobbing breath. 

"Gallop! they say he's old and slow," muttered the 
Parson. " Dash ! Look at that ! " For the grey dog, 
racing like the Nor* Easter over the sea, had already 
retrieved the fugitive. 



262 



OWD BOB 



Man and dog were coaxing the three a step at a time 
towards the bridge. 

One ventured ; the others followed. 

In the middle the leader stopped and tried to turn ; 
and time was flying — flying, and the penning alone must 
take minutes. Many a man's hand was at his watch, 
but no one could take his eyes off the group below to 
look. 

"We're beat. I've won bet, Tammas," groaned 
Sam'l. The two had a long-standing wager on the 
matter. " I olas knoo hoo 'twud be. I olas tell't thee 
as t' owd tyke," — then breaking into a bellow, his honest 
face crimson with enthusiasm, — "Coom on, Master! 
Good for thee, Owd 'Un ! Yon's t' style ! " 

For the grey dog had leapt on the back of the hind- 
most sheep ; it had surged forward against the next, 
and they were over, and making up the slope amidst a 
thunder of applause. 

At the pen it was a sight to see shepherd and dog 
working together. The Master, his fice stern and a 
little whiter than its wont, casting forward with both 
hands, herding the sheep in ; the gu.y dog, eyes big 
and bright, dropping to hand, crawling and creeping, 
closer and closer. 

" They're in ! — Nay — Ay — dang me ! Stop 'er ! — 
good Owd 'Un ! Ah-h-h, they're in ! " and the last 
sheep reluctantly passed through on the stroke of time. 

A roar went up from the crowd ; Maggie's white face 
turned pink ; and the Dalesmen mopped wet brows. 
The mob surged forward, but the stewards held them 
back. 

" Back, please ! Don't encroach ! M'Adam's to 
come." 

From the far bank the little man watched the scene. 



to 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 263 

His coat and cap were off; his hdir gleamed white in 
the sun ; his sleeves were rolled up ; and his face was 
twitching as he stood ready. 

The hubbub over the stream at length subsided. One 
of the judges nodded to him. 

" Noo, Wullie ! noo or niver ! " and they were off. 

" Back, gentlemen ! back I He's off ; he's coming ! 
M'Adam's coming 1 " 

They might well shout and push ; for the great dog 
was on to his sheep almost before they knew it ; and 
they went away with a rush and Red Wull right on 
their backs. Up the slope they swept and round the 
first flag, already galloping. Down the hill for the 
gap, and M'Adam was flying ahead to turn them. But 
they passed him like a hurricane, and Red Wull was in 
front with a plunge and turned them alone. 

" M'Adam wins ! Five to four M'Adam ! I lay agin 
Bob!" rang out a clear voice in the silence. 

Through the gap they rattled, ears br.ck, feet 
twinkling like the wings of driven grouse. 

" He's lost 'em ! They'll break ! They're away ! " 
was the cry. 

Sam'l was half up the wheel of the Kenmuir waggon ; 
every' man was on his toes; ladies standing in their 
carriages ; even Jim Mason's face flushed with moment- 
ary excitement. 

The sheep were tearing along the hillside, all together, 
like a white scud. After them, galloping like a 
Waterloo winner, raced Red Wull. And last of all, 
leaping over the ground like a dem'^niac, making not 
for the two flags but the plank-bridge, the white-haired 
figure of M'Adam. 

" He's beat ! The Killer's beat ! " roared a strident 
voice. 



264 



OWD BOB 



" M'Adam wins ! Five to four M'Adam ! I lay agin 
Owd Bob ! " rang out the clear reply. 

Red Wull was now racing parallel to the fugitives 
and above them. All four were travelling at a terrific 
rate; and the two flags were barely twenty yards in 
front. To effect the turn a change of direction must be 
made through a right angle. 

" He's beat ! he's beat ! M' Adam's beat ! Can't make 
it nohow ! " was the roar. 

From over the stream a yell — 

"Turn'em, Wullie!" 

At that the great dog swerved down on the flying 
three. They wheeled, still at the gallop, like a troop of 
cavalry, and dropped, clean and neat, between the flags ; 
and down to the stream they rattled, passing M'Adam 
on the way as though he were standing. 

" Weel done, Wullie ! " came a scream from the far 
bank ; and from the crowd an involuntary burst of 
applause. 

" Ma wud ! " 

•* Did ta' see tliat ? " 

" By gob ! " 

It was a turn, indeed, of which the smartest team in 
the galloping horse-gunners might have been proud : a 
shade later and they must have overshot the mark, a 
shade sooner and a miss. 

" He's not been two minutes so far. We're beaten : 
don't you think so, Uncle Leggy?" asked Muriel 
Sylvester, looking up piteously into the Parson's face. 

" It's not what I think, my dear, it's what the judges 
think," the Parson replied testily. 

Right on to the centre of the bridge the leading sheep 
galloped, and stopped abruptly. 

Up above in the crowd there was utter silence ; staring 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 265 

eyes ; rigid fingers. The sweat was dripping off Long 
Kirby's face ; and, at the back, a green-coated book- 
maker slipped his notebook in his pocket, and glanced 
behind him. James Moore, standing in front of them 
all, was the calmest there. 

Red Wull was not to be denied. Like his forerunner 
he leapt on the back of the hindmost sheep. But the 
red dog was heavy where the grey was light. The 
sheep staggered, slipped, and fell. 

Almost before it had touched water, M'Adam, his 
face afire and eyes flaming, was in the stream. In a 
second he had hold of the struggling creature and had 
half-thrown, half-shoved it on to the bank. 

Again a tribute of admiration, led by James Moore. 

The little man scrambled, panting, on to the bank 
and raced after sheep and dog. His face was white 
beneath the perspiration ; his breath came in quavering 
gasps ; his trousers were wet and clinging to his legs ; 
he was trembling in every limb and yet indomitable. 

They were up to the pen, and the last wrestle began. 

The crowd, silent and motionless, craned forward to 
watch the uncannie pair working so close below them. 
M* Adam's eyes were staring, unnaturally bright; his 
bent body was projected forward ; and he tapped with 
his stick on the ground like a blind man, coaxing the 
sheep in. And the Tailless Tyke, tongue out, flanks 
heaving, crept and crawled and worked up to the opening, 
patient as he had never been before. 

They were in at last. 

There was a lukewarm, half-hearted cheer: then 
silence. 

Exhausted and trembling, the little man leant against 
the pen, one hand upon it ; while Red Wull, his flanks 
still heaving, gently licked the other. Quite close stood 



266 



OWD BOB 



James Moore and the grey dog ; above, was the black 
wall of people, utterly still ; below, the judges comparing 
notes. In the silence you could almost hear the 
panting of the crowd. 

Then one of the judges approached the Master and 
shook him by the hand. 

The grey dog had won. Owd Bob o' Kenmuir had 
won the Shepherds' Trophy outright I 

A second's palpitating silence ; a woman's hysterical 
laugh ; and a deep-mouthed bellow rent the expectant 
air : shouts, screams, hat-tossings, back-clappings, blend- 
ing in a. din that made the many- winding waters of the 
Silver Lea quiver and quiver again. 

Owd Bob o' Kenmuir had won outright. 

Maggie's face flushed scarlet; Wee Anne flung fat 
arms towards her triumphant Bob and screamed with 
the best ; Squire and Parson, each red-cheeked, were 
boisterously shaking hands ; Long Kirby, who had not 
prayed for thirty years, ejaculated with heartfelt 
earnestness — " Thank God ! " Sam'l Todd bellowed 
in Tammas's ear, and almost slew him with his mighty 
buffets ; while amongst the Dalesmen some laughed 
like drunken men ; some cried like children ; all joined 
in that roaring song of victory. 

To little M'Adam, standing with his back to the 
crowd, that storm of cheering came as the first 
announcement of defeat. 

A wintry smile, like the sun over a March sea, crept 
across his face. 

"We might ha' kentit, Wullie," he muttered softly. 

The tension loosed, the battle lost, the little man 
almost broke down. There were red dabs of colour in 
his face ; his eyes were big ; his lips pitifully quivering : 
he was near to sobbing. 



black 
>aring 
r the 

r and 

if had 

terical 
lectant 
blend- 
of the 



ing fat 
d with 
1, were 
ad not 
eartfelt 
llowed 
mighty 
aughed 
joined 

to the 
le first 

a, crept 

)ftly. 
le man 
alour in 
vcring : 



THE SHEPHERDS' TROPHY 267 

An old man — utterly alone — he had staked his all on 
a throw — and lost. 

Lady Eleanour marked the forlorn little figure 
standing solitary on the fringe of the uproarious mob. 
She noticed the expression on his face; and her 
tender heart went out to the little lone man in his 
defeat. 

She went up to him and laid a hand upon his arm. 

" Mr. M'Adam," she said timidly, " won't you come 
and sit down in the tent ? You look so tired." 

The little man wrenched roughly away. The unex- 
pected kindness, coming at that moment, was almost 
too much for him. 

A few paces off he turned again — 

" It's real kind o' yer Leddyship," he said huskily ; 
and tottered away to be alone with Red Wull. 

Meanwhile the victors stood like rocks in the tide- 
way. About them surged a continually changing 
throng, shaking the 'man's hand, patting the dog. 

Maggie had carried Wee Anne to tender her con- 
gratulations ; Long Kirby had come, Tammas, Saunder- 
son, Hoppin, Tupper, Londesley, Parson Leggy — all but 
Jim Mason; and now, elbowing through the press, came 
the Squire. 

" Well done, James ! well done, indeed ! Knew you'd 
win ! told you so — eh, eh ! " then facetiously to Owd 
Bob, " Knew you would, Robert, old man ! Ought to 
— Robert the Dev — mustn't be a naughty boy — eh, eh ! 
And oh ! by-the-by, James, I've fixed the Manor dinner 
for to-day fortnight. Tell Saunderson and Tupper, will 
you? Want all the tenants there." He disappeared 
into the crowd, but in a minute had fought his way 
back. " I'd forgotten something," he shouted. " Tell 



v\\ 



268 



OWD BOB 



your Maggie perhaps you'll have news for her after it, 
eh 1 eh I " and he was gone again. 

Last of all, James Moore was aware of a blotchy, 
grinning face at his elbow. 

" I maun congratulate ye, Mr. Moore. Ye've beat us — 
you and the gentlemen-judges." 

"'Twas a close thing, M'Adam," the ether answered. 
" An' ye made a gran' fight. In ma life I never saw a 
finer turn than yours by the two flags yonder. I hope 
ye bear no malice." 

"Malice! Me? Is it likely? Na, na. 'Do onto 
ivery man as he does onto you — and somethin' over,' 
that's my motter. Na, na ; there's nae gude fechtin' 
agin fate — and the judges. Weel, I wush you well o* 
yer victory. Aiblins 'twill be oor turn next." 

Then a rush, headed by Sam'l, roughly hustled the 
one away, and bore the other off on its shoulders in 
boisterous triumph. 

In presenting the Cup, Lady Eleanour made a 
prettier speech than ever. Yet all the while she was 
haunted by a white miserable face ; and all the while 
she was conscious of two black moving dots in the 
murk Muir Pass opposite her — solitary, desolate, a 
contrast to the huzzaing crowd around. 

That is how the Champion Challenge Dale Cup — the 
world-known Shepherds' Trophy — came to wander no 
more ; won outright by the last of the Grey Dogs of 
Kenmuir — Owd Bob, son of Battle. 

Why he was the last of his line is now to be told. 



/^ 



Part VI 



^ 



The Black Killer 



M» 



/^ 



>--i- 



'F 



Part VI 
The Black Killer 



CHAPTER XXVIII 



RED-HANDED 



THE sun was hiding behind the Pike. Over the 
lowlands the breath of night hovered still ; and 
the hillside was shivering in the chillness of dawn. 

Down on the sward beside the Stony Bottom there 
lay the ruffled body of a dead sheep. All about the 
victim the dewy ground was dark and patchy like 
dishevelled velvet ; bracken trampled down ; stones 
displaced as though by striving feet ; and the whole 
spotted with the all-pervading red. 

A score yards up the hill, in a writhing confusion of 
red and grey, two dogs at death-grips. While yet 
higher, a pack of wild-eyed hill-sheep watched, fascin- 
ated, the bloody drama. 

The fight raged. Red and grey, blood-spattered, 
murderous-eyed, the crimson froth dripping from their 
jaws; now rearing high with arching crests and wrestling 
paws ; now rolling over in tumbling, tossing, worrying 
disorder, the two fought out their blood-feud. 

Above, the close-packed flock huddled and stamped, 

271 



mm 



272 



OWD BOB 



ever edging nearer to watch the issue. Just so must 
the women of Rome have craned round the arenas to 
see two men in death-struggle. 

The first cold flicker of dawn stole across the green. 
The red eye of the morning peered aghast over the 
shoulder of the Pike. From the sleeping Dale there 
arose the yodling of a man driving his cattle home. 

Day was upon them. 

James Moore was waked by a whimpering cry 
beneath his window. He leaped out of bed and --Ubiied 
to look ; for well he knew 'twas not for nothing that the 
old dog was calling. 

" Lord o* me ! What'n's gotten to thee, Owd 'Un ? " 
he cried in angiish. And, indeed, his favourite, war- 
dauoad past recognition, presented a pitiful spectacle. 

In a moment the Master was downstairs and oat, 
examining him. 

" Poor owd lad, ye've fair cop't it this time ! " he cried. 
There was a ragged tear on the dog's cheek; a deep 
gash in his throat from which the blood still welled, 
staining the white escutcheon on his chest ; while head 
and neck were clotted with the red. 

Hastily the Master summoned Maggie. After her, 
Andrew came hurrying down. And a little later, a 
tiny, night-clad, naked-footed figure appeared in the 
door, wide-eyed, and then fled, screaming. 

They doctored the old warrior on the table in the 
kitchen. Maggie tenderly bathed his wounds, and 
dressed them with gentle, pitying fingers ; and he stood 
all the while grateful yet fidgeting, looking up 'nto his 
master's face as if imploring to be gone. 

" It mun ha' bin a rousan bout — eh, dad ? " said the 
girl as she worked. 



RED-HANDED 



273 



10 must 
enas to 

; green, 
ver the 
e there 
home. 



ng rry 
1 nisned 
that the 

I'Un?" 
te, war- 
pectacle. 
ind o il, 

he cried, 
a deep 
welled, 

ile head 

fter her, 

later, a 

in the 

t in the 

ds, and 
le stood 
nto his 

;aid the 



'* Ay ; and wi' whom ? 'Twarn't for nowt he got 
fightin', i warrant. Nay ; he's a tale to tell has Th' Owd 
'Un, and — Ah-h-h ! I thowt as mickle! Sitha' noo?" 
For bathing the bloody jaws, he had come upon a 
cluster of tawny red hair, hiding in the corners of 
the lips. 

The secret was out. Those few hairs told their own 
accusing tale. To but one creature in the Daleland 
could they belong — the Tailless Tyke. 

" He mun ha' bin trespassin' ! " cried simple Andrew. 

"Ay., and up to some o' his bloody wark, I'll lay," 
the Master answered. " But Th' Owd 'Un shall show 
us." 

The old dog's hurts proved less serious than had at 
first seemed possible. His good grey coat, forest-thick 
about his throat, had never served him in such good 
stead. And, at length, the wounds washed and sewn 
up, he leaped down all in a hurry from the table and 
made for the door. 

"Noo, owd lad, ye may show us," said the Master, 
and, with Andrew, hurried after him down the hill, 
along the stream, and over Langholm How. And as 
they neared the Stony Bottom, the sheep, herding in 
groups, raised frightened heads to stare. 

Of a sudden, a cloud of poisonous flies rose buzzing 
up before them ; and there in a dimple of the ground 
lay a murdered sheep. Deserted by its comrades ; the 
glazed eyes staring upwards ; the throat horribly gaping, 
it slept its last sleep. 

The matter was plain to see. At last the Black 
Killer had visited Kenmuir. 

" I guessed sae mickle," said the Master, standing 
over the mangled body. " VVeel, it's the worst neet's 
work ever the Killer done. 1 reck'n Th' Owd 'Un com' 
18 




274 



OWD BOB 



on him while he was at it ; and then they fowt. And, 
ma sarty ! it mim ha' bin a fight too." For all around 
were traces of that terrible struggle : the earth torn up 
and tossed ; bracken uprooted ; and, throughout, little 
dabs of wool and tufts of tawny hair, mingling with 
dark-stained iron-grey wisps. 

James Moore walked slowly over the battlefield, 
stooping as though he were gleaning. And gleaning 
he was. A long time he bent so, and at length raised 
himself. 

" The Killer has killed his last," he muttered ; " Red 
Wull has run his course." Then, turning to Andrew, 
" Run ye home, lad, and fetch the men to carry yon 
away," pointing to the carcase. " And, Bob, lad, you've 
done your work for to-day, and gay weel too, gang 
home wid him. I'm off to see to this." 

He turned and crossed the Stony Bottom. His face 
was set like a rock. At length the proof was in his 
hand. Once and for all the hill-country should be rid 
of its scourge. 

As he stalked up the hill, a dark head appeared at 
his knee. Two big grey eyes, half - doubtful, half- 
penitent, wholly wistful, looked up at him ; and a 
silvery brush signalled a mute request. 

" Eh, Owd 'Un, but ye should ha' gone wi' Andrew ! " 
he said. " Hooiver, as ye are here, coom along." And 
he strode away up the hill, gaunt and menacing, with 
the grey dog at his heels. 

As they approached the house, M'Adam was standing 
in the door, sucking his eternal twig. 

The Master eyed him closely as he came ; but the 
sour face framed in the door betrayed nothing. 
Sarcasm, surprise, challenge, were all writ there, plain 
to read, but no guilty consciousness of the other's 



RED-HANDED 



275 



And, 
iround 
orn up 
t, little 
y with 



tlefield, 
leaning 
I raised 

: "Red 
indrew, 
ry yon 
, you've 
3, gang 

iis face 

5 in his 

be rid 

ared at 
, half- 
and a 

drew!" 
And 
ig, with 

landing 

3ut the 
othing. 
;, plain 
other's 



errand, no storm of passion to hide a faih'ng heart. If 
it was acting it was splendidly done. 

As man and dog passed through the gap in the 
hedge, the expression on his face changed again. He 
started forward. 

" James Moore, as I live ! " he cried, and advanced 
with hands extended, as though welcoming a long-lost 
brother. "'Deed and it's a weary while sin' ye've 
honoured ma puir hoose ; " and, in fact, it was nigh 
twenty years. " I tak' it gey kind in ye to look in on a 
lonely auld man. Come ben and let's ha' a crack : 
James Moore kens weel hoo welcome he aye is in ma 
bit biggin'." 

The Master ignored the greeting. 

"One o' ma sheep been killed dyke -back," he 
announced shortly, jerking his thumb over his shoulder. 

"The Killer?" 

"The Killer." 

The cordiality beaming in every wrinkle of the little 
man's face was absorbed in a wondering interest ; and 
that again gave place to sorrowful sympathy. 

"Dear, dear! it's come to that has it — at last?" he 
said gently, and his eyes wandered to the grey dog and 
dwelt mournfully upon him. " Man, I'm sorry — I canna 
tell ye I'm surprised. Masel', I kent it all alang. But 
gin Adam M'Adam had tell't ye, ye'd no' ha' believed 
him. . . . Weel, weel, he's lived his life, gin ony dog iver 
did ; and noo he maun gang where he's sent a-many 
before him. Puir man ! puir tyke ! " He heaved a 
sigh, profoundly melancholy, tenderly sympathetic. 
Then, brightening a little, "Ye'll ha' come for the 
gun ? " 

James Moore listened, at first puzzled. Then he 
caught the other's meaning and his eyes flashed. 



Tr^ 



276 



OWD BOB 



I 



" Thoo fool, M'Adam ! did ye iver tell o' a sheep-dog 
worryin' his master's sheep ? " 

The little man was smiling and suave, rubbing his 
hands softly together. 

" Ye're right — I niver did. . But your dog is not as 
ither dogs — ' there's none like him — none,* I've heard ye 
say so yersel', mony a time. An' I'm wi' ye. There's 
none like him — for devilment." His voice began to 
quiver and his face to blaze. " The dog has a devil — I 
aye tell't ye so. It's his cursed cunning that's deceived 
everyone but me — whelp o' Satan that he is ! " He 
shouldered up to his tall adversary. " If not him, wha 
else had done it?" he asked, looking up into the 
other's face as if daring him to speak. 

The Master's shaggy eyebrows lowered. He towered 
above the other like th« Muir Pike above its surrounding 
hills. 

" Wha, ye ask ? " he replied coldly ; " and I answer 
you— Your Red Wull, M'Adam, your Red Wull ! It's 
your Wull's t' Black Killer! it's your Wull's bin the 
plague o' the land these months past ! it's your Wull's 
killed ma sheep back o' yon ! " 

At that, all the little man's affected good -humour 
fled. 

" Ye lee, man ! ye lee ! " he cried in dreadful ^scream, 
dancing up to his antagonist. " I knoo hoo 'twad be ! 
I said so ! I see what ye're at ! Ye've found at last — 
blind that ye've been ! — that it's yer ain hell's tyke 
that's the Killer, and ye think by yer leein' impitations 
to throw the blam«_ on ma Wuilie. Ye rob me o' ma 
Cup ; ye rob me o' ma son ; ye wrang me in ilka thing : 
there's but ae Ihing left me — Wuilie. And now ye're 
set on takin' him awa'. But ye shall not — I'll kill ye 
first I " 



:ep-dog 

ing his 

not as 
eard ye 
There's 
igan to 
levil— I 
eceived 
!" He 
im, wha 
iito the 

towered 
Dunding 

answer 
11 1 It's 
bin the 

Wull's 

humour 

^scream, 
kvad be ! 
it last — 
s tyke 
litations 
o' ma 
1 thing : 
)w ye're 
I kill ye 



RED-HANDED 



277 



He was all a-shake, bobbing up and down like a 
stopper in a soda-water bottle ; almost sobbing. 

" Ha' ye no* wranged me enough wi'oot that ? ye lang- 
leggit liar, wi' yer skulkin' murderin' tyke 1 " he cried. 
"Ye say it's Wullie. Where's yer proof?" and he 
snapped his fingers in the other's face. 

The Master was now as calm as his enemy was 
passionate. 

" Wheer ? " he replied sternly ; " why, theer I " holding 
out his right hand. "Yon's proof enough to hang a 
huner'd." For lying in his broad palm was a little 
bundle of that damning red hair. 

"Where?" 

" Theer." 

" Let's see it." 

The little man bent to look closer. 

"There's for yer proof!" he cried ; 
ately down into the other's naked 
stood back, facing his enemy, in a manner to have done 
credit to a nobler deed. 

James Moore strode forward. It looked as if he was 
about to make an end of his miserable adversary, so 
strongly was he moved. His chest heaved, and the 
blue eyes blazed. But just as one had thought to see 
him take his foe and crush him, who should come 
stalking round the corner of the house but the Tailless 
Tyke. 

A droll spectacle he made, laughable even at that 
moment. He walked all stiff and slow; his button- 
tail was shut down ; his head and neck were swathed 
in bandages, and beneath their ragged fringe the red- 
shot eyes gleamed up molten murder. 

Round the corner he came, unaware of strangers ; 
then, straightway recognising his visitors, halted abrupt. 



and spat deliber- 
palm. Then he 



278 



OWD BOB 



His hackles ran up ; each individual blade leapt to the 
engage ; and a snarl, like a rusty brake shoved hard 
down, escaped in jarring thunder from the port-holes 
of his lips. Then he trotted heavily forward, his head 
sinking low and lower as he came. 

And Owd Bob, eager to take up the gage of battle, 
advanced, glad and gallant, to meet him. Daintily he 
picked his way across the yard, head and tail erect, 
perfectly self-contained ; only the long grey hair about 
his neck stood up like the ruff of a courtier of Queen 
Elizabeth. 

But the war-worn warriors were not to be allowed 
their will. 

" Wullie, WuUie, wad ye ? " cried the little man. 

" Bob, lad, coom in ! " called the other. Then he 
turned and looked down at the man beside him, 
contempt flaunting in every feature. 

« Well ? " he said shortly. 

M'Adam's hands were opening and shutting; his 
face was quite white beneath the tan; but he spoke 
calmly. 

" I'll tell ye the whole story, and it's the truth," he 
said. "I was up there the morn" — pointing to the 
window above — " and I see Wullie crouchin' down 
alangside the Stony Bottom. (Ye ken he has the 
run o' ma land o' neets the same as your dog.) In a 
minit' I see anither dog squatterin' alang on your side 
the Bottom. He creeps up to the sheep on the hillside, 
chases 'em, and doons one. The sun was risen by then, 
and I see the dog clear as I see you now. It was that 
dog there — / swear it !" His voice rose as he spoke: 
and he pointed a damning finger at the grey dog. 

" Noo, Wullie, thinks I ! And afore ye could clap 
yer hands, Wullie was over the Bottom and on to him 



\ 



RED-HANDED 



279 



tt to the 
:d hard 
)rt-holes 
lis head 

f battle, 
intily he 
il erect, 
ir about 
f Queen 

allowed 

in. 

rhen he 
de him, 



ng ; his 
e spoke 

uth," he 
to the 
down 
has the 
In a 
our side 
hillside, 
by then, 
was that 
spoke : 



jld clap 
1 to him 



as he gorged, the bloody-minded murderer. They 
fought and fought — I could hear the roarin' o't where 
I stood. I watched till I could watch nae langer, and, 
all in a sweat, I rin doon the stairs and oot. When I 
got there, there was yer tyke makin* fu' split for 
Kenmuir, and Wullie comin' up the hill to me. . . . It's 
God's truth, I'm tellin' ye. Tak' him hame, James 
Moore, and let his dinner be an ounce o' lead. Twill 
be the best day's work iver ye done." 

The little man was lying — there could be no doubt 
of it. Yet he spoke with an earnestness, a seeming 
belief in his own story, that might have convinced one 
who knew him less well. 

But the Master only looked down on him with a 
great scorn. 

" It's Monday to-day," he said coldly ; " I gie ye till 
Saturday. If ye've not done your duty by then — and 
well ye ken what 'tis — I shall come do it for ye. Ony 
gate I shall come and see. I'll mind ye agin o* 
Thursday — ye'll be at the Manor dinner, I suppose. 
Noo I've warned ye, and ye ken best whether I'm 
in earnest or no'. Bob, lad ! " 

He turned away, but turned again. 

"I'm sorry for ye, but I've ma duty to do — so've 
you. Till Saturday I shall breathe no word to ony 
soul o' this business, so that if ye see good to put him 
oot o' t* way -.vidoot bodderment no one need iver ken 
as hoo Adam M'Adam's Red WuU was the Black 
Killer." 

He turned away for the second .time. But the little 
man sprang after him, and clutched him by the arm. 

" Look ye here, James Moore ! " he cried in thick, 
horrible 



shaky. 



voice. 



big, 



sma 



Strang, I'm weak.; ye've ivery one to your back, I've 



28o 



OWD BOB 



niver a one ; you tell your story, and they'll believe 
ye — for ye go to church; I'll tell mine, and they'll 
think I lee — for I dinna. But a word in your ear! 

If iver agin I catch ye on ma land, by ! " he swore a 

great oath — " I'll no' spare ye. . . . Ye ken best if I'm 
in earnest or no.' " And his face was dreadful to see in 
its hideous seriousness. 



CHAPTER XXIX 



FOR THE DEFENCE 



THAT night a vague story was whispered in the 
Sylvester Arms. But Tammas, on being inter-, 
rogated, pursed his lips and replied, " Nay ; A'm sworn 
to St V nowt." Which was the old man's way of putting 
that h< knew nowt. 



On Thursday morning James Moore and Andrew 
came down arrayed in all their best. It was the day 
of the Squire's annual dinner to his tenants. 

The two, however, were not allowed to start upon 
their way, until they had undergone a critical inspection 
at Maggie's hands : she brushed up Andrew ; tied his 
scarf; saw his boots and hands were clean ; and 
tittivated him generally till she had converted the un- 
gainly hobbledehoy into a thoroughly likely young man. 

And all the while she was thinking of that other boy 
for whom on such gala days she had been wont to 
perform like offices. And her father, marking the tears 
in her eyes, and mindful of the Squire's mysterious 
hint, said gently — 

" Cheer oop, lass. Happen I'll ha' news for thee 
the neet." 

The girl smiled wanly. 

" Happen so, dad," she said. But in her heart she 
doubted. . 

281 



5U "^.""^^l^ 




IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-S) 




1.0 



I.I 



'- I— 1 2.2 

^ IAS ill 10 



L25 ■ 1.4 



1^ 
1.6 



v. 



V] 



7 



V 



*/ \> 



-1? 




># 





/^ 



Photographic 

Sciences 

Corporation 



23 WEST MAIN STRFfT 

WEBSTER, NY. MS80 

(716) 872-4503 




.■^ 



<*>^* 

'^A^ 
^^% 




o"^ 



282 



OWD BOB 



Nevertheless it was with a cheerful countenance that 
she stood in the door with Wee Anne and Owd Bob 
and waved the travellers God-speed ; while the golden- 
haired lassie, fiercely gripping the old dog's tail with 
one hand and her sister with the other, screamed them 
a wordless farewell. 

The sun had reached its highest when the two way- 
farers passed through the grey portals of the Manor. 

In the stately entrance hall, imposing with all the 
evidences of a long and honourable line, were gathered 
now the many tenants throughout the wide March 
Mere Estates. Weather-beaten, rent-paying sons of 
the soil ; most of them native-born ; many of them like 
James Moore, whose fathers had for generations owned 
and farmed the land they now leased at the hands 
of the Sylvesters, there in the old hall they were 
assembled, a mighty host; statesmen no longer, good 
men and true yet. 

And apart from the others, standing as though in 
irony beki>eath the frown of one of those steel-clad 
warriors who held the door, was little M'Adam, puny 
always, paltry now, mocking his manhood. 

The door at the far end of the hall opened, and the 
Squire entered, beaming on everyone. 

"Here you are — eh, eh! How are you all? Glad 
to see ye. Good-day, James! good-day, Saunderson! 
good-day to you all! Bringin' a friend with me — eh, 
eh ! " And he stood aside to let by his agent. Parson 
Leggy, and last of all, shy and blushing, a fair-haired 
young giant. 

" Eh, if it isna David ! " was the cry. " Eh, lad, we's 
fain to see thee!" And they thronged about the boy, 
shaking him by the hand, and asking him his story. 

Twas but a simple tale. After his flight on the 



FOR THE DEFENCE 



283 



ice that 
vd Bob 
golden- 
lil with 
:d them 

vo way- 
nor. 

all the 
gathered 

March 
sons of 
tern like 
> owned 
; hands 
y were 
^r, good 

3Ugh in 
eel-clad 
n, puny 

and the 

Glad 
derson ! 
ne — eh, 
, Parson 
r-haired 

ad, we's 
the boy, 

My- 
on the 



eventful night he had gone south, drovering. He had 
written to Maggie and been surprised and hurt to 
receive no reply. In vain he had waited, and, too proud 
to write again, had remained ignorant of his father's 
recovery, neither caring nor daring to return. Then, by 
mere chance, he had met the Squire at the York cattle- 
show; and that kind man haa eased his fears and 
obtained from him a promise to return as soon as the 
term of his engagement had expired. And there he was. 

The Dalesmen gathered round the boy, listening to 
his tale, and in return telling him the home news and 
chaffing him about Maggie, while the Squire, his jolly 
face red with pleasure and mirth, stood by, chuckling. 
" Eh, James, what d'you think of my surprise — eh, eh ? 
What'll your Maggie say ? " 

Of all the people present only one seemed unmoved ; 
and that was M'Adam. When first David had entered, 
he had started forward, a flush of colour warming his 
thin cheeks ; but no one had noticed his emotion, and 
now, back again beneath his armoured friend, he watched 
the scene, a sour smile playing about his lips. 

" I think the lad might ha' the grace to come and say 
he's sorry for 'temptin' to murder me. Hooiver," — with 
a characteristic shrug, — " I suppose I'm onraisonable." 

Then the gong rang out, and the Squire led the way 
into the great dining-hall. At the one end of the long 
table, heavy with all the solid delicacies of such a feast, 
he took his seat with the Master of Kenmuir upon his 
right. At the other end was Parson Leggy. While 
down the sides the stalwart Dalesmen were arrayed, 
with M'Adam a little lost figure in the centre. 

At first they talked but little, awed like children : 
knives plied ; glasses tinkled ; the carvers had all their 
work ; only the tongues were at rest. But the Squire's 



m^ 



284 



OWD BOB 



ringing laugh and the Parson's cheery tones soon put 
them at their ease*; and a babel of voices rose and 
waxed. 

Of them all only M'Adam sat silent He talked to no 
man, and you may be sure no one talked to him. His 
hand crept oftener to glass than platc» till the sallow 
face began to flush, and the dim eyes to grow un- 
naturally bright. 

Towards the end of the meal there was loud tapping 
on the table, calls for silence, and men pushed back their 
chairs. The Squire was on his feet to make his speech. 

He started by telling them how glad he was to see 
them there. He made an allusion to Owd Bob and the 
Shepherds' Trophy which was heartily applauded. He 
touched on the Black Killer, and said he had a remedy 
to propose : that Th' Owd 'Un should be set upon the 
criminal's track — a suggestion which was received with 
tremendous cheering, while M'Adam's cackling laugh 
could be heard hig*^ above the rest. 

From that he dwelt upon the existing condition of 
agriculture, the depression in which he attributed to the 
late Radical Government. He said that now with the 
Conservatives in office, and a Ministry composed of 
" honourable men and gentlemen," he felt convinced that 
things would brighten. The Radicals' one ambition 
was to set class against class, landlord against tenant. 
Well, during the last five hundred years, the Sylvesters 
had rarely been — he was sorry to have to confess it — 
good men (laughter and dissent); but he never yet 
heard of the Sylvester, though he shouldn't say it, who 
was a bad landlord (loud applause). 

This was a free country, and any tenant of his who was 
not content (a voice — " 'Oo says we's not ? ") — " thank 
you, thank you ! " — well, there was room for him outside 



FOR THE DEFENCE 



285 



n put 
; and 

Itono 

His 

sallow 

w un- 

ipping 
k their 
peech. 
to see 
nd the 
I. He 
emedy 
ion the 
:d with 
laugh 

tion of 

to the 

h the 

sed of 

ed that 

ibition 

enant. 

testers 

5S it — 

er yet 

t, who 

10 was 
thank 
)Utside 



(cheers). He thanked God from the bottom of his 
heart that, during the forty years he had been re- 
sponsible for the March Mere Estate, there had never 
been any friction between him and his people (cheers), 
and he didn't think there ever would be (loud cheers). 
" Thank you, thank you," and his motto was — " Shun a 
Radical as you do the Devil I " and he was very glad to 
see them all there — very glad ; and he wished to give 
them a toast — " The Queen, God bless her ! " and — wait 
a minute ! — with Her Majesty's name to couple — he 
was sure that Gracious Lady would wish it — that of 
" Owd Bob o' Kenmuir ! " Then he sat down abruptly 
amidst thundering applause. 

The toasts duly honoured, James Moore, by pre- 
scriptive right as Master of Kenmuir, rose to answer. 
He began by saying that he spoke " as representing all 
the tenants," but he was interrupted. 

"Na," came a shrill voice from half-way down the 
table; "yc'll except me, James Moore. I'd as lief be 
represented by Judas." 

There were cries of — " Hod tongue o* thee, HI man ! " 
and the Squire's voice — " That'll do, Mr. M'Adam ! " 

The little man restrained his tongue, but his eyes 
were burning ; and the Master continued his speech. 

He spoke briefly and to the point, in short stilted 
phrases. And all the while M'Adam kept up a low- 
voiced, running commentary. At length the little man 
could control himself no longer. Half rising from his 
chair, he leaned forward with hot face, and cried, " Sit 
down, James Moore ! Hoo daur ye stan' there like an 
honest man, ye whitewashed sepulchre ? Sit down, I 
say, or " — threateningly — " wad ye hae me come to 
ye?" 

At that the Dalesmen laughed uproariously, and even 



286 



OWD BOB 



the Master's grim face relaxed. But the Squire's voice 
rang out sharp and stern — 

" Keep silence and sit down, M'Adam ! D'you hear 
me, Sir? If I have to speak to you again it will be to 
order you to leave the room." 

The little man obeyed, sullen and vengeful, like a 
beaten cat. 

The Master concluded his speech by calling on all 
present to givt three cheers for the Squire, her ladyship, 
and the young ladies. 

The call was responded to enthusiastically, every man 
standing. Just as the noise was at its zenith. Lady 
Eleanour herself, with her two fair daughters, glided 
into the gallery at the end of the hall ; whereat the 
cheering became deafening. 

Slowly the clamour subsided. One by one the 
tenants sat down. At length there was left standing 
only one solitary figure. His face was set, and he 
gripped his chair with thin, nervous hands. 

" Mr. Sylvester," he began, in low yet clear voicj, " ye 
said this is a free country and we're a' free men. And 
that bein' so I'll tak' the liberty, wi' yer permission, to 
say a word. It's maybe the last time I'll be wi' ye, so I 
hope ye'll listen to me." 

The Dalesmen looked surprised, and the Squire 
uneasy. Nevertheless he nodded assent. 

The little man straightened himself. His face was 
tense as though strung up to some high resolve. All 
the passion had fled from it, all the bitterness was gone, 
and left behind was a strange, ennobling earnestness. 
Standing there in the silence of that great hall, with 
every eye upon him, he looked like some prisoner at the 
Bar about to plead for his life. 

" Gentlemen," he began, " I've been amang ye noo a 



FOR THE DEFENCE 



287 



noo a 



score years, and I can truly say there's not a man in 
this room I can ca' * Friend.' " He looked along the 
ranks of upturned faces. " Ay, David, I see ye ; and 
you, Mr. Hprnbut ; and you, Mr. Sylvester — ilka ain o' 
you, and not one as 'd back me like a comrade gin a 
trouble came upon me." There was no rebuke in the 
grave little voice, it merely stated a hard fact. 

" There's, I doot, no one amang ye but has someone 
— friend or blood — to wham he can turn when things 
. ire sair wi' him. I've no one. 

'I bear alane my lade o' care' — 

alane wi' Wullie, who stands to me, blaw or snaw, rain 
or shine ; and whiles I'm feared he'll be took from me." 
He spoke this last half to himself, a grieved, puzzled ex- 
pression on his face, as though lately he had dreamed 
some ill dream. 

" Forbye Wullie I've no friend on God's earth. And, 
mind ye, a bad man aften mak's a good friend — but 
there! ye've never given me the chance. It's a sair 
thing that, gentlemen, to ha' to fight the battle o' life 
alane : no one to pat ye on the back, no one to say 
* Weel done I ' It hardly gies a man a chance Forgin 
he does try and fails, men never mind the tryin', they 
only mark the failin'. 

" I dinna' blame ye. There's somethin' bred in me, it 
seems, as sets iveryone agin me. It's the same wi' Wullie 
and the tykes — they're doon on him same as men are 
on me. I suppose we was made so. Sin' I was a lad 
it's aye bin the same. From schooldays I've had ivery- 
one agin me." 

There was a moment's pause ; then the voice began 
again — 

" In ma life I've had three friends. Ma mither — and 



k 



'^ 



288 



OWD BOB 



she went ; then ma wife " — he gave a great swallow — 
" and she's awa ; and I may say they're the only two 
human bein's as ha' lived on God's earth in ma time 
that iver tried to bear wi* me ; — and Wullie. A man's 
mither — a man's wife — a man's dog ! it's aften a' he has 
in this warld ; and the more he prizes them the more 
like they are to be took from him." 

The little earnest voice shook, and the dim eyes 
puckered and filled. 

"Sin' I've bin amang ye — ^twenty odd years — can 
ony man here mind speakin' ony word that wasna ill 
to me?" 

He paused : there was no reply. 

" I'll tell ye. All the time I've lived here I've had 
one kindly word spoke to me, and that a fortnight 
agone, and not by a man then — by her Leddyship, God 
bless her 1 " 

He glanced up into the gallery. There was no one 
visible there : but a curtain at one end shook as though 
it were sobbing. 

"Weel, I'm thinkin' we'll be gaein' in a wee while 
noo, Wullie and me, alane and thegither, as we've aye 
done. And it's timi '»ve went. Ye've had enough o' us, 
and it's no* for me to blame ye. And when I'm gone 
what'll ye say o' me ? — * He was a drunkard.' I am. 
' He was a sinner.' I am. * He was ilka thing he 
shouldna be.' I am. 'We're glad he's gone.* That's 
what ye'll say o' me. And it's but ma deserts." 

The gentle condemning voice ceased, and began 
again. 

"That's what I am. Gin things had been differ', 
aiblins I'd ha' bin differ*. D'ye ken Robbie Burns ? . . . 
That's a man I've read — and read — and read. D'ye ken 
why I love him as some o' you do yer Bibles ? — Because 



FOR THE DEFENCE 



289 



eyes 



while 

ve aye 

o' us, 

gone 

I am. 

ing he 

That's 






there's a humanity about the man. A weak man 
himsel', aye slippin', slippin', slippin', and tryin' to haud 
up ; sorrowin' ae minute, sinnin' the next ; doin' ill 
deeds and wishin' 'em undone — just a plain human 
man, a sinner. And that's why, I'm thinkin', he's 
tender for us as is like him : — /te understood. It's what 
he wrote — after ain o' his tumbles, I'm thinkin' — that 
I was goin' to tell ye — 

'Then gently scan yer brither man, 

Still gentler sister woman, 
Tho' they may gang a kennin' wrang, 
To step aside is human : * — 

the doctrine o' Charity. Gie him his chance, says 
Robbie, tho' he be a sinner. Mony a man 'd be differ', 
mony bad 'd be gude, gin they but had their chance. 
Gie 'em their chance, says he, and I'm wi' him. As 'tis, 
ye see me here — a bad man wi' still a streak o' good in 
him. Gin I'd had ma chance aiblins 'twad be — a good 
man wi* just a spice o' the devil in him. The differ' 
between what is and what ought to ha' bin." 



began 



»9 



CHAPTER XXX 



THE devil's bowl 



HE sat down. In the great hall was silence, save 
for a tiny sound from the gallery like a sob 
suppressed. 

The Squire rose hurriedly and left the room. After 
him, one by one, trailed the tenants. 

At length, two only remained: M'Adam, sitting 
solitary, with a long array of empty chairs on either 
hand ; and, at the far end of the table, Parson Leggy, 
stern, rigid, motionless. 

When the last man had left the room the Parson 
rose, and, with lips tight set, strode across the silent hall. 

" M'Adam," he said rapidly and almost roughly, " I've 
listened to what you've said, as I think we all have, with 
a sore heart. You hit hard ; but I think you were 
right. And if I've not done my duty by you as I 
ought — and I fear I've not — it's now my duty as God's 
minister to be the first to say I'm sorry." And it 
was evident from his face what an effort the words 
cost him. 

The little man tilted back his chair, and raised his 
head. It was the old M'Adam who looked up. The 
thin lips were curled ; a grin was crawling across the 
mockir • face ; and he wagged his head gently as he 
looked at the speaker through the slits of half-closed 
eyes. 

890 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



291 






e, save 

i a sob 

After 

sitting 

1 either 

Leggy, 

Parson 
snt hall, 
y, " I've 
ve, with 
>u were 
>u as I 

God's 
And it 

words 

ised his 
The 
•OSS the 
as he 
f-closed 



"Mr. Horribut, I believe ye thocht me in earnest, 
'deed and I do I" He leaned back in his chair and 
laughed softly. "Ye swallcred it all doon like best 
butter. Dear, dear! to think o' that I" Then, stretching 
forward, " Mr. Hornbut, I was playin' wi' ye I " 

The Parson's face, as he listened, was ugly to watch. 
He shot oul a hand and grabbed the scoffer by the 
coat ; then dropped it again and turned abruptly away. 

As he passed through the door a little sneering voice 
called after him — 

*' Mr. Hornbut, I ask ye hoo you, a minister o' the 
Church of England, can reconcile it to your conscience 
to think — tho' it be but for a minute — that there can be 
ony good in a man, and him no church-goer? Sir, 
ye're a heretic — not to say a heathen I " He sniggered 
to himself, and his hand crept to a half-emptied wine 
decanter. 

An hour later, James Moore, his business with the 
Squire completed, passed through the hall on his way 
out. Its only occupant was now M'Adam. The 
Master walked straight up to his enemy. 

" M'Adam," he said gruffly, holding out a sinewy 
hand, "I'd like to say"— 

The little man brushed aside the token of friendship. 

"Na, na. No cant, if ye please, James Moore. 
That'll aiblins go down wi' the parsons, but not wi' me. 
I ken you and you ken me, and all the whitewash i' th' 
warld '11 no' deceive us." 

The Master turned away, and his face was hard as 
the nether millstone. But the little man pursued him. 

" I was nigh forgettin'," he said. " I've a surprise for 
ye, James Moore. But I hear it's yer birthday on 
Sunday, and I'll keep it till then— he ! he I " 



393 



OWD BOB 



" Ye'll see me afoor Sunday, M'Adam. On Saturday, 
as I told ye, I'm coomin' to see if you've done yer duty." 

•' Whether ye come, James Moore, is your business ; 
whether ye'll iver go, once there, I'll mak* mine. I've 
warned ye twice noo," and the little man laughed that 
harsh, cackling laugh of his. 

At the door of the hall the Master met David. 

" Noo, lad, ye're coomin' along o' Andrew and me," 
he said ; " Maggie '11 niver forgie us if we dunnot bring 
you home." 

"Thank you kindly, Mr. Moore," the boy replied. 
" I've to see Squire first ; and then ye may be sure I'll 
be after you." 

The Master faltered a moment. 

" David, have ye spoken to yer father yet ? " he asked 
in low voice. " I think ye should, lad." 

The boy made a gesture of dissent. 

" I canna," petulantly. 

" I would, lad," the other advised. "If ye don't, ye 
may be sorry after." 

As he turned away, he heard the boy's steps, dull and 
sodden, crossing the hall ; and then a thin would-be 
cordial voice in the emptiness — 

"I declar' if 'tisna David! The return o' the 
Prodeegal — he ! he I So ye've seen yer auld dad at 
last, and the last: the proper place, say ye, for yer 
father — he! he! Eh, lad, but I'm blithe to see ye. 
D'ye mind when we was last thegither? Ye was 
kneelin' on ma chest — 'Your time's come, dad,' says 
you, and wangs me ower the face — he ! he ! I mind it 
as if 'twas yesterday. Weel, weel, we'll say nae mair 
about it. Boys will be boys. Sons will be sons. 
Accidents will happen. And if at first ye don't succeed, 
why, try, try again." 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



293 



turday, 

duty." 

isiness ; 

I've 

sd that 



id me," 
)t bring 

replied, 
bure I'll 



e asked 



on't, ye 

dull and 
^ould-be 

o' the 

dad at 
for yer 

see ye. 
Ye was 
id,' says 

mind it 
lae mair 
be sons, 
succeed, 



Dusk was merging into darkness when the Master 
and Andrew reached the Dalesman's Daughter. It had 
long been dark when they emerged from the cosy 
parlour of the inn, and plunged out into the night. As 
they crossed the Silver Lea and trudged over that 
familiar ground where a fortnight since had been 
fought out the battle of the Cup, the wind fluttered past 
them in spasmodic gasps. 

" Theer's trouble in t' wind," said the Master. 

" Ay," answered his laconic son. 

All day there had been no breath of air and the sky. 
dangerously blue. Now a world of black 'as surging 
up from the horizon, smothering the star-lit night. 
Small dark clouds, like puffs of vioke, detPcLing 
themse'.es from the main body, were drivipT tempestu- 
ously forward, the vanguard of the storm. In the 
distance was a low rumbling like heavy tumbrils on the 
floor of heaven. All about, the wind sounded hollow 
like a mighty scythe in corn. The air was oppressed 
with a leaden blackness — no glimmer of light on any 
hand ; and as they began the ascent of the Pass they 
reached out blind hands to feel the rock-face. 

A sea fret, cool and wetting, fell. A few big rain- 
drops splashed heavily down. The wind rose with a 
leap and roared past them. And the water-gates of 
heaven were flung wide. 

Wet and weary, they battled on ; thinking sometimes 
of the cosy parlour behind, sometimes of the home in 
front ; wondering whether Maggie, in flat contradiction 
of her father's orders, would be up to welcome them ; 
or whether only Owd Bob would come out to meet them. 

The wind volleyed past like salvoes of artillery. The 
rain stormed at them from above ; spat at them from the 
rock-face ; and leaped at them from their feet. 



' 



294 



OWD BOB 



Once they halted for a moment, finding a miserable 
shelter in a crevice of the rock. 

" It's a Black Killer's ncet ! " panted the Master. ** I 
reck'n he's oot." 

"Reck'n he is," the boy gasped. 
^ Up and up they climbed through the blackness, 
blind and buffeted. The eternal thunder of the rain 
was all about them, the clamour of the gale above, and 
far beneath, the roar of angry waters. 

Once, in a lull in the storm, the Master turned and 
looked back into the blackness along the path they 
had come. 

" Did ye hear owt ? " he roared above the muffled 
soughing of the wind. 

" Nay," Andrew shouted back. 

" I thowt I hard a step ! " the Master cried, peering 
down. 

But nothing could he see. 

Then the wind leaped to life again like a giant from 
his sleep, drowning all sound with its hurricane voice ; 
and they turned and bowed to their task again. 

Nearing the summit, thc^ Master turned once more. 

" Theer it was again ! " he called ; but his words were 
swept away on the storm ; and they buckled to the 
'struggle afresh. 

Ever and anon the moon gleamed down through the 
riot of tossing sky. Then they could see the wet wall 
above them, with the water tumbling down its sheer 
face ; and far below, in the roaring gutter of the Pass, 
a brown-stained torrent. Hardly, however, had they 
time to glance around when a mass of cloud would 
hurry jealously up; and all again was blackness and 
noise. 

At length, nigh spent, they topped the Neck of the 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



295 



Pass and emerged into the Devil's Bowl. There, over- 
come with their exertions, they flung themselves on to 
the ground to draw breath. 

Behind them, the wind rushed with a sullen roar up 
the funnel of the Pass. It screamed above them as 
though ten million devils were a-horse ; and blurted out 
on to the Marches beyond. 

As they lay there, still panting, the moon gleamed 
doivn in pallid graciousness. In front, through the 
lashing rain, they could discern the hillocks that squat, 
hag-like, around the Bowl ; and lying in its bosom, its 
waters ploughed now into a thousand white-tipped 
furrows, the Lone Tarn. 

The Master raised his head and craned forward at 
the ghostly scene. Of a sudden he reared himself on 
his arms, and stayed motionless awhile ; then he 
dropped as though dead, forcing down Andrew with an 
iron hand. 

" Lad, did ye see ? " he whispered. 

"Nay; what was't?" 

"Theer!" 

But as the Master pointed, k blurr of cloud intervened, 
and all was dark. Quickly it passed ; and again the 
lantern of the night shone down. Then Andrew, looking 
with all his eyes, saw indeed. 

There, in front, by the fretting waters of the Tarn, 
packed in a solid phalanx, with spurting breaths and 
every head turned in the same direction, was a flock 
of sheep. They were motionless ; all-intent ; staring 
with horror-bulging eyes. A column of steam rose 
from their bodies into the rain-pierced air. Panting 
and palpitating, yet they stood with their backs to 
the water, as though determined to sell their lives 
dearly. 



L 



296 



OWD BOB 



Beyond them, not fifty yards away, crouched a hump- 
backed boulder, casting a long, misshapen shadow in 
the moonlight. And beneath it were two black objects, 
one still struggling feebly. 

•*T' Killer!" gasped the boy, and, all ablaze with 
excitement, began forging forward. 

" Steady, lad, steady ! " urged the Master, dropping a 
restraining hand on the boy's shoulder. 

Above them a huddle of clouds flung in furious rout 
across the night, and the moon was veiled. 

" Follow, lad ! " ordered the Master, and began to 
crawl silently forward. As stealthily Andrew pursued. 
And over the sodden ground they crept, one behind the 
other, like two night-hawks on some foul errand. 

On they crawled, prone during the blinks of moon, 
stealing forward in the dark. At length, the swish of 
the rain on the waters of the Tarn, and the sobbing of 
the flock in front, warned them they were near. 

They skirted the trembling pack, passing so close as 
to brush against the flanking sheep ; yet they were un- 
noticed, for the sheep were soul-absorbed in the tragedy 
in front; only, when the moon was in, Andrew could 
hear them huddling and stamping in the night; and 
again, as it shone out, fearfully they edged closer to 
watch the bloody play. 

Along the Tarn edge the two crept. And still the 
gracious moon hid their approach, and the drunken 
wind drowned with its revelry the sound of their 
coming. 

So they stole on, on hands and knees, with hearts 
aghast and fluttering breath ; until, of a sudden, in 
a lull of wind, they could hear, right before them, the 
smack and slobber of bloody lips, chewing their bloody 
meal. 






THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



297 



"Say thy prayers, Red Wull. Thy last minute's 
coom ! " muttered the Master, rising to his knees ; then, 
in Andrew's ear, " When I rush, lad, follow ! " For he 
thought, when the moon rose, to jump in on the great 
dog, and, surprising him as he lay gorged and un- 
suspicious, to deal him one terrible swashing blow, and 
end for ever the lawless doings of the Tailless Tyke. 

The moon flung off its veil of cloud. White and 
cold, it stared down into the De\'irs Bowl ; on murderer 
and murdered. 

Within hand's cast of the avengers of blood humped 
the black boulder. On the border of its shadow lay a 
dead sheep ; and standing beside the body, his coat all 
ruffled by the hand of the storm — Owd Bob — Owd 
Bob o' Kenmuir. 

Then the '«ght went in, and darkness covered the 
land. 



CHAPTER XXXI 



THE devil's bowl 



IT was Owd Bob. There could be no mistaking. In 
the wide world there was but one Owd Bob o' 
Kenmuir. The silver moon gleamed down on dark 
head and rough grey coat, and lit the white escutcheon 
on his chest. 

And in the darkness James Moore was lying with his 
face pressed downwards that he might not '^ee. 

Once he raised himself on his arms : his eyes were 
shut and face uplifted, like a blind man praying. He 
passed a weary hand across his brow ; his head dropped 
again ; and he moaned and moaned like a man in 
everlasting pain. 

Then the darkness lifted a moment, and he stole a 
furtive glance at the scene in front. 

It was no dream : clear and cruel in the moonlight, the 
hump-backed boulder ; the dead sheep ; and that grey 
figure, beautiful, motionless, damned for all eternity. 

The Master turned his face and looked at Andrew, a 
dumb, pitiful entreaty in his eyes ; but in the boy's 
white horror-stricken countenance was no comfort. 
Then his head lolled down again, and the strong man 
was whimpering. 

" He 1 he I he ! 'Scuse ma laffin', James Moore — he ! 
he! he!" 

A little man, all wet and shrunk, sat hunching on a 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



299 



mound above them, rocking his shrivelled form in the 
agony of his merriment. 

" Ye raskil — he ! he ! Ye rogue — he ! he ! " and he 
shook his fist waggishly at the unconscious grey dog. 

" I owe ye anither grudge for this — yeVe anticipated 
me ! " and he leant back and shook this way and that in 
convulsive mirth. 

The man below him rose heavily to his feet, and 
tumbled towards the mocker, his great figure swaying 
from side to side as though in blind delirium, moaning 
still as he went. And there was that on his face 
which no man can mistake. Boy that he was, Andrew 
knew it. 

" Father ! father ! " he pleaded, laying impotent hands 
upon him. 

But the strong man shook him off and rolled on, 
swaying and groaning, with that awful expression plain 
to see in the moonlight. 

In front the little man squatted in the rain, bowed 
double still ; and took no thought to flee. 

" Come on, James Moore I come on ! " he laughed, 
malignant joy in his voice ; and something gleamed 
bright in his right hand, and was hid again. " I've bin 
waitin' this a weary while noo." 

Then had tliere been done something worse than 
sheep-murder in the dreadful lonesomeness of the 
Devil's Bowl upon that night ; but, of a sudden, there 
sounded the splash of a man's foot, falling heavily 
behind. A hand like a falling tree smote the Master 
on the shoulder ; and a voice roared above the noise of 
the storm, " Mr. Moore ! Look, man ! look I " 

The Master tried to shake off that detaining grasp. 
It pinned him where he was, immovable. 

" Look, I tell thee ) " cried that great voice again. 



300 



OWD BOB 



A hand pushed past him and pointed ; and sullenly 
he turned and looked. 

The wind had dropped suddenly as it had risen ; the 
little man on the mound had ceased to chuckle; 
Andrew's sobs were hushed; and in the background 
the huddled flock edged closer. The world hung 
balanced on the pin-point of the moment. Every eye 
was in the one direction. 

With dull uncomprehending gaze James Moore 
stared as bidden. There was the grey dog naked in 
the moonlight, heedless still of any witnesses; there 
the murdered sheep, lying within and without that 
distorted shade ; and there the hump-backed boulder. 

He stared into the shadow and still stared. Then 
he started as though struck: the shadow of Jhe 
boulder had moved. 

Motionless, with head shot forward and bulging 
eyes, he gazed. 

Ay, ay, ay ; he was sure of it : a huge dim outline, as 
of a lion couchant, in the very thickest of the blackness. 
At that he was seized with such a palsy of trembling 
that he must have fallen but for the strong arm en- 
circling him. 

Clearer every moment grew that crouching figure. 
At length they plainly could discern the line of arching 
loins, the crest thick as a stallion's, the massive, 
wagging head. 

No mistake this time. There he lay in the deepest 
black, gigantic, revelling in his horrid debauch — the 
Black Killer. 

And they watched him at his feast. Now he 
burrowed into the spongy flesh ; now turned to lap the 
dark pool glittering at his side like claret in a silver 
cup; now lifting his head, he snapped irritably at the 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



301 



rain, and the moon caught his wicked, rolling eye, and 
the red shreds of flesh dripping from his jaw ; and again, 
raising his great muzzle as if about to howl, he let the 
delicious nectar trickle down his throat to ravish his 
palate. 

So he went on, all unsuspicious, wisely nodding in 
slow-mouthed gluttony. And in the stillness, between 
the claps of wind, they could hear the smacking of his 
lips. While all the time the grey dog stood before 
him, motionless as though carved in stone. 

At last, as the murderer rolled his great head, he 
saw that still figure. At the sight he leaped back, 
dismayed. Thea with a deep-mouthed roar that shook 
the waters of the Tarn, he was up and across his victim 
with fangs bared, coat standing erect in wet rigid 
furrows from top-knot to tail. 

So the two stood, face to face, with perhaps a yard 
of rain-pierced air between them. 

The wind hushed its sighing to listen. The moon 
stared down, white and dumb. Away at the back the 
sheep edged closer. Save for the everlasting thunder 
of the rain there was stillness. 

An age, it seemed, they waited so. Then a voice, 
clear yet low and far-away, like a bugle in a distant city, 
broke the silence. 

"Eh, Wullie!" 

There was no anger in the tones, only an incompar- 
able reproach : the sound of the cracking of a man's 
heart. 

At the call the great dog leaped round, snarling in 
hideous passion. He saw the small familiar figure, 
clear-cut against the tumbling sky ; and for the only 
time in his life Red Wull was afraid. 

His blood-foe was forgotten; the dead sheep was 



302 



OWD BOB 



forgotten ; everything was forgotten in the agony of that 
moment. He cowered upon the ground, and a cry like 
that of a lost soul was wrung from him : it rose on the 
still night air and floated, wailing, away — out of the 
lonely hollow, over the desolate Marches, into the night. 

On the mound above stood his master. The little 
man's white hair was naked to the night ; the rain 
poured down his face ; and his hands were folded behind 
him. He stood there, looking down into the dell below 
him, as a man may stand at the tomb of his late-buried 
wife. And there was such an expression on his face 
as could not be described. 

" WuUie, Wullie, to me I " he cried at length ; and his 
voice sounded weak and far like a distant memory. 

At that, the huge brute crawled towards him on his 
belly, whimpering as he came, very pitiful in his distress. 
He knew his fate as every sheep-dog knows it. That 
troubled him not His pain, insufferable, was that this, 
his friend and father, who had trusted him, should have 
found him in his sin. 

So he crept to his master's feet ; and the little man 
never moved. 

" Wullie, ma Wullie ! " he said very gently. " They've 
aye bin agin me — and noo you. A man's mither, a 
man's wife, a man's dog ! they're all I've iver had, and 
noo ain o' they three has turned agin me. Indeed I 
am alone!" 

At that the great dog raised himself, and placing 
his forepaws on his master's chest, tenderly, lest he 
should hurt him who was already hurt past healing, he 
stood towering above him ; while the little man laid his 
two cold hands on the dog's shoulders. 

So they stood, looking at one another, like a man and 
his love. 



THE DEVIL'S BOWL 



303 



At M' Adam's word, Owd Bob looked up and for the 
first time saw his master. 

He seemed in no wise startled, but trotted over to 
him. There was nothing fearful in his carriage, no 
haunting blood-guiltiness in the deep grey eyes which 
never told a lie, which never, dog-like, failed to look 
you in the face. Yet his tail was low, and, as he 
stopped at his master's feet, he was quivering. For 
he too knew and was not unmoved. 

For weeks he had tracked the Killer ; for weeks he 
had followed him as he crossed Kenmuir, bound on his 
bloody errands ; yet always had lost him on the Marches. 
Now, at last, he had run him to ground ; yet his heart 
went out to his enemy in his distress. 

" I thowt t'had bin thee, lad ! " the Master whispered^ 
his hand on the dark head, " I thowt t'had bin theel" 



man 



Rooted to the ground, the three watched the scene 
between M'Adam and his Wull. 

In the end the Master was whimpering; Andrew 
crying ; and David turned his back. 

At length, silent, they moved away. 

" Had I — should I go to him ? " asked David hoarsely, 
nodding towards his father. 

" Nay, nay, lad," the Master replied. " Yon's not a 
matter for a man's friends." 

So they marched out of the Devil's Bowl, and left 
those two alone together. 



A little later, as they tramped along, James Moore 
heard pattering, staggering footsteps behind. 

He stopped : the other two went on. 

"Man!" a voice whispered, and a face, white and 
pitiful as a mother's pleading for her child, looked into 



Ik 



304 



OWD BOB 



his, "Man 1 ye'll no' tell them a'? I'd no' like 'em to 
ken 'twas ma Wullie. Think an t'had bin yer ain 
dog." 

" You may trust me," the other answered thickly. 

The little man stretched out a palsied hand. 

"Gie us yer hand on't. And G-God bless ye, 
James Moore." 

So those two shook hands in the moonlight, with 
none to witness it but the God who made them. 



And that is why the mystery of the Black Killer is 
still unsolved in the Daleland. Many have surmised : 
besides those three only one other knows — knows now 
which of the two he saw upon a summer's night was 
the guilty, which the innocent. And Postie Jim tells 
no man. 



CHAPTEP XXXII 



THE KILLER aT BAY 



ON the following morning there was a sheep-auction 
at the Dalesman's Daughter. 

Early as many of the farmers arrived there was one 
earlier. Tupper, the first man to enter the sand-floored 
parlour, found M'Adam before him. 

He was sitting a little forward in his chair ; his thin 
hands rested on his knees ; and on his face was a gentle 
dreamy expression such as no man had ever seen there 
before. All the harsh wrinkles seemed to have fled in 
the night; and the sour face, stamped deep with the 
bitterness of life, was softened now, as if at length at 
peace. 

"When I com' doon this momin'," said Teddy 
Bolstock in a whisper, " I found 'im sittin* just so. And 
he's nor moved nor spoke since." 

Wheer's t' Terror, then ? " asked Tupper, awed some- 
how into like hushed tones. 

" In t' paddock at back," Teddy answered, " marchin' 
hoop and doon, hoop and doon, for a' the world like a 
sentry - soger. And so he was when I looked oot o' 
window when I woke." 

Then Londesley entered, and after him, Ned Hoppin, 
Rob Saunderson, Jim Mason, and others, each with 
his dog. And each as he came in and ,.aw the little 
lone figure, for once without its huge attendant genius 



) 



20 



306 



OWD BOB 



put the same question ; while the dogs sniffed about the 
little man, as though suspecting treachery. And all the 
time M'Adam sat as though he neither heard nor saw, 
lost in some sweet sad dream ; so quiet, so silent that 
more than one thought he slept. 

After the first glance the farmers paid him little 
heed, clustering round the publican at the farther end 
of the room to hear the latest story of Owd Bob. 

It appeared that a week previously, James Moore 
with a pack of sheep had met the new Grammoch-town 
butcher at the Dalesman's Daughter. A bargain con- 
cluded, the butcher started with the flock for home. 
As he had no dog, the Master offered him Th* Owd 
'Un. "And he'll pick me up i' t* toon to-morrow," 
said he. 

Now the butcher was a stranger in the land. Of course 
he had heard of Ow J Bob o' Kenmuir ; yet it never struck 
him that this handsome gentleman with the quiet, resolute 
manner, who handled sheep as he had never seen them 
handled, was that hero, the best sheep-dog in the North. 

Certain it is that by the time the flock was penned in 
the enclosure behind the shop, he coveted the dog — ay, 
would even offer ten pounds for him I 

Forthwith he locked the old dog in an outhouse — 
summit of indignity ; resolving to make his offer on the 
morrow. 

When the morrow came, he found no dog in the out- 
house, and, worse, no sheep in the enclosure. A sprung 
board showed the way of escape of the one, and a dis- 
placed hurdle that of the other. And as he was making 
the discovery, a grey dog and a flock of sheep, travelling 
along the road towards the Dalesman's Daughter, met 
the Master. 

From the first Owd Bob had mistrusted the man. 



THE KILLER AT BAY 



307 



The attempt to confine him set the seal on his 
suspicions. His master's sheep were not for such a 
rogue ; and he worked his own way out and took the 
sheep along with him. (A year later, the old dog's 
judgment was proved correct ; for the man absconded.) 

The story was told to a running chorus of — " Ma wud ! 
—Good Owd 'Un!— Ho! ho! did he that?" 

Of them all, only M'Adam sat strangely silent. 

Rob Saunderson, always glad to draw the little man, 
remarked it 

" And what doesta' think o' that, Mr. M'Adam, for a 
wunnt ' tale of a wunnerfu' tyke ? " he asked. 

" It's a gude tale, a vera gude tale," the little man 
answered dreamily. " And James Moore didna invent 
it : he had it from the Christmas number o* the Fiock- 
keeper in saxty." (On the following Sunday, old Rob, 
from sheer curiosity, reached down the specified number 
of the paper. To his amazement he found the little 
man was right. There was the story almost identi- 
cally. None the less is it also true of Owd Bob o' 
Kenmuir.) 

" Ay, ay," the little man continued, " and in a day or 
twa James Moore '11 ha' anither tale to tell ye — a better 
tale, ye'll think it — mair laffable. And yet — ay — no' — 
I'll no* believe it. I niver loved James Moore, but I 
think, as Mr. Hornbut aince said, he'd rather die than lie. 
. . . Owd Bob o' Kenmuir I " he continued in a whisper ; 
" up till the end I canna shake him afT. HafHins I think 
that where I'm gaein* to there'll be grey dogs sneakin' 
around and around me in. the twilight. And they're 
aye behind and behind and I canna, canna " — 

Te'ddy Bolstock interrupted, lifting his hand for 
silence. 

" Heark ! thunder." 



3o8 



OWD BOB 



,,^if>i 



They listened. From without came a gurgling, jarring 
roar, dreadful to hear. 

" It's coomin' nearer." 

" Nay, it's gangin* away." 

" No thunder that." 

"Mair like t' Lea in flood. And yet— Eh, Mr. 
M'Adara, what is it?" 

The little man had moved at last. He was on his 
feet, staring about him, wild-eyed. 

" Where's yer dogs ? " he screamed. 

" Here's mi — Nay, by thunder ! but he's not," was 
the astonished cry. 

In the interest of the story no man had noticed that 
his dog had risen from his side ; no one had noticed a 
file of shaggy figures creeping out of the room. 

" I tell ye it's the tykes ! I tell ye it's the tykes ! 
They're on ma WuUie — fifty to one they're on him ! 
My God ! my God ! and me not thc;\. 1 . . . Wullie, 
Wullie ! " in a scream, " I'm wi' ye ! " 

At the same moment Bessie Bolstock rushed in, 
white-faced. 

" Hi ! father ! Mr. Saunderson ! all o' you ! T' tykes 
fightin'mad! Hearkl" 

There was no time for that. Each man seized his 
stick and rushed for the door ; and M'Adam led them 
all. 

A rare thing it was for the little man and his Red 
Wull to be apart. So rare that others besides the men 
in that little tap-room noticed it. 

Saunderson's old Shep walked quietly to the back- 
door and looked out. There on the slope below him 
he saw what he sought, stalking up and down, gaunt 
and grim, like a lion at feeding - time. And as the 



THE KILLER AT BAY 



309 



jarring 



Eh, Mr. 
I on his 

ot," was 

ced that 
oticed a 

) tykes! 

)n him ! 

Wullie, 

shed in, 

T' tykes 

lized his 
ed them 



his Red 
the men 

le back- 
low him 
n, gaunt 
1 as the 



old dog watched, his tail was slowly swaying as though 
he were well pleased. 

F' walked back into the tap-room just as Teddy 
began his tale. Twice he made the round of the room, 
silent-footed. From dog to dog he went, stopping at 
each as though urging him on to some great enterprise ; 
then he made for the door again, looking back to see 
if any followed. 

One by one the others rose and trailed out after him : 
big blue Rasper ; Londesley's Lassie ; Ned Hoppin's 
young dog; Grip and Grapple, the publican's bull- 
terriers; Jim Mason's Gyp, foolish and flirting even 
now; others there were; and last of all, waddling in 
the rear, that scarred Amazon, the Venus. 

Out of the house they pattered, silent and unseen, with 
murder in their hearts. At last they had found their 
enemy alone. And slowly, in a black cloud, like the 
Shadov/ of Death, they dropped down the slope upon him. 

And he saw them coming, knew their errand, as 
who should better than the Terror of the Border, and 
was glad. Death it might be, and such an one as he 
would wish to die ; at least distraction from that long- 
drawn, haunting pain. And he grinned as he looked 
at the approaching crowd and saw there was not one 
there but he had humbled in his time. 

He ceased his restless pacing, and aw:iited them. 
His great head was high as he scanned them con- 
temptuously, daring them to come on. 

And on they came, marching slow and silent like 
soldiers at a funeral : young and old ; bob-tailed and bull ; 
terrier and collie, flocking like vultures to the dead. And 
the Venus, heavy with years, rolled after them on her 
bandy legs, panting in her hurry lest she should be 
late : for had she not the blood of her blood to avenge ? 



3IO 



OWD BOB 



So they came about him, slow, certain, murderous, 
opening out to cut him off on every side. 

There was no need. He never thought to move. 
Long odds 'twould be — crushingly heavy ; yet he loved 
them for it, and was trembling already with the glory 
of the coming fight. 

They were up to him now; the sheep-dogs walking 
round him on their toes, stiff and short like cats on 
coals; their backs a little humped, heads averted, yet 
eyeing him askance. 

And he remained stock still, nor looked at them. 
His great chin was cocked, his muzzle wrinkled in a 
dreadful grin. As he stood there, shivering a little, 
eyes rolling back, breath grating in his throat to sei 
every bristle on edge, he looked infernal. 

The Venus ranged alongside him. No preliminary 
stage for her : she never walked where she could stand 
or stood where she could lie. But stand she must now, 
breathing hard through her nose, never taking her eyes 
off that pad she had marked for her own. Close beside 
her were crop-eared Grip and Grapple, looking u{) at 
the line above them where hairy neck and shoulder 
joined. Behind was big Rasper, and close to him. 
Lassie. Of the others each had marked his place, 
each taken up his post. 

Last of all, old Shep took his stand full in front of 
his enemy, their shoulders almost rubbing, head past 
head. 

So the two stood a moment, as though whispering ; 
each diabolical, each rolling back red eyes to watch 
the other ; while from the little mob there rose a 
snarling, bubbling snore, like giants wheezing in their 
sleep. 

Then like lightning each struck. Rearing high, they 



THE KILLER AT BAY 



3" 



wrestled with striving paws and the expression of 
fiends incarnate. Down they went, Shep underneath, 
and the great dog with a dozen of these wolves of hell 
upon him. Rasper, devilish, was riding on his back ; 
the Venus — well for him — had struck and missed ; but 
Grip and Grapple had their hold ; and the others, like 
leaping demoniacs, were plunging into the whirlpool 
vortex of the fight. 

And there, where a fortnight before he had fought 
and lost the battle of the Cup, Red Wull now battled 
for his life. 

Long odds : but what cared he ? The long-drawn 
agony of the night was drowned in that glorious 
delirium ; the hate of years came bubbling forth. In 
that supreme moment he would avenge his wrongs on 
humanity. And he went in to fight, revelling like a 
giant in the red lust of killing. 

Long odds. Never before had he faced such a 
galaxy of foes. His one chance lay in quickness : to 
prevent the swarming crew getting their hold till at 
least he had diminished them. 

Then it was a sight to see the great brute, huge as 
a bull-calf, strong as a bull, rolling over and over and 
up again, quick as a kitten ; leaping here, striking 
there ; shaking himself free ; swinging his quarters ; 
fighting with feet and body and teeth — every inch of 
him at war. More than once he broke through the 
ruck; only to turn again. No flight for him, nor 
thought of it. 

Up and down the slope the dark mass tossed, like 
some hulk the sport of waves. Black and white, sable 
and grey, worrying at that great centrepiece; up and 
down, roaming wide, leaving everywhere a trail of red. 

Gyp he had pinned and hurled across his shoulder. 






312 



OWD BOB 



Grip followed : he shook her till she rattled, then flung 
her afar ; and she fell with a horrible thud, not to rise ; 
while Grapple, the death to avenge, hung tighter. In 
a scarlet soaking patch of the ground lay Kirby's 
lurcher, doubled up in a dreadful ball. And Hoppin's 
young dog, who three hours before had been playing 
tenderly with the children, now fiendish to look on, 
dragged after the huddle up the hill. Back the mob 
rolled on her. When it was passed, she lay quite still, 
grinning, a handful of tawny hair and flesh in her dead 
mouth. 

So they fought on. And ever and anon a great 
figure rose up from the inferno all around, rearing to 
his full height, his head all ragged and bleeding, the 
red foam dripping from his jaws. Thus he would 
appear momentarily, like some dark rock amidst a 
raging sea ; and down he would go again. 

Silent now they fought, dumb and determined. Only 
you might have heard the rend and rip of tearing flesh ; 
a hoarse gurgle as some dog went down ; the panting 
of dry throats; and now and then a sob from that 
central figure. He was fighting for his life. The 
Terror of the Border was at bay. 

All who meant it were on him now. The Venus 
had her hold at last ; and never but once in a long life 
of battles had she let go ; Rasper, his breath coming 
in dreadful rattles, clipped him horribly by the loins ; 
while a dozen other devils with hot eyes and wrinkled 
nostrils clung still. 

Long odds. And down he went, smothered beneath 
the weight of numbers, yet struggled up again; his 
great head torn and dripping, eyes a gleam of rolling 
red and white, the little tail stern and stiff like the 
stump of a flagstaff" shot away. He was desperate 




THE KILLER AT BAY 



3U 



but indomitable ; and he sobbed as he fought doggedly 
on. 

Long odds: it could not last. And down he went 
at length, silent still — never a cry should they wring 
from him in his agony : the Venus glued to that 
mangled pad; Rasper beneath him now; three at his 
throat ; two at his ears ; a crowd on flanks and body. 

The Terror of the Border was overwhelmed at last. 

" Wullie ! ma Wullie ! " screamed M'Adam, bounding 
down the slope a crook's length in front of the rest. 
"Wullie! Wullie! to me!" 

At the cry the huddle below was convulsed. It 
heaved and swayed and dragged to and fro, like the 
sea lashed into life by some dying Leviathan. 

A gigantic figure, tawny and red, fought its way to 
the surface. A great tossing head, gory past recogni- 
tion, flung out from the ruck. One quick glance he 
shot from ragged eyes at the little flying figure in 
front ; then with a roar like a waterfall plunged towards 
it, shaking off the bloody leeches as he went. 

"Wullie! Wullie! I'm wi' ye!" cried that little 
voice, now so near. 

Through — through — through ! an incomparable 
effort, and his last. 

They hung to his throat, they clung to his muzzle, 
they were round and about him. 

Down he went again with a sob and a little suffocat- 
ing cry, shooting up at his master one quick beseeching 
glance as the sea of blood closed over him — worrying, 
sjnothering, tearing, like foxhounds at the kill. 



They left the dead, and pulled away the living. And 
it was no light task ; for the pack were mad for blood. 



314 



OWD BOB 



At the bottom of the wet mess of hair and red and 
flesh was old Shep, stone-dead. And as Saunderson 
pulled the body out, his face was working ; for no man 
can lose in a crack the friend of a dozen years and 
remain unmoved. 

The Venus lay there, her teeth clenched still in death ; 
smiling that her vengeance was achieved. Big Rasper, 
blue no longer, was gasping out his life. Two more 
came crawling out to find a quiet spot where they might 
lay them down to die. Before the night had fallen 
another had gone to his account; while not a dog 
who fought upon that day but carried the scars of 
it to his grave. The Terror o' th' Border, terrible 
in his life, like Samson, was yet more terrible in his 
dying. 

Down at the bottom lay that which once had been 
Adam M'Adam's Red Wull. 

At ♦ihe sight the little man neither raved nor swore : 
it Was past that for him. He sat down, heedless of the 
soaking ground, and took the mangled head in his lap, 
very tenderly. 

"They've done ye at last, Wullie — they've done 
ye at last," he muttered, convinced that the attack 
had been organised while he was detained in the tap- 
room. 

On hearing that little voice, the dog gave one weary 
wag of his stump-tail. And with that, the Tailless 
Tyke, Adam M'Adam's Red Wull, the Black Killer, 
went to his long home. 



One after one the Dalesmen bore away their dead, 
and the little man was left alone with the body of his 
last friend. 



THE KILLER AT BAY 



315 



Dry-eyed he sat there, nursing the dead dog's head ; 
hour on hour ; alone ; c«-ooning to himself — 

" 'Monie a sair daurk we twa hae wrought, 
An' wi' the weary warl' fought ! 
An' mcnie an anxious day I thought 
We wad be beat' — 

An' noo we are, Wullie — noo we are !" 

So he went on, repeating the lines over and over 
again, always with the same sad termination. 

"A man's mither — a man's wife — a man's dog! 
they three are a' little M'Adam iver had to back him. 
D'ye mind the auld mither, Wullie? and her 'Niver 
be doon-hearted, Adam ; ye've aye got your mither ' 
— and ae day I had not. And Flora, Wullie (ye 
remember Flora, Wullie ? Na, na ; ye dinna), wi' her 
laffin' daffin' manner, cryin' to me, ' Adam, ye say ye're 
alane. But ye've me — is that no' enough for ony man ? * 
And God kens it was — while it lasted." He broke 
down, and sobbed awhile. " And you, Wullie — and you ! 
the only man friend iver I had." He sought the dog's 
bloody paw with his right hand. 

" ' And here's a hand, my trusty fier', 
And gie's a baud o' thine ; 
And we'll tak' a right guid wiliie-waught. 
For auld lang syne.'" 

He sat there, stroking the poor head upon his lap, 
bending over it like a mother over a sick child. 

" They've done ye at last, lad — done ye sair. And 
noo f m thinkin' they'll no' rest content till I'm gone. 
And oh, Wullie ! " he bent down and whispered, " I 
dreamed sic an awfu* thing: that ma Wullie — But 
there ! 'twas but a dream." . 

So he sat on, crooning to the dead dog ; and no mar. 



3i6 



OWD BOB 



i 



approached him. Only Bessie of the inn watched the 
little lone figure from afar. 

It was long past noon when a^. length he rose, laying 
the dog's head reverently down, and tottered away 
towards that bridge which once the dead thing on the 
slope had held against a thousand. 

He crossed it ai\d turned : there was a look upon his 
face, half hopeful, half fearful, very piteous to see. 

" Wullie, WuUie, to me ! " he cried ; only the accents, 
formerly so fiery, were now weak as a dying man's. 

He waited : in vain. 

" Are ye no' comin', Wullie ? " he asked at length, in 
quavering tones. " Ye're not used to leave me." 

He walked away a pace, then turned again and 
whistled his shrill sharp call ; only now it sounded like 
a broken echo of itself. 

"Come to me, Wullie!" he implored very pitifully. 
" *Tis the first time iver I kent ye not come and me 
whistlin'. What ails ye, lad?" 

He recrossed the bridge, walking blindly like a 
sobbing child ; and yet dry-eyed. 

Over the dead body he stooped. 

" What ails ye, Wullie ? " he asked again. " Will you 
too leave me ? " 

Then Bessie, watching fearfully, saw him bend, sling 
the great body on to his back, and stagger away. 

Limp and hideous, the carcase hung down from his 
shoulders. The huge head, with grim, wide eyes and 
lolling tongue, jolted and swagged with the motion, 
seeming to grin a ghastly defiance at the world it had 
left And the last Bessie saw of them was that bloody, 
rolling mask, with the puny legs staggering beneath their 
load, as the two passed out of the world's ken. 



• ' 



THE KILLER AT BAY 



3^7 



In the Devil's Bowl, next day, they found the pair : 
Adam M'Adam and his Red Wull, face to face ; dead 
not divided ; each save for the other alone. The dog, 
his saturnine expression glazed and ghastly in the fixed- 
ness of death, propped up against that hump-backed 
boulder beneath which, a while before, the Black 
Killer had dreed his weird ; close by, his master, lying 
on his back, his dim dead eyes staring up at the heaven 
where now he had appeared, one hand still clasping a 
crumpled photograph : the weary body at rest at last, 
the mocking face— mocking no longer— alight with a 
whole-souled, transfiguring happiness. 



POSTSCRIPT 

ADAM M'ADAM and his Red Wull lie buried 
together ; one just within, the other just without, 
the consecrated pale. 

The only mourners at the funeral were David, James 
Moore, Maggie, and a grey dog peering through the 
lych-gate. 

During the service, a carriage stopped at the church- 
yard, and a lady with a stately figure and a gentle face 
stepped out and came across the grass to pay a last 
tribute to the dead. And Lady Eleanour, as she joined 
the group about the grave, seemed to notice a more 
than usual solemnity in the Parson's voice as he intoned 
— "earth to earth — ashes to ashes — dust to dust — in sure 
and certain hope of the Resurrection to eternal life." 



When you wander in the grey hill-country of the 
North, in the loneliest corner of that lonely landtyou 
may chance upon a hoar farmhouse lying in the shadown 
of the Muir Pike. 

Entering, a tall old man comes out to greet you — the 
Master of Kenmuir. His shoulders are bent now ; the 
hair that was so dark is frosted ; but the blue-grey eyes 
look you as proudly in the face as of yore. 

And while the girl with the glory of golden hair is 
preparing food for you — they are hospitable to a fault, 
these Northerners — you will notice on the mantelpiece, 
standing solitary, a massive silver Cup, dented. That 



S18 



POSTSCRIPT 



319 



ie buried 
t without, 

id, James 
3ugh the 

e church- 
entle face 
ay a last 
ihe joined 
J a more 
e intoned 

—in sure 

life." 



ry of the 
ndfyou 
shadow** 



you — the 
now ; the 
grey eyes 

en hair is 
o a fault, 
ntelpiece, 
:d. That 



is the world-known Shepherds' Trophy, won outright, 
as the old man will tell you, by Owd Bob, last and best 
of the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir. The last because he is 
the best ; because once, for a long-drawn unit of time, 
James Moore had thought him to be the worst. 

When, at length, you take your leave, the old man 
will accompany you to the top of the slope to point the 
way. 

" Ye cross the stream ; ower Langholm Mow, yonder ; 
past the Bottom ; and oop t' hill on far side. Ye'll 
happen on t' hoose o' top. And mebbe ye'll meet 
Th' Owd 'Un on t' road. — Good-day to you, sir, good- 
day." 

So you go as he has bidden you : across the 
stream, skirting the How, over the gulf, and up the 
hill again. 

On the way, as the Master has foretold, you come 
upon an old grey dog, trotting soberly along. Th' 
Owd 'Un, indeed, seems to spend the evening of his 
life going thus between Kenmuir and the Grange. The 
dark muzzle is almost white ; the gait, formerly so 
smooth and strong, is very slow ; venerable, indeed, is 
he of whom men still talk as the best sheep-dog in the 
N(y1(i. 
> $Ls he passes, he stays to scan you. The noble head 
IS high, and one foot raised; and you look into two 
deep grey eyes such as you have never seen before — 
soft, a little dim, and infinitely sad. 

That is Owd Bob o' Kenmuir, of whom the tales are 
many as the flowers on the may. With him dies the 
last of the immortal line of the Grey Dogs of Kenmuir. 

You travel on up the hill, something pensive, and 
knock at the door of the house on the top. 

A woman, comely with the inevitable comeliness of 



;«* 



320 



OWD BOB 



motherhood, opens to you. And nesth'ng in her arms 
is a little boy with golden hair and happy face, like a 
cherub of Correggio. 

You ask the child his name. He kicks and crows 
and looks up at his mother, and in the end lisps 
roguishly, as if it was the merriest joke in all this 
merry world, "Adum Mataddum." 



r 



The End 



miNTBO BY MORRISON AND CIBB LIMITKO, EDINBURGH 



her arms 
ce, like a 

nd crows 
end lisps 
1 all this 






Morang's "Florin" Series 

50c. and $1.00 



This series of popular first-class novels is issued at 
the moderate price of 50 cents per volume in paper and 
$1.00 in cloth. The object of "The Florin Series" is to 
provide a regular issue of bright and entertaining reading 
by the best authors. The volumes already issued are : 

No. I. Bob, 5on of Battle. Bv Alfred Ollivant. 
No. a. The Nameless Castle. Bv Maurus Jokai. 
No. 3. The Town Traveller. By George Gissino. 
No. 4. The Heart of Toil. By Octave Thanet. 
No. 5. The Adventures of Captain Kettle. By Cut- 

CLIFFE HyNE. 

No. 6. rioran of the Lady Letty. By Frank Norris. 
No. 7. The Amateur Cracksman. By £. W. Hor- 

NUNC. 

No. 8. The Confounding of Camelia. By Anne 

Douglas Sedgwick. 

No. 9. The Sturgis Wager. By Edgar Morette. 

No. 10. Througli the Turf Smolce. By Seumas 
MacManus. 

No. II. The House of the 5orcerer. By Haldanb 
Macfall. 

No. la. Old riadame. By Harriet Prescott Spof- 
ford. 

No. i:3* The World's Mercy. By Maxwell Gray. 

AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID ON 
RECEIPT OF PRICE, BV 

QEORQE N MORANQ & COMPANY Limited 
Publishers Toronto 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



Aylwin. By Theodore Watts-Dunton. 

A vivid and enthralling' love-story, full of movement and 
vigor. The tenth edition of this remarkable book is now on sale. 
Crown 8vo., Cloth, $1.50; Paper, 75 cents. 

The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll. By S. D. 

COLLINGWOOD, B.A. 

This is the life of the author of "Alice in Wonderland." It 
is a work of deep interest, and the illustrations, which are re- 
productions of photographs, have excited great ?.ttention. Croron 
8vo.f Cloth f $3.00. 

With Nansen in the North. By Lieut. Hjalmar 

JoHANSEN. A record of the From expedition. 

With very numerous illustrations. 

This is a record of Arctic experiences that cannot be read 
without a thrill of interest. Its characteristics are simplicity 
and straightforwardness. Crown 8vo., Cloth, $1.^0; Paper, ^g 
cents. 

The Forest of Bourj^-Marie. By S. Frances Har- 
rison. 

A story of French-Canadian life, which displays in a vivid 
and interesting manner the characteristics of the habitant. Its 
story element is strong. Crown 8vo., Cloth, $1.25 >' Paper, 75 
cents. 

A 5ister to Evansfeline : being the story of Yvonne 

de Lamoune. By Charles G. D. Roberts. 

This work, as its name denotes, deals with the scene already 
made famous by Longfellow's poem. It is a most interesting^ 
story. Crown 8vo., Deckle-edged. Cloth, gilt top, ^/.jo/ Paper, 
^r cents. 

Liie of Jane Austen. By Goldwin Smith, D.C.L. 

The accomplished and learned author of this "Life of Jane 
Austeki " has brought to the task a fulness of information and a 
literary insight that make this book a valuable addition to bi- 
ography. Crown 8vo., Library Edition, half Morocco, $1.50. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



i»i^v.'.6-. ^sasiwiic-- 



snt and 
on sale* 



S. D. 

nd." It 

are rc- 

Cvowtt 



JALMAR 

edition. 

be read 
implicity 
Paper, 75 



s Har- 

a vivid 
ant. Its 
*aper, 7$ 

Yvonne 

s. 

already 
terestingf 
/ Papttt 



C.L. 

of Jane 
on and a 
on to bi« 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 

Bird Neisrhbors. By Neltje Blanchan ; with an in- 
troduction by John Burroughs. 

Will be found not only tc contain much interesting: readingf, 
but to have a high value as a work of reference. Crown ^to. 
Cloth, with s^ beautiful colored photogravures, $2.2$. 

Qame Birds and Birds of Prey. By Neltje Blan- 
chan ; with an introduction by G. O. Shields. 

This book, a companion volume to the foregoing', contains 
the life-histories of 170 birds of prey, game-birds and water-fowl. 
It has 48 colored plates. Crown 4to., Cloth $2.pg. 

Cliristian Martyrdom in Russia : an account of the 

members of the Universal Brotherhood, or Douk- 

hobortsi. By Vladimir Tchertkoff. 

This is a most interesting description of the Doukhobors, 
our new immigrants to Canada. It contains a chapter by 
Tolstoy and an introduction by Prof. James Mavor. Crown 8vo., 
Paper, js cents. 

Heart Songs. By Jean Blewett. 

Mrs. Blewett has taken a special place in the affections of 
the reading public, and this volume will undoubtedly confirm her 
dominion there. The predominant note of the book is buoyant 
optimism. Crown 8vo., Cloth, ornamental, gilt-top, $1.00. Half 
Morocco, tz.50. 

A Critical Study of *« In rtemorlam.** By the late 
Rev. John M. King, D.D. 

The wide scope of the work and its masterly dealing with 
the experiences of human nature give it a unique prominence in 
poetic literature. It will take its place not only as a text-book 
but as a valuable addition to private book-shelves. Cloth, umo., 
gilt-top, deckle edges, $1.2^. 

Essays on Worlc and Culture. By Hamilton Wright 
Mabie. 

The p4ace which Mr. Mabie has undoubtedly taken in modern 
criticism is exemplified in these books. Already he has won a 
large following by these delightful essays. In eight volumes, 
Clothi i2mo., gilt top, deckle-edges, %i. 25 per volume. 



\ID 



A 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



)l 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



iT 



Trlmalchio's Dinner. By Petronius, translated by 
Harry Thurston Peck. 

This story, of the period of " Quo Vadis," brings before the 
reader in a realistic way, the people and the time of the reign of 
Nero. The book is a voice from the past. Crown 8tw., Cloth, 
$1.50/ Paper, 75^. 

Stories from Starland. By Mary Proctor, daughter 

of the famous astronomer. 

It precisely fills the want, so often expressed, of a child's 
book, that is not, encumbered with matters that the little reader 
cannot possibly understand. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 75c. 

Cyrano de Bergerac. By Edmond Rostand, a drama, 

translated from the French by Gertrude Hall. 

The unanimity of the critics with regard to this piece of 
literary work is as surprising as it is rare. Cloth, 1611*0., with 
portrait of Miss Margaret Anglin as Roxane, $oc. 

Quo Vadi5. By Henryk Sienkiewicz, translated by 
Jeremiah Curtin. 

This remarkable romance deals with the history, religion 
and customs of Rome in the days of Nero, which is portrayed 
with vividness and power. It has been called one of the greatest 
books of our day. Crown Svo. Cloth, $1.50/ Paper, 75c 

Witli Fire and Sword. By Henryk Sienkiewicz. 

An historical novel of Poland and Russia, authorized and 
unabridged edition, translated by Jeremiah Curtin, containing 
the history of the origin and career of the two Slav States, 
Poland and Russia. Crown Svo, Cloth, $1,25/ Paper y^c. 

Pan riicliael. By Henryk Sienkiewicz, Author of 

"Quo Vadis," etc. 

In this interesting novel, Sienkiewicz has further developed 
the characters and scenes to be found in "With Fire and Sword." 
It is characterized by great vividness and power. Cnrwn Svo, 
Cloth, $1.25/ Paper, i^c. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUB USHERS 






;t. 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



lated by 

before the 
e reig^n of 
vo.t Clothf 



laughter 

r a child's 
lie reader 



a drama, 
>E Hall. 

s piece of 
6m0., toith 



lated by 

r, religion 
portrayed 
e greatest 

JWICZ. 

rized and 
ontaining 
LV States* 
ISC' 

ithor of 

leveloped 
Sword." 
txfwn ovo* 



I 



The Prisoner of Zenda. By Anthony Hops, Author 

of •♦ The Dolly Dialogues," etc. 

" The Prisoner of Zenda " at once leaped into popularity 
because it brought with it a novelty and freshness that was 
piquant even to the most jaded novel reader. Crown^ 8vo., clotht 
$1.50. Paper^ 7Sc. 

To London for the Jubilee. By "Kit.'* 

These descriptions of travel, and of a great national ce!i?bra- 
tion are the best record of the ceremonies of the Diamond 
Jubilee, and they form a very interesting memento of the 6oth 
year of the Queen's reign. Their gifted author had exceptional 
opportunities of seeing all that was going on, and the brilliant 
account of it that she wrote forms delightful reading. 16 mo., 
cloth ornamental, gilt top, T^c; Paper, 25c. 

The Seven Seas. By Rudyard Kipling, Author of 
*• Barrack Room Ballads," **The Phantom Rick- 
shaw," etc. 

These poems are among the best productions of Kipling's 
5enius. Crown, &vo., cloth, ornamental, $1.50. 

The Day's Worlc. By Rudyard Kipling, Author of 

•* The Seven Seas," etc., with eight full page 

illustrations. 

To read this book, " The Day's Work," is to receive a men- 
tal training and nerve bracing such as must make any man or 
woman — and especially any young man or woman — fitter to face 
life and conquer it. Crown^ Svo.,' Cloth, gilt top, uncut edges, 
$1.50; Paper, -jsc 

Wolf vi lie. By Alfred Henry Lewis, illustrated by 
Frederic Remington. 

This is a book of fresh and quaint humor. It describes in 
odd, but not tedious dialect, the doings in a Western ranclang 
settlement. The 18 illustrations by Remington are fully equal 
to that artist's great reputation. Crown, 8vo.; Cloth, $i.JS* 
Paper, 75^. 



UD 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



IP 






GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 






The Black Doug^las. By S. R. Crockett. 

This is a romantic and stirring story of the fifteenth century 
with its armed strongholds and its fighting men. Lovely women 
are also to be found in the tale, and their influence on its devel> 
opment is strong. Crown 8vo,, Cloth, $i.as ; Paper, 7$ cents. 

Agriculture. By C. C. James, M.A., Dep. Min. of 

Agriculture for Ontario. 

Authorized for use in schools. As a primary treatise in the 
science underlying farming, no better treatise has been put be- 
fore the public. Crown 8vo. Cloth, 25 cents. 

Away from Newspaperdom and other Poems. By 

Bernard McEvoy. 

The style and the sentiment of the poems are admirable. 
Mr. McEvoy has both the eye and ear of the true poet. Square 
8vo., with illustrations by G. A. Reid, R.C.A. Cloth, $1.00 ! 
Paper, t;o cents. 

Canada and Its Capital. By Sir James Edgar, 

Speaker of the Dominion House of Commons. 

Containing twenty-one photogravure illustrations. "The 
work is a beautiful production from all points of view. Con- 
tains material that is calculated to make Ottawa the Mecca of 
the tourist, the sportsman, and the health-seeker." Large 8vo., 
Cloth, $2.50 ; half-Morocco, Sj-so. 

A History of Canada. By Charles G. D. Roberts, 

Author of ''The Forge in the Forest," "A Sister 

to Evangeline," etc. 

A complete history, with chronological chart and maps of 
the Dominion of Canada and Newfoundland ; containing nearly 
500 pages, including appendix, giving the British North America 
and Imperial Acts in full. Large 8vo., Cloth, ornamental, $2.00. 

The Book of Qames : with directions how to play 

them. By Mary White. 

As a compendium of evening amusements for the family and 
other social circles it is unrivalled. Cloth, ornamental, i2mo,t 
Si. 00. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHRRS 



mMm 



wmin&s^'' 



1ST. 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



ith century 
ely women 
I its devel- 
TS cents, 

Min. of 



itise in the 
sen put be- 



ms. By 

admirable. 
t. Square 
'A, $i.oo ; 



Edgar, 
imons. 

!. "The 
5w. Con- 
Mecca of 
argeSvo.i 



Roberts, 
A Sister 

maps of 
UK nearly 

America 
/, $2.00. 

to play 
mily and 



!i 



Where Dwells Our Lady of the Sunshine. By the 

Countess of Aberdeen. 

A booklet describing the grand resources of Canada, in the 
form of a parable. Square, i6mo., decile edge ewer, -with design 
in gold. IOC. 

The Incidental Bishop. By Grant Allen. 

This is a bit of good literary sculpture, the scene of which 
is laid partly in Africa and partly in Britain. Crown 8vo. Papery 
Soc, 

Bachelor Ballads. By Blanche McManus. 

This is an attractive book, containing 29 of the celebrated 
ipood fellowship songs of the world. Crown, 8vo., bound in art 
linen, with numerous illustrations, fr.^o. 

Equality. By Edward Bellamy, a sequel to *' Look- 
ing Backward." 

The large sale which this book has had indicates that its 
•abject is an interesting one. Crown, 8vo.; Cloth, %i,2s; Paper, 

The Scourge of Qod. A Novel, By John Bloundell- 

Burton, Author of ♦♦ The Clash of Arms," ''The 

Mutable Many," etc. 

This is an engrossing story of religious persecution. Qrown, 
8vo.; Cloth, $T.oo; Paper, 50c. 

When the World was Younger. By Miss M. E. 
Braddon. 

An historical romance of the Stuart period, in which love, 
tragedy, and passion figure prominently. Crown. 8vo.; Cloth, 
$1.25; Paper, soc. 

The Deluge. By Henryk Sibnkiewicz, Author of 

"Quo Vadis," etc. 

This work completes the trilogy begun by the author's great 
novel, "With Fire and Sword," of which "Pan Michael" also 
forms a number. It deals in a masterly way, with Russian and 
^ Polish history. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $1.25; Paper, y^c. 



ID 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



r' 



w 






/ 



I 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



Wild Animals 1 Have Known. By Ernest Sbton 
Thompson, Naturalist to the Government of Man- 
itoba, Author of '• Rirds of Manitoba," etc. 

This book has fair claims io being considered unique, for it 
is probably the first serious attempt to depict the daily life of 
wild animals as it really is. Profustly illustrated by the author. 
Cloth, octavo, $2.00. 

niss Qrace of All Souls. A novel, by William 

Edwards Tirebuck, Author of " St. Margarets," 

*' Sweetheart Gwen," etc. 

It:; scene Us laid in one of the mining districts of England, 
and social ^onw' ns arc- tou.':hed upon in a discerning and 
sympathetic niaiviit^r. CrrwnSvo. Cloth, %i.oo; Paper, ^oc. 



The WojderfMl T^^'/'ury. By Alfred Russel Wal- 
lace, Author of ** The Malay Archipelago," 
** Darwinism," etc. 

This book describes the doings of science during the century 
that is now drawing to a close, and also touches upon their 
relation to social conditions. It is a most interesting review of 
electricity, travel, labor saving machinery, evolution, etc. Croiwn 
%vo. Cloth, $2.00. 

Her Memory. By Maarten Maartens, Author of 

♦♦God's Fool," ♦♦Joost Aveling," etc. 

The delicate and finely sympathetic quality of this consum- 
mate literary artist is well illustrated in the revelations and 
finished characterizations of this novel. Crown 9ivo. , with portrait 
of the author: Cloth, $1.50/ Paper, i^c. 

In the Forest of Arden. By Hamilton W. Mabib, 

Author of "Essays on Work and Culture," ♦♦My 

Study Fire," etc. 

This is a beautiful piece of poetic idealism, and is presented 
to the public in a dress in all respects worthy of its literary 
beauty. Large Crown Svo., Cloth and Gold, Gilt-top, decorated 
by Will H. Low, Edition de Luxe, $2.25. 






V 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



% 



Notes on Appreciation of Art and on Art In Ontario: 

With remarks on the Exhibition of the Ontario 
Society of Artists, MDCCCXCVIII. By James 
Mayor. 

\2mo.; Paper, -with eleven illustrations from or^nal draw- 
ings by the artists, 25c. 

At the Cross Roads. By F. F. Montr^sor, Author 
of "Into the Highways and Hedges," "False 
Coin or True," etc. 

There is as much strength in this book as in a dozen ordinary 
successful novels. Crown 8w. Cloth, $1.00/ Paper, soc. 

Tlie United States of Europe, on the Eve of the 

Parliament of Peace. By W. T. Stead. 

This is a most interesting description of a tour around 
Europe by the Auth3r, in the fall of 189S. It is lavishly and 
beautifully illustrated. Crown 8vo., Cloth, ^1.50. 

The Confounding of Camelia. A Novel, by Anne 
Douglas Sedgwick. 

This is a story of English life and society, which attracts by 
its truth and intimateness. Crown 8vo., Cloth, $1,00; Paper, $oc. 

Love Among the Lions. By F. Anstey, Author of 
*' Vice Versa." 

A very bright little story of a strange matrimonial experi- 
ence, with thirteen clever illustrations. t2mo.; Paper, $oc. 

Scottish Folic Lore, or Reminiscences of Aberdeen- 
shire, from Pinafore to Gown. By Rev. Duncan 
Anderson, M.A., Author of "The Lays of 
Canada," etc. i2mo.; Cloth, $1.00, 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



The Celebrity. By Winston Churchill. 

This is an exceedingly amusing book. All the characters 
are drawn with the firm sharpness of a master hand. To read 
*'The Celebrity" is to laugh. The dramatic effects are un- 
forced. Crown, 8vo.; Cloth, $1.00/ Paper, $oc. 

Commercial Culm : A Book for Business rien. With 
eight maps, seven plans of cities, and forty full 
page illustrations. By William J. Clark, of the 
General Electric Company, with an introduction 
by E. Sherman Gould, M. Am. Soc. C. E. 

Octavo; Cloth, %4..so. 

Lyrics of Lowly Life. By Paul Lawrence Dunbar. 

A very pleasing collection of short poems by a rising writer. 
Cloth, xamo.,%i.2S» .\ 

Folks from pixie. By Paul Lawrence Dunbar, 

illustrated by E. W . Kemble. 

In the present work the author comes before us as a success- 
ful writer of sbiot't stories and graphic sketches of negro life. 
, These pages are replete with humor. Cloth, i2mo. , ornamental, 
\%i.as. 

The Science of Political Economy. By Henry George, 

Author of "Progress and Poverty," "Social 

Problems," Etc. 

This is the last work of the celebrated author. In his intro- 
duction he calls it "a treatise on matters which absorb the 
larger part of the thought and effort of the vast majority of us — 
the getting of a living." Crorwn, 8vo,, Cloth, %2.oo. 

Little riasterpieces. From Hawthorne, Poe and 
Irving. 

These volumes comprise the most characteristic writings ol 
each author, carefully selected and edited by Prof. Bliss Perry, 
of Princeton University. Flexible cloth, z6mo., gilt top, j vols, in 
a box, per vol. 40c. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



JUm 



yffii 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



i i 



The Choir Invisible. By James Lane Allen. 

The longest, strongest and most beautiful of M r. Allen's- 
novels. Crown 8vo. Cloth, %i,2s; Pap*r, ygc. 

A Kentuclcy Cardinal and Aftermath. By Jambs 
Lane Allen. 

"A Kentucky Cardinal " and "Aftermath," form, together, 
one of the most delightful little love stories that was ever 
written. lamo. Cloth, $i.2S>' Paper, 75c. 

5imon Dale. By Anthony Hope ; with eight full- 
page illustrations. 
The story has to do with the English and French Courts ia 
the time of Charles II. The material for a tale of love, intrigue 
and adventure to be found here, could hardly be surpassed. 
Crown 8vo. Cloth, $z.so; Paper, 750. 

Rupert of Hentzau. By Anthony Hope, a Sequel to^ 
"The Prisoner of Zenda," illustrated by Charles 
Dana Gibson. 

The world is always ready to read a story of courage and 
daring, and there is even more exemplification of these qualities 
in "Rupert of Hentzau" than there was in "The Prisoner of 
Zenda." Crown 8vo. Cloth, $i.so; Paper, 7sc. 

Paris. By Emile Zola. 

The descriptive power of the author is to great that to read 
this is to take a bird's eye view of the things and people 
described. The political world is unveiled for us and Parisian 
journalism is drawn with a keen pen. Crown 8vo. Cloth, %x.2$y 
Paper, isc. 

The Christian. By Hall Cainb. 

This book deserves a fresh interest from its recent drama* 
tization under the superintendence of the author. No novel 
of recent years has aroused more discussion, and none has 
been read with greater eagerness. Crown 8vo. ■ Cloth, %i.so ; 
Paper, 7sc. 

The Beth Book. By Sarah Grand, Author of *• The 
Heavenly Twins." 
Sarah Grand's new work of fiction "The Beth Book," will 
be likely to meet a wider acceptance than "The Heavenly 
Twins." As a literary production it fully sustains the anthor's 
high reputation. Crown Svo. Cloth, $1.30; Paper, 7$c. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



GEORGE N. MORANG & COMPANY'S LIST. 



Caleb West. By F. Hopkinson Smith. 

This remarkable story is full of human nature and incident. 
It has had a surprising run in the United States, and describes 
the exigencies that an engineer had to meet with while building 
a lighthouse on a stormy coast. Crown 8vo. Cloth ^ %''So; 
Paper, 75c. 

The Grenadier. A Story of the Empire, by James 
Eugene Farmer. 

Although this stonr is by a new writer, its force and ability 
mark it as the work of a coming man. It is a fine specimen of 
military fiction. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $i.t;o ; Paper, 7sc. 

The Uncalled. A New Story, by Paul Lawrence 
Dunbar, Author of ** Folks from Dixie." 

This is a strong work of great interest, and will make its 
author a large number of friends. He writes what is in his 
heart, and has no mercy for sanctimonious shams. Crown 8vo. 
Cloth, $7.25/ Paper, 75^. 

The House of Hidden Treasure. By Maxwell Gray, 
Author of ••The Silence of Dean Maitland," etc. 

The success of the former works of this clever author guar- 
antees a large sale of this novel. The portrayal of the character 
Grace Dorrien is a masterly effort, and there are scenes in the 
book that dwell in the memory. Crown 8vo. Cloth, $i.So; 
Paper, 750. 

Tekla. By Robert Barr. 

This novel is pronounced by competent critics to be its 
author's strongest work. As he is a Canadian, the book is sure 
to arouse strong interest. Crown 8vo. Cloth, ^1.25; Paper, 75c. 



By W. O. Stoddard. 



With The Black Prince. 

Illustrated. 

This is an ideal boy's book. It deals with a stirring period 
of history in a way that will captivate the boy's heart. Crown 
Svo. Cloth, ornamental, $1.50. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS, OR SENT POST-PAID 
BY THE PUBLISHERS 



A Duet 
with an Occasional 
Chorus 

By A. CONAN DOYLE 
Anikor of "Unclt Btmac»" **Mtmoin of Sherlock Holmo$t" <*k 

Crown 8vo. Ctetfe, $1.50. Paper, 75c 



PreM Notices : 

"We thank Dr. Doyle for his charming volume and say 
fiUPewell with extreme regret."— lUustrated London News. 

" It is all very sweet and graceful."— Zomibn TtUgraph. 

'< A bright story. All the characters are well drawn."^ 
London Mail, 

•* 'Charming' is the one word to describe this volume ade- 
quately. Dr. Doyle's crisp style, and his rare wit and refined 
humor, utilized with cheerful art that is perfect of its kind, fill 
these pages with joy and gladness for the resLder:'—miadelphia 
Pnss. 

" 'A Duet* is bright, brave, simple, natural, delicate. It is 
the most artistic and most original thing that its author has done. 
We can heartily recommend <A Duet' to all classes of readers." 
Chicago Times Herald. 



A T ALL BOOKSELLERS OR POSTPAID FROM 

George N. fHotang & Company Limited 

PUBUSHBRS AND IltPORTBRS 

Toronto 



1 



The Amateur Cracksman 



By E. W. HORNUNG. 



(JVb. 7 of Morang^s Florin Series.) 

Crown 8vo. Cloth, $i.oo. Paper, 5oc> 



In this book the author has produced a sort of counterpart 
of the detective stories of Dr. A. Conan Doyle. But it gives the 
other side of the question. In the " Memoirs of Sherlock 
Holmes/' and in a "Study in Scarlet," the narrative was from 
the point of view of the law and its myrmidons. In the "Amateur 
Cracksman " it is one of the burglars who gives the story of his 
doings. It is a story that is told in a most interesting manner, 
as the undermentioned reviews will testify. 

" The book is distinctly a good one. ... It has a 
lightness and brightness which Dr. Doyle never attempted." — 
The Academy, 

" It interests from the opening page to the last." — Litera- 
ture. 

" Raffles is the counterpart of Sherlock Holmes to the full ; 
as ingenious, as cool, as cunning, and as fascinating a rascal as 
one can find anywhere in fiction." — Detroit Free Press. 

" There is not a dull page from beginning to end. It Is ex- 
citing at times in a breathless way. He is the most interesting 
rogue we have met for a long time." — N. Y, Evening Sun. 



^T ALL BOOKSELLERS OR POSTPAID FROM 

George N. Morang & Company Limited 

Publishers and Importers 
Toronto 



The Music Lover's Library 

In 5 Vols., each Illustrated, lamo, $1.35 

A series of popular volumes — historical, biographical, anec* 
dotal and descriptive — on the important branches of the art of 
music, by writers of recognized authority. ""'^ 



NOW READY 

The Orchestra 
and Orchestral Music 

By W. J. Henderson 

Author of "What is Goo' Music?" tie. 
With 8 PortraiU and lUuitratiou. 



SUMMARY OP CONTENTS : 

Part I. How the Orchsstra Is Constituted. 
Part II. How the Orchestra Is Used. 
Part III. How the Orchestra is Directed. 
Part IV. How the Orchestra Grew. 
Part V. How Orchestral Huslc Orew. 

Mr. Henderson's book is a guide to a perfect understand- 
Ing of the modern orchestra and of the uses in tone coloring of 
the various groups of instruments composing it. The develop- 
ment of the condn.ctor is also traced, and the history of orchestral 
music is sketched. The book is addressed to the amateur, and 
is free from technicalities. It contains much information to be 
found in no other work. 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS OR POSTPAID FROM 

George N. Moratig 6: Company Limited 

Publishers and Importers 
Toronto 



it 



The Music Lover's Library 



j-*n' 



IN PREPARATIOK^^ ^ 



'm< 



The Pianoforte and its Music 

By H. B. Krehbiel 

Author of « How to Listen to JHusie," 
**Music and Manners in the Classical Period,'* etc. 



The Opera Past and Present.^ 

By W. F. Apthorp 1^ 

Author of ** Musicians and Music Lovers" etc 

Songs and Song Writers 

By Henry T. Flnck 

Author of « Wagner and ^i» Woris," 
"Chopin and oti^ ^IjM ^Sitays" etc 



i^Wv^'"^' 



•-«' 



Choirs and Choral Singing 

By Arthur Meet 

Conductor of the Mendelssohn Glee Club, 



AT ALL BOOKSELLERS OR POSTPAID FROM 

George N. Morang & Company Limited 

Publishers and Importers 
Toronto 



ibrary 



^. 



^usic 






;•' etc. 



jsent#' 



etc. 



rs 



"*?^- 



> 



/:*^ 



ng 







imited 



