By Proxy (1878)
Author: Payn, James.
Publication info: By Proxy: By James Payn ... With Twelve Illustrations By Arthur Hopkins: In Two Volumes. Second Edition . 2 v. London: Chatto and Windus, 1878.

By Proxy: By James Payn ... With Twelve Illustrations by Arthur Hopkins: In Two Volumes. Second Edition VOL. I.
‘Not in the sky, not in the midst of the sea.
Not in the clefts of the mountains,
Is there a spot in the whole world
Where a man may be freed from an evil dee!’ Buddhist Proverb
[Page ]
CHAPTER I. ON THE CANAL. The time is spring-time—the scene the north of China; or rather that north-eastern portion of the Celestial Empire which the few Europeans who have visited it call North. At the date of which we write, it was a much rare matter to explore the plains of Keang-Soo, the district lying to the north-west of Shanghae, than even now; it was an excursion which, on the part of the ‘Pak- Quei-Tye’ or ‘Foreign Devils,’ required money, courage, an armed guard, and above all a quietness of demeanour and conduct in the presence of much that was irritating, and more that was ludicrous, which all Europeans, and we fear we must add especially our military fellow-countrymen, do not possess. English officers in particular, who have been accustomed to the natives of India, are apt to get into trouble with those of China; the character of ‘Pandy’ being very different from that of John Chinaman, and especially of John Chinaman on his own dunghill—far inland, where ‘the Barbarians’ —that is to say, all persons belonging to civilised communities— are held not only cheap but contemptible. The fine old quotation, omne ignotum pro magnifico , is in this instance sadly out of place;
[Page 2]
for though the Chinese know nothing whatever of our particular ‘tribute-bearing nation,’ except that it consists of men without pig-tails ‘governed by a lady with large feet,’ they do not despise us one whit the less on that account. From the days when the unconscious Lord Macartney went up the Peiho with ‘Ambassador bearing tribute from the country of England’ in Chinese upon his flag, until now, the Celestial People have laboured under false impressions of us which induce the circumstances of what, in domestic scenes at our police courts, is termed ‘aggravation;’ and when young Englishmen of condition are aggravated, it touches a certain spring in their system which is apt to make them hit out straight from the shoulder. The consequences of this movement, especially in connection with a Mandarin, are exceedingly serious in every part of China except the five treaty ports; and officers of the English army were therefore very seldom given permission to visit the district of Keang-Soo, notwithstanding the abundance of game it was reputed to possess, and the charms of its local scenery.
Nevertheless, of the two Englishmen now seated in the covered boat making its slow way up a tributary of the Cha-Ho (otherwise Imperial Canal) upon this moonlit night in spring, one is in the army. He is the younger of the two travellers, but not sufficiently so to make him, as usual, the more interesting of the two. There is only a year or so of difference in the ages of Ralph Pennicuick and Captain Arthur Conway. But except as to years they have little or nothing in common. The Captain is slight though wiry; his complexion would be fair, if the effects of ten years' broiling under Eastern suns could be removed by the application of some of those cosmetics, the action of which we know (by the advertisements) is so unfailing; but then he never uses
[Page 3]
cosmetics. He has not the money to spare for such luxuries, having to support a wife and child in England, and possessing little more than his pay with which to do it. His face would be comely enough but for a look of care—or rather of the weariness that is the result of care—in his blue eyes: his mouth, notwithstanding the long brown beard, flecked here and there with grey, has a mild and pleasant expression, especially when it smiles: but it smiles rarely: his voice, firm, but gentle almost as a woman's, has a certain melancholy in its tone, such as belongs to men who have missed their mark in life and have no desire to take aim again; who know how it happened quite well, and what has come of it; and who, if not content, at least do not complain. He holds a sketch-book in his hand, to which, while conversing with his companion, he transfers, from time to time, some picturesque or curious object on the canal bank. He is a man of considerable accomplishments, as the phrase goes, though they have hitherto been of no practical advantage to him. He can catch a likeness, and place it on paper in a few strokes; as a young man—that is to say, some twenty years ago, for he is now three-and-forty—he could sing a song with much feeling and expression; but his singing days have long been over. He has a genuine talent for languages, and, having now resided some three years in the ‘crockery shop,’ as his companion calls the ‘Flowery Land,’ can make himself understood in Chinese. Had Captain Arthur Conway possessed a friend sufficiently sympathetic (which he does not) to enquire what he had done with his life and opportunities in the world, he would have replied, ‘Wasted myself.’ The general opinion of his brother-officers was correct, when they remarked to one another, as they had occasionally done, that ‘Conway had missed his tip.’
[Page 4]
The general opinion of those who knew Ralph Pennicuick was of quite the contrary kind. He had not ‘missed his tip,’ if that means any aim whatever to which he had at any time directed his energies. He had always had all he wanted, or almost all; partly, it is true, because his wants had been of a material sort, with which a large fortune inherited when he came of age had always supplied him; but also because of his indomitable will. His wish was as much a law to him as that of his Imperial Majesty the Son of Heaven and Vice-Regent of the Universe, in whose dominions he was now travelling for his own pleasure. A disciple of Lavater would have judged as much from Pennicuick's mouth, the firmness of which, set in its massive jaw, reminded you of the Nineveh marbles; it was not the jaw alone, however, which associated itself with those steadfast faces of the despots of old, but the beard of inky blackness which, flowing broadly down from his dark face, was clubbed towards the ends and curled upwards as hair appears to have done in Nineveh, alike with bulls and men. Of course Pennicuick was much respected for this attribute—by which I mean his will and not his beard, though that too he used to say had its attractions for the fair sex—but it did not make him beloved of men. He was not a man to get his name abbreviated from familiarity or affection, but it was abbreviated nevertheless. He was called ‘Steel Pen,’ and ‘Hard Pen,’ from his decisiveness of character; and ‘Black Beard,’ not so much from his beard as from the characteristics he had in common with the famous pirate of that name. But these things were only said behind his back, while Conway was always ‘Connie’ even with the youngest ensign, and, despite his poverty and want of animal spirits, one of the most popular men in his regiment. Pennicuick would have been popular
[Page 5]
too, perhaps, if he would have taken the trouble to be so, and even as it was his company was sought after by both sexes. For women love a tyrant, and men (who are also cowards in their way) have always a welcome for those who have a sharp tongue, a ready sword, and a large rent-roll.
These two men had been at College together, where they had both been their own masters and enjoyed themselves; only the one had lived on his income, and indeed within it, while the other had made a hole in his small capital. They had both married for love (after their several fashions), but Pennicuick with the more discretion. His wife died in giving birth to her first child—a son—and left her husband with twice the fortune he had possessed before: while Conway's wife had brought him little (or what seemed little to a man of his habits) beyond a daughter, to keep whom and her it had been necessary for him for the last ten years to exile himself from England. This at least was the view he himself took of it (though always, as I have said, without complaint); but, as a matter of fact, he had not been prudent at any time, and had both spent and lost money in pursuit of pleasure and gain. His friends said that he had never been anybody's enemy but his own; but his wife, who was very plain-spoken, had not always endorsed that sentiment. She had occasionally even expressed a contrary one, a circumstance which had perhaps had its influence in keeping them apart. Pennicuick, who was an idle man, had always kept up his acquaintance with Conway—indeed, Mrs. Conway had been a second mother to his boy at a time when he sorely needed maternal solicitude—and having exhausted the pleasures of Town, and even of Europe, he had come out to China for a few months in search of his friend and new excitements. Hong Kong and Shanghae had
[Page 6]
soon been exhausted in their turn, and hence this expedition into the interior, the expenses of which were solely defrayed out of his own pocket; Conway had had nothing to procure but leave of absence from his regiment, which was stationed at the latter city. The position of being ‘franked’ by another man is always a delicate if not an absolutely disagreeable one, unless that man is indeed one's friend; his merely calling himself so having little to do with the matter: and perhaps in the present case that complete though tacit understanding—the total absence of the general principle of ‘give and take’—which underlies all genuine friendship was wanting. On the other hand, the sense of obligation on Conway's part was greatly lessened by the fact that Pennicuick could have got no one else to accompany him on such a tour, or, even if he could, would probably not have accepted such companionship. There was just enough consciousness of dependence to cause the poorer man to assert himself (which under ordinary circumstances he never did), and to offer an opinion, and stick to it, which he would have been otherwise too indolent to express. Pennicuick, who perceived everything that had the smallest reference to himself, understood this thoroughly, and to do him justice liked the other's society all the better for it.
He was just now enjoying it particularly, as he leant back in the centre compartment of the boat, with a very large cigar in his mouth, or in his fingers, according to whether he was the listener or the spokesman. In the prow were the few Chinese soldiers who formed their guard, commanded by Fu-chow their captain; in the stern were the Chinese boatmen, who worked the vessel in the usual fashion by sculls upon a pivot, and from which labour they never ceased. Except for the movement of the oars, and an
[Page 7]
occasional snore from the pigtailed warriors who were all asleep, there was no sound to interrupt the talk of the two friends.
‘They have been at it now for two whole days and nights,’ said Conway, ‘and are going on, as fresh as ever. It is perfectly marvellous.’
‘That men should snore so,’ put in Pennicuick gravely: ‘I quite agree with you.’
‘I mean that men should row so. I saw them at dinner-time eating rice with their chopsticks, which even now I find an almost impossible feat, and still rowing.’
‘They go deuced slow,’ observed the other, in a tone of depreciation.
‘Nevertheless, they will make a boat go farther in twenty-four hours than our best English watermen.’
‘Possibly: mules and camels will go farther than the horse, and yet the horse is the superior animal. The Chinaman is a brute inferior to all the three.’
‘That is not the opinion of those who are best acquainted with him.’
‘You mean that is not the opinion they express, my dear fellow. Men always praise the people they are compelled to have to do with, to excuse their own necessity. A step farther, and we find them cracking up the country they belong to, no matter how absurd may be the boast. You don't suppose any Scotchman, for example, who sings “Scots wha hae,” and all the rest of it, would be a Scotchman if he could help it?’
‘Upon my life, I think some of them would,’ said Conway, smiling; for it was well known that Pennicuick was himself of Scotch descent.
[Page 8]
‘No, no; there are no mad Scotchmen. Now these Chinese are all mad; and their madness takes the most contemptible form, that of imbecility. They are like men in their second childhood, when they are like men at all. You will tell me they invented gunpowder—though I believe it was nothing but gunpowder tea—but what use do they make of it, except to fill crackers wherewith to please their gods? you will also tell me they invented printing, which however nobody, including themselves, has yet been able to read. What has come of all this early ingenuity? They are like precocious children with immense heads, from which sanguine persons augur intelligence, but which turns out to be water on the brain. It is astonishing to me that a man of your intelligence does not see through the shallow motives which induce folks to preach up barbarism all over the world. A man goes to St. Petersburg, and because he finds the nobles and the military talking French—which is a positive necessity of the case—avers that it is a second Paris.’
‘You think that Paris, then, is the focus of civilisation, do you?’ answered Conway, who was busy pencilling in his sketchbook a tall bridge, in a mulberry plantation, through which they were about to slide.
‘Certainly not: the man who says that is only not quite such a fool as the other. The civilisation of Paris is but skin-deep. It is, I grant, the Paradise of the Cheap Tripper; but its very luxuries and pleasures—which are its real attractions—can all be procured in London by one who knows where to look, and can afford to pay for them. Even in vice, of which it flatters itself it has the monopoly, it is by no means without rivals.’
‘You speak with authority, no doubt,’ said Conway drily.
[Page 9]
‘Of course; experto crede . I was about to say that your Chinese, for example, run the Parisians very close in this respect— in the drawing of iniquity with a cart-rope; which I remark is tacitly taken, if not absolutely instanced by observers, as a proof of their civilisation.’
‘They are certainly most abominably vicious, and, what is worse, inordinately cruel,’ assented Conway.
‘The two things are not so far apart as is supposed,’ observed Pennicuick with the air of a philosopher. ‘Do you remember the prison where we saw the Englishman convicted of half-a-dozen brutal murders, and yet pitied him?’
‘Can I ever forget it?’ answered Conway with a quick shudder.
‘Do you remember the prisoners clenched together by a nail through their hands, because there happened to be a deficiency of handcuffs; and the wretch that was starved to death in the cangue , with his fellow-countrymen keeping guard over him and enjoying it: how even the best off among them clamoured to us like wild beasts, to give them food?’
‘Pray desist, Pennicuick,’ cried the other, with a movement of disgust. ‘Why do you dwell upon such hideous things?’
‘Because I hate cant, and more especially in the mouth of an honest man. If these wretches'—he jerked his left hand to the prow, and then to the stern—‘are to be called human, so much the worse for humanity.’
‘Gaolers and prisoners do not make a nation, Pennicuick. Yonder boatmen are good fellows enough, I dare say, and for that matter the soldiers too: they work for their families, love their wives and children, and though, as you say, like babies, they cry when you strike them, are not all cowards. I think Fu-chow
[Page 10]
yonder, for example, behaved very pluckily—and you must allow me to add very properly—when you chucked his daughter under the chin yesterday.’
‘How the deuce was I to know it was his daughter?’ enquired the other sullenly.
‘I don't think that is quite the point; and though, since you say so, I am bound to believe you meant no offence, the man was bound to resent it.’
‘Still, but for you, it would have been unlucky for the man,’ answered Pennicuick grimly; ‘for I should certainly have wiped him out. There would have been three hundred and fifty millions of Celestials minus one by this time.’
‘Then that would have been unlucky for you, my friend, for there would certainly have been two Englishmen minus one, or perhaps we should both have been wiped out. As it is, you have made the man your enemy, which under the circumstances— especially as he is a nephew of a Mandarin—is, to say the least of it, injudicious.’
‘I didn't know he was the nephew of a Mandarin,’ said Pennicuick, in a tone of mock penitence. ‘I have a very great regard for the Mandarins. Since Humbug must be King, let us revere his High-priest. I don't think anything ever tickled me so much as seeing that high functionary at Yang-chin “saving the sun” during the eclipse. His capers, and his incense; his prostrations, and his knocking his hairless head upon the ground nine times, all to preserve the great source of light from being devoured by a monster, was a waste of energy which really bordered on the sublime. The ceremony has moreover the immense advantage over the proceedings of nature that it is always completely successful.
[Page 11]
These “crocks” indeed never own themselves beaten. When they pray for fine weather, and it doesn't come, they put their gods out in the rain to see how they like it: whereas our archbishops and bishops, with a total absence of spirit, go on praying, till (very literally) “all's blue,” and adopt no measure of retaliation whatever. I am afraid, however, I am shocking your prejudices. You are a believer in the popular superstition?’
‘I am not a disbeliever in it,’ answered Conway gravely.
‘Is it possible? Then even these “crocks” have the advantage over you. They have no apprehension that after their lives here are ended—with its prisons, and cangues , and tyranny of all kinds —they are doomed to eternal misery. They have no fear of death whatever: any man who is condemned to die can for a five- pound note—and another to “square” the Mandarin—get some one else to die for him. I have seen such a substitute kneel down, with a cigarette in his mouth, for the executioner to strike his head off.’
‘I should be no more afraid to die than he, Pennicuick,’ answered Conway slowly.
‘Physically, of course not: you have given your proofs to the contrary, my good fellow. But psychologically you would imagine you ran a risk.’
‘Perhaps: yet, on my word,’ answered Conway, ‘but for my wife and Nelly, I would almost chance it. They wouldn't miss my company, it's true,’ added he bitterly; ‘but, you see, I can't afford to die just yet, for their sakes.’
‘Come, come, Conway: you must not talk like that. You are a young man still: younger than I. There are years of life before you yet: and where there's life there's hope; the chances of promotion, a stroke of luck at the races—’
[Page 12]
‘You said you hated cant, just now,’ interrupted Conway. ‘I entertain a similar dislike. Let us drop this subject.’
‘By all means. And let us also drop asleep if we can. It must be nearly morning. Good night, old fellow.’
‘Good night,’ answered Conway gently.
In a few minutes his companion had his wish: the moonlight glinted in upon his massive features, firmer and sterner than ever in their repose. But Conway slept not. He continued to gaze dreamily forth, on bridge and joss-house; on the distant hills covered with juniper and pine; on the plantations with their running streams, half natural, half artificial, that fringed the banks. But though he saw them with his outward eyes he recked not of them. His thoughts were far away, and it was long before slumber visited him. Even then he did not sleep for long. His dreams were weird and monstrous; they pictured him, with his present companion, sailing up a river, but no in China: they were in Egypt on the Nile, where indeed he had once been. An immense crocodile had clambered into their boat, and opened its mouth to swallow Pennicuick; he would have struck at it to aid his friend, but the creature turned and spoke: ‘Beware, rash man; I am the sacred Dragon of China;’ and the next instant his jaws had closed upon his victim with a horrid clash. The noise awoke him with a start: it was broad daylight; his companion was sleeping tranquilly upon the opposite bench, unconscious as it seemed even of dreams; but another face was in the little cabin, projected over the bunk that divided it from the forepart of the vessel, and peering between the curtains above it: a ruddy, hairless face, with twinkling eyes that ordinarily expressed good humour, but which now, fierce and glittering, fixed themselves on Pennicuick's face with
[Page 13]
a look of fiendish malice. Presently a hand was thrust noiselessly through the curtains, and touched a bruise upon the ruddy face; it was but a momentary action, but the pantomime was perfect: what it said was, ‘White devil, you shall suffer for this!’ so menacing was the expression indeed that, fearing an immediate onslaught on his friend, Conway leapt to his feet. In that instant the face had withdrawn like a flash of lightning. When Conway in his turn looked into the next compartment, the half-dozen soldiers who were his servants were all sunk in slumber, while to all appearance Fu-chow, their captain, was as fast asleep as the rest. So perfect indeed was the simulation of repose—if simulation it was—that Conway doubted whether his senses had not deceived him; whether the alligator of the Nile and the menacing face of Fu-chow had not been part and parcel of the same vision. But if so, it was curious that he should have seen the man point to his cheek, where the effects of the blow by which Pennicuick had felled him on the previous day were still plainly visible.
Upon the whole, Conway judged it best to make no stir about the matter.
[Page 14]
CHAPTER II. A BREEZE IN THE BOAT. The morning was a superb one even for spring-time in China, which, unlike that of India, (which has been well described as a hot winter,) or the same cheerless season in England, is like the spring of the Poets. Moreover, it is not a liar pretending to be the herald of summer, and suddenly throwing off the mask in a snow-storm. It is bright and fresh and genial; the air, though cool, being singularly soft; while the green of the foliage and herbage is beyond measure beautiful. The flower-beds also, from being, as botanists tell us, very prominently developed in autumn, burst into bloom at the first dawn of spring, so that the jessamine (which grows in great abundance in the district of which we speak) puts forth its yellow even above the snow. No snow, however, save upon the distant hill-tops, was visible to Conway's eyes that morning; the whole earth blushed like a garden, and made the air one perfume. Lilacs and pink Judas-trees grew luxuriantly upon the banks; and out-of-doors, in front of the gay little country houses, were rows of striped camellias. Most beautiful of all, perhaps, were the trees like almond-trees, but bearing gorgeous double blossoms as large as roses, which covered the country as plenteously as May hawthorn in England—and would in time become peaches. Although,
[Page 15]
as we have said, there was no snow in the valleys, immense banks of azaleas supplied its place to the ravished eye, while, lest this prodigal show of blossom should still fail to give an idea of nature's wealth, the exquisite wild rose hung in festoons, as though it were some gala day, from every tree. In Arthur Conway the eye was still alive to natural beauties, but the soul, which had once also been alive to them, was dead. For however matters may be with us in another world, in this one the soul is, alas! with most of us, the first of our attributes to die. As we grow old, its sensations become more and more difficult to excite, and if trouble or disappointment have laid heavy hands upon us, this happens early— sometimes ere middle age. What are sights and smells, nay, all the treasures of nature, to one whose mind is occupied with regrets for the past, or with anxieties for the future? There was even a sort of sadness for the present spectator in all this splendour, because he felt the loss of that which would have made it glorious. As for Pennicuick, it was certainly not worth while to awaken him , to look at trees and flowers, which after all would be seen later in the day when he had had his sleep out. But presently the silent highway upon which they were journeying became alive with boats of all shapes and sizes, full of people, while the paved walks upon each side —or towing-path as it would be called in England, where horses are the only beasts of burden—grew almost as populous as the banks of Thames during the University Race. Then Conway awoke that student of humanity Ralph Pennicuick.
‘Good Heavens, what a lot of crocks!’ was his ejaculation ere he plunged his head and face into the canal—the only means of ablution that offered itself. ‘What is it all about, Connie?’
‘They are pilgrims bound for the shrine up yonder,’ explained
[Page 16]
Conway, pointing to a mountain in the foreground, up which a winding road led to a native temple.
‘They are deuced pretty pilgrims, some of them,’ observed Pennicuick, scanning approvingly the female occupants of the boats, which their superior speed (for they had several rowers) caused them to overtake one by one. The Celestial ladies, thus alluded to, hung their heads beneath the bold glance of the barbarian, and looked as though they had never been so stared at before: but directly the ‘white devils” boat had passed they broke out into a merry laugh, which seemed to imply that they had got over the shock, and even forgiven him. They were by no means in what in Europe is understood to be pilgrims' weeds: their dresses were silks and satins, and crapes of brightest colours, but especially blue. Sitting still, they looked like other women, but for their almond eyes; when they rose and disembarked, however, as many did, the manner in which they tottered across the plank from boat to bank was a spectacle which moved Pennicuick to cynical mirth.
‘Look at their tootsicums, Connie: their dear little toes all cramped together into a club-foot.’
‘Hush, Pen, hush. They know what makes you laugh; and it is no laughing matter for them, poor creatures. From six years of age their lives have been made miserable by this iron law of fashion.’
‘But why the deuce do they do it?’
‘Why do English ladies wear crinoline? There was an Empress of China named Tak-ki who had club-feet and set the fashion. It is, at all events, the only sign of caste in the country, which is surely creditable. The common people do not trouble themselves to go in for it: indeed, no heavy work can be done under such conditions.
[Page 17]
These ladies therefore, we may be sure, all belong to the genteel classes.’
‘It adds, if not a cubit, several inches to their stature,’ observed Pennicuick critically.
‘Yes: they all stand on tiptoe as it were, though their toes are turned under them. If they don't do it, they cannot aspire to marry into respectable or literary families.’
‘That “literary” and “respectable” should be convertible terms seems the most curious thing of all,’ remarked Pennicuick.
‘To us, no doubt: but this is the land of literature. The very printed character is held so sacred that Government makes arrangements for picking up all bits of paper, and even broken crockery that has letters upon it.’
‘You charm me more and more with every detail of this intelligent race, Connie. Is it true that ten thousand candidates voluntarily submit themselves at every season to a competitive examination?’
‘No doubt: the aspirants, too, are of all ages. I knew an old gentleman of eighty (he had been plucked a good many times, as you may guess) who went up to be examined from Shanghae last year, and died under the operation. He had to take up six books of Confucius.’
‘Capital name, Confucius,’ remarked Pennicuick drily. ‘Everything here tends in that direction. These hobbling women, these pigtailed men, whose ancestors knew so many things before we knew anything, but who still believe in—what is their god's name?’
‘Ay-tum-foo,’ interpolated Conway.
‘Just so, in a Tom-fool in a temple. The whole thing looks
[Page 18]
like an allegory, doesn't it?—the temple of Fame, or something, with its thousands of worshippers, winding up the toilsome path. I'm hanged if I don't think the very hill is out of perspective.’
The effect of the scene was really very curious, and gave an impression not wholly natural. The temple was perched upon the very top of the mountain; the paths were cut in zigzag with mathematical precision, and stiffness and formality everywhere pervaded the sacred scene.
‘I've seen it all somewhere before,’ continued Pennicuick, ‘but I can't tell where. Oh, now I've got it. It's like a blessed Valentine, only instead of the church there is the temple, and instead of the parson there is the priest, and instead of the Happy Couple there are these miserable sinners. Why should we not pay our respects to Ay-tom-fool, like the rest of them?’
‘By all means, if you like. I will tell Fu-chow to moor the boat.’
‘Do: and as you wish to propitiate the beggar, tell him also we are about to become converts to his religion.’
At the mention of his name by Conway, Captain Fu-chow had presented his flat round face between the curtains: it looked so innocent and so subservient—although out of China one might have thought the subservience a little over-done—that it was impossible to reconcile it with the look of malignant hate that it had worn—or had seemed to wear—an hour or so before.
‘Joss Chin-chin topside galow,’ said Conway. Fu-chow cast a rapid glance in the direction of the temple, and then towards Pennicuick.
‘Him talkey largey, talkey strong,’ replied he doubtfully.
[Page 19]
‘What is the pippin-faced idiot saying about me?’ enquired Pennicuick angrily. It was disagreeable to him to hear Chinese, because he could not understand it: but the Pidgeon English which Fu-chow insisted on talking even to Conway, who could speak the native tongue—just as one's French or German nurse will talk broken English in preference to her own language—was hateful to him.
‘Fu-chow is afraid of our going to the temple because you express yourself so strongly upon serious subjects, and generally with disrespect. He is quite right to be careful.’
‘Tell him I adore Tom-fool—or, at least, am about to do so— and will not breathe a word to his disadvantage; and when you have quieted his religious scruples, ask him about breakfast.’
‘Catchery some chow-chow, chop-chop,’ said Conway; whereupon Fu-chow nodded intelligently and withdrew.
‘Let us have the chops first, Connie,’ said Pennicuick, ‘and the chow-chow, which I suppose means fish, when he has caught it.’
‘“Chow-chow” is not fish, but food,’ explained Conway, laughing; ‘and “chop-chop” only means directly: by the time it is ready we shall be opposite the temple, and can drop the anchor.’
‘By jingo!’ exclaimed Pennicuick, pointing to the bank, along which some ladies and children were being carried, not in a palanquin, but in separate little baskets swung from a long bamboo.
‘That's a family equipage,’ explained Conway. ‘Young Milburn of ours says that when a Chinese woman is carried she is an air- plant; but when she walks she's orchid: he is the wit of the regiment.’
‘I congratulate the regiment,’ said Pennicuick drily; for, like
[Page 20]
many clever fellows, he did not much appreciate other people's jokes. ‘Confucius, look how they shake hands!’
Some Chinese neighbours on the bank were exchanging a morning greeting, which they accomplished by shaking their own hands. Each placed the fingers of one hand over the fist of the other, so that the thumbs met, and then, standing a few feet apart, raised his hands gently up and down in front of his breast.
‘Of course it looks ridiculous to us,’ said Conway. ‘But, on the other hand, they don't slobber one another like the French and Germans. The women do not even kiss the women.’
‘Then they are ignorant of the niceties of expression in hate and envy,’ observed Pennicuick. ‘To see a woman kiss a woman whom she doesn't like—and she generally doesn't—is the very height of civilisation. But here comes the chop-chop.’
‘Excuse me, it is the chow-chow,’ said Conway, laughing. ‘Here are fish, fowl, pork, and potato-rice. Veal and mutton are never seen, you know.’
‘Of course not, because you expect them. Take away these infernal chopsticks, will you!’
This last remark was addressed to the Chinese attendant to whose culinary skill they were indebted for the dainties he had just set before them; and it seemed to puzzle him immensely.
‘Too muchey curio,’ murmured he to Conway, who could use the chopsticks with some skill. ‘Too muchey bobbery: me plenty fear.’
‘What the deuce does the creature mean, Connie?’ the speaker's voice was so full of ire, that the ‘creature’ had bolted over the bunk like a deer.
‘He means that you are much too excited to be sane; that you
[Page 21]
are apt to kick up a row about nothing at all; and that your conduct is calculated to alarm all peaceable people. It seems to me that he has described your character very graphically.’
‘It seems to me that when I come to understand these graphic people's lingo, it will be the worse for them,’ said Pennicuick, sullenly.
‘Well, you had better wait till you get back to Shanghae—or, better still, to England—and then you can be as ill-natured as you please—with safety.’
‘I don't understand you, Conway. Are these miserable wretches all your clients, that I am bound to be on my best behaviour to them? I shall behave just as I please, with your good leave.’
‘Which you will not have.’
‘Why?’
‘Because you are sure to behave badly. You are a man of the world, if ever there was one; and yet you cannot put up with anyone's peculiarities but your own. We are come here to enjoy ourselves, not to get into any confounded row. If you mean to show temper about every little thing, I shall be sorry I agreed to come with you.’
Pennicuick swallowed something in his throat which, perhaps, was his temper, for his face at once lost its truculent expression.
‘I certainly had no intention of making myself disagreeable to you, my dear fellow. You ought to know me better.’
‘I quite understand that, Pennicuick; but, unfortunately, your making yourself disagreeable to others has, under the circumstances, a reflex action on myself. If you turn into ridicule, or put in bodily fear, every Celestial we chance to come across—we are likely to have a hot time of it.’
[Page 22]
‘I confess that I despise tomfoolery and detest extortion,’ observed Pennicuick curtly.
‘And yet you have sense enough to make allowances for the one and wealth enough to afford the other. You are not a missionary that you should be angry with these poor people because they worship Mumbo-Jumbo: and if Fu-chow does cheat you out of a thousand “cash,” it is after all only twopence halfpenny.’
To this Pennicuick answered not a word. The reply that came to the tip of his tongue was that it was all very well for Conway not to care about Fu-chow's little embezzlements, since it was not his purse that defrayed them: but he restrained himself. He knew very well, had the position of his companion and himself been reversed, that the other would have been freer with his purse- strings. Pennicuick spent large sums upon his pleasures, but not a shilling more than was necessary to make them completely enjoyable. He was careful with his money, if not absolutely close; and for this Conway, he knew, rather despised him. He did not understand, however, that his friend hated still more his brusque and bullying ways with the poor Celestials. He was himself a man absolutely indifferent to the feelings of his inferiors, and he did not comprehend that there are natures which resent slights and insults to the poor and dependent almost as much as if they were offered to themselves. Conway had his own faults, plenty of them: but they did not tend in the same direction as those of his companion, which after all were not so marked to others as they appeared to be in his eyes. Pennicuick was arrogant, and somewhat grudged expense; but he was neither a bully nor a miser. It would not have been just to call him cruel. But
[Page 23]
there was a certain grimness about him, not unmixed with humour, such as is commonly seen in the schoolboy ‘ere he grows to pity,’ and is an occasional attribute of hard and headstrong men who have good animal spirits.
[Page 24]
CHAPTER III. THE JOSS-HOUSE. There is one great virtue about the Chinese religion which, in addition to its amazing ludicrousness, makes it attractive to the outsider. It is, externally at least, always allied with the picturesque. They build their temples in the most lovely spots that can be selected, and, though their taste is tawdry, it would revolt at the downright ugliness and want of symmetry that distinguish our own Bethels. The temple of Ay-tum-foo, for example, was, as we have said, placed on a hill-top, commanding such exquisite scenery as well might lead human thought from nature up to nature's God. That it had quite a contrary effect upon the Chinese pilgrim was an idiosyncrasy. It led him to a certain point, namely the top of a hill—and then into the joss-house, at whose entrance gate sat a wooden lady about sixty feet high, with a perpetual smile upon her face, supposed to be provoked by the vanities of the world. Her august title was Mi-leh-fu (the Guardian); but as an immense pot of incense, to which every visitor contributed a stick or two, dispersed odours all around her, an irreverent spirit might have termed her Millefleurs. That was the name Ralph Pennicuick gave her, directly he had seen and sniffed. She was very handsomely painted and gilded, and had a hole between her
[Page 25]
shoulder-blades through which she was supplied with artificial entrails.
The Chinese, it is said, with reference to their indifference to human suffering, have no bowels; but that is not the case with their deities. The gods of the Buddhist Olympus are nothing without them, which are supposed to represent the living spirit; they generally consist of silver representations of the heart and other internal parts of the anatomy, with pearls and precious stones dropped in by the well-to-do pious; and during certain international troubles, the British officer, who has improved his mind by the study of native customs, has been known to reap the fruits of it, by taking advantage of the above circumstance. A primrose by a river's brim is to a very large class of persons but a yellow prim- rose; and a wooden idol covered with gold leaf has similarly nothing but his external charms to recommend him to the ignorant observer. But to minds less superficial, and given to look into things, he may turn up trumps.
Our two friends found little difficulty in reaching the presence of this goddess (who, after all, only kept the door of the temple) beyond the steepness of the ascent. The crowds of worshippers were much too bent upon their pious object to pay that attention to the strange visitors which is generally given to European strangers. For once, the natives excited far more interest in the latter than did the latter in them. The occasion, indeed, was a supreme one, being Buddha's birthday; and all the neighbourhood —or certainly every woman—the rich in sedans, the poor on foot, were on their way to do honour to his shrine. The broad paved paths were covered with them, so that progression was not easy; and especially since the more devout would suddenly prostrate themselves
[Page 26]
at every dozen paces, with the same consequences that follow the same feat of the clown in our pantomimes; if you were not very careful you fell over them. All the women had baskets containing candles, incense sticks about a foot long with a knob of sawdust paste at the top to make a respectable volume of smoke, and were provided with strings of cash—very ‘petty cash’ indeed—to buy prayers with of the priest. Each too, young or old, had a sort of alpenstock to help him up the hill. What was a much less pleasant sight was the swarm of beggars, with every form of disease, who besought the passengers to ‘do good deeds’ with a particular reference to their own case. The Englishmen were very lavish—Pennicuick, perhaps, from the recollection of his friend's remark upon his weakness in the direction of economy; for he disliked almsgiving on principle, and had a strong conviction that the sightless eyes, the swollen and maimed limbs, and even the deficiency of them, were all parts of a huge priestly imposture. The habit of indiscriminate charity is greatly insisted upon by the disciples of Buddha, and the generosity of the two strangers gained them much popularity, which a peep at the back of the brain of at least one of them would have considerably impaired. At the gate of the temple —and indeed for the last half-mile of the way up—stalls were erected for the sale of candles, joss sticks, and sycee paper, used in worship; and as it was shrewdly supposed that the ‘white devils’ were wanting even in these simplest elements of religion, they had been much importuned to buy them; and here again Pennicuick had done his duty.
‘Pray take notice of my exemplary conduct, Connie,’ observed he when they had reached the top of the hill; ‘and also that I have distributed at least fourpence among forty scoundrels.'
[Page 27]
‘Your behaviour is admirable, Pennicuick; but take care to keep it up in the temple.’ a hint that had been called forth by the abrupt transformation of Mi-leh-fu into Millefleurs.
‘She is the reverse of the proverb “All is not gold that glitters,” Connie,’ whispered Pennicuick, with reference to her interior; ‘for though she is but gold leaf outside, she has gold fruit within her. The first row you have with those crocks, you will come here to practise anatomy, I reckon.’
‘Hush, Pennicuick, hush: or some folks will be practising vivisection on you.’
A very unpleasant-looking priest, quite bald, and dreadfully burnt about his head—marks of great merit—was regarding his companion with an air which might or might not be Buddhist, but was certainly very unchristian. His duties were apparently similar to those of a verger, since his brethren were all actively engaged in their spiritual calling—that is to say, in chanting, in prostrations, in beating drums, and bells, and balls of wood, or in taking the petty cash from the ladies. In exchange for it they gave what may be called ‘drafts from Hades, payable to Bearer:’ the idea being that everybody who comes into the world has contracted debts during his previous transmigration, which will have to be settled (at compound interest) during the next, unless discharged in this, for which these self-appointed ecclesiastical commissioners kindly undertake to arrange. It is rather a less direct system than that of Peter's Pence, but has the same practical effect. Conway explained all these matters in a low voice to his companion, while maintaining a sufficiently reverent air.
‘Why do the women all hum the musical gamut,’ enquired Pennicuick, ‘“Do, re, mi, fa”?’
[Page 28]
‘Hush; it is nothing of the kind. They are saying “Na mi o mi tah fuh,” which is their great shibboleth. These drafts the priests sell have had those excellent monosyllables chanted over them many thousand times: hence their extraordinary value.’
‘But what are they doing with those chopsticks, since they have no rice?’
‘They are not chopsticks: you will observe that they are rounded on one side and flat on the other. The fair petitioners chuck them into the air, in the hope that they will come down on the flat side, in which case their prayers will be granted; but as the rounded side is the heavier, the augury is generally the other way.’
‘Heads I lose, tails you win,’ commented Pennicuick.
‘Just so: the laws of gravitation are against the poor creatures. Here is a pilgrim with a better plan; in that hollow bamboo he has a bundle of sticks, each with a written character upon it, and he will be prosperous or the reverse, according to the stick that is first shaken out.’
‘I would practise that in the seclusion of my own apartments,’ observed Pennicuick; ‘and after a few goes at it, I'll bet a guinea I'd shake the right stick out first.’
‘Unfortunately, you don't know which is the right one. The priest interprets it for you; he has a sort of Fortune-telling book which gives the meaning of the lettered sticks, and, you see, these good people are not always satisfied with his decision. They ask their neighbours what they think about it, and whether the respected ecclesiastic may not have made some mistake.’
[Page 29]
‘They chatter worse than people used to do in church in my young days, unless it's ALL “Do, re, mi, fa”!’
‘You are right. They repeat, perhaps a thousand times over, their monosyllabic shibboleth, but continue to keep up a conversation nevertheless. “ Na mi o mi ta fuh . How is your good man? Do you like your new work? That girl's feet were not made so small without pinching: thank Heaven, our family were all born so. Na mi o mi ta fuh .”’
‘I can scarcely hear half you say,’ said Pennicuick. ‘What an infernal row those drums and bells make!’ besides the smaller instruments that kept up a perpetual concert within the building, an immense drum was being struck at intervals outside the temple, as outside our booths in the old Fair times.
‘The bells are said to be finer than any we have in England, remarked Conway.
‘Very likely: I am sure I wish they were in England: then we should have them mellowed by distance: as it is, I believe the drum of my ear has given way. I also find some difficulty in breathing.’
‘It is only the clouds of incense. We have the same thing in Europe in our Roman Catholic churches.’
‘Yes, but as I am never in them that doesn't concern me.—By gad, there's a sensible fellow!’
‘Good Heavens, what are you going to do, Pennicuick?’
‘I am going to have a cigar. This excellent man has just lit his pipe at yonder altar—I never knew the use of candles there before; and I mean to do the same.’
The next moment Pennicuick had suited the action to the word; and without, as it seemed, exciting much comment. The Chinese
[Page 30]
religion is a curious mixture of devotion and irreverence, and a man will prostrate himself flat before an idol, and then light a pipe at his taper.
‘Now they may make what noises and smells they like,’ said Pennicuick triumphantly. ‘I have got my consoler. You may depend upon it, if folks were allowed to smoke in church in England, it would set our respectable Establishment on its legs again. The men would go—because with a cigar one could stand even a sermon—and then of course the women would go even more than ever. When I get home, I mean to go into Parliament upon that platform.’
His tobacco, for which he had been craving—for to make such a man give up, or even postpone, an accustomed enjoyment is to do him a grievous wrong—put Pennicuick in high good humour. If he took no great interest in the proceedings around him, he showed no signs of boredom. Some things even amused him. One very pious pilgrim struck his forehead upon the paved floor of the temple no fewer than nine times, each time causing a distinct reverberation, notwithstanding the drums.
‘Why don't he go on?’ enquired our cynic of his friend. ‘Has he cracked it?’
‘No, no. You are most grossly ignorant of the rudiments of his religion. Nine is a sacred number. Nine prostrations, nine ablutions, nine repetitions of a formula, and so on, are necessary for everything important. You have to burn nine joss sticks, for example, before you can see, even with the eye of faith, the sacred Shay-le.’
‘Who is he?’
‘It is not a “he” at all. It is one of the most precious relics
[Page 31]
of Buddha, and supposed to be what the poets call one of the “pearls that adorn the brow of labour:” in other words, a drop of his perspiration.’
‘Nonsense, you must be joking. This is too absurd even for Buddha.’
‘I am perfectly serious: the Buddhists say that there are 84,000 pores in a man's body, and that after transmigration he leaves behind 84,000 particles of dust. In the case of Buddha, by resisting evil and reverting to truth, he left instead 84,000 relics “as hard and as bright as diamonds.” Of these, many have disappeared, but there is one in this very temple of Ay-tum-foo, said to emit the most brilliant colours, if you only look at it in the right light—that is, from a devotional point of view.’
‘Let us see it, by all means,’ cried Pennicuick.
‘That is quite out of the question. No Christian need apply, I do assure you.’
‘You may depend upon it, you can see it, like any other exhibition, Connie, if you choose to pay the entrance-fee.’
‘I know that one of the preliminaries is to burn nine sticks of incense to Buddha.’
‘I will burn ten as soon as look at him—I mean, rather than not look at his relic,’ exclaimed Pennicuick enthusiastically.
‘Well, I confess I shouldn't like to do that,’ answered the other gravely.
‘Why not? Your scruples astound me. For my part, I should have been a universal worshipper—a Polytheist—if anything could be got by it. I have gone in for one or two religions. I shall never forget confessing to a good priest at Rome—just to see what it was like, you know; by jingo, I astonished him. All
[Page 32]
the hair on his head stood up, till his tonsure looked like a pool in a forest. I have not the least objection to being a Buddhist, or anything else, for half an hour. Indeed, it is just possible— everything is possible—that Buddha may be worth cultivating. I always thought the gentleman who took off his hat to the fallen statue of Jupiter a very sagacious fellow. “If your turn ever comes round again, Mr. Jove, please to remember this salute.”— Where is this blessed relic?’
‘It is kept in the shrine at the back of the temple, and can only be seen on application to the high-priest. You might as well ask to see His Celestial Majesty the Son of Heaven himself. Let us come into the garden.’
The garden of a Chinese temple is always worth a visit. If the natives of the Flowery Land can boast of no other art, they excel in that of landscape gardening. They select as picturesque a spot as they can, and then improve it after their fashion, which, whatever its faults, never interferes with the beauties of nature. These they preserve, while adding those of art—grottoes, bridges, fancy ruins, and pagodas. Their taste for crowding every variety of picturesque object into a small space reminds one (though, it must be allowed, with a difference) of the pictures of Claude. It also reminds the Englishman—or at least it reminded Pennicuick— of the place in which the natives of London are adjured per advertisement, throughout the summer, to pass a Happy Day, namely, Rosherville Gardens.
‘It's deuced like Rosherville, is it not, Connie?’
‘Very much,’ said Conway, laughing; ‘a sort of cross between the scenery of that establishment and the willow-pattern plate.’
The grounds were extensive, and made to appear much more
[Page 33]
so by the manner in which they were laid out. You walked up and down, and round and round, and sometimes through and through (where there were caverns) without much progression. Presently, towards the rear of the temple, the two friends came upon a wooden edifice, which contained a fasting monk.
‘This is the Hermit of Cremorne,’ observed Pennicuick.
‘Hush, hush! he is a most sacred personage,’ whispered Conway. ‘He has been in these close quarters for nearly three years; and observe how uncomfortable they are. These long nails driven through the planks project on the inside, to prevent him leaning against the walls. For every thousand cash paid by any pilgrim a nail is taken out, and the old gentleman is made a little more easy. There have been a good many removed to-day, you may be sure.’
The Englishmen came up to the little pigeon-hole through which the inmate of this dog-kennel received the contributions of the pious, and likewise his scanty supplies of food, and looked in. The saint was seated tailor-fashion on a board, the upper part of his body being upright as an idol. There was a shelf before him with some books—works, probably, of the eternal Confucius. Not only did the pleasures of literature still remain to him—he was taking snuff. With these trifling exceptions, however, he was supposed to be quite dead to the vanities of the world. His face was blank and cadaverous; his long black hair, parted in the middle, flowed down to his waist; his nails, also, were very long and very black. He had been in his present place of residence for nearly three years, the full time appointed for his voluntary imprisonment; but he showed no signs of ‘breaking up and going
[Page 34]
away,’ at least in its holiday sense. He looked very much like breaking up from a physical point of view.
‘This is the biggest fool I have seen yet,’ observed Pennicuick, critically. ‘Do you think he would have a cigar?’ the scene was exactly such as one sees every day in the monkey-house in the Zoological Gardens.
‘I don't think you'd better try him,’ said Conway; ‘he may take it as an insult, and ring his alarm bell.’ a huge bell was just outside his cell, which he could sound by pushing a piece of wood against it, that was thrust through a hole for that purpose.
‘I didn't see his bell,’ said Pennicuick; ‘that's clearly an article of luxury. If he rings for everything he wants, where is his merit?’
‘He never rings for hot water for shaving—nor, to look at him, for any other purpose,’ observed Conway, always maintaining a respectful air. ‘I think you'd better let him be.’
‘No, no: he shall have a cigar. He takes snuff, therefore he can't belong to the Anti-Tobacco Association. Hi, old gentleman! Have a weed?’
The ascetic lifted his heavy eyes, from which all meaning seemed to be expelled, and then protruded a shrivelled hand, into which Pennicuick dropped a cigar. The next instant he was immersed in pious meditation.
‘I apologise,’ observed Pennicuick to this inanimate object; ‘you are not such a fool as you look; though that is not a high compliment, after all. I would have given five pounds, Connie,’ added he, grimly, as they pursued their way, ‘if that cigar had been a Surprise one.’
‘What do you mean by a Surprise Cigar?’
[Page 35]
‘One of those with a cracker in it, that goes off when you are half way through it. Imagine the effect upon a pious ascetic who has never stirred out of a box like that for three years, or been accustomed to any sensation beyond what is covered by a pinch of snuff.’
‘The effect upon us, also, would be rather serious,’ observed Conway: ‘our lives would not be worth an hour's purchase.’
‘I don't believe a word of it. I think it would all be put down to Buddha, and would give that old gentleman—if he lived through it—a higher reputation with the faithful than ever.’
‘Well, I am glad you were not in a position to try the experiment. Come, we have got to the end of our tether; there is nothing more to be seen, and it is time to get back to the boat and our dinner.’
‘Very good: but what is that queer-shaped house standing all alone, at the back of everything, with the gentleman in the yellow robe apparently keeping guard over it?’
‘Oh, that is the sanctum sanctorum , in which the Shay-le, or blessed relic of Buddha, is kept. It is so sacred, you see, that nobody comes near it.’
‘I mean to see it,’ said Pennicuick, confidently; ‘so here goes.’
‘Good Heavens, man, it's the chief-priest himself.’ but before he had finished his sentence, Pennicuick had already presented himself before that august individual.
[Page 36]
CHAPTER IV. THE SHAY-LE. It was Arthur Conway's habit on touching foreign soil to begin to make himself acquainted as far as possible with the language of its inhabitants, and he had given all the greater attention to the Chinese tongue on account of its supreme difficulty; perhaps he now knew nearly as much about it as an Englishman expensively educated at one of our public schools knows of the Continental languages when he returns from his first tour; he could ask a few questions—after the fashion of the dialogue-books—and procure for himself the necessaries of life, and he could understand what was said to him pretty well. He exceedingly disapproved of his friend's having anything to say—or rather to gesticulate—to the high-priest of Ay-tum-foo, but he was too loyal to leave him in the lurch; and therefore he hastened to the spot where that enormously important ecclesiastic and his friend were by this time standing together; the former bowing slightly in the urbane national manner, and the latter pronouncing the word ‘Shay-le, Shay-le,’ in as insinuating a tone as he could compass.
There is always this difficulty in dealing with the Buddhist priest (which cynics may say is not wholly confined to ecclesiastics of that persuasion), namely, that although he may be one of the most
[Page 37]
venerable and pious of human beings, it may also happen that he may be very much the reverse of all this, and indeed a most superlative scoundrel. The reason of this is that some persons embrace the sacred profession from the most secular of reasons. The completely shaven head, the burns and bruises that are generally to be seen sprinkled over them in plentiful patches, and the austerity which distinguishes their lives and keeps them apart from other men, offer great opportunities for disguise. So that before now very considerable criminals have escaped punishment, and even lived for the rest of their lives in the odour of sanctity, by assuming the vows and habit of the priesthood. Imagine the case of one's meeting the Archbishop of Canterbury, and not being quite sure that his Grace of Lambeth had not at one time experienced the gaol discipline o neighbouring Millbank. However, the probability of the high- priest of Ay-tum-foo's being all that he should be was of course far greater than the reverse: though the fact of his having a finger or two burnt off (in excess of zeal), as well as his other self-inflicted injuries, was perhaps a suspicious circumstance: (‘for being so particular religious, why that, you see, puts persons on their guard;’) he had a sort of beadle's mace in one hand, and a human skull in the other, and in his gown of yellow silk looked altogether a remarkable object
‘Lawya-lawya,’ commenced Conway, not of course that this individual was a lawyer, but because that is the mode of address used to a high-priest; ‘we are two Englishmen who have come from far to see this famous temple.’ here Conway had unconsciously placed the good priest in a position of much embarrassment, for the polite way of the Chinese is to underrate anything of their own, and to exaggerate the possessions of their interlocutor. If
[Page 38]
the temple had been the priest's private mansion he would, for example, have answered, ‘You have given your honourable selves unnecessary trouble in coming to see my wretched hovel.’ But as it was the house of his god he could scarcely speak of it in a depreciatory way. Upon the whole he judged it better to take a general view of matters.
‘After all, oh Christians, your religion and that of Buddha are alike as melons.’
Conway translated this would-be compliment to his friend, who took it in a more literal sense than the good priest had probably intended.
‘Quite right: tell him he's a very sensible fellow, and that I quite agree with him. And then ask him to show us the relic.’ Conway accomplished this with much delicacy and caution, but the high-priest lifted up both staff and skull in shocked negation. Such a proposition was impossible: even his own people, as the Englishman might have observed, had not ventured within the sacred precincts of the Shay-le, which had been exhibited to the Faithful at sunrise that morning, positively for the last time until next feast-day. The precious casket which contained it could never be opened without an act of adoration in the form of a burnt offering; and even if it were, it could not be seen by white devils—he apologised for having no other name for them—because it was only visible to the eye of Faith.
‘Look here, Connie: I mean to see it,’ persisted Pennicuick. ‘Tell the old beggar that I am a convert to the Buddhist faith. Here are my joss sticks, which I am prepared to sacrifice as the law directs: it will be a bonâ-fide transaction. And, I say, just
[Page 39]
add that I should like to give five pounds or so to the keeper of the shrine.’
This audacious speech Conway translated as insinuatingly as his slender knowledge of Chinese enabled him to do, and, much to his surprise, the priest took it in good part. Five English pounds represent a very considerable sum in the Flowery Land, and no doubt he recalled to mind how much could be done with them to the glory of Buddha. In the great hall of gods, adjacent to the temple, there was more than one deity from whom very literally the gilt was a good deal rubbed off; and who had scarcely enough in his inside to maintain the ‘vital principle,’ or, as we say, to keep body and soul together. There is nothing so distressing to a high-priest—wounding at once his amour-propre and his esprit de corps —as to see his gods out of repair. Of course there was a difficulty as to the genuine adhesion of Mr. Ralph Pennicuick to Buddhism; the unyielding and somewhat contemptuous expression of his countenance did not, it must be confessed, impress one with the idea of a devotee; but there he was, at all events, a professing believer, with one of his joss sticks already lighted; and does not Confucius himself lay it down as an axiom that we are to believe in a man's professions until they have been shown to be false? Moreover, at this supreme moment, Pennicuick produced his purse, which, being of network, showed the glint of sovereigns.
‘Heaven forbid,’ said the good priest, ‘that I should quench any man's pious zeal.’ And with a grave inclination of his head he led the way to the little bell-shaped edifice in which the precious Shay-le was deposited. Conway remained where he stood, not altogether at his ease. Without having the good nature that belongs to high spirits, his friend had a turn for mischief, which in his
[Page 40]
younger days had led him into some serious scrapes, and which even now occasionally exhibited itself; his remark about the ‘surprise cigar’ showed the way his thoughts had been tending, and it was just possible that he designed to play some absurd trick upon the high-priest to recompense himself for having let the hermit slip so easily through his fingers. Above all it puzzled Conway to account for his friend's giving so large a sum to see a relic—things for which he always expressed the utmost contempt—unless he had some whim of his own to serve at the same time.
It was, therefore, with no slight sense of relief that after a few minutes he saw Pennicuick emerge from the shrine, and part company with the priest, apparently on the best of terms.
‘Well, Penn, and what was it? Or are you bound to secresy upon a subject so tremendous?’ enquired Conway, laughing.
‘My dear fellow, there are a dozen of them, and all rubbish, was his friend's reply. ‘Let us get home, for I am downright sick of Buddha and all his works.’
There was something strange in the speaker's manner that convinced his hearer that something had happened within the last few minutes of an unexpected or surprising kind. If the other had had the least grain of superstition in him, Conway might have even supposed that he had been impressed by some seemingly supernatural incident; so grave and serious was his air. However, after a few minutes, Pennicuick proceeded to tell what had happened without further importunity; and as it certainly appeared that he had got very little for his five pounds, perhaps, thought Conway, it was that which made him look so serious.
What Pennicuick had seen at the shrine of Ay-tum-foo appeared to have been much the same as is seen at similar institutions nearer
[Page 41]
home: the small bones of a saint or two, and even the shavings of a toe-nail of Huang Ing Huk, the goddess of mercy; which is all that is left of her in China.
‘But you surely saw the Shay-le, the relic of Buddha?’ observed Conway.
‘Well, I don't know whether I did or not,’ answered the other drily. ‘The thing was in a small wooden pagoda, almost dropping to pieces with age, which the priest unlocked for me with every sign of reverence. I looked in and understood him to say that the thing lay at the bottom; I saw nothing for some time, and then—whether it was fancy or not, I will not swear—I did seem to see something sparkling. It may have been a bit of glass, or even the sparks from one's own eyes that are struck out from too much staring into darkness.’
‘I am afraid you are still a sceptic, Penn. The received opinion of the sacred Shay-le is that it emits coloured light, and that no fire will burn nor diamond-headed hammer bruise it. It is also sometimes surrounded by a halo “as big as a cart-wheel.”’
‘The last was not the case to-day, I will positively swear,’ said Pennicuick: ‘and as for the rest of the Shay-le's attributes, I will take your word for them.’ And no more was said about the matter.
The two friends dined in the boat, as usual, and afterwards some cormorant-fishing was got up for their delectation. The rivers, canals, and even the pools in China are alive with fish. Nothing is more common than to see a native catching them with his hands, not as we do when tickling trout, with infinite pains and caution, but quite otherwise. He strikes the water sharply, the noise and shock of which cause the fish to take refuge in the mud, where he
[Page 42]
feels them with his feet, and then dives down after them. While the boat of the Englishmen lay at anchor, their rowers had provided them with a fish course by this simple means; but the cormorant business was really a high-class performance. In the present case, there were no fewer than a dozen of these birds, which at a word from their master left the small craft that carried them, and spread themselves over the canal, the sea-green eyes of each fixed at once upon its finny prey, and hardly had they cloven the water than they reappeared with the prize in their sharp notched bills. Most curious of all, if the fish was too large for one to convey to his master, the others came to his assistance, and captured it by their united efforts. A collar of straw, carefully arranged round the upper part of the neck, prevented the thing, as the gossips say, ‘from going any farther,’ and ensured his returns to the proprietor.
The sport was amusing even to Conway who had seen it before, while its ingenuity extorted Pennicuick's admiration.
‘I am glad you find something to praise in China at last,’ said Conway.
‘I admire its cormorants, my dear fellow: which seem to be very numerous.’
‘Still, however clever you allow the birds to be, their masters who taught them must have a still larger share of credit. Besides, it is not so very clever to fish for other people, with a ring round your neck which prevents your deriving any advantage from your own exertions.’
‘How can you talk such nonsense, Connie, with the recollection of what we have seen to-day so fresh in your mind? The relations between priest and people are here accurately symbolised, except that the situation is reversed. The priests are the cormorants who
[Page 43]
compel the people to fish for them, with a ring—or a rope—round their necks.’
‘It seems to me you are still sore at having spent those five pounds upon the representative of Ay-tum-foo,’ said Conway slily. ‘I don't think you got much for your money.’
‘That's true,’ said Pennicuick, with a grim smile.
‘Yet, upon my life, I believe you got more than you bargained for, Penn, up yonder.’ And Conway pointed to the distant hill crowned by the temple. ‘Did they make you a real Buddhist after some unpleasant form of initiation such as is said to prevail among Freemasons?’
‘Perhaps,’ said Pennicuick indifferently: ‘also perhaps not.’
‘Shall we stay where we are for the night or move along, Penn?’ enquired his companion presently. ‘The Mandarin to whom I have got the letter of introduction lives about six miles up stream, and it is too late—except for official visits—to make our call upon him. It would be better therefore to stay here, and go on in the morning, especially as all the fun is to come over again at sunrise tomorrow---’
‘What fun?’ interrupted Pennicuick.
‘Why, the pilgrimage to the temple, and your sacred Shay-le.’
‘Why, that old priest in yellow said it would not be shown till the next feast-day?’ exclaimed Pennicuick.
‘Yes, but when he said that, his reverence had not given way to your solicitations; moreover, to-morrow is a feast-day, though one of less importance than to-day. But you seem to be tired of it all, and rather in a hurry to get away. Of course we can go on to-night if you please.’
‘I don't care twopence whether we do or not,’ answered Pennicuick.
[Page 44]
There was a look of doggedness, almost of defiance, in his tone, that annoyed Conway, and not the less because it was wholly unaccountable. He was not a man to put up with another's caprices or sullenness.
‘I care as little as you do. We will stay here then,’ he answered curtly.
The reply seemed of small consequence enough; but the value of words, like that of pictures, is sometimes nought at first, and afterwards turns out to be priceless. In this case that ‘We will stay here then’ of Arthur Conway's proved a Sentence of Death.
Nothing, however, could be more peaceful, or less indicative of evil, than the scene wherein it was spoken. The pilgrims had all departed, leaving no tokens of their presence on land or water. The priests were at their solitary vespers, or perhaps counting the ‘cash’ that had been received during the day. The beggars had shrunk away into clefts and caves, to refresh themselves with sleep for the resumption of operations on the morrow. The soldiers and boatmen were either asleep or silently smoking: or perhaps both: for though there is a theory in Europe that people do not enjoy tobacco in the dark or with their eyes shut, it does not hold good in China. The very birds of the air were silent. Conway got out his desk and began to write at the little table.
‘Hullo, Connie? You are not going to keep a journal surely?’
‘No. I am writing home.’
‘Oh dear! What an excellent husband!’ remarked Pennicuick. There was a touch of satire in the tone that did not escape the
[Page 45]
other's ears. The colour came into his cheek, as he answered coldly, ‘I am writing to Nelly.’
‘There can be no great hurry about it, my dear fellow, as we shall not be back at Shanghae for six weeks.’
‘There may be some opportunity of sending a letter, and I make a point of writing by every mail.’
‘You astonish me. What the deuce do you find to say?’
‘To my daughter? Well; I tell her everything that I think will interest her which I hear or see.’
‘Good Heavens! I think I see myself writing in the same style to Raymond. “China is a large and populous country: it is governed by an Emperor called the Son of Heaven. The amount of tea drunk in Shanghae alone is estimated at a million pounds.” He would not much care for that, I think. My own style is, “Dear Ray,—Shall be home in August or thereabouts. In the mean time, draw on me as usual.” Why, you have not seen your Nelly for these ten years.’
‘No; and it may be ten years more before I do see her. It is the more necessary therefore to do all I can to keep my memory green with her.’
‘I see.’
Nothing more was said. Conway went on with his letter, which occupied him for a long time; when he had finished—or rather, when he had written it up to the latest date, for it was never destined to be finished—he looked up, and saw by the dull light of the cabin lamp that his friend had fallen asleep. Then he turned in himself, and was soon sunk in slumber.
But Pennicuick was only feigning sleep. When he found himself no longer under the observation of his friend, he took something
[Page 46]
out of his breast pocket, and, softly rising, held it beneath the rays of the lamp. It was a large and solid piece of glass or crystal cut into facets, and resembled a drop from a chandelier. It emitted a light so bright and sparkling that one almost expected it to be accompanied with sound. There was a sound, though it did not come from this object; it was like the faint movement of a ring that slides upon a bar. Pennicuick's face darkened in an instant, then grew very ‘set’ and hard; he dropped his right hand noiselessly into his shooting-jacket pocket, and moved towards the curtains that separated the cabin from the front compartment. He parted them softly with the finger that still held the piece of crystal, and looked forth with keen and steadfast eyes. Beneath him lay six sleeping men; the five soldiers, and their commander Fu-chow. It was the same scene as that which Conway had looked upon on the morning of that very day, and with the like suspicion. Only there had not been such menace in his eyes as now gleamed from those of his friend.
They took in the whole six soldiers at a glance, but fixed themselves on Fu-chow. The round-faced captain lay nearest to him; his pig-tail was towards him; his face, half averted, lay on its pillow- mat, to all appearance in sound sleep. The others were snoring, however, and this man was not. Pennicuick drew his hand up out of his pocket and with it a six-barrelled revolver. The moonlight shone brightly on the steel, as he levelled it at the head of Fu-chow.
Then on the silence broke sharply a sudden click. No one moved, and therefore, reasoned Pennicuick, no one heard it.
If Fu-chow had heard, with the muzzle of that deadly weapon within two feet of him, he must surely have made some movement
[Page 47]
—which in that case would have been the last he would have ever made. But Fu-chow lay like a log, or an apple branch with one great round fruit upon it, the cheeks of which retained their red. Then Pennicuick replaced his weapon in his pocket, dropped the curtain, and again fell to regarding the object in his left hand. He had now apparently new views respecting it, for he pushed aside the mat that at night filled the place of cabin window, and leant thoughtfully over the moonlit wave. Should he drop the crystal or should he not? It was heavy for its size—which was about that of one of the glass rests that are used at dinner tables to support the carver's knife and fork—and at the bottom of the canal, as had been shown that day by the fishermen, was a deep layer of mud into which it would quickly sink. He held it between his fingers with that intent, but at that moment the moon-beams struck upon it, and like steel on flint evoked a thousand sparkles; red, blue, and emerald green, they flashed on his admiring eyes.
‘It is not an opal,’ he murmured; ‘what the deuce is it? I will wear it, hidden, like an amulet, here in China; and when I get home to Pall Mall, I'll have it set for a scarf-pin. I wonder what the jeweller will say to it, and whether it is worth the five pounds.’
Though, as we have said, like a drop form a chandelier, this crystal had no hole through it; but there was a little ridge sunk round the middle, and about this Pennicuick wound a thread of silk, and suspended it round his neck, and next his skin. ‘It is like a charm that fools wear,’ he muttered to himself; ‘I wonder whether it will bring me good luck or bad.’ And then he too lay down and fell asleep.
[Page 48]
CHAPTER V. THE INFORMER. Different as the two Englishmen were in almost all particulars, they differed also in this, that Pennicuick, though he was much the stronger, and could keep awake night after night, if it were necessary, was a heavy sleeper; while Conway was a light one. The passing by of the first pilgrim on the paved towing-path the next morning awoke him, and he at once got up and looked about him. The first object his eyes rested on was Fu-chow, just stepping from the boat to shore.
‘Where are you going, captain?’
‘Topside-galow, much plenty walk before chow-chow.’
‘Not a bit of it; there is no time for going up hill. And as to chow-chow, we mean to take that with his Excellency the red-buttoned mandarin.’
He had produced his watch in corroboration of the first part of this statement, for an illustration is the best sort of language to all aliens; but the captain appealed to it as a witness on the other side.
One piecey hand look plenty time for chin-chin.’
‘Yes; but the other hand says No. You can chin-chin here just as well as at that blessed temple, and in short you sha'n't go.
[Page 49]
‘Chop-chop,’ pleaded Fu-chow, and moved his legs like Mr. Payne of pantomimic celebrity, to express rapidity of movement. ‘One young man walkey, no step.’
‘I don't care how quick a young man can walk. We are going on with the boat at once.’
‘What is that dancing ape about?’ inquired Pennicuick, roused by the noise of the argument, and putting his head out of the shoreward cabin. Fu-chow skipped back into the boat with all the celerity of which he had just been boasting.
‘Oh, nothing,’ said Conway. ‘I am only telling him to move on, since we mean to breakfast with the mandarin.’
‘To be sure, with old red-button. He will give us “frogs and snails and puppy dogs' tails,” no doubt; but what is enlargement of theliver compared with that of the mind?’ Then, with a supercilious glance at the pilgrims: ‘So all this Ay-tum-foo tomfoolery is beginning again, I see. What surprises me is the egotism of these idiots in each imagining that he possesses a soul.’
‘Perhaps he does,’ said Conway drily.
‘Well, of course it is possible; but you must allow even in that case that it can't be possibly worth saving.’
Although it was almost certain that the mandarin to whom they had been recommended would presently ask them to breakfast (for, though by no means hospitable to strangers, the Chinese pay considerable attention to persons who have letters of introduction), the two Englishmen thought it prudent to take what is called a ‘summer oyster.’ Oysters are very plentiful in the Flowery Land in the proper season, and during the remainder of the year a substitute—thanks, we believe, to ‘barbarian’ ingenuity—has been discovered for them. The yolk of an egg is put into a wine-
[Page 50]
glass; a few drops of water and as many of vinegar are added, with salt and pepper. Then the recipient ‘shuts his eyes and opens his mouth,’ as in the nursery game of our childhood, and ‘Heaven sends him,’ or seems to send him, an oyster.
Pennicuick approved of this delicacy in his unenthusiastic manner, and appeared in better spirits than on the previous evening: he acknowledged that his temper had not been what it should have been on that occasion, which he attributed to being shut up in a horrid boat; and now that they were on their way again, he grew animated and full of talk. His quick eye roved hither and thither and found a theme for sprightly scorn wherever it fell; on the tea-farms that now began to sprinkle the banks, where every parasitic plant was ‘Twining’ 1 ; on the family tombs with their groups of pines or junipers (‘there's another hearse and feathers’); on the blocks of granite cut into forms of gigantic animals, in imitation, as he affirmed, of the antediluvian department of the gardens of the Crystal Palace; and on the pagodas, the idea of which he maintained was derived from Kew. Presently glancing nearer home, he noticed that the number of soldiers in attendance upon them was diminished.
‘There are but five men here, and there should be six,’ observed he in a quick tone of anger.
‘Fu-chow, how is this?’ inquired Conway, who as usual saw no reason for such excitement. It had happened more than once that some of their guards had got out and walked beside the boat.
Fu-chow seemed to think that this was the case now; for he gazed earnestly along the footpath, as if expecting to see the truant following them, ere he replied: ‘Man plenty dirtey, plenty wash.
‘He says the fellow has stopped to bathe,’ explained Conway.
[Page 51]
‘He is a liar,’ said Pennicuick grimly; ‘they never wash— You, sir, come here.’
‘Fu-chow came up close to the bunk that separated the two compartments, and stood face to face with his enemy. The contrast between the two men—typical as it was, too, of their respective races—was very remarkable: the European, unyielding, confident, and implacable; the Asiatic, dismayed, conciliatory, and full of guile.
‘Do not strike him,’ cried Conway quickly.
‘I don't intend to do so,’ answered the other. ‘But if I do strike him I shall kill him. Please say to him that he had better tell the truth.’ Conway had seen his friend in ‘tempers’ more than once; but never in one like this, which was all the more terrible because of its calmness. He himself was more than annoyed; he was indignant with Pennicuick, and made up his mind that this sort of thing should cease, or he would return to Shanghae alone, and leave his companion to get on without him as he could; but for the present he restrained himself, for he knew that the captain's life was in danger.
‘See here, Fu-chow, my friend is displeased because you have told him a lie. He says he will cut your pigtail off if you tell him another.’ For the first time the Chinaman lost colour; the red faded from his cheek and left it yellow. To lose his pigtail would have been far worse than to lose life itself, and this ‘white devil was capable of any extremity of outrage.
‘I ask once more, where is that soldier gone?’ said Pennicuick. Fu-chow understood the question as though it had been addressed to him in the purest accent of Pekin.
[Page 52]
‘Young joss pidgeon man went to chin-chin at morning time.’
‘He says the soldier is a pious young fellow, and went off to the temple when we started,’ explained Conway; ‘he will rejoin us, no doubt, at the mandarin's, where he knows we are to stop.’
Pennicuick nodded as if satisfied, and Fu-chow assumed his usual post at the extreme fore part of the boat, of which he formed as it were the figure-head.
At the same moment there fell on the clear air the distant sound of a great bell tolled with rapidity and at unequal intervals.
‘What is that, Connie?’ inquired Pennicuick, with an unusual display of interest.
‘I suppose it is the great bell at the temple; we heard it yesterday, though it is true not rung so irregularly. Perhaps a part of those five pounds of yours has gone in drink to the ringers.’
Pennicuick smiled, not very pleasantly; that piece of extravagance was perhaps a sore subject; or perhaps his eye resting for the moment on Fu-chow, caused him to show his teeth.
More tombs, more tea-farms, more pagodas, and presently a villa residence on the riverside, which would have astonished a Thames tourist, accustomed though he is to various styles of architecture. Imagine a Swiss cottage, painted very brightly, and with gilt bells hanging from the verandahs, that shone in the sun and tinkled in the breeze: in front a garden with grottoes and fishponds; on one side, and a little to the rear, what in England would have been a coach-house and stables, but was in this instance a ‘Hall of Ancestors,’ where the memory of one's great-grandfather was a never-tiring subject of devotional exercise. On the other
[Page 53]
side of the villa a similar range of buildings, the ‘Hall of Education,’ or, as we should say, the schoolroom, where the children of the proprietor take in Confucius with their mothers' milk. This was the residence of Twang-hi, the mandarin.
The boat was pulled ashore and one of the soldiers despatched to his Excellency, bearing the Englishmen's credentials: the letter of introduction from their Shanghae acquaintance, and a piece of cardboard of bright vermilion, eight inches long by four wide, which was Conway's visiting card. His name was on the centre, and in one corner, in Chinese, the words, ‘Your stupid younger brother bows his head in salutation.’
‘Well, I don't like children,’ observed Pennicuick frankly, ‘but to call these people children is to pay them far too high a compliment. Does the fool who lives in this gimcrack edifice—the proper place of which is at the top of a twelfth-cake—wear a peacock's feather, I wonder?’
‘Certainly not; that is reserved for even greater men. He boasts of the red button only.’
‘Then he is not allowed to swallow gold-leaf when the Emperor grants his gracious permission to him to die?’
‘I am not sure, but I think he can only strangle himself with a silken cord,’ answered Conway gravely. ‘Now, whatever you do, Penn, when we come into this gentleman's presence, don't you laugh —see, here is his master of the ceremonies.’
Down the steps of the gimcrack villa, like an actor out of a stage castle a trifle too small for him, was seen descending a solemn personage, with a wand in his hand, and a similar address card, only a trifle bigger, to that which had been handed in. He was attired in a blue dressing-gown, so full in its make as almost
[Page 54]
to give a suspicion of crinoline, and wore upon his head a sort of inverted butter-dish, which wobbled as he moved. As he drew near the boat, he shook his own hands with cordiality, and then placed them reverently on his stomach.
‘My master,’ said he, ‘is doubtful whether he shall presume to receive the trouble of your honourable footsteps.’
‘Confound him! then he won't give us any breakfast,’ observed Pennicuick, when this sentence had been translated to him.
‘Hush! hush! that is only his form of invitation,’ explained Conway. ‘Tell the great Twang-hi, whose reputation reaches beyond the seas, that we crave permission to look upon him.’
This reply was evidently expected, as with a profound obeisance the master of the ceremonies moved his wand and marched before them towards the mansion, like a drum-major at the head of a regiment.
As they drew near the house, they perceived a number of paper lanterns hanging from the eaves of the verandah, each inscribed with the name of the proprietor; and, on the triple door being set wide, Twang-hi himself seated at the end of the entrance-hall. He was a man barely of middle age, but endowed with great gravity of demeanour, though, as Pennicuick thought, by no means with more than was needed to carry off his gown of office, with the tablets of the law worked on the breast, his necklace of huge beads that descended below his middle, and his mandarin's hat with the red button conspicuous on its summit, exactly like a dish-cover with its knob.
He rose on the approach of his guests, with a ‘Tsing-tsing!’ (‘Hail! hail!’), then addressed Conway, who, he seemed to divine at once, was the one endowed with talking powers.
[Page 55]
‘What is your honourable age?’
‘My worthless number is about five-and-forty.’
‘Does the venerable man enjoy happiness?’
‘My father is happy, I trust; being in the abodes of the blessed.’
For the moment Twang-hi showed some symptoms of embarrassment. He had concluded from his visitor's age that his father was alive, and by this mistake had perhaps awakened sorrowful memories. Conway therefore at once came to the rescue by asking in his turn: ‘Is your honourable wife living?’
‘The mean person of the inner apartment is still in life,’ was the uncomplimentary but conventional reply.
‘How many worthy young gentlemen have you?’
‘Fate has been unpropitious to me in that particular. I have but one bug .’
‘He is, however, doubtless doing credit to your Excellency in his education.’
‘I believe that the lazy little beggar has learned a few characters.’
Thus they continued for several minutes, each one underrating himself and his own possessions, while exaggerating the importance of everything pertaining to the other; and then pipes and coffee were brought in. With these came several attendants, each of whom performed a different sort of obeisance, corresponding to his position in the household. There are no fewer than eight gradations of salutation, from the mere clasping of the hands to the knocking the head nine times upon the floor, so that there was a good deal pantomimic action. To Conway's great relief, this seemed to have no effect upon the risibility of his friend, who indeed was looking very
[Page 56]
grave. His hearing, like his other physical senses, was especially acute, and certain sounds of shouting and tumult without had reached him. Presently the number of the attendants in the room became augmented; among them were some of the soldiers from the boat, but there were also other soldiers.
The mandarins in China, as Conway was aware, have no ‘business hours,’ as we term them, but are subject at any time to have the claims of justice urged upon them; therefore the sudden appearance of two police officials followed by their myrmidons did not occasion any alarm to him. Pennicuick, on the other hand, grew, not alarmed, indeed—for to fear he might with truth be said to be a stranger—but suspicious of danger. He maintained an air of politeness, but his stern face grew dark, and he mechanically pushed his chair back to the wall.
With a wave of his hand, as if to bespeak his visitors' pardon for his momentary neglect of them, the mandarin turned slowly to the foremost police official, who addressed him with an excitement very unusual; for an inferior in China is to his superior always respectful, even to the very carriage of his pigtail. It was plain that something had happened to override even the national regard for ceremony.
So rapidly did the man speak, that Conway was unable to gather any sense from his words except that it was some sort of accusation, and his astonishment was great indeed on seeing the mandarin suddenly turn round and point towards his friend. At the same moment, as if in obedience to the signal, he saw Fu-chow emerge from the crowd, with several soldiers, and make a rush at Pennicuick. Quick as thought, the latter leapt from his seat and drew a revolver from his pocket; the next instant Fu-chow, for
[Page 57]
certain, would have been sent to Hades, and in all probability the mandarin after him, had not Conway, with a warning cry of ‘Madman! what would you do?’ struck the muzzle of the weapon upwards, so that the bullet buried itself harmlessly in the roof of the apartment. Before Pennicuick could recover himself, a dozen men were on him, and he was disarmed and thrown upon the floor. A soldier on either side of Conway had also seized each an arm, though he made no sign of resistance.
‘We are Englishmen, Twang-hi,’ he exclaimed in a loud voice, ‘and claim the protection of our flag.’
‘If what I have just heard is true,’ returned the mandarin, ‘the Son of Heaven himself could scarcely protect yonder wretch. He has committed a sacrilege more impious than has yet entered into the brain of man to execute.’
‘This is some terrible mistake or lying charge, your Excellency.’
‘Mistake!’ cried the mandarin in a tone of horror; ‘look yonder!’
Conway looked, and beheld the treacherous Fu-chow holding in his open palms, with a mixture of malignant joy and superstitious reverence, a shining something, like the drop of a chandelier.
‘It is the sacred Shay-le of Buddha, O barbarian devil!’ continued Twang-hi, ‘that your comrade has stolen from its ten-thousand-year-old shrine.’
‘It is impossible!’ cried Conway, in tones almost as horror- stricken as those of the other; for he well knew the heinous nature of such an outrage in Chinese eyes, and also its consequences. ‘I saw him place it round his neck last night,’ put in Fu-chow, ‘and have just taken it from thence with my own hands.’
[Page 58]
‘O Pen, is this true?’ cried Conway in a tone of agony,— ‘that you took away the Shay-le?’
‘Yes, it's true enough,’ returned Pennicuick, speaking with some difficulty from the number of Chinese upon his chest, but still with a certain characteristic scorn. ‘I was a fool to do it, of course, and I am sorry for it; but not half so sorry as that you made me miss that whey-faced scoundrel Fu-chow with my first barrel.’
Not a syllable of this, of course, was intelligible to those who heard it, except that Fu-chow caught the sound of his own name. As he did so, the same look of vindictive fury came into his face that Conway had noticed in it on that night when the captain had played the spy.
‘You would not turn traitor, surely, and destroy those who have fed you?’ pleaded Conway desperately.
‘No,’ said Fu-chow slowly; ‘only, the guilty must needs be punished. His Excellency here, as my father the mandarin has informed me, is one whose justice never fails. I will tell him you are a good man; how you defended my daughter from this devil, and have twice saved my life from him; and how you revere Buddha, and know nothing of this vile and impious sacrilege.’
‘And yet it was my friend, and not I,’ urged Conway, ‘whose hand has fed you.’
‘Ay, and struck me,’ whispered Fu-chow fiercely, and touching for an instant his scarred cheek. ‘See, yonder, what he has taken, and reckon what he is like to pay for it.’
He pointed to the family alter, erected, as usual, in the hall, and on which by this time a priest from the temple had placed the missing Shay-le with every demonstration of reverence. The faces of all the spectators, including even those of the soldiers who had
[Page 59]
just been employed in binding Pennicuick's limbs with ropes, expressed a superstitious awe.
‘How much shall I get for this, as they say at the Old Bailey, Connie?’ inquired the prostrate Pennicuick, taking advantage of the solemn silence; ‘I suppose that friend of yours—whom you will do me the justice to say I always took for a scoundrel—will tell us as much as that.’
Conway murmured a few words to the captain, who answered in the same low tone, but with a look which fortunately Pennicuick could not see.
‘You will be fined and perhaps imprisoned, he says,’ answered Conway cheerfully.
It was an effort for him to speak with hope, for what the captain had hissed into his ear was this: ‘As sure as that is the Shay-le of Buddha, he will be Cut into Ten Thousand Pieces.’ Such is in China the punishment invariably inflicted on those who commit sacrilege, as Conway was well aware; but no less did the corroboration of the fact from Fu-chow's lips cost him a shudder. Far from European aid, and in the heart of a hostile and superstitious people—even had he had no personal enemy to urge the law upon its cruel course—Ralph Pennicuick was surely doomed.
[Page 60]
CHAPTER VI. THE GARDEN AT RICHMOND. Welcome everywhere as is the spring, it is nowhere hailed with more genuine satisfaction than in the outlying neighbourhoods near London, where so many families reside in reality to be spared the London rent, but professedly because the country is ‘so delightful,’ or ‘so much more healthy for the dear children.’ As for the healthiness, that is a matter to be settled between the Registrar-General (who holds a different opinion) and themselves; but as to the delightfulness, we believe that under cross-examination they will withdraw that statement except as regards the summer months. From October to March there is not a man whose house is thus located, and whose business or pleasure lies in town, that does not, rising early in the morning, curse his fate; and again, when prematurely leaving some hospitable roof, or the theatre before the play is finished, because he has to ‘catch the train.’ This difficult feat has to be accomplished so often, and at such inconvenient hours, and in such winds, and snows, and rains, that a hundred times he vows that, as soon as he can get that hateful suburban mansion off his hands, he will come and dwell in Piccadilly. His wife and daughters too, during his absence the whole day in town, find Twickenham or Richmond, Hampton or Norbiton, as the case may
[Page 61]
be, excessively dull; especially so as regards the young ladies, since all the young gentlemen go off to town with their elders, and leave these localities in the same state as the cities of old, which a general levy of the nation in the field has left guarded only by women and children, and a few quite ‘ineligible’ old fogies. This is the invariable state of things during the winter; but with the return of spring the young men return from town by earlier trains for a row on the river, and other country joys, in which ladies can partake. Paterfamilias, too, finds getting up ‘with the lark’ no longer a fiction, and appreciates that bird's society; and in the evening, after the din and smoke and toil of London, takes kindly to the green earth and budding trees, and likens the family garden at home, however small, to that of Eden. Some of the gardens are very small indeed. Let us introduce the reader to one of them, with an apology for the scantiness of the accommodation. It is situated at Richmond, not by the river-side, where gardens are large and houses costly, but somewhere near the old church in the back part of the town, of which fashionable London frequenters of the ‘Star and Garter’ and the ‘Castle’ know nothing at all. It is a quiet old-world locality, the inhabitants of which should be by rights (if appearance has rights) reduced gentlefolks, or at the worst ‘decayed’ clergy. It is dull, but not dreary; comfortable, though cheap; and has certain picturesque features of its own, not of the tumbledown sort born of absolute decadence, but which belong to genteel old age, and the absence of a vulgar flush of ready money. There are no fountains, nor fishponds, nor any of those pocket conservatories which attach themselves to the side of our brand-new villas as if they were being treated for pleurisy—with blisters; the gardens are long strips of greensward, not very much
[Page 62]
broader, some might scornfully say, than the strips of carpet rolled forth from the portals of town mansions on ball nights to save white satin shoes from contact with the pavement; but they are green in spring-time nevertheless, and often boast a crop of daisies, that outshines all the patterns of the upholsterers. They are quite private too, being shut in by high brick walls of very old standing, whereon are trained peach-trees and pear-trees, which, though seldom giving any account of themselves such as would be received in Covent Garden, bear here and there a cherished fruit or two, which is reserved by the proprietor for great occasions, and descanted on as ‘home-grown.’
In one of these gardens, on the selfsame spring morning, as it happens, on which Arthur Conway, thousands of miles away, is paying with his friend that fatal visit to the mansion of his transparency Twang-hi, his daughter Nelly is sitting before an easel, in front of her mother's house; she is painting a picture of it in water-colours for her far-away father, whose artistic talent and something more she has inherited, and she calculates that it will reach him, some three months hence or so, upon his birthday. He has never seen the house; for when he left his wife and child, years and years ago, they were in lodgings in London, where they had continued to live on until lately, when some slight change for the better in his circumstances enabled them to remove to Richmond. To what that change was owing Nelly does not know, nor even does her mother. Papa is reticent about such matters. He is always poor, but sometimes a little less so than at others; and then the wife and child at home, or ‘his belongings,’ as he lightly calls them, always derive advantage from it. The quarterly cheque to Mrs. Conway has another twenty pounds in it, and Nelly gets some
[Page 63]
pretty ornaments from China to wear in her bright brown hair or around her shapely neck, which sets her thinking what this dear distant papa is like, whom she has not seen since she was a little child, but who never forgets her. The cheque sometimes comes to her mother without a letter, but for herself there are always some loving lines by the China mail that fill her with unuttered yearnings. The subject of her father is not one upon which her mother encourages her to speak. That there is ‘nothing absolutely wrong’ about papa, she is well convinced, but she also knows that mamma and he are not quite in accord. This gives her affection for him a tinge of sorrow, which does not, however, abate it. She has been told by some of her father's friends that she is the ‘very image of him,’ but that does not help her much towards picturing him to herself. He cannot, for example, be only a few inches more than five feet high; wear brown hair in masses about his forehead, and in a heap at the back of his head; have hands so ridiculously small that he is obliged to ask for his gloves as ‘first child's size’ instead of any number known to adults; all which are among the personal characteristics of ‘his image.’ Were Nelly inclined to be vain, which is not the case, she might have given a more favourable description of herself. She is small, it is true, but light and bright as a fairy. How that little head, set so airily on its slender neck, can carry such a harvest of gold-brown hair, awakens wonder; her brown eyes, too, are very large for her face, giving almost the impression of one of those charming initial letters which magnify the female graces in ‘Punch;’ though, after all—as one looks at them—who would have them smaller? Softer and brighter they could not be; if you borrowed a pair of any bird to prove it, and placed them beside Nelly's, you would own yourself in the wrong. As sweetly as any
[Page 64]
bird, whom heartless man has robbed of sight to make its song more ravishing, does Nelly sing; and here, too, is a wonder how so frail a body can trill forth such far-sounding melodies as are now filling the spring air around her. When she works alone with her brush or pencil, it is her habit so to sing; and the two occupations harmonise together like the voice and the instrument.
‘My dear Nelly, I do hope you are not putting your paintbrush in your mouth,’ exclaimed an agitated female voice, and at the same moment an elderly lady appeared at the top of the little flight of steps that led down from the dining-room window to the garden. As Nelly was in full song at the time, the question appeared a little superfluous, but she hastened to reply to it nevertheless.
‘No, mamma, dear; I hope I gave up that practice once for all when Mrs. Wardlaw bought me my first “grown-up” paint-box, nearly five years ago.’
‘My dear child, it feels very cold,’ resumed Mrs. Conway, with a lady-like little shudder; ‘there is nothing so treacherous as these warm days in early spring, as you will come to know when you have lived as long as I have, and got the sciatica through sitting out in them. I think you had much better paint indoors.’
‘But, my dear mother, I can't paint the outside of the house from the inside,’ returned Nelly, laughing. ‘Now, do come down and see how I am getting on.’
Mrs. Conway frowned, not that she was at all annoyed, but because she always did frown when invited to do anything. It was her standing protest against the unsatisfactoriness of life and all its acts, of the world and all its ways. Like her daughter, she was small, though by no means slight, and doubtless had
[Page 65]
been at one time a pretty piquant little woman, though never, like her, of the spiritual sort; but years and cares had furrowed her brow, and set their marks upon her generally. Her light eyes, from being constantly thrown up in astonished reprobation, had assumed a permanent position of amazement, though still capable of further movement in the same direction. If annoyed, thwarted, or astonished—to all three of which conditions of mind she was very prone—her hands and eyes flew up together, like those of a mechanical doll; only, it was not necessary to press any particular spring, for she was all spring.
Her complexion was very fair and good, and she would have looked comparatively young, but for those furrows and for the wrinkles about her mouth, where a painful smile was working (for you couldn't call it playing) in sign that for all that had come and gone to her in the way of sorrow, and for all the unsatisfactoriness of the scheme of creation, she was, thank Heaven, still cheerful. But it was no more like real cheerfulness than a gas-fire is like one of wood or coal. Her father, a plain blunt man, with a turn for drollery, used to say of her when a child, that she had got ‘the Toos.’ She was always too hot or too cold, or the weather was; and all about her were too hard, or too rude, or too unsympathising; and she never forgave him that little joke, though it was greatly appreciated by the rest of the family. The poor man went to his grave, she was wont to say, without ever knowing what his poor daughter suffered; which, so far as any particular ailment was concerned, was certainly true. If she had ever heard of the poet's advice to ‘suffer and be strong’—which she had not—she would have retorted that ‘it was all very well for a great rough man like him, but she would just like to see him trying to
[Page 66]
bear for half an hour what she had had to bear all day and every day of her life, not to mention her nervous headaches. Nobody could call her repining who knew the meaning of words; but any other poor creature in her position would be sorely tempted to inquire why such misfortunes befell her , who had really not the physical strength to endure them.’ Mrs. Conway was really a kind-hearted good woman, and yet men had been known to say that, if there was no other woman in the world, they could never have married her: but this was after the days of her piquant prettiness had passed away; during that time she had had wooers enough, for in addition to her personal charms she had had some trifling attractions in the three per cents, though, to do her (and him) justice, they had weighed as nothing with Arthur Conway. Speculations as to what on earth could have induced this or that man to marry this or that woman are always idle when indulged in twenty years after the catastrophe. In this case it was only certain that Mrs. Conway still had her virtues; and among them this important one, that she had done her duty by her child. It is easier perhaps to be a good mother than a good wife; but, at all events, Nelly and her mamma were not only united by a bond of the most genuine affection, but—which does not always happen, even under those favourable circumstances—‘got on’ together perfectly well.
The eddies and ripples upon the surface of her mother's character, perplexing and misleading as they were to superficial observers, did not hinder the girl from seeing the clear pure stream that ran below them; and, moreover, she had discovered, what scarcely anyone else suspected, that, although strangely deficient in what is very properly called common sense, her mother was
[Page 67]
possessed of an intuitive sagacity that shone forth on occasion with great keenness, though it lay for the most part in the scabbard of disuse.
‘Well, mamma, dear, what do you think of it?’ inquired Nelly, when Mrs. Conway had stood regarding her picture for some moments, with her hand over her eyes, and her head on one side at the critical angle.
‘Well, it's like the house, of course; indeed, I should know it almost anywhere: it strikes me, however—though it's only my opinion, which goes for nothing, of course,—that it is rather out of the perpendicular.’
‘Nay, that's not a matter of opinion, but of fact, mamma; here's the ruler; now, if you place it along the line here, you will see it's as straight as can be.’
‘I only meant that the copy differed from the original, my dear; it is the house that's out of the perpendicular, that's all,’ observed Mrs. Conway confidently.
‘Indeed, I hope not, mamma,’ said Nelly, laughing; ‘because you know we have got it for a year.’
‘And nothing more likely, my dear, than that it should come down before the time expires. These old houses often do. However, I had no choice in the matter; I never have.’
‘You don't regret coming here, dear mamma, I hope,’ said Nelly, with a gravity which I am afraid was not wholly genuine. ‘I am sure it was very nice of papa to get us out of those dreary London lodgings. I do hope he will be pleased with this picture of our new home, and that it will come as a little surprise to him very near his birthday; perhaps upon the very day.’
‘Well, that will depend upon the mails, my dear,’ observed
[Page 68]
Mrs. Conway with sudden stiffness. ‘And as to a surprise, how can there be anything of the sort when your father knows we are here?’
‘I merely meant as far as the present goes, mamma.’
Then there was the little silence that follows upon the introduction of an unwelcome topic.
‘Well, I hope you won't spoil your things, Nelly, with these horrid paints,’ observed Mrs. Conway presently. ‘Oil never comes out, remember, and that is the only spring dress I can afford you this year.’
‘I will be very careful, dear mamma. It isn't oil, however; it is a water-colour drawing.’
‘My dear, it's paints, and that's the point; as for its being a water-colour, as you call it, and at the same time a drawing—that is ridiculous.’
‘It is the name that it always goes by in art, mamma.’
‘Very likely, my dear; I only observed that it was ridiculous.’
And if all the members of the Royal Academy, including its associates, honorary lecturers, and the chaplain, had been collected together in that back garden, Mrs. Conway would have still maintained her opinion.
‘I suppose we shall see nothing of Mr. Raymond Pennicuick now that we have come out of town,’ continued she, after a pause.
‘Well, mamma, we have only been here a week, and he is working hard at Lincoln's Inn, you know. It can scarcely be expected that he can look in upon us at Richmond so often as when we were in Gower Street.’
‘I did not say anything about “so often,” my dear. To-day is Saturday, when even the humblest clerk is given a half-holiday; and Raymond is his own master, and could come if he chose. Not
[Page 69]
that I want him, goodness knows. If he feels no wish to visit us —if he forgets that when he was an orphaned child I was a second mother to him—let him stop away.’
‘He was not an orphan, surely, mamma,’ said Nelly, smiling.
‘Now, that's what I call hair-splitting,’ returned Mrs. Conway quickly. ‘He was worse than an orphan; for a man that has a bad father is more to be pitied than one who has none. The child was utterly neglected. I don't believe Ralph Pennicuick cared one fourpenny-piece whether it lived or died. But there, men are all alike; self, self, self is all they think about from the cradle to the grave.’
‘Oh, mamma, I cannot believe that!’
‘Of course not; I didn't believe it myself when I was your age but I have come to learn it by experience. You imagine, I dare say, that Raymond, for example, is a high-principled, unselfish, dutiful young gentleman; and I grant he seems all that. But a woman can no more judge of a man's character before she marries him, than you can tell how a house is furnished by looking at the outside walls. Seeing that it's our first Saturday in our new house, and that we know none of our neighbours except Mrs. Wardlaw, one would think it would be only common civility in Raymond to run down. But, no; it is too fine a day to waste on that, especially when the whitebait season has just begun at Greenwich—my goodness gracious, there's the front-door bell! Now, you mark my words, that's Mrs. Wardlaw. She has come to lunch; and we have nothing in the house but that cold leg of lamb, and the mint sauce has been thrown away by that idiot Jenny.’
‘I don't think that will much distress Mrs. Wardlaw, mamma,’ said Nelly quietly.
[Page 70]
‘Ah, that shows how little you are acquainted with human nature; you imagine that because she was not brought up, as I have been, to all the delicacies of the season, she won't miss her mint sauce. But not a bit of it; she'll say to Perkins, “Mint sauce,” as naturally as, when cold beef is before one, you would say, “Mustard, Perkins;” and then Perkins will look at me, and I sha'n't know where to look; or as likely as not she will blurt out, “Please, marm, it's all throw'd away.” I must say it's very inconsiderate of Mrs. Wardlaw—Law, bless me, it's Raymond! Why, my dear boy, who would have thought of seeing you !’
‘Well, I should have hoped you would, Mrs. Conway,’ answered a cheery voice. ‘It surely required no great gift of prophecy to foretell that out of Lincoln's Inn, upon the last day of the week, being a holiday, should come one who useth the pen and wasteth the ink, even unto Richmond. Forgive my Eastern imagery, but our chief is engaged in the great case of Ramchunder versus Jeejeebhoy! and we are all—May I come down?’
‘Stop, sir!’ cried Nelly, as Mr. Raymond Pennicuick, a very handsome young gentleman of nineteen or twenty, stood salaaming in oriental fashion at the top of the steps. ‘First tell us whether you can eat cold lamb without mint sauce for luncheon?’
‘My dear Nelly, there is nothing that I could not eat—and I may even add drink—this morning, for I have walked every step of the way from London; I am STARVING .’
‘There, mamma,’ cried Nelly, ‘that will be a relief to your mind—’ But Mrs. Conway had already vanished, on hospitable thoughts intent, into the kitchen department; and the two young people were left under the necessity of making themselves agreeable to one another.
[Page 71]
CHAPTER VII. A BARGAIN RATIFIED. Raymond Pennicuick was dark like his father, but without his stern and almost truculent expression. His eyes were not black, but hazel; and, in place of that astonishing black beard his father wore, he had a slight moustache and a smooth chin. The people who called the elder ‘hard Pen,’ sometimes called the younger ‘soft Pen;’ not that he was weak and yielding, but because he was gentle and conciliatory. His behaviour as a son, too, was exemplary; and, since it is by no means fashionable to be filial, this was set down by some to want of strength of mind. As a matter of fact, Raymond had a good deal of independence of character, though mitigated in expression by a strong sense of duty as respected his parent, and by the gift of charity as regarded others. It was this latter quality which had won him the esteem of Mrs. Conway, whose recent denunciation of him Nelly had set down at its just value. She had not even taken the trouble to defend him against her mother's accusations, which were like the charges of a pet goat, made in wilfulness and not in malice. At that very moment she was assisting Jenny in the basement story to cook a sweetbread for her favourite.
[Page 72]
‘What a charming picture, Nelly! But, dear me—it will be finished too late.’
‘Why, you don't even know, you silly boy, for what it is intended!’
‘Why, of course, for exhibition at the Royal Academy. And to-day is closing day.’
‘Raymond, you're a tease. This picture is intended, sir, for a birthday present for somebody.’
‘Dear, dear, I am so sorry to have precipitated matters. I had no notion you were intending anything so kind. It happens on June 4, you know—same day as that of George III., which is curious and interesting. But now I know of it, you may just as well give it to me as soon as it is done. It is for me, is it not, Nelly?’
‘It certainly is not , sir; nothing was further from my intention. The picture is for dear papa; it will go out on the 14th of this month, and reach him, I hope, just in time. Don't you think it will please him?’
‘If it doesn't, I'll take it off his hands,’ answered Raymond, regarding it with admiration. ‘It pleases me uncommonly.’
‘Yes; but you are not an artist as he is, and, in short, know nothing about it.’
‘That's quite true, dear; yet somehow one feels what's good. There will be scores of pictures of old red-brick houses, in sunny gardens, at the exhibition this year, which will not please me so well as this; which will only please me, perhaps, because they are like this.’
Nelly stepped back a pace or two from her easel, and executed a curtsey down to the very ground.
‘Spare my blushes, sir; you overwhelm me quite.’
[Page 73]
‘I did not mean a mere empty compliment, Nelly,’ answered the young man gravely. ‘Everything done by those little hands of yours is dear to me.’
‘That takes the gilt off the criticism though, Mr. Raymond,’ answered Nelly steadily.
‘Well, I confess I can't criticise in your presence. I can only admire. You say “spare my blushes;” but I can't spare one of them. I can't, indeed.’
‘My dear Raymond, I think you are mistaking the day,’ said Nelly gravely. ‘It is not February 14; and it's not the 1st of April.’
‘No; April-fool's day is past, but I am not the less a fool on that account. I know I'm a fool to expect any such happiness to befall me as I have now in my mind. Still, I must tell you what it is that I dare to hope, though I think you can guess.’ He had taken her by the hand and led her gently to the bottom of the little garden, out of earshot of anyone in the house.
‘I am not a good hand at guessing, Raymond,’ answered she; ‘and as for your hope—I am sure you will say nothing to pain me; and it would pain me very much if you asked for anything I could not give.’
She wore no blushes now. Her fairy face had lost all its bloom, and looked so exquisitely delicate, with here and there a faint blue vein, as to remind you of Shelley's lily of the vale:
Whom youth makes so fair and passion so pale,
That the light of its tremulous bells is seen
Through its pavilions of tender green.
But except for her paleness there was no token of passionate love.
[Page 74]
Her look was firm, her eyes were resolute: it was only her tone that was tender, though that was steadfast too.
‘You can give me what I am about to ask, if you will, Nelly.’ She stood quietly in front of him without reply. If he must speak, he must, and she must hear him. But her answer was ready, and he knew, or ought to know, what it needs must be. She had been apprehensive of late of the very question (for she well knew what it was) that he was about to put, and had done her best to avoid it. She had striven to show him, by her frankness and freedom from constraint, that they were brother and sister yet, as they had always been; but her very precautions (as she had thought them) had, it seemed, only fanned his flame.
‘We have known one another for all our lives, dear,’ he began in a tremulous tone that betrayed the weight of feeling with which it was freighted; ‘we have loved one another all our lives—or at least I have loved you —as children together, as boy and girl, as man and woman. There has never been a thought of my heart in connection with you which has not been one of love. It has not been a fancy, Nelly, for your fair face—though that is beautiful enough to turn the head of a wiser man; but I know you altogether, how fair and pure you are; and, darling, I worship you.’
‘Raymond, I cannot listen to this: I cannot bear to hear it. You are paining me more than words can express.’
‘It will be soon over, Nelly, once and for all; have patience with me. I was just speaking of my birthday; when that day arrives I shall be twenty-one, when men are their own masters.’
‘Some men,’ said Nelly quietly; ‘not you, Raymond.’
‘You mean that I shall be still dependent on my father. That
[Page 75]
will be so, I admit. But I have thews and sinews, and wits like other men, who have no other inheritance. I am taking, you see, the most unfavourable view of my own prospects.’
‘You are right so far, Raymond, for it is the correct one,’ answered the girl gravely. ‘If you went counter to your father's wishes, you would have your thews, and sinews, and wits wherewith to support yourself, and that would be all.’
‘You would be afraid, then, to trust to those, if those were all I had to offer?’
‘It is unnecessary to discuss that question, Raymond,’ said Nelly, with a touch of dignity and even a tinge of scorn. ‘No woman, worthy of the name, would permit a man to beggar himself for her sake.’
‘But if I got my father's permission to ask you to be my wife?’
‘That is another question which need not be discussed; you know, as well as I do, that you would never get it.’
‘At all events, let me try to get it. I will write by this next mail to him, and tell him how dearly I love you; how my hopes of happiness are centred in you alone; how little we should require —you and I—to live upon. I will appeal to him by the friendship he bears your father; by the affection that he owes to me, his only son. I will say---’
‘Is it possible that you can be so mad, Raymond, knowing what your father is?’ interrupted the girl impetuously. ‘You would have bitter cause to repent such folly, and might even find repentance itself too late.’
‘My father is a hard man, you think, but he is surely human,’ answered Raymond bitterly. ‘It is your mother who has set you against him so.’
[Page 76]
‘I am not set against him, Raymond; but I am resolute to see things as they are.’
‘Do you mean to say that you will not permit me to tell him that you have consented to be my wife?’
‘I do mean to say that.’
‘Great Heaven! then you do not love me?’ He literally staggered back as from a physical blow: his face was white with the whiteness of despair; his eyes had the pained look which comes into those of some loving animal whom its master chides. Yet it was not in tones of pity, but rather of indignation, that the girl replied:
‘It is cruel of you, Raymond, to put me to the question thus. What can it avail you to wring such a confession from me? Is it manly to endeavour to do so from any woman who cannot be your wife? Do you wish to make a boast of me as one among the many girls that you might have wedded if you wished?’
‘Oh, Nelly, Nelly, who is cruel now?’
‘I am sorry, very sorry, Raymond; I did not mean to be cruel. But there are some things—you don't understand what a girl's heart is. No; I can't let you tell your father that I will marry you, if he will graciously permit it: We Conways are very poor, but we are proud. I also have a father, not rich like yours, but whose good opinion is worth much to me; and I know how he would feel upon this subject. Mr. Pennicuick and he are, it is true, old friends; but it is an unequal friendship, Raymond. It is not one of those, I mean, which knows on one side nothing of favour, and on the other nothing of obligation. Such a proposition as you have in your mind would be its death-blow. The bond between our fathers is not, as I have said, so very strong, yet each is to the
[Page 77]
other the best friend he has. Have you the right to sunder them?’
‘I never looked upon the matter in that light, Nelly,’ answered the young man dejectedly. ‘I was only thinking of myself, I own.’
‘There you do yourself injustice, Raymond; for you were thinking of both of us.’
‘When I said “myself,” I implied that, Nelly,’ answered he simply: ‘I never think of myself without thinking of you. However, I will not pain you further. Since you refuse me permission to add your entreaties to mine—alas, I have annoyed you again!— I meant to say, since you forbid me to urge your own consent as an argument in my behalf, I must do my best to move my father without it.’
She shook her head and smiled sadly.
‘You are not angry with me, Nelly?’
‘No, Raymond; but I am very, very sorry. We were so happy together as brother and sister---’
‘And so we shall be still,’ put in Raymond eagerly. ‘If my father consents, all will be well; and if he refuses, matters will be no worse than they have been. Do you think, after what you have said, that I shall persecute you with my importunities? Indeed, I never will. There, that is a bargain.’
‘With all my heart,’ said Nelly.
‘Nay, don't say that . Only it's bargain; and when bargains are struck at Lincoln's Inn, Nelly, there is a form of ratification’— a little arbour stood at the extremity of the lawn, and behind it ran the path; they had reached the spot where this arbour intervened between them and the house, and shut them out from observation
[Page 78]
—‘we cannot sign it here, but we can seal it. Witness my act and deed.’ He stooped down and kissed her cheek, which was pale and cold. ‘The other party to the contract does the same at Lincoln's Inn.’
‘No, Raymond.’
The touch of his lips had been too much for her; she could not trust herself to kiss him in return, lest she should have thrown her arms round his neck and clung there. She had seemed cold and prudent, but it had been only for his sake; for in truth she loved him, and with a fervour undreamt of by himself, though, as we have seen, he had taken her love for granted. If he had known what was passing through her mind—or rather, what was not passing, for it had its dwelling there—he might perhaps have scattered all her resolution to the wind. But he was young, and a woman's heart is only read by man after years of study, and rarely, even then, aright. If her mother had seen her at that moment, she would have made a shrewder guess how matters stood with her. Perhaps it was maternal instinct that brought her at this juncture to the top of the stone steps, with the news that lunch was on the table.
‘Come in at once, young people,’ cried she authoritatively. ‘I have got a sweetbread for you, Raymond,’ added she, as they drew near, ‘because you're a good boy. He has been good, has he not, Nelly?’ for her quick eye at once detected that there was something amiss. ‘You have not been quarrelling?’
‘No, mamma; we have only had a difference of opinion. Raymond has been good enough, but not very wise.’
‘Well, one can't expect everything in a man, my dear: for my part—from what I've seen of them—I should be glad to compound for goodness.’
[Page 79]
‘You pay me but a doubtful compliment,’ laughed Raymond, ‘and even that at the expense of my sex.’
‘Nothing is ever done at their expense,’ replied Mrs. Conway tartly. ‘It is we poor women who have to pay for everything— and especially for compliments.’
[Page 80]
CHAPTER VIII. MOTHER AND DAUGHTER. It could not be said of Mrs. Conway, as it has been laid down of women in general, that she was ‘variable,’ and not to be depended upon; for her temper was of that character that nobody ever thought of trusting to it. It was bad, and always bad; and showed itself in its worse colours upon the topic of sovereign man, against whom she was in a chronic state of rebellion. To her daughter, however, she was almost always kind; and there was one exception to her general antagonism to the other sex in favour of Raymond Pennicuick. She would abuse him, as we have seen, even behind his back, but she had in reality a very genuine affection for him, as indeed was natural enough, for she had nourished and tended him when a forlorn and forsaken child; and when he grew up he had shown himself not ungrateful. He was the only man that could ‘put up’ with her humours and caprices, and not even solace himself for his forbearance by making fun of them. It annoyed him to hear his father speak of her, as he often did, as ‘that infernal woman;’ though he was much too wise to advance any arguments in her favour, the only effect of which would have been to intensify the other's ungenerous epithets. When he had occasionally expressed his sense of Mrs. Conway's kindness towards
[Page 81]
himself, Ralph Pennicuick had answered with a sneer equal to a folio.
That there was no love lost between them was notorious; and it was even whispered that Ralph had given a helping hand to widen the breach between Conway and ‘the woman that owned him,’ as his friend called her. But the reason of this exceeding dislike was known to none except themselves; the world at large only knew that it was reciprocal. Even Nelly could not understand how it was that her mother had not only no good word for her father's friend, but rarely mentioned him without contempt or abhorrence. If he had really come between her father and mother, and separated them, that of course was cause enough to explain anything; but she did not believe this to be the case. The friendship between the two men was not, in her opinion, sufficiently strong to have effected this. Her mother's dislike of the elder Pennicuick was something quite extraordinary, and would sometimes even cause her to fly out at Raymond. ‘What's bred in the bone,’ she would say, ‘will come out in the flesh. The son of such a man as that must inherit some evil taint, depend upon it. He can't belong to his mother only.’
Raymond's mother had died, as we have said, within a year of her marriage; but not before she had made friends of all her husband's friends, and even of some of his enemies. She was a gentle, quiet creature, as timid as a gazelle, and who filled all who beheld her with love and pity. Perhaps it was more pity than love that moved Mrs. Conway's heart towards her; pity, while alive, because she had married such a heartless wretch as she believed Ralph Pennicuick to be; and pity, after her death, because his harshness and wickedness had been the cause of it. This was not
[Page 82]
literally true, but where is the woman that hates who is rigidly particular to stick to truth in her denunciations? Unfortunately for Raymond, so far as Mrs. Conway was concerned, he was physically like his father, and this aroused her acrimony; but upon the whole, as has been seen, he was a favourite with her. It puzzled outside people a good deal as to whether she was throwing her daughter at Raymond Pennicuick's head or not. Of course that would seem probable. He was the son and heir of a rich man, who, though only of middle age and of an iron constitution, was given to adventure and travel. He might be struck down by yellow fever in the West Indies, or by a tiger in the East; or might be ‘scraped to death with oyster-shells among the Caribbees,’ at any time. His long absences in foreign parts gave her many opportunities of bringing the young people together, and she seemed to avail herself of them. But, on the other hand, it was not the way to win the good graces of the young man to speak so bitterly against his father, not indeed in his presence, but so openly that he could hardly fail to be aware of it. It puzzle Nelly herself to reconcile these inconsistencies in her mother's conduct, though the matchmaking part of the matter never crossed her mind. The very topic of China, necessarily of familiar one since her father had been there so long, was now distressing to her when Raymond and her mother were present, since it naturally suggested his father, who had gone out some six months back to join his friend. She was always fearing an explosion; and the more so because Raymond seemed to have so little apprehension of it, and would chat about mandarins, and dragons, and pigtails, with the nonchalance of an Irishman who smokes his pipe while sitting on a powder- barrel.
[Page 83]
‘You heard from the “Flowery Land” last mail, of course, Mrs. Conway?’ observed he, after having done full justice to the sweetbread and the cold lamb.
‘My daughter had a letter,’ answered the lady frigidly.
‘The captain is well, I hope?’
‘He seemed to be the same as usual.’
‘I concluded as much from my father's silence upon the point.’ Mrs. Conway gave a short laugh, which, if translated, would have said, ‘You are quite wrong there. If his friend had been dead, he would not have given himself the trouble to mention it.’
‘My governor's letters,’ continued the young man, turning to Nelly,‘are of the same length as those I used to write to your mother from my first school.’ “My dear Mrs. Conway,—I hope you are very well. I have a new top. It is three weeks and two days to the holidays. Believe me to be yours affectionately, Raymond Pennicuick.” I dare say she remembers the style.’
‘I have no need to tax my memory, my dear boy, for I have got the letters,’ observed Mrs. Conway.
‘What! the school ones?’
‘All that you ever wrote to me. It is quite a little collection of love-letters—and the only one I have.’
This was an example of Mrs. Conway's embarrassing way. When she was to all appearance in high good humour, nay, even tender and affectionate, she would all of a sudden burst out into complaint and denunciation. Her last remark implied, of course, that her husband never wrote to her with affection.
‘And how does Mr. Pennicuick like China?’ inquired Nelly hurriedly, the disagreement between her parents being always a most painful theme to her.
[Page 84]
‘Oh, he doesn't say much about it. He had only just arrived in “the crockery shop,” as he calls it; and he doesn't go in for descriptions. But for the postmark, his letter might have come from his own chambers in the Albany.’
‘That is so different from papa. He gives us a picture—sometimes a real picture, but always a word-painting—of where he is, and all about him.’
‘Don't say “us,” Nelly, I beg,’ interposed Mrs. Conway stiffly; ‘he writes very fully to you .’
‘Nay, he means the letter to do for both of us, mamma,’ answered the girl; ‘for what is mine of course is yours. He goes into such detail (but always interesting, you know, because everything in China is so queer and strange), that we can imagine exactly how he lives, and who are his friends and neighbours. In his last budget, there was a good deal about Mr. Pennicuick, who had just arrived. They were going together up the country—into the heart of it—in a sort of barge, and were anticipating ever so much fun.’
‘ My governor only wrote,’ said Raymond, “we are going right through the shop” (that is, the crockery shop); and spoke of his seven friends that were to accompany him, namely, his revolver (which has six barrels) and your father.’
‘Dear me! I hope they will have no need of revolvers,’ exclaimed Nelly with agitation. ‘I thought the Chinese had become quite friendly to us.’
‘So they have,’ answered Raymond quickly. ‘There is no sort of danger to mere tourists and pleasure-seekers. But my father never travels without his revolver; carries it about with him all
[Page 85]
day like a pocket-handkerchief, and puts it under his pillow at night, like a Dent's repeater.’
‘If I were he, I should be always afraid of its going off,’ said Nelly with a little shudder.
‘Nay, rather, it is other people who are always afraid of its going off,’ observed her mother grimly.
‘Just so,’ remarked Raymond, laughing; ‘and it makes him very much respected, he says, in foreign parts. That reminds me, by-the-by, that I must be going off myself, having promised some men to pull up to Hampton Court at three.’
Perhaps he would not have been so careful to keep that appointment had his interview with Nelly ended differently. It would have been much pleasanter than rowing—or even steering— to have wandered about Richmond Park with her, with his arm in hers, or perhaps occasionally round her dainty waist, as an engaged couple. He was as resolute as ever to win her for his wife, but for the present it seemed they were still to remain brother and sister; and after what had just passed between them—just at first —that connection was a little embarrassing, notwithstanding he had said that ‘matters would be no worse than they had been.’ Matters were already worse, or at all events quite different; and, though he was neither chilled nor piqued, he felt that for that afternoon, at least, he had better go elsewhere. Nelly understood his feelings, though perhaps she gave him credit for a little annoyance, for her manner at parting was doubly kind.
‘You will come again on Saturday, Ray’—she had not so abbreviated his name since as boy and girl together they had been ‘Ray’ and ‘Nell,’ which had been objected to by the authorities as they grew up as too suggestive of ‘So ho,’ and ‘Down charge.’ It
[Page 86]
was tender, and at the same time it implied the old relations, when their thoughts of marriage were limited to the gorgeous nuptials of princes and princesses in fairy tales.
‘Oh, yes, I will certainly come,’ said Raymond.
‘And then, if there is lamb, there shall be mint sauce, I promise you,’ observed Mrs. Conway. ‘Of course you will say you didn't miss it; but man is man, and one must consider his palate —What was the matter with him, Nelly? Why did he go?’
She put this question when he had gaily taken leave of them and left the house.
‘He had an appointment---’
‘Pshaw! I mean, what was his real reason? You said he had not been wise in what he had been speaking about in the garden; that you had some difference of opinion; what was it?’
‘Mamma,’ answered Nelly, blushing violently,‘Raymond asked me to be his wife.’
A gleam of triumph lit up the elder lady's face. ‘Indeed!’ cried she; ‘I should not have thought he had had the courage. I mean, of course, because of his tyrant father. And when is it to be?’
‘Oh, mamma, how can you ask such a question? He wished to marry me as soon as he came of age, and should be what he called his own master; as if that could ever be while Mr. Pennicuick is alive. I convinced him of the madness of such a project, and then he pressed me to give my promise in case his father should consent---’
‘It was you who were mad, not he,’ interrupted Mrs. Conway angrily. ‘Do you suppose his father would do anything of the sort? Don't you know he is a brute, a miser, a man that has never had any feeling but for himself, nor a single thought beyond the gratification
[Page 87]
of his own wishes! Don't you know that he stints the lad even as it is; that his only idea connected with him is to get him off his hands, to see him provided for by some rich marriage! You didn't surely demean yourself by an acceptance conditional on such a contingency?’
‘I did not demean myself, mamma, I hope, in any way,’ answered the girl, drawing up her fairy form to almost womanly height. ‘I told him that such a proposition was out of the question, and not to be discussed; that my consent was not to be alluded to in any communication he might make to Mr. Pennicuick, and that I strongly disapproved of any such communication at all. I represented to him that it would annoy my father as much as it would enrage his own, and probably cause a breach in the friendship that had so long existed between them.’
‘Tut tut! that is no matter. But you were right enough not to compromise yourself. He will be twenty-one—yes—on June 4th. I ought to know it, for it was the death-day of his poor mother.’
‘Mamma, you cannot be serious!’
‘I am quite serious; it is you who seem to be playing the fool. I thought you loved this Raymond Pennicuick.’
‘I do love him,’ answered the girl, with a deep blush, but in firm and confident tones. ‘I love him too well to allow him to become a beggar for my sake.’
‘The sacrifice would not have been so great,’ observed Mrs. Conway drily. ‘He will have three hundred pounds a year of his own, out of his mother's money, when he comes of age; in fact, the very sum that his father allows him now. It was fixed at that amount, no doubt, that when the young man came into his own the elder should not feel the loss of the income.’
[Page 88]
‘I don't think Raymond can be aware of this,’ said Nelly thoughtfully; ‘are you sure , mamma?’
‘Oh, yes, I am quite sure; though Raymond, as you say, knows nothing about it. It is so like his father to make him think as long as possible that he is entirely dependent upon him. I would have told him long ago myself, but that I thought it better not to do so, for his own sake. Now, however, I will tell him.’
She seated herself at a little writing-table and opened her desk.
‘Mamma, I beg of you not to do so. If you tell him this, he will do something rash.’
‘He would be down to-morrow morning, no doubt, if you call that rash.’
‘Well, I don't want him here to-morrow morning. The three hundred a year, which will make such a difference to him, makes none to me. He shall never be disinherited on my account; I swear it. Don't you see that the knowledge of this comparative independence would make him bolder as respects his father, and he would write—what he says he means to write—in a less filial sprit? Then there would be a quarrel between Mr. Pennicuick and his son on my account.’
‘Yes, I see all that. It would have the effect of opening the lad's eyes to his father's character, which must happen sooner or later; a little sooner, well, why not?’
‘Because chiefly, or at all events for one thing, there would not only be quarrel, but Raymond would be the suffer. I will no more be the cause of his being disinherited than of his being beggared. The effect of your telling him what you propose would be but to give him false hopes and to make him importunate. I hope, dear mamma, you will respect my wishes.’
[Page 89]
‘Why shouldn't the poor boy know what belongs to him?’ inquired Mrs. Conway in a tone of irritation.
‘Nay, he has only three months to wait; and since you have concealed the intelligence from him so long, why divulge it now? Besides, there may be some mistake; your authority may have deceived you.’
‘He certainly would have, if there had been anything to gain by deceiving me, for it was Ralph Pennicuick himself.’
‘What! Did Mr. Pennicuick make you his confidant, mamma?’
‘Oh, yes: when little Raymond was in my charge, matters were very different,’ observed Mrs. Conway drily.
‘But you never liked Mr. Pennicuick even then, did you?’
‘Never. And I hate him now more than ever,’ added she with vehemence, ‘because he stands between my daughter and her happiness. Why is it that such men live on, and prosper? I never hear those words in the Litany, “From plague, pestilence, and famine, from battle, murder, and sudden death,” without wondering which evil fate will overtake him. It must be so at some time, surely. Let us hope he will meet with his deserts in China, where men, they say, are hard and cruel—like himself.’
‘Oh, mamma, mamma!’ cried Nelly, appalled by the passionate violence of her mother's manner even more than by her words,‘do not talk like that, lest you bring some judgment down upon ourselves. Think if anything should happen to dear papa instead.’
‘There is Mrs. Wardlaw coming down the road,’ returned the elder lady, who was seated by the window; ‘she intends, no doubt, to call upon us. Pray go upstairs, and wash away those tears.’
Mrs. Conway's manner had become indifferent at once at the mention of her husband; the topic had always a chilling, nay, a
[Page 90]
refrigerating effect upon her; so much so, indeed, that Nelly sometimes thought or hoped that it was to some extent exaggerated and artificial; that the coldness between her parents was not quite so intense as one of them at least would have it to be believed. To-day, above all days, in which it had lain in her power to have won a husband for herself had she been so minded, did the sense of this estrangement between her father and mother cause Nelly an especial pain. It seemed more shocking even than at other times that such a state of things could ever come about between man and wife; they had been lovers once, she knew, in days when they were young; but the days were gone by for ever, and their love, it seemed, likewise. It was very, very sad; so sad, that ere she could wash away her tears, as directed, others came; and it was many minutes before she could present herself in the little drawing-room with the bright face and the sunny smile that were as fit and proper a welcome for good Mrs. Wardlaw as a salute of twenty-one guns is for crowned heads.
[Page 91]
CHAPTER IX. MRS. WARDLAW. It is notoriously the custom with the best story-tellers to let their characters speak for themselves: to ticket them with adjectives such as ‘good,’ for example, instead of making them establish their own right to it, is the same sorry device as is adopted by early painters (not the ‘old masters,’ but the very young ones) who scrawl ‘man,’ ‘woman,’ ‘tree,’ below their counterfeit presentments of those objects, in order to prevent mistakes arising from their own defects of execution. But I have written ‘good’ Mrs Wardlaw on our first introduction to that personage, because you had only to look at her to be convinced at once that she had a title to that epithet, if good humour, good temper, and good nature combined have any claim to it. It is curious that in the system of Lavater the point of ‘age’ is so slightly dwelt upon, when it is in fact the keynote of the whole of it. Just as an artist finds it easier to take the set and pronounced features of elderly persons than the comparatively unformed faces of the young, so it is with the student of character; he can, in fact, only judge with certainty of men's minds from their faces when they have passed life's meridian. By that time the habitual smile or frown has become stereotyped; greed or generosity, duplicity or frankness, and even to some extent
[Page 92]
wisdom or folly, have written their autographs upon their possessors with more or less of distinctness. Care and toil, indeed, may cause us to pass a harsh judgment; for we sometimes ascribe their work to that of moroseness; but after forty it is very difficult for any gentleman who is a scoundrel to appear like an honest man. The kind heart, too, glows through the genial countenance no matter how coarse the grain, how weather-beaten the skin, like the light through a horn lantern.
Mrs. Wardlaw's ruddy face was the incarnation of kindness; and, though her majestic proportions forbad any approach to sprightliness, she had a dancing eye. Judged by a Mayfair standard, her appearance might have been set down as vulgar; (between ourselves, I have seen leaders of fashion quite as unfortunate in that respect, but in them it is called ‘a majestic appearance’); she looked, said her enemies (for in this wicked world how could so excellent a soul be without them?) ‘like a housekeeper;’ but what is better than a good housekeeper, I should like to know, except indeed a good cook? It was a matter of surprise among some who had the privilege of Mrs. Conway's acquaintance how so exclusive and lady-like a being could have got to know so stout and florid a personage as Mrs. Wardlaw, who was also (and by no means distantly) ‘connected with trade.’
The captain's wife had always held her head up-metaphorically —very high, and when circumstances had prevented her from continuing to move in the best circles, had kept herself to herself, and ceased to move at all. Lodgings in Gower Street (however convenient with regard to omnibuses) are not adapted for this sort of motion, and while residing in them she had therefore been stationary. Yet it was during that period, and now some years ago, that
[Page 93]
the acquaintance with Mrs. Wardlaw had been formed, not indeed by Mrs. Conway, but by Nelly herself.
Wearied with reading, and practising on the piano, the girl was amusing herself one day during the absence of her mother by looking out of the dining-room window—her pretty chin resting on the top of the blind, her little nose flattened against the pane —when an accident occurred just opposite the door. An omnibus had stopped to ‘drop’ a lady passenger, and not stopping long enough had dropped her in the road, from which, with an obstinacy which the conductor denounced as ‘cussed,’ she refused to stir. When one weighs sixteen stone, and sprains an ankle, it is difficult to put even one's best leg foremost. The stout lady was evidently helpless, and in great pain, and promised a gratuitous entertainment to the public more gratifying, because less fleeting, than Punch, or organs; but as the sudden crowd closed around her, a young girl followed by a maid-of-all-work appeared upon the scene: ‘Bring the lady into our house,’ cried she excitedly.
‘Who's to do it, miss, without a windlass?’
‘I have got a shilling,’ said Nelly (of which she was quite certain, it being her whole stock of pocket-money), and she held it between her small finger and thumb. The power of the lever is as nothing compared with that of a visible coin. Four sturdy men seized the prostrate lady and carried her like a feather into Nelly's parlour, and retired with the price of four quarts of beer among them.
‘Where is it you are hurt, madam?’ inquired Nelly tenderly.
‘I have broken my leg, my dear; send for my doctor—Dr. Walsh, of Russell Square.’
Short as was the distance, and quickly as the doctor took to
[Page 94]
traverse it, he found the patient and her little hostess already on intimate terms.
‘You have had a bad fall, but it is into good hands, I see,’ said he, when he had made his examination of the ankle, round which Nelly had wrapped some wet rags.
‘She is a little angel,’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw rapturously.
‘She is a little doctor, which is almost the same thing,’ answered he smiling. ‘We shall get you home in half an hour.’ But Mrs. Wardlaw remained on the sofa for a much longer time. awaiting Mrs. Conway's return home.
‘I could not leave your roof,’ she said when that lady arrived, ‘without expressing my sense of the kindness with which I have been treated by your sweet little daughter. I am sure John also —that is my husband: we live in the square close by—will never rest till he has thanked you.’
‘There is nothing to thank us for, madam,’ replied Mrs. Conway with stiffness. Her visitor's appearance did not impress her favourable; the ‘h’ in the word ‘husband’ had not been so distinct as could be wished; the name of John had a plebeian sound; moreover, it was annoying—though quite in consonance with the unsatisfactoriness of things in general—that a person of this description should live in the square, while she, Mrs. Conway, to whom the first circles had once been open, lived in the street, and in lodgings.
Poor Mrs. Wardlaw perceived that she was snubbed.
‘I take the liberty to kiss your dear little daughter,’ said she, ‘because I have no words to speak my gratitude to her, Mrs. Conway, and of course no other means of expressing it. If there were any such means, or if a time should ever arrive when John
[Page 95]
Wardlaw—he is in the timber trade, ma'am, at present, but is about to retire—I should know what to be about; it will be as much as I can do, I know, to keep him from stepping round and thanking her in person.’
‘I am sure my Nelly has been thanking enough, Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘John will not think so, ma'am; and he is so fond of children, though unhappily we have none of our own, and when I come to tell him of your daughter's kindness and of the good sense beyond her years---’
‘Indeed, you will make her vain,’ put in her hostess peremptorily; ‘children are so easily spoilt.’
‘And how I should like to spoil you, my darling!’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw, putting her arms about the child in farewell. ‘No, I don't want your help, little one: I should break you all to pieces, if I leant upon you. Jessie's arm will do.’ And so with the maid's support she hobbled to the hired brougham that had been waiting for her hours ago, as though time had not been money; and departed, leaving the aforesaid Jessie in possession of a glittering medallion, which, upon consulting with more experienced friends, she discovered to be a half-sovereign piece.
No news came from their late patient to the dwellers in Gower Street, far less any personal visit from her ‘John;’ and Mrs. Conway rather repented of the sharp way in which she had put a stop to any such communication; a few messages, backwards and forwards, would not have injured her own quondam position in the fashionable world; nor was it, on the whole, a wise proceeding to have thus quenched the incipient liking of their wealthy neighbour for Nelly. This last consideration, however,
[Page 96]
weighed but little with Mrs. Conway; no material reasons ever did when set in the balance against her prejudices. Moreover, though it is possible that, in a future state of existence, this lady might possibly be induced, under pressure of Rhadamanthus, to admit that on one or two occasions she had committed during her life —say—an error of judgment; as to allowing that she was wrong, there were no imaginable conditions, either of circumstance or being, under which she could have been brought to such a confession.
In all probability the relations between Mrs. Wardlaw and the Conways would have ended with that first interview, but that in a few days Nelly asked permission to make inquiry after the wounded lady at her house; nor would the intimacy have gone far perhaps even then but that the child went unaccompanied by her mother, though bearing from her a pretty gift in the shape of a posy of hothouse flowers. That Mrs. Conway should have thought of them, and given half-a-crown for them, and arranged them with her own tasteful hands, notwithstanding her previous discourtesy, was quite in keeping with her character; it was not done with the least feeling of making amends; but since the visit was to be, it was well that the obligation which had already proceeded from her side should remain there—nay, be intensified. The lady in the square had her advantages; and that was all the more reason why she should not have the whip-hand of the lady in the street. Unconscious of these subtle and philosophic reasons, little Nelly took her nosegay to the big house in Russell Square, where the invalid was lying, in the immensity of the back drawing-room, on a sofa which, compared with that in Gower Street, was a very Bed of Ware.
[Page 97]
‘You look more like a good fairy than ever,’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw, which, as to size, in contrast to those spacious surroundings, she did indeed. ‘You cannot be flesh and blood, but some lovely little ornament for the mantel-piece in china.’
‘Papa's in China,’ returned Nelly roguishly, ‘not I.’
‘And so ready too with her little tongue!’ exclaimed her hostess rapturously. ‘What a pretty nosegay! and with your ma's compliments, is it? Well, I'm sure it's very kind of your ma. Yes, my ankle's better; all the better for seeing you, I do believe; you're as welcome as the spring vi'lets. Won't she be a pocket Venus when she's full-growed, John?’ Nelly looked round, and saw a jolly-looking old gentleman, stouter and ruddier even than Mrs. Wardlaw, regarding her with approving eyes; he had come out of the front drawing-room, while she had been talking with his wife, and it evidenced well indeed to the deep pile of the carpet that his steps had not been heard. ‘So that's your young friend, is it!’ said he, rattling the loose silver in his capacious pocket with one hand, and laying the other lightly upon Nelly's head. ‘She's a very nice little lot.’
‘Lot, indeed. A very much nicer one than you ever saw in any of your auction-rooms, I reckon,’ returned his lady, with what seemed somewhat uncalled-for severity.
‘Yes, a rare article,’ continued the old gentleman critically; ‘quite unique, I should say; late the property of—but her father's alive, ain't he?’
‘Of course he is; didn't you hear the dear child say he was in China?’
‘That's a long way off,’ observed Mr. Wardlaw gravely, as though hesitating to admit even the existence of a gentleman at so
[Page 98]
great a distance. ‘But then her mother's in Gower Street,’ added he cheerfully; ‘that's close enough, anyway; and there's not a better neighbourhood for chance “finds” in London.’
If Nelly was at a loss to perceive the opportuneness of these observations of her host, she was not the first person who had been thus puzzled. Mr. Wardlaw's weakness was attendance at sales by auction, at which he spent most of his leisure time, and most of his surplus money. They had the same attraction for him which the billiard-room and the racecourse have for another class of men, though without any evil result save an infinity of bad bargains. His purchases, indeed, would have been cheap at the money, had he wanted them, but, being continuous and of a wildly miscellaneous character, his accumulations could be scarcely considered as good investments. He would buy sables enough to set up a fur shop, and which got the moth before he got a purchaser for them; or French clocks by the dozen, which remained on his hands till their year's warranty had expired, and with it their powers of motion; or claret by the hogshead, which ‘only wanted keeping to be a first- class wine,’ but which somehow went sour during the process. An advertisement of a great sale was an irresistible invitation to him; the roving eye of the auctioneer had a fascination for him such as that of the snake is said to exercise over his feathered prey; and the fall of the hammer was as the rattle that immediately precedes its doom.
After all, as Mrs. Wardlaw was well aware, her husband's weakness was one for which most wives would be very willing to compound, and more especially since he could afford it.
If he made a few bad bargains, there were some very good ones
[Page 99]
made for him by the house in the City wherein he was a nominal partner.
The phrase ‘a nice little lot’ he had applied to Nelly was a great compliment from him, and his good opinion was confirmed on further acquaintance. Nobody could say, considering how often he bid for things which were not desiderated by other people, that Mr. Wardlaw had no opinion of his own; and, once formed, he stuck to it.
And so it came about that the girl made to herself two warm and faithful friends in this honest couple.
Even Mrs. Conway was in time brought to endure them, though she never forgot her own superior position, or permitted poor Mrs. Wardlaw to forget it. As to the old gentleman, it was difficult to make him understand how his wife should be inferior to any living woman; but he was all the easier to patronise from his very obtuseness. Moreover, he won Mrs. Conway's heart by a characteristic criticism he passed upon Mr. Pennicuick, the elder, with whom he became (very distantly) acquainted through his new friends. He pronounced him to be ‘rather a scratch lot,’ and more likely to be ‘bought in’ than to awaken public competition. On the other hand, he took to Raymond Pennicuick from the first, and would have put him up to many good things at ‘Garraway's’ and ‘Christie's,’ but for his wife's veto, who looked upon those respectable establishments as haunts of temptation to which no young man should be exposed. As time rolled on, so did Mr. Wardlaw's wealth—increasing like a snow-ball, till at length it enabled him to retire from business, when he took a country-house at Richmond, a fact which had formed a very strong inducement to the Conways to pitch their tent in the same locality.
[Page 100]
Both families were new-comers, but the latter was the later arrival, which had permitted Mrs. Wardlaw to pay the first call upon Mrs. Conway; if their positions had been reversed, that lady would have probably taken advantage of it to delay her visit in order to make it evident that she was not dependent upon the other's acquaintance, or in any way ‘eaten up with those Wardlaws.’ Notwithstanding all which rubbish, the two elder ladies had a sincere regard for one another, not to mention the common bond of affection which Nelly formed between them.
The present occasion was only the second visit which Mrs. Wardlaw had paid Mrs. Conway and her daughter since they had been installed in their new home, but she had been obliged to wait for Mrs. Conway's return call, and had replied to it on the very next day.
‘Why, how is it you have not come in your carriage?’ inquired that lady condescendingly. ‘Nelly and I were quite looking forward to seeing you come in “state.”’
‘Well, the fact was, it seemed too ridiculous, Mrs. Conway, considering what a short distance I had to come; and I want to get used to the thing—which I can't do just yet—before I call on you. It is very kind of John, of course, to give me such a fine coach and horses, not to mention the coachman (who has got a wig, my dear Nelly, made I believe of spun silk), but at present I don't feel much to enjoy them. Thursday—that was the first day—was a great trial to me, dear Mrs. Conway.’
‘A trial? Why a trial, Mrs. Wardlaw?’ inquired the other sweetly; though knowing perfectly well to what her friend was alluding.
‘Well, I dare say to you who have been brought up among
[Page 101]
carriage-people, and are used to all their ways, it would have been nothing; but it was not only that the thing was strange to me, but everybody about me knew that it was strange. I felt all of a twitter at the grandeur and novelty of it, but still more so because Jane and Susan, who had lived with a mistress without a carriage all these days, must have known I was in a twitter. When Charles (that's the new footman) came into the room with his “Ma'am, the carriage is at the door,” it was something so dreadful that I had almost a mind to say, “Then send it away again.” What I did say, however, was “Very good,” with a quiet wave of the hand that I had practised in my own apartment before the pier-glass. I knew that Jane and Susan would be looking out of window at the new carriage, but I was not prepared for what I did see, over the dining-room blind, which was nothing less than Charles himself performing a dance like a wild Indian before the two girls in the area, to express his sense of enjoyment of the whole proceeding. The coachman sat immovable except for a slight wobble which pervaded his frame and extended to his wig. When I appeared at the front door you might have taken them both for graven images; and I hope I looked grave and dignified myself. Only unhappily, in my hurry and nervousness, and also because of my fine train (which is longer than the long clothes I wore as a baby), I put my foot in my gown as I stepped into the carriage, and fell flat on the floor of it.’
For Nelly this narrative had nothing but amusement, but Mrs. Conway received it austerely: she did not like jokes upon any subject; and felt it deplorable that a person unaccustomed to keeping a carriage should find in her own incompetence to assume the ways of ‘society’ a theme for mirth.
[Page 102]
‘You will become used to your new position in time, no doubt,’ said she; ‘but in the mean while you must be careful to maintain your dignity before your servants.’
‘But it is so difficult to do that upon all-fours,’ pleaded the good lady, still shaking with laughter at the recollection of her late catastrophe; ‘and after all, when one does meet with misfortunes, the best plan, I do believe, is to laugh at them.’
‘Indeed!’ said Mrs. Conway, who had never tried that plan. ‘You must have been exceptionally fortunate, I think, to have been able to do so.’
‘Well, yes; I have no reason to complain,’ assented Mrs. Wardlaw simply. ‘Though sometimes John is very trying. What do you think he did only yesterday, for example? He brought down to be stored away in our new house—which, if somewhat larger than we need, is certainly not meant for a dry-goods store— a gross of tambourines.’
‘Of tambourines!’ echoed Nelly, laughing. ‘Is Uncle John’ [she used to call him uncle as a child, notwithstanding some opposition upon the part of her mamma, and still continued so to do because she knew that to drop the assumed relationship would pain him] ‘going to learn that instrument?’
‘Of course not, my dear; and if he was, he could not practise on one hundred and forty-four at once. He has bought them because he says they were an excellent bargain. Now, what would you do, Mrs. Conway, if your husband were to bring you home twelve dozen of tambourines?’
‘I should burn them; but he would never venture,’ added the other haughtily, ‘to commit such an act of folly.’
‘Well, of course it is foolish of John; but then, on the other
[Page 103]
hand, he is no sort of trouble to me as some husbands are; he never interferes with matters of the house, and though he worries me sometimes with his insisting on my doing this and that—on my having this carriage, for instance, which I didn't want, and which will only make me fatter, yet I know it was meant in nothing but kindness, and to save my old legs.’
Mrs. Conway shrugged her shoulders; the expression, ‘to save my old legs,’ was very distasteful to her; a woman who could use it was certainly unworthy of a carriage.
‘Dear Uncle John!’ said Nelly softly, ‘he is always thinking how to please people.’
‘Yes, my dear, he is not clever, but he is kind. I only hope you will have as good a husband. He is never away from home; we have not been separated for twenty-four hours since we married. Of course,’ added Mrs. Wardlaw, with precipitation, for she saw the wrinkles deepening on the forehead of her hostess, ‘that is impossible in many cases. Your own dear papa, for instance, is obliged to be away, but that is for your sakes.’
Mrs. Conway smiled bitterly. Poor Mrs. Wardlaw grew redder and redder, and so very warm that the colour came out of her bright blue gloves. Only one means of conciliation presented itself. She disliked to speak ill of anybody, but to abuse Mr. Pennicuick was always a sure way to Mrs. Conway's favour: so she resolved to sacrifice that gentleman upon the altar of friendship.
‘What I meant to say against men leaving their homes and families was when they do so of their own free wills, from love of travel as they call it, but which is often only a cloak for selfishness. What a mistake it is, for example, in that Mr. Pennicuick to leave
[Page 104]
his son, and his country, and his parish church, to go gadding about in foreign parts!’
‘I cannot say that I agree with you, Mrs. Wardlaw,’ observed Mrs. Conway coldly. ‘I think Mr. Pennicuick is quite right. The mistake he makes—and which those like him make who separate themselves from their own flesh and blood, to live abroad—is this, that they ever trouble themselves to come home again.’
‘Oh dear!’ murmured Mrs. Wardlaw under her breath. She felt as though she had broken some priceless article which could not be replaced, and for which mischance no apology could be made. ‘Do you know, Nelly, I think it's going to rain; so I had better get home while I can.’
She rose and made her adieux to her hostess, who received them with frigidity. Nelly accompanied her to the hall door.
‘My dear child,’ whispered the departing visitor, ‘I am afraid I have put your mamma out. What could I have said that set her off so? Can it possibly have been the tambourines? Perhaps your dear papa used to play upon them.’
‘No, no; mamma is not very well to-day: that is all.’
‘But that would never make her say that he needn't trouble himself to return home.’
‘Hush, hush: she didn't mean it.’
‘Of course not; but even to say it, with your poor dear papa all among those pigtailed savages! why, if anything was to happen to him, she would never forgive herself—I've not upset you , darling, I do hope. I can see there's something the matter.’
‘No, no. I shall better presently. Good-bye, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, and love to Uncle John.’
It was not often that Nelly Conway ‘broke down;’ but that
[Page 105]
afternoon had been a very trying one to her. She had been more moved by Raymond's proposal than she had owned even to herself; the necessity of rejecting it had disheartened her, and made her strangely subject to depressing influences. That allusion of Mrs. Wardlaw's to her father—the very echo of the sentiment she had herself expressed but a few minutes before—filled her with a vague sense of foreboding; how dreadful it would be if ‘anything was to happen to him,’ and she were never to see the loving face which she had pictured to herself so often, partly from memory, partly from the personal description which he had penned to her half in jest! She knew this was weakness, but she was just now too weak to battle against it. It was her wont, when her mother was irritable or in low spirits, to do her best to comfort her, but on this occasion she shrank from the dutiful task. There were two topics —Raymond and her father—which for the time were too painful to her to be discoursed upon; and they were the very ones that her mother would probably select.
She passed by the parlour door, and went up into her own room: not ‘to have a good cry,’ as is the way with some girls, but to think matters out, and if possible compose her mind. She did think of many things both sad and strange. But the wild, wandering, audacious thought itself sometimes falls short of the reality; and so it was with Nelly Conway as she dwelt anxiously upon her father's and her lover's future, or dreamily forecast her own.
[Page 106]
CHAPTER X. CHINESE JUSTICE. There is but one step, it is often said, between the Sublime and the Ridiculous: a downward one, and taken very quickly; but the shock is far greater when the step is taken the other way, and we stumble up from the Ridiculous to the sublime. I remember a masked ball, in a certain place, where men and women were grinning and jigging together, without a serious thought among them, when suddenly above the brazen roar of the band there rose a shrill terrified shriek of ‘Fire!’ What happened on the occasion in question need not be here narrated; but it was dwelt upon by the annalists of the day as transcending all that has been written of the cowardice of human nature. Had they been there themselves, perhaps they would have helped to illustrate it. It was a spectacle, at all events, calculated to inspire pity as well as contempt. To be brought face to face with Death without warning is awful even to the wretched; but to meet him at a harlequinade, with our cap and bells on, is an ordeal terrible to the bravest.
It was something of this nature that had happened to Ralph Pennicuick, when he found himself felled and bound in the hands of the despised Chinese. He had conceived so intense a disdain
[Page 107]
for them, he had been accustomed to regard them so entirely as disagreeable children, that even his dislike of them had been mitigated by their insignificance; and now, in a moment, all his views were changed. The very ridicule he had expended on them seemed to have been paid back to him again; he could not understand how he had ever entertained it; his heart had room for nothing in regard to them save rage, and hate, and horror. For though his courage, or his pride, forbad him to give the least sign of fear, he was as well aware as Conway himself that he was doomed to death. It was surprising that so sagacious a man, and one in general so careful of his own well-being, should have given way to a temptation that would only have been attractive, as one would think, to a midshipman or a schoolboy, and the consequences of succumbing to which were obviously so tremendous. It was, however, his very love of self, which never permitted him to deny it a gratification, however fleeting, combined with what in a younger man would have been the love of mischief, but was in him a malicious impulse, that had induced him to steal the Shay-le. The sudden impulse to deprive thousands of ignorant devotees, and scores of lying priests, of the most precious and most ancient relic their temple possessed, had seized upon him while the Chief-priest's attention was engaged in exhibiting some other sacred object, and it had proved too strong to be resisted. When he had done it, his repentance had been as rapid as his crime; he had perceived the extreme danger of his position, and would perhaps willingly have withdrawn from it had retreat been possible. On the other hand, the Shay-le would not be inquired for again till the next feast-day, which he understood would not occur for several weeks, and by that time he would be safe enough
[Page 108]
among his fellow-countrymen. And with what pride and pleasure would he exhibit this concentration of Chinese sanctity, this crystallised essence of Buddha himself, to admiring friends! If he had not made a reputation for himself already for audacity and coolness, the possession of this relic and the story of its capture would have secured one. At first, as I have said, he had had his doubts, which had given his manner that constraint which his friend had observed: but, before he reached the boat, the matter had thoroughly recommended itself to him. When Conway informed him that the priest had indirectly deceived him, and that the morrow was another feast-day on which the Shay-le would probably be again exhibited, his mind once more misgave him. For it was plain that the loss of the relic would be at once discovered, and on whom was suspicion so likely to fall as upon himself? He even took it from its hiding-place, as we have seen, with the half-intention of dropping it into the river, and so getting rid of all evidence against him; but the thing had shone so, that it struck him it might be really a precious stone; and he was a man to whom gems were gems, and money money. Moreover, pride came to his ruin. He had got possession of this blessed ‘curio,’ and he was not going to part with it, come what would. A resolve once taken with him became adamant. It was clear that the sooner they left the neighbourhood of the temple the better; yet just because Conway had unconsciously observed, ‘You seem in a hurry to get away,’ Pennicuick had obstinately denied it; nay, even though, as has been seen, he had a suspicion that he had been watched by Fu-chow, so strong that if the Chinese captain had given a sign of wakefulness that night, he would have shot him dead, he had not been deterred from his purpose to retain
[Page 109]
his prize. The thought that any harm might arise to his companion out of his own recklessness did not enter into his mind; but it would have been all the same if it had; for if Ralph Pennicuick was not to be moved from a course of action by a consideration of the consequences to himself, it is certain that he would not be so from any fear of what might happen to other people. Hard, insolent, selfish as he was, however, even the sternest moralist might have felt pity for him now. A few days at furthest, to be spent in a noisome prison and to be ended by a lingering death of unimaginable pain, were all that would probably remain to him of life. In the contemplation of which, a better man might have been forgiven if all thought of ‘and after death the judgment’ was overwhelmed and lost.
And yet, all hopeless and helpless as Pennicuick was, not a muscle quivered, nor did the steadiness of his keen eyes abate one jot, as he looked round about him upon his keen-eyed foes. The Chinese, some say, are not cruel; but this only means that they do not take the same active delight in cruelty as some more savage communities; they are totally insensible to the sufferings of their fellow-creatures. They knew that the Englishman was about to undergo one of the most horrible punishments even in their horrible code; but that did not cause them to regard him with any special interest. One of their own countrymen would have failed to arouse it under similar circumstances, and far less this barbarian. What made their almond eyes so bright and wondering as they gazed upon their captive was the immensity of his crime. They could not understand what Buddha could have been about to have permitted so great an impiety as the abstraction of a portion of his own anatomy, without some
[Page 110]
signal and immediate revelation of his wrath. Here was the man alive and unscathed who had stolen the sacred Shay-le, and carried it round his neck as a girl her beads; and there was the precious relic itself, on an open plate upon the altar, twinkling in a subdued manner (by reason of the paper windows) as though the sacrilege that had disturbed its ten thousand years of venerable seclusion was rather a joke than otherwise. Anger and pity were equally absent from the flat smooth faces that surrounded the prostrate prisoner, with one exception. The countenance of Fu-chow, in general not more significant than that of most of his countrymen, expressed quiet malice—an unsatisfied grudge. As Pennicuick's gaze rested upon it, he knew—quite as surely as if the man had told him—that it was to him that he was indebted for this catastrophe: that he had tried to leave the boat that morning to give information of the sacrilege, and failing in that attempt had sent one of his men to do so. This did not arouse in him any remembrance of his own conduct; of the insult he had put on the man's daughter, or of his threats and harshness to the man himself, which had hourly kept alive and ministered to his rancour; but it filled him with a yearning never to be satisfied, and like the craving of a strong man for food or drink, to be allowed one minute—only one—with his arms free, or even his hands, and that smooth traitor's throat within reach of them.
Fu-chow, who read this desire in his eyes quite plainly, moved softly across the room, and stooping down, with quite a winning smile, whispered something in his ear. ‘I understood you, my friend, quite well,’ returned Pennicuick quietly, ‘though I am unacquainted with your charming language.’ But he put the
[Page 111]
word that had been whispered into a pigeon-hole of his mind, that he might presently obtain its interpretation.
The next moment he was picked up by four soldiers, and carried, as though he were already dead, into a neighbouring chamber. This was what in an English country gentleman's house, who is a magistrate, would have been termed the justice-room, where poachers undergo preliminary examination (in which they are by no means cautioned not to criminate themselves), and the parentage of village love-children is humorously investigated; in China, where everything is as magnificent as sound can make it, it was the Hall of Audience, where the proceedings are conducted in accordance with the dignity of its title.
At a high broad desk set out with writing materials, the mandarin had already taken his seat, with secretaries, clerks, and even an interpreter (who did not understand English) in attendance; and two lictors with whips—used not as formal instruments of punishment, but merely in a casual way to clear the road for his Eminence, when he moved in his sedan abroad. On the desk was Twang-hi's official seal, and a cup containing tallies, to be thrown down on the ground to indicate how many stripes with the universal bamboo he considered to be adapted for any culprit brought before him. The bamboo stood up against the wall, along with a board with two round grooves for compressing the ankles, in order to expedite confession, and five round sticks arranged to squeeze the fingers with the like object. Above these instruments of persuasion hung several inscriptions, like the Scripture texts in the bedrooms of some professing Christians (and with about as much practical effect), recommending the exercise of mercy.
[Page 112]
Despite these formal shows, and not a little tawdry ornamentation, the room was as dirty as a police-court in a low neighbourhood. There was of course no counsel on either side; none such are in any case permitted to appear; nor are the witnesses even sworn—a precaution the less necessary since no oath has up to this date been discovered which is binding upon the Chinese conscience; indeed, if among the wise sayings of Confucius the phrase ‘first catch your conscience’ does not appear, his system of morality as regards the Celestial race is singularly deficient and unelemental. Moreover, the witnesses are not bound to appear against the prisoner during any subsequent proceedings. It cannot be urged against the Chinese code that these most necessary and innocent persons are kept hanging about in draughty courts, as under our own system, not knowing when they will be called upon, and uncertain of everything except that they are the only persons in the case who are being put to inconvenience without remuneration. In China, to prevent all this, and especially to insure their attendance, witnesses, prosecutor, and prisoner, are all committed to gaol together in readiness for the assizes.
In the present case there was but one witness pure and simple, a Buddhist priest, who had seen the two Englishmen go up towards the pagoda where the Shay-le was kept; for Fu-chow, although his revelation of what he had seen in the cabin would prove fatal enough, even if the relic had not been found upon the prisoner's person, assumed to himself the position of prosecutor. His glibness in his own tongue was surprising; and as he had taken the precaution to preface his observations with the statement that his father was a mandarin, the great Twang-hi condescended to attend to them; otherwise (and this is a plan which we might
[Page 113]
borrow with great advantage), when witnesses are tedious or even too florid in their testimony, the bamboo is applied to them , to compel terseness.
Conway listened with all his ears; but his scanty knowledge of the Chinese tongue placed him in much the same position as that of gentleman learning short-hand who endeavours to set down the words of a fluent speaker; before he had thoroughly mastered the meaning of the first sentence, the orator was three sentences ahead of him. He could only gather vaguely that Fu-chow was extolling his father, whose dignity and position he described as only inferior to that of Twang-hi himself; and that he then proceeded to describe his own devotion to the principles of morality and religion, which had caused him to watch with caution (or in other words to play the spy upon) this barbarian blasphemer, whose cup of enormities, long filled to the brim, had at last been made to run over by this unparalleled act of sacrilege. He also observed that the references to himself were exculpatory and even favourable, which afforded him some comfort upon his friend's account as well as upon his own, since, had he also been included in the accusation, he would have been powerless indeed to give him aid.
What he missed the sense of, and which was likely to escape him from its original view of the matter, was the two pictures drawn of him and Pennicuick by the Chinese captain and contrasted with one another. He himself was described as a military personage of distinction, revered by his fellow-countrymen, and even respected, as was proved by his letter of introduction, by Chinese officials at Shanghae of such rank as to enjoy the personal acquaintance of Twang-hi himself. He was guileless, pious, and passionately
[Page 114]
attached to the memory of his parents: whereas this Pennicuick, on the other hand, was a mere hanger-on of society, unknown to persons of respectability, and one whom he (Fu-chow), albeit imperfectly acquainted with the barbarian language, had with his own ears heard speak disrespectfully of mandarins, of their buttons, their peacock's feathers, and in short of every institution calculated to arouse reverence and respect in the mind of man. That the prisoner was wicked and dangerous, in fact, had been long abundantly clear to him, though the crime of which he now stood committed did, Fu-chow confessed, transcend everything of which he had suspected him to be capable.
To all this impassioned eloquence Twang-hi listened with a sublime gravity, not to be emulated by flesh and blood; indeed, he looked more like the mandarins we see in England, not constructed of those fleeting materials, who stand at the doors of tea-shops, and point rigidly to the legends in the window concerning the prices of Congou or Hyson. Only at intervals he would slowly and solemnly incline his head, so much after the manner of an automaton chess-player that Conway almost expected to hear the click in the machinery as he did so. Presently, however, cutting Fu-chow's eloquence not short indeed, but very abruptly, he signed to his two lictors, and in a moment Pennicuick was on his knees in front of the desk with these two personages on either side of him, and apparently hanging on to him by his ears. They were not hurting him at present, but were prepared to twist them at a moment's notice in case the culprit proved refractory in the matter of confession, or generally failed to gratify expectation. Conway also noticed for the first time that there was a neat plot of flint-stones
[Page 115]
on the floor, to which a kneeling prisoner might be removed, by no means to his convenience, if he showed any tardiness of speech.
‘Let the culprit say what he has got to say for himself,’ observed the mandarin; ‘and do you, sir’ (this with a courteous inclination of his head to Conway), ‘interpret it to us in the interests of justice.’
‘He calls upon you, Pennicuick, for your defence,’ said Conway hurriedly. ‘Tell him you were ignorant of the gravity of your crime; that you are exceedingly sorry; and above all that you have lots of money wherewith to make expiation to the temple for the wrong committed, and—especially—to recompense his Excellency for the trouble you have caused him.’
‘I will see him damned first, Connie,’ was the fierce reply. ‘The revolver is lying on the right-hand side of his desk beneath those papers. I will give you a thousand pounds---’
‘You are throwing away your life, Pennicuick,’ interrupted Conway, ‘by every moment of silence, and the least show of resistance would throw away mine. I adjure you to say something conciliatory, and above all to offer as huge a bribe as it is in your power to pay without application to Shanghae.’
‘I am not to be frightened, Conway, by this juggler's threats. And I will not submit to extortion,’ answered Pennicuick sternly. ‘Tell him I am underneath the protection of the British flag, and woe betide him---’
Twang-hi lifted up his hand for silence, and at the same moment something happened to the speaker's ears which somehow compelled obedience. The agony was so excessive that it might have extorted a shriek from the strongest man, but not a sound broke from the prisoner's lips. His friend, attracted by the mandarin's
[Page 116]
eye, did not even know what had taken place, nor did the stubborn pride of Pennicuick permit him to reveal the humiliation he had suffered.
‘My friend wishes to say, your Excellency,’ said Conway, very slowly, not only that he might be understood, but to give himself time to manufacture suitable arguments, ‘that he is overwhelmed with horror and penitence, on account of the outrage he has committed. He had no idea of the sacredness of the Shay-le, or of the value set upon it by so many religious persons. He is prepared to pay to the utmost of his power in atonement for the foolish frolic (as he thought it) of which he has been guilty. If any offering to the temple, or endowment for the priests’—a look of such intense negation came into the mandarin's face, that Conway would have left that line, and glided off to another branch at once, even without the words that accompanied it.
‘Is it conceivable,’ interrupted Twang-hi, pointing to Pennicuick, ‘that this wretch imagines that Buddha needs his dirty money, or that his priests would accept in his cursed name, as expiation for so infamous a sacrilege, any pecuniary recompense whatever? If it was possible to enhance such unparalleled wickedness as he has committed, he has done so by this proposal.’
Here the audience all raised their hands in admiration of his Excellency's noble sentiments, with the exception of the Buddhist priest himself, who looked morose and disappointed. Like a High Church rector who has been decorating his chancel, he was thinking of restorations, and how conveniently a little heretical money would have come in just then.
‘There is no reason, O Twang-hi,’ said he, ‘why this unhappy reprobate should not do something in the way of repairs to our
[Page 117]
holy temple, before expiating in torments that fall far short of his deserts his abominable crime. In the Fire-lake that awaits him hereafter it may be some consolation to his wretched soul that he has contributed to so pious a work.’
‘What the deuce are they jabbering about, Connie?’ inquired Pennicuick fretfully. ‘I have five hundred pounds or so on board the boat; and if you will not let me have a shot at them, I suppose there is nothing for it but to pay.’ His ears were still in pain, and the friction of his knees against the flint-strewn floor was getting intolerable.
‘My friend has made me a communication, your Excellency,’ said Conway gravely, ‘which is of great importance, but must be addressed to your private ear.’
‘In the Hall of Audience there are no secrets,’ returned the mandarin austerely; ‘the works of justice must be seen of men. Nevertheless, that the whole truth of the matter should be known, approach and speak.’
Then ensued the scene which is so often witnessed in our Courts of Chancery, when a married woman is admitted, in sight of all, to converse with the Lord Chancellor on the bench of justice; their whispers having reference (as is charitably understood) solely to the disposal of her property without dictation from her husband.
‘That my friend has committed a great crime, Twang-hi, is true, though it was done in ignorance and error; but penetrated as he is with a sense of its enormity, it almost equally distresses him to have put your Excellency to so much trouble and inconvenience. “How shall I recompense this wise and merciful functionary,” is the question that now agitates his bosom, “for the
[Page 118]
attention which he has bestowed upon this affair?” I adjure your Excellency to condescend to accept two hundred pounds of English money.’
If the countenance of Twang-hi could have been capable of expressing a greater gravity and sense of official responsibility than it did already, it expressed it now, as he solemnly looked round the court.
‘You are a good man,’ he whispered in a low tone, ‘and your feelings do you honour. I will take the two hundred pounds of English money.’
‘And your prisoner will go free?’
‘Nay. I have not the power to set him at liberty. The offence he has committed is far too grave. His sentence will be pronounced by the governor of the province, and will without doubt be such as is awarded to all who commit sacrilege. The Emperor himself could not save him from the post and the knife.’
‘You will at all events permit me to communicate with his friends at Shanghae?’
‘By no means,’ answered the mandarin coolly. ‘It would cost me my position, and perhaps my head. It has been proclaimed that there is to be no more truckling to barbarians. Your friend there is as good as dead already.’
‘If this be so, what advantage will he derive from the little present of which I have already spoken?’
‘He will be spared the great distress of seeing his innocent friend thrown into prison with himself, in a few days to suffer the same condign punishment. You will have access to him while in goal, and may even enjoy the melancholy pleasure of witnessing his execution. Then you shall depart in peace, and tell
[Page 119]
your fellow-countrymen all that has happened, in one of their so admirable newspapers.’
‘But this man is not only a person of wealth, Twang-hi, but of much importance. His death will be avenged by the men of his own nation; and not only you, and everyone who has had a hand in it, but the country at large, will be held responsible.’
‘I have said you were a good man,’ observed Twang-hi coldly; ‘but you will not permit me to add, a wise one. The argument you advance, if it were of real importance, would recommend that yon should both be killed, since dead men do not make a fuss about their fate. But, in fact, it is quite worthless. If a native of this country goes to England, and commits a crime, he is punished by the law of the land. You do not say to yourselves, What will the Celestials think about it? Perhaps the idea of the anger of the Emperor, the Son of Heaven, has but little effect upon you. What is sauce for the duck, says Confucius, is sauce for the drake. Moreover, even supposing there should be a national disturbance about this fellow, Dhulang here, my private residence, is a long way up the country, and, to speak freely, I should not care one cash about the matter. On the other hand, I should risk my head by omitting to send the case before the governor, and I value my head at a considerably higher figure than two hundred pounds of English money. Nevertheless, for that sum I will make things as comfortable as I can, having heard a satisfactory report of you from Fu-chow (who is the nephew of a friend of mine), and also because I believe you to be a good man. If things had been less agreeably managed, your friend would have had his ankles squeezed for him, and his fingers pinched, perhaps, not to mention the bamboo. “What we have escaped,” says Confucius, “may well be reckoned as gain.”’
[Page 120]
‘How long, Twang-hi, will the messenger whom you send to the governor of the province take to go and return?’
‘About eight-and-forty hours.’
‘And if the sentence should be’—Conway was a brave man, but a certain creeping of the flesh here seized him—‘should be,’ he continued, ‘as you apprehend, when will it be executed?’
‘It must be put into effect at once. I shall have no choice in the matter, but be personally responsible for the least delay. The affair is not in my hands, but in those of Imperial justice. I conclude you have the money you spoke of in the boat?’
‘Your Excellency shall have it at once,’ said Conway gravely. ‘In the mean time I have your solemn promise that I shall have unrestrained communication with my friend, and that he will be treated with kindness?’
‘As to that, dear sir,’ replied Twang-hi, with blandness, ‘he will have to make his own arrangements. I can only see that no wrong is done here in my own court; “men's consciences are in their own private keeping,” says Confucius, and I have heard, unofficially, that our gaoler makes his little perquisites. I am thus frank with you because I wish you well, and believe you to be a good man.’
Then Twang-hi arose, and, in the name of the Emperor, the Son of Heaven, announced that he, for his part, washed his hands of the barbarian blasphemer, and left him to be dealt with by the mercy of the governor of the province.
This phrase, as Conway was well aware, corresponds in China with the euphonious terms in which heretics were wont to be recommended to the attentions of the Holy Office, and is always fatal to the prospects of a prisoner.
At this juncture Ralph Pennicuick was twitched up by the
[Page 121]
arms from his kneeling posture, and, followed by two soldiers with drawn swords, the points of which almost touched his retreating figure, was hurried from the room. Conway would have hastened after him, but the master of the ceremonies interposed.
‘It is the desire of Twang-hi,’ said he, with great politeness, ‘that an immediate opportunity should be afforded you of returning to your boat, and making the arrangements about which you expressed anxiety.’
Conway would have remonstrated, but the mandarin had disappeared, nor was even Fu-chow to be seen, being, in fact, in his character of prosecutor, already on his way to prison. For the rest, the malignity that was expressed upon the countenances of all, especially on that of the scowling priest, evidenced the futility of any appeal. There was nothing for it but to accompany the major-domo to the boat.
‘His Excellency, your master, has given orders, I presume, that after I have made my compliments’—as delicate a phrase as he could think of for greasing the hands of justice—‘I shall be at liberty to visit my friend?’
‘Except the words of wisdom which have just fallen from his mouth, like the pure and sparkling drops of yonder fountain,’ said the major-domo serenely, ‘his Excellency has kept silence.’
This gentleman, as is always the case with persons in his position in China, was devoted to literature; he had a very pretty turn for poetic imagery, and a talent for iteration from the classics, and would, under less auspicious circumstances, and in a barbarian clime such as our own, have probably been an art-critic.
‘Do you mean to say that the word of Twang-hi is as your
[Page 122]
mock money?’ inquired Conway, his patience, which was considerable, on the brink of giving way, notwithstanding his familiarity with the national methods of procedure.
‘Speak not disrespectfully of that which is burnt before the gods,’ answered the other reprovingly. ‘Twang-hi wishes you well. But his hands are washed of you. It is henceforth the pride and pleasure of Kushan to take charge of your esteemed interests. You will be kept under guard on board the boat until your friend has met with the fate awarded to him, unless any solid reason should chance, by the will of Heaven, to be advanced to the contrary.’
‘Would a “tael,” 2 O Kushan, be a solid reason?’
‘A tael is what is given to-day upon the Sacred Hill to every beggar,’ observed the major-domo abstractedly.
‘Then a sycee—let us say of five taels—is at your service.’
‘There is no weight in it,’ replied the other, holding out his finger as if balancing a feather; ‘it would almost float in the air. When one has ten taels in the hand, then indeed we say, “Ah, there is something!”’
‘When I behold the face of my friend again, O Kushan, thou shalt have ten taels.’
‘Good. Human joys are but as the skippings of a sparrow, yet the face of a friend is a sweet spectacle. “Sunder not man from his brother,” says the Best and Wisest. I will myself accompany you to the gaol when the business that we have on hand is concluded.’
Kushan was not only literary, but (which is rare in persons of that class) a man of business. He accompanied Conway to the
[Page 123]
cabin, and assured himself of the value of the notes and bullion which the latter paid over to him for the mandarin on behalf of his friend.
‘These will go to Shanghae at once to be realised, I suppose,’ observed Conway.
Kushan nodded. ‘Delay is deprecated by the Wise,’ he said.
‘And for how many taels could a letter be taken with them by a sure and private hand?’
‘It is hopeless,’ answered the philosopher, with a sigh of unmistakable regret. ‘To do business, and at the same time to benefit humanity, is an opportunity that rarely offers itself. That gentleman yonder,’ he pointed towards the court, indicating Pennicuick, ‘will be dead before your messenger could go two days' journey; and those who sent him would smart for it. You will say that you meant nothing, that you only intended to send a messenger to your wife to say the weather is beautiful. But you should not pull up your stockings in a melon field; people always think you are stealing.’
‘My friend is very rich, Kushan,’ pleaded Conway earnestly. ‘If time were given me, I could make it worth the while even of the lord of the province to take a merciful view of the case.’
‘You could not buy his head, and that is what he would lose by such a course,’ returned the other coolly. ‘You think I paint a snake and add legs. On the contrary, I understate the matter. No human power can save the man; and it is not likely, under the circumstances’—here a quiet smile crossed the grave face of the speaker—‘that Buddha will interfere in his favour.’
‘Then what advantage, in Heaven's name, do we gain by all this expenditure?’
[Page 124]
‘For yourself, immunity and escape; for your friend—well, when one is on his death-bed there is sometimes mitigation from pain. A fish may sport in the kettle though his life will not be long. By the by, I conclude that he has money in his pocket.’
‘In his pocket? No; I think not.’
‘What, has he gone to gaol without money? That is like going to sea without sails; he will not get on at all.’
‘But they will not venture to ill-treat him in spite of the mandarin's orders to the contrary?’
‘I am afraid it is possible that, by this time, the honourable person about whom we are discoursing may have been made exceedingly uncomfortable.’
The face of Kushan expressed so much more even than his words, that Conway did not lose a moment in providing himself with funds, and starting with the major-domo for the prison.
[Page 125]
CHAPTER XI. THE PRISONER'S HOPE. The Chinese themselves, who ought to be the best authorities upon the matter, indicate their gaols by the same name as that which they give to the infernal regions. When a man has been committed to prison, they say, ‘He is gone to---,’ the short for Gehenna, concerning which locality their views are identical with those entertained by our own theologians. These places of durance are built for the accommodation of prisoners only; and as witnesses and prosecutors are sent thither as well as the accused, the consequence is over-crowding. The inmates also suffer another sort of squeezing at the hands of the officials. The gaolers receive from Government a mere pittance, and make up their income by perquisites, which are wrung from those who are so unfortunate as to fall into their hands.
Conway and Pennicuick had both beheld with their own eyes the condition of these miserable beings, during a visit which curiosity had led them to take to a certain prison on their road, and they had been each impressed in their several ways. ‘It is a nice world,’ was Pennicuick's observation. ‘Thousands of persons in it, mostly innocent, are suffering slow tortures in these places day and night. What has become of all the principles of eternal
[Page 126]
justice, and so forth?’ It would be unjust to say that he felt no pity; but there had nevertheless been something satisfactory to his feelings in this corroborative testimony (as he considered it) to the non-existence of a Supreme Benevolence.
Conway had kept silence; for unhappy persons, when not base enough to derive pleasure from the greater misery of their fellows, are rendered by the contemplation of it still more depressed.
‘Your view of the case,’ Pennicuick had continued, in his bitter way, ‘is that matters are redressed hereafter. You allow that such a state of things as we have just been witnessing would be a reproach to any government calling itself divine, except for the doctrine of compensation. All these poor tortured friendless beings are to go to heaven. Yet, I suppose, their being in prison, even in China, does not argue that they are more virtuous than the rest of their lying, thieving fellow-countrymen who happen to be at large. Why should they therefore go to heaven? and if not, why should they be thus oppressed on earth?’
‘I am not the Creator, Pennicuick.’
‘You are His apologist; and I ask you if this is justice, and (especially) mercy?’
‘I reply, in the words of Scripture, that He is in Heaven, and we are on earth; and that, being equally ignorant of the riddle of human fate and destiny, it is no use asking questions of one another about it.’
‘Well, it is something that you don't fold your hands, Connie, and, looking smug and submissive, observe that whatever is right. Let us light our cigars, and forget all about it.’
Conway had not forgotten all about those unimaginable horrors of which he had been a witness, but their impression had grown faint
[Page 127]
and vague upon the retina of his mind, just as happens to all of us —except some Mrs. Fry (who is one in a million)—when we have visited any scene of misfortune, such as a workhouse, or a lunatic asylum, in which, nevertheless, many thousands of our fellows continue to live on.
When now, in company with the dignified Kushan, he reached the gate of the gaol, it was with no greater apprehension concerning the present position of his friend than that his own absence might have distressed him, since he would not know how long they might be kept apart. His mind, too, was monopolised by the ultimate fate of Pennicuick, which, he was only too sure, was sealed, and which it was become, he thought, his painful duty to break to him.
Although, as we have said, the man was not very dear to him as a friend, his unhappy position seemed to beget a dearness, or rather, perhaps, to revive all those feelings of regard he had once entertained for him in youth. The memory of their old college days together welled up from his still kindly heart into his eyes, as he thought of this man and the bitter end that awaited him. What an end it was for so masterful and proud a spirit! If his sentence had been death—mere death—that would have been sad enough; but no soldier would have looked down the muzzle of the guns that were to kill him more steadfastly, he was well aware, than would Ralph Pennicuick. But that he should be bound to a post, and hacked to pieces by savage hands—faugh! His soul sickened at the contemplation of it. It seemed too hideous and terrible a thing to happen. And yet it was certain to happen.
They were standing before a long low building of but two stories high—or rather of one story and a half, for the basement was half sunk, and only showed the tops of certain barred windows
[Page 128]
without panes, through which, even to where they stood, came a sickly effluvium that seemed to poison the spring air.
‘Why do they not open the gate, Kushan? They have both heard and seen us.’
‘That is the very reason,’ answered the other quietly. ‘They are making preparations for your honourable visit. Here is the governor of the prison himself, who, in general, only receives in person those who have committed murder.’
The individual whose appearance had suggested this doubtful compliment was a tall athletic man, attired in a loose grey gown, and very little else, his legs being bare, and even his arm sleeves rolled up to the elbow, but wearing a button on his cap denoting the sixth degree of rank, an unusually high one for a person of his calling. He was a little under middle age—not old enough in fact to wear a beard, a privilege which is not awarded in China to young men—but without that hirsute appendage he looked truculent and forbidding enough. His small eyes, in particular, were cruel as well as cunning, and his voice had a harsh strident ring, in strong contrast to the mellifluous accents of the major-domo.
‘This is not the day for visits,’ said he to Conway. ‘You cannot be admitted without an order from the mandarin.’
Conway put his hand in his pocket and pulled out two taels of silver. The major-domo looked up at the sky, as if in admiration of that work of nature; the governor of the gaol (which stood in the open country) turned his eyes towards the distant mountains, at the same time holding out his hand, hollowed for the reception of the expected bribe. The whole scene reminded one of a borough election as it used to be in England.
[Page 129]
‘You wish to see your friend, I suppose; it is contrary to rule, but perhaps I may effect it.’
‘The general interests of humanity,’ observed Kushan, ‘should overbear particular enactments, and lenity should be practised where it does not encourage crime.’
The chief gaoler nodded approval of these noble sentiments.
‘The Englishman has been made comfortable, and placed in a room by himself,’ said he; ‘but such advantages are rare.’
‘He who gives him comfort will be well rewarded,’ said Conway. ‘My friend here will tell you that I have the means of paying for every privilege that is granted to him.’
‘You should have sent word of that when he first came,’ observed the gaoler drily. ‘However, there is no harm done; he has been subjected to a little discipline, but he will enjoy himself all the more when you tell him it will not occur again.’ Here he smoothed his chin—a very superfluous operation—and in so doing displayed upon his forefinger Pennicuick's signet ring.
‘Oh, the ring!’ said he, perceiving that Conway's eye had caught sight of it; ‘the poor man had nothing else wherewith to discharge his entrance fee. It may be redeemed, however, at a just valuation. Enter. Your friend is in the farther chamber.’
The gate opened on a passage, the walls of which were mere iron gratings, through which could be seen the prison yards, crowded with their half-naked and squalid inmates; at the end was a low door, which the gaoler unlocked, signing to Conway to pass in.
The chamber was so dark that he could but just perceive the short flight of steps that led down into it; it was in fact but a mere cell, half underground, and contained nothing in the way of
[Page 130]
furniture save a low wooden bed like a fishmonger's slab. Upon this was stretched, or rather was huddled up, a human form, whom his stumbling and somewhat noisy ingress had failed to rouse.
‘Pennicuick, Ralph Pennicuick, it is I,’ said Conway, in vague alarm. It was only an hour or so at farthest since he had stood beside his friend in the house of the mandarin, and had seen him depart in evil plight indeed, but in health and courage. And now the man lay before him, motionless and almost shapeless, with his eyes staring wildly at the wall.
‘Is it really you, Connie?’ answered the other, but without stirring a muscle. ‘I was afraid we should not meet again. No, no , don't touch me’—Conway had striven to take the hand that lay nearest to him; ‘I am one bruise.’
‘What, in the devil's name, have they done to you, Penn?’
‘I don't know; never mind now. What I want is, above everything —will you swear to get it me, Conway?’
‘Yes, I will; whatever it is.’
‘It is the bottle of laudanum out of my writing-case.’
Then in a moment Conway knew what had happened. His unhappy friend had been put to the torture, and wished to guard against the possibility of its recurrence. Under such circumstances he would perhaps have sympathised with the request in any case; but with the knowledge of what must needs await Pennicuick in the end he by no means repented of his promise. His ideas were sufficiently unconventional to see nothing worse in taking poison to avoid a lingering death than in taking chloroform to kill the pains of an ‘operation.’
‘You shall have the bottle, my dear fellow,’ said he cheerily,
[Page 131]
‘just for a satisfaction to your mind; but I have taken measures that in future no hurt shall be done you in this accursed den. I had no idea, since the mandarin had passed his word you should be kindly treated, that such an outrage could be possible. I did but go to the boat to get 200 l . that Twang-hi demanded, I must say, for very scant service; but perhaps he might have made it worse for both of us, and I thought---’
‘If you had gone through what I have suffered for these last three hours’—interrupted Pennicuick with a bitter groan.
‘My dear old Penn, you have not been here an hour.’
‘It seems a lifetime, Conway. As for money,’ continued Pennicuick peevishly, ‘I would give all I possess in the world to get clear of these devils. It was because I had no coin about me that they hung me up by an arm and a leg—it seems so simple, but oh, Heaven, the agony of it! My wrist and ankles are in flames, and the rest of me is a cold jelly.’
And indeed, in spite of the closeness of the cell, the face and forehead of the unhappy man were wet and cold.
‘Take this,’ said Conway, putting a flask of brandy, which, hardly knowing why, but with a vague sense that it might be useful, he had thrust into his pocket on leaving the boat, to his companion's lips.
‘Ah, that is life!’ gasped Pennicuick gratefully. ‘I am no longer a jelly; I am rising in the scale of development, and feel more like a turkey that has been boned. You are quite right about hell, Conway—there is such a place, for I have been in it. And now tell me about that hound of a mandarin, and what is to be done with me.’
‘It seems the matter does not lie in his hands, Penn,’ answered
[Page 132]
Conway gravely. ‘It has been referred to the governor of the province.’
‘Then give him 20,000 l ., in the fiend's name, and let us get home,’ cried Pennicuick vehemently. ‘I tell you that money is no object to me—none. I must get home.’
‘Indeed, Penn, I have done my best. I have offered, on your behalf, any sum the man would name; but my answer is that it would be useless; that the taking that infernal Shay-le is a sacrilege that cannot be atoned for by any bribe; that it would cost the governor's life to compromise the matter.’
‘You are deuced cool about it, Conway,’ said the other reproachfully.
‘Do not say that, Penn. I endeavour to keep cool, as you call it, for your sake; that I may have my wits about me to take advantage of the least turn in the cards. So help me Heaven, I would give my right hand to see you out of this, and safe at Shanghae.’
‘I do believe you, Connie. Forgive me.’ There was a long silence, during which Conway was not ashamed to show the grief that consumed him.
‘Don't do that, pray don't,’ said Pennicuick. ‘It is no use crying over spilt milk. Of course, I have been a fool, and shall have a high price to pay for my folly. You do think a price will pay for it, don't you? Tell me the truth.’
‘While there is life, Penn, there is hope.’
‘I understand,’ said the other gravely. ‘These devils mean to take my life. Well, we must all die some day.’
There was resolution in his tone, but no resignation. It was plain that the man, bold as he was, thought it very hard to die.
[Page 133]
The expression of his eyes, as he stared at the blank wall, was that of anger as well as despair.
‘If I had only hold of him—of his windpipe—with my teeth,’ he murmured grimly, ‘then I should die content. Where is he?’
‘Do you mean Fu-chow? He is in the prison somewhere, I believe. Don't waste a thought on him.’
‘Oh, yes, he is in the prison; he spoke to me. By the by, tell me what is meant by the words “Ling-chih,” Connie.’
Conway felt himself growing cold; his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth.
‘Come, have courage,’ said Pennicuick. ‘After all, it is not your affair but mine. I wish to know the worst. What is “Ling-chih”?’
‘It is a Chinese punishment.’
‘I know that; what does it mean? that a man is boiled alive, or starved to death, or what?’
‘It means literally “cut into ten thousand pieces.”’
‘How is that done?’
‘I believe the poor wretch is tied to a post, and hacked about with a knife. Why speak of such horrors?’
‘I will cease to do so when you have brought me the laudanum. In the mean time the matter concerns me a good deal, for such is to be my sentence. I gathered that much for a certainty from the enjoyment in Fu-chow's face when he communicated it to me in Chinese.’
Conway was silent. He had no comfort to give, and he did not wish to speak of Fu-chow. But, sitting on the wretched pallet, he laid his hand upon his friend's head with a tenderness that a woman might have envied.
[Page 134]
‘You will do everything that can be done, I am sure, Conway,’ continued the other with unwonted softness; ‘and you will not forget the laudanum.’
‘Certainly not. Though I trust in Heaven there may be no need for using it.’
‘I trust in you ,’ said Pennicuick significantly; ‘and I have a plan. The decree for “Ling-chih” will come, no doubt, and somebody must go through with it. But these wretches will do anything for money; not being Christians, like you, old fellow’— here he smiled after his old fashion—‘they are not afraid of death. Of course, the torture must be taken into the account and paid for; let it be so. Why should I not purchase a substitute?’
The suddenness of this proposition put Conway's ideas to flight. It was so audacious, and also, as it struck him for the moment, so immoral. If he himself at least had committed any crime, he felt sure that he could not have permitted an innocent man to die for him. At the same time, the life of a Chinese was by no means in his eyes what that of an Englishman would have been. Moreover, it was not as if any compulsion was to be exercised; it was a simple contract. Every man who is a soldier, for the sake of a soldier's pay, may be said to sell his life; why not on the scaffold as in the field? Still, for the moment the suggestion startled him.
‘Do you see any difficulties?’ inquired Pennicuick impatiently. ‘The chief gaoler and his subordinates can be squared, and the mandarin has already shown his hand. It must, therefore, be a mere question of figures. Where the pinch will be is about the time. These fellows will not take my bare word, of course; we must send to Shanghae for something in the way of security for
[Page 135]
the money. But time can be bought like anything else, I suppose.’
A keen admiration for his friend's wits began to mix with Conway's pity. What a clever fellow he must be to have thought out all this in his miserable and shaken condition; not concealing his own danger from himself, but selecting at once the only possible course that could avert it!
‘I am pretty well off, Connie,’ continued Pennicuick, in a tone half jesting, half constrained; he was conscious that, to account for certain economies, he had always represented himself as less wealthy than he really was. ‘Even 20,000 l . would not break me.’
‘I can easily believe that, my dear fellow,’ answered Conway drily. ‘It is a large sum, but not too large to give for a man's life.’
‘For my own life, no, begad. But that of a Chinaman is very different. Of course, no Englishman would part with his life at all, however high the offer. But my impression is that you will get your native substitute for a song—say, a fifty-pound note; while the rest of the money will go among the officials. When do you think this infernal decree will arrive?’
‘The mandarin told me that he expected the reply from the governor of the province in eight-and-forty hours.’
‘Well, that will be my death doom, so we have no time to spare. You had better at once sound these scoundrels about providing a substitute. And, for Heaven's sake, Connie, in case the luck goes all against me, remember the laudanum.’
[Page 136]
CHAPTER XII. A CHINESE PRISON. A more willing mind to save his friend than that of Arthur Conway, or a more loyal heart, did not exist in any man; but, if their circumstances had been reversed, it is no discredit to him to say that Pennicuick would have been the better man to conduct the matter now in hand. With the fellow-creatures he had to deal with —which means, as it too often does at home, to contend against— three things were above all things necessary: audacity, unscrupulousness, and a profound belief in the vileness of human nature. In all three of these qualities Conway was wanting. He was brave, and had once been reckless enough, but he had lost much of his ‘go’ and vigour; though his morality was by no means of a milk- and-water type, he was a man of honour; and he entertained the erroneous idea that there was some sort of good in almost every man. Matters were, therefore, against him as a plenipotentiary about to transact with Chinese officials, but on the other hand he felt that he had a personal well-wisher in Fu-chow. True, this man had betrayed his friend, and was indeed the immediate cause of his misfortune; but this was no reason why he should not make use of him to mitigate the mischief he himself had wrought. He had his revenge, and might now prove susceptible of other
[Page 137]
passions. If help lay anywhere, it was to be obtained, Conway thought, through this man's agency; and it was to him—the last man in the world that Pennicuick would have looked to—that his thoughts turned upon leaving his unhappy friend.
At the cell door he found the chief gaoler; a sycophantic smile sat on his evil face, the consequence probably of some recent private conversation with Kushan, and he rubbed his huge hands softly together to express conciliation.
‘My friend has been ill-treated,’ said Conway coldly.
‘They have stretched him a bit, honourable sir, but he will come round with a little hog's lard, which shall be applied immediately. In the meantime, can I oblige you in any way?’
‘Yes, in many ways; and you will find it to your advantage— much to your advantage—so to do. In the first place, I must see Fu-chow, the prosecutor in this case, and immediately.’
‘Good; there is a small fee---’
‘You shall be paid in a lump sum for everything. It is not a question of a tael or two. Do you understand?’
There was no doubt that this gentleman understood. The characteristics of the wolf which had heretofore distinguished him disappeared from his cruel face at once, and were replaced by those of the fox; he looked keen, but in high good-humour, like Reynard when he has a fat turkey slung on his shoulder, and is trotting homewards with the best of appetites.
‘There is nothing which is more agreeable to my feelings,’ he said, ‘than to see everything run smooth with honourable persons in my establishment; when things run otherwise, there is no one to blame but themselves. Mistakes,’ added he, with a sudden recollection of his treatment of Pennicuick, ‘will sometimes occur
[Page 138]
in the inferior departments, for the master's eye cannot be everywhere; but that is only to say we are human.’
It is one of the small aggravations of Chinese misrule that almost all officials of any rank are ‘literates;’ they have gained their position by ‘cram’ of the philosophic kind, which gives their conversation a touch of the Tartuffe or the Joseph Surface. To hear this half-naked villain excusing himself on the ground of humanity would have been grotesque if it had not been so outrageous.
He placed a whistle to his lips, and blew a long shrill call, which produced the under-gaoler, a facsimile of himself except that he was of a slightly more brutal type, and had less clothes on; he wore nothing, in fact, but a pair of linen drawers reaching to his middle.
‘Sheer Singh, take this honourable person to see the commander Fu-chow.’
The answer was delivered so rapidly that Conway could not catch it.
The chief gaoler broke out into a grim smile.
‘Sheer Singh thinks the commander had better come to you unless you are in a great hurry.’
‘I have no time to lose,’ observed Conway.
The chief gaoler nodded, and walked away; but Sheer Singh, with a great key in his hand, stood with his face turned heavenward in serene abstraction, like a fiendish St. Peter.
Conway knew by this time what was meant by this contemplative attitude, and at once produced some pieces of silver, which the other seized on greedily and transferred to his mouth, where they stuck out on one side, like a nut in the cheek of a monkey. It was plain by the look of gratified greed in his small eyes that
[Page 139]
it was a bigger nut than he had expected, and Conway improved the occasion by telling him that he should have as much again if his conduct gave satisfaction.
The next moment the gate in the grating was unlocked, and he was ushered into the prison yard. This was full of people all sitting or lying on the bare earth in various stages of despondency. Not one was either walking or standing, for this was the ‘poor’ ward, every inmate of which had been ‘squeezed,’ and squeezed in vain, until they had very literally no leg to stand upon. Some had suffered, as Pennicuick had done, from ‘the frame of the flowering eyebrow,’ so called from its resemblance to a bird of that name which in captivity is tied by a short string to its perch, to and from which it continually flies and returns; others had ‘grasped the peach,’ a cant term applied to suspension by the armpit; and others had ‘stood in the cage,’ a place just high enough to stand in with no support save from a slab under the chin, and the tips of the toes. These wretched creatures, bruised and nerveless as they were, gazed with interest at the barbarian stranger, and broke into a low droning chatter as the two passed by. Conway understood now the hesitation of his companion to admit him, for tortures of this kind, though always practised upon prisoners who cannot pay their footing, are in fact illegal. The chief gaoler, on the other hand, did not hold himself responsible for these outrages, though he benefited by them, and perhaps was not displeased that the Englishman should have the opportunity of seeing with his own eyes how unpleasant things might be made for his friend, unless good reasons were advanced for a more tonic treatment. To Conway, as we know, the existence of these horrors was not unknown; but from that very circumstance, since he understood
[Page 140]
them, or their consequences, at a glance, they filled him with the greater loathing. To leave not a stone standing of such a den of torment, and to sow the spot with gunpowder, became an appreciable aspiration, as he looked shudderingly around him; but the general wretchedness it was out of his power to assuage, and he felt he should be fortunate indeed if even the particular object with which he had come to that hateful place could be attained.
‘It was necessary to bring you here,’ explained his guide, guessing his thoughts, or some of them, from the expression of his countenance, ‘because your business did not, it seems, admit of delay; and to bring the commander into your honourable presence would have taken time, since he has been put to bed.’
‘Put to bed? why, it is still early morning.’
‘Yes,’ grinned the other, ‘but Fu-chow was tired.’
They had reached a cell door at the end of the yard, which his companion now unlatched, and, warning him to stoop his head, made signs that he should enter. Conway did so, and found himself in a similar apartment—except that it was sunk a little lower, and therefore received still less light—to that in which he had just left his friend. An earthenware oil lamp which stood on the floor dispelled the dusk of the cell and showed a bed apparently similar to that occupied by Pennicuick. Its occupant, who was undoubtedly Fu-chow, was lying on his back stiff and rigid as a corpse; nor did the entrance of his two visitors cause him to move a muscle, or breathe a word.
‘We give this gentleman a lamp, you see,’ explained Sheer Singh, with the air of a man apologising for a luxury, ‘because he informs us he is highly connected. His father, so he says, is a
[Page 141]
mandarin, and personally acquainted with his Excellency Twang-hi; and though we have no proof of this, we are willing to take his honourable word. He gives us also to understand that his fees will be forthcoming, but in the mean time, as we have not seen the colour of his money, he is detained here—in rather close custody—until his friends can be communicated with.’
‘And yet he is not accused of any crime,’ observed Conway.
‘Certainly not,’ answered the other coolly. ‘He has no right here, as you say, at all; and therefore it is all the more necessary that he should pay for his lodging. At present he is quite comfortable, but in an hour or two he will feel the desirability of a change of posture, and begin to wish his friends would discharge his debts.’
By this time Conway perceived that the unfortunate ‘commander,’ as Fu-chow was called, or called himself, was by no means lying at his ease. He was stretched on a level slab of wood through which little boards came up at right angles which confined his neck, wrists, and ankles. Thus pegged down—for they fitted very closely—he was of course unable to move a hair's breadth, and became conscious of Conway's presence only when he had reached his bed and stood immediately beside him.
‘I am sorry to see you in so ill a plight, Fu-chow,’ observed he gravely, ‘though indeed you have deserved little pity at my hands.’
‘You catch your fish, and throw away the net,’ said the prisoner, speaking slowly and with difficulty.
‘If you mean I have been ungrateful,’ returned Conway, ‘what shall be said of you, who have eaten your master's bread and have betrayed him?’
‘He and I are now quits,’ resumed the other sullenly; ‘but as
[Page 142]
for you, why are you free to come and go? Why are you not lying here, as I am, or being squeezed as he is? Would it not have been as easy to witness against both of you as against one? Yet for my daughter's sake, and because you were kind to me, I remembered you for good when I remembered him for evil.’
‘Well, so far as I am concerned, Fu-chow, I am obliged to you, and I hope to show it. And as for Mr. Pennicuick since you say that you are quits with him, there is no need for further bitterness on either side. From henceforth let us help one another. What is the sum in which you are indebted to this man for fees?’
‘Two taels of silver,’ interposed the gaoler laconically. Then, seeing Conway putting his hand into his pocket, he added hastily, ‘and half a tael for the extra accommodation.’
‘Oh, for the bed! I see. Well, here's the money; so unloose him.’
A few strokes of the huge key knocked out the wedges that confined Fu-chow to his pillowless couch; but though free, it was by no means an easy matter for him to rise. Even that hour or so of excessive constraint had stiffened every joint, and planted an ache in every bone. Yet, but for Conway's interference, he would have been doomed to lie upon that bare board, already become a rack of agony, for days and nights.
‘Perhaps, my friend, as I wish to have some private talk with Fu-chow,’ observed Conway to the gaoler, ‘you will leave us alone together.’
‘It is not usual to grant such an indulgence,’ answered Sheer Singh with a doubtful air; but the next moment he had left the cell, with a similar swelling in his left cheek to that which had interfered with the lines of beauty in his right. Conway had
[Page 143]
learnt by this time the one efficacious treatment for all Chinese scruples.
‘Well, Fu-chow, you feel better now?’
‘Yes, I feel better; but yonder fellow,’ pointing to the door which had just closed upon the gaoler, ‘will presently feel much worse. All the time I was lying there, I have been thinking of what will fit him best; and it shall be the shirt.’
‘The shirt?’ exclaimed Conway, wondering that the man should think of clothing his enemy, though indeed he stood much in need of garments.
‘Yes, the wire shirt; it fits quite closely, you see; you pull it, and the skin comes through, and then a razor is run over the outside. That shall be Sheer Singh's suit when my father the Mandarin comes to hear of what has been done to his son.’
The expression of Fu-chow's face was absolutely fiendish in its fury: his words, too, were all the more malignant from the tardy and unctuous tone in which they were delivered. Above all, he had an air of insulted nobility beneath which Conway hardly recognised the prompt attendant, who had served him on board the boat, and showed no sign of pride save in his fancied proficiency in the English tongue. His sense of dignity had been offended by Pennicuick, but it was plain that it had been outraged infinitely more by his treatment at the hand of his fellow-countryman.
‘Look you, because I am poor,’ he continued, wetting his dry lips with his tongue, in a manner very suggestive of a serpent's flicker, ‘they have dared to treat me in this manner. They do not understand that, though my father has been discontented with my conduct, he has not disowned me. They do not believe
[Page 144]
a man who wears the three-eyed feather can have a son who is poor.’
‘It is no longer necessary for him to be poor, if he will only be obliging,’ observed Conway with significance. ‘I know one who will give five thousand taels of silver for an act of good service, and yet not think he has paid too much for it.’
‘Five thousand taels!’ repeated Fu-chow slowly. ‘That tastes very nice.’
‘Yes, and you shall have it in your own mouth, Fu-chow, like that scoundrel yonder, if you will accomplish what I am about to ask of you.’
‘I will do anything for you that lies in my power,’ answered Fu-chow simply, ‘and that chop-chop, even without the five thousand taels.’
A childish smile had replaced the scowl upon his pasty face, and Conway felt that he could believe him.
‘Well, my friend's interests are my interests just now, Fu-chow, and in advancing them you will be obliging me.’
Fu-chow shook his head; the sentiment was too subtle for him; and as for its practical application, that was altogether outside his experience. Conway was compelled to put the case in a more material form.
‘If I were in my friend's position, you would do your best for me, would you not? Well; do it for him instead of me, and while he pays you with money, I will pay you with thanks from my very heart.’ Conway laid his hands upon that organ. If Pennicuick had been by, he would have said, ‘There is nothing like pantomime for your savages;’ and indeed gesture helped out the halting words.
[Page 145]
‘Good master,’ said the Chinaman, but without a touch of softness, ‘all this care of yours is labour in vain. The decree for “Ling-chih” will come to-morrow or next day, as sure as the sun. Not I, nor my father (though he wears the three-eyed feather), nor Twang-hi, nor the lord of the province, no, nor the Emperor, the Son of Heaven himself, could save this man, since he has committed sacrilege. Though, indeed,’ he added, dropping his voice, ‘money can do something.’
‘That is what I want to come to,’ said Conway eagerly. ‘What can it do, and how can it be applied?’
‘Well, a good sum must be given to the executioner, who will then strike a vital part with the first blow, and kill your friend at once; he will be put out of his misery on the instant instead of being cut to pieces alive. If he had been a warrior, like yourself, his gall-bladder would have been afterwards sold for a charm, for it gives courage; but being what he is, why, that operation will be dispensed with.’
It was plain by the unctuous manner in which he lingered over these details that Pennicuick's impending fate was even yet by no means distressing to him to contemplate, and it was with difficulty that Conway could restrain his disgust. What pained him, however, still more, was the confidence with which Fu-chow spoke of the sentence being carried out, and of the impossibility of its being interfered with. He could not but remember that the Mandarin Twang-hi had expressed himself to the same effect, and almost in the same words. As for the mitigation hinted at, the victim would have a better resource in the bottle of laudanum than in the humanity of the executioner. ‘My friend is as brave a man as ever drew breath, Fu-chow,’ said he gravely, ‘though he
[Page 146]
does not chance to wear a sword. But life is dearer to us Englishmen than it is held in China. In this country, I know, it is not difficult to buy it if the temptation is great enough. In short’ (and here Conway felt the colour rising in his cheek in spite of himself), ‘the proposition of my friend is that he should purchase a substitute.’
‘The punishment of “Ling-chih” is no ordinary death,’ observed the Chinaman immediately.
‘Nor would the bribe be an ordinary one,’ put in Conway ‘the executioner would of course be feed in the manner you suggested. When I mentioned five thousand taels, that would be your reward alone for bringing this matter to a satisfactory issue. There would be more money forthcoming for other services.’
‘It is an offer that makes one's mouth water,’ said Fu-chow with a tender sigh. ‘But, unhappily, it can benefit nobody.’
‘Do you mean to say that no substitute could be found?’
‘Not at all; I could get you fifty for a few taels a head, without looking beyond these walls. But then they would be all Chinese. The execution must take place in public. Do you suppose that any fellow-countryman of mine could be made to look like an Englishman? Even if you could bribe everybody all round, from the lord of the province downwards, which in truth would not be impossible, you could not deceive 20,000 spectators. No one would run the risk of trying to do it. If there was an Englishman in gaol here, why, then everything could be managed nicely; even if he did not voluntarily consent to it, he could be gagged and “Ling-chihed” in the place of your friend, and the public would be none the wiser. But as it is, the plan is valueless. By this time every worshipper in the temple has heard of the
[Page 147]
sacrilege that has been committed, and has resolved to witness its expiation. When one is in the oven, it is useless to kick; there is nothing left for your friend, I do assure you, but resignation. When all is over, Twang-hi will no doubt permit you to put up some memorial to him, which will be a comfort to his family.’
[Page 148]
CHAPTER XIII. A SACRIFICE. Although Fu-chow's view of Pennicuick's position was precisely identical with that of Conway, the latter could not bring himself to communicate it to his friend. He had returned to him after his conference with their late attendant and told him of the difficulty in the way of procuring a substitute, but did not speak of it as insuperable. He also affected to hope that the expected reply from the governor of the province might not, after all, be fatal to his hope of life. He was not a clergyman, whom duty compelled to prepare his friend for death; he felt himself rather in the place of a physician whose mission is to cheer even where he cannot cure. At the same time, it pained him to see the very effect which his own conduct was designed to promote. Pennicuick was no longer suffering in body; he had been rubbed down with hog's lard, and that simple remedy had certainly relieved his pains; cushions had been brought in which made his bed tolerably comfortable; he had taken some refreshment, and was well supplied with cigars; and in these better circumstances his spirits had risen.
‘I feel that I shall win out of this yet, Conway,’ he said; ‘and if so, I shall never forget how you have stuck by me. It was all
[Page 149]
my own fault that I got into this mess, and it will be all by your credit if I get out of it.’
‘I have done very little, my dear fellow; I wish I could do more.’
‘Well, you have set matters in train, at all events. Perhaps, as you say, the sentence may be a light one after all, when it will be easy enough to square matters. And if the worst comes to the worst, I cannot but believe that such a big sum as I am prepared to give will, somehow or other, make matters all right. Why, for 20,000 l ., even in England, a man might get off most things.’
The inappositeness of this speech was remarkable considering the intelligence of the speaker, and Conway did not fail to note it. It was clear that his poor friend was clinging to a straw, and absolutely without an argument for the faith that was in him. At one time he would talk almost boisterously of the fun they would have when they got back to Shanghae, and the next minute would advert to the precaution about which he had before been so importunate to the exclusion of all other considerations: ‘You will not forget the laudanum, Connie.’
Conway brought him, in the course of the evening, the bottle that contained it, and continued with him until long beyond the usual hour for closing the gaol to visitors. Pennicuick had been removed by that time to a room in the chief gaoler's house, and before his friend left him for the night was made, generally, as comfortable as circumstances permitted. And it was curious what a change this improvement in his position wrought in the prisoner's mind. He bade his friend ‘good-bye’ quite cheerfully, a somewhat anxious request to see him the first thing in the morning being the only sign of disquietude he exhibited. The
[Page 150]
fact is, though he did possess great courage, it was, as is often the case, in part the result of a lack of imagination; matters material —a good dinner, a good bed, and present immunity from inconvenience—went farther with him than they would have done with a more delicate organisation. The physical outrage to which he had been subjected had for the time demoralised him, but now that its effects had vanished he was himself again; resolute, hopeful, and secretly sustained by the conviction that he was a man not born to be put out of the world by such base agencies as threatened him. Above all, he had great trust in the wonder-working powers of money. And even if his friend had dwelt upon the special difficulty of his case, instead of ignoring it—on the superstition which, shocked at his crime, demanded its expiation, and before which even the highest officers of the state were compelled to bow in at least apparent reverence—it is probable that his sceptical mind could have still insisted that such arguments tended at worst to put the price of his escape a little higher.
Arthur Conway was buoyed up by none of these delusions. His knowledge of the national character corroborated all that Twang-hi and Fu-chow had said of the hopelessness of his friend's case. When he went for the laudanum, he had sought and obtained a few minutes' interview with the Mandarin, and had openly spoken with him on the question of providing a substitute. He had promised largely in Pennicuick's name, and found the Mandarin even more willing than Fu-chow had been to sell his good offices: but he had plainly told him that the thing could not be done. If a wealthy native had been in the place of the culprit, it would have been possible (though very dangerous) to
[Page 151]
effect his escape in the way proposed. But as matters stood, the plan was hopeless. Ralph Pennicuick must die.
At the very moment Conway received this answer, his daughter was listening to the offer of his friend's son in the old garden at Richmond. The same sun which shone that day upon the mud walls of the Chinese gaol with its hopeless inmates, shed its glories on that peaceful river and fair scene which had often gladdened Ralph Pennicuick's eyes, on the terraces of the ‘Star and Garter.’ If Mrs. Conway could have known in what straits he lay that day, even she would have hesitated to let loose her tongue against him. We should all moderate our rancour on many occasions, did we know what was going on in the world while we so speak. On the next day, the last one that was fated to have hope in it for the wretchéd man, Nelly and her mother were at the peaceful parish church together, not knowing that there was special need of prayer for anyone connected with them; perhaps Nelly paid a devouter attention than usual to the appeal ‘for those who travel by land or by water,’ thinking of her father journeying in that far country; but the words ‘upon all prisoners and captives’ fell without meaning on her ear. Raymond was dining at the Trafalgar at Greenwich that day with a few friends. He had been the first to leave the table to smoke his cigar in the balcony, and as he sat alone, listening to the beat of a great ocean-bound steamer, it set him wondering what his father out in China would say upon the receipt of the letter that he had written to him the preceding night, announcing his intention of asking Nelly's hand in marriage on his coming of age; what his father would say, whose sentence at that very moment had reached the
[Page 152]
hand of the Mandarin at Dhulang: ‘Death, by the Ling-chih, within eight-and-forty hours.’
It had been arranged by Conway that he should be sent for, on some pretence connected with the supply of victuals on board the boat, as soon as the news arrived, should it come when he was in his friend's company. And so it happened.
‘Well, since it is so late, Conway, you need not trouble to return till to-morrow morning,’ said Pennicuick; ‘that is, unless— unless you should have heard anything. I begin to think that this delay on the part of our deputy-lieutenant, or whatever he is, augurs well; if he had meant to be nasty, he would have been quicker; don't you think so?’
‘Perhaps,’ said Conway. He could not even add, as usual, ‘Let us hope so.’ He felt that hope was gone, even before he saw the gaoler's face, who was awaiting him outside the door.
‘It has come,’ said that official; ‘and is what I told you it would be; you will hear all about it from the Mandarin.’ The man was perfectly callous as to the fact and its consequences, but the matter had an interest for him, because so much fuss had been made about it; he would very gladly have had a hand—well filled with dollars—in his prisoner's escape, had it been possible. But even now there would be some pickings.
‘I will speak to the executioner to-night,’ added he, as his guest left the gaol; ‘you may rely upon it that his first stroke shall do the trick.’
Conway did not reply even by a nod. He felt like a man who, walking in his sleep, has suddenly been awakened in a position of extreme danger. A chaos of nightmare thoughts were thronging his brain, and yet he was face to face with a still worse reality.
[Page 153]
Twang-hi had nothing to tell him but the bare fact of the arrival of the decree. He was probably as indifferent about the matter as the gaoler had been, but his superior education suggested a few words of polite condolence. To him, too, there were still remaining some slight contingencies of profit.
It would doubtless be a satisfaction to learn, he said, that on the hill behind his (Twang-hi's) dwelling-place, there was a solitary spot with fir-trees suitable for the erection of a monument to a beloved friend, which was at Conway's service at a fair price to the proprietor.
To the Chinese mind, the tomb is of more consequence than life itself, and the Mandarin was as much scandalised as disappointed to find that this genial offer met with no response.
‘My friend,’ said Conway gravely, ‘is not one who will receive satisfaction from your proposal; and, for my part, I have no heart to consider it. My desire is to do him service while he is alive. You cannot save him, you say; can you extend his span of life?’
‘The decree enacts within forty-eight hours. A few hours perhaps may be added under pretence of the tardiness of the messenger—but not without strain upon the strict principles of justice.’
‘Every hour shall be paid for, Twang-hi, if delay is indeed all that money can purchase?’ And he looked towards the Mandarin with a lingering hope.
‘Honourable sir, I assure you by the bones of my ancestors that nothing more can be done. The Englishman must die. The whole country round demands it, and expects it. I have been already urged to name the hour of execution; but that, as I have said, may be deferred a little.’
[Page 154]
Then Conway took his way to the boat, still moored as on that fatal morning at the garden steps, and descended into the cabin, so solitary and silent, and yet which reminded him in its every object of the companionship of his friend. The moon had risen and was shining with such singular brightness that he had no need to light his lamp; it had so shone, he remembered, on the Southampton Water on the night when he had left old England years ago. He had come away in dudgeon, and had indeed made up his mind that his departure should be ‘for good.’ He could not go back again, he had said—he did not even call it ‘home again'—to be tormented and reproached by that shrew his wife; though at the same time he confessed that he had deserved reproach. He had been very foolish and very selfish in those days, for he had dissipated not only his own fortune, but almost all her little dowry. She was not a woman to forgive this, or let her husband forget it. He loved his little daughter; but his wife was always throwing, as it were, the child in his face, and accusing him of having made a beggar of her. What was worse was that she had told the truth, or little worse than the truth. But for his love of pleasure, and especially of that derived from the card-table, his Nelly would have had the reversion of a comfortable competency —two or three hundred a year of her own. But now, ‘if anything should happen to him,’ her mother and she would have a hard matter to live. The girl whom he pictured to himself so fair and delicate—nay, whom he knew to be so, for had he not her photograph in his desk?—and whom he knew too, by her loving letters, to be so tender and true, would have in all probability to go out as a governess, among strangers; to meet with
[Page 155]
coldness, perhaps rudeness, and to eat the bitter bread of dependence all her life, thanks to her father's misdoings.
This misery had often pressed upon his mind, but never so bitterly as of late, for an especial reason—though he had so ill-conducted himself of old, he had of late years done his best to remedy the mischief he had committed. He had lived, so far as it was possible for an officer so to live, upon a very crust, in order to save money for the woman he had wronged and her child; and the child at least had become very dear to him. Her school-girl letters, and still more those she had written to him more recently, were what he loved to read (though he was a great reader) more than his most favourite books; and he was always picturing to himself how she looked and how she spent her days. It was with an exquisite delight that he had found himself in a position to improve her mode of life a little by installing her in the house at Richmond; but stern moralists would not have praised him for his kindness, since the power to confer it had been placed in his hands by an unusual run of good luck at cards. It had been so good and so continuous, that it was not likely even at the considerable points at which he was accustomed to play at the houses of his civilian acquaintance at Shanghae—for he was too wise to play in the regiment except for shillings—that he would have to refund so large a sum; indeed, he had a hundred pounds or so still over, with which he had made up his mind to commence insuring his life. Of course this ought to have been done long ago; but so ought many, many other things. It is something even to begin to amend our ways. It so happened, however,that Conway's good intentions had been frustrated in an unexpected manner.
The medical agent of the insurance office to which he had
[Page 156]
applied had ‘refused his life,’ as not being worth having. In England, he said, his chances of existence might be good enough, but too much had been taken out of his constitution to render it probable that he would live to be an old man except under very favourable circumstances, among which could not be reckoned the Chinese climate. This refusal had been a great blow to Conway. He had long made up his mind that when an opportunity did occur he would repair, in this way (as far as it was safe for him so to do, as respected his power of paying the premiums), the wrong that he had done his child. The information that his health was shattered did not move him, so far as it concerned himself, in the least. Except to see his daughter, all ambition had long ago left him; life held no other promise for him; and since even that seemed as far off fulfilment as ever, it had lost all its dearness. What had life to give him, that it should be dear? Nothing, certainly, that it had not given him already; old pleasures without the old appetite, and very few of them. He could afford, in fact, no other pleasure than that of the card-table, occasionally diversified by that of the racecourse, and in neither could he afford to lose. The idea that the comforts of his wife and child depended partly upon such gains, shocking as it may be to the moralist, redeemed them in his own eyes. He saw no more harm in standing on doubtful cards at loo than respectable men see in speculating on the Stock Exchange. His principles were all astray, though perhaps his heart was sounder than that of others who have more to say for themselves, morally speaking. He was, or had been, a spendthrift, a man of pleasure— nay, almost a rake—a card-player, a person of very undomestic habits, and he never went to church except at the head of his company. With more than considerable talents, he had in fact wasted
[Page 157]
the precious gift of life. Though no hero in anyone's eyes, and least of all in his own, he had always, however, done his duty as a soldier, not from the highest motives perhaps, but still from a good one: namely, that what one is bound to do one has no right to shirk. For the rest, he was kind, generous to a fault— so much so, that the economies he now practised for the sake of others were hateful to him—brave as a lion, and gentle as a child. His disposition was formed for love, but love, by some freak of Fate, had been denied to him. He had married in haste, and repented, not at leisure, but almost immediately. It had been a case of love at first sight, which often proves at second sight— and still more, as the sight becomes accustomed to the near view of the beloved object—to be no love at all, but a momentary infatuation which costs the happiness of two lives.
Such was Arthur Conway; a man who, under brighter circumstances, would have shone in the world; but who, as it was, would never shine; who, far from shining, would glimmer on, disreputably rather than otherwise, an exile from his country and his home, with the one pure desire of his life ungratified, till the prophecy of the insurance agent should come to pass. That prophecy, which had rendered his attempt to provide for his loved one, and to remedy the wrong he had done her mother, void, had seemed the last drop in his full cup of bitterness. He had started on the present expedition partly to oblige his friend, but also partly to save money, since, until he returned to his regiment, he would be incurring no expenses; but it had not been an expedition of pleasure to begin with, and how miserably was it about to end!
These thoughts, and many others, and all devoid of cheer, crowded on Arthur Conway's mind as he sat alone at the open
[Page 158]
window of the cabin, watching the moonlight on the level stream. How calm and quiet it was, yet how much calmer up yonder in the blue sky, among the quiet stars,
Where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest!—
was the line that haunted him as he gazed out upon them. How weary of the world he was, and how he longed to be at rest! Then, all of a sudden, a thought shot through him, swift as lightning, and, like it, of livid brightness: ‘Ralph Pennicuick is doomed to die, and would give 20,000 l . for a substitute. Why should I not take the money, and die for him—and my Nelly?’
[Page 159]
CHAPTER XIV. CONWAY'S WILL. By persons who pride themselves upon their ‘ballast,’ Arthur Conway would without doubt have been termed ‘a creature of impulse;’ and to a certain extent this was true; but, unlike the class of men thus designated, his impulses were lasting. And this was especially the case with his good impulses. When he did think of doing an unselfish act, he at once put it into effect, where a better man would often ‘think it over,’ and, upon mature consideration, not do it. Perhaps Conway thus acted from a doubt of his own constancy, or from a sense that he had many ‘back payments' of the kind to make, and had better not have another score set down to his discredit; but at all events so it was. He never went from his word to another man, nor broke—to himself—a determination he had once formed for good. This extraordinary resolve of his to sell his life at a great price for the benefit of his belongings, instead therefore of ‘passing through his mind,’ as so many fine notions of self-sacrifice do pass with many of us, remained there, as much a settled plan as though he had been revolving it for years. The obstacle that would have occurred to most men in such a case, that Pennicuick would not consent to such an arrangement, did not occur to him, because he knew his friend so well. However the
[Page 160]
man might seem to struggle against such a temptation, he would, Conway felt, give way at last; the view that would present itself to Pennicuick's mind would, after the first words of grateful acknowledgment, be of the most sensible and matter-of-fact description. ‘This poor devil has little to live for, whereas I have a great deal: it is deuced hard lines on him to have to put his neck in a halter for another man; but he cannot do better with himself as regards his daughter, to benefit whom seems to be the one wish of his heart; it's like drawing for the militia; one man finds it to his advantage to serve, and another to purchase a substitute.’
This estimate of his friend's views (though he felt his mood was bitter) would turn out, Conway was persuaded, to be essentially correct. He had long ago lost his illusions; and now, within a few hours of his end, it was not likely any of them should return. The poet's statement that no one is such a prey to dull despondency that he can resign this ‘pleasing anxious being’ without a sigh, is not of universal application; his being was so ‘anxious’ to poor Conway, and so little ‘pleasing,’ that he could not sigh about it; but before leaving the ‘warm precincts of the cheerful day,’ it was natural that he should cast a lingering though not a longing look behind.
He opened his old desk and spread out the contents before him; there were some twenty letters in it, almost all from Nelly, with one or two from his wife. The former were all long ones; some containing whole pages of mere childish prattle, but singularly frank and tender; about the weather and her walks; about a caged bird she had purchased with the guinea he had sent her on her birthday, years ago; about a visit to the Zoological Gardens, where she had seen some creatures that had come from
[Page 161]
China, such perhaps as he saw every day at large; about a visit to the play. These little nothings—which all ended with her ‘dearest love,’ and hopes to see him home—were cruel daggers now, and pierced his heart. It was worse still, when, growing older, she bewailed his absence, and spoke of her affection for the kind father who was always reaching out his hand from far to give her pleasure; of how nice dear Raymond was, and of how much they saw of him, though their home in Gower Street could scarcely be attractive to the bright young fellow; of Mrs. Wardlaw's kindness, and how often she talked about her papa to the good-natured old lady, whom she was sure he would like ‘when he came home’—that was always dwelt upon—if it was only because she spoilt his Nelly so. There were tender fears, too, that he was pinching himself as to money matters, in order to provide indulgences for her and dear mamma at home. [‘She shall never know ,’ he murmured to himself, while the hot tears rolled down his sunburnt cheeks that had been strangers to them for many a year, ‘she shall never know.’] In her last letter she had sent her photograph, and over that he hung in a burst of grief. How beautiful she was; how good and true she looked; how he had dreamt of seeing her one day—he knew not when, but some day surely—and clasping her to his loving heart! And now that would never be. The idea was almost unendurable. He dared not even write to her one word of farewell. At such a time he could not write a lie; and if he told the truth, he would be embittering the very life to secure whose happiness he was about to die. Even as it was, she would weep for him; those bright eyes would be dim for many a day, after the news got home. For she had looked forward too, sweet soul, to seeing him. And that would never be.
[Page 162]
Then he took the letters one by one, tore them up into small pieces,—so sharp was the pain as he did it, that it was the ‘Ling-chih’ (thought he bitterly) already for him,—and cast them out of the window; but over the photograph he pored and pored, and could not part from it, as from the letters, but placed it next his heart, the only treasure he—who was to die so rich—had left to him. For a little this unmanned him quite; but there was something, as he knew, to make his purpose firm again, and which he had reserved with that intent. The letters of his wife still lay before him, and these, he was well aware, would steel his heart, and give him courage; for they were arguments, keen, strong, and uncompromising, upon the other side. They might not have seemed so to a less sensitive mind, nor even to a well-regulated one, conscious of having given cause of offence, but to Arthur Conway they were powerful incentives to the act he had in contemplation. They were not vituperative in their language, although there was a sharp hit now and then; but the whole tone of them—even to their very brevity—was that of reproach. If there was a gleam of affection beyond the ‘My dear Arthur’ and ‘Your affectionate wife’—and now and then there was—the effect of it was at once erased—it almost seemed designedly—by the next sentence. If Mrs. Conway permitted herself to express a hope that her husband was comfortable in his circumstances, she added an intimation that it was more than he deserved; if she dropped an apprehension that he might be lonely, she took care to guard against the possibility of a mistake that he had anybody to blame for it but himself; if she lamented his exile, she reminded him that with ordinary prudence there would have been no necessity for it. This is the sort of behaviour that has driven some married men out of their minds,
[Page 163]
and many more out of their homes; to one of Conway's type it was torture. He was remorseful for what he had done, and did not need such vulgar reminders; he felt confident (and perhaps with justice) that had he been in his wife's place he could never have ‘gone on’ in this aggravating style against one who had expressed sorrow for his misdeeds, and had gone into voluntary exile to atone for them. A man endures some things in a woman because she is his wife, but for that very reason other sins of hers appear less pardonable. ‘The woman is a shrew’ was Conway's verdict upon her; though he knew she had good qualities; and it was this last knowledge that gave her the power of being so unpleasant. Every line of her handwriting cost him a pang, though of a very different sort from that inflicted by the correspondence of his daughter: he had taken the best way to put himself out of love with life in the perusal of this second batch of letters, which, like the others, he presently tore up and cast away.
So certain was he, by this time, of what would be his course of conduct, that he then sat down and remade his will: the old one was already in his desk, so that he had but to copy the legal form; but the sums at his disposal were different indeed from what they had been. To his wife he left the dowry he had squandered—he made especial reference to that fact—and also the same amount of property he had himself possessed at the date of his marriage. She could therefore have nothing to complain of in the way of loss. To his daughter he left the residue, amounting to 16,000 l . He hesitated as to making some statement which should account for his possession of the sum, but in the end determined to omit it. He had been always a truthful man, and the idea of his last act on earth being a lie revolted him. Besides, Pennicuick was a much
[Page 164]
better hand at making up a story than he, and would have no scruples about it: he might say that he had realised this fortune on the race-course, or in a speculation upon tea or opium; only he must be careful to show that this had happened recently. It would be terrible that his wife and daughter should imagine he had been in the enjoyment of this wealth for any time, and yet had not shared it with them. His friend (with the gaoler, perhaps) would be a witness to this will, and therefore the properest person to explain it. This might be a little difficult; but after all, when money is left, the recipients are not very curious as to how it came; though, when money is lost, folks are very importunate to know what has become of it.
His worldly affairs being thus disposed of and those belonging to him well provided for, he began for the first time to look his own fate in the face. He had no doubt that, for a few hundred pounds which Pennicuick had with him, and for the expenditure of which he could repay himself if he chose out of his own (Conway's) property at Shanghae, the officials could be bribed to make the proposed substitution; but it might be necessary, for the deception of the public, that he should actually suffer the cruel punishment the law had decreed; the escape from it by laudanum, though easy enough to the real culprit, might not be open to himself, on account of the investigations that it would necessitate, the risk of which the Mandarin and the rest would be unwilling to face. He might have no choice but to trust to the purchased humanity of the executioner. Viewed in this light, his ease was even worse than Pennicuick's had been, and it had seemed to him a few hours ago that the position of Pennicuick had been very terrible. Curiously enough, now that he himself stood in
[Page 165]
his friend's place, there was no terror in it, except for the physical fear in connection with the execution itself. Without being what would be considered, by a meeting of Convocation, orthodox, Conway entertained a wholesome faith that matters would be better arranged for him upon the other side of the grave than he had arranged them for himself on this; after all, there could be but an hour's intense pain, at most— probably it would last but a second—to be followed by an eternity of—what he felt would to him be Heaven, even though there should be nothing better—Rest; there would be no more carking cares, nor vain regrets, nor unsatisfied longings, and Nelly's life would be made smooth for her.
These reflections were interrupted by the return of the soldiers and sailors to the boat, who in the daytime now went where they would, passing only the night on board; it was understood, however, that they were to hold themselves in readiness to return to Shanghae with the surviving Englishman when his friend should have expiated his offence against the law. From their unwonted loquacity, more than from what he actually overheard, Conway judged they had already become acquainted with the nature of the Lieutenant-Governor's sentence, and that it gave them no little satisfaction. A few hours ago he would have felt indignant against them for this brutality towards ‘poor Pennicuick,’ though he was well aware that the latter's manners had been the reverse of conciliatory; but, as it was, it mattered nothing. They would be aware, of course, of the substitution of his friend for himself; but as that would be done under authority, he knew that they would be far too wise to stir in the matter from any abstract devotion to the principles of justice.
[Page 166]
If expectation might ever plead excuse for wakefulness, it will be thought that it might have done so that night with Arthur Conway; but such was not the case. The anxieties that had hitherto haunted his pillow were now in fact laid to rest, and the personal apprehensions that occupied their place were altogether disproportionate to them. He desired to sleep, not so much to forget his woes, as to gain strength and courage for the endurance of them: and he soon fell into a tranquil slumber, from which (as generally happens to those who have cause to wake) he woke long before his usual hour. A task lay before him such as has rarely fallen to the lot of man to undertake, and the time allotted to him between that present hour and the commencement of eternity—or mere ‘cold obstruction,’ as the case might be—was short indeed. Upon one thing he was resolved: that neither by bribes nor persuasion would he endeavour to move the Mandarin to postpone the execution. He was too sensible—and it may be added, perhaps, too self-conscious— to underrate the greatness and rarity of the sacrifice he was about to make; but he felt like a man who has some painful operation to undergo, and wishes to have it over, rather than like one who, about to lose it, clings to dear life.
[Page 167]
CHAPTER XV. THE BARGAIN. Early as it was when Arthur Conway took his way that morning to the prison where his friend lay, but which he had resolved was henceforth to be his own dwelling-place, there were people in that land of Morning already astir. On a waste piece of ground adjoining the gaol, the existence of which had somewhat excited his curiosity—for in China it is unusual to see any spot uncultivated— a knot of natives were collected, one of whom was raised above the others on a ladder. As he drew near he heard the ‘thump thump’ of a wooden mallet, and perceived that they were fixing into the earth a post about eight feet high. He felt a sickness at his heart, and knew that his face grew pale as he approached these men—for the object of their preparations was plain to him—but nevertheless he gave them a ‘good morning.’
‘This is the execution ground, I suppose, my friends?’
‘Yes,’ answered one subserviently, ‘and this is the post for the “Ling-chih” to-morrow. There will be half the province come to see it, but there will be ever so good a view for your honourable worship from the roof of the gaol yonder.’
There was no intentional cruelty in the man's speech: he knew the destined victim was Conway's friend; but since the
[Page 168]
execution was to be, he thought it was probable that he would wish to witness the spectacle. There is a great deal of philosophy in China besides that which is cultivated by the learned, and astonishingly little sentiment.
Conway found his friend—who was usually a late sleeper—very much awake, and in a state of anxiety the expression of which he strove in vain to conceal. He had discovered by some behaviour of the under-gaoler on the preceding night that the decree from the lieutenant-governor had arrived, but had been too proud—or perhaps too nervous—to inquire what it was.
‘I am sure it has come, Connie. Why was I not told at once?’
‘Because I wished you to pass as good a night as might be possible, Penn,’ answered his friend gravely.
‘The news is had, then, is it?’
‘It is as bad as can possibly be, Pennicuick.’
‘It is not to be that infernal “Ling-chih,” surely.’
‘Yes, that is the sentence.’
Pennicuick turned very pale, and sat down on his little bed. He seemed to swallow something twice or thrice in his throat before he spoke.
‘And when is it to be, Conway?’
‘That is not quite certain. It will probably be to-morrow, but the Mandarin will, I think, consent—for a consideration—to put it off for a little; perhaps a day or so.’
Pennicuick made an impatient movement with his hands. ‘No,’ said he; ‘if the d---d thing is to be done, let it be done quickly.
It was strange, Conway thought, that he did not even allude to the plan of the substitute, about which he had been apparently so
[Page 169]
confident a few hours ago, not withstanding that the difficulty of procuring one had been stated to him. Perhaps the fact was that he had never really had much hope of it.
‘How long will it last?’ inquired Pennicuick presently; ‘I mean, the pain of the thing.’ Then Conway told him what Fuchow had said about feeing the executioner.
‘Well, well, that is no matter,’ said Pennicuick grimly. ‘The scoundrels shall have no more of my money. I am independent of them, so far, thanks to what I have here;’ and he tapped his waistcoat pocket where lay the bottle of laudanum. Curiously enough, Conway had for the moment forgotten the laudanum, which would certainly not have happened had he had his friend's case only to think about, and not his own.
‘Still, it's deuced hard lines, Connie, to die like a dog, and twenty times worse than a dog, at the hands of these idiots.’ He uttered a fierce oath and gnashed his teeth.
Still Conway did not speak; it was not that he did not pity his friend, and was willing enough to put an end to his apprehensions. But he felt that it was necessary for his purpose to bide his time. In that supreme hour, all pretences, all delusions, were swept away from his mind; he felt that it was within the bounds of possibility that if Ralph Pennicuick were cognisant of his friend's necessities he might drive a bargain with him even for his life. At last the other touched upon the desired topic.
‘It is the fact, then, that these scoundrels could not be bought even with 20,000 l .? I should have thought that such a sum as that would have induced Twang-hi himself to take my place.’
‘It would be easy enough, Pennicuick, for such a sum, to bribe these men all round, and of course to find a substitute; but, as I
[Page 170]
gave you to understand last night, no Chinese could carry out the deception. The trick would be discovered at once, and all who connived at it would be punished.’
‘That is only a question of risk, which again is a question of “How much,”’ urged Pennicuick. ‘Sooner than lose my skin, I would pay 30,000 l . Think of what such a fortune would be in England—how much more, then, in China!’
‘No money would do it, Pennicuick; unless some European could be induced to die for you.’
‘That is as much as to say “You're a dead man,”’ answered Pennicuick stolidly.
‘Not quite. I know one Englishman who would not shrink— at least, I think so—with such a prize in view, from such a sacrifice.’
‘What matters, since he is not here?’
‘He is here, Pennicuick; he stands before you.’
‘You! You , Conway? Are you mad?’
‘No, Penn, although things have gone with me almost ill enough to drive me mad. To me life has long been valueless, except for a hope that draws no nearer to its fulfilment. I had wished to see my dear daughter before youth and beauty had passed away from her; but, if I die for you, I must be content to feel that, in so doing, I purchase for her ease and comfort. I owe her mother, too, some reparation. The 20,000 l .—you spoke just now of 30,000 l ., but the first sum will suffice—that you were prepared to give to some Chinaman, will be given to your friend instead; a change with which you will not be inclined to quarrel. Some more money will be necessary, doubtless, to induce the authorities to consent to the substitution; but that, I think, may be arranged for a small sum. We are like enough—being both
[Page 171]
Englishmen—to pass for one another on the scaffold; for it will perhaps be necessary for me to go thither. It is not certain that that easy way of going out of the world—the laudanum—will be open to me, as it was for you. It will probably be made a sine quâ non that I should be made a show of. Do you hear that hammering, Penn, outside? They are putting the post into the earth, to which I shall be tied before the torment.’
‘Conway, I can't permit it,’ exclaimed Pennicuick suddenly: his face was pale and wet, and his voice greatly agitated. ‘What will they say at home when they come to hear that I let you die for me?’
‘They must never know it at home, Pennicuick. I must forfeit the last poor privilege of writing one line of Farewell—for a lie I could not write. You must explain it all—what way you please. They threw me into prison, say at once, and cut off all communication between us; I was allowed no writing materials; you will have time enough between this and when you see—when you see my Nelly, to invent the best excuse. The truth would kill her. I should have thrown my life away, since the money for which I sold it for her sake would never give her pleasure. Do you follow me?’
‘Yes, I am listening. I do not say I will consent, Connie. It seems a baseness, somehow.’
‘It is not a baseness if I wish it: if I had rather die and make my daughter happy, than live on, and know her to be poor and wretched. It is a voluntary act on my part; it is not as if you asked me to make the bargain.’
‘That is true,’ said Pennicuick, moistening his dry lips.
‘Of course that makes all the difference,’ continued Conway.
[Page 172]
‘I have looked at the matter all round, and am not acting on the impulse. Here is my will, in which I have left the 20,000 l .as though it were already mine. It shall be witnessed, and then you will take charge of it and give it into my wife's hands. There will be nothing more to give of mine—not one line of my handwriting, no word of Good-bye.’ Here Conway's voice broke down for the first time.
‘But my dear Connie, supposing this sad matter should be thus arranged, how is your possession of so much money to be accounted for?’
‘I have thought of that, of course; but you have a better head than mine for invention. Say I made some fortunate investment in opium, don't say I won it on the turf, if you can help it; it will have been gained honestly enough, and hardly enough, Heaven knows. There is something in the Bible about dying for one's friend. “Yet for a good man some would even dare to die,” I think it runs. Though' (here he smiled) ‘I am not quite sure about the application.’
‘Well, it don't much matter as to whether I am a good man, Connie. You are not dying for me, you see, but for my money.’
‘That is no doubt one way of putting it,’ said Conway drily. He had accurately forecast what would be his friend's view of this matter, and had divested himself of all illusions with respect to him, but he had not expected him to use so calculating a style in the very acceptance of his sacrifice. He knew that the affair would have presented itself in this gross light to Pennicuick sooner or later; but that he should thus view it, so immediately, with the sound of the preparations for his friend's death ringing in his very ears, disgusted him, and his face betrayed it.
[Page 173]
‘I am not underrating the service you propose to do for me, Conway,’ said the other apologetically. ‘If you are saying to yourself that I would not do as much for you, if our positions were reversed, you are quite right. Still, to a poor man—that is, to a man whose family is poor—20,000 l . is a great heap of money.’
‘No doubt,’ answered Conway scornfully. ‘One might even say that it is a good deal more than some people's lives are worth.’
‘That sarcasm cuts both ways, Connie. Come, don't let us quarrel at such a time as this. If your offer is genuine, I accept it, and there's an end. I am deeply and most unfeignedly obliged to you for it; but I protest against being compelled to look upon it solely as an act of self-sacrifice. For if, as you have suggested, my own life may not be valuable to the community, still I have some self-respect, and that I should lose utterly if I were to picture myself as escaping from this calamity at your expense, without, as it were, value received on your part. Even as it is, I own to having serious scruples: it is not a matter on which any man can congratulate himself.’
‘I do not wish you to feel any sense of obligation, Pennicuick,’ answered the other coldly. ‘There is no time, even if I had the desire, for the discussion of the sentimental aspect of the affair. My hours are numbered, and I cannot afford to waste them.’
‘Conway, old fellow, you do me wrong,’ said Pennicuick frankly. ‘You do not understand my feelings; it is hard that you should compel me to confess that I feel ashamed of myself, but so it is. A man ought to take the consequences of his own acts upon his own shoulders, and not shift them to those of his friend; I feel that, I do indeed. Yes.’ Here he began to walk
[Page 174]
rapidly to and fro. ‘I feel that when the thing is done, I shall not be able to look other men in the face, as I used to do. In what I said about the money, I was only trying to excuse myself. Shake hands. Now, look you, you shall not die if I can help it. Make what arrangements about the substitution you please, but above all things stipulate for delay. Offer what you like—five pounds an hour, or ten—and then I will set off at once for Shanghae, and, if money can do it, I will return to save you.’
‘In which case I shall have risked my life for nothing,’ observed Conway coldly.
‘No; not so. I will pay you’—he hesitated—‘yes, I will pay you for the risk all the same; it is not blood-money. I do not believe the worst will happen—Fu-chow is your friend, and the Mandarin; they will do more for you than for me; I confidently expect that you will procure such a reprieve as may give me time to obtain your pardon through the Embassy; if so, you will have the money for yourself; if, on the other hand, I do not return in time to save you, there will be the 20,000 l . for your family.’
‘Very good: I agree to that.’
In his heart of hearts Pennicuick was well aware that there was no such hope as that he spoke of; and Conway knew that he was aware of it. The latter quite understood that the alternative had suggested itself to his companion as a salve to his conscience; as a something that should mitigate the unpleasantness of leaving his friend at the very foot of the scaffold. In his bitterness, he even felt that it might be an excuse for departing with a whole skin, as soon as the necessary permission should be purchased from the Mandarin, and placing himself in safety. But it was of no use, and would only make matters more painful, to impute these
[Page 175]
motives. It was better to say simply, ‘I agree to that,’ than to expose the futility of the arrangement.
It was fortunate that Conway's estimate of his friend's character had been already made, and correctly made: otherwise, the manner in which his offer of a life for a life had been accepted would have been indeed disappointing. As matters were, it was perhaps advantageous to him that no element of sentiment was to be introduced into the affair, beyond what belonged to it, and which had no reference to Pennicuick. It left his mind more firm and free for the transaction of the necessary arrangements with the authorities.
[Page 176]
CHAPTER XVI. LAST WORDS. In China almost everything is possible to one who fights justice with a full purse. Conway had failed, it is true, to persuade the Mandarin to save the life of his friend in one way, but he accomplished it in the other. Twang-hi, who had been incorruptible when the scheme menaced his own safety, allowed himself to be won over by another one hundred pounds to countenance a plan which, although it had its risks, was not very likely to be dangerous, since all concerned in it had their good reasons—mostly in silver money—for helping to delude the lieutenant-governor, and (especially) the public. If one barbarian chose to die in place of another barbarian, that was not Twang-hi's affair, except as regarded the price charged for permitting the exchange. All he insisted upon was that somebody should undergo the punishment of the ‘Ling-chih’ within forty- eight hours of the receipt of the sentence—unless some very excellent reasons (in gold) should be advanced for a little delay. One single day's reprieve he might be induced, he thought, to grant in the interests of mercy, and at the rate of 5 l . an hour. But of this Conway did not care to avail himself. Not one day, nor ten, would have sufficed for his friend to have gone to, and returned from, Shanghae: all loophole of escape that way was barred.
[Page 177]
Thirty-six hours, then—or, if the destined victim should alter his mind and open his purse,—perhaps sixty hours of life were all that was now left to Arthur Conway. On his departure from the audience chamber of the Mandarin he was almost embraced by Kushan, to whom his Excellency had communicated the Englishman's chivalric purpose.
‘You are about, honourable sir, to perform one of the noblest of human acts. In China, where philosophy is respected, it is common enough that a man should die for his friend [he might have added, ‘or even for a stranger’]; but being, as you are, a barbarian, the sacrifice is infinitely more creditable to you.’
Conway did not express himself as flattered by this gentleman's good opinion, nor take the trouble to undeceive him as to his own motives; he only bowed in an abstracted manner—indeed, his mind was sufficiently occupied with other matters—and would have passed out of the house, had not the master of the ceremonies again addressed him.
‘Gold is emptiness, silver is emptiness, honourable sir; how after death can we retain them in our grasp? The thing remains, the man departs.’
‘Very true, Kushan; but I am in a hurry.’
‘Too much haste is sometimes the handmaid of delay.’
‘What is it, Kushan? Speak your real meaning, my good friend, if you have any.’
‘There is but one thing real,’ answered the other blandly; ‘namely, the effect of virtuous deeds leaving their lasting impress on an individual being. If you wish to go to heaven, you must observe several things; notably, not to destroy your children; not to sing on the twelfth or thirtieth of the month; and never to
[Page 178]
spit with your face to the north star. Above all things, be munificent to the learned; if a man is also a scholar, he may always do us an ill turn.’
‘How so, Kushan?’
‘Such men have the gift of writing, and their messages are borne afar, though they themselves remain in one place. It is like employing a bird of the air, since he who carries their news may not even know from whence it comes.’
‘I see,’ said Conway; ‘an anonymous letter such as would disarrange my plan might reach the governor of the province, unless a certain precaution is taken.’
‘Heaven alone knows what may happen,’ observed Kushan with pious unction. ‘What you hint at, however, appears to me not improbable.’
‘I confess, Kushan, that it had not been my intention to purchase your silence, on account of the opinion I entertained of your learning and morality; but since you have expressed a wish for more money, it shall be gratified. I hope this will prove to my advantage.’
‘When a person has been guilty of a wicked thought,’ returned Kushan calmly, ‘and afterwards repents and does the right thing, he will in due time be certainly rewarded.’
‘There was once a philosopher,’ said Conway, producing his purse, ‘of great renown in my own land, of whom you remind me much.’
‘I dare not presume to rival such a reputation,’ answered the other; ‘but what was his honourable name?’
‘His name, my friend,’ said Conway, as he pressed three taels into the other's hand, ‘was Pecksniff.’
[Page 179]
The major domo gravely entered Mr. Pecksniff's name in his tablets, and announced his intention of burning a little incense once a fortnight to that sage's memory.
The gaoler and his myrmidon, Sheer Singh, were found even more amenable to the new arrangement than Conway had expected. Since the Mandarin, their immediate superior, was in favour of the exchange of culprits, it was not, they said, for them (as they pocketed their hush-money) to express objections. It therefore remained only to secure the silence of Fu-chow, who had been by this time officially acknowledged by his distinguished parent, and was held in much; respect accordingly by those who had been his gaolers; though still up at the prison, he was now a free man, the arrival of the sentence of death having settled the case and done away with the necessity of his safe keeping. Even in England, where the judges are incorruptible, it is often found practicable to arrange matters with a prosecutor, so that this last transaction seemed to Conway to be the easiest to effect of all. It proved, however, to be the most difficult. Fu-chow protested with indignation that nothing should induce him to connive at the escape from justice of one who had outraged both human and divine institutions by stealing the sacred Shay-le. His line of argument seemed to be so similar—in its high tone and moral sublimity—to that of Kushan and his master, that Conway at once took out his purse.
But Fu-chow, with a dignified gesture of refusal, replied, ‘Honourable sir, you mistake. In no case would I take your money, to whom I am already under such obligations.’
‘But it is not my money,’ interposed Conway; ‘my friend of course pays for the whole transaction.’
[Page 180]
‘Possibly, but the matter is not one to be settled in that way at all. A man who has committed so heinous a crime must not be permitted to purchase impunity by a mere fine; not to mention that it is also proposed to punish another in his stead, who is innocent, and what is more,’ added Fu-chow naïvely, ‘for whom I have a high regard.’
‘I am aware of it, Fu-chow, and I thank you; but you must understand that it is at my request this exchange is made. You are thwarting me in a purpose that I have near at heart.’
‘The punishment for sacrilege is to be cut into ten thousand pieces,’ observed Fu-chow quietly.
‘Ah! you deceived me, then,’ cried Conway, ‘when you said my friend and you were quits. You are still his enemy, and desire his destruction. There lies the root of your objection.’
‘He shall die,’ said Fu-chow; ‘he and no other; my mind is fixed upon that score.’
‘It is contrary to your faith, Fu-chow, as to mine,’ pleaded Conway, ‘to nourish such bitter revenge against a fellow-creature. I acknowledge that this man has misbehaved himself towards you—’
Fu-chow waved his hand as if to put that suggestion by. ‘It is not that at all,’ said he.
‘You are thinking of your daughter, and of the insult this man put upon her.’
‘A man may think what he likes,’ said Fu-chow sententiously, ‘provided that his actions are in accordance with the law.’
‘Listen, my friend,’ said Conway, ‘and remember, as you do so, that I did you a good service in the matter to which you have referred. I, too, have a daughter, young, fair, but whom, unlike you, I shall never see again. I do not say so because I am about
[Page 181]
to die. It would be all the same if I lived. I shall be—always— too poor to go home to see her. She is herself almost penniless, and the thought of her being so, of the slights—perhaps the insults—she may suffer from the rich in consequence, is wormwood to me. Do you understand?’
‘Yes, indeed; for I also am a father.’
‘Well, if I succeed in this plan of substituting myself for my friend, I shall receive from him a large fortune—that is to say, my daughter will do so. She is dearer to me far than life. To ensure her well-being, to place her above the reach of poverty, has been the dream of my existence; but, had I lived, it could have been only a dream. Now there is at last—at a small sacrifice, for I am not in love with life, Fu-chow—a certainty of its being realised. If you oppose yourself to it, you will be doing me an ill turn indeed for such good services as you may owe me. If you have any gratitude in your heart towards me, if you have a genuine love for your own daughter, you will listen to my entreaty, who am pleading on behalf of mine.’
For more than a minute Fu-chow kept silence; his flat bare face, which in general exhibited only a good-natured vacuity, looked grave and even thoughtful. He was evidently giving his whole mind to the situation.
At last he said, ‘If I consent to this, I must be well paid—I mean, really well; better than Twang-hi and the rest of them.’
Up to that moment Conway had believed this man to be moved by that touch of nature which is said to make the whole world kin; but somehow he wished that to his parting view this particular specimen of humanity had shown himself in a less sordid light
[Page 182]
His disgust at finding him as grasping as the rest of his fellow-countrymen was considerable.
‘It is, then, a question of money with you, after all,’ said he, coldly. ‘Well, my friend is not in a position to haggle; but if you mean to be greedy, you must be content to wait till he reaches Shanghae. A man doesn't carry his whole fortune in his pocket.’
‘What I require, I must have at once,’ answered Fu-chow doggedly. ‘Your friend will not want money for his travelling expenses, since he will have the boat at his disposal. If he doesn't choose to pay up handsomely, he shall not go at all. How much was given to the Mandarin?’
‘In all, 200 l . English; but 100 l . was paid in the first instance to ensure to my friend civil treatment in the prison. You yourself know best with what result.’
‘I do not care one cash how the man was treated,’ answered Fu-chow bluntly. ‘It is a subject that doesn't interest me. What I have to say is that I also must have 200 l . for connivance in the scheme proposed. He may either give it, or keep it and suffer the “Ling-chih.” These are my lowest terms.’
‘I have already said, Fu-chow, that we are in your hands,’ answered Conway coldly. ‘We have no choice but to submit to your exactions, which however are, in my opinion, infamous.’
Fu-chow was a plain man, even for a Chinese, but he had beautiful teeth. These he now showed. ‘You think so?’ said he, good-naturedly. ‘Well, in affairs of business there are generally two opinions.’
‘You shall have the 200 l .,’ said Conway. He had neither time nor patience to argue the matter; nor, indeed, did the amount of the bribe concern him very nearly. It was not to be expected,
[Page 183]
under the circumstances, that he should be very solicitous about details.
‘I conclude,’ continued he, ‘that you will not now return with my friend to Shanghae.’
‘Certainly not,’ said Fu-chow drily. ‘I have had quite enough of that gentleman. It would have pleased me to see the last of him out yonder’ (here he pointed with his thumb in the direction of the execution ground); ‘but as it is, I shall still stay.’
‘To see the last of me , I suppose,’ thought Conway bitterly. ‘Well, it is no matter; only I had fallen into the error of mistaking this brute for a man.’
It was curious how this misconception affected him; he was annoyed to find that his friend's view of their late attendant was a more correct one than his own.
The fact was, his mind was eminently just, very remarkably so considering his circumstances and manner of life; and he had contrived up to that point not only to make allowances for this man, who had betrayed his employer and was about to be the cause of his own destruction, but even to think well of him. He managed, however, to stifle his disgust.
‘Well, if you get this money, Fu-chow, you will at least make such final arrangements as may be necessary; I mean, as to the departure and safe conduct of my friend. It is his desire to start for Shanghae at once.’
‘I can well believe it,’ returned the captain, with a contemptuous smile. ‘I will do all that is necessary, so soon as I touch the money. I would rather have it in my hands, you see, than a promise from this good gentleman in my ear for ten times as much.’
[Page 184]
It would have been very difficult to explain to Fu-chow what is understood by the phrase ‘a man of honour,’ even had Conway felt inclined to attempt that feat. As it was, he only said, ‘You shall have your 200 l ., sir;’ and turned upon his heel.
Within half an hour he had kept his word, and the last obstacle had been removed to his friend's escape and to his own destruction.
When Conway returned to Pennicuick with the news that the exchange had been effected, the latter was greatly moved. The actual state of the case—the positive reality that his friend was about to die for him—had perhaps not struck him before with its full force. Just as when he had been awaiting his own sentence he could hardly realise the idea that it could be his death doom, so up to this time it had probably seemed something too monstrous and horrible that his friend should be actually sacrificed in his stead. For the moment, since the people had been excited by his thoughtless act, it might have been necessary to make some show of severity; but the authorities could surely never contemplate the execution of a British subject of position for such an offence, in earnest. So he had reasoned, or endeavoured to reason, in his own case; and when this hope had turned out to be hopeless and the case had become his friend's, he had said to himself, ‘It will be easier for Conway to get out of this scrape than it was for me; he can speak these scoundrels' language, and make friends of them. They will, surely, never carry matters to extremity with him, especially as they will be aware of his innocence.’ They two would somehow still get back again together to Shanghae, and the whole adventure would serve for them to talk about over their cigars.
[Page 185]
But it was different now that Conway had come back with a pale grave face, saying, ‘You are free, Pennicuick; get you gone, while you may, at once.’
‘And you?’
‘I am to suffer death to-morrow evening. You will think of me, Penn, when the hour arrives, and say a “God be with you.” Don't let us talk of it, however; for I would wish to play the man before these people.’
‘Great Heaven! Do you mean to say they will do it?’
‘They will unquestionably do it. It is settled.’
‘But not to-morrow! You have surely made arrangements for delay? I have money enough left to purchase that; I will not lose one instant in getting help, and---’
‘It is useless, Pennicuick. You have not much money left. Everybody, inclusive of our friend Fu-chow, has been as greedy as a pike. And even if it were otherwise, the money would be thrown away. Help is out of the question. A few hours of life— for that could be all it would purchase—are of no moment to me. Since I am to die, the quicker death comes the better.’
‘Oh, Connie! This is too terrible!’
For a moment the hard heart of the man had melted within him.
‘You have got my will, Pennicuick, which we will now have witnessed. It rests with you to see that its conditions are made effectual. I put my confidence in you, being persuaded that you will not wrong a dying man.’
‘And a man who is also dying in my stead,’ put in Pennicuick.
Conway had not expected him to exhibit such feeling—his voice was not only tender and solemn, but even reverent.
[Page 186]
‘I need add nothing more, then, on that head,’ continued Conway, when the formality had been completed by help of the gaoler. ‘Tell her—tell Nelly—that my last thoughts were for her. I have fancied of late, from something in her letters— nothing distinct—but to me, who have studied them well, there seems a strain of tenderness in relation to your son Raymond. Of course, under other circumstances, this could never have borne fruit. I do not blame you for that; it is your nature, Pennicuick, to exaggerate the claims of wealth: I say, had Nelly been poor, I know this would have been out of the question. But now, since she is rich—at your expense, you will say, but surely also at mine—there need be no such objection. I may be mistaken in this matter altogether, but if the young people love one another, Penn, let them marry.’
For a moment Pennicuick did not answer; he had not suspected the fact of which his friend informed him, and under other circumstances it would have incensed as well as surprised him: but it was no time for anger now. Moreover, what Conway had said was reasonable enough. Pennicuick's chief objection, indeed the only one, to such a match, would have been Nelly's poverty: and she would be now no longer poor.
‘I will be no obstacle to Raymond's views as to your daughter,’ replied he presently, ‘though I was unaware they tended that way; there will, as you say, be now no great inequality in the way of money between them; since, until my death—after this considerable diminution in my fortune—he can expect but little from me.’
A shadow flitted across Conway's face: the allusion to the price he had sold his life for pained him, for it showed a grudging
[Page 187]
spirit. Moreover, it seemed hard that this man should talk so quietly about his future arrangements, while he himself had for his future but a few hours, and those to be passed in prison, and then to be ended miserably.
‘Let us cut this short, Pennicuick. There is nothing more of importance to be said, and such talk is painful to both of us. The boat is ready, and the men. There is a sedan at the door, so that you can get on board without being seen. Twang-hi has given orders for my—that is, for your—return to Shanghae immediately. You will do as you please about returning hither; it will be a useless as well as a troublesome matter, and I absolve you from it.’
‘I shall return as soon as it is humanly possible,’ said Pennicuick earnestly.
‘If you do so, and they have left my bones out yonder—as is their custom, I believe—put them underground, somewhere. Just take precautions that the details are not known at home. You will say, “He was executed.”’
‘You forget; here is the laudanum, Conway.’ He passed over to him the little bottle.
‘Thanks: I doubt, however, if I shall use it. It is suicide, after all, and you know I have always had my scruples.’
‘If I thought you would be so weak as to let these wretches torture you, I swear I would not leave you!’ cried Pennicuick. ‘Even as it is, I feel like a murderer.’
‘Then I ought to feel like a robber,’ said Conway, smiling, ‘since I take your 20,000 l . Come, good-bye, Penn;’ and he held out his hand.
‘Good-bye, Connie.’
There were real tears in Pennicuick's eyes. This man was
[Page 188]
the only friend—even to be called such—that he had ever had; and he had brought death upon him.
‘I shall come back,’ he continued, ‘and not without hope. But if they have put you to death—then this I swear, one man at least shall pay for it. As sure as the sun is in the sky, I will kill Fu-chow.’
‘Then my death will be of no service, since yours must follow.’
‘Not at all. I shall take my opportunity. Nobody will ever know about it but Fu-chow himself. I will strangle that devil very slowly, and put him under water.’
‘To appease my manes?’ inquired Conway, with a sad smile.
But Pennicuick did not smile: his face was terrible in its fury. There was no use in reasoning with him, and besides (though at present he was unaware of that), Fu-chow was not going to be his companion any more.
The two friends grasped hands for the last time.
‘You will remember, Penn, all that I have charged you with?’
‘How is it possible that I should forget it?’
‘Say something kind for me to my wife; and tell dear Nelly how I loved her.’ He threw himself on the couch, and, with a sign that his friend should leave him, turned his face to the wall.
[Page 189]
CHAPTER XVII. THE SURVIVOR. Pennicuick left the cell, closing the door softly behind him. In the corridor he found the head gaoler waiting for him.
‘Put your cloak about your face,’ he said, ‘so as to hide your black beard. The sedan is at the door and will take you to the boat. The sooner you are on board and off, the better.’
Pennicuick understood nothing of this speech, but the gestures which accompanied it were intelligible enough. He lost no time in obeying the hint. His heart was full of sorrow for his friend, but that did not dull his wits; he felt that it behoved him to take care that Conway did not die in vain—that his own escape, that is, should be made secure.
Muffling himself in his cloak, he stepped into the sedan, with which the bearers immediately began to trot. In a few minutes he was at the garden steps that led down to the canal. He felt a cool breath that was inexpressibly grateful to him, for it was the air of freedom. Then, still using the same precautions, he entered his cabin, drew the curtains, and locked the door. At the same moment the boat began to move on its homeward journey. Peering cautiously through the window, he saw the Mandarin's house
[Page 190]
beginning to recede, then the pine-trees on the hill behind it, then, afar off, the roof of the gaol.
The sense of humiliation was receding too, and giving place to one of exultation. If an Englishman had been with him, or had been even left behind him, cognisant of the means by which he had escaped, and with power to speak of it, it would have dashed his spirits: but no one could ever know what had really happened. He was safe and without a strain so far as the world— his world—was concerned. He had still, notwithstanding the huge sum he was pledged to pay as the price of his freedom, a considerable fortune. Many years of life yet lay before him, and he would enjoy them none the less by reason of his late bitter experience.
Then his eyes rested on the vacant couch which was Conway's, and he felt a sting of reproach. Poor Connie! How different would his thoughts be in that infernal prison, with the shadow of that dread To-morrow hanging over him. He would take the laudanum of course when it came to the pinch—but even so, Death was Death. How beautiful looked the green earth, and the bright sky; and Conway would never see them more!
Along the roadway by the river a horseman was passing at full speed. He knew by his dress that he was a government messenger. This gave him a momentary apprehension; for his nerves were not as they had been before the Torture. He knew now why brave men had succumbed to the Rack and Screw, betrayed their fellows, or even made false accusations against them. Then appeared the Temple where he had committed the foolish outrage that had cost his friend his life, and himself a fortune. His lips framed a bitter curse, and he plunged his hand mechanically
[Page 191]
into the pocket of his jacket. His revolver, however, was in the custody of Twang-hi. He felt that it would cost him something to keep his hands quiet when Fu-chow should present himself, who was doubtless among the soldiers who were chatting together forward, behind the curtain. Dearly as he loved money, and grievously as he had been despoiled of it, he would have given a thousand pounds that moment (he said to himself) to meet Fu-chow in some desert place alone. He preferred to think of that to thinking of his friend's position; and when driven to do the latter, he avoided looking at it in its true light. He would be still in time to return and save him. He sat down, and mapped out in his mind exactly what was to be done on reaching Shanghae, so that not a moment should be lost. He would go to the Consul and the Commandant, and through their influence procure an order to stay Conway's execution, which should be sent off by express. Then he would, if possible, procure a pardon for the culprit, and also a safe conduct for himself, and armed with these would return at once, as he had promised. Though he had been so lately compelled to acknowledge to himself that Conway's doom was sealed, there had now arisen within him a ray of hope sufficient at least to make him strain every nerve to save him.
Supposing that the difficulties of the case were not absolutely insuperable, Ralph Pennicuick was indeed just the man to overcome them. He was prompt and vigorous; was well acquainted with the official and military mind, and with the scruples of each; and had no scruples of his own. Nor was he now disposed, to do him justice, to spare his purse, or endeavour to release himself from so huge an obligation. Under these circumstances Pennicuick grudged every hour spent upon the journey; fretted and fumed in the
[Page 192]
solitary cabin to which prudence still confined him; and consigned the Chinese nation to eternal perdition a thousand times a day. A thrill of vague disappointment seized him when he discovered that Fu-chow was not on board; yet he confessed to himself it was better that it should be so, since he could hardly have kept his hands off him, and to have touched him would, without doubt, have been to kill him.
In five days, thanks to incessant urging of his laborious boatmen, Pennicuick came in sight of the city. He presented himself at once at the British Consulate, and stated what had happened, substituting of course Conway's name for his own, and pleading the lightness of his offence and the severity of the threatened punishment. In half-an-hour, accompanied by the Consul, he presented himself at the door of the Governor of Shanghae, and was admitted to that great official's presence. The Mandarin listened to all he had to say with the most benignant face. ‘The laws of China,’ he said, ‘were flawless as its ministers were incorruptible, but the highest attribute of the Emperor, the Lord of Heaven, was mercy. If the case were laid before his supreme Majesty, it was possible that something might be done.’
‘But meanwhile we are losing the most precious time.’
‘That is true,’ said the Governor. ‘But in virtue of my high office I can grant a reprieve subject to his Majesty's confirmation. You will take this yourself. I will despatch messengers on “horses of a thousand li” to Pekin, and from thence the imperial reply shall be sent straight to the Mandarin at Dhulang, at whose house you will receive it.’
By this plan not an hour would be lost, and Pennicuick hastened to express his acknowledgements. The Chinese are
[Page 193]
slow at writing, but the form of reprieve was at hand, and the governor had but to sign and seal it.
‘We shall save poor Conway yet,’ cried Pennicuick as they left the palace.
‘Let us hope so’ returned the Consul drily.
‘Well, at all events the governor has shown himself anxious to do what he can: what did he mean by horses of a thousand li?’
‘The horses used by the government carriers are so called; some of them will cover that distance—about 200 English miles—in a single day. These carriers carry hens' feathers to indicate their pressing business, and everyone is bound to hasten them on their way by all means in his power.’
‘I saw one myself upon the road,’ mused Pennicuick. ‘But why not send one of these to precede me at Dhulang with the reprieve?’
‘No; don't let that document out of your sight. It is better to be a little later, and in possession of it, than to trust it to native hands. I know these people well; the Governor was too civil by half, and, what is a very bad sign, even dropped no hint about expenses.’
‘Do you mean to say that he will not perform his promise?’
‘No. He will do everything that costs him nothing and at the same time gives him a good character with Europeans; but, judging from his manner, I warn you not to be too hopeful.’
In a few hours after his arrival in Shanghae Pennicuick was once more departing from it, in company with two brother-officers of Conway's—Major Ross, an old campaigner, and Lieutenant Milburn, a young fellow with whom Conway was a great favourite;
[Page 194]
he had once got himself into a boyish scrape which might have been very serious but for the captain's interference. Conway was very popular in his regiment, and the news of his dangerous position had been received with the sincerest sorrow, indignation, and surprise. Of course they were all for rescuing their comrade sword in hand; England was bound to declare war with China if a hair of his head was injured; and in the mean time let the regiment march to Dhulang and claim its captain. But the Consul and even the Commandant held a different opinion. The responsibility upon the latter's shoulders was very great, and he had other things to consider than the life of one man. It was more than doubtful whether the execution even of a British officer, who had confessedly outraged the feelings of the natives and broken the law of the land, would be held as a casus belli by his government. Moreover, it was certain that any movement on Dhulang, supposing it were possible to reach the place with the handful of men at his disposal, would be far too late to effect its object. Even greater than the indignation of Conway's brother-officers at hearing of his position was, as I have said, their surprise; and this last feeling was a source of intense annoyance to Pennicuick; he did not like being told, as he was told a dozen times a day by his two companions, that they could not understand how a fellow like Conway could possibly have got into such ‘a hole.’ It was so unlike him to have played the fool under any circumstances; but knowing the Chinese character, as he did, so well, it was absolutely unaccountable to them how he could have committed such an outrage.
‘I can only tell you what occurred,’ said Pennicuick doggedly. ‘I suppose it was some impulse of the moment.’
[Page 195]
‘Conway is the most prudent fellow out,’ answered the Major, ‘and wholly without devilry.’
‘I believe there has been some cursed mistake,’ said Milburn; ‘and if so, I hope it will be taken up at home. Nobody but a Chinese would have dreamt of harming poor old Connie; and nothing would please me better than having to go in at such brutes.’
‘There I agree with you,’ said Pennicuick; and he swore a terrible oath to that effect, which won him more favour with his companions than all they had yet seen of him. It was clear that he was very much in earnest to avenge Conway's fate, however it should have been brought about, and he had without doubt plenty of pluck. It was no wonder that under such circumstances, and considering his late experiences, he was somewhat stern and sombre, and unlike the man whom Conway had introduced to their society a few weeks ago; nor indeed, though they had good hopes of the success of their mission, were they themselves in good spirits. They travelled as quickly as it was possible, but the time passed wearily enough till the boat once more touched Twang-hi's garden steps. They had taken the precaution to bring with them an interpreter, and accompanied by him the three Englishmen at once stepped on shore. It was early morning, the same time or nearly so when Pennicuick had landed last there, with his friend; but on this occasion no stately major-domo came forth to greet them. The house showed no sign of welcome, and silence reigned throughout the place.
‘I thought these people were astir at sunrise,’ remarked the Lieutenant.
‘They sleep, or seem to sleep, when it suits them,’ answered
[Page 196]
Pennicuick gravely. A terrible presentiment had taken possession of him. He felt somehow that the horrible deed he had dreaded had been done, and that the Mandarin and his household, observing their arrival, kept within doors to avoid them. The gate of the court was locked, and there was no answer to their repeated summons.
‘We are wasting time,’ said he; ‘let us go to the prison at once, and learn the worst.’
‘But we can do nothing until the Mandarin has seen and countersigned the reprieve,’ said the Major.
‘Yes, we can learn whether the reprieve is of any service.’
His voice had a solemnity in it which chilled his companions. As for Pennicuick himself, the place in which he stood, the road which he traversed (and which was the same along which he had been hurried by the soldiers from Twang-hi's hall of justice), were like the scenes in a dream which we dream over again—vague, unstable, and yet familiar. Not a living creature was to be seen; but presently, in the middle of a waste plot of ground they saw a solitary figure standing.
‘It is a statue,’ said one.
‘It is an idol,’ suggested another.
It was, however, a dead man tied to a post.
They approached it with awe and horror; but they had still a hope that this victim to justice or barbarity might prove to be a native, for indeed such spectacles are not uncommon in China. The corpse was frightfully disfigured; it had, if not ten thousand cuts, at least many hundreds, evidently from their size inflicted by the sword of the executioner. The skin fell in flaps from the forehead over the eyes, from the cheek over the chin; the whole
[Page 197]
body was, in fact, one gaping wound. Unrecognisable, however, as were the features, it was plain that the victim had been a European.
‘Great Heaven, can this be Conway?’ groaned Milburn. They were all three deeply moved. They had turned away their faces in disgust; but the interpreter, who had no such fine feelings, was examining the body with minuteness.
‘It is an Englishman,’ observed he quietly. ‘He has suffered the “Ling-chih.” Did your friend wear rings?’
‘He had one on the second finger of his left hand,’ said Pennicuick.
‘I thought so. The executioner has cut that finger off in order to obtain the ring.’
Pennicuick turned his back on the man, and walked hastily away, accompanied by his two companions.
‘I will have blood for blood for this,’ cried he between his teeth. ‘What an end!’
‘Poor dear Connie!’ sighed the Lieutenant.
‘England will see to it,’ observed the Major gravely. ‘If ever there was a just cause for war, this is surely one.’
Pennicuick felt his face flush like fire. He understood how base he would feel if his friend's memory should be charged with such a national disaster. He pictured a war between two great nations arising from his own practical joke.
At this moment a tall figure was seen slowly coming from the direction of the Mandarin's house. He had a staff in his hand, apparently black and white; small slips of paper were, however, pasted upon it. His attire was of hemp cloth with a tinge of yellow.
[Page 198]
‘This person,’ said the interpreter, ‘is a mourner.’
‘Ask him if he knows who this man was whom they have murdered here,’ said Pennicuick sternly.
‘I know,’ answered the stranger, when the question had been put. ‘It is the Englishman who stole the blessed Shay-le. May Buddha forgive him!’
‘What is the most insulting thing that I can say to this man?’ inquired Pennicuick, when this reply had been translated to him.
‘You are the dead man's friend,’ continued the stranger. ‘I recognise you, though my face has become strange to you through grief. He was a good man, notwithstanding the crime, which he has expiated. We burnt incense to him; we gave him money; there has been a sufficiency of rice laid at his feet every morning.’
‘He means since the gentleman has been dead,’ explained the interpreter.
‘He had better stop, or I shall kill him,’ exclaimed Pennicuick.
‘Nay, nay,’ interposed the Major with an angry gesture. ‘Let us hear what the scoundrel has to tell us.’
‘You are like a calf without a ring in his nose,’ observed Kushan (for he it was), looking at Pennicuick benignly.
‘I shall not translate that ,’ murmured the interpreter parenthetically.
‘A toad in a well cannot perceive the whole heavens. Your ideas are contracted. To be angry with us is to be angry with Heaven. We did (I repeat) what we could for this unhappy man. My master, Twang-hi (who loved him), is overcome with sorrow, and can see no one in consequence. But there was nothing for him but to obey the commands of the lord of the province in seeing the execution carried out.’
[Page 199]
‘The man is so far right,’ observed the Major, when this speech had been explained to them; ‘his master's duty was to obey orders, as I trust it will be ours to hang the lord of the province, and all the rest of them.’
‘When did it happen?’ inquired Pennicuick, motioning towards the ghastly spectacle, to which, however, he did not venture again to turn his gaze.
Kushan shut his eyes, and assumed an attitude of consideration. ‘This is the ninth day since the execution.’
‘That is certainly a lie,’ exclaimed the Major.
‘It is the date at which the poor fellow was condemned to die,’ observed Pennicuick doubtfully.
‘Then he is trying to square facts which are incompatible. I have seen men who have been killed in action, and nine days afterwards---’
‘I understand,’ interrupted Pennicuick, with a shudder.
‘Look here, Kushan; if you tell any more lies, I will kill you. When did your filthy people murder this Englishman?’
‘An upright heart does not fear demons,’ murmured Kushan, rather to bolster his own courage than with any intention of defiance, since he added immediately, ‘Perhaps the poor man perished later. Let us say eight days ago.’
‘At all events he was dead when the Governor of Shanghae issued the reprieve,’ observed Pennicuick; ‘and no doubt he knew that it would be so. What liars and hypocrites all these wretches are!’
‘Do you see yonder grove of pine-trees on the hill-side?’ inquired Kushan, in a mellifluous voice. ‘It was the desire of your departed friend to be laid there, beneath their soothing murmur.’
[Page 200]
‘It is possible that he is now speaking the truth,’ observed Pennicuick. ‘Conway did, I remember, express some wish to that effect.’
‘Then let us lay him there,’ said the Major. ‘It is the least we can do to carry his last wish into effect, and it is all, alas! that can be done.’
Kushan, having been informed of this intention, expressed his serene approval.
‘One cannot carry an olive on the pate of a priest, but one can do something. To pay the funeral rites to those who are dear to us is one of the 1,300 meritorious deeds. In the mean time, in the name of my master, I invite you to his house while the coffin is being prepared and the grave dug.’
The three Englishmen, glad enough of any excuse for leaving the scene of so terrible a tragedy, accepted this invitation.
‘Where is Fu-chow?’ inquired Pennicuick of Kushan in his gentlest tones.
‘Fu-chow—Fu-chow?’ echoed the major-domo, striking his smooth forehead. ‘Ah, I remember; he was the officer in command of your guard of soldiers. Did he not return with you to Shanghae?’
‘No, he did not,’ answered Pennicuick. ‘If he could be persuaded to do so—that is, to return with us now—I would pay a handsome sum to the person who brought about such an arrangement.’
‘Ah, you miss him:’ remarked Kushan blandly. ‘It is unhappily, however, useless to climb trees in search of fishes. If he did not return with you, I don't know what became of him. China is very large; if a man slips away, he is gone for ever. Here is my
[Page 201]
master's house. Please to walk towards the dining-chamber. You will find chickens and goat's flesh, with a steak of the water-ox.’
It was a gloomy meal, and the guests had but small appetite for the dainties that were set before them. Kushan, who presided at the board, delivered himself of innumerable aphorisms, mostly of a lugubrious kind, to which, however, nobody listened. The two officers conversed together in a low tone concerning their dead friend. Pennicuick sat silent, full of sorrow, and rage, and self-reproach.
It was felt by everybody to be a relief when an attendant appeared to summon them to the funeral. This would have taken place on that very day, even if the Englishmen had not arrived, so that all preparations had been made for it.
Only, as the payment of expenses was now assured, the proceedings were of a more ambitious character. A life-size figure made of bamboo and covered with red paper, like a military Guy Faux, was carried by the two leading members of the procession, to indicate the calling of the deceased; this was intended to be consumed beside the grave. Next came two men with large white lanterns, on one of which was inscribed ‘a hundred children,’ on the other ‘a thousand grandchildren,’ in compliment to the dead man's supposed descendants. Next, was a band of music playing solemn airs. Then came men scattering mock money—white and yellow bits of tin with holes through them—to open the road, i.e. to propitiate the spirits who might be guarding the way to Heaven. And last the coffin, varnished, and adorned with red paper.
The absurdity of these arrangements increased rather than detracted from the melancholy of the three mourners. It seemed an additional calamity that to their unhappy friend could be given
[Page 202]
neither a military burial, nor the simple rites of home; these foolish gewgaws which were intended to do him honour appeared to be an insult to his memory. But there was no time for any alteration in the matter, even if it could have been satisfactorily effected.
When the coffin was put into the grave young Milburn handed something to his superior with a blush at his own kindly foresight. It was an English prayer-book. The Major nodded approval, and read from it the service for the dead. When the grave had been filled in, Kushan stepped forward and inquired whether anything else could be done. His plausible and unctuous manner resembled greatly that of an undertaker at home, but his attire was different; he had exchanged his hempen garment for a silk one of brightest yellow.
‘Put up a headstone with that name upon it,’ said Pennicuick, handing him a slip of paper. ‘What is it in all in which I shall then be indebted to you?’
Kushan named a sum which must have been certainly sufficient for all expenses, and Pennicuick paid it without a word.
‘Shall I now conduct these honourable personages to their boat?’ inquired Kushan, through the interpreter.
‘Not yet,’ said Pennicuick. ‘I wish first to visit the prison.’
Kushan turned up the whites of his eyes. ‘Houses are emptiness,’ he said, ‘when they have been exchanged for the lonely mound outside the city wall.’
Nevertheless he led the way to the goal.
They once more passed by the spot, where the post now stood without its ghastly burden; and on this occasion they took notice how the ground and turf had been lately trodden down, as if by a great multitude.
[Page 203]
‘There were 50,000 persons to witness the “Ling-chih,”’ explained Kushan, in answer to the Major's inquiry.
The governor of the gaol received them with great urbanity. Pennicuick's quick eye detected on this man's finger, not only his own signet-ring, but that of his deceased friend; but upon the whole he judged it better to utter no remonstrance.
It was not expedient to make this personage his enemy who, though he did not know his power over him, held a secret in his hands the betrayal of which would have been his social ruin. In even speaking with him, in fact, he ran a great risk, but his prudence was overborne by a certain insatiable curiosity. He wished to know whether his unhappy friend had taken advantage of the means in his possession to obtain a painless death, or whether he had really undergone the agonies of the torture.
That the execution had taken place proved nothing; since that would have happened—in order to deceive the public—had the victim been dead or alive. It was necessary to proceed with caution in his inquiries.
‘Did my friend leave any message behind him?’ asked Pennicuick.
‘He left nothing but his clothes,’ was the reply; ‘they have passed into the legal possession of Sheer Sing, the turnkey, who is now wearing them: he might nevertheless, however, be persuaded to give them up.’
Pennicuick shook his head, with a gesture of disgust. He felt his fury rising against this man, who had been the cause of a frightful humiliation being inflicted upon him. ‘I perceive he also left his ring,’ said he sternly.
‘Yes. He gave it to me as they led him forth to death,’ replied
[Page 204]
the gaoler with imperturbable face, ‘as a testimony to my kindness towards him. I would never part with such a memento —unless for a very considerable consideration.’
‘How much?’ inquired Pennicuick.
The gaoler named a sum greatly in excess of the value of the trinket; Pennicuick at once produced the money, and received the article in exchange.
‘Perhaps you would like to buy back your own ring also?’ said the gaoler persuasively; ‘it is of greater cost, and has also memories of a tender nature connected with it. The regard I entertain for yourself is very genuine.’
‘You may keep it, and—and welcome,’ said Pennicuick, swallowing his wrath with a great effort.
‘As you please,’ answered the other gravely. ‘By the by, there was a little bottle found in your friend's chamber, full of some dark liquid, and untouched. It is perhaps a cordial.’
‘You and Sheer Sing can drink that between you,’ said Pennicuick quietly. ‘Now answer me this question truly; did my poor friend suffer much? or were those precautions taken about which he spoke to you?’
‘Those precautions were taken,’ answered the gaoler; ‘it is very well you spoke of them, for I paid the executioner two taels out of my own pocket for that purpose, which had escaped my memory. It was well earned, too; your man was dead in a second, I do assure you.’
Pennicuick gave him the money as before, then turned upon his heel without a word.
‘Let us go,’ said he to his companions. ‘This fellow makes me sick.’
[Page 205]
‘You have been paying through the nose, as it seems to me, for everything,’ observed the Major, as they retraced their steps.
‘No doubt. They are all cheats as well as murderers. But what do a few pounds matter more or less? I would have given five hundred to learn what that scoundrel just told me, that Conway did not suffer pain.’
‘This man is a good fellow, after all,’ observed the Major to Milburn presently, in a low tone.
‘I am not sure,’ answered the young man doubtfully. ‘He has a cold-blooded way with him, and gives me the idea of wishing to get the whole affair out of his mind.’
‘Gad, I can't blame him for that,’ said the Major, with a shudder.
Kushan took leave of his three visitors at the boat-side with a stately salaam to each.
To Milburn he said, ‘Youth is vanity.’
To the Major he said, ‘Reform yourself, that you may reform others.’
To Pennicuick he said, ‘May you and your whole family be jammed into one coffin!’
As all these remarks were accompanied by the same sweet smile, and the interpreter was already on board, they did not produce any particular effect.
All were sombre and silent throughout the voyage; but Pennicuick hardly uttered a word. The two officers were thinking of their dead friend's fate, and of what steps it was probable would be taken to avenge it; Pennicuick, too, thought of these things, but also of others. It was difficult to move him from what appeared to be a species of lethargy; but he was roused from it on one occasion.
[Page 206]
‘I suppose,’ said the Major, as the three sat smoking together on the morning of the day they reached Shanghae, ‘that our poor friend has not left much behind him in the way of money.’
‘Sir?’ said Pennicuick; ‘I beg your pardon. You were saying---’
‘I was referring to what Conway may have had to leave behind him. I am afraid it will not be much.’
‘Just so; I dare say,’ answered Pennicuick abstractedly.
The Major stared at him.
‘We thought you would know all about it,’ explained Milburn simply. ‘Conway has spoken to me about his family more than once. He has only one daughter; let us hope he has been at least enabled to provide for her.’
‘Yes, indeed; let us hope that,’ said Pennicuick. ‘One cannot know anything for certain, however, just at present.’
And he again relapsed into silence.
‘Now, if I were a rich man like that fellow,’ observed the Lieutenant presently to the Major, ‘I would take care that my friend's only daughter should not be unprovided for in any way.’
‘My dear boy,’ answered the Major, ‘you think that because you are not a rich man. If you had as much money to spend as Pennicuick, you would perhaps be as close-fisted.’
‘He paid everything very handsomely up yonder, however,’ remarked Milburn.
‘But how do you know he won't deduct it out of Conway's little property? It is my opinion—taking everything I have seen of him one with another—that he is a deuced hard lot.’
‘I'm glad he isn't in the regiment,’ answered the Lieutenant, with a glance of great disfavour at the subject of these remarks.
[Page 207]
Whether Pennicuick was a hard lot or not, he certainly did not deserve the imputation of intending to charge his friend's estate with the money he had just expended on his account. He was quite ready to pay that, and would have been so had it been thrice as much. But what he was thinking of, with his hand resting on his breast pocket in which lay his dead friend's will, was whether 20,000 l . was not too large a sum to pay away without a scrap of paper being in existence to compel him to do so—and when even the verbal promise he had given to that effect had been passed to a dead man. He had been thinking over the matter for four days, and it was now become necessary to make up his mind about it one way or the other. The question that had just been put to him—‘What has Conway left behind him?’—would be put again by others, and would have to be answered definitely. In that case, which reply should he give, ‘He has left 20,000 l .,’ or, ‘He has left next to nothing’?
[Page 208]
CHAPTER XVIII. UNCONSCIOUS. Lincoln's Inn , although it doubtless has its merits, is, viewed as a dwelling-place, not an enticing spot. Its chambers have, to my eye at least, an aspect especially unliveable. That they are good to read in, good to write in, good to make money in, I do not dispute; but I would rather not sleep in them, nor eat in them. When the day's work is over, it is well to leave them, and breathe a little fresh air. They are a part of the necessary toil and moil of life, but by no means of its cheerful serenity. They are dull without being quiet (for the thunder of Chancery Lane ever booms above them), and their look-out is for the most part melancholy and devoid of interest. There are trees, indeed, of goodly height—a whole avenue of them, leading from wall to wall, in a most disappointing manner and there is one large grass-plot, which has, however, the air of a drying-green that attempts to be ornamental. On this abuts Stone Buildings, which may therefore lay claim to command foliage and verdure. But it is not a cheerful block of residences, nor would one's sense of the fitness of things be outraged if one were told it was a workhouse or a barrack. Nevertheless, if I must needs live in Lincoln's Inn, I would live in Stone Buildings, where a first floor is as highly rented, I suppose, as any
[Page 209]
twenty-roomed house in the suburbs with a garden and a double coach-house. In this ‘dusky purlieu of the law,’ though by no means on the first floor, lived or ‘kept’ (for he was young enough to retain his university phrases) Raymond Pennicuick. He had a large sitting-room looking down on the green, a bed-room, a clerk's room, and a very small nondescript apartment, so wretched and rayless that it seemed appropriate for suicidal purposes and nothing else. The furniture of this suite, which had been passed on, from inmate to inmate, so long, that it might have served the student days of the Lord Chancellor, was mouldy and moth-eaten, and looked all the worse from its contrast with the articles of modern luxury Raymond had brought with him from his college rooms. The easy chair, the fire-screen (a triumph of Nelly's skill in needlework) and the volumes of Thackeray and Dickens were like new cloth patched on an old garment, and he himself in his youth and comeliness looked the brightest patch of all. It was small matter to him that the carpet was worn and that the rugs bore the marks of coals both hot and cold; or that when his gaze through the open window left the elms and the grass, it had nothing but chimney-pots to rest upon. When one is young, unless one is a very exceptional sort of fool, the mind is not affected by furniture; and the look-out from one's windows is of small importance, when, beyond it, the world is lying before us.
Raymond Pennicuick, therefore, had no grudge against his father for having placed him in this dreary spot; he had, indeed, only murmured against the parental fiat on one occasion, when it had removed him from college before his time. He had, it is true, been by no means studious, and would certainly not have distinguished himself in the honour list; but he would have taken his
[Page 210]
ordinary degree, like other young men in his own ‘set,’ and he had not been told that more was expected of him. Yet his father had removed him suddenly from his college joys, protesting that he had wasted time enough, and must now buckle to the business of life. The real reason of this was unknown to the young fellow, though it had lain quite on the surface; a run of ill luck on the turf had for the time made money scarce with his father, and by way of retrenchment he had withdrawn his son from the university, the educational advantages of which, let us charitably add, he did not perhaps very highly estimate. It was very unusual with him to lose, for he was a book-maker, and always stood to win; but on this occasion a certain nobleman who had long been an ornament of the sporting world, and who was Pennicuick's principal debtor, had levanted. The most prudent mind cannot guard against a catastrophe of this kind, which for some months compelled Ralph Pennicuick to lodge under the same roof with his son. He need not have done so, of course, since he could have procured any amount of money; but it was one of his caprices—he called it ‘a principle’—never to borrow a shilling, or spend one above his income. For a time Raymond rather resented this abrupt separation from his university friends, but in London there are compensations to be found for most things by a genial young fellow of position. He was even more content when his father placed him in the chambers at Stone Buildings, and himself retired to the agreeable privacy of the Albany. There had not been the least disagreement between them; Raymond's sense of duty was too strong for that; but he had felt himself de trop , like a boy who is forced to remain with his seniors after dinner, when the ladies have gone into the drawing-room.
[Page 211]
‘Youth and age,’ the poet tells us, ‘cannot live together;’ but the reasons he gives were by no means those which disinclined Ralph Pennicuick to live in lodgings with his son. If there was no absolute ‘incompatibility of disposition,’ such as nowadays so often sunders husbands and wives, they had few ideas in common.
Ralph Pennicuick hated argument—that is, any expression of opinion contrary to his own; and therefore, since Raymond was quite incapable of hypocrisy, he had often to remain silent. Similarly, in writing to his father, he was aware that no distasteful topic must be broached; a knowledge that tends to make correspondence brief, though not always easy.
Unhappily, it had become necessary to Raymond to break through his usual rule. He had ventured to address his father upon a subject which would certainly not find favour in his eyes, and the letter had been posted, and was now on its way. Upon the contents of it, and on the manner in which they were likely to be received, Raymond was now thinking, as he sat alone in his chambers smoking his after-breakfast cigar. He did not, like other young men of his day, smoke pipes in preference; in which respect, as in a few others, he showed himself his father's son. He had a natural taste for what was most expensive, though without the vulgarity of liking things because they were dear.
‘What will he say—what will he do—when he gets my letter?’ were the thoughts in his mind, as he sat at the open window watching the clouds above the elm-trees and listening to the chirps of the sparrows. ‘If Nelly will have me, I will marry her, whatever he does or says, that's certain.’ Here again he was his father's son. ‘But without his consent it will be difficult to obtain hers. She is so unselfish that she will never see the matter in its true
[Page 212]
light; her very love for me—sweet heart!—will prevent it.’ He rose and paced the room, with a glow upon his handsome face; he was recalling his last interview with her in the garden at Richmond. Presently his eye wandered to the dusty rows of law books that lined one side of the apartment. ‘If I had but expectations,’ muttered he, ‘if there was an entail which I could cut off, and so render him a service, I might win him over. But I have nothing —no plea to urge with him, except that my happiness is wrapt up in her: and there he will not believe me.’ He did not say, ‘and he will care nothing for that,’ which some sons would have said, and which would in his case have been no more than the truth. Even in his bitterness, his sense of filial duty restrained his tongue.
In this, Raymond Pennicuick's disposition was peculiar. There are many men who have a keen sense of filial and fraternal respect, and who have even a strong regard for their more distant relatives (quite independent of their merits), and who, with all this, have scarcely any affection in them. It is doubtful, indeed, whether this devotion to their own family does not arise from egotism. Fathers and brothers are dear to such men because they are of their own blood, and as it were a part of themselves. The dearness is literally of the heart—or rather, of the arteries. It is an anatomical attachment. Their love, if they boast of such a possession at all, is self-love. It is scarcely going too far to say that— with the exception of his love for his mother—a man's power of loving is in inverse ratio to his devotion to his elder and contemporaneous relatives. The more ‘clannish’ people are, the less they have, generally, of geniality, friendship, and general benevolence. But with Raymond this was not so. He had the ‘piety’ of the ancients as well as the kindliness of the moderns. If he did not
[Page 213]
absolutely love his father, he did his best to do so, and persuaded himself that he had succeeded; and, if he found it impossible to respect him, he at least respected his authority. And notwithstanding this, a more generous and affectionate young fellow than Raymond did not exist. His heart and his conscience were alike tender. He had not, indeed, much cleverness; he had probably never uttered ‘a good thing’ intentionally in all his life. But he had said very many pleasant things, which go much farther towards making a man popular. His popularity had one effect, which, had he known of it, would have given him genuine pain; it set people contrasting him with his father, much to the latter's disadvantage. Everybody said how ill Ralph the elder behaved to Raymond the younger; how short of money he kept him; what little natural affection he showed for him; and generally, how much better a son he had in Raymond than he deserved. The young man knew that his father was disliked and feared much more than he was admired; but he did his best to counteract this feeling; no one had ever heard him complain of the manner in which he had been treated; and when any opportunity for praise of his father was offered to him, he never failed to take advantage of it. It was not his fault that it so often sounded like apology. For his own part, he had avoided all causes of offence with him, and bowed to his every wish, even to his caprices. But now a cause of offence had come which could not be avoided. He did not repent that he had sent that letter asking permission to offer his hand where his affections had been already bestowed, but he was full of misgivings about its reception. He was not afraid of the effects of his father's anger, as most sons in his position would have been afraid; he did not dread disinheritance, the cutting off
[Page 214]
of the supplies, &c., but he feared the anger itself, not as a coward would have done, but as one who fears a quarrel because of his regard for his antagonist.
‘I am very young,’ he had written, ‘to urge anything counter to your wishes, as I apprehend this request may be: but my heart is set upon the matter, and will not be moved. Neither Nelly nor I are extravagant in our tastes; a small income will suffice for us: not more to begin with, perhaps, than the sum you are at present so good as to allow me. With such an incentive to exertion I shall set to work at my profession in earnest, and trust not to be a burden to you.’
If he had known that in a few months 300 l . a year to which he had alluded would become his own, he would, of course, have worded his communication differently; but the tone would have been the same. No sense of independence would have made him undutiful. Upon the whole the letter was very simple, honest, and dignified; though it unconsciously betrayed the fact that he was aware of his father's selfishness. He knew that he should be reproached with his youth, inexperience, ignorance of his own mind, &c.; but that the real objection to his plan would lie in its being expensive. His father had always insisted upon the importance of a young fellow's becoming independent; and had, moreover, pointed out that the best and shortest way of accomplishing this desirable object was to marry an heiress. If Ralph Pennicuick's morality was not of any high type, he could not at least be accused of hypocrisy.
It was nearly a week since Raymond had called upon Mrs. Conway and her daughter, which was a longer time than he had ever suffered to elapse between his former visits; he had felt a little
[Page 215]
sensitive about Nelly's reception of him on that occasion, and still more embarrassment as to the position in which he now stood as her avowed yet unaccepted lover; but he meant to go down to Richmond that very day. The longer he was away, the more awkward, he felt, would be their next meeting; and besides, it was his greatest happiness in life to be with her. It was arranged that, pending his father's decision, they were to be as brother and sister; and though that was not the relationship he most desired, it was a very agreeable one. He was not of those unhappy persons who can enjoy nothing unless they get all they want; and he would have been very willing indeed to make the most of his opportunities before any decided veto could arrive from his father, but for Nelly's sake. He felt that it would be wrong to irrevocably engage her affections unless marriage were to follow; and he was sure that she would be resolute against it, if his father's consent were not obtained.
Still, as he left his chambers in his summer garb, and with a flower in his button-hole, there was a radiance in his face that only a certain tender expectancy can bestow, and which is very different from the smirk of satisfaction that sits upon us in later life, when we are about to make a coup in the City; it contrasted strongly with the expression usually worn by the inmates of Stone Buildings, and especially with that upon the face of his fellow-lodger, Beaumont, whom he happened to meet upon the stairs. They were merely acquaintances, though they lived under the same roof, and were almost contemporaries. Beaumont read much harder; he reported legal cases for the papers; and he took to his profession kindly, which could not quite be said of Pennicuick.
[Page 216]
‘Hullo, Beaumont! you look as if the Long Vacation were done away with. There has nothing gone wrong with you, I hope.’
‘No, nothing. You are playing the truant early; you have not even read the newspaper yet, I'll warrant.’
‘I have read all that is interesting in it; that is, your admirable reports. The weather is too fine for work, and I am off— somewhere up the river.’
It was a proof of the seriousness of his intentions with respect to Nelly that he did not say to Richmond. Even the young do not wear their hearts upon their sleeves when there is a conjunction of hearts. He ran down-stairs with a merry laugh; but Beaumont, as he leant over the banisters watching him, grew graver than before.
‘He has not seen it,’ he muttered, ‘and I have not the pluck to tell him.’
As Raymond stepped across the court to Chancery Lane, where there are always cabs to be found, he came upon two men, who stopped their talk at his approach. One he knew just enough to nod to him. When he had passed by, this one said to his companion, ‘That is the son of the very man in question.’
‘Why, he looks more as if he were going courting than as if---’
‘Hush! It is evident he knows nothing about it, poor devil!’
‘Waterloo Station!—Richmond line!’ cried Raymond to his cabman.
[Page 217]
CHAPTER XIX. BREAKING IT. If it is true that one's ears burn while others are talking of us in our absence, Raymond Pennicuick's ears ought to have been very red upon his road to Richmond that morning. And, curiously enough, those who were talking of him were the very folks he was about to visit.
When Mrs. Conway and her daughter came down to breakfast, the latter, as usual, had made the tea, while the former had taken up the paper. She was fond of news of all kinds, and it was one of her very few pieces of personal extravagance to have the ‘Times' ‘to read’ for the first two hours every day. Under such circumstances, it was only reasonable that during that interval she should read it all, and get her money's worth out of it. She was one of those terrible people who will read their newspapers aloud, and poor Nelly had to listen to her. First came the Births, Deaths, and Marriages, to which the young lady did not object—the female mind (perhaps from the earliest ages) takes an interest in the ‘Hatch, Match, and Despatch’ of its fellow-creatures—and then the general news of all descriptions, beginning with the Royal Family's walking on the slopes. But there was sometimes a pause between the extracts from the supplement and those from the main body
[Page 218]
of the paper. This, as Nelly was well aware, was when there was news from China, which her mother always ignored, as not having any interest for her, but somewhat inconsistently always read to herself before everything else.
On this occasion, however, Mrs. Conway did not make this exception. ‘Good Heavens!’ she cried aloud in a voice that made her daughter utter also a little cry; ‘Ralph Pennicuick is dead!’
‘Oh, mamma, how shocking!’ exclaimed Nelly; ‘let us hope it is not true.’
‘Yes, it is true; see here.’ Her fat hands trembled with such excitement that Nelly had to take the paper from her to read the statement.
‘By telegraph. Hong Kong, May 4.—English officer named Pennicook has been put to death by the Chinese in the province of Keangsoo. His companion has arrived at Shanghae.’
‘It says “Pennicook,”’ said Nelly faintly.
‘That is a mistake, of course, in the telegram, as also the word officer. It is Ralph Pennicuick, no doubt. Thank God, your father's safe.’
This was the first time that Mrs. Conway had ever suffered herself to be surprised into any expression of solicitude upon her husband's account, and she evidently regretted it as soon as it was uttered.
‘It was very thoughtless and selfish of him to go with such a companion on such a journey. You see it says “put to death”— that is, by law. No doubt the man did something that roused the anger of the natives.’
‘Oh, mamma, what does it signify? is it not enough that they have killed him? We cannot be sure, however, that such a catastrophe has happened. There is no telegraph between Shanghae
[Page 219]
and Hong Kong, and this may be a mere rumour. As you say, however, thank God dear papa is safe.’
‘No doubt he is safe enough,’ replied Mrs. Conway, adding something in an undertone, which Nelly did not or would not catch, about ‘nought never coming to harm.”
‘How terribly this will shock poor Ray!’ sighed Nelly, with a little outburst of tears; she was glad to weep on Raymond's account, since she could not do so upon his father's. ‘He was always such a good son.’
‘I have known good sons who were not worth much in other respects,’ observed Mrs. Conway, still repentant of her tenderness. ‘However, we shall soon see what he is made of. He will be his own master now.’
‘And very sorry he will be that it is so,’ observed Nelly.
‘No doubt he will—for a day or two. That will be only decent. I am not so interested, however, in his filial feelings as I am as to whether he will keep his promise or not.’
‘What promise, mamma?’
‘Well, it may not be exactly a promise: but it was only a week ago, I believe, that he asked you to be his wife.’
‘And I refused him, mamma. Raymond is quite free to do as he pleases. But how can you think of such things with such news as this before you? Poor Mr. Pennicuick murdered, perhaps tortured, by those dreadful people! I feel as if it were a judgment upon us for what was said the other day about people “not troubling themselves to come home.”’
‘As I said it, my dear,’ answered Mrs. Conway drily, ‘the judgment, as you call it, has, I suppose, fallen upon me. And, thank goodness, I have strength to bear it.’
[Page 220]
There was something in Mrs. Conway's manner not only callous and cruel, but, as it seemed to Nelly, almost triumphant in its malice. She could not restrain a shudder as she listened to her.
‘I am sorry to shock you so, my dear,’ continued Mrs. Conway quietly. ‘I dare say I appear very unfeeling. However, since I am your mother, try to persuade yourself that I may have some good reasons for not making myself unhappy because this man is dead. Of course I am sorry that it has happened in this way; but I do not pretend to be sorry that it has happened. It is better for everybody, especially for his son, who has hitherto been his salve; he will now obtain his freedom.’
‘At a great price,’ sighed Nelly. It seemed to her a terrible thing that a son should be made happy by his father's death; and yet she was aware that this would in some measure come to pass in the present instance.
Her mother rose, and, patting her softly on the head, said tenderly, ‘You are a good girl, my darling, too good for this world, or at all events for any man in it. Dry your eyes and eat your breakfast.’ Then she left the room, leaving her own meal untasted.
Once in the passage, and beyond the observation of her daughter, Mrs. Conway's face grew not only grave but pained. This was not from distress of mind, however, but of body. She leant against the wall with her hand upon her side, and uttered a low groan. ‘This must not kill me,’ murmured she to herself. ‘I must get over it somehow, or he will have the better of me yet. Tortures! he could not have suffered worse than I have done during the last five minutes. It is the heart, no doubt. It would be curious indeed if I should die “heart-broken” upon his account.’
[Page 221]
She looked up at the stairs, which were steep for so old-fashioned a house, and shook her head. Then she moved very slowly and without noise into a room on the same floor at the back of the breakfast-room, and separated from it by folding-doors.
Her face expressed the anxiety of a person who has a wound in some vital part, which has been stanched insecurely, and who is afraid of its bleeding afresh. Like most women—which, poor souls, is fortunate for them—she had a capacity for bearing pain. She could be as secretive about it as the Spartan boy with his fox; but it sometimes betrayed itself by ‘temper.’
‘The doctor said “perfect rest,”’ she murmured; ‘I will lie down here.’ She placed herself cautiously upon the sofa, and remained there without movement. Presently her face became calm, and her lips began to move without sound slowly. You would have said she was some good woman at her prayers. She was not praying, but going through a certain scene in her mind that had occurred in her previous life, and which had indeed a sort of prayer for its conclusion. Could you have understood such silent speech (as the deaf and dumb do), her last words would have run thus: ‘Dead, dead in his sins. May God forgive him as I do!’
Nelly, quite unconscious of her mother's propinquity, remained meanwhile in the front room. She had obeyed the mandate as to drying her eyes, but not that as to eating her breakfast. She felt as if a morsel of bread would have choked her. Her sorrow for what had happened was very genuine, though it was not for the chief sufferer's sake at all. She was horrified that a man like Pennicuick, vicious and heartless as she understood him to be, should have been thus suddenly cut off from life. She was not naturally conventional, and that she took in this instance a conventional
[Page 222]
view was proof how little her feelings were really concerned. Under ordinary circumstances no one was quicker than herself to perceive the absurdity of such phrases as ‘hurried before the judgment-seat of Heaven,’ ‘cut off in his sins,’ &c., &c., as though his Maker were unable to take the circumstances of a man's death into account. But now she took refuge in these common-places. It was less painful to her to let her thoughts dwell upon the dead man than upon his son, because of the latter's relations with herself; but they did revert to him, nevertheless, and to herself in connection with him. She strove in vain to shut out from her view that he was now in a position to offer his hand to her with a certainty of its being accepted. She had no doubts of his good faith whatever; she knew that he had in fact plighted it to her, notwithstanding what she had said to her mother about his being a free man; but she felt that with this news of death no such anticipation of bliss should mingle. Through the gloom of these tidings, however, there glinted in upon her bright streaks of light; thoughts of herself as Raymond's wife, of her mother's satisfaction and comfort, and of her father's return to England, which might now—since he would be relieved of all expenses upon her account—be looked upon as certain. Even when those die who are near to us, thoughts of personal advantage will thus intrude; how much more, then, when we derive benefit from the removal from the world of those to whom we are indifferent.
It was Nelly's practice after breakfast to repair to her easel, which stood in a little room opening from her own bed-chamber and dignified by her mother by the title of ‘the studio;’ but this morning she remained below stairs, with a book in her hand— which she did not read—and with the fatal newspaper on her
[Page 223]
knees. She had known Mr. Pennicuick as a child knows her father's friend who is not her own friend. She had a vague dislike and distrust of him, either instinctive, or engendered by her mother's views of the man, but she had never hated him—his relationship to Raymond, if not his intimacy with her father, had forbidden that—nor did she fear him, for it was not in her nature to fear. Others there were, however, as she was well aware, who feared him; and, mingled with her horror at what had happened, she experienced a sort of wonder (which would have flattered him) that so masterful a man should so ignobly perish—should have been put to death by such despicable creatures as she understood the Chinese to be.
She was still plunged in these conflicting and uncanny thoughts, when a footstep that she well knew was heard on the flags outside; the little gate swung back upon its hinges, pushed by an impatient hand, and then visitor sprang up the steps of the front door. There was no need for her to look out of window. It was Raymond Pennicuick—come to tell her of the misfortune that had befallen him. That would have been bad enough. But when she heard his eager voice, inquiring whether they were at home, she knew that a worse thing awaited her. He did not as yet know what had happened, and she would have to tell him. Her mother from the next apartment heard him likewise, and drew the same conclusion. It was hard on her daughter that she should be left to break such news, but she felt herself to be physically unequal to such a task, or even to move from her present position. There was nothing for her but to lie where she was—and listen; for every word spoken aloud in the next room was audible.
‘Why, Nelly dear, this is a happy chance! I thought by
[Page 224]
this hour you would have been engaged on some immortal work upstairs, and that the greatest interest would be necessary to gain speech with you. But, what is the matter?’
‘Nothing, Ray—at least, there is---’ she cast her eyes down at the newspaper, in hopes that he would guess that it was there her sorrow lay; but he quite misunderstood the cause of her gravity.
‘I am afraid you are still annoyed with me, Nelly; you are apprehensive I shall resume the subject upon which I spoke to you last week. You need not fear it. I have written to my father to express my fixed intentions regarding you. I have said my happiness is only to be found in your love. But in the mean time, we are to be as brother and sister. Is it not so?’ He spoke with such volubility that she had not the power to interrupt him. The very pitifulness in her sweet face doubtless led him on.
‘You must not reckon upon your father, dear Raymond, she faltered out, ‘for anything; for alas! you have no father.’
‘Ah, that comes from your mother's view of him,’ replied he impatiently; ‘she thinks the governor an unnatural parent, which would be rather hard lines upon him, if he were affected by it. She believes he thinks too much of No. 1, but who doesn't? He has, no doubt, a will of his own; but it is not immutable; and if anybody can move it, it will be surely you. I think if he saw you pleading for us---’
‘You do not understand, dear Raymond; your father will never see either of us again; at least, if this report be true—which may not be the case—’ here she put the newspaper into his hand; ‘there is still a hope that it may be mere rumour: and the Chinese news---’
‘Good God!’ exclaimed Raymond in a low suppressed tone.
[Page 225]
He had read the telegram, and stood like one transfixed. ‘My poor, poor father!'
Nelly had run to the sideboard, and from the cellaret produced a glass of sherry. Some girls would have sought to comfort their lover in another way, and dearly would she have liked to do so; but would not that have been to take advantage of him for her own benefit? She could let him see how sorry she was for him without that.
‘There is no telegraph, Raymond, from Shanghae, whence this report has come, to Hong Kong: there is an error as to your father's name and profession, and the whole thing may be therefore a mistake.’ She did not think it was, but she knew that such an idea would help to break the blow to him.
‘It is possible,’ said Raymond slowly; ‘yet I feel the news is true. What does your mother think about it? I should have more confidence in her judgment than in my own in such a case.’
While they still stood together, but not touching one another —he had put his arm half round her waist and then withdrawn it, because to be happy at such a moment seemed a sin to him—Mrs. Conway entered.
‘This is a bad blow to you, my dear Raymond,’ said she softly.
He took her hand, but without his usual cordiality. Though he had expressed a wish for her opinion, her presence was, in fact, unwelcome to him, for had she not been his father's foe?
‘I feel it, Mrs. Conway, very deeply.’
‘I am sure you do, because you are a good son.’ She felt she was paying a compliment to him at the expense of the dead man;
[Page 226]
but she could think of nothing more appropriate to say: she was a woman who never told a lie to mitigate matters, though she had, at least on one occasion in her life, omitted for that reason to tell the truth.
‘You have nothing to reproach yourself with for your conduct to your father, which is what few sons can say.’
‘I am thinking of him, and not of myself,’ replied Raymond coldly. ‘What is your opinion about this telegram? Do you think it is really true?’
‘I am afraid it is so. At least, I have no reason to doubt it.’
‘But the thing may be exaggerated; my father may have got into trouble with the natives, and be in prison, and yet not---’ he hesitated—he could not say, ‘and yet not dead.’
‘The telegram says, “His companion has arrived at Shanghae,” observed Mrs. Conway gravely; ‘my husband would never have left him in such a plight as you suggest.’
There was neither pride nor affection in her tone; but she spoke as one who is stating an undeniable fact: and yet she seemed to repent of having even thus far borne witness to her husband's virtues, for she added significantly, ‘No one ever accused Arthur Conway of not sticking to his friends .’
Nelly knew very well that this remark had a suppressed antithesis with respect to her mother herself, and she showed her consciousness of it by a pained look.
Raymond only understood that a hope had been rudely dispelled.
‘I think I will go home,’ said he, rising slowly from his seat.
‘I should have thought you would have found more comfort here, Raymond, among your old friends, at a time like
[Page 227]
this,’ observed Mrs. Conway reproachfully, ‘than in your solitary chambers.’
Raymond shook his head, and, looking mechanically towards Nelly, answered sadly,
‘You are right, Mrs. Conway; but I am right too. I shall go back to town, and telegraph to Hong Kong at once for confirmation or otherwise of this evil news. In the mean time, God bless you both!’
He shook hands cordially with the women, and in the same may with each. There was a lingering pressure of the fingers (usual with him in Nelly's case), that is the hall-mark of Love, and distinguishes it from that other precious metal, Friendship; but his thoughts were (or he strove his best to keep them so) upon his father's unhappy fate, and his own bereavement.
‘There must have been something good about Mr. Pennicuick, after all,’ observed Nelly, when the young man had gone, ‘or his loss would not excite such genuine sorrow even in a son.’
‘Robespierre had a landlord, who wept for him when he was guillotined, answered Mrs. Conway drily. ‘And besides, Raymond mourns because it is his duty to do so.’
[Page 228]
CHAPTER XX. VICE VERSÂ. When Raymond got back to London, he found the town alive to the misfortune that had happened to him. ‘Outrage on an Englishman in China;’ ‘An English gentleman put to death by the Chinese;’ ‘A casus belli with China,’ formed the great attraction of the contents of the day's papers, and was posted up on the hoardings, and exposed in the largest print at the corners of the streets. He averted his eyes from these advertisements of his sorrow as much as he could, and yet they had a certain fascination for him; nor could he resist buying an evening paper, which promised ‘further particulars’ of the catastrophe. He took it up with him to his chambers, and opened it with a feverish expectation he could scarcely have explained. It was to the last degree improbable that any such details could have come to hand; nor was any newspaper editor likely to be a better judge of the authenticity of the telegram than the Conways or himself. The journal in question, however, took the truth of the news for granted, and merely used it as a peg whereon to hang one of those social or personal paragraphs which are now so common. ‘The lamented and untimely fate of our fellow-countryman in
[Page 229]
China’ was the excuse for half a column of biography. There were very few facts in it, but the mistake as to the victim being a military man was corrected. He was spoken of as being well-known in Club circles, and as having at one time given promise of a political career. His abilities were described as ‘remarkable,’ and, of course, he was ‘universally respected.’ He had left behind him a son, who was still a minor, but who would succeed to the very considerable property of the deceased.
That last sentence gave a pang to the heir, which would probably have been incomprehensible to the man who wrote it. ‘I am rich, I am free to marry the girl of my choice,’ thought Raymond, ‘thanks to the murderers of my father.’ He had no doubt that ‘the natives’ had killed him—probably in some barbarous and shocking fashion—without the pretence of justice.
When Beaumont came up that evening to condole with him on his loss, Raymond felt that it was in fact to congratulate him. The advantages he derived from his father's misfortune were, for the time, almost abhorrent to him. This did not arise from remorse—from his ever having speculated upon such an event in his own mind —but it did partly arise from the circumstance that others had so speculated. He knew that Mrs. Conway had—for one: the pity that she had often expressed for him by reason of his father's neglect, or of his niggardliness with respect to money, recurred to him now with exceeding bitterness. He was one of that rare class who, however they have knocked about in the world, retain their sensitiveness.
He had sent a telegram to his father's bankers at Hong Kong, demanding an immediate reply; but he did not know when that might be expected; nor did he entertain much hope of its contradicting
[Page 230]
the previous despatch in any important particular. There was nothing for him but to sit at home and wait.
In the mean time, he was not without visitors. Many came to see him in his trouble; in part, perhaps, because it was of that sort which ends in material prosperity, but not a few out of genuine regard, for Raymond was very popular. Among others came the family lawyer, whom, since his errand was one of business, he received with but scanty welcome. In talking of his late father's affairs, he experienced much the same feeling as he would have done in taking his father's purse from his pocket after death: nay, it was even worse, since he was not certain that he of whose effects he was thus in a manner taking possession was actually deceased. However, as the lawyer bluntly said, Raymond's attention to such matters could not affect the fact one way or the other, and he felt it his duty to put him into possession of certain particulars.
There were responsibilities of a delicate nature which he shrank from continuing to undertake without consultation with the dead man's heir, although he was still in his legal infancy. These were by no means satisfactory in a moral point of view; but what, perhaps, gave the young man greater pain, was the revelation of his father's wealth. It seemed impossible that the reasons that had been advanced to him from time to time for the necessity for economy could have been founded on fact; and if not, they were mere excuses for parsimonious conduct. In particular, there was a sum of no less than 20,000 l . in a separate investment, of which Raymond had never so much as heard: and it was the knowledge of this fact, no doubt, that led Ralph Pennicuick to name that precise amount as what he was willing to pay to the Chinese authorities by way of bribe, when he was first thrown into prison.
[Page 231]
It is common enough, alas! that sorrow for our dead finds mitigation in the revelation of the mourned one's unworthiness; and something of this sort began unconsciously to affect Raymond's mind. He still felt a poignant pity and regret for his father's fate, but the burden of his grief was lightened, and after a while his thoughts grew free to roam in other directions, and the first object towards which they turned was Nelly. His heart was heavy, but he had a right, like other mourners, to look for comfort; and where was it to be found, if not in the companionship of the girl he loved?
Nearly a fortnight had now elapsed since he had telegraphed to the bankers at Hong Kong, and their silence could be taken as nothing less than a corroboration of the original despatch. It was become only a question of time when he should leave his seclusion and seek consolation from the quarter to which be naturally looked for it. He had heard nothing from Richmond since his visit, and one evening he took up his pen, and wrote to Mrs. Conway that he should call upon her on the ensuing day. That night he had happy dreams, and woke in the morning, for the first time since he had received intelligence of his calamity, without any sense of its oppression. How could it be otherwise, when the morning was to be devoted to his tale of love, and when he knew how willing to listen would be that ear into which he was to pour it?
He had breakfasted, and was about to start, when his clerk brought in a telegram. The colour of its envelope at once informed him that it was not a message of the ordinary kind. It was doubtless the long-expected reply from China. Then for a moment all his old feelings of regret and pain recurred to him. He almost experienced a remorse for the errand on which he was about to start
[Page 232]
as he stood with the document in his hand, which he knew would be the corroboration of his bereavement. With a sigh he opened the envelope—and then sat down, aghast, struck with a wild astonishment at the first words! ‘From Ralph Pennicuick, Hong Kong, to Raymond Pennicuick, Lincoln's Inn, London.’ So ran the words. There was no doubt about it. His father was alive, and had himself sent the message. For a moment he could read no further, overcome with an amazement that was perhaps not all delight. Then he read on: ‘Conway killed by Chinese in revenge for insult to an idol. Break the news to family. I start for England by to-morrow's steamer.’
Conway dead: Nelly's father dead: and he, Raymond, commissioned to break the news to her! It was terrible—for the moment it even seemed more terrible than the news she had broken to him. The horror of it was enhanced by its contrast with the words he had had in his mind to tell her—and which now perhaps would never be told. In his own case there had been some hope—indeed, the hope had been since realised; but in the present matter there could be none. The tidings had come from the only man who was cognisant of what had happened, who had perhaps even seen the catastrophe with his own eyes—the survivor.
Raymond Pennicuick had a very tender heart; one of the reasons, perhaps, why women loved him—though they love many heartless fellows also; and he felt altogether unequal to the duty thus suddenly imposed upon him. It was very easy for one, thousands of miles away, to write, ‘Break the news to the family; but very difficult for the man that had to do it. It was not, he bethought him, a man's task at all. It was a woman's rather, since it was women only that the matter concerned; and then
[Page 233]
Mrs. Wardlaw at once occurred to him as the proper person to undertake it. She was kind-hearted, but by no means weak; she had, he thought, good judgment; and it was certain that she was very fond of Nelly. He took off his mourning garments—by no means with the rapture which he had pictured to himself he would feel in finding that they were out of place, that his father was, after all, alive and well; and went out upon his unexpected errand. It did not strike him that people might stare to see him going about in coloured clothes. His thoughts were wholly fixed upon those bereaved ones he was about to visit; and upon their changed circumstances. They had been always poor; but would they not now be still poorer? Surely his father, who was, it seemed, so rich, would never permit his lost friend's wife and daughter to feel the stings of poverty. He knew, however, that their new position would make his father still more antagonistic to his views respecting Nelly; and also that Nelly on her part would be less disposed than ever to act counter to his will. Upon the whole, though he would not have admitted it, he certainly felt more wretched than when he had thought his father was dead.
On arriving at Richmond, he drove straight to Coromandel Lodge, the residence of Mr. John Wardlaw, and which had been so called from a very successful speculation in which his house had been once engaged in Coromandel wood, a substance of which he was nevertheless entirely ignorant. It was a very handsome house, quite new, with all the latest improvements, such as you seldom see in the country except in the neighbourhood of London. No doubt the beauties of park and woodland, of field and river, are much better viewed through vast windows of plate glass than through those scantier ones of the old pattern; but, up to the present
[Page 234]
time at least, some prejudice is entertained in favour of the more picturesque and old-fashioned style. It was so entertained by Raymond, who, notwithstanding the sad topic that filled his mind, could not but observe the spick-and-span newness as well as the splendour of the Wardlaws' country mansion. The entrance gates were fresh painted; the very gravel sweep was newly laid down, and showed no other traces of wheel-marks than those made by Mrs. Wardlaw's new carriage. Mr. Wardlaw always walked to and from the station. He complained that the cushions of his wife's equipage were too ‘slippy,’ and that the rug afforded him no such secure foothold as the board of the omnibus to the box seat of which he had been so long accustomed. The master of Coromandel House was still engaged most days in the City, notwithstanding his retirement from active commercial life, and it was so on this occasion.
Raymond was ushered into the drawing-room, and informed that Mrs. Wardlaw would be with him in a few minutes. It was a handsome room, though perhaps a little too gorgeous in the way of paint and gilding, and commanded a lovely view of the winding Thames; the garden sloped down so steeply from the windows that they seemed to look directly out upon the glittering stream, already alive with its flotilla of pleasure boats. Everything spoke of wealth and luxury, and even of beauty. Raymond knew how little the owners of all this splendour cared about it, and especially how little she cared for it for whom it had been purchased. John Wardlaw was really pleased that his wife should possess everything that money could bring: but all this magnificence, and perhaps even the picturesque beauties that accompanied it, were ‘quite thrown away,’ as she expressed it, upon honest Mrs. Wardlaw, who
[Page 235]
was never wholly without the feeling of Christopher Sly in the play. It was ‘very nice’ of John to go to such expense upon her account, but these things were ‘too good for the likes of her.’ Raymond could not help reflecting how comfortable a little of this superfluous luxury would have made some one else, who would have known how to appreciate it; not that Nelly was fond of grandeur in any form, but she had that artistic temperament which takes pleasure in colour and glow, and knows how to enjoy, where others only plume themselves upon the cost.
Presently his hostess entered the room, in gorgeous hues as to her raiment, but with a countenance toned down to meet the victim of domestic affliction. Raymond did not notice the incongruity, but her woman's eye at once perceived that he was in coloured clothes.
‘I am come to you, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, upon a very sad errand.’
‘I am sorry for that, Mr. Raymond. I had begun to hope---’
She looked at his summer cravat, and hesitated.
‘One trouble has departed only to make room for another,’ said he gravely. ‘My father, I am thankful to say, is alive and well; the news that reached us of his death has been contradicted by his own hand.’
‘That must be a great comfort to you,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw mechanically. What at once occurred to her mind was that the course of true love, which had been running so smoothly of late with her young favourite, would now meet with new obstacles.
‘With these good tidings, however, come some sad news. Captain Conway has met the fate which was attributed to my father: he has been put to death in China.’
[Page 236]
‘Captain Conway dead! What will my darling do?’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw; and she plumped down on the sofa, and burst into tears.
‘I knew you would feel for her,—that is why I came to you. I felt sure you would help me to—to—break it to her.’
‘And the widow, the widow!’ continued the good lady, sobbing in great gasps and plunges, like a steam-engine just set going; ‘it will be worse for her than for her daughter, Mr. Raymond, because, you know, they were not good friends.’
‘Just so,’ he answered slowly. He had not as yet thought of that, his mind being fixed so much on Nelly; but now he acknowledged to himself that the task imposed on him would be even more painful than he had anticipated.
‘I hope, I do hope, dear Mr. Raymond, that this sad news will be—will have some set-off against it, for you and Nelly.’
‘I fear not, Mrs. Wardlaw: but this is no time to think of that, in any case.’
‘Nay, but it is the very time. Of course, you can't talk of marriage in the same breath with death. But you can show by your manner that you have a right derived from Nelly to comfort both of them; they will then understand that, though their natural protector, and their breadwinner, is taken from them, you have put yourself in his place. They will not have other miserable things to worry them besides this evil news.’
‘To comfort them is what above all things I should wish to do, Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘Where there's a will, there's a way, Mr. Raymond.’
She had dried her eyes, and was regarding him with a keen, almost a suspicious, glance.
[Page 237]
‘Not always,’ replied he gravely. ‘If you mean, am I willing to marry Nelly---’
‘Yes, that is what I do mean,’ interrupted his companion.
‘Willing! I would give my right hand to do it,’ he continued vehemently. ‘I would marry her to-morrow, if she would have me. How can you suppose that it could be otherwise?’
‘That's well said,’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw approvingly. ‘That looks, as John says, like business. I was afraid you might not be so eager, because she was poor.’
‘I don't know why you should have entertained that fear,’ said Raymond. There was a dignity in his tone of which the young man was himself unconscious, but that made his companion wince.
‘I beg your pardon, Mr. Raymond,’ said she; ‘I believe you are a real good sort, and almost good enough for Nelly herself. But John does lay such a stress on money, that he wins one over to believe in it, even in your case. But if such are your feelings, which I do not doubt, why don't you get the knot tied at once—I mean, so soon as she recovers herself from this sad news— and before your pa comes home? There is a difficulty about getting his permission, is there not? Well, why not marry without it, and ask for his blessing instead?’
Raymond could not restrain a smile at this advice, which was delivered with the gravest and most matronly air.
‘The difficulties of which you speak, my dear Mrs. Wardlaw, are not in my eyes insurmountable; it is Nelly who considers them to be so.’
‘I see; she is afraid of making Mr. Pennicuick angry upon his son's account. Most girls would run that risk if their inclination
[Page 238]
went the same way: but Nelly is an angel. And now I shall have to break her heart. Well, well, I will put on my bonnet at once, and get it over.’
‘I had better go with you, I suppose, Mrs. Wardlaw,’ said Raymond hesitatingly.
‘Yes: you will not be so useful as I had hoped you might be; but the sight of you will be something.’
In other circumstances such an observation could hardly have been pleasing, but Raymond liked this plain-speaking lady all the more for the manner in which she thus ignored him, because it was for Nelly's sake.
She had her bonnet on, as she promised, ‘in a jiffy,’ and the two started together on foot for Mrs. Conway's house. Thinking of the scene that lay before them, they both walked on in silence, which was broken only once by Mrs. Wardlaw.
‘You must not think me a fool because I am crying,’ sobbed the good lady; ‘I want to pucker my face up and make my eyes red, that Nelly may know that something has happened. If you could cry too, it would be a good thing; but there!—it's so seldom that a man can do anything really useful.’
If Raymond could not shed tears, it was not because he was not unhappy enough. As he drew near the house that he was about to darken with the shadow of death, his knees trembled under him with the fear that is the worst of fears, though it is no disgrace—the apprehension of the pain that he must needs inflict upon the heart he loved. Nelly was at the window looking dreamily forth, perhaps for Raymond himself, and her quick eye at once perceived them. They could see too, by her change of countenance, that she augured the importance of their errand.
[Page 239]
Her own hands quietly opened the front door to them, and, after a silent salutation of them both, she led them into the nearest sitting-room with a grave air.
‘Mamma is ill, Raymond; she has not been herself, as Mrs. Wardlaw knows, ever since---’ her eye rested inquiringly, apprehensively, upon the young man's face, and it was with a hesitating voice that she concluded her sentence, ‘ever since your sad news came.’
‘His news was false, Nelly,’ interposed Mrs. Wardlaw softly. ‘But what is true is worse—worse a great deal for you and your poor mother. Mr. Raymond has had a telegram from China this morning—from his father---’
‘Hush, hush!’ whispered the young girl, turning deadly pale; ‘mamma is coming downstairs.’
Her step was at the door as she spoke—the heavy inelastic tread that speaks not only of physical weight, but of depression of mind; and the next moment she stood before them.
‘Ah, Raymond, so you are come at last! We were half thinking of coming up to town, and bringing you down with us by force of arms. You should not have allowed sorrow to be so long your sole companion.—What is the matter? Some new misfortune has happened, to judge by your long faces. What is it?’ And she looked impatiently towards her daughter.
‘I don't know, mamma,’ answered Nelly, white and trembling. ‘But I am afraid there is bad news.’
‘Then why are they so slow to tell it?’ inquired Mrs. Conway, confronting her visitors with an air that was almost menacing. ‘Are we such strangers to misfortune that you need be afraid to break it to us? If there was anything pleasant to tell, there
[Page 240]
would be some reason for your hesitation, since, being so unused to good news, it might kill us outright; but if it is bad---’
‘It is very bad, dear Mrs. Conway,’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw gently.
‘Well, Nelly is here, and the kitchen chimney is not on fire, continued the other sharply; ‘so it can't be so very shocking.’
‘Oh, mamma!’ said Nelly faintly, ‘you forget there is dear papa.’
‘No, my dear, I don't forget. I wish sometimes I could. Your papa is in Shanghae, and has no doubt lost his money. He is always losing either his own or other people's. We shall have to move out of this house, no doubt, and live again in wretched lodgings. I am disgusted, of course, but not surprised.’
‘Captain Conway is not at Shanghae,’ whispered Mrs. Wardlaw hoarsely. ‘He never returned thither. Mr. Pennicuick has telegraphed---’
‘What, Ralph?’ interrupted Mrs. Conway quickly. ‘Is Ralph alive? Then there has been some plot, some falsehood.’
‘It was a mistake of the newspapers. The two gentlemen were together; and one of them had the misfortune to provoke the natives by some disrespect towards one of their idols.’
‘That was Ralph,’ observed Mrs. Conway confidently; ‘that was Ralph Pennicuick all over.’
‘Indeed it was not so,’ continued Mrs. Wardlaw. ‘The telegram is quite precise, and comes to Raymond from his father.’
‘Is he dead?’ whispered Nelly to Raymond. Then, reading his answer in his face, she fell back on the sofa with her eyes closed.
‘What have you been telling Nelly?’ inquired Mrs. Conway
[Page 241]
angrily. ‘I won't have her made miserable by lying messages from anybody.’
‘Indeed, indeed, dear Mrs. Conway,’ cried Raymond, ‘this is no lie. I wish to Heaven it were; I would give all I have---’
‘Show me the telegram,’ interrupted Mrs. Conway imperiously.
Raymond had the document in his pocket, but was by no means inclined to produce it. The terms of it had struck him as curt, if not absolutely unfeeling; it was not a message to put into the hands of those the dead man had left behind him. Besides, this unhappy woman did not as yet seem to understand that her husband was dead, that she was a widow, and her daughter fatherless. Nevertheless, since words were utterly wanting to him, he produced the paper and placed it in Mrs. Conway's hand. She read it aloud, in a hard, mechanical voice. ‘From Ralph Pennicuick, Hong Kong, to Raymond Pennicuick, Lincoln's Inn, London. —Conway killed by Chinese in revenge for insult to an idol. Break the news to family. I start for England by to-morrow's steamer.’
‘I suppose that is true,’ said Mrs. Conway scornfully, ‘about his starting for England. Such men as he generally do come back. But as for the rest of it, it is false.’
‘But how can it be false, dear Mrs. Conway?’ urged Mrs. Wardlaw piteously.
‘It is false, I tell you,’ cried the wretched woman: ‘first, because Ralph Pennicuick writes it; and secondly, because the thing he states is an impossibility. Arthur Conway is a man I know quite well, being my husband; and I tell you it is not in his nature to have insulted those people as described. “Break the
[Page 242]
news to his family.” Well, sir, you have done your mission; and when you tell him that you did so, add that you were not believed. “Break the news;” yes, you have broken it, and my daughter's heart; but you have not broken mine.’
She stood with one hand pressed to her side, while her face twitched and quivered with inward pain; with the other hand she pointed to the door.
‘We had better go,’ whispered Mrs. Wardlaw to Raymond, who had thrown himself on his knees beside the sofa like some devotee at the feet of a pictured saint—for Nelly was quite unconscious of his presence. He got up, and obeyed her without a word. Mrs. Conway spoke to neither of them as they went out, but stood rigidly with her hand extended till the door had closed.
‘This is sadder than anything I could have imagined, Mrs. Wardlaw,’ murmured Raymond to his companion, when they found themselves on the road again. ‘Is that unhappy woman mad?’
‘No, no; the worst is over with her. She has got her daughter in her arms by this time. But your presence was insupportable.’
‘My presence! What have I done?’
‘Nothing. It is useless to discuss the matter; it is simply that you have the misfortune to be your father's son.’
‘But she does not believe even now that her husband is dead.’
‘Yes, she does. She knew it the moment she saw us. But she believes there has been some foul play. Of course it is not so; but that matters little when a woman has a prejudice. Leave Mrs. Conway to herself, and Nelly to me; they will both, please God, come round in time.’
[Page 243]
CHAPTER XXI. THE BEGINNINGS OF BASENESS. It has been stated by a classical poet, and has been therefore extremely quoted, that no one becomes very base upon a sudden; but, if that be so, it is nevertheless certain that some people take a but short time in effecting the change. Their baseness, like a good housemaid's grate, is ‘ready laid,’ and only requires the match of temptation to be struck on the box of opportunity to set it in a blaze. There were but six days between the time that Ralph Pennicuick had seen the dead body of his friend hanging on the post where he was butchered, and the afternoon on which he arrived at Shanghae, and during that brief interval he had made up his mind to keep the 20,000 l . that had been the price of his own safety. This determination did not appear to him, of course, in the same light that it does to us. Except in the working out of some great revenge, no man probably beholds his own wickedness in its true proportions. The murderer does not say to himself, ‘I murdered So-and-so for five shillings that I knew he had in his pocket;’ but, ‘I wanted So-and-so's five shillings, and he was very obstinate about it, and a scuffle ensued which ended most disastrously for him.’
Similarly, Ralph Pennicuick would by no means have admitted
[Page 244]
that he was about to cheat the dead and rob the living. He was only going to abstain from the performance of a promise that was, at the best, quixotic. In a moment of irrational apprehension he had offered to give 20,000 l . to get out of a certain difficulty; and Conway had taken his words as though they had been an agreement on stamped paper.
If he had said, ‘I would give a million,’ the other might just as well have claimed the million. The sum in which he was morally indebted was too large (he said to himself) to be seriously considered as a pecuniary debt. Moreover, one must not only consider the intention of a testator, but also, as in the case of ‘pious founders,’ the results that are likely to flow from the proposed disposition of his property. Conway's desire was to make his daughter happy; but had he selected the due means to effect it, in making her an heiress? She had been brought up in a simple quiet way, and the possession of all this money would be an embarrassment rather than a benefit to her, while it would expose her to the seductions of every fortune-hunter. If Conway himself had had time to reflect upon the matter, he would probably have come to the same conclusion; he would have considered ten thousand pounds, or even five thousand, a much more suitable sum. To be sure, he had spoken of some attachment between his daughter and Raymond, and Pennicuick himself had expressed some opinion not absolutely antagonistic to the young people's union; but the confusion of affairs had been such that no deliberate judgment could be formed on any matter; things were said and done, in fact, under a sort of compulsion—under which circumstances, in the eye of the law itself, agreements are not considered binding. Of course, if Nelly had had 20,000 l . of her own, she would have been a suitable
[Page 245]
match for his son, but that her father-in-law should supply the dower —should take such a sum, as it were, out of one pocket to put into the other—was practically absurd. Twenty thousand pounds was a thousand a-year for ever.
Unfortunately, no middle course was open to him. If he was to produce Conway's will at all, he must pay the whole sum. His friend would never have bequeathed such a fortune unless the money had somehow been his to leave. It was a question, therefore, of whether he should discharge the debt, or totally ignore it.
Ralph Pennicuick did not hesitate, by this time, to look all these contingencies more or less in the face; but the motives that were attracting him, he shut out of sight as much as possible. In particular he evaded this one; that if he discharged this obligation, he should be enriching—and at his own expense—Mrs. Conway, a woman who hated him. She could not harm him, but it was not prudent to put arms—that is to say, money—in the hands of an enemy. She was proud and stiffnecked enough, as it was, without being rendered independent. Perhaps if she had been dead, and Nelly had alone been concerned in the matter, Ralph Pennicuick would not have listened to the devil—self—within him. Even as it was, he did not, as we have said, propose to himself to rob the widow and the orphan. He would not give them their due, but he would give them—well, a good deal—and all in the way of kindness and generosity. The idea of playing the patron to Mrs. Conway was very pleasant to him; if she rejected his gifts, which he believed would be the case, that would be her own look-out; he would have all the more to give to Nelly, which her mother could hardly dissuade her from accepting, and yet
[Page 246]
which would lay herself under the very obligation which she had resented.
When matters so incidental as these occurred to Ralph Pennicuick, we may be sure that he had made his mind up as to the main question. He had fully resolved to become a thief, and, what was worse for him, in his heart of hearts, he knew it. The world, which credits what is done, is blind to all that might have been, in another sense than that contemplated by the poet. To its broad view there are the people outside Newgate and the people inside. But there are many persons who have earned a chamber in that building who are much better lodged than those within it, and who, considering their comparative freedom from temptation, much more deserve to be there. The man who destroys a will that has been made to his disadvantage may be committed to prison by a Lord Mayor of London who has been equally felonious, in a moral sense, by taking advantage of a will which ought to have been destroyed; but the former gentleman (if he is not used to destroying wills) feels a shock in the actual commission of the crime which the latter is spared.
The will of Arthur Conway which Ralph Pennicuick still carried in his breast-pocket was a burden to him such as the honest reader can hardly imagine. During the whole of his journey to Shanghae he had only one opportunity of perusing it quite alone, but he remembered every word of it. It was witnessed by himself and the governor of the gaol, and from the latter fact he had actually endeavoured to lay this flattering unction to his own soul— that since the witness was a Chinese, he was probably not cognisant of what he was doing, and therefore the document was illegal. It would be therefore no crime to destroy it. This probably comforted him for nearly a whole day—if to dull the pain of conscience
[Page 247]
can be called to comfort; when he suddenly recollected that if there was no will at all, Conway's wife and daughter would inherit his property. So far as he was concerned, the money therefore would—even in the eye of the law—be still owing to him.
Valueless as the document might be, it was, however, a serious incubus to him. So long as it was not destroyed, he had not yet crossed the Rubicon—except in thought—between right and wrong; and so far it was a sedative to his anxious mind; but on the other hand its existence was a material danger. If read by any eyes save his own it must needs give rise to wonder if not suspicion. It would astonish anyone who knew Arthur Conway to read that he had left 20,000 l . behind him; but even that would be more easy to believe than that he had been mad when he executed the will.
On the last day of their journey, Major Ross and Pennicuick had left the boat, to walk for a few miles across the country and rejoin it at a certain place, while Milburn remained on board writing letters. Ralph had changed his coat for a lighter one, and not till he had gone some distance did he remember that he had forgotten to take out the will which was left in the pocket of the coat in the cabin. Suppose Milburn should look in the coat and read the will! No apprehension of course could have been more wild and groundless; but the guilty are frightened at a shadow. Milburn was a gentleman and a man of honour; but the young are proverbially curious, and if such a thing were to happen, he, being Conway's friend and admirer, would be of all men the most dangerous to be possessed of such a secret. He had also actually made inquiry as to what the dead man was likely to have left behind him. The moralist who said that lying should be avoided because it was ‘such a strain upon the memory,’ might
[Page 248]
have extended his warning to all crimes on the ground of their exacting nature. The criminal must needs be always vigilant, yet always suspicious; he can never take precautions enough, nor be too prudent in his very precautions. The risks he runs may be infinitesimally small, but the danger, if discovery should occur, magnifies them to colossal proportions.
Up to that hour it had seemed to Pennicuick that the destruction of the will would have secured him complete immunity, but from henceforth this was far from being the case. If he now destroyed the will, or failed to produce it, it might be that that very circumstance would at least to one man in the world be a proof of his villany. The fear of exposure was so terrible to him, that it almost drove him back into the path of honesty which even yet lay open to him. He would still be a rich man, even if he did disburse that 20,000 l .; but then it was such a large sum, and money was so dear to him, not only for what it commanded, but for its own sake. Moreover, though it was true he might still be honest, Ross and Milburn would think it at least strange that he should not only have kept secret his friend's testamentary instructions, but also led them to imagine that they were right in supposing he had died poor. Thus silence itself was fraught with danger; while speech—admission of any kind—absolutely bristled with it. And yet to speak, to answer questions, to supply explanations, was now become so necessary!
As to the mere narrative—the statement of what had happened at the temple and the prison—that was easy enough. In a great law case in our own country, during which there had been a more than usual amount of perjury, it was observed that no fewer than eight persons gave a coherent account of a certain dinner at which
[Page 249]
the defendant was said to have been entertained, and on which fact hung a most important issue; they all described the affair in detail, and all the particulars tallied with one another so accurately that it was impossible to believe (what was, however, the actual fact) that not one of these witnesses had ever before set eyes on the man in question. This miracle was managed by the attorney for the defence, who gave a dinner to these eight witnesses with himself in the chair, and all they had to do was to associate all that was done and said, not with him, but with his client. The formula was precisely the same; they had only to put A for B. Thus, in Pennicuick's case, he had but to substitute Conway for himself, and there was no fear of his story containing any contradictions. Even its inconsistencies were not of fact—though there were inconsistencies. No one who knew Conway, for example, could understand how he could have committed such an act as the stealing of the Shay-le. To have done that, it would be justly argued, a man must be possessed of the spirit of recklessness—or he must be malicious. Now, Conway, though an agreeable companion and a general favourite, was by no means of a rollicking disposition; his behaviour was quiet, his spirits, if equable, were never high; and, indeed, it was understood that the poor fellow ‘pulled a very heavy boat’ as respected domestic and pecuniary matters, and had enough to trouble him. He was prudent, too, notwithstanding that he had a weakness for cards and horses, and never ran any risk that could be avoided. How, then, could he have risked—and lost —his life in the indulgence of a mischievous whim?
Then, as to malice, never was man more devoid of it. Those who knew him best, too, were aware that, though by no means a religious man himself, he respected religion, of whatever kind, in
[Page 250]
others, and it was to the last degree unlikely that he should have committed an offence that was an outrage on the feelings of our entire nation.
These were objections which Ralph Pennicuick had to meet on all sides upon his arrival at Shanghae, but which he made no effort to combat. After a severe mental struggle, he had destroyed the will, and so far ‘burned his boats.’ No retreat lay open to him along the broad straight road of honour, though it was still in his power to make restitution for the wrong he had committed by putting Conway's wishes into effect. Every hour, however, made this more difficult; since, after looking into his friend's affairs, he must needs say whether he died rich or poor, and act accordingly. He could scarcely make over 20,000 l . to the widow and her daughter as a free gift, even if they would have accepted it. Such hypocrisy would have been almost as abominable as the contemplated robbery itself, and there would also be the loss of the money. That of course was the keystone of the whole edifice of fraud and crime that Pennicuick was building up, and which every day grew larger and larger, as is usual with such buildings; an outwork of lies had to be thrown out here, and another there, to defend the citadel, till at last he could scarcely emerge from the work of his own hands to draw a breath of fresh air. His specious excuses to himself, his reasons for his wrong, were all moonshine— or rather limelight, for there was nothing natural about them; the main fact was, that he could not bring himself to part with the money, since there was none to compel him, or reproach him for keeping it.
It is not to be supposed, however, though he had escaped from the hands of his enemies with a whole skin and a comparatively
[Page 251]
undiminished purse, that Ralph Pennicuick felt triumphant or even satisfied. A man can be selfish, greedy, and even altogether bad, without such a consciousness of the fact as is disturbing to his mind; but he cannot be a scoundrel without knowing it: and this knowledge is—just at first, at all events—exceedingly disturbing.
Moreover, Pennicuick's sensibilities were still alive. Every reference to Conway's fate was painful to him, to an extreme degree. Great pangs of remorse shot through him on each occasion of them; and the pain he could not conceal was set down by those who observed it to tenderness and friendship, which made their sympathy intolerable.
It was agreed on all sides—even by Milburn himself, who did not like him—that Pennicuick had behaved ‘deuced well about poor Conway.’ He had paid his money right and left to ensure his comfort in prison; had spared no trouble or expense to obtain his pardon; and had done all he could, when his friend was dead, to do honour to his memory. It was quite understood that he would never look to the widow for any of these expenses; and, though he was rich, he was known to ‘stick to his money,’ so that his generosity was the more commendable. The military gentlemen who were addicted to sport did not forget, too, that Pennicuick's expedition up the country had been cut short by his friend's misfortune, and all the fun he had promised himself turned into misery, which they said was ‘rather rough’ on Pennicuick, who, instead of shooting ‘a jolly lot of game among the hills,’ had now to concern himself with business affairs in relation to his dead friend. In one particular, however, Conway's friends were not inclined to approve of Pennicuick's conduct. He was not so solicitous as they thought he ought to be to ‘make a row at the embassy’
[Page 252]
about what had happened. The British minister ought to be urged to communicate with his government, who should require Conway's murderers to be given up to justice. If this was refused, then let there be war. To this Pennicuick replied that he was the best judge of his own responsibility in the matter; and that, while he lamented what had occurred as deeply as any man, he could not bring himself to state that murder had been done. Conway had fallen a victim, it is true, to Chinese superstition, but everything had been done in course of law. He could not in honesty give such evidence as might be made a casus belli.
‘But, at all events, these beggars should be made to give compensation to the widow,’ urged the gentlemen of the mess-table.
‘As to that,’ said Pennicuick modestly, ‘I will myself take care that she at least suffers no pecuniary loss from the misfortune that has befallen her.’ This assurance earned him golden opinions; and when, after a very few days, it was found that Arthur Conway had died worth next to nothing, everyone took comfort because of this friend that had the power and will to serve the dear ones he had left behind. It could even be said that those who knew most about Ralph Pennicuick at Shanghae had the best opinion of him. But then only very few people had any personal knowledge of him: while a good many—indeed, the whole English-speaking population—had heard something of his adventures. On the occasion of his first return to Shanghae, however, so little had been known for certain about the matter, that a rumour had got about —and, as we have seen, had reached Hong Kong—that it was Pennicuick and not Conway who had been put to death. It was easily accounted for enough, since the two names were mentioned together, and those who knew Conway took it for granted that the
[Page 253]
other man must have been the one in the scrape; but the error was a great annoyance to the real survivor. Just as a criminal is sometimes convicted by help of a piece of evidence that happens to be in itself false, so by a mere accident Pennicuick found that part imputed to him in the catastrophe which he had actually played; and though his own reappearance in the flesh soon set the matter right at Shanghae, the other story had by that time gone elsewhere, beyond the reach of such personal contradiction, and had received the usual additions and exaggerations on its way. Worse than all, as he discovered on his arrival at Hong Kong, this rumour had actually been telegraphed to England; and, had they not taken great pains to ascertain the truth before replying to Raymond's inquiry, his own bankers might have confirmed the first report, so strongly were they assured on all sides of its correctness.
The terms of Ralph Pennicuick's telegram to his son had been, as we have seen, concise and cold enough; he was, in fact, greatly troubled at the error that had taken place, to the probable effects of which, in the way of gossip and scandal, he was keenly alive; and, moreover, he felt the extreme need of caution. He had not yet shaped out for himself the course to be adopted in relation to Mrs. Conway and her daughter, when he should return to England, though he had vague ideas of being very patronising and munificent. The breach of faith he had committed began itself, indeed, already to sit more lightly on his conscience; but there were matters in connection with it that he had not considered—a few weeks ago, in fact, he would have thought them beneath consideration—but which now gave him great annoyance, and even distress of mind.
Everything that had relation to the dead man was a source of mental trouble to him. It had been painful to him, as we have
[Page 254]
seen, to describe, even after his own fashion, the details of Conway's misadventure and death; and, though his actual remorse showed signs of mitigation, this feeling by no means wore out with time; it weighed, too, upon his mind like lead that he would have to go over the whole matter again when he reached England, and, what was worse than all, to Mrs. Conway herself. Though he had telegraphed curtly, ‘Break it to the family,’ he thought of the task he had thus imposed upon his son for many an hour. He pictured to himself again and again Nelly's silent agony, and her mother's artificial composure, under which would be even sharper pangs at work than in her daughter's case. He had the sagacity to comprehend how much worse would these fatal tidings fall upon their ears from the circumstance of their having already received the false report. Ralph Pennicuick entertained no ‘illusions’ respecting either himself or his fellow-creatures. It must have been an uncommonly good piece of news to Mrs. Conway and the girl to hear that he was dead and gone: that woman had always hated him, and had probably not even taken pains to conceal her satisfaction at his fate. Nelly would have said ‘How shocking!’ and then they would have both set to work to discuss what money he had left behind him, and how long Raymond would wait out of decent respect till he came to see them—and propose. He had been so wrapt up in self, and so little observant of his son's behaviour, that he had guessed nothing of the attachment between the young people, till Conway's last request had suggested it to his mind; but now he perceived how his death would have made the course of true love run smooth, and how his being alive must be resented as an obstacle to it. In picturing all this, he showed great acumen; and if he failed altogether in representing to himself
[Page 255]
the feelings of his son, it was not for want of cleverness. He prided himself on his ability to ‘put himself in the place of other people’—in quite another sense from that wherein he had just given proof of his powers in poor Conway's case—but he could not penetrate Raymond's nature, the dutiful simplicity of which was altogether unintelligible to him. He saw his son wearing a mask of sorrow, but in reality congratulating himself that he was his own master, and had come into his father's kingdom; and though he allowed that this state of things was natural, he resented it.
He was coming home, in short, in a bad humour with himself and everybody else, and also, for the first time in his life, in bad health. For what could it be but some touch of indigestion, or other vulgar malady, that had rendered him of late so nervous?
‘Nerves’ had been heretofore a thing unknown to him—now the least thing sudden or unexpected startled him. When he was in Conway's quarters at Shanghae, for example, packing up some of his dead friend's little ‘belongings’—a few books, half-a-dozen drawings, &c.—the following circumstance had occurred. He had been looking at a sketch which called to mind some scene upon the fatal journey they had taken together, and was just placing it along with the rest, when he suddenly became conscious that some one was standing behind him. It was, in fact, Conway's servant, whose entrance had not attracted his observation, and nothing was less extraordinary than his being there. Yet it was full a minute before Ralph Pennicuick could bring himself to turn round and look the man in the face. He did not believe that dead men rose even in the other world, and much less therefore in this and yet—well, of course it was only liver, but these ridiculous
[Page 256]
apprehensions were recurrent. He spoke to the regimental surgeon on the matter, in a guarded manner and without mentioning names, and that gentleman had affirmed that he was ‘a cup too low,’ and recommended a little stimulant. Pennicuick, always moderate in his mode of life, because enjoyment was a science with him, had accordingly begun to take a few drops of brandy. But even this did not effect a complete cure. When he went into his cabin on board the steamer, the first thing he saw there was a coffin with ‘Arthur Conway’ upon it. An absurd delusion enough, since it was only poor Conway's black portmanteau which had been placed there by mistake instead of his own; but the same weird terror had seized him as on the previous occasion, and he acknowledged to himself that Ralph Pennicuick was not the man he had been. ‘That infernal climate’ had no doubt affected him, and a few days at sea would make all right.
[Page 257]
CHAPTER XXII. A MAN OF BUSINESS. Whatever may be said of woman's disadvantages, she possesses the great gift, denied to the male, of believing or disbelieving certain things according to her own desires. The evidence of her own senses, and of all human and even divine testimony, goes for next to nothing when she once takes a thing into her head. ‘If an angel from heaven were to tell me so-and-so,’ she says (it generally relates to her husband), ‘I should not believe him;’ and there is little doubt but that she would not. Man, weak creature, gives up his illusions when experience has proved them baseless—there are examples of his having even parted with his prejudices; but woman, like a rock amid a world of waters, is deaf to the universal voice—whether it come in lap or roar—and remains immovable. Even if her belief is undermined by the incessant beat of the wave, the result as respects others is the same, since she never confesses it.
Now, Mrs. Conway had made up her mind—it was a small parcel, but exceedingly compact—that her husband was not dead. Her chief reason (though, in truth, reason had very little to do with it) was, that the news came from Ralph Pennicuick, who (so she put it to herself without circumlocution) was a liar.
[Page 258]
She would have believed, if it had been possible, that Pennicuick was dead; she wanted to believe it very much, and she had believed it—both excellent causes for an immutable faith. But since he had apparently telegraphed to his son in person, and was coming home in the next steamer, she was obliged to give way in that one particular. All the more steadily, however, did she cling to her other fixed idea. Pennicuick would return to England with a lie in his mouth about her husband. His statement that his friend was dead was almost evidence to her that he was alive; and as to this story of his having been put to death for an outrage upon Chinese religious feeling, if the sun had turned black in corroboration of such an assertion, she would only have concluded that Pennicuick had found means to apply tar or caustic to the sun. While poor Nelly, therefore, was overwhelmed with grief and pity for the loss of her father, her mother maintained an inviolable calm which was set down by the little world around her as proof of her want of feeling.
‘All we can say is,’ said the more charitable, ‘that it is better than hypocrisy, since it is certain she never cared for her husband.’
But even these persons allowed that such conduct was indecent. For many days she would not even go into mourning, and, when persuaded so to do by her daughter, assumed her widow's weeds under protest.
‘I tell you, your father is alive, child; nor should I give up my conviction to your importunities, but that it suits me to wear mourning, because of other things that have happened.’
Nelly was well aware that her mother referred to her disappointment about Ralph Pennicuick, and to the change in her own fortunes brought about by that gentleman's being still in the flesh.
[Page 259]
For it was one thing to poor Nelly to have had her grief on account of the loss that had befallen her lover mitigated by the thought of their assured union; and quite another to have her wretchedness on her father's account enhanced by the knowledge that Raymond was removed from her still more completely than before. And yet in both cases she strove her best to be unselfish. She wept for her parent's fate upon its own account, and only thought of her own in relation to him. She was miserable because she was never to see him more; never to know how the dear bronzed face was changed from that whose likeness hung in the drawing-room, and a copy of which she had taken for her own little room. It had been the dream of her young life to welcome him to England, and to effect a reconciliation between him and her mother, so that his home should be home indeed. She had fancied there were misconstructions, misunderstandings, between her parents, that her eyes, quickened by Love, might penetrate, and which she might smooth away, and that they might all be, one day, happy together; and all this was over now. The kind heart, that, though so far away, had beaten, she knew, in sympathy with her own, was pulseless; the father would never clasp his child to his arms; the husband was dead, and the breach between him and the woman he had sworn to love and cherish was not to be healed in this world.
It was not quite so bad for Nelly as for some bereaved ones, whom everything about them reminds of their calamity. There were not those unmistakable links between her father's memory and the ordinary life at home which exist in most cases, and the snapping of each of which costs a sharp pang; but such few things as were connected with him had from their very rarity an unusual significance.
[Page 260]
His letters were sacred treasures, and the perusal of any of them now carried her beyond the bounds of ordinary sorrow; she perceived, for the first time with distinctness, how the dead man had been bound up in that distant daughter of his, and what unaccustomed pains he had taken to show his love for her, and to ask her confidence. How strange it was that he, a soldier, among such stirring and alien scenes, should have striven to enter into her childish thoughts, and interest himself in her homely wishes! What a gentle heart must this man have had who, reaching his brown hand as it were across the world, took her own little palm in his and pressed it so tenderly! In particular, it struck her, how generous was the nature that never took advantage of the love it had evoked for itself, to persuade her to take his side in the domestic quarrel. He could not write to her, as fathers should do, of her mother, but he never used an expression that could be construed as one of disrespect. Yet Nelly's sense of justice prevented her even now from being her father's partisan. She understood how the very love he had shown for her must have been gall and wormwood to her mother, for whom he had expressed none, and yet she herself had never suffered for it. Her mother had never betrayed a spark of jealousy, though bitter things had escaped her lips upon her own account. And her silence now had an immense significance. Its meaning was, in spite of her reiterated assurances that she knew herself to be no widow, that she had in truth a secret doubt about it. Ralph Pennicuick might have lied to her as to the circumstances of her husband's death, and yet have told the truth as to the fact. And in time there was confirmation of this. The scanty income of Mrs. Conway and her daughter was paid through an army agent at certain dates, and an instalment became presently
[Page 261]
due. As it did not arrive, the widow wrote to the agent, and his reply was that his esteemed client Captain Conway was dead, and that there would be no more remittances. He probably thought that the widow's application for the money was either the most impudent proceeding that had been ever heard of west of Temple Bar, or that it afforded the strongest proof within his experience of the ignorance of the female mind respecting business matters.
Mrs. Conway put the letter into her daughter's hand, and observed quietly, ‘This does not alter my opinion, Nelly; but I suppose we must now act as you suggested.’
This was in reference to Nelly's proposal that they should consult Mr. Wardlaw as to their affairs; on the sale of their furniture, and the realisation of what other little property they possessed; and generally upon the subject of their means of livelihood.
‘Shall we go together, mamma?’
‘No, dear; I think, as the Wardlaws are your friends rather than mine, you had better go alone.’
Nelly knew very well that it was not to escape a disagreeable conversation that her mother had thus deputed the matter to her, but to be spared the humiliation of owning herself even by implication in the wrong. She could hardly consult upon arrangements to be made in consequence of her husband's death, and yet maintain her theory that he was alive. So, after their slender midday meal was over, Nelly, dressed in her deep black garb, and with the grave slow step that only genuine grief can teach the young and healthful, took her way to their friendly neighbours. It was now nearly five weeks from the date of her father's death, and since that tidings had been brought to them by Raymond she had not
[Page 262]
seen him. We may say at once that this was not his fault. He had hesitated to intrude upon their calamity for the first few days, and then had written to Mrs. Conway to ask leave to visit them. She had declined to see him for the present, at the same time intimating that when they felt equal to a second interview she would give him notice, and up to this time he had heard nothing further. Mrs. Conway had penned her letter without consultation with her daughter, or even letting her know that she had heard from Raymond; her distrust and hatred of Ralph Pennicuick were just then so extreme, that they had almost extended to the young man himself; his presence at all events would remind her of his father, and was therefore unwelcome to her. But when Nelly had expressed her quiet surprise at Raymond's absence, Mrs. Conway did not conceal the step she had taken, though she hid her two reasons for it. ‘Since this man is coming back so soon, my dear, I think it wise to keep Raymond at a distance. There may be nothing—as you tell me—but friendliness between you, but that Ralph Pennicuick will never believe. I do not wish him to reproach us in our stricken state with laying a trap to catch his boy.’
‘Oh, mamma, how would it be possible for us—nay, for anybody—to think of such things so soon---’ Here she stopped, remembering that her mother did not admit the premisses alluded to, and half afraid that she should have angered her—as had been more than once the case—by assuming them. But it was with quiet calm that Mrs. Conway answered, ‘You speak in ignorance, Nelly—judging of others by your own standard. You are one of those who think they see good in everybody when it is only the reflection of their own proper feelings. To suppose that Ralph Pennicuick would take such a small thing as his friend's death
[Page 263]
into account, in ascribing a motive to our actions, shows a simple faith indeed. He will find us in the dust, but let us not give him an opportunity of treading us under foot.’
‘Only do not let Raymond think us unkind,’ pleaded Nelly.
‘I care nothing what he thinks, nor what anybody thinks. I---’ then came the symptoms familiar to her daughter by this time—the hand pressed upon the side, and the face of pain, and the break of speech in its full tide.
‘Everything shall be done as you please, dear mamma,’ said Nelly soothingly. ‘Pray, pray, do not distress yourself.’
And from that moment she had made no mention of Raymond. The motives that actuated her mother were unintelligible to her; it seemed to her inconsistent that a few weeks ago she should have seemed to advocate her immediate marriage with her lover without his father's consent, and that now, because Mr. Pennicuick was coming home, she was to be even deprived of his son's friendship. She did not understand that a middle course in relation to Ralph Pennicuick was as impossible to her mother as it is to the drunkard with respect to wine. She could keep him at a distance and treat him with scorn, or she could act in flat defiance of him. But she could not be on such terms with him as would give opportunity for patronage, or for the imputation of interested conduct.
No doubt the sense of separation from Raymond made Nelly's heart more heavy than it would have been; but her thoughts for the present were almost monopolised by her recent loss. The errand on which she was now bound to Coromandel House was sad and serious enough, but her calamity so outweighed the results of it that she did not as yet realise them; in her knowledge that she
[Page 264]
was bereaved she forgot that she might be also penniless. She had timed her visit so as to find the master of the house at home, without reference to the canonical hours for ‘calling;’ and expected, as usual, to be at once ushered into the dining-room, to find Mr. Wardlaw with a handkerchief cast decently over his face, as was his custom after dessert, and his wife—knitting-needle in hand—keeping guard over his slumbers.
Upon this occasion, however, she was shown into the library, where perhaps was to be seen the very newest collection of books on view anywhere; for in London, literature—with the exception of the catalogue of the auction marts—had been neglected by Mr. Wardlaw, while in the country he had understood a library to be a sine quâ non , and had provided himself with one well furnished, and thirty feet by twenty in length, accordingly. In a few minutes her hostess entered the room, with a face in which Nelly was quick to read not only sympathy for her own case, but a personal trouble. ‘My darling, this is indeed kind of you, and like the old times,’ she said. ‘To keep aloof from one's true friends when misfortune overtakes one is a bad plan; but I know it is not your fault that we have seen so little of one another lately; and as for your mother, I will say nothing more than that I am thankful that she has let you come at last.’
‘She has not only let me come, but sent me, Mrs. Wardlaw; though my visit is not, I confess, without a selfish object. I am come to consult your husband about my poor father's affairs.’
‘Very good; he will be delighted to see you, and will give you, I am sure, the best advice in his power. We shall find him in the drawing-room, and, I hope, awake.’
She led the way into the room in question, where at the
[Page 265]
dessert-table—Nelly noticed with surprise that it was laid for three—sat Mr. Wardlaw, with a glass of spirits and water before him, a beverage he much preferred to wine.
‘Now sit down, my dear, and take an orange,’ said he, patting Nelly's head as if she were a child; ‘you're as welcome as nutmeg to punch in this house, and always will be; how's your ma?’
‘Mamma is pretty well as to health, Mr. Wardlaw; though in grievous trouble, as you may imagine. A new cause of worry to her cropped up this morning, in the fact of Messrs. Boxe & Co. declining to pay her quarter's allowance, on account of my poor father's death. It was nothing more than what was to be expected, of course; but you know my mother's views; and now that matters have come to a crisis, she has sent me here to ask your counsel. She says that I know as much about poor dear papa's affairs as she does, but indeed I know very little; and it seems to me that all that can be done at present is to make arrangements about our house. Of course we cannot afford to live there, in any case---’
‘And why not?’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘you must live somewhere, Nelly, and why not there?’
‘I am afraid that our landlord will say “he does not see the necessity,”’ said Nelly smiling. ‘The house does not require much “keeping up,” it is true, but it requires an income of some sort—and I don't know that we have any.’
‘You must have got something , Nelly,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw confidently. ‘But there, John will tell you all about it.’
‘My dear, I must have the facts before me,’ said Mr. Wardlaw, with the air of a man who only needs the raw materials to indite
[Page 266]
an epic. ‘In the first place, Nelly, what does your father's will say?’
‘We don't even know if dear papa left a will, Mr. Wardlaw.’
‘A will! of course he left a will!’ answered the merchant. ‘The only question is whether the will is in England.’
‘But if he had nothing to leave?’ said Nelly simply.
‘Stuff and nonsense! everybody has something,’ said Mr. Wardlaw. ‘The idea of your mother being in such a state of helpless ignorance, Nelly! she must be worse than my wife. She always seemed to me a sensible, prudent woman, too.’
‘She is very careful and prudent, Mr. Wardlaw, so far as has been possible for her; but there were reasons—I think you will understand them—why she has not pressed dear papa of late as to our pecuniary position; they were not on confidential terms, and the subject of money---’
‘Of course, my dear,’ interrupted Mrs. Wardlaw, willing to spare her favourite what she knew would be a painful explanation; ‘that is intelligible enough.’
‘Not to me, my dear, I confess,’ observed her husband drily. ‘Whether I were confidential with a party or not, I should insist upon knowing how my affairs stood. As matters are, then, you don't really know whether your father has left five thousand pounds or fivepence? You can tell me, I suppose, at least whether his life was insured?’
‘It was not so when he left England, nor has he mentioned having insured his life in any of his letters. You see,’ said Nelly, in mitigation, as Mr. Wardlaw beat the air with his hands in horrified dismay, ‘dear papa found it hard enough to save out of his professional income’ (the poor girl knew nothing about his
[Page 267]
successes at play, or the little thoroughbred he had ‘financed’ for a couple of racing seasons) ‘to support his wife and daughter, and had nothing to put by for an insurance premium.’
‘I see,’ said Mr. Wardlaw, in a tone that suggested that it was a bad look-out indeed.
‘You will wonder what I come to consult you about, Mr. Wardlaw,’ continued Nelly, with a ghost of a smile, ‘since it appears---’
‘Nay, my dear, I don't wonder,’ interposed Mr. Wardlaw kindly; ‘it is the most natural thing in the world that you should do so. And though, of course, until the China mail comes in, nothing certain can be known of your affairs, I can perhaps be of help in the mean time.’
‘That is what we thought,’ answered Nelly eagerly. ‘It was you who were so kind as to take the house for us; you will know what to advise us as to giving it up. We have got it for the year, mamma understands.’
‘Oh, yes; you have undoubtedly the right of remaining in it for the year.’
‘But it is not paid for up to the end of the twelve months?’
Mrs. Wardlaw's face was a study; she had moved behind her young friend, and was making the most eloquent signals to her husband to answer the girl in the affirmative.
‘Paid for!’ echoed the merchant, with a clumsy laugh. ‘Oh yes, I paid for it myself—that is, of course, with your father's money.’
‘Then we have a roof over our heads at least,’ said Nelly, with a sigh of relief. ‘You see, if we had had to move at once into small lodgings, we should have had to part with all our furniture,
[Page 268]
and there are some things—though it is only a fancy—that I should be loth to part with, unless it were absolutely necessary.’
‘Which it never will be,’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw confidently. ‘Do you suppose there is not a room to keep things for you at Coromandel House!’
‘What Miss Nelly is thinking of is that she may be obliged to dispose of some superfluous articles,’ observed the merchant gravely.
‘Then she ought to be ashamed of herself,’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw indignantly, ‘since she ought to know that she has friends as would not stand by and see it done.’
‘Nay, wife, the young lady is right. It is better to look matters in the face, and make up one's mind to a thing when it has to be done.’
‘That is what I am striving to do,’ said Nelly simply; ‘to begin a new sort of life, where pleasure may still be pleasure, but a source of profit also. In case poor mamma is left with nothing —absolutely nothing, I mean—I think—indeed, I know that I can earn sufficient by my pencil, or rather my paint-brush, to supply our modest needs. I have already made inquiries at an artist-colourman's in town, who puts pictures for sale in his window; and I am not without hopes. I confess it is an immense relief to me to find that we can stay on for a time at least in our present quarters, since I could scarcely do my work so well in such lodgings as we had, for example, in Gower Street. And oh, Mr. Wardlaw, I am so much obliged to you---’
‘Pooh, pooh! for nothing at all. Why, what have I done?’ inquired the merchant with an aggrieved air, as though some imputed misconduct of his own had melted the poor girl to tears.
[Page 269]
‘It is your kindness,’ sobbed poor Nelly. ‘I see you are so sorry for us.’
‘I am sorry for your changed circumstances, my dear,’ said the merchant, patting her head, as she took her leave, ‘that is, so far as you yourself are concerned, and of course your mother likewise; but personally, and from a commercial point of view, my wife and I have cause to be pleased. We see our way to getting some excellent pictures, by an artist we have long admired, dirt cheap—cheaper even than at an auction.’
‘He shall pay their weight in gold for them, my dear,’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw indignantly.
‘The market price—the market price, and a little under on account of personal friendship,’ answered her husband, waving her away with his toddy-spoon. ‘The great principles of buying in the cheapest market, and taking advantage of the necessities of the vendor, are cardinal points.’
‘You are a greedy, grasping, selfish wretch, John,’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘to talk like that even in fun. Come along, my dear, and don't waste another smile on him.’
Oh, rare and blessed gift of kindliness! what matters it in what guise you come to the bruised human heart? The rough but genial humour of the honest merchant touched poor Nelly as deeply as his wife's sympathetic tears. When we are in trouble, and find friends are true, the benefit is infinite, since it seems to us a sign that God also has not forsaken us. And that visit to Coromandel House had for Nelly the same sweet solace that is found at shrines.
[Page 270]
CHAPTER XXIII. A BITTER TRIAL. ‘ You must not mind John, dear,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, as she took Nelly's hand and led her with a gentle violence from the front door, to which she was tending, into the library once more.
‘ Mind him!’ said Nelly, with a smile. ‘Indeed, I only mind him in the sense of liking him very much.’
‘Well, I shall not believe that, if you run away from the house as though you were in a huff, and don't give me a minute's talk to myself. How nice my pretty pet does look,’ added she, holding the girl at arm's length and sighing, ‘even in her black things!’
‘I do not feel nice, dear Mrs. Wardlaw. I am very unthankful, I fear, for the good of the past, and very resentful of the evil to come.’
‘And quite right too,’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw impulsively; ‘or, rather, it's only natural. It does seem very hard that a bright little innocent creature like you should suffer so, now, doesn't it?’
‘Well, I don't think it ever struck me quite in that light, dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ said Nelly, laughing; ‘but of course it seems hard. My sense of loss, however, will wear away in time, I suppose, and poverty is a burden that soon fits itself to the back.’
‘Well, I'm not so certain about that, Nelly. I wouldn't admit
[Page 271]
as much to John for a fifty-pound note, but I will confess to you that I never got over the discomfort of those omnibuses. It was necessary, or I thought it was, to use them at one time, but I had rather have walked the whole distance if my legs could have done it. Never was more dismay and discomposure bought for twopence or threepence than I got for my money. In the first place, there were “Pickpockets, male and female, beware!” staring me in the face, at the bottom of the table of fares. I never picked a pocket in my life, and the insult used to bring the blood into my face to begin with.’
‘But, surely,’ said Nelly, laughing, ‘that notice is meant for the honest people.’
‘I don't know which way it is to be read, my dear; but it is just as bad to be put on your guard against everybody that sits next or opposite to you. Then I was always as much afraid of losing my purse as of having it stolen, for what would become of me when I got out, and couldn't pay? Still I went on with those omnibuses—out of principle, my dear—until I had that accident opposite your house in Gower Street. Then says John, “Now, in future you take cabs.” But, lor, that was nearly as bad as the other. Hansoms of course I would no more have trusted myself to than to winged griffins, but the very first four-wheeler I engaged to bring me home from a friend's house, where I had been to tea, took me right away among strange streets, and presently down a steep place into darkness, and then stopped. When I expected nothing less than to be robbed and murdered, the man put his head into the window, and said, “This is my mews; and I am a-going to put a fresh horse into the shafts, that's all.” But it was nearly enough to do for me. Then again I had sad colds at that time, and used to
[Page 272]
lose my voice. I could hail a cab, of course; but when I had to say where I wished to go to, it was very embarrassing. Many a time have I gone quite close to the wheel and beckoned the man to lean his head down that I might whisper in his ear, and his only reply has been to drive off wildly, and almost over my toes, thinking perhaps I was a mad woman and wanted to bite him.’
‘Well, now you have got a carriage of your own, Mrs. Wardlaw, all your troubles are over,’ said Nelly, who, though her mind was fixed on serious matters, had a great stock of patience and good temper, and knew that as a listener she was conferring happiness on her hostess.
‘Not all, my dear, I do assure you, as I was afraid you would see by my red eyes when you entered the house. I'm fairly worrited to death about them tambourines.’
‘What tambourines?’
‘Why, that gross of them as I told you John picked up at some auction, and brought home with him six months ago. One hundred and forty-four tambourines all blocking up my store cupboard! Well, since it was so long since he bought the things, I began to hope he had forgotten all about them; and the fact is, I put them into a sale which I saw advertised in John's paper. And now, only think, they have all come back again on my hands.’
‘What, couldn't you sell them?’
‘Oh, yes! I sold them fast enough, but unfortunately it was John that bought them. Bought his own tambourines, my dear, at an advance of a shilling apiece, as I'm a sinful woman!’
‘And does not he know what he has done?’
‘Not a bit of it; and it makes me so miserable, because I've got to tell him. He says, “Here's another gross of tambourines, my
[Page 273]
dear; a little dearer than the last, I am sorry to say, but it would never do to let the price go down.”’
At this Nelly could no longer restrain herself, but broke into a hearty laugh—such as had not escaped her since her first day of mourning.
‘That's music,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, laughing too; ‘and there's one within hearing of it, who will rejoice in it even more than I do. Nelly dear, I've been a-talking about this, and that, and the other, but nothing—except the tambourines—has had any real hold upon me. I was striving to keep your heart up, and to turn it mayhaps, if I could see the chance, to listen to one as loves you dearly. Raymond Pennicuick is waiting in the boudoir yonder for one clasp of your hand—if that is all you will give him.’
‘Raymond here!’ said Nelly, with a flush of anger as well as of distress; ‘why was I not told at first?’
‘Because I was afraid you might have gone away, my darling, from a mistaken sense of what was right. Of course he did not know you were coming. He was dining with John and me, not as I believe because we are much attraction for him, but simply because we are your neighbours and friends, and like to talk about you. When he heard you were at the door, he was for running away, lest his presence should give you pain. But I said, “No! you just wait here till I talk to her a bit, and she'll see you, never fear.” And you will see him, won't you, Nelly?’
‘Yes; I will see him.’
She had grown pale again, now, and calm. Indeed, Mrs. Wardlaw thought she had never seen her ‘bright little fairy,’ as she was wont to call her, so quiet and resolute-looking.
‘You are not going to be hard upon the poor lad, I trust,’ said
[Page 274]
she apprehensively. ‘I hoped I had put a little life and spirit into you; if it is not a good time for him to see you, let him bide awhile, or he will lay all the blame upon my shoulders.’
‘It is as good a time now, Mrs. Wardlaw, as any time will be.’ ‘Lor, my dear, you talk as if you were an old woman; and life is but beginning with you.’
‘I know it,’ said Nelly gravely; though, indeed, she felt as if life—or all that was worth living for—was finished rather than beginning. ‘Where is Raymond?’
Mrs. Wardlaw rose and opened a door that communicated with her boudoir, an apartment which had been put to its first use that day. As she never wrote, nor read, for pleasure, nor played on any musical instrument, nor had any intimate acquaintances with whom to enjoy a tête-à-tête , the room was a superfluous luxury; but this afternoon it had offered an asylum to Raymond Pennicuick, where he had been placed in honourable imprisonment until it should be decided whether Nelly was to see him or not. He had guessed pretty accurately the cause of her long silence, but that had only made it the more insupportable to him. If his visits were unwelcome now, when he was his own master, how much less welcome would they be after his father's return, when it would be taken for granted that he was subject to his dictation. As Mrs. Wardlaw had stated with such characteristic humility, it was for some news of Nelly, some hint perhaps as to her position with respect to himself, that he had called that day at Coromandel House, where of course he had been pressed to stay to dinner. And now, by a stroke of fortune—which might be good or bad—an opportunity was afforded him of getting an explanation of the state of affairs from Nelly's own lips.
[Page 275]
The room was as elegant as the upholsterer's art could make it—with dainty hand-paintings on the walls and ceilings, which (as that astute tradesman had himself observed) had ‘removed the apartment beyond the domain of upholstery,’ while a magnificent stretch of landscape was commanded from the open windows; but neither the view without nor the scene within had attracted Raymond's attention. He stood with his hand upon the central table, waiting and watching for the summons that he felt would come, but to which he had looked forward by no means with delighted expectation. His eyes would indeed be gladdened by the sight of Nelly—it was a physical impossibility that it should be otherwise; but the words of her lips might be far indeed from those he longed for. He had begun to understand her backwardness to accept his proffered love since the change that had fallen on his own fortunes. If she really thought it her duty to oppose his wishes upon the ground of his father's disapprobation of their union, there was small chance of his winning her, for that objection was not likely to be removed. He had thought it possible, when he had asked her permission to quote her own consent among the arguments he was about to make use of to his father; and of course, when he had thought his father was dead, the marriage had seemed certain; the question had become one of ‘how soon’ only. But from this last height of assurance his fall had been as severe as it was sudden. All the objections of his father had once again presented themselves to his mind, accompanied with a certain prejudice of the force of which he had not taken much account. He had long understood that Mrs. Conway and his father were antagonistic; so much so, that he and the Captain could hardly have been such close friends had the pillars of domestic peace
[Page 276]
at home been unshaken; but he had thought this enmity lay mainly on the lady's side—was one of those unreasoning prejudices which women so often entertain, and which in her case amounted to mania. But now he had begun to think this hate was reciprocated. The terms of his father's telegram occurred to him again and again, and always with a renewed impression of hardness and antagonism. ‘Conway killed by Chinese. Break the news to family.’ The curtness of it almost bordered upon cruelty. Indeed, to his morbid apprehension, it seemed to have been couched purposely in that hard style, not to save a few sovereigns—which had probably been his father's chief motive—but to express a fixed hostility. And at the back of all this there was the ominous silence of Nelly herself for the last five weeks.
Thus it was that with no high-wrought expectation Raymond saw the boudoir door open, and reveal the girl he loved by the side of his hostess. That she smiled upon him, and shook his hand so frankly, were no longer the good omens he would have taken them for a while ago; if she had hung back and looked embarrassed or even sorrowful, he would have liked it better, for these friendly signs might well belong to that rôle of ‘sister’ which she had already announced her intention of playing.
‘I shall leave you young people together to make your own explanations,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw. ‘I suppose you have no objection to be left alone with him, Nelly?’
This was by no means said in a light vein. She understood that there was a kink in the cable of true love, so serious that electric communication was suspended; and she was not sure whether a private interview with Raymond would at present be agreeable to the girl.
[Page 277]
‘I have certainly no objection,’ said Nelly gravely. ‘Why should I have?’
The question was addressed to Mrs. Wardlaw, as she left the room, but Raymond replied to it.
‘I know not why, indeed, Nelly; but it does seem as though you did entertain objections to see me. Do you know it is five weeks since we met last?’
‘I know it is a long time, Raymond; I have felt it to be very long, believe me.’
‘You would have seen me, then, if the choice had lain with yourself?’ said Raymond eagerly.
‘Yes, I think so. I would not so long have delayed the—the explanation, as Mrs. Wardlaw calls it, between us,—which must needs have come sooner or later. Matters are not as they were, Raymond, when you and I spoke to one another’—she hesitated, and a faint flush overspread her cheek—‘that afternoon in the garden. They were not favourable to the wish you were so good as to express, even then; I did not even then share the hope that you entertained---’
‘But you shared the wish,’ put in Raymond pleadingly; ‘whatever you are going to say, at least do not retract your own confession.’
‘I deny that I confessed to you anything, Raymond; and I am sure you are not so cruel as to put me to the question now. As things stood at that time, I repeat, the probability of what you desired being accomplished was very small. It has now dwindled into nothing.’
‘Who says that? who has a right to say it?’ inquired Raymond quickly.
[Page 278]
‘I say it, Raymond; I who have a right above all others to speak upon this matter, since my life—or the peace of my life— depends upon it. These are selfish words, you may say; Heaven knows that they are not so: but you are welcome to believe them selfish. If my mother and I were but poor, and my father were yet alive to be a bond in some sort between your father and ourselves, your love for me would be likely to meet with opposition from him; how, think you, would he regard it now, when we are not only poor but penniless, and the tie—slender at best—is snapped that bound him to us!’
‘There is at least a hope,’ urged Raymond; ‘why stifle it?’
‘No, Raymond, there is no hope; and even if there were, that is, even if your father could be induced to give his consent, and to make you some allowance such as would be fitting—you understand, I hope, that I am speaking of your position, not of mine—I say, even then I doubt whether my mother would permit me to accept his bounty. It may be prejudice; but it is no use to combat it, and she is my mother, the only being to whom my duty is now owed.’
‘Yet love is duty too, dear Nelly,’ pleaded Raymond; ‘and though to my sole parent I also owe obedience, and have never shrunk from paying it, yet, in this case, I claim to be my own master; no man, not even a father, has a right to destroy the happiness of another. If I had anything—were it but enough to buy food and clothing and a roof to cover us—of my own, I would work, I would slave for you till better times, and in the mean while our poverty would be happiness. But since, Heaven help me! I have nothing certain—I cannot, I dare not, ask you to run a risk so perilous.’
[Page 279]
He spoke with vehemence, and trembled as he spoke, moved with o'ermastering love. Nelly trembled too; for had he but known it, she was on the very verge of passion's giddy height, while he thus held out his arms to her.
Her mother, as will be remembered, had informed her that Raymond would have an income of his own—though he was himself unaware of it—when he should come of age. If he had known it, how vehemently would he have urged his suit! When he should come to know it, how quickly would he renew his appeal! It was the foreknowledge of this that had caused her to lay such weight upon her mother's prejudice against his father, though indeed it had weight enough of its own. In her mother's present temper—and it was to the last degree unlikely that it would suffer mitigation—an alliance with Raymond, if it included the permission of the elder Pennicuick, would mean a practical separation from her remaining parent. The question that Raymond had put, ‘Had anyone a right, even a parent, for a mere personal whim, to destroy the happiness of her offspring?’ had at least as great a force with her as with himself. Indeed, it had a greater, for her disposition was less dependent, though not less filial. She knew how her heart would make common cause with his, when he should say, ‘I am free to marry you; I have enough for both, though not to spare. Let us be happy.’ But in accepting him she felt that she would be destroying for him all that is included in what the world calls prospects. Thanks to her, he would be a poor man all his life, and alienated from the father to whom he had hitherto been an exemplary son. Had she a right to force him to this sacrifice, because she loved him? or was it not because she loved him that she ought to save him from himself—from the results of his
[Page 280]
own generous passion? The answer was plain to her; and it must be given him now—at once—while his strongest arguments could not be urged against her. Yet every word she was about to use would be a dagger-thrust in her own breast.
‘Raymond,’ she said, ‘there was no need to speak as you have spoken; I know your nature to its core. There is no man whom I esteem so much, or ever will be, or for whom I would do more than I would for you; but the one thing I will not do, so help me Heaven! is to consent to your own ruin. Listen to me, for what I say will never be recalled or altered. If you find it impossible to keep the word you passed to me six weeks ago, and behave to me as a dear friend and brother, I will not see you again. I have suffered—well, no matter what—from your absence from us during our late calamity. When the heart is sorrowful and very heavy, it yearns for friendship, and the more when it has but one or two friends. But I can bear your absence for ever, better than a repetition of such scenes as these. If you speak to me of love again, Raymond —it wounds me to the quick to say so, but I mean it—then speech between us two will be over; you will have spoken to me for the last time.’
‘The last time!’ echoed the young man, like one who cannot believe his ears. ‘She will have spoken to me for the last time!’
‘Such is my fixed and positive resolve—a harsh one, you will say, but even harshness is sometimes necessary to secure obedience. Upon one side stand you and your love; upon the other—forgive me for speaking of them as antagonistic, for it needs must be so—stand myself and my future. My mother and I are absolutely, as I understand, without resources, and from henceforward we shall both be dependent for the means of existence upon my personal
[Page 281]
exertions. I shall need all my wits, all my courage, all my strength, for this battle of life, for which I shall be armed with but a poor pencil and paint-brush. Do you not see, dear Raymond, how necessary it will be for me to be at least in freedom? If, in addition to what is required of me, I am tied and bound to you, by an engagement however contingent upon circumstances, how is it possible that I can be may own mistress? All my thoughts and all my time will be bespoken by the work before me; I could not afford—to put the matter on its lowest ground, but still upon a high one, since another will be dependent on me—to have my mind disturbed by hopes so tender.’
‘But other girls, dear Nelly,’ pleaded Raymond, ‘find strength and motive in such hopes.’
‘Then I am not as other girls, or at least,’ she added hastily, ‘the circumstances in which I am placed compel me to be different. I know what is good for you, Raymond, and what is possible for me. Pray understand that I am resolute about this matter. You must promise me to be henceforth as my brother only, or we must be strangers altogether.’
‘But if my father does consent to our marriage, and gives us fitting means, and if your mother should abate her unreasonable prejudices, in that case at least, darling, you will promise to be mine?’
‘I will promise nothing, Raymond,’ answered the girl vehemently. ‘It is cruel of you to demand it. What you ask is nothing less than a confession of love from one who has forbidden you to speak of love. If I should answer “yes,” I should be bound to you as though all those impossible events of which you speak had actually taken place. It is not my wish to be so fettered, and still
[Page 282]
less so to fetter you. You are a free man, to marry whom you please.’
Raymond shook his head with a sad smile, but she went on without regarding it. ‘And I also am free to begin my new life of labour—not in happiness indeed, but at least without the distraction and distress of groundless hope. Here is my hand, Raymond, a hand that has work to do in the world.’
Raymond took her hand, surely the whitest and tiniest that ever had to do with work, and pressed it in both his own.
‘Good-bye—sister,’ said he, tenderly.
‘Good-bye—brother,’ answered she firmly.
‘But I thought brothers and sisters always kissed one another, Nelly?’
The innocent simplicity of the young rascal's tone would have made his fortune in a stage play.
‘I don't think that is necessary,’ said she, turning very white.
‘Then I won't ask it,’ replied he with gravity, as he opened the door for her, and bowed her out.
Lover though he was, he was secretly delighted that she had not kissed him; for it seemed somehow to signify that she was not quite prepared to play her part in the new relations she had herself established between them.
Nelly made no attempt to see her hostess, but started for home at once; she had done her duty—or what she believed to be her duty—and in doing it had shown, as she flattered herself, no sign of weakness; but it had in fact cost her very dearly. Her comfort was that it had been in truth for Raymond's sake, and not her own, that she had given him up: but it was but cold comfort. Light as her frame was, her limbs trembled under it, as she took her
[Page 283]
solitary way, and she felt depressed in mind as she was weak in body. The work before her in the world had seemed pleasant enough when it had been play, but it had had but small attraction for her in itself. Toil without pleasure, life without love, seemed henceforward to be her lot.
By the time she reached home, she had summoned up a smile to meet her mother, but it was a relief to her to learn that she had retired to her own room, ‘not wishing to be disturbed for an hour or so,’ as the servant said. She threw herself on the sofa in the little drawing-room, and saying to herself, ‘I will be strong and patient,’ burst into tears; they were very bitter tears but they did her good. The first thing she noticed, when the last had been shed, and she had dried her eyes, was that there was a space upon the wall where her father's picture had been wont to hang. She understood at once that her mother had taken it upstairs with her, and also that it was a tacit confession on her part that she was indeed bereaved.
[Page 284]
CHAPTER XXIV. RETURNED. As the time drew on for the return of his father from China, Raymond Pennicuick began to be greatly excited, and so strangely that the state of his feelings was unintelligible even to himself. That he was pleased to be about to see the parent whom he had mourned as dead, alive and well, he took for granted; but something so very bitter was mixed with his cup of happiness, that the result was an ill flavour. It was not only that Captain Conway was dead, or had met his death under circumstances that must needs have been horrible and distressing, though of their precise nature he had not been as yet informed; but the consequences that had resulted from the false telegram oppressed him in various ways. It had been terrible to hear that his father was no more; but it was also terrible to find that his own marriage with Nelly, which that sad circumstance had seemed to ensure, was now farther off than ever. Nelly, indeed, as we have seen, thought it so out of all human probability, that she had forbidden the subject to be alluded to, and professed to have banished hope itself. And finally, there were those revelations of the family lawyer, which that gentleman probably regretted as much as Raymond himself did. Raymond had, of course, suspected much of what he was now
[Page 285]
compelled to know, but he had always given his father the benefit of all doubts, and this dutiful charity was no longer possible. The secrets he had thus incidentally learnt were not, indeed, crimes: they were only what society smiles at as peccadilloes; but there were certain pecuniary arrangements in connection with them, which made it necessary he should be acquainted with these matters, that he could not but regard as mean. And those arrangements had, of course, been made by his father himself. It was most unfortunate that he should have become possessed of such particulars at the very time when the springs of duty were somewhat dry, and he had most need of his filial respect. And yet—so loyal was the young fellow's nature—the less he respected, the more he felt compelled to obey his father. He had portrayed to himself that scene of arrival at Southampton; the sight of the vessel as it neared the docks, the meeting on the deck, the tête-à-tête dinner at the ‘Sun;’ but, as it happened, these pictures turned out, as such so often do, but so many mental mirages— illusions of anticipation. Raymond got a telegram from his father from Cairo, in his usual concise style: ‘Shall be at my rooms in the Albany on the 14th to dinner.’ It was clear by the date that he was coming overland, which was rather surprising. Ralph Pennicuick never spent money extravagantly, unless to give himself pleasure, and a sea voyage had been hitherto always preferable in his eyes to a journey by railway. Raymond did not flatter himself that this haste could be caused by a desire on the traveller's part to clasp his only son in his arms, but he did venture to hope that it might be owing to some consideration for the Conways. His father must know how the widow and orphan yearned to hear particulars concerning their lost one; not, indeed, the details of
[Page 286]
his decease, which, on the contrary, it would be well to spare them, but how he looked and spoke in those last hours, and what fond farewells he might have sent them. It was important, too, for them to know as early as possible of what worldly goods (if any, alas!) he had died possessed.
On the day and near the hour appointed, Raymond turned his steps to his father's chambers. He had been there more than once of late to see that everything was in order for his arrival—a work of some supererogation, since Mr. Pennicuick's valet, Hatton, was already installed there, who had a keen eye for his business, sharpened by twenty years' experience of his master's ways. Most men of fortune, when they go abroad, take their body-servants with them; but, in this case, the master, though bent on pleasure, had always a frugal mind. He allowed the man a certain sum, which did not, however, amount to the board wages usually demanded by gentlemen's gentlemen, and, to use his own expression, let him ‘run loose.’ It was like turning a horse out to grass when you have no present use for him. And Hatton was of such a patient and contented nature—or seemed to be so—that he never missed his corn. It was wonderful how well, considering Pennicuick's harsh and overbearing character, master and man got on together; and though opportunities were by no means wanting to the latter to ‘better himself’ in other situations, he stuck where he was. If Ralph Pennicuick happened to say some morning, as he poured himself out his cup of coffee, ‘I am going to Egypt this afternoon; put my things to-rights here, and give the key of my rooms to the porter,’ Hatton only replied, ‘Very good, sir.’ If the master chose to name the date of his return, the man was always sure to be at his post a day or two beforehand; and if otherwise, Mr.
[Page 287]
Hatton was always ‘to be heard of’ at the ‘Coach and Horses, Groom Street.’ Whether he was Jew or Christian, married or single, his master never inquired and never knew. I was once acquainted with a very stately and perfect butler who left his situation (and quite right too) because his employer evinced no sympathy with him: ‘I ain't 'ad a word o’ kindness, my lady,’ said he, ‘since I 'a bin in your service, and it's love, it's love, it's love, as makes the world go round.’ But Mr. Hatton was not of this sentimental nature. Great confidence, however, was reposed in him by his master—so much so, that people used to express their astonishment at it; but Ralph Pennicuick was one who would soon have discovered if he was being robbed, and would certainly not have hesitated to prosecute the offender to the bitter end.
Hatton was a wiry little fellow, of middle age, who only by the most scrupulous care could prevent himself from appearing ‘horsey;’ but as it was, he looked the quiet impassive confidential valet to perfection. He was always very civil to Raymond, but not without a touch of patronage; and I am afraid he did not think very highly of his intelligence. ‘The young un runs wonderful well in harness with his governor, considering,’ he would remark to his intimates, ‘but they ain't anything of a match. One is a couple of hands higher than the other in point of wits.’
From the terms of which frank criticism it must not be hastily concluded that Mr. Hatton was (while on service) otherwise than polished, grave, and reticent.
Mr. Pennicuick's chambers in the Albany were on the first floor, and in that portion of the building which, if you did not know in how fashionable a spot you stood, and also if it were but a trifle cleaner, you might take for a model prison. It seems as
[Page 288]
though, posted in the upper gallery, an intelligent warder might observe all that came and went, and all that was done in the great echoing place; in which case he would have needed to be a warder of philosophic temperament, and who would not have minded sitting up occasionally very far into the small hours.
Like all the rest, the chambers in question were guarded by double doors, and when the outside one was closed, or ‘sported’ as it is termed at college, it not only said ‘not at home,’ but meant it. The inmate might be within, but there was no means of disturbing him at his devotions, or any other private pursuit in which he might be engaged. To be sure, in some instances, as in this case, there was a little staircase within, leading to the valet's room, but it was as much as that gentleman's gentleman's place was worth to go out or in at unseasonable times. When the master would be private, the man was himself in quarantine.
The outer door was now open, and the inner, with its smart little brass knocker and bell handle (the bell of which, as in a stage play, tinkled immediately on the other side), presented itself to Raymond; but this he set down to the fact of Hatton's presence. He had rarely been more astonished than he was when, in answer to his summons, the man appeared, and, with a voice unusually grave and low, observed:
‘Master is come, sir.’
‘What! my father here already!’ said Raymond.
‘Yes, indeed, sir, more than two hours ago: he almost took me by surprise,’—by which Mr. Hatton meant to express the very extremity of the unforeseen. Then he added, in a little lower tone ‘You will see a great alteration in him, Mr. Raymond.’
‘Indeed! Does he not look well?’
[Page 289]
‘Well, it is not only that; he looks altogether out of condition. He's been shuck, sir, you may depend upon it, sadly shuck.’ And Mr. Hatton put his finger significantly (but very deferentially) to his nose, to express that that opinion was a confidential communication.
‘I dare say he is tired with his long journey, Hatton,’ answered the young fellow; and the next moment he was ushered into the traveller's presence.
For an instant Raymond hardly knew his father, so grizzled had the black beard become, and so shrunken was the sunburnt face on which it grew. The eyes in particular had a wavering and indecisive look which he had never seen in them before. The whole appearance of the man suggested not only fatigue but worry.
‘Well, Raymond, my boy, how are you?’ The voice even was changed; it had lost its habitual coldness; and if not genial, was at least conciliatory. Its tone, joined with his father's looks, at once went to Raymond's heart.
‘I am very glad to see you home, sir, though sorry for the cause that has cut short your travel. You must have come very fast, without giving yourself much time for rest, I fear.’
‘What, I look fagged, do I? Well, that is like enough. The heat on the voyage was frightful; after that cursed steamer even the railway carriage seemed like paradise; and when I got in it, I stopped there and came right on.’
‘I am sure you must want rest and quiet, and you will find it here. Everybody is out of London.’
‘Ah, I suppose so; the men are gone to the moors, and the
[Page 290]
women after them. What is your news?—remember, I know nothing.’
‘Well, sir, I have not been much interested of late in public matters, the tidings from yourself and about yourself having monopolised my attention.’
‘About myself? What do you mean?’
Ralph had been standing at the open window, with his eyes fixed on the flower-box that stood in it; but now he turned them sharply on his son.
‘I mean the telegram that came by mistake, and for some time was of course believed, that the catastrophe which befell poor Captain Conway---’
‘Ah, had happened to me ,’ interrupted Ralph Pennicuick indifferently. ‘To be sure, I had forgotten that. I must seem like the man in the poem, who died and came back to receive but an iron welcome.
The hard heir strides about his lands,
And will not yield them for a day.
It must have been deuced unpleasant for you to find you had to disgorge.’
‘Indeed, sir, I did not feel that,’ said Raymond. ‘There are heavier losses in the world than money losses.’
‘You think so, do you?’ Ralph Pennicuick was himself again as he said that. Contempt for the sentiment expressed, and for the person expressing it, were both conveyed in that short sentence.
‘Yes, sir, I do,’ said Raymond boldly. ‘I think money a very inferior commodity as compared with affection.’
‘Ah, you have never had enough of the former article to appreciate it, my boy. Unfortunately, what is enough for one—that is,
[Page 291]
if the one has been accustomed to his little comforts—is not enough for two, or you would have had a wider experience.’
Raymond did not reply. He could not help thinking of the lawyer's revelation to him—about which, of course, he could say nothing—respecting that 20,000 l . over and above that of which he knew his father to be possessed; the phrase ‘not enough for two’ seemed wofully out of place. His father must surely have enough, at all events, to place in competence the widow and daughter of his best friend. He was longing to speak upon that subject, and it seemed strange that the opportunity had not been already afforded him—that his father had not yet let fall one word concerning the sad incident which had brought him prematurely home.
In the next sentence, delivered after a long pause, however, his father made allusion to it.
‘How are poor Conway's widow and daughter?’
‘They are well in health, sir; that is, so I hear from Mrs. Wardlaw, for I have seen but little of them myself of late; but of course they are dreadfully cut up, and besides---’
‘How is it that you have seen so little of them?’ interrupted Ralph Pennicuick curtly.
‘Well, sir, partly her bereavement, and partly, I am afraid, the possibility of a change for the worse in her circumstances, have made Mrs. Conway disinclined for the society of even her old friends.’
‘Ay, a morose woman; that was always her character. And the girl?’
‘Nelly is very courageous, and makes up her mind for the worst; she actually thought of giving drawing lessons, and earning her own living by her pencil, if such a course should be necessary, which I most sincerely trust will not be the case.’
[Page 292]
‘Certainly not; she need do nothing of the kind,’ answered Ralph Pennicuick emphatically.
‘I am delighted to hear you say so, father. I could not believe that Captain Conway had left no provision for their wants; it would have been most sad---’
‘Who said he had left provision?’ interrupted the other angrily. ‘What provision do you suppose a captain in a marching regiment, who had always to live abroad to support his family, was likely to leave? When I said his daughter need not support herself by her own exertions, it was because I, his friend, intend to take that burden upon me.’
‘That is very kind of you, sir,’ said Raymond; ‘but---’
‘But what? Is there anything so extraordinary in an act of liberality, or do you think it extraordinary that your father should be the man to do one?’
He spoke with heat and very excitedly. Raymond answered, quietly enough, ‘I am not surprised—far from it—at your offering to assist them, sir; and indeed I took it for granted that you would do so.’
‘Quite right, quite right,’ replied the other; ‘though, mind you, I acknowledge no claim.’
‘Beyond the claim of friendship, of course not. I am sure you will proffer your assistance with all delicacy; but from what I have noticed, I am apprehensive that they will have scruples in accepting it. That is why I feel disappointed that it seems they have no means of their own.’
‘Of course it would be better if everybody could leave their wives and children well provided for,’ returned Ralph Pennicuick testily. ‘Unfortunately, only one person in a thousand can do so.
[Page 293]
Conway, as we all know, was not one of the fortunate exceptions. You speak of the scruples of his family; why should they have scruples?’
‘It is not “they,” but one of them, of whom I was thinking. I do not agree with you that Mrs. Conway is morose; but she is rather peculiar, and---’
‘She hates me like the devil—probably more than the devil— if that is what you mean by being “peculiar,”’ interrupted the other.
Raymond was greatly embarrassed by this outburst, for he felt that what had been said was true. At the same time, it was creditable to his father that, in spite of his knowledge of Mrs. Conway's feelings towards him, he had the intention to benefit her.
‘Antipathies are often removed by kindness, sir,’ said he gently; ‘though of course I was not alluding to anything of the kind; I referred to her independence of spirit, which would probably make her hesitate to receive a mere bounty.’
‘She can either take it or leave it, for that matter; her obstinacy shall not affect my good intentions. I will settle some sum upon her daughter which will be sufficient for both of them.’
‘You are very good,’ said Raymond, and that doubtful phrase for once really expressed his feelings. But at the same time he was far from satisfied that this benevolent scheme would bring forth fruit. He knew that Nelly shared in some degree her mother's independence of character, if not her antipathies, and would be slow to take her bread from another's hand; moreover, he felt that, as a dependent on his father's bounty, she would in his eyes be less eligible than ever as a wife for his son. He had intended to speak upon that matter, if any opening had offered
[Page 294]
itself, if his father had expressed that sorrow and tenderness for the family, and for his friend's memory, which he had ventured to hope; but the moment, it was clear, was far from opportune. There was a certain harshness in his father's tone, even when speaking of his own good intentions towards the widow and her daughter, that warned Raymond to postpone the pleading of his cause. Between the time that must elapse before the letter he had written to China could return and reach his father's hands, there would surely be better opportunities; only meanwhile he could not speak to Nelly on the subject, and she was sure to construe his silence as significant of failure.
Dinner had been brought in by this time, and while Hatton waited, it seemed natural enough that the conversation should be confined to general subjects. Mr. Pennicuick appeared to be more interested in politics than had been customary with him of late years, and expressed his intention of sitting for a borough, if a good one (by which he meant a bad one) should happen to offer itself. But when the repast was over and they were left alone, he still abstained from speaking of the catastrophe that had befallen his friend. At this, Raymond, who knew his father to be far from sentimental, was greatly surprised, and as the evening wore on he felt it incumbent on himself to broach the subject.
‘I promised, as soon as I should have seen you, to run down to Richmond,’ said he tentatively, ‘in case you yourself should be unable to do so.’
‘Ah, very good. Perhaps you may be able to sound Mrs. Conway as respects her acceptance of the—the allowance we were speaking of; I should wish to behave handsomely in the matter; what do you say to 300 l . a year?’
[Page 295]
If Ralph Pennicuick, who of course was not aware that Raymond knew of that ‘nest egg’ of 20,000 l ., expected an outburst of applause at this munificence, he must have been disappointed; the young man only answered with gravity, ‘It will, I think, be quite sufficient. Their tastes are very simple, and they have always been accustomed to live upon a little.’
‘Yes, but a little which is given as of right becomes a good deal, let me tell you, when it is given voluntarily,’ observed the elder Pennicuick. ‘You speak as if 300 l . a year was to be picked up at every street corner. I named that sum, however, because I thought it a fitting one; if you think it less than it ought to be, I will add another hundred.’
Raymond looked up surprised, not, indeed, even now at the extent of his father's liberality, which to his eyes seemed moderate enough, but at the effect of his own words. It occurred to him little less than astounding that any arguments of his, and far less any mere hint or intimation, should have altered his father's views, and especially upon a matter of money. Hitherto, upon the few occasions when he had ventured to propose a freer disbursement of cash, whether in his own favour or that of others, he had met with a steadfast and contemptuous resistance.
‘I think it would be very gracious, father, to leave the ladies their choice. You could say they are the best judges of their own requirements, and that either 300 l . or 400 l . a year would be equally convenient to you.’
‘It is absurd to pretend there is no difference between 3 and 4,’ answered the other testily; ‘but make the offer your own way. I intend to act for their benefit, of course, but I don't desire any thanks—mind that ,’ he added sharply. ‘I don't wish them to
[Page 296]
feel any sense of obligation, and still less do I wish them to express it.’
The sentiment was not out of keeping with his father's character; he was a man who did not care for thanks (and, to say truth, he seldom earned them), but the vehemence of his words and manner struck Raymond as remarkable.
‘Of course, sir,’ said he, smiling, ‘they will not thank you if you don't like it. But are they not to hear your kind intentions towards them from your own lips?’
‘No; I have no time at present to go down to Richmond. I have a great deal to do in London. You can say everything for me.’
‘But I have nothing to say, father. With the exception of this generous offer, which I will take on myself to make known to them, since you wish it, I have absolutely nothing to tell them: I mean, as to Captain Conway's death. Of course they will be expecting particulars.’
‘What nonsense! Did I not telegraph the particulars? Women don't want to have their minds harrowed by dreadful descriptions, surely. The poor fellow was put to death; is not that enough, even if it had happened in a civilised country? Do you not understand that, since it was in China, the details are terrible? and into Ralph Pennicuick's face there came a look of horror that seemed, as it were, to illustrate his words.
‘Still, sir, they will ask questions: I mean, as to what he said at the last.’
‘I did not see him at the last. Did you not hear that I hurried off to Shanghae in hopes to get a pardon for him?’
‘Yes, sir, everybody speaks of your strenuous efforts to save your friend: that part of the tidings seems the only one with any
[Page 297]
truth in it that at first reached us: though, as it was reported, it was Conway who was at Shanghae, and you who were condemned to death. But you look pale, father. I am sure you are fatigued with your long journey, and no doubt this topic is distressing to you.’
‘It is not , sir,’ exclaimed Ralph Pennicuick angrily; ‘that is, of course it is not a pleasant topic, but I hope I can speak of it like a man. On the other hand, it did strike me that it was a very shocking one to discuss with Mrs. Conway and her daughter.’
‘There is no doubt of that, father. It would make the matter easier for me, and, what is of more consequence, less painful to them, if I had any message to deliver.’
‘There was none,’ interrupted Ralph Pennicuick curtly; nothing, at least, but his blessings and farewells; you can imagine them, and say them yourself. The whole thing took place in a few hours—I mean, from when he was arrested to the time I started off to Shanghae.’
‘He left no written word, then—nor any will?’
‘Will? What is the use of a will, when a man has nothing to leave! Of his effects, such as they were, I took charge myself, and they are coming by the steamer. You would not have had me bring half-a-dozen great packing-boxes to the Albany, I suppose?’
It was evident to Raymond that his father was labouring under excessive irritation, doubtless produced by the unusual heat of the weather and exhaustion of travel, and he felt that he could do no better than leave him to his repose. He therefore took his leave, promising to look in the next evening and give him an account of his reception by the widow and her daughter.
‘Do, boy, do,’ said Ralph in a conciliatory tone; ‘I shall be
[Page 298]
glad to hear about them, and shall be especially pleased if you persuade them to accept my proposition; the annuity will be paid without grudging, and let there be no fuss about it; and—yes, you may say this—after Mrs. Conway's death, it will be continued to the girl.’
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
[Page ]
VOL. II.
[Page ]
CHAPTER I. THE IRON MELTS. Some people are so clever that they find it easy to discover other men's motives; but Raymond Pennicuick was not of this clever sort, and it is therefore not surprising that he failed to account to himself for his father's behaviour as respected the wife and daughter of his dead friend. His disinclination—nay, his downright refusal—to visit them, on pretence of engagements in town, shocked Raymond's sense of propriety; no matter how painful might have been the interview, it seemed to him downright cowardice to shirk so obvious a duty. On the other hand, there was his father's offer to benefit them pecuniarily, which, if not handsome, might be deemed sufficient, in any person not bound to them by ties of blood, and which he felt to be liberal when taken into consideration with his father's views about money matters. Under any other circumstance he would not even to himself have admitted so much to his parent's detriment; had the persons concerned been indifferent to him, he would have made excuses, and, so far as his conscience permitted, even taken the other side; but
[Page 2]
when our feelings are excited both for and against, we are liable to have the operation which by oculists is called ‘couching’ performed on us. Here, then, was a man by nature loth to part with his money, making a liberal provision for individuals who had no legal claim on him, but at the same time so wanting in proper feeling as not to see the necessity of telling them with his own lips of how it had fared with their nearest and dearest in his last hours.
Nor could his son honestly find an apology for him on the score of extreme sensibility. That the subject of Conway's death should be distasteful to his father was natural enough; but that he should have ignored it, as he had done, throughout their late interview, was inexplicable to Raymond. To him , at least, the details might have been confided; and at all events some hint might have been given of Conway's state of mind and behaviour; above all, those last fond words should have been repeated to him, which, however feeble in themselves, have so intense a significance for those who love and survive us. It was incredible that a man like Conway, tender-hearted and passionately attached to at least one of the members of his little family, could have left the world without a word of farewell.
Raymond's duty, however, was plain enough: he must go down to Richmond; make out the best case for his father that was possible, and, above all, endeavour to persuade the widow and her daughter to receive assistance from his hand. One cause of embarrassment was upon this occasion spared to him; his errand was such that no allusion to his love for Nelly need be apprehended from him; for though the subject was forbidden, it was in his thoughts, and could
[Page 3]
be read by her, he fancied (and not without reason), in his tell-tale face and tone.
The house at Richmond bore externally the same appearance as usual; he was pleased to see that the tiny plot of ground that lay between it and the road was as full of flowers and kept as neatly as before, though he little knew that this was the work of Nelly's own hands, and not of those of the ‘odd man,’ who had heretofore performed the duties of gardener. But, within, the signs of the altered circumstances of its inmates were at once apparent. The door was ‘answered’ to him no longer by the trim housemaid, but by a little maid-of-all-work of tender years, who held it half open in her hand, after the manner of her kind, as doubtful whether the visitor was to be admitted, or left standing on the steps outside, till his errand should be made known to ‘missus.’ The presentation of his card seemed only to add to her difficulties; she turned it over and over as if it was a cryptogram which she could not decipher (for, indeed, the art of reading was unknown to her), and then running to the foot of the stairs, exclaimed, ‘Oh, please, Miss Conway, here is a young man as wants you.’
It was quite true, but under the circumstances a little embarrassing, and doubtless accounted for Nelly's heightened colour when she presented herself.
She greeted him with a sad smile and a grasp of the hand, which, though eloquent of friendship, somehow seemed to speak of love's divorce; and led the way into the parlour.
‘You have seen your father, Raymond,’ were her first words.
‘Yes, Nelly. I have seen him. He is, I am sorry to say, far from well; he looks aged and even broken. I think,’ he added,
[Page 4]
‘if your mother saw him she would acknowledge, notwithstanding her prejudice against him, that he had a heart.’
‘Do not let us talk of prejudices, Raymond, at a time like this,’ said Nelly reprovingly; ‘I feel as if I stood beside my father's grave. What word does Mr. Pennicuick bring us of him?’
‘He has little to say, Nelly; and it pains him to say even that little. I have come to-day in his place—’
‘What? Will not Mr. Pennicuick come to see us?’
‘Nay, it is not “will;” he is really not equal to it just at present. He is exhausted by grief and travel, and he has sent me as his messenger to say all that is kind and—and—friendly, and to make a certain proposition to you which I hope—I do most earnestly hope—Mrs. Conway and yourself may take into your favourable consideration.’
It had cost poor Raymond a good deal to say this much, and, though he was conscious that he had not expressed it very happily, it was a great relief to him to have ‘got it over;’ his disappointment therefore was considerable when Nelly only replied, ‘And what have you to tell us about dear papa?’ as though she had not even heard him.
‘He met his fate, it seems, dear Nelly, very suddenly; directly he was condemned, my father started for Shanghae to endeavour to procure his pardon, or at least his reprieve, and when he got back—all was over.’
‘What? was there no message? no good-bye? no word to me, nor to my mother?’
‘He sent his love, his dear love; he bade you not grieve for him over-much, and blessed you.’
‘And was there no line of farewell? Even a scrap of his handwriting,
[Page 5]
he must have known, would have been inexpressibly dear to me, and I am sure he would have thought of that.’
‘He did not think of it, dear Nelly, or at least there was none. Consider the frightful position in which he found himself. The suddenness of his calamity, the shock—’
Nelly shook her head. ‘It was not like papa, Raymond,’ interrupted she. ‘He was so brave, so careless of self, and so thoughtful for others. Even when I was a child, and he upon the eve of battle, he once wrote—’ Here she broke down and sobbed as though her heart would break.
‘Don't cry, don't cry,’ whispered Raymond imploringly; ‘I can't bear it, darling.’
Her sorrow so distressed him that he was himself unconscious of the loving epithet he used; moved though she was, it did not however escape Nelly's notice, and, though she did not resent it, it had the effect of calming her at once.
‘Forgive me for my selfishness, Raymond; it is wrong to give such way to weakness. There must be some mistake, I think, about dear papa, which will be cleared up hereafter. You say Mr. Pennicuick is ill; he may have forgotten things which, to us in our forlorn condition, are of great moment. We must have patience a little longer.’
‘But indeed it is not that, dear Nelly. My father is quite himself. He has been thinking a great deal about you—you and your mother,’ he added hastily, for he saw the colour rush into the young girl's cheek: it was terrible to him that she should believe even for a moment that he was referring to his suit. ‘What he wishes to do—the only service he can now do for his dead friend—is to protect his dear ones; he cannot control fate, but
[Page 6]
he can mitigate its harshness. You must permit him to do that, Nelly.’
‘I don't quite understand, Raymond.’
‘That is my fault; I am stupid in expressing myself. My father wishes to help you in a material way: and yet, so that you should feel no sense of obligation. Three or four hundred a year is a mere nothing to him; while to you, with your simple habits and economical ways, it would be of some service. He wishes, without condition of any kind,’ added Raymond significantly, ‘to make you, that is your mother and yourself, this modest allowance.’
‘It is very kind and very liberal of him, Raymond, but—’
‘No, it is not liberal,’ interrupted the young man emphatically; ‘it is purposely the reverse of liberal, in order that you may feel no sense of dependence or obligation; the only stipulation, indeed, he made was that there should be no thanks.’
‘I have done your father wrong, Raymond, for I did not think him capable of this; I thank him, or, if he will not have thanks, I thank you for him; it is most generous and most delicate; I for my part feel as—as—grateful to him as though we could accept it.’
‘And why, in Heaven's name, should you not accept it? Does a man owe nothing to his best friend when he is dead? no debt which a sigh or a tear cannot discharge? Is it not as cruel to deny him such a mournful pleasure as to refuse to allow him to pay him the last rites, to follow him to his grave? I cannot think you will be so—so—’
‘So churlish, if you will, Raymond,’ put in Nelly, with a sad smile. ‘It is one of the many disadvantages of poverty that it
[Page 7]
often makes one appear ungracious. For my own part, I must needs say that I prefer to keep my independence. But this is a matter to which I have no right to reply for certain. It is my mother who must decide.’
‘And you will use your influence to induce her to decline this offer?’
‘No: since you wish it, Raymond, I will be quite passive.’
‘That is because you have such confidence in her prejudices that you are sure—’
‘Hush! here is mamma,’ said Nelly hurriedly: and at the same moment Mrs. Conway entered the room.
Among the many ills to which obesity is subject there is this peculiar misfortune, that when in sorrow the very stout and florid do not evince it by their appearance: we are accustomed to associate melancholy with a lean frame and a pale face, and fat people cannot ‘bring themselves down,’ like jockeys, to suit the exigencies of the occasion.
The misfortune that had befallen Mrs. Conway had not one whit reduced her ample proportions, or robbed her cheeks of a single rose—or peony. It was only to a close observer that the signs of trouble were manifest, in the lack-lustre eye and the trembling hand. Her voice, too, had lost its former testiness, and become soft and gentle. ‘I am glad to see you, Raymond,’ she began; then suddenly stopped as though she read his errand and in a harsh, almost defiant tone, inquired, ‘What is your news?’
‘My father has come home, Mrs. Conway.’
‘I concluded as much,’ said she, closing her eyes and pressing her lips together like one in pain. ‘Well?’
He knew this was no inquiry about his father's health, for she
[Page 8]
never gave herself the trouble to affect an interest in him. It was simply a sign to him that she was prepared to listen to whatever he might have to say.
‘The steamer will arrive at Southampton on Tuesday, Mrs. Conway, my father having been obliged to leave it from ill health, and return overland. It will bring four large cases, I was instructed to tell you, directed hither. I believe nothing has been left behind of your poor husband's property. His own servant, who was deeply attached to him, assisted by my father himself, undertook—’
‘What does your father say?’ The interruption was not violent, though abrupt, but the tone of it was singularly keen and searching.
‘He has little to say, dear Mrs. Conway. The catastrophe, it seems, was very sudden and unexpected, and my father's mind was wholly taken up with efforts—vain, alas! to avert it. He started for Shanghae after but a brief interview—it was all that was allowed him—and except that your dear husband sent you a loving farewell, and invoked God's blessing upon you both—’
‘That is false,’ put in Mrs. Conway, in a terrible voice; ‘there was more than that.’
‘Indeed, dear madam, my father assures me that there was nothing else.’
‘He lies.’
There was a painful silence. It was plain that argument with the poor lady was out of the question. Her face was the very incarnation of obstinate conviction.
‘Dear mamma,’ said Nelly softly, ‘pray remember that you are speaking to Mr. Pennicuick's son.’
[Page 9]
Mrs. Conway did not seem to hear her; her eyes were riveted upon Raymond's face, but her thoughts were far away.
‘Why does he not come here?’ inquired she presently in sharp, incisive tones. ‘Why does he keep in hiding?’
‘My father is greatly exhausted with his journey, and, as I have told you, very unwell. He did not feel equal, just at present, to converse with you on so sad a subject.’
‘Not equal? Bah ! he had not courage enough.’
There was another painful pause.
‘Perhaps,’ said Nelly hesitatingly, ‘there may be a letter, or something, in dear papa's travelling desk; I know he took it with him wherever it was possible.’
She looked inquiringly at Raymond, so that he was obliged to speak.
‘Indeed, dear Nelly, I am afraid there was nothing of the kind. My father made search everywhere, as it was his duty to do, in case there should be a will.’
‘We are beggars, of course,’ observed Mrs. Conway calmly.
‘No, indeed, madam,’ began Raymond; and he was about at once to mention his father's offer, when Nelly restrained him. She was right, he felt; it was a most inopportune time to speak to Mrs. Conway upon such a subject.
‘We are not beggars, mamma, unless we beg,’ said Nelly quietly; ‘and there is no need to beg.’
‘It is as well to beg as to slave oneself to death as you are doing,’ replied Mrs. Conway bitterly. Then she burst into tears and began to rock herself to and fro upon her chair, quite regardless and perhaps unconscious of the presence of her visitor.
‘Go, Raymond, go,’ whispered Nelly; and the young man rose
[Page 10]
with the intention of withdrawing at once without exciting the widow's observation. He was distressed and shocked to an extreme degree, not only at the poor lady's condition, but at the words she had spoken to her daughter, which confirmed his worst suspicions as to the efforts she was making to maintain the little household. It was painful to him that Nelly should work at all for her daily bread; but that she should be overworking herself was terrible. And yet the reception that his father's proposition had met with, even thus far, and from her whom he had thought the less likely of the two to oppose herself to it, was most discouraging. In his hurry to escape he tripped in the carpet, and overturned a chair.
‘What is that?’ exclaimed the widow excitedly.
‘Nothing, mamma: Raymond is going away.’
‘Why does he not wish me good-bye?’ said Mrs. Conway in her old fretful manner. ‘And yet, why should he? Why should anyone care for an old and beggared woman?’
‘Indeed, Mrs. Conway, you must not talk like that,’ said Raymond softly. ‘There are bright days in store for you yet, I hope.’
‘Bright days! for me ? No, lad, no. I might have had them once, perhaps; but that is all over now.’ She murmured something to herself that sounded like ‘the night cometh, the night cometh,’ and Raymond noted for the first time how old and ill she looked. ‘He was fond of you, Ray, when you were a child,’ she continued caressingly: ‘he was always fond of children. He had a kind heart before I turned it into stone.’
Again, at an appealing look from Nelly, the young man was about to leave the room, when the widow called him back.
[Page 11]
‘Don't send Raymond away without a good-bye, Nelly, though that is all we have to give him. He is a good lad, though of an evil stock. I mind the days when I have dandled you in my arms, boy, and striven to be to you what your mother might have been had not Heaven been kinder to her. She died ere she reached your age. I was young then myself; and Arthur—that was your father, girl—he was my lover and my husband too. Do you think I turned his heart to stone, Nelly?’
‘Indeed, mamma, you did not. You cannot be conscious of your own words. He was the kindest, gentlest being to the last.’
‘Right, right, Nelly; so he was. Not one to leave us without a word, without a line, to die without a sign of love to those belonging to him. No, no. No, no—But you are Ralph Pennicuick's son, lad. Well, well; I would not say a word to wound you. Do you mind if I kissed you, just once—an old woman like me—for the sake of old times when you cared to kiss me? The old times—the old times that were so short because I turned my Arthur's heart to stone!’
Raymond could bear the scene no longer, but, having affectionately embraced the poor lady and pressed Nelly's hand, fled from the house. If he had been alone with the widow his position would have been sufficiently distressing; but that her daughter should be present while she thus reproached herself for what might be almost termed the conduct of her life, was intolerable. What made it the more impressive was that this was the first occasion on which either he or Nelly had heard Mrs. Conway own herself in the least to blame as respected the estrangement between herself and her husband. She must have been moved indeed to have made such an admission; and the burst of affection with
[Page 12]
which she had bidden good-bye to Raymond had been scarcely less surprising than her self-reproach.
In after days, when subsequent events had made that interview memorable, Raymond often pondered on it: how sad and strange that condemnation had sounded from the lips of the self-accused! how unexpected had been that outbreak of affection and remorse! It was as though the barrier that had shut in the poor woman's feelings for twenty years had given way beneath the pressure of her love, and laid bare her broken heart.
[Page 13]
CHAPTER II. A PICTURE SALE. On the afternoon after Raymond's visit, Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw presented themselves at the Cedars, to pay their first formal call on the widow since her bereavement: and, much to their astonishment, found her from home. She was wont to go abroad but seldom, even before her late misfortune, and rarely without being accompanied by her daughter; but on this occasion she had left the house, while Nelly was ‘marketing’ in the morning, leaving word with the little maid that she had business in London, and might not be back till late in the day. Nelly was not absolutely alarmed at her absence, but she had a sense of disquiet which made the arrival of the friendly couple a great relief to her. They endeavoured to allay her anxiety by offering a number of reasons, more or less ingenious, but all improbable, for her mother's leaving home; and though these carried no conviction with them, the very expression of their confidence that all was right, was vaguely comforting. They supplied that need of ‘company’ which—where the company is sympathetic—we all feel when in nervous suspense; and their conversation prevented her from dwelling upon the matter, and helped to pass the time
[Page 14]
until her apprehensions (as she hoped) should be removed by her mother's return.
‘I am come here, my dear young lady,’ said Mr. Wardlaw gravely, ‘upon a business errand. I want to get the advantage of you in a little bargain or two.’
‘Yes,’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘and you must be very firm, my dear Nelly, and if possible grasping. You must not be taken in by John's apparent frankness. He has been all his life connected with commerce, and has been successful in it, and you may be quite certain therefore that he will cheat you if he can.’
To see this honest merchant laugh and roll in enjoyment of this shameful accusation—which he did not attempt to combat—was a spectacle that drew a smile from Nelly in spite of all her troubles.
‘I know your husband's character well, dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ she replied, ‘and believe him capable of anything; but, as Raymond used to quote from the classics when we remonstrated with him for crossing Hyde Park so late at night in the garotting times, “he who has empty pockets can afford to laugh at the footpad;” I have nothing about which to bargain with Mr. Wardlaw, and therefore cannot be overreached.’
‘What! Have you sold all your pictures?’
‘Oh, my pictures!’ said Nelly, laughing; ‘well, I am afraid I have still one or two on hand. But Mr. Jones, the print-seller in the High Street, has got more in his window than he can accommodate, and if you really wish—the prices are marked on them!’ Here she stopped short with a little blush.
‘What! you don't mean to say those beautiful views of the river, that Jones has had these three weeks, are yours?’ continued Mrs. Wardlaw.
[Page 15]
‘They are my little attempts at water-colours,’ said Nelly shyly; ‘but I should be sorry that, out of mere good nature, Mr. Wardlaw should disfigure the walls of Coromandel House with them.’
‘But I tell you they are beautiful ,’ continued Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘I was saying so to John the other day; only he answered, “Stuff and nonsense! do you suppose any pictures can be worth buying at those prices?”’
‘My dear young lady, don't believe her,’ cried Mr. Wardlaw, turning a deep purple. ‘I know a good thing when I see it, as well as any man that ever made a bid at Christie's. Said I to myself, “Those are Miss Nelly's, and she is very foolish to let Jones exhibit them at so low a figure;” but I was not going to say so, for my wife would have said, “Buy 'em,” which would have depreciated your valuable works in the market, and at the same time put a commission into Jones's pocket. Now, I am come here expressly to save the commission. So let us go up to the studio, and get to business at once.’
‘Well, I never!’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw, holding up her hands. ‘I did not believe it was in the man to tell such a tale. If you can talk like that, John—with such hypocrisy and deceit—why, how do I know that it is business takes you up to town so regular, as you say , and sometimes until the small hours? Oh, Nelly, Nelly, what a revelation have you been the means of making of the depravity of man!’
‘Well, I didn't think your husband was such a diplomatist, I must say,’ said Nelly, smiling.
‘Ah! he's all that and worse,’ put in Mrs. Wardlaw gravely.
‘Nay, if it comes to long words, let us see the pictures,’ exclaimed
[Page 16]
the culprit; ‘there is something in canvas as seems to draw 'em out. Even a sensible man, when he gets opposite a picture, begins to talk outlandishly; it's “delicacy of tone,” or “refinement of treatment,” or “cheery skewero,” or such like; I sometimes think it's something in the oil as draws it out, though it's almost as bad with the water-colours.’
‘It is plain you are not an art-critic,’ said Nelly, as she led the way to her little studio, ‘and I am afraid you have not a reverent mind.’
‘Yet John knows what's what,’ whispered Mrs. Wardlaw, who thought perhaps that her husband had been ‘run down’ enough. ‘He's got an eye in his head.’
Which was true enough, although he could not have put an ‘h’ before the latter to save his life.
‘Oh, ho! so these are the shadovers are they?’ observed Mr. Wardlaw, as he looked round the room, the walls of which, notwithstanding her contributions to Mr. Jones's shop, still showed some half-dozen specimens of Nelly's handiwork. ‘Why, here's the “'ouse” itself. A very pretty little thing, upon my word.’
‘It's lovely,’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw, enthusiastically, ‘and as like as like; why, there's the creeper as though it was a-growing, and the balcony with the flowers looking as if one could smell 'em, and the kitchen window looking as nat'ral—’
‘Hush! hold your tongue, silly,’ interrupted her lord and master; ‘that ain't the way to cheapen a picture. Why, the wall is out of drawing, miss; and the top of the house too big for the bottom; and as for the cheery skewero’—here he stepped back and made a telescope of his hand—‘why, it's evident it's the work of a beginner.’
[Page 17]
‘John, for shame!’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw indignantly; ‘I say it's all lovely.’
‘Indeed, Mrs. Wardlaw, your husband is quite right,’ said Nelly. ‘Mamma herself pointed out that the perspective was amiss; and of course it's true that I am but a beginner.’
‘Nay, I don't say I don't admire it,’ observed Mr. Wardlaw in less critical tones. ‘There are many points about it that I do admire. And it's like the house, or how should I have known it at the first glance? The garden, too, if it wasn't so confoundedly steep—’
‘I'm afraid it's rather like a hanging garden,’ put in Nelly good-humouredly.
‘What, for clothes? Indeed it's not, my dear,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw encouragingly. ‘Nobody would mistake it for a place of that kind.’
‘Well, I tell you what, Miss Nelly,’ cried the merchant, ‘I'll give you ten guineas for it as it stands, without the frame.’
Nelly smiled sadly, and shook her head.
‘Quite right!’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw vehemently; ‘it is worth twenty if it's worth a guinea.’
‘I doubt very much, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, if it is worth a guinea,’ observed Nelly quietly. ‘I am sure your good husband bid at least five times its value. But the fact is the little sketch is not for sale.’
‘She understands all about it,’ said Mr. Wardlaw admiringly. ‘That is exactly the right thing to say, my dear. Come, I will give you five-and-twenty guineas for it.’ The honest merchant was really in earnest; he felt as though in his favourite atmosphere of the auction room, and it excited him prodigiously.
[Page 18]
‘Indeed, Mr. Wardlaw, I was quite serious,’ said Nelly gravely; ‘that sketch was done for my dear father, when—when we little thought that he was to be taken from us; it was painted for him as a birthday gift, at the very time, alas! that he was doomed to death, and it seems somehow, as it were, a part of him. So, you see, it can never be for sale.’
‘Oh lawks!’ cried Mr. Wardlaw under his breath, and wiping his face with his pocket-handkerchief. ‘This is what comes of fancy prices, a thing I always set myself against on principle.’
‘I am so sorry we have hurt your feelings, darling,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw soothingly; then, turning sharply round upon her husband, ‘How could you be such a fool, John? The very least you can do is to take all the other pictures, at dear Nelly's own estimate of their value.’
‘Indeed,’ laughed Nelly, through her tears, ‘if Mr. Wardlaw did that, he would not ruin himself. I am conscious that they are but very poor things. Do you suppose,’ she continued with deep feeling, ‘that I do not know why you two are here to-day? You wish to encourage me in the calling to which I have ventured to apply myself. You want to persuade me that these indifferent productions of mine are really worth the lavish sums you are prepared to offer for them. You are not my true patrons, but something infinitely better and dearer—my true friends. I am not so blinded by self-conceit as not to know that I have everything to learn—except your kindness, which I knew beforehand.’
‘I will give five hundred pounds for the lot,’ murmured Mr. Wardlaw to himself; ‘I must give it and she must take it.’
‘But indeed, Nelly,’ cried Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘you are much mistaken. I really want to possess your pictures; they are far more
[Page 19]
valuable in my eyes than the things John buys at the London sales, painted by the greatest masters. What do I care about a tall street, and a straight stream, without a tree to be seen near it—’
‘She means my Canalettis,’ groaned her husband; ‘I've got 1,500 l. worth of 'em—go on.’
‘I say, what do I care about those hideous pictures of out-of-the-way places, by a foreigneering artist, compared with these bright sketches of scenes that I know, by a hand that I love? I protest, Nelly, that these half-dozen little pictures of yours give me a greater pleasure than all the grand collection that we have got at home. And since this is so, why shouldn't John make me a present of the whole of them? They will give me more satisfaction than any diamond ring he can buy me, and will not cost half the price.’
Upon this there commenced a Dutch auction of the works in question; Mr. Wardlaw or his wife proposing some preposterous bid, and Nelly insisting on a much smaller and more reasonable figure.
‘I don't want 'em home just now, my dear Nelly,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, when the purchases had been completed; ‘I must make room for 'em as I can.’
‘What you are thinking of, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, is that the absence of the sketches would leave my walls bare.’
‘No, no,’ cried the old merchant, ‘of course you keep 'em. When I buy a pictur at the Royal Academy, do you think I get it home at once: not a bit of it, it's not the custom of the trade. And when I do get it home, do you think I keep it? Certainly not. I have to loan my picture to the artist who painted it. He
[Page 20]
says he wants it again for a few ‘touches,’ which means perhaps to take a copy of it for somebody else; what he calls a “replica”; if it was in any other line of business than the Fine Arts, I should call it a fraud.—Hullo, what's the matter?’
It was the little maid with a telegram, which Nelly took from her with a white face.
‘It is for you , Mr. Wardlaw, thank heaven,’ faltered she; ‘they have sent it on from your house. My nerves are unstrung; and telegrams have been so fatal of late, that I almost feared some bad news about dear mamma.’
‘That is not like you to be so nervous, my darling,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw soothingly. ‘It is but five o'clock, and it is only natural that your mother, who feels the heat so much, should defer her return till the cool of the day. Besides, she left word she might be late. If I was to be frightened by every telegram that comes to John—I hope it isn't about those tambourines, by the by.’
Mr. Wardlaw had glanced his eye over the telegram, and then crumpled it up in his pocket. He now walked to the window and looked out, so that his back was turned to the two ladies.
‘Something has gone down that ought to have gone up,’ whispered Mrs. Wardlaw to Nelly, ‘or something has gone up that ought to have gone down. They're always doing it, bless ye.’
‘I think we had better be going,’ said Mr. Wardlaw, still keeping his face averted. The change from kindly banter to gravity in his tone was very marked.
‘You can go, of course, John, but I shall stay with Nelly till her mamma comes back. I am sure she will be glad of company.’
[Page 21]
‘Very good,’ said Mr. Wardlaw slowly. ‘Can I have a word with my wife, Nelly, before I go?’
‘Then it is the tambourines,’ murmured Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘he has found out he has but one gross instead of two.’ Nelly had passed into the next room, and closed the door, leaving her visitors alone together.
‘Oh wife, wife! this is a dreadful business,’ said Mr. Wardlaw hoarsely. ‘That poor girl yonder is an orphan.’
‘Good heavens, what do you mean, John? I know of course that she has lost her father.’
‘And her mother too. This message comes from Raymond Pennicuick. “ Mrs. Conway has fallen down dead in a fit of apoplexy while at my father's rooms in the Albany. Your wife will go to Nelly at once, I know .”’
[Page 22]
CHAPTER III. FACE TO FACE. Nelly never knew that it was owing to her own words that her mother had undertaken that visit to London which had ended so disastrously. After Raymond's departure on the preceding day, and when Mrs. Conway had somewhat recovered from her passionate despair, she had pressed her daughter for every detail of his conversation. ‘Was she sure,’ she asked, ‘that he was himself convinced from his father's manner that the dead man had left no word of farewell: or was he only dutifully repeating Mr. Pennicuick's words without faith in their veracity?’
‘I think Raymond believes, mamma, that there was no especial message from dear papa.’
‘And you ,’ put in her mother quickly, ‘what do you think?’
‘I don't know what to think,’ answered Nelly sadly; ‘it was very unlike dear papa; he was not accustomed to use vague terms in expressing his affection; and as a dying man, he would, one would imagine, have sent some particular message.’
‘You think he would have forgiven your mother?’ said Mrs. Conway slowly.
‘Oh, indeed, dear mamma, I was not thinking of that; at such an awful time, it is probable that his mind never dwelt on
[Page 23]
the unhappy estrangement between you. He must have wished to die in love and peace with all, and above all with you.’
‘That is what I am trying to believe, Nelly. The shortest time, it is said, is sufficient for man to reconcile himself with his Maker. I read a verse once over some one's grave:—
Between the stirrup and the ground
Mercy I sought, mercy I found;
and surely even a less time should suffice for reconciliation between man and wife.’
‘It should indeed, dear mother, and no doubt it was so. What I am most surprised at in poor papa's silence is that he should have said nothing of the circumstances that led to his cruel punishment; I should have thought he would have commissioned Mr. Pennicuick to explain them; to my mind they need explanation.’
‘And to mine,’ answered Mrs. Conway hoarsely.
‘It was so contrary to dear papa's character,’ continued Nelly, preferring to dwell even on so sad a topic rather than on the more distressing one of the alienation between her parents, ‘to commit any outrage upon people's feelings, let them be who they might; not to mention the risk he must have been conscious of incurring; and he was not one to run foolish risk.’
‘Not of that sort,’ answered her mother thoughtfully. ‘Your good sense goes all the way with my own convictions. Ralph Pennicuick is lying to us—that is certain. He has some selfish reason, some wicked motive, for keeping us in the dark.’
‘Nay, nay, dear mamma, I can no longer follow you,’ remonstrated Nelly. ‘What possible motive can Mr. Pennicuick have in depriving us of the melancholy satisfaction of hearing the last of my poor father? Because we are miserable, we have no right
[Page 24]
to discard both reason and charity. Indeed you are doing Mr. Pennicuick wrong.’
‘You are speaking to one who knows him,’ said her mother bitterly, and with a preoccupied air. Her head, heavy with thought, was leaning on her hand; she looked like one without a future, and whose weary brain, o'erladen with vain regrets, searches the past in vain for one bright spot whereon to linger.
‘Nay, since you are so very hard upon Mr. Pennicuick, mamma, I must tell you something to his credit. He has made a certain offer—you will probably refuse it—but it is due to him that it should not be rejected ungraciously.’
‘An offer? What sort of an offer? Has it anything to do with Raymond?’
‘Nothing at all, mamma,’ answered the girl firmly, though the red rose in her cheek. ‘It is a proposition entirely of his own, and I must say a generous one.’
‘Generous? and from Ralph Pennicuick? that is impossible! We have good authority for believing that grapes do not grow on thorns, nor figs on thistles.’
‘Indeed, mamma, if I may say so, the same authority has taught us to impute no evil—and especially where only good can be intended. Mr. Pennicuick has offered—and I must add in a very delicate way—to allow us three hundred pounds a year.’
‘What!’ Mrs. Conway rose from her chair with a quickness of which her stout frame would have seemed incapable, and stared incredulously in her daughter's face.
‘There was only one stipulation, mamma,’ continued Nelly; ‘that there should be “no thanks.”’
‘That means that he does not wish to see us,’ said Mrs. Conway.
[Page 25]
‘So much we already know, dear mother; and indeed, if he is ill, as Raymond tells us, that is intelligible enough. The offer, however, is certainly a genuine one and must be suitably acknowledged. I am sorry I spoke of it just at present, but you seemed anxious that I should tell you all that passed.’
‘Quite right, quite right, Nelly—and now let us talk of something else.’
There was very little talk, however, between them; Mrs. Conway's manner was thoughtful and abstracted, and she retired earlier than was her wont, on the plea of fatigue. She had not quitted her room the next morning when Nelly went into the town, and her surprise was great indeed on her return to find that her mother had left the house for London.
That livelong night no sleep had visited Mrs. Conway's pillow. She did not even attempt to sleep. It was only a portion of her life, so far as her mere existence was concerned. Her thoughts, her heart, her soul were fixed upon the Past; and not even upon her own Past. The question that presented itself again and again to her was, What had happened to her husband?
The offer of the allowance from Ralph Pennicuick had reawakened all her suspicions, all her fears—though without rekindling a single hope. What could have induced a man so mean—except where his own pleasures or vices were concerned—to have made such a proposal? That it was no tenderness for the memory of his friend, she felt well assured. It must be some miserable attempt at compensation—at neutralisation of the stings of conscience. The ghost of her dead husband seemed to stand beside her, whispering, ‘Foul play, foul play.’ Even the morning light had no power to exorcise it. The question that had importuned
[Page 26]
her when she lay down in her bed was reiterated still when she arose from it, ‘What did in truth happen to my husband?’ There was only one man in England—and as she imagined in the world—who could answer it for her; and that man was Ralph Pennicuick. To him therefore she resolved to go.
Mrs. Conway, though she had so long been poor, was unaccustomed to the independent ways which are common among persons of scanty income. She was not used to travel, nor of late years to go indeed anywhere, alone. Even the short railway journey to Waterloo Station would under ordinary circumstances have been quite an ordeal to her, and it flurried her now notwithstanding the importance of the matter that occupied her thoughts. Then there was the cab from Waterloo to ‘the Albany,’ and when she got there the doubt as to how to enter that mysterious, though fashionable, establishment. all these things agitated the poor lady, as small things agitate the rest of us when we are ill and weak and helpless, and rendered her especially unfit for the interview on which she had set her mind.
A more unfit antagonist to deal with ‘Steel’ Pennicuick upon a matter in which it was necessary that he should hold his own, could hardly be imagined. The widow, however, was not afraid of him. She was too full of suspicion and anger to feel fear. Dame Partlet, the hen, who has lost her mate and has suspicion that Reynard knows what has become of him, will flutter up against his sharp nose and glittering teeth with reckless importunity.
The Albany porter was rather puzzled by Mrs. Conway's appearance. He had general directions about the admission of the female sex, none of which seemed quite to apply to her particular case. She was neither young nor pretty; she did not look like a dun,
[Page 27]
though, on the other hand, he was not sure that she was a lady; however, Mr. Pennicuick had a janitor of his own, and he left him to decide upon the advisability of admitting her to his master's presence.
‘Letter X, mum, first floor,’ was all he thought it necessary to say to her.
On arriving at Letter X, Mrs. Conway, had she been acquainted with the usages of the place, would have gone away and deferred her errand for a better opportunity, for the outer door was closed; but, not being aware that this meant ‘not at home,’ she used the knocker sharply, which at once produced Mr. Hatton.
‘Mr. Pennicuick is not at home, Mrs. Conway,’ said he blandly.
‘That is not true,’ said she (for the porter had told her otherwise), ‘and I mean to see him.’
If this audacious visitor had been quite outside the ‘oak,’ perhaps the valet would have ventured to close it, even in her face; but she had already crossed the threshold, and he could hardly push the poor lady out.
‘Please to wait here, madam, one moment.’
It was his loyal intention to give his master the chance of flying to his bedroom, from whence escape was possible by another door, for he was a fox whose earth had more than one outlet; but the widow was too quick for him. Ere he could give his warning, Ralph Pennicuick caught sight of the woman's face which of all others he most feared to see glowering behind his valet's shoulder.
‘Dear Mrs. Conway, this is most unexpected. Hatton, you may leave us,’ added he quickly; for there was that in his visitor's eye which presaged a stormy scene, and a scene before a servant is unendurable.
[Page 28]
He held out his hand, but the widow waved it away with an impatient gesture, nor would she even take the chair which he pushed forward for her accommodation; she stood with one shaking hand upon the back of it, and the other pointing at him, while her white lips strove to articulate in vain.
‘You are angry with me, I perceive, Mrs. Conway,’ said Pennicuick in conciliatory tones, ‘though I have knowingly done nothing to arouse your anger. If it seems strange that I have not visited you, mere physical inability to do so must be my excuse. I sent my son to explain to you—’
‘Ralph Pennicuick,’ interrupted Mrs. Conway hoarsely, ‘I am come here to know the truth.’
‘The truth, my dear madam?’
‘Yes, the truth about my husband.’
Pennicuick's swarthy face, pale with fear and hate and care, quailed before her searching glance, but he answered calmly enough:
‘What Raymond has told you he heard from my own lips. I can only repeat—’
‘That is why I disbelieve it,’ broke in the other vehemently. ‘It is your lips that I mistrust, because they are used to lying. Did they not lie to him when he was alive? What, do you suppose I have forgotten when your Raymond was but a few months old, and I a second mother to him, and my husband your best friend, how you set all those sacred ties at naught, and dared to offer me your love?’
‘That was a long time ago, my dear madam,’ answered Pennicuick, with a harsh laugh.
‘It was so, but I have not forgotten it. The nature of the man
[Page 29]
who could so outrage friendship and the memory of the dead has never altered; now as then, there is no sacrifice of others—even of your own son—which you would hesitate to make, to gratify one selfish pleasure.’
‘You are severe, madam; I admit that you were a very dragon of virtue, and I—well, anything you please—but there is a statute of limitations for offences committed a lifetime ago, and as in this case nothing came of it—’
‘That is false! Everything came of it. It cost me my husband's love.’
‘You never told him?’
‘No, or you would not have been alive to ask the question, but the horror (the cause of which I might not tell) with which I saw his friendship for you, bred quarrels between us, and, thanks to you, the breach grew so wide that love could not recross it. It was you that separated us and you that kept us asunder.’
‘Indeed, madam, you overrate my influence. Of course I was not pleased at the contempt—merited, I will confess—with which you treated my devotion; but as to your domestic differences, I think they can be otherwise accounted for.’
‘I was to blame,’ said Mrs. Conway gravely; ‘I was much to blame; though, if you had not come between us, matters would not have been so bad. I was hard and bitter and cold, though Heaven knows that through it all I loved him. I read your sneer, “You hid it well, madam,” but it is true, and you shall find it so. If I proved it not while he lived, I will prove it now. If he never knew it in this world, he shall know it in heaven, if spirits have any cognisance of things on earth. I will devote myself henceforth to redress his wrongs.’
[Page 30]
‘Your grief has weakened your judgment, Mrs. Conway,’ observed Ralph Pennicuick quietly. ‘That your husband has met with a most cruel fate is true—so cruel, that, to spare you, I have sealed my lips concerning it.’
‘I spoke of wrongs,’ broke in the other harshly; ‘falsehood, where we have a right to look for truth; treachery, where loyalty should be; betrayal of trust—ah, you have betrayed him!’
Her words, swift as lightning, seemed to blast their object; Ralph Pennicuick literally shrank before them and grew deadly pale, though he still faced the speaker with his eyes, the expression of which was firm and venomous.
‘Who says I have betrayed him?’ inquired he hoarsely.
‘Your face,’ answered she quietly, ‘which speaks truth, and gives the lie to your tongue. I was sure it was so all along, but now I am doubly sure.’
Her passion was frightful to witness; her large frame trembled and quivered; her face was purple; her eyes, always prominent, seemed to leap at him from their sockets.
‘Do you suppose,’ she went on, ‘that I was deceived by your lying telegram? that I did not know Arthur Conway better than to believe him capable of the offence you imputed to him? He was not one to defile temples and break down images: or to risk, for a mere whim, a life that was precious to another. You alone, Ralph Pennicuick, were with him; you alone know how and why he met his death.’
‘You know all that I know, madam,’ answered Pennicuick sullenly. ‘I was in Shanghae, doing my best to save him, when he perished. The matter does not rest upon my testimony: two English officers accompanied me to the scene of his execution.’
[Page 31]
‘Is that the way an innocent man defends himself?’ cried Mrs. Conway. ‘“If you don't believe me, there are two others—credible witnesses.” Every word you speak is a confession of your guilt.’
‘I do not understand you, madam,’ said Pennicuick.
‘Then I will speak plainer. I see there has been foul play. I suspect the worst of you. He never committed the offence for which he suffered. It was you who committed it. What, what! have I found you out? Murderer, murderer!’ She threw up her hands and fell forward on the floor with a heavy thud.
Pennicuick did not move; it seemed as though her last words had turned him into stone; he stood and stared at the prostrate woman without an effort to assist her, without an attempt to summon others to her assistance, though he was dimly aware of the presence of Hatton on the other side of the door.
Mrs. Conway's voice had been raised loud enough to summon him from a much greater distance than the servants' room he occupied, and most persons would have answered a cry which must have sounded very like ‘Murder!’ but Mr. Hatton's characteristic was discretion.
At last, seeing that his visitor still lay without motion at his feet, Ralph Pennicuick, moved by a new terror, pulled the bell-rope furiously, which at once summoned the valet.
‘Something has happened to Mrs. Conway; an apoplectic fit as I should imagine; send the porter for Dr. Green, and return to me immediately.’
His mind had recovered from the rude shock of Mrs. Conway's vehement accusation, and was getting into its usual excellent working order. At the same time he felt like one in front of a battery that has ‘got the range,’ and whose only hope lies in its ammunition
[Page 32]
being exhausted. If Mrs. Conway had drawn her last breath he would be safe, but otherwise the rancour of her tongue would pursue him everywhere. The shaft she had shot at a venture appeared to him to have had a definite aim; for though, in her hate and rage, her suspicions had far outstripped the truth, there had been moments when he had actually accused himself of his friend's death, and the word ‘murderer’ had scarcely seemed misplaced to him. It was no time for such morbid and remorseful feelings now; it behoved him to stand upon his guard against a charge, less serious indeed, but by no means fanciful or groundless. This woman, lying dead or alive before him, had seized the very weapon used by his conscience, the barb of which he was ever striving to pluck out from his own bosom. She had called him Betrayer of Trust; it was true there was no proof of that, nor ever would be; but the knowledge that another person beside himself had become possessed of this fact—though it was only by intuition—would be intolerable.
To know oneself to be a scoundrel is one of the bitterest fruits of the tree of knowledge, yet not so bitter as to know another knows it, and ‘another’ in this case Ralph Pennicuick felt but too sure meant all who had a right to know it. Reckless of consequences, as deaf to menace as to reason, this woman would proclaim his infamy upon the housetops, and as confidently as though she possessed the proofs of it, as long as she lived. But would she live even to repeat her accusation once? He leant over the prostrate body and regarded it attentively, taking care, however, not to disturb a limb. He foresaw that, if matters were as he hoped, there must be an inquest; and though to no mortal eye could he seem to have any interest in the woman's death, yet it was well
[Page 33]
to be on the safe side. It struck him that it might have been better perhaps, if it were apoplexy, to raise her head, but he let it lie (the purple face staring upwards with apathetic eyes); not that he wished to kill her (though he wished her dead), but simply that none should say he had had any hand in the matter.
She lay quite still, nor, so far from the stertorous breathing that he had understood took place under such circumstances, could he discern she breathed at all. It was indeed a sorry sight, and had he been quite sure that all was over, it might have aroused his pity. The contrast between what lay before him and the recollection of what she had been years ago, when he had thought it worth while to have run risks to win her, might in that case have struck him; but, as it was, the desire of self-preservation overpowered all other feelings and obliterated them. He kept his place, like a sentinel on guard, till his valet reappeared. ‘This is a sad business, Hatton,’ said he. ‘I am afraid of doing anything till the doctor comes for fear it should do more harm than good.’
‘That is the safest plan, sir. I noticed the poor lady was very excited when I let her in—or rather, when she let herself in— for she would take no denial.’
‘It was natural that she should wish to see me,’ answered the other quietly.
Then master and man both stood on guard—revolving their own thoughts—till the doctor came, who, stooping down, busied himself for a few seconds with his lancet, and then rose, shaking his head in the manner with which we are most of us, alas! acquainted, and which thus appeared in the reports of certain subsequent
[Page 34]
proceedings, ‘Dr. Green at once pronounced life to be extinct.’
This gentleman was an eminent physician living hard by in Piccadilly, and professionally known to Mr. Pennicuick.
‘How did this sad business come about?’ inquired he.
‘It was from intense excitement I believe, doctor. It is Mrs. Conway, wife of the poor fellow who was killed when travelling with me in China, and she came here insisting upon having the whole particulars. I had avoided her for that very reason—for they were of a nature to shock any woman; but she compelled me to be explicit, and this, alas! is the result.’
‘I am not surprised at it,’ answered the doctor gravely. ‘There was a strong predisposition to apoplexy, no doubt, and any sudden shock, especially if she was excited, must have been dangerous to her.’
‘She was intensely excited,’ reiterated Pennicuick; ‘Hatton there remarked it even before she entered the room. When I spoke of what had happened to her husband, she cried out, speaking of the Chinese who had put him so barbarously to death, “Murderers! murderers!” and then fell down upon the floor just as you found her.’
‘I heard the lady cry out them very words,’ put in Hatton respectfully.
‘The whole affair is clear as daylight,’ observed Dr. Green; ‘but it will be necessary to inform the coroner. I am very sorry to inconvenience you,’ he added, seeing the clouds gather on Pennicuick's face, ‘but an inquest is indispensable.’
‘Do not speak of inconvenience, doctor. I will go to some hotel for the present—perhaps Hatchett's’
[Page 35]
‘There is no reason why the poor lady should not be taken home.’
‘There is only a daughter left; the shock would be too terrible. No, she had better remain here. Let everything be done, Hatton, that should be done.’
‘And about Miss Conway, sir? should not Mr. Raymond be communicated with?’
‘Why?’ The question was short and sharp; but immediately his voice altered to a gentler tone. ‘Yes, you are right; I will go to him myself, and he will arrange matters, at least if I can be spared,’ continued he, looking inquiringly at the doctor.
‘You can be of no sort of use here,’ answered that gentleman. ‘If you take my advice, you will at once remove to Hatchett's. Town is very full, and the sooner you secure rooms—and especially the sooner you leave these rooms—the better.’
Ralph Pennicuick took the hint and his hat, and left at once.
‘Your master is not looking well,’ said the doctor to the valet.
‘He is far from well, sir; he has been very nervous and out of sorts ever since he came home from China. Captain Conway's death has shaken him a great deal, I think.’
‘Ah! And this is not a nice sort of thing to happen to a man in his state. You must stay here, and I will send some people to look after matters.’
Mr. Hatton did not care to stay by himself where he was, but followed the doctor out, and remained outside the door of the apartment until the ‘people’ alluded to arrived. The whole occurrence was distasteful to him; he had not contemplated being asked to remain with corpses when he entered upon his situation;
[Page 36]
but, on the other hand, he felt that the bond between himself and his master had been somehow strengthened by this unpleasant event. He was conscious that he had been discreet, and that his discretion had not escaped Ralph Pennicuick's observation. Very few things that concerned that gentleman did.
[Page 37]
CHAPTER IV. ORPHANED. Though poor Nelly's home was left desolate on that terrible day, it was not deserted. Mrs. Wardlaw left her home and the husband from whom she had never been separated for a quarter of a century, to take up her quarters for the night with the orphaned girl.
‘You have got a mother yet, my darling,’ she whispered fondly in her ear, ‘if you would only let it be so.’
But for the time Nelly was hardly sensible of her kindness. She had lost father, mother, and all that belonged to her, and seemed to herself utterly alone in the world. If Raymond had been her accepted lover, and could have come down in person to give his loving sympathy, it would just then have hardly availed her, though the consciousness that he was hers would without doubt have been an unspeakable comfort; but, as it was, it was forbidden her even to think of him. There was no green spot in all the desert of Life that lay before her on which to fix her eyes. She was unhappy before, and full of apprehension for the future, but far worse had befallen her than she had dreamed of. ‘I was not in safety, neither was I quiet, yet trouble came,’ were the words of Scripture that seemed to her to have the most proper
[Page 38]
application to herself; its promises and recommendations to be of good cheer, were not for her. Even the excellent woman who had come to sustain her in her tribulation failed in her errand of mercy. There was no faculty of consolation in her; for sympathy —except so far as pity and kindliness went—was wanting. She had never so much as seen Captain Conway,and only knew of him as a man who had been estranged from his family, partly by his own act; it was impossible for her to understand the bond that, stretching across the globe, had united father and daughter of late years so nearly. Her knowledge of Mrs. Conway had been more personal, but it had only made her acquainted with the poor woman's faults and follies; and Nelly could not but be aware of this. She had herself been acquainted with them, but also with the love and tenderness that lay at the root of her mother's character, and which were hidden from Mrs. Wardlaw as from the rest of the world, and she resented the fact that this kind friend had been, although by necessity, thus ignorant of her mother's virtues. How could she understand the greatness of her sorrow, who did not understand the greatness of her loss? Nelly was very sensible, however, of her good intentions, nor did her common sense so far desert her in her wretchedness as to cause her to fail to recognise the rarity as well as the value of such a friendship. Words of gratitude, steeped in tears, were not wanting to her, and she did also what she could in the shape of acknowledgment by giving way to her friend's wishes in various material particulars. If she had had her own way, she would have gone up to town at once, and kept companionship with all that remained of her poor mother till it was committed to the grave; but she suffered herself to be overruled in this particular.
[Page 39]
‘You surely believe me, Nelly,’ Mrs. Wardlaw had reasoned, ‘when I say that your dear mother is dead, and can derive no possible solace from your presence.’
‘I know you got the telegram—but,’ added she with sad significance, ‘one cannot always believe telegrams.’
‘My darling, Raymond has been,’ returned the other softly. ‘He followed his message to our house in person; only he told my husband not to tell you unless you inquired; he is not one of those to parade his kindness, and, besides, it really seems as though—’
‘I understand,’ put in Nelly gravely. ‘What did he tell Mr. Wardlaw? Let me know all.’
‘Well, darling, he told him enough to make me sure that it would only shock you to—to do what you propose. It is better to remember your poor mother as you saw her last.’
There was a long pause, during which Nelly shed those tears whose silent flow is deeper and more sad than the wildest bursts of grief.
‘Raymond saw her, darling, and everything—the little that now can be done—has been, done, just as though you had been there youself. It may be necessary, but he hopes not, that you should be at the inquest.’ Here Nelly had been unable to repress a shudder. ‘There must be one, it seems, though Dr. Green, who saw your poor mother within a few minutes of her seizure, pronounced it, for certain, apoplexy.’
‘Where—where is she?’
‘At the Albany, at Mr. Pennicuick's chambers. That is what makes it so impossible that you should go, even if there were not other reasons. He has gone himself to some hotel; but the place
[Page 40]
will be given up to the officials—the jury and that—and afterwards she will be brought to Richmond. John will make arrangements. Pray be reasonable, darling.’
So Nelly consented, and never saw her dead mother's face— just as it had happened with her in the case of her father. There is much painfulness in such farewells, but also a melancholy satisfaction, and to forego it, was, in Nelly's case, an act of self-denial. It is a test (though a rough one, and by no means without exceptions) of the genuineness of our love, when we wish to take such sad leave-takings in person, and not to have our dead put out of sight—and, too often, out of mind—as quickly as may be.
On another point, also, Nelly felt herself constrained to give way to her good friend's arguments. If her own ideas had been consulted, she would have preferred to dwell alone in her present habitation, at all events for a little, albeit her bereavement had robbed it of all the attributes of home. But Mrs. Wardlaw had put it to her John, that it would never do to let the dear girl ‘eat her heart out with thinking of them as she had lost’ in that death-stricken abode, and she contrived to rescue her from that fate by help of arguments borrowed from the Proprieties.
‘I care nothing for what people think of my staying here alone,’ Nelly had said, not audaciously, but from that callous indifference to the opinion of ‘people’ which always accompanies genuine woe.
‘But your poor dear mother would have cared for it for you, Nelly, under such circumstances. I am sure, if she can look down from heaven and see you now, she would say, “Make Coromandel House your home, my darling, until you find youself better suited somewhere else.”’
[Page 41]
A remark the sublunary tone of which could only be attributed to the very recent arrival of its supposed utterer in the Celestial Regions; but Nelly understood what was meant, and, urged also by the wish to gratify her friend, was moved to take up for the present her quarters with the Wardlaws.
There, in seclusion of course from all save her host and hostess, and with a sense of loneliness and isolation beyond the power of words to tell, she remained for some time, save for a few hours of painful publicity. It was found necessary, after all, that she should give evidence at the inquest. She pleaded against it as some half-blinded creature might have implored not to be dragged into the glare of noon, but declined to take advantage of a doctor's certificate to excuse herself. It could easily and with propriety have been obtained, for she was very far from well; but she had been given to understand that to absent herself would be to evade a public duty. This information she had received, strange to say, in a note from Mr. Pennicuick, marked ‘Private and confidential,’ the contents of which she had therefore kept to herself; but there is no reason why my readers should exercise a similar delicacy.
My dear Miss Conway,—In spite of my utmost efforts to save you from attending the sad formality that must needs take place on Wednesday, it seems your presence can hardly be dispensed with. To learn that any act is a duty is, I know, in your case, to secure its performance: but over and above that consideration I think there is a peculiar propriety in your making this sacrifice. You and I are well aware that it was your mother's excessive sensitiveness and sorrow for your father's loss, acting upon a system already debilitated and little fitted to sustain so terrible a shock, that has been the cause of her decease; but it is just possible that some question may be put embarrassing to a mere friend (however devoted) like myself, but easily answered, and with much greater weight of authority, by yourself. Your poor mother's prejudices were strong—she was easily angered and somewhat difficult to conciliate—but we know how loyal and loving was her heart. It seems to me that no hint of
[Page 42]
what was after all a constitutional weakness should be allowed to leak out in a mere formal inquiry such as this, and your presence would prevent it, or nip it in the bud. I hope I have made my meaning clear: but at all events I am quite certain, my dear Miss Conway, you will not misunderstand my motives. For the present I write nothing more, for I feel the subject of my note is too grave and sad to admit of the companionship of another topic.
Your very sincere friend,
Ralph Pennicuick.
Mr. Pennicuick's meaning was quite clear to Nelly, and she understood even his motives better than be imagined. She did not dislike him as Mrs. Conway had done, but she could not give him credit for unselfishness. That paragraph about her mother's ‘prejudices’ had reference, she was persuaded, to the feelings she had entertained towards himself; and the ‘hint’ of which he spoke in all probability was an allusion to the enmity between them. She was, however, as anxious as himself that no record of weakness should sully her mother's memory; and moreover it appeared her duty that she should do his bidding, and so she wrote him a few words of acquiescence. It did not seem strange to her, under the circumstances, that he had not, as usual, made Raymond his messenger, but other facts corroborated her view of the object of his communication. Perhaps, if she had been less nearly interested in its proceedings, the inquest would have been an ordeal even more severe than it proved to be. As it was, her thoughts were too much wrapped up in the Dead to admit of her being disturbed by minor matters, and moreover she was spared as much as possible in consideration of her position.
One juryman, indeed—there is always one such individual among the twelve—did put some searching questions to her as respected Mr. Pennicuick, which arose from the circumstance that
[Page 43]
the notion had found its way into his head that that gentleman had murdered the deceased.
‘Were Mr. Pennicuick and your mamma upon good terms,’ he had inquired, ‘at the time when she called at the Albany?’
‘They had not met for nearly a year, in consequence of Mr. Pennicuick's absence abroad,’ she had replied; ‘but he was my father's most intimate friend, and had just made a proposition through a third person, which testified to his good feeling towards her.’
‘Your mamma had no pecuniary claim upon him of any kind?’ persisted the juror.
‘None whatever,’ answered Nelly emphatically, and not without a sense of recognition, in her very emphasis, of the generosity of the offer she had in her mind.
‘I think there is no need to pursue our inquiries in that direction,’ the coroner had observed, and so the matter had dropped. She was unaware at the time that Mr. Pennicuick himself had already suffered from that hostile and suspicious juror, though she guessed something of it from what she read in subsequent reports of the proceedings. Mr. Pennicuick had schemed in vain to get Nelly examined first, and, failing in that, had given his own evidence with characteristic clearness: perhaps the juror had thought him too clear, and at once built up an hypothesis of murder, and then clung to his hobbyhorse, in a manner which, if it could be practised with real horses, would ensure a man's never being thrown.
‘You say the object of the deceased's visit to your chambers, Mr. Pennicuick, was to receive from you an account of her late husband's death. Why had you withheld this from her?’
‘I had not withheld it; I had communicated the particulars
[Page 44]
to her through my son Raymond, but it seems she wished to have them from my own lips.’
‘She was not satisfied, then, with your version of the matter?’
‘On the contrary, she desired to have my version without those alterations which, I suppose, belong to every narrative when it passes through fresh hands.’
‘Your interview, however, seems to have been a somewhat stormy one?’
‘It was so; through the natural excitement with which Mrs. Conway received the recital of her husband's fate, and of the atrocities that were committed upon him.’
‘You had no sort of advantage to derive, of course, from the death of the deceased lady?’
‘Advantage! Good heavens, no! What benefit could it have been to me?’
This was a little indiscreet. The Scriptural precept of confining our remarks to ‘Yea, yea,’ and ‘Nay, nay,’ his its best exemplification in the witness-box. Whatever goes beyond this, contains the element of danger. The reply ‘Certainly not’ would have satisfied the juror; but, as it was, an opportunity was afforded him of pursuing his investigations.
‘Well, it would have been a benefit to you if she was an annuitant upon your estate, for example; we are to understand, however, that she had no sort of claim upon you?’
Ralph Pennicuick hesitated. If the question could have been foreseen, he would have replied to it with the promptest brevity, but he had only made provision against inquiries respecting his social relations with Mrs. Conway: he had not thought it possible that allusion would be made to pecuniary matters between them,
[Page 45]
and for the moment it fairly staggered him. The claim about which he was thus interrogated had been for weeks the chief topic of his waking thoughts, as of his feverish dreams, but that only made this sudden reference to it from so unexpected a quarter the more startling. It was as a blow on an open wound. He knew that he was changing colour, and was even conscious of a faint trembling in his limbs, as he replied at last, and not before his silence had excited curiosity:
‘Mrs. Conway had no sort of claim upon me whatever.’
The answer was decisive enough; yet, as we have seen, Nelly was called upon to corroborate it.
The circumstance made but little impression upon her at the time; her heart was too full for that; and the sad ceremony at Richmond, which immediately succeeded the official proceedings, helped to blot it from her remembrance. Raymond of course attended the funeral, but she was only dimly conscious of the fact. Through the darkness of that day she felt rather than saw certain gleams of light. Her host and hostess were standing by her, and would stand by her, she knew, in other trials to come; and there was another presence equally faithful and more tender, but studiously undemonstrative and unpresuming, and which she knew it behoved her not to recognise at such a time, even though all her nature yearned for sympathy and her heart was weary within her. She could not trust herself even to press Raymond's hand. As to his father, she was not even aware, until afterwards informed of the fact, that he had not been present at the funeral.
[Page 46]
CHAPTER V. A JESUITICAL LETTER. If Nelly was indifferent as regards Ralph Pennicuick and his actions, such was by no means the case with him as respected her. It would have astonished her not a little if she could have known the space which she occupied in his thoughts. While her mother had been alive, the two women had been burden enough upon his mind of late; but strange to say, now one had been removed by death, the survivor weighed upon him even more heavily than the two had done. His animosity towards Mrs. Conway—though he would never have confessed as much even to himself—had greatly mitigated his remorse for the wrong that he had done them. It is a feeling from which no human being, perhaps, is utterly free. The religious persecutor, who burnt women and children alive for the glory of God, could never have done the devil's work in that way so gaily, if he had not entertained a private grudge against them as being heretics. Our notions of Right and Wrong, so far as dealing with our fellow-creatures is concerned, are largely guided by our sense of Like and Dislike. It is even more easy to love our enemies than to behave with perfect fairness towards those who, without being our enemies, are what is termed antipathetic.
Fairness of course did not enter into Pennicuick's thoughts;
[Page 47]
he had made up his mind to fraud from the beginning; but that course had, without doubt, been rendered less difficult to him from the sentiments he had entertained towards Mrs. Conway. He had been of old attracted by her beauty, and she had treated his attentions, as soon as they became intelligible, with indignant scorn; and from that moment his heart had hardened against her. It made no difference to him that she had not told her husband of his traitorous behaviour; to do him justice, he was no coward, and besides he was perfectly aware that she had not spared him for his own sake. For some women it would have been a perilous thing to possess such a secret, and yet to keep on tolerable terms, so far as appearances went, with their tempter. But Mrs. Conway's character was much too pronounced, and her tone of mind altogether too robust, to be open to this danger. And this, strange to say, Pennicuick at once understood, though his false notions of female honour had allowed him to make so grave a mistake in the first instance. Moreover, it was not in her nature to play the hypocrite, and notwithstanding the apprehensions she entertained of her husband's guessing the truth of the matter—a totally groundless fear, by the way, for he was the most unsuspicious of men— her behaviour towards his friend had changed from that hour, and, though it hinted nothing of the hatred with which she regarded him, became austere and chilling. This was the only way the poor woman had of declaring war; she could not appeal to her natural ally her husband; whereas, her enemy did appeal to him; drew him from his allegiance to her, or helped to draw, by widening every little breach between them caused by her unhappy temper; encouraged him in all those paths, to which he was
[Page 48]
already too prone, that led him away from home; and in the end no doubt contributed to their separation.
Ralph Pennicuick knew that he had done this, but had never felt a pang of remorse in consequence. In his eyes, Mrs. Conway was an ill-conditioned waspish woman, and he sincerely pitied his friend for having married her. The best thing Conway could do, in his opinion, since he had been fool enough to tie such a stone round his neck, was to give her as much line as possible; the rope could not be cut, but it could be elongated. He had advised him to go abroad ‘out of reach of Madam's tongue,’ but not more strongly (so he flattered himself) than he would have urged the same course on any other man in the like position. But his heart, in truth, had been set hard against her. He never thought of her more directly as respected himself than as a cold-blooded prude, but her contempt for him inspired his actions. The recollection of all this, and the knowledge of her animosity towards him, heightened as it had been by intermediate events, had without doubt gone far to quiet his conscience in his falsehood to his friend— which was after all only a different sort of falsehood (with fraud added) from that which he had originally contemplated—but the love of money had been at the root of the matter; and it remained there still. He did not like Mrs. Conway a bit better because she was dead. He was quite above that weakness which softens some of us towards those with whom we have not ‘got on’ when they are removed by death; indeed, in this case, his foe had died in a manner studiously devised, as it seemed, for his discomfort. But now that she was gone, he felt that one of his chief springs of evil action was removed; that a flange, as it were, that had helped to keep him on the line of wrong, had given way; and though he must
[Page 49]
still go on, that it would now be more difficult for him to do so. For Nelly Conway had given him no cause of offence whatever. He even knew (for he knew everything that concerned himself) that the girl had done her best to mitigate her mother's antipathy towards him, and though the thought of robbing the widow and the orphan had been made almost tolerable to him, now that the question narrowed itself to the orphan alone, the idea of injuring the harmless, helpless girl, the only child of the man that had died for him, was well-nigh insupportable.
But between shrinking from wronging her and rising to the height of righting her at a cost of 20,000 l . there was a great gulf. Having once reconciled himself to keeping that sum of money to himself, he was not the man to begin arguing so delicate a question of conscience all over again. It had cost him a good deal— all his peace of mind, and half his powers of digestion—to establish the matter to his satisfaction, or partly to his satisfaction, and he was not going to be disturbed by casuistry. Only he did desire, now, much more even than before, to feel less like a villain. Although never liberal in his dealings, he had been a scrupulously honest man all his life, until this great temptation to do evil without risk had been too much for him. No amount, or scarcely any amount, of gain could have induced him to rob another man; for in this case he did not feel that he was doing this; he was only keeping money which, though he had agreed to part with it, had never left his hands, and therefore seemed somehow still to be his own. And it was really so much better, taking the matter all round, that he should keep it. What would a girl like Nelly Conway, for example, who had been brought up in a homely and quiet way, do with 20,000 l .? It would be the ruin of the simplicity
[Page 50]
of her character, and would mark her as a prey for every fortune-hunter. As to her father's dying wish that it should be so, the case was a precisely parallel one to that of the ‘pious founders’ of old, who, with the intention of doing good, did from their bequests a great deal of harm instead, and whose postmortem arrangements were therefore very properly set aside by Act of Parliament in favour of some more useful plan. In spite of his determination not to reopen the question, Ralph Pennicuick in fact found himself going over again all the old round of self-extenuation and self-apology, except of course that there was now only Nelly on whom to fix his thoughts.
Raymond had not as yet spoken a word to him about her, but he had an uneasy consciousness that the boy would speak, and it would be therefore well to take precautions. As to making her an heiress at his own expense, and then permitting his son to marry her, the idea was almost as distasteful to him as that of simple restitution. Ralph Pennicuick not only loved money, but power; especially power over his own flesh and blood: and perhaps in no case—though he had always enjoined on him the propriety of ‘marrying money’—would he have been pleased to see his son independent of himself. He had great confidence in the sense of future advantage, of benefits to come, and very little in the force of natural affection, and he deemed the best way to keep a son under one's thumb was to keep a tight hand on him with something in it . In this, as we know, he utterly misjudged Raymond's character, but such mistakes are the penalty always paid by egotists, however sagacious. To them the world is peopled by Frankensteins of their own creation, who are necessarily wanting in the attributes which they do not themselves possess.
[Page 51]
On the very day of the funeral of Mrs. Conway, Ralph Pennicuick returned to his own rooms in the Albany, and sat down to compose a letter to Nelly. He chose that time, not only because it was the earliest date on which the thing could with propriety be done, and the sooner it was done and off his mind the better, but also because he was safe from interruption from Raymond. The lad had been as usual very dutiful, and was always looking in upon him to inquire after his health, which in truth was far from good; he was willing to stay and dine, or leave his father to himself, just as the latter pleased, and had thus unknowingly often afforded him intense relief. Ralph Pennicuick had hitherto been the most independent of men; he was not indeed particularly ‘full of resources’—which generally implies drawing, painting, playing the flute, making artificial flies, deciphering double acrostics, and other little elegant accomplishments—but he was generally satisfied with his own society and the companionship of a cigar and a French novel; but there were now times when it seemed intolerable to him to be alone. And yet Raymond's company had been unpleasant to him from the apprehension that he might return to the topic of Nelly Conway. The recency of his own return to England and, later, the catastrophe of Mrs. Conway's death, had hitherto perhaps preserved him from the discussion of this unpleasant subject, but he had a presentiment that it would come sooner or later, and it was well to take precautions. Under ordinary circumstances, and when no such weight was on his mind as now habitually oppressed it, he would have taken a very short way with both Raymond and the girl: ‘Marry and starve’ would have been his reply to the former, while he would not have scrupled to point out to the latter, that if in
[Page 52]
becoming his son's wife she was under the expectation of making a good match, she was mistaken. But with the consciousness of what he had done as respected her dead father, and of what he was resolved to fail to do as respected herself, he could not take this high hand. He had been a bully and he had of late become a scoundrel; but he could not—at least as yet—brazen out his crime by any species of tyrannical swagger. He had, as we have seen, already astonished Raymond by his unwonted liberality towards the widow and her daughter, and the same tenderness of conscience led him now in the same direction, and even still further, inasmuch as the survivor was not objectionable to him. Only his mind was fixed that she should never marry Raymond.
It was under these circumstances that Ralph Pennicuick composed his letter to her.
‘My dear Miss Nelly,—You will, I am sure, understand that nothing short of serious indisposition prevented my attendance at—’
Here a strange thing happened; the door of the bedroom in which the dead woman had lain up to that very morning opened slowly outward. It was a thing that had happened to him—as it has probably happened to all of us—half a dozen times before. An insecure catch of the lock, a draught, a weakened hinge—any or all of these things might have occasioned it; but the effect upon the witness was very remarkable. His fingers stiffened upon the pen and grew damp and clammy, his brow was bedewed with sweat; his eyes stared at the advancing door with stony horror. This was but for a minute at most: then he rose quickly, walked steadily to the door, closed it, and resumed his seat. His occupation, however, he was unable to resume. His mind was clear as to
[Page 53]
what he wished to write, but his trembling hand could no longer obey his wishes. He sat feeling his wrist and nothing its pulsations by the clock upon the mantelpiece and with an anxious look upon his face. He was no longer a prey to superstitious terror, but thoroughly alarmed upon his own account. Nothing but physical ailment—something seriously wrong in his system—could have caused him, he was well convinced, to have been so weak and foolish. He felt as if he had a warning—not of the supernatural sort—and it was not the first by many, though he had never before experienced so rude a shock. His sea voyage had been by no means so beneficial as he had promised to himself; he had been nervous and ‘shaky’ all along, and, having no confidence in the chief surgeon, had resorted to a remedy which he knew to be a dangerous one. He turned to it now, though by no means eagerly —as he was aware might be the case some day. He took from his side pocket a silver flask, and poured himself out a little brandy; ‘just a thimbleful,’ as he murmured to himself in an apologetic tone. ‘I must really see Green about this before it goes any further.’
Then he lit a cigar, and placing his chair so that he faced the bedroom door, continued his letter.
‘You will, I am sure, understand that nothing short of serious indisposition prevented my attendance at the funeral of your poor mother. I am deeply grieved not to have been able to pay her that last sad tribute of respect; but, to say truth, I could not trust myself to do so. My health, already broken down by recent events, has altogether given way beneath this last catastrophe.’
Here he paused, pen in hand, and then wrote, with many alterations and erasures: ‘There are no more friendships for me,
[Page 54]
to be called such; and when I have seen Raymond suitably married, I feel that then there will be little else for me to live for.’ The word ‘suitably’ had been selected with especial care. He gave an approving nod as he wrote it down. ‘One satisfaction, however, I have promised myself; namely, to make sure that she who was nearest and dearest to my departed friend shall be placed above all carking care. You must permit me, dear Miss Nelly, for his sake [here his hand shook so that the words were hardly decipherable: but that was of small consequence, as the note was but a rough copy], to settle on you, for life, the sum of four hundred pounds a year. The first quarter of this, as you may be in present need of funds, I shall instruct Mr. Tatham, my solicitor, to pay over to you at once.’ At first he intended to end here; but on perusing the composition, it struck him that the allusion to Raymond's future prospects as respected matrimony had hardly sufficient directness. ‘I need not say how pleased I shall always be to hear of your well-being, and especially to welcome, in due time, the man who may have the good fortune to win your heart, and supply to you the place of those whose loss now doubtless appears irreparable.
‘Yours always faithfully,
Ralph Pennicuick .’
It was a letter by no means characteristic of the writer, and had consequently cost him infinite pains. But upon the whole he was well satisfied with it. It was liberal (or at least the recipient must needs think so); it was sympathetic, as he flattered himself; and, above all, it expressed his intentions as to Raymond without the possibility of a mistake. It did flash across him for a moment that, if his offer was accepted, the girl might take his money and
[Page 55]
his son too, who, with that three hundred a year of his own, of the possession of which he was yet in ignorance, would then have sufficient for an independent subsistence. But there would be an opportunity of guarding against that in the deed of settlement. It would, at all events, be doing more harm than good to allude at present to a contingency which the letter itself placed, by implication, out of the question.
It was some hours before the post went out to Richmond, but Ralph Pennicuick felt that the sooner it was sent the better; and wishing, for certain reasons of his own, that it should not pass through Mr. Hatton's hands, he went out and posted it himself at once.
[Page 56]
CHAPTER VI. A DELICATE TOPIC. If when we lose a limb the pain were done with, so much importance would not be attached to that misfortune; but, as everybody knows who is acquainted with one who has thus suffered, there are periods when the patient seems to undergo the agony afresh, besides those ordinary and frequent occasions when, through accident, the wounded man receives a blow, and all the torments of the original catastrophe are renewed again. And thus it is with a wounded conscience. We may have taken the strongest measures with it; the ‘actual cautery,’ as it were, may have been applied, and we may flatter ourselves that, although a certain inconvenience —a sense of being no longer whole—may remain with us, the mischief has found its limits; that we shall not again be troubled by those remorseful pangs which are felt at first. But, alas, we find that no such comfort is vouchsafed us: the wound is there, and not until we have received so many such that we are morally head to foot a festering sore, do we lose the sense of its individual pain.
Ralph Pennicuick was what is called in pulpit phrase ‘a man of sin’ in many ways; but the course which he had adopted and was still pursuing with respect to his dead friend was the one dishonest
[Page 57]
action of his life; nor could he hope, by any subsequent behaviour, to become callous to it. He had flattered himself that when he had once made up his mind to neglect to fulfil his bargain with Conway, the affair would cease to give him trouble; the feverish days and wakeful nights that had befallen him had long proved that hope fallacious, and now he found that everything which had reference to his delinquency—however remote—was an instrument, not, indeed, of punishment, for punishment suggests expiation, but of retribution, and remorse, and woe. Even the narratives he had been compelled to give of Conway's death, the feelings he had been forced to affect concerning it, the reasons for this and that, in connection with it, he had been obliged to invent, had been gall and wormwood to him; but these references to the wronged dead were painless compared with the direct communications it had been necessary to have with the wronged living. The very idea of them had, as we have seen, been so hateful to him, that at some risk of involving nearer relations between Nelly and his son than already existed, he had sent Raymond as his envoy to Richmond; in spite of which precaution, the widow had visited him in person, discomfited him to the last degree with her suspicions and accusations, and eventually so died as to seem to lay her very death at his door. Then, in self-defence, he had had to write to Nelly about the inquest, a task which cost him not a little; and after all these things he had suffered a recurrence of his original feelings of remorse and shame. And now, when he had posted that second letter to the girl, which had seemed such a masterpiece of policy, and so thoroughly adapted for the main purpose he had now in view (and which, indeed, threatened to become the main purpose of his life), namely, that of quieting his
[Page 58]
own mind by a judicious expenditure of money on Nelly, now , to his great disappointment and almost to his indignation, the cries of his half-stifled conscience broke forth afresh.
As he sat in his lonely room waiting for Raymond's return from the funeral, he felt so far from satisfied with himself that he had to debate the question of his own scoundrelship all over again, as though it had not already been settled half-a-dozen times in his favour. It seemed that there must be always a right of appeal for that unhappy case, however he might get it arranged or compromised in the courts below. Four hundred a year, there was no doubt, was an income sufficient for any young lady, and when, as in this instance, she had been accustomed to economical ways, it was something more than sufficient, it was handsome. But it was not the income derivable from 20,000 l ., except at two per cent.; and it also suggested no hint of its being the interest of any such sum. Again, it was doubtless better for the girl that she should be thus provided for, and, while placed in comfort and even affluence, should be at the same time removed from the arts of Irish and other adventurers. But the question that would still intrude itself upon Ralph Pennicuick's mind, was what Arthur Conway had thought upon that matter when lying between life and death in Dhulang prison; he had probably been as good a judge of what would conduce to his daughter's happiness as a stranger; but at all events, and however that might be, it was certain that in return, for a very material value received, he had imposed certain conditions on his seeming friend which that gentleman had wilfully declined to fulfil, and was still declining . It was there, in the tail of the thing, that the sting lay. It was not as if he had robbed a man, and had done with it; robbery had become, as it were, his profession;
[Page 59]
it sometimes entailed the most shocking responsibilities upon him—such as the death of a fellow-creature, since certainly but for his behaviour Mrs. Conway would not have died; but he must needs follow it for all that; it was a business from which he could not retire; he was now robbing an orphan girl.
There was another thing that troubled Pennicuick immensely, though he fought against it with all his weakened powers. He had from the first a consciousness that Arthur Conway was cognisant of what he was doing, and was in a manner present with him during all his planning and scheming to reconcile his conscience with himself and make all things pleasant and comfortable; and since the widow's death this conviction had grown upon him. Moreover, he now fancied them both possessed of his shameful secret, and regarding him with accusing eyes. This monstrous idea was one very inconsonant with his nature, and which his intelligence exceedingly resented; it got the mastery over him only in moments of physical weakness, and never after a good meal or a glass of wine; but it always seemed on the watch to possess his mind. It was not substantive at present; he never actually seemed to see these phantoms of his brain, but he had a secret fear lest he should see them, and this (among other things) made his own society distasteful to him. If the companionship of others was not absolutely a comfort to him, he felt it to be a sort of safeguard.
It was with genuine satisfaction therefore that Ralph Pennicuick received his son's visits, and never more so than on the afternoon of Mrs. Conway's funeral, when he had made provision in his note to Nelly against all consequences, in case the topic which he had always apprehended should be started from Raymond's
[Page 60]
lips. He felt sure that Raymond would come, and he did so. He was in deep black of course; his face was pale; his eyes looked as if he had been weeping. It was natural enough, and his father had expected it, for he knew the lad to be of a sentimental nature; ‘soft’ like his mother before him; and yet he resented these evidences of emotion. He felt it as a reproach to himself that his son should be so tender-hearted towards these Conways, though it was his own wish to affect to be so: and he also suspected that the tenderness had something to do with his liking for Nelly.
‘Well, my lad, you must be glad it is over. It must have been a sad morning's work.’ He purposely spoke curtly to let Raymond know that he did not wish to touch upon the subject more than was necessary.
‘Yes, sir; it was very sad.’
‘You told her, of course—I mean Nelly—how deeply I felt for her, and how I regretted my enforced absence from the funeral.’
‘I had no speech with her at all, sir; she was not in a state to be spoken to.’
‘Ah, I dare say, poor girl! Well, well, these are things that happen to all of us. All we can do is to make it as easy as we can for her. Those Wardlaws fortunately seem to have taken a fancy to her.’
‘Yes; they are kindness itself. Mrs. Wardlaw told me they are going to take her away to the seaside, somewhere, as soon as possible.’
‘Quite right to remove her from all painful associations. The very thing I should have advised myself. We must take care, however, to save her from all sense of obligation.’
[Page 61]
‘I think that can hardly be, sir; indeed, I think it is a comfort to her to feel indebted to such good friends.’
‘In a sentimental point of view, no doubt; but she would not like them to pay money for her.’
‘They are not people to think of that,’ said Raymond confidently.
‘Very likely not; I dare say they are free enough with their money; persons of their class often are; but I confess, from what I have seen of them, they seem rather a vulgar couple. At all events, I have taken measures to place her upon a proper footing with them.’
‘I hope you have not written to Mr. Wardlaw,’ said Raymond, flushing up, ‘to offer—’
‘Of course not. I have nothing to do with Mr. Wardlaw. I have written to Nelly herself. She is a sensible girl and will, I am sure, understand her own position. I am going to allow her 400 l . a year for life; that will be an ample provision for her wants, while at the same time it will not attract the greed of adventurers. If she marries suitably—’ here Ralph Pennicuick rose and put the clock straight upon the mantelpiece, to avoid meeting his son's eyes—‘I propose in addition to settle a lump sum upon herself and children.’
‘I have a few words to speak to you, father, upon that subject,’ said Raymond suddenly, moved by an impulse of desperation. ‘I expressed them in a letter to you I sent to China, but which you have not as yet received.’
‘About a settlement on Nelly Conway,’ returned the other, with affected astonishment; ‘how could that possibly have happened?’
[Page 62]
‘No, sir, not about the settlement, but about Nelly herself. I—that is she—’
‘Now, I hope you are not going to make a fool of yourself, my lad,’ interrupted the other sharply. ‘I am not in a state of health to endure worry.’
‘I am very sorry to give you any annoyance, sir, but this is a matter upon which some time or another I must speak, and if I were silent now you might afterwards accuse me, with good reason, of duplicity. From my childhood upwards I have loved no human being as I have loved Nelly Conway—’
‘You are certainly candid,’ put in Ralph Pennicuick; ‘you make no exception, them, even of your father.’
‘Indeed, sir, I have always loved you also and striven to obey you in all things; but this is a love of another kind, a boy's love for a girl you may say, but it has passed through that phase, and is now a deep-seated passion, the one hope of my life.’ Raymond paused, from sheer agitation, for he was deeply moved; his father, who had produced a penknife, and had begun deliberately to pare his nails, regarded him with an amused air.
‘This is curious, my dear Raymond, but it is not unparalleled, though I confess I have never experienced anything of the same kind myself. Perhaps I was not quite so particular in the objects of my attachments; before I was your age I had half-a-dozen of them.’
‘I have never loved but one woman,’ returned the young man gravely.
‘Dear me! and you are almost one-and-twenty! The gentle passion, however, does sometimes delay to seize a man till late in
[Page 63]
life; then, as with the measles, it is all the more dangerous; at sixty, my dear Raymond, you will be like the Grand Turk.’
‘I beseech you, sir, not to treat what I am about to say to you as a jest,’ answered the young man earnestly. ‘I know that my appeal is distasteful to you; it grieves me more than I can express to urge it under the present circumstances; I entreat you, however, to bear with me. It is the first time, I think, that I have ever had the misfortune to act counter to your wishes.’
‘Let us say to propose to act counter to them,’ observed the other quietly.
‘Indeed, sir, there are some matters which override all the ordinary rules and duties of life,’ replied Raymond quickly. ‘My heart is so bound up in this one that I cannot answer for my own fealty to you. We are told to leave father and mother to cleave to her that is our wife—’
‘You don't mean to say you have dared to marry this girl!’ cried Ralph Pennicuick, starting up in fury.
‘No, sir; I have not married her.’ For the moment he wished he had, since such a possibility had crossed his father's mind; he would now have known the worst that could be done with him; and it could be no worse—or so it seemed to him—than being denied his suit.
‘It is lucky for you, sir,’ answered the other menacingly, but not without a sigh of relief. ‘You would have been married over a broomstick, since that is how beggars wed. I shall now take care, in making arrangements for this young woman's subsistence, that no misfortune shall happen to her such as you have had in contemplation.’
[Page 64]
‘This is the penalty of frankness, then!’ observed Raymond bitterly.
‘It will be the penalty of filial disobedience, sir,’ answered the other curtly. ‘I stand aghast at your audacity, but not more so than at the craft and cunning that have been disclosed in this girl so early. She has been much mistaken, however, in her calculations.’
‘You misjudge her altogether, father,’ said Raymond, interrupting in his turn, but speaking with great gravity and deliberation. ‘Craft and cunning are unknown to her. She does not harbour a selfish thought. She is utterly ignorant of my appeal to you.’
‘And also of your devotion to her, no doubt,’ observed the other cynically.
‘She knows I love her. How could she help knowing it, when I have been her companion for years? Nor do I deny that my love is returned, though I have not her permission to affirm it.’
This piece of delicacy was, unfortunately for his own views, quite lost upon the elder gentleman. If he had understood what Raymond literally meant, that Nelly had forbidden him to use her as an ally in pleading with his father, he might have made some capital out of it; but he set down this statement as merely another specimen of the young fellow's ‘maundering’ and ‘softness’ which was to be met with contemptuous indifference like all the rest of it. Still his rôle was to be good-natured as well as firm.
‘My good sir, this whole love affair of yours is a chimera,’ exclaimed he, ‘a mere monster of your amorous imagination. It can no more take a solid practical shape than yonder clouds over Piccadilly. It will presently dissolve—perhaps with a tear or two
[Page 65]
on her side—and leave the future all the clearer for both of you. There is no sort of reality about it.’
‘I can understand your saying that, father, if I were asking you for any considerable allowance to support us,’ pleaded Raymond. ‘I don't think I have ever shown myself greedy in that way, or—or—extravagant as some young fellows are. I have heard you say as much yourself. And I don't wish you to trench upon your own income, so as to be a burden to you in any way. I thought if you would add another 200 l . to my own allowance—’
‘Not a shilling, not a penny,’ interrupted the other impatiently. ‘You should have no allowance from me at all. And I need not add, that this girl would have none either. What you are urging me to do, in fact, is to hold my hand as respects herself. You are seeking to impoverish the very being to whom you pretend to be attached. As to your own moderate way of living, I don't wish to detract from its merits; it does you credit; but, on the other hand, you would be a fool to be extravagant. If you raised money, it would be at a ruinous interest, for you well know, and the Jews know, that I am not one to be crossed. Then as to my not making you a large allowance, I am not in the position to do so.’
‘I have never hinted that you should do so, sir,’ said Raymond gloomily. He was very unwilling that his father should enter upon this topic, lest he should be obliged to disbelieve him. He could not forget that 20,000 l . of which Mr. Tatham the lawyer had informed him when he had thought that Raymond had come into his kingdom; any plea of poverty put forward by his father must needs, he was therefore aware, be a pretence. It is impossible
[Page 66]
however, for a mean man to be otherwise than secretive. When pushed with relation to pecuniary affairs, he resorts to the expedient of the cuttle-fish; he darkens the whole matter; and when it comes to giving reasons for his economies, he will lie. And thus it happened with Ralph Pennicuick; only, instead of being pushed, he was volunteering falsehood.
‘You may, nevertheless, Raymond, have expected more,’ continued the other. ‘You may have formed an exaggerated view of my fortune. It amounts to no great sum, as I have more than once endeavoured to point out to you, and there are many demands upon it of which you know nothing. At the same time, it is not so despicable that you should risk losing it, by opposing yourself to my wishes.’
‘Pray cease to threaten me, sir,’ cried Raymond suddenly; ‘I cannot bear it.’
This was not spoken in a pleading voice: the son's tone had quite as much menace in it as that of the father: the word was I ‘can’ not, but the meaning was I ‘will’ not. Ralph Pennicuick fully understood this. His face grew set, and hard; he pressed his thin lips tightly together, and his eyes shot a glance like flame.
‘By heaven, young man, you are independent enough!’ he began angrily; then he suddenly recollected that he was independent, though he did not know it; that in a few weeks he would have three hundred a year with which to do as he pleased. If he showed this audacity when for all he knew he was a pauper, how would he behave when he should be no longer indebted to another for supplies! Ralph regretted for the first time that he had hitherto ‘kept his son so short,’ since his habits of economy would now render him the more independent of him.
[Page 67]
‘By heaven, young man, you are independent enough!—but it is ungenerous of you thus to take advantage of a father's affection. You know that I could never leave you to starve; but that should hardly have encouraged you to ask what by your own confession you knew would be distasteful to me, and was indeed as improper as it was impracticable.’
‘Improper, sir? What is there improper in my attachment to the daughter of your friend? If he is cognisant of the request I make—if the dead can know what is affecting their nearest and dearest—’
‘Be silent, sir,’ cried Ralph shrilly, while a shudder passed over his hard face, like a shadow blown about a crag. ‘I will not be dictated to, or taught my duty by a boy. I cannot believe that such wilful disobedience can be the product of your own nature. I believe that this girl is egging you on. I will write to her in plain terms, so that at least she shall not ruin both herself and you with her eyes shut.’
‘I entreat you, I beseech you, sir, not to do that,’ exclaimed Raymond passionately. ‘Let it be sufficient that I have failed to move you; that the one favour I have asked of you during my whole life has been refused.’
‘If I remain silent,’ said Ralph, ‘you on your part must pledge yourself not to blast this young woman's prospects by urging her to act in opposition to my will.’
‘I promise that, sir,’ said Raymond gloomily.
‘Very good; your word I know is to be depended upon. Now, if you will take my advice, you will give yourself a holiday, and mix a little more in the world of pleasure than, it seems, you have
[Page 68]
of late been doing. If you want money for a fling—fifty pounds or so—’
‘I want no money, sir, thank you.’
‘Well, well, if you do, apply to me; what is mine is yours, my lad. I have no other aim in life than to see you happy—that is, in a reasonable way; mingling with your equals , and remaining in that sphere to which you naturally belong. You will thank me some day for what you now consider to be my cruelty. I would say, Stay to dine with me, but this talk has upset me. Go to the opera to-night; see Léonie in the ballet: they tell me she's charming.’
And so father and son took leave of one another.
[Page 69]
CHAPTER VII. ALONE IN THE WORLD. When we speak of natural beauty, it is generally the face which we have in our eye or in our mind's eye: it is only a few enthusiasts who rave about a woman's ears or the nape of her neck; we even say ‘the face of nature’ when extolling the charms of a landscape. But in England, at least, there is one exception to this general rule, namely the Isle of Wight. In that case our admiration is always reserved for the ‘back of the island.’ The few miles of road that lie between Blackgang and Sandown Bay form a sort of marine Fairyland. Its loveliness is undeniable, but it is Lilliputian. The romances which are enacted there lie in a nutshell, but they are very numerous. It is sometimes called the Garden of England, but, if so, it is the back garden—as immortalised in the lives of Vilikins and his Dinah: a charming plot of ground, removed from the madding crowd, and open only to the sea and sky, but of very limited extent. Within this enchanted area lies Sandybeach. I suppose more happy brides have dated their first letters to the objects of their eternal school-friendships from Sandybeach than from any place of ten times its size within Her Majesty's dominions. Cupid hovers everywhere; over the level sands, over the sparkling sea, over the wooded cliffs, as though he were—the
[Page 70]
reverse, some cynics whisper, of his usual character—a gull. At all seasons his victims are seen arm-in-arm, or hand-in-hand, or even still more tenderly connected, parading the shore, or strolling through the pocket wilderness of the Undercliff. Life is an idyll in this exquisite village, and endures for a month exactly. I know an old gentleman who has been three times a Benedict, who has always spent his honeymoons in this sweet spot, and still cordially recommends it to friends about to marry. It is also by reason of its quiet and seclusion frequented by the afflicted in mind. So soon as her gentle guest began to gather strength after the double blow that cruel fate had dealt her, Mrs. Wardlaw said to her husband, ‘John, we must take Nelly to Sandybeach.’ And they took her.
The poor girl did not herself care where she went; it seemed to her that all places were alike now—all darkened by the shadow of death and environed by the waters of bitterness; but the sunshine and the sea had balm in them. In a few days that first oppression of grief which seems almost to threaten physical suffocation, as well as to sink the heart down to bottomless depths, was mitigated. The clouds lifted a little from her mental view, and through the misty grey of life shone here and there a speck of blue.
Ralph Pennicuick's letter, strange to say, had done her good. It had roused her from the lethargy of grief, by compelling a reply to him, and at the same time had given her a rough reminder of the immediate necessity for exertion. She positively declined his offer of pecuniary aid. She had no doubt of the propriety of that course of action, but perhaps she would have been puzzled to account for all the causes that led her to adopt it. His proposal was
[Page 71]
kind—if there was some lack of kindliness in the terms in which it was conveyed—and certainly liberal; she acknowledged that very readily; she had certainly no claim upon Mr. Pennicuick's purse, and he had opened it freely, but, somehow, she felt, even if she were ailing in health, and unfit to gain her own living, that she could never have touched the contents of it. He had been her father's friend, it was true; and his present generosity would seem to prove that that friendship had been genuine: yet, somehow, it failed to do so. So far from accepting the gift for her father's sake, her very love for her father would have urged her to decline it, even had there not been more cogent reasons for her refusal. Her mother's dislike to Ralph Pennicuick was a still more unsurmountable barrier. The bounty her mother had refused she for her part could certainly not have accepted in any case. This consideration was of course final and sufficient for her: but she also felt a secret disinclination to become the pensioner of Raymond's father. It behoved her in all things to be independent, but above all things to be independent of any bond with Raymond or Raymond's belongings. It made no difference that certain phrases in the elder Pennicuick's letter had their full significance for her: that she quite perceived that his offer covered a tacit understanding that his son and she should be no more than friends; the words, as she read them, had called up a blush of indignation into her cheeks, as well as innocent shame. But she was not going to be bribed into discarding Raymond, though she was quite resolved not to permit him to become her suitor. Perhaps she experienced a little satisfaction in the thought that her rejection of Ralph Pennicuick's bounty would give him some alarm upon his son's account though there would be no cause for it. And yet his letter
[Page 72]
had not wholly failed in its intention. She had been resolved before that she would never disclose her tenderness for Raymond, however persevering might be his importunity, but now she was doubly sure of herself; for that her weakness in this respect would be a cause of quarrel between his father and himself was now made known to her for certain.
She had taken her time—an interval of at least two days—in writing her reply to Ralph Pennicuick; a circumstance that had given him great disquietude, for he had at once pictured her to himself as communicating his offer to Raymond and consulting with him upon its acceptance, or perhaps even arranging with him some common plan of action. Her reason for the delay, however, was simply that her would-be benefactor should understand that her rejection of his offer was deliberate, and therefore final. She thanked him, of course, but without effusion; nor did she hint at any of the reasons which, in truth, actuated her conduct, with the exception of her wish for independence. ‘I feel,’ she wrote, ‘that there is now no happiness for me but in work; and for that I must have the incentive of necessity.’
She did not consult with either her host or hostess, but told them all about it when she had settled the matter.
‘Well, my dear, I think you have been a little too sensitive,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw (who, however, had not seen Mr. Pennicuick's letter). ‘The man is rolling in wealth, and keeps his only son as short as though he had a dozen of them. What could he do better with his hoarded money than give you some of it? He evidently thinks you have some claim—’
‘Nay,’ interrupted Nelly, ‘that is not so. I have no claim whatever; and indeed he expressly stated so on another occasion’
[Page 73]
(she was alluding to that of the inquest). ‘I think you are scarcely just to him.’
‘Well, you know, my dear, I hate him,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw frankly. ‘I think him a selfish, bad man. His treatment of his son is alone a proof of it, if there were no other. When people are rich and mean, it is quite right to get everything out of them we can. It is like so much saved out of a fire.’
‘But I should not like to take that sort of salvage,’ said Nelly, smiling.
‘Well, perhaps not, though I should like to see it taken. But this case is different. If conscience induces such a man in any one thing to act handsomely and honourably, I think it is your duty—your moral duty—to let him do it. It will probably be his last endeavour to perform a good action of any kind.’
‘I don't see how his conscience can have anything to do with it, my dear Mrs. Wardlaw. He is simply moved by a kind impulse, though he does not express it, perhaps, in the most gracious manner.’
‘How should he?’ returned Mrs. Wardlaw. ‘He does not know how, because this is his first attempt. However, as you have said “No,” so let it be. Fortunately we are not dependent on him, my darling.’
She stooped down and gave Nelly, who was at her easel, a hearty kiss. The use of the word ‘we’ was very delicate; it signified that the girl was as a daughter of their own, and as such entitled to her share of their prosperity. Nelly understood it thoroughly, but, except for the tender tones of her reply, ignored it.
‘Yes, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, I feel that I do not need much
[Page 74]
help. I have your love and sympathy, without which I should be poor indeed; and with those allies I feel myself strong enough, thank heaven, to do my own work in the world, and in time, I hope, to earn my own living. What do you think of my little sketch here? It is very slight, but audaciously ambitious. I mean it for Ophelia.’
‘I don't know the young lady,’ replied Mrs. Wardlaw, putting up her glasses, ‘and therefore can't speak as to her likeness. She's certainly very pretty, but seems to have rather a wild look about the eyes.’
Mrs. Wardlaw was certainly not a connoisseur in pictures; and even her husband could be scarcely said to be an art-critic, though he had a certain rough-and-ready estimate of the merits of a work which was not without its value. Nelly had had but little teaching, and knew how much she stood in need of it; but for the present Sandybeach would at least afford her objects for study, and afterwards she would place herself under professional guidance; at the lowest the place would give her occupation, which she felt to be essential to her.
They took rooms at a pleasant hotel on the very margin of the shore, and at first lived a very secluded life. Nelly and her hostess were all day in the open air; the former sketching, the latter knitting, or intent upon a page of some novel procured from the little circulating library in the place; I say ‘a page,’ because she seldom went beyond it; for literature had so immediately soothing an effect upon Mrs. Wardlaw, that she dropped to sleep under its influence at once. Then Nelly's pencil would drop too, and her eyes rest upon the far-stretching solitude of the sea, in melancholy thought, chiefly upon her dead father. The sea had always
[Page 75]
separated them, and the sight of it perhaps suggested their eternal separation now. She had not set eyes on him since she had been a child, yet so long as he had been in the world, although so far removed, he had seemed near to her. The consciousness that his loving heart was heating in unison with her own, though ever so far away, had annihilated distance; but now all was distance, solitary space, infinity. The sense of loneliness seemed almost more than she could bear. Why should she think of working? What good would it do, even if she succeeded in her works, beyond keeping her alive? And what was there left to live for? She was well in health, she had felt herself getting better and stronger ever since her removal from Richmond; but she almost regretted it. She believed that she would some day meet her father in heaven; oh, would that it could be soon! Her friends were kind to her, beyond all expectation or her own desert, but they could never fill the void around her. She was alone, and must needs remain alone, till her dying day.
One afternoon Mrs. Wardlaw was indisposed—had a headache which the sunshine would only aggravate—and as she would not hear of Nelly remaining within-doors for her sake, the girl went out alone.
Mr. Wardlaw was in London, to which he paid pretty frequent visits, the picturesque not having a continuous attraction for him. Nelly took her sketch-book and sauntered across the sands to her favourite bay. It was a less retired one than many others, and therefore—though it seems a paradox—was always more deserted; the happy pairs who formed the majority of the visitors to Sandybeach affecting the more secluded coves and dells. The day was lovely, with a fresh wind that drove the shadows across the sea,
[Page 76]
but was hardly felt in the sheltered spot which Nelly had selected for herself. She took her seat upon a rock with her little box of water-colours beside her, intending to have a long afternoon's work. But as usual, when alone, under similar circumstances, she fell a-thinking. Only—what was most unusual—her thoughts on this occasion escaped from her control. Instead of dwelling upon the dear ones she had lost, or facing the difficulties of her future, they played truant and took holiday. Who is there of us who, at times, has not ventured to picture to himself the Unobtainable; to portray the happiness which he knows can never befall him, and which in his more collected moments he resolutely ignores? It is a foolish indulgence, and brings with it certain punishment; for though we know all along we are but dreaming, the life to which we wake is all the sadder for it. Indeed, this is one of the few weaknesses which bitter experience compels us to forego; to contemplate the Might-be is bad enough, but endurable because of the bare possibility of its being realised; but to think on the Might-have-been, the Irrevocable, the Impossible, is too severe an ordeal even for the best disciplined mind.
Nelly's errant thoughts had strayed to Raymond. He had written to her once since her mother's funeral; a kind, but undemonstrative letter, in her reply to which she had informed him of her approaching departure for Sandybeach; but he had not come down to Richmond to see her. She understood both his reticence and his absence—she would have done so, even if she had not received his father's communication—and she had persuaded herself that all was lost. If he would remain silent and absent long enough, her image would gradually fade from his honest heart and be replaced by some worthier object: it was in process of fading
[Page 77]
now, no doubt; the knowledge of Mr. Pennicuick's aversion to his suit, communicated to him long before the present date, and probably with great force and directness, must needs have had its effect. Raymond must have given up all thoughts of her—as a lover—as she herself had bade him do. There could be no great harm, then, in letting her mind dwell upon him, since the punishment of her folly would be all her own; it would be severe, she knew—no vague regrets, but an exceeding bitter pain; but the temptation had come suddenly upon her, and she could not resist it. She called to mind the happy years of childhood they had spent together, more harmoniously than brother with sister: they had had no quarrels, for he had always been to her as knight to lady, a gentle yet gallant guardian and champion of her right. And in boyhood he had been the same, though now and then, something that had dropped from her mother's lips, or Mr. Pennicuick's, had suggested to her that they were not upon terms of perfect equality; that he would be rich and she would be poor. Then Mr. Pennicuick had made long absences, and Raymond and herself had been thrown more and more together, and these suggestions had ceased (her mother perhaps had had her own reasons for not recurring to them), and love had grown up between them before they were aware. As in childhood so in manhood, Raymond had ever shown himself unselfish, generous, and devoted to her; and what was still rarer, young as he was, he had won her respect from his behaviour to others. Her mother had been very fond of him, in spite of his dutifulness towards the father she had hated, and which had forbidden him to listen to her, even when eloquent on his own wrongs. Mrs. Wardlaw would have loved him like a son, if she had not stood in just a little fear of him; she had once advised
[Page 78]
him to take a high hand in certain dealings with his father—respecting pecuniary matters—and had been rebuked for her interference. Nelly was aware of the total want of sympathy between the elder and younger Pennicuick, and admired the latter beyond measure for his patience and filial submission. She felt that the relation which in her own case had been the chief happiness of her life, was in his a sore and grievous trial. Altogether this young fellow was her ideal of what a man should be; and—and—he could never be hers, but only one to be admired and worshipped a long way off, or, if he came near, to be repressed and put aside. Only, in her thought, to-day, he had not been put aside, but brought very, very near to her, as he had been, in spite of herself, when the tidings of his father's death had come, and he had seemed to be his own master, to wed with whom he would. Oh, if only that might have been, she would not now have been alone in the world, without hope, or ambition, or a future—to be called such. Her hope would have been that she would never lose his love, her ambition to be worthy of retaining it, her Future one clear blue, or if clouded, only as the heavens above her, with such hurrying clouds as passed and left her sky the purer. She was dreaming thus, when a shadow from no cloud fell on the sand before her, and looking up with a quick start of alarm, she beheld the object of her thoughts—Raymond Pennicuick himself.
[Page 79]
CHAPTER VIII. REJECTED. If in the long picture gallery of Hallington Manor, the ancestral home of Ralph Pennicuick, but into which he never willingly set foot, Nelly had been contemplating some full-length portrait of Raymond, and had seen it suddenly slip out of its frame, she could have been hardly more astonished than at his appearance before her now in flesh and blood—like an illustration to the biography she had been compiling of herself. If he had been his own ghost, she could never have stared at him with more tremulous affright.
‘I am afraid I have alarmed you, Nelly,’ said he gently. ‘I ought to have remembered that the sand gives no warning of one's approach, though it is such a tell-tale when we have passed by.’
‘But it was so unexpected, Raymond.’
‘Why should it be, Nelly?’ The hand she had held out to him he retained for a little, and then relinquished with a pressure that he had of late omitted to use. ‘It was surely only natural that I should come to see you as soon as circumstances admitted of it. I called at the hotel, and Mrs. Wardlaw told me where to find you—you are not sorry to see me, are you?’
‘Indeed I am not, Raymond.’ What were the ‘circumstances,’
[Page 80]
she wondered, to which he alluded? Why had he come down now, and not before? Why did he press her hand with such tender meaning? Why did he look at her so lovingly as he had not ventured to do since their talk in that Richmond garden? Was it possible, after all, that he had gained permission to speak to her —as he had been speaking to her in her day-dream five minutes ago? If he had not, he was very cruel, and yet—
‘You are looking better for the Sandybeach air, dear Nelly, I am delighted to see. You have got back your own sweet roses.’
‘I am very well,’ answered she quickly; ‘it is a very healthy place. How is Mr. Pennicuick?’
Raymond's face grew dark; she knew at once that it was not by his father's leave that he had come down to see her; she even suspected there had been a quarrel between them.
‘My father is much the same,’ he answered. ‘Strangely altered from the man he was before he last left England, but the same as he has been since his return. Dr. Green does not detect anything organically wrong; but there is something seriously amiss with him. It is more difficult than ever,’ he added, after a pause, ‘to overcome his prejudices or preconceived opinions upon any subject.’
‘That is only to be expected, Raymond,’ answered Nelly gently.
‘Yes, but there is a limit to the forbearance due to an invalid, even when he is one's father: that is to say, our duty to him must not override considerations that affect the happiness of others as well as our own.’
Nelly bowed her head; she knew of course to what he was
[Page 81]
alluding, but she would give him no encouragement to pursue the topic.
‘Perhaps I had no right to say “of others,”’ continued he, after a pause of expectation, ‘even when speaking to you alone?’
‘I think you have no right to talk at all to me upon the subject—if it be the one which we agreed together should for the future be a sealed one between us.’
‘Except under certain contingencies,’ he put in hastily.
‘There was one, and only one, Raymond, and you have just informed me that that has not taken place. You are breaking your plighted word in reopening any discussion concerning—’
‘One moment, Nelly,’ interrupted the young man passionately. ‘You must have patience with me, and hear me and my cause before dismissing it—and me—for ever. I have not broken faith, as you will acknowledge, in thus addressing you again, in thus, if you will have it so, importuning you again. I am sorry to distress you, I would give my life to save you pain—but then I am pleading for more than life. Moreover, I have an excuse; I am in a different position from that I occupied upon the last occasion when I dared to say, “I love you, dearest.”’
‘In a better one then, I hope—that is, for your sake,’ she added hastily.
‘I thought you would have hoped it for both our sakes,’ replied he. He had no selfish motive in thus speaking, no desire to make her commit herself, to acknowledge her love for him, before he had shown that their union was practicable. He spoke only out of his heart's abundance; but directly the words had passed his lips he perceived that such an interpretation was possible. ‘I am not come to trouble you, Nelly,’ he went on
[Page 82]
earnestly; ‘but only to say a few words on—business. My father wrote to you some weeks ago, I think.’
‘Yes, he did. He was good enough to renew the same offer to myself that he made through you to my poor mother. An allowance of 400 l . a year. It was very handsome of him.’
Raymond shook his head.
‘Well, so I thought, at all events, and I think so now. But I refused it. I am sure you think that I did right.’
‘I am not sure I do,’ said Raymond thoughtfully. ‘May I ask if that offer was made without conditions?’
Nelly hesitated; the conditions had been only implied.
‘There was no condition stated,’ she answered after a little pause.
‘Then you ought to have taken the allowance, Nelly. My father would never have felt it; it would have been a mere flea-bite. He is a much richer man than you or I ever imagined him to be.’
‘I have never given my attention to the extent of Mr. Pennicuick's fortune.’
‘I don't suppose you have, Nelly,’ answered the young man gravely; ‘and what appears to some people curious is that I had not considered the matter myself. Only when—when that false tidings first came over from China, my father's lawyer, Mr. Tatham, had occasion to make certain disclosures to me. If matters had turned out as then seemed certain, I should (he told me) be a very rich man. Four hundred a year out of my income would certainly not have hurt me.’
‘That makes no difference as to my case,’ observed Nelly, wondering whither all this should tend.
[Page 83]
‘Perhaps not; and to mine only indirectly; thus: my father sent for his lawyer the other day, and, talking to him of this and that, expressed his wish that I was not to be told of his possession of a certain sum, no less than 20,000 l .—of the existence of which he supposed me to be ignorant; only Tatham had, as it happened, already informed me of the fact. No doubt my father would have been angry: especially as the disclosure was made under the impression that I had succeeded to his throne; and hereupon the lawyer felt great alarm. In order to bribe me to secrecy—though I hope such a precaution was unnecessary—he has entrusted me with another secret, which time indeed must needs soon disclose— but which in the mean time is of immense importance to me. I started off within half an hour after I heard it to come and tell it you with my own lips.’
‘Indeed! It is good news, I trust, though I cannot read it in your face.’
‘Because my face does not know whether it be good or— indifferent. That will depend on you, Nelly.’
Raymond's voice was always musical, but this time when he spoke her name it sounded like the fragment of a song. She was still sitting on the stone, with her paint-brush lying idle in its box beside her; her face was turned up to his with quiet firmness, as he stood on the sand with his eyes fixed tenderly—but not confidently—upon her. There was genuine passion in his tone, but also earnestness, as though he believed with all his heart in the arguments he was about to urge; yet he had the air of a man who is pleading a lost cause.
‘I did speak to my father about you, Nelly, though without
[Page 84]
using your name to back my suit. If I had done so, it would have been all the same. He would never, I think, have given his consent to our marriage.’
‘It was not likely, Raymond; anyone but yourself would have known as much.’
‘It was natural that I should put faith in my own father,’ said he simply. ‘I thought I could have convinced him that my happiness was bound up in winning you; perhaps I did convince him, but if so, his will over-rode that consideration.’ There was a tinge of bitterness in his speech that she had never observed before. ‘At all events, he positively denied my prayer. He said that he could not make the least provision for our subsistence, in case I married you in the teeth of his disapproval, and that we should in fact be beggars.’
‘I expected neither more nor less,’ said Nelly quietly.
‘Yes, but he—well, he omitted to say something which it did not suit him to say, but which Mr. Tatham has told me. Now let me ask you a question, Nelly. Are you ambitious? Have you set your mind on marrying a rich man? Are carriages and horses and men-servants necessary to your scheme of life?’
‘Except since I have been living with Mrs. Wardlaw, I never tried them,’ answered Nelly with a quiet smile. ‘They do not give me any great pleasure as a guest, nor would it make much difference, I think, if I were their mistress.’
‘I thought so,’ exclaimed Raymond eagerly; ‘it is only what I expected. You would be content with a little, even a very little, if it were shared with one you love. Nelly, darling, I have some money of my own left me by my mother, and which, when I come of age, will fall into my own hands. It will make me independent
[Page 85]
of my father; I am free, therefore, to marry you. Will you take me, Nelly, poor as I am?’
If, instead of using the first words that Love suggested, he had given himself up to composition for weeks, he could not have achieved a more eloquent peroration; that ‘poor as I am’ went straight to her very heart.
‘Raymond, it is not that ,’ answered she earnestly. ‘You have only done me justice in supposing that mere wealth would have little weight with me in such a matter; in your case it would have none whatever. But as regards the wish upon which you have set your boyish heart, believe me, Raymond, it can never be. I do not say but that it might have been, had your father come to a different decision. I know—for I have the utmost confidence in your generosity—that my frankness in confessing so much will be a reason why you should desist from importuning me. It can only be disappointment to yourself and pain to me.’
‘You say “no,” but you give no reasons,’ pleaded Raymond bitterly.
‘Because you are already in possession of them,’ she answered quickly. ‘What I said at Richmond, when you asked me the same question, I say again, and it has thrice the force that it had then. I am now certain that your father would never consent to our marriage: that he would cast you off as his son if you disobeyed him. Do you suppose that I, who have confessed my love for you, will be your ruin? If it were only that I should cause a breach between you two which time would heal, I should hesitate to do so; I should shrink from standing even for a day between a son and his father; but you know as well as I do, that if this gulf were made, it would never be bridged over. I should rob you both
[Page 86]
of fortune and of father, and for ever. Raymond, so help me Heaven, I will not do it.’
‘It was a foregone conclusion with you, then!’ answered Raymond bitterly. ‘You had resolved to deny me under all circumstances. You have not even asked what this independence is, which has bred in me such fruitless hope.’
‘Because I knew it, Raymond. It is three hundred a year, the same sum which your father has always allowed you.’
‘You knew it, and you never told me!’ answered he reproachfully.
‘I have not known it long: I did not tell you because I felt it might feed your hopes: I trusted that before you came to know it the matter might have been settled, as it has been, by your father's voice: with that against me, if the sum you can call your own had been thrice as large, I should have refused to be the cause of your disinheritance. But I shall always love you, Raymond.’
He put up his hand in mute appeal for silence; he knew that the love of which she spoke was not the love he sought, and had no wish to hear of any other.
‘You will not part from me with anger in your heart?’ said she; for, with bowed head, he had turned to go. ‘I say, as I once said before, that you will thank me for this, one day, Raymond. It is as hard for me as it is for you, but it is right.’
‘It is not so hard for you, or you would not do it,’ he answered passionately. ‘As for “right,” do you think that this will reconcile me to my father—to the man who has parted you and me? No: I have lost you both.’
He stooped down quietly, kissed her forehead, and, with long strides upon the noiseless sand, took the way by which he had come.
[Page 87]
‘Why, Nelly, where is Raymond?’ inquired Mrs. Wardlaw, when the girl, an hour afterwards, returned to the hotel. ‘Is it possible he missed you?’
‘No; I saw him,’ said she.
‘But he was to return and dine with us!’ Then, with a change of voice, which showed that she had guessed the truth, ‘Oh, Nelly, have you sent him away for ever?’
Her white pained face was answer enough.
‘I am very, very sorry, Nelly darling. Have you counted the cost? Are you quite sure of yourself, my pet?’
‘Quite sure, dear friend. I pray you never speak of it to me again.’ She was quite sure, and if she had not counted the cost, it was because it was incalculable: but the subject was one she henceforth shrank from even in thought.
[Page 88]
CHAPTER IX. NEWS FROM CHINA. From the day on which Raymond came and went so suddenly there fell a change on Nelly, and, as it seemed, for the better. She no longer affected her own company, or sought seclusion; her manner was cheerful, though a close observer might have thought it studiously so; she rather encouraged than otherwise her hostess's little expeditions of pleasure. One day, when Mr. Wardlaw was with them, she said, ‘Suppose we dine at the table d'hôte ?’
This unexpected suggestion was received with rapture. Mrs. Wardlaw was one of those persons who delight in dining in public; it was to her an innocent method of ‘seeing life,’ and she flattered herself that it expanded her mind. Her husband thought it a decidedly preferable notion to that of dining in their own room—which, however, for their guest's sake, he would have continued to do quite contentedly. His habits were eminently social, and heretofore he had only indulged himself with a nightly pipe in the public billiard-room.
The table d'hôte at the hotel was a new institution, but it was said to work well; which was the least that could be expected of it, since it certainly worked ill for those who took their meals in private. The staff of waiters was limited, and while the public
[Page 89]
dinner was in progress, ‘attendance’ was difficult to procure elsewhere; while if you dined afterwards you got the warmed-up soup, the réchauffé cutlets, and the ‘leavings’ generally of the common table. The newly married couples who shrank from the public eye had doubtless consolations of their own for this neglect and ill-treatment, but Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw were by no means a newly married couple, and liked their food hot and at first hand; so Nelly's proposition was eminently agreeable to them.
The seats of honour—that is, those at the head of the table— were filled as usual by the longest established guests, while the newcomers were placed by themselves at the other end. Opposite the Wardlaws' little party of three were some university men and their tutor; and next to them a young couple, who were by the company at once set down as ‘turtle doves’ recently united. The bird was so common in the locality, that that view of their relation was very excusable; especially as there was no family likeness between them. The man was bronzed and dark, while the lady was fair; and the former was very attentive to the latter. Still, Mrs. Wardlaw had a doubt about their relationship to one another, and expressed it.
‘You may be right, my dear; you generally are upon such matters,’ was her husband's whispered reply. ‘If they are man and wife, it is certain the wedding must have been very recent; for the lady is so civil to him.’
When they returned to their sitting-room, Nelly was asked her opinion on the matter.
‘I did not observe them very particularly,’ said she.
‘Her attention was absorbed by the Oxford gentlemen,’ observed Mr. Wardlaw wickedly.
[Page 90]
‘In that case, I am sure that it was reciprocal,’ answered his wife, carrying on this little joke; ‘even the tutor was smitten; I heard him sigh over his apple dumpling. But none of those young men was to be compared with the personage we are discussing.’
‘Do you mean the gentleman or the lady?’
‘What nonsense, John! of course I mean the gentleman. A more washed-out uninteresting-looking creature than the woman I never beheld.’
Mr. Wardlaw laughed and rattled the silver in his pockets.
‘Now, do you know what he's thinking, Nelly?’ continued her hostess; ‘that no woman can ever admire another woman. To punish him, let us send him off to make inquiries; and don't you come back, sir, till you discover what relation exists between those two people. You will find the man in the billiard-room, of course, in any case—unless he is much better than most husbands.’
In an hour or so Mr. Wardlaw came back, looking unusually grave.
‘They are brother and sister,’ was his report. ‘Did you ever hear of the name of Milburn, Nelly?’
‘Never, Mr. Wardlaw.’
‘Well, he has heard of yours. He has just come from China, it seems.’
‘What? Did he know poor papa?’ asked Nelly, flushing.
‘Oh yes; he was in the same regiment. He seemed very much interested when I told him who you were; and I said, I thought you might wish to talk to him.’
‘Yes, indeed, I should like to do so.’
[Page 91]
‘In that case he will pay a visit to us to-morrow morning; so that's settled.’
When Nelly had retired to her room, considerably excited by this incident, her host and hostess had a little further talk about it.
‘Well, John, and what do you think of this Mr. Milburn?’
‘Oh, he seems a nice young fellow enough. He has come home, it appears, upon urgent private affairs, his uncle having died and made him his heir.’
‘Dear me! then he has money?’
‘Lot's of it: so much that he has been obliged to ask his sister to help him spend it. That was the woman we saw at dinner. There are the foundations, my dear, and now you can set to work and build your edifice.’
To this sarcastic observation Mrs. Wardlaw made no reply at the moment, but buried herself in the ‘Saturday Review,’ from whose columns, after half an hour or so, she emerged, with the vague remark, ‘Well, it seems to me it would be the best for her, poor darling;’ and lighting her flat candle, marched up to bed.
In the forenoon of the next day Mr. Henry Milburn paid a formal call, nominally on Mrs. Wardlaw, but in reality on Nelly herself, her hostess of course being present. He was not quite the same young fellow—to look at—as we knew him in China, because his English tailor had turned him out in the height of the summer fashion. The ‘puggaree,’ and the open shirt-front, and the linen clothes had vanished; but his manly air and handsome face, from which the ‘tan’ had only just begun to fade, were as attractive as ever. His manner, naturally so frank, was a little constrained, and at the same time touched with tenderness; for he felt for the poor orphan
[Page 92]
girl to whom he had so sad a story to tell of her dead father, and from whom too he had to conceal so much that could not be told.
‘It is very good of you, Mr. Milburn, to pay this visit to mere strangers,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw with her best ‘company manners.’
‘Not strangers,’ said he gently; ‘for I have heard my dear friend Captain Conway speak both of you and your husband; and as to Miss Conway, she of course—’ and instead of ending his sentence, he respectfully pressed her hand.
Nelly murmured some words of thanks: she was greatly moved, for here stood one who had seen her father almost at the very last, and could perhaps say something about him which Mr. Pennicuick had left unsaid. It still seemed to her most strange that he should have died without a word of farewell, and she had a vague hope that this man might bring one, or at all events explain that mysterious silence.
‘Your father was captain of my company, Miss Conway, and the best friend I had in the regiment, though indeed he was everybody's friend.’
‘And you were with him up to the time he left Shanghae on that fatal journey?’
‘Oh yes,’—he was going to say, ‘and even later,’ but stopped short, remembering, with a quick shudder, what that last sight had been. ‘Mr. Pennicuick, you know, accompanied him alone; but afterwards, when he returned in hopes to save him, and procure the reprieve that was unhappily useless, I went back with him to Dhulang. That was the name of the pris—the place where your poor father got into trouble.’
‘We could never understand that,’ said Nelly sadly: ‘I mean, how my father, of all men, could have committed—’
[Page 93]
‘Nor I,’ broke in Milburn suddenly, ‘nor anybody who knew him. The whole thing was a mystery, and still remains so.’
‘Unhappily, however, what happened afterwards was certain enough.’
‘Yes.’
Never was monosyllable more fraught with significance.
‘You reached Dhulang too late? You never saw him?’
Milburn shook his head. ‘He perished before our arrival, thanks to the treachery of the Chinese government. I trust they will still be made to pay for it; but it is so difficult to punish the true transgressors in such cases. Moreover, supposing the facts to be as reported, it was not a casus belli .’
‘I am sure my poor father would have wished no war to be made on his account,’ said Nelly earnestly.
‘That is quite true. He was gentleness itself, though as bold as a lion, and had always a keen sense of responsibility. But as for me, when I saw—I mean, when I heard what had taken place, I should have liked to have burnt that temple about its rascally priests' ears, and—’ The young fellow said no more, remembering that he stood in the presence of women, but his flushed cheek and flaming eyes filled up the sentence for him.
‘There are some things that make me wish to be a man,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, clenching her fat fists. ‘But what I don't understand, and what I think we none of us understand, is the part Mr. Pennicuick took in this unhappy business. Can you tell us about that , Mr. Milburn?’
Nelly looked up surprised, and with a little flush; she had no idea that Mrs. Wardlaw concerned herself with Mr. Pennicuick, and if she did so she would have thought her regard for Raymond
[Page 94]
would have prevented her from saying anything to his father's prejudice. It was, on the contrary, Mrs. Wardlaw's affection for the young man that made her detest Ralph Pennicuick for his conduct towards him; but to Nelly, just at this time, her remark seemed very malàpropos.
‘Well, Mrs. Wardlaw,’ observed Milburn, in answer to her tone rather than her words, ‘I confess I did not like Pennicuick myself. He seemed a cold self-conscious sort of fellow. I never knew him well, however. Of course,’ added he, turning to Nelly, ‘there must have been something attractive about him, or your father and he could never have been so intimate.’
Nelly bowed her head, not knowing what to say in Mrs. Wardlaw's presence, who was acquainted with poor Mrs. Conway's detestation of the man; and her hostess answered for her.
‘Yes, that was a strange thing, for nobody else seems to have had much love for him. He has a son, indeed, who is a very nice young fellow—that is all I have ever heard of nice belonging to him.’
‘Indeed! He never spoke to any of us of his having a son.’
‘I dare say not,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw scornfully. ‘He was afraid of being made to look old. He is proud enough, but not proud of the only thing he has really to be proud of.’
‘Go it!’ observed Mr. Wardlaw cheerfully, and speaking for the first time. ‘If you want a man to go dirt cheap, no matter how high his own opinion of himself, let a woman who don't like him put him up to auction.’
‘I think you are inclined to be a little hard upon our friend, Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘He is not my friend, Mr. Milburn, I do assure you,’ interrupted that lady.
[Page 95]
‘Then I may the more honestly call you hard on him,’ observed the young man, smiling, ‘since I have a feeling of antagonism against him myself. There was only one thing indeed that I liked about him, but as that very thing was connected with the matter under discussion, I think it in justice ought to be mentioned. As to what happened before the deplorable catastrophe took place I of course know nothing—nobody can know anything— excépt from his own lips, which can scarcely be expected to speak unfavourably of his own part in the matter; but afterwards, when he and I were at Dhulang, his conduct was more than praiseworthy.’
‘I am glad to hear it,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, in a tone which unmistakably implied either the reverse of the words she used, or incredulity. ‘I should like to hear, however, what Mr. Pennicuick did that was so much to his credit.’
Mr. Milburn did not answer; he was piqued by the speaker's manner, and it was also plainly impossible for him to reply categorically to such a question. Perhaps he would have kept silence on the subject altogether had not Nelly herself said, ‘I should like to know, Mr. Milburn, all you can tell me that does not give you pain.’
‘I will say, then, Miss Conway, that so far as doing honour to your poor father's memory—which was all that was left for him to do—Mr. Pennicuick spared nothing. It seems a small thing to mention money in such a case, but the man we speak of is not liberal; he had in our regiment, though he had been with us so short a time, rather the character of being the reverse.’
‘He has that at home,’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw the irrepressible.
[Page 96]
‘Well, that being the case,’ continued the young man, ‘it was all the more credit to him that on the occasion I speak of he was more than liberal; he was lavish. The cost of what he did, and he did much, did not seem to affect him at all; while as for his personal feelings of regret—so far as one can judge of such things in another—they were most acute and genuine. I cannot in fact picture a man's performing the last duties to a lost friend with more generosity and devotion.’
‘You have taken a great weight from my mind, Mr. Milburn,’ said Nelly gravely, ‘and I am the more obliged to you since you have shown it was quite misplaced.’ There was a little pause, during which Milburn bowed and Mrs. Wardlaw sniffed disapprobation. Then the visitor, perceiving one of Nelly's unfinished drawings on its easel, turned the conversation to that topic. He drew a little himself, it seemed, and was very fond of that occupation. When he rose to go, ‘I hope,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘that we may have the pleasure of making the acquaintance of your sister.’
‘If you would be good enough to call,’ answered Mr. Milburn, ‘I should deem it a kindness to her.’
Upon the whole, their new acquaintance was felt to be an acquisition. ‘I don't think much of the sister,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘she looks “stuck up,” to my mind, but it is one of the penalties of knowing nice gentlemen that one must needs know their female relatives also.’ From which observation it will be gathered that this excellent lady had in that very limited time either got accustomed to her carriage, or had learnt a little of the mode of ‘riding the high horse.’
‘When one knows nice ladies,’ observed Mr. Wardlaw drily,
[Page 97]
‘I have noticed that it is necessary to introduce them to one's wife, or else there is a row.’
Nelly was deep in thought, and her host forbore to appeal to her, as it was his humour to do, for corroboration of his views. Her late interview had a melancholy charm for her, and she looked forward with genuine interest to seeing Mr. Milburn again. When she had gone upstairs, Mrs. Wardlaw remarked to her husband that she thought the young people had decidedly taken to one another.
‘Your edifice has reached its first story, has it?’ said he, laughing.
‘Well, why not? Since she has given poor Raymond up, I see no objection to Mr. Milburn.’
‘I am glad of it, my dear. I was afraid you would be rather down upon the young gentleman for his advocacy of Mr. Pennicuick.’
‘Not at all, John. Mr. Pennicuick's conduct to the dead may be quite irreproachable—I know nothing about that—for you know he didn't think proper to attend poor Mrs. Conway's funeral; all I say is that his behaviour to his fellow-creatures while they are alive is eminently unsatisfactory; and nothing that Mr. Milburn, or anyone else, can ever say to the contrary will alter my opinion.’
‘I am quite sure of that, my dear,’ observed her husband confidently, and resumed his perusal of the doings at the auction mart in yesterday's ‘Times.’
[Page 98]
CHAPTER X. BROTHER AND SISTER. The promised call upon Miss Milburn was made that very afternoon; her residence was in the same quarter of the little hotel, and of course under the same roof, so that it became a great question of etiquette with Mrs. Wardlaw whether they should put their bonnets on for the ceremony. After much consideration this was decided in the affirmative, and she and Nelly equipped themselves for out-of-doors, and then sailed down the passage to their port— about four doors off. They found brother and sister both ‘at home.’ Perhaps the former had remained within in order to receive them, as it was his custom to spend his whole time out-of-doors, whereas Miss Milburn, on the contrary, was rather a hot-house flower. She had more pretensions to good looks than Mrs. Wardlaw had shown herself willing to allow, but by day she looked considerably older than under the gaslight of the table d'hôte.
‘No chicken, my dear,’ was Mrs. Wardlaw's subsequent verdict on her in confidence to Nelly, and she was certainly some years senior to her brother. There was, as has been said, no family resemblance between them, and the contrast of his sunburnt cheeks with her pale and somewhat freckled features, made the dissimilarity even stronger than nature had done. She was straight as a poplar,
[Page 99]
and rather of its colour, but not without a certain grace of movement, which seemed however to be studied. Her eyes were grey and very expressive; her voice soft and even musical; her features very clear cut—they were politely called ‘classical’ by her admirers —but her lips were thin, and she seemed to smile rather to show her excellent teeth than her good nature.
She received her visitors, however, very graciously: indeed, with a greater demonstration than her brother, who seemed more silent and reserved than he had been when he had made his own ‘call’ that morning. The usual topics were discussed; the climate of Sandybeach: the hotel and its table d'hôte ; and the scenery.
‘My brother tells me you draw, Miss Conway.’
‘A little,’ answered Nelly modestly.
‘Oh dear! I thought you were an artist—indeed, quite a professional.’
‘That is very true,’ said Nelly, colouring. ‘I hope to gain my living by my brush; but at present I am but a beginner.’
Mr. Milburn coloured also till his bronzed cheek grew almost black. But he said nothing.
Mrs. Wardlaw too looked annoyed.
‘I hope I have not been indiscreet,’ continued Miss Milburn with concern. ‘I thought Mr. Wardlaw told you, Herbert—’
‘Then he had no business to tell him,’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw decisively.
‘But why not, my dear Mrs. Wardlaw?’ said Nelly, smiling. ‘If he did say I hoped to become a professional artist, it was quite true.’
‘If you are interested in drawings, Miss Conway, there are
[Page 100]
some in this portfolio,’ said Mr. Milburn, and Nelly rose and went to it.
Miss Milburn showed her teeth—for the smile she put on did not extend beyond them—and began to talk to Mrs. Wardlaw about her horses (for the new carriage had come down to Sandybeach), which she had seen that morning on the sands and professed to admire exceedingly.
‘We should have brought our own down,’ she said, ‘if we had been certain of the duration of our stay; and then the hills are a consideration. They pull one's horses to pieces—don't you think so?’
‘ My horses are not in pieces,’ answered Mrs. Wardlaw.
‘Oh, perhaps they are accustomed to a hilly country.’
‘Perhaps,’ was the unexpected reply; but it was quite true that Mrs. Wardlaw didn't know whether they were or not.
In the mean time Mr. Milburn and Nelly were conversing together in rather a low tone. Not that they had any secrets, but that the common topic between them—Captain Conway's death— was so sad and serious a one. And the sketches he was showing her he had taken in China.
He did not draw well, and he knew it, but he had sufficient skill both with brush and pencil to make a picture that should reproduce any scene he had beheld with his own eyes, and even to give a tolerable idea of it to others.
‘They are very inferior to your poor father's handiwork,’ said he. ‘I have one of them here.’
And he placed in her hand a little sketch of the neighbourhood near Shanghae.
‘That is as like as life,’ said he. ‘And it has a peculiar value for
[Page 101]
me since it was the last he did previous to his departure on his ill-fated journey.’
Nelly regarded it with intense interest, and could hardly restrain her tears.
‘You have many of his paintings no doubt,’ he went on, ‘and this is but a sight example of his skill.’
‘I have one or two of his sketches,’ said Nelly, in tones whose quiet calmness cost her something; ‘but he sent us very few from China.’
‘Then these even from my 'prentice hand may interest you. I will send the portfolio to No. 8—that is your sitting-room, I think? Then you can look them over at your leisure.’
‘I should like to do so exceedingly.’
‘You will find the names at the back of each, so that you may identify the scenes, in case your father may have mentioned them in his letters.’
His manner was very kind, but it had a certain stiffness about it, which was perhaps the result of his military training. Soldiers are generally reserved, unless they are very much the reverse, when they are not pleasant. Being ‘in the army’ is, as to manners, like being in a refrigerator. Nelly knew very few young men, and only one at all intimately. Raymond was a great contrast to Milburn, impulsive, frank, and demonstrative. It was an inexpressible comfort to her that this man was otherwise; or she could not have discoursed with him upon the painful subject, with which all he said was more or less connected, with such comparative self-control. He told her how popular her father had been with all who knew him; how kindly was his character, though at the same time so shrewd; how quietly he lived, and yet without a
[Page 102]
suspicion of the ‘closeness’ attributed to his friend Pennicuick; how everyone thought Captain Conway could have done anything he liked but for a certain indolence, which the young man termed modesty.
So intent were they in conversation that Mrs. Wardlaw had already observed, ‘Well, my dear, I think we must be going for our drive,’ without attracting their attention. On the repetition of the remark, however, Nelly rose, with a little blush, and an apology founded on the interest of the sketches. ‘Mr. Milburn has been so good as to say he will send us over his portfolio that we may examine its contents at leisure.’
‘That's very good of him,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘but why trouble him to send it? It is not a large one, and we can take it back with us now.’
‘I had rather send it,’ said Mr. Milburn quickly.
‘You can bring it yourself, if you please,’ answered Mrs. Wardlaw; ‘we shall always be glad to see you.’
The young man murmured his thanks. His sister said a little stiffly, ‘We shall certainly take an early opportunity of returning your call.’
‘Well, Nelly, and what do you think of our new friend?’ inquired Mrs. Wardlaw, as soon as they were seated in the carriage.
‘I like Mr. Milburn very much; indeed, I have seldom liked anyone so much on a first acquaintance.’
‘That is bad,’ thought the old lady to herself. ‘If she was really smitten, she would not be so enthusiastic.’
‘On the other hand,’ added Nelly, ‘it must be considered that first acquaintances have rarely anything in common, as in the present case. He talked of dear papa so very, very nicely.’
[Page 103]
‘Of course he did; he was a very different sort of friend to him, depend upon it, than that Mr. Pennicuick.’
‘Then he knew all about China, and that of course was interesting to me who know so little about it. In poor papa's boxes there was scarcely a single sketch made in that country, whereas he gave one to Mr. Milburn—such a charming little thing—only a few weeks before—before his end.’
‘I dare say he'd give it you if you asked him.’
‘That is quite out of the question,’ answered Nelly decisively. ‘He seemed to value it almost as much as I should do if it were mine; it seems papa was always working with his pencil, though he thought little of the value of what he did, and would give his sketches away to anyone who took a fancy to them. Only what astonished Mr. Milburn was that among his other things we should have found no sketches taken—quite at last—during that unhappy journey. He could not have given them away, you see; and he would be sure to have made several before he fell into the hands of those wretches.’
‘If he did, where are they?’
‘Perhaps Mr. Pennicuick has sold them,’ suggested Mrs. Wardlaw.
‘Oh, for shame, my dear friend! I am sure you cannot say that seriously.’
‘I only said “perhaps,” my dear. Anything is possible, in my humble opinion, with respect to that man.’
The reason of which extreme antagonism might be thus explained: she had disliked Mr. Pennicuick, to begin with, and all that Mrs. Conway had said to her against him had a double force now that she was dead; she had especially disliked him for his
[Page 104]
treatment of her favourite Raymond; and when he set himself, as she knew he had, against his son's marrying her beloved Nelly, she absolutely loathed him. It was true that she herself had now other views for the girl, but they had been necessitated by Ralph Pennicuick's conduct, and in carrying them out her conscience pricked her, on Raymond's account, and made his father more detestable to her even than before.
‘I don't like to hear you say such things,’ said Nelly, ‘when the facts, as we have just heard from Mr. Milburn, not only do not warrant, them, but all point the other way.’
‘I know if your poor mother was alive she would hold the same view of him that I do.’
This was a strategic stroke, but hardly a fair one; the proper answer was that Mrs. Conway had hugged her prejudices as though they had been her children, notwithstanding that some of them were quite grown up (this one against Ralph Pennicuick, for example, had been born before Nelly was); but of course Nelly was precluded from this reply.
After a short pause, she said, ‘And what do you think of Miss Milburn?’
‘Well, my dear Nelly, at the risk of being thought uncharitable twice in one day, I must confess that I don't like her. Perhaps it is that my intimacy with your dear self of late has placed all other young women at a disadvantage in my eyes—I never pay compliments, my darling; it is the sober truth—I say perhaps I have unconsciously contrasted this lady with yourself, and she has suffered accordingly: but certainly she has fallen far short of my expectations, which were founded of course on what we had seen of her brother. I think she is pretentious; proud of her money—or
[Page 105]
rather of her brother's money, for it seems it is all his—and desperately alarmed lest anybody else should get hold of it.’
‘How clever you must have been, my dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ laughed Nelly, ‘to find all that out in ten minutes! She must have been very candid and communicative.’
‘She was neither, my dear; nor am I clever, as you very well know. But she held her hand a little too low, and—as I can never help doing when John and I play at cribbage together—I looked over it.’
‘That was very wrong,’ said Nelly, much amused at this confession.
‘Well, if one has eyes, one must use them. It is money that has brought these two together. I don't believe she cared two-pence about her brother till he became rich; and she only cares for him now because he is so. Her whole object in life is to keep him—that is, his money—to herself.’
‘But who on earth is going to rob her of him—or it?’ inquired Nelly.
‘Well, she suspects everybody, no doubt, but just at present you .’
‘Me?’
‘Certainly. You are young and pretty; and she thinks (and she is doubtless right) that her brother admires you. She wishes you were at York, or still better at Jericho; anywhere else, in short, than at Sandybeach, under the same roof with him; you should have seen her green eyes—’
‘They are grey,’ put in Nelly quietly.
‘They are green when she is jealous, and it was with jealous eyes that she kept watch over you and him (out of the corners of
[Page 106]
them) the whole time she was talking with me. You heard her rude remarks about your being an artist by trade.’
‘I don't think she meant any rudeness, Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘She did; but that was not her chief object: she made that speech for her brother's benefit, and her intention was to point out to all concerned that you were very poor, and consequently not to be thought of seriously by a young man of his fortune.’
‘My dear Mrs. Wardlaw, you make me very uncomfortable by talking of such things, which I am sure have no existence save in your own mind. It is your affection for me, I know, which prompts you to believe I am of such importance—or indeed of any importance—to other people; but you are not only doing Miss Milburn wrong, but giving me pain.’
‘Then I am a brute beast, my darling, and will be dumb accordingly.’
‘But I like to hear you talk, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, if you only won't suppose that every young man wants to marry me.’
‘Now there! I never said they did—though of course they do: I only said that Miss Milburn thought so. Well, then, to drop that subject (though it was the thing she had in her mind, for all that) she told me that “dear Herbert” was in doubt about returning to China or not. Of course he had a great position in this country, but on the other hand it was so necessary for a young man to have some occupation: being in the army kept a man out of harm's way. It doesn't, my dear, as you, alas! have good cause to know; but what she meant was that, out in China, it is likely “dear Herbert” will remain single, or perhaps succumb to the climate.’
‘It strikes me, my dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ said Nelly, laughing.
[Page 107]
‘that you have succumbed to the Sandybeach climate, and are getting a little—shall I venture to say—“gritty”?’
‘If you will have it so, my dear. The sand gets everywhere, and perhaps has penetrated the—what do you call it?—the spleen.’
The two ladies had a hearty laugh, which is not only the best deodoriser for all unwholesome ‘breezes’ between friends, but where there has been no breeze, and only an unpleasantry in the way of allusion to a delicate topic, disperses the little clouds and makes all blue again. Only—to use a very common phrase for a thing that affects everybody, whether common or otherwise—by ‘putting it into’ Nelly's ‘head’ that Miss Milburn was afraid of her brother falling in love with her, Mrs. Wardlaw had made her very uncomfortable, and quite destroyed the pleasure that she had derived from that young gentleman's acquaintance. Nor was her embarrassment diminished when, on coming home from her drive, she found in No. 8, not only the promised portfolio, but something in paper directed to herself, ‘with Mr. Milburn's compliments’ outside it, that turned out to be her father's sketch, and which of course he had thus sent her as a present.
[Page 108]
CHAPTER XI. TWO SKETCHES. It was a satisfaction to Nelly to find that, after they had parted from their new acquaintances, Mr. Milburn had received a letter by the afternoon post which necessitated his immediate presence in London; since his absence gave her time to consider whether she ought to accept his proffered gift. He had said that he highly prized her father's sketch, but his good feeling might very easily suggest that the daughter of his dead friend would prize it more; and it really seemed ungracious to refuse it. It was no ordinary case of a complimentary present which could be declined or otherwise without any show of feeling. Had it not been for Mrs. Wardlaw's remarks, she would have had no doubt upon the matter; she would have accepted the picture in the same kindly, reverent spirit in which (she felt sure) it had been offered her, and also, of course, with genuine gratitude. Even now she had not been grievously disturbed by her friend's view of her relation to Mr. Milburn in his sister's eyes; but it had certainly embarrassed her.
In the mean time, since Miss Milburn was alone, the Wardlaws sent a polite message to ask her to join their party at the table d'hôte , which of course included an invitation for the rest of the
[Page 109]
evening. ‘Civility costs nothing,’ was Mrs. Wardlaw's confidential remark to Nelly, ‘and you may depend upon it she won't come.’
Much to that lady's confusion, however, she did come, and with that evident intention of making herself agreeable which is so overwhelming. Moreover, she affected an air of self-depreciation with which not the most consummate tact can deal. It was so kind of them to take compassion upon a deserted creature like herself, who had no accomplishments to repay them for their welcome, and who had no claim upon their hospitality whatever!’
Mr. Wardlaw thought she alluded to the expenses they might be put to in her entertainment, and hastened to explain that all they had in the evening was a sort of tea-cake procured in the village by his ‘Missus’ (as he familiarly termed Mrs. Wardlaw) at a very reasonable rate.
‘Oh no,’ answered Miss Milburn in correction of this error, ‘it is not the cost that I refer to, but the kindness: one does not judge a thing by its mere worth , you know.’
Mr. Wardlaw shook his head; he felt that he and his guest had some different standard of value for things, but did his best to agree with her by saying ‘No, no, it's what things will fetch , isn't it, miss?’ Perceiving that he had made a mistake again, he hastened to express his admiration for a certain diamond ring of ancient workmanship she wore, of the value of which under the hammer he had already made an approximate estimate in his own mind.
‘It was one of Herbert's gifts,’ she said, ‘when he came into his property.’ It had been a sort of heirloom in the family for centuries, but nevertheless he had insisted upon her taking possession of it. She had replied, ‘Only as a loan, Herbert; when you bring
[Page 110]
home your bride to the Old Hall, this ring shall have its proper place upon her finger.’
‘I shouldn't give it up in a hurry if I were you,’ observed Mr. Wardlaw practically.
‘Indeed,’ returned she, ‘providing it be a fitting recipient—one who has been used by birth and fortune to wear such ornaments— nothing would give me greater pleasure.’
‘You don't say so!’ said Mr. Wardlaw innocently: ‘now, my view would be just the contrary. If I were in your case, and my brother married a rich wife, I should say to myself, “Well, she's got plenty of rings, and don't want this one;” but if she was a poor girl, then it would be very pleasant to give her such a ring as that, to be the first perhaps she had ever worn.’
‘I am afraid our views upon such a subject are not likely to assimilate,’ said Miss Milburn stiffly: after which he felt equal to no more conversation with her until after his second glass of champagne.
To the ladies Miss Milburn was very confidential: she informed them that ‘dear Herbert’ was worried to death by lawyers, who had dragged him up to town that very day on matters connected with ‘the estate.’ He hated business, and she feared he was often imposed upon; his nature was so frank and cordial that he was really no match for anybody that was at all designing. ‘I feel as angry with people that endeavour to get the better of him in any way, as though they were taking advantage of a child.’
‘He is a very fine child,’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw.
Miss Milburn glanced at her with her keen grey eye, but could not quite make out whether she was in jest or earnest.
‘Yes, Herbert is very handsome. That is an additional source
[Page 111]
of anxiety to me; for more than once—even in the few weeks since he has been at home—he has attracted—girls will be girls, you know—a little too much admiration from young ladies, and that without the least “design” on their parts: they did not know he was rich, or their good feeling would have prevented them giving way to such weakness; and they learnt it too late I fear for their peace of mind.’
‘I hope they did not die?’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw innocently. The concern expressed in her good-natured face was once more too much for her new acquaintance, who could not of course understand that she had taken unwonted refuge in sarcasm from anger upon Nelly's account, for whose benefit she felt certain that these anecdotes were narrated.
‘I did not mean to say that it had any such serious effect,’ explained Miss Milburn, ‘but the whole affair was unfortunate! On the one side there was a sense of humiliation—if nothing deeper —and on the other—well, of course Herbert was sorry, although he had nothing to reproach himself with.’
‘How much has he a year?’ inquired Mrs. Wardlaw simply.
‘Well, really,’ said Miss Milburn, ‘that is rather a home-question. His estate is in land, and therefore cannot be estimated by its mere worth.’
‘There she is again,’ murmured Mr. Wardlaw to himself. ‘I wonder how she does calculate things?’
Perhaps he could not help expressing this curiosity in his countenance, for Miss Milburn added, ‘What I mean is, that the social position of a great landholder is not to be measured by his rent-roll. People in commerce, for example, may have a larger income, and yet be in every way inferior.’
[Page 112]
‘But what is his rent-roll?’ inquired Mrs. Wardlaw, with innocent importunity.
‘I suppose it is not less than four thousand a year,’ replied Miss Milburn.
‘Well, then, you ought to ticket him: “To young ladies and others: To prevent disappointment, it is hereby notified that this attractive gentleman is possessed of three or four thousand a year in land.” Don't you think that would be a good plan?’
Then Miss Milburn perceived that she had been going a little too far in her Notice to Trespassers, and vouchsafed a smile. Not that she was amused by the pleasantry, but she felt that, if she took any offence at it, her brother would come to hear of the matter.
‘I dare say, Mrs. Wardlaw, you think me foolishly fond of Herbert, and that I imagine every young woman is setting her cap at him—but then, you know, he has only me to look to, and I feel such a sense of responsibility!’
Nelly fortunately did not overhear much of this talk which took place at the table d'hôte , where she sat by Mr. Wardlaw on the side remote from the other two ladies, but she had a general impression that Mrs. Wardlaw and her guest were not ‘getting on’ very well together. After dinner Miss Milburn was particularly gracious to Nelly, either with a view of removing any bad impression she might have made, or to show that she had really no sort of prejudice against that young person, if only she showed no signs of a wicked ambition: but it could not be said to be a successful evening.
The next day, Mr. Milburn being still in town, his sister was
[Page 113]
again invited to join the little Wardlaw circle, but declined upon the plea of indisposition—which in one sense at least was doubtless a genuine one. It was not likely that she could have taken to Mrs. Wardlaw kindly, who, though a most good-natured and long-suffering woman, and hardly to be moved to anger on her own account —as indeed she had proved in her relations with poor Mrs. Conway—had resented so decidedly the hints that Miss Milburn had thrown out for Nelly's guidance.
On the fourth day ‘dear Herbert’ returned, and the intercourse between the two families was renewed. They met out of doors, and as they sauntered together upon the sands the young man attached himself to Nelly's side, which gave her some annoyance, but at the same time afforded her an opportunity of thanking him for his present. ‘Of course I value it very highly,’ she said, ‘but for that very reason I feel that I ought not to rob you of it.’
‘Nay,’ said he gently, ‘it is a question of a little loss on the one side, and of a great gain on the other: even a political economist would decide in your favour. I am very glad to have been able to give you the sketch. By the by,’ added he, in a lighter tone, ‘I have seen Mrs. Wardlaw's favourite, Mr. Pennicuick, in London.’
‘Indeed!’ answered Nelly quietly: but her heart was beating painfully while she spoke. She never doubted that by ‘Mrs. Wardlaw's favourite’ Mr. Milburn had meant Raymond; she had thought of him many times since he had turned so sadly from her and hurried away with drooping head over the sands, and wondered how matters were with him.
‘I thought I ought to call, you know,’ continued Milburn, ‘especially as I had heard that he was ill; so I looked him up at
[Page 114]
the Albany. At first he seemed anything but glad to see me— looked as scared at me as if I had been a ghost—but presently he became almost cordial. I don't think he likes anything that reminds him of his Chinese experiences, which indeed is natural enough, and does him credit. He seems to me by no means so black as he is painted, though perhaps—if I may be allowed to say so—that might be partly owing to the very high terms in which he spoke of a certain Miss Conway.’
‘Mr. Pennicuick has been always very civil to me ,’ observed Nelly, smiling; her relief at finding that it was the elder Pennicuick who was the subject of her companion's talk, preventing her taking much notice of his compliment, though it was uttered with some significance.
‘Oh, but he was much more than civil, Miss Conway. If he had been your own—that is, your guardian—he could not have said prettier things; our sentiments coincided so perfectly that he asked me to dinner the next day.’
‘He must be coming out of his shell indeed,’ observed Nelly; ‘we understood that he had become quite a recluse.’
‘Well, I don't know about that; but he is going into Parliament, perhaps upon the “Recluse” interest, for he didn't seem to have any particular views on Politics. Now, I should have thought a man of that kind would have been an out-and-out, no-compromise, church-and-king old Tory.’
‘By which I suppose I may gather,’ answered Nelly slily, ‘that the politics of Mr. Herbert Milburn are common-sense, progressive, broad, and Liberal.’
‘Well, they are something like that, I believe,’ answered Milburn, laughing. ‘I forgot that your poor father's views were
[Page 115]
True Blue, and you have no doubt inherited his opinions. However, I am very amenable to what the electioneering people call “influence,” and if you will undertake to show me the error of my ways, I don't doubt you will make a convert.’
‘I should not like to hold my opinions—whatever they are— quite so loosely as you seem to do, Mr. Milburn,’ answered Nelly gravely.
Oh, excuse me,’ answered the young man earnestly; ‘I only meant that I had not given much attention to Politics, and took no decided line; and under these circumstances, you know, when a person for whom one has a great respect comes to talk to one, of course he—that is, that person—exercises a considerable effect. But in the case of Mr. Pennicuick, it did seem strange to me that he should seriously contemplate going into Parliament, without even caring on which side he sits.’
‘Did he really say that?’ inquired Nelly.
‘Well, yes, he did. Of course we should not take the words of a man of the world, such as Mr. Pennicuick, quite literally: but it made me laugh to hear him talk. “I want an object in life,” he said; “and though to sit for a borough is rather an expensive object, it is cheaper than some others, such as horse-racing, for example, and it also suits me better. As for Whig and Tory, the difference between them is merely that between Tweedledum and Tweedledee.”’
‘I don't think you should have told me this, Mr. Milburn, if you wanted me to plume myself on the good opinion of me this gentleman was good enough to express.’
‘Well, perhaps not: but then you are not likely to “plume yourself,” as you term it, upon any such thing. I should think
[Page 116]
you were a sort of person who would always do what was right without much regard for the opinion of the Mr. Pennicuicks. And, by the by, that reminds me that I saw Mr. Pennicuick's son at his father's table; you are acquainted with him, of course?’
‘We know him very well,’ answered Nelly quietly, for she was quite prepared this time for any allusion to Raymond. ‘He is a great favourite—a real one—of Mrs. Wardlaw's.
‘Do I understand you to imply, and not of yours?’ inquired the other lightly.
‘Certainly not. I have a great regard for him: we were brought up together almost like brother and sister.’
‘Indeed! I should never have guessed that, since he did not speak of you. To be sure he had doubtless heard all about you that I could tell from his father. And besides he was very reticent; hardly spoke a word.’
‘He was well, I hope?’ said Nelly, conscious of her rising colour, and unable, as it seemed to her, to speak with the indifference she intended.
‘Oh yes, he seemed well enough; but if it is not his nature to be silent, he must have been out of spirits. It struck me that the father and son did not hit it off together quite comfortably.’
‘Raymond is not a man to quarrel with his father,’ said Nelly gravely. She resented her companion's light way of talking of him, and of that sorrow which she understood so well. ‘You talked just now of duty; he is the most dutiful man I know.’
‘No doubt he is a good fellow,’ said Milburn hastily; ‘and indeed, since you say so, it must be so. I have not a word to say against him. I did not mean that he and his father quarrelled,
[Page 117]
only it seemed to me that there had been some recent misunderstanding between them—in fact what, in ignorance of his being such a good young man, I might have profanely called “a row,”—and that the son had had to give in, but as it were under protest. It was perhaps about money matters, and in that case the old fellow was the one in fault, no doubt; for we all know he is a screw. That reminds me of something that I wished to tell you. Mr. Pennicuick, as I have said, was not a screw in connection with one matter, nor indeed as respects anything that occurred at Dhulang. I dare say you wondered why I would not let you have that portfolio at the time when you were so good as to call on us, and that I insisted on sending it later to your room. The reason was, that it contained two sketches which, if you had come upon them unexpectedly, would have caused you pain.’
‘That was very kind and thoughtful of you,’ said Nelly gratefully.
‘Nay, it would have been very thoughtless had I not taken the precaution. The fact is that, while at Dhulang, though my visit was very short, I drew a sketch of the Mandarin's house from which your poor father was committed to the prison. But I am afraid’ —for she had turned pale—‘I am doing the very thing I would have avoided—giving you the heartache.’
‘No; it was just for the minute. I should like to see the sketch.’
‘You shall not only see it, but possess it. It is not worth your thanks, for since it is my own handiwork, it is not—like the other —of any intrinsic value.’
‘I shall value it nevertheless,’ answered Nelly simply, ‘upon
[Page 118]
that very account. I should think of the kindness of the donor, whenever I look at it.’
‘Your words make me very happy,’ answered the young man earnestly. ‘The other sketch will speak for itself. It is—’
‘O Herbert dear, do pray come and tell us about this starfish,’ broke in Miss Milburn; ‘it is quite different from the common ones, and Mrs. Wardlaw is dying to know about it.’
If Mrs. Wardlaw's decease had depended solely upon her curiosity remaining unsatisfied upon any point of science whatever, whether ichthyological or otherwise, it is probable she would have lived for many hundreds of years; but as a pretext to cut short the conversation between the two young people, Miss Milburn's speech fulfilled its intention. They had no further chance for private talk that day, and Milburn secretly congratulated himself that he had not wasted his time while the opportunity lasted. His sister's suspicions, though she would have probably entertained them had Nelly been infinitely less attractive, were in her case well-founded; ‘dear Herbert’ was really smitten by ‘that Miss Conway,’ and much more seriously than his self-constituted guardian and protectress imagined. He had left her with very great reluctance for his two days' business in town, and as it happened she had been there the topic of Mr. Pennicuick's talk. Of course Milburn did not need any corroboration of the view he had taken of her character, but somehow the eulogies he had heard from his host's lips had increased his own admiration of their object. He had no respect for Ralph Pennicuick's opinions, as we have seen; but still, when he found so acute and experienced a man of the world speaking in such high terms, not only of a girl's grace and beauty, but of her talents and good sense, it had not been without
[Page 119]
its effect upon him. He could not know that every word the other said had been spoken with a purpose, namely, to urge Milburn on to offer himself as her lover, and thereby, as he trusted, to extinguish the dying embers of Raymond's hopes at once and for ever.
As to Nelly, she was quite unconscious of Mr. Milburn's feelings towards her, notwithstanding his sister's warnings. She liked him exceedingly, but her liking was due to his relations with her father, and to the evident regard he had entertained for him, quite as much as to his own attractions. If he had had those alone to recommend him, he would have found her—doubly oppressed as she was by her recent loss, and by her renunciation of Raymond—very difficult of approach and anything but demonstrative. Even as it was, his presence, though agreeable to her, rather increased her melancholy than otherwise, by perpetually reminding her of her father.
The chief interest attaching to the young man in her eyes was that he had gone to Dhulang and been one of the three Englishmen who had seen their dead comrade laid in his grave. The promised sketches were brought to her that afternoon, while she happened to be alone, and she had carried them up to her own room without even mentioning their arrival to her hostess.
Her curiosity respecting them was overpowered by a deeper and more solemn feeling, and she did not open the little packet till she retired for the night. The evening had been very still, and nothing was then heard but the gentle kiss of the wave, or its sigh as it withdrew from the yielding sand; the sky was black and starless, and the quiet and the darkness renewed that sense of solitariness from which she had of late been slowly emerging.
[Page 120]
She felt again how lonely her life was doomed to be, and her thoughts did not need the association which Mr. Milburn's gift must needs possess to turn them to those who had departed and left her thus alone. Did her father see her now, she wondered, and was he conscious how great a void his death had made for her, and how she yearned to join him in the land of shades? She sat down with a certain sense of expectation, but also with one of weariness and woe that dulled its edge, and opened the packet. The first sketch depicted the house of Twang-hi, the Mandarin, taken from the garden where we saw poor Conway and his companion—the former so unconscious of coming trouble—on the morning after their visit to the Temple. It was a bright and cheerful scene, with the light of summer shining upon the velvet lawn and the gilded pinnacles of the Joss-house, with its flowing lines of roof and tiny balconies. It was difficult to imagine that those gay and glittering gates could have been the portals of death—and such a death! If Nelly imagined that this very contrast gave her greater pain, she found out her mistake when her eyes rested on the second sketch, which, as Milburn had said, spoke for itself. It had been apparently taken by moonlight, and represented an abrupt hill thickly covered with pine-trees. The whole scene was black and gloomy to an extreme degree, save the Lamp of Night in the heavens and one white spot on some level ground at the foot of the hill—which was a tombstone.
Nelly understood at once that she was looking on her father's grave.
[Page 121]
CHAPTER XII. AN OBJECT IN LIFE. Whether Ralph Pennicuick did or did not exaggerate his own cynicism respecting political matters in his talk with Milburn, he was quite in earnest about going into Parliament. The ‘object in life’ of which he spoke had really become necessary to him, though hitherto he had made it his boast that he was able to get on without any such thing. He had been asked more than once how it was that he contrived to pass his aimless existence with such apparent ease and self-satisfaction, and his answer had always been ‘Because I understand myself.’ He had studied his own wants (or rather wishes), his tastes, his characteristics, just as a man of science studies the Fauna or the Flora of some particular clime, and had thus acquired a perfect knowledge of himself: if this was not the ‘know thyself’ of the philosopher, it was a good practical guide, and had at least made him certain of what he liked, which is a great step in the direction which he considered to be the right one.
He flattered himself, because he was vicious without being actually depraved, that he had in his pleasures hit the golden mean: he did not trouble himself with study, but he read not only those French novels, more numerous than select, which form the chief
[Page 122]
literary pabulum of men of his stamp (as well as of many others who ought to know better), but also such books as dealt with the thoughtful questions of the time; if these did not do him the benefit their authors (if we are to believe their prefaces) intended, they kept him abreast, and—assisted by his natural cleverness— even ahead, of most minds with which he was brought into contact. It was pleasant to him to hear it said that ‘that fellow Pennicuick, idle as he was, knew as much as any of your reading men,’ and there was also some solid advantage to be got out of it. When one goes to Rome, for example, nine-tenths of the enjoyment of the visit is lost without a little scholarship, and to lose enjoyment annoyed Pennicuick almost as much as to have lost a day pained the tender conscience of Titus. He was a good sportsman, without ever becoming the slave of horse, or dog, or gun, and, in a word, had taken just so much of interest in most things as made his time pass agreeably wherever he was.
But now things had altered with him altogether; small matters could no longer win his mind from what he termed his ‘morbid thoughts,’ but which was in truth remorse and self-reproach. He felt for the first time the want not so much of an object in life as (very literally) a diversion, and he was not the man to long deny himself his desire. Circumstances indeed had made it absolutely necessary that he should obtain it quickly as a relief from worries of all sorts. Not only was there the central trouble, which he had fondly hoped Nelly's acceptance or rejection of the proffered annuity would set at rest, haunting him day and night with grim persistence, but his relations with Raymond were most annoying. He could certainly not be said to be a devoted father; it had perhaps been part of his admirable scheme of life not to bestow
[Page 123]
his affections anywhere for fear he should be made to suffer through them; but he had doubtless some vulgar natural liking for his only son, and in his present nervous and depressed condition he keenly felt (though he would have scorned to acknowledge it) the need of human sympathy. It was therefore highly disagreeable to him that none was forthcoming. Raymond was dutiful still, solicitous for his comfort, and always at his beck and call, but his manner plainly showed that he had been hardly used and could not forget it. Directly he had become acquainted with the fact that he had an independence of his own, he had, as we have seen, gone at once to Nelly, and asked her to become his wife; but in accordance with his promise to Mr. Tatham he had said nothing of his having acquired this knowledge to his father, nor of course of the action that he had taken on becoming possessed of it. The melancholy that had seized him since his rejection by Nelly was therefore set down by Ralph Pennicuick as caused by his own opposition to the match, which indeed in the main it was; and his fear was that, when his son should come into his mother's money, he would do the very thing which in fact he had done, only with the opposite result; that is to say, that Nelly, trusting to his own eventual forgiveness, or perhaps rendered careless of it by her passion, might accept his son's love and marry him out of hand. He had therefore used every argument to Herbert Milburn to induce him to prevent this catastrophe by marrying the girl himself. As time went on, and Raymond in due course came into his slender inheritance, it was no small relief to his father that he did not take the course thus apprehended; and to reward him for it— though he was careful not to say so—he informed him that for the future his allowance would be continued to him notwithstanding
[Page 124]
that he had now an equal income of his own. ‘You may have wondered, my lad, why I have never told you of the existence of the little independence that has become your own; the reason was, not that I desired to keep you in leading-strings, but that I wished you to practise economy and self-restraint, since an exaggerated view of what would probably be yours some day—and certainly will be if you continue to please me—might lead you into habits of extravagance. But now that you have shown you are a sensible fellow, and know the value of money, I have great pleasure in making you easy in your circumstances: you will henceforward have six hundred a year to spend instead of three hundred.’
‘Thank you, sir,’ said Raymond (never did the expression of gratitude have less of cordiality in it). ‘I think, however, it is but right that you should know all, before bestowing your generosity upon what you may consider an unworthy object.’
‘Know all?’ exclaimed the other, once more alarmed lest his son should have set him at nought by a secret marriage; ‘you have done nothing, I hope, that you are ashamed of.’
‘No, sir: though I would have done something, if I could, of which you would not have approved.’
Raymond had never felt so galled, antagonistic, and (albeit he had nothing now to fear) so defiant. His father's words had sounded very unpleasantly to him. The reason he had given for his silence about his mother's money was, he felt, a false one; he had been kept in ignorance of it for the very cause which the other had disclaimed, namely, that he might be kept in leading-strings. The allusion to his father's fortune was also false; instead of taking an exaggerated view of it, Ralph Pennicuick must have known that his son had believed it to be much less than it really was. The
[Page 125]
threat implied in the phrase ‘if you continue to please me’ was offensive to the young man; and, above all, the sense that his father's objection to his marriage had proved an insurmountable bar to Nelly's acceptance of him, made him very grave and grim.
Ralph Pennicuick's mind leaped at once to the truth, so far as the girl was concerned.
‘If nothing has been done amiss, Raymond,’ said he quietly, ‘you may trust to my forgiveness of the intention, since I conclude that it no longer exists.’
‘But it does exist, sir, and it always will exist,’ answered the young man quickly. ‘The first use I made of the discovery of my independence was to ask Miss Conway to become my wife.
‘I had an idea that when we last talked upon this subject, Raymond, that course of action was barred.’
‘No, sir: it was agreed that I should not damage the young lady's prospects, as regarded your proffered aid, by urging my suit: but since she refused your bounty, she could be no longer harmed by acting counter to your wishes. I proposed therefore to marry her, and would have done so; I would marry her to-morrow if she would have me.’
‘You are very frank, I must say. Well, the young lady, it seems, rejected you.’
‘Miss Conway, I am sorry to say, refused to be my wife, upon the ground that it would cause a breach between yourself and me, and prejudice my future prospects.’
‘She took a very correct view of what would have happened, my good lad,’ said Ralph Pennicuick coolly, ‘and exhibited an amount of common sense that is rare indeed in women.’
[Page 126]
‘I beg, sir, that you will not make light of what is the gravest calamity of my life,’ said Raymond warmly. ‘I cannot—nay, I will not—bear it.’
‘Oh, I see,’ observed the other in his most cynical tones. ‘You are seeking a quarrel. You wish me to say, “Go to the devil,” and then you would go to this excellent and high-principled young woman and say, “My wicked father has cast me off: the breach between us is made; my future prospects are ruined, and therefore we might just as well be man and wife.” The plan does infinite credit to your sagacity, but I am not quite certain that, with respect to morals and filial feeling, it is quite so worthy of praise.’
‘So help me Heaven, sir, such an idea never entered into my mind!’ exclaimed Raymond. ‘I should have thought it shameful to entertain it. My motive was merely to avoid partaking of your bounty under false pretences. I disobeyed you in my heart, and I do so still, and I think it right that you should know it.’
‘Well, well, we cannot always control our wishes, my lad,’ returned the other quietly, ‘even when they are in opposition to our best interests and to those who have the right to choose for us. I freely forgive your deviation from the path of filial duty, and I hope—’ he hesitated; it would have seemed impossible to Ralph Pennicuick, a few months ago, that he should have made such an appeal to any man, much less to his own son, but he did make it—‘I hope you will forgive me for being what now doubtless seems to you an obstacle to your happiness, but in reality—’
‘I forgive you, sir, so far as it is possible,’ put in Raymond hastily; ‘I will try to think you are acting for the best; but pray let us drop the subject.’
The fruits of victory of course remained with the elder Pennicuick,
[Page 127]
but he by no means felt master of the field. His son, it was plain, was no longer in his power, since a threat of disinheritance would be welcome to him; and indeed he owed his obedience, not, it seemed, to filial respect, but to the view which Nelly had happened to take upon the matter. It may be thought, perhaps, that another bitter reflection would have occurred to him, namely, that, should he die, the young people would speedily console themselves for his departure; but the fact was that, notwithstanding he knew that his health was failing, and that rapidly, he shut Death out from view—for a particular reason. It was not terrible to him upon theological grounds; for before we fear God, we must at least believe in His existence; but he shrank from the contemplation of it, because it was just possible that, on the other side of the grave, he might be brought face to face with Arthur Conway. It may be asked, if this was the case, why did he not make haste to reconcile himself with him as far as possible, by reparation and atonement? The same question may be put concerning most men. Their time is short: eternity is long. They must surely be mad to procrastinate. And yet, as a general rule, they do not hurry themselves to make amends. ‘There are so many things to be considered.’
It was necessary for Ralph Pennicuick to live most resolutely in the Present, forgetting the Past and ignoring the Future, and, since he was always careful not to live for others, to get some thing to live for. And this thing had resolved itself into a seat in Parliament. It is not rare in England for a man in middle life, who has all things comfortable about him, and no inward call whatever towards politics, to entertain this ambition; to spend money without stint for the privilege of sitting in the council-chamber of the
[Page 128]
nation until the small hours, to hear speeches made that have no sort of interest for him: but in Ralph Pennicuick's case his avowed intention to take this course did arouse no little surprise. For in the days when it was said of him that he could do anything he liked, and when it had not as yet been discovered that he liked to do nothing, a political career had been prophesied for him; nay, had been even offered to him, and declined. And now that he was getting on in years, it seemed strange enough that he should thus reconsider that matter. He had an answer, we may be sure, for all who expressed their surprise at it: for he was bright and keen as ever, out-of-doors; as much respected (when present) in the club smoking-room; and as much a leading figure in certain social circles of consideration, as of yore. He was not always cowering over his autumn fire in his rooms at the Albany, alone save for the spectres of the Dead, and the company of a certain familiar spirit, who was growing every day more familiar than welcome to him.
He went about his electioneering, too, in a practical commonsense way; not in asking vague questions here and there, or ‘putting himself into communication’ with those political committees about which we hear so much, and of the work of which we see so little, for a very sufficient reason—namely, that they do none. On the contrary, he applied in person for the thing he wanted to Mr. Gustavus Pierrepoint.
Mr. Pierrepoint was not a ‘creature’ of any party, nor even a wire-puller, except so far as his own private machinery was concerned, in connection with the body politic; but he had turned his attention to electioneering just as other men turn theirs to science or philosophy; only the result of his studies was that he knew much more about the matter in question, for certain, than
[Page 129]
they did; and moreover he made his living by it. He took a very material, almost a mechanical, view of his calling. In his snug apartment in Gray's Inn he had a map of England laid out— though it was always kept rolled up—upon quite a peculiar system. It was divided into electoral districts coloured like a geological chart, only the strata signified political opinions: they were denoted by the most various shades of blue and yellow, from indigo to orange, while here and there (in a good many places) were very cheerful spots of scarlet, which meant, I am sorry to say, ‘these seats generally go to the highest bidder.’
There was a certain borough in the Midland Counties, called Slowcomb, which wore a very roseate hue indeed on this tell-tale map, and it was about Slowcomb that Mr. Ralph Pennicuick called one morning in Gray's Inn—after a little previous correspondence—to have some professional talk with Mr. Pierrepoint. The subject divided itself, like a sermon, into several heads, only (which is not the case with sermons, which generally keep their ‘gallop for the avenue’) the most important was the first brought under notice. This was of course ‘the figure.’
Mr. Pierrepoint was of opinion that the privilege of representing Slowcomb—for which there were two members—could be acquired for between two and three thousand pounds; he would venture to say three at the outside.
‘It is a large sum to throw away upon a caprice,’ observed Mr. Pennicuick (as though he had been in the habit of investing his money in works of public utility for the benefit of the nation), ‘and I conclude that my return will at least be realised if I do so. If success could be guaranteed, I don't think I should grudge even the three thousand.’
[Page 130]
Mr. Pierrepoint gave a deprecatory smile.
‘Well, of course, a guarantee is out of the question; but I will pledge my professional reputation that—if you will be guided by my advice—in five weeks hence you will be one of the members for Slowcomb, though this is the last time I shall be able to say as much.’
‘You think that at the next general election we shall have the Ballot?’
‘There is no doubt of it; and though, in my opinion, it will not very much alter matters, nothing can then be predicated for certain. At present the thing lies in a nutshell. Sir James Tremaine and Warren only just scraped in last time by forty votes, and the Liberals had a very shaky candidate. In your case no one will have a word to say.’
‘Well, I don't know that there is much against me,’ said Pennicuick.
‘On the contrary, everything is in your favour; now, Tremaine and Warren, though united in face of the common danger—that is, yourself—will not pull very well together. The borough has been in Sir James's family for four generations. He represents the principle of feudality. Warren, on the other hand, is a novus homo , and only a Conservative on that account; it being the quickest method to gain admission among the Upper Ten. Warren's men—he has the ironworks, you know, where the mechanics are Radicals to a man—only vote for him from esprit de corps .’
‘And because, being mechanics,’ observed Mr. Pennicuick drily, ‘they appreciate the principle of the lever.’
‘Not at all. You are quite mistaken, my dear sir. If they did not like their chieftain—who has a pleasant fluent way with
[Page 131]
him enough, and is a good paymaster—they would throw him over. They would much rather vote with him on your side against Tremaine, but they will stand by their man.’
‘Then he will be as safe as Tremaine himself?’
‘More so; it is Sir James who will have to go.’
‘Impossible! why, he owns half the place.’
‘Just so. This is how it is. Sir James is a thorough party man. His people will have orders to split their votes: he will promise, moreover, that there shall be no plumping. I shall take care that early on the polling day you will be ahead of them both. Then Warren (for I know him) will get frightened, and will privately let his men know that they are to plump for him . They will certainly do so since they hate Sir James, and that great feudal chief will be left out in the cold.’
‘But that will be very discreditable in Warren?’
Mr. Pierrepoint shrugged his shoulders.
‘Everybody is not a gentleman, like yourself, Mr. Pennicuick. You of course would scorn to break a promise—even though it were only implied. It would make no matter to you whether it was expressed in writing, witnessed, signed and sealed, or merely an understanding between friends: it would have the same force.’
‘I suppose so; yes,’ said Pennicuick. He endeavoured to speak with indifference, but he felt his cheeks burn.
‘Well, of course; but this Warren will act like a cur.’
A cur! That was the term this parliamentary agent—no very particular person, and one used to deal with very ‘shaky’ characters—applied to one who broke his promises even about election matters and to a mere political acquaintance. What would he call a man (wondered Pennicuick) who had pledged his word to
[Page 132]
a dying man—a man, too, who had died for him, and who was his dearest friend—and deliberately ignored it!
‘Well, Mr. Pierrepoint, I shall go in for Slowcomb.’
‘Very good.’ Mr. Pierrepoint opened a ledger, and with some demonstrativeness put his pen through a couple of names. ‘You will have a fair field, and I believe a good deal of favour.’
‘I am not the first applicant for the place, it seems?’
‘No, the third. The other two were shilly-shallying. They will both complain that I have come to terms with you, but secretly will both be glad. Bunkum of that sort is very common. The writs for the boroughs will be out at the end of the month, so we have not too much time before us. You would like to be spared as much trouble as possible, I conclude?’
‘Not at all. I should like to go down at once, and begin my canvass.’
‘Very good. If you will call to-morrow at this hour, I will furnish you with all preliminary information.’
[Page 133]
CHAPTER XIII. ON CANVASS. On the third day after that interview with Mr. Pierrepoint, Ralph Pennicuick was at Slowcomb, ‘putting up,’ as it was then called (perhaps because guests had a good deal to put up with), at the ‘Swan with Two Necks’ at Slowcomb. It was a fine country inn of the old style, with huge rooms smelling very fusty though they were full of draughts; great four-poster beds with canopies an inch thick in dust; candlesticks of massive silver; and a great reputation for old port. It was very lofty, but it had no ‘lift’; there was not a spring mattress in the house; there was no smoking room, no bath room, no reading room. For any modern comfort that it could supply, it might have been furnished a century ago. But it had always been the head-quarters of the ‘yellows,’ and the yellow candidate patronised it accordingly.
If that most respectable widow woman, the landlady, could have looked into the heart of this guest she delighted to honour, when on the second day after his arrival she expressed her hopes— according to immemorial usage—that he found the ‘Swan with Two Necks’ to his liking, it is probable she would have experienced a severe shock. He had been all the world over (though, it is true, always with an eye to his personal comfort), and he thought this
[Page 134]
highly respectable inn at Slowcomb ‘the most infernal hole in which he had ever set foot.’
It was certainly an irritating place of abode for anybody, on account of the solemn air of pretence and dignity which pervaded it There was a man in the great hall in a kind of military uniform, who did nothing but open and shut the door, and sleep in a sort of sedan chair without handles. If the head waiter had worn an apron (which was not to be thought of), you would have concluded him to have been a bishop at least, and his method of performing his duties carried out that idea. Every meal was a solemn rite, and the arrangement of the napkins was as vital a question with him as ‘vestments’ to a High Church ecclesiastic. This magnificent personage waited on Mr. Pennicuick with his own hands, in the first-floor apartment (fifty feet long by thirty broad) that had been assigned to him; and in course of time his use was discovered; he had been created (it was evident) for the purpose of introducing deputations.
Mr. Hatton cultivated him, with the sinister object of ‘drawing him out’ and reproducing him for the benefit of society in town. The female domestics, being carefully selected for their great respectability and mature years, did not distract his attention from this study.
I have said that the ‘Swan with Two Necks’ would have been distasteful to anyone not a mummy or a fossil, but to Ralph Pennicuick it was something worse. He slept—or rather he retired to rest—in an apartment admirably adapted for lying-in-state, but little suited to a living occupant. There were two steps at the side of the bed by which access could be gained to it; but once in it you were in a sea of feathers, which overwhelmed you with its
[Page 135]
billows; the pillow was feathery too, and you were smothered there as certainly as elsewhere. It was not you that ‘tossed,’ but the bed itself. Now and then, like the porpoise, you came to the top for air; you sat up, that is, and breathed a breath or two; but even then you sank down, down, and were presently submerged sitting. To complain of this bed, with which so many candidates had expressed themselves satisfied, would be, Pennicuick felt, to endanger the prospects of the Liberal cause in Slowcomb.
An adventure happened to him, however, the very first night, of a nature so terrible, that he almost made up his mind to leave the place, and let Sir James and Mr. Warren misrepresent it for another Parliament. He had fallen after some hours into a perturbed sleep, from which he was awakened by the splash of water; it mingled with his dream, as such things will, and what it seemed at first to be was the noise the cormorants made which he had seen fishing in the river when with his friend in China. His dreams were often laid in those scenes, and this had been a comparatively quiet one; not filled with prisons, and tortures, and one ghastly spectacle—a mangled body tied to an upright stake— which haunted him with terrible persistence. Still it had been graphic and lifelike enough to hold him for some waking moments in its spell. He leaped from the bed, and applied one of the quaint wax candles on his dressing table to the night-light which he always kept burning. The dropping of water was still heard: but he now understood that it was only that intermittent splash and choking which often takes place at night in the pipes of such establishments as the ‘Swan.’ The aspect of the room was a little more gloomy than it had been, but he recognised it well enough; the two black feathers at the corners of the bed-head (for there
[Page 136]
were feathers there too) looked more like funeral plumes than ever, and he was turning from them with a half sneer, half shudder (common enough with him now when he was alone), to put out the light, when something shining on the carpet attracted his attention. He stooped down and picked it up; then uttered a cry of fear so loud and wild that it must have rung through any house of modern construction. Unfortunately, however (as he thought at the time), the state rooms of this ancient inn were provided with inner doors of baize, through which no sound could easily penetrate, and his voice was unheard. He sank into a chair in a perspiration of fear, and not until some minutes later did he muster courage sufficient to examine the thing which had filled him with such terror.
What he thought it was, was the Shay-le of Buddha that he had stolen from the temple, and which had been the cause of the catastrophe that had slain his friend and made a scoundrel of himself. What it really was, was a drop that had fallen from the great chandelier that hung from the centre of the room, and on which the light played as it lay on the carpet as though it had been the Kohinoor. Though Pennicuick thus convinced himselfs as to what it was, the effect of his mistake was by no means transient. It shook his nerves, and, what was worse, turned his thoughts and dreams more than ever into that channel from which he was always striving to free them. In vain he said to himself that it was an infernal shame (he did not say upon whose part, but made it somehow a vague grievance against the government of the universe) that he should be troubled in this way about a transgression for which he had done his best to make atonement. It was no fault of his that Conway's daughter had refused his bounty; and as to the
[Page 137]
amount of it, if he had offered her 20,000 l.—the 20,000 l .—she would probably have refused it just the same. It was not as if he had not tried to put himself right with her. In opposing her marriage with Raymond he had only exercised a privilege enjoyed by every father. Young Milburn was a better match for her every way, and he had done all he could to bring it about: had asked the fellow to dinner (though he hated the sight of him), and gone out of his way to promote it. As to giving up the lump sum, now, it could not be done. No possible excuse could be made for it, supposing even he contemplated such an act of folly. The consideration that ‘nobody knew about it,’ or even that there was no real claim upon him— only a matter of morbid sentiment—no longer weighed with him; he had, as it were, long sailed by all those obstacles, which had once looked so formidable; and yet he was not in smooth water. It really was ‘deuced hard.’ His health, of course, was not what it had been, or he would have known how to deal with these chimæras. It was possible, notwithstanding, that they would have proved too many for Mr. Pennicuick, had he been doomed to spend much more time in the solemn solitudes of the ‘Swan;’ but he was so fortunate as to make so favourable an impression upon a Mr. Major, the mayor of Slowcomb and the leading Liberal of the place, that he invited him to remove from the ‘Swan with Two Necks’ to his own home.
This was a villa residence, just outside the town, which in its newness and primness offered the strongest contrast to his late quarters, and was therefore all the more welcome to him. There were huge rooms—but full of light, without and within—that offered the same facilities for the reception of his hoped-for constituents which those of the inn had done, and Mr. Major threw
[Page 138]
them open for that purpose with generous patriotism. ‘Don't you deny yourself to anybody’ was the advice he gave to his guest, and Pennicuick followed it not unwillingly. It was a relief to him to be always doing something, or receiving somebody, though he would have smiled his old sardonic smile, if you had said that his mind, was occupied. Whatever he did was to distract his mind, and dissipate his more importunate thoughts. It was with this object that he made his canvass on foot, or horseback, or even sometimes in a carriage with good-natured Mrs. Major beside him, in colours that did more credit to her principles than to her complexion.
He had also to make innumerable speeches. They were rather good ones of their kind—certainly above the average of similar displays of eloquence that were to be heard at that time throughout the country—but it was a perpetual matter of surprise to him that anybody could be got to listen to them without being paid for it. He had always had a high idea of the stupidity of his fellow-creatures: he had thought it ‘stupendous,’ and incalculable; but he now felt that the adjectives he had applied to it fell short of the subject. Of course it was very sad that people should be thronging to hear a gentleman speak with no particular eloquence upon themes that were by that time as sucked oranges; but Mr. Pennicuick did not reflect that though no person was paid (directly) for hearing him, there was at least no charge made upon his side, and that the love of gratuitous entertainment— under which head are even comprised sermons and orreries—is one of the strongest passions of uncultivated man and woman. Moreover, there was just that soupçon of ‘improvement’ about these oratorical flights of his, which reconciled people, who might
[Page 139]
otherwise have had scruples about throwing away their time, to coming to hear him. But to the orator himself these harangues were (not vanity, for, to do him justice, he thought anything but highly of them, but) vexation of spirit. He had a positive feeling of humiliation in saying the same thing over and over again, in district A , district B , and district C , and especially as sometimes happened, to the same people. His excellent host, for example, gave him his countenance everywhere, and never dreamt how uncomfortable he made his guest, by sitting apparently with rapt attention (sucking the knob of his umbrella) while his candidate aired his well-worn platitudes, or ascended the oft-trodden path of declamation! He greatly over-estimated Mr. Major's sufferings, which were set down as ‘all in the day's work,’ for that gentleman's whole heart was in the election for Slowcomb, the result of which he honestly believed would be to overturn the principle of Feudalism, and to make Tyrants tremble.
Mr. Pennicuick saw nothing of this ‘vision splendid,’ but only the farmers or small tradespeople he happened to be addressing, and to whom he could not conceive that he was giving pleasure: but at the same time the whole thing was so new to him that it took him out of himself, and effected for the time the very object he had in view. It was a much greater change than anything he had experienced in going abroad: for after all that is but a superficial change. New scenery, costumes, and language do not go so far down as a new range of human character; he had made in foreign parts about the same sort of acquaintances that he met at home, and had never probably so much as spoken to a greengrocer (for instance) in all his life. Mr. Major himself was a most interesting study—though his interest in him, it is true, was
[Page 140]
grievously marred by his own cynicism. It seemed very extraordinary to him that a man who had been an ironmonger—Major's ‘registered’ coalscuttle was a household word in many domestic circles—and made a fortune by it, should identify himself with any kind of political movement. What could it matter to him how the world was governed (so long as cutlery was not superseded), or who was in, or who was out? But this mattered to Mr. Major (or at least he thought so) very much.
Mr. Pierrepoint had the highest opinion of him, and wrote to Pennicuick, ‘You could not have done a wiser thing than stay at “the Andirons”’—which was the popular name for the villa— ‘only don't forget to keep on your rooms at the “Swan” all the same.’
After each day's proceedings Mr. Major made a most elaborate calculation of the results, and as the date of the election drew near became more and more confident.
‘I'll lay a fippun' note, Mr. Pennicuick, as we'll bring you in at the head of the poll.’
Pennicuick would have taken the bet, which was clearly a good ‘hedge,’ but that he was afraid it would look like a want of confidence. As a matter of fact, he himself had but little hope or fear, and of course no actual knowledge of the matter whatever. He had already begun to think that Parliamentary life would bore him a good deal, and interest him scarcely at all; and, unlike all other candidates that ever were, he felt that he should be sorry when all the turmoil of the contest should be over. Still, of course, he wished to win: the notion of throwing away 3,000 l . was displeasing to him, and the idea, which his host expressed, of ‘at all events placing the great Liberal party of his country under a great
[Page 141]
obligation’ would not have gone very far with him in the way of consolation.
He prided himself on never having yet been baulked in anything on which he had set his mind, and he had a reputation to keep up at the clubs to that effect. He had met his two opponents in the course of his canvass, and of course with courtesy; his behaviour towards them throughout had indeed been rather more civil than some of his supporters approved.
‘If there was anything against you, as there was against Gaythorne’ (the previous Liberal candidate), ‘it would be different,’ they had naïvely said; ‘but you have nothing to fear from them; and you should hold your own as tight as wax.’ Certainly no canvass at Slowcombe had ever been conducted with so few personalities. There were yellow posters, of course, calling upon all slaves to put their necks under Sir James's chariot wheels—and even a very spirited likeness of him in the character of the Genius of Feudalism, driving a couple of steeds, with Oppression and Exaction written upon their foreheads; and there was a pleasant little cartoon of Mr. Warren in the act of blacking boots. But the highest flight of offence to which the blue posters attained as respected Mr. Pennicuick was the inquiry, ‘Who is He?’ by which they intended to convey that gentleman was a total stranger in those parts, and had no business to be there at all.
The hustings had been erected opposite the Town Hall, just on the right-hand side of it; a space cleared for some building operations had been temporarily taken by the Blues for the erection of a temporary hoarding and the display thereon of banners, mottoes, and the interrogation, ‘Ralph Pennicuick, who is He?’ in very startling characters indeed. On the day when the candidates were
[Page 142]
proposed, some of these queries were removed, and the gigantic inquiry ‘What has he Done?’ was substituted for them, with a large space beneath either signifying that he had done nothing, or to be filled up by the imagination of the Conservative reader with ‘atrocities.’ This amused Mr. Major very much. ‘It is very seldom in these days, my dear sir, that any candidate comes before a constituency with such clean hands as yours. Gaythorne, between ourselves, was a very queer fish indeed: I worked for him, of course; but it was against the grain, and with feelings very different from those I experience in your case. There was a story, and I believe it had some truth in it, that he had robbed a ward of his—quite a girl—of thousands of pounds, and thereby compelled her to go out as a governess.’
‘I should have thought the law would have taken cognizance of a fraud of that kind,’ observed Pennicuick carelessly.
‘Well, he was on the safe side of the law; the girl's father, it seems, had an implicit trust in him, and Gaythorne betrayed it. He was very “yellow” (or rather he pretended to be, for he had in reality no principles save that of taking care of number one), and that hid his blackness; else he was a man who ought to have been hung. We have therefore had some lee way to make up, you see, but I think we have done it. To-morrow you will make your last speech as a candidate for Slowcomb; the day after you will be its representative.’
It was certain that one of the two Conservative candidates would be run very hard indeed, and that, if there was ‘plumping,’ Warren would be ‘out of it.’ Sir James, however, had given the order that all Blue votes should be split; and if this was carried out to the letter, all honest Blues (for to despond in such cases is
[Page 143]
to be lukewarm and almost dishonest) were very sanguine about carrying both their men. In those days the Ballot was a question very hotly debated; but if the three candidates for Slowcomb— two of whom were openly opposed to that measure, and the third (though he supported it) was privately as much against it as themselves—could have looked a few years ahead, they would certainly—as candidates—have altered their opinion. Our children's children, accustomed to the present quiet of electioneering proceedings, will be unable to picture to themselves the riot and disorder that attended the ‘nomination day,’ even in the dullest of dull country boroughs. Slowcomb was not only dull, but really respectable, except for the ironworking element (‘on this occasion only’ allied with ‘the party of order’), and yet for two days it was given up to licence—and the licensing system. From morn to dewy eve every public-house was full, and all places of business empty.
To the candidates, as they stood on the hustings, was presented a sea of upturned faces, half of which shrieked applause, and half hurled defiance. As to the statements of their political convictions, it was fortunate that they were intrusted in manuscript to the reporters for the Press, or the world would have retained nothing of them beyond disjointed fragments. Of the first sentences nothing at all was heard, and the man who knew his business best, and who in this case was Sir James, moved his lips, gesticulated, and smiled with the utmost sweetness for five minutes, without uttering a syllable; after which there was a lull, and the crowd began to listen.
It is not necessary for us to do the like, and the less so since he only repeated for the most part what his proposer and seconder
[Page 144]
had said before him. In his place in the House, Sir James had once risen, it was said, to complain of the draught from an open window; but that had been his only Parliamentary utterance. He told the electors of Slowcomb on this occasion that though he hoped his heart was in the right place, he was not much of a speaker. And no exception could have been taken to the truth of that statement by the most censorious.
Mr. Warren, on the contrary, was glib, and possessed that singular power of walking round a subject, without ever going into it, that is peculiar to a certain class of men, and, curiously enough, especially to self-made men. They have, perhaps, expended so much of their practical force in getting money, that they have none left for other uses. He paid some rather fulsome compliments to Tremaine, ‘an old and tried representative,’ whereat Mr. Major nudged Pennicuick, and whispered, ‘You see, they are as thick as thieves.’ The yellow candidate nodded adhesion, but in his own mind came to the conclusion that this sycophancy was a good sign, and went rather to corroborate Mr. Pierrepoint's view, that if it came to a pinch the ironmaster would throw the baronet over.
When Mr. Warren sat down, Mr. Harwood, a country gentleman in the neighbourhood, proposed Mr. Pennicuick in a neat speech, with a quotation from Shelley at the end of it about the banner of Freedom streaming ‘against’ the wind, which caused much discussion afterwards in the local journals upon scientific grounds; and then got up Mr. Pennicuick's seconder, Mr. Major. This gentleman stood in the remarkable position of believing every word he said, and saying it from the bottom of his heart; and if his aspirates had been as unexceptionable as his aspirations, he
[Page 145]
would have been a very formidable orator indeed. Even as it was, he began to attract so much rapt attention, that the brass band of the Blues were given orders to divert it, which was done forthwith. Art is often compared with Nature, to the former's disadvantage; yet what is the human voice when in competition with a trombone? Mr. Major, however, was permitted to say a few words in conclusion which had a personal reference to his candidate. ‘We have been asked,’ he said (indeed, I am afraid he said ‘ast’), ‘“Who is He?” and I will answer that question. He is a gentleman of old family and good estate, who, having passed his life in a varied experience of mankind at home and abroad, has turned of late a mind of no ordinary calibre to the consideration of those vital questions—’ Here the trombone expressed dissent. ‘It has been asked—I see the question on yonder hoarding—“What has he Done?” He—’ A roar of laughter shook the crowd. The blank space on the hoarding in question had suddenly become filled up, as if by magic. It was in reality a very well-known pantomime trick, but it was new to Slowcombe eyes, and exceedingly effective. A large board, worked on a pivot, had suddenly been reversed; and underneath the question, ‘What has he Done?’ now appeared in enormous characters, ‘ Inquire at Dhulang, China. ’
[Page 146]
CHAPTER XIV. ‘AN HON. MEMBER.’ The suggestion that had suddenly appeared upon the Conservative hoarding owed all its effect of course, so far as the great mass of the spectators were concerned, to its unexpectedness. There were probably not half a dozen present who remembered to have heard of Dhulang—though it had been mentioned in the newspapers in connection with Conway's death—and very few who had any definite notion even of China. But to Pennicuick the unexpectedness of this spectacle only contributed to the shock he experienced. How the thing got there at all was the problem that confounded him, and for the moment seemed to turn his blood to water; he felt as weak and flaccid as a starved man, with no capability within him save that of abject terror. He stared at those pregnant words till—absurd as they were to the common eye, and reproducing indeed but a very ordinary form of advertisement —they seemed to be written, like Belshazzar's warning on the wall, in letters of fire. And at that moment his seconder sat down, and he found himself called upon to make his speech. He could about as easily have leaped across the street on to the roof of the Town Hall, which was paved, like every other available space, with expectant faces: he was tongue-tied, dumb. From the
[Page 147]
direction of his eyes, which were still fixed upon the hated words, the cause of his silence was instinctively guessed at, and a roar of ‘Dhulang, Dhulang! tell us what took place at Dhulang’ shook the air.
‘I will tell you,’ answered a sharp stern voice; it was Pennicuick's own, though it was difficult to recognise it as such, and though he himself scarcely knew that he was speaking. The instinct of self-preservation—always powerful within him—had come at last, and all the stronger for its temporary intermission. Those shrill and piercing tones produced an immediate silence. ‘I will answer you—you, whoever you are, who have written on that wall that cruel question—and you, my friends, shall judge between us, whether I or the writer has cause to be ashamed. At Dhulang I lost, through a miserable misfortune, and by the most cruel of deaths, the dearest friend that man ever had. I did all that I could, so help me Heaven, to save him, as is well known to many persons then in China whose sympathy I can never sufficiently acknowledge, but I failed. It is a subject so distressing, so ineffably painful to me, that the mere mention of it affects me— as you have just seen. And yet I would rather suffer thus, if it were for all eternity, than change places with that ruffian, who, taking advantage of my known weakness, should have chosen such an opportunity as this, when I need all my powers to express the gratitude I feel towards you for your kind reception of me, to blast them with a reminder such as that —’ As he spoke with withering scorn, and flung his hand out in the direction of the obnoxious placard, a rush was made upon the hoarding by the furious ‘Yellows,’ and in a few minutes it was levelled with the ground. ‘That's worth at least fifty votes to us,’ cried Mr. Major in Pennicuick's
[Page 148]
ear; ‘but don't press it; now stick it into them about the Ballot.’
‘I have done with personalities,’ continued Pennicuick; ‘I do not need any disclaimer from my honourable opponents, with respect to that outrage which you have just treated in the only way that it deserved. Such mean and anonymous slanders can never emanate, I am sure, from gentlemen who have used such hard words about votes by Ballot,’ et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. The speech was a successful one even on its merits, but it certainly owed its triumphant reception to the burst of scorn which had been its herald.
‘My dear Pennicuick, I congratulate you,’ cried Mr. Major, laughing, as they drove off to ‘The Andirons’ together after the show of hands, which had been two to one in favour of his friend. ‘As a piece of acting your treatment of the thing was perfect. You took us all in for the moment: and for my part I thought you were quite floored.’
‘Acting, Mr. Major! I don't understand you!’
‘Oh pray, my dear sir, don't mistake me. Of course you felt all you said: but the opportunity—the patness —that is what charms me beyond expression. What a tactician you are, too, while all the time you have pretended to know nothing about electioneering! How the deuce did you manage—on the enemy's ground, too—to get that placard put up?’
Pennicuick smiled and threw himself back in the carriage. If Mr. Major really supposed that he had put that horrid placard up himself, so much the better. It would save him a great deal of torture in the way of examination and investigation. It had been upon the tip of his tongue to answer, ‘I know no more than the
[Page 149]
Dead about this thing,’ but the thought of ‘the Dead’ had restrained him. What hateful conspiracy had been at work to remind him of what had happened at Dhulang, which was unknown to living man, except a few Chinese? What personal enemy could have set the thing on foot he burnt to know; but he also shrank from all inquiry into that subject. It was much better to let it drop, and Mr. Major's suggestion offered the readiest way to do so.
But in the mean time he was racked by forebodings; filled with presentiments of evil, to which he could give no tangible shape. He had come down to Slowcomb with no other object than to forget one terrible incident in his past life, and, lo, he had become publicly reminded of it, and that too with the obvious intention of imputing to him some wrongdoing in the matter. Who could have done this?
When Mr. Major descanted at the dinner-table, which was crowded with ‘Yellows’ that evening, upon his friend's admirable speech, everybody expressed their satisfaction that so mean a trick of the opposite party had met with so signal a failure.
‘I wonder who was the man who did it? He must have been more fool than knave,’ said one.
Then Mr. Major chuckled, and said, ‘You must take care what you are saying. For my part, I think it was neither fool nor knave, but a very honest clever fellow.’
Then of course everybody knew that he meant Pennicuick. That gentleman denied the impeachment, but in so suspicious a manner that it was as good as an acknowledgment of its truth. If he had had time to think about the affair coolly, perhaps he would not have done this: he would have felt that such a bit of strategy was much more clever than creditable to him: but his
[Page 150]
mind was too troubled to consider the matter; he only felt relief that it had got explained in some way, and his reserve protected him from cross-examination. The guests too, if they had been less flushed by their party triumph, and not so brimful of electioneering sentiments, would probably not have expressed such admiration for the ruse . Fortunately for the interests they held so dear, the report of Mr. Pennicuick's connivance in the thing did not get abroad before the election was over; and as matters were, the incident gained them, as Mr. Major had prophesied, a large number of votes. A good deal is excused to Party tactics, but a mean device, even in electioneering warfare, is held by most Englishmen in contempt. The thing which is expressed in the vulgar tongue as ‘an infernal shame’ is repudiated by Blue and Yellow and all the colours of the rainbow with us, as it is repudiated nowhere else. In vain Sir James Tremaine and Mr. Warren issued a joint manifesto which denied all complicity in setting up the obnoxious placard: in vain the Blue ‘organ’ published a special edition that same evening, explaining how ‘the contract for the hoarding had been undertaken by our esteemed fellow-townsmen Messrs. Deal and Maple, whose names would be a guarantee against any such ill behaviour. The occurrence in question had taken them as much by surprise as anyone, but investigations were being made, and it seemed that some London hand, recently taken on in their employment, had been at the bottom of the mischief.’
All this was read at leisure, twenty-four hours afterwards, and accompanied by much more, not in the present edition, to the effect that the whole affair had been an infamous device of the enemy; but in the mean time there was no time for reading, but
[Page 151]
only for talking of the Yellow candidate's admirable defence, and for voting.
As man after man ascended the steps of the polling booth, you might see them turn round, and point to the ruins of the hoarding and converse with one another evidently about that ‘infernal shame.’ Mr. Pierrepoint did not come to Slowcomb in person— he worked like Moltke in his closet, and marshalled his battalions with the pen—but his advice was implicitly followed. Mr. Pennicuick's voters polled early. At eleven o'clock the numbers stood —Pennicuick 400, Tremaine 368, Warren 350. The disparity between the two last, small as it was, was not Sir James's fault; some tenant-farmers would not vote to their feudal chieftain's disadvantage even at his express command. ‘If we can only keep ahead till the afternoon,’ said Mr. Major, ‘Pierrepoint thinks we shall be safe.’
‘Why?’ inquired Mr. Pennicuick innocently.
‘Oh, I suppose he relies on the prestige. There are some men who will never vote except upon the winning side.’
Then Pennicuick understood that Mr. Pierrepoint was really a great commander, and knew his men. He had entrusted the key of his position to his employer only, feeling confident that it would be safe with him. If good-natured frank-speaking Mr. Major had had it in his possession it might have slipped out of his hands, and Sir James might have been warned of his danger. At four o'clock the relative position of the three candidates remained unchanged. Pennicuick had 910 votes, Sir James had 890, Mr. Warren had 876.
It now seemed almost certain that the Yellow candidate would come in, and in all probability at the head of the poll. But some
[Page 152]
of the stauncher Blues said, ‘No; Pennicuick might come in (and be hanged to him!), but it would be seen that Sir James would be above him. For when Warren saw clearly he had no chance, he would tell his men to plump for the Baronet (without whose aid he would have been absolutely nowhere), and at least put this interloping Whig in the second place.’ At five o'clock, when the poll closed, these prophets had the mortification of reading the following result:
Mr. Pennicuick 950
Mr. Warren 920
Sir James Tremaine 908
And much as they detested Pennicuick in consequence, they hated Warren more. For they had the intelligence to understand the tactics when accomplished which Mr. Pierrepoint's sagacity had foreseen. Mr. Major was wild with joy, and congratulated the new member for Slowcomb with genuine enthusiasm.
‘Those 950 will cost me just three pounds a head,’ said that gentleman ruefully, though in reality he was well pleased. For the moment his success and the novelty of his position monopolized his attention; and he almost began to think that by getting a seat in Parliament he had obtained his end. Except for that public allusion to Dhulang, he had been really almost free from mental trouble while at ‘The Andirons,’ and he felt now that he had really received a fillip. He slept better that night than he had done for months; and he awoke with sensations which, compared with his ordinary state of mind at that time, could be almost called elation.
More than one eminent man has recorded his feelings on finding himself, for the first time, a member of the British Legislature,
[Page 153]
in terms highly complimentary to that body (though, to be sure, it was before they mixed with it), but no such pride of position was experienced by Mr. Pennicuick; he had by far too good an opinion of his own place in the world to be moved by any consideration of that kind. But he was very pleased that he had secured the article for which he was to pay his money, and also that his reputation for getting what he had a fancy for would now stand higher than ever: for some folks had ventured to say that Ralph Pennicuick was not cut out for electioneering, and would be certain to fail in paying due attention to the interesting children of his constituents.
He found his host in equally good spirits in his morning-room, where they were generally accustomed to meet and have a few words of business together before breakfast.
‘How is my honourable friend the member for Slowcomb?’ was his cheerful greeting; but Mr. Pennicuick's quick eye noticed that there was something else in his mind beside congratulations, and told him so at once.
‘What a clever fellow you are, Pennicuick!’ answered he admiringly; ‘well, yes, I just wanted to say two words to you about that Dhulang placard. The Blue papers this morning are full of it; and though I myself thought it a telling trick at the time, I am now inclined to think it was a mistake. I am afraid you will be worried about it a good deal to-day.’
‘I don't see how I can possibly be worried, since I had nothing whatever to do with it. I saw your mistake all along, my dear Mr. Major, but I didn't think it worth while to correct it. You chose to get it into your head that I had put that placard up myself.’
[Page 154]
‘Most certainly I did, and every voter in Slowcombe has by this time got it into his head.’
‘But for all that I didn't do it, and I never said I did.’
‘I don't mean you did it with your own hands, but—’
‘I do assure you, my dear sir,’ interrupted Pennicuick gravely, ‘that I knew nothing whatever about that disgraceful proceeding. It may have been foolish—I now perceive it was—to have allowed it to be supposed I did. But I give you my honour that I am as innocent of the whole matter as you are yourself.’
‘Very good; you must tell them that on the hustings,’ replied Mr. Major, but in a tone which implied, ‘You must tell that to the Horse Marines.’ ‘Let us have our breakfast’ (after that , was what his face added). It was plain he didn't believe him.
Pennicuick was furious, but there was nothing left for him but silence. If this ironmonger would not believe a gentleman's word of honour, there was an end of the matter; and there was this advantage about it, that such an insult wiped out at once all his gratitude for the hospitality that had been offered to him at ‘The Andirons,’ and relieved him from all sense of obligation. It was curious, of course, that Pennicuick should have felt so very touchy about his word of honour, which had been so infamously broken in respect to his dead friend; but, like a lady who has ‘slipped in her time,’ he was on that very account all the more tender of his reputation; and, moreover, it is to be observed that nothing aggravates your criminal so much as to be accused of a crime he did not commit, though he has committed fifty other worse ones.
As to the placard itself, Pennicuick had come to the conclusion that it had been merely a hap-hazard device of the enemy—a shaft shot at a venture, and need not give him any disturbance. It was
[Page 155]
known through the newspapers that he had been at a place called Dhulang, and that something dreadful had occurred there; that mistake in the first telegram might have suggested some wrong- doing on his part; and hence this vague attack upon his character. Except for Mr. Major's observations (which had, however, infused more of bitterness in his cup of triumph than he would have liked to own) he would have been inclined to treat the whole affair with contempt. And he resolved, henceforward, not to speak, and if possible not to think, about it again. But in this he was reckoning not only without his host, but in ignorance of the dimensions which the affair had assumed within the last four hours—that is, since the publication of that admirable Conservative organ the ‘Slowcombe Intelligencer.”
As he entered his carriage-and-four with Mr. Major to go down to the Town Hall, his ears were saluted even by his own supporters with words which, though they meant encouragement, gave him the keenest annoyance. ‘Stick to it, Pennicuick!’ ‘Tell a lie, and tell a good 'un!’ ‘Say it was me ! and (this brought down a storm of cheers) ‘Say it was Warren, for it's just like him!’ were cries that convinced him that his host's views of the matter were shared by his own party, and that his determination to deny having had any hand in the affair had been already circulated—as, indeed, it was highly necessary should be done. From the ‘Blue’ faction, who had only heard that he was the guilty party, and not the denial of his guilt, has was received by yells of indignation, delivered in that high pitch of nasal frenzy to which the vocal organs of no other nation but our own have, I really believe, attained. ‘Yah, yah, trickster!’ ‘Yellow sneak, Yellow sneak!’ ‘Dhulang, Dhulang!’ and similar outpourings testified to their
[Page 156]
sense of his iniquity, and also, perhaps, of the success that had attended its commission. But the conviction that it was a dirty trick to play, and unworthy of any candidate, was general, and also —it was impossible to ignore the fact—that he, Ralph Pennicuick, was the man who had played it.
It was anything but consolatory to him that some of his more thorough-going supporters of the lower rank were prepared to justify his supposed conduct. Their ‘Quite right too!’ ‘Who cares? you've won the day,’ were perhaps the most galling of all the cries that met his ear. That triumphal entry of his into his own borough, instead of being, as he was presently to call it, ‘the proudest moment of his life,’ was perhaps the most humiliating portion of it. The innocent, it may be said, do not feel such degradations; but Pennicuick felt it the more bitterly for the very reason that he was innocent. It did not strike him that he had his own villany to thank for it, since, but for that, the circumstances could never have arisen.
His appearance on the hustings—for, being at the head of the poll, he was the first to speak—was the signal for an outburst compared with which all previous manifestations sank into insignificance. It was like one of those revival meetings where the prize of salvation is supposed to be given to the loudest groaner. The cheers of the Yellows grew faint before that dull roar of execration. That idea of the ‘infernal shame’ had, it seemed, veered round altogether to the other side. In common, however, with many noxious persons (who often set a fancy value on their own lives and interests which is as deplorable as it is unreasonable), Ralph Pennicuick had plenty of pluck. The spectacle of this concentrated contempt and hate braced his nerves and gave vigour
[Page 157]
to his tones. ‘I am sorry,’ he said, ‘electors of Slowcombe, once more to intrude upon you any matter personal to myself; but if anyone has told you that I had anything, directly or indirectly, to do with that placard about Dhulang, he has told a lie.’ The uproar was here so tremendous that he had to wait for several minutes for a hearing. ‘If anyone here believes it, he is an idiot; if anyone here has repeated it, he has propagated a falsehood.’ This was indiscreet, for as all present did believe it, even including his own party, and had talked about nothing else that morning, he had simply given everyone the alternative of being a fool or a knave. The storm of disapprobation was such that there was nothing for it but for the brass band of the Yellows to strike up ‘See the Conquering Hero comes,’ and thereby to remind honest folks that, whatever might be said against the man of their choice, the Good Cause had triumphed. The cheering was henceforward as continuous as the hissing; but between these Mr. Pennicuick's oration was lost until the next day, when it duly appeared in the newspapers. His whole speech was, in fact, delivered in dumb show.
Then he had to listen to Mr. Warren's speech, which would have been received almost as ill as his own but for his supposed delinquency, upon which the hon. gentleman dwelt long and unctuously. His faculty of going round and round a subject, without ever actually going into it, was here invaluable to him. He contrived to express his own belief in his honourable opponent's innocence of the trick laid to his charge, while at the same time leaving the impression of his guilt upon the audience twice as strong as it was before. Ere he had finished speaking, handbills, printed on Mr. Major's advice, were circulating among the crowd, offering 500 l . reward to anyone who would discover the actual perpetrator
[Page 158]
of the offence in question: but the only effect of this was to cause a costermonger of Conservative opinions and excellent lungs to call out at the highest pitch of his voice, ‘I know the man: his name is Ralph Pennicuick: so hand me over the money.’ The roar of laughter that greeted this sally was the only good- natured thing in the whole proceedings.
When the ordeal was over, and Pennicuick, before descending among the howling throng, turned to bid his host good-bye—for his traps had been already despatched from the villa to the railway station—Mr. Major had disappeared.
The hon. member for Slowcomb understood at once that the hospitable ironmonger objected to shake hands with him. He had done his best for his candidate up to the very last, even to the suggestion of the offer of the reward; so much he owed to his party: but
The hand of Major was his own,
And never would in friendly grasp
The hand of such as this man clasp.
In his opinion, Pennicuick was guilty of a most audacious falsehood, and Mr. Major had a prejudice against even courageous lying. ‘It is very hard,’ said this honest fellow to his wife when he got home, ‘that we should be so unfortunate in our candidates. The last one was a rogue, and this one is a knave at the very least.’
‘If you will meddle with politics, Sam,’ answered that sensible woman, ‘you must expect such things. You can't touch pitch and have clean hands.’ Then, with that inconsistency which distinguishes her sex, she added, ‘I do hope next time you will not be so diffident, but insure the borough an honest representative by standing for it yourself.’
[Page 159]
As we here take leave of this good fellow, I may say at once that when the opportunity arrived he took his wife's advice, and became, if not a shining light in Parliament, a very good burner, never flickering this way and that with the popular breath; in short, dropping metaphor, the best member that Slowcomb ever sent to the House of Commons.
That Mr. Samuel Major, formerly an ironmonger in this country town, should thus withdraw his countenance from Mr. Pennicuick, filled that gentleman with rage rather than regret. If he was so pigheaded as to believe he had put up that placard, in spite of his positive assertion to the contrary, let him believe it: but at the same time it was a most infernal piece of impertinence that he should do so. As to the borough with which he had just professed himself identified heart and soul, he hated the sight of it, and could hardly keep his face from showing it to the crowd of supporters who, with waving of hats and rounds of cheers, accompanied him to the very door of his railway carriage.
The first words that he uttered softly to himself, as the train glided out of the station and as he lay back in his cushioned corner, were, ‘Curse the place and all that's in it!’ Which was not grateful in the Honourable Member for Slowcomb.
[Page 160]
CHAPTER XV. THE DISADVANTAGES OF GREATNESS. A Great author has described his feelings on waking one morning under the very same roof which sheltered Mr. Ralph Pennicuick, and ‘finding himself famous’; this no doubt is very pleasant when publicity breaks upon us in that engaging form. Even to find onself notorious and not famous is gratifying to some minds, though I do not personally sympathize with them. I can remember—it is very many years ago, alas!—when the words of the critics used to go through and through me: when they called me a fool, I shivered; when they touched my trembling ears with praise, I glowed. It seems now as if every publishing season had given me another skin, I am grown so very pachydermatous. Still, if the papers were to call me a Rogue, I suppose I should feel that. How much more keenly then did Mr. Ralph Pennicuick, who had not been used to have publicity conferred upon him, feel his position, when he woke on the morning after his election for Slowcombe and found himself—‘ infamous ’! He had flattered himself that what had taken place in the obscure borough of Slowcombe would never be narrated much beyond its limits; he had no idea that, by becoming a Member of Parliament, he had not only become a public character, but a public enemy, at least in the eyes of one great
[Page 161]
section of the body politic. He had turned out a Conservative member, and thereby had caused—though it is true in common with some others—the righteous indignation of the whole Conservative Press. If he had been beaten they would have dismissed him with a few words of contempt—just a kick or two administered to his prostrate body; but as he had triumphed, they rained on him shot and shell and especially that description of missile used in Chinese warfare (and therefore familiar to him) called ‘stink pots.’ He was, they of course said, ‘a mischievous interloper;’ but he also combined two characteristics seldom found in the same individual; he was at once both a Jerry Sneak and a Baron Munchausen: a cunning trickster and a most audacious liar. Worse than all, the word Dhulang, for which Pennicuick's eye sought with feverish apprehension up and down each envenomed page, was repeated everywhere. No definite charge, indeed, was made against him, but nothing that malicious innuendo could suggest was wanting. It was hinted that he had taken Conway's fate in a very philosophic manner—‘it was well known that Mr. Ralph Pennicuick was a Stoic philosopher in his manner of enduring the misfortunes of his friends; that he had not hurried himself to procure a reprieve from the Chinese Government; and that, though very wealthy, he had spared his money at a time when it might have saved his friend, in order that he might spend it with a lavish hand on the venal electors of Slowcombe.’
His offer of the 500 l . reward for the discovery of the actual perpetrator of the placard trick was treated with particular scorn. One of the papers had even calculated the cost of the handbill at thirty shillings, which it said was the sole expense to which this apparently handsome conduct could possibly put Mr. Ralph Pennicuick.
[Page 162]
The Liberal papers, it is true, upheld his conduct as irreproachable and his motives as pure as the untrodden snow; but that was, as it were or as it seemed, a matter of course. It is very small satisfaction when twelve men out of a jury box announce their belief in your innocence of a crime of which twelve men in a jury box have declared you guilty.
He had been ‘put upon his trial’—so ran the very words of one influential organ—‘before the electors of Slowcombe, and if there had been only time’ (and this was probably true enough) ‘for them to have considered his case, their verdict would have been a very different one. As it was, it’ (the organ) ‘wished them joy of their brand-new representative.’ He could not complain that his own words had been misrepresented, for his speech on the hustings was reproduced in each paper with the usual fidelity: they simply refused to believe his assertions.
Ralph Pennicuick was almost out of his mind with rage and terror: rage at the insult thus unjustly heaped upon him, and terror at the growing in fluence which that wrongdoing of his at Dhulang was exercising over his life. It was marvellous—nay, it was miraculous—that that deed done in a corner, thousands of miles from his native land, and from civilization itself, without a witness except certain savages all interested in keeping silence on the matter, should be making this stir on English soil. It was almost enough to make a man believe in an overruling Providence, or at all events in a Nemesis of some sort that awaited the transgressor; and then again the question recurred to him (which he had hoped was stifled) as to who had put up that terrible placard, ‘Inquire at Dhulang, China.’ Such hideous results had flowed from it, that he could now hardly deem it a haphazard blow.
[Page 163]
While he was still at his toilet—which had become rather a protracted affair, and lucky it was for him that he did not shave, for his nerves were in no condition to hold a razor—Raymond looked in, though he had called on the previous evening to congratulate his father, it must be confessed in rather a mechanical manner, on his success.
‘Well, my knight of the rueful countenance, how goes it?’ inquired the elder Pennicuick, who in the presence of a fellow-creature could be generally ‘himself again.’ ‘I hope your political opinions will not prevent your sitting down with your father to breakfast, though he is the Whig member for Slowcombe.’
‘I will sit down with you with pleasure, sir, though I have long breakfasted. As for politics, they are matters that I never cared much about, and care less for now than ever.’
‘Thank you,’ interrupted the other sharply.
‘Nay, sir, I did not mean as respected your new connection with them—that of course gives them a personal interest for me: but when one has troubles of one's own, the affairs of the British Constitution —speaking generally—do not hold any large space in one's thoughts. It was, however, about this election matter that I have come to you this morning. I suppose you have not seen the newspapers?’
‘I have seen some,’ answered the other carelessly. He had thrust half a dozen of them under the bed when he heard his son's voice in the passage.
‘There are, I am sorry to say, some remarks of an offensive nature in one or two of them,’ said Raymond gravely.
‘I have not a doubt of it, my lad,’ answered the other cheerfully. ‘The Tories are very sore at the result of the elections, and I dare
[Page 164]
say they do not owe me much love for winning a seat from them at Slowcombe.’
‘I make allowance for party feeling, sir; but personal accusations have been made, and it seems to me of such a kind that they should be answered.’
Mr. Pennicuick desisted for a moment from trimming his once universally admired beard with some elaborate instrument of the toilet, to smile good-naturedly upon his offspring.
‘How charming it is to find you still so young, Raymond! Is it possible that you have reached the legal years of discretion, and yet can advocate a man's attempting to set himself right with a newspaper? It was done once—by Richard Cobden, if I remember rightly—and with tolerable success; but the exception only proves the rule. If a Bengal tiger tore the clothes off your back, you wouldn't go and ask him for them, I suppose, nor yet for an apology. If you couldn't shoot him—and you can't in this case—you'd be glad to leave the beast alone.’
‘Still, there are questions of fact, sir, which it is desirable should be made known. I don't know how you may take things now in a Parliamentary sense, but when I read in the paper that my father has told a lie, that makes my blood boil.’
‘Does it, indeed, my lad?’ replied the other coolly. ‘What a very bad state your blood must be in! A newspaper—and especially a Tory newspaper—will say anything. The only question that the person of whom it says it has to consider is, Is that paper worth powder and shot? You can only make it feel by means of an action for libel. Now’ (this with a light touch of scorn), ‘is it worth my while to bring one?’
It was an admirable piece of acting. You would have said
[Page 165]
this man was of iron; utterly impervious to the whips and stings of which he spoke.
‘Well, it is not the insult that moves me so much, father,’ answered Raymond hesitatingly, ‘as what these blackguards have said about your behaviour to—that is, about what happened at Dhulang. Everybody knows, who knows anything about it, how loyally you stuck by your friend. And these innuendoes are abominable. Have you any personal enemy, do you think, who, knowing something of what you did, endeavours thus cruelly to misrepresent it?’
It took Ralph Pennicuick ‘all he knew,’ as he would have himself phrased it, to keep his colour here, and to prevent his hands from trembling. It was horrible to think that the very idea which had haunted him since that nomination day at Slowcombe should have occurred thus naturally to his son.
‘Enemies, my lad!—why, of course I have enemies. The man must be a cipher indeed who has not made such.’
‘But did you make one in China?’
Pennicuick's mind reverted to Fu-chow, and he gave a ghastly smile. He had certainly nothing to fear from that obscure barbarian, though he would even yet have liked to cut his pigtail off and his head with it.
‘The whole Chinese race are my enemies,’ said he quietly, ‘but I have no quarrel with anyone in particular.’
‘I of course refer to some European; and one who has communications with this country.’
‘I know of now such foe, my lad,’ said Pennicuick thoughtfully.
‘Well, there is some malicious scoundrel at work in this
[Page 166]
matter, sir, I feel confident: and fortunately we can dispose of his slanders. Milburn, who accompanied you when you returned to Dhulang, will, I am sure, write to the papers—’
‘Not a word,’ interrupted the other violently; ‘I will not have a syllable written upon the subject. Pray permit me to manage my own affairs, sir.’ His face was pale with passion, but he controlled himself. ‘Come, my lad, let us go to breakfast.’
On the table, duly spread for that meal, was a large heap of letters. ‘Ah, this is what comes of being an M.P.! I have no doubt everybody is wanting everything.’ He ran his eye over the addresses. ‘Yes: I thought so; strangers every one of them. They want churches endowed, chapels built, the Liberal cause supported—that is to say, from 5 l. to 50 l. —every one of them. I wish they may get it.’
‘I know that handwriting,’ observed Raymond, pointing to one of these communications, ‘and I will promise you it is not a begging letter. It is from Mr. Wardlaw.’
‘Wardlaw? What on earth should he be writing to me about?’
He opened the letter, and, having rapidly scanned the contents, threw it down with an execration.
‘I hope there is nothing the matter, sir,’ said Raymond, who feared there might be some evil news from Sandybeach. He did not love Nelly the less because he had lost her.
The elder Pennicuick in his selfish egotism forgot the cause which had aroused his son's anxiety.
‘Matter? There, you may read it for yourself if you like. It is monstrous—it is infamous, that I am to be persecuted by
[Page 167]
every human being upon this infernal subject.’ And he threw the open letter across the table.
Raymond read as follows:—
Dear Sir, — The interest which you have so strongly manifested in Miss Ellen Conway must be my excuse for addressing you concerning a matter that affects her nearly. She has, to our great distress, suddenly resolved upon leaving our roof—or rather the house that has for the last few months represented it—and on maintaining herself, in London, on her own slender resources and the small pecuniary aid which her pencil may afford her. Her reasons for this I need not go into; she is quite determined upon the subject, and will no doubt carry out her intention. It is in vain that we have be sought her to accept, even for the present, such assistance from us as would at least put her above the necessity of practising what I fear must be called sordid economies. She will take nothing, she says, but what she earns or to which she has a right . The poor soul, though (as my wife says, who loves her like her own child) she deserves everything, has a right, as far as we know, to nothing. Still, it strikes us both that there is a course by which she may be benefited through your means, though, as I understand, she has refused to do so at your expense. I had the pleasure of reading the telegram to-day which announced your return for Slowcombe. Now, it is certain that a Member of the House of Commons can call attention to anything that has been done amiss far better than any private individual, and I venture to suggest therefore that you will press upon the Ministry, of which it seems you are a supporter, the propriety of doing something for Miss Conway in the way of pension. Her father, it is true, was not killed while on military service, and it was even urged, I believe, when the matter was before mooted, that he was put to death for a grave offence which insulted the whole Chinese nation through their religion, and, in short, admitted of no palliation, far less of recompense. You, however, will be in a position to state the facts of the case, which, from poor Nelly's own account of her father's character, I can scarcely believe are in accordance with these statements. You have already shown your willingness to assist this dear good girl with your purse; I am sure, therefore, you will not refuse—since that sort of private aid is distasteful to her—to give your voice to the advocacy of her claims in Parliament. No one so well knows as you do what actually occurred at Dhulang, and, as the nearest friend of her father, you are certainly the fittest man to undertake her cause. The poor girl has made up her mind to go to her old lodgings in Gower Street, the landlady of which is a kind motherly sort of woman, she says, and where, it seems, there is a room suitable for a studio. Her first step will be to
[Page 168]
provide herself with some suitable drawing-master—so that she will have to educate as well as to clothe and feed herself upon what is, in fact, a mere pittance. The urgency of the case will therefore, I am sure, excuse my addressing you upon the matter.
I am, dear sir,
Yours truly,
John Wardlaw.
‘Now, what do you think of that?’ said Ralph Pennicuick peevishly. ‘You know this fellow well; I don't—at least, scarcely to nod to; and yet he writes to dictate to me what I am to do as soon as I take my seat in Parliament. I call it a most infernal liberty. As to Miss Nelly, I have not a word to say against her.’ So furious was his mood, that he now remembered for the first time that there had been a love affair between the two young people. ‘But I put it to you, Raymond; if you were in my place, would you not think it deuced hard?’
‘However hard it was, father, I should take care that no effort of mine was wanting, were I you, to urge my dead friend's daughter's claim, as Mr. Wardlaw suggests. She, unhappily, refuses aid from those who would think it an honour and a pleasure to help her, and therefore there is no resource for her but a public grant. It is plain she will be in penury, if not in absolute want—’
‘That's her own fault, sir,’ broke in the other petulantly. ‘She is too proud to take anybody's money, though, as you are a witness, I have offered her enough and to spare. Her view— quite contrary to that entertained by those who won't go into the workhouse—is that it is less humiliating to become a pensioner of the State.’
‘I don't see that is her view at all, sir. Mr. Wardlaw
[Page 169]
takes it for granted that it is so, and that is all we know about it.’
‘Very true; a very just remark, Raymond,’ observed the other approvingly. ‘We have no evidence that the young lady herself had any hand in this singular—this most unjustifiable—application. She may not even approve of it.’
‘Very likely, sir; indeed, I feel confident that she is ignorant of Mr. Wardlaw's having written to you; and I think it only too likely that she would have scruples about making capital (as it may seem to her) out of her poor father's murder. I can easily imagine her shrinking from the public disclosures it would be necessary to make regarding the catastrophe itself.’
‘And very right too,’ put in the elder Pennicuick. ‘Such feelings do her honour, and I would be the last man to wound them. Moreover, I will credit her with appreciating the great inconvenience that the course proposed would entail on me. Why, sir, I should have to demand of the Prime Minister a night all to myself to bring the matter before Parliament. Among the “notices of motion” you would see, “Ralph Pennicuick, to ask the Government why a pension has not been conferred on the orphan daughter of the late Captain Arthur Conway, put to death in March last by order of the Imperial Government of China,” &c., &c. I shall be looked upon like one of those melancholy bores who insist upon having their say concerning the Begum of Badrapore and her hereditary claim of seven millions of rupees, and other horrid Indian matters. It would be making me supremely ridiculous, and be unspeakably distressing into the bargian. You must see that yourself.’
‘It would be distressing, of course, sir, and doubtless disagreeable
[Page 170]
in many ways,’ answered Raymond gravely; ‘but if you ask my opinion, and supposing the young lady is in favour of the application being made, it seems to me you have no option but to undertake it. Consider, sir, the position of this orphan girl in London, alone and unfriended, endeavouring to earn a scanty pittance by her pencil, while you, the nearest friend of her dead father, prosperous and in good position, do not stir a finger to help her. I am sorry to distress you, sir, but, believe me, I speak on your own account as much as upon hers; would not such a state of things, I say, give grounds, and apparently solid ones, for accusations which are now, thank Heaven, baseless and contemptible, but which in that case I, for my part, should blush to read?’
The expression of Ralph Pennicuick's face, who, at the commencement of this impassioned speech, had stared at his son with angry eyes, had wholly altered during its progress. It had worn such a look of mute appeal when Raymond painted Nelly's wretched condition, that you would have thought the description of it had pierced his listener's very heart (as indeed it did); and now, when Raymond spoke of what his own feelings would be if his father should refuse to urge Nelly's plea, should she herself desire it, it changed again to an expression of patient but pained submission.
‘You are too impetuous, Raymond—far too impetuous, and you take advantage of my—what is the word?—yes, my failing health. But if the girl wishes it—mind that, if she really wishes it —and if you think it my duty, and if I am equal to it—you'll just write to Wardlaw for me and say that —if I am equal to it—the thing shall be done.—Now I think,’ here his tones assumed their old petulance, ‘you have done me enough of mischief for one morning,
[Page 171]
and—oh, I have no doubt you didn't mean to kill me, but when one is out of health one doesn't want to be pulled down still lower by bad news and—and—disagreeable talk. And if you will kindly ring the bell, Raymond, Hatton will show you out .’
It was quite true that the young man's visit had done his father harm. When his son had left the room Ralph Pennicuick fell back in his chair as a dying man lies, at length, from sheer feebleness.
‘They will kill me amongst them,’ he murmured. ‘I could never stand it—that speech in the House of Commons about him . It would be one lie from first to last. Alone and unfriended—a scanty pittance—and his daughter. It is frightful every way.’ His face was so ghastly that, as he pulled out a drawer in the breakfast-table and produced a bottle, a looker-on would have said, ‘Why, this man is going to put an end to his life.’ It was, however, only some brandy, which he poured from the bottle into his cup of coffee, and drank with a trembling hand.
[Page 172]
CHAPTER XVI. A FRIEND IN NEED. Grief , it is said, does not always disincline ladies to love; indeed, there is a famous classical story—I am not classical myself, only devout, and I have read it as it appears in Jeremy Taylor— of a widow who, even while weeping over her husband's tomb, became filled with the tender passion for somebody else; and at all events, grief forbids mere flirtation and makes matters serious. So, in Miss Ellen Conway's case, though she never thought of Love, her very sorrows made her more accessible, as I have said, to one who, it was easy for anyone else but herself to see, had become her lover. To her the talk about her father and his fate was so incongruous with any notion of ‘being courted,’ that it did not occur to her that she was undergoing that operation; but Mr. Herbert Milburn was not for his part so overcome with melancholy but that he could think of other things than the Tomb—such as the Altar. Another thing, too, conduced to the young people being ‘thrown together’ more than would otherwise have been the case, namely, Miss Milburn's opposition. By Nelly it was simply disregarded; but ‘dear Herbert’ resented it exceedingly, and redoubled his attentions to his fair enslaver in consequence.
After a few weeks he was summoned to London again on
[Page 173]
business for a day or two, and then it was for the first time that Nelly felt—through her sense of loss—how agreeable a companion he had been to her. If her mere affection for each had been weighed, it would probably have been found that she liked Mrs. Wardlaw much the better of the two; but then Milburn could sympathise with her, while her kind hostess could only pity and pet her. The young rogue affected to encourage her views of independence and artistic toil—though in his heart he intended to knock all such projects on the head by marrying her—while Mrs. Wardlaw utterly scoffed at them. ‘She had no patience with such nonsense,’ she said. ‘What did Heaven send us friends for but to make use of them!’
There was a certain generous scorn about her, which I venture to think was as fine in its way as those Spartan precepts about living on a crust of one's own winning which Nelly preached, and indeed burnt to practise. She was getting convinced that her skill with her pencil was retrograding rather than improving, and that she must place herself under professional guidance.
In vain Mr. Herbert Milburn had recommended himself as a competent teacher. ‘You draw no better than I do, sir, nor yet so well,’ she had replied, which was quite true, as he laughingly acknowledged. Now that he was gone she missed his laugh, his gentle, earnest talk, and perhaps (though she would not have called it by that name) even his devotion.
More thoughtful than usual, but with her thoughts fixed on her future, not her past, she took her solitary way one afternoon along the shore. Some fancy—or it might be a disinclination to choose the favourite route that had so often been enlivened by Milburn's companionship—made her seek the southern bay, where the projecting cliffs were steep and high, and the beach level and sandy
[Page 174]
without a stone. As she crossed the jetty she passed an artist at his work; his colour-box was on the stone step, and she inadvertently struck it with her foot. ‘I beg your pardon, sir.’
‘Nay, it was my fault, not yours,’ said he.
The words were commonplace, but the voice attracted her by its exceeding gentleness. He was an old man—or rather looked like a man prematurely old; his brown hair and beard were plentifully streaked with grey, and his face was sharp and worn—as though it had been held to the grindstone by harsh Fate. His eyes, deep sunk in their sockets, flamed at her with an expression such as she had seen the hungry wear in sight of food exposed in shops, and which would have frightened her but for the softness of his speech. If the poor man looked mad—and that idea did strike her—he certainly looked harmless. He was long past the time of life at which landscape painters are seen sitting about in the late autumn, even at Sandybeach, and, judged by his attire, was far from prosperous. Perhaps at his age, thought she, it might come to pass she might have met with the same ill-success, and wear as despairing looks as he did.
He had risen as she passed, but sat down at once again very hastily: his shrunken limbs trembled excessively and seemed unable to support him. Nelly felt sorry for him, but her own sorrow presently monopolised her mind, and she forgot all about him; she forgot, too, the time, the place, and the warnings she had received not to linger in Blackness Bay during the spring tides. She was walking to and fro on the dry firm sand when suddenly she looked up and saw the two arms of the bay already projecting far into the sea, and the stern face of the sheer cliff cutting off her escape to landward. The wind was blowing fresh, and from the
[Page 175]
south, that is towards Sandybeach, but she felt that she was too far from the village for a cry for help to reach it. Still she knew that was her only chance, for though there were ships in sight they were miles and miles away, and she could scarcely have been seen from them had she stood on the cliff against the sky instead of on the shore with the dark cliff behind her, which must have seemed almost one with her black dress. Her mind, always alive to ‘colour,’ seized on this fact almost as soon as it grasped the awful peril of her situation.
In all probability she was doomed to die. Before the sunset came and painted yonder ocean with its gorgeous hues, she would be lying beneath it. She was too young for this awful thought not to affect her exceedingly. Now that Death was so near she no longer yearned for it as she had seemed to do of late, but would have very willingly escaped it. She had no fears of the superstitious kind, but, strange to say, the idea that she was about to meet her parents, which hitherto had been so familiar to her, did not now occur to her. Her thoughts, after the first few moments of physical fear, wandered back instead of forward—to her childhood; the enclosed space—narrowing with such frightful speed—in which she found herself, reminded her of some familiar scene in which Raymond and she had been placed during a visit to some other point of the coast, and when they had ‘made believe’ to be in a similar danger. The cliffs in that case had been easily accessible, but it had been the children's fancy to suppose it otherwise. ‘Now,’ said Raymond, who was for ever reading books of peril and adventure, ‘we must cry “Help,” because that word goes far; and the way to cry it is this: turn your back to the wind, and hollow your two hands—so—and then shout.’ Every word of good
[Page 176]
advice is a seed that depends upon the soil on which it falls for life, and on occasion for development. Raymond's words seemed to fall upon her ear exactly as they had done half a score of years ago, and she put both her little hands together (firm they were as the fluted capital of a pillar), and shouted ‘Help, help!’ to the eager wind. It sped upon its course carrying this plaintive music with it, round the southern arm of the bay, till the sound grew faint and was left for dead upon the jetty.
Its last breath, however, caused the old artist, who was still sitting on the same step, to start up and listen. It would not have been so had he been attending to his work: but neither pencil nor brush had he touched since Nelly went by him two hours ago. He had been staring out to sea, and frowning and muttering to himself, and at times giving a great sigh and shutting his eyes, as though nothing was worth looking at: when presently over his face would steal a gentle smile, and the tears would fall two by two, without a sound.
He might not, as Nelly suspected, have had all his five senses about him, but he had certainly the sense of hearing; for, faint as it was, he had caught that inarticulate cry. It might have been the whimper of a sea-bird for all that he could gather from it, but it had been sufficient to arouse his earnest attention. He too, like Raymond, had read books of travel and adventure, or had perhaps, in visiting savage lands himself, had occasion to practise shifts and expedients, for he turned the curled brim of his wide-awake into the shape of what is called a coal-scuttle bonnet, and under that improvised sounding-board looked all ear.
Again the piteous sound came wailing round the point, and died like a ghost on the same spot, as it had died before; but
[Page 177]
this time, because he had been waiting for it, he recognised it for what it was.
He started to his feet, and hurried down the sea-worn slippery steps of the jetty as well as his weak limbs would permit; when in motion you could see clearly how feeble and shattered was his frame. Indeed, since walking was such a toil to him, he had come even the short distance from Sandybeach in a boat, which lay moored close by.
He scrambled into this, and seized the oars with trembling hands. The wind was dead against him, and his arms were weak, but the will, as you could read in his glittering eyes, was strong within him, and in his first few strokes you saw that he was familiar with the oar. He had an oarsman's intelligence, too, for he urged the boat up to the promontory and then along under its lee, instead of making straight for its head. The rounding this against wind and tide was his difficulty, and it strained all his powers. The sweat came out upon his forehead, and his lungs laboured with his labouring arms, and for minutes—that seemed to him years—the issue hung in doubt, but at last he conquered and reached the comparatively smooth water of the bay beyond.
At the edge of its semicircle, on a mere ridge of sand which in a quarter of an hour would be sea, stood Nelly, with one hand fluttering a handkerchief, with the other shading her eyes as she gazed on the coming succour; directly she had caught sight of the black stem of the boat she had ceased to call for help. She felt sure that help was coming—if it could. The ridge of sand had contracted to a riband when the boat reached her, but she stepped into it dryshod. She was about to pour forth her thanks to her deliverer, but he put his finger to his lips; his face was wet, but,
[Page 178]
notwithstanding his exertions, without a trace of colour; and his breath came in great gasps. ‘Great heaven!’ said she, ‘you are killing yourself for my sake. I am strong—I can row; give me the oars.’
He muttered a faint protest, but she took them from his hand, and he tottered to the stern and sat down. The boat drew away from shore like an arrow, urged by her long steady strokes and by the favouring wind. She had learned how to use the oars from Raymond—the second accomplishment of his teaching which had stood her in good stead that day. Her companion's eyes regarded her with the same hungry look as before, but it no longer startled her.
When they had rounded the point, and found themselves under its protection, she ceased rowing. ‘I owe you my life, sir,’ said she simply. He bowed his head without speaking; but those flaming eyes began to soften, till the flame was quenched; he was weeping.
‘I am ill and old,’ said he, with a pained look; ‘pray excuse my weakness.’
‘It is your kindness, not your weakness. What am I to you, that you should have exerted yourself so nobly for my sake! How thankful I am that you are not a poor sailor, but a gentleman.’
‘Why so?’ he asked.
‘Because you will need no recompense but the satisfaction of having done a generous action; if it were otherwise, and I gave you all I had, it would be but a small guerdon for so great a service.’
‘You are poor, then?’ said he sharply.
‘Yes, quite poor. I am—or rather some day I hope to be—
[Page 179]
an artist like yourself, only with me it will be working for bread.’
‘Ah!’
It was but a monosyllable, but it was full of significance; it was pitiful, but it had also a sort of fierceness in it. It was evident to her that this poor man was eccentric, to say the least of it; but her gratitude was due to him even if he were a madman. ‘Let me know the name of my deliverer,’ said she earnestly.
‘Pearson,’ he answered; ‘but you need not make so much of the matter; I heard you cry for help, and rowed across yonder. It took me half-an-hour, it is true; a few years ago it would have taken me five minutes.’
‘You have been ill, then?’
‘Yes, I was taken ill abroad; I am reduced to this;’ he held out his skinny hand against the sun, which almost shone through it. ‘Let us talk on a worthier subject—yourself. Who are you?’
‘My name is Ellen Conway: I am an orphan, but I am staying here for the present with some kind friends, Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw. You must come and receive their thanks, for they value her you have saved far beyond her merits.’
‘They are good friends to you, then?’
‘No one had ever better.’
‘And rich?’
‘Yes, they are very well off.’
‘Rich and good friends, and yet you are poor, you say. I do not understand that sort of friendship.’
‘Oh, it is not their fault; I could live with them all my life, I believe, if I were so minded; but I prefer to be independent.’
‘And you have a talent with the pencil?’
[Page 180]
‘I sometimes think I have; at all events, I take a great pleasure in it. Perhaps it is hereditary, for my dear father did the like.’
‘He was an artist, then?’
‘No, a soldier.’
Her companion nodded and leant back in the stern with a weary air. Nelly took to her oars again, and in a few strokes brought the boat beside the jetty.
‘You are staying at the hotel, I believe, Miss Conway?’
‘Yes, I hope you will call, sir, or permit my friend Mrs. Wardlaw to call on you: I should be very sorry to lose sight of one to whom I owe so much.’
‘My lodgings are not good enough to receive ladies in,’ he answered simply; ‘but I will certainly call at the hotel.’
Nelly held out her hand; he took it and carried it rapidly to his lips, which startled her a little.
Concealing her alarm, however, she wished him ‘good-day’ with a grateful smile, and walked quickly home.
Her adventure was commonplace enough, and would have been so even if it had ended fatally; but he who had shared it with her was certainly not a common character. It was difficult to guess his age, but she put it at about fifty-five; that he was ill, and poor seemed certain; also that he was eccentric to an extreme degree: but she felt that he was a gentleman and had a good heart.
[Page 181]
CHAPTER XVII. A SECOND SUITOR. It was not Nelly Conway's way to make much of any accident that befell her, but out of gratitude to Mr. Pearson she felt compelled to tell Mrs. Wardlaw how near she had been to Death, as well as to whom she owed her escape from it. That good lady was so horrified by the mere fact, that it was fortunate the narrator did not use any arts of embellishment. ‘I should never, never have forgiven myself, dear Nelly, if anything had happened to you.’
‘Why not, dear Mrs. Wardlaw? It would not have been your fault.’
‘Yes, it would; for ever letting you go out of my sight. Does not this show how totally unfit you are to take care of yourself? And yet you used to talk of going away from us, and living all alone in London.’
That ‘used to talk’ was quite a Machiavellian touch: it suggested that this wild resolution of Nelly's had been given up ever so long ago, instead of being a project that pressed itself upon her daily, as Mrs. Wardlaw was well aware, though her guest had ceased to talk of it of late, as is often the case when we are on the brink of action.
[Page 182]
‘I can't be caught by the tide in London,’ urged Nelly, ‘unless I choose my lodgings down at Bankside.’ The periodical inundations of the Thames, according to the last aquatic information, having just taken place in that locality.
This bantering rejoinder drew no answering smile from Mrs. Wardlaw. ‘There was nothing to laugh at,’ thought that kind old soul, in anything which had reference to Nelly's threatened departure.
‘Well, at all events, it was not Mr. Pearson's fault that I was nearly drowned, but quite the reverse; so I hope you will be very kind to him,’ said Nelly softly. ‘He is an artist, but not, I fancy, very prosperous.’
‘Not likely to be, my dear,’ answered her hostess drily. ‘Drawing and painting are all very well for those who can afford them, but as professions—’
‘Hush!’ The door opened. The servant announced ‘A gentleman to see you, ma'am;’ and in walked the very person in question. Mr. Pearson was dressed in the same time-worn summer suit which he had had on an hour or so ago, when Nelly had parted from him on the jetty; but even the hotel waiter had not mistaken his social position. His hat was in his hand, and the intelligence and delicacy of his features were more clearly seen; there was a hesitation in his manner, but it did not appear to arise from mauvaise honte , but seemed rather a personal characteristic.
Mrs. Wardlaw held out her hand to him at once, which seemed to reassure him.
‘You have placed me, Mr. Pearson, under a very great obligation by preserving to me this dear girl.’
‘That you should have a high regard for the young lady does
[Page 183]
not astonish me,’ said he; ‘though as I understand, madam, she is no blood relation.’
‘She is my adopted daughter,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, with quite a fierce look at Nelly, as much as to say, ‘Contradict me if you dare.’ If she could but be reduced to silence, the elder lady might not unreasonably assume some authority when the matter of the girl's departure should come to be seriously discussed.
‘Mrs. Wardlaw is as kind to me as any mother could be,’ said Nelly, whom experience had made alive to pitfalls of this kind, ‘but I am not a party to the arrangement of adoption.’
‘Why not?’ inquired Mr. Pearson, not with conventional indifference, but as if he was really anxious to know.
‘Well, I have the filial love, but not the sense of filial duty,’ said Nelly naïvely. ‘I don't mind her petting me, but then I want to have my own way.’
‘Very natural,’ said the visitor approvingly.
‘What!’ interrupted Mrs. Wardlaw with indignation.
‘But, as I was about to add, madam, very wrong. When a young girl is left without father or mother, and (as she has informed me) scanty means, why should she refuse the help of loving hands? Ah, dear young lady, Poverty, like Death, has its charms when at a distance, but when it comes near us—look at me.’
There was light enough yet to see his threadbare clothes, his parched and weary face, the hollow eyes that bespoke want as well as weakness; but light enough also (for those who could see them) to mark the pride and independence of his look and mien.
‘You are an honest man,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw warmly, ‘and you
[Page 184]
know what you are talking about. May this dear girl have the wisdom to lay your words to heart!’
‘At the same time,’ continued he, ‘the bread of dependence can never be so sweet as that we earn. You tell me, Miss Conway, that you trust to your pencil to do something for you. I have some judgment in such matters—though, it is true, my own want of success may inspire little confidence. Might I see your drawings?’
Nelly ran upstairs at once to bring down her portfolio. Brief as was her absence, there was time enough for the visitor to say with hurried eagerness, ‘She will leave you, Mrs. Wardlaw, and take her own way; she will fail in her object, but she will not confess it; she will suffer—and make no sign; you must never lose sight of her.’
‘Bless the man! as if I should ! Hush, here she is!’
‘So these are your art-treasures, are they, young lady?’ said he cheerfully, as Nelly placed the portfolio before him, and then sat down, in modest confusion, a little ashamed of her prompt acceptance of his criticism. But then she was anxious to ‘improve’ and be corrected in her faults. ‘Well, there is plenty of promise; plenty—dear me, what's this in silver paper? a gem, no doubt?’
‘Oh, please, I did not mean that for a specimen,’ said Nelly with a sudden flush.
‘Why not? it's very creditable; a quaint old garden, and a house of Queen Anne's time.’
‘It is our old house at Richmond: I did it for my poor father as a present on his birthday—and—and—’ here she burst into tears and ran out of the room.
[Page 185]
The events of the afternoon had been a severer mental strain than at the time she had felt them to be. Her nerves were altogether unstrung.
‘Her father met his death in China under the saddest circumstances,’ explained Mrs. Wardlaw in low tones. ‘It is too shocking to talk about. She is quite upset, you see; but I know she had rather be left alone, and presently she will come back again all right.’
‘Poor girl, poor soul! and this was done for her father, was it, and he never lived to see it? It's a pretty picture, but the sentiment is above all art. She wouldn't part with it now, I dare say, for anything.’
‘I should think not. Why, John—that's my husband—offered her ever so much for it, but she wouldn't have sold it him for ten times its weight in gold. She doesn't much like it even to be looked at, though she did show it the other day to Mr. Milburn.’
‘Milburn?’ inquired Mr. Pearson. ‘What Milburn?’
‘Oh, a gentleman who is staying at the hotel. A very nice young fellow—Herbert is his christian name. Do you know him?’
Mr. Pearson shook his head. ‘I thought it might have been a man I knew in India, but on reflection it cannot be he. Is she fond of him?’
‘What, Nelly of Mr. Milburn? Well, really, one doesn't talk of such things.’
‘“Not to strangers,” you would say: of course not. Only I feel such an interest in this young lady from having seen her in such a strait as I did this afternoon: within a few minutes of being drowned, and yet so calm and quiet.’
‘Ah, because she's so “fit to go,” that's it, Mr. Pearson. Well,
[Page 186]
since you saved her life, you have some right to hear about her. I am in hopes this Mr. Milburn may win her heart. It would be an excellent match for her; but there has been some hitch upon her side. Girls are so strange. I think, however, she seems to miss him since he went away.’
‘He is not here, then, at present?’
‘No, he comes back to-morrow: you will then see them together, and be able to judge for yourself.’
‘I suppose such a pretty girl has been sought after, notwithstanding her want of fortune, by other suitors?’
‘Well, between ourselves, by one person only. It's a sad business. His father has stepped in between the young people. He is a hard man—but still it is not to be wondered at. Nelly has not a shilling, and the young man will be very rich when his father dies. It is the Mr. Ralph Pennicuick who is standing for Slowcombe. He was a great friend of Captain Conway's, nevertheless —that was Nelly's father.’
‘Then he has not been a friend of his child?’
‘Well, no; I don't call him a friend. It is true he offered her an annuity after her mother's death, but she declined it.’
‘Why so?’ he inquired again with that air of genuine interest which seemed to excuse what would have otherwise appeared to be mere vulgar curiosity.
‘Well, you see how independent she is: she would probably not have taken it in any case, but it was offered, I fancy, ungraciously. If I were to say to Nelly, “Here is a five-pound note, but understand at the same time that you have no claim upon me,” that would be very brutal.’
[Page 187]
‘But it would be the truth,’ said the other drily.
‘Perhaps so: but I would rather never speak truth again than say such a thing.’
‘Your husband should be a worthy man, madam.’
‘John? I should think so! No better man breathes. But what makes you say that?’
‘Because he has a noble wife.’
‘La! well, I'm sure!’ said Mrs. Wardlaw; and she looked very much relieved as Nelly re-entered the room. It began to strike her, as it had struck her young friend before, that their visitor was a little eccentric.
‘I have looked through your drawings, my dear young lady, and I think you want nothing but good teaching—’
‘Which she shall have wherever and whenever she likes,’ put in poor Mrs. Wardlaw, never forgetting the word in season.
‘To turn out a good artist, continued Mr. Pearson.
‘Since you are stopping here, why cannot you be her master?’ inquired Mrs. Wardlaw boldly.
‘Alas, I am not even my own master,’ returned the other gravely. ‘And I am called elsewhere even now.’ He rose from his chair as he spoke.
‘I wish you could see John,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, who had confidence in her husband's ‘business head.’ ‘If it's a question of terms, I am sure there will be no difficulty, and he'll be back by the express to-night.’
Mr. Pearson shook his head.
‘Well, perhaps you'll give us a line by post, just to say where you are likely to be: even a word or two of advice to Nelly—
[Page 188]
good advice,’ she added significantly—‘that will be very welcome, won't it, my dear?’
‘I can't write,’ sighed Mr. Pearson. He had muttered the remark, as he thought, to himself, but they had both heard it.
‘He must be certainly mad,’ thought Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘to say he can't write!’
‘At least it is very painful to me,’ added the visitor, touching his right hand.
‘Then how terrible it must have been to you to pull that boat out to my rescue!’ said Nelly tenderly.
‘Oh, it was nothing—and soon over,’ answered he, smiling; ‘and then, you know, you pulled me back.’
‘What a mercy it is that you can draw with it!’ observed Mrs. Wardlaw, looking at his hand, which, though thin and delicate, showed no sign of hurt.
‘True, yes: one feels what is amiss, but one overlooks one's advantages. I can just make shift to draw.’ Then after a pause he added, ‘Though I am obliged to go, ladies, I hope to see you again some day.’
‘I hope it will be soon,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw warmly.
‘Whether I see you or not, Mr. Pearson, I shall not forget you, nor what I owe you,’ added Nelly earnestly.
She could hardly say less, yet her manner was so grateful that she could hardly have expressed more. He said good-bye to each of them, and was gone.
‘What a strange man!’ exclaimed Mrs. Wardlaw.
‘A very good and kind one, I am sure,’ said Nelly.
‘I have no doubt about it: but I wish he was a little more like other people.’
[Page 189]
‘He has had troubles, I fear, which have broken him.’
‘But they can't have broken his wrist; or if they have, how is it that he can paint and yet not write; that is what seems to me so queer. By the by, did you see him paint?’
‘Yes: at least, I saw his colour-box, because I was so clumsy as to tread upon it.’
‘Well, it is very mysterious: and I wish John had been here.’
Mr. Wardlaw arrived in due time, according to promise, and, as it happened, Mr. Milburn with him.
‘I was able,’ the latter explained at dinner-time, ‘to escape from the lawyers a day earlier than I had hoped.’
‘How nice of you it was, dear Herbert,’ said his sister gushingly, ‘to come back again to me as soon as you could.’
‘Dear Herbert’ did not reply to this, and Miss Milburn, who detected a sly smile upon Mrs. Wardlaw's face, looked anything but pleased.
If Mr. Milburn's personal presence had been dispensed with, his attention was still a good deal occupied by business affairs. Not a day passed without deeds and documents passing and repassing through the post, in all of which his sister took a family pride, and talked sympathisingly about the trouble there always was in settling matters connected with large landed estates. This continued for a week or two, during which the intimacy of the two families increased by time rather than circumstance, and Miss Milburn kept watch and ward over her brother as though he had been an enchanted princess for whom marriage had been foretold to be fatal, and she herself were an incorruptible dragon.
It was Nelly's custom to take a walk before breakfast, when
[Page 190]
the sands, except in the immediate neighbourhood of the bathing machines, were as deserted as those of Sahara, and the roar or whisper of the waves was the only noise to be heard. She was returning one morning from her favourite bay, when she saw Mr. Milburn coming towards her. He was a late riser, and had expressed in her presence his astonishment at her own heroic conduct in taking these matutinal walks: and at the sight of him she felt her face flush. She had as little vanity as it is possible for a pretty girl to have, but she knew why he was to meet her, and what he was about to say. She saw as they drew nearer one another that his face wore a more earnest look than usual, and yet that it had an expression of unrest about it: a combination she had noticed once before in the face of another man.
‘You are very courageous, Mr. Milburn,’ said she, smiling—for a woman has always a smile and a tear handy—‘thus to dare the morning air.’
‘Yes, I am courageous,’ he quietly said; ‘perhaps even to audacity. Would you mind turning back with me, Miss Conway, just for a hundred yards or so?’
He little knew that he was leading her back to the very spot where Raymond Pennicuick had told to her—in vain—the same old story that he himself was about to tell again, or he would surely have avoided it as of evil omen.
They walked on for a few steps in silence, which becoming intolerable to Nelly, as well it might, she broke by a reference to his sister.
‘Miss Milburn told us yesterday that all your business had at last been settled; so I suppose you feel quite a gentleman at large?’
[Page 191]
‘It has not all been settled, dear Miss Conway; but it will be so before I get home again; and how it is to be done will depend on you.’
‘On me ?’ said she gaily, but with a weight about her heart that sank it very low. ‘I am afraid my advice on such matters will not be worth much.’
‘Your decision on the point will nevertheless be final. This estate, that Catherine talks so much about, but which is no such great matter after all, has a “mansion” upon it (as the auctioneers call it), which is at present a millstone about my neck. I am to decide to-day whether I am to live in it or to let it. If the former, I shall sell out of the regiment and become, as you say, a gentleman at large; if the latter, I shall return at once to China.’
‘Indeed!’ said she with genuine interest. She felt that she should be seriously sorry if this bright, kind young fellow should leave England, when in all probability they would never meet again.
‘Yes, If I stay in this country, and reside at my own place, it will certainly not be alone, nor with my sister: she is a good creature, but I feel that we could not live for ever under the same roof. But if, my dear Miss Conway, you would consent to be its mistress, then I should be the happiest man, I do believe, in England. Take time, take time, I do beseech you’ (for he read rejection in her eyes), ‘for if you say “No,” that will mean exile, probably for all my life. I was your father's friend—’
‘Mr. Milburn, I entreat you to say no more,’ interrupted the girl earnestly. ‘I ask it for both our sakes; I appeal to a nature that I know is as unselfish as it is kind to spare yourself and me . I am deeply sensible of the honour you would confer upon me, and of which I am wholly unworthy; but I cannot accept it. I do not
[Page 192]
mean to marry. I have had troubles such as you cannot understand—’
‘But I said “Take time, take time,”’ broke in the young man eagerly. ‘I know you have had cruel trials, from which, at present, you have not recovered. It was wrong of me to speak so soon, but my love must be my excuse.’
‘You need no excuse, Mr. Milburn; though, indeed, that you have thought so seriously of one like me, surprises me. If I have given you cause to—to—’ She blushed and hesitated, her mind reverting to his sister and her innuendoes.
‘No, you have given me no cause,’ said he; ‘it is Nature herself which has made you so adorable. I have said that I was audacious in my hopes, but tell me at least that I need not despair.’
‘Mr. Milburn, you have been very kind to me. I believe you are a good man, and I respect you with my whole heart; but, once for all, I cannot marry you.’
‘It is enough. I have no right to ask you another question, yet I must put it for my own sake; for if your answer is what I believe it will be, hope will still be left to me—as it is left, they say, even to the most wretched. I am, it seems, not personally distasteful to you. Is the cause of my rejection that you love another?’
Her lips moved, though without any articulate sound. Her face flushed from brow to chin. She cast down her eyes. Her answer was very plain to read. Milburn bit his lips—his face, unlike hers, was very pale—and bent his head. It was his submission to his fate. ‘Let us go back to the hotel,’ he said; ‘you must not keep your friends waiting for breakfast. Do not cry, I beseech you. I am not worth a tear from your eyes.’
[Page 193]
CHAPTER XVIII. MISS MILBURN EXPRESSES APPROVAL. It was with profound distress that Nelly Conway had received and rejected the offer of Milburn's hand, for she had no doubt that his heart would have gone with it. It would have pained her to have so behaved any honest young fellow, but, in truth, she had a great liking for this one, though it had no touch of love about it. It was plain to her that her departure from Sandybeach, on which she had so long determined, could be no longer delayed if Mr. Milburn should stay on there; and though, indeed, that was not probable, for he would be sure to feel the delicacy of her position, and hasten to relieve her of his presence, yet what right had she—who in any case had meant to go—to drive him to such a step? That very day, therefore, without stating her immediate reasons for her resolution, she informed her kind host and hostess of her intention to go to town at once, and begin the life of independence she had always determined upon. There was a terrible scene of tears and tender pleading, which would have carried conviction, had she needed it, of how dear she had become to both these excellent people.
‘It'll go near to break my old woman's heart,’ said Mr. Wardlaw, in a tone that showed his own was not quite bomb-proof.
[Page 194]
‘Oh, never mind me ,’ sobbed his wife; ‘when I'm dead and gone she'll be sorry, and I dare say will come back to you, John, and make the tea, and put out the flowers, and play toons to you on the piano, just as she used to do.’ The recollection of these tender services, which were no longer, it seemed, to be performed by her darling, utterly overcame the good lady.
‘I am sorry that any poor thing we were able to do for you,’ said Mr. Wardlaw simply, ‘should have the sense of obligation about it. We didn't—neither of us—mean it to be so, Miss Nelly, I do assure you.’
‘Oh, I am sure you didn't, and I never did feel it so,’ cried the poor girl. ‘It is your very goodness and kindness that make me want to go.’
‘Then we'll be very hard and grumpy, won't we, missus? We'll do our very best to be unkind to you, indeed, though just at first, perhaps, my old woman here will find it a little difficult.’
‘Not more difficult than you would, Mr. Wardlaw. Of course I don't mean exactly what I said. I have been made so happy by your kindness, but it has placed me in a false position. I feel myself getting less and less fitted—because you spoil me so—to make my own way in the world; and so I must needs set about it at once.’
As in all discussion in which the affections mingle, the arguments were various and discursive; but Nelly maintained her point; it was settled that she was to go to town, and, residing, if possible, at the old lodgings in Gower Street, to there pursue her studies. She wrote that day to the proprietor of the ‘Fine Arts’ establishment at Richmond, who had been her earliest patron, to inquire as to some drawing-master whose charges should be within
[Page 195]
her slender means. As a supplement to his teaching, it was her purpose to attend the classes at South Kensington.
Having got over the first and worst difficulty—that of wrenching herself from her generous friends—Nelly felt somewhat more composed in mind; but the need of solitude after so much mental struggle was imperative. For the second time that day she took a walk alone. On this occasion she went inland, as being the less likely route on which to meet people, and especially Mr. Milburn; she chose a footpath through the fields that led to the high downland above the village, and on the down she walked for miles with untiring feet, in a clear wind that blew the sea-gulls about the skies, and the weariness and worry out of her brain. In youth nature will do this for us, but in old age the sunshine and the breeze fall but as rain upon a stony soil.
On her way down she saw a female figure coming up the path; by the daintiness with which she crossed the stiles and picked her way she knew it was Miss Milburn, and would gladly have avoided the rencontre. There was a little wood between them, through which were two paths, one direct and the other leading to a small farm, and so by a circuit to the same point of egress. Nelly took the longer route, calculating that this lady would take the other, but, when she emerged, there was her friend seated on the stile, and dinting the soft ground with the point of her parasol.
‘My dear Miss Conway, I am so glad to have found you,’ cried she, with enthusiasm. ‘Indeed, I came out on purpose. I felt that I could never have sat down to dinner, or have met you in any cold or formal way, as usual, without expressing to you what I felt: without telling you how admirably, how nobly, you have behaved!’
[Page 196]
‘I am glad to hear I have earned your good opinion, Miss Milburn,’ said Nelly coldly; ‘but I am at a loss to know what I have done to deserve it.’
‘Well, it is not what you have done, so much as what you have not done: not one girl in a thousand, in your position, would have resisted such a temptation. To see the incongruity of things, and the impropriety of any line of conduct in the presence of a great advantage, is given to so very few people.’
‘You speak in riddles,’ answered Nelly; her tones were ice; her face was stone.
‘Ah, there again you are so judicious; you are quite right to keep dear Herbert's secret as though it were your own: only, as it happens, he has told me everything.’
‘Everything!’ repeated Nelly slowly. He surely, surely, could never have told this woman that sacred secret which she had hidden from every eye but his, and only revealed to him in merciful kindness.
‘Oh, yes; how you refused him, though he actually offered to make you mistress of the old Hall. It was a most imprudent impulse, but, there! you had the good sense to see it in its right light. Most fortunately—as I told him—you were a girl of independent spirit, and who understood the fitness of things. He will understand it himself if he has time for thought, and is let alone. Then, what a comfort it will be to you to reflect that you acted as you have done. My dear Miss Conway, it may seem a liberty, but if you knew how gratified I feel for your conduct to dear Herbert —might I kiss you?’
‘I really don't see any reason why you should,’ said Nelly, drawing herself back from the threatened embrace.
[Page 197]
‘Well, at all events you may count upon me to be your friend for life.’
‘You are very good, but I am afraid there will be few opportunities of our meeting in future. Our ways will lie far apart. It will be my lot to earn my own living—if, indeed, I am able to succeed in that—while you—’
‘One moment!’ interrupted Miss Milburn sprightlily: ‘never mind about me, for I'm nobody in this matter: I am only thinking of dear Herbert. You have often talked, you know, about earning your own living, but in the mean time you continue to remain here with Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘Well?’
‘What I was about to say is a little embarrassing, my dear Miss Conway,’ continued the other, and it must be confessed by no means in her usual style, which was florid and flowing. ‘Indeed, if I was not certain that your good sense would insure its being taken as it is intended, as a friend's advice, I could hardly mention it: but the fact is, so long as you remain at Sandybeach, there will be still danger.’
‘To whom?’
‘Well, really you are quite abrupt: I mean, of course, to dear Herbert. You have behaved admirably, and, as it were, saved him from himself: but he is not yet—ahem—well—’ she looked towards the coppice and found a metaphor—‘out of the wood. It is possible he may himself fly from temptation: I recommended that course to him very strongly, but then men are so weak. What I wish to ask you —and I know it is a great favour—would you mind going away?’
‘As it happens, Miss Milburn,’ said Nelly quietly, ‘I am going away to-morrow or the next day at latest. I am bound to say,
[Page 198]
however, that, if it had not been so, your request would not have moved me. I think it officious, I think it impertinent, and to the last degree unbecoming in—I will not say a lady—but any woman.’
Nelly's blood was fairly up; she mounted the stile with a vigour that rather alarmed her late companion, who made room for her with great alacrity, and hurried home.
It was very well that she was going; that she had thoroughly made up her mind to leave Sandybeach, and informed others of it, or she felts as though she must have stayed, in sheer defiance of that insolent request.
However, there was one good thing about it; it had reminded her, in a manner not easily to be forgotten, of her own position in the world, of the humility of which, at times, she had perhaps been in danger of losing sight. It was high time that she should begin life upon a genuine basis.
On the day after the morrow she would receive a definite answer from the lodging-house keeper; indeed, such had been her haste to escape from Sandybeach, that she had begged her to telegraph in case of the house being full, so that she might lose no time in applying elsewhere. How much better it would have been could she have fled at once, that very morning, and so escaped the unmannerly and insulting advice of Catherine Milburn!
As it happened, that lady might, after all, have spared herself the trouble—and perhaps even the pain—of making herself so disagreeable, for when she got home to the hotel she found her brother had in her absence quitted it for London. He had confided to her the fact of his rejection, simply to account for his departure, which he had intended to take in her company, but the manner in which she had received his news was so offensive to him (though
[Page 199]
she was quite unconscious of it) that he had felt her society to be for the present insupportable. He left word that she should join him in town, whither business had suddenly summoned him, so soon as she heard from him again.
‘How very, very weak he is!’ was his sister's reflection. ‘He evidently dare not trust himself near the girl, for fear he should make a fool of himself a second time, and not so easily escape. I wonder what induced her to reject him! It is plain, from her late impertinent behaviour to me, that it was from no proper sense of the superiority of his position. Is it possible, I wonder, that she is married already? Well, at all events, he has made himself safe, and for that one cannot be too thankful.’
A telegram did come on the morrow to Nelly from Gower Street, but it was to say that the rooms she had fixed on—one of which was adapted for a studio—were not let, but at her disposal; and she resolved to migrate thither the next day.
It was this determination of hers that caused Mr. Wardlaw to write the letter to Ralph Pennicuick with the contents of which we are acquainted, her host and hostess having attempted in vain to persuade her to accept from them any pecuniary aid. On the morning of her departure she got a communication from the proprietor of the ‘Fine Arts’ depository at Richmond, which interested and excited her much. Its reception had the great and immediate good of diverting her mind from the pain of parting with her loving friends, which had wrung her very heart-strings, and seemed at the last moment to be greater than she could bear. The letter from Richmond was as follows:—
In reply to your inquiry, I have the honour to tell you that I think I know of a teacher who will suit your purpose. He is not perhaps a first-rate
[Page 200]
artist, but he draws and paints very well, and indeed the best things I have now in my establishment are the work of his pencil. He came to reside here—I suppose for the river scenery—about three weeks ago, but has since gone to town; he left his London address with me for the very purpose of my recommending to him a pupil or two—and I enclose it with much pleasure. His terms, as you see, are very moderate, and I believe him to be thoroughly competent. After all, it is quite possible you may know him yourself, for I seem to fancy he spoke of you, or at all events of Mr. and Mrs. Wardlaw (to whom I offer my respectful compliments), when he first called on me.
The card enclosed bore the name of Mr. William Pearson, Teacher of Drawing, &c., Bedford Place, and also his terms for attending at pupils' private houses.
It was a common name enough, but still the probability was that this Mr. Pearson was identical with the very man who had saved Nelly's life but three days ago, and who had certainly made a very favourable impression on her and Mrs. Wardlaw. If this was so, the initial difficulty of procuring a teacher was not only got over, but that teacher was just the one the girl would have chosen for herself had the choice been offered her.
On the other hand, Mrs. Wardlaw had ‘fished’ for that Mr. Pearson, with the very view of employing him as Nelly's master, and he had answered, ‘Alas, I am not even my own master;’ but perhaps that had only meant that he could not teach out of London. At all events, this communication gave her matter for thought throughout the journey, prevented her from dwelling (not without sharp stings of conscience) upon those she had left behind her, and gave her hope that not quite everything in the hard life that lay before her would be new and strange.
[Page 201]
CHAPTER XIX. TUTOR AND PUPIL. As honour cannot heal a wound, though it may help us to get one, so determination cannot make soft the bed which it has compelled us to lie on. It can only enable us to endure hardness. Very bare and melancholy looked the old lodging-house in Gower Street to poor Nelly's eyes, when she re-entered it as her own mistress; lonely and full of bitter memories, though the rooms she had taken were not those which her mother and herself had tenanted of yore. Her bedroom looked now to the front, and the parlour, which was to be her studio, to the back, where a long strip of desolate garden ground ran out, and was terminated by a dead wall. Mrs. Hansel, the landlady, was indeed profuse in her welcome, and even didactic also—it was a credit both to landlady and lady, she said, when ‘a party’ came back to their old quarters as in this case—but Nelly missed Mrs. Wardlaw's loving looks, and the kind and cheerful accents of her honest spouse. Upon the whole, she had not felt so miserable since her father's death; for at her mother's there were hopes for her still, though she had tried to persuade herself otherwise. But now there was no hope that a young girl could call such. The knowledge that she had given sorrow to two noble natures, as she believed those of Raymond and Mr. Milburn to be,
[Page 202]
was no slight addition to her sense of woe, which was indeed almost overwhelming.
There had been young and delicately nurtured women before her, doubtless, who in lonely London lodgings, friendless and almost moneyless, had been sustained by strong ambition and had lived to justify their aspirations. But she felt that hers was not one of those exceptional characters; she had no conviction of success, no consciousness of genius to support her. If these even fell short of their ideal, they attained to something ; their art, their talent, at least procured them a due subsistence: but in Nelly's case to procure this had become her chief if not her highest aim, and if she fell short of it, she would fail miserably indeed. Her practice with her brush at Sandybeach had much disheartened her; she had observed the sketches of others, who themselves had made no particular mark in the world, to be much superior to her own; she could not do much better than even Mr. Milburn, who was but a desultory amateur, while that little sketch, slight as it was, from her father's hand, which she had become possessed of, was infinitely beyond her powers. Yet she had never heard him spoken of as having any especial skill as an artist. It was plain that her only chance was application and incessant work, and that very evening she despatched a line to Mr. Pearson to ask him to call upon her. ‘If you are the same gentleman that I met at Sandybeach,’ she wrote, ‘it will be a happy chance for me indeed should you have a little time for teaching at your disposal.’
She received no reply the next day, nor the next, and almost in despair she took counsel of Mrs. Hansel as to what should be done.
‘Well, Janet shall step round with you and call upon the
[Page 203]
gentleman, if you please, Miss; for you see you couldn't well go alone.’
Nelly had not seen this, having been deterred from that course by shyness rather than by any sense of impropriety, but she at once acknowledged to herself that the good woman was right. Suppose this Mr. Pearson should turn out to be a stranger, or indeed in any case, it would not have been becoming.
‘But is your daughter well enough to walk so far?’ said Nelly, for poor Janet was an invalid, a little deaf, and somewhat lame.
‘Oh yes, it will do her good to walk a little way, the doctors say: and the poor dear is so pleased when she can make herself useful. It is mostly but sitting work as she can do, and she can have company with you, Miss, if you please—and do her needlework all the same—when your tutor comes.’ Here was a difficulty (which had never occurred to Nelly) at once suggested and got over. At the same time it impressed her unpleasantly with a sense of her own ignorance of the world and her general incompetence. What mistakes might she not commit, what precautions might she not overlook! How difficult was the whole course of life before her, and how unskilled she was to navigate it!
That very afternoon Mr. Pearson called, and delighted indeed was she to find in him her Sandybeach preserver. Her pleasure, however, was damped at seeing him look so ill and worn.
‘I have only just got your letter, my dear young lady,’ said he kindly, ‘or you may be sure you would have seen me earlier. I have been out of town on business.’
‘I fear you have been working too hard, Mr. Pearson; it seems quite selfish in me to wish to add to your labours.’
‘Nay, drawing and painting never hurt me; I have had other
[Page 204]
work on hand of a more harassing nature: but that is over now, at all events for the present. To teach you will be a great pleasure. How strange it is that we should meet again in this manner!’
‘It is most fortunate for me ,’ said Nelly simply.
‘I hope so, I trust so. Miss Conway, consider me your friend as much as your tutor. If I am saying too much, forgive me— but after what happened down at the seaside, it seems as if Fortune intended me to be of service to you.’
‘It does indeed,’ said Nelly gratefully.
There was something in this poor artist which inspired her with trust and confidence. He was so outspoken and so frank—on everything except his own troubles—that a less unsuspicious person than herself might have well believed in him.
When Janet came into the room, and dropped into a chair with her needlework in her hand, Mr. Pearson raised his eyebrows, then murmured, ‘To be sure,’ and sighed. Nelly was not the least afraid of him, but the sense of his eccentricity did not wear off by any means. It seemed to her that the expression of premature age in this poor man, his pre-occupation, strange looks and incoherent talk, were all the result of trouble. In his teaching—for she took her first lesson then and there—he was very quiet and patient. In the middle of it, a letter came for her, which being marked ‘immediate,’ she asked leave to open: otherwise she would have postponed the reading of it till she was alone—for the handwriting was that of Raymond Pennicuick.
‘You seem disturbed,’ said Mr. Pearson gently. ‘You have had no bad news, I hope?’
‘No: not exactly.’
[Page 205]
‘You said I might be your friend, Miss Conway,’ continued her companion earnestly. ‘If the matter is one in which I can be of any help, I need not say I am at your service.—Let me see the letter.’
He took it out of her unresisting hand. It was a great liberty, of course, yet she experienced no sense of resentment. There was something in his manner so genuinely kind and honest, that it was impossible to be offended with him. Moreover, she felt the need of advice and sympathy as she had never felt it before. She had not a friend on earth, as it happened, who could give her an opinion upon the matter in question, without bias or prejudice.
‘Dearest Nelly,’ ran the letter. ‘My father hears from Sandybeach that you have left your friends, and come to live in London alone, in hopes to earn your own living. I make no remark on this, because you know beforehand how I must regard such a course of conduct, how my heart bleeds for you when I think of the loneliness you must at present feel, and of the hard things that must be in store for you. I hate myself, because I am at this moment in the midst of luxuries and comforts, and you are in your melancholy lodgings alone. However, I have no right, alas, to interfere in your arrangements. What I now write about is a communication that my father has received from Mr. Wardlaw. He urges upon him, now that he is in Parliament, that his first duty is to bring your poor father's case under the notice of the Government, in order that some sort of provision should be made for you. As you have refused all assistance, even from those whose greatest happiness it would be to serve you, it is possible that even the idea of a government pension may be disagreeable to you. But I venture to think that you are bound to consider other things than your own feelings in the matter. If I wished to be selfish, I might urge that your acquiescence in this plan would give my father an opportunity of publicly rebutting certain infamous though vague charges which have been recently made against him in the newspapers concerning his conduct at Dhulang: but I prefer to press upon you a less personal argument. I would remind you that various more or less distorted accounts have got abroad respecting the catastrophe that happened to Captain Conway; and that you owe it to his memory to have the matter placed in its true light. From all that I know or have heard of his character and
[Page 206]
disposition, it is inconceivable that he should have committed the indiscretion which cost him his life in the manner represented. The subject is so painful to the only person who can speak upon it, that even I myself am unacquainted with the details, but from what has dropped from him on the subject, I am sure it was a very, very hard case. Your kind heart will at once suggest, “But will it not be still more painful to that person to have to discuss the matter in public?” To that, I answer, No; or rather, that though it will undoubtedly be distressing, the result, when it is once over, will be beneficial. As it is, I am confident that the malicious innuendoes which the newspapers opposed to my father's politics have been vile enough to publish, are having a most prejudicial effect upon his health and spirits. His state is so grievous and deplorable, indeed, that I hardly like to dwell upon it. What I adjure you to do for all our sakes is this: write a few lines to my father, just to say that his intention of bringing Captain Conway's case before the notice of Parliament has reached your ears, and that it has your thorough approbation.
‘I remain, dearest Nelly,
‘Yours faithfully,
‘Raymond Pennicuick.’
‘I have heard something of this,’ said Mr. Pearson gravely, as he folded up the letter. ‘The young gentleman's arguments are specious enough, but we must remember that he is an interested person.’
‘You are wrong there, Mr. Pearson,’ said Nelly warmly; ‘he has not a grain of selfishness in him. On the contrary, what I fear is that all his reasoning is used to hide his earnest desire to see me independent; in short, that I should get the pension.’
‘Ah! and then, perhaps, he would like to win the pensioner.’
‘You are most unjust,’ cried Nelly, so vehemently that Janet dropped her work, and stared at her in mute astonishment. ‘You do not know Raymond Pennicuick—nor me.’
‘To be sure, that is true,’ answered the other quietly. ‘I was merely guided by one's ordinary experience of human nature. It is so rare to find young men “without a grain of selfishness.” After
[Page 207]
all, perhaps my ignorance of the individuals in question may not make my opinion upon the matter in hand less valuable. Let me think about it while you go on with your drawing.’
Nelly's fingers were still trembling with indignation, but she did her best to comply with this request, while Mr. Pearson, chin in hand, and with his hollow eyes turned upon the leafless garden, gave himself up to reflection.
‘If the writer of that letter is, as you say, to be depended upon,’ said he presently, ‘if his statement of facts is genuine, you seem to me, my dear young lady, to have no choice but to act upon it. One point alone, on which he very justly dwells, appears to me to be conclusive.’
‘You mean, that I owe it to my father's memory.’
Mr. Pearson bowed his head. ‘It is of course a matter of feeling. Since, as I learnt from Mrs. Wardlaw, you never knew him personally from your childhood, it is possible this consideration may not weigh with you—and very naturally—as it would weigh with some daughters.’
‘Mr. Pearson,’ said Nelly earnestly, ‘you misjudge me. Never was father more loved by daughter than mine by me. We were separated, indeed, by distance, but we were not divided; my heart clung to him—and still clings—as nearly as though my hand had been always clasped in his.’
She was not indignant, as she had been when her companion had reflected upon Raymond's motives, but her tones had a certain tender dignity which was very impressive. On Mr. Pearson, however, this did not seem to have much effect.
‘He was a good father to you, then, though he was so much from home?’ said he quietly.
[Page 208]
‘The best of fathers; his poverty compelled him to live abroad with his regiment.’
‘Umph! I thought regiments came home every five or six years or so.’
‘He exchanged more than once for the reasons I have stated.’
‘He was a good husband, then, no doubt?’
‘I do not feel called upon, Mr. Pearson, to discuss with you the affairs of my family,’ said Nelly coldly. ‘As a matter of fact, however, there was a misunderstanding between my dear father and mother. They are both in Heaven now, and that is over.’ She rose and went to the window to hide her tears.
‘Pray forgive me if I have pained you, my dear young lady. Such misunderstandings are common enough, and, as you say, death heals all.’
He sighed so deeply that Nelly turned to him with pity in her dewy eyes. She could not help thinking how near he looked to death himself.
‘You have given me more than full measure,’ said she, alluding to the two hours' teaching that had been agreed upon as the length of her lessons; ‘you must not lavish on me thus your time and strength.’ The last word was uttered involuntarily, and was suggested by his appearance.
‘But then we have been so discursive,’ answered he with a faint smile.
‘And, Mr. Pearson,’ continued Nelly, blushing, and speaking so that Janet could not hear her, ‘when would it be most convenient to you to—I mean, shall I send you what is due to you—and very small remuneration it is for such kindly teaching—weekly, or—’
The fact was, her tutor looked so poor, as well as ill, that she
[Page 209]
thought he might even prefer to receive his money day by day— a reflection which alone enabled her to summon courage to speak upon such a subject.
‘Oh, I think monthly will do,’ interrupted he, still smiling. ‘You may imagine, perhaps, to look at me that I may not live a month, but that is my affair.’
‘Dear Mr. Pearson, how you shock me!’
‘Do I? then I won't do it again. Seriously, I am not going to die just yet, having something of importance to do first. Well, here are the heads for you to study in my absence’—he had brought a couple of chalk drawings with him—‘only, don't you overwork yourself. It is better to read than to draw, remember, if you want to avoid thinking too much; and you'll write to say you'll have that pension, won't you?’ added he suddenly.
‘I will turn the matter over in my mind,’ answered Nelly gravely, ‘though the pension is not the point.’
‘No, indeed; I forgot. It is your father's memory. You are a good girl; you will do what is right. Good day to you, my dear young lady.’
Despite his ghastly looks, Nelly thought she had seldom seen a kindlier smile than that of Mr. Pearson. His troubles might have embittered his nature, but surely it was still wholesome and tender at the core.
[Page 210]
CHAPTER XX. HAUNTED. It is a fortnight since Nelly Conway took her first lesson in Gower Street, and during that time there have been spring tides in the ebb and flow of the lives of more than one person in this history, and she has been the moon which has most certainly caused them. Herbert Milburn has let his ‘family seat,’ to his sister's extreme annoyance, and sailed for China, though his leave has by no means expired. It seems to him that he will never wish to return to his native land again.
Ralph Pennicuick is sitting at his chamber window at the Albany, watching the waning light in the skies, and the growing light in the streets. There is something which lies before him to be done this night which lies heavy on his soul, and prevents his giving his mind to any other subject for an instant. On the notice board of the House of Commons there is a statement that he, Ralph Pennicuick, will rise in his place, within the next four hours, and put a question to the Government concerning certain proceedings at Dhulang, and as to the reasons why a pension should not have been conferred upon the orphan daughter of Captain Arthur Conway deceased. The chief Tory organ has expressed its approval of this course in a far from complimentary fashion.
[Page 211]
Among its ‘Topics of the Day’ appeared this paragraph:—‘We are glad to inform our readers that we are at last to hear from the honourable member for Slowcombe his own story of the Dhulang catastrophe; we shall compare it very carefully with certain notes of the same event with which we have been specially favoured by an eye-witness.’ The appearance of these few lines, which were probably passed by altogether unnoticed by nine hundred and ninetynine out of every thousand of those who read them, had affected the subject of them most seriously. Indeed, since his eyes had lit on them they had not known sleep. An eye-witness! That must certainly be a falsehood, for, except Fu-chow and the Chinese officials, there could be no witness to what had happened at Dhulang in existence. Still, how came such a paragraph into the paper? It had come out within twelve hours of his placing his notice on the board, and bitterly he now repented of having done so. It had been weak of him to the last degree to make his consent dependent upon Nelly's wishes, but he made certain that she would have opposed such a proceeding. How useless were sagacity and knowledge of human character to forecast the whims of women!
The reflection may have been a just one, but intelligent as Pennicuick undoubtedly was, he had not possessed the data for judgment in the present case. His mind had only concerned itself with the matter of the pension, which, we have seen, was not Nelly's motive of action at all: had that been the only question involved, she would no doubt have declined his services, and justified his foresight. But since she had said, ‘Yes,’ he, Ralph Pennicuick (though he had prided himself all his life upon that very capability) had not had the moral courage to say ‘No.’ So weak
[Page 212]
and broken was he, that, so far from taking any pleasure in setting opinion at defiance, he bowed to it; the thought of what Mr. Wardlaw, and Herbert Milburn, and even his own son would ‘say’ should he go back from his word, and refuse to become Nelly's champion, had been too much for him. He had given the desired notice, and now he would have paid down half he was worth in the world—double the 20,000 l ., to secure which by fraud had cost him so dearly—to be able to withdraw it. But this required even something more than courage—audacity. Should he now shrink from the ordeal, judgment would go against him, as it were, by default, and even his own party would not have a word to say for him.
Of course he exaggerated, as every man does, the amount of public attention he excited, but still this was very considerable. From the day of his election, now many months ago, up to now, the Tory papers—especially the chief organ of the opposition— had never, as the phrase goes, ‘let him alone.’ But this last paragraph about the Eye-witness had hit him harder than anything which had preceded it. He had consulted about it with his son— for the burden of the whole matter had become almost more than he could bear alone, and what he could talk about, he discussed with him eagerly—and Raymond expressed himself more convinced than ever, that the attack was not dictated by mere party motives. ‘You have some enemy, father, who has done this,’ said he, ‘and who has been working against you all along, like a mole, underground.’
‘If he is a mole, he can't be an eye-witness,’ said Ralph, with a gleam of his old grim humour.
‘Of course not; it is mere lying. The Newspaper has two strongholds: the Impersonal, who is nobody but itself, the We;
[Page 213]
and the Personal, who is nobody at all. It is folly to contend with either of them, being shadows.’
The remark would seem to evidence that the young man had begun to think for himself, and, curiously enough, this had a disagreeable effect upon his father.
‘I am failing and he is growing,’ thought he; ‘he is pushing me from my throne, and will presently reign in my stead.’
But, on the other hand, Raymond had by this time a good many acquaintances on the Press, from whom it was likely enough he might have picked up this philosophy. Without revealing his intention, he went away and consulted some of these respecting the paragraph in question, and gleaned some important information. Then he came back and told his father.
‘My suspicious have proved correct,’ he said; ‘those attacks have been all personal; they have been “communicated.”’
‘And the person?’
‘Well, that I have not been able to discover. I doubt whether the newspaper itself knows who it is. What is very curious is that the substance of the last paragraph was brought to the office by a Chinese.’
Ralph Pennicuick started from his chair with a fierce oath ‘It is Fu-chow,’ he cried.
‘Who is Fu-chow?’
‘A traitorous scoundrel in my employment on our shooting expedition, who discovered that the Shay-le—the relic—had been abstracted from the shrine, and gave information to the authorities. It was he, in fact, who ruined us.’
‘Forewarned is forearmed, sir,’ said Raymond gravely; ‘that circumstance should certainly be mentioned in your speech to-night.’
[Page 214]
It was upon that speech, to be delivered in a few hours, that Ralph Pennicuick was now pondering alone. His difficulties in the matter were enormous, and wholly exceptional. A maiden speech upon any subject in the House of Commons is an embarrassing undertaking to most people; but the usual stumbling-blocks did not trouble him. He had no mauvaise honte ; he had plenty of words at his command; and no one expected either a lengthy or a powerful oration. He had merely to make a statement of facts, every one of which was at his fingers' ends. But, unhappily, though authentic, these were the reverse of genuine. They had happened, but they had happened to himself, and he must needs describe them as having happened to another man. What he had to tell, in fact, was a Lie from beginning to end; and this is rather a feat to do successfully in the House of Commons, with the consciousness, too, that half-a-dozen hostile newspapers will be endeavouring to detect your falsehood the next morning.
It seemed inconceivable that Fu-chow could have come to London, and put himself in connection with the Press: but how could Raymond's story about the Chinese informant be otherwise explained? Fu-chow had shown hostility enough against him for anything (Mr. Pennicuick stigmatised it in his own mind as ‘malice,’ though we know it had been but the payment of old scores), but it could never have been worth his while to come to England to wreak it. The only possible solution of the thing, though even that was improbable, was that some Englishman had brought Fu-chow home in his service, and that, finding himself in a position to do his old enemy a mischief, he was taking advantage of his opportunity.
[Page 215]
He resolved at all events to take his son's advice, and to present the Imperial Parliament with a very dark picture of ‘Captain’ Fu-chow. At the same time, such was the state of his nerves, that he was not convinced by his own arguments, and feared lest even his worst apprehensions should, somehow, fall short of the reality. The condition of the whole man was one by no means unknown to the medical world, but which goes under a number of scientific names—names which often conceal its real nature. I have known a man unjustly suspected of delirium tremens, who was in reality troubled by the consciousness of having murdered a child of tender years. Ralph Pennicuick was conscience-smitten. Wrongdoers sometimes are so; they are morally prostrated by the guilty knowledge within them; and yet they generally retain their intelligence—as some would call their reluctance to part with their stolen goods.
Nothing, for example, was further from Ralph Pennicuick's mind that night than the idea of restitution, which had in fact by this time become almost impossible for him. It was doubtful whether, even if he should have gone down to the House and spoken the whole truth exactly respecting what had occurred at Dhulang, he would have been believed. Most people would have thought he had lost his wits; his own son would certainly have done so, and would have preferred to think his father mad, rather than guilty of the crime of which he had thus accused himself. Ralph Pennicuick felt like a man lost in some primeval forest, who plods on with weary and uncertain steps, suspicious of unknown dangers, with this terrible addition to his lot, that the way he had come was barred behind him.
The wind blowing boisterously from the south, brought presently
[Page 216]
to his ears the voice of the great clock at Westminster; and he rang his bell for the servant to bring his overcoat.
‘This has just come for you, sir, by the post,’ said Hatton, putting a roll of manuscript, as it seemed, into his hand.
‘Why do you pester me with such rubbish now?’ answered his master pettishly.
‘Well, sir, it had “immediate” on it, or I should not have brought it in.’
‘You may go,’ said Mr. Pennicuick, who was now equipped for departure: the vague terror with which he was consumed impelled him, however, ere he went, to open this communication in private, though it was ten chances to one it was but some circular, the ‘immediate’ on which was but a device to secure attention.
The manuscript was tightly rolled, and had something hard inside it, which presently fell out upon the floor; it was only a round piece of wood such as drawings are wrapped round to go by post. The drawing itself was in Mr. Pennicuick's hand, and his eyes were fixed upon it in abject terror. It was the representation of a man tied to a stake, and being cut to pieces by an executioner in Chinese apparel: a vast crowd of men of the same nation were looking on, but indicated only by a few bold strokes: the whole picture was but a sketch, very slightly but skilfully rendered, with one exception—namely, the countenance of the victim. This was most carefully and elaborately drawn, and represented without a shadow of doubt—indeed, almost as truly as the mirror reflects its object—the very face which was now regarding it, namely, that of Pennicuick himself. Underneath, at the left-hand corner, was written, but in printed characters,
[Page 217]
the day of the month on which Arthur Conway had been put to death at Dhulang.
For a minute or two, it seemed as though Ralph Pennicuick were on the eve of some physical calamity; he stood swaying from side to side, as if about to fall, while his face worked in a manner frightful to behold: but presently he steadied himself, and tore the picture along and across and threw it on the fire, then the wrapper (addressed, like the date within, in printed characters), and afterwards even the little roll of wood. (If conscience were combustible, as some theologians assert the soul to be, how easy it would be to deal with it!) Then he drew out that drawer in his table which we have seen him open before—it glided out very easily now, as though it well knew its way—and took a deep draught of brandy.
‘Your brougham is at the door, sir,’ said Hatton, putting in his respectable head.
‘Send it away: I'll walk,’ was the abrupt reply.
Mr. Hatton withdrew, shaking his head and compressing his nose with a wry face; he was a man who never took spirits himself—preferring the claret of '64—and hated the smell of them.
Presently his master hurried out, and ran rapidly downstairs and into the street. The wind was in his teeth, but he did not mind that; physical exertion was welcome to him. Under the flickering gas lamps, with one hand on his hat and the other pressed to his breast, he walked rapidly down Waterloo Place, intending as usual when on foot to go through St. James's Park to Westminster. Something, however—perhaps the comparative gloom of that route—deterred him, and he turned sharply towards Parliament Street. Twice, blinded by the wind, and also by the
[Page 218]
tumult of his own thoughts, which rendered him scarcely cognisant of external objects, he came into collision with other passengers on the footway; and when at last he reached Westminster Hall and was about to enter it, he came face to face with a third man. No actual contact this time took place, yet Ralph Pennicuick started back with a sharp and sudden cry; and with a quick toss of the arms (as though one should say ‘All's Lost!’) he fell heavily on the pavement.
A crowd was round him in a moment: his face was known, as is that of every member of the House at Westminster, after he has once taken his seat (though it has been but for an hour), and he was placed in a brougham at once, and taken home, speechless and insensible.
Dr. Green was summoned at once, and of course Raymond. There were also two other doctors promptly in attendance. The medical opinion was that Mr. Pennicuick had a stroke of apoplexy, though there were some symptoms not in accordance with this view. A little after midnight he recovered his speech.
‘I have seen him,’ he said suddenly, in distinct tones.
‘Who is it you have seen, father?’ asked Raymond gently, as he leant over his pillow.
‘ Arthur Conway .’
[Page 219]
CHAPTER XXI. A GOOD SON. Matters were so serious with Ralph Pennicuick that night, that Raymond occupied a bedroom at his father's chambers, but he accompanied Dr. Green on his way home to have a few minutes' private talk with him: a doctor being always reticent, but in the presence of other doctors absolutely dumb.
‘It is a very bad case, I fear, Dr. Green,’ said Raymond with grave abruptness.
‘It is a complicated and serious one,’ was the reply.
‘How can you possibly account for such an extraordinary hallucination as that which my poor father labours under?’
‘It is not at all extraordinary, my dear young sir, if you use the word in the sense of uncommon; I have seen a hundred such cases. You observed, I dare say, that I did not attempt to reason with the patient: nor even make any remark with respect to the absurdity of his conviction. The fact is, I did not wish my professional brethren to know that the person he was speaking of was dead.
‘Why?’
‘Well, I consider myself a friend of the family, and though of course these things are supposed among us to go no farther, it
[Page 220]
is always best to be on the safe side. Your father may recover, you see—’
‘Indeed I hope so,’ put in the young man quickly.
‘Just so: then it is better to keep things quiet. It is said by a great philosopher—but who did not have the advantage of being a student of medicine—that where a man takes his ideas for facts, and what he imagines for things, that man is mad. But this is not always the case. The hallucination sometimes arises from a less hopeless but still a very serious cause. I am about to ask you a painful question, but it is necessary you should be frank with me. Does your father take much wine at dinner?’
‘No. He has always been a singularly abstemious man in that respect. I have heard him say, and have no doubt of the fact, that he can take any amount of wine without it affecting him, but he never had any taste that way. I have seen him rise from table directly after dinner when other men sat over their claret, because drinking was disagreeable to him.’
‘And there has been no change in him in that respect of late months—since his return from China, for example?’
‘None that I am aware of.’
‘My dear young friend, you have corroborated my worst suspicions. Your father takes stimulants in secret, and to a great extent.’
‘You astonish me, doctor.’
‘Nevertheless I am speaking truth. There are certain indications in him which convince me of it. Moreover, when I asked for brandy, Hatton took some out of the little drawer, and I had noticed before that there was a smell of raw cognac in the sitting-room; and it was not for the first time.’
[Page 221]
‘Good heavens!’ cried Raymond painfully; ‘that explains everything.’
‘No, it does not; only some things. Your father has a fixed idea: ideas are always dangerous when a man has not to gain his own living by them; this one has become morbid and monopolising.’
‘You refer to this Dhulang affair, of course?’
‘Yes. Those two scientific gentlemen had not heard about it, I saw; they are “devoted to their profession,” as the phrase is; that is to say, they throw away all advantages external to it, and flatter themselves that gives them “a pull”—which it does, only in the wrong direction. They had never heard of Arthur Conway, though the whole town is ringing with his name. You must on no account permit your father to read a newspaper for the next ten days.’
‘I am afraid it is not likely that he will feel equal to do so,’ said Raymond gloomily.
‘It is the first thing he will ask for—to see the papers,’ said the doctor confidently.
And Dr. Green was right. Twice and thrice the doctor called next morning, but always to find his patient in heavy stertorous slumber. Late in the day, however, he awoke, and turning his eyes upon his son, who was sitting by his pillow, put out his hand. Raymond, surprised and pleased by this touch of feeling, seized and pressed it eagerly: but he had mistaken the meaning of the action.
‘Where are they?’ said the sick man hoarsely. ‘Why have you not brought the papers as usual? Open the curtains—give me light.’
When the light poured in, he saw that it was not Hatton who was watching by him, but his own son.
‘You are a good lad, Raymond,’ he sighed; ‘a good lad.’
[Page 222]
It would not have been a very tender speech for most fathers under the like circumstances, but coming from the mouth of Ralph Pennicuick, it went straight to his son's heart.
‘I hope—I trust, dear father, that you feel better.’
‘You wish me to live, then?
‘Good heavens! How can you ask me such a question? There is nothing that I so earnestly desire.’
‘How strange!’ murmured the sick man; then added, with what was less like a smile than a sharp spasm of the lips, ‘and how unwise!’
Raymond, deeply pained, answered nothing. He knew, of course, what his father meant: that if he died, he (Raymond) would be his own master, and might claim perhaps the dearest wish of his heart, or what had seemed so up to that moment. To do him justice, the spectacle of his father's condition had made him, for the time, oblivious to all else.
Then again the sick man said, ‘Give me the morning papers.’ Raymond had read already all that they had to say upon the subject which he knew was engrossing his father's thought; and the doctor's veto was fresh in his mind.
‘Indeed, father, it would not be good for you.’
‘There is a Bible of your mother's somewhere, Raymond; in the second drawer younder. Bring it to me.’
Raymond brought it; it was wrapped up in paper, and had not been touched for the last twenty years; he gave it open into his father's hand.
‘I thought so,’ muttered the sick man peevishly. ‘I cannot read it; the letters run together; I am blind.’
‘Not blind, sir, but only weak. Let me read it to you.’
[Page 223]
‘The Bible! No. Read me the papers—all that is said about what happened last night.’
‘Indeed, sir, it will do you harm.’
‘Be so good as to do as I tell you, or I will get Hatton to read them. Perhaps that will be better.’
‘No, sir; if you insist upon it, I had rather read them myself.’
‘Ah, they are very bitter, then. Not that I mind Hatton. He knows much worse of me than you do, my poor lad.’
Raymond could not gainsay that: he bowed his head, and fetched two newspapers from the next room. He chose the Government organ first; it described the sudden ‘seizure,’ as it termed it, to which Mr. Ralph Pennicuick had succumbed, just as he was entering the House of Commons the previous night; ‘it was only too much to be feared,’ it said, ‘that this had been brought on by excitement caused by certain infamous calumnies lately published by a contemporary in relation to his conduct at Dhulang, and which it had been his intention to refute that very evening.’
‘Very good,’ said Ralph, with the same ghastly shiver of a smile. ‘That is all in the way of friendship. The bonne bouche is still to come. What does the enemy say?’
‘It says what is most offensive and abominable,’ answered Raymond. ‘I do most earnestly beg of you to treat it with the contempt it merits. It can only give you unnecessary pain and—’
‘Read, read,’ murmured the sick man impatiently. Raymond, with a movement of his shoulders expressive of disgust at his task, reluctantly obeyed.
‘“Last night, as it will be remembered, was the time appointed
[Page 224]
for the Hon. Member for Slowcombe to make his explanation regarding the mysterious affair at Dhulang, under cover of a question to the Government with respect to the payment of a pension to the orphan daughter of the late Captain Conway. His statement was looked forward to by the public with peculiar interest in consequence of certain circumstances to which we have from time to time called the attention of our readers: and their curiosity, it seems, is, after all, not likely to be quickly satisfied. Mr. Ralph Pennicuick, it is said, was seized with sudden illness on the very threshold of the House of Commons. From certain information which has reached us, and which we hold in our hands, this incident seems to us, to say the least of it, to the last degree unfortunate for the Hon. Member for Slowcombe. If he is innocent of certain grave matters which we refrain for the present from alluding to more particularly, never was an attack of illness more inopportune; if, on the other hand, he is guilty—and supposing the hon. gentleman's indisposition to be physical, and as serious as it is represented—one would almost imagine—”’
‘Well, what?’ inquired the sick man impatiently. ‘Why can't the hack speak out?’
‘He does speak out, sir,’ said Raymond hesitatingly, ‘and in the next sentence: but I hardly like to repeat such words: “one would imagine,” he says, “that the Finger of Providence had intervened in the matter, and struck the guilty down.”’ Raymond expected an outburst of wrath, or more probably some expression of scorn. But there was only silence, and this alarmed him. His father had closed his eyes.
‘I am sure, sir, you are too sensible, even in your present weak condition,’ said Raymond, ‘to be moved by vulgar declamation of
[Page 225]
this sort. If I am not much mistaken, such words are actionable, though indeed the horsewhip applied to such a scoundrel—’
‘Draw down the blind, Raymond; the light hurts me,’ interrupted his father, as though he heard him not.
Then there was silence again, which to the young man, unused to illness, and dreading he knew not what, was almost intolerable.
‘Will you not have a cup of tea, sir?’ said he presently. The sick man's lips moved slowly, and the young man leant down to listen.
‘“And struck the guilty down,”’ were the words he heard; and again: ‘“the finger of Providence”—that means the finger of God.’
It was positively astounding to Raymond to hear the invective of a penny paper repeated thus with every sign of intense feeling by his father's lips. Of course, it showed how weak and ill he was; but still it was astounding.
‘Providence is stronger than we are, after all, my lad,’ continued the other, in more distinct tones. ‘I have fought against it all my life. But I give in.’
‘It is never too late to make our peace with God,’ said Raymond reverently.
‘I would I could make my peace with Man,’ was the unexpected reply.
‘Oh father, if there is anything on your mind that troubles it —as I have for some time feared,’ said Raymond earnestly—‘I beseech you, if it would lighten your load, to let me share the burden.’
‘Ah, you think I am dying,’ answered the other bitterly; ‘you would have me confess, would you? Why don't you send Hatton for a priest? It would be a strange errand, but he would do your bidding. He has been educated to be astonished at nothing.’
[Page 226]
‘Indeed, sir, I trust you are not dying—’
‘Then you trust in vain: I am ,’ interrupted the sick man curtly. ‘When I pass through that door again, it will be feet foremost.’
‘If it be so, father,’ said Raymond solemnly, ‘I entreat you more than ever to ease your mind of this sore trouble. Tell me— your only son—what it is, that I may comfort you.’
‘You do not know what you ask, lad,’ sighed the sick man wearily; he turned his face to the wall as though to avoid further questioning, but not before Raymond had marked a certain yearning look in his eyes which seemed to contradict the action.
‘I do not know, of course, father, nor do I wish to know except for your sake; but if I could give you ever so little comfort—’
‘It would cost you dearly,’ put in the other gravely.
‘If you mean that it would lose me money, sir, I beseech you not to let that weigh with you. What is money compared with peace of mind?’
‘Nay, what is your money compared with my peace of mind— that is the question,’ said the sick man bitterly. It was curious to see how his old self asserted itself in the intervals, as it were, of his new condition of mind.
‘Well, sir, I answer, Nothing.’
‘Twenty thousand pounds is not to be called nothing, lad. That is what you would have to pay for hearing my story. No publisher has ever given such a sum yet for a three-volume one.’
This speech, instead of being given trippingly on the tip of the tongue, was delivered in a hoarse voice, with stops and gasps; the dew stood on the speaker's brow, his dilated eyes were fixed upon the pattern of the paper on the wall.
[Page 227]
‘I would give twice the sum, father, if I possessed it,’ said Raymond simply, ‘to see you at ease in mind or body.’
‘That will never be, lad: yet I could wish—’
‘What, what, father? There is nothing I would not do, nothing I would not sacrifice, to give you comfort.’
‘I know it, I feel it: you are a good son—I had forgotten something. No, no. It would be a poor return indeed for such loving duty. The money, as you say, would be nothing in your eyes, though it has been much—too much—in mine. It is lying heavy on me now, and will press me down, down in the very grave.’
‘Oh sir, I beseech you tell me, if this burden may be lifted, ever so little—’
‘No, lad, no; it would be your ruin. I do not mean the mere money loss; but it would destroy your happiness. There are things in the Bible true after all: that the sins of the father are visted on the children, for one thing. You don't understand, my lad. How should you?’
‘I know at least, sir, that I am your son,’ said Raymond firmly; ‘and it is mine by right to share my father's burden.’
‘Your right would be a wrong, Raymond,’ answered the sick man, turning his face towards his son with a pitiful look; ‘a grievous and cruel wrong. If I told you what is on my mind, the dearest wish of your heart would be blighted for ever. You could never marry Ellen Conway.’
Raymond turned white to the very lips. His heart became as lead. He felt that the lamp that lives within us all, when fed by Love and Youth (though it may burn but low), was suddenly extinguished, leaving all things dark; but he answered in a firm voice, nevertheless, ‘Tell me, father.’
[Page 228]
CHAPTER XXII. THE SELF-ACCUSER. ‘Do you remember a play of Shakespeare's, Raymond, where a man says to his sister, “Death is a dreadful thing,” and she replies, “And shamed life a hateful”?’
‘Yes, father.’
‘Well, I was once in that man's position. I saw before me— immediately before me—a slow and painful death, and also a way of escape by the sacrifice of another man. And I chose the way of escape. To be sure, I did so with the consent of the other.’
‘That was something,’ said Raymond, drawing a deep breath.
‘Well, it was short of murder. I said to myself this: “I am rich, this man is poor: I enjoy life, and he has not the means to do so. It is better, therefore, if one of us is to die, that it should be he and not I.”’
‘It was not certain, then, that the man would die?’
‘It was quite certain, though we pretended to one another—or at least I pretended to him—that there was a chance of rescue, of ransom. What I tried to persuade myself he did, was to risk his life for mine: but what I knew in my heart he did, was to sacrifice if for mine; and he did sacrifice it.’
‘Oh father, was it Arthur Conway?’
[Page 229]
‘Yes, Raymond: it was my friend: I may say, indeed (for I did not know you for what you are at that time), my only friend. I took advantage of his poverty to persuade him to part with his existence.’
The cloud of distress and shame that had settled upon Raymond's brow since his father had begun to speak here lifted a little; his face, though it still wore a look of intense pity, began to clear.
‘Do not deceive yourself, my lad,’ said the sick man, who was regarding him attentively; ‘I have not lost my wits, nor, alas! even my memory. What seems incredible to you, seemed to me a very natural course to take at the time, I do assure you. Circumstance is a very powerful agent in the affairs of this world, not even second to Opportunity.’
‘But if Captain Conway took away the Relic from the Temple—’
‘He did not ,’ interrupted Ralph Pennicuick quietly. ‘ I took it.’
‘You?’
Raymond involuntarily drew back a pace from his father's pillow. His face expressed repugnance as well as horror.
‘You are not fit to be a priest, lad,’ observed the other coldly; ‘a priest ought to be shocked at nothing. And besides, I am not asking for absolution. That is an easy thing to give compared with what I am about to demand of you.’
‘My all is at your service, sir,’ said Raymond in show mechanical tones. ‘What can I do for you?’
‘You can make restitution.’
‘I cannot give back his life to Arthur Conway.’
‘That is true. But you must understand that it was a bargain.
[Page 230]
He took my guilt upon him, knowingly, and for a consideration. You would not make things worse for me than they are, lad, if you knew what was coming.’
What was coming! What could he be about to hear worse than he had already heard? His father had confessed himself guilty of all, and more, that had been vaguely laid to his charge. He had committed the crime for which another had suffered, and for which he had permitted him to suffer. How that had happened was in comparison but a small thing; it had happened.
‘I was in gaol, Raymond: I had been tortured,’ continued the sick man piteously; ‘and life was so dear to me.’
‘Then you were not yourself, sir,’ cried the young man eagerly: ‘you were weak and shattered; if you had time to think—’
‘I had plenty of time,’ put in the other irritably: ‘I had nothing else to do but to think, or to think of but myself. I must make a clean breast of it, lad, or tell nothing. No one shall ever accuse Ralph Pennicuick of cant—but only of Robbery and Murder.’
It was frightful to mark the smile with which he spoke, the very blossom, as it seemed, of self-contempt and cynicism: like the scorpion that turns its sting against itself when hedged in by the ring of fire, so had it happened to his bitter spirit.
‘Robbery and murder!’ repeated Raymond mechanically. He could no longer believe his father mad, and could hardly refuse credit to any statement he should make to his own disadvantage. These were crimes, as he thought, of which he had not as yet accused himself, and they astounded him.
[Page 231]
‘To be sure, you have not heard all,’ said the sick man, perceiving his look of amazement. ‘However, when a man steals a relic, and, being condemned to death for it, permits his friend to die for him—and to bear the disgrace as well, mark you—that is what the world would call by two ugly names. Moreover, that I murdered Arthur Conway is certain, or his ghost would not haunt me.’
‘Well, that cannot be, father,’ said Raymond emphatically; ‘you may imagine as much from a morbid sense of your own wrong-doing; but as to a ghost in these days—’
‘Stop!’ cried the other vehemently; and then, exhausted by his own exertion, he was silent for a moment, while his son stood dumb before him. ‘There are some things, Raymond, I never liked—such as contradiction. And in this case I won't stand it. I may be mad—I begin to think I am—to have told you what I have, but I will not be held in other respects to be a madman. I saw Arthur Conway last night, as plainly and as near me as I see you now. He looked old, and wan, and white, but it was he and no other. It is as true as—well, I don't believe in many things—let us say as that I am now upon my death-bed. I was stepping into Westminster Hall, and he was the first man to meet me. He looked, as to the expression of his face, exactly as I should have expected him to look; he said—that is, his eyes said— “You are a liar, a robber, and a murderer.” It was too much for me—being guilty of those crimes—and as that paper said, it struck me down.’
‘If you saw him, father, he is not dead. Did you see him at Dhulang after death?’
‘Yes. I saw his naked body pierced with ten thousand
[Page 232]
wounds tied to the post where they had hacked him to death. Milburn and one other man saw him also. You are thinking, “This is a delusion; and if a man deludes himself in one thing, he may do so in another.” Dismiss that fond hope from your mind, lad. I am as sane as you are, and have told you the simple truth—unhappily, not all of it. Give me some brandy.’
‘I entreat you to excite yourself no more at present, sir,’ said Raymond, with whom pity had once more regained its ascendency. ‘You have taken nothing to strengthen you for many hours. Let me get you a cup of coffee—something for breakfast—’
‘I am long past the coffee stage, lad,’ murmured the sick man, whose powers of speech seemed to have almost ebbed away; ‘I must have what my stomach is accustomed to. You will find the bottle in the wardrobe.’
‘At least, sir, spare yourself for the present,’ sighed Raymond, as he reluctantly produced the liquor. ‘When you have had what you wish, try to sleep a little.’
‘No, my lad. When one has to have a limb cut off, it is done at a single operation. I have begun, and I must go through with it. Moreover, there is no “for the present” for me, I am very sure. To-morrow—nay, an hour else—may be too late. Thanks! that is life, or all that I shall know of it, till it is over.’
He lay back, with closed eyes, and was so long silent that Raymond began to hope that he had involuntarily given way to slumber; but he was in fact only rallying his feeble powers.
‘You have never asked me,’ he recommenced, ‘what it was that induced Arthur Conway to die so many deaths instead of me. It was his poverty. He wished to place his wife and child—that Nelly, my poor boy, who can never now be yours—above the reach
[Page 233]
of want—nay, in affluence. “If I lose my life for yours”—he said, for he said ‘lose,’ though I said ‘risk’—“you must pay me 20,000 l .” It seemed but a small sum to me, as I lay on the floor of my wretched prison, the door of which would only open to me to be led forth to death and torture, but afterwards it seemed greater.’
Raymond groaned.
‘Yes, you have guessed it. I robbed him. I bought his life and never paid the purchase-money. When one has committed murder, robbery comes quite easy—no, not easy, or I should not be lying here.’
‘For Heaven's sake, sir, let this money be paid to the poor girl at once; that is the first thing to be done.’
‘No. You must wait till the breath is out of my body; that is the first thing I must do—to die. I have told you what a false and wretched creature lies before you, because you call him “father,” but I cannot confess it to all the world. The girl can wait an hour or two, a day at furthest, since she has waited so many months already. I killed her mother too, for her husband's death, for which I am answerable, was the cause of hers. Let me leave the world without her daughter's curse.—Raymond, can you forgive me?’
‘Oh sir, it is not I who have anything to forgive,’ cried the young man, bursting into tears; ‘it is our Father which is in Heaven.’
‘I am not speaking to a priest, but to my son,’ returned the sick man curtly. ‘Do you not see that it is you whom I am wronging now, my own flesh and blood, as I have wronged these others before? It was a selfish act, like all the rest, to have told
[Page 234]
you what I have. Why did you urge me to do it in spite of my solemn warning?’
‘I do not regret it, father. Restitution can at least be made.’
‘Yes, but not to you. I cannot restore to you the happiness which my words have taken away. You love this girl, but how can you ever be her husband, when you know that her father's death lies at my door, and that I robbed him afterwards?’
‘I saw from the first, sir,’ answered Raymond gently, ‘that what you were about to say would kill my hopes.’
‘Then you have borne with me like a man, lad. Can you still take my hand, knowing what I am, and say, “Farewell, father”?’
Raymond took the fevered fingers which the other extended towards him, in his own; then, bending down, kissed the cheek his lips had never touched since he was a little child.
‘Hush, my lad,’ for Raymond was weeping bitterly: ‘I hear the Doctor's voice; he must not be bilked of his last fee. You will find Tatham has all your affairs at his fingers' ends; the twenty thousand pounds, that I had not the heart to part with, can be realised at once. Hatton has served me well, after his fashion. Stop! keep Green out till you have put away the brandy. Men will say hard things of Ralph Pennicuick when he's grassed over—those that were most civil to him when he was above ground, the hardest, because they feared him—but do not let them say “he drank.”’
[Page 235]
CHAPTER XXIII. A DILEMMA. For some weeks Nelly had gone on with her studies under Mr. Pearson's superintendence, but a day or two had now passed without his making his appearance. This intermission in his visits had been by no means unexpected. She had felt sure that his failing health must needs break down sooner or later; and it had broken down rather more suddenly than she had looked for. That indisposition was the reason of his absence she had discovered by sending to his lodgings; for he had written no line about himself. He had said at Sandybeach that he could not write, that he was prevented (as he would have it appear) by some physical cause from so doing; but she was inclined to set this down to a mere eccentric disinclination. This poor man was full of eccentricities, which Nelly regarded not only with indulgence, but with favour—a sure sign that she had conceived a genuine liking for her tutor; for it is only where there is real affection that these excrescences on the character are patiently endured. He had earned her good opinion not only by his kind and gentle ways and excellent tutorship, but by the generous sympathies of his nature, which a bitter experience (as she judged his to be) of life had been unable to destroy. Of his regard for herself there could be no doubt. When, as we have
[Page 236]
seen, she had asked his advice, it was given not only sagaciously, but with a consideration for the whole of the circumstances of the case that evinced a strong personal interest. He did not, as too many physicians do, prescribe ‘a cob’ when his patient was too poor to keep one, or ‘Carlsbad’ when he must needs make his daily bread in England. As to that particular opinion of his concerning the bringing her father's case before Parliament, no practical judgment could be passed on it as to whether it had been wrong or right, for it had never been put in practice. Mr. Ralph Pennicuick, indeed, had in a few civil lines expressed his intention to carry out Nelly's wishes, but had been prevented from doing so at the last moment by an illness which had since proved fatal to him. It had also been a source of grievous sorrow to Nelly herself, for, though she had small liking for the man, was he not Raymond's father? She knew that the lad's loyal heart would feel this loss, and the more so because it had happened under very distressing circumstances: for even to her secluded home had come the echoes of the gossip that imputed to the dead M.P. certain vague charges of misconduct at Dhulang, and hinted at things much more shameful.
This would have been bad enough, but in addition there was the pain of knowing that in this matter Raymond and herself had been placed, through their respective fathers, in somewhat antagonistic positions. Indeed (though of this she was happily ignorant), one of the newspapers had actually spoken of their interests as being opposed to one another, and even drawn a picture of Raymond lolling in the lap of luxury, while the daughter of his father's friend and victim was steeped to the lips in poverty. No communication had passed between them since Raymond had written to urge her
[Page 237]
to adopt the very course which had, as it happened, helped to bring down this storm of calumny upon his father and his father's memory. She had received the news of Mr. Pennicuick's death only a day or two ago, and was still doubtful whether or no she should write to Raymond to condole with him, when a communication arrived for her that put her judgment to a severer test, and made the advice of some mentor almost indispensable.
It was a communication of a business nature that might have puzzled folks more familiar with affairs than she, but would have been received by most people with far too much pleasure to admit of question. It was simply an intimation from her bankers that a sum of money, amounting to no less a sum than nearly 21,000 l ., had been anonymously paid in to her account, thereby increasing the same more than a hundredfold. About 200 l . had heretofore represented her available capital, and now she had become an heiress. She had repaired to the bank at once, but had been unable to glean any further information save the assurance that the money was there; the manager could not, or would not, enlighten her; he said that the sum in question had been paid in notes by an unknown person, and that the bank had no right to refuse to receive them. He evidently thought her a very fortunate young lady, but somewhat foolish withal, to make any stir about a matter the result of which had been so eminently satisfactory for her.
Generally speaking, we may say that if anybody were to pay 21,000 l . into one's banker's account—which is a proceeding by no means so familiar as it would be welcome—one would know who it was, even if the donor did his best to remain anonymous. Even if one's acquaintance lay among very rich people, there could be
[Page 238]
little difficulty in pitching upon the person who had shown so proper a sense of one's merits; while if one knew only one or two, the identification would lie within correspondingly narrower limits.
To Nelly the problem was easy, since there were only two persons of her acquaintance who were capable of such an action— not in the sense of nobility of mind, but of possession of capital. Mr. Wardlaw and Raymond Pennicuick (and he only within the last forty-eight hours), of all whom Nelly knew, alone had it in their power to make over so enormous a gift. All the rest of her world, therefore, though they might be credited with the most splendid intentions, were left out of the category; it must needs be one of these two.
Again, she felt certain it was not Mr. Wardlaw. He had more than once made her the most generous offers, which she had some difficulty in declining; but he had at last been brought to understand that she wished—even where favour was no obligation —to maintain her independence, and he knew her far too well to imagine that the largeness of the bribe would have any effect upon her resolution. No, it was not Mr. Wardlaw: it must, therefore, be Raymond Pennicuick. But although Nelly had guessed rightly enough from whom the splendid gift had come, she was not quite sure of the fact, and, in any case, she was wholly ignorant why it had come. The only thing she knew for certain was that its coming had given her no pleasure.
Late in life, when the value of money has become impressed upon us (often by harsh experience), and when the needs of those dear to us are importunate, any ‘windfall’ that honestly falls to us is welcomed as a godsend; but in youth we have not only scruples,
[Page 239]
we invent dilemmas. What right, thought Nelly, had Raymond to thus load her with his bounty, and especially without a word or a line to temper it? Could he be so childish as to imagine she would accept the money as a fairy gift, so that she might have a fortune, as it were, in her own right, and be on equal terms to marry him? As to accepting it, or rather as to refusing it, her mind was at once made up, though that rapid conclusion had not been arrived at from the least guess at his motives, but from another supposition, which, though dismissed as unworthy, had refused to take its dismissal. Her difficulty was, what immediate steps to take with respect to this sum—how, in short, to acknowledge its receipt and to return it. The Wardlaws, she well knew, would advise her to keep it; they had a simple belief that nice people who wanted this world's goods ought to have them from the hands of those who had plenty to spare; and it must be allowed that they had the generosity of their opinions. She could not, therefore, apply for advice to them. But there was this kind Mr. Pearson, who took common-sense, if somewhat severe, views of life, and whose disinterestedness in the matter would make him a proper judge. She therefore resolved to consult him; and as indisposition or some other cause prevented his coming to Gower Street as usual, she determined to call upon him at his lodgings. On this errand she of course took Janet with her, though the attendance of that faithful watch-dog had of late been dispensed with when Mr. Pearson was in her studio; the relations between tutor and pupil having become so cordial as to make that conventionality an affectation.
Upon inquiry at the artist's lodgings they found that he was within, and, sending up her name, Nelly was informed that he would see her in a few minutes.
[Page 240]
‘Mr. Pearson has not been ill, then?’ inquired she of the lodging-house servant.
‘Well, no, ma'am, not to say ill—or at least, no badder than usual.’
This relieved Nelly's mind, but at the same time surprised and perhaps a little vexed her. She had flattered herself that he would have come to Gower Street unless absolutely incapacitated from so doing.
Mr. Pearson seemed to understand this, for as soon as she entered his parlour, which was on the second floor, he began to explain matters. ‘I have had troubles, my dear young lady, and matters that required my personal attendance elsewhere; but my thoughts have been with you.’
‘And you have not been well,’ said she gently. His face, indeed, was an apology in itself: it was paler and more weary-looking than ever; the eager look that it had once worn was gone, and had been replaced by one of settled melancholy.
‘Oh, I have been well enough; but not quite up to giving lessons,’ said he gently. ‘I have been working at home, you see.’
On his easel was a half-finished sketch; but the walls of the room were bare. Nelly comprehended at once that he could not afford to keep his works beyond the day on which they were finished. This man was little better than a pauper, while she had lying at her banker's more than 20,000 l.
‘Well,’ continued he, smiling, ‘this is not a professional visit, I suppose?’
‘No, Mr. Pearson, I should not have ventured on that course, much as I miss your teaching. Yet I came on a purely selfish errand. The fact is, I need the advice of a friend most sorely.’
[Page 241]
‘That is well: since it is one of the few things that it is in my power to give you. What is your trouble?—for I see that there is trouble, my dear.’
‘Well, I have had a fortune given to me.’
‘You mean left to you,’ said Mr. Pearson quietly. He had a pencil in his hand, and was sketching carelessly upon a slip of paper on the table while he spoke, as though fortunes were left every day to those who need them.
‘No, I mean what I say— given . A very large sum has been paid anonymously into my banker's hands.’
‘How much?’
‘No less than 21,000 l .’
‘Ah!’ returned the other quickly. The magnitude of the sum seemed to have overset his philosophy for the moment; but he presently added in his usual tone, ‘That is, as you say, quite a fortune. I congratulate you with all my heart.’
‘Yes, but I am not going to take it.’
‘What?’ said he, rising to his feet, and for the first time, in her eyes, wearing a look of severe displeasure. ‘You must be mad, my dear young lady: or if not mad, profoundly ignorant. Do you know that 20,000 l . is a sum for which, before now, brave men have bartered life, and men who thought themselves honest, honour; a sum which in bad hands is a source of evil to hundreds, and in good hands, such as yours, is a fountain of good?’
‘I do not underrate its value, dear Mr. Pearson; but even money, as I have heard Mr. Wardlaw say, may be bought too dear.’
‘Mr. Wardlaw! what does he know about it?’ answered the other excitedly; ‘a man that has laid pound to pound from his boyhood, and never knew what poverty means.’
[Page 242]
‘Indeed, Mr. Pearson, he has told me he was once very poor.’
‘To begin with; yes: then he, least of all men, can be a judge in this matter. It is those who have been gently nurtured, and brought up in comfort, who, when the stroke of adversity falls, have the tender skin. What the gods send you, take and be thankful for it, and ask no questions for conscience' sake. The Bible itself tells you so.’
‘I don't think the Bible quite says that,’ replied Nelly, smiling.
‘Then look at me , my dear young lady, and from that sad spectacle take your warning. I am old before my time; I am dying before my time; I have lived a life of anxiety and wretchedness, and all for want of that dross which you so ignorantly despise.’ He was indeed a sorry sight. His hollow eyes, his shrunken cheeks, his thin grey hair, his hoarse and broken voice, all spoke of privation and distress of mind. ‘If you have come here for my advice,’ he continued with earnest fervour, ‘I have given it you before you asked it. Nay more, I will be frank with you upon another matter. You will never earn more by your pencil than will suffice, as in my case, to keep life within you. And what is life without, I do not say enjoyment, but without leisure, and the power of benefiting others? Long, long ago, dear girl, I thought that death was preferable to such an existence, and now I know it.’
If there was not truth, there was conviction in his every word. As Nelly looked at him, the first temptation she had felt to keep this money occurred to her: ‘It is within my power,’ was her reflection, ‘to make at least one life tolerable.’
He perceived her momentary indecision, and taking her hand in his, whispered with ineffable tenderness, ‘Be sane, be wise, and
[Page 243]
if you have still a doubt, let my entreaties turn the wavering scale.’
‘Indeed, dear Mr. Pearson, they have weight—a weight which I am sure you will regret, since it gives me pain. But I am not here to ask you, shall I accept this gift or not. My mind is made up—to decline it.’
‘Why? why? What madness! You say it is anonymous: how know you, then, but some person may have been indebted to those belonging to you—your mother or your father—and have taken this means of payment? It may be conscience- money.’
‘It may be; perhaps it is,’ she answered, with a flush. ‘But if so, not of the kind you hint at. The fact is, I know from whom it comes.’
‘Indeed!’ He had sat down again, overcome by his excitement and, as it seemed, depressed by the statement of her resolve, but now again he raised his head. ‘How can you know, since the money was paid anonymously?’
‘There are only two persons in the world, Mr. Pearson, in whose power it lay to do this thing; and I am sure it is not one of them. It must therefore be the other. It is Raymond Pennicuick.’
Mr. Pearson poured himself out a glass of water from a caraffe on the table, before he answered; and she noticed that his hand shook like a palsied man's.
‘Well, my dear young lady, and why not? He has become, I suppose, a rich man. His father was a friend of your father's, and it is probable that before he died he enjoined this act upon his son. When he was alive, as I understand, he offered to pay you an
[Page 244]
annuity; and when about to die, it is comparatively easy even for a close-fisted man, to be extremely liberal.’
Nelly shook her head. ‘In that case Raymond would have told me, Mr. Pearson. He is not a man to take the credit of another's gift.’
‘He has taken no credit to himself at all that I can see.’
‘It is the same thing. He must know that I should identify him with the giver; at all events—which is all that we need consider —I have done so. Mr. Pearson,’ Nelly went on, with quivering lips, ‘it is fair, since I come to ask your counsel, it is only fair that I should have no secrets from you.’
Here that gentleman, softly rising, took the astonished Janet by the shoulder, and, opening the door of an inner apartment, put her quietly within it, and there left her.
‘There was a time,’ continued Nelly in low tones, ‘when Raymond Pennicuick asked me to become his wife.’
‘I have heard or guessed as much; and you refused him?’
‘Yes: but not because I did not love him: it was because I would not be the cause of quarrel between him and his father. And now—I have thought of this, and put it from me, again and again—and, mind you, it is not like him; the suggestion I am about to make does his nature, so far as I have known it, grievous wrong; but the facts compel it—and now, I say, that he has become his own master, and the master of his father's wealth, he sends me this huge sum, without a line of explanation, or a word of kindness.’
‘Well?’ for she paused—while the colour mounted to her very forehead.
[Page 245]
‘You said, Mr. Pearson, there was such a thing as conscience- money.’
‘I see,’ he answered gravely. ‘You think he has sent you 21,000 l . by way of compromise, because he does not mean to ask you again to be his wife.’
‘Heaven forgive me if I wrong him,’ answered Nelly, ‘but so it seems.’ She covered her face with her hands—and burst into tears.
‘My dear young lady, this must not be,’ said Mr. Pearson tenderly. ‘If this notion of yours is true, the man is not worth a thought, much less a tear. And if it is not true, we are, as you say, doing him grievous wrong in supposing it. As to his not coming to you, or writing to you, his position, after your rejection of him, is very delicate.’
‘He wrote to me about the Dhulang matter,’ sobbed poor Nelly. ‘He is not like you; he can write if he chooses. You may say indeed that it is not to be expected with his father but a few days dead—but then, why have sent the money? He should have had no thought of money at such a time, but since he had’—she could say no more, but broke down utterly. For weeks she had not spoken to a friend; and weakened by solitude and helpless thought, this blow had fallen upon her—to be despised as she imagined (for in such sad straits we are apt to imagine slights) by the man she loved. ‘Forgive me, sir, for I have no right to trouble you,’ said she, recovering herself; ‘you must blame your own kindness as much as my own selfishness; and, alas! I have no friend but you whose counsel I can ask on such a subject—you would not wish me now to touch that money, sir?’
‘No, my dear girl, I would not; no, no, no. That would be degradation. But remember we are not sure .’
[Page 246]
‘That is what my heart says still, dear Mr. Pearson, but my reason contradicts it.’
‘Then your heart is still his?’ put in the other gravely.
‘I did not say so,’ said she passionately; ‘I never told himself so. That is nothing now. What I came here to ask you for is counsel. What am I to say, what am I to do? To draw a cheque for this huge sum, and then return it, would be the simplest way; but then if by any chance it should not be Raymond!’
Mr. Pearson rose and began to pace the room uneasily. ‘It is a difficult question, my dear girl: there is, as you say, a possibility— and to suggest such a gift, if undesigned, would be intolerable. Are you sure that there is no other friend who has this power?’
For an instant her thoughts flew to Herbert Milburn; he was rich, he had loved her with an unselfish love, and he had departed (Mrs. Wardlaw said because Nelly had rejected him) to a foreign land. Being without hope of her, it was just within possibility that his generosity of soul might have dictated such an act: it was not vanity that suggested this, but simply that the affair was so extraordinary that it evaded all reasonable solution, and yet she felt a sense of shame at having entertained such a conjecture.
‘No, there is no other,’ said she at last. ‘I am quite sure.’
‘Will you promise not to move in the matter until I have thought over it—until I see you again?’
‘I will, dear Mr. Pearson. But I entreat you, do not delay your decision. So long as I hold this money in possession it is as molten gold to the hand that clasps it.’
Then she thanked him warmly and took her leave, not without more tears, for her nerves were greatly shaken.
When his visitor was gone, Mr. Pearson too, strange to say,
[Page 247]
showed more signs of emotion than when she had been present. He continued to pace his room, though it was plain the exertion wearied him, while frequent mutterings showed his brain was busy in her behalf. ‘Poor girl, dear girl,’ would drop from his white lips in accents of tenderest pity; then they would grow rigid, as he murmured ‘Right is Right’; and then again ‘Dead, Dead! what profit though the tree be fallen, if we miss the fruit?’
[Page 248]
CHAPTER XXIV. A MYSTERY. It was not Raymond Pennicuick's fault that his father died, as such men mostly do die, without friends or kin about him, and with hireling hands to close his eyes. Raymond was dutiful enough, and none the less so though the confession Ralph Pennicuick had made had, as he had himself foreseen, deprived his son of his dearest hope. He would have continued to remain under the sick man's roof and to have tended him with all care and gentleness, but that the patient himself had expressed a wish to the contrary. From the moment he had entrusted his shameful secret to his son, he had resumed towards him his old manner; he had become cynical, suspicious, hard, again, so far at least as his waning powers permitted him to be; where he had been violent, he was irritable; where he had been caustic, he was curt and peevish. Perhaps he regretted his confession; perhaps he resented the fact that Raymond possessed his secret, and would fain show him that in spite of that Ralph Pennicuick was master still. At all events, that momentary flow of natural tenderness had stopped, having perhaps exhausted the reservoir.
Thus it happened that when the end came, which it did a few days after the interview we have recorded, the dying man was
[Page 249]
attended by Hatton only. The Doctor and Raymond were of course sent for, but arrived too late to find him alive. He had made some movement which had roused his servant, who was sleeping in a chair by the bedside. He had raised himself on his elbow and was looking straight before him in a manner which Hatton described as ‘unked’—the vulgar English for ‘uncanny.’ ‘I am coming,’ said he, in tones that despite their weakness were still harsh and resolute.
‘Master, what is it?’ inquired Hatton.
‘It is Death,’ was the calm reply; ‘I am about to meet him face to face.’
And it was Death.
Who it was that Ralph Pennicuick was about to meet, the man of course did not know, though he knew enough of his master's opinions to feel sure that he was not referring to the Eternal Judge.
‘That's what he said, Mr. Raymond; “I am about to meet him face to face;” only those words and no more, and then he fell back, and I saw by his looks that it was all over.’
Raymond knew whom his father had felt he was about to meet only too well, and those last words spurred on a purpose with which his mind had been busy for many a day. That very evening Raymond sent for Mr. Tatham and said, ‘You must procure me one-and-twenty thousand pounds at once’—for there was interest to be paid on that shameful debt as well as the principal.
The lawyer stood aghast, as well he might; he had not been unaccustomed to the spectacle of a greedy heir, but such a request as this at such a time surpassed all his experience: to hear it, too, from the lips of Raymond Pennicuick of all men, fairly astonished him.
[Page 250]
‘Good heavens, sir, when the breath is scarce out of your father's body!’
‘He was my father, not yours!’ cried Raymond, with a look and tone that reminded the lawyer of Ralph himself; ‘what I ask of you is, not your approval, but the thing itself.’
‘But, sir, the will has not been read, or rather we do not know for certain that there is no will.’
‘You do know that. If you cannot raise this money immediately —at once—I can find those who can, though I pay twice as much for it a fortnight hence. I tell you I must have it.’
And somehow or other Mr. Tatham contrived, within a marvellously short time, and doubtless at some considerable cost, to get it. Then, by his client's directions, he paid it with all possible secrecy into Miss Ellen Conway's account at her banker's. Raymond thought it better for Nelly's sake that it should be done through him than to select any other confidant. ‘I am at liberty,’ he said, ‘to tell you this much and no more, Mr. Tatham, that in paying this money I am only discharging a just debt.’
The lawyer bowed, and, being an astute man, never again so much as referred to the question of ‘value received.’
From that moment a great weight was lifted off Raymond's mind, but it was still very far from being at peace. He had inherited something else besides his father's money—the sense of his shameful conduct. The knowledge of the evil he had wrought on his dead friend, and of his subsequent baseness, affected him as though it were a taint in his blood. To hear his father spoken of, even in the way of condolement with himself, was distressing to him; such words were to his ears not even ‘the vacant chaff well meant for grain,’ they were smooth lies, probably known to be
[Page 251]
such by the speakers themselves, but at all events known so to be sometimes by him. It was still worse to hear the dead man spoken of, as he did, with that frankness used by men of the world, who had once called themselves his friends. In a railway carriage one day, not long after the funeral, he had heard two such men, known to him by sight, though he was a stranger to them, discussing his father's character.
‘They used to call him Steel Pen, you know,’ said one; ‘and indeed he was a man of iron every way—including his heart.’
‘But it seems he broke up at last; we may be sure, however, he never melted.’
‘He is melting now , if there's any truth in what the parsons say,’ and then they both laughed aloud.
It matters nothing to us , probably, what men may say of us when we have played our parts in this world, but it does matter, sometimes, to those who belong to and survive us; and even for their sakes it behoves us to leave a decent memory.
There were other things, too, that embittered Raymond Pennicuick's life, though to the world it seemed incredible that, being young and prosperous, and having got rid of that incubus his father, he could be otherwise than happy. He had given up all hopes of Nelly Conway. It would probably have seemed to him, in any case, with his scrupulous notions of right and his keen sense of what was becoming, that he must withdraw his pretensions in that quarter after what had happened; that, being who he was, he could not marry her father's daughter; but at all events the opinion of Ralph Pennicuick himself had settled that matter for his son. If such a union seemed to his father's eyes to be impossible and not to be contemplated, it must indeed, reasoned Raymond,
[Page 252]
be out of the pale of propriety; forgetting that, though unhappily this logic held true enough with respect to other matters (i.e. that his father was anything but a severe judge on a question of duty), yet that in this particular instance the horror of his own crime, or its consequences, had made him for once both sensitive and scrupulous. Raymond had, we say, given up all hopes of Nelly, but unfortunately he could not help thinking about her. It was not yet certain that she had accepted the 21,000 l . without suspicion of the source from which it had come, or even that she had accepted it at all. She had certainly not breathed a word of the matter to Mrs. Wardlaw, whom Raymond had seen, and whom he knew too well to suppose capable of concealing from him such an incident. It seemed to him (what was in fact the case) that the girl was making up her own mind what to do on the subject, and then would take some practical step.
Suppose she should tax him with having sent the money! This idea was terrible to him, for to tell her the truth would be impossible. He was content—no, not content—he had submitted, though he felt that she loved him and had only declined his suit for reasons to his own advantage, to live without her, but it was intolerable to him that she should regard him even from a distance as the man whose father had ‘robbed and murdered’ hers. Such had been the very terms used by the criminal himself, and he scarcely felt them to be exaggerated. There were times, in his solitude and hopelessness, when he felt that, though he had assured him to the contrary, he had hardly forgiven the father who had stood between him and his love in life, and in death had still more effectually separated them. To lose her, and her good opinion also (so far as it was possible for one so just to condemn the innocent)
[Page 253]
was not to be endured; and yet sooner or later some explanation would certainly be demanded of him. He began to think how foolish he had been in supposing that a girl so scrupulous would consent to accept so huge a sum without inquiry; and then to fear lest she should inquire of him.
From the moment that that apprehension seized him, he was in a fever to be out of her reach. Foreign travel had never had the charms for him that it had for his father: his tastes were homely, as his views on most subjects were what soaring spirits, with a dislike for the proprieties, are wont to term ‘narrow’ and ‘insular;’ but now he resolved at once to go abroad. He therefore gave Hatton orders to that effect, and that adroit attendant had all things ready for his journey, including his passport, in a very few hours.
Said Raymond, as he was about to depart, ‘I shall give up the rooms in the Albany, but you can stay on here in Lincoln's Inn, Hatton. I shall probably not have much occasion for your services at any time, but for my father's sake, and on account of your long and faithful service to him, I shall certainly not discharge you.’
‘You are very good, Mr. Raymond,’ returned his attendant quietly; ‘but I am thinking of retiring from service altogether. Your ways, you see, sir, are not my old master's ways, though some folks may think them better ones, and I can't say as I relish the idea of Lincoln's Inn after the Halbany.’
Raymond could not restrain a smile; he had never liked the man, but he felt that he had done his duty after a fashion, and sometimes under very unpleasant circumstances. Ralph Pennicuick had been a harsh master, and, as we have said, it was the
[Page 254]
wonder of those who knew him best how he had contrived to retain so long Mr. Hatton's services.
‘Well, of course you will please yourself, Hatton. If you are resolved to leave me I shall make you a present of one hundred pounds; or if that is insufficient—’
‘Well, no, Mr. Raymond; I think under the circumstances that will be handsome.—Thank you, sir.’
He took up the cheque Raymond wrote for him, and placed it in his breast pocket.
‘As we are going to part company, Mr. Raymond, and on good terms,’ continued he, ‘I will give you a piece of good advice in confidence. I would recommend you, when you begin housekeeping reglar on your own account, to go over your plate rather oftener than was the custom of your honoured parent.’
‘To go over my plate!’ repeated Raymond. ‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘Well, to count it, sir; especially the salvers and tureens and things, which are seldom used. The fact is, sir, we gentlemen's gentlemen don't like to see money lying idle, and some of us are of a speculative turn of mind, especially as respects the Turf. A respectable-looking man, you see, such as yours truly, can raise a good bit of money on plate at the pawnbroker's. I have been very fortunate in my investments myself, but that may not always be the case with my successors. There is not a saltspoon missing, as it happens, but such luck cannot happen both to master and man for ever.—Good-bye, sir, and thank you kindly.’
It was frank, and no doubt well meant of the man, but somehow this revelation awoke other emotions than amusement in Raymond's mind. Even the faithfulness of his unhappy father's
[Page 255]
servant, then, had only been secured by self-interest that smacked strongly of dishonesty! How miserable it was to have none to trust, and none to love one, and to wander aimlessly over the wide world, as he was himself about to do! When would he see these old rooms of his again, and, alas! what did he care whether he saw them again or not? The cab was at the door, with his luggage piled, and he was about to descend the stairs, when his clerk put a registered letter into his hand, just come by post. He felt something round and hard in the envelope before he opened it. But he turned his first attention to the letter.
‘One who knew your father, and who loves one who is very dear to you, would have half an hour's conversation with you at the above address. It is important for your own interests that you should come at once, as his days—perhaps his hours—are numbered. The enclosed ring will be the writer's credentials for the authenticity of this communication.’
The ring Raymond recognised at the first glance as his father's signet-ring; he had always worn it on his finger before his last expedition abroad; but it had been taken from him by force (as he had stated) by a Chinese official at Dhulang.
How came it now in England, and in the possession of a stranger? There was no signature to the letter: only an address in Bedford Place, and nothing in the contents which pointed to the identification of the writer. But was he a stranger? The phrase ‘One who knew your father,’ would seem to imply that Raymond himself was unacquainted with him, and yet the handwriting did not seem altogether unfamiliar to his eyes. Was it possible that this man had somehow become possessed of his father's secret, and intended to trade upon it? The letter was mysterious,
[Page 256]
but it did not give the impression of being treacherous or fraudulent. At all events, the footing on which the writer had placed himself appealed to Raymond's sense of duty. He knew the worst concerning what had happened at Dhulang, but it still remained to preserve, as far as possible, his father's memory from public shame. If this man was what he pretended to be, he might even have something to say in mitigation of that unhappy business. Strange as the matter was so far, it was not stranger (but for the inexplicable presence of the signet-ring) than the allusion made in the letter to Nelly Conway, for to whom save her could the expression ‘one who is very dear to you’ refer? There was no other person, alas! ‘very dear to him’ in all the world. The writer said that he himself loved her. Now, the only person of whom Raymond had ever heard as having paid court to Nelly was Herbert Milburn. And Herbert Milburn had been a friend of his father's, and had gone to Dhulang in his company. But Raymond had heard that he had left England for China many weeks ago; and even if it was Milburn, why should he communicate with him thus anonymously?
The more he thought of the matter, the more mysterious and impenetrable it became; but it seemed at least of sufficient importance to demand his immediate attention. So Raymond's luggage was taken down from the cab, and he himself was conveyed in it to Bedford Place instead of to the railway station.
[Page 257]
CHAPTER XXV. THE INTERVIEW. ‘ My name is Pennicuick,’ said Raymond to the servant who opened the door to him in Bedford Place. ‘I have been asked to call upon some gentleman residing in this house, but whose name I do not know.’
‘That is right enough, sir; it is Mr. Pearson. He is very ill at present, but I believe he will see you.’
This information affected Raymond in two ways: it was at once a relief to his mind and a disappointment. Mrs. Wardlaw had informed him that Nelly was taking lessions of a Mr. Pearson, and it was to the last degree unlikely that this artist-tutor could have any personal knowledge to his father's prejudice; on the other hand, this man might easily have guessed or discovered his affection for his pupil, and made use of that information to obtain an interview from interested motives, in which case he had postponed his journey for a very insufficient cause. However, his possession of the signet-ring was a mystery, even in that case, still to be accounted for.
On entering the sitting-room he beheld not so much a man as the skeleton or shadow of one, enveloped in a dressing-gown, and sitting in an arm-chair by the fire.
[Page 258]
‘I do not rise, Mr. Pennicuick,’ said this ghastly figure, in a hollow voice, ‘because I am too weak to pay you that courtesy. Pray take a chair.’
Raymond bowed stiffly, and sat down; the sense that he was being made a victim to some kind of artifice was strong upon him.
‘You came hither, I conjecture, immediately upon the receipt of my note, and you did well and wisely in so doing; for, as you see’—he pointed to his own haggard frame—‘there is not much time to lose. You are sceptical, I perceive, upon that point,’ added he, after a moment's silence, and in harsher tones. ‘What was it, then, that secured your promptness in acceding to my request?’
‘You sent me my father's signet-ring.’
‘Well, you got it; what more was there to be hoped for, Mr. Raymond Pennicuick?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Perhaps, however, there was something to be feared ?’
Raymond felt his colour changing, but he answered in a firm voice enough, ‘I have nothing to fear from any man. You wrote to me, as you stated, from your dying bed; you professed to be a friend (and, so far, I am inclined to believe you) of one who is very dear to me; and you also hinted at some connection with my late father, which your possession of his signet-ring seemed to corroborate. These seemed to afford claims enough upon my attention. But do not suppose that my coming here is any sign of weakness; any attempt at duplicity or extortion—’
‘Would fail in your case, I have no doubt,’ put in the other curtly; ‘nor is it necessary to employ such means towards a gentleman who, without compulsion, and of his own free will, has paid away 20,000 l . or so.’
[Page 259]
‘This is intolerable,’ said Raymond, rising from his chair. ‘If you think to get any advantage from your knowledge of my having of late disbursed that sum, you are mistaken. Since you are acquainted with Miss Ellen Conway, it is no mystery to me how you learnt the fact, though I am surprised indeed that she should have made such as you her confidant.’
‘She did not tell me, however, that it was conscience-money.’
‘And who are you, sir, that dare to say it was?’
‘I am Arthur Conway .’
Raymond stood aghast. ‘It is impossible,’ he said; yet his eyes sought the letter that had summoned him, and which he still held in his hand with uncertain glance.
‘Yes, the handwriting of a man survives the man himself,’ observed the other in answer to it. ‘You recognise me now, I see.’
‘I do, I do,’ answered Raymond with deep emotion. ‘I thank Heaven with all my heart that you are a living man.’
‘That is not on my own account, however,’ answered the other drily.
‘To be frank with you, Captain Conway, it is not. My poor father died with—Oh, sir, he told me all that happened.’
‘Or what he thought had happened. I guessed as much directly I heard of that act of reparation.’
‘Alas, sir, it was not that: reparation was not possible. I did, however, what I could.’
‘And at his request?’
‘Yes, sir, upon my honour,’ exclaimed Raymond eagerly. ‘He knew that my first act after his death would be the repayment of the sum he owed you to your daughter, and he approved of it.’
[Page 260]
‘It was his wont, it seems, to do all things by proxy,’ answered the other coldly, ‘even to the discharge of his just debts.’
‘He suffered, sir, for all he did amiss; ay,’ added Raymond, with sudden sternness, ‘and he was tricked, imposed upon. I see now how you plotted against him; made his name infamous, and wrecked his peace. It was you, then, and not your ghost, who met him face to face in Westminster. Revenge is sweet to you; you should therefore be well satisfied; for it was you who killed him.’
‘Was it so, indeed? Alas, alas! and he was once my friend,’ murmured Conway with dropping head. ‘Be patient, Raymond. You cannot guess the things that I have suffered—and all wrongfully. Your father also has killed me . These grey hairs, these hollow eyes, this shrunken frame, and worse, the changed and hardened heart within me, are all his doing, I came back to England not to right myself, but her you love. Broken, betrayed, despoiled beyond the reach of righting, I had no sense of right but that. What was I to do? Would you have had me appeal to him—who let me perish (as he imagined) in his stead, and kept back the money for which I had sold my life—for justice? There was no justice in him.’
‘Captain Conway, I was his son.’
‘I feel that, unhappy lad! but you have compelled me to speak in my own defence. Listen awhile, but not to the record of your father's shame. Let that be buried in his grave and mine. My purpose in sending for you here is to avert the miseries that have fallen upon him and me, from you and yours; to confine the evil that has destroyed us both to our own generation.’
The speaker paused for breath, and held his finger up for silence: but there was no fear of interruption from his companion
[Page 261]
now. A spark had fallen among the dead embers of his dearest hope, which it seemed to him that a word of his might extinguish.
‘Your father left me at Dhulang a prisoner doomed to death, as certainly, as it appeared, as it is certain now. I had no hope of life, and few regrets for it. The people about me, from the highest to the lowest, were cruel, base, and brutal. There was only one man, Fu-chow—his name was mentioned to you, perhaps?—’
Raymond motioned with his head that he knew the man.
‘You were told, doubtless, that he was vile and false as all the rest, and so I then believed him to be. He had been friendly to me at first, but when I exchanged places with your father, he had insisted on being bought over like the rest to acquiesce in the substitution. Indeed, he was more obstinate than the others, and stood out for better terms, and we had no choice but to accede to them. No sooner had your father sailed, however, than this man came to me and showed himself my friend. I had done him a service—no matter what—and, barbarian as he was, it seems he was grateful for it. He had influence, he was free, he had money, and more than the average cunning of his race, and he was inclined to save me, and he told me so. I thanked him, but the thing appeared impossible: we had tried every plan already, as I reminded him, and the execution was fixed for the next day but one.
‘“I have got a substitute,” said he, “who will suffer for you.”
‘I think in no case would I have consented to such an arrangement, though the desire of life had begun to stir within me as he spoke those words. It was of no use to speak of scruples to the man, but I simply said that no Chinese could be mistaken for me for an instant.
[Page 262]
‘“I know it,” said he. “It is not a Chinese; it is an Englishman.”
‘I could scarcely believe him, but at all events I could never have permitted the sacrifice of a fellow-countryman in my place. Forgive me, Raymond; I do not blame those that would; life is dearer to some men, Heaven knows, than to others; and mine seemed of little value. I said that that could not be.
‘“But this Englishman,” said Fu-chow, “must suffer in any case, and the self-same punishment. It is the murderer we saw in prison as we came along.”
‘Then I remembered that we had visited a Chinese prison some hundred miles away, in which lay an English criminal condemned like me—but for most heinous crimes—to the Ling-chih, i.e. to be cut into ten thousand pieces. It seemed, indeed, since the poor wretch must suffer, that I should be doing him no wrong to exchange places with him.
‘“But the man is in gaol,” said I, “and distant three days' journey.”
‘“No, master, he is on his road, and will be here to-morrow,” said Fu-chow cunningly. And indeed he had so contrived it. He had taken a dislike to your father—for which, in truth, he had his reasons—and though he had all along had this device to rescue him in his mind, and had even put it in train, he had not intended to tell him of it till the last moment.’
‘Great Heaven! then my father's life might have been saved without this shame!’ cried Raymond bitterly.
‘Perhaps. Let us not dwell, however, on what might have been; evil enough has befallen us, without adding to it by vain regrets. My task is to stop its growth beyond my grave. The man I speak
[Page 263]
of arrived at Dhulang the next morning, and on the same night I left the prison accompanied by Fu-chow. Not then, but afterwards, I redeemed your father's signet-ring from the custody of the gaoler, who had robbed him of it, intending to restore it to him under far other circumstances than afterwards took place. I was carried away up the country, and lay in hiding for many weeks. It would have compromised the officials as well as hazarded my own life to let it be known that I was still in existence. I suffered very great hardships, but my greatest pain was the reflection that by that time my dear daughter must have heard of my death, and be enduring —for I knew she loved me well—the pangs of a grief for which there was no need. I took it for granted that she had received news of her worldly prosperity; that your father had telegraphed to her the provisions of the will I had executed, and which was to account (as he and I had agreed upon together) for her change of fortune, but I felt that riches would not compensate her for her father's loss. I was right there—or rather, I should have been, had circumstances turned out as I had shaped them: but I was cruelly deceiving myself, as you know, in the other matter.
‘It was stipulated by the Mandarin who had connived at my escape that I should not return to Shanghae, or reveal myself to any of my fellow-countrymen while in China; and it was very easy to maintain my incognito. The privations I had endured, the agonies of mind I had undergone, had greatly altered me, though I had not as yet become the wretched object that you see here. On the other hand, my spirit was not broken: I was going home at last to see my darling child in the prosperity which I had earned for her. For the money, as you are aware, was to be paid for the risk I ran, and not for the sacrifice of my life itself, though indeed the risk and death
[Page 264]
seemed one. Fu-chow, faithful to the last, furnished me with funds sufficient to pay my passage home in the steerage of an English steamer, and I took my berth in it under the name of Pearson, as a merchant's clerk. It was not for many days after we got to sea that I learnt that your father had not fulfilled his solemn promise given to me on that prison pallet, far more terrible than any death-bed. The catastrophe at Dhulang was a frequent subject of conversation on board, but I had kept aloof from my fellow-passengers, and it was quite by chance that I heard how “that poor devil Conway” had left nothing behind him save his sad story.
‘That news, Raymond Pennicuick, seemed to take ten years from a life that I had good cause to know would in no case have been a long one. And yet I felt I must needs live on for my revenge. Food I could not take, but on the thoughts of that revenge I lived throughout that hateful voyage. You may see in me to what such diet brings a man.’
Here he paused, partly from failing breath, partly from an emotion which, throughout his narrative, from time to time utterly overpowered him.
‘On my arrival in England I found that what I had heard of your father's conduct was but too true. My wife was dead; my child was in poverty and dependence; Ralph Pennicuick, who had robbed them and his dead friend, was, on the other hand, as prosperous as ever, and about to become a member of Parliament. Do you wonder that I swore to become his evil genius? For your own sake and for mine, I spare the details of how I kept my oath. I would not have wounded you, Raymond Pennicuick, by telling even this much, had it not been necessary to the happiness of others. Had I painted your father's conduct in brighter and less
[Page 265]
faithful colours, my own would have seemed darker by its side, and that it was my purpose to avoid; not, believe me, for my own sake,—for what opinion you or any living being, save one, may form of me is, to one in my case, not worth the breath with which you may express it. I wish to stand excused in your sight for another reason. You love my daughter, and the knowledge of your father's behaviour towards me has alone kept you, since his death, from giving sign of it. Am I right or wrong?’
‘You are right, sir. I was quitting England lest haply I should have to tell her with my own lips the story of my father's shame.’
‘Just so. Now, it struck me, if this man has so tender a conscience—inherited from your mother, lad, a saint in heaven— and I tell him less than the bare truth to spare his feelings, he may think me in my turn so base (for revenge is base, and I too have erred deeply in this matter) that he may well shrink from wedding with one of my blood. As it is, both your father and I have sinned against one another—I will not say in what proportion—and have both repented. Put us both, as far as may be, out of your mind: and at all events, let not our acts affect your future conduct. I am speaking, of course, under the supposition that you and Nelly love one another; it seemed to me so from what I gathered from her letters, and my last words, or what I felt to be my last, at Dhulang, were to entreat your father to consent to your union.’
‘The greatest sorrow, save one, sir,’ observed Raymond, ‘of my poor father when he lay a-dying was that his confession must needs rob me of your daughter's love.’
‘And now it need not rob you. He never took my life, that's
[Page 266]
plain: and if he defrauded me, his son has made reparation for him.’
‘But when she comes to know all, sir,’ urged Raymond despairingly, ‘she is so pitiful, and just, and pure, that the thought of the wrongs you have suffered, and at such hands—’
‘Hush, hush! no matter, lad. She shall never know them,’ answered Conway solemnly. ‘Have I gone through so much for her sake to draw back now—so near the close! No, I will die and make no sign. She shall never know she has a father.’ He hid his face in his thin hands and groaned.
‘Oh sir, I could not, even to win Nelly's love,’ cried Raymond, deeply moved, ‘exact such a self-sacrifice. What! after so many years, and the last so full of pain and care, to ask you to give up your single solace, the one hope of those dark days; to forbid you to call her “daughter,” to let you die a stranger to your child! No, never!’
‘You have a kind heart, Raymond Pennicuick. Nelly will be in safe hands,’ moaned the old man. ‘Let that suffice for me.’
Raymond shook his head. ‘I could not build my happiness upon the ruin of yours, sir. To deprive you of your daughter's love would be the worst robbery of all: and besides, what explanation can be given her, save the true one, respecting that act of reparation, and my own silence and neglect of her? She would be as far out of my reach as ever, and you will have suffered to no purpose.’
‘Nay, I have thought of that, and made provision for it. Suffer!—yes, I shall suffer, but I am used to that. It cannot now be for long. Oh, if I could clasp her to my heart, and cry, “My child, my child!” just once, then death were welcome.’
[Page 267]
‘You shall do that, sir,’ said Raymond firmly, ‘and find, I trust, new life from that sweet solace. She shall come here this day, though I myself should fetch her, and meet her only to part from her for ever.’
He had risen and seized his hat, as one who, fearful of his own weakness, must needs act at once or fail to act at all.
‘Stay, stay, dear lad,’ cried Conway hurriedly; ‘I have a device to save us both. We must deceive her for her own good; or rather, tell her a half-truth, since the whole would ruin all. I will spare your father's memory all I can, and that too at the expense of my own good name; yet something bitter must be told. Will you trust me, Raymond, as your advocate?’
‘Indeed, indeed I will, sir.’
‘Then leave me now, for my strength is almost gone, and return hither—it is just noon—at four. Then you shall learn my plan.’
[Page 268]
CHAPTER XXVI. THE RECONCILIATION. Nelly had waited for many days, and not without impatience, to hear, according to promise, from Mr. Pearson; his judgment, it seemed, took a long time to mature. But she knew he was far from well, and had forborne to trouble him. His counsel would be given at last, and she felt sure would be both wise and just. Only, in the mean time, it fretted her to feel that that great sum of money still lay in her hands, and that he who had placed it there must be wondering at her silence, or perhaps taking it for granted that she was disposed to quietly accept it without question. It was only when ‘her light was low’—when loneliness and the toil she did not love so much as she had flattered herself she did, oppressed her more than common, that she verily and indeed believed that this money had been given as a peace-offering on Raymond's part; but the very fact that it was open to such a construction, though only to her own mind, brought a flush of wounded pride into her cheek. She longed to get quit of this unwelcome wealth, and to return it to its rightful owner: though how to do it perplexed her as much as ever. Mr. Pearson, however, had promised to seek out a way.
In about a fortnight after her visit to him, sent word one
[Page 269]
afternoon that he should be happy to see her between four and five, and she concluded at once that he had found some means of meeting her difficulty. Of course she was punctual at the time appointed. At a quarter past four she presented herself with her usual attendant in Bedford Place, and was ushered into Mr. Pearson's parlour: but that gentleman was not in his usual place. The apartment was empty. The maid had said that her master was not so well as usual, so Nelly concluded that he had not yet left his bedroom. When one is waiting in a new place, with nothing particular upon one's mind, one looks about one: Nelly, who was preoccupied, sat by the window with her eyes fixed on the houses opposite, but without observing them; Janet, on the other hand, who had no mauvaise honte , and who had a curiosity inherited from her mother and sharpened by the practice of letting lodgings, made a tour over the little room. She scrutinised the sketch upon the easel—the same, alas, and in the same stage of progress as it had been when they called last, for Mr. Pearson was now too ill to work; she criticised the empty frames that stood in the corner against the wall; she moved the arms and legs of the lay figure into postures unknown to art or nature; and then she gravitated towards the looking-glass and stuck there.
Miss Janet Handsel was not good-looking, but she was accomplished —that is to say, grown up: and it was only natural that she should regard her countenance with satisfaction. ‘To see ourselves as others see us' is a very meritorious desire, and it was probable she would have spent her time thus profitably until Mr. Pearson made his appearance, but for another object of interest which presented itself: also a young lady's face, or the photograph of one, stuck in the corner of the mirror. If
[Page 270]
any had approached the mantelpiece less devoted to self-contemplation than Miss Handsel, it must have met their eyes at once.
‘Lawks a mussy, Miss Nelly, why, here's your pictur!’
‘My picture!’ returned Nelly, rousing herself from her reflections. ‘Where?’ She had a notion that Mr. Pearson might have amused himself by making a sketch of her, and this awakened a languid interest.
‘Yes, your pictur,’ repeated the girl in answer to her look, ‘or leastways a photo. It was taken a year or two ago, I should say, but it's as like you, Miss, as it can stare.’
Nelly took the photograph and gazed upon it intently. She had it taken three years ago upon her birthday, in order to send her father a copy. She had given one or two only to other people—such as Raymond and Mrs. Wardlaw—and they were not persons likely to have parted with such a gift. How came, then, this copy here? She turned the photograph round, and looked at the back; then cried out suddenly, ‘Janet, leave me. I wish to be alone.’
Janet was naturally hard of hearing, but deafer than any stone when she didn't wish to hear what was said.
‘It's as pretty a pictur as ever I saw,’ was her reply.
‘Go downstairs, Janet, and wait for me. I wish to have a few words with Mr. Pearson alone.’
It was impossible, unless she had the gift of blindness as well as of deafness, to misunderstand what her mistress meant; and Janet left the room accordingly.
Nelly sat down with her hands pressed close upon her beating heart; she had read the date on which it was taken, and the words
[Page 271]
‘For my darling father,’ in a still childish scrawl; it was without doubt the very picture she had sent to China.
‘My dear young lady, I fear I have kept you waiting.’ Mr. Pearson stood before her in his dressing-gown, looking very aged and ill, but with a gracious light in his eyes that she had not seen before: he had been always kind to her, but his haggard face had hitherto never worn even a gleam of joy.
‘I have given my best attention to the case you have put before me,’ continued he slowly.
‘Thanks, Mr. Pearson, but first—first of all,’ said Nelly, speaking with difficulty—for not only was she greatly moved, but something in her companion's face, tenderly as it smiled upon her, imparted an inexplicable awe—‘I wish to know about this picture; it is a photograph of myself that I sent to my dear father long ago. How came it in your hands? Did you know him? Did he give it you? No, I cannot believe that,’ for the other nodded in grave assent ‘Who are you?’
Mr. Pearson, who had taken his usual seat, took up a pen, and, writing down four words on a piece of paper, passed it to her. ‘Do you know that handwriting, Nelly?’
The words he had written were familiar enough to her—the usual ending to those most precious treasures, her father's letters; ‘Yours lovingly, Arthur Conway.’
‘Oh father, father!’ she rose, and tottered to his feet, and fell into his outstretched arms.
‘Be calm, be brave, my darling,’ he murmured, caressing her fondly. ‘I need all my strength to bear this joy.’
Had he appealed to any other motive than her solicitude for his own health, Nelly felt that she must have given way to her
[Page 272]
emotions. The sudden shock of happiness, though broken to her with gentlest care, had overwhelmed her quite.
‘You must not mind my tears, darling,’ continued her father softly; ‘I am used to trouble, but not to happiness like this, and you must help me to bear up against it. I have much to tell you, that will tax my feeble powers.’
She had no words of cheer to give him, but smiling like the summer sun through rain, and kissing his withered cheeks, and fingering his gaunt hand with tenderest touch, she strove to tell him how she yearned to yield him strength and comfort, and presently—only give her time—would do so.
‘Yes, darling, I have longed for weeks for this day to come, he said, ‘but its promise being so bright and genial, and my winter having endured so long without a glint of sunshine, I had mistrusted its fulfilment. Let me enjoy it now, for it will be brief, Nelly. Let no false scruples, or bitter thoughts of what has passed and gone, mar the bright prospect.’
‘Oh father, what can mar it? you are here: you will never leave me more.’
‘Yes, Nelly, I shall leave you—but not as you fear: only as we all must, one day, leave those we love. There, there! we will not talk of that. I must tell you how it happened that I came home alive.’
Then he told her (but without a word about his having suffered for another' crime) how he had been thrown into prison, and had escaped through Fu-chow's aid, in the manner with which we are acquainted.
‘But why did you not come straight to me, father? Why conceal yourself under another name?’
[Page 273]
‘Hush, hush! not so loud, darling. I have a secret to share with you. Ralph Pennicuick was a false friend.’
‘I have heard as much!’ sighed Nelly softly.
‘Yes, but he is dead and gone, and bygones must be bygones. He owed me money—a huge sum—20,000 l .’
‘Ah, now I see! But how could he possibly come to be your debtor for such an amount?’
‘It was a debt of honour.’
Nelly looked very grave. She had heard from her mother's lips, when moved to wrath against her husband, that her father was a gambler. She clung to his thin hand still, and kissed it too, but it was plain she had received a blow.
‘Yes, darling; so it was. It was fairly and honourably won; and, strange as it may seem—but you will take your father's word for it—its equal value was staked against it. He acknowledged the debt, though at that time it was only known to him and me; but when he thought me dead, he broke his solemn pledge that he would pay it to those I left behind me.’
‘I should not have taken it, father,’ murmured Nelly.
‘You would if you had known all, dear girl,’ answered Conway quietly; ‘but let that pass. I returned home, penniless and broken, with one hope in my heart, which has to-day been realised. But it was not so then. No: I came to find you, my darling, almost as poor and friendless as myself; while he, my debtor—’
‘Mr. Pennicuick did offer us a handsome income,’ put in Nelly gently, ‘but my mother would not accept it. After her death it was renewed, and I declined it for the second time.’
‘You did well, dear girl. He tried to salve his conscience, and, I am rejoiced to think, in vain. As for me, I was resolved to
[Page 274]
have my rights,—though, Heaven knows, not for my own sake,—or, failing that, at least to avenge your wrongs. My heart was bleeding for you, orphaned as you thought yourself, friendless as you were (save for those good souls the Wardlaws), and most unjustly poor. I went to Richmond, where I found—your mother's grave.’
Here the speaker paused. A feeling very different from those by which he had hitherto been moved appeared to actuate him. The passionate agitation with which he had hinted at his wrongs had disappeared; the pathos with which he had described his yearning to behold his daughter was gone; there was remorse as well as regret in his changed tones.
‘If right had been done to me, Nelly, she would perhaps have been alive; under brighter circumstances we might have understood one another better: God knows.—How did your mother die? Did she speak of me?’
‘She died—very suddenly, father; dropped down and died away from home. But before that, when the report came of your death, she reproached herself bitterly for the misunderstanding between you.’
‘It was not all her fault. We were both to blame,’ murmured Conway. ‘At heart I can well believe she loved me.’
‘She did indeed, father.’
‘God bless her and forgive us all.—What was I saying, darling?
‘You went to Richmond.’
‘Yes, and found you gone to Sandybeach, and followed you. I could not resist looking upon the face that I had pictured to myself so long, and for which that portrait yonder had so long been the only substitute. And I did see you. I was able, you remember, to render you a service.’
[Page 275]
‘Can I ever forget it? But why was it that, when you had thus given me life for the second time, you did not reveal yourself?’
Her father's brow grew dark.
‘I had my reasons. It was necessary that I should not be known to you—to anybody—for the execution of a plan I had formed to get you righted. There is no need to speak of that. Since restitution has been made, we will take for granted it succeeded. I told you at that time I was not my own master; but it was for you, dear Nelly, that I was about to work. My task was difficult, but nothing to what happened after—to the restraint I had to put on myself when I found my daughter in my pupil. Still, for your sake—never mind why; you must trust me here to have acted for the best, Nelly—I kept my secret. I did keep it till my end was gained.’
‘What end, father?’
‘Well, for one thing, till the money was paid that was your due. I knew, of course, before you told me, who had sent it.’
‘Did Raymond know—what you have told me—then?’
‘Yes; and hence his silence with respect to you. His father told him all upon his death-bed, and urged him at once to pay the money. The lad needed no such spur. You know his nature, how sensitive it is as well as noble: the shame of what Ralph Pennicuick had done lived after him in his son's mind; and even when that load of infamous debt was off his shoulders, the young man was still bowed down by the recollection of it. “How can she look at me, except with loathing,” said he to himself, “whose father robbed her father, being dead?” '
‘But why was he silent?’ inquired Nelly gravely. ‘Did he think of me so ill as to imagine that a quarrel about money
[Page 276]
between our fathers would have parted me from him? Why was he not frank with me? What right had he to send me that huge sum without a line of kindness? One gracious word would have outweighed it all.’
‘Oh, Nelly, do not steel your heart against this lad. He loves you dearly, and I think—I think my darling returns his love. Believe me, he is worthy of it. But for his generosity of soul you would never have called me father. We foresaw your scruples, should you come to hear my story, and I was content to leave it all untold, rather than risk its separating you from Raymond. But he who loves you, and has ever loved, and looks upon you as the dearest treasure earth possesses, refused the sacrifice. “You shall not die,” he said, “a stranger to your child.” You despise the wealth with which he would have loaded you; but let this gift of his—myself (since it seems you value it)—have weight with you, and plead his cause.’
‘Oh, father,’ faltered the young girl, ‘there is no need—if I were sure—but it was months ago since Raymond sought my love, and I withheld it; and it well may be since then (though you think otherwise)—’
‘Tut, tut, my girl,’ interrupted the old man, drumming on the table with his fingers, ‘no fear but that I read his heart aright. Would he have left England, think you, to go none knows whither, had another taken your place in his affections?’
‘What! has he left England?’ exclaimed she, the colour fading from her cheeks. ‘Oh, not, I trust, to wander aimless as his father did?’
‘That depends on you, dear Nelly,’ said a soft voice behind her. It was Raymond's voice, who, at her father's signal, had stepped
[Page 277]
opportunely from the inner room where he had been in waiting all along. ‘Without your love all countries are alike to me, and in none shall I find a home.’
His blue eyes gazed upon her with earnest wistfulness, but in an instant their expression changed to tender triumph; he was clasping his darling to his breast.
‘Dear Ray, I have always loved you,’ was her passionate cry, as she threw herself into his arms.
[Page 278]
CHAPTER XXVII. UNITED. No veteran lags more superfluous on the stage than do lovers, whose course of love is run, in the pages of fiction. But it must be acknowledged that there were exceptional obstacles to be surmounted in the case of Raymond and Nelly notwithstanding that they had plighted troth. To acknowledge one's parents has before now been found, by persons moving in good society, as difficult a matter as for others to acknowledge their offspring; and the existence of Captain Arthur Conway was a fact the publication of which was likely to be fraught with much more than inconvenience both to himself and other people. For Raymond's sake, or rather for the sake of smoothing for him his way to Nelly's heart, he had to his own daughter pictured his conduct in a way that did him great injustice. He had allowed her to imagine that he had committed the act which had made Pennicuick's life forfeit to Chinese justice; and he had actually borne false witness against himself on the subject of the money owed to him, which, though in one sense a debt of honour, was by no means a gambling debt such as Nelly understood it to be. In thus lowering himself in his daughter's eyes (albeit for her own advantage), and trusting to her loving charity to rectify what seemed to have
[Page 279]
been amiss in him, instead of standing on his moral rights, it will be conceded that Arthur Conway had done enough in the way of self-sacrifice. He was not bound to stand in the pillory for the world at large to jeer at. He did not regret his generosity; perhaps he felt that he was atoning by it for the rancour with which he had avenged his wrongs, and which had found vent on the hustings at Slowcombe (for it was he, of course, who had contrived the advertisement about Dhulang) and in the columns of the daily press; but he felt that it had gone far enough. As for personal recognition, except at Nelly's hands, he cared nothing for it. In England he had no friends; and his time was getting far too short to make them. What, then, was to be done, which, while on the one hand, it should give him the companionship of his daughter, should yet not compel him to tell the story he had told to her to the world at large? He could scarcely pass even the brief remainder of his days—for he had told truth in saying they were numbered—under the same roof with her as Mr. Pearson, and yet he felt it would be beyond his powers, having once acknowledged her, having felt those loving arms about him for whose embrace he had yearned for years, to become again, even to others' eyes, a stranger to her.
As often happens, this serious difficulty was surmounted through the pursuance of the path of duty, though it did not seem to lead in the direction of any such relief.
Nelly, even as matters were, conceived that the chief objection to the disclosure lay in the slur that the facts would cast upon Ralph Pennicuick's memory, and in that view was as strongly adverse to it as the other two possessors of the secret; but in Mrs. Wardlaw's case she knew that nothing that could come to light respecting
[Page 280]
this unhappy man would make that lady's opinion of him worse than it was already, while she did feel that she owed nothing less to her fond and faithful friend than a frank explanation of her position.
‘I think, dear father,’ said she, while the subject was under discussion, ‘if you have no vital objection, that an exception should be made in the matter of our secret with respect to Mrs. Wardlaw. Her affection, nay, her devotion, to me has been such as to make me ashamed not only of my own unworthiness of it, but even of the step I took in leaving her to gain my own living; it was my duty, as you know, but, though I felt it to be such, I also felt that in so doing, contrary to her vehement entreaties, I was making a poor return for her unexampled kindness. If I conceal my present happiness from her, I shall be depriving her of happiness also, for she loves me—almost’ (here she cast a tender look at her father) ‘as though I were her own child.’
Conway shook his head, not in absolute negation, but grave doubt; he was a proud man—far prouder, indeed, than Ralph Pennicuick (who passed for proud) had ever been. The hard and selfish man is never proud except in the vulgarest sense; there is always a point with him where self-interest will outweigh a degradation. Conway, who had stooped to revenge (for another's sake), possessed a nature otherwise incapable of baseness: he was very sensitive as to his own honour; he had had a far harder struggle to represent himself as he had done to his daughter than to sacrifice his life for her at Dhulang; and it was a bitter thought to him that another woman—and a good one too—should have cause to think ill of him.
Another counsel, however, followed on the same side.
[Page 281]
‘If any words of mine, Captain Conway, may weigh with you,’ said Raymond earnestly, ‘I beseech you to give ear to Nelly's request. I scarcely think that even she herself is conscious of the love that Mrs. Wardlaw bears to her. My testimony may be considered independent,’ added he, ‘since I have good reason to believe that it is no fault of that lady's that my darling here is not now Mrs. Herbert Milburn.’
‘Independent, sir! not a bit of it,’ answered Conway, smiling. ‘Whatever this girl says—God bless her! I believe you are prepared to swear to. Well’—this with a little sigh—‘let it be as you please.’
Thus it came about that the very next morning Nelly presented herself at Coromandel Lodge. It was the first time she had seen its mistress since she had left the hotel at Sandybeach; not that Mrs. Wardlaw nourished any anger against her, but the good lady hoped that, if she kept aloof, solitude and discomfort would be her best assistants to drive her darling back the sooner to her friendly arms.
‘Ah, you are coming back to us, my darling; I see it in your pretty eyes,’ was her welcome; ‘you could never dare to smile like that if you meant to be as obstinate as ever.’
Then Nelly told her, in brief terms, what was the reason of her having such a happy face: how in Mr. Pearson she had found the father she had so long mourned as dead. Then she went on to say that to none but to so dear and tried a friend as she to whom she spoke would she have confided this, since the disclosure of it would reflect upon Ralph Pennicuick's memory.
‘ That wouldn't hurt it much,’ returned Mrs. Wardlaw drily, for she was one of those ‘good haters’ who, while allowing the force of the de mortuis nil nisi bonum argument, still think with the poet that truth should be spoken in any case:
[Page 282]
Rien jusqu'ici poursuivre une mémoire;
Rien— excepté la vérité.
‘But at least you should consider Raymond, Mrs. Wardlaw.’
‘To be sure, my dear; I have forgotten him: although I must say that the lad has sadly disappointed me. I thought that, when his father was dead, the lad would not have lost a moment—’
‘Dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ put in Nelly quietly, ‘I have promised to be his wife.’
‘You, darling !’ cried the old lady rapturously, and embraced her on the spot. ‘Whatever shall I get you good enough for your marriage present! Oh, when is it to be?’
‘Alas, dear Mrs. Wardlaw, my father is in a very critical state of health. I am thinking of nothing but him at present.’
‘Then let him come down here at once, and be nursed,’ was the other's prompt reply. ‘Richmond air is better than London smoke. We have room for half-a-dozen such patients: and I am so fond of him—though I did think him queer—already, you know; but, Nelly, I must tell John.’
‘Of course you must, dear Mrs. Wardlaw. I know your husband's discretion is to be relied upon.’
‘Yes, indeed, I wish it wasn't: I mean, I wish he would talk things over a little more. I think his going to all those auctions makes him reticent; he seems to be afraid of opening his mouth lest he should be knocked down for something without intending it. But I'll manage him, you may rely upon it.’
That very evening she made her approaches, and carried the citadel—her point—though under very disadvantageous circumstances. Mr. Wardlaw had met with a misfortune at a wine sale: he had gone to buy claret, but had tasted some hock which pleased
[Page 283]
his palate, and had bidden 35 s . for it. When it was knocked down to him, he found it was being sold by the bottle and not by the dozen. No wonder he had liked the wine, but he didn't like the price.
It required, therefore, some considerable dexterity on the part of his wife to bring him into his natural condition of mind— which was one, as we know, of the most unbounded hospitality.
When this was attained Mrs. Wardlaw told him Nelly's story, and the difficulty that had arisen of bringing father and daughter under the same roof.
‘He must be disposed of by private contract,’ said Mr. Wardlaw thoughtfully.
‘What on earth do you mean, John? how can you be thinking of your auction sales on such an occasion as this?’
‘I mean, there can be no public competition for the pleasure of his presence, my dear; why shouldn't he come here, to Coromandel Lodge? His daughter will come, of course, to nurse him; only we will give out that she has come back to us, as we always wished her to do, and that we have arranged for her having a resident tutor. Yes, that will be a capital plan.’
He did not seem to think there was the least generosity or benevolence in the arrangement; but only that it was a convenient one for all parties.
‘John,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, with quiet pride, ‘you are a duck:’ and she kissed him.
So it came about that Arthur Conway was received at Coromandel Lodge with a welcome with which few sick guests—except very rich ones—are received anywhere; and all out of love and kindness. For Nelly to talk of obligation was, as she protested,
[Page 284]
ridiculous, since she owed more than a lifetime could repay to these good friends already.
‘Then why do you talk of it, my dear?’ said Mr. Wardlaw logically. And he forbade the least allusion to it upon Captain Conway's part as being exciting, and therefore prejudicial to the patient's health.
‘I can only say,’ said the sick man with tears in his eyes, ‘that it seems to me, so far as Nelly is concerned, I might just as well have stopped in China, since she has found both father and mother in England.’
‘We have only done our best as such,’ said Mrs. Wardlaw, ‘by proxy.’
Besides these two new inmates of the Lodge there would, ‘but for the look of the thing,’ as its mistress said, have been a third in the person of Raymond; and, indeed, he was so frequent a guest, that he might almost as well have taken up his quarters there.
All the kindness of this excellent couple could not, however, save Arthur Conway's life; he had no particular ailment, but his whole constitution was broken beyond doctors' mending. He suffered no pain, and was perfectly placid and happy, except that he evinced great anxiety to have the young people married. Nelly combated this notion (though we may be sure it was not otherwise distasteful to her) from the sense that it was unbecoming to think of marriage while the shadow of death, as it were, was hovering over her father: but he gained Mrs. Wardlaw's ear, and through her influence obtained his wish.
‘My dear Nelly,’ said she, ‘you are positively weakening what little hope remains to us of your father's restoration to health, by your foolish scruples.’
[Page 285]
To this Nelly could answer nothing, save that she was in her friend's hands.
The marriage was therefore at once arranged for: even the lawyers did not delay it, since their instructions were simplicity itself. The twenty-one thousand pounds that were, by rights, Conway's own, were taken as his daughter's and settled absolutely upon her, at Raymond's wish, ‘for her sole use and benefit.’ He was not going to lie under Mrs. Wardlaw's suspicions, he said, the second time. She had thought he had neglected Nelly when she was poor, and might possibly imagine he only married her because she was an heiress. On her resenting this with becoming indignation, he whispered something in her ear, which he flattered himself would cover her with confusion; but it had not that effect at all.
‘I know I did,’ said she (he had alluded to her advocacy of Mr. Herbert Milburn); ‘I thought very well of the young man, and you seemed to have withdrawn from the field. It was my duty to do the best I could do—though it was only the second best of what I wished—for Nelly. I liked you very much, Raymond Pennicuick, but I liked my darling more.’
‘And quite right too, dear Mrs. Wardlaw,’ cried the young fellow, ‘and I love you (if your husband, and Nelly, will permit me to say so) all the better for so doing.’
But Mr. Herbert Milburn was always a subject of pleasant —though quite private—raillery between Mrs. Wardlaw and Raymond.
The marriage was of course a very quiet one: indeed, no guests were bidden to it; but that did not prevent the arrival of many marriage presents. As the rain falls most plentifully upon moist
[Page 286]
ground, so, when folks are rich and do not want them, these gifts are always in the greatest profusion. It was astonishing how many acquaintances of Nelly Conway's—about whom she knew almost as little as we ourselves—became her friends when she married Mr. Ralph Pennicuick's son and heir. One present, but not sent from the same motives, arrived several months after Raymond and Nelly were man and wife. It was a magnificent China shawl from Mr. Milburn, forwarded through his sister's hands, ‘with dear Herbert's kind regards and best wishes,’ to Nelly. The splendour of this gift—only second to one she had received from Mrs. Wardlaw herself—excited that lady's highest commendation.
‘I always thought, you know, my dear Raymond,’ said she mischievously, ‘that our dear Nelly might have done better with herself.’
But that is not our opinion, as indeed it is needless to say it was not seriously hers. There was never a happier married pair than Raymond and Nelly Pennicuick.
At the very first, however, there was a sad trouble, though an expected one. Hardly had Arthur Conway obtained his wish of seeing his daughter wedded than Death claimed him. Indeed, the young couple were summoned from their wedding tour to his death-bed. He was alive when they arrived, and that was all. His mind was wandering chiefly on matters that had taken place at Dhulang; and I think that from his wild talk—joined with certain suspicions of her own—Nelly learnt more of the true state of the case than when in his right mind he had told her. If so, she only loved him more, not her husband less; and indeed, in what had he offended? A bad son may indeed sometimes lay his sins
[Page 287]
at his father's door; but for a father's sins what son can be answerable?
Just at the last, as often happens, Conway's wandering wits returned to him. He recognised his daughter and bade her a loving farewell.
‘I shall see her, and we shall be made one again through you, my darling,’ were his last words. ‘Let me be buried in the same grave with her.’
It was an inexpressible comfort to poor Nelly that her father's last thoughts had reverted—and in such tender fashion—to her mother.
THE END.
NOTES
1 [1] A celebrated tea-firm in London is so called, Cousin Jonathan.
2 [1] Something over an ounce of silver, or a little more than a dollar in value.
$$$
