If 



A 












A 




C~l 




(/> 


























33 







ja 














5 




c~> 




o 


9 




J> 






1 


9 




5 

33 


5 




33 




3 


9 




< 





alifornia 

:ional 

ility 




LIBRARY 

UWVERSITY 0' 'CALIFORNIA 

RIVERSIDE 







► Ex Libris < 
[ ISAAC FOOT ' 






1 



UNWIN'S 1/9 MOVELl 



Neatly Bouad and wilh Piottire Wrappers. 



1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7, 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 

17. 
IS. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 



The Way of an Ee^Ie. 

MoGlusky the Rcforiaer, 

The Trail of '98. 

Ann Veronica. 

The Knave oi Diamonds. 

The Beetle : A Mystery. 

Aimayer's ¥oUy. 

The Shulamite. By 



Hy Ethel M. Dell 

By A. G. Hales 

By RoBitRT W. Service 

By H. G. Wells 

By Ethel M. Dell 

By Richard Marsh 

By Joseph Conkad 

Alice and Claudis Askkw 



Ncvr Chrenioles of Don Q. By K. & Hesketh Pric;!ard 
The Canon ic Residence. By Victor L. Whitechurch 
The Camera Fiend. tJy the Author of "Raffles' 
Monte Carlo. By Mks. H. De Verb Stacpoole 

CaUed Back. By Hugh Cowway 

The Stickit Minister. By S. R. Crockett 

The Crimson Azaleas. By H. de Verb Stacpoole 

My Lady of the Chimney Corner. 

By Alexander Irvlnk. 
Patsy. By H. de Vere Stacpoole 

The Indiscretion of the Duchess. By Anthony Hope 
By Reef and Palm. By Louis I.'ecks 

Queen Sheba's Riutf. By H. Rider Haggard 

Uncanny Tales. By F. Marion- Crawford 

Rioroft of Withens. By Halliwell Suxcliffb 

The Vulture's Prey. By H. de Verb Stacpoolb 

The Pretender. By Robert W. Service 

Me t A Book of Remembrance. 



Garryowea. , 

The Lady Killer. 

As in a Looking Glass. 

The Victorians. 

Liza of Lambeth. 

Arundel. 

The Rod of Justice. 

Exile. 



Anonymous 
DE Vers Stacpoole 
de Vere Stacpoolb 
By F. C. Philips 
By Netta Syrett 
Somerset Maugham 
By E. F. Benson 
By Alice and Claude Askew 

By DOLF WVLLAFUE 



By H. 
By H. 



By W. 



Othar i'olutnes in Preparation. 



T. FISHER UNWIN, Ltd.. 1, AdelpW Terrace, LONDON 



First ptiblished {Royal 8w) 

Fcap Svo Edition . 

Crown Svo lUuslraled Edition 

Detny Svo Edition 

Fcap 8po Edition 

Fcap Svo Edition 

Fcap Svo Edition 

Fcap Svo Edition 

Fcap SfO Edition 



Sovember 1883 

January 1884, reprinted C 4 times 

May 1885 

November 1898, reprinted 11 times 

February 1912, reprinted in 1916 

August i()i7, reprinted 

December 1917. reprinted 

May 1918, reprinted 

February igio, reprinted 



CONTENTS, 



Chap. 

I. In Darkness and in Danger 

II. Dronk or Dreaming 

III The Fairest Sight of all 

IV. Not roR Love or Marriage 

V. By Law, not Love 

VI. Unsatisfactory Answers 

VII. Claiming Relationship 

VIII. Called Back . 

IX. A Black Lie . 

X. In Search of the Truth 

XI. A Hell upon Earth . 

XII. The Name of the Man 
XIIL A Terrible Confession 
XIV. Doss She Remember ? 

XV. From Grief to Joy 



I 

»7 
33 
43 
60 

71 

80 

' 92 

104 
112 
"3 
134 
145 
163 
174 



AGIC. 



Pelmanism and the " Liule Grey Books." 



Are you " pelmauiaing " ? 

Have you read, or heard, or thought 
about the wonderful " brain-growing " 
method that is creating such a fiensation 
by its almost magical results ? 

Everybody, from Royalty dowu- 
wards, is busily " pelmanisiiig " and 
praisiuR the system. Tiie soouer you 
begin to " pelmaoise " the better for 
your pocket and your prospects. 

There are uot>' over 70,000 " I'elman- 
ists " In the British Army and Navy, 
includhig over 100 Admirals and Gen- 
erals, and it is an open secret that the 
officers of our smartest battleships au'l 
cruisers are enthusiastic " Pelmauists." 

Governmeut officials, M.P.'s, peers, 
and lens of thousands of busy prc- 
fes.sioaal an I business men and women, 
clerJis, shopke<?;)ers, etc., have also 
taken up with tlie fascinating science 
of " peliiiaaising." 

A member of the House of Lords goes 
go far as to say that the Pelman system 
should be included in our aatioual 
scheme of pduc-.ation, and this viiw is 
v.'armly endorsed by many otlier 
notable Pelmanists. " A Pelman- 
trained nation viv-uld be irresistible," 

1 oto a well-known journalist. 

• But what Ls this Pelmauisni, and 
wnat does it do ? " asks the reader. 
Well, it is a system which does even 
more for th? brain than seifentific 
physical culture does for the muscles 
of the body. Far more. By a series 
of short, simple, and delightfully 
fascinating t'.\<:rciscs, the brain is drilled 
and developed to a marvellous extent, 
doubliug and trobhng the " Poluiau- 
ist's " capabilities an^ his or her (for 
there are tiiousands of women " Pel- 
manist's ") income. Letters are daily 
received at the Pelman Institute telling 
of 100 per cent., .and even 300 per cent., 
increases of income resulting dircctl> 
f-'Vfi " ix'lnii.ni.aing." And these, re- 



member, include men and women of all 
vocations — clerks, typists, shop assist- 
ants, artisans, merchants, managers, 
directora, journalists, doctors, musicians, 
clcrgymeu, la^vyers, authors, and actors. 

In fact, it is clearly proved tliat 
" Pelmauism " means {iiat in a few 
weeks, by practi=ing for a few minutes 
daily, anyone can open up the road to 
Fortune, success, and even wealth and 
fame. 

If you do not know " the little grev 
books," if you are not a Pelmanist, you 
should liastcn to make up for lo.^t time. 
" ^'obody who has not studied these 
books," says an ardent Pelmanist, " can 
conceive the immeasurable benefits 
resulting fiom them." 

" A single one of them would be cheap 
to me at a hundred pounds," declares a 
solicitor. •' As a direct con.=;equenc« of 
t.'icm I gained a step in promotion," 
writes a Lieut.-Colouei: 

Many clerks, shop-assi-srauts, and 
salesmen tell how they doubled and 
trebled their incomes as the result of a 
few weeks' study of the Pelman Course. 

Women are particularly keen o;; 
Pelmauism ; It has proved such an 
enormous help to them in " getting on " 
in business. Many of them describe it 
as " th-j best investment I ever made." 

Moreover, they find it a truly fas- 
ciaatiug study. " I am genuinely sorry 
the course has fmishsd. I have found 
it 80 absorbingly iutercsting as well as 
l)rofltablf." These are the exact word> 
used by students of th-" Pelman 
Course. 

" Pclmuniim" is fully explained in 
riri interestintj book ivhich every reader 
:iliould at oixcn get and read. It is called 
" Mind and Memory," and can he secured 
grails and post free by writing to-day to 
I'ip. Pehiian Institute, F., Pelman House, 
lHoomsbury l-Jirest, Lonlon, ir.C.l. 



CALLED BACK. 



CHAPTER I. 




IN DARKNESS AND IN DANGER. 

HAVE a reason for writing this tale^ 
or it would not become public pro- 
perty. 

Once, in a moment of confidence, 
I made a friend acquainted with some 
curious circumstances connected with 
one period of my life. I believe I asked him to 
hold his tongue about them — he says not. Anyway, 
he told another friend, v/ith embellishments I sus- 
pect ; this friend told another, and so on and on. 
What the tale grew to at last I shall probably 
never learn ; but since I was weak enough to trust 
my private affairs to another I have been looked 
upon by my neighbours as a man with a history — 
one who has a romance hidden away beneath an 
outwardly prosaic life. 

For myself I should not trouble about this. I 
should laugh at the garbled versions of my story 
set floating about by my own indiscretion. It 
would matter little to me that one good hiend has 
an idea that I was once a Communist and a mem- 
ber of the inner circle of a secret society — that 
another has heard that I have been tried on a 
capital charge — that another knows I was at one 
time a Roman Catholic, on whose behalf a special 



S CALLED BACK. 

miracle was performed. If I v/ere alone in the 
world and young, I daresay I should take no steps 
to stili these idle rumours. Indeed, very young 
men feci flattered by being made objects of 
curiosit},' aiid speculation. 

But I am not vcr}' young, nor am I alone. There 
is one who is dearer to me than life itself. One 
from whose heart, I am glad to say, every shadow 
left by the past is rapidly fading — one who only 
wishes to live her true sweet "ife without mystery 
or concealment — wishes to be thought neither 
better nor v,orse than she really is. It is she who 
shrinks from the strange and absurd reports which 
are flying about as to our antecedents — she who is 
vexed bv those leading questions some*:Jmes asked 
by inquisitive friends ; and it is for her sake that I 
look up old journals, call back old memories of joy 
and grief, and tell every one, who cares to read, all 
he can possibly wish to know, and, it may be, 
more than he has a right to know, of our lives. 
This done, my lips are sealed for ever on the sub- 
ject. My tale is here — let the inquisitive take his 
answer from it, net from me. 

Perhaps, after all, 1 write this for m}' own r.ake 
.as well. I also hate mysteries. One mystery 
which I have never been able to determine may 
have given me a dislike to everything which will 
not admit of an easy explanation. 

To begin, 1 must go back more years than I 
care to enumerate ; although I could, if necessary, 
fix the day and the year. I was young, just past 
twenty-five. 1 was rich, having when I came of 
age succeeded to an income of about two thousand 
a year ; an income which, being drawn from the 
funds, I was able to enjoy without responsibilities 
or anxiety as to its stability and endurance. 
Although since my twenty-first birthday I had 



CALLED BACK. 3 

been my own master I had no extravagant follies 
to weigh nie down, no del>ts to hamper mc. 1 was 
without bodily ache or pain; yet I turned again 
and again on my pillow and said that my life for 
the future would be little more than a curse to me. 
Had death just robbed me of one that was dear 
to me ? No ; tlie only ones I had ever loved, my 
father and mother, ha'd died years ago. Were my 
ravings those peculiar to an unhappy lover ?_ No ; 
my eyes had not yet looked with passion into a 
woman's eyes — and now would never do so. 
Neither Death nor Love made my lot seem the 
most miserable in the world. 

I was young, rich, free as the wind to follow my 
own devices. I could leave England to-morrow 
and visit the most beautiful places on the earth : 
those places I had longed and determined to see. 
Now, I knew I should never see them, and I 
groaned in anguish at the thought. 

My limbs v/ere strong. I could bear fatigue and 
exposure. 1 could hold my own with the best 
walkers and the swiftest runners. The chase, the 
sport, the trial of endurance had never been too 
long or too arduous for me — I passed my left hand 
over my right arm and felt the muscles firm as 
of old. Ye"t I was as helpless as Samson in his 
captivity. 

For, even as Sampson, I was blind ! 
Bhndl Who but the victim can even faintly 
comprehend the significance of that word ? Who 
can read this and gauge the depth of my anguish 
as I turned and turned on my pillow and thought 
of the fifty years of darkness which might be mine 

a thought which m.ade me wish that when I fell 

asleep it might be to wake no more ? 

Blind I After hovering around me for years the 
demon of darkness had at last laid his hand upon 
me. After letting me, for a while, almost cheat 



4 CALLED BAGS. 

myself into security, he had swept down upon me, 
folded me in his sable wings and blighted my life. 
Fair forms, sweet sights, bright colours, gay scenes 
mine no more ! He claimed them all, leaving me 
darkness, darkness, ever darkness ! Far better to 
die, and, it may be, wake in a new world of light — 
"Better," I cried in my despair, "better even the 
dull red glare of Hades than the darkness of the 
world ! " 

This last gloomy thought of mine shows the state 
of mind to which I was reduced. 

The truth is that, in spite of hope held out to 
me, I had resolved to be hopeless. For years I 
had felt that my foe was lying in wait for me. 
Often when gazing on some beautiful object, some 
fair scene, the right to enjoy which made one fully 
appreciate the gift of sight, a whisper seemed to 
reach my ear — "Some day I will strike again, then 
it will be all over." I tried to laugh at my fears, 
but could never quite get rid of the presentiment 
of evil. My enemy had struck once — why not 
again ? 

Well I can remember his first appearance — his 
first attack. I remember a light-hearted school- 
boy so engrossed in sport and study that he scarcely 
noticed how strangely dim the sight of one eye was 
getting, or the curious change which was taking 
place in its appearance. I remember the boy's 
father taking him to London, to a large dull-looking 
house in a quiet dull street. I remember our wait- 
ing in a room in which were several other people ; 
most of whom had shades or bandages over their 
eyes. Such a doleful gathering it was that I felt 
much relieved when we were conducted to another 
room in which sat a kind pleasant-spoken man, 
called by my father Mr. Jay. This eminent man, 
after applying something which I know now was 
belladonna to my eyes, and which had the effect 



\ CALLED BACK. 5 

for a short time of wonderfully improvlnj^ my sight, 
peered into my eyes with the aid of strong lenses 
and mirrors — I remember at the time wishing some 
of those lenses were mine — what splendid burning 
glasses they would make ! Then he placed me with 
my back to the window and held a lighted candle 
before my face. All these proceedings seemed 
so funny that I was half inclined to laugh. My 
father's' grave anxious face alone restrained me 
from so doing. As soon as Mr. Jay had finished 
his researches he returned to my father — 

" Hold the candle as I held it. Let it shine 
into the right eye first. Now Mr. Vaughan, what 
do you see ? How many candles, I mean ? " 

" Three — the one in the centre small and bright, 
but upside down." 

" Yes ; now try the other eye. How many 
there ? " 

My father looked long and carefully. 

" I can only see one," he said, " the large one." 

" This is called the catoptric test, an old-fashioned 
but infallible test, now almost superseded. The 
boy is suffering from lenticular cataract." 

This terribly sounding name took away all my 
wish to laugh. I glanced at my father, and was 
surprised to notice his face wearing an expression 
of relief. 

«* That may be cured by an operation ? " he said. 

•* Certainly ; but in my judgment it is not well 
to meddle, so long as the other eye remains un- 
affected." 

" Is there aanger ? " 

" There is always danger of the disease appear- 
ing in the sound eye : but of course it may not 
happen. Come to me at the first sign of such a 
thing. Good morning." 

The great specialist bowed us out, and I returned 
to my school life, troubling little about the matter. 



CALLED BACK. 



as it caused rne no pain, and, although in less than 
a twelvemonth the sight of oiie eye v/as completely 
obscured, I could see well enough for every pur- 
pose with the remaining one. 

But I remembered every word of that diagnosis, 
although it was years before I recognised the im- 
portance of it It was only when compelled by 
an accident to wear for some days a bandage over 
my sound eye that I reahsed the danger in which 
I stood, and from that moment felt that a merciless 
foe was ever waiting his time. 

And now the time had come. In the first flush 
of my manhood, with all that one could wish for 
at my command, the foe had struck again. 

He came upon me swiftly — far more swiftly 
than is his custom in such cases ; yet it was long 
before I would believe the worst—long before I 
v/ould confess to myself that my failing sight and 
the increasing fogginess of everything I looked af 
were due to m.ore than a tem.porary weakness. 
I was hundreds of miles from home, in a country 
where travelling is slow. A friend being with rne, 
I had no wish to make myself a nuisance by 
cutting our expedition short. So I said nothing 
for weeks, although, at the end^of each week my 
heart sank at the fresh and fearful advances made 
by the foe. At last, being unable to bear it, 
or in fact conceal it longer, I made known my 
condition to my comrade. We turned our faces 
homewards, and by the time London was reached 
and the long journey at an end, everything to mc 
was blurred, dim, and obscured. I could just see, 
that was all ! 

I flew to the eminent ocuhst's. He was cut oi 
town. Had been ill, even at the point of death. 
He would not be back for two months, nor would 
he see any patient until his health was quite 
restored. 



CALLED tJACK, 7 

I had pinned my faith upon this man. No 
doubt there were as skilful oculists in London, 
Paris or other capitals; but it was my fancy that, 
if I was to be saved, I could only be saved by Mr. 
Jay. Dying rnen are allowed their whims : even 
the felon about to be hanged can choose his own 
breakfast, so 1 had an undoubted right to choose 
my own surgeon. I resolved to wait in darkness 
until Mr. Jay returned to his duties. 

I was fooiibh. I had better iiave trusted myself 
in other clever hands. Before a month was over 
I had lost all hope, and at the end of six weeks 1 
was almost distracted. Blind, blind, blind ! I 
should be blind for ever ! So entirely had 1 lost 
licart that I began to think I would not have the 
operation performed at all. Why fly against fate ? 
For the rest of my life I was doomed to darkness. 
The subtlest skill, the most delicate hand, the 
most modern appliances would never restore the 
hght I have lost. For me the world was at an end. 

Now that you know the cause, can you not 
imagine me, after weeks of darkness, broken in 
spirit, and, as I lay sleepless that night, almost 
wishing that the alternative refused by Job — to 
curse God and die — were mine? If you are unable 
to realise my condition, read the above to anyone 
who has lost his sight. He will tell you what his 
feelings were when the calamity first came upon 
him. He will understand the depths of my woe ! 

I was not left entirely alone in my trouble. Like 
Job, I had comforters ; but, unlike Eliphaz and 
Company, they were good -hearted fellows who 
spoke with cheerful conviction as to the certainty 
of my recovery. I was not so grateful for these 
visits as I should have been. I hated the thought 
of anyone seeing me in my helpless condition. 
Day by day my frame of mind grew more and 
more desponding and morbid. 



8 CALLED BACK. 

My best friend of all was a humble one: Priscilla 
Drew, an old and trusted servant of my mother's. 
She had known me from earliest childhood. When 
I returiicd to England I could not bear the thought 
of trusting my helpless self entirely to a stranger's 
care, so 1 wrote to her and begged her to come to 
nie. I could at least groan and lament before her 
Vv'ithout feeling shame. She came, wept over me 
for a while, and then, like a sensible woman, 
bestirred herself to do all she could to mitigate 
the hardships of my lot. She found comfortable 
lodgings, installed her ti"oublesome charge therein, 
and da}^ and night was ever at his beck and call. 
Even now, as I lay awake and tossing in mental 
anguish, she was sleeping on an extemporised bed 
just outside the folding doors which opened from 
my bedroom to the sitting room. 

It was a stifling night in August. The sluggish 
air which crept in through the open window made 
little perceptible difference in the temperature of 
my room. Ever\'thing seemed still, hot, and dark. 
The only sound I could hear was the regular 
breathing of the sleeper behind the door, which 
she had left an inch or two ajar in order that she 
might catch my faintest call. I had gone early to 
bed. What had I to wait up for now ? It was sleep 
and sleep alone which brought forgetfulness, but to- 
night sleep refused to come to me. I struck my 
repeater. I had bought one in order that I might, 
at least, know the time. The little bell told me it 
was just past one o'clock. Craving for sleep I 
sighed and sank back upon my pillow. 

Presently a sudden fierce longing to be out of^ 
doors came over me. It was nights-very few people 
would be about There was a broad pavement in 
li cmt of the row of houses in one of which I lodged. 
Up and down this I might walk in perfect safety. 
Even if I only sat on the doorstep it would be 



OALLfiD BACK. 9 

better than lying ia this close hot room, tossing 
from side to side unable to sleep. 

The desire took such full possession of me that 
1 was on the point of calling old Priscilla and 
making her aware of it ; but knowing she was 
sleeping soundly, I hesitated, I had been unusually 
restless, cross and exacting during the day, and 
my old nurse — heaven reward her ! — was serving 
me for love, not for money. Why should I disturb 
her? Let me -begin to learn to help myself like 
others in my wretched plight. I had already 
acquired this much, to dress without assistance. 
If I could now do this and leave the room unheard, 
I could, I felt sure, grope my v/ay to the front door, 
let myself out, and, whenever I chose, return by 
aid of the latchke}'. The thought of even a 
temporary independence was attractive, and my 
spirits rose as I resolved to make the attempt. 

I crept softly from my bed, and slowly but easily 
dressed myself, hearing all the while the sleeper's 
regular breathing. Then, cautious as a thief, I 
stole to the door which led from my bedroom to 
the landing. I opened it without noise and stood 
on the thick carpet outside, smiling as I thought of 
the sleeper's dismay if she awoke and discovered 
my absence. 1 closed the door, then, guiding 
myself by the balustrade, passed lightly down the 
stairs and reached the street door without accident. 

There were other lodgers in the house, among 
them young men who came in at all hours, so, the 
door being always left on the latch, I had no bolts 
to contend with. In a moment I was on the door- 
step, with the door behind me closed. 

I stood for a short time irresolute, almost trem- 
bling at my temerity. This was the first time I 
had ventured beyond the house without a guiding 
hand to trust to. Yet I knew there was nothing 
to fear. The street — a quiet one — was deserted. 



TO CALLED P.ACK. 

The pavement was broad. I could walk up and 
down without let or hindrance, guiding myself, 
after tlie manner of other blind persons, by tapping 
my stick against the curbstone or the railings. 
Still I must take a few precautions to enable me 
to ascertain my latitude and longitude at will. 

I came down the four steps which led from the 
front door, turned myself to the right,«and, by aid 
of the line of railings, set my face towards the end 
of the street. Then I began to warlk and to count 
my steps, sixty-two of which brought my right 
foot on to a road, which told me I had reached 
my limit. I turned, counted back the sixt3'^-two 
paces, and then sixty-five more in the same direc- 
tion before I found myself again off the pavement. 
My calculations were verified by my knowing that 
my house was very nearly in the centre of the row. 
I was now quite at my ease ; I had determined the 
length of m}' tether; I could walk up and down 
the deserted street, yet, at an}' time I wished to 
do so, could, by counting from either end, arrest 
my steps in front of my abode. 

So, mightil}' proud of m)' success, for a while I 
went up and down — up and down. I heard one 
or two cabs pass me, and also one or two persons 
afoot. As these latter seemed to pay no attention 
to me, I felt glad to think that my appearancd and 
gait were not such as to attract notice. Most men 
like to conceal their infirmities. 

This night excursion did me a great deal of 
good. Perhaps it was finding that I was not alto- 
gether so helpless and dependent that changed in 
a few minutes my whole frame of mind. The 
mental rebound took place. I went from despon- 
dency to hope — extravagant hope — even to cer- 
tainty. Like a revelation it came to me that my 
malady was curable : that, in spite of my presen- 
timent, what friends had been assuring me would 



CALLED BACK. II 

prove to be the truth. So elated I grew tliat I 
threw my head back and walked with a firm quick 
step, almost forgetting that I was sightless. I 
began to think of many things, and m)' thoughts 
were happier ones than I had known for months. 
I gave up counting my paces, I walked on and on, 
planning what I should do ; v.-here I should go when 
my darkness was removed. I do not know whether 
1 may have at times guided myself by the wall or 
pavement edge ; but if so I did it mechanically 
and instinctively, without noticing the action or 
remembering it afterwards. 

I cannot say whether it may be possible for a 
bliad man, who can divest himself of the fear of 
encountering unseen obstacles, to walk as straightiy 
and accurately as one^vho can see. I only know 
that, in my prc;Occupied and elevated state of mind, 
I must have done so. Intoxicated and carried 
away by the return of hope, I may have walked 
as a somnambulist or as one in a trance. Anyway, 
forgetful of all save my brighter thoughts, I went 
on and on, heedless of the missing sense, until 
coming full against a person walking in the oppo- 
site direction recalled me from my visions and 
brought me back to my misery, I felt the mar, 
I had encountered shake himself Iree ; I heard him 
mutter " Stupid fool ! " and go swiftly on his way, 
leaving me motionless on the spot where the colli- 
sion had occurred, wondering where I was and 
what I should do. 

It was no use attempting to find my way back 
unaided. Not having brought my repeater with me 
I could not even say how long I had been walking. 
It might have been ten minutes, ir might have 
been an hour since I gave up counting my steps. 
Judging by the number of things I had thought of 
since that rapturous exaltation of mind commenced 
it seemed more likely to be the latter. Now that 



12 CALLED BACK. 

1 had come back to the earth I must be content to 
remain on this particular spot of it until I lieard 
the step of a policeman or someone else who might 
happen to be abroad at this unusual hour — unusual, 
at least in this quiet part of London. I leant my 
back against the wall and waited patiently. 

I soon heard an approaching step ; but such a 
staggering, uncertain, lurching kind of step, that 
from the soimd of the feet alone I was al^le to 
determine the condition of their owner, and was 
obliged to decide that he was not the man 1 
wanted. I must let him pass and wait for another. 
But the feet staggered up to me and stopped near 
me, whilst a voice, jolly, but like the feet unstejjidy, 
.cried — 

"'Mother feller worsh tm^ me! Can't get on 
at all — eh, old chap ? Comfort t' think someone's 
head '11 ache worsh than mine to-morrow ! " 

" Can you tell me the way to Walpole street ? " 
I asked, standing erect to show him I was sober. 

** Walpole street — course I can — closhe by — 
third to left I think." 

" If you are going that way would you lead me 
to the corner of it. Unhappily I am blind and 
have lost my way." 

" Blind, poor beggar — not screwed then. Giiess 
I 'm in nice state to lead anyone. Blind leading 
blind — both tumble into ditch. I shay, though," 
he added with drunken gravity, ** make a bargain — 
I lend you eyes, you lend me legsh. Good idea. 
Come 'long." 

He took my arm and we went yawing up the 
street. Presently he stopped. 

" "Walpole street," he hiccupped. " Shall I take 
you to your house ? " 

" No, thank you. Please put my hand on the 
railing of the 'corner house. I shall be all right 
then." 



CALLED BACK. 13 

"Wish I were all right. Wish I could borrow 
your legs to take me home," said my bibulous 
conductor. " Good night — Blesh you." 

I heard him tack away, then turned to complete 
my journey. 

I was not quite certain as to which end of 
Walpole street I was starting from ; that mattered 
little. Either sixty-two or sixty-five paces would 
leave me in front of my door. I counted sixty- 
two, and tlien felt for the entrance betv/een the 
railings : not finding it, I went on a step or two 
until I came to it. I was giad to have reached 
home without accident, and, to tell the truth, was 
beginning to feel a little ashamed of my escapade. 
I hoped that Priscilla had not discovered my 
absence and alarmed the house, and I trusted I 
should be able to regain my room as quietly as I 
had quitted it. With all my elaborate calculations, 
I was not quite sure that I had hit upon the riglu 
house ; but if they were incorrect I could only be 
a door or two away from it, and the key in my 
hand would be a certain test. 

I went up the doorsteps — was it four or five I 
had counted as I came out ? I fumbled for the 
keyhole and inserted the latchkey. It turned easily, 
and the door opened. I had not made a mistake. 
I felt an inward glow of satisfaction at having hit 
upon the house at the first attempt. "It .must 
have been a blind man who first discovered \ that 
Necessity is the mother of Invention," I said, as I 
softly closed the door behind ine and prepared to 
creep up to my own room. 

I wondered what the time was. All I knew was 
that it must be still nigh.t, for I was able to dis- 
tinguish light from darkness. As I had found 
m3'self so close to Walpole street I could not have 
walked for any length of time in my ecstatic state, 
so 1 fancied it must be somewhere about twoo'clock. 



14 CALLED BACK. 

Eveti more anxious than when I started to make 
no noise which might awaken people, I found the 
bottom of the staircase and began my stealthy 
ascent. 

Somehow, blind as I was, the place seemed 
unfamiliar to me. The balustrade I was touching 
did not seem the same. The very texture of the 
carpet under my feet seemed different. Could it 
be possible that I had entered the wrong house ! 
There are plenty of instances on record of a key 
having opened a strange lock. Could I, through 
such a circumstance, have strayed into a neigh- 
bour's house ? I paused ; the perspiration rising 
on my brow as I thought of the awkward situation 
in which I should be placed if it were so. For a 
moment I resolved to retrace my steps and try the 
next house ; but I could not be quite sure I was 
wrong. Then I remembered that in my own house 
a bracket, v;ith a plaster figure upon it, hung near 
the top of the stairs. I knew the exact place, 
naving been cautioned many times to keep my 
head from knocking against it. I could settle all 
my doubts by going on and feeling for this land- 
mark : so on I went. 

I ran my fingers softly along the wall, but no 
bracket could I find. My hand touched the lintel 
of a door instead. Then I knew, for certain, I was 
in the wrong house. The only thing to be done 
was to creep out as quietly as I bad entered and 
try my luck next door. 

As I turned to grope my way back 1 heard the 
murmur of voices — late as it was, there were people 
talking in the room, the door of which my fingers 
had so lightly touched. 

I could not distinguish words, but I was sure 
the voices were those of men. I stood irresolute. 
Would it not be better to knock at the door and 
throw myself upon the mercy of the inmates of the 



CALLED BACK. 15 

room ? I could apologise and explain. My blind- 
ness would account for the mistake. Some one 
would, no doubt, be kind enough to put me on my 
right road home. Yes, this was the best thing to 
do. I could not go on creeping into strange houses 
like a midnight thief. Perhaps each house in the 
row had an equally common lock and my key 
might open all. If so, the end would be that some 
alarmed householder would put a bullet into me 
before I had time to assert my innocence. 

Just as I raised my fingers to tap at the door I 
heard another voice — a woman's voice. It seemed 
to come from the back room, and was singing to an 
accompaniment played softly on a piano. I paused 
and listened — 

I have been so occupied with complaining of the 
hardships of my lot, I have not told you I had one 
solace to my misery ; that merciful gift, so often 
bestowed on the blind, music. Had it not been for 
this I believe those weeks of darkness and un- 
certointy would have driven me mad. Had it not 
been that I could pass many weary hours away 
playing to myself, that I could be taken to concerts 
and hear others play and sing, my days would have 
been unbearable, and I shudder to think of what 
aid I might have called in to render them less 
burdensome — 

I waited and listened to the song. It was taken 
from an opera recently produced on the Continent, 
an opera not yet popularly known in England, and 
the song was one that few amateurs would dare to 
attempt. The singer, whoever she might be, sang 
it softly and under her voice, as though fearing to 
throw it out with full force. The lateness of the 
hour might well account for this restraint. Never- 
theless, anyone capable of judging must have 
known he was listening to no ordinary singer. 
It was easy to recognise the trained skill and 



l6 CALLED BACK. 

dormant power, and imagine what, under favour- 
able circumstances, tliat voice might accomph'sh. 
I was enchanted. My idea was that I had stum- 
bled into a nest of professionals — people whose 
duties ended so late, that to enjoy any evening at 
all, night must be greatly encroached upon. All 
the better for me! Bohemians themselves, my 
unexpected nocturnal intrusion might not frighten 
them out of their wits. 

The singer had now commenced the second 
verse. I placed my ear close to the door to catch 
every note. I was curicnis to hear wliar she would 
make of the effective but trying finale, when— oh 
horrible contrast to the soft sweet liquid notes and 
subdued words of passionate love ! — I heard a 
gasp, a spasmodic fearful gasp, that could convey 
but one meaning. I heard it succeeded by a long 
deep groan, which terminated in a gurgling sound 
which froze my blood. I heard the music stop sud- 
denly, and the cry, the piercing cry of a woman ring 
out hke a frightful change from melody to discord, 
and then I heard a dull heavy thud on the floor ! 

I waited to hear no more. I knew that some 
dreadful deed had been perpetrated within a fev/ 
feet of where I stood. My heart beat wildly and 
fiercely In the excitement of the moment I forgot 
that I was not like others — forgot that strength 
and courage could avail me nothing — forgot every- 
thing save a desire to prevent the accompHshment 
of crime — the v/ish to do a man's duty in saving 
life and succouring the ones in peril. I threw open 
the door and rushed headlong into the room. 
Then, as I became aware of the presence of strong 
hglit, but light which revealed nothing to me, the 
folly and rashness of my proceedings came fully 
home to rne, and like a flash it crossed my mind 
that unarmed, bhnd and helpless, I had rushed 
into that room to meet my death. 



CALLED BACK. 17 

I heard an oath — an exclamation of surprise. 
In the distance I heard the cry of the woman, but 
it sounded muffled and faint ; it seemed to me that 
a struggle was going on in that part of the room. 
Powcrlessthough I was to aid, I turned impulsively 
and took a couple of steps in the direction whence 
the cry came ; my foot caught in something and I 
fell prostrate on the body of a man. Even in the 
midst of the horror that awaited me I shuddered 
as I felt my hand, lying on the fallen man, grow 
wet with some warm fluid whicli slowly trickled 
over it. 

Before I could rise strong muscular living hands 
were upon my throat, holding me down, whilst a 
short distance ofl" I heard the sharp click of a pistol 
lock. Oh, for light for a second ! If only to see 
those who were about to take my life, if onl}' — 
strange fancy — to know in what part of me to 
expect the fatal bullet. And I, who some hour or 
two ago lay and dared to wish for death, felt at 
this momeni that life, even my darkened Hie, was 
as dear to me as to any creature under the sun. 
So I cried aloud, and my voice sounded to me like 
the voice of a stranger — 

'« Spare me I I am blind ! blind 1 blind I" 



CHAPTER II. 

DRUNK OR DREAMING 

The hands pinning me down did not for an instant 
relax their grasp : yet they might safely have done 
so. Situated as I was I felt that my only chance 
of life was to lie still and convince, if I could, 
the persons in that room of the truth of my asser- 
tion. Nothing could be gained, but everything 
would be lost by resistance. I was strong, but, 
even if all the senses had been mine, I doubted if I 



iS CALLED BACK. 

couldxompete successfully with the man who held 
me down. I could feel the nervous power of his 
hands and arms. Certainly, nov/ that I was blind 
and helpless, the struggle would be a short one. 
Resides he had companions, how many I knew 
not, ready to help him. The first movement I 
made would be the end of everything so far as I 
was concerned. 

I made no further attempt to rise, but lay as still 
and unresisting as the prostrate form across w^hich 
I had fallen. Every moment seemed an hour ! 

Think of my situation. A blind man in a strange 
room in a strange house — held down on the body 
of a man whose last groan he had just heard — held 
down and at the mercy of those who it was certain 
had just taken part in a black and cowardly crime ! 
Unable to look into the faces of the murderers 
around him and learn whether their looks meant 
life or death to him 1 Expecting every moment to 
feel the sharp stab of a knife or the fiery sting of a 
bullet ! Seeing nothing and feeling nothing save 
the hands upon his throat and the dead body 
beneath him 1 E/ven hearing nothing save that 
stifled moaning in the distance ! Can the wildest 
flights of fiction show a parallel to my case ? 

Since that night I have quite disbelieved in the 
possibilitj' of people's hair turning suddenly grey. 
If such a thing can be I must have left that room 
with the locks of an old man. 

I can only say that even now as, after the lapse 
of years, I write this ; even as I see everjrthing 
around me safe, still and at peace ; even though I 
know the ones I love are close at hand, my pen 
trembles, my blood feels chilled and a faintness 
steals over me as the recollection of the most 
terrible moments in my life comes to me with a 
vividness I cannot describe. 

It was well for me that I could keep still and 



CALLED BACK. 19 

cry again and again, " I am blind— look and see ! " 
My quiescence, the tone of my voice, may have 
turned the balance on which my Hie hung— may 
have carried conviction to my hearers. Presently 
the strong light of a lamp was perceptible to my 
obscured vision ; a lamp placed so close to me 
that I could feel its hot glow upon my face ; and I 
was av/are that someone was stooping or kneeling 
down and peering into my eyes. His breath 
struck against mv cheek : a short, quick, excited 
breath— liow could it be otherwise after the deed 
in which he had just taken part ! 

At last he rose : a moment afterwards the re 
straining hands moved from me, and then, for the 
first time, I began to hope that my life might be 
spared. 

As yet none of those around me had spoken. 
Now 1 heard voices, but whispering so softly that 
even my sharpened ears could not catch the 
purport of a single v,'ord, although I could gather 
that three persons at least were engaged in that 
hushed consultation. 

All the while, like a dreary and fitting accompani- 
ment, I could hear that stilled moaning — a woman's 
moaning. I v/ould have given all I possessed — all 
save life— in exchange for a minute's sighi, that I 
might have been able to comprehend what had 
passed and what was passing around me. 

Still the whispers continued. They came thick 
and fast, running into and interrupting each other, 
as from men in hot but guarded discussion. It 
needed httle intelligence to guess the subject of 
that debate ! Presently that died av/ay altogether, 
and, for a time, the only sound I heard was that 
terrible, muffled moan — that continued with a 
dreary monotony. 

A foot touched me. *' You may stand up," I 
heard someone say. When I burst so recklessly 



20 CALLED BACK. 

into the room I fancied the exclamation with 
which i was greeted came from foreign lips, but the 
man who now addressed me spoke in pure English. 
By this time I was beginning to recover self- 
possession and was able to make a mental note of 
these facts. 

Thankful at being allowed to quit my ghastly 
couch, I rose. As I could think of nothing better 
to do I stood motionless. 

" Walk this way — straight on — four paces," said 
the voice. I obeyed. The third step brought me 
in collision with the wail. No doubt this was an 
extra test as to the truth of my statement. 

A hand was placed upon my shoulder and I was 
guided to a chair. " Now, sir," said the speaker 
who had before addressed me, "Tell us, in as few 
words as possible, who you are — how and why you 
came here. Be quick, we have no time to spare." 

I well knew they had no time to spare. They 
had much to do — much to hide. Oh, for the gift 
of sight for one moment ! 1 would purchase it, 
even if the price were years of darkness ! 

Shortly and sim.ply as I could, I told them what 
had brought me into such straits. The only thing 
I concealed was my true name. Why should 
these assassins know it ? If I revealed it they 
might set a watch upon me, and at any moment 
their safety demanded it I might share the fate of 
him who lay within a few feet of my chair. So I 
gave a fictitious name, but everything else I told 
them was true. 

All the v/liile I was speaking I heard -iiiat dis- 
tressing sound at the other end of the room. It 
drove me nearly mad. I believe, could I have 
made sure of reaching through my darkness and 
catching one of those men by the throat, with the 
certainty of crushing hfe out of him, I should have 
done so, even had such an act sealed my own fate. 



CALLED BACK. 21 

When my explanation was over another whis- 
pered consultation took place. Then th? spokesman 
demanded the key which had so nearly cost me 
my life. I suppose they tried it and found it acted 
as I said. It was not returned to me, but I lieard 
the voice once more. 

'* Fortunately for you we have decided to believe 
your tale. Stand up." I did so, and was led to 
another part of the room and again placed in a 
chair. As, after the manner of the blind, I stretched 
out my hands, I found I was in a corner of the 
room, my face turned to the angle of the walls. 

" If you move or look round," said the voice, 
"our belief in your blindness will vanish." 

It was impossible to misunderstand the grim 
threat conveyed by the last words. I could only 
sit quiet and listen with all my ears, 

Y^s, they had much to do. They moved about 
busily and rapidly, 1 heard cupl)oards and drawers 
opened. I detected the sound of papers being torn 
and the smell of papers burning. I heard them 
raise some dead weight from the floor — heard a 
sound as of rent cloth and linen — heard the jingle 
of money, even the tick of a watch as it was drawn 
forth from somewhere and laid on the table near 
me. Then I felt a breath of air and knew that the 
door had been opened. 1 heard heavy footsteps 
on tlie stairs — the steps of men bearing a weighty 
burden, and I shuddered as I thought what that 
burden must be. 

Before the last task was completed the woman's 
moan had ceased. For some time it had been 
growing fainter and only sounding at recurring 
intervals Now I heard it no longer. This cessa- 
tion was. a great relief to my overwrought nerves, 
but my heart grew sick as I thought it may be 
there were two victims instead of one. 

Although z.i least two men must have borne that 



^2* CALLED BACfc, 

weight away, I knew I was not left alone. I 
heard someone throw himseJf into a chair with a 
half weary sigh and guessed he had been left to 
guard me. I was longing to make my escape— 
longing to wake and find I had been dreaming. 
The suspense or the nightmare was growing un- 
beara.ble. I said, without turning my head, 

" How long am I to be kept amid these horrors ? " 
I heard the man move in his chair, but he made 
no answer. «' May I not go ?" I pleaded, «' I have 
seen nothing. Put me out into the street— any- 
where. I shall go mad if I stay here longer." 
Still no answer. J said no more. 
By-and-by the absent men returned to their 
companion. I heard the door close after them. 
Then came more whispers, and I heard the draw- 
ing of a cork and the jingle of glasses. They were 
refreshing themselves after the night's dark work. 
Presently a curious odour— that of some drug 
was perceptible. A hand was laid on my shoulder 
and a glass full of some liquid was placed between 
my fingers. 

" Drink," said the voice— the only voice I had 
heard. 

*• I will not," I cried, '* it may be poison." 
I heard a short harsh laugh and felt a cold 
metallic ring laid against my forehead. 

"It is not poison; it is an opiate and will do 
you no harm. But this," and as he spoke I felt 
the pressure of the little iron circlet, " this is 
another affair. Choose ? " 

I drained the glass and was glad to feel the 
pistol moved from my head. " Now," said the 
spokesman, taking the empty glass from my hand, 
*'if you are a wise man, when you awake to- 
morrow you will say, ' I have been drunk or 
dreaming. You liave heard us but not seen us, 
but remember we know v'ou." 



CALLED BACK. 23 

He left me and in a short time, do what I would 
to struggle against it, heavy drowsiness, came over 
me. Thoughts grew incoherent and reason seemed 
leaving me. My head fell first on one side, then 
on the other. The last thing I can remember is a 
strong arm encircling me and keeping me from 
tumbling out of my chair. Whatever the drug 
was, its action was strong and swift. 

For hours and hours it held me senseless, and 
when at last its power faded and my mind, 
struggling back to a clouded sort of conscious- 
ness, made, after many attempts, the fact apparent 
to me that I was lying on a bed, and, moreover, as 
I found by stretching out my arms and feeling 
around, my own bed, is it to be wondered at that 
I said to myself, " I have dreamed the most fright- 
ful dream that ever came to a tormented mind " ? 
After this efiort of mind I sank back once more 
into a semi-conscious state, bat fully persuaded I 
had never quitted my bed. My relief at this dis- 
covery was immense. 

Yet if my nMud grew easy, I cannot say the same 
for the body My head seemed preparing to split in 
two ; my tongue was dry and parched. These un- 
pleasant facts became more and more noticeable as 
consciousness gradually returned. I sat up in the 
bed and pressed my hands to my throbbing brow.s. 

"Oh dear heart!" I heard my old nurse say. 
" He is coming round at last." Then anothe 
voice — a man's voice, soft and bland. 

" Yes, your mast'^r viJl soon be well agaic 
Kindly let me feel your pulse, Mr. Vaughan." 

A soft finger was laid upon my wrist. 

*' Who k it ? " I asked 

*' I am Doctor Deane, at your service:," said the 
stranger. 

" Have 1 been ill ? How long ? How mxny 
days ? " 



24 CALLKD BACK, 

" A few hours only. There is nothing to be 
alarmed at. Lie down again and keep quiet for 
a while. Are you thirsty ? " 

•' Yes, I am dying with thirst — give me water." 

They did so. I drank greedily, and felt some- 
what relieved-. 

" Now nurse," I heard the doctor say, " make him 
some weak tea, and when he wants anything to eat 
let him have it. I v/ill look in again later on." 

Doctor Deane Was shown out, and old Priscilla 
returning to my bedside patted and punched the 
pillows to make me more comfortable. By this 
time I was wide awake and the experiences of the 
night were coming back to me with a distinctness 
and detail far above those of a recalled dream. 

" What is the time ? " I asked. 

" Nigh upon noon, Master Gilbert." Priscilla 
spoke in a sorrowful injured manner. 

" Noon ! what has been the matter with me ? " 

The old servant was weeping. I could hear her. 
She made no answer, so I repeated my question. 

"Oh, Master Gilbert!" she sobbed, "how 
could you do it ? When I came into the room 
and saw the empty bed I thought I should have 
dropped." 

When she saw the empty bed ! I trembled. 
The horrors of the night were real ! 

" How could you do itj Master Gilbert ? " con- 
tinued Priscilla. " To go out v/itliout a word, and 
wander half over London, all alone and not able 
to see a thing ! " 

" Sit down and tell me what you mean — what 
has happened." 

She had not yet quite aired her grievance. " If 
you wanted to get tipsy or to take any of them 
stuffs to send you to sleep and make you insensible, 
you might have done it at home. Master Gilbert. 
1 shouldn't have minded once in a way." 



CALLED BACK. 2$ 

♦•You're a kind old fool, Priscilla. Tell me all 
about last night." 

It was not until she saw I was getting quite 
angry that her tongue would consent to run pretty 
straight, and when I heard her account of what 
had occurred my head was whirling. This is 
what she told me. 

It must have been about an hour after my 
stealthy exit that she awoke. She put her ear to 
the door to make certain that I was asleep and 
wantmg nothing. Hearing no sound of life in my 
room she entered it, and found the bed untenanted 
and me gone. Probably she was even more 
frightened than she owned to being. She knew 
all about my despondency and complainings of the 
last few days, and I have no doubt but her first 
fear was that I had destroyed myself. She started 
m search of me, and at once recognising the im- 
possibility of finding m.e without assistance, turned 
to that first and last resort of an Englishwoman 
m such a difficulty— the Police. Having told her 
tale at the nearest station, and by entreaties, and 
by enlarging on my infirmity, made known the 
urgency of the case, and secured sympathy, tele- 
graphic messages were sent to other police stations 
asking if any one answering to my description had 
been found. Priscilla waited upon thorns until 
about five o clock in the morning, when a replv 
came from the other end of the town. It stated 
that a young man who appeared to be blind, and 
who was certainly drunk and incapable, had just 
been brought in. >r , j oi 

Priscilla fiew to the rescue. She iound me Ivine 
senseless and destined, upon my recovery, to be 
brought before the magistrate. A doctor w'as soon 
procured, who testified to my innocence so far a<= 
alcoho was concerned.. The energetic Priscilla; 
nfter placing me safely m a cab, gave the officers a 



26 CALLED BACK. ' 

bit of her mind as to the discomforts under which 
she had found me labouring. She then departed 
triumphantly with her unconscious charge, and 
laid him on the bed he had so rashly quitted. 

I am grieved to be compelled to gather from her 
words, that, in spite of the indignation she dis- 
played towards the policemen, her estimate of my 
condition was the same as theirs. She was par- 
ticularly grateful to the doctor, whom, I fear, she 
looked upon as a clever and complaisant prac- 
titioner, who had extricated a gentleman from a 
scrape by a well-timed but untruthful explanation. 

" But I never knew a body stop insensible 
so long after it. Don't ee do it again, Master 
Gilbert," she concluded. 

I did not combat her suspicions. Priscilla was 
scarcely the one to whom I wished to confide the 
adventures of the night. By far the simplest way 
was to say nothing, to leave her to draw her own 
and, perhaps, not unnatural conclusions. 

*' I v/on't do it again," I said. '• Now get me 
some breakfast. — Tea and toast — anything." 

She went to do my bidding. It was not that 
I was hungry. I wanted to be alone for a few 
minutes, to think — or think as well as my aching 
head would allow, 

I recalled everything that had happened since 
I left the door of my house. The entranced walk, 
the drunken guide, the song I had heard, and, 
afterwards, those horrible, eloquent sounds and 
touches. Everything was clear and connected up 
to the moment the opiate was forced upon me : 
after that my mind was a blank. Priscilla's tale 
showed me that during that blank I must have 
been transported several miles and deposited in 
the thoroughfaie where I v/as found by the police- 
man. I saw through the crafty scheme^ I had 
been dropped, insensible far av/ay how the scene 



CALLED BACK. 27 

of the crime at v/liich I had been present. ^Io^v 
wild and improbable my tale would seem J Would 
any one believe it ? 

Then I remembered my horror at what I felt 
streaming over my hand as I lay pinned down 
upon the fallen man. I called Priscilla, 

"Look," I said, holding my right hand towards 
her, " is it clean — was it clean when j'ou foimd me ? " 

" Clean — la, no, Master Gilbert ! " 

*' What was on it?" I asked, excitedly. 

" All covered with mud, just as if you 'd been 
dabbling in the gutter. The first thing I did when 
I got you home was to wash your poor hands and 
face. I hoped it would bring you round — it 
generally does, you know." 

" But my coat sleeve — my shirt sleeve. The 
right hand side. See if anything is on them." 

Priscilla laughed. " You hav'nt got ne'er a right 
hand sleeve left. They were cut or torn off above- 
the elbov/. Your arm was naked." 

Every scrap of circumstantial evidence which 
would confirm my tale v/as vanishing away. There 
would be nothing to support it except the assertion 
of a blind man, who left his house in the dead of 
night, secretly, and who was found, several hours 
afterwards, miles away, in such a state that the 
guardians of the public morals were compelled to 
take charge of him. 

Yet I could not remain silent with the knov/ledge 
of such a crime weighing on my mind. The next 
day I had entirely recovered from the effects of the 
opiate, and after consideration sent for my sohcitor. 
He was a confidential friend, and I resolved to be 
guided by his advice. In a very short time I found 
it was hopeless to think of carrying conviction to 
his mind. He listened gravely, giving vent to 
" Well, well ! " " Bless my soul 1" " Shocking 1 " 
and other set expressions of surprise, hvd I knew 



28 CALLED BACK. 

he was onl)' humouring me, and looked upon the 
whole thing as a delusion. I have no doubt that 
Priscilla had been talking to him and telling him 
all she knew. His incredulity annoyed me, so I 
told him, testily, I should say no more about the 
affair. 

"Well, I wouldn't if I were you," he said." 

" You don't believe me ?" 

" I believe you are saying what you think is true; 
but if you ask me, my opinion is that j^ou walked 
in your sleep, and dreamed all this." 

Too cross to argue with him, I took his advice, 
so far as he was concerned, and said no more about 
it. Afterwards I tried another friend with a similar 
result. If those who had known me from childhood 
would not believe me, how could I expect strangers 
to do so ? Everything I had to reveal Avas so vague 
and unsupported. I could not even fix upon the 
spot where the crime was committed. I had 
Ascertained that no house in Walpole street could 
be opened by a key similar to mine. There was 
no other street of that name anywhere near. My 
friend with the unstead}'- feet must have misunder- 
stood me, and conducted me to another row of 
houses. 

I thought, at one time, of advertising and asking 
him to communicate with me, but I could not word 
a request which should be intelligible to him, with- 
out, perchance, exciting the suspicions of those who 
were concerned in the crime. Even now, if they 
had discovered m.y true name and abode, there 
might be someone on the watch for any movement 
I might make I had been spared once, but no 
mercy would be shown me a second time. Why 
should I risk my life by making disclosureb which 
would not be believed — accusations against men 
who were unknown to me ? What good could I 
do ? By now the assassins must have hidden all 



CALLED BACK. tg 

trace of the crime, and made good their retreat. 
Why should I face tlie ridicule which must attach 
to such a talc as mine, the truth of which I could 
not prove ? No ; let the horrors of that night be 
as a dream. Let them fade and be forgotten. 

Soon I have something else ta think of; some- 
thing that may well drive such dismal memories 
from my mind. Hope has become certainty. I 
am almost delirious with delight. Science has 
triumphed ! My defeated foe has left me. I am 
told his return is almost beyond possibility. The 
world is light again ! I can sec ! 

But my cure v/as a long and tedious affair. Both 
eyes were operated upon. First 0£i£, and, when 
the success of that operation was assured, t'.<5 
other. It was months before I was allowed to 
emerge altogether from darkness. Light was 
doled out to me sparingly and cautiously. What 
did that matter so long as I knew there was light 
again for me? I was patient, very patient and 
grateful. I followed Mr. Jay's instructions to the 
letter, knowing I should reap the reward of so 
doing. '' 

My case had been treated by the simplest and 
safest method of operation — the one which is always 
chosen when the nature of the disease and the age 
oi the patient permits — solution or absorption it 
is termed. When it was all over, and all danger 
of inflammation at an end ; when I found that by 
the aid of strong convex glasses I could see well 
enough for all ordinary purposes, Mr. Jay congratu- 
lated both himself and me. It promised, he said, 
to be the most thoroughly successful cure he had 
ever taken part in. It must have been something 
above the common, as I am informed that every 
book on the eye which has since been published 
cites my case as an example of what may be done. 
Not until my dying day shall I forget that time 



30 CALLED BACK. 

when my cure was declared a fact ; when the 
bandages were removed, and I was told I might 
now use, sparingly, my uncurtained eyes. 

The joy, from what seemed never-ending night, 
to wake and see the sun, the stars — the clouds 
sped by the wind across the fair b lue sk y ! To see 
green branches sv/aying with the breeze, and 
throwing trembling shadows on my path ! To 
mark the flower ; a bud but yesterday — to-day a 
bloom ! To watch the broad bright sea grow 
splendid with the crimson of the West ! To gaze 
on pictures, people, mountains, streams — to know 
shape, colour, form and tint ! To see, not hear 
alone, the moving lips and laugh of those who 
grasped my hand and spoke kind w^ords ! 

To me, in those first days of new-born light, the 
face of every woman, man, and child seemed 
welcome as the face of some dear friend, long lost 
and found again ! 

After this description of my ecstasy it seems 
pure bathos to say that the only thing which 
detracted from it w^as my being obliged to wear^ 
those strong convex glasses. I was young, and 
they were horribly disfiguring. 

'* Shall I never be able to do without them ? " 
I asked, rather ruefully. 

** That," replied Mr. Ja}-, is a point upon which 
I wish to speak to you. You will never be able to 
do without glasses. Remember, I have destroyed, 
absorbed, dissolved the glasses in your e3'es called 
crystalline lenses. Their place is nov/ supplied by 
the fluid humour. This has a high refracting 
power. Very often if you don't give in to Nature 
she will give in to you. if you can take the trouble 
to coerce her, she will gradually nieet you If an)' 
one sliould do tliis, it is you. You are young ; you 
have no profession, and your bread does not depend 
upon ;j our sight. Glasses you must always wear, 



CALLED BACK. 3I 

but if you insist tliat Nature sliall act withoui such 
strong aids as these, the chances are she will at 
last consent to do so. It is a tedious process : few 
have been ab!e or have had patience to persevere; 
but my experience is that in many instances it 
may be done." 

I determined it should be done. I followed his 
advice. At great personal inconvenience I wore 
glasses which only permitted me to say J could see 
at all. But my rev/ard came. Slowly, very slowly, 
I found my sight growing stronger, till, in about 
tv/o 3'ears' time, 1 could, by the aid of glasses, the 
convexity of which was so slight as to be scarcely 
noticeable, see as well as most of my fellow crea- 
tures. Then I began once more to enjoy life. 

I cannot say that, during those two 3'ears spent 
in perfecting my cure, I thought no more about 
that terrible night ; but I made no further attempt 
to unravel the niystery, or to persuade auj^one that 
I had not imagined those events. I burietl the 
history of my adventure in my heart, and never 
again spoke of it. In case of need, I wrote down 
all the particulars, and tlicn tried to banish all 
memory of what I had heard. I succeeded fairly 
well except for one thing. I could not for any long 
period keep my thoughts from the remembrance of 
that woman's moaning — that pitiable transition of 
tlie voice from sweet melody to hopeless despair. 
It v/as that cry that troubled my dreams, if ever 
I dreamed of that night— it was that cry which rang 
in my ears as I awoke, trembling, but thankful to 
find that this time at least I was only dreaming. 



ja CALLED BACK. 

CHAPTER III. 

THE FAIREST SIGHT OF ALL. 

It is spring— the beautiful spring of Northern 
Italy. My friend Kenyon and I are lounging about 
in the rectangular city of Turin, as happy and idle 
a pair of comrades as may anywhere be met with. 
We have been here a week, long enough to do all 
the sight-seeing demanded by duty. We have seen 
San Giovanni and the churches. We have toiled, 
or beasts of burden have toiled with us, up La 
Superga, where we have gazed at the mausoleum 
of Savoy's princely line. We have seen enough of 
the cumbrous old Palazzo Madama, which frowns 
at OUT hotel across the Piazzi Castello. We 
have marvelled at the plain uninteresting looking 
Palazzo Reale, and our mirth has been moved by 
the grotesque brickwork decoration of the Palazzo 
Carignano. We have criticised the rather poor 
picture gallery. In fact we have done Turin thor- 
oughl}'', and, with the contempt bred by familiarit}-, 
are ceasing to feel like pitiful little atoms as Ave 
stand in the enormous squares and crane our necks 
looking at Marochetti's immense bronze statues. 

Our tasks are over. We are now simply loafing 
about and enjoying ourselves ; revelling in the deli- 
cious weather, and trying to make up our languid 
but contented minds as to when we shall leave the 
town and where our next resting place shall be. 

We wander down the broad Via di Po, lingering 
now and then to peer into the enticing shops vv^hich 
lurk in its shady arcades ; v^e pass through the 
spacious Piazzi Vittorio Emanuele we cross the 
bridge whose five granite arche>i span the classic 
Po ; we turn opposite the domed church and soon 
are walking up the wide shaded path which leads 



CALLED BACK. 33 

to the Capuchin Monastery ; the broad terrace in 
front of which is our favourite haunt Here we 
can lounge and see the river at our feet, the great 
town stretching from its further bank, the open 
plain beyond the town, and, far, far away in the 
background, tb.e glorious snow-capped Alps, with 
Monte Rosa and Grand Paradis towering above 
their brothers. No wonder we enjoy the view 
from this terrace more than churches, palaces or 
pictures. 

We gaze our fill, then retrace our steps and 
saunter back as lazily as we came. After lingering 
a few moments at our hotel some hazy destination 
prompts us to cross the great square, past the frown 
ing old castle, leads us up the Via di Seminario, 
and we find ourselves for the twentieth time in 
front of San Giovanni, I stop with my head in the 
air admiring what architectural beauties its marble 
front can boast, and as I am trying to discover 
them am surprised to hear Kenyon announce his 
intention of entering the building. 

"But we h^\e vowed a vow," I said, "that the 
interior of churches, picture galleries, and other 
tourist traps shall know us no more." 

"What makes the best men break their vows ? 

" Lots of things, I suppose." 

" But one thing in particular. Whilst you are 
staring up at pinnacles, and buttresses, and trying 
to look as if you knew architecture as well as 
Ruskin, the fairest of all sights, a beautiful v/oman, 
passes right under your nose." 

" I understand — I absolve you ." 
, " Thank you. She went into the church. I 
feel devotional, and will go too." 

" But our cigars? " 

"Chuck them to the beggars. Beware of miserly 
habits, Gilbert ; they grow on one." 

Knowing that Kenyon was not the man to 



34 CALLED BACK. 

abandon a choice Havannah without a weighty 
teason, I did as he suggested and followed him into 
die dim cool shades of San Giovanni. 

Nd''^ service was going on. The usual little 
parties of sightseers were walking about and look- 
ing much impressed as beauties they could not 
comprehend were being pointed out to them. 
Dotted about here and there were silent worship- 
pers. Kenyon glanced round eagerly in quest of 
" the fairest of all sights," and after a while dis- 
covered her. 

" Come this way," he said ; " let us sit down and 
pretend to be devout catholics. We can catch 
her profile here," 

I placed mj'self next to him, and saw a few seats 
from us an old Italian woman kneeling and pray- 
ing ferventl}'^, whilst in a chair at her side sat a girl 
of about twenty-two. 

A girl who might have belonged to almost any 
country. The eyebrows and cast-down lashes said 
that her eyes were dark, but the pure pale com- 
plexion, the delicate straight features, the thick 
brown hair might, under circumstances, have been 
claimed by any nation, although had I met her 
alone I should have said she was English. She 
was well but plainl}^ dressed, and her manner told 
me she was no stranger to the church. She did 
not look from side to side, and up and down, after 
the way of a sightseer. She sat without moving 
until her companion had finished her prayers. So 
far as one could judge from her appearance she 
was in church for no particular object, neitlier 
devotional nor critical. Probably she may have 
come to bear the old woman at her side company. 
This old. Tvoman, who had the appearance of a 
superior kind of servant, seemed from the pas- 
sionate appeals she was addressing to heaven, to 
be in want of many things. I could see her thin 



CALLED BACK. 35 

Up3 working incessauuy, and although her words 
were inaudible it was evident her petitions were 
heart-spoken and sincere. 

But the girl by her side neither joined h#t in her 
prayers nor looked at her. Ever motionhss as a 
statue — her eyes ever cast down — apparently wrap- 
ped in deep thought, and, I fancied, sad thought, 
she sat, showing us the while no more of her I^ace 
than ,that perfect profile. Kenyon had certainly 
not over-praised her. Hers was a face which had 
a peculiar attractiveness for me, the utter repose of 
it not being the least of that ch.arm. I was grov/- 
ing very anxious to see her full face, but as I Could 
not do so without positive rudeness, was compelled 
to wait until she might chance to turn her head. 

Presently the old Italian woman appeared to 
think she had done her religio\is duty. Seeing 
she was preparing to cross herself, I rose and 
sauntered down the churcli tov.ards the door. In 
a few minutes the girl and her companion passed 
me, and I was able to see her to better advantage, 
as she waited whilst the old woman dipped her 
fingers in the holy water. She was undoubtedly 
beautiful ; but there was something strange in her 
beauty. I made tliis discovery when, for a 
moment, her e3es met mine. Dark and glorious 
as those eyes w^ere there was a dreamy, far-away 
look in them — a look that seemed to pass over 
one and see v/hat was behind the object gazed at. 
This look gave me a curious impression, but as it 
was only for a second that my eyes met hers, I 
could scarcely say whether the impression was a 
pleasant or an unpleasant one. 

The girl and her attendant lingered a few 
moments at the door, so that Kenyon and I 
passed out before them. By common consent 
we paused outside. The action may have been 
a rude one, but we were both anxious to see the 



^6 CALLED BACK. 

departure of the girl whose appearance had so 
greatly interested us. As we came through the 
door o^the church I noticed a man standing near 
the steps — a middle-aged man of gentlemanly 
appearance. He was rather round-shouldered 
and wore spectacles. Had I felt any interest 
in determining his station in life I should have 
adjudged him to one of the learned professions. 
There could be no mistake as to his nationality; 
he was Italian to the backbone. He was evidently 
waiting for someone ; and when the girl, followed 
by the old woman, came out of San Giovanni, he 
stepped forward and accosted them. 

The old woman gave a little sharp cry of sur- 
prise. She took his hand and kissed it. The 
girl stood apparently apatlietic. It was evident 
that the gentleman's business lay with the old 
servant.- He spoke a few words to her ; then 
drawing her aside the two walked away to some 
distance, under the shadow of the church, and to 
all appearance were talking earnestly and volubly, 
but ever and anon casting a look in the direction 
of the girl. 

As her companion left her she walked on a few 
paces, then paused and turned as though waiting 
for the old woman. Now it was that we were able 
to see her perfect figure and erect carriage to full 
advantage. Being some little way off, v^re could 
look at her without committing an act of rudeness 
or indiscretion. 

" She is beautiful," I said, more to myself than 
to Kenyon. 

"Yes she is — but not l3 beautiful as I thought. 
There is something wanting, yet it is impossible 
to say what it is. Is it animation or expression ? " 

" I can see nothing wanting," I said, so enthu- 
siastically that Kenyon laughed aloud. 

" Do English gentlemen stare at their own coun- 



\ CALLED BACK. 37 

trywomen and appraise them in public places, like 
this ; or is it a custom adopted for the benefit of 
Italians? " 

This impudent question was asked by some one 
close to my side. We turned simultaneously, and 
saw a tall man of about thirty standing just behind 
us. His features were regular, but their effect was 
not a pleasant one. You felt at a glance that a 
sneering mouth was curtained by the heavy mous- 
tache, and that those dark eyes and eyebrows we're 
apt to frown with sullen anger. At present the 
man's expression was that of haughty arrogance — 
a peculiarly galling expression, especially so I find 
when adopted by a foreigner towards an English- 
man. That he was a foreigner it was easy to see, 
in spite of his perfectly accented English. 

A hot reply was upon my lips, but Kenyon, who 
was a young man of infinite resource and well able 
to say and do the right thing in the right place, 
was before me. He raised his hat and made a 
sweeping bow, so exquisitely graduated that it 
was impossible to say where apology ended and 
mockery began. 

"Signer," he said, <' an Englishman travels 
through your fair land to see and praise all tliat is 
beautiful in nature and art. If 01 r praise offends 
we apologise." 

The man scowled, hardly knowing whetliei my 
friend was in jest or in earnest. 

" If we have done wrong will the Signer convey 
our apologies to the lady? His wife, or shall I 
say his daughter ? " 

As the man was young, the kst question w^:, 
sarcastic. 

" She is neither," he rapped out. Kenycn bow*Al. 

"Ah, then a friend. Let me congratulate the 
Signer, and also congratulate him on his urofi- 
ciency in our language." 



38 CALLED BACK. 

The man was growing puzzled ; Ken5'on spoke 
so pleasantly and naturall3^ 

" I have spent man}' years in England," he said, 
shortly. 

" Many years ! I should scarcely have thought 
so, as the Signor has n^t picked up that English 
peculiarity which is far more important than accent 
or idiom." 

Kenyon paused and looked into the man's face 
so innocently and enquiringly that he fell into the 
trap. 

" And pray what may that be ? " he asked. 

" To mind one's own business," said Kenyon, 
shortly and sharply, turning his back to the last 
speaker, as if the discussion was at an end. 

The tall man's face flushed with rage. I kept 
mj' eye upon him, fearing he would make an 
assault upon my friend, but he thought better ot 
it. With a curse he turned on his heel, and the 
matter ended. 

While this conversation v/as in progress, the old 
Italian v/oman had left her learned-looking friend, 
and having rejoined the 'young girl, the two went 
upon their way. Our ill-conditioned Italian, after 
his discomfiture, v/alked across to the man who 
had been talking to the old servant, and taking his 
arm went with him in another direction. They 
were soon out of sight. 

Kenyon did not propose to follow the steps of 
the first couple, and I, even liad I wished to do so, 
was ashamed to suggest such a thing. Still, I am 
afraid that a resolution as to visiting San Giovanni 
again to-morrow was forming in my mind. 

But I saw her no more. How many times I 
went to that church I dare not say. Neither the 
fair girl nor her attendant crossed my path again 
whilst in Turin. We met our impertinent friend 
several times in the streets, and were honoured by 



CALLED BACK. 3Q 

a dark scowl wliich passed unnoticed ; but of that 
?weet girl with the pale face and strange dark eyes 
we caught no glimpse. 

It would be absurd to say I had fallen in love 
with a woman I had seen only for a few minutes — 
to whom I had never sppken — whose name and 
abode were unknown to me ; but I must confess 
that so far as looks went, 1 was more interested 
in this girl than in any one I had ever seen. 
Beautiful as she was, I could scarcely say wh}' I 
felt this attraction or fascination. I had met many, 
many beautiful women. Yet for the slender chance 
of seeing this one again I lingered on in Turin 
until Kenyon — my good-tempered friend's patience 
was quite exhaustetl — declared that unless I quitted 
at once, he would go away alone. At last I gave 
in. Ten days had passed by without the chance 
encounter I was waiting for. We folded up our 
tents and started for fresh scenes. 

From Turin we went southwards — to Genoa, 
Florence, Rome and Naples, and other minor 
places ; then we went across to Sicily, and at 
Palermo, according to arrangement, were received 
on board a yacht belonging to another friend. We 
had taken our journey easily ; staying as long as 
it suited us in each town we visited, so that by 
the time the yacht had finished her cruise and 
borne us back to England, the summer was nearly 
over. 

2>Iany and many a time since leaving Turin I 
had thought of the girl I had seen at San Gio- 
vanni — thought of her so often that I laughed at 
myself for my folly. Until now I had never carried 
in my mind for so long a period the remembrance 
of a woman's f;i.ce. There must, for me, have been 
something strangely bewitching in her style oi 
beauty. I recalled every feature — J. could, had l 
been an artist, have painted her portrait from 



40 CALLED BACK. 

memory. Laugh at m}^ folly as I would, I could 
not conceal from myself that short as the tim.e was 
during which I had seen her the impression made 
upon me was growing stronger each daj', instead 
of fainter. I blamed myself for leaving Turin be- 
fore I had met her again — even if for that purpose 
it had been necessary to linger there for months. 
M3' feeling was that by quitting the place I had 
lost a chance v>"hich comes to a man but once in a 
lifetime. 

Kenyon and I parted in London. He was going 
to Scotland after grouse, I had not yet quite settled 
my autumn plans, so I resolved to stay, at any rate 
for a few days, in town. 

Was it chance or was it fate ? The first morn- 
ing after my arrival in London, business led me to 
Regent street, I was walking slowly down the 
broad thoroughfare, but my thoughts were far 
away. I was trying to argue away an insane long- 
ing which was in my mind — a longing to return at 
once to Turin. I was thinking of the dim church 
and the fair young face I saw three months ago. 
Then, as in my mind's eye I saw that girl and her 
old attendant in church, I looked up and here in 
the heart of London they stood before me ! 

Amazed as I v/as, no thought of being mistaken 
entered my head. Unless it was a dream or an 
illusion, there came the one I had been thinking 
of so often ; walking towards me, with the old 
woman at her side. They might have just steppec 
out of San Giovanni. There was a little change 
in the appearance of the old woman ; she was 
dressed more like an English servant ; but the girl 
was the same. Beautiful, more beautiful than ever, 
I thought as my heart gave a great leap. They 
passed me ; I turned impulsively and followed 
them with my eyes. 

Yes, it was fate ! Now I had found her in this 



CALLED BACK. 4I 

unexpected maaaer I would take care not to lose 
sight of her again. I attempted to disguise my 
feelings no longer. The emotion which had thrilled 
me as I stood once more face to face with her told 
me the truth. I was in love — deeply in love. 
Twice, only twice, I had seen her, but that was 
enough to convince me that if my lot was ever 
linked with another's, it must be with this woman's, 
whose name, home or country, i knew not. 

There w^s only one thing I could now do. I 
must follow the two women. So, for the next hour 
or more, wherever they went, at a respectful 
distance, I fohov.-ed. I waited whilst they entered 
one or two shops, and when their walk was resumed 
discreetly dogged their steps. I kept so far in the 
rear that my pursuit was bound to be unnoticed 
and could cause no annoyance. They soon turned 
out of Regent street and Avalked on until they 
came to one of those many rows of houses in Maida 
vale. I marked the house they entered, and as I 
passed by it, a few minutes afterwards, sav/ in the 
front window the girl arranging a few flowers in a 
vase. It was evident I had ascertained her abode. 

It was fate ! I was in love and could only act as 
my passion impelled me. I must find out all about 
this unknown. I must make her acquaintance and 
so obtain the right of looking into those strange 
but beautiful eyes. I must hear her speak. I 
laughed again at the absurdity of being in love 
with a woman whose voice I had never heard, 
whose native language vv^as a matter of uncertainty. 
But then, love is full of absurdities. When once 
he gets the whip hand he drives us in strange 
ways. 

1 formed a bold resolve. I re raced my steps 
and walked up to the house. The door was opened 
by a tidy-looking servant. 

" Have you any rooms to let ? ' I asked ; having 



42 CALLED BACK. 

jumped at the conclusion that the unknown was 
only lodging at the house. 

The servant replied in the affirmative, aud upon 
my expressing a wish to see the vacant rooms I 
was shown a dining room and bedroom on the 
ground floor. 

Had these rooms been dungeons instead of airy 
cheerful apartments — had they been empty and 
bare instead of comfortably furnished — had the 
rent been fifty pounds a week instead of the 
moderate sum asked, I should have engaged them. 
I was very easy to deal with. The landlady was 
, summoned and the bargain struck at once. If that 
good person had known the state of my mind she 
might have reaped a golden harvest from her 
ground floor apartments. As it was, the only thing 
she was exacting in was in the matter of references. 
I named several, then I paid a month's rent in 
advance and received her permission, as I had 
just returned to England and wanted a home at 
once, to enter into possession that very evening. 

" By-the-by," I said carelessl)^, as I left the 
house to get my luggage, " I forgot to ask if you 
have other lodgers — no children, I hope ? " 

" No, sir — only a lady and her servant. They 
are on the first floor — very quiet people." 

" Thank you," I said. " I daresay I shall be 
very comfortable. You may expect me about 
seven o'clock." 

I had re-engaged my old rooms in Walpolc street 
before the meeting with my unknown had changed 
my plans. I went back there, and after packing 
up all I wanted, inform.ed the people of the house 
that I was going to stay at a friend's for a few 
weeks. The rooms were to be kept for me all the 
same. At seven o'clock I was at Maida vale and 
duly installed. 

It was the hand of fate had wrought this — who 



CALLED BACK. 43 

could doubt it ? This morning I was almost on my 
way to Turin in search of my love. Tl:!is evening 
I am beneath the same roof. As I sit here in my 
arm chair and see all kinds of beautiful visions 
wreathed in the smoke curling from my cigar, I 
can scarcely believe that she is within a few feet 
of me — that I shall see her to-morrow — the next 
day — for ever and ever ! Yes, I am hopelessly in 
love — I go to bed thinking I shall dream of her ; 
but, probably owing to the strange quarters, my 
dreams are far less pleasant. All niglit long I 
dream of the blind man who walked into a 
stranKe house and heard such fearful sounds ! 



CHAPTER IV. 

KOT FOR LOVE OR MARRIAGE. 

A WEEK has passed by. I am more in love than 
ever. I am now satisfied as to the thoroughness 
of my passion ; certain that this sudden love of 
mine will endure as long as my life : that it is no 
transient flush to fade away with time or absence. 
Whether my suit be successful or not, this woman 
will be my first and last love. 

As yet I have made little progress in the further- 
ing of my desire. 1 see her every day, because I 
watch for her coming and going ; and every time 
I see her I find fresh charms in her face and graces 
in her figure. Yet Kenyon was right. Hers is a 
peculiar style of beauty. That pale pure face, 
those dark dreamy far-away eyes, are out of the 
common run of womanhood. It may be this 
accounts for the strange fascination she has for 
me. Her ^carriage is upright and graceful; she 
walks always at the same pace; her iace is always 
grave, and it seems to me she seldom speaks to 



44 CALLED BACK. 

that old companion or servant who never quits her 
side. I am beginning to look upon her as a riddle, 
and wonder if the key will ever be mine. 

I have found out some few things about her. 
Her name is Pauline — a sweet and suitable name — 
Pauline March. She is therefore English, although 
I sometimes hear her saying a fev/ words in Italian 
to old Teresa, her servant. She seems to know no 
one, and, so far as I can learn, no one knows more 
about her than I do — I, at least, know she came 
from Turin, and that is more than my informants 
were aware of. 

I still occupy my rooms, waiting my chance. 
It is tantalising to live in the same house with 
the one you love and find no opportunity of even 
commencing the siege. That old Teresa guards 
her charge like a thorough-bred Spanish duenna. 
Her dark eyes glance quickly and suspiciously at 
me whenever I meet the two women, and bid them 
the good morning or good evening which a fellow- 
lodger may venture upon. As yet I have got no 
further than these cold civilities. Pauline's eyes 
and manner give me no encouragement. She 
acknowledges my salutation gravely, distantly and 
apathetically. It is clear to me that love at first 
sight is not bound to be reciprocal. I comfort 
myself by thinking that Fate must have some- 
thing in store for me, or Pauline and I would 
never have been brought face to face again. 

So all I can do is to lurk behind the thick red 
curtains of my window and watch my love, 
guarded by that old cat Teresa, go out and come 
in. 1 am obliged now to exercise due caution in 
this"^ proceeding, as the duenna once caught sight 
of me, and now each time they pass I see her 
fierce eyes peering into my hiding place. I am 
beginning to hate Teresa. 

Yet if I have done little. T am in the same house 



CALLED BACK. 45 

breathing tlie same air as Pauline, and I am a 
patient man and can wait for my opportunity. 
It will be sure fo come at last. 

This is how it came. One evening I heard a 
fall, a clatter of china and a cry of distress. I ran 
out of yiy room and found Teresa lying on the 
stairs amid the ruins of the landlady's best tea set, 
and groaning earnestly. My chance had come 1 

With the shameless hypocrisy of love, I ran to 
her aid, as eager to help her as though she had 
been my mother. I endeavoured, in the most 
tender manner, to raise her; but she sank back, 
wailing out something about, "one of ze foots 
broke." 

It was clear that Teresa's English was not her 
strong point ; so I asked her in Italian what was 
the matter. She brightened up as she heard her 
own language, and I found that she had sprained 
her knee so severely that she was unable to rise. 
1 told her I would carry her to her room, and 
without more ado picked her up and bore her 
upstairs. 

Pauline was standing on the landing. Her 
large dark eyes were opened wide, her whole 
appearance that of affright. I paused a moment 
and explained what had happened, then I took 
the old woman into the room which she occupied 
md laid her on her bed. The servant of the 
house was sent for a doctor, and, as I retired, 
Pauline thanked me quietly, but I fancied listlessly, 
tor my kindness. Those dreamy eyes mot mine, 
yet scarcely seemed to know it. Yes, I was 
obliged to confess it, my goddess was in manner 
apatlietic — but then her beauty! Those refined 
regular features, the girlish but well-formed figure 
— the thick brown hair, even those strange dark 
eyes. Surely there was no woman in the world to 
compare to her I 



46 CALLED BACK. 

She gave me lier liand at parting — a small well- 
formed soft hand. I could scarcely refrain from 
pressing my lips to it — I could scarcely refrain 
from telling her tlien and there that for months I 
had thought of her and her only — but injudicious 
as such proceedings might have been at a first 
meeting they would have been doubly so whilst 
old Teresa was lying and, in spite of her pains, 
with suspicious eyes watching every movement 
of mine ; so I could only express a wish to be 
of further service to her and bow myself out 
discreetly. 

But the ice was broken — our hands had met. 
Pauline and I v/ere strangers no longer ! 

Old Teresa's sprain, although not such a serious 
affair as she fancied, kept her indoors for several 
days. I hoped this would enable me to improve 
my acquaintance with her mistress, but the result 
was not commensurate with the hope. For the 
first few days, Pauline, so far as I knew, did not 
leave the house. Once or tvv^ice I met her on the 
stairs, and assuming a fictitious interest in the 
old v;oman, kept her in conversation for a m.inute 
or two. It seemed to me that she was painfully 
shy — so sh}/ that the conversation I would fain 
have prolonged, after a little while, died a natural* 
death. I was not conceited enough to attribute 
her shyness and reticence to the same cause which 
made me blush and stammer as I spoke to her. 

At last, one morning I saw her leave the house 
alone. I took my hat and followed her. She was 
walking up and dov/n the pavement in front of the 
house. I joined her, and, after the usual enquiry 
for Teresa, continued at her side. I must make 
an attempt to establish matters on a better footing 
between us. 

"You have not been long in England, Miss 
March ? " I saido 



CALLED BACK. 47 

•' Some time — some months," she replied. 

" I saw you in the spring at Turin — in church, 
at San Giovanni." She raised her eyes and met 
mine with a strange puzzled look. 

" You were there with your old servant — one 
morning," I continued. 

'• Yes — we ofLen went there." 

'* You are English, I suppose — your name is not 
an Italian one ?" 

" Yes. I am English." 

She spoke as though not quite certain about it — 
or as if it were a matter of complete indifference. 

" Your home is here — You are not going back to 
Italy?" 

"I don't know — I cannot tell." 

Pauline's manner was very unsatTsfying. I made 
many attempts to learn somethmg about her 
habits and tastes. Did she play or sing — was she 
fond of music, of pictures, of flov/ers, of the stage, 
of travelling ? Had she many relations and 
friends ? Directly and indirectly, I asked her all 
these questions. 

Her replies were unsatisfactory. Either she 
evaded the questions, as if determined I should k low 
nothing about her, or she did not seem to under- 
stand them. Many of them I felt si re puzzled 
her. At the end of our little promenade she 
remained as great a mystery to me as before. The 
only comfort I could take was thaKshe displaj'ed 
no wish to shun me. We passed and repassed the 
house several times, but she did not suggest re- 
entering, as she might have done had she wished 
to get rid of me. There was no trace of coquetry 
in her manner — quiet and reserved as I found her, 
she was at least simple and natural — and she was 
very beautiful, and 1 was very, very much in love ! 

It was not long before I discovered that old 
Teresa's black eyes were watching us from behind 



48 CALLED BACK. 

the blind of the drawing-room. She mast have 
crept from her bed to see that her charge got into 
no mischief. I chafed at the espionage, but as 5'et 
it was too early to escape from it. 

Before Teresa could hobble out of doors I had 
met Pauline more than once in the same way. 
She seemed, I was glad to believe, pleased 
when I joined her. The difficulty I laboured 
under wAs to make her talk. She would listen to 
all I had to say without comment and without 
reply, save yes or no. If, by a" rare chance, 
she asked a question or spoke a longer sentence 
than usual, the effort was never sustained. I attri- 
buted a great deal of this to shyness and to her 
secluded life — for the only person she had to speak 
to was that terrible old Teresa. 

Although every word and action^ of Pauline's 
told me she was well-educated and well-bred, I 
was certainly surprised at her ignorance of litera- 
ture. If I quoted an author, mentioned a book by 
name, the remark passed unnoticed ; or she looked 
at me as if puzzled by my allusion, or distressed 
at her own ignorance. Although I had now seen 
her several times, I was not satisfied at the pro- 
gress I had made. I knew I had not as yet 
struck the key-note of her nature. 

As soon as the old servant, duenna, friend, or 
v\'hat she was, grew well, I heard some startling 
news. My landlady asked me if I could recom- 
mend her apartments to any friend of mine — such 
another as myself she was good enough to say — 
Miss March was going to leave, and the landlady 
thought she would prefer taking a gentleman in 
her place. 

I felt certain this was a counterrnove of that old 
hag Teresa's. She had cast venomous glances at 
lae when we passed each other on the stairs ; had 
responded surlily when I asked if she had quite 



CALLED BACK. 49 

recovered from the effects of her accident — in a 
word, I knew she was my enemy; that she had 
discovered my feehngs towards PauHne and was 
doing her best to keep us apart. I had no means 
of knowing the extent of her power or influence 
over tlie~girl, but I had some time since ceased to 
regard her as nothing more than a servant. The 
intelligence that my fellow-lodgers were about to 
quit showed me that to bring my love for Pauline 
to a successful issue, I must in some way make 
matters straight with this unpleasant old attendant. 

That same evening, as I heard her coming down 
the stairs, I threw open my door and stood face to 
face with her. 

" Signora Teresa," I said, with high-^own polite- 
ness, " will it please you to step into my room ? I 
wish to speak to you." 

She gave me a quick, suspicious glance, but 
nevertheless complied with my request. I closed 
the door and placed a chair for her. 

"Your poor knee — is it quite well?" I asked 
sympathetically, and in Italian. 

" It is quite well, Signer," she replied laconically. 

" Will you take a glass of sweet wine ? I have 
some here." 

Teresa, in spite of our inimical relations, made 
no objection, so I filled a glass and watched her 
sip it approvingly. 

" Is the Signorina — Miss March well ? I have 
not seen her to-day." 

" She is well." 

"It is about her I wish to speak to you — you 
have guessed that ? " 

" I have guessed it." As she spoke Teresa gave 
me a sullen defiant look. 

" Yes," I continued, " your vigilant, faithful eyes 
have seen what I have no wish to conceal. I love 
the Signorina Pauline." 



50 CALLED BACK. 

'* She is net to be loved," said Teresa, sulkily. 

" One so beautiful must be loved. I love her 
and will marr}' her." 

" She is not to be married." 

** Listen, Teresa. I say I will marry her. I am 
a gentleman and rich. I have 50,000 lire a year." 

The amount of my income, magnificent when 
reduced to her native coinage, was not without its 
expected effect. If her eyes, as they met mine, 
were as unfriendly as ever, their look of astonish- 
ment and increasing respect told me I was appeal- 
ing to her tenderest feeling — cupidity. 

" Now tell me why I should not marry the 
Signorina ? Tell me who her friends are that I 
may see the*n and ask her in marriage ? " 
" " She is not for marriage." 

This was all I could get from the old woman. 
She would tell me nothing about Pauline's family 
or friends. She would only reiterate that she was 
not for love or for marriage. 

I had but one chance left. Teresa's eager look 
when I mentioned the income I possessed had 
impressed me. I must condescend to the vulgar 
act of direct bribery; the end would justify the 
means. 

As I was so often travelling it was my habit to 
carry a large sum of money on my person. I 
drew out my pocket-book and counted out a hun- 
dred pounds in new crisp notes. Teresa eyed 
them hungrily. 

" You know what these are v/orth ? " I said. 
She nodded. I pushed a couple of the notes 
towards her. Her skinny hand seemed twitching 
with the desire to grasp them. 

" Tell me who Miss March's friends are and 
take these two notes ; all the rest shall be yours 
on the day we are married." 

The old woman sat silent for a v/hile, but I 



CALLED BACK. 51 

knew temptation was assailing her. Presently I 
heard her murmuring, "50,000 lire! 50,000 lire^a 
year!" The spell worked. At last she rose. "Are 
you going to take the money ? " I asked. 

" I cannot. I dare not. I am bound. But — " 

" But what ? " 

" I will write. I will say what you say to il 
dottore." 

" Who is the doctor ? I can write to him or 
see him." 

" Did I say il dottore ? It was a slip. No, you 
must not write. I v/ill ask him and he must decide." 

" You will write at once ? " 

"At once." Teresa, with a lingering gl-ance at 
the money, turned to leave me. 

"You had better take these two notes," I said, 
handing them to her. 

She buttoned them in the bosom of her dress 
with feverish delight. 

"Tell me, Teresa," I said coaxingly, "tell me 
if you think — if the Signorina — Pauline — cares at 
all for me ? " 

" Who knows," answered the old woman testily ; 
" I do not know — but again I say to you she is not 
for love or marriage." 

Not for love or marriage ! I laughed aloud as I 
thought of the old woman's absurd and oft-repeated 
assertion. If on the earth there was one woman 
more than another made for love and marriage it 
was my beautiful Pauline ! I wondered what 
Teresa could mean ; then remembering the fervour 
with which she prayed in San Giovanni I decided 
that, being an ardent Roman Catholic, she wished 
Pauline to take the veil. This theory would ex- 
plain everything. 

Now that I had bought Teresa I looked forward 
to the enjoyment of Pauline's society without 
espionage or interruption. The old woman had 



52 CALLED BACK. 

taken my money, and no doubt would do her best 
to earn more. If I could persuade the girl to let 
me pass several hours of each day in her company 
I need fear no hindrance from Teresa. The bribe 
bad been accepted, and, although I blushed at the 
ixpedient to which I had been compelled to resort, 
h had been successful. 

I was obliged to defer any further attempt at 
love-making until the next evening, as an impor- 
tant piece of business had to be attended to in the 
morning. It kept me away from home for several 
hours, and when at last I returned to Maida vale 
I was thunder-struck to hear that my fellov^r-lodgers 
had left the house. The landlady had no idea 
Avhither they had gone. Teresa, who it appears 
always acted as pursebearer, had paid her dues 
and had departed with her young mistress. There 
was nothing more to tell. 

I threw myself into my chair cursing Italian 
guile ; yet, as I thought of Italian cupidity, not 
altogether hopeless. Perhaps Teresa would write 
or come to me. I had not forgotten the eager looks 
she cast upon my money. But day after day passed ' 
without letter or message. 

I spent those days, for the most part, wandering 
about the streets in the vain hope of encountering 
the fugitives. It was only after this second loss 
that I really knew the extent of my passion. I 
cannot describe the longing I had to see that fair 
face once more. Yet, I feared the love was all on 
my side. If Pauline had felt even a passing in- 
terest iii me she could scarcely have left in this 
secret and mysterious manner. Her heart was yet 
to be won, and 1 knew that unless I won it no 
woman's love would to me be worth having. 

I should have returned to mj' old lodgings in 
Walpole street had it not been that I feared to 
quit Maida vale, lest Teresa, if she should be 



CALLED BACK. 53 

faithful to her engagements, might niiLis nie ! So I 
lingered on there until ten days went slov/ly by ; 
then, just as I was beginning to despair, a letter 
came. 

It was written in a delicate pointed Italian style 
and signed Manuel Ceneri. It simply said that 
the writer would have the honour of calling upon 
me about noon to-day. 

Nothing was hinted at as to the object of the 
visit, but I knew it could be connected with only 
one thing — the desire of my heart. Teresa, after all, 
had not played me false. Pauline would be mine. 
I waited with feverish impatience until this un- 
known Manuel Ceneri should make his appearance. 

A few minutes after twelve he was announced 
and shown into m}^ room. I recognised him at 
once. He was the middle-aged man with rather 
round shoulders who had talked to Teresa under 
the shade of San Giovanni at Turin. Doubtless 
he was " il dottore," spoken of by the old v/oman 
as being the arbiter of Pauline's fate. 

He bowed politely as he entered, cast one qtiick 
look at me as if trying to gather what he could 
from my personal appearance, then seated himself 
in the chair I offered him. 

" I make no apology for calling,' he said ; ''you 
will no doubt guess why I come." His English 
was fluent, but the foreign accent very marked. 

" I hope I guess correctly," I rephed. 

"A am Jklanuel Ceneri. I am a doctor by pro- 
fap«ion. My sister was Miss March's mother. I 
have come from Geneva on your account." 

" Then you kno-v what the wish — the great w'sh 
.o' my life is ?" 

"Yes, I know. You want to marry my niece. 
Now, Mr. Vaughan, I have many reasons for wish- 
ing my niece to remain single, but your proposal 
has induced me to reconsider the matter. ""^ 



54 CALLED BACK. 

Pauline might have been a bale of cotton, so 
uiipassively did her uncle speak of her future. 

" In the first place," he went on, " I am told you 
are well born and rich. Is that so ? " 

" My family is respectable. I am well connected 
and may be called rich." 

" You will satisfy me on the latter point, I 
suppose." 

I bowed stifly, and taking a sheet of paper wrote 
a line to my solicitors asking them to give the 
bearer the fullest information as to my resources. 
Ceneri folded up the note and placed it in his 
pocket. Perhaps I showed the annoyance I felt 
at the mercenary exactness of his enquiries. 

" I am bound to be particular in this matter," 
he said, " as my niece has nothing." 

" I expect nothing or wish for nothing." 

'* She had money once — a large fortune. It was 
lost long ago. You will not ask how or where ?" 

" I can only repeat my former words." 

" Ver)' well — I feel I have no right to refuse 
your offer. Although she is half Italian, her 
m.anners and habits are English. An English 
husband will suit her best. You have not yet, I 
believe, spoken of love to her?" 

" I have had no opportunity. I should no doubt 
have done so, but as soon as our acquaintance 
commenced she was taken away." 

" Yes, m}' instructions to Teresa were strict. It 
was only on condition she obeyed her that I allowed 
Pauline to live in England." 

Although this man spoke as one who had ab- 
solute authority over his niece, he had not said one 
word which evinced affection. So far as that went, 
she might have been a stranger to him. 

" But now, I suppose," I said, " I shall be 
allowed to see her?" 

" Yes — on conditions. The man who marries 



CALLED BACK. 55 

Pauline March must be content to take her as she 
is. He must ask no questions, seek to know 
nothing of her birth and family, nothing of her 
early days. He must be content to know that she 
is a lady, that she is very beautiful, and that he 
loves her. Will this suffice ? " 

The question was such a strange one that even 
in the height of my passion I hesitated. 

"I will say this m.uch," added Ceneri, "she is 
good and pure — her birth is equal to your own. 
She is an orphan and her only near relative is 
myself." 

"I am content," I cried, holding out my hand to 
seal the compact. " Give me Pauline, I ask no 
more." 

Why should I not be content ? What did I 
Want to know about her family, her antecedents 
or her history? So madly did I long to call thai 
beautiful girl mine that, I believe, had Ceneri told 
me she was worthless and disgraced among women 
I should have said, " Give her to me and let hex 
begin life anew as ray wife." Men do such things 
for love I 

" Now, Mr. Vaughan," said the Itahan, drawing 
his hand from mine ; " my next question will 
astonish you. You love Pauline and I believe she 
is not indifferent to j'ou — " 

He paused and my heart beat at the thought. 

" Will your arrangements permit of an earlj 
marriage — an immediate marriage ? Can I upon 
my return to the Continent .in a few days leave her 
future in your hands entirely ? " 

" I would marry her to-day if it were possible," 
I cried. 

" We need not be so impetuous as that — but 
could you arrange for, say the day after to- 
morrow ? " 

i stared at him — I could scarcely believe I heard 



56 CALLED BACK. 

correctly. To be married to Pauline within a few 
hours ! There must be something in the back- 
ground of such bliss ! Ceneri must be a madman ! 
Yet, even from the hands of a madman how could 
I refuse my happiness ? 

" But I don't know if she loves me — would she 
consent ? " I stammered. 

" Pauline is obedient and will do as I wish. You 
can woo her after her marriage instead of before it." 

" But can it be done on so short a notice ? " 

" I believe there are such things as special 
licenses to be bought. You are wondering at my 
suggestion. I am bound to return to Italy almost 
at once. Now, I put it to you — can I, under the 
present circumstances, leave Pauline here with 
only a servant to look after her? No, Mr.Vaughan, 
strange as it may seem, I must either see her your 
wife before I leave or I must take her back with 
me. The latter may be unfortunate for you, as 
here I have only myself to consider, whilst abroad 
there may be others to consult and perhaps I might 
change my mind." 

*• Let us go to Pauline and ask her," I said, 
rising impatiently. 

" Certainly," said Ceneri, gravely, " we will go 
at once." 

Till now I had been sitting with my back to the 
window. As I faced the light I noticed the Italian 
doctor look very straightly at me. 

" Your face seems quite familiar to me, Mr. 
Vaughan, although I cannot recall where I have 
seen you. 

I told him he must have seen me outside San 
Giovanni whilst he was talking to old Teresa. He 
remembered the occurrence and appeared satisfied. 
Then we called a cab and drove to Pauline's new 
abode. 

It was not so very far away. I wondered I had 



CALLED BACK. 57 

not encountered either Pauline or Teresa in my 
rambles. Perhaps they had both kept to the house 
to avoid tne meeting. 

" Would you mind waiting in the hall a minute ? ' 
asked Ceneri as we entered the house. " I will gc 
and prepare Pauline for your coming." 

I would have waited a month in a dungeon foi 
the reward in prospect ; so I sat down on the 
polished mahogany chair and wondered if I was in 
my right senses. 

Presently old Teresa came to me. She looked 
scarcely more amiable than before. 

" Have I done well ?" she whispered in Italian. 

" You have done well — I will not forget." 

" You will pay me and blame me for nothing. 
But listen — once more I say it — the Signorina is 
not for love or marriage." 

Superstitious old fool ! Were Pauline's charms 
to be buried in a nunnery ! 

Then a bell rang and Teresa left me. In a few 
minutes she re-appeared and conducted me up- 
stairs to a room in which I tound my beautiful 
Pauline and her uncle. She raised her dark dreamy 
eyes and looked at me — the most infatuated man 
could not have flattered himself that the light of 
love was in them. 

I fully expected that Doctor Ceneri would have 
left us to arrange matters alone ; but no — he took 
me by the hand and in a stately manner led me 
to his niece. 

" Pauline, you know this gentleman." 

She bowed. "Yes, I know him." 

" Mr. Vaughan," continued Ceneri, "does us the 
honour of asking you to be his wife." 

I could not permit all my wooing to be done by 
proxy, so I stepped forward and took her hand in 
mine. 

" Pauline," I whispered, " i love you — since first 



50 CALLED BACK. 

I saw you I have loved you — will you be my 
wife ? " 

"Yes, if you wish it?" she replied softly, -but 
without even changing colour. 

" You cannot love me now, but you will by-and- 
oy — will you not, my darling ?" 

She did not respond to my appeal, but then she 
did not repulse me, neither did she strive to with- 
irav/ her hand from mine ; she remained calm and 
undemonstrative as ever ; but I threw my arm^ 
round her, and, in spite of Ceneri's presence, kissed 
her passionately. It was only when my lips touched 
her own that I saw the colour rise to her cheek and 
knew that she was moved. 

She disengaged herself from my embrace, glanced 
at her uncle, who stood impassive as if he had 
witnessed nothing out of the common, and then 
she fled from the room, 

*' I think you had better go now,"' said Ceneri. 
"I will arrange everything with Pauline. You 
must do on your part all that is necessary for the 
day after to-morrov/.' 

*' It is very sudden," I said. 

" It is, but it must be so — I cannot wait an hour 
longer. You had better leave me now and return 
to-morrow." 

I went away with my head in a whirl — I was 
uncertain what to do. The temptation to call 
Pauline my own in so short a time was great ; but 
I could not deceive myself by thinking that she 
cared for me at all, as yet. But as Ceneri said, I 
could do my wooing after marriage. Still I hesi- 
tated. The hurried proceedmg was so strange. 
Ardently as I desired to wed Pauline, I wished I 
could have first won her. Would it not be better 
to let her uncle take her to Italy, then to follow 
her and learn if she could love me ? Against this 
prudent course came Ceneri's vague threat, that in 



CALLED BACK. 59, 

such an event, his mind might be changed — and 
more than' all, 1 was desperately in love. Although 
it could be only for her beauty that I loved her, I 
was madly in love. Fate had thrown us together. 
She had escaped me twice — now the third time 
she was offered to me unreservedly. I was super- 
stitious enough to think that if I rejected or post- 
poned accepting the gift, it would be withdrawn 
for ever. No — come what will, in two days' time 
Pauline shall be my wife ! 

I saw her the next day, but never alone. Ceneri 
was with us all the time. Pauline was sweet, 
silent, shy and languid. I had much to do — 
much to see to. Never was a wooing so short or 
so strange as mine. By the evening all arrange- 
ments were made, and by ten o'clock the next 
morning Gilbert Vaughan and Pauline March 
were man and wife — those two who had not in 
their lifetime even conversed for a time amounting, 
say, to three hours, were linked together for better 
or worse till death should- part them ! 

Ceneri left immediately the ceremony was over, 
and, to my astonishment, Teresa announced her 
intention of accompanying him. She did not fail 
to wait on me for the promised reward, which I 
gave her freely and fully. My heart's desire was 
to wed Pauline, and by her aid it had been com- 
passed. 

Then, with my beautiful bride, I started for the 
Scottish lakes, to begin the wooing which should 
have been completed before the final step had been 
taken. 



6o CALLED BACK. 

CHAPTER V. 

BY LA W, NOT LOVE. 

Proud and happy as I felt when seated side by 
side with Pauline in the railway carriage which 
was taking us to the north : fortunate as I told 
myself I was to have won such a fair bride : great 
as my love was for the sv/eet girl who had just 
vowed herself mine for ever, Ceneri's extraordinary 
stipulation kept recurring to my mind — the man 
who marries Pauline March must be content to 
take her as she is : to wish to know nothing of 
her past. 

Not for one moment did I think such a contract 
could be enforced. As soon as I had succeeded in 
making Pauline love me, she would surely wish to 
tell me all her history — there would be no need to 
ask for it — the confidence would tnen be given as a 
matter of course. When she had learnt the secret 
of love, all other secrets would cease between us. 

My wife looked very beautiful as she sat with 
her head leaning against the dark cloth of the 
carriage. Her clear-cut refined features showed 
in that position advantageously. Her face, as 
usual, was pale and calm ; her eyes were cast 
down. A woman to be indeed proud of, to wor- 
ship, to cherish, and — how sweet it seemed to 
whisper the word to myself — my wife ! 

Yet I suspect none would have taken us for a 
newly married couple. At any rate there were no 
nudgings and sly glances among our fellow pas- 
sengers. The ceremony had been so hurried on 
that no attempt had been made to invest Pauline 
with the usual bridal accessories Her dress, al- 
though becoming and fashionable, was the one .in 
.vhich I had seen her several times. Neither of us 



CALLED BACK. 6l 

had any brand new belongings to stamp us as 
being bound for a honeymoon ; so tlie only notice 
we attracted was the notice which was due to my 
wife's great and uncommon beauty. 

The carriage was nearly full when we started 
from London, and as the strangeness of our new 
relations prevented our conversing in an ordinary 
way, by mutual consent we were all but silent ; a 
few soft words in Italian were all I could trust 
myself to speak until we were alone. 

At the first important station, the first place at 
which the train stopped for any time worth men- 
tioning, I exercised a little diplomatic bribery, and 
changing our carriage we were installed in a com- 
partment, the windows of which bore the magic 
word " engaged." Pauline and I were alone. I 
took her hand in mine. 

"My wife!" I said passionately, "mine, only 
mine, for ever ! " 

Her hand lay listless and unresisting in my own. 
I pressed my lips to her cheek. She shrank not 
from my kiss, neither did she return it— she simply 
suffered it. 

"Pauline!" I whispered, ' say once, 'Gilbert, 
my h{isband.' " 

She repeated the words like a child learning a 
new lesson. My heart sank as her emotionless 
accents fell on my ears. I had a hard task before 
me ! 

I could not blame her. Why should she love 
me yet ? Me, v/hose christian name, I think, she 
heard- yesterday for the first ^time ? Better, far 
better, indifference than simulated love. She had 
become my wife simply because her uncle wished 
it I could at least comfort myself by thinking the 
marriage had not been forced upon her; also that 
so far as I could see, she entertained no dislike tc 
me. I did not for one moment despair. I mus< 



b2 CALLED BACK. 

now woo her humbly and reverently, as every man 
should woo his love. Certainly as her husband, 
I did not stand in a worse position than when I 
was her fellow lodger and old Teresa was following 
my every movement with her black suspicious 
eyes. 

I would win her, but until I could claim the 
rights which love would give, I resolved to take 
none of those with which the lav/ had invested me. 

None save this, and this only once. 

"Pauline," I said, "will you kiss me? Only 
once I ask it. It will make me happier ; but if you 
would rather wait until we are better acquainted, 
I shall not complain." 

She leant forward and kissed m}' forehead. Her 
young lips were red and warm, but they chilled 
me — in that kiss there was not a suspicion of the 
passion which was thrilling me. 

I drew my hand from hers, and, still sitting be- 
side her, began to do my best to make myself 
agreeable to the woman I loved. If I felt dis- 
tressed and somewhat disappointed, I concealed 
it and strove to talk pleasantly and naturally — 
tried to ascertain what manner of woman I had 
married — to get at her likes and dislikes — to study 
her disposition — to determine her tastes — learn her 
wishes — read her thoughts, and eventually to make 
her regard me as one who would spend his life in 
rendering her happy. 

When was it the idea first struck me — the 
horrible idea that even the peculiarity and novelty 
of situation could not altogether account for Paul- 
ine's apathy and lack of animation — that shyness 
alone could not be entirely responsible for the 
difficulty I experienced in making her talk to me, 
even in inducing her to answer my questions ? I 
made every excuse for her. She vv^as tired ; she 
was upset; she could think of nothing else save 



CALLED BACK. O3 

the rash and sudden step taken to-day — more rash 
for her than for me — as I, at least, knew that I 
loved her. At last I, too, sank into silence, and 
miles and hours went by, whilst the bride and 
bridegroom sat side by side without exchanging 
a word, much less a caress. It was a strange 
situation — a strange journey. 

And on and on the train rushed northwards — on 
and on until the dusk began to creep over the fly- 
ing country ; and I sat and looked at the listless 
but beautiful girl at n^y side, and wondered what 
our future life would be ; but I did not despair, 
although the rattle of the train as it whirred along 
seemed to resolve itself into a dreamy rhythm, and 
reiterated without ceasing old Teresa's sullen 
words, " She is not for love or marriage — not for 
love or marriage." 

Darker and darker it grev/ outside, and as the 
carriage light fell on the pure white face of the girl 
beside me ; as I watched its never changing ex- 
pression ; its beautiful but never varying pallor, a 
strange fear came over me — a fear lest she was 
wrapped in an armour of ice which no love would 
ever thaw. Then tired, weary and almost dis- 

firited, I sank into a kind of sleep. The last thing 
could remember before my eyes closed was that, 
in spite of my resolution, I took that white, well- 
ehaped, unresisting hand in my own, and slept 
Still holding it. 

Sleep ! Yes, it v/as sleep, if sleep means any- 
thing but rest and peace. Never, since the night I 
heard it, had that woman's stifled moaning come 
back to me so clearly ; never had my dreams so 
nearly approached the reality of the terror which 
the blind man had felt years ago. Right thankful 
I was when the haunting cry rose shriller and 
Bhnller, and, at last, culminated by resolving itself 
into the shrieking whistle, which told me we were 



64 CALLED BACK. 

s^ear to Edinburgh. I loosed my wife's hand and 
recalled my senses. That dream must have been 
a vivid one, for it left me with the beads of per- 
spiration clammy on my brow. 

Never having been to Edinburgh, and wishing 
to see something of the city, I had proposed stay- 
ing there for two or three days. During the 
journey I had suggested this to my wife. She had 
agreed to it as though place or time was a matter 
of little moment to her. Nothing, it seemed to 
me, awoke her interest ! 

We drove to the hotel and supped together. 
From our manner we might, at the most, have 
been friends. Our intercourse, for the time, being 
confined to the usual civilities shown by a gentle- 
man towards a lady in whose society he is thrown. 
Pauline thanked me for any little attention to her 
comfort; and that was all. The journey had been 
a long and trying one — she looked wearied out. 

" You are tired, Pauline," I said, " would you 
like to go to your room ? " 

" I am very tired," she spoke almost plaintively. 

"Good night then," I said, "to-morrow you 
will feel better, and we will look at the lions of the 
pl?.ce." 

She rose, we shook hands and said good night. 
Pauline retired to her apartment whilst I went out 
for a ramble through the gas-lighted streets, and 
with a sad heart recalled the events of the day. 

Husband and wife ! The bitter mockery of the 
words ! For in everything except the legal bond 
Pauline and I were as far apart as we were on that 
day when first I saw her at Turin. Yet this morning 
we had vowed to love and cherish each other until 
death did us part. Why had I been rash enough 
to take Ceneri at his word ? Why not have 
waited until I had ascertained that the girl could 
love me, or at least ascertained that she had the 



CALLED BACK. 65 

power of loving at all ? The apathy and utter in- 
difference she displayed fell like a chill upon rny 
heart. I had done a foolish thing — a thing that 
could never be undone. I must bear the conse- 
quences. Still I would hope — hope, particularly, 
for what to-morrow might bring forth. 

I walked about for a long time, thinking over 
my strange position. Then I returned to the hotel 
and sought my own apartment. It was one of the 
suite of rooms I had engaged, and next to my wife's. 
I dismissed, as well as I could, all hopes and fears 
until the morning came, and, tired with the day's 
events, at last slept. 

My bride and I did not visit the Lakes as I had 
planned. In two days' time 1 had leaint the whole 
truth — learned all I could know — all that I might 
ever know about Pauline. The meaning of the old 
woman's repeated phrase, " She is not for love or 
marriage," was manifested to- me. The reason 
why Dr. Cener* had stipulated tliat Pauline's hus- 
band should be content to take her without enquir- 
ing into her eirly life was clear. Pauline — my 
wife — my love, had no past I 

Or no knowledge of the past. Slowly at first, 
then with swift steps the truth came home to me. 
Now I knew how to account for that puzzled, 
strange look i\ those beautiful eyes — knew the 
reason for the indifference, the apathy she dis- 
played. The face of the woman I had married 
was fair as the morn ; her figure as perfect as that 
of a Grecian statue; her voice low and sweet; 
but the one thing which animates every charm — 
the mind — was missing ! 

How shall I d(^scrihe her ? Madness means 
something quite different from her state. Imbe- 
cility would still less convey my meaning. There 
is no word I can find which is fitting to use. There 
was simply something missing from her intellect— 



66 CALLED BACS. 

as much missing as a limb may be from a body. 
Meii.ory, except for comparatively recent events, 
she seemed to have none. The power of reasoning, 
weighing and drawing deductions seemed beyond 
her grasp. She appeared unable to recognise the 
importance or bearing of occurrences taking place 
around her. Sorrow and delight v»'ere ehiotions 
she was incapable of feeling. Nothing appeared 
to move her. Unless her attention w^as •called to 
them she noticed neither persons nor places. She 
lived as by instinct — rose, ate, drank, and lay dow^n 
to rest as one not knowing why she did so. Such 
questions or remarks as came within the limited 
range of her capacity she replied to — those outside 
it passed unheeded, or else the shy troubled eyes 
sought for a moment the questioner's face, and left 
him as mystified as I had been when first I noticed 
that curious enquiring look. 

Yet she was not mad. A person might have met 
her out in company, and after spending hours in 
her society might have carried away no worse im* 
pression than that she was shy and reticent. When- 
ever she did speak her words were as those of a per- 
fectly sane woman ; but as a rule her voice v.'as only 
heard when the ordinary necessaries of life demand- 
ed, or in reply to some smiple question. Perhaps, I 
should not be far wrong in comparing her mind to 
that of a child — but, alas ! it was a child's mmd in 
a woman's body — and that woman was n\y wife ! 

Life to her, so far as I could see, held neither 
mental pleasure nor pain. Considered physically, 
I found that she was more influenced by heat and 
cold than by any other agents. The sun would 
tempt her out of doors, or the ^-old wind would 
drive her iix. She was by no means unhappy. 
She seemed quite content to sit by my side, or to 
walk or drive with me lor hours without speaking. 
Her whole existence was a negative one. 



CALLEB BACK. 5^ 

And she was sweet and docile. She followed 
every suggestion of mine, fell in with every plan, 
was ready to go here, there, or everywhere, as I 
wished ; but her compliance and obedience were 
as those of a slave to a new master. It seemed to 
me that all her life she must have been accustomed 
to obey some one. It was this habit which had so 
misled me — had almost made me think that Pauline 
loved me, or she would not have consented to that 
hasty marriage. Now, I knew that her ready obe- 
dience to her uncle's command was really due to 
the inability of her mind to offer resistance, and its 
powerlessness to comprehend the true meaning of 
the step sh was taking. 

Such was Pauline, my wife ! A woman in her 
beauty and grace of person ; a child in her clouded 
and unformed or stunted mind 1 And I, her 
husband, a strong man craving for love, might win 
from her, perchance, at last, what might be com- 
pared to the affection of a child for its parent, or a 
dog to his master. 

As the truth, the v/hole truth, came home to me, 
I am not ashamed to say that I lay down and 
wept in bitter grief. 

i loved her even now I knew all ! I would not 
even have undone the marriage. She was my wife 
— the only woman I had ever cared for. I would 
fulfil my vow — would love her and cherish her. 
Her life, at least, should be as happy as my care 
could make it. But all the same I vowed I would 
have a fitting reckoning with that glib Italian 
doctor. 

Him, I felt it was necessary I should see at once. 
From him I would wring all particulars. I would 
learn if Pauline had always been the same — if 
there was any hop« that time and patient treatment 
would work an improvement. I ^/auld learn, 
moreover, the object of his concealment- I would, 



6S CALLED BACK. 

I swore, drag the truth from him, or it should cost 
him dear. Until I stood face to face with Ceneri 
I should find no peace. 

I told Pauline it was necessary we should return 
to London immediately. She betrayed no surprise ; 
raised no objection. She made her preparations 
at once, and was ready to accompany me when I 
willed it. This was another thing about her which 
puzzled me. So far as things mechanical went, 
she was as other people. In her toilet, even in her 
preparations for a journey, she needed no assist- 
ance. All her actions were those of a perfectly 
sane person ; it was only when the mind was called 
upon to show itself that the deficiency became at 
all apparent. 

It was grey morning when we reached Euston 
Station. We had travelled all night. I smiled 
bitterly as I stepped on to the platform ; smiled 
at the contrast between my thoughts of to-day and 
those of a few mornings ago when I handed the 
wife I had so strangely won into the train, and 
told myself, as I followed her, that a life of perfect 
happiness was now about to begin. 

And yet how fair the girl looked as she stood by 
my side on that wide platform ! How strangely 
that air of repose, that sweet refined calm face, 
that general appearance of indift'erenoe, contrasted 
with the busy scene around us, as the train disgorged 
its contents. Oh, that I could sweep the clouds 
from her mind and make her what I wished ! 

I had found some difficulty in settling what 
course to pursue. I decided, after ventilating 
various schemes, that I would take PauHne to my 
own rooms in Walpole street. I knew the people 
of the house well, and felt certain she would be 
taken care of during my absence ; for, after a few 
hours' repose, it was my intention to start in search 
of Ceneri. i had written from Edinburgh to 



CALLED BACK. 69 

Walpole street, telling the good people there to be 
ready for me and whom to expect ; moreover, I had 
again appealed to my faithful old servant, Priscilla, 
and begged her to be at the house awaiting my 
arrival. For my sake, I knew she would show 
every kindness to m.y pocr girl. So to Walpole 
street we went. 

All was in readiness for us. Priscilla received 
us with eyes full of curious wonder. I saw that 
her sympathies were at once enlisted by Pauline's 
appearance. After a cup of tea and something to 
eat, I begged Priscilla to lead my wife to her room, 
that she might take the rest she needed. Pauline, 
in her childlike, docile way, rose and followed the 
old woman. 

" When you have seen to Mrs. Vaughan's 
comforts, come back to me," I said, *• I want to 
speak to you." 

Priscilla, no doubt, was only too eager to return 
to me. I felt she was brimming over with questions 
about my unexpected marriage ; but I checked her 
volubility. My face must have told her that I had 
nothing pleasant to communicate. She sat down, 
and, as I desired her to do, listened without 
comment to my tale. 

I was compelled to confide in some one. The 
old woman, I knew, was trustworthy and would 
keep my affairs secret. So I told her all, or nearly 
all. I explained as well as I could Pauhne's 
peculiar mental state. I suggested all that my 
short experience brought to my mind, and I prayed 
Priscilla, by the love she bore me, to guard and be 
kind in my absence to the wife I loved. The 
promise being given, I threw myself upon the 
sofa and slept for several hours. 

In the afternoon I saw Pauline again. I asked 
her if she knew where I could write to Ceneri. 
She shook her head. 



70 CALLED BACK. 

"Try and think, my dear," I said. 

She pressed her delicate finger tips against her 
brow. I had already noticed that trying to think 
always troubled her greatly. 

" Teresa knew," I said to assist her. 

"Yes, ask her." 

«* But she has left us, Pauline. Can you tell us 
where she is ? " 

Once more she shook her head hopelessly. 

" He told me he hve'd in Geneva," I said. *' Do 
you know the street ? " 

She turned her puzzled eyes to mine. I sighed, 
as I knew my questions were useless. 

Still, find him I must. I would go to Geneva. 
If the man was a doctor, as he represented him- 
self, he must be known there. If I could not find 
any trace of him at Geneva I would try Turin. I 
took my wife's hand. 

" I am going away for a few days, Pauline. You 
will stay here until I return. Every one will be 
kind to you. Priscilla will get you all you want." 

"Yes, Gilbert," she said softly. I had taught 
her to call me Gilbert. 

Then, after some last instructions to Priscilla, I 
started on my journey. As my cab drove from the 
door I glanced up at the window of the room in 
which I had left Pauline. She was standing there 
looking at me, and a great v/ave of joy came over 
my heart, for I fancied that her eyes were looking 
sad, like the eyes of one taking leave of a dear 
friend. It may have been only fancy, but, as i 
had never before even fancied the expression there, 
that look in Pauline's eyes was some comfort to 
carry away v/ith me. 

And nov7 for Geneva and il dottore Ceneri I 



CALLED BACK. 7I 

CHAPTER VI. 

V>iSATISFACTORY ANSWERS. 

I TRAVELLED in hot haste, as fast as steam would 
bear me, to Geneva ; where I at once began my 
enquiries as to the whereabouts of Doctor Ceneri. 
I had hoped that finding him would be an easy 
matter. His words had given me the impression 
that he practiced in the town. If so, many people 
must know him. But he had misled me or I had 
deceived myself. For several days I hunted high 
and low.;^ enquired everywhere; but not a soul 
could I find who knew the ma.a. I called on every 
doctor in the place ; one and all professed entire 
ignorance of such a colleague. At last I felt 
certain that the name he had given me was a ficti- 
tious one, or that Geneva was not his abode. 
However obscure a doctor may be, he is sure to be 
known by some of his professional brethren in the 
same tovvn. I decided to go to Turin and try my 
luck there. 

It was on the eve of my int ;nded departure. I 
was strolling about, feeling vei^ sad at heart, and 
trying to persuade myself that I should fare better 
in Turin, when I noticed a man lounging along the 
opposite side of the street. As his face and bear- 
ing seemed familiar to me, I crossed the road to 
see him to better advantage. Bemg clothed in the 
inevitable tourist suit he presented the appearance 
of an ordinary British traveller — so much so that 
I believed 1 must be mistaken. But I was right, 
after all. In spite of his strange attire I recog- 
nised him the moment I drew near. He was the 
man with whom Kenyon had engaged in a wordy 
war qulside San Giovanni — the man who had re- 
monstrated with us for our expressed admiration of 



72 CALLED BACK. 

Pauline — the man who had walked away arm in 
arn? with Ceneri. 

The chance was too good a one to be lost. He 
would, at least, know where the doctor was to be 
found. I trusted his memory for faces was not so 
retentive as mine ; that he would not connect me 
with the unpleasant passage which occurred when 
we last met. I walked up to him, and raising my 
hat requested him to favour me with a few 
moments' conversation. 

I spoke in English. He gave me a quick 
penetrating glance, then acknowledging my salu- 
tation, professed, in the same language, his wish to 
place himself at my service. 

" I am trying to ascertain the address of a 
gentleman who I believe lives here. I think you 
will be able to assist me." 

He laughed. " I will if I can — but being like 
yourself an Englishman, and knowing very few 
people, I fear I can be of little help to you." 

" I am anxious to find a doctor named Ceneri." 

The start he gave as he heard my words ; the 
look, almost of apprehension, he cast on me, 
showed me that he recognised the name. But in 
a second he recovered himself. 

" I cannot remember the name. I am sorry to 
say I am unable to help you." 

♦* But," I said, in Italian, " I have seen you in 
his company." ^ 

He scowled viciously. " I know no man cf the 
name. Good morning." 

He raised his hat and strode away. 

I was not going to lose him like that. I^ 
quickened my pace and came up with him, 

" 1 must beg of you to tell me where I can find 
him. I must see him upon an important matter. 
It is no use denying that he is a friend of yours." 

He hesitated, then halted. ' You are strangely 



CALLED BACK. 73 

importunate, sir. i'diiaps you wiii tell me your 
reason for your 'Statement that the man you seek 
is my friend ? " 

" I saw you arm in arm with him." 

'* Where, may I ask ? " 

" In Turin — last spring. Outside San Giovanni." 

He looked at me attentively. " Yes, I remember 
your face now. You are one of those young men 
who insulted a lady, and whom I swore to 
chastise." 

" No insult was meant, but even had it been so, 
it might be passed over now." 

'* No insult ! I have killed a man for less than 
'your friend said to me ! " 

" Please remember I said nothing. But that 
matters little. It is on behalf of his niece, Pauline, 
that I wish to see Dr. Ceneri." 

A look of utter astonishment spread over his 
face. "What have you to do w^ith his niece ?" he 
asked roughly. 

"That is his business and mine. Now tell me 
where I can find him." 

" What is your name ? " he asked curtly. 

" Gilbert Vaughan." -_ 

•* What are you ? " 

"An English gentleman — nothing more." 

He remained thoughtful for a few seconds. " 1 
can take you to Ceneri," he said, " but first I must 
know what you want with him, and why you men- 
tion Pauline's name ? The street is not the place 
to talk in — let us go elsewhere." 

I led him to my hotel, to a room where we could 
talk at our ease. 

"Now, Mr. Vaughan," he said, "answer my 
question, and I may see my way to h(.;lping 3'ou. 
What has Pauline March to do with the matter ?" 

" She is my wife — that is all." 

He sprang to his feet — a fierce Italian oath 



74 CALLED BACK, 

hissed from his lips. His face was white with 
rage. 

"Your w^fe ! " he shouted. " You lie — I say you 
lie ! " 

I rose, furioTis as himself, but more collected. 

•* 1 told you, sir, that I am an English gentle- 
man. Either you wili apologise foi your words 
or I v/ill kick you out of the room." 

He struggled with his passion and curbed it. 
*' I apoJogise," he said, " 1 was wrong. Does 
Ceneri know it?" he asked sharply. 

*' Certainly, he was present when we were 
married." 

His passion once more seemed upon the point 
of mastering him. '* Traditore ! " I heard him 
whisper fiercely to himself. *' htgannatore 1 " Then 
he turned to me with composed features. 

" If so I have nothing more to do save to con- 
gratulate you, Mr. Vaughan. Your fortune is indeed 
enviable. Your v/ife is beautiful, and of course good. 
You will find her a charming companion." 

I would have given much to know why the 
mention of my marriage should have sent him into 
such a storm of rage, but 1 would have given more 
to have been able to fulfil my threat of kicking 
him out. The inton,'\tion of his last words told me 
that Pauline's state of mind was well knov/n to 
him. I could scarcely keep my hands off the 
fellow ; but I was compelled to restrain my anger, 
as without his aid I could not find Ceneri. 

" Thank you, " I s;iid quietly, " now perhaps you 
will give me the information I v/ant." 

" You are not a very devoted bridegroom, Mr. 
Vaughan," said the fellow mockingly. " If Cenen 
was at your wedding, it could only have occurred 
a fev/ days ago. It must be important busiiiess 
which tears you from the side of your bride." 

" It is important business." 



CALi.£D BACK. 75 

" Then I fear it must v/ait a few days. Ceneri 
is not in Geneva But I have reason to think he 
may be here in about a week's time. I shall see 
him, and will te'.l him you are here." 

" Let me koow where to find him and I will 
call upon him. I must speak with him." 

" 1 imagine that will he as the doctor chooses. 
I can only make known your wishes to him." 

He bowed and left me. I felt that even now it 
was doubtful whether I should succeed in obtain- 
ing the interview with the mysterious doctor. It 
depended entirely whether he chose to grant it. 
He might come to Geneva and go away again 
without my being any the wiser, unless his friend 
or himself sent me soilie communication. 

I idled away a week, and then began to fear 
that Ceneri had made up his mind to keep out of 
my way. But it was not so. A letter came one 
morning. It contained a few words only. ** You 
wish to see me. A carriage will call for you at 
eleven o'clock. M.C." 

At eleven o'clock an ordinary hired conveyance 
drove up to the hotel. The driver enquired for 
Mr. Vaughan. I stepped in without a word, and 
was driven to a small house outside the town. 
Upon being shown into a room I found the doctor 
seated at a table covered with newspapers and 
letters. He rose, and shaking my hand begged 
me to be seated. 

" You have come to Geneva to see me, I hear, 
Mr. Vaughan ?" 

'• Yes, I wished to ask you some questions 
respecting my wife." 

•• I will answer all I can — but there are many I 
shall doubtless refuse to reply to. You remember 
v.y stipulation ?" 

" Yes, but why did you not make me aware oi 
my wife's peculiar naental state ? " 



76 CALLED BACK. 

" You had seen her yourself several times. Her 
state was the same as when she first proved so 
attractive to you. I am sorry you should think 
yourself deceived." 

" Why not have told me everything ? Then I 
could have blamed no one." 

" I had so many reasons, Mr. Vaughan. Pauline 
was a great responsibility on my shoulders. A 
great expense, for I am a poor man. And, after 
all, is the matter so very bad ? She is beautiful, 
good and amiable. She will make you a loving 
wife." 

" You wished to get rid of her in fact." 

" Scarcely that altogether. There are circum- 
stances — I cannot explain them — which made me 
glad to marry her to an Englishman of good 
position." 

" Without thinking what that man's feelings 
might be on finding the woman he loved little 
better than a child." 

I felt indignant, and showed my feeling very 
plainly. Ceneri took little notice of my warmth. 
He remained perfectly calm. 

" There is another point to be considered. 
Pauline's case is, in my opinion, far from being 
hopeless. Indeed, I have always looked upon 
marriage as greatly adding to the chance of her re- 
covery. If her mind to a certain extent is wanting, 
I beheve that, little by little, it may be built up 
again. Or it may return as suddenly as it left her." 

My heart leapt at his words of hope. Cruelly 
as I felt I had been treated, tool that I had been 
made for this man's selfish ends, I was willing to 
accept the situation cheerfully if I had any hope 
held out to me. 

'• Will you give me all the particulars of my 
poor wife's state ? I conclude she has not been 
always like this." 



CALLED BACK. 77 

"Certainly not. Her case is most peculiar. 
Some years ago she received a great shock — sus- 
tained a sudden loss. The effect was to entirely 
blot out- the past from her mind. She rose from 
her bed after some weeks' illness with her memory 
a complete blank. Places were forgotten — friends 
were strangers to her. Her mind might, as you 
say, have been the mind of a child. But a child's 
mind grows, and, if treated properly, so will hers." 

" What was the cause of her illness — what 
shock ? " 

" That is one of the questions I cannot answer." 

" But I have a right to know." 

"You have a right to ask, and I have a right to 
refuse to speak." 

" Tell me of her family — her relatives." 

" She has none, I believe, save myself." 

I asked other questions, but could get no 
answers worth recording. I should return to 
England not much wiser than I left it. But there 
was one question to which I insisted on having a 
a clear reply. 

" What has that friend of yours — that English- 
speaking Italian to do with Pauline ? ' 

Ceneri shrugged his shoulders and smiled. 

" Macari ? I am glad to be able to answer some- 
thing fully, Mr. Vaughan. For a year or two before 
Pauline was taken ill, Macari supposed himself to 
be in love with her. He is now furious with me for 
allowing her to get married. He declares he was 
only awaiting her recovery to try his own luck." 

" Why should he not have served your purpose 
as well as I seem to have? " 

Ceneri looked at me sharply. " Do you regret, 
Mr. Vaughan ? " 

" No — not if there is a chance, even a slight 
chance. But I tell you, Dr. Ceneri, you have 
deceived and cajoled me shamefully." 



75 CALLED BACK. 

I rose to take my leave. Then Ceneri spoke 
with more feeling than he had as yet displayed. 

♦' Mr, Vaughan, do not judge me too harshly. 
I have wronged you, I admit. There are things 
you know nothing of. I must tell you more than 
I intended. The temptation to place Pauline in a 
position of wealth and comfort was irresistible. 
I am her debtor for a vast amount. At one time 
her fortune was about fifty thousand pounds. The 
whole of that I spent " 

" And dare to boast of it ! " I said, bitterly. 
He waved his hand with dignity. 

"Yes. I dare to speak of it. I spent it all 
for freedom — for Italy. It was in my keeping as 
trustee. I, who would have robbed my own father, 
my own son, should I hesitate to take her money 
for such an end ? Every farthing went to the 
great cause, and was well spent." 

" It was the act of a criminal to rob an orphan." 

*' Call it what you like. Money had to be found. 
Why should I not sacrifice my honour for my 
country as freely as I would have sacrificed my 
life ? " 

" It is no use discussing it — the matter is ended." 

'• Yes, but I tell you to show you why I wished 
to gain Pauline a home. Moreover, Mr. Vaughan " 
— here his voice dropped to a whisp*;r — '• I was 
anxious to provide that home at once. I am bound 
on a journey — a journey of which I cannot see the 
end, much less the returning. I doubt whether I 
should have decided to see j^ou had it not been for 
this. But the chances are we shall never meet again." 

♦* You mean" you are engaged in some plot or 
conspiracy ? " 

" I mean what I have said — no more, no less. 
I will now bid you adieu." 

Angry as I was with the man, I could not refuse 
the bsmd be stretched out to me. 



CALLED BACK. 75 

"Farewell," he said; "it may be that in some 
year or two I shall write to you and ask you if mj 
predictions as to Pauline's recovery have been ful- 
filled ; but do not trouble to seek me or to enquire 
for me if I am silent." 

So we parted. The carriage was waiting to take 
me back to the hotel. On my way thither I passed 
the man whom Ceneri had called Macari. He 
signalled to the driver to stop, and then entering 
the carriage sat beside me. 

" You have seen the doctor, Mr. Vaughan ? " he 
asked. 

" Yes. I have just come from him." 
" And have learnt all you wish to know, I hope ? " 
'• A great many of my questions have been 
answered." 

" But not all. Ceneri would not answer all." 
He laughed, and his laugh was cynical and 
mocking. I kept silence. 

" Had you questioned me," he continued, '* I 
might have told you more than Ceneri." 

" I came to ask Dr. Ceneri for all the informa- 
tion he could give me respecting my wife's mental 
state, of which I believe you are aware. If you 
can say anything that may be of use to me, I will 
beg you to speak." 

"You asked him what caused it?" 
•' 1 did. He told me a shock." 
" You asked him what shock. That he d-d not 
tell you ? " 

" He had his reasons for declining, I suppose."' 
"Yes. Excellent reasons — family reasons." 
" If you can enlighten me, kindly do so." 
" Not here, Mr. Vaughan. The doctor and I 
are friends. You might tly back and assault him, 
and 1 should get blamed. You are going back to 
England, I suppose?" 
" Ye». I start at once." 



60 CALLED BACK. 

" Give me your address, and perhaps I will 
write ; or better still, if I feel inclined to be com- 
municative, I will call on you when I am next in 
London, and pay my respects to Mrs. Vaughan at 
the same time." 

So eager was I to get at the bottom of the affair 
that I gave him my card. He then stopped the 
carriage, and stepped out. He raised his hat, and 
there was a malicious triumph in his eyes as they 
met mine. 

•* Good bye, Mr. Vaughan. Perhaps after all 
you are to be congratulated upon being married to 
a woman whose past it is impossible to rake up." 

With this parting shaft — a shaft which struck 
deep and rankled — he left me. It was well he did 
so, before I caught him by the throat and strove 
to force him to explain his last words. 

Longing to see my poor wife again, I went back 
to England with all speed. 



CHAPTER Vn. 

CLAIMING RELATIONSHIP 

Yes, she was glad to see me back 1 In her un- 
certain clouded way she welcomed me. My great 
fear, that in the short time she would have entirely 
forgotten me, was groundless. She knew me and 
welcomed me. My poor PauHne ! If I could but 
find the way to bring those truant senses back 
once more ! 

For months and months nothing of importance 
occurred. If my love's mind was, as Ceneri pre- 
dicted, to be gradually restored, the process was a 
tedious one. At times I thought her better — at times 
worse. The fact is there was little or no change 
in her condition. Hour after hour she sits in her 



CALLED BACK. 8l 

apathy and listlessness ; speaking only when spoken 
to ; but wiUing to come with me anywhere ; do 
anything I suggest, whenever, alas ! I express my 
wish in words she can comprehend. Poor Pauline ! 

The greatest doctors in England have seen her. 
Each says the same thing. She may recover ; 
but each tells me the recovery would be made 
more possible if the exact circumstances which 
brought about the calamity v/ere known. These 
I doubt if we shall ever learn. 

For Ceneri has made no sign, nor has Macari 
sent his promised information. The latter, after 
his last malicious words, I dread more than I wish 
for. Teresa, who might 'have thrown some light 
on the subject, has disappeared. I blame myself 
for not having asked the doctor where she was to 
be found ; but doubtless he would have declined to 
tell me. So the days go on. All I can do is, with 
Priscilla's assistance, to ensure that my poor girl 
is made as happy as can be, and hope that time 
and care may at length restore her. 

We are still at Walpole street. My intention 
had been to buy a house and furnish it. But why? 
Pauline could not look after it — would not be 
interested in it — it would not be home. So we stay 
on at my old lodgings, and I live almost the life of 
a hermit. 

1 care to sec no friends. I am, indeed, blamed 
for forsaking all my old acquaintances. Some who 
have seen Pauline attribute my lack of hospitality 
to jealousy ; some to other causes ; but, as yet, I 
believe no one knows the truth. 

There are times when I feel I cannot bear my 
grief — times when 1 wish that Keuyon had never 
led me inside that church at Turin: but there are 
other times when I feel that, in spite of all, my 
love for my wife, hopeless as it is, has made me a 
better and even a happier man.- I can sit for hours 



52 CALLSD BACK. 

looking at her lovely face, even as I could looking 
at a picture or a statue. I try to imagine that 
face lit up with bright intelligence, as once it must 
have been I long to know what can have drawn 
that dark curtain over lier mind, and I pray that 
one day it may fall aside, and I may see her eyes 
responsive to my own. If I felt sure this would 
ever be I would wait without a murmur, if needs 
be, till our hair has grown grey. 

I have this poor consolation — whatever the effect 
of our marriage may have been upon my life, it has, 
at least, not made my wife's lot a sadder one. Her 
days I am sure must be brighter than those when 
she was under the supervision ot that terrible old 
Italian v/oman. Priscilla loves her and pets her 
like a child, whilst I — well, I do everything I can 
which I fancy may give her such pleasure as she is 
capable of feeling. Sometimes, not always, she 
seems to appreciate my efforts, and once or twice 
she has taken my hand and raised it to her hps as 
if in gratitude. She is beginning to love me as a 
child may love its father, as some weak helpless 
creature may love its protector. This is a poor 
recompense, but I am thankful even for this. ^_ 

So, in our quiet household, the days pass by and 
the months glide away until the winter is over, and 
the laburnums and lilacs in the httle plots in front 
of houses in the suburbs are in bud. 

It is fortunate that 1 am fond of books. With- 
out that taste life would indeed be colourless. I 
have not the heart to leave Pauline alone and seek 
society on my own account. I spend many hours 
every 'day reading and studying, whilst my wife 
sits in the same i-oom, silent, unless I address a 
remark to her. 

It is a matter of great grief to me that I am 
almost entirely debarred from hearing the soiind of 
musie I soon discovered that its effect upon 



CALLED BACK. 83 

Pauline was prejudicial. The notes which soothed 
me, in some way seemed to irritate her and make 
her uneasy. So, unless she is out somewhere with 
old Priscilla, and 1 am left alone, the piano is un- 
opened ; the music books lie unused. Only those 
who love music as I love it can understand how 
great a deprivation this is to me. 

One morning as I sat alone I was told that a 
gentleman wished to see me. He gave the servant 
no name, but instructed her to say that he was 
from Geneva. I knew it must be Macari. My 
first impulse was to send back word that I would 
not see him. Again and again, since our last 
meeting, his words had com.e back to me — those 
words which hinted at something in Pauline's past 
which her uncle had an object in concealing. But 
each time I thought of them I decided they were 
only the malicious insinuation of a disappointed 
man, who having failed to win the woman he loved, 
wished to make his favoured rival suspicious and 
unhappy. I feared nothing he could say against 
my wife, but disliking the man, I hesitated before 
giving instructions for his admittance. 

Yet Macari was the only link between Pauline 
and her past ; Ceneri, I felt sure, I should never 
see again ; this man was the only one remaining 
from whom it was possible to learn anything 
respecting my wife. The only person whose appear- 
ance could, by any chance, stimulate that torpid 
memory, and, perhaps, influence the state of her 
mind by suggesting, no matter how dimly, scenes 
and events in which he must have played a part. 
So thinking, ' decided that the man should be 
admitted, and, moreover, that he should be brought 
face to face with Pauline. If he wished to do so he 
might speak to her of old days, even old passion — 
anything that might aid her to pick up and retrace 
those dropt threads of mnmorv'. 



84 CALLED BACK. 

He entered my room and greeted me with what 
I knew to be assumed cordiality. I felt, in spite 
of the hearty grasp he gave my hand, that he 
meant his visit to bode no good to me. What did 
I care why he came ? I wanted him for a pur- 
pose. With the end in view, what mattered the 
tool, if I could keep it from turning in my hand 
and wounding me — and this was to be seen. 

I met him with a greeting almost as cordial 
as his own : I begged him to be seated, then 
rang for wine and cigars. 

*• You see I have kept my promise, Mr. Vaughan," 
he said, with a smile. 

" Yes. I trusted you would do so. Have you 
been long in England ? " 

-^'-Only a couple of days." 

^ How long do you stay ? " 

'' Until I am called abroad again. Things have 
gone wrong with us there. 1 must wait until the 
atmosphere has quieted down," 

I looked at him enquiringly. 

*' I fancied you knew my trade," he said. 

" I suppose you are a conspirator — I don't usq 
the word offensively ; it is the onlv one I can think 
of." 

♦'^Yes. Conspirator — regenerator — apostle of 
freedom, whatever you like." 

"But your country has been free for some years.** 

" Other countries are not free. I work for them. 
Our poor friend Ceneri did the same, but his last 
day's work is done." 

'• Is he dead ? " I asked, startled. 

" Dead to all of us. I cannot give you particu- 
lars ; but a few weeks after you left Geneva he was 
arrested in St. Petersburgh. He lay in prison for 
months awaiting his trial. It has come off, I hear." 

" Well, what has happened to him ? " 

'*What always happens — our poor friend is at 



CALLED BACK. 85 

this moment on his way to Siberia, condemned ta 
twenty years' hard labour at the mines." 

Although I bore no particular love towards 
Ceneri, I shuddered as I heard his fate. 

" And you escaped ? " 1 said. 

*' Naturally, or I should not be here smoking your 
very good cigars and sipping your capital claret." 

I was disgusted at the indifference with which 
he spoke of his friend's misfortune. If it seemed 
horrible to me to think of the man working in the 
Siberian mines, wliat should it have seemed to his 
fellow-conspirator ? 

'* Now, Mr. Vaughan," said the latter, " with 
your permission I will enter on business matters 
with j'ou. I am afraid I shall surprise you." 

" Let me hear what you have to say." 

" First of all I must ask .you wh^ Ceneri told 
you about myself? " 

" He told me your naire.*' 

" Nothing of my family ? He did not tell you 
my true name any more than he told you his own ? 
He did not tell you it was March, and that Pauline 
and I are brother and sister ? " 

I was astonished at this ajinouncement. In the 
face of the doctor's assertion that tliis man had 
been in love with Pauline, I did not for a moment 
believe it : but thinking it better to hear his tale 
out, I simply replied, '* He did not." 

" Very well — then I will tell you my history as 
briefly as I can, I am known by many names 
abroad, but my right name is Anthony March. 
My father and Pauline's married Dr. Ceneri's 
sister. He died young, and left the whole of his 
large property to his wife absolutely. .She died 
some time afterwards, and in turn left everything 
in my uncle's hands as sole trustee for my sister 
and myself. You know what became of the money, 
Mr. Vauofhan ? " 



86 CALLED BACK. 

" Dr. Ceneri told me," I said, impressed in spite 
of myself by the correct way in which he mar- 
shalled his facts. 

" Yes, it was spent for Italy. It paid for the 
keep of many a red-shirt, armed many a true 
Italian. All our fortune was spent by the trustee. 
I have never blamed him. When I knew where 
it had gone I freely forgave him." 

•' Let us say no more about it, then." 

" I don't quite look upon it in that light. Victor 
Emmanuel's government is now firmly established. 
Italy is f.ee and will grow richer every year. Now, 
Mr. Vaughan, my idea is this. I believe, if the 
facts of the case were laid before the king, some- 
thing might be done. I believe, if I, and you on 
behalf of your wife, were to make it known that 
Ceneri's appropriation of our fortunes for patriotic 
purposes had left us penniless, a large portion of 
the money, if not all, would be freely returned to 
us. You must have friends in England who would 
assist you in gaining the ear of King Victor. I 
have friends in Italy. Garibaldi, for instance, 
would vouch for the amount paid into his hands 
by Dr. Ceneri. 

His tale was plausible, and, after all, his scheme 
was not altogether visionary. 

I was beginnmg to think he might really be my 
wife's brother, and that Ceneri had, for some pur- 
pose of his own, concealed the relationship. 

" But I have plenty of money," I said. 

" But I have not," he replied with a frank laugh. 
■' I think you ought for the sake of your wife to 
join me in the matter." 

" I must take time to consider it." 

*' Certainly — I am in no hurry. I vrll in the 
meantime get my papers and petition in order, 
Vnd now may I see my sister ? " 

"She will be in veity shortly if you will wait." 



CALLED BACK. 67 

" Is she better, Mr. Vaughan ? " I «hook my 
head sadly. 

" Poor girl ! tlieii I fear she will not recognis« 
me. We have spent very few days together since 
we were children. I am, of course, much her 
senior; and from the age of eighteen have been 
plotting and fighting. Domestic ties are forgotten 
under such circumstances." 

I was still far from putting any faith in the man ; 
besides, there were his words on a former occasion 
to be accounted for. 

•• Mr. Macari," I said. 

•' Excuse me — March is my name." 

•♦Then, Mr. March, I must ask you now to tell 
me the particulars of the shock which deprived 
my wife of her full reason." 

His face grew grave. " I cannot now. Some 
day I will do so." 

" You will then, at least, explain your words 
when we parted at Geneva? " 

" I will ask pardon for them and aTj^ologise, us I 
know I spoke hastily and thoughtlessly — but having 
forgotten, I am., of course, unable to explain them." 

I said nothing, feeling uncertain whether he was 
pla3'ing a deep game with me or not. 

" I know," he continued, "that I was furious at 
hearing of Pauline's marriage. In her state of 
health Ceneri should never have allowed it — and 
then, Mr. Vaughan, I had set my heart upon her 
marrying an Italian. Had she recovered, my dream 
was that her beauty would win her a husband of 
the highest rank." 

Any reply I should have made was prevented by 
the entrance of Pauline. I was intensely anxious 
to see what effect the appearance of her so-called 
brother would have upon her. 

Macari ruse and stepped towards her. " Pauline," 
he said, " do you remember me ? " 



88 CALLED BACK. 

She looked at him with eyes full of curious won- 
der, but shook her head as one in doubt. He took 
her hand. I noticed that she seemed to shrink 
from him instinctively. 

" Poor, poor girl ! " he said. " This is worse 
than I expected, Mr. Vaughan. Pauline, it is long 
since we have met, but you cannot have forgotten 
me!" 

Her large troubled eyes were riveted on his 
face ; but she made no sign of recognition. 

"Try and think who it is, Pauline," I said. 

She passed her hand across her forehead, then 
once more shook her head. " Non me vicordo," she 
murmured ; then, as if the mental effort had ex- 
hausted her, sank, with a weary sigh, upon a chair. 

I was delighted to hear her speak in Italian. It 
was a tongue she seldom used unless compelled to 
do so. That she employed it now showed me she 
must, in some dim way, connect the visitor with 
Italy. It was to me a new gleam of hope. 

There was another thing I noticed. I have said 
how seldom it was that Pauline raised her eyes to 
anyone's face ; but to-day, during the whole time 
Macari was in the room, she never looked away 
from him. He sat near her, and after a few more 
words to her, addressed his remarks exclusively to 
me. AH the while I could see my wife watching 
him with an eager, troubled look ; several times, 
indeed, I almost persuaded myself that there was 
an expression of fear in her eyes. Let them express 
fear, hate, trouble, even love, so long as I could see 
the dawn of returning reason in them ! I began to 
think that if Pauline was to be restored, it would 
be through my visitor. 

So when- he took his leave I pressed him, with 
no assumed manner, to call again very soon — to- 
morrow if possible. He readily promised to do 
so, and we parted for the day. 



CALLKD BACK Bg 

I can only hope he was as satisfied with the 
result of our interview as 1 was. 

After his departure Pauline fell into a restless 
state. Several times I saw her pressing her hand 
to her forehead. She seemed unable to sit still. 
Now and again she went to the window and looked 
up and down the street. I paid no attention to 
her actions, although once or twice I saw her turn 
her eyes towards me with a piteous, imploring 
glance. I believed that something — some old 
memory in connection with Macari — was striving 
to force itself to her clouded brain, and I looked 
forward with impatience to to-morrow, when he 
would pay us another visit. The man had some- 
thing to get out of me, so I felt certain I should 
see him again. 

He came the next day, and the next, and many 
other days. It was clear he was determined to 
ingratiate me, if possible. He did all he could to 
make himself agreeable, and I must say he was, 
under the present circumstances, very good com- 
pany. He knew, or professed to know, all the ins 
and outs of every plot or political event of the last 
ten years, and was full of original anecdotes and 
stirrmg experiences. He had fought under Gari- 
baldi through the whole of the Italian campaign. 
He had known the interior of prisons, and some 
of his escapes from death had been marvellous. 
I had no reason to doubt the truth of his tales, 
although I mistrusted the man himself. Let his 
smile be as pleasant as he could make it — let his 
laugh ring natural'y, — I co.uld not forget the ex- 
pression I had seen on that face, or his manner 
and words on former occasions. 

1 took care that Pauline should always b" with 
us. It was the only wish of mine the poor child 
had ever shown even a mute disinclination to 
comply with. She nevor spoke in Macari's pre- 



90 OALLfiD 8AC&. 

sence, but her eyes were scarcely ever turned from 
him. He seemed to have a kind of fascination 
for her^ When he entered th^ room 1 could hear 
her sighj and when he left it she breathed a breath 
of relief; and every day she grew more restless, 
uneasy and, I knew, unhappy. My heart smote 
me as I guessed I was causing her pain ; but, at 
all cost, I determined to persevere, I felt that the 
crisis of her life was fast drawing near. 

One evening, after dinner, as Macari and I sat 
over our claret, and Pauline, with her troubled 
eyes fixed, as usual, on my guest, was reclining on 
the sofa a little way oJQf, he began to relate some 
of his military adventures. How once, when in 
imminent peril — his right arm broken and useless 
at his side, his left arm not strong enough to wield 
the rifle with the bayonet fixed — he had taken the 
bayonet off, and holding it in his left hand, had 
driven it through the heart of an antagonist. As 
he described the deed, he suited the gesture to the 
word, and seizing a knife which lay on the table, 
dealt a downwards blow through the air at an 
imaginary white-coated Austrian. 

I heard a deep sigh behind me, and, turning, I 
saw Pauline lying with her eyes closed, and appa- 
rently in a dead faint. I ran to her, raised her up, 
and carrying her to her room, laid her on her bed. 
It was now about nine o'clock. Priscilla happened 
to be out, so I ran back to the dining-room and 
bade Macari a hasty good-night. 

•' I hope there is not much the matter." he said. 

**No; only a fainting fit. Your fierce gesture 
must have frightened her." 

Then I returned to'my wife's bedside, and began 
the vMXisi course of restoratives. Yet without 
oUCce88. " White as a statue she lay there, her soft 
breathing and the faint throb of her pulse only 
telling that she was alive. She lay there without 



\ 

CALLED BACK. QX 

sense or motion, whilst I chafed her hands, bathed 
her brow, and endeavoured to recall her to life. 
Even whilst doing so my heart was beating wildly. 
I felt that the moment had conse ; that something 
had brought back the past to her, and that the 
fierce rush with which it came had overpowered 
her. I could scarcely dare to put my wild belief 
into words, but it was that when Pauline again 
opened her eyes they would shine with light which 
I had never known in them — the light of perfectly 
restored intelligence. A wild, mad idea, but one 
I had the fullest faith in. 

So it was that I did not send for a doctor : that 
after a while I gave up my own attempts to awaken 
consciousness ; that I resolved to let her lie in that 
calm, senseless state until she awoke of her own 
accord. I took her wrist between my fingers that 
I might feel every beat of her pulse. I laid my 
cheek against hers that I might catch the sound of 
every breath — and thus I waited until PauHne 
should awake, and, as I fondly believed, awake in 
her right mind. 

She rem.ained in this state for at least an hour. 
So long that at last I began to get frightened, and 
think I must, after all, send for medical aid. 
Just as I was forming the resolution to do so, I 
noticed the beats of her pulse grow stronger and 
more rapid ; I felt her breath drawn deeper ; I 
saw a look of returning life steal over her face; 
and, in breathless impatience, I waited. 

And then Pauline — my wife — came back to life 
— she rose in the bed and turned her face to mine ; 
and in her eyes I saw what, by the mercy of God, 
I shall never again see there I 



99 CALLED BACK. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

CALLED BACK. 

I WRITE this chapter with great reluctance. If I 
could make my tale connected and complete with- 
out it, I should prefer to say nothing about the 
events it records. If some of my experiences have 
been strange ones, all save these can be explained ; 
but these never will, never can be explained to my 
satisfaction. 

Pauline awoke, and, as I saw her eyes, I shud- 
dered as if a freezing wind had passed over me. 
It was not madness I saw in them, neither was it 
sense. They were dilated to the utmost extent ; 
they were fixed and immovable, yet I knew they 
saw absolutely nothing ; that their nerves con- 
veyed no impression to the brain. All my wild 
hopes that reason would return at the expiration 
of her fainting fit, were at an end. It was clear 
that she had passed into a state far more pitiable 
than her former one. 

I spoke to her ; called her by name ; but she 
took no notice of my words. She seemed to be 
unaware of my presence. She looked ever, with 
strange fixed eyes, in one direction. 

Suddenly she rose, and, before I could interpose 
to prevent her, passed out of the room. I followed 
her. She went swiftly down the stairs, and I saw 
she was making for the front door. Her hand was 
on the latch when I came up to her and again 
called her by name ; entreating, even commanding 
her to return, No sound of my voice seemed to 
reach her ears. In her critical state, for so I felt 
it to be, I shrank from restraining her by force, 
thinking it would be better to leave her free to go 
as she listed ; of course accompanying her to 
guard her against evil. 



CALLED BACK. 93 

I caught up my hat and a large cloak, both of 
which were hanging in the hall ; the latter I 
wrapped around her as she walked, and managed 
to draw the hood over her head. She made no 
resistance to this, but she let me do it without a 
word to show that she noticed the action. Then, 
with me at her side, she walked straight on. 

She went at a swift but uniform pace, as one 
who had a certain destination in view. She turned 
her eyes neither to the left nor the right — neither 
up nor down. Not once during that walk did I 
see them move, not once did I see an eyelid quiver. 
Although my sleeve was touching hers, I am certain 
she had no thought or knowledge of my presence. 

I made no further attempt to check her progress. 
She was not wandering about in an aimless manner. 
Something, I knew not what, was guiding or im- 
pelling her steps to some set purpose. Something 
in her disordered brain was urging her to reach 
some spot as quickly as possible. I dreaded the 
consequences of restraining her from so doing. 
Even if it was but an exaggerated case of sleep 
walking, it would be unwise to wake her. Far 
better to follow her until the fit ended. 

She passed out of Walpole street, and, without 
a moment's hesitation, turned at right angles and 
went along the straight broad road. Along this 
road for more than half a mile she led me, then, 
turning sharply round, walked half way through 
another street ; then she stopped before a house. 

An ordinary three -story house of the usual 
London type. A house differing very little from 
my own and thousands of others, except that, by 
the light of the street lamp, I could see it looked 
ill-cared for and neglected. The window panes 
were dusty, and m one of them was a bill stating 
that this desirable residence was to let, f irnished. 

I marvelled as to whai strange freak of mind 



^4 CALLED BACK. 

could have led Pauline to this untenanted hou?%. 
Had anyone she had known in former days lived 
here ? If so, it was, perhaps, a hopeful sign that 
some awakened memory had induced her to direct 
her unwitting steps to a place associated with her 
earlier days. Very anxious, and even much ex- 
cited, I waited to see what course she wOuld now 
take. 

She went straight up to the door and laid her 
hand upon it, as though she expected it would 
yield to her touch. Then, for the first time, she 
appeared to hesitate and grow troubled. 

"Pauline, dearest," I said, "let us go back now. 
It is dark, and too late to go there to-night. To- 
morrow, if you like, we will come again." 

She answered not. She stood before that door 
with her hand pressing against it. I took her arm, 
and tried gently to lead her away. She resisted 
with a passive strength I should not have believed 
she possessed. Whatever was the dimly con- 
ceived object in my poor wife's brain, it was plain 
to me it could only be attained by passing through 
that door. 

I was quite willing to humour her. Having 
come so far, I feared to retreat. To cross her 
wishes in the present state of things I felt might 
be fatal. But hov/ could we gain entrance ? 

There was no gleam of light upstairs or down- 
stairs. As you looked at the house you knew in- 
tuitively it was uninhabited. The agent whose 
name appeared on the bill carried on business a 
mile away, and, even if I had ventured to leave 
Pauline and go in search of him, at this time of 
night my expedition would .^e fruitless. 

As I cast around, wondering what was the best 
thing to do— ^vhether to fetch a cab and carry my 
poor girl yito it, or whether to let her wait here 
until she recognised the impossibility of entering 



CALLED BACK. 95 

the house, and, at last grow'iig weary, choose to 
return home of her own accord — as I debated these 
alternatives a sudden thought struck me. Once 
before my latchkey had opened a strange door, it 
was withm the bounds of possibility it might do 
so again. I knew that uninhabited houses are 
often, from carelessness or for convenience, left 
with doors only latched. It was an absurd idea, 
but, after all, there was no harm in trying. I drew 
out my key, a duplicate of that used on another 
occasion. I placed it in the keyhole without a hope 
of success, and as I felt the lock turn and saw the 
door yield, a thrill of something like horror ran 
through me, for now that it had come to pass I 
knew this thing could be no mere coincidence. 

As the door opened, Pauline, without a word, 
without a gesture of surprise, without anj-thing 
that showed she was more aware of my presence 
than before, passed me and entered first. I followed 
her, and, closing the door behind me, found myself 
in perfect darkness. I heard her light quick step 
in front of me ; I heard her ascending the stairs ; 
I heard a door open, and then, and only then, I 
summoned up presence of mind enough to force 
my limbs to bear me in pursuit — and my blood 
seemed to be iced water, my flesh was creeping, 
my hair was bristling up, as, still in darkness, I 
crossed the hall and found the staircase without 
difficulty. 

Why should I not find it, dark, pitch dark aS it 
was ? I knew the road to it well ! Once before I 
had reached it in darkness, and many times be- 
sides, in dreams, had I crossed that space ! Like 
a sudden revelation the truth came to me. It 
came to me as the key turned in the lock. I was 
in that very house into which I had strayed three 
years ago. I was crossing the very hall, ascending 
the same stairs, and should stand in the identicsJ 



96 CALLED BACK. 

room which had been the scene of that terrible un- 
expiated crime. I should see with restored sight 
the spot where, blind and helpless, I had nearlj 
fallen a victim to my rashness. But Pauline^ 
what brought her here ? 

Yes, as I expected ! as, in fact, I felt certain 1 
The stairs the same, and the lintel of the door in 
the exact place it should be. I might be reacting 
the events of that fearful night, complete even to 
the darkness. For a moment I wondered whether 
the last three years were not the dream ; whether 
1 was not blind now ; whether there was such a 
being as my wife ? But I threw the fancy aside. 

Where was Paiiline ? Recalled to myself, I 
realised the necessity of light. Drawing my 
match-box from my pocket I struck a vesta, and 
b}' its light entered the room which once before I 
had entered with little hope of ever leaving. 

My first thought, my first glance, was for 
Pauline. She was there, standing erect in the 
apartment, with both hands pressed to her brow. 
The expression of her face and eyes was little 
changed ; it was easy to see she comprehended 
nothing as yet. But I felt that something was 
struggling within her, and I dreaded the moment 
when it should take coherence and form. I 
dreaded it for her and I dreaded it for myself. 
What awful passages would it reveal to me ! 

The wax light burnt down to my fingers, and I 
v/as compelled to drop it. I struck another, then 
looked about for some means of making the illu- 
mination sustained. To my great joy I found a 
half-burnt candle in a candlestick on the mantel- 
piece. I blew the thick dust out of the cup 
formed by the melted wax at the bottom of the 
wick, and after a little spluttering and resistance, 
managed to induce it to remain lighted. 

Pauline stood always in the same attitude, but / 



CALLED BACK. 97 

fancied her breath was quickening. Her fingers 
were playing convulsively round her temples, 
fidgeting and pushing her thick hair back, striving, 
it seemed to me, to conjure thought. to return to 
that empty shrine I could do nothing but wait; 
and whilst I waited I glanced around me. - 

We were in a good-sized room, substantially 
but not fashionably furnished ; the style altogether 
was that of an ordinary lodging house. It was 
clear it had not been occupied for some time, as 
dust lay thick on every article. I could throw my 
mind back and recall the very corner of the room 
in which I was stationed whilst the assassins were 
so busily engaged. I could mark the spot where 
I fell upon the yet quivering body, and I shuddced 
as 1 could not resist peering on the floor for traces 
of the crmie. But if the carpet was the same one, 
it was of a dark red hue and kept its secret well. 
At one end of the room were folding doors — it 
must have been from behind these I heard those 
haunting sounds of distress. I threw them open, 
and, holding my candle on high, looked in. The 
room was of much the same kind as the other one, 
but, as I fully expected, it contained a piano — the 
very piano, perhaps, whose notes had merged into 
that cry of horror. 

What possessed me 1 What impulse urged me ! 
I shall never know. I laid down the candle ; I 
entered the back room ; I lifted the dust-covered 
lid of the piano and I struck a few notes. Doubt- 
less it was the tragical associations of the scene 
which made me, without thinking why or where- 
fore, blend together the notes which commenced 
that great song which I had heard as I lingered 
outside the door, listening to the sweet voice 
singing, and wondering whose voice it was. As I 
Struck those notes I looked through the folding 
door at the motionless statue-like figure of Pauline. 



g8 CALLED BACK. 

A nervous trembling seemed to pass over her 
frame. She turned and came towards me, and 
there was a look in her face which made me move 
aside from the piano, and wonder and fear what 
was to take place. 

The cloak I had thrown aroimd her had fallen 
from her shoulders. She seated herself on the 
music bench, and striking the keys with a master 
hand played brilliantly and faultlessly the prelude 
to the song of v/hich I had struck a few vagrant 
notes. 

I was thunderstruck. Never till now had she 
shown the slightest taste for music — as I have said, 
it appeared rather to annoy and irritate her. Now 
she was bringing out sounds Avhich it seemed absurd 
to expect from that neglected and untuned piano. 

But after the first few bars my astonishment 
ceased. As well as if I had been told, I knew 
what would happen — or part of it. I was even 
prepared, when the moment came for the voice to 
join the music, to hear Pauline sing as faultlessly 
as she was playing, yet to sing in the same subdued 
manner as on that fatal night. So fully prepared I 
v/as, that with breathless emotion I waited until 
the song came to the very note at which it finished 
when once before I listened to it. ,So fully prepared, 
that when she started wildly to her feet and uttered 
once more that cry of horror, my arms were round 
her in a moment, and I bore her to a sofa close by. 

To her, as well as to me, all the occurrences of 
that dreadful night were being reproduced. The 
past had come back to Pauline — come back at the 
moment it left her. 

What the reflux might do eventually — whether 
it would be a blessing or a curse — I had no time to 
consider. All my cares were needed by Pauline. 
My task was terrible ! I had to hold her down by 
main force, to endeavour in every possible way to 



CALLED BACK. 99 

soothe her and prevent her cries, which rang so 
loudly that I feared the neighbours would be 
alarmed. And all the while she struggled with 
nie, strove to repulse me and regain her feet, as 
certainly as if I could read her thoughts I knew 
that whatever had happened formerly was once 
more before her eyes. Once more she was being 
held down by a strong hand, most likely on the 
same couch, and once more her struggles were 
gradually becoming feebler, and her cries growing 
fainter. It needed only for the latter to sink at 
last into a repetition of that dismal moan to make 
the picture, so far as she was concerned, complete. 
The only difference was that the hands now laid 
upon her were loving ones. 

All things up to the present situation, and all 
that I narrate after the termination of this chapter, 
I expect to be believed. I do not say that such 
events and coincidences are of every day occur- 
rence. Had they been so, I should have no object 
in writing this tale. But I do say this, all else save 
this one thing I could prove to be true, if not by 
direct by circumstantial evidence ; all else can be 
explained either simply or scientifically; but what 
follows I can only give my own word for. Call it 
what you like, dream, hallucination, overheated 
imagination — call it anything save invention — I 
shall not be annoyed. This is what happened. 

Pauline at. last lay still. Her moan had sunk 
into silence. She seemed once more to have lost 
all consciousness. My one idea now was to re- 
move her as speedily as possible from this fatal 
place. All sorts of strange thoughts and specula- 
tions were thronging my brain. All sorts of hopes 
and fears were shaking me. What would the 
explanation be, if ever I could get it ? 

My poof darling lay still and peaceful. I thought 
I would let her rest so for a few moments before 1 



100 CALLED BACK. 

carried licr out. I dreaded what waking her mighi 
mean. So 1 took her hand and lield it close in 
mine. 

The candle was on the mantel-piece behind me. 
It threw little or no hght into the front room, the 
folding doors of which were only partially open — 
the half behind the couch on which Pauline lay 
being closed. It was, therefore, impossible for me 
from my seat beside her to look into the front 
room. Indeed, as I sat there my face was turned 
from it. 

I held mj'^ wife's hand for a few seconds, and 
then a strange undefinable feeling crept over me — 
the kind of feeling sometimes experienced in a 
dream in which two persons appear, and the 
dreamer cannot De certain with which one's 
thoughts and acts he identifies himself. For a 
while I seemed to have a dual existence. Although 
p>erfectly aware that I still occupied the same seat, 
still held Pauline's hand in mine, I was also seated 
at the piano, and in some way gazed through the 
half-open doors into the other room, and that 
room was full of light ! 

Light so brilliant that in a glance I could see 
everything the apartment contained. Each article 
of furniture, the pictures on the walls, the dark 
curtains drawn over the window at the end, the 
mirror over the fire-place, the table in the centre, 
on which a large lamp was burning. I could see 
all this, and more I For round the table were 
grouped four men, and the faces of two of the 
party were well known to me ! 

That man who was facing me — leaning across 
the table on which his hands rested, whose features 
seemed full of alarmed surprise, whose eyes were 
fixed on otie object a few feet away from him — that 
man was Ceneri, the Italian doctor, Pauline's 
uncle and guardian 



CALLED BACK. lOI 

That man who was near tlie table on Ceneri's 
right hand — who stood in the attitude of one ready 
to repel a possible attack, whose face was fierce 
and full of passion, whose dark eyes were blazing— 
that man was the English-speaking ItaHan, Macari, 
or, as he now styled himself, Anthony March, 
Pauline's brother. He also was looking at the 
same object as Ceneri. 

The man in the background — a short thick-set 
man with a scar on his cheek — was a stranger to 
me. He was looking over Ceneri's shoulder in 
the same direction. 

And the object they all looked at was a young 
man, who appeared to be falling out of his chair, 
and whose hand grasped convulsively the hilt of 
a dagger, the blade of which was buried in his 
heart, buried 1 knew by a blow which had been 
struck downwards by one standing over him. 

All this I saw and realized in a second. The 
attitude of each actor, the whole scene surrounding 
was taken in by me as one takes in with a single 
glance the purport and meaning of a picture. Then 
I dropped Pauline's hand and sprang to my feet. 

Where v^as the lighted room ? Wliere were the 
figures I had seen ? VVhere was that tragic scene 
which was taking place before my eyes ? Vanished 
into thin air 1 The candle was burning dimly 
behind, me, the front room was in dusk. Pauline 
and I were the only living creatures in the place I 

It was a dream of course. Perhaps, under the 
circumstances, not an unnatural one Knowing 
what I knew already of the crime which had taken 
place here; feeling sure that in some way Pauline 
had been present when it was committed ; excited 
by what had occurred to-night — Pauline's strange 
walk, her sudden bursting into song, the very song 
I had before heard, that song with the dreadful 
ending — it is no wonder that I imagined a scene 



lOa CALLED BACK. 

like this, and taking the onl3' persons I linev/ who 
were in any way connected with my poor wife, 
brought them into the hfe-like vision, 

But given that a man may dream the same 
dream twice, perhaps three times, there is no 
record of his dreaming it as often as he willed. 
Yet this was my case. Again I took Pauline's 
hand, and again, after a few moments' waiting, 
I felt the same strange sensation and saw the 
same awful sight. Not once, not tv/ice, bui 
many tim.es did this occur, until, sceptical as I 
was, as even I am nov/ in such matters, I could 
only believe that in some mysterious way I was 
actually gazing on the very sight which had n^et 
the girl's eyes when memory, perhaps m.ercifully, 
fled from her, and reason was left impaired. 

It was only when our hands were in contact that 
the scene came before me. This fact strengthened 
my theory. I felt then — I feel now it is the true 
one. What peculiar mental or physical organiza- 
tion can have brought about such an effect I am 
unable to say. Call it cataleptic, clairvoyant, 
anything you will, but it was as I relate. 

Again and again I took Pauline's hand, and as 
I held it looked into that brilliantly lighted room. 

Like the motionless figures in a tableau vivant, 
again and again, without a change of attitude or 
expression, I saw Ceneri, Macari, and the man in 
the background looking at their victim. The 
appearance of the last named I studied verj' 
closely. Even with the agony of death on his 
face I could see he was supremely handsome. 
His must have been a face that women love 
to look upon, and even through the horror of 
the vision, a painful thought came to me as 
I wondered what might have been his relations 
with the girl who saw him suddenly struck down. 

Who had struck him ? Without a doubt Macari, 



CALLED BACK. I03 

wlio, as I said, was standing nearest to hini, in the 
attitude of one expecting an attack. His hand 
might just have quilted the dagger hilt. His 
downward stroke had driven the blade so deeply 
into the heart that death and the blow were all but 
simultaneous. This was what Pauline sav/, what 
perhaps she was seeing now, and what, by some 
strange power, she v/as able to show me as one 
shows another a picture ! 

Ever since that night I have wondered how 
I found the presence of mind to sit there and re- 
peatedly call up, by the aid of that senseless girl 
by my side, that phantasmagoria. It must have 
been the burning desire to fathom the mysteries 
of that long past night, the wish to learn exactly 
what shock had disarranged my wife's intellect, 
the indignation I felt at the cowardly murder, and 
the hope of bringing the criminals to'justice, which 
gave me strength to produce and reproduce that 
scene until I was satisfied that I knew all that 
dumb show could tell me, until my heart smote me 
for letting Pauline lie so long in her present state. 

Then I wrapped her cloak around her, raised her 
in my arms and bore her from the room, down the 
stairs to the doov. The hour was not late ; I soon, 
by the aid of a passer by, summoned a cab, and in 
a very short time reached home, and laid her, still 
insensible, upon her bed. 

Whatever strange power she had possessed of 
communicating her thoughts to me, it ceased as 
soon as we were outside that fatal house. Now 
and hereafter I could hold her hand, but no dream, 
vision or hallucination followed the act. 

This is the one thing I cannot explain — the 
mystery at which I hinted when I commenced my 
tale. I have related what happened; if mv bare 
word is insufficient to win credence, I must be ( w.i 
tent on this one point to be disbelieved. 



104 CALLED BACK 

CHAPTER IX. 

A BLACK LIE. 

Having placed the poor girl in Priscilla's motherly 
hands, 1 fetched the best doctor I could think of, 
and efforts were at once made to restore conscious- 
ness. It was long before any sign of returning 
animation showed itself, but, at last, she awoke. 
Need I say what a supreme moment that was to 
me? 

I need not give details of that return to life. 
After all it was but a half return, and brought fresh 
terrors in its train. When morning dawned it 
found Pauline raving with what I prayed was but 
the delirium of fever. 

The doctor told me her state was a most critical 
one. There was hope for her life, but no certainty 
of saving it. It was during those days of anxiety 
that I learnt how much I loved my unhappy girl. 
How grateful I should be if she were given back 
to me, even as I had always known her. 

Her wild fevered words cut me to the heart. 
Sometimes in English, sometimes in soft Italian, 
she called on some one ; spoke words of deep love 
and sorrow ; gave vent to expressions of fond en- 
dearment. These vvere succeeded by cries of grief, 
and it seemed as if shudders of fear passed over 
her. 

. For me there was no word ; no look of recog- 
nition. I, v/ho would have given worlds to hear 
my name spoken oncc, during her delirium, with 
an expression of love, was but a stranger at her 
bedside. 

Whom was it she called for and lamented ? Who 
was the man she and I had seen slain ? I soon 
learnt — and if my informant «poke the truth, he 



CALLED BACK. IO5 

had, in so doing, dealt me a blow from which I 
should never nilly. 

It was Macari who struck it. He called on me 
the day after Pauline and I had visited that hou^e. 
I would not see him then. My plans were not 
formed. For the time I could think of nothing 
save my wife's danger. But two days afterwards, 
when he again called, I gave orders for him to be 
admitted. 

I shuddered as I took the hand I dared not yet 
refuse him, although in my own mind I was certain 
that a murderer's fingers were clasped round my 
own. Perhaps the very fingers which had once 
closed on my throat. Yet, with all I knew, I 
doubted whether I could bring him to justice. 

Unless Pauline recovered, the evidence I could 
bring would be of no weight. Even the victim's 
name was unknown to me. Before the accusation 
would lie his remains must be found and identi- 
fied. It was hopeless to think of punishing the 
murderer, now that more than three years had 
elapsed since the crime. 

Besides — was he Pauline's brother ? 

Brother or not, I would unmask him. I would 
show him that the crime was no longer a secret ; 
that an outsider knew every detail. I would teU 
him this in the hope that his future would be 
haunted with the dread of a just vengeance over- 
taking him. 

1 knew the name of the street to which Pauline 
had led me. I had noticed it as we drove from it 
a few nights ago, and the reason of my drtmkcn 
guide'? mistake was apparent. It was Horace 
street. My conductor had jumbled up Walpole 
and Horace in his drink-muddled brain. 

On what a slight thread the whole course of a 
life hangs ! 

Macari had heard of Pauline's illness and 



100 CALLED BAC1&. 

delirium. He was as tenderly solicitous in his 
enquiries as a brother should be. My replies 
were cold and brief. Brother or not, he was 
answerable for everything. 

Presentl}'- he changed the subject. " I scarcely 
like to trouble you at such a time ; but I should 
be glad to know if you are willing to join me, as I 
suggested, in a memorial to Victor Emmanuel ? " 

•* I am not. There are several things I must 
have explained first." 

He bowed, pohtely ; but I saw his lips close 
tightly for a moment. 

" I am quite at your service," he said. 

'* Very well. Before all I must be satisfied that 
you are my wife's brother." 

He raised his thick dark eyebrows and tried to 
smile. 

" That is easily done. Had poor Ceneri been 
with us, he would have vouched for it." . 

" But he told me very differently." 

" Ah, he had his reasons. No matter, 1 can 
bring plenty of other persons." 

•♦ Then again," I said, looking him full in the 
face and speaking very slowly, "I must know why 
you murdered a man three years ago in a hou^e in 
Horace street." 

Wliichever the fellow felt — fear or rage — the ex- 
pression of his face was that of blank astonishment. 
Not, I knew, the surprise of innocence, but of wonder 
that the crime should be known. For a moment 
his jaw dropt and he gaped at me in silence. 

Then he recovered. "Are you mad, Mr. 
Vaughan ? " he cried. 

" On the 20th of August, i86 — , at No. — 
Horace street, you stabbed here, to the heart, a 
young man who was. sitting at the table. Dr. 
Ceneri was in the room at the time, also another 
man with a scar on his face." 



CALLED BACK. IO7 

He attempted no evasion. He sprang to his 
feet with features convulsed with rage. He seized 
my arm. For a moment I tliought he meant to 
attack me, but found he only wanted to scan my 
face attentively, I did not shrink from his in- 
spection. I hardly thought he would recognise 
me ; so great a change does blindness make in a 
face. 

But he knew me. He dropt m.y arm and 
stamped his foot in fur3\ 

"Fools! Idiots!" he hissed. "Why did they 
not let me do the work thoroughly I " 

He walked once or twice up and down the 
room, and then wi'h regained composure stood 
in front of me. 

" You are a great actor, Mr. Vaughan," he said, 
with a coolness and cynicism which appalled me. 
•'You deceived even me, and I am very suspicious." 

" You do not even deny the crime, you villain?" 

He shrugged his shoulders. " Why should I, 
to an eye witness ? To others I will deny it fast 
cr.ough. Besides, as you are interested in the 
matter, there is no occasion to do so." 

" I am interested I " 

"Certainly; as you married my sister. Now 
my fine fellow ! my gay bridegroom ! my dear 
brother-in-law ! I will tell you why I killed that 
man and what I meant by my words to you at 
Geneva." 

His air of bitter callous mockery as he spoke 
these words made me dread what was to come. 
My hands were tingling to throw him from the 
room. 

" That man — I shall not for obvious reasons t^'U 
you his name — was Pauline's lover. Translate 
' lover ' into Italian — into what the word drudo 
signifies in that language — then you will under- 
stand my meaning. We, on our mother's side 



ZOS CALLED BACK. 

have noble blood in our veins — blood which brooks 
no insult. He was Pauline's, your wife's lover, 
I say again. He had no wish to marry her, and 
so Ceneri and I killed him — killed hirn in London 
— even in her presence. As I told you once before, 
Mr. Vaughan, it is well to marry a woman who 
cannot recall the past." 

I made no reply. So hideous a statement 
called for no comment. I simply rose and walked 
towards him. He saw my purpose written in my 
face. "Not here," he said hastily, and moving 
away from me : " what good can it do here — a vulgar 
scuffle between two gentlemen ? No ; on the 
Continent — anywhere, meet me, and I v/ill show 
you how 1 hate j'ou." 

He spoke well, the self-possessed villain I What 
good could it do ? An unseemly struggle, in 
which I could scarcely hope to kill him ; and 
Pauline the while perhaps upon the point of death! 

"Go," I cried, "murderer and coward! Every 
word you have %ver spoken to me has been a lie, 
and because you hate me, you have to-day told 
me the greatest lie of all. Go ; save yourself from 
the gallows by flight." 

ri^ p^ave me a look of malicious triumph and 
left me. The air in the room seemed purer now 
that he no longer breathed it. 

Then I wen. to Pauline's room, and sitting by 
her bed heard he. parched lips ever and ever 
calling in English or Italian on some one she 
loved. Heard them hes' eching and warning, and 
knew that her wild wor s were addressed to the 
man whom Macari avei ed he had slain because 
he was the lover of his - ter — my wife ! 

The villain lied ! 1 k lew he lied. Ovei and 
over again I told myself n was a black, slanderous 
lie — that Pauline was a? pure as an angel. But, 
-as I strove to comfort my. elf with these assertions, 



CALLED BACK. lOQ 

I knew that, lie as it was, until I could prove it such, 
it would rankle in my heart ; would be ever wun 
me ; would grow until I mistook it for truth ; 
would give me not a moment's rest or peace, 
until it made me curse the day when Kenyon led 
me inside that old church to see " the fairest 
sight of all." 

How could I prove the untruth ? There were 
but two other persons in the world who knew 
Pauline's history — Ceneri and old Teresa. Teresa 
had disappeared and Ceneri was in the Siberian 
mines or some other living grave. Even as I 
thought of the old Italian woman, Macari's slander 
began to throw forth its first poisonous shoots. 
Her mysterious words, " not for love or marriage," 
might bear another meaning, a dishonourable 
meaning. And other circumstances would come 
to me. Ceneri's haste to get his niece married — 
his wish to get rid of her. Thoughts of this sort 
would steal into my mind until they half maddened 
me. 

I could bear to sit with Pauline no longer. I 
went out into the open air and wandered about 
aimlessly, until two ideas occurred to me. One 
was that I would go to the greatest authority on 
brain diseases, and consult him as to Pauline's 
hope of recovery — the other that I would go to 
Horace street and examine, by daylight, the house 
from top to bottom. I went first to the doctor's. 

•To him I told everything, saving, of course, 
Macari's black lie. I could see no other way to 
explain the case without confiding fully. I most 
certainly succeeded in arousing his interest. He 
had already seen Pauline and knew exactly the 
state in which she had been. I think he believed, 
as many others will, all I told him except that one 
strange occurrence. Even this he did not scoff at, 
accustomed as he was to wild fancier and freaks 



no CALLED BACK. 

of imagination. He attributed it to this cause ; 
which was but natural — And now what comfort or 
hope could he give me ? 

'* As I told you before, Mr. Vaughan," he said, 
" such a thing as losing the recollection of the 
past for a long while and then picking up the end 
of the thread where it fell is not altogether unpre- 
cedented. I will come and see your wife ; but as 
the case now stands it seems to me it is an attack 
of brain fever, and as yet no specialist is needed. 
When that fever leaves her I should like to knov/, 
that I may see her. It Avill, I expect, leave her 
sane, but she will begin life again from the hour 
that her mind was first unhinged. You, her hus- 
band, may even be as a stranger to her. The 
case, I say again, is not unprecedented, but the 
circumstances which surround it are." 

I left the doctor and walked to the agents in 
whose hands the house in Horace street was placed. 
I obtained the keys and made some enquiries. I 
found that at the time of the murder the house 
had been let furnished for a few weeks to an Italian 
gentleman whose name was forgotten. He had 
paid the rent in advance, so no enquiries had been 
made about him. The house had been vacant for 
a long time. There was nothing against it except 
that the owner would only let it at a certain rent, 
v/hich most people appeared to consider too high. 

I gave my name and address and took the keys. 
I spent the remainder of the afternoon in searching 
every nook and cranny in the house, but no dis- 
covery rewarded my labour. There was, I be- 
lieved, no place in which the body of a victim 
could have been hid — there was no garden ia 
which it might have been buried. I took back the 
keys and said the house did not suit me. Then 
I returned home and brooded on my grief, whilsl 
Macaii's lie ate and ate its way to my heart. 



CALLED BACK. Til 

And day by day it went on working and gnawing, 
corroding and warping, until I was told that the 
crisis was over; that Pauline was out of danger, 
that she was herself again. 

Which self? The self I had only known, oi 
the self before that fatal night ? With a beating 
heart I drew near to her bedside. Weak, ex- 
hausted, without strength to move or speak, she 
opened her eyes and looked at me. It was a look 
of wonder, of non-recognition, but it was the look 
of restored reason. She knew me not. It was as 
the doctor had predicted. I might have been a 
total stranger to those beautiful eyes as they 
opened, gazed at me, and then reclosed them- 
selves wearily. I went from the room with tears 
running down my cheeks, and at my heart a feeling 
of mingled joy and sorrow, hope and fear, which 
words will not express. 

Then Macari's black lie came out from its lurking 
place and seized me as it were by the throat — 
clung to me, wrestled with me— cried, "I am true! 
Push me away, I am still tme. The lips of a villain 
spoke to me, but for once he spoke the truth. If 
not for this, why the crime ? Men do not lightly 
commit murder." Even then, when the moment I 
had prayed and longed for had come — when sense, 
full sense, was given back to my poor love — I was 
invaded, conquered and crushed to the ground by 
the foul lie which might be truth. 

"We are strangers— she knows me not," I cried. 
" Let me prove that this he is a he or let us bf 
strangers for ever ! " 

How could I prove .'t ? How could I ask Pauline ? 
Or asking her, how could I expect her to answer ? 
Even if she did, would her word satisfy rne ? Oh 
that I could see Ceneri ! Villain he riiight be, but 
I felt he was not such a double-dyed villain a.6 
Macari. 



112 CALLED BACK. 

Thinking thus, I formed a desperate resolve. 
Men are urged to do strange and desperate things 
when hfe is at stake — with me it was more than 
hfe. It was the honour, the happiness — everything, 
of two people ! 

Yes, I would do it ! Mad as the scheme: seemed, 
I would go to Siberia, and if money, perseverance, 
favour, or craft could bring me face to face with 
Ceneri, I would wring the truth, the whole truth, 
^rom his lips ! 



CHAPTER X. 

IN SEARCH OF THE TRUTH. 

Across Europe — half-way across Asia — for the 
sake of an hour's interview with a Russian politi- 
cal prisoner ! It was a wild scheme, but I was 
determined to carry it out. If my plan was a mad 
one, I would, at least, ensure a chance of its success 
by putting all the method I could in m.y prepara- 
tions. I would not rush wildly to my journey's 
end and find it rendered fruitless by the stupidity 
or suspicion of some one vested with brief autho- 
rity. No ; I must go armed with credentials which 
no one would dare to dispute. Money, one of the 
most important of all, I had plenty of, and was 
ready to use freely ; but there were others which 
were indispensable, my first step would be to obtain 
these. I would go quietly and systematically to 
work, tor it would be days before I could venture 
to leave Pauline. Only when all chance of danger 
was at an end could I begin my journey. 

So during those days whilst the poor girl was 

Q^radually, but very, very slowly, regaining strength, 

i looked up what friends I possessed among the 

i^reat people of the land, until 1 found one whose 

■osition was such that he could ask a favour of a 



CALLED BACK. II3 

far greater man than himself, and, moreover, expect 
that it should be granted without delay. He did 
this for my sake with such efficacy that I received 
a letter of introduction to the English ambassador 
at St. Petersburgh, and also the copy of a letter 
which had been forwarded him containing instruc- 
tions on my behalf. Each of the letters bore an 
autograph which would ensure every assistance 
being given to me. With these, and the addition 
of a letter of credit for a large amount on a St. 
Petersburgh bank, I was ready to start. 

But before I leit, Pauline's safety and well-being 
durmg those months of absence must be con- 
sidered. The difficulties this presented almost 
made me abandon, or, at least, postpone, the 
execution of my plan. Yet I knew it must be 
carried out to the very letter, or Macari's he would 
ever stand between my wife and myself. Better I 
should go at once, while we were strangers ; better, 
if Ceneri by word or silence confirmed the shameful 
tale, that we should never meet again I 

Pauline would be left in good hands. Priscilla 
would do my bidding faithfully and fully. The old 
woman was by this time quite aware that her 
charge had awaken to both memory and new for- 
getfulness. She knew the reason why for days and 
days I had not even *ntered the room. She knew 
that I considered Pauline, in her present state, no 
more my wife than when I first met her in Turin. 
She knew that some mystery was attached to our 
relations with each other, and that I was bound 
upon a long journey to clear this up. She was 
content with this knowledge or sought to obtain 
no more than I chose to give her. 

My instructions were minute. As soon as she 
was well enough Pauline was to be taken to the 
seaside. Everythmg was to be done for her com- 
fort and according to her wishes. If she grew 



H^ CALLED BACK. 

curious she was to be told that some near relation, 
who was now journeying abroad, had placed her 
in Priscilla's hands, where she was to stay until 
his return. But, unless the recollection of the past 
few months came to her, she was to be told nothing 
as to her true position as my wife. Indeed, I 
doubted now if she v/as legally my wife — whether, 
if she wished, she might not annul the marriage by 
stating that at the time it took place she was not 
in her right mind. When I returned from my 
expedition — if things were right, as I told myself 
they must be, all would have to be begun again 
from the beginning. 

I had ascertained that, since the departure of 
the fever, Pauline had said nothing about the 
terrible deed she had witnessed three years ago. 
I feared that when her health was re-established 
her first wish would be to make some stir in the 
matter. It was hard to see what she could pos- 
sibly do. Macari, I learned, had left England the 
day after I accused him of the crime ; Ceneri was 
out of reach. I hoped that Pauline might be 
induced to remain quiet until my return ; and I 
instructed Priscilla, in the event of her recurring 
to the subject of a great crime committed by per- 
sons she knew, to inform her that all was being 
done to bring the guilty to their deserts. I trusted 
she would, with her usual docility, rest contented 
with this scarcely correct assertion, 

Priscilla was to write to me — to St. Petersburgh, 
Moscow, and other places I must stop at, going 
and returning. I left directed envelopes with her, 
and would send from St. Petersburgh instructions 
as to the dates when the various letters should be 
posted. And then all I could think of was done. 

All except one thing. To-morrow morning I 
must start. My passport is duly signed ; my trunks 
are packed — everything is ready. Once, once for 



CALLED BACK. II5 

a moment, I must see her before I sleep to-night 
— see her it may be for the last time. She was 
sleeping soundly — Priscilla told me so. Once 
more I must look upon that beautiful face, that I 
may carry its exact image with me for thousands 
of miles ! 

I crept upstairs and entered her room. I stood 
by the bedside and gazed with eyes full of tears on 
my wife — yet not my wife. I felt like a criminal, 
a dosecrator, so little right, I knew, I had to be in 
that room. Her pale pure face lay on the pillow 
— the fairest face in all the world to me. Her 
bosom rose and fell with her soft regular breathing. 
Fair and white as an angel she looked, and I swore, 
as I gazed on her, that no word of man should 
make me doubt her innocence. Yet I would go to 
Siberia. 

I would have given worlds for the right to lay 
myjjps on hers ! to have been able to awake her 
with a kiss, and see those long dark lashes rise, and 
her eyes beam with love for me. Even as k was I 
could not refrain from kissing her gently on the 
temple, just where the soft thick hair began to 
grow. She stirred in her sleep, her eyelids quivered, 
and like one detected at the commencement of a 
crime, I fled. 

TItc next day I was hundreds of miles away, and 
my mind was in a sterner frame. If when I reached, 
if ever I did reach, Ceneri, I found that Macari had 
not bed — found that I had been fooled, cajoled, 
made a tool of, I should, at least, have the grim 
consolation of revenge. I should be able to gloat 
upon the misery of the man who had deceived me 
and u^ed me for his own purposes I should see 
him dragging out his wretched life in chains and 
degradation. I should see him a slave, bealen and 
illtreated. If this was the only reward I should 
reap, it would repay me for my long journey. Far- 



Il6 CALLED BACK. 

haps, considering all that had passed and my 
present anxiety and dread, this unchristian state 
of mind vrs not unnatural to an ordinary son of 
Adam. 

St. Petersburgh at last ! The letter I bear, and 
the letter already received on my account, ensure 
me a gracious reception from her majesty's noble 
representative in the Russian capital. My request 
is listened to attentively; not scouted as ridiculous. 
I am told it is unprecedented, but the words im- 
possible to be granted are not used. There are 
difficulties, great difficulties in the way, but, as my 
business is purely of a domestic nature, with no 
political tendency, and as the letters bear the magic 
autograph of a person whom the noble lord is eager 
to oblige, I am not told that the obstacles are in- 
superable. I must wait patiently for days, it may 
be weeks, but I can be sure that everything will be 
done that can be done. There is, at present, or so 
the newspapers say, a little friction between the 
two Governments. Sometimes this is shown by 
requests more simple than mine being refused. 
Still, we shall see 

Meanwhile, who is the prisoner, and where is he? 

Ah ! that I cannot say. I only know him as a 
doctor named Ceneri — an Italian — an apostle of 
freedom — patriot — conspirator. I was not foolish 
enough to imagine he had been tried and sentenced 
under the name I knew him by. I supposed this 
to be a false one. 

Lord was certain that no one of that name 

had been sentenced within the last few months. 
That mattered little. Permission accorded, with 
the data I had given, the man would at once be 
identified by the police. Now, good morning — as 
soon as possible I should hear from the embassy. 

" And one word of caution, Mr. Vaughan," said 
his lordship. •• You are not in England. Remem- 



CALLED BACK. II7 

ber that a hasty word, even a look; a casual remark 
to any stranger you sit next at dinner, may utterly 
defeat your ends. The system of government here 
is diiTerent from ours." 

I thanked him for his advice, although I needed 
no warning. The truth is that an Englishman in 
Russia has an even exaggerated dread of spies and 
the consequences of a loose tongue. More of us 
are looked upon with suspicion from our taciturnity 
than from our garrulity. I was not likely to err on 
the latter point. 

I went back to my hotel, and for the next few 
days whiled away the time as best I could. Not 
that, under ordinary circumstances, I should ha\»e 
found much difficulty in so doing. St. Petersburgh 
was one of the places I had always wished to 
visit. Its sights were new and strange to me ; its 
customs worth studying; but I took little interest 
in anything I sav/. 1 was longing to be away in 
pursuit of Ceneri. 

I was not foolish enough to pester the ambassa- 
dor and make myself a nuisance. Believing he 
would do all he could, I waited patiently and in 
silence until I received a letter asking me to call 
at the embassy. Lord received me kindly. 

"It is all settled," he said. "You will go to 
Siberia armed wv h authority which the most 
ignorant jailor or soldier will recognise. Of course, 
I have pledged my honour that in no way will you 
connive at the convict's escape— that your business 
is purely private." 

I expressed my thanks, and asked for instructions. 

" First of all," he said, " my instructions are to 
take you to the palace. The Czar desires to see 
the eccentric Englishman A'ho wishes to make sucij 
a long journey in order to ask a few questions." 

I would right willingly have declined the honour, 
but as there was no chance of escapmg from it, 



il8 CALLED BACK, 

nerved myself to meet the autocrat as well as I 
could. The ambassador's carriage was at the 
door, and in a few minutes we were driven to the 
Imperial Palace. 

I retain a confused recollection of gigantic sen- 
tries, glittering officers, grave-looking ushers and 
other officials ; noble staircases and halls ; paint- 
ings, statues, tapestry and gilding ; then, following 
my conductor, I entered a large apartment, at one 
end of which stood a tall noble-looking man in 
mihtary attire ; and I realised" that I was in the 
presence of him whose nod could sway millions 
and millions of his fellow-creatures — the Emperor 
of all the Russias — the White Czar Alexander II. 
The sovereign whose rule stretches from the highest 
civilization of Europe to the lowest barbarism of 
Asia. 

Two years ago when the news of his cruel death 
reached England, I thought of him as I saw him 
that day — in the prime of life, tall, commanding 
and gracious — a man it does one good to look at. 
Whether — if the whole truth of his great ancestor, 
Catherine the Second's frail^s were known — the 
blood of a peasant or a kingTran in his veins, he 
looked every inch a ruler of men, a splendid despot, 

To me he was particularly kind and condescend- 
ing. His manner set me as much at my ease as it 
is possible for a man to be in such august company. 

Lord presented me by name, and after a 

proper reverence I waited the Czar's commands. 

He looked at me for a second from Iws towering 
height. Then he spoke to me in French, fluently 
and without much foreign accent : 

«' I am told you wish to go to Siberia ? " 

" With your majesty's gracious permission. ' 

" To see a political prisoner. Is that so ? " 

I replied in the affirm.ative. 

" It is a loag iourney for such a purpose." 



CALLED BACK. II9 

" My business is of the most vital importance^ 
your majesty." 

" Private importance, I understand from Lord 

He spoke in a quick, stern way which showed 
that he admitted of no prevarication. I hastened 
to assure him of the purely private nature of rny 
desired interview with the criminal. 

^' Is he a dear friend of 3^ours ? " 

" Rather, an enemy, your majesty ; but mv 
happiness and my wife's happiness are at stake.'' 

He smiled at my explanation. " You English 
are good to your wives. Very well, Mr. Vaughan, 
it shall be as you wish. The Minister of the In- 
terior will provide you with the fullest passports 
and authorities. Bon voyage " 

Thus dismissed, I bowed myself out, praying 
mentally that no red-tapism or bureaucracy might 
delay the transmission of the promised documents. 

In three days I received them. The passport 
authorised me to travel to the end of the Czar's 
Asiatic dominions if I thought fit, and was worded 
in such a way that it obviated the necessity of 
obtaining a fresh passport whenever a fresh govern- 
merit district was to be traversed. It was not 
until I found the trouble, annoyance and delay 
I was saved by this magic strip of paper, that I 
fully reahzed how much favour had been shown 
me. Those few words of writing, unintelligible 
to me, were a magic spell, the potency of which 
none dared to resist. 

But now, armed with power to travel, the question 
was where must I go ? To ascertain this I was taken 
to one of the heads of the police. To him I explained 
my case I described Ceneri, gave him what I sup- 
posed was about the date of his crime~^and trial, and 
begged for information as to the best means to adopt 
to find him ii the place of his banishment. 



120 CALLED BACK. 

I was most civilly treated. Indeed, for courtesy 
commend me to the Russian official Mhen 3'ou are 
properly and powerfully accredited. Ceneri was 
at once identified, and his right name and secret 
history given to me, I recognised the name at 
once- 

There is no need to make it public. There are 
many men in Europe who believe in the dis- 
interested character and noble aims of the un- 
fortunate convict ; men who mourn him as a 
martyr. Perhaps in the cause of liberty he was 
single-hearted and noble-minded. Wh}' should 
I distress his followers by revealing any dark 
secrets of his private life ? Let him be, so far 
as I am concerned, Dr. Ceneri to the end. 

I learnt from the suave, obliging Russian chief 
of police that a few weeks after I had seen him in 
Geneva, Ceneri had been arrested in St. Peters- 
burgh. A deeply laid plot, involving the assassin- 
ation of the Czar and several members of the govern- 
ment, had been revealed through the treachery of 
a confederate. The police, fully cognisant of every- 
thing, had waited until the pear was nearl}' ripe, 
and then struck with dire results to the plotters. 
Scarcely one of the principals escaped, and Ceneri, 
one of the most deeply implicated, was shov/n 
scant merc3^ He certainly had few claims on 
their consideration. He was no Russian groan- 
ing under oppression and despotic government. 
Although he called himself Italian, he was, in 
truth, cosmopolitan. One of those restless spirits 
who wish to overturn all forms of government, 
save that of republican. He had plotted and 
schemed — even fought like a man — for Italian free- 
dom. He had been one of Garibaldi's most trusted 
workmen ; but had turned fiercely against his 
master when he found Italy was to be a kingdom, 
not the ideal republic of his dreams. Latterly he 



CALLED HACK. 121 

had directed liis attention to Russia, and the plot 
lie was engaged in having been betrayed, his 
career, in all human probability, was ended. After 
lying many months in the fortress of St. Peter and 
St. Paul, he was tried and condemned to twenty 
years hard labour in Siberia. Some months a^jo 
ne had been dispatched to his destination, and, my 
informant added, was considered to have been 
dealt with most leniently. 

Where was he now ? That could not be said 
for certain. He might be at the Kara gold wash- 
ings, at the Ustkutsk salt works, at Troitsk, at 
Nertschinsk. All convicts were first sent to 
Tobolsk, which was a kind of general rendezvous ; 
thence the}' were drafted off, at the pleasure of the 
Governor-General, to various places and various 
occupations. 

If I wished, the Governor of Tobolsk should be 
telegraphed or written to; but, as I was bound 
anj' way to go to that town, it v/ould be just as 
well if I made my enquiries in person. To this I 
quite agreed, mistrusting the speed of the Russian 
post or the newly-opened telegraph. I v/as ready 
to start to-morrow. 

So after getting all the hints and information I 
could, I thanked the chief for his courtesy, and 
with my precious papers in my pocket, v/ent to 
complete my preparations for my journey ; a 
journey which miglit be a thousand or two thciisand 
miles longer or shorter, according to where it had 
pleased the Governor of Tobolsk to bestow '^he 
wretched Ceneri. 

Before I started 1 1'eceived a letter from Priscilla 
— one of those laboured and rather misty epistlos 
usually written by people of her station in life. It 
told me that Pauline was v;ell ; that she was willing 
to be guided by Priscilla's advice, and to remair, 
<vith her until the return of 1i*m- wnknown relation o. 



122 CALLED BACK. 

friend. " But, Master Gilbert," the letter went on, 
** I am sorry to say I believe she is not quite right 
at times. The poor young lady talks wildly about 
an awful crime ; but she says she is content to 
wait for justice to be done, as someone she has 
seen in her dreams during her illness is working 
for her. She doesn't know who it is, but it is 
someone who knows everything." 

This intelligence made me feel easier. Not only 
did it show me that Pauline would wait quietly 
until my return, but also that some gUmmering of 
the immediate past might be dawning upon her. 
The closing lines of Priscilla's letter made my 
heart beat "with hope. 

" This afternoon, Master Gilbert, she seemed to 
discover for the first time that she had a wedding 
ring on her finger. She asked me how it came 
there. I told her I could not say. Then she sat 
for hours and hours twisting it round and round, 
thinking and thinking. I asked her, at last, what 
she was thinking of. * Dreams I am trying to re- 
member,' said she, with that pretty quiet smile of 
hers. I was dying to tell the dear young lady that 
she was my own master's lawful wife. I was afraid 
she would take the ring off, but she didn't, thank 
God ! " 

Yes, thank God, she did not ! As I read Priscilla's 
letter I yearned to turn homewards and fly back to 
my wife. But I conquered the inclination, although 
I felt more and more certain that my meeting with 
Ceneri would be a happy one for me ; that I should 
return, and, if necessary, once more place that ring 
on her finger and claim her as my own, knowing 
that she was purer than the gold of which that 
shining circlet was made. 

Pauline ! my beautiful Pauline ! my wife, my 
love, we shall be happy yet. 

The next day I started for Siberia, 



CALLED BACK. 123 

CHAPTER XI. 

A HELL UPON EARTH. 

It was midsummer when I left St. Petersburgh. 
The heat was oppressive and quite disturbed my 
idea of the Russian cHmate. I went by rail to 
Moscow, by the iron road wliich runs straight as a 
line from the one largo city to the other. The Czar 
ordered it to be so made, without curves or devia- 
tions. When the engineers asked him what popu- 
lous places they should take on their way, his 
Imperial Majesty took a ruler and on the map ruled 
a straight line from St. Petersburgh to Moscow. 
** Make it so," were his commands, and so it was 
made, as rigid and careless of the convenience of 
other persons as his own despotism — a railway for 
some four hundred miles running simply to its 
destination, not daring, however much tempted, to 
swerve aside and disobey the autocrat's commands. 

At Moscow the colossal I lingered a couple of 
days. It was there I had settled to engage a guide 
and interpreter. As I spoke two or three languages 
besides my own, I was able to pick and choose, 
and, at last, selected a pleasant mannered, sharp 
looking young fellow who averred that he knew 
every inch of the great post road to the east. Then 
bidding farewell to the mighty Kremlin with its 
churches, watch towers and battlements. I started 
with my new companion (or Nijnei Novgorod; at 
which place we must bid adieu to the railway. 

We passed the old picturesque but decaying 
town of Vladimir, and after duly admiring its five- 
domed cathedral I found nothing more to distract 
my attention until we reached Nijnei. My com- 
panion was very anxious that we shoula linger for 
a day or two at this city. The great fair was on, 



124 CALLED BACK. 

and he assured me it was a sight not to be missed 
I had not come to Russia to look at fairs or fes 
tivities, so commanded him to make instant pre- 
parations for continuing the journey. 

We now changed our mode of conveyance. 
Being summer the rivers were open and naviga- 
tion practicable. We took the steamer and went 
down the broad Volga till we passed Kasan and 
reached the river Kama. Up this tortuous stream 
we went until we landed at the large important 
town of Perm. 

We were five days on the water — I think the 
five longest da5'-s I ever spent. The winding river, 
the slow-going steamer, made me long for the land 
again ; there one seemed to be making progress. 
The road there was straight, not running into a 
hundred bends. 

We were now nearly at the end of Europe. A 
hundred miles further and we shall cross the Ural 
mountains and be in Asiatic Russia. 

At Perm we made our final preparations. 
From now we must depend on post horses. Ivan, 
my guide, after the proper amount of hagghng, 
bought a tarantass — a sort of phaeton. The 
luggage was stowed into it ; we took our seats ; 
our first relay of horses were engaged — three in 
number, and harnessed in the peculiar Russian 
fashion — the yemschik started them with the words 
of encouragement and endearment which in Russia 
are supposed to be more efficacious than the 
thong, and away we went on our long long drive. 

We crossed the Urals, which after all are not so 
very high. We passed the stone obelisk erected, 
Ivan told me, in honour of a Cossack chief named 
Yermak. We read the word "Europe" on the 
sis^e which first met our eyes, and turning- round 
saw *' Asia " written on the back. I spent my 
first night in Asia at Kkaterineburg ; and lay 



CALLED BACK. 17$ 

awake the best part of it trying to calculate how 
many miles stretched between Pau'ine and myself. 
For days and days have passed since I left St. 
Petersburgh, and I have travelled at all possible 
speed ; yet the journey seems scarcely begun. 
Indeed, I cinnot even guess at its length until I 
get to Tobolsk. 

A trifle of some four hundred miles from 
Ekaterineburg to Tinmen, another of two hundred 
from Tinmen to Tobolsk, and I shall await the 
pleasure of the Governor-General and what infor- 
mation he may choose to give me. 

The carriage and ourselves are ferried across 
the broad yellow Irtuish— that river, the crossing 
of which by a Russian officer at once raises him a 
step in rank ; for such is the inducement held out 
to serve in Siberia ; and at the east bank of the 
Irtuish Siberia proper begins. 

Tobolsk at last ! The sight of my passports 
renders the Governor civility itself. He invited 
me to dine with him, and, as for prudential reasons 
I thought it better to accept his invitation, treated 
me royally. His register told me all I wanted to 
know about Ceneri. He had been sent to the 
very extreme of the Czar's dominions, as his 
was a case which called for special severity. 
Where he would finish his journey v;as not settled 
but that made little difference to me. As he would 
travel the greater part of the way on foot, and as 
there was but one road, I must overtake him 
although he left Tobolsk months ago. The escort 
which accompanied that particular gang of prisoners 
was under the command of Captain VarlamotT, to 
whom his Excellency would write a few lines which 
I should take with me— he would also i^ive me a 
supplementary passport signed by himself 

"Where do you think I shall overtake the 
party ? " I asked. 



126 CALLED BACK. 

The Governor made a calculation. " Soino- 
where about Irkutsk," he thought. 

And Irkutsk two thousand miles, more or less, 
from Tobolsk ! 

I bade the great man a grateful adieu and 
st5urred on at such speed that even the good- 
tempered Ivan began to grumble. Man, even a 
Russian, was but mortal, he said, and I could not 
expect to find Arab steeds among government 
posthorses which the postmasters were compelled 
.to furnish at about twopence a mile a horse. I 
left the yemschik and himself no time for refresh- 
ment. Their tea had not grown cool enough to 
swallow before I was insisting on a fresh start. 
And as for a proper night's rest ! 

Tea ! Until I made that journey I never knew 
the amount of tea a mortal stomach could hold. 
One and all they drank it by the gallon. They 
carried it about compressed into bricks, cemented, 
I heard with a shudder, by sheep's or some other 
animal's blood. They drank it morn, noon and 
night. Whenever there was a stoppage and 
boiling water could be obtained bucketsful of tea 
were made and poured down their throats. 

The impressions I retain of that long journey 
are not very deep. I was not traversing the 
country for the sake of writing a book of travels, 
or to observe the manners and customs of the 
people. My great object was to overtake Ceneri 
as quickly as possible, and my endeavours were 
directed to passing from one posting station to 
another as swiftly as I could. We sped over vast 
steppes, wild marshes, through forests of birch, 
tall pines, oak, ash, and other trees, we were 
ferried over broad rivers. On and on we went 
as straight to our destination as the great post- 
road would take us. When nature forced us to 
rest we had to put up with such pitiful accom- 



CALLED BACK. 12y 

modation.-fts we could get. Unless the place at 
which we stopped was of some importance, inns 
were unknown. By dint of practice I at last con- 
trived to obtain almost enough sleep, if not to 
satisfy me, to serve my needs, whilst jolling along 
in the tarantass. 

It was a monotonous jou/ney. I turned aside to 
visit no objects of interest spoken of by travellers. 
From morn to night and generally through the 
greater part of the night our wheels rolled along 
the road. And at every posting station I read on 
the wooden post which stands in front of it the 
number of miles we were from St. Petersburgh, 
until, as the days and weeks passed, I began to 
feel appalled at the distance 1 had come and the 
distance I must return. Should I ever see Pauline 
again? Who can say v.-hat may have happened 
before I return to England ? At times I grew 
quite dispirited. 

I think what made me realise the length of the 
journey even more than days or measured miles 
was to see, as we went on, the country people 
gradually changing their costume and dialect. 
The yemschiks who drove us changed in appear- 
ance and in nationality ; the very breed of the 
horses varied. But let man or cattle be of what 
kind they may, we were well and skilfully con- 
ducted. 

The weather was glorious, almost too glorious. 
The cultivated country we passed through looked 
thriving and productive. Siberia was very diflferent 
in appearance from what is usually associated with 
its name. The air when not too warm was simply 
delicious. Never have I breathed a more invigora- 
ting and bracing atmosphere. There were da3's 
when the breeze seemed to send new life through 
every vein. 

The people I thought fairly honest, and when- 



L28 CALLED BACK. 

ever I found a need of producing my papers the 
word civility will scarcely express the treatment I 
received. How I should have been treated with- 
out these potent talismans I cannot say. 

The whole country-side in most places was 
busy with the hay harvest ; a matter of such im- 
portance to the community at large that convicts 
are told off for some six weeks to assist in the 
work of saving the crops. The wild flowers, 
many of them very beautiful, grew freely: the 
people looked well and contented. Altogether 
my impressions of Siberia in summer were plea- 
sant ones. 

Yet I wished it had been the dead of winter. 
Then it is that, in spite of the cold, one travels 
more pleasantly. Ivan assured me that when a 
good snow road is formed and a tarantass may be 
exchanged for a sledge, the amount of ground 
passed over in a day is something marvellous. I 
am afraid from memory to say how many miles 
may be covered in twenty -four hours when the 
smooth-going runners take the place of wheels. 

We had, of course, various small accidents and 
dela5-s on the road. However strongly built a 
tarantass may be it is but mortal. Wheels broke, 
axletrees gave way, shafts snapped, twice we were 
overturned, but as no evil except delay ensued I 
need not relate the history of these misfortunes. 

Nor need I enumerate the towns and villages 
ihrough which we passed unless I wished to make 
my story as interesting as a scriptural genealogy — 
Tara, Kainsk, Koliuvan,TonKsk, Achinsk, Krasnoy- 
arsk, Nijnei Udinsk, may or may not be familiar 
to the reader, according to the depth of liis geo- 
graphical studies; bat mo.'-'t of the others, even if 
I knew how to spell their )iames, would be nothing 
more than vain sounds. Perhaps, when we trace 
the march of ^he Rusr^ian armv desiined to in- 



CALLED BACK. 1 39 

vade our Indian Empire we may become better 
acquainted with the Czar's Asiatic dominions. 

Yet at the entrance of each of these httle towns 
or villages, the very names of which I liave for- 
gotten, so surely as you found the well-appointed 
posting station, you found also a gloomy square 
building, varying with the size of the place, sur- 
rounded by a tall palisade, the gates of which ' 
were barred, bolted and sentried— these buildings 
were the ostrogs, or prisons. 

Here it was Jhat the wretched convicts were 
housed as they halted on their long march. _ In 
these places they were packed like sardines in a 
box. Prisons built to hold two hundred were often 
called upon to accommodate at least twice that 
number of luckless wretches. I was told that when 
ice was breaking up in the rivers; when the floods 
were out ; when in fact the progress must perforce 
be delayed, the scenes at these prisons or depots 
beggared description. Men, sometimes unsexed 
women with them, huddled into rooms reeking 
with filth, the floors throwing out poisonous 
emanations — rooms built to give but scanty space 
to a small number, crowded to suffocation. The 
mortality at times was feariul. The trials of the 
march were as nothing when compared to the 
horrors of the so-called rest. And it was in one 
of these ostrogs I should find Ceneri ! 

We passed many gangs of convicts plodding 
along to their fate. Ivan told me that most of 
them were in chains This I should not have 
noticed as the irons are only on the legs and worn 
under tiie trousers. Poor wretched beings, my 
heart ached for them ! Felons though they were 
I could never refwse the charity they invariably 
prayed for. So far as I could sse they were not 
unkindly treated by tlie soldiers and officers, but 
terrible tales were told me ab'^ut their sufferings 



130 CALLED BACK. 

at the hands of inhuman jailors and commandants 
of prisons. There, for the shghtest infraction of 
rules, the rod, the dark cell and a variety of other 
punishments were called into play. 

I always felt relieved when v/e had passed out 
of sight of a gang like this. The contrast between 
my own position and that of such a number of my 
fellow men was too painful to contemplate — and 
yet if Ceneri did not clear away every shadow of 
doubt from my mind, I might retrace my steps, a 
more miserable wretch than any of those footsore 
convicts. 

Some week or ten days after leaving Tobolsk 
I began to make enquiries at ever)^ ostrog as to 
when Captain Varlamoff's gang passed, and when 
I might expect to overtake it. The answers I 
received to the latter question corresponded with 
that given me by the governor — all agreed at 
Irkutsk, or just beyond. Da}^ after day I found 
we were gaining rapidl}' upon the party, and wlien 
at last we reached the large handsome town of 
Irkutsk I rightl}'- reckoned that I had reached the 
end, or nearl}' the end of my journey. 

On enquiry I found Captain Varlamoff had 
not yet arrived. At the place where I had last 
enquired I had been told he had passed through 
a day before, so it was evident we had overlooked 
and outstripped them. The best thing to be done 
was to await in Irkutsk the arrival of the part)'. 

I was not at all sorry to take a couple of days' 
rest after my fatigues. I was not sorry to indulge 
once more in the comforts of comparative civiliza- 
tion ; yet nearly every hour I was sending down 
to enquire if the convicts had arrived. More 
ardently than I had longed to reach Irkutsk I 
longed to turn the horses' heads westwards and 
Start on the return journey. 

I had heard no news from heme since I le't St. 



CALLED BACK. I3I 

Petersburgh. Indeed, I could not expect a letter, 
as, after my departure from Nijnei Novgorod, I 
had positively outstripped the post. On the road 
home I hoped to find letters waiting me. 

After I had kicked my heels in Irkutsk for two 
days I received the welcome news that Captain 
Varlamoll had marched his prisoners to the ostrog 
at four o'clock that afternoon. I rose from my 
dinner and went with all speed to the prison. 

A man in plain clothes — a civilian — demanding 
to be conducted to the presence of a Russian 
captain, who had just arrived from a long march, 
seemed almost too great a joke for the sentries to 
bear in a soldierlike manner. Their stolid faces 
broke into scornful smiles as they asked Ivan if 
"the little father" had quite gone mad. It required 
nuch firmness, much persuasion and a gratuity, 
which to the simple military mind represented an 
unhmited quantity of "vodka," and consequently 
many happy drinking bouts, before I was allowed 
to pass through the gates of the high palisade, and, 
with many misgivings on the part of my guide, 
was conducted to the presence of the Captain. 

A fine fierce-looking j'oung soldier, who glared 
at me for disturbing him ; for having, by advice, 
adopted the Russian costume, which oy now was 
stained and fra5'ed by travel, there was nothing to 
show him I was not a civilian whom any soldier 
might kick at his pleasure. 

It was delightful to see the change the perusal oi 
the Tobolsk governor's letter made in the Captain's 
appearance. He rose, and with the greatest courtesy 
offered me a chair, and asked me in French if I spoke 
that language. 

I assured him on that point, and finding I could 
dispense with Ivan's services, sent him outside to 
wait for me. 

VarUmoff would not hear of commencing busi- 



132 



CALLED BACK. 



ness until wine and cigarettes made theif appeal"- 
ance — then he was at my service in anything and 
everytliing. 

I told him what I desired. 

"To speak in "private with, one of my convicts> 
Certainly — this letter places me at your command:-. 
But which convict ? " 

I gave him the true name. Ke shook his head, 

" I know none of them by tliat name. Most of 
the names the political prisoners pass under are 
false ones. When they leave me they will become 
numbers, so it doesn't matter." 

I suggested Ceneri. He shook his head again. 

" I know the man I want is with you," J. said. 
'■' How shall I find him ? " 

" You know him by sight ? " 

•' Yes — well." 

" Then you had better come with rne and try 
and pick him out among my unfortunates. Light 
another cigarette — you will want it," he added 
v.'ith meaning. 

He led the way, and soon v/e stood before a 
heavy d-oor. At his command a jailor, armed with 
mighty keys, appeared. The grinding locks were 
turned, and the door was opened. 

"Follow me," said \''ar!amofr, with a long pull 
at his cigarette. 1 obeyed, and standing on the 
threshold had much ado to keep from fainting. 

From the stench whicli rushed through it, that 
open door might have been the entrance to some 
pestilential cavern at tlie bottom of which all the 
impurities of the world were rotting and putrefying. 
As it passed \ou, y< u felt tl'.ai the thick air v\a. 
poisonous with disease and d(-'ath. 

I recovered myself as best I could, and followed 
my guide into the grim interior. The door closed 
behind us. 

Had I the power to describe the sij^hts I sav,- 



CALLED BACK. 133 

when my eyes grf:w accustomed to the gloom I 
should not be believed. The prison was spacious, 
but, when the number of the prisoners was con- 
sidered, it should have been three times the size. 
It was thronged with wretched beings. They were 
standing, sitting and lying about. Men of all ages 
and, it seemed, of all nationalities. Men with 
features of the lowest human type. They were 
huddled in groups — many were quarrelling, cursing 
and swearing. Moved by curiosity they pressed 
around us as closely as they dared, laughing and 
jabbering in their barbarous dialects. 1 was in a 
hell, an obscene, unclean hell ! a hell made by men 
for their fellow-rnen. 

Filth ! the place was one mass of it. Filth 
under foot — filth on the walls, the rafters and the 
beams — fillh floating about in the hot, heavy, 
pestiferous air. Each man seemed to be a nioving 
mass of filth. Zola would revel in a minute des- 
cription of the horrors of that place, but I must 
leave them to the imagination, although I know 
and even trust that no one's imagination can come 
near the reality. 

The only thing I could think of was this. Why 
did not these men rush out, overpov/er the guards, 
and escape from this reeking den ? I put the 
question to Varlamoff. 

" They never attempt to escape whilst on the 
march," he said. " It is a point of honour among 
them, If one escapes those left are treated with 
much greater severity." 

'* Do none ever get away ? " 

" Yes, many do when they are sent to the works. 
But it does them no good. They must pass through 
the towns on their flight or thsy would starve. 
Then they are always caught and sent back." 

I was peering into all the faces about, trying to 
find the one I sought. My insp«ctinrt v^-nr re- 



134 CALLED BACK. 

ceived with looks sullen, suspicious, defiant cr 
careless. Remarks were made in undertones, but 
Varlamoff's dreaded presence kept me from insult. 
I examined man}^ groups without success, then I 
made a tour of the prison. 

All along the wall was a slanting platform upon 
which men lay in various attitudes. Being the most 
comfortable station, every inch of it was covered by 
recumbent forms. In the angle formed by the prison 
walls I saw a man reclining, as if utterly worn out. 
His head sank down upon his breast, his eyes were 
closed. There was something in his figure which 
struck me as familiar. I walked to him and laid my 
hand upon his shoulder. He opened his weary eyes 
and raised his sad face. It was Manuel Ceneri 1 



CH.^PTER XII. 

THE NAME OF THE I^fAN. 

He locked at me with an expression in his eyes 
which passed at once from hopelessness to be- 
wilderment. He seemed to be uncertain whether 
it was a phantom or a man he was looking at. He 
rose to his feet in a dazed, stupefied way, and 
stood face to face with me, whilst his wretched 
fellow-prisoners pressed curiously around us. 

" Mr. Vaughan ! Here! In Siberia!" he said, 
as one not believing his own senses. 

" I have come from England to see you. This 
is the prisoner I am looking for," I said, turning to 
the ofiticer who stood at my side, mitigating to 
some extent the noxiousness of the atmosphere by 
the cigarette he puffed vigorously. 

** I am glad you have found him," he said po- 
litely. "Now the sooner we get outside the better; 
the air here is unhealthy." 

Unhealthy I It v/as foetid I I was filled with 



CAT.LED BACK. 135 

\vonJcr, as I looked at the bland French-speaking 
captain at my side, at the state of mind to which 
a man must bring himself before he could calmly 
stand in the middle of his fellow-creatures and see 
such misery unconcernedly — could even think he 
was but doing his duty. Perhaps he was. It may 
be the crimes of the prisoners forbade sympathy. 
But, oh ! to stand there in the midst of those poor 
wretches, turned for the time into little more than 
animals ! I may be wrong, but it seems to me 
that the jailor must have a harder heart than the 
worst of his captives ! 

"I can see him — talk to him alone?" I asked. 

"Certainly; so you are authorised to do. I am 
a soldier ; you in this matter are my superior 
officer." 

" May I take him to the inn ? " 

" I think not. I v/ill find you- a room here. 
Please follow me. Phew 1 that is a relief." 

We were now outside the prison door and 
breathing fresh air once more. The Captain led 
me to a kind of ofTice, dirty and furnished barely 
enough, but a paradise compared to the scene we 
had just quitted. 

" Wait here ; I will send the prisoner to you." 

As he turned to leave me I thought of the 
miserable, dejected appearance Ceneri had pre- 
sented. Let him be the greatest villain in the 
world, I could not keep from wishing to do some 
little thing to benefit him. 

" I may give him food and drink ?" I asked. 

The Captain shrugged his shoulders and laughed 
good temperedly. 

" He ought not to be hungr5\ He has the 
rations which government says are sufficient. But 
then you may be hungry and thirsty. If so, I do 
not see how 1 can stop you sendiig for winr and 
food — of course for yourself." 



136 CALLED BACK. 

I thanked him and forthwith despatched my 
guide in quest of the best wine and meat he could 
get. Wine, v;hen ordered l:)y a gentleman, means 
in Russia but one thing — cliampagne. At an inn 
of any standing champagne, or at least its substi- 
tute, wine of the Don, may be procured. My 
messenger soon returned with a bottle of the real 
beverage and a good supply of cold meat and 
white bread. As soon as it was placed on the 
rough table a tall soldier led in my expected guest. 

I placed a chair for Ceneri, into which he sank 
wearily. As he did so I heard the jingle of the 
irons on his legs. Then I told my interpreter to 
leave us. The soldier, who no doubt had received 
his orders, saluted me gravely and follov/ed his 
example. The door closed behind him, and 
Ceneri and I were alone. 

He had somewhat recovered from his stupe- 
faction, and as he looked at me I saw an eager, 
wistful expression on his face. Drowning as he 
was, no doubt h? caught at the straw of my 
unexpected appearance, thinking it might assist 
him to freedom. Perhaps it was to enjoy a 
moment or two brightened by the faintest or 
wildest gleam of hope, made him pause before he 
spoke to me. 

" I have come a long, long way to see you, 
Dr. Ceneri," I began. 

" If the way seemed long to you, what has it 
been to me ? You at least can return when you 
like to freedom and happiness," 

He spoke in the quiet tone of despair. I had 
been unable to prevent my words sounding cold 
and my voice being stern. If my coming had 
raised any hope in his heart, my manner now 
dispelled it. He knew I had not made the 
journey for his sake. 

'« Whether I can go back to happiness or not de' 



CALLIiD BACK. 137 

pends cTi whet you tttU me. You may imagine it 
is no light matter which has brought me so far to 
see you for a few minutes." 

He looked at me curiously, hut not suspiciously. 
I could do him no harm — for him the outer world 
v/as at an end. If I accused him of fifty murders, 
and brought each one home to him, hiii fate 
would be no worse. He was blotted out, erased ; 
nothing now could matter to him, except more or 
less bodily discomfort. I shuddered as I realised 
what his sentence meant, and, in spite of myself, a 
compassionate feeling stole over me. 

"I have much of importance to say, but first let 
me give you some wine and food." 

"Thank you," he said, almost humbly. " Ycu 
would scarcely believe, Mr. Vaughan, that a man 
may be reduced to such a state that he can hardly 
restrain himself at the sight of decent meat and 
drink." 

I could believe anything after the interior of the 
ostrog. I opened the wine and placed it before 
him. As he ate and drank, I had leisure to 
observe him attentively. 

His sufferings had wrought a great change in 
him. Every feature was sharpened, every limb 
seemed slighter — he looked at least ten ye^^rs older. 
He wore the Russian peasants' ordinary garments, 
and these hung in rags about hin? His feet, 
swathed in fragments of some woollen material, 
showed in places through his boots. The long, 
weary marches were telling their tale upon his 
frame. He had never given me the idea of being 
a robust man, and as I looked at him I thought 
that whatever work he might be put to, it would 
not pay the Russian Government for his sorr)' 
keep. But the probabilities were, they would not 
have to ke?p him long. 

He ate, not voraciously, but with a keen appe- 



138 CALLED BACK. 

tite. The wine he used sparingly. His meal being 
finished, he glanced around as if in quest of some- 
thing. I guessed what he wanted and passed him 
my cigar-case and a light. He thanked me and 
began to smoke with an air of enjoyment. 

For a while I had not the heart to interrupt the 
poor wretch. When he left me it must be to return 
to that hell peopled by human beings. But time 
was slipping by. Outside the door I could hear 
the monotonous step of the sentry, and I did not 
know what period of grace the polite Captain 
might allow to his prisoner. 

Ceneri was leaning back in his chair with a kind 
of dreamy look on his face, smoking slowly and 
placidly, taking, as it were, everything he could 
out of the luxury of a good cigar. I asked him to 
drink some more wine. He shook his head, then 
turned and looked at me. 

"Mr. Vaughan," he said; "yes, it is Mr. 
Vaughan. But who and what am I ? Where are 
we ? Is it London, Geneva, or elsewhere ? Shall 
I awake and find I have dreamed of what I have 
suffered ? " 

** I am afraid it is no dream. We are in Siberia." 

" And 5'OU are not come to bear me good news ? 
You are not one of us — a friend trying at the peril 
of your life to set me free ? " 

I shook my head. " I would do all I could to 
make your lot easier, but I come with a selfish 
motive to ask some questions which you alone can 
answer." 

"Ask them. You have given me an hour's relief 
from misery; I am grateful." 

" You will answer truly ? " 

•' Why not ? I have nothing to fear, nothing to 
gain, nothing to hope. Falsehood is forced on 
people by circumstances ; a man in my state has 
no need of it." 



CALLED BACK. I39 

'•The first question I have to ask is — who and 
what is that man Macari ?" 

Ceneri sprang to his feet. The name of Macari 
seemed to bring him back to the world. He looked 
no longer a decrepit man. His voice was fierce 
and stern. 

" A traitor ! a traitor ! he cried. " But for him 
I should have succeeded and escaped. If he were 
only standing in your place ! Weak as I am I could 
find strength enough to cling on to his throat till 
the vile breath was out of his accursed body ! " 

He walked up and down the room, clenching 
and unclenching his hands. 

" Try and be calm, Dr. Ceneri,' I said. " I have 
nothing to do with his plots and political treasons. 
Who is he ? What is his parentage ? Is Macari 
his name ? " 

" The only name I ever knew him by. His 
father was a renegade Italian who sent his son to 
live in England for fear his precious blood should 
be spilt in freeing his country. I found him a 
young man and made him one of us. His perfect 
knowledge of your tongue was of great service ; 
and he fought — 3'es, once he fought like a man. 
Why did he turn traitor now ? Why do you ask 
these questions ?" 

'• He has been to me and asserts that he is 
Pauline's brother." 

Ceneri's face, as he heard this intelligence, was 
enough to banish lie number one from my mind. 
My heart leapt as I guessed that number tw< would 
be disposed of as easily. But there was a terrible 
revelation to be made when I came to ask about 
that. 

" Pauhne's brother ! " stammered Ceneri. " Her 
brother 1 She has none." 

A sickly look crept over his features as he spoke 
— a look the meaning of which I could not read. 



140 CALLED BACK. 

" He says he is Antkony March, her brother." 

" Anthony March ! " gasped Ceneri. " There is 
no such person. What did he want — his object ? " 
lie Qontinued feverishly. 

" That I should join him in a memorial to the 
Italian Government, asking for a return of some 
portion of the fortune you spent." 

Ceneri laughed a bitter laugh. '* All grows 
clear," he said. •' He betrayed a plot which 
might have changed a government for the sake 
of getting me out of the way. Coward ! Why 
not have killed me and only me ? Why have 
made others suffer with me ? Anthony March 1 
My God ! that man is a villain ! " 

"You are sure that Macari betrayed you ?" 

" Sure ! yes. I was sure when the man in the 
cell next to mine rapped it on the wall. He had 
means of knowing." 

" I don't understand you." 

" Prisoners can sometimes talk to each other by 
taps on the wall which divides their cells. The 
man next me was one of us. Long before he 
went raving mad from the months of solitary con- 
finement he rapped out, over and over again, 
* Betrayed by Macari.' I believed him. He was 
too true a man to make the accusation without 
proof. But until now I could not see the object 
of the treason." 

The easiest part of my task was over. Macari's 
assumed relationship to Pauline v/as disposed of. 
Now, if Ceneri would tell me, I must learn who 
was the victim of that crime committed years ago, 
and what was the reason for the foul deed. I must 
learn that Macari's explanation was an utter false- 
hood, prompted by malice, or else my journey 
would have benefited me nothing. Is it any 
wonder that m.y lips trembled as I endeavoured to 
approach the subject ? 



CALLED BACK. 14^ 

••Now, Dr. Ceneri," I said, " i have a question 
of weightier import to ask. Had PauHne a lover 
before I married her?" 

He raised his eyebrows. '■ Surely you have not 
come here to ask that question — to have a fit of 
jealousy cured ? " 

«• No," I said ; " you will hear my meaning later 
on. Meanwhile, answer me." 

" She had a lover, for Macari professed to love 
her, and swore she should be his wife. But I can 
most certainly say she never returned his love." 

" Nor loved anyone else ? " 

••Not to my knowledge. But your manner, 
your words are strange. Why do )'ou ask ? I 
may have wronged you, Mr. Vaughan,' but save 
for the one thing, her mind, PauUne was fit to be 
your wife." 

'• You did wrong me — you know it. What right 
had you to let me marry a woman whose senses 
were disarranged ? It was cruel to both." 

I felt stern and spoke sternly. Ceneri shifted 
in his chair uneasily. If I had wished revenge 
it was here. Gazing on this wretched, ragged, 
broken-down man, and knowing what awaited 
him when he left me, would have filled the mea- 
sure desired by the most vengeful heart. 

I wanted no revenge on the man. His manner 
told me he spoke the truth when he denied that 
Pauline had ever been in love. As, when last I 
gazed on her fair face, I knew it would, Macari's 
black lie had been scouted. Pauline wa^ innocent 
as an angel. But I must know who was the man 
whose death had for a while deprived her of reason. 

Ceneri was glancing at me nervously Did he 
guess what I had to ask him ? " Tell me," I said, 
'• the name of the young man murdered by Macari 
in London, in the" presence of Pauline ; tell me 
why he was killed ? " 



142 CALLED BACK. 

His face grew ashen. He seemed to coHapse — • 
to sink back into his chair a helpless heap, with- 
out the power of speech or movement, without 
the power of turning his eyes from my face. 

" Tell me,'" I repeated " Stay, I will recall 

the scene to you, and j'ou will know I am well 
informed. Here is the table ; here is Macari, 
standing over the man he has stabbed ; here are 
you, and behind you is another man with a scar 
on his cheek. In the back room, at the piano, is 
Pauline. She is singing, but her song stops as the 
murdered man falls dead. Do I describe the scene 
truly ? " 

I had spoken excitedly. I had used gestures 
and words. Ceneri's ears had drank in every 
syllable ; his eyes had followed every gesture. As 
I'pointed to the supposed position of Pauline, he 
had looked there with a quick, startled glance, as 
if expecting to see her enter the door. He made 
no attempt to deny the accuracy of my representa- 
tion. 

I waited for him to recover. He was looking 
ghastly. His breath came in spasmodic gasps. 
For a moment I feared he was about to die then 
and there. I poured out a glass of v/ine ; he took 
it in his tremblin,ft hand and gulped it down. 

" Tell me his name ? " I repeated. " Tell me 
what he had to do with Pauline ? " 

Then he found his voice. " Why do you come 
here to ask me ? Pauline could have told you. 
She must be well, or you could not have learned 
this." 

" She has told me nothing." 

" You are wrong. She must have told you. No 
one else saw the crime — the murder : for a murder 
it was." 

"There was another present beside the actors 
I have named," 



CALLED BACK. 143 

Ceneri started and looked at me, 

" Yes, there was another ; there by an accident. 
A man who could hear but not see. A man whose 
life I pleaded for as for my own." 

" I thank you for having saved it." 

" You thank me. Why should you thank me ? " 

" If you saved anyone's life it was mine. 1 was 
that man." 

"You that man!" He looked at me more 
attentively — "Yes : now the features come back to 
me. I always wondered that your face seemed so 
familiar. Yes. I can understand — I am a doctor 
— your eyes v/ere operated upon ? " 

"Yes — most successful!)'." 

" You can see well now — but then ! I could not 
be mistaken, you were blind — you saw nothing." 

" I saw nothing, but I heard everything." 

"And now PauHne has told you what happened ? " 

" Pauline has not spoken." 

Ceneri rose, and in great agitation walked up 
and down the room, his cliains rattling as he moved. 
" I knew it," he muttered, in Italian, " I knew it — 
such a crime cannot be hidden." 

Then he turned to me. " Tell me how you have 
learned this ? T^esa would die before she spoke. 
Petr6ff is dead — died, as I told you, raving mad." 

From his last words I presumed that Petroff 
was the third man I had seen, and also the fellow- 
prisoner who had denounced Jilacari. 

"Was it Macari — that double-dyed traitor? No 
— he was the murderer — such an avowal would 
defeat his ends. Tell me how you know ? " 

" I would tell you, but I suspect you would-not 
believe me." 

" Believe you ! " he cried, excitedly. " I would 
believe anything connected with that night — it has 
never left my thoughts — Mr. Vaughan, the truth 
has come to me in my captivity. I am not con- 



t44 CALLED BACK. 

demned to this life for a political crime. My 
sentence is God's indirect vengeance for the deed 
you witnessed." 

It was clear that Ceneri was not such a hardened 
ruffian as Macari. He, at least, had a conscience. 
Moreover, as he appeared to be superstitious, he 
would perhaps believe me when I told him how 
my accurate knowledge had been obtained. 

"I will tell you," I said, "provided you pledge 
your honour to give me the full history of that 
fearful crime, and answer my questions fully and 
truthfully." 

He smiled bitterly. "You forget my position, 
Mr. Vaughan, when you speak of ' honour.' Yet 
I promise all you ask." 

So I told him, as shortly and simply as I could, 
all that had occurred ; all I had seen. He shud- 
dered as I again described the terrible vision. 

" Spare me," he said, " I know it all. Thousands 
of times I have seen it or have dreamed it — it will 
never leave me. But why come to me ? .Pauline, 
you say, is recovering her senses — she would have 
told you all." 

" I would not ask her until I saw you. She is 
herself again, but I am a stranger to her — and un- 
less your ansvv'er is the one I hope for, we shall 
never meet again." 

"If anything I can do to atone — " he began, 
eagerly. 

" You can only speak the truth. Listen. I taxed 
the murderer, your accomplice, with the crime. 
Like you he could not deny it, but he justified it." 

"How ? — tell me," panted Ceneri. 

For a moment I paused. I fixed my eyes upon 
him to catch every change of featme — to read the 
truth in more than words. 

"He vowed to me that the ,young man was 
killed by your instructions — that he was — oh God 



CALLED BACK. I45 

how can I repeat it ! — the lover of Pauline, wlio 
having dishonoured her, refused to repair his fault. 
The truth I Tell me the truth ! " 

I almost shouted the last words — my calmness 
vanished as I thought of the villain who had, with 
a mocking smile, coupled Paulina's name with 
shame. 

Ceneri, on the other hand, grew calmer as he 
grasped the purport of my question. Bad as the 
man might be, even stained with innocent blood, 
I could have clasped him in my arms as I read in 
his wondering eyes the^ baselessness of the foul 
accusation. 

"That young man — the boy struck down by 
Macari's dagger was Pauline's brother — my sister's 
child — Anthony March ! " 



ClfAPTER XIII. 

A TEKIilBLE CONFESSION 

Ceneri, having made this astounding announce- 
ment, threw his wasted arms across the rough 
table, and laid his head upon them with a gesture 
of despair. I sat like one stupefied, repeating me- 
chanically, "Pauline's brother — Anthony March 1" 
Every vestige of the black lie was swept away 
from my mind ; but the crime in which Ceneri had 
been concerned assumed more fearful proportions. 
It was more dreadful than I had suspected. The 
victim a near blood relation — his own sister's 
child ! Nothing, I felt, could be urged to excuse 
or palliate the crime. Even had he not 9rdered 
and planned it, he had been present; haS assisted 
in hiding all traces of it ; had been, until recently, 
on terms of friendship with the man who had struck 
the blow. I could scarcely control the loathing 



146 CALLED BACK. 

and contempt I felt for the abject wretch before 
me. My burning indignation would scarcely allow 
me to ask him, in intelligible speech, the object of 
the cruel deed. But for once and all I must have 
ever3rthing made clear to m.e. 

I was spared the necessity of asking the question 
1 was trying to force to my lips. The convict 
raised his head and looked at me with miserable 
eyes. 

" You shrink from me. No wonder. Yet I am 
not so guilty as you think." 

"Tell me all, first ; the^xcuses may come after- 
wards, if an3'thing can be urged in excuse of the 
crime." 

I spoke as I felt — sternly and contemptuously. 

"None can be urged for the murderer. Forme, 
God knows I would willingly have let that bright 
boy live. He forsook and forgot his country, but 
that I forgave." 

" His country ! His father's country was Eng- 
land ! " 

*' His mother's was Italy," replied Ceneri almost 
fiercely. " He had our blood in his veins. His 
mother was a true Italian. She would have given 
fortune, life — aye, even honour, for Italy." 

*' No matter. Tell me the whole terrible story." 

He told me. In justice to a penitent man, I do 
not use his own words in re-telling it.. Without 
his accent and stress they v/ould sound cold and 
unemotional. Criminal he had been, but not so 
utterly black as my fancy had painted him. His 
great fault was that in the cause of liberty any 
weapons were allowable, any crimes were pardon- 
able. We Englishmen, whose idea of tyranny and 
oppression is being debarred from the exercise of 
the franchise, can neither understand nor sym- 
pathise with a man of his type. We "may call the 
govenment righteous or corrupt as we are Whigs 



CALLED BACK. I47 

or Tories, and one side happens to be in or out; 
but, at least, we are ruled by our countrymen, 
elected by some of us for that purpose. Let us be 
for years and years at the mercy of a foreigner, and 
we may understand what patriotism, in Cencri's 
sense, means. 

He and his sister were the children of respectable 
middle-class people — not noble as Macari asserted. 
He had been given a liberal education, and adopted 
the profession of a doctor. His sister, from whom 
Pauline inherited her great beauty, lived the life of 
an ordinary Italian girl — a duller life perhaps 
than many of them led, as, following her brother's 
example, she refused to share in gaieties whilst the 
white-coated foe ruled the land. No doubt she 
would have been faithful to her mourning for her 
countr)' had not love comie upon the scene. An 
Englishman named March saw the fair Italian 
girl, won her heart, wedded her and carried her 
away in triumph to his native land. Ceneri never 
quite forgave his sister for her desertion and de- 
fection ; but the prospects opened before her by the 
marriage were so great that he made httle oppo- 
sition to it. March was a verj^ rich man. He was 
the only son of an only son, which fact accounts 
for Pauline having, so far as Ceneri knew, no near 
relatives on her father's side. For several years 
the young husband and his beautiful dark-eyed 
wife lived in great happiness. Two children, a 
son and a daughter, were born to them. When 
the son was twelve and the daughter ten years 
old the father died. The widow, who had m^.de 
few close friends in England, and only loved the 
country for her husband's sake, flew back to her 
li-itiva land. She was cordially welcomed bf vdl 
her old friends. She was considered fabulously 
v,eal_thy. Her husband, in the first flush of his 
passion, had made a will bequcathi?ig everything 



148 CALLED BACK. 

he possessed to her absolutely. Although children 
had since come, so perfectly did he trust her that 
no change had been made as to the disposition of 
his property. So with such a fortune at her com- 
mand, Tilrs. March was honoured and courted by all. 
,She had, until she met her future husband, 
loved her brother above everyone in the world. 
She had echoed his patrioKsm, sympathised with 
him in his schemes, and listened to the wild plots 
he was always planning. He was some years 
older than she was, and upon her return to Italy 
she found him, outwardly, nothing more than a 
(Uiiet, hard-working, ill-paid doctor. She marvelled 
at the change from the headstrong, visionary, daring 
young man she had left. It was not until he was 
certain her heart had not forsaken her country 
(hat Ceneri allowed her to see that under his 
prosaic exterior lurked one of the subtlest and 
ablest minds of all tiiose engaged in working 
out the liberation of Italy. Then all his old sway 
came back. She admired, almost worshipped him. 
She, too, was ready to make any sacrifice when 
the time sliould come. 

What she would have done had she been called 
upon, it is impossible to say ; but there is little 
doubt but her fortune and her children's fortune 
vould have been freely spent in the good cause. 
As it was she died long before the pear was ripe, 
and when she died, such was her faith in her 
brother, everything was left in his hands as sole 
trustee for her children. In her last moments the 
thought of her husband's decided English proclivi- 
ties made her exact a promise that both the boy 
and the girl should be given an English education. 
Then she closed her eyes, and the orphans wer« 
left entirely to the trustee's mercy. 

He obeyed her spoken commands to the letter. 
Anthony and Pauline were sent to English schools; 



CALLED BACK, I49 

but having no friends in their father's native land, 
or all old friends having been lost sight of during 
their mother's widowhood, the holidays were spent 
in Italy. They grew up almost as much Italian as 
English. Ceneri husbanded, invested and managed 
their fortune with care and in a business-like wa)'. 
I have no doubt, so far as it went, his honesty was 
unimpeachable. 

Then the longed tor moment came ! The great 
blow was to be struck. Ceneri, who had kept 
himself out of little abortive plots, felt that now or 
never he must do all he could do for his country. 
He hailed the coming man. He knew that Gari- 
baldi was to be the saviour of his oppressed land. 
The first rash step had been taken and led to 
success. The time and the man were at hand. 
Recruits were flocking by thousands to the scene 
of war, but the cr^' was " Money, money, money ! " 
Money for arms and ammunition — money for stores, 
food and clothing — money for bribes — money for 
everything ! Those who furnished the sinews of 
war would be the real liberators of their country ! 

Why should he hesitate ? Had his sister lived 
she would have given all the fortune she possessed 
as freely as she would have given her life ! Were 
not her children half Italian ? Liberty laughed at 
such a small thing as breach of trusc. 

Except a few thousand pounds, he ruthlessly 
realised and sacrificed the wiiole of the children's 
inheritance. He poured their thousands and 
thousands into the hands held out for them. The 
large sum was spent where it was most wanted, 
and Ceneri averred that he freed Italy by the 
opportune aid. Perhaps he did — wlio can tell ! 

Titles and honours were afterwards offered hinj 
for this great though secret service. It makes me 
think better of the man that he refused all reward. 
His conscience may have told him he had not 



150 CALLED BACK. 

robbed Lirnself. Anyway, he remained plain 
Doctor Ceneri, and broke with his old leader? 
and friends when he found that Italy was to be a 
kingdom, not a republic. 

He had kept, I said, a few thousand pound?, 
The boy and the girl were growing up, and their 
uncle thought that even his patriotism permitted 
him to keep back enough to complete their educa- 
tion and start them in life. Pauline was promising 
to be so beautiful that he troubled little about her 
future. A rich husband would set everj^thing right 
for her. But Anthony — who was becoming a wild 
headstrong young fellow — was another affair. 

As soon as the youth should reach man's estate 
Ceneri had resolved to make a clean breast of his 
defalcations — to tell him how the money had been 
spent — to beg his forgiveness, and, if necessary, 
bear the penalty of his fraudulent act. But so long 
as any money remained he delayed doing so. The 
young man, if evincing no sympathy with his 
uncle's regeneration schemes and pursuit of liberty, 
fully believed in his integrity. Feeling assured 
that when he came of age he would succeed to 
a splendid inheritance, swelled by accumulated 
savings, he threw away money in a thousand and 
one extravagant ways, till Ceneri soon saw that 
the end of the reserve fund was drawing near. 

So long as he had money in hand to meet 
Anthony's demands, he postponed the evil day of 
confession. The idea, which Macari had tried to 
work out with my aid, of appealing to the Italian 
Government for a return of some of the amounts 
expended, suggested itself to him ; but to carry 
this out it would be necessary to let his nephew 
know what had taken place — the appeal must be 
made in his name. 

As the inevitable exposure drew near he dreaded 
it more and more. He had studied Anthony's 



CALLED BACK. I5I 

character, and felt sure that when he knew the 
truth his one wish would be to take revenge on 
the fraudulent trustee. Ceneri could see nothing 
before him but a well -deserved term of penal 
servitude. If the English law failed to touch 
him, that of his own country might be brought 
against him. 

It seems to me that until this time he had com- 
mitted no crime from v/hich he could not absolve 
himself on the grounds of patriotism; but now 
the desire to save himself from punishment grew 
upon him, and he determined to avoid the con- 
sequences of his acts. 

He had never felt any great affection for the two 
children. No doubt they had latterly appeared in 
the light of wronged innocents who would one 
day demand a reckoning with him. They were 
in disposition too much like their father for him 
to be greatly drawn towards them. He despised 
Anthony for his gay, frivolous life — a life without 
plans or ambition — and contrasted it with his 
own. He honestly believed he was doing good 
work in the world; that his plots and conspiracies 
quickened the steps of universal liberty. In his 
dark, secret circle he was a figure of considerable 
importance. If he were ruined and imprisoned he 
would be missed. Had he not the right to weigh his 
own high purposes against the butterfly existence 
of his nephew ? 

So he reasoned and persuaded himself that, for 
the sake of mankind, he might do almost anything 
to save himself. 

Anthony March was now twenty-two. Trusting 
his uncle; careless and easy-going; so long as his 
wants had been supplied he had accepted, until 
now, the excuses made for deferring the settlement 
of his affairs. Whether his suspicicns had at last 
been awakened or not cannot be said; but recert' 



I5Si CALLfiD BACK, 

he had taken another tone and was insisting that 
his fortune should be at once placed in his hands. 
Ceneri, whose schemes called him for a time to Eng- 
land, pacified him by assuring him that he would, 
during his stay in London, explain everything. 

The explanation must indeed be given now, as 
Anthony's last drafts had reduced the remnant oi 
his father's wealth almost to nothing. 

Now, as to Macari's part in the affair. He 
had been for years a useful and trusted agent of 
Ceneri's ; but most probably without the Tatter's 
lofty and unselfish aims. He appears to have 
followed conspiracy as a trade by which money 
might be made. The fact, which seems beyond a 
doubt, that he fought bravely and distinguished 
himself on the battle-field, may be accounted for 
by the natural ferocity of the man's nature, which 
bade him fight for the sake of fighting. 

Being mixed up in all his plots he was often at 
Ceneri's house, wherever for the time being it 
might be ; and on many occasions saw Pauline. 
He fell in love with her v/hen she was but a young 
girl, and tried everything he knew to win her heart. 
To her he was soft and kind. She had no reason 
to mistrust him, but she utterly refused to give 
him the love he asked for. The pursuit went on 
at intervals for years — the man, to give him his 
due, was constancy itself. Again and again Pauline 
assured him of the hopelessness of his suit, but 
after each rebuff he returned to the attack. 

Ceneri gave him no encouragement. He did 
not wish to ot end him, and seeing that the givi 
was proof against his blandishments, let things 
alone, hoping that Macari would grow weary ol 
urging those requests which were always met by 
refusals. Ke believed that he was not seeking 
Pauline for ihe sake of the money which should 
have been h.-rs. Macari knew vvbat large sum.^ 



CALLED BACK. 1 53 

Ceneri had poured into the patriot's treasury, and, 
no doubt, guessed whence they came. 

Pauhne remained at school until she was nearly 
eighteen : then she spent two years with her 
uncle in Italy, it was a dull life for the girl, and 
she sighed audibly for England. Although meeting 
him seldom, she was passionately attached to her 
brother, and was greatly delighted when Ceneri 
told her that business would take him for a while 
to London, and that she might accompany him. 
She was growing tired of Macari's pertinacity 
and, moreover, longed to see her brother again. 

Ceneri, for the sake of receiving his many 
political friends at what hours of day or night he 
chose, took a furniGhed hou^ie for a short term. 
I'auline's disgust was great when she found that 
one of their first visitors was Macari. His 
presence was so indispensable to Ceneri that he 
took up his abode with them in Horace street. 
As old Teresa, the doctor's servant, accompanied 
the party and waited upon them, the change to 
Pauline was a very slight one. 

Macari still persecuted the girl without success. 
At last, almost desperate, he formed the wild plan 
of trying to enlist her brother on his side. His 
idea was that Pauline's love for Anthony would 
induce her to yield to any wish he expressed. He 
was no particular friend of the young man's, but, 
having once rendered him a signal service, felt 
himself entitled to ask a favour at his hands. 
Knowing that both brother and sister were penni- 
less he had less hesitation in so doing. 

He called on Anthony and made hi? request. 
Anthony, who seems to have been a proud, 
arrogant and not a very pleasant young man, 
simply ''aughed at his impertinence and bade 
him begone. Poor boy, he little knew what that 
laugh would cost him ! 



154 CALLED BACK. 

It may have been the retort made by Macari, as 
he departed in a whirlwind of rage, that opened 
Anthony's e3'es as to the jeopardy in which his 
fortune was placed. Anyway he wrote at once to 
his uncle, insisting upon an immediate settlement. 
In the event of any delay he would consult a 
solicitor and if necessary take criminal proceed- 
ings against the trustee. 

The moment which Ceneri had so long dreaded 
— so long postponed — had come; only nov.s the 
confession, instead of being, as he intended, a 
voluntary one, would be wrung from him. 

Whether he would be amenable to the Italian 
or English law he did not know, but he felt 
certain that Anthony would at once take steps 
to insure his arrest and detention. The latter, 
if only temporar}^, v/ould ruin the scheme upon 
which he was now engaged. At any cost Anthony 
March must be silenced for a time. 

He assured me with the solem.nity of a dying 
man that no thought of the dreadful means which 
effected this was in his mind. He had revolved 
many plans and finally settled on one which, 
although difficult to execute and very hazardous, 
seemed to give the best promise of success. His 
intention was, with the assistance of his friends 
and subordinates, to carry Anthony abroad and 
deposit him for some months in a lunatic asylum. 
The confinement was only to be temporary; yet, 
although Ceneri did not confess to it, I have little 
doubt but the young man would have been asked 
to buy his freedom by a promise to forgive the 
misappropriation of the trust money. 

And now as to carrying this precious plan into 
execution. Macari, vowing vengeance for the 
words of insult, was ready to aid in every way. 
Petroff, the man with the scarred face, was the 
doctor's, body and soul. Teresa, the old servant, 



CALLED BACK. 155 

would have committed any crime at he master's 
command. The necessary papers could be obtained 
or forged. Let the conspirators get Anthony to 
visit them at the house in Horace street, ai^d he 
should leave it only as a lunatic in charge of his 
doctor and his keepers. It was a vile treacherou. 
scheme, the success of which was very doubtful, 
necessitating, as it must, carrying the victim to 
Italy. How this was to be done Ceneri did not 
exactly explain — perhaps he had not quite worked 
out the details of the plot— perhaps the boy was 
to be drugged — perhaps he counted upon his 
frantic state when he discovered the true position 
of affairs to give colour to the statement that he 
was of unsound niind. 

The first thing was to induce Anthony to come 
to Horace street at an hour suitable for develop- 
ment of the plot. Ceneri made his preparations ; 
gave his instructions to his confederates, and then 
wrote to his nephew begging him to call upon him 
that night and hear his expl mation of matters. 

Perhaps Anthony mistrusted his relative and his 
associates more than was suspected. Anyway, he 
replied by declining the invitation ; but suggested 
that his uncle should call upon him instead. Then, 
by Macari's advice, Pauline was made the innocent 
means of luring her brother to the fatal house. 
Ceneri expressed his perfect indifference as to 
where the meeting took place, but, being very 
much engaged, postponed it for a day or two. He 
then told Pauline that as business would keep him 
from home until late the next night, it would be a 
good opportunity for her to spend some time with 
her brother — she had better ask him to come and 
■ee her during his absence. As he also wanted to 
see Anthony she must endeavour to keep him until 
his return. 

Pauline, suspecting nothing, wrote to her brother, 



156 CALLED BACK. 

and, saying she should be all alone until late at 
night, begged him to come to her, or, if he would, 
take her to some place of amusement. They went 
to the theatre together, and it was twelve o'clock 
before he brought her back to Horace street. No 
doubt she begged him to remain with her awhile — 
perhaps against his will. Awful as the shock of 
what followed was to the girl, it must have been 
doubly so when she knew that her entreaties had 
led him to his death. 

The brother and sister sat alone for some time: 
then Ceneri and his two friends made their appear- 
ance. Anthony seemed displeased at the encounter, 
but made the best of matters and greeted his uncle 
civilly. Macari he simply turned his back upon. 

It was no part of Ceneri's plan that any act of 
violence or restraint should take place in the pre- 
sence of Pauline. Whatever was to be done 
should Vjo done when Anthony was about to leave 
the house. Then he might be seized and conveyed 
to the cellar: his cries if needful being stifled. 
Pauline was to know nothing about it. Arrange- 
ments liad been made for her to go on the morrow 
to a friend of her uncle's, v»ath whom she was to 
stay, ignorant of the purport of the business which 
suddenly called tlie plotters away. 

"Pauline," said Ceneri, "I think you had better 
go to bed. Anthony and I have some affairs to 
speak about." 

" I will wait until Anthony leaves," she said, " but 
if you want to talk I will go into the other room." 

So sa5nng, she passed through the folding doors 
and went to the piano, where she sat playing and 
singing for her own amusement. 

" It is too late to talk about business to-night," 
said Anthony, as his sister left the room. 

"You had better take this opportunity. I find 
I must leave England to-morrow ' 



CALLED BACK. X57 

Anthony, having no wish to let his uncle escape 
without an explanation, reseated liiniself. 

" Very well," he said ; " but there is no need tc 
have strangers present." 

" They are scarcely strangers. They are friends 
of mine, who will vouch for the truth of what I am 
going to say." 

" I will not have my affairs talked about before 
a man like that," said Anthony, with a motion of 
contempt towards Macari. 

The two men were conversing in a low tone. 
Pauline was not far ofl", and neither wislied to 
alarm her by high words or by the appearance o( 
a pending quarrel ; but Macari heard the remark 
and saw the gesture. His eyes blazed and he 
leaned forward towards young March. 

" It may be, in a few days," he said, "you will 
be willing enough to give me freely the gift you 
refused a short time ago." 

Ceneri noticed that the speaker's right hand 
was inside the breast of his coat, but this being 
a favourite attitude of his, thought nothing of it. 

Anthony did not condescend to reply. He turned 
from the man with a look of utter contempt — a 
look which, no doubt, drove Macari almost beside 
himself with rage. 

'• Before we talk about anything else," he said 
to his uncle, " I shall insist that from now Pauline 
is placed under my care. Neither she nor her 
fortune shall become the prey of a low-bred, 
beggarly Italian adventurer like this man, your 
friend." 

These were the last words the poor boy ever 
spoke. Macari took one step towards him — he 
made no exclamn.tion of rage — hissed out no oath 
which might warn his victim. Grasped in his right 
hand the long bright steel leapt from its lurking 
place, and as Anthony March looked up, and then 



158 CALLED BACK. 

threw himself back in his chair to avoid him, the 
blow was struck downwards with all the force of 
that strong arm — the point of the dagger entering 
iust below the collar-bone and absolutely trans- 
fixing the heart. Anthony March was silenced 
for ever ! 

Then, even as he fell, Pauline's song stopped, 
and her cry of horror rang through the room. 
From her seat at the piano she could see what 
had happened. Is it any wonder that the sight 
bereft her of her senses ? 

Macari was standing over his victim. Ceneri 
was stupefied at the crime which in a moment had 
obviated any necessity for carrying out his wild 
plot. The only one who seemed in possession of 
his wits was Petroff. It was imperative that 
Pauline should be silenced. Her cries would 
alarm the neighbours. He rushed forward, and 
throwing a large woollen sofa-cover over her head, 
placed her on the couch, where he held her by 
force. 

At that moment I made my frantic entrance — 
blind and helpless, but, for all they knew, a 
messenger of vengeance. 

Even the ruthless Macari was staggered at my 
appearance. It was Ceneri who, following the 
instincts of self-preservation, drew a pistol and 
cocked it. It was he who understood the meaning 
of my passionate appeal to their mercy — he who, 
he averred, saved my life. 

Macari, as soon as he recovered from his sur- 
prise, insisted that I should share Anthony March's 
fate. His dagger was once more raised to take 
human life, whilst Petroff, who had been forced by 
the new turn of affairs to leave Pauline, pinned me 
down where I had fallen. Ceneri struck the steel 
aside and saved me. He examined my eyes and 
vouched for the truth of my statement. There 



CALLED BACK. 1 59 

was no time for recriininations or accusations, but 
he swore that another murder should not be com- 
mitted. 

Petroff supported him, and Macari at last sul- 
lenly yielded, with the stipulation that I should be 
disposed of in the matmer already related. Had 
the means been at hand 1 should have been drugged 
at once ; as it was, the old servant, who as yet 
knew nothing of the tragedy which had taken 
place, was roused up and sent out in search of the 
needful draught. The accomplices dared not let 
me leave their sight, so I was compelled to sit and 
listen to all their actions. 

Why did Ceneri not denounce the niurder ? 
Why was he, at least, an accessory after the 
crime ? I can only believe that he was a worse 
man than he confessed himself to be, or that he 
trembled at his share in the transaction. After 
all, he had been planning a crime almost as black, 
and when the truth as to the trust money was 
known, no jury in the world would have acquitted 
him. Perhaps both he and Petroff held human 
life lightly ; their hands were certainly not clean 
from political assassinations. Feeling that a trial 
must go hard with them, they threw their lotin 
withMacari's, and at once set about baffling inquiry 
and hiding all traces of the crime. From that 
moment there was httle to choose between the 
degrees in criminality of the three men. 

Now that they were all sailing in the same boat, 
they had little doubt of success. Teresa was per- 
force taken into their confidence. This was no 
matter, as. devoted to Ceneri. she would have 
aided in a dozen murders had her master decreed 
them. First of all they must get rid of me. Petroff 
— for Ceneri would not trust me in Macari's 
hands— went out and found a belated cab. For a 
handsome consideration the driver consented to 



l50 CALLED BACK. 

lend it to him for an hour and a half. It was still 
night, so there was no difficulty in carrying my 
senseless form to it without observation. 

PetrofF drove off, and having deposited me in a 
by-way a long distance from the house, returned 
the cab to its owner and rejoined his companions. 

And now for Pauline. Her moans had gradu- 
ally died away, and she lay in a deathlike stupor. 
The great danger to the accomplices would be 
from her. Until she recovered nothing could be 
done save to carry her to her room and place her 
under Teresa's charge. When she awoke they 
must decide what course to pursue. 

But the pressing thing was, how to make away 
with the dead body of the murdered man. All sorts 
of plans were discussed, until one at last was 
adopted the very audacity of which no doubt made 
it a success. They v/ere now growing desperate and 
prepared lo risk nmch. 

Early in the morning a letter was dispatched to 
Anthony's lodging, saying that Mr. March had 
been taken seriously ill the night before, and was 
at his uncle's. This served to stop any enquiry 
from that quarter. In the meantime the poor young 
fellow had been laid out as decently as possible, 
and with everything that could be done to suggest 
a natural death. A doctor's certificate of death 
was then forged. Ceneri did not tell me how the 
form was obtained. The man he got it from knew 
nothing of its object. An undertaker then was 
ordered to send a coffin and deal case for the same 
the next night. The body, in Ceneri's piesence, 
was simply placed inside it, with none of the usual 
paraphernalia, the reason given for such apparent 
indecency being that it was only a temporary 
arrangement, as it was to be taken abroad for in- 
terment. The undertaker marvelled, but being 
well paid, held his peace. Then, by the aid of the 



CALLED BACK. I&l 

forged certificate, the proper formalities were com- 
plied with, and in two days' time the three men, 
in the garb of mourners, were travelling to Italy 
with the body of their victim. There was nothing 
to stop them, nothing suspicious in their manner 
or in the circumstances of the case. They actually 
took the cofhn to the town where Anthony's mother 
died, and they buried the son by the side of the 
mother, with his name and the date of his death 
recorded on the stone. Then they felt safe from 
everybody except Pauline. 

They were safe even from her. When she at 
last awoke from her stupor, even Teresa could see 
that something had gone wrong. She said nothmg 
about the scene she had witnessed ; she asked no 
questions. Her past had vanished. According to 
instructions given her, Teresa, as soon as possible, 
took her to join Ceneri in Italy, and he saw that 
Macari's crime had deprived the brother of life and 
the sister of reason. 

No search or enquiry was made for Anthony 
March. Carrying out his bold plan to the very 
letter, Ceneri instructed an agent to take posses- 
sion of his fev/ personal effects at his lodgings, and 
to inform the people there that he had died at his 
house and been taken to Italy to be buried with 
his mother. A few friends for a while regretted 
a companion, and there was an end of the affair. 
Nothing having been heard of the blind man, it 
was supposed he had been wise enough to keep his 
own counsel. 

Months and months passed by, whilst Pauline 
remained in the same state. Teresa took charge 
of her, and lived with her in Turin until that time 
when I saw them at San Giovanni. Ceneri, who 
had no fixed home, saw Uttle of the girl. His 
presence did not awaken any painful recollections 
in her mind, but to him the sight of his niece waa 



l6a CALLED BACK. 

unbearable. It recalled what he was eager to 
forget. She never seemed happy in Italy ; in 
her uncertain way she was pining for England. 
Anxious to get her out of his sight, he had con- 
sented that Teresa should take her to London- 
had, in fact, come to Turin that particular day to 
arrange as to their departure. Macari, who, even 
with a brother's blood between them, considered 
her in some way his property, accompanied him. 
He had been continually urging Ceneri to let 
him marry her, even as she was now. He had 
threatened to carry her off by force. He had 
sworn she should be his. She remembered no- 
thing — why should he not wed her ? 

Bad as Ceneri was, he had recoiled from this. 
He would even, had it been possible, have broken 
oflf all intercourse with Macari; but the men were 
too deep in each other's secrets to be divided on 
account of a crime, however atrocious ; so he sent 
Pauline to England. There she was safe from 
Macari. Tlfen came my proposal, the acceptance 
of which would take her, at my expense, entirely 
off his hands and out of his companion's way. 

Hence our strange marriage, which even now 
he justified by saying that should the girl grow 
attached to anyone, should any feelings correspond' 
ing to affection be awakened in her clouded mind, 
that mind would gradually be built up again. 

This, if not in his own words, was Ceneri s tale. 
I now knew all I wanted to know. Perhaps he 
had painted himself in better colours than he 
deserved ; but he had given me the whole dark 
history freely and unreservedly, and in spite of 
the loathing and abhorrence with whici. he now 
inspired me, I felt that he had told me the truth. 



CALLBD BACK. l6\ 

CHAPTER XIV. 

DOES SHE REMEMBER f 

It was time to bring our interview to an end. It 
had lasted so long that the civil Captain had more 
than once peeped in v/ith a significant look on his 
face, as much as to say there was such a thing as 
oversteppmg the limits of even such an authority 
as I held. I had no desire to protract the con- 
versation with the convi(5l. The obje(5t of my 
long journey had been attained. I had learnt all 
that I could learn. I knew Pauline's history. 
The crime had been fully confessed. The man 
with me had no claim upon my consideration. 
Even had I felt inclined to help him I had nc 
means of so doing. Why should I linger ? 

But I did Hns^er for a while. The thought that my 
rising and giving the signal that my business was 
finished would immediately consign the prisoner 
to that loathsome den from which he had emerged, 
was inexpressibly painful to me. Every moment 
I could keep him with me would be precious to 
him. Never again would he see the face of a 
friend or acquamtance. 

He had cciised lipedking. lie sat v/ith his head* 
bent forward ; his eyes resting on the ground. A 
tattered, haggard, hopeless wretch ; so broken 
down that one dare not reproach him. I watched 
him in r-ilcnc^. 

Presently he spoke: *' Ycu can find no excuse 
for me, Mr. Vaughan ?" 

•' None," I said. •• it seems to me there is little 
to choose between you and your associates." 

He rose wearily. '* Pauline will recover, you 
tbiiik ?" he asked. 



164 CALLED BACK. 

" I think — I liopc I shall find her almost well on 
my return." 

" You will tell her how you have found rne ; she 
may be happier in knowing that Anthony's death 
has indirectly brought me to this." 

I bowed assent to this dreary request. 

" I must go back now," he said, with a kind oi 
shiver, and dragging his weary limbs slowly to- 
wards the door. 

In spite of his sins I could not let the wretched 
being go without a word. 

"Stop a moment," I said. "Tell me if there is 
anything I can do to make your life any easier." 

He smiled faintly. " You may give me money 
— a little. I may be able to keep it and buy a few 
prisoners' luxuries." 

I gave him several notes, which he secreted on 
his person. 

" Will you have more ? " I asked. He shook his 
head. 

" I expect these will be stolen from me before 1 
spend them." 

' " But is there no way of leaving money with 
an3'one for your use ? " 

" You might leave some with the Captain. It 
may be, if he is kind-hearted and honest, a portion 
of it may reach me. But even that is doubtful."^ 

I promised to do so, and knew that, whether it 
reached him or not, I should feel easier for having 
made the attempt. 

*'But what will your future be? Where are 
they taking you, and what will be your life ?'' 

"They are taking us right to the end of Siberia 
— to Nertchinsk. There 1 shall be drafted off with 
others to work in the mines. We go ail the way 
on foot and in chains." 

'■* What an awful fate ! " 

Ceneri smiled. •• After what I have passed 



CALLED BACK. 165 

througli, it is Paradise opening before me. When 
a man offends against the Russian law his one 
hope is that he may be sent at once to Siberia. 
That means going from hell to heaven." 
" I do not understand." 

••You would if you had lain like me for months, 
untried and uncondemned. If you had been 
placed in a cell without light, without air, without 
room to move. If you had heard those next to 
you screaming in their madness — madness brought 
on by solitary confinement and cruel treatment. 
If every morning as you woke you had said, ' I, 
too, shall be an' idiot before nightfall.' If you had 
been frozen, beaten, starved, in order to make you 
betray your friends. If you had been reduced to 
such a state that your death warrant would be 
welcome ; then, Mr. Vaughan, you would look for- 
ward to and long for the gentle rigours of Siberia. 
I swear to you, sir," he continued with more fire 
and animation than he had yet displayed, "that if 
the civilised nations of Europe knew one -tenth 
part of the horrors and deeds in a Russian prison, 
they would say, •Guilty or innocent, no hum.an 
beings shall l)e tormented like this,' and for the 
sake of common humanity would sweep the whole 
accursed govenunent from the face of the earth!" 

•' But twenty years in the mmes I Is there no 
hope of escaping ? " 

" Where could I escape to ? Look at the map 
and see where Nertchinsk is. If I escape I could 
only wander about the mountains until I died or 
until some of the savages around killed me. No, 
Mr, Vaughan, escapes from Siberia only occur in 
novels." 

'•Then 5'ou must slave until your death ?" 

" i hope not. I once gathered together much 
mformation respecting Siberian convicts, and, to 
tell you the truth, was rather disgusted to find 



l66 CALLED BACK. 

how incorrect the common opinion is. Now I can 
only hope my researches showed me the truth." 

" The treatment is not so bad, then ? "' 

" It is bad enough, as you are always at the 
mercy of a petty tyrant. There is no doubt but 
for a year or two I must slave in the mines. If 
I survive the toil, which is very unlikely, I may, 
by finding favour in the ruler's eyes, be released 
from further work of that description. I may even 
be allowed to reside at some town and earn my 
living. I have great hopes that my professional 
skill may be of use to me. Doctors are scarce in 
Asiatic Russia," 

Little as he deserved it, my heart echoed his wish ; 
but as I looked at him I felt sure there was small 
chance of his enduring even a year's toil at the mines. 

The door opened and the Captain once more 
looked in. He was growing quite impatient. I 
had no reason for wishing to prolong the conver- 
sation, so I told him I should have finished in a 
moment. He nodded his head and withdrew. 

" If there is anything more I can do let me 
know," I said, turning to Ceneri. 

"There is nothing" Stay! one thing. Macari, 

that villain — sooner or later he will get his 
deserts. I have suffered — so will he. When that 
time comes, will you try to send me word ? It 
may be difficult to do so, and I have no right to 
aak che favoar. But you have interest, and might 
get intelligence sent me. If I am not dead by 
then, it will make me happier." 

Without waiting for my reply he walked hastily 
to the door, and with the sentry at his side was 
marched off to the prison. 

As the cumbrous lock was being turned he 
paused. " Farewell, Mr. Vaughan," he said. " If 
I have wronged you I cAtreat your pardon. We 
shall meet no more-" 



CALLED BACK. 167 

" So far as I am concerned I forgive you freely." 

He hesitated a moment and then held out his 
iiand. The door was now open. 1 could see the 
throng of repulsive, villainous faces— the faces of 
his feliow-prisoners. I could hear the jabber of 
curiosity and wonder. I could smell the foul 
odours coming from that reeking den crowded 
with filthy humanity. And in such a place as 
this, with such associates, a man of education, 
culture and refined tastes, was doomed to spend 
his last days. It was a fearful punishment 1 

Yet it was well merited. As he stood on the 
threshold with outstretched hand I felt this. To 
all in^tents and purposes the man was a murderer. 
Much moved as I was by his fate I could not bring 
myself to giasp his hand- My refusal may have 
been harsh, but I could not do it. 

He saw that I did not respond to his action. 
A flush of shame passed over his face ; he bowed 
his head and turned away. The soldier took him 
roughly by the arm and thrust him through the 
doorway. Then he turned, and his eyes met mine 
with an expression that haunted me for days. He 
was gazing thus when the heavy door was shut 
and hid him from my sight for ever. 

I turned away sick at heart, perhaps regretting 
I had added anything to his shame and punish- 
ment. I sought my obliging friend, the Captain, 
and received his word of honour that any money I 
left with him should be expended for the convict's 
benefit. I placed a considerable sum in his hands, 
and can only hope that a part of it reaqhed its 
destination. 

Then I found my interpreter, and ordered horses 
to be at once procured and the tarantass brought 
out. I would start v.'ithout a moment's delay for 
England — and Pauline ! 

In half -an -hour all was ready. Ivan and I 



t68 CALLED BACK. 

stepped into the carriage; the yemschik flourished 
his whip ; the horses sprang forward ; the bells 
jingled merrily, and away we went in the darkness; 
commencing the return journey which counted by 
thousands of miles. It was only now, when burn- 
ing to find myself home again, that I realised the 
fearful distance which lay between me and my 
love. 

A turn of the road soon hid the gloomy ostrog 
from my sight, but it was not until we were miles 
and miles away that my spirits recovered anything 
like their former tone, and it v/as days before I 
ceased to think, at nearh/ every moment, of that 
terrible place in which I had found Ceneri, and to 
which I saw him again consigned after my business 
with him was finished. 

As this is not a book of travel I will not recapit- 
ulate the journey. The weather nearly all the 
time was favourable, the roads were in good con- 
dition. My impatience forced me to travel almost 
day and night. I spared no expense ; my extra- 
ordinary passport procured me horses when othrr 
travellers were compelled to wait — my large gra- 
tuities made those horses use their best speed. In 
thirty-five days we drove up to the Hotel Russia 
at Nijnei Novgorod, with the tarantass in such 
a dilapidated condition that in all probability 
another stage would have finished its work in this 
world. I bestowed it, a free gift, upon my guide, 
who, I believe, sold it inmiediately for three 
roubles. 

From Nijnei by rail to Moscow ; from Moscow 
to St. Petersburgh. I only tarried in the capital 

long enough to pay my respects to Lord , and 

once more thank him for his assistance : then 
having collected what luggage I had left there, 
away for England ! 

Ou my road back from Irkutsk I found a letter 



CALLED BACK. lOQ 

from Piioolla at Tomsk, at Tobolsk and at Perm, 
also more recently written ones at St. Peiersijurgh. 
All up to the date of the last was going on well. 
Priscilla had taken her charge to Devonshire, 
liaving been reared in that county the old woman 
had a great belief in its virtues. They were at a 
quiet but beautiful little watering-place on the 
north coast, and Priscilla averred that Pauline 
" was blooming as a rose, and seemed as sensible 
aj Master Gilbert himself." 

No wonder after hearing this good rews I was 
eager to reach home — longing, not only to see my 
wife again, but to see her as I have never yet seen 
her, with her mind restored. Would she remember 
me ? How should we meet ? Would she at last 
learn to love me ? Were my troubles at an end 
or only begun ? These were the questions which 
could only be answered when England was 
reached. 

Home at last! How delightful to stand among 
one's own countryni'^-n, and hear nothing but good 
intelligible English around me. I am bronzed 
with exposure to the wind and sun, my beard has 
grown to a great length ; one or two acquaintances 
I met when 1 reached London scaicely knew me. 
In my present trmi 1 could not hope that 1 should 
awaken any recollections in Pauline's mind. 

By the aid of a razor and fresh apparel I was 
soon converted to a fairly good semblance of my 
former self, and then, without having apprised 
even Priscilla of my return, I started for the west, 
to see what fate had in store for me. 

What is a run across England after a man has 
made such a journey as my recent one ? Yet, that 
pitiful hundred and fifty miles seemed to me as 
long as a thousand did a month ago. The last few 
miles I had to go by coach, and, ahhough four 
splendid horses spun us along, each individual 



170 CALLED BACK. 

mile seemed as long as a Siberian stage. But the 
journey was at last ended, and, leaving my luggage 
in the coach office, I salhed forth, with a beating 
heart, to find Pauline. 

I went to the address given in Priscilla's letter. 
The house was a quiet little building, nestling on 
a wooded bank, with a sloping garden in front, 
full of late summer flowers. Honeysuckle twined 
round the porch, great sunflowers stared fiercely 
from the beds, and carnations sweetened the air. 
As I waited for the door to be opened I had time 
to approve Priscilla's choice of a resting place. 

I enquired for Mrs. Drew. She was not at home 
— had gone out with the young lady sometime ago, 
and would not be back until the evening. I turned 
av/ay and went in search of them. 

It was early autumn, but the leaf showed no 
signs of fading. Everything was green, fresh and 
beautiful. The sky was cloudless, and a soft 
balmy air fanned my cheek. I paused and looked 
around me before I decided in which direction to 
go. Far below my feet lay the little fishing village ; 
its houses clustered round the mouth of the noisy, 
brawling stream which ran down the valle)', and 
leapt joyously into the sea. On either hand were 
great tors, and behind them, inland, hills covered 
with woods, and in front of me stretcliing away 
and away was the calm green sea. The scene was 
fair enough, but I turned away from it. I wanted 
Pauline. 

It seemed to me that on such a day as this the 
shady woods and the running stream must offer 
irresistible attractions ; so I found my way dov/n 
the steep hill, and began walking up the riverside, 
whilst the merry stream danced past me, throwing 
its rich brown peat-stained waters into a thousand 
little cascades as it shot over and foamed round 
the great boulders which disputed its passage. 



CALLED BACK. I7I 

I followed its course for about a mile — now 
clambering over moss-grown rocks, now wading 
through ferns, now forcing my way through pliant 
hazel boughs — then in an open space on the oppo- 
site bank 1 saw a girl sitting sketching. Her back 
was towards me, l)ut I knew every turn of that 
graceful figure well enough to feel sure she was 
my wife. 

If I iiad needed extra assurance I had but to 
look at her companion, who sat near her and 
appeared to be dozing over a book. I should have 
recognised that shawl of Priscilla's a mile away — 
its like has never been knov/n on earth. 

Hard as I found it to do so, I resolved not to 
make my presence known to them. Before I met 
Pauline I wanted to talk to Priscilla and be guided 
by her report as to my future method of proceed- 
ing. But in spite of my determination I yielded 
to the temptation of drawing nearer — from v/here 
I stood I could not see her face — so I crept on inch 
Dy inch till I was nearly opposite the sketcher, 
and, half hidden by the undergrowth, 1 stood 
watching her to my heart's content. 

There was the hue of health upon her cheek — 
there was the appearance of health in every move- 
ment, and as she turned and spoke a few words to 
her companion there was that in her look and in 
her smile which made my heart bound. The wife 
I returned to wag a different being from the girl I 
had married. 

She turned and looked across the stream. 
Carried away by my joy I had entirely emerged 
from my lurking place. With the river between 
us our e3'es met. 

She must in some v.'ay have remejnbered me. 
Were it but- as in a dream my face must have 
seemed familiar to her. She dropped her pencil 
and sketch-book and sprang to her feet before 



172 CALLED BACK. 

Priscilla's exclamation of surprise and delight was 
heard. She stood looking at me as though she 
expected I would speak or come to her, whilst the 
old servant was sending words of welcome across 
the noisy stream. 

Had I wished to retreat, it was now too late. I 
found a crossing place and in a minute or two was 
on the opposite bank. 

Pauline had not moved, but Priscilla ran to 
meet me and almost shook my hands off. 

" Does she remember — does she know me ? " I 
whispered, as I disengaged myself and. walked 
towards my wife. 

"Not yet ; but she will. I am sure she will, 
Master Gilbert." 

Breathing a prayer that her prophecy might 
come true, I reached Pauline's side and held out 
my hand. She took it without hesitartion, and 
raised her dark eyes to mine. How did I refrain 
from clasping her to my heart 1 

" Pauline, do you know me ? " 

She dropped her eyes. " Priscilla has talked of 
you. She tells me you are a friend, and that until 
you came I must be content and ask no questions." 

" But do you not remember me? I fancied you 
knew me just now." 

She sighed. " I have seen you in dreams — 
strange dreams." As she spoke a bright blush 
spread over her cheek. 

"Tell me the dreams," I said. 

" I cannot. I have been ill, very ill for a long time. 
I have forgotten much — everything that happened." 

" Shall I tell you ? " 

" Not now — not now," she cried eagerly. " Wait, 
and it may all come back." 

Had she any inkling of the truth ? Were the 
.'reams she spoke of but the struggles of growing 

lemory? Did that bright ring which was still on 



CALLED BACK. 173 

her finger suggest to her what had happened ? 
Yes, I would wait and hope. 

We walked back together, with Friscilla follow- 
ing at a proper distance. Pauline seemed to accept 
my society as though it was a perfectly natural 
thing to do so. When the path grew steep or 
rugged she held out her hand for mine, as though 
its support was her right. Yet for a long time she 
said nothing. 

•* Where have you come from ? " she asked at last. 

" From a long, long journey of many thousands 
of miles." 

" Yes ; when I saw your face you were always 
travelling. Did you find what you sought ? " she 
asked eagerly. 

♦' Yes. I found the truth. I know everything." 

♦* Tell me where he is ? " 

*• Where who is ? " 

" Anthony, my own brother — the boy they killed. 
Where is his grave ?" 

•' He is buried by the side of his mother." 

•« Thank God 1 I shall be able to pray over him." 

She spoke, if excitedly, quite sensibly, but I 
wondered she was not craving for justice to be 
meted out to the murderers. 

" Do you wish for vengeance on thos2 who killed 
him ?" 

"Vengeance! what good can vengeance do? 
It will not bring him back to life. It happened 
long ago. When, I know not ; but now it seems 
years ago. God may have avenged him by now." 

" He has, in a great measure. One died in prison 
raving mad ; another is in chains, working like a 
slave ; the third, as yet, is unpunished." 

"It will come to him sooner or later. Which 
is it ?" 

" Macari. ' 

She shuddered at the name and said no more. 



174 CALLED BACK. 

Just before we reached the house in which they 
lodged, she said, softly and beseechin<;ly, — 

" You will take me to Italy — to his grave ? ' 
^ I promised, only too glad to find how instinc- 
tively she turned to me to prefer the request. She 
must remember more than she gave herself credit 
for. 

" I wiil go there," she said, "and see the place, 
and then we will speak of the past no more." 

We were now at the garden gate. I took her 
hand in mine. 

" Pauline," I said, " try — try to remember me." 

A ghost of the old puzzled look came into her 
eyes ; she passed her disengaged hand over her 
forehead, and then, without a word, turned away 
and entered the house. 



CHAPTER XV. 

FROM GRIEF TO JOY. 

My tale is drawing to an end, although I could, 
for my own pleasure, write chapter after chapter, 
detailing every occurrence of the next month — 
describing every look, repeating every word that 
passed between Pauline and myself, but if I wrote 
them they would be sacred from all persons save 
two — my wife and myself. 

If my situation was an anomalous one, it had at 
least a certain charm. It was a new wooing, none 
the less entertaining and sweet because its object 
happened to be already my wife in name. It was 
like a landowner walking over his estate and in 
every direction finding unsuspected beauties an6 
unknown mines of wealth. Every day showed me 
fresh charms in the Vv^oman I loved. 

Her smile was a joy greater than I had ever 



CALLED BACK. I75 

pictured, her laugh a revelation. To gaze into those 
bright unclouded eyes and strive to learn their 
secrets was a reward that repaid me for all that I 
suffered. To find that her intellect, now restored, 
was fit to be matched with anyone's — to know 
that when the time came I should be given not 
only a wife, beautiful, in my eyes, above all v.'omen, 
but a companion and a sympathetic friend — how 
can I describe my rapture ? 

Yet it was a rapture not unmodified by doubts 
and fears. It may be that my character lacked 
that very useful trait called by some self-confidence 
and by others conceit. The more I saw to love 
and admire in Pauline, the more I asked myself 
how I could dare to expect that so peerless a 
creature would condescend to accept the love and 
the life I wished to offer her. Who was I to win 
her ? I was rich, it is true, but I felt sure that 
riches would not buy her affection— besides, as I 
had not told her that her own wealth was swept 
away, she fancied her fortune was as large as my 
own. She was young, beautiful, and, so far as she 
knew, free and amply provided for. No, I had 
nothing to offer her which was worthy of her 
acceptance. 

I quite dreaded to look forward to the moment 
which must sooner or later come -the moment 
when I must, ignoring the past, ask her once more 
to be my wife. On her answer would hang the 
whole of my future life. No wonder I decided to 
postpone the ordeal until I felt quite certain that 
the result of it would be favourable to me. No 
wonder that when with Pauline, and realising the 
value of the prize I aimed at, I grew quite humb'e 
and depreciatory of what merits 1 may have pos- 
sessed. No wonder that at times I wished that 1 
were gifted with that pleasing assurance which sits 
so well on many men, and time and opportunity 



lyb CALLED BACK. 

being given, seems to go a long way towards win- 
ning a woman's heart. 

Time and opportunity at least were not wanting 
in my case. 

I had taken up my quarters near to her, and 
from morn to night we were in each other's 
company. We wandered through the narrow 
Devonshire lanes, with their luxuriant banks of 
ferns on either side. We climbed the rugged 
tors. We fished with more or less success the 
rapid streams. We drove together. We read and 
sketched — but as yet we had not talked of love ; 
though all the while my wedding ring was on her 
finger. 

It required all my authority to prevent Priscilla 
telling Pauline the truth. On this point I was 
firm. Unless the past came back of its own accord, 
I would hear her say she loved me before my lips 
revealed it to her. Perhaps it was the idea which 
at times came to me, that Pauline remembered more 
tha-n she would own to, kept me steadfast in this 
resolution. 

It was curious the way m which she at once 
fell into friendly, unconstrained intercourse with 
me. We might have known each other from 
childhood, so perfectly natural and unembarrassed 
was her manner when we were together. She 
made no demur when I begged her to call me by 
my christian name, nor did she object to my 
making use of her own. Had she done so, I can- 
not think in what form I should have addressed 
her. Although I had instructed Priscilla to call 
her Miss March, the old woman stoutly objected 
to this, and compounded matters by speaking to 
her and of her as Miss Pauline. 

The days slipped by — the happiest days my life 
had as yet known. Morn, nooji and eve we were 
together ; and I fear were objects of great curiosity 



CALLED BACK. 177 

to our neighbours, who no doubt wondered v/hat 
relations existed between me and the beautiful 
girl at whose side I ever was. 

I soon found that Pauline's natural disposition 
was gay and bright'. It was too soon yet to expect 
it to reassert itself, yet I was not without hopes 
that before long that look, telling of sad memories, 
which so often crossed her face, would fade away 
for ever. Now and again a pleased smile Ht up 
her face; and merry words slipped from her lips. 
Although, when reason first returned to her, it 
seemed as if her brother's death had occurred but 
the day before, I felt sure that, after a while, she 
understood that years had passed since the fatal 
night. These years were to her wrapped in a mist ; 
they seemed as dreams. She was trying to recall 
them, beginning at the beginning ; and I need not 
say with what alacrity I lent my aid. 

By common consent v/e avoided the future ; but 
of the past, or all the past in which I was not 
concerned, we spoke freely. All the events of her 
early years she now remembered perfectly ; she 
could account for everything up to the time when 
her brother was struck down — after that came 
mistiness ; from which she emerged to find herself 
in a strange room, ill, and being nursed by a 
strange nurse. 

Several days passed before Pauline questioned 
me as to the part I had played in her clouded life. 
One evening we stood on the top of a thickly 
wooded hill, from which we could just catch a 
glimpse of the sea, now reddened by a glorious 
sunset. We had been silent for some time, and 
who can say that our thoughts were not more in 
unison than any words we could have spoken 
whilst our strange and uncertain relations con- 
tinued. I looked at the western sky until the 
glowing tints began to fade, then turning to mv 



178 CALLED BACK. 

companion I found her dark eyes gazing at' me 
with ahnost painful earnestness. 

" Tell me," she eaid, " tell me what I shall find 
when that lost time comes back to me." 

Her finders as she spoke were playing with her 
wedding ring. She still wore it, and the diamond 
keeper I had placed above it ; but she had not as 
yet asked me why it was on her hand. 

" \Vill it come back, Pauline, do you think ? " 
I asked. 

" I hope so — or stay ;■ should I hope so ? Tell 
me, will it bring me joy or sorrow ? " 

" Who can say — the two are always mingled." 

She sighed and turned her eyes to the ground. 
Presently she raised them to mine. 

"Tell me," she said, "how and when did you 
come into my Hfe — why did I dream of you ? " 

" You saw me so often when you were ill." 

" Why did I wake and find your old servant 
taking care of me? " 

" Your uncle gave you into my charge. I pro- 
mised to watch over you during his absence." 

" And he will never return. He is punished for 
his crime — for standing by when the poor boy 
was murdered " 

She pressed her hands to her eyes, as if to shut 
out the sight. 

" Pauline," I said, wishing to change the current 
of her thoughts, " tell me how you saw me in 
dreams ; what you dreamed of me ? " 

She shuddered. " I dreamed that you were 
standing by me— in the very room — that you 
saw the deed. Yet I know that it could not 
be so." 

" And then ? " 

" I saw your face many times — it v/as always 
travelling, travelling through clouds. I saw^ your 
lips move, and you seemed to say, ' I am going to 



CALLED BACK. 179 

learn the truth' — so I waited patiently till you 
returned." 

** You never dreamed of me before ? " 

It was growing dusk. I was uncertain whether 
it was the deepening shade from the trees which 
made her cheeks look darker, or whether it was a 
blush. My heart was beating madly. 

" I cannot tell ! I don't know ! Don't ask me!" 
she said in a troubled voice. Then she turned. 

" It grows dark and chilly. Let us go in." 

I followed her. It was so completely the rule 
for me to spend the evening with her that I did 
not even wait for an invitation. It was our custom 
to play and sing together for an hour or two. 
Pauline's first expressed desire after her recovery 
had been for a piano.' Believing herself to be an 
heiress she had felt no scruple in asking for all she 
wanted, and my instructions to Priscilla being 
that no money was to be spared in ministering 
to her comforts, a piano had been sent from the 
nearest town. 

All her skill had returned to her. Her voice 
had come back even stronger and more sweet 
than of old. Again and again she held me en- 
tranced as she had held me once before, when I 
little expected the fearful ending to her song, or 
that my fate and the singer's were so closely 
interwoven. 

I was surprised, therefore, when this evening 
she turned on the doorstep and said, " Not to- 
night Leave me, please, for to-night." 

I urged no objection. I took her hand and 
bade her farewell until the morrow. I would go 
and wander by starlight and think of her. 

As we parted she looked at me strangely, almost 
solemnly. 

" Gilbert," she said, speaking in Italian ; for 
Priscilla was now standing at the open door — 



l8o CALLED BACK. 

" shall I pray for the past to return or that I 
should never remember it ? Which will be the 
best for me — and for you?" 

Without waiting to hear my reply, she glided 
past Priscilla, who stood waiting for me to follow 
her. 

" Good night, Priscilla," I said ; " I am not 
coming in." 

" Not coming in, Master Gilbert ! Miss Pauline 
will be vexed." 

" She is tired and not quite well. You had 
better go to her. Good night." 

Priscilla came out to the doorstep and closed 
the door behind her. There was something in her 
manner which told me she meant on this par- 
ticular occasion to resume what she could of that 
authority she had been delegated to exercise over 
me during my tender years — an autlaority I did 
not dare to dispute until long after I had been 
invested with jackets and trousers. I have no 
doubt but she would have liked to have seized me 
by the collar and given m.e a sound shaking. As 
it was she was obliged to content herself with 
throwing a world of sorrowful indignation into 
her voice. 

" Sht may easily feel ill, poor young lady, when 
her husband lives at one house and she at another. 
And here's everybody roundabout trying to find 
out what relation you two are to each other — 
asking me all sorts of questions, and I mustn't say 
you are husband and wife." 

'* No — not yet." 

" Well, I 'm going to, Master Gilbert. If you 
won't tell the poor young lady, I shall. I '11 tell 
her how you brought her home and sent for me to 
take care of her — how you tended her and waited 
on her all day long — how you shut yourself up 
for her sake, never seeing an old friend's face. 



CALLED BACK. l8l 

Oh, yes, Master Gilbert, I'll tell her all; and I'll 
tell her how you went into her room and kissed 
her ere you started on that fool's journey, 
wherever it was. She '11 remember everything 
fast enough then." 

" I command you to say nothing." 

" I 've heeded too many commands of yours. 
Master Gilbert, to mind breaking one for your 
sake. I '11 do it and take the consequences." 

Feeling tliat the explanation, if made by 
Priscilla, would not only sweep away a great deal 
of romance, but also might precipitate matters and 
make them far more diflicult to adjust to my own 
satisfaction, I was bound to prevent her carrying 
out her threat. Knowing from old experience 
that although the good soul could not be driven, 
she could be led, I was obliged to resort to 
cajolery. So I said, as one asking a boon — 

" You won't if I entreat and beg you not to, my 
old friend. You love me too much to do anything 
against my wishes," 

Priscilla was not proof against this appeal, but 
she urged me to proclaim the true state of affairs 
as soon as possible. 

" And don't be too sure. Master Gilbert," she 
concluded, '.' as to what she remembers or doesn't. 
Sometimes I think she knows a deal more than 
you suppose." ^ 

Then she left me, and I went wandering about 
thinking as to what meaning to attach to Pauline's 
parting words. 

" Which will be the best for me — and tor }^ou ? " 
— to forget or to recall ? How much did she 
forget — how much did she recall ? Had those 
rings on her hands not shown her that she was a 
wite J Could she help suspecting whose wife she 
was ? Even if she remembered nothing about our 
strange hurried marriage, nothing about our sub- 



l8a CALLED BACK. 

sequent life together, she found herself after that 
interval of oblivion, as it were, under my charge : 
found that I knew all the tragic circumstances of 
her brother's end, that I had now returned from a 
journey of thousands of miles, undertaken to learn 
the fatal particulars. Although she might not be 
able to account for it, she must by this time know 
the truth. Keeping the ring on her finger showed 
that she did not dispute the fact that, somehow, she 
was wedded. Who could be her husband save 
me ? 

Yes, by the evidence the situation offered, I 
determined that she had arrived at the right con- 
clusion ; and the hour was at hand when I should 
learn if the knowledge would bring her joy or 
sorrow. 

To-morrow I would tell her all. I would tell 
her how strangely our lives became linked. I 
would plead for her love more passionately than 
ever man yet pleaded. I would prove to her how 
innocently I had fallen into Ceneri's schemes — 
how free from blame I was in wedding her whilst 
her mental state was such that she was unable to 
refuse consent. All this she should learn, and then 
I would hear my doom from her lips. 

I would urge no plea based upon my legal right 
to my wife. So far as I could make her she should 
be free. Nothing should bind ^er to me except 
love. If she had none to give me I would tear 
myself from her, and, at her wish, see if steps could 
not be taken to annul the marriage — but whether 
she elected to remain my wife in name, to become 
my wife in reality, or to sever every tie, her future 
life, with or without her knowledge, should be my 
care. By this time to-morrow my fate should be 
known. 

Having settled this I should have retired to rest; 
but I was in no mood for sleep. Again and again 



CALLED BACK. I83 

1 recalled her last words and commenced one of 
those weighings of hopes and fears which always 
means self-torture. Why, if Pauline had guessed 
the truth, had she not asked me about it ? How 
could she spe-ad hour after hour with me, knowing 
she was my wife, yet not knowing how she became 
so ? Would her words admit of the interpretation 
that she dreaded what she had to learn ? Did she 
wish for freedom and continual forgetfulness ? So 
on and on until I made myself quite miserable. 

Many a man on the eve of learning whether 
his love is to be accepted or rejected has been 
racked as I was that night, but surely no lover 
save myself ever lived, who was to receive the 
momentous answer from the lips of a woman who 
tras already his wife. 

The hour was late when I returned from my 
solitary walk. I passed Pauline's window, and 
standing gazing up at it I wondered if she, too, 
were lying awake and thinking and deciding about 
our future lives. Ah well, to-morrow would put 
us both out of suspense! 

The night being still and warm her window was 
open at the top. Before I turned away a fancy 
seized me. I picked a rose from a bush in the 
garden and managed to toss it through the open 
sash. She might find it in the morning and 
guessing from whom it came might wear it. It 
would be a good omen. 

The blind shivered as the rosebud struck it ; 
then, fearing discovery, I turned and fled. 

The morning broke fair. I rose with hope in 
my heart and scouted the fears of the night. At 
the earliest moment I could hope to find her I 
started in search of Pauline. She had just gone 
out. I ascertained in which way, and followed 
her. 

I found her walking slowly, with her head bent. 



184 CALLED BACK. 

She greeted me with her usual quiet sweetness, 
and we walked on side by side. I looked in vain 
for my rose; and was fain to comfort myself by 
thinking it must have fallen where she could not 
see it. Nevertheless, I was troubled. 

And there was worse in store for me. Her 
hands, ungloved and with the fingers interlaced, 
were carried in front of her. I was walking on 
her left side, and I saw that the hand nearest me 
was denuded of its rings. The golden circlet 
which had shone until now like a beacon of hope, 
had disappeared. My heart sank. The meaning 
was onl)^ too clear : when coupled with her words 
of last night, who could fail to understand it ? 
Although she knew herself to be my wife she 
wished to throw the yoke aside. Pauline loved 
me not — the truth which was gradually creeping 
from the misty past would bring her sorrow — now 
that she remembered, she wished to forget. The 
rings were cast aside to show me, if possible, 
without words, that she was not to be my wife. 

How could I speak now ? The answer had 
been given before the question had been put. 
She saw me looking at that little white hand of 
hers, but simply dropt her lashes and said nothing. 
No doubt she wished me to spare her the pain of 
an explanation. If I could nerve myself to it, 
perhaps the best thing would be to leave her as 
speedily as possible — leave her to return no more. 

Moody and despondent as I felt at the discovery 
just made, it was not long before I found a great 
change in Pauline's manner. She was not the 
same. Something had come between us, some- 
thing which entirely dispelled the old friendly 
intercourse ; changing it into little more, than 
conventional politeness. Shyness and restraint 
now made themselves manifest in every word and 
action — perhaps, in mine also. We spent the day 



CALLED BACK. I85 

together as usual, but the companionship must 
have been irksome to both, so greatly was its 
footing changed for the worse. That night I went 
to bed wretched. Tlie prize 1 had striven for 
seemed to be snatched away just as I had hoped 
to win it ! 

So several days passed. Pauline made no sign, 
or certainly none I could construe favourably. I 
could bear this state of things no longer. . Priscilla, 
whose sharp eyes saw that something was amiss, 
pestered me beyond endurance ; and spoke her 
mind so roundly that I began to suspect she had 
already executed her threat of telling Pauhne 
everything; and I felt inclined to attribute niy 
failure to the old woman's officiousness in making 
a premature revelation. All might have gone well 
had I been given another week or a fortnight to 
win my wife's heart. I began to believe that she 
was growing unhappy ; that my presence troubled 
her. Not that she evinced any wish to avoid me ; 
indeed, she came so surely at my beck and call as 
to suggest a shadow of the obedience she had 
always given during those days upon which I now 
dreaded to dwell. But I felt she would be happier 
and more at ease in my absence. So I resolved 
to depart. 

I knew that my only way was to carry out my 
determination at once. Having made the resolve 
I would act upon it next day. I packed up my 
things in readiness. I arranged by which coach 
to go. I should have three hoursin the morning 
to give Priscilla my final instructions and to bid 
my wife adieu for ever- 

1 could not go without explaining some things 
10 her. I need not pain her by alluding to our 
relationship, but I must inform her that she was 
not the heiress she believed. I must tell her she 
had plenty to hve upon without saying that I, her 



1 86 CALLED BACK* 

husband, would supply It. When this was arranged, 
farewell for ever! " 

As soon as I had finished my pretence at a 
breakfast, I walked across to the house where 
Pauline lodged. As yet she knew nothing of my 
purpose. 1 held her hand rather longer than 
usual, and by a desperate effort forced words to 
my lips. 

'* I am come to say good-bye. I go to London 
to-day." 

She answered not a word, but I felt her hand 
tremble in my own. Her eyes I could not see. 

'• Yes, I have loitered here long enough," I con- 
tinued, attempting to speak easily ; " a great many 
things call me to town." 

Pauline was not looking in the best of health this 
morning. Her cheek was paler than it had been 
since my arrival. She looked languid and de- 
pressed. Doubtless my presence had worried her. 
Poor girl, she would soon be relieved of that ! 

Seeing that I paused for her to speak she found 
her voice, but even that seemed to have lost some 
of its fieshness and tone. 

'• When do you go ? " was all that she said. 
Not a word about my return ! 

" By the mid-day coach. I have still some 
hours left. As it is the last time, shall we walk to 
the Clearing together ? " 

" Do you wish it ? " 

" If you have no objection. Besides, I want 
to speak to you about yourself — about business 
matters," I added to show that she need not fear 
the interview. 

" I will come," she said, quitting the room 
hurriedly. 

I waited. Presently Priscilla appeared. She 
was looking daggers at me, undeserved, at least, 
from her. Her voice was harsh and raspy, bring- 



CALLED BACK. 187 

ing back to my mind a familiar sound of early 
childhood, when I had committed some petty 
crime which excited her ire. 

" Miss Pauline begs you will walk on and not 
wait for her. She will join you at the Clearing 
presently." | 

I took my hat and prepared to do as com- 
manded. Priscilla had said nothing which showed 
she knew of my approaching departure, but as I 
was passing out of the house she said, in a tone of 
withering scorn, 

"Master Gilbert, you're a bigger fool than I 
thought you were." 

Such an observation, even from an old servant, 
could not be passed by. I turned to remonstrate. 
Priscilla simply slammed the door almost against 
my nose. 

I walked away — the thing in the face of my 
other troubles was not worth a thought. Of course 
I could not expect Priscilla to enter into my feel- 
ings and appreciate the delicacy of my position. 
Besides, I must see her and have a long talk with 
her before I left. 

The Clearing, as we called it, was a place on 
the hill side, not far away. We had stumbled 
upon it, almost by accident, during our walks. A 
seldom trodden path through the wood led to a 
spot from which the trees and undergrowth had 
been cleared. From it there was a delightful 
view of the opposite hills and the stream winding 
through the valley. It was a favourite resort of 
mine. Her^ I had sat for hours talking to Pauline, 
and here in my dreams I had poured forth the 
words of love I longed to speak — and here I was 
to say good-bye for ever ! 

My frame of mind was a sad one when 1 reached 
the Clearing. I threw myself down on the sloping 
ground and turned my eyes up the path by whicH 



l88 CALLED BACK. 

she must come. A fallen trunk at my back formed 
a rest for my head — the trees around were rustling 
in the soft breeze — the monotonous rush of the 
stream below was soothing and lulling — a few 
white clouds sailed slowly aci'oss the sky. It was 
a drowsy, dreamy, beautiful morning. I had 
scarcely slept for the last two or three nights. 
Pauline lingered. Is it any wonder that my eyes 
closed and for awhile all sorrow and disappoint- 
ment were chased away by the sleep I so sorely 
needed ? 

Was it sleep ? Yes, because one must sleep in 
order to dream. Ah ! if that dream were reality, 
life would be worth having. I dreamed that my 
wife was beside me, that she took my hand and 
pressed her hps to it passionately, that her cheek 
was almost touching mine, that I could feel her 
soft, sweet breath. So real did it seem that I 
turned on my hard rustic pillow towards the dream, 
and then of course it vanished. 

I opened my eyes. In front of me stood Pauline. 
Those grand dark eyes of hers no longer veiled by 
the lashes, but open and looking into mine. I saw 
them but for a second, but that was long enough 
for the look I had surprised to send the blood 
throbbing through my veins — to make me spring 
to my feet — to embolden me to take her suddenly 
and swiftly in my arms — to cover her sweet face 
with kisses, ejaculating the only words that one 
can find at such a time, '* I love you ! I love you ! 
I love you ! " 

For no man yet has seen in a woman's eyes the 
look I saw m Pauline's unless that woman loves 
him above all the world. 

No words can describe the rapture of that 
moment — the revulsion of my feelings. She was 
mine, my own for ever. I knew it ; J could feel 
it every time my lips touched hers. The bright 



CALLED BACK. I89 

blush which spread from her cheek to her neck 
proclaimed it — her suffering without resistance my 
passionate caresses confirmed it — hut let me hear 
it from those sweet lips ! 

"Pauline! Pauline!" I cried; "do you love 
me?" 

A trembling which I knew was of joy passed 
over her. 

" Do I love you ! love you ! " she ^aid, and hid 
her blushing face on my shoulder. The words, the 
action was enough, but presently she raised her 
head and pressed her lips to mine. 

*' I love you — yes, I love you, my husband ! " 

'• When did you know ? When did you re- 
member ? ' 

For a moment she answered not. She broke 
from my embrace ; then, opening the bosom of her 
dress, drew forth a blue ribbon which hung round 
her neck. Upon it were threaded the two rings. 
They seemed to sparkle with joy in the bright sun. 

She detached them and held them towards me. 
•' Gilbert, my love, my husband, if you will that 
I shall be your wife, if you think me worthy of 
it, take them and place them where they should 
be." 

And then once more, with many a kiss, many a 
vow, I placed the rings upon her finger and knew 
that my troubles were at an end. 

" But when did you know — when did the memory 
come back ? 

" Dearest, she whispe ed, and her voice sounded 
like music, '• I knew it when I saw you standing 
on the river bank. It came to me all at once. 
Till then all was dark. I saw your face and knew 
everything." 

" Why did you not tell me ? " 

She hung her head. " I wanted to find out if 
you loved me. Why should you do so ? If you 



190 CALLED BACK. 

did net we could part, and I would set you free if 
possible. But not now, Gilbert; you will never 
get rid of me now." 

Her thoughts had been the same as mine. No 
wonder I had misunderstood her. The idea of 
ner waiting to see if I loved her seemed so pre- 
posterous ! 

'* You would have saved me days of grief if I 
had known you cared for me. Why did you take 
ofi" the rings, Pauline ? " 

" Day after day passed and you said nothing. 
Then I took them off. They have been next my 
heart ever since, waiting for you to give back when 
you chose." 

I kissed the hand on which they shone. *• Then 
all is clear to you now, my own wife ? " 

*• Not quite all, but enough. The truth, the 
love, the devotion — all this, my husband, I can 
remember — all this I will repay, if my love can 
do it." 

Our wooing may close with these words — let all 
the rest be sacred. The trees around alone know 
what passed between us, as their kindly shade fell 
on us where we sat and interchanged our words 
of love whilst hour after hour of our second and 
real wedding day slipped by. At last we rose, but 
lingered yet awhile, as though loath to leave the 
spot where happiness had come to us. We looked 
round once more and bid farewell to hill and valley 
and stream : we gazed long in each other's eyes, 
our Ups met again in a passionate kiss ; then we 
went forth together to the world and the new 
sweet life awaiting us. 

We walked as in a dream, from which we were 
only recalled by the sight of houses and people. 

" Pauline ! " I whispered, " can you leave this 
place to-night? We will go to London." 

•• And afterwards ? " she asked, wistfully. 



CALLED BACK. 



191 



•• Can you ask me ? To Italy, of course." 
She thanked me with a look and pressure of the 
hand. We were now at her home. She left me, 
passing Priscilla, whose honest eyes were glower- 
ing at me. Priscilla had called me a fool ; I must 
be revenged. 

" Priscilla," I said gravely, " I am gomg by this 
evening's coach. I will write when I get to 
London." 

I had my revenge in full. Tne good old soul 
almost fell weeping at my feet. 

" Oh, Master Gilbert, don'tee, don'tee go, sir ! 

The poor young lady, Miss Pauline, what will she 

do ? She loves the very ground you tread upon." 

I had bargained for reproaches, not sentiment of 

this kind. I laid my hand on her shoulder. 

'• But, Priscilla, Miss Pauline— Mrs. Vaughan, 
my wife, goes with me." 

Priscilla's tears came more copiously than before, 
but they were tears of joy. 

Ten days later and Pauline stood beside her 
brother's grave. By her own wish she visited it 
alone. I waited at the gate of the cemetery until 
she rejoined me. Her face was very pale, her eyes 
showed traces of many tears, but she smiled as she 
met my anxious glance. 

"Gilbert, my husband," she said, •• I have wept, 
but now I smile. The past is past. Let its dark- 
ness be dispersed by the brightness of the present 
and the promise of the future. Let the love I 
bore my brother be carried into the greater iove I 
give my husband. Let us turn our backs on the 
dark shadows and begin our lives." 

Have I more to tell ? One thing only. 

Years afterwards I was in Paris. The great 

war had been fought out to the bitter end. Traces 

of the conflict between the two races had almost 

vanished, but those of the second and internecine 



192 CALLED BACK. 

contest were visible everywhere. The Gaul him- 
self had destroyed what the Teuton spared. The 
Tuileries, with sightless, empty eyes, gazed sadly 
towards the Place de la Concord, where stood the 
statues of the fair lost provinces. The Vendome 
column lay prostrate. The fair city was charred 
and blackened by the incendiarj^ torches of her 
own sons ; but the flames had been some time ex- 
tinguished and ample revenge had been taken. A 
gay young officer, a friend of mine, took me to see 
a military prison. We were chatting and smoking 
in the open air when a small body of soldiers 
appeared. The}^ were escorting three men, who 
walked with fettered hands and bowed heads. 
'* Who are they ? " I asked. 
" Blackguard Communists." 
" Where are they taking them ?" 
The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders. "Where 
they ought all to be taken — to be shot, the brutes ! " 
Brutes or not, three men who have but a minute 
to live must be objects of interest if not sympathy. 
I looked closely at them as they passed us. One 
of them raised b''^ head and stared me in the face. 
It was Macari. 

I started as his eyes met mine, but I am not 
ashamed to say the movement was caused by no 
feeling of compassion. Ceneri, in spite of mj^self, 
I pitied, and would have aided had it been possible; 
but this ruffian, liar and traitor, should have gone 
to his doom, even if I could have saved him by 
lifting a finger. He had passed long ago out of 
my life, but my blood still boiled when I thought 
of him and his crimes. I knew not how he had 
lived since. I last saw him — knew not whom or 
how many he had betrayed ; but if Justice had 
been slow in claiming him, her sword had at last 
reached him, and his end was close at hand. 

He knew me — perhaps he thought I had come 



CALLED BACK. IQj, 

there to gloat over his punishment. A look of bitter 
hate crossed his face. He stopped and cursed me. 
The guard forced him on. He turned his head 
and cursed me until one of the soldiers smote him 
on the mouth. The action may have been cruel, 
but there was little mercy shown to Communists in 
those days. The guard and their prisoners turned 
round an angle of the building. 

"Shall we see the end ? " said my friend, flippmg 
the ash off his cigar. 

" No, thank you." 

But we heard it. In ten minutes the rattle of 
ritles sounded, and I knew that the last and 
guiltiest of Anthony March's murderers had 
found his deserts. 

I remembered my promise to Ceneri. With 
great trouble I managed to get a message sent 
which I believed would reach him. Six months 
afterwards a letter stamped with innumerable 
hieroglyphical postmarks, was deHvered to me. 
It told me that the prisoner to whom I had 
written had died two years after his arrival at 
the mines. So the lesser criminal had not the 
satisfaction of knowing the fate of the man who 
had betrayed him. 

My tale is told. My life and PauHne's began 
when we turned from that cemetery and resolved 
to forget the past. Since then our joys and griefs 
have been the same as those of thousands. As 
I write this in my happy country house, blessed 
with wife and children, I wonder if I could ever 
have been that blind man who heard those fearful 
sounds and who saw afterwards that terrible 
sight. Could it have been I who rushed from 
one end of Europe to the other to set at rest a 
doubt which I blush at even harbouring ? Could 
it have been Pauline, whose eyes now shine with 
love and intelligence, who lay for months, even 



194 CALLED BACK. 

years, with the sweet bells of her intellect jangled 
and out of tune ? 

Yes, it must be so; for she has read every line 
I have written, and as we peruse and revise this 
last page her arm steals round me, and she says, 
insisting that I shall record her utterance, 

"Too much, too much of me, my husband, not 
enough of what you did and have always done for 
me ! " 

With this, the only difference of opinion that 
exists between us, my tale may end. 



Printed in Great Britain by J. W. Arrowimtth Ltd., Bristol. 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

305 De Neve Drive - Parking Lot 17 • Box 951388 

LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA 90095-1388 

Return this material to the library from which it was borrowed. 




DC 



:S0UTHfRN,RFG10NAlllB^^^^ 



AA 000 599 645 9 

There is no Substitute 



^ j.Collis Brottne's 

CNorodyDe 

The World Known Remedy 

!^ COUGHS GOLDS 

ASTHMA BRONCHITIS 



m 



Bat 



'V liiii liMii 



Acts like a charm in 
DIARRHCEA and other 
boxvei complaints 



A trua palliative in 

RHEUMATISM, 'lOOTHACHE, 
GOUT, NEURALGIA. 



Always ask for a 

** "DR. GOLLIS BROWNE" 

Of all Chemists. 1/3. and 3/-. 




Unr 
S 



