Charlotte: A Tale of Truth, Volume 1 . . . (1794)
Author: Rowson, Susanna.
Publication info: Charlotte: a Tale Of Truth . . . vi-085. Philadelphia: D. Humphreys, for M. Carey, 1794.

Front matter Covers, Edges and Spine
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Preliminaries
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
[Page ]
Title Page
CHARLOTTE.
A TALE OF TRUTH.
By Mrs. ROWSON ,
OF THE NEW THEATRE PHILADELPHIA;
AUTHOR of VICTORIA, THE INQUISITOR, FILLE
DE CHAMBRE, &c .
IN TWO VOLUMES.
She was her parents only joy:
They had but one—one darling child.
Romeo and Juliet .
Her form was faultleſs, and her mind,
                           Untainted yet by art,
Was nobly, juſt, humane, and kind,
                           And virtue warm'd her heart.
But ah! the cruel ſpoiler came—
VOL. I.
—SECOND PHILADELPHIA EDITION—
OCT. 9—1794.
[Page ]
Acknowledgment
“IT may be a Tale of Truth, for it is not unnatural, and
it is a tale of real diſtreſs—Charlotte, by the artifice of a
teacher, recommended to a ſchool, from humanity rather
than a conviction of her integrity, or the regularity of her
former conduct, is enticed from her governeſs, and accompanies
a young officer to America.—The marriage ceremony,
if not forgotten, is poſtponed, and Charlotte dies
a martyr to the inconſtancy of her lover and treachery of
his friend.—The ſituations are artleſs and affecting—the
deſcriptions natural and pathetic; we ſhould feel for Charlotte,
if ſuch a perſon ever exiſted, who, for one error,
ſcarcely, perhaps, deſerved ſo ſevere a puniſhment. If it is
a fiction, poetic juſtice is not, we think, properly distributed.”—
Crit. Review, April 1791, page 468.
[Page ]
PREFACE.
FOR the peruſal of the young and thoughtleſs of
the fair ſex, this Tale of Truth is deſigned;
and I could wiſh my fair readers to conſider it as
not merely the effuſion of Fancy, but as a reality.
The circumſtances on which I have founded this novel
were related to me ſome little time ſince by an
old lady who had perſonally known Charlotte,
though ſhe concealed the real names of the characters,
and like wife the place where the unfortunate
ſcenes were acted: yet as it was impoſſible to offer
a relation to the public in ſuch an imperfect ſtate, I
have thrown over the whole a ſlight veil of fiction,
and ſubſtituted names and places according to my
own fancy. The principal characters in this little
tale are now conſigned to the ſilent tomb: it can
therefore hurt the feelings of no one; and may, I
flatter myſelf, be of ſervice to ſome who are ſo unfortunate
as to have neither friends to adviſe, or understanding
to direct them, through the various and
unexpected evils that attend a young and unprotected
woman in her firſt entrance into life.
While the tear of compaſſion ſtill trembled in my
eye for the fate of the unhappy Charlotte, I may
have children of my own, ſaid I, to whom this
[Page vi]
recital may be of uſe, and if to your own children, ſaid
Benevolence, why not to the many daughters of
Misfortune who, deprived of natural friends, or
ſpoilt by a miſtaken education, are thrown on an
unfeeling world without the leaſt power to defend
themſelves from the ſnares not only of the other ſex,
but from the more dangerous arts of the profligate
of their own.
Senſible as I am that a novel writer, at a time
when ſuch a variety of works are uſhered into the
world under that name, ſtands but a poor chance
for ſame in the annals of literature, but conſcious
that I wrote with a mind anxious for the happineſs
of that ſex whoſe morals and conduct have ſo powerful
an influence on mankind in general; and convinced
that I have not wrote a line that conveys a
wrong idea to the head or a corrupt wiſh to the
heart, I ſhall reſt ſatisfied in the purity of my own
intentions, and if I merit not applauſe, I feel that I
dread not cenſure.
If the following tale ſhould ſave one hapleſs fair
one from the errors which ruined poor Charlotte,
or reſcue from impending miſery the heart of one
anxious parent, I ſhall feel a much higher gratification
in reflecting on this trifling performance, than
could poſſibly reſult from the applauſe which might
attend the moſt elegant finiſhed piece of literature
whoſe tendency might deprave the heart or miſlead
the underſtanding.
Main text
[Page ]
CHARLOTTE.
A TALE OF TRUTH.
By Mrs. ROWSON ,
OF THE NEW THEATRE PHILADELPHIA;
AUTHOR of VICTORIA, THE INQUISITOR, FILLE
DE CHAMBRE, &c .
IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.
Chapter I.
A BOARDING SCHOOL.
“ARE you for a walk,” ſaid Montraville to
his companion, as they aroſe from table;
“are you for a walk? or ſhall we order the chaiſe
and proceed to Portſmouth?” Belcour preferred
the former; and they ſauntered out to view the town,
and to make remarks on the inhabitants, as they returned
from church.
Montraville was a Lieutenant in the army:
Belcour was his brother officer: they had been to
take leave of their friends previous to their departure
for America, and were now returning to
Portſmouth, where the troops waited orders for
embarkation. They had ſtopped at Chicheſter to
dine; and knowing they had ſufficient time to
reach the place of deſtination before dark, and yet
allow them a walk, had reſolved, it being Sunday
afternoon, to take a ſurvey of the Chicheſter ladies
as they returned from their devotions.
They had gratified their curioſity, and were
preparing to return to the inn without honouring
any of the belles with particular notice, when
[Page 008]
Madame Du Pont, at the head of her ſchool,
deſcended from the church. Such an aſſemblage
of youth and innocence naturally attracted the
young ſoldiers: they ſtopped; and, as the little
cavalcade paſſed, almoſt involuntarily pulled off
thir hats. A tall, elegant girl looked at Montraville
and bluſhed: he inſtantly recollected the
features of Charlotte Temple, whom he had once
ſeen and danced with at a ball at Portſmouth. At
that time he thought on her only as a very lovely
child, ſhe being then only thirteen; but the improvement
two years had made in her perſon, and
the bluſh of recollection which ſuffuſed her cheeks
as ſhe paſſed, awakened in his boſom new and pleasing
ideas. Vanity led him to think that pleaſure
at again beholding him might have occaſioned the
emotion he had witneſſed, and the ſame vanity led
him to wiſh to ſee her again.
“She is the ſweeteſt girl in the world,” ſaid
he, as he entered the inn. Belcour ſtared. “Did
you not notice her?” continued Montraville: ſhe
had on a blue bonnet, and with a pair of lovely eyes
of the ſame colour, has contrived to make me feel
deviliſh odd about the heart.”
“Pho,” ſaid Belcour, “a muſket ball from our
friends, the Americans, may in leſs than two months
make you feel worſe.”
“I never think of the future,” replied Montraville;
but am determined to make the moſt of
[Page 009]
the preſent, and would willingly compound with
any kind Familiar who would inform me who the
girl is, and how I might be likely to obtain an
interview.”
But no kind Familiar at that time appearing,
and the chaiſe which they had ordered driving
up to the door, Montraville and his companion
were obliged to take leave of Chicheſter and its
fair inhabitant, and proceed on their journey.
But Charlotte had made too great an impreſſion
on his mind to be eaſily eradicated: having therefore
ſpent three whole days in thinking on her and
in endeavouring to form ſome plan for ſeeing her,
he determined to ſet off for Chicheſter, and truſt
to chance either to favour or fruſtrate his deſigns.
Arriving at the verge of the town, he diſmounted,
and ſending the ſervant forward with the horſes,
proceeded toward the place, where, in the midſt
of an extenſive pleaſure ground, ſtood the manſion
which contained the lovely Charlotte Temple.
Montraville leaned on a broken gate, and looked
earneſtly at the houſe. The wall which ſurrounded
it was high, and perhaps the Argus's who guarded
the Heſperian fruit within, were more watchful
than thoſe famed of old.
“'Tis a romantic attempt,” ſaid he; “and
ſhould I even ſucceed in ſeeing and converſing
with her, it can be productive of no good: I muſt
of neceſſity leave England in a few days, and
[Page 010]
probably may never return; why then ſhould I
endeavour to engage the affections of this lovely
girl, only to leave her a prey to a thouſand inquietudes,
of which at preſent ſhe has no idea? I will
return to Portſmouth and think no more about her.”
The evening now was cloſed; a ſerene ſtilneſs
reigned; and the chaſte Queen of Night with her
ſilver creſcent faintly illuminated the hemiſphere.
The mind of Montraville was huſhed into composure
by the ſerenity of the ſurrounding objects.
“I will think on her no more,” ſaid he, and
turned with an intention to leave the place; but
as he turned, he ſaw the gate which led to the
pleaſure grounds open, and two women come
out, who walked arm-in-arm acroſs the field.
“I will at leaſt ſee who theſe are,” ſaid he. He
overtook them, and giving them the compliments
of the evening, begged leave to ſee them into the
more frequented parts of the town: but how was
he delighted, when, waiting for an anſwer, he
diſcovered, under the concealment of a large bonnet,
the face of Charlotte Temple.
He ſoon found means to ingratiathe himſelf with
her companion, who was a French teacher at the
ſchool, and, at parting, ſlipped a letter he had
purpoſely written, into Charlotte's hand, and five
guineas into that of Mademoiſelle, who promiſed
ſhe would endeavour to bring her young charge
into the field again the next evening.
[Page 011]
Chapter II.
DOMESTIC CONCERNS.
Mr. Temple was the youngeſt ſon of a nobleman
whoſe fortune was by no means
adequate to the antiquity, grandeur, and I may
add, pride of the family. He ſaw his elder
brother made completely wretched by marrying a
diſagreeable woman, whoſe fortune helped to prop
the ſinking dignity of the houſe; and he beheld
his ſiſters legally proſtituted to old, decrepid men,
whoſe titles gave them conſequence in the eyes of
the world, and whoſe affluence rendered them
ſplendidly miſerable. “I will not ſacrifice
internal happineſs for outward ſhew,” ſaid he:
“I will ſeek Content; and, if I find her in a
cottage, will embrace her with as much cordiality
as I ſhould if ſeated on a throne.”
Mr. Temple poſſeſſed a ſmall eſtate of about five
hundred pounds a year; and with that he reſolved
to preſerve independence, to marry where the
feelings of his heart ſhould direct him, and to
confine his expenſes within the limits of his
income. He had a heart open to every generous
feeling of humanity, and a hand ready to diſpenſe
to thoſe who wanted part of the bleſſings he
enjoyed himſelf.
As he was univerſally known to be the friend
[Page 012]
of the unfortunate, his advice and bounty was
frequently ſolicited; nor was it ſeldom that he
ſought out indigent merit, and raiſed it from
obſcurity, confining his own expenſes within a
very narrow compaſs.
“You are a benevolent fellow,” ſaid a young
officer to him one day; “and I have a great
mind to give you a fine ſubject to exerciſe the
goodneſs of your heart upon.”
“You cannot oblige me more,” ſaid Temple,
“than to point out any way by which I can be
ſerviceable to my fellow creatures.”
“Come along then,” ſaid the young man,
“we will go and viſit a man who is not in ſo
good a lodging as he deſerves; and, were it not
that he has an angel with him, who comforts and
ſupports him, he muſt long ſince have ſunk under
his misfortunes.” The young man's heart was
too full to proceed; and Temple, unwilling to
irritate his feeling by making further enquiries,
followed him in ſilence, till they arrived at the
Fleet priſon.
The officer enquired for Captain Eldridge: a
perſon led them up ſeveral pair of dirty ſtairs,
and pointing to a door which led to a miſerable,
ſmall apartment, ſaid that was the Captain's
room, and retired.
The officer, whoſe name was Blakeney, tapped
at the door, and was bid to enter by a voice
[Page 013]
melodiouſly ſoft. He opened the door, and discovered
to Temple a ſcene which rivetted him to the
ſpot with aſtoniſhment.
The apartment, though ſmall, and bearing ſtrong
marks of poverty, was neat in the extreme. In an
arm-chair, his head reclined upon his hand, his eyes
fixed on a book which lay open before him, ſat an
aged man in a Lieutenant's uniform, which, though
threadbare, would ſooner call a bluſh of ſhame into
the face of thoſe who could neglect real merit, than
cauſe the hectic of confuſion to glow on the cheeks of
him who wore it.
Beſide him ſat a lovely creature buſied in painting
a fan mount. She was fair as the lily, but ſorrow
had nipped the roſe in her cheek before it was half
blown. Her eyes were blue; and her hair, which
was light brown, was ſlightly confined under a
plain muſlin cap, tied round with a black ribbon;
a white linnen gown and plain lawn handkerchief
compoſed the remainder of her dreſs; and in this
ſimple attire, ſhe was more irreſiſtibly charming to
ſuch a heart as Temple's, than ſhe would have
been, if adorned with all the ſplendor of a courtly
belle.
When they entered, the old man aroſe from his
ſeat, and ſhaking Blakeney by the hand with great
cordiality, offered Temple his chair; and there
being but three in the room, ſeated mimſelf on the
ſide of his little bed, with evident compoſure.
[Page 014]
“This is a ſtrange place,” ſaid he to Temple,
“to receive viſitors of diſtinction in; but we muſt
fit our feelings to our ſtation. While I am not
aſhamed to own the cauſe which brought me here,
why ſhould I bluſh at my ſituation? Our misfortunes
are not our faults; and where it not for that
poor girl—”
Here the philoſopher was loſt in the father. He
roſe haſtily from his ſeat, and walking toward the
window, wiped of a tear which he was afraid would
tarniſh the cheek of a ſailor.
Temple caſt his eye on Miſs Eldridge; a pellucid
drop had ſtolen from her eyes, and fallen upon a
roſe ſhe was painting. It blotted and diſcoloured
the flower. “'Tis emblematic,” ſaid he mentally:
“the roſe of youth and health ſoon ſades when wa
“tered by the tear of affliction.”
“My friend Blakeney,” ſaid he, addreſſing the
old man, “told me I could be of ſervice to you:
be ſo kind then, dear Sir, as to point out ſome way
in which I can relieve the anxiety of your heart and
increaſe the pleaſures of my own.”
“My good young man,” ſaid Eldridge, “you
know not what you offer. While deprived of my
liberty I cannot be free from anxiety on my own account;
but that is a trifling concern; my anxious
thoughts extend to one more dear a thouſand times
than life: I am a poor weak old man, and muſt expect
in a few years to ſink into ſilence and oblivion;
[Page 015]
but when I am gone, who will protect that fair bud
of innocence from the blaſts of adverſity, or from
the cruel hand of inſult and diſhonour.”
“Oh, my father!” cried Miſs Eldridge, tenderly
taking his hand, “be not anxious on that account;
for daily are my prayers offered to heaven
that our lives may terminate at the ſame inſtant, and
one grave receive us both; for why ſhould I live
when deprived of my only friend.”
Temple was moved even to tears. You will both
live many years, ſaid he, and I hope ſee much happiness.
Cheerly, my friend, cheerly; theſe paſſing
clouds of adverſity will ſerve only to make the sunshine
of proſperity more pleaſing. But we are losing
time: you might ere this have told me who
were your creditors, what were their demands, and
other particulars neceſſary to your liberation.
“My ſtory is ſhort,” ſaid Mr. Eldridge, “but
there are ſome particulars which will wring my
heart barely to remember; yet to one whoſe offers
of friendſhip appear ſo open and diſintereſted, I will
relate every circumſtance that led to my preſent,
painful ſituation. But my child, continued he, addressing
his daughter, “let me prevail on you to
take this opportunity, while my friends are with
me, to enjoy the benefit of air and exerciſe. Go, my
love; leave me now; to-morrow at your uſual hour
I will expect you.”
Miſs Eldridge impreſſed on his cheek the kiſs of
filial affection, and obeyed.
[Page 016]
Chapter III.
UNEXPECTED MISFORTUNES.
“ My life,” ſaid Mr. Eldridge, “till within
theſe few years was marked by no particular
circumſtance deſerving notice. I early embraced
the life of a ſailor, and have ſerved my
King with unremitted ardour for many years.
At the age of twenty-five I married an amiable
woman; one ſon and the girl who juſt now left
us, were the fruits of our union. My boy had
genious and ſpirit. I ſtraitened my little income
to give him a liberal education, but the rapid
progreſs he made in his ſtudies amply compenſated
for the inconvenience. At the academy where he
received his education he commenced an acquaintance
with a Mr. Lewis, a young man of affluent
fortune: as they grew up their intimacy ripened
into friendſhip, and they became almoſt inſeparable
companions.
“George choſe the profeſſion of a ſoldier. I had
neither friends or money to procure him a commission,
and had wiſhed him to embrace a nautical life:
but this was repugnant to his wiſhes, and I ceaſed
to urge him on the ſubject.
“The friendſhip ſubſiſting between Lewis and
my ſon was of ſuch a nature as gave him free acceſs
to our family; and ſo ſpecious was his manner that
[Page 017]
we heſitated not to ſtate to him all our little difficulties
in regard to George's future views. He liſtened
to us with attention, and offered to advance any
ſum neceſſary for his firſt ſetting out.
“I embraced the offer, and gave him my note
for the payment of it, but he would not ſuffer me
to mention any ſtipulated time, as he ſaid I might
do it whenever moſt convenient to myſelf. About
this time my dear Lucy returned from ſchool, and
I ſoon began to imagine Lewis looked at her with
eyes of affection. I gave my child a caution to beware
of him,and to look on her mother as her friend.
She was unaffectedly artleſs; and when, as I suspected,
Lewis made profeſſions of love, ſhe conſided in
her parents, and aſſured us her heart was perfectly
unbiaſſed in his favour, and ſhe would chearfully submit
to our direction.
“I took an early opportunity of queſtioning him
concerning his intentions towards my child: he
gave an equivocal anſwer, and I forbade him the
houſe.
“The next day lie ſent and demanded payment
of his money. It was not in my power to comply
with the demand. I requeſted three days to endeavour
to raiſe it, determining in that time to
mortgage my half pay, and live on a ſmall annuity
which my wife poſſeſſed, rather than be under an
obligation to ſo worthleſs a man: but this ſhort
time was not allowed me; for that evening, as I
[Page 018]
was ſitting down to ſupper, unſuſpicious of danger,
an officer entered, and tore me from the embraces
of my family.
“My wife had been for ſome time in a declining
ſtate of health: ruin at once ſo unexpected
and inevitable was a ſtroke ſhe was not prepared
to bear, and I ſaw her ſaint into the arms of our
ſervant, as I left my own habitation for the comfortless
walls of a priſon. My poor Lucy, distracted
with her fears for us both, ſunk on the
floor and endeavoured to detain me by her feeble
efforts; but in vain; they forced open her arms;
ſhe ſhrieked, and fell proſtrate. But pardon me. The
horrors of that night unman me. I cannot proceed.”
He roſe from his ſeat, and walked ſeveral times
acroſs the room: at length, attaining more composure,
he cried—“What a mere infant I am! Why,
Sir, I never felt thus in the day of battle.”
“No,” ſaid Temple; “but the truly brave
ſoul is tremblingly alive to the feelings of humanity.”
“True,” replied the old man, (ſomething
like ſatisfaction darting acroſs his features) “and
painful as theſe feelings are, I would not exchange
them for that torpor which the ſtoic miſtakes for
philoſophy. How many exquiſit delights ſhould
I have paſſed by unnoticed, but for theſe keen sensations,
this quick ſenſe of happineſs or miſery?
[Page 019]
Then let us, my friend, take the cup of life as it is
preſented to us, tempered by the hand of a wife
Providence; be thankful for the good, be patient
under the evil, and preſume not to enquire why the
latter predominates.”
“This is true philoſophy,” ſaid Temple.
“'Tis the only way to reconcile ourſelves to the
croſs events of life,” replied he. “But I forgot
myſelf. I will not longer intrude on your patience,
but proceed in my melancholy tale.
“The very evening that I was taken to priſon,
my ſon arrived from Irelend, where he had been
ſome time with his regiment. From the diſtracted
expreſſions of his mother and ſiſter, he learnt by
whom I had been arreſted; and, late as it was, flew
on the wings of wounded affection, to the houſe of his
falſe friend, and earneſtly enquired the cauſe of this
cruel conduct. With all the calmneſs of a cool
deliberate villain, he avowed his paſſion for Lucy;
declared her ſituation in life would not permit him
to marry her; but offered to releaſe me immediately,
and make any ſettlement on her, if George would
perſuade her to live, as he impiouſly termed it, a
life of honour.
“Fired at the inſult offered to a man and a foldier,
my boy ſtruck the villain, and a challenge ensued.
He then went to a coffee-houſe in the neighbourhood
and wrote a long affectionate letter to
me, blaming himſelf ſeverely for having introduced
[Page 020]
Lewis into the family, or permitted him to confer
an obligation, which had brought inevitable ruin on
us all. He begged me, whatever might be the
event of the enſuing morning, not to ſuffer regret
or unavailing ſorrow for his fate, to encreaſe the
anguiſh of my heart, which he greatly feared was
already inſupportable.
“This letter was delivered to me early in the
morning. It would be in vain to attempt deſcribing
my feelings on the peruſal of it; ſuffice it to ſay,
that a merciful Providence interpoſed, and I was
for three weeks inſenſible to miſeries almoſt beyond
the ſtrength of human nature to ſupport.
“A fever and ſtrong delirium ſeized me, and my
life was deſpaired of. At length nature, overpowered
with fatigue, gave way to the ſalutary power
of reſt, and a quiet ſlumber of ſome hours reſtored me
to reaſon, though the extreme weakneſs of my frame
prevented my feeling my diſtreſs ſo acutely as I
otherways ſhould.
“The firſt object that ſtruck me on awaking,
was Lucy ſitting by my bedſide; her pale countenance
and ſable dreſs prevented my enquiries for
poor George: for the letter I had received from
him, was the firſt thing that occurred to my memory.
By degrees the reſt returned: I recollected
being arreſted, but could no ways account for being
in this apartment, whither they had conveyed
me during my illneſs.
[Page 021]
“I was ſo weak as to be almoſt unable to ſpeak.
preſſed Lucy's hand, and looked earneſtly round the
apartment in ſearch of another dear object.
“Where is your mother?” ſaid I, faintly.
“The poor girl could not anſwer: ſhe ſhook her
head in expreſſive ſilence; and throwing herſelf on
the bed, folded her arms about me, and burſt into
tears.
“What! both gone ſaid I.
“Both, ſhe replied, endeavouring to reſtrain her
emotions: “but they are happy, no doubt.”
Here Mr. Eldridge pauſed: the recollection of
the ſcene was too painful to permit him to proceed.
Chapter IV.
CHANGE OF FORTUNE. “ It was ſome days,” continued Mr. Eldridge,
recovering himſelf, “before I could venture
to enquire the particulars of what had happened
during my illneſs: at length I aſſumed courage to
aſk my dear girl how long her mother and brother
had been dead: ſhe told me, that the morning
after my arreſt, George came home early to enquire
after his mother's health, ſtaid with them but a few
minutes, ſeemed greatly agitated at parting, but
gave them ſtrict charge to keep up their ſpirits,
and hope every thing would turn out for the beſt.
[Page 022]
In about two hours after, as they were ſitting at
breakfaſt, and endeavouring to ſtrike out ſome plan
to attain my liberty, they heard a loud rap at the
door, which Lucy running to open, ſhe met the
bleeding body of her brother, borne in by two
men who had lifted him from a litter, on which
they had brought him from the place where he
fought. Her poor mother, weakened by illneſs and
the ſtruggles of the preceding night, was not able
to ſupport this ſhock: gaſping for her breath, her
looks wild and haggard, ſhe reached the apartment
where they had carried her dying ſon. She knelt by
the bed ſide; and taking his cold hand, `my poor
boy,' ſaid ſhe, `I will not be parted from thee;
huſband! ſon! both at once loſt. Father of mercies,
ſpare me!' She fell into a ſtrong convulſion,
and expired in about two hours. In the mean time,
a ſurgeon had dreſſed George's wounds; but they
were in ſuch a ſituation as to bar the ſmalleſt hopes
of recovery. He never was ſenſible from the time
he was brought home, and died that evening in the
arms of his ſiſster.
“Late as it was when this event took place, my
affectionate Lucy inſiſted on coming to me. `What
muſt he feel,' ſaid ſhe, `at our apparent neglect,
and how ſhall I inform him of the afflictions with
which it has pleaſed heaven to viſit us?”
“She left the care of the dear departed ones to
ſome neighbours who had kindly come in to
[Page 023]
comfort and aſſiſt her; and on entering the houſe where
I was conſined, found me in the ſituation I have
mentioned.
“How ſhe ſupported herſelf in theſe trying moments,
I know not: heaven, no doubt, was with
her; and her anxiety to preſerve the life of one parent
in ſome meaſure abated her affliction for the
loſs of the other.
“My circumſtances were greatly embarraſſed,
my acquaintance few, and thoſe few utterly unable
to aſſiſt me. When my wife and ſon were committed
to the kindred earth, my creditors ſeized
my houſe and furniture, which not being ſufficient
to diſcharge all their demands, detainers were
lodged againſt me. No friend ſtepped forward to
my relief; from the grave of her mother, my beloved
Lucy followed an almoſt dying father to this
melancholy place.
“Here we have been nearly a year and a half.
My half-pay I have given up to ſatisfy my creditors,
and my child ſupports me by her induſtry: sometimes
by fine needlework, ſometimes by painting.
She leaves me every night, and goes to a lodging
near the bridge: but returns in the morning, to
chear me with her ſmiles, and bleſs me by her duteous
affection. A lady once offered her an aſylum
in her family; but ſhe would not leave me. `We
are all the world to each other,' ſaid ſhe. `I
thank God, I have health and ſpirits to improve
[Page 024]
the talents with which nature has endowed me;
and I truſt if I employ them in the ſupport of a
beloved parent, I ſhall not be thought an unprofitable
ſervant. While he lives, I pray for ſtrength
to purſue my employment; and when it pleaſes
heaven to take one of us, may it give the ſurvivor
reſignation to bear the ſeparation as we ought:
till then I will never leave him.'
“But where is this inhuman perſecutor?” ſaid
'Temple.
“He has been abroad ever ſince,” replied the
old man; but he has left orders with his lawyer
never to give up the note till the utmoſt farthing is
paid.”
“And how much is the amount of your debts in
all?” ſaid Temple.
“Five hundred pounds,” he replied.
Temple ſtarted: it was more than he expected.
“But ſomething muſt be done,” ſaid he: “that
ſweet maid muſt not wear out her life in a priſon.
I will ſee you again to-morrow, my friend,” ſaid
he, ſhaking Eldridge's hand: “keep up your
ſpirits: light and ſhade are not more happily blended
than are the pleaſures and pains of life; and the
horrors of the one ſerve only to increaſe the splendor
of the other.”
“You never loſt a wife and ſon,” ſaid Eldridge.
“No.” replied he, “but I can feel for thoſe
[Page 025]
that have.” Eldridge preſſed his hand as they went
toward the door, and they parted in ſilence.
When they got without the walls of the priſon,
Temple thanked his friend Blakeney for introducing
him to ſo worthy a character; and telling him he
had a particular engagement in the city, wiſhed
him a good evening.
“And what is to be done for this diſtreſſed man,”
ſaid Temple, as he walked up Ludgate Hill.
“Would to heaven I had a fortune that would
enable me inſtantly to diſcharge his debt; what
exquiſite tranſport, to ſee the expreſſive eyes of Lucy
beaming at once with pleaſure for her father's deliverance,
and gratitude for her deliverer: but is
not my fortune affluence,” continued he, “nay
ſuperfluous wealth, when compared to the extreme
indigence of Eldridge; and what have I done to deserve
eaſe and plenty, while a brave worthy officer
ſtarves in a priſon? Three hundred a year is ſurely
ſufficient for all my wants and wiſhes: at any rate
Eldridge muſt be relieved.”
When the heart has will, the hands can ſoon find
means to execute a good action.
Temple was a young man, his feelings warm and
impetuous; unacquainted with the world, his heart
had not been rendered callous by being convinced
of its fraud and hypocriſy. He pitied their sufferings,
overlooked their faults, thought every bosom
as generous as his own, and would chearfully
[Page 026]
have divided his laſt guinea with an unfortunate fellow
creature.
No wonder then that ſuch a man (without waiting
a moment for the interference of Madam Prudence)
ſhould reſolve to raiſe money ſufficient for
the relief of Eldridge, by mortgaging part of his
fortune.
We will not enquire too minutely into the cauſe
which might actuate him in this inſtance: ſuffice it
to ſay, he immediately put the plan in execution;
and in three days from the time he firſt ſaw the unfortunate
Lieutenant, he had the ſuperlative felicity
of ſeeing him at liberty, and receiving an ample reward
in the tearful eye and half articulated thanks
of the grateful Lucy.
“And pray, young man,” ſaid his father to
him one morning, “what are your deſigns in
viſiting thus conſtantly that old man and his
daughter?”
Temple was at a loſs for a reply: he had never
aſked himſelf the queſtion: he heſitated and his father
continued—
“It was not till within theſe few days that I
heard in what manner your acquaintance firſt
commenced, and cannot ſuppoſe any thing but
attachment to the daughter could carry you ſuch
imprudent lengths for the father: it certainly muſt
be her art that drew you in to mortgage part of
your fortune.”
[Page 027]
“Art, Sir!” cried Temple eagerly. “Lucy
Eldridge is as free from art as ſhe is from every
other error: ſhe is —”
“Every thing that is amiable and lovely,” ſaid his
father, interrupting him ironically: “no doubt
in your opinion ſhe is a pattern of excellence
for all her ſex to follow; but come, Sir, pray tell
me what are your deſigns toward this paragon.
I hope you do not intend to complete your folly by
marrying her.”
“Were my fortune ſuch as would ſupport her
according to her merit, I don't know a woman
more formed to enſure happineſs in the married
ſtate.”
“Then prithee, my dear lad,” ſaid his father,
ſince your rank and fortune are ſo much beneath
what your Princeſs might expect, be ſo kind as to
turn your eyes to Miſs Weatherby; who having
only an eſtate of three thouſand a year, is more
upon a level with you, and whoſe father yeſterday
ſolicited the mighty honour of your alliance. I ſhall
leave you to conſider on this offer; and pray remember,
that your union with Miſs Weatherby will
put it in your power to be more liberally the friend
of Lucy El dridge.”
The old gentleman walked in a ſtately manner
out of the room; and Temple ſtood almoſt petrified
with aſtoniſhment, contempt, and rage.
[Page 028]
Chapter V.
SUCH THINGS ARE.
Miss Weatherby was the only child of a wealthy
man, almoſt idolized by her parents,
flattered by her dependants,and never contradicted
even by thoſe who called themſelves her friends: I
cannot give a better deſcription than by the following
lines.
The lovely maid whoſe form and face
Nature has deck'd with ev'ry grace,
But in whoſe breaſt no virtues glow,
Whoſe heart ne'er felt another's woe,
Whoſe hand ne'er ſmooth'd the bed of pain,
Or eas'd the captive's galling chain:
But like the tulip caught the eye,
Born juſt to be admir'd and die;
When gone, no one regrets it's loſs,
Or ſcarce remembers that it was.
Such was Miſs Weatherby: her form lovely as
nature could make it, but her mind uncultivated,
her heart unfeeling, her paſſions impetuous, and her
brain almoſt turned with flattery, diſſipation, and
pleaſure; and ſuch was the girl, whom a partial
grandfather left independent miſtreſs of the fortune
before mentioned.
She had ſeen Temple frequently; and fancying
ſhe could never be happy without him, nor once
[Page 029]
imagining he could refuſe a girl of her beauty and
fortune, ſhe prevailed on her fond father to offer
the alliance to the old Earl of D—, Mr. Temple's
father.
The Earl had received the offer courteouſly: he
thought it a great match for Henry; and was too
faſhionable a man to ſuppoſe a wife could be any
impediment to the friendſhip he profeſſed for Eldridge
and his daughter.
Unfortunately for Temple, he thought quite
otherwiſe: the converſation he had juſt had with
his father, diſcovered to him the ſituation of his
heart; and he found that the moſt affluent fortune
would bring no increaſe of happineſs unleſs Lucy
Eldridge ſhared it with him; and the knowledge
of the purity of her ſentiments, and the integrity
of his own heart, made him ſhudder at the idea
his father had ſtarted, of marrying a woman for no
other reaſon than becauſe the affluence of her fortune
would enable him to injure her by maintaining
in ſplendour the woman to whom his heart was
devoted: he therefore reſolved to refuſe Miſs Weatherby,
and be the event what it might, offer his
heart and hand to Lucy Eldridge.
Full of this determination, he ſought his father,
declared his reſolution, and was commanded never
more to appear in his preſence. Temple bowed: his
heart was too full to permit him to ſpeak; he left
the houſe precipitately, and haſtened to relate the
[Page 030]
cauſe of his ſorrows to his good old friend and his
amiable daughter.
In the mean time, the Earl, vexed to the ſoul
that ſuch a fortune ſhould be loſt, determined to
offer himſelf a candidate for Miſs Weatherby's fafour.
What wonderful changes are wrought by that
reiguing power, ambition! the love-ſick girl, when
firſt ſhe heard of Temple's refuſal, wept, raved, tore
her hair, and vowed to found a proteſtant nunnery
with her fortune; and by commencing abbeſs, ſhut
herſelf up from the ſight of cruel ungrateful man for
ever.
Her father was a man of the world: he ſuffered
this firſt tranſport to ſubſide, and then very deliberately
unſolded to her the offers of the old Earl,
expatiated on the many benefits ariſing from an
elevated title, painted in glowing colours the surprise
and vexation of Temple when he ſhould ſee
her figuring as a Counteſs and his mother-in-law,
and begged her to conſider well before ſhe made any
raſh vows.
The diſtreſſed fair one dried her tears, liſtened
patiently, and at length declared ſhe believed the
ſureſt method to revenge the ſlight put on her by
the ſon would be to accept the father: ſo ſaid ſo
done, and in a few days ſhe became the Counteſs
D—.
Temple heard the news with emotion: he had
[Page 031]
loſt his father's favour by avowing his paſſion for
Lucy, and he ſaw now there was no hope of regaining
it: “but he ſhall not make me miserable,”
ſaid he, “Lucy and I have no ambitious
notions: we can live on three hundred a year for
ſome little time, till the mortgage is paid off, and
then we ſhall have ſufficient not only for the comforts
but many of the little elegancies of life. We
will purchaſe a little cottage, my Lucy,” ſaid he,
“and thither with your reverend father we will
retire; we will forget there are ſuch things as
ſplendor profuſion, and diſſipation: we will have
ſome cows, and you ſhall be queen of the dairy;
in a morning, while I look after my garden, you
ſhall take a baſket on your arm, and ſally forth to
feed your poultry; and as they flutter round you
in token of humble gratitude, your father ſhall
ſmoke his pipe in a woodbine alcove, and viewing
the ſerenity of your countenance, feel ſuch real pleasure
dilate his own heart, as ſhall make him forget
he had ever been unhappy.”
Lucy ſmiled; and Temple ſaw it was a ſmile
of approbation. He ſought and ſound a cottage
ſuited to his taſte; thither, attended my Love and
Hymen, the happy trio retired; where, during
many years of uninterrupted felicity, they caſt not
a wiſh beyond the little boundaries of their own tenement.
Plenty, and her handmaid, Prudence,
preſided at their board, Hoſpitality ſtood at their
[Page 032]
gate, Peace ſmiled on each face, Content reigned in
each heart, and Love and Health ſtrewed roſes on
their pillows.
Such were the parents of Charlotte Temple, who
was the only pledge of their mutual love, and
who, at the earneſt entreaty of a particular friend,
was permitted to finiſh the education her mother
had begun, at Madame Du Pont's ſchool, where we
firſt introduced her to the acquaintance of the
reader.
Chapter VI.
AN INTRIGUING TEACHER. Madame Du Pont was a woman every way
calculated to take the care of young ladies,
had that care entirely devolved on herſelf: but it
was impoſſible to attend the education of a numerous
ſchool without proper aſſiſtants: and thoſe
aſſiſtants were not always the kind of people whoſe
converſation and morals were exactly ſuch as parents
of delicacy and refinement would wiſh a
daughter to copy. Among the teachers at Madame
Du Pont's ſchool, was Mademoiſelle La
Rue, who added to a pleaſing perſon and inſinuating
addreſs, a liberal education and the manners of a
gentlewoman. She was recommended to the ſchool
by a lady whoſe humanity overſtepped the bounds
[Page 033]
of diſcretion: for though ſhe knew Miſs La Rue
had eloped from a convent with a young officer,
and on coming to England had lived with ſeveral
different men in open defiance of all moral and religious
duties; yet, finding her reduced to the
moſt abject want, and believing the penitence
which ſhe profeſſed to be ſincere, ſhe took her
into her own family, and from thence recommended
her to Madame Du Pont, as thinking the
ſituation more ſuitable for a woman of her abilities.
But Mademoiſelle poſſeſſed too much of the
ſpirit of intrigue to remain long without adventures.
At church, where ſhe conſtantly appeared,
her perſon attracted the attention of a
young man who was upon a viſit at a gentleman's
ſeat in the neighbourhood: ſhe had met him ſeveral
times clandeſtinely; and being invited to come out
that evening, and eat ſome fruit and paſtry in a
ſummer-houſe belonging to the gentleman he was
viſiting, and requeſted to bring ſome of the ladies
with her, Charlotte being her favourite, was fixed
on to accompany her.
The mind of youth eagerly catches at promiſed
pleaſure: pure and innocent by nature, it thinks
not of the dangers lurking beneath thoſe pleaſures,
till too late to avoid them: when Mademoiſelle
aſked Charlotte to go with her, ſhe mentioned the
gentleman as a relation, and ſpoke in ſuch high
terms of the elegance of his gardens, the
[Page 034]
sprightliness of his converſation, and the liberality with which
he ever entertained his gueſts, that Charlotte
thought only of the pleaſure ſhe ſhould enjoy in the
viſit,—not on the imprudence of going without
her governeſs's knowledge, or of the danger to
which ſhe expoſed herſelf in viſiting the houſe of a
gay young man of faſhion.
Madame Du Pont was gone out for the evening,
and the reſt of the ladies retired to reſt, when Charlotte
and the teacher ſtole out at the back gate, and
in croſſing the field, were accoſted by Montraville,
as mentioned in the firſt chapter.
Charlotte was diſappointed in the pleaſure ſhe
had promiſed herſelf from this viſit. The levity of
the gentlemen and the freedom of their conversation
diſguſted her. She was aſtoniſhed at the liberties
Mademoiſelle permitted them to take; grew
thoughtful and uneaſy, and heartily wiſhed herſelf
at home again in her own chamber.
Perhaps one cauſe of that wiſh might be, an earnest
deſire to ſee the contents of the letter which had
been put into her hand by Montraville.
Any reader who has the leaſt knowledge of the
world, will eaſily imagine the letter was made up
of encomiums on her beauty, and vows of everlasting
love and conſtancy; nor will he be ſurpriſed
that a heart open to every gentle, generous sentiment,
ſhould feel itſelf warmed by gratitude for a
man who profeſſed to feel ſo much for her; nor is
[Page 035]
it improbable but her mind might revert to the
agreeable perſon and martial appearance of Montraville.
In affairs of love, a young heart is never in more
danger than when attempted by a handſome young
ſoldier. A man of an indifferent appearance, will,
when arrayed in a military habit, ſhew to advantage;
but when beauty of perſon, elegance of manner,
and an eaſy method of paying compliments, are
united to the ſcarlet coat, ſmart cockade, and military
ſaſh, ah! well-a-day for the poor girl who
gazes on him: ſhe is in imminent danger; but if ſhe
liſtens to him with pleaſure, 'tis all over with her,
and from that moment ſhe has neither eyes nor ears
for any other object.
Now, my dear ſober matron, (if a ſober matron
ſhould deſign to turn over theſe pages, before ſhe
truſts them to the eye of a darling daughter,) let
me intreat you not to put on a grave face, and
throw down the book in a paſſion and declare 'tis
enough to turn the heads of half the girls in England;
I do ſolemnly proteſt, my dear madam, I
mean no more by what I have here advanced, than
to ridicule thoſe romantic girls who fooliſhly imagine
a red coat and ſilver epaulet conſtitute the fine
gentleman; and ſhould that fine gentleman make
half a dozen fine ſpeeches to them, they will imagine
themſelves ſo much in love as to fancy it a meritorious
action to jump out of a two pair of ſtairs
[Page 036]
window, abandon their friends, and truſt entirely
to the honour of a man, who perhaps hardly knows
the meaning of the word, and if he does, will be too
much the modern man of refinement, to practiſe it
in their favour.
Gracious heaven! when I think on the miſeries
that muſt rend the heart of a doating parent, when
he ſees the darling of his age at firſt ſeduced from
his protection, and afterwards abandoned, by the
very wretch whoſe promiſes of love decoyed her
from the paternal roof—when he ſees her poor and
wretched, her boſom torn between remorſe for her
crime and love for her vile betrayer—when fancy
paints to me the good old man ſtooping to raiſe the
weeping penitent, while every tear from her eye is
numbered by drops from his bleeding heart, my
boſom glows with honeſt indignation, and I wiſh
for power to extirpate thoſe monſters of ſeduction
from the earth.
Oh my dear girls—for to ſuch only am I writing—
liſten not to the voice of love, unleſs ſanctioned
by paternal approbation: be aſſured, it is now paſt
the days of romance: no woman can be run away
with contrary to her own inclination: then kneel
down each morning, and requeſt kind heaven to keep
you free from temptation, or, ſhould it pleaſe to
ſuffer you to be tried, pray for fortitude to reſiſt
the impulſe of inclination when it runs counter to
the precepts of religion and virtue.
[Page 037]
Chapter VII.
NATURAL SENSE OF PROPRIETY INHERENT
IN THE FEMALE BOSOM.
“I Cannot think we have done exactly right in
going out this evening, Mademoiſelle,”
ſaid Charlotte, ſeating herſelf when ſhe entered
her apartment: “nay, I am ſure it was not right;
for I expected to be very happy, but was ſadly disappointed.”
“It was your own fault, then,” replied Mademoiselle:
“for I am ſure my couſin omitted nothing
that could ſerve to render the evening agreeable.”
“True,” ſaid Charlotte: “but I thought the
gentlemen were very free in their manner: I wonder
you would ſuffer them to behave as they did.”
“Prithee, don't be ſuch a fooliſh little prude,”
ſaid the artful woman, affecting anger: “I invited
you to go in hopes it would divert you, and be an
agreeable change of ſcene; however, if your delicacy
was hurt by the behaviour of the gentlemen, you
need not go again; ſo there let it reſt.”
“I do not intend to go again,” ſaid Charlotte,
gravely taking off her bonnet, and beginning to
prepare for bed: “I am ſure, if Madame Du Pont
knew we had been out to-night, ſhe would be very
angry; and it is ten to one but ſhe hears of it by
ſome means or other.”
[Page 038]
“Nay, Miſs,” ſaid La Rue, “perhaps your
mighty ſenſe of propriety may lead you to tell her
yourſelf: and in order to avoid the cenſure you
would incur, ſhould ſhe hear of it by accident,
throw the blame on me: but I confeſs I deſerve it:
it will be a very kind return for that partiality
which led me to prefer you before any of the reſt of
the ladies; but perhaps it will give you pleaſure,”
continued ſhe, letting fall ſome hypocritical tears,
“to ſee me deprived of bread, and for an action
which by the moſt rigid could only be eſteemed an
inadvertency, loſe my place and character, and be
driven again into the world, where I have already
ſuffered all the evils attendant on poverty.”
This was touching Charlotte in the moſt vulnerable
part: ſhe roſe from her ſeat, and taking Mademoiselle's
hand—“You know, my dear La Rue,”
ſaid ſhe, “I love you too well, to do any
thing that would injure you in my governeſs's
opinion: I am only ſorry we went out this evening.”
“I don't believe it, Charlotte,” ſaid ſhe, assuming
a little vivacity; “for if you had not gone
out, you would not have ſeen the gentleman who
met us croſſing the field; and I rather think you
were pleaſed with his converſation.”
“I had ſeen him once before,” replied Charlotte,
“and thought him an agreeable man;
and you know one is always pleaſed to ſee a perſon
[Page 039]
with whom one has paſſed ſeveral chearful hours.
But,” ſaid ſhe pauſing, and drawing the letter from
her pocket, while a gentle ſuffuſion of vermillion
tinged her neck and face, “he gave me this letter;
what ſhall I do with it?
“Read it, to be ſure,” returned Mademoiſelle.
“I am afraid I ought not,” ſaid Charlotte:
“my mother has often told me, I ſhould never
read a letter given me by a young man, without
firſt giving it to her.”
“Lord bleſs you, my dear girl,” cried the
teacher ſmiling, “have you a mind to be in leading
ſtrings all your life time. Prithee open the letter,
read it and judge for yourſelf; if you ſhow it
your mother, the conſequence will be, you will be
taken from ſchool, and a ſtrict guard kept over
you: ſo you will ſtand no chance of ever ſeeing the
ſmart young officer again.”
“I ſhould not like to leave ſchool yet,” replied
Charlotte, “till I have attained a greater proficiency
in my Italian and muſic. But you can, if
you pleaſe, Mademoiſelle, take the letter back to
Montraville, and tell him I wiſh him well, but
cannot, with any propriety, enter into a clandestine
correſpondence with him.” She laid the
letter on the table, and began to undreſs herſelf.
“Well,” ſaid La Rue, “I vow you are an unaccountable
girl: have you no curioſity to ſee the
inſide now? for my part I could no more let a
[Page 040]
letter addreſſed to me lie unopened ſo long, than I
could work miracles: he writes a good hand,”
continued ſhe, turning the letter, to look at the
ſuperſcription.
“'Tis well enough,” ſaid Charlotte, drawing it
towards her.
“He is a genteel young fellow,” ſaid La Rue
careleſsly, folding up her apron at the ſame time;
“but I think he is marked with the ſmall pox.”
“Oh you are greatly miſtaken,” ſaid Charlotte
eagerly; “he has a remarkable clear ſkin and fine
complexion.”
“His eyes, if I could judge by what I ſaw,”
ſaid La Rue, “are gray and want expreſſion.”
“By no means,” replied Charlotte; “they are
the moſt expreſſive eyes I ever ſaw.”
“Well, child, whether they are gray or black is
of no conſequence: you have determined not to
read his letter; ſo it is likely you will never either
ſee or hear from him again.”
Charlotte took up the letter, and Mademoiſelle
continued—
“He is moſt probably going to America: and
if ever you ſhould hear any account of him, it may
poſſibly be that he is killed; and though he loved
you ever ſo fervently, though his laſt breath ſhould
be ſpent in a prayer for your happineſs, it can be
nothing to you: you can feel nothing for the fate
of the man, whoſe letters you will not open, and
[Page 041]
whoſe ſufferings you will not alleviate, by permitting
him to think you would remember him when
abſent, and pray for his ſafety.”
Charlotte ſtill held the letter in her hand: her
heart ſwelled at the concluſion of Mademoiſelle's
ſpeech, and a tear dropped upon the wafer that
cloſed it.
“The wafer is not dry yet,” ſaid ſhe, “and
ſure there can be no great harm—” She hesitated.
La Rue was ſilent. “I may read it, Mademoiselle,
and return it afterwards.”
“Certainly,” replied Mademoiſelle.
“At any rate I am determined not to anſwer it,”
continued Charlotte, as ſhe opened the letter.
Here let me ſtop to make one remark, and truſt
me my very heart aches while I write it; but certain
I am, that when once a woman has ſtifled
the ſenſe of ſhame in her own boſom, when once
ſhe has loſt ſight of the baſis on which reputation,
honour, every thing that ſhould be dear to the
female heart, reſts, ſhe grows hardened in guilt,
and will ſpare no pains to bring down innocence
and beauty to the ſhocking level with herſelf: and
this proceeds from that diabolical ſpirit of envy,
which repines at ſeeing another in the full possession
of that reſpect and eſteem which ſhe can no
longer hope to enjoy.
Mademoiſelle eyed the unſuſpecting Charlotte,
as ſhe peruſed the letter, with a malignant pleaſure.
[Page 042]
She ſaw, that the contents had awakened new emotions
in her youthful boſom: ſhe encouraged her
hopes, calmed her fears, and before they parted for
the night, it was determined that ſhe ſhould meet
Montraville the enſuing evening.
Chapter VIII.
DOMESTIC PLEASURE PLANNED. “I Think, my dear,” ſaid Mrs. Temple, laying
her hand on her huſband's arm as they
were walking together in the garden, “I think
next Wedneſday is Charlotte's birth day: now I
have formed a little ſcheme in my own mind, to
give her an agreeable ſurpriſe; and if you have no
objection, we will ſend for her home on that day.”
Temple preſſed his wife's hand in token of approbation,
and ſhe proceeded.—“You know the little
alcove at the bottom of the garden, of which Charlotte
is ſo fond? I have an inclination to deck this
out in a fanciful manner, and invite all her little
friends to partake of a collation of fruit, sweetmeats,
and other things ſuitable to the general
taſte of young gueſts; and to make it more pleaſing
to Charlotte, ſhe ſhall be miſtreſs of the feaſt, and
entertain her viſitors in this alcove. I know ſhe
will be delighted; and to complete all, they ſhall
have ſome muſic, and finiſh with a dance.”
[Page 043]
“A very fine plan indeed,” ſaid Temple, smiling;
“and you really ſuppoſe I will wink at your
indulging the girl in this manner? You will quite
ſpoil her, Lucy; indeed you will.”
“She is the only child we have,” ſaid Mrs.
Temple, the whole tenderneſs of a mother adding
animation to her fine countenance; but it was
withal tempered ſo ſweetly with the meek affection
and ſubmiſſive duty of the wife, that as ſhe
pauſed expecting her huſband's anſwer, he gazed
at her tenderly, and found he was unable to refuſe
her requeſt.
“She is a good girl,” ſaid Temple.
“She is, indeed,” replied the fond mother exultingly,
“a grateful, affectionate girl; and I am
ſure will never loſe ſight of the duty ſhe owes her
parents.”
“If ſhe does,” ſaid he, “ſhe muſt forget the example
ſet her by the beſt of mothers.”
Mrs. Temple could not reply; but the delightful
ſenſation that dilated her heart ſparkled in her
intelligent eyes, and heightened the vermillion on
her cheeks.
Of all the pleaſures of which the human mind is
ſenſible, there is none equal to that which warms
and expands the boſom, when liſtening to commendations
beſtowed on us by a beloved object,
and are conſcious of having deſerved them.
Ye giddy flutterers in the fantaſtic round of
[Page 044]
diffipation, who eagerly ſeek pleaſure in the loſty
dome, rich treat, and midnight revel—tell me,
ye thoughtleſs daughters of folly, have ye ever
found the phantom you have ſo long ſought with
ſuch unremitted aſſiduity? Has ſhe not always
eluded your graſp, and when you have reached
your hand to take the cup ſhe extends to her deluded
votaries, have you not found the long-expected
draught ſtrongly tinctured with the
bitter dregs of diſappointment? I know you have:
I ſee it in the wan cheek, ſunk eye, and air of
chagrin, which ever mark the children of dissipation.
Pleaſure is a vain illuſion; ſhe draws you on
to a thouſand follies, errors, and I may ſay vices,
and then leaves you to deplore your thoughtleſs
credulity.
Look, my dear friends, at yonder lovely Virgin
arrayed in a white robe devoid of ornament;
behold the meekneſs of her countenance, the modesty
of her gait; her handmaids are Humility,
Filial Piety, Conjugal Affection, Induſtry and
Benevolence ; her name is Content; ſhe holds in her
hand the cup of true felicity, and when once you
have formed an intimate acquaintance with theſe
her attendants, nay, you muſt admit them as your
boſom friends and chief counſellors, then, whatever
may be your ſituation in life, the meek eyed
Virgin will immediately take up her abode with
you.
[Page 045]
Is poverty your portion?—ſhe will lighten your
labours, preſide at your frugal board, and watch
your quiet ſlumbers.
Is your ſtate mediocrity?—ſhe will heighten every
bleſſing you enjoy, by informing you how grateful
you ſhould be to that bountiful Providence who
might have placed you in the moſt abject ſituation;
and, by teaching you to weigh your bleſſings againſt
your deſerts, ſhow you how much more you receive
than you have a right to expect.
Are you poſſeſſed of affluence?—what an inexhaustible
fund of happineſs will ſhe lay before you!
To relieve the diſtreſſed, redreſs the injured, in
ſhort, to perform all the good works of peace and
mercy.
Content, my dear friends, will blunt even the
arrows of adverſity, ſo that they cannot materially
harm you. She will dwell in the humbleſt cottage:
ſhe will attend you even to a priſon. Her parent
is religion; her ſiſters, Patience and Hope. She
will paſs with you through life, ſmoothing the
rough paths and tread to earth thoſe thorns which
every one muſt meet with as they journey onward
to the appointed goal. She will ſoften the pains
of ſickneſs, continue with you even in the cold
gloomy hour of death, and, chearing you with the
ſmiles of her heaven-born ſiſter, Hope, lead you triumphant
to a bliſsful eternity.
I confeſs I have rambled ſtrangely from my
[Page 046]
ſtory: but what of that? if I have been ſo lucky
as to find the road to happineſs, why ſhould I be
ſuch a niggard as to omit ſo good an opportunity
of pointing out the way to others. The very baſis
of true peace of mind is a benevolent wiſh to ſee
all the world as happy as one's ſelf; and from my
ſoul do I pity the ſelfiſh churl, who, remembering
the little bickerings of anger, envy, and fifty
other diſagreeables to which frail mortality is subject,
would wiſh to revenge the affront which
pride whiſpers him he has received. For my own
part, I can ſafely declare, there is not a human
being in the univerſe, whoſe proſperity I ſhould
not rejoice in, and to whoſe happineſs I would not
contribute to the utmoſt limit of my power: and
may my offences be no more remembered in the
day of general retribution, than as from my ſoul
I forgive every offence or injury received from a
fellow creature.
Merciful heaven! who would exchange the rapture
of ſuch a reflexion for all the gaudy tinſel which
the world calls pleaſure!
But to return.—Content dwelt in Mrs. Temple's
boſom, and ſpread a charming animation over her
countenance, as her huſband led her in, to lay the
plan ſhe had formed (for the celebration of Charlotte's
birth day,) before Mr. Eldridge.
[Page 047]
Chapter IX.
WE KNOW NOT WHAT A DAY MAY BRING
FORTH.
Various were the ſenſations which agitated
the mind of Charlotte, during the day preceding
the evening in which ſhe was to meet Montraville.
Several times did ſhe almoſt reſolve to
go to her governeſs, ſhow her letter, and be
guided by her advice: but Charlotte had taken one
ſtep in the ways of imprudence; and when that is
once done, there are always innumerable obſtacles
to prevent the erring perſon returning to the path
of rectitude: yet theſe obſtacles, however forcible
they may appear in general, exiſt chiefly in imagination.
Charlotte feared the anger of her governeſs: ſhe
loved her mother, and the very idea of incurring
her diſpleaſure, gave her the greateſt uneaſineſs; but
there was a more forcible reaſon ſtill remaining:
ſhould ſhe ſhow the letter to Madame Du Pont,
ſhe muſt confeſs the means by which it came into
her poſſeſſion; and what would be the conſequence?
Mademoiſelle would be turned out of doors.
“I muſt not be ungrateful,” ſaid ſhe, “La Rue
is very kind to me; beſides I can, when I ſee Montraville
inform him of the impropriety of our continuing
to ſee or correſpond with each other,
[Page 048]
and requeſt him to come no more to Chicheſter.”
However prudent Charlotte might be in theſe
reſolutions, ſhe certainly did not take a proper
method to confirm herſelf in them. Several times
in the courſe of the day ſhe indulged herſelf in reading
over the letter, and each time ſhe read it, the
contents funk deeper in her heart. As evening
drew near, ſhe caught herſelf frequently conſulting
her watch. “I wiſh this fooliſh meeting was over,”
ſaid ſhe, by way of apology to her own heart, “I
wiſh it was over; for when I have ſeen him, and
convinced him my reſolution is not to be ſhaken, I
ſhall feel my mind much eaſier.
The appointed hour arrived. Charlotte and Mademoiselle
eluded the eye of vigilance; and Montraville
who had waited their coming with impatience,
received them with rapturous and unbounded
acknowledgments for their condeſcenſion: he had
wiſely brought Belcour with him to entertain Mademoiselle
while he enjoyed an uninterrupted conversation
with Charlotte.
Belcour was a man whoſe character might be
compriſed in a few words; and as he will make
ſome figure in the enſuing pages, I ſhall here describe
him. He poſſeſſed a genteel fortune, and had a
liberal education; diſſipated, thoughtleſs, and capricious,
he paid little regard to the moral duties, and
leſs to religious ones: eager in the purſuit of pleasure,
he minded not the miſeries he inflicted on
[Page 049]
others, provided his own wiſhes, however extravagant,
were gratified. Self, darling ſelf, was the idol
he worſhipped, and to that he would have ſacrificed
the intereſt and happineſs of all mankind. Such was
the friend of Montraville: will not the reader be
ready to imagine, that the man who could regard
ſuch a character, muſt be actuated by the ſame feelings,
follow the ſame purſuits, and be equally unworthy
with the perſon to whom he thus gave his
confidence?
But Montraville was a different character: generous
in his diſpoſition, liberal in his opinions,
and good-natured almoſt to a fault; yet eager and
impetuous in the purſuit of a favourite object, he
ſtaid not to reflect on the conſequence which might
follow the attainment of his wiſhes; with a mind
ever open to conviction, had he been ſo fortunate
as to poſſeſs a friend who would have pointed out
the cruelty of endeavouring to gain the heart of an
innocent artleſs girl, when he knew it was utterly
impoſſible for him to marry her, and when the gratification
of his paſſion would be unavoidable infamy
and miſery to her, and a cauſe of neverceasing
remorſe to himſelf: had theſe dreadful consequences
been placed before him in a proper light,
the humanity of his nature would have urged him
to give up the purſuit: but Belcour was not this
friend; he rather encouraged the growing paſſion
of Montraville; and being pleaſed with the
[Page 050]
vivacity of Mademoiſelle, reſolved to leave no argument
untried, which he thought might prevail on her to
be the companion of their intended voyage: and
he made no doubt but her example, added to the
rhetoric of Montraville, would perſuade Charlotte
to go with them.
Charlotte had, when ſhe went out to meet
Montraville, flattered herſelf that her reſolution was
not to be ſhaken, and that, conſcious of the impropriety
of her conduct in having a clandeſtine intercourse
with a ſtranger, ſhe would never repeat
the indiſcretion.
But alas! poor Charlotte, ſhe knew not the deceitfulness
of her own heart, or ſhe would have
avoided the trial of her ſtability.
Montraville was tender, eloquent, ardent, and
yet reſpectful. “Shall I not ſee you once more,”'
ſaid he, “before I leave England? will you not
bleſs me by an aſſurance, that when we are divided
by a vaſt expanſe of ſea I ſhall not be forgotten?”
Charlotte ſighed.
“Why that ſigh, my dear Charlotte? could I
flatter myſelf that a fear for my ſafety, or a wiſh for
my welfare occaſioned it, how happy would it make
me.”
“I ſhall ever wiſh you well, Montraville,”
ſaid ſhe; “but we muſt meet no more.”
“Oh ſay not ſo, my lovely girl: reflect, that
[Page 051]
when I leave my native land, perhaps a few ſhort
weeks may terminate my exiſtence; the perils of
the ocean—the dangers of war—”
“I can hear no more,” ſaid Charlotte in a tremulous
voice, “I muſt leave you.”
“Say you will ſee me once again.”
“I dare not,” ſaid ſhe.
“Only for one half hour to-morrow evening:
'tis my laſt requeſt. I ſhall never trouble you again,
Charlotte.”
“I know not what to ſay,” cried Charlotte,
ſtruggling to draw her hands from him: “let me
leave you now.”
“And you will come to-morrow,” ſaid Montraville.
“Perhaps I may,” ſaid ſhe.
“Adieu then. I will live upon that hope till we
meet again.”
He kiſſed her hand. She ſighed an adieu, and
catching hold of Mademoiſelle's arm, haſtily entered
the garden gate.
Chapter X.
WHEN WE HAVE EXCITED CURIOSITY,
IT IS BUT AN ACT OF GOOD NATURE
TO GRATIFY IT. Montraville was the youngeſt ſon of a
gentleman of fortune, whoſe family being
[Page 052]
numerous, he was obliged to bring up his ſons to
genteel profeſſions, by the exerciſe of which they
might hope to raiſe themſelves into notice.
“My daughters,” ſaid he, “have been educated
like gentlewomen; and ſhould I die before they are
ſettled, they muſt have ſome proviſion made, to
place them above the ſnares and temptations which
vice ever holds out to the elegant, accompliſhed
female, when oppreſſed by the frowns of poverty
and the ſting of dependance: my boys, with only
moderate incomes, when placed in the church, at the
bar, or in the field, may exert their talents, make
themſelves friends, and raiſe their fortunes on the
baſis of merit.”
When Montraville choſe the proſeſſion of arms,
his father preſented him with a commiſſion, and
made him a handſome proviſion for his private
purſe. “Now, my boy,” ſaid he, “go! ſeek
glory in the field of battle. You have received
from me all I ſhall ever have it in my power to
beſtow: it is certain I have intereſt to gain you
promotion; but be aſſured that intereſt ſhall never
be exerted, unleſs by your future conduct you
deſerve it. Remember, therefore, your ſucceſs in
life depends entirely on yourſelf. There is one
thing I think it my duty to caution you againſt;
the precipitancy with which young men frequently
ruſh into matrimonial engagements, and by their
thoughtleſſneſs draw many a deſerving woman
[Page 053]
into ſcenes of poverty and diſtreſs. A ſoldier has
no buſineſs to think of a wife till his rank is ſuch
as to place him above the fear of bringing into the
world a train of helpleſs innocents, heirs only to
penury and affliction. If, indeed, a woman,
whoſe fortune is ſufficient to preſerve you in that
ſtate of independence I would teach you to prize,
ſhould generouſly beſtow herſelf on a young soldier,
whoſe chief hope of future proſperity depended
on his ſucceſs in the field—if ſuch a woman
ſhould offer—every barrier is removed, and I ſhould
rejoice in an union which would promiſe ſo much
felicity. But mark me, boy, if, on the contrary, you
ruſh into a precipitate union with a girl of little or
no fortune, take the poor creature from a comfortable
home and kind friends, and plunge her into all
the evils a narrow income and increaſing family
can inflict, I will leave you to enjoy the bleſſed
fruits of your raſhneſs; for by all that is ſacred,
neither my intereſt or fortune ſhall ever be exerted
in your favour. I am ſerious,” continued he,
“therefore imprint this converſation on your
memory, and let it influence your future conduct.
Your happineſs will always be dear to me; and I
wiſh to warn you of a rock on which the peace of
many an honeſt fellow has been wrecked; for
believe me, the difficulties and dangers of the
longeſt winter campaign are much eaſier to be
borne, than the pangs that would ſeize your heart,
[Page 054]
when you beheld the woman of your choice, the
children of your affection, involved in penury
and diſtreſs, and reflected that it was your own
folly and precipitancy had been the prime cauſe of
their ſufferings.”
As this converſation paſſed but a few hours before
Montraville took leave of his father, it was
deeply impreſſed on his mind: when, therefore,
Belcour came with him to the place of aſſignation
with Charlotte, he directed him to enquire of the
French woman what were Miſs Temple's expectations
in regard to fortune.
Mademoiſelle informed him, that though Charlotte's
father poſſeſſed a genteel independence, it
was by means probable that he could give his
daughter more than a thouſand pounds; and in
caſe ſhe did not marry to his liking, it was poſſible
he might not give her a ſingle ſous; nor did it appear
the leaſt likely, that Mr. Temple would agree
to her union with a young man on the point of embarking
for the ſeat of war.
Montraville therefore concluded it was impoſſible
he ſhould ever marry Charlotte Temple; and what
end he propoſed to himſelf by continuing the acquaintance
he had commenced with her, he did not
at that moment give himſelf time to enquire.
[Page 055]
Chapter XI.
CONFLICT OF LOVE AND DUTY.
Almost a week was now gone, and Charlotte
continued every evening to meet
Montraville, and in her heart every meeting was
reſolved to be the laſt; but alas! when Montraville
at parting would earneſtly intreat one more
interview, that treacherous heart betrayed her;
and, forgetful of its reſolution, pleaded the cauſe of
the enemy ſo powerfully, that Charlotte was unable
to reſiſt. Another and another meeting ſucceeded;
and ſo well did Montraville improve each opportunity,
that he heedleſs girl at length confeſſed no
idea could be ſo painful to her as that of never seeing
him again.
“Then we will never be parted,” ſaid he.
“Ah, Montraville,” replied Charlotte, forcing
a ſmile, “how can it be avoided? My parents
would never conſent to our union; and even could
they be brought to approve of it, how ſhould I bear
to be ſeparated from my kind, my beloved mother?”
“Then you love your parents more than you do
me, Charlotte?”
“I hope I do,” ſaid ſhe, bluſhing and looking
down, “I hope my affection for them will ever
keep me from infringing the laws of filial duty.”
“Well, Charlotte,” ſaid Montraville gravely,
[Page 056]
and letting go her hand, “ſince that is the caſe,
I find I have deceived myſelf with fallacious hopes.
I had flattered my fond heart, that I was dearer
to Charlotte than any thing in the world beſide.
I thought that you would for my ſake have braved
the dangers of the ocean, that you would, by
your affection and ſmiles, have ſoftened the hardships
of war, and, had it been my ſate to fall,
that your tenderneſs would chear the hour of
death and ſmooth my paſſage to another world.
But farewel, Charlotte! I ſee you never loved me.
I ſhall now welcome the friendly ball that deprives
me of the ſenſe of my miſery.”
“Oh ſtay, unkind Montraville,” cried ſhe
catching hold of his arm, as he pretended to leave
her, “ſtay, and to calm your fears, I will here
proteſt that was it not for the fear of giving pain
to the beſt of parents, and returning their kindneſs
with ingratitude, I would follow you through
every danger, and, in ſtudying to promote your
happineſs, inſure my own. But I cannot break
my mother's heart, Montraville; I muſt not bring
the grey hairs of my doating grand-father with sorrow
to the grave, or make my beloved father perhaps
curſe the hour that gave me birth.” She
covered her face with her hands, and burſt into
tears.
“All theſe diſtreſſing ſcenes, my dear Charlotte,”
cried Montraville, “are merely the
[Page 057]
chimeras of a diſturbed fancy. Your parents might
perhaps grieve at firſt; but when they heard from
your own hand that you was with a man of honour,
and that it was to inſure your felicity by an
union with him, to which you feared they would
never have given their aſſent, that you left their
protection, they will, be aſſured, forgive an error
which love alone occaſioned, and when we return
from America, receive you with open arms and tears
of joy.”
“Belcour and Mademoiſelle heard this laſt
ſpeech, and conceiving it a proper time to throw
in their advice and perſuaſions, approached Charlotte,
and ſo well ſeconded the intreaties of Montraville,
that finding Mademoiſelle intended going
with Belcour, and feeling her own treacherous heart
too much inclined to accompany them, the hapleſs
Charlotte, in an evil hour conſented that the next
evening they ſhould bring a chaiſe to the end of the
town, and that ſhe would leave her friends, and
throw herſelf entirely on the protection of Montraville.
“But ſhould you,” ſaid ſhe, looking earneſtly
at him, her eyes full of tears, “ſhould you, forgetful
of your promiſes, and repenting the engagements
you here voluntarily enter into, forſake and leave
me on a foreign ſhore—”
“Judge not ſo meanly of me,” ſaid he. “The
moment we reach our place of deſtination, Hymen
[Page 058]
ſhall ſanctify our love: and when I ſhall forget your
goodneſs, may heaven forget me.”
“Ah,” ſaid Charlotte, leaning on Mademoiſelle's
arm as they walked up the garden together, “I
have forgot all that I ought to have remembered, in
conſenting to this intended elopement.”
“You are a ſtrange girl,” ſaid Mademoiſelle:
“you never know your own mind two minutes at a
time. Juſt now you declared Montraville's happineſs
was what you prized moſt in the world; and now I
ſuppoſe you repent having inſured that happineſs by
agreeing to accompany him abroad.”
“Indeed I do repent,” replied Charlotte, “from
my ſoul: but while diſcretion points out the impropriety
of my conduct, inclination urges me on to
ruin.”
“Ruin! fiddleſtick?” ſaid Mademoiſelle; “am
not I going with you? and do I feel any of theſe
qualms?”
“You do not renounce a tender father and mother,”
ſaid Charlotte.
“But I hazard my dear reputation,” replied
Mademoiſelle, bridling.
“True,” replied Charlotte, “but you do not
ſeel what I do.” She then bade her good night: but
ſleep was a ſtranger to her eyes, and the tear of anguish
watered her pillow.
[Page 059]
Chapter XII.
                           Nature's laſt, beſt gift:
Creature in whom excell'd, whatever could
To ſight or thought be nam'd!
Holy, divine! good, amiable, and ſweet!
How thou art fall'n!—
When Charlotte left her reſtleſs bed, her languid
eye and pale cheek diſcovered to Madame
Du Pont the little repoſe ſhe had taſted.
“My dear child,” ſaid the affectionate governess,
“what is the cauſe of the langour ſo apparent
in your frame? Are you not well?”
“Yes, my dear Madam, very well,” replied
Charlotte, attempting to ſmile, “but I know not
how it was; I could not ſleep laſt night, and my spirits
are depreſſed this morning.”
“Come chear up, my love,” ſaid the governeſs;
“I believe I have brought a cordial to revive them.
I have juſt received a letter from your good mama,
and here is one for yourſelf.”
Charlotte haſtily took the letter: it contained
theſe words—
Letter “As to-morrow is the anniverſary of the happy
day that gave my beloved girl to the anxious wiſhes
of a maternal heart, I have requeſted your governeſs
to let you come home and ſpend it with us; and as
I know you to be a good affectionate child, and
[Page 060]
make it your ſtudy to improve in thoſe branches
of education which you know will give moſt
pleaſure to your delighted parents, as a reward
for your diligence and attention I have prepared
an agreeable ſurpriſe for your reception. Your
grand-father, eager to embrace the darling of his
aged heart, will come in the chaiſe for you: ſo
hold yourſelf in readineſs to attend him by nine
o'clock. Your dear father joins in every tender
wiſh for your health and future felicity, which
warms the heart of my dear Charlotte's affectionate
mother,
L. TEMPLE.”
Section “Gracious heaven!” cried Charlotte, forgetting
where ſhe was, and raiſing her ſtreaming eyes as in
carneſt ſupplication.
Madame Du Pont was ſurpriſed. “Why theſe
tears, my love?” ſaid ſhe. “Why this ſeeming
agitation? I thought the letter would have rejoiced,
inſtead of diſtreſſing you.
“It does rejoice me,” replied Charlotte, endeavouring
at compoſure, “but I was praying for merit
to deſerve the unremitted attentions of the beſt of
parents.”
“You do right,” ſaid Madame Du Pont, “to
aſk the aſſiſtance of heaven that you may continue
to deſerve their love. Continue, my dear Charlotte,
in the courſe you have ever purſued, and
you will inſure at once their happineſs and your
own.”
[Page 061]
“Oh!” cried Charlotte, as her governeſs leftlier,
“I have forſeited both for ever! Yet let me
reflect:—the irrevocable ſtep is not yet taken: it is
not too late to recede from the brink of a precipice,
from which I can only behold the dark abyſs of ruin,
ſhame, and remorſe!”
She aroſe from her ſeat, and flew to the apartment
of La Rue. “Oh Mademoiſelle!” ſaid ſhe,
“I am ſnatched by a miracle from deſtruction!
This letter has ſaved me: it has opened my eyes to
the folly I was ſo near committing. I will not go,
Mademoiſelle: I will not wound the hearts of thoſe
dear parents who make my happineſs the whole
ſtudy of their lives.”
“Well,” ſaid Mademoiſelle, “do as you pleaſe,
Miſs; but pray underſtand that my reſolution
is taken, and it is not in your power to alter
it. I ſhall meet the gentlemen at the appointed
hour, and ſhall not be ſurprized at any outrage
which Montraville may commit, when he finds
himſelf diſappointed. Indeed I ſhould not be astonished,
was he to come immediately here, and reproach
you for your inſtability in the hearing of
the whole ſchool: and what will be the consequence?
you will bear the odium of having formed
the reſolution of eloping, and every girl of ſpirit
will laugh at your want of fortitude to put it in
execution, while prudes and fools will load you
with reproach and contempt. You will have loſt
[Page 062]
the confidence of your parents, incurred their anger,
and the ſcoffs of the world; and what fruit do
you expect to reap from this piece of heroiſm; (for
ſuch no doubt you think it is?) you will have the
pleaſure to reflect, that you have deceived the man
who adores you, and whom in your heart you prefer
to all other men, and that you are ſeparated from
him for ever.”
This eloquent harangue was given with ſuch
volubility, that Charlotte could not find an opportunity
to interrupt her, or to offer a ſingle word
till the whole was finiſhed, and then found her ideas
ſo conſuſed, that ſhe knew not what to ſay.
At length ſhe determined that ſhe would go with
Mademoiſelle to the place of aſſignation, convince
Montraville of the neceſſity of adhering to the resolution
of remaining behind; aſſure him of her
affection, and bid him adieu.
Charlotte formed this plan in her mind, and exulted
in the certainty of its ſucceſs. “How ſhall
I rejoice,” ſaid ſhe, “in this triumph of reaſon
over inclination, and when in the arms of my
affectionate parents, lift up my ſoul in gratitude
to heaven as I look back on the dangers I have
eſcaped!
The hour of aſſignation arrived: Mademoiſelle
put what money and valuables ſhe poſſeſſed in her
pocket, and adviſed Charlotte to do the ſame; but
ſhe reſuſed: “my reſolution is fixed,” ſaid ſhe; I
will ſacrifice love to duty.”
[Page 063]
Mademoiſelle ſmiled internally; and they proceeded
ſoftly down the back ſtairs and out of the
garden gate. Montraville and Belcour was ready
to receive them.
“Now,” ſaid Montraville, taking Charlotte in
his arms, “you are mine forever.”
“No,” ſaid ſhe, withdrawing from his embrace
“I am come to take an everlaſting farewel.”
It would be uſeleſs to repeat the converſation
that here enſued; ſuffice it to ſay, that Montraville
uſed every argument that had formerly been
ſucceſsful, Charlotte's reſolution began to waver,
and he drew her almoſt imperceptibly towards the
chaiſe.
“I cannot go,” ſaid ſhe: “ceaſe, dear Montraville,
to perſuade. I muſt not: religion, duty,
forbid.”
“Cruel Charlotte,” ſaid he, “if you diſappoint
my ardent hopes, by all that is ſacred, this hand
ſhall put a period to my exiſtence. I cannot—will
not live without you.”
“Alas! my torn heart!” ſaid Charlotte, “how
ſhall I act?”
“Let me direct you,” ſaid Montraville, lifting
her into the chaiſe.
“Oh! my dear forſaken parents!” cried
Charlotte.
The chaiſe drove off. She ſhrieked, and fainted
into the arms of her betrayer.
[Page 064]
Chapter XIII.
CRUEL DISAPPOINTMENT.
“ What pleaſure,” cried Mr. Eldridge, as he
ſtepped into the chaiſe to go for his grand-daughter,
“what pleaſure expands the heart of an
old man when he beholds the progeny of a beloved
child growing up in every virtue that adorned the
minds of her parents. I fooliſhly thought, ſome
few years ſince, that every ſenſe, of joy was buried
in the graves of my dear partner and my ſon;
but my Lucy, by her ſilial affection, ſoothed my
ſoul to peace, and this dear Charlotte has twined
herſelf round my heart, and opened ſuch new ſcenes
of delight to my view, that I almoſt forget I have
ever been unhappy.”
When the chaiſe ſtopped, he alighted with the
alacrity of youth; ſo much do the emotions of the
ſoul influence the body.
It was half paſt eight o'clock: the ladies were assembled
in the ſchool room, and Madame Du Pont
was preparing to offer the morning ſacrifice of
prayer and praiſe, when it was diſcovered, that Mademoiselle
and Charlotte were miſſing.
“She is buſy, no doubt,” ſaid the governeſs,
“in preparing Charlotte for her little excurſion;
but pleaſure ſhall never make us forget our duty
to our Creator. Go, one of you, and bid them both
attend prayers.”
[Page 065]
The lady who went to ſummen them, ſoon returned,
and informed the governeſs, that the room
was locked, and that ſhe had knocked repeatedly,
but obtained no anſwer.
“Good heaven!” cried Madame Du Pont,
“this is very ſtrange:” and turning pale with
terror, ſhe went haſtily to the door and ordered it
to be forced open. The apartment inſtantly discovered,
that no perſon had been in it the preceding
night, the beds appearing as though juſt made. The
houſe was inſtantly a ſcene of conſuſion: the garden,
the pleaſure grounds were ſearched to no purpose,
every apartment rung with the names of Miſs
Temple and Mademoiſelle; but they were too
diſtant to hear; and every face wore the marks of
diſappointment.
Mr. Eldridge was ſitting in the parlour, eagerly
expecting his grand-daughter to deſcend, ready
equipped for her journey: he heard the conſuſion
that reigned in the houſe; he heard the name of
Charlotte frequently repeated. “What can be
the matter?” ſaid he, riſing and opening the
door: “I fear ſome accident has befallen my dear
girl.”
The governeſs entered. The viſible agitation of
her countenance diſcovered that ſomething extraordinary
had happened.
“Where is Charlotte?” ſaid he, “Why
does not my child come to welcome her doating
parent?”
[Page 066]
“Be compoſed, my dear Sir,” ſaid Madame
Du Pont, “do not frighten yourſelf unnecessarily.
She is not in the houſe at preſent; but
as Mademoiſelle is undoubtedly with her, ſhe will
ſpeedily return in ſafety; and I hope they will
both be able to account for this unſeaſonable absence
in ſuch a manner as ſhall remove our preſent
uneaſineſs.
“Madam,” cried the old man, with an angry
look, “has my child been accuſtomed to go out
without leave, with no other company or protector
than that French woman. Pardon me, Madam,
I mean no reflections on your country, but
I never did like Mademoiſelle La Rue; I think ſhe
was a very improper perſon to be entruſted with
the care of ſuch a girl as Charlotte Temple, or to
be ſuffered to take her from under your immediate
protection.”
“You wrong me, Mr. Eldridge,” ſaid ſhe, “If
you ſuppoſe I have ever permitted your grand-daughter
to go out unleſs with the other ladies. I
would to heaven I could form any probable conjecture
concerning her abſence this morning, but it is
a myſtery which her return can alone unravel.”
Servants were now diſpatched to every place
where there was the leaſt hope of hearing any tidings
of the fugitives, but in vain. Dreadful were
the hours of horrid ſuſpenſe which Mr. Eldridge
paſſed till twelve o'clock, when that ſuſpenſe was
[Page 067]
reduced to a ſhocking certainty, and every ſpark of
hope which till then they had indulged, was in a
moment extinguiſhed.
Mr. Eldridge was preparing with a heavy heart,
to return to his anxiouſly-expecting children, when
Madame Du Pont received the following note without
either name or date.
“Miſs Temple is well and wiſhes to relieve the
anxiety of her parents, by letting them know ſhe
has voluntarily put herſelf under the protection of
a man whoſe future ſtudy ſhall be to make her happy.
Purſuit is needleſs; the meaſures taken to
avoid diſcovery are too effectual to be eluded.
When ſhe thinks her friends are reconciled to this
precipitate ſtep, they may perhaps be informed of
her place of reſidence. Mademoiſelle is with her.”
As Madame Du Pont read theſe cruel lines, ſhe
turned pale as aſhes, her limbs trembled, and ſhe
was forced to call for a glaſs of water. She loved
Charlotte truly: and when ſhe reflected on the
innocence and gentleneſs of her diſpoſition, ſhe
concluded that it muſt have been the advice and
machinations of La Rue, which led her to this imprudent
action; ſhe recollected her agitation at the
receipt of her mother's letter, and ſaw in it the conflict
of her mind.
“Does that letter relate to Charlotte?” ſaid Mr.
Eldridge, having waited ſome time in expectation
of Madame Du Pont's ſpeaking.
[Page 068]
“It does,” ſaid ſhe. “Charlotte is well, but
cannot return to-day.”
“Not return, Madam? where is ſhe? who will
detain her from her fond expecting parents?”
“You diſtract me with theſe queſtions, Mr. Eldridge.
Indeed I know not where ſhe is, or who has
ſeduced her from her duty.”
The whole truth now ruſhed at once upon Mr.
Eldridge's mind. “She has eloped then,” ſaid he
“My child is betrayed; the darling, the comfort
of my aged heart, is loſt. Oh would to heaven I
had died but yeſterday.”
A violent guſh of grief in ſome meaſure relieved
him, and, after ſeveral vain attempts, he at length
aſſumed ſufficient compoſure to read the note.
“And how ſhall I return to my children?” ſaid
he: “how approach that manſion, ſo late the habitation
of peace? Alas! my dear Lucy, how will
you ſupport theſe heart-rending tidings? or how
ſhall I be enabled to conſole you, who need ſo much
conſolation myſelf?”
The old man returned to the chaiſe, but the light
ſtep and chearful countenance were no more; sorrow
filled his heart, and guided his motions; he
ſeated himſelf in the chaiſe, his venerable head reclined
upon his boſom, his hands were folded, his
eye fixed on vacancy, and the large drops of ſorrow
rolled ſilently down his cheeks. There was a
mixture of anguiſh and reſignation depicted in
[Page 069]
his countenance, as if he would ſay, henceforth who
ſhall dare to boaſt his happineſs, or even in idea
contemplate his treaſure, left, in the very moment
his heart is exulting in its own felicity, the object
which conſtitutes that felicity ſhould be torn from
him.
Chapter XIV.
MATERNAL SORROW. Slow and heavy paſſed the time while the carriage
was conveying Mr. Eldridge home;
and yet when he came in ſight of the houſe, he
wiſhed a longer reprieve from the dreadful taſk of
informing Mr. and Mrs. Temple of their daughter's
clopement.
It is eaſy to judge the anxiety of theſe affectionate
parents, when they found the return of their
father delayed ſo much beyond the expected time.
They were now met in the dining parlour, and
ſeveral of the young people who had been invited
were already arrived. Each different part of the
company was employed in the ſame manner, looking
out at the windows which faced the road. At
length the long-expected chaiſe appeared. Mrs.
Temple ran out to receive and welcome her darling:
her young companions flocked round the door,
each one eager to give her joy on the return of her
[Page 070]
birth-day. The door of the chaiſe was opened:
Charlotte was not there. “Where is my child?”
cried Mrs. Temple, in breathleſs agitation.
Mr. Eldridge could not anſwer: he took hold of
his daughter's hand and led her into the houſe; and
ſinking on the firſt chair he came to, burſt into tears,
and ſobbed aloud.
“She is dead,” cried Mrs. Temple. “Oh my
dear Charlotte!” and claſping her hands in an agony
of diſtreſs, fell into ſtrong hyſterics.
Mr. Temple who had ſtood ſpeechleſs with ſurprize
and fear, now ventured to enquire if indeed his Charlotte
was no more. Mr. Eldridge led him into
another apartment; and putting the fatal note into
his hand, cried—“Bear it like a Chriſtian, and turned
from him, endeavouring to ſuppreſs his own too
viſible emotions.
It would be vain to attempt deſcribing what Mr.
Temple felt whilſt he haſtily ran over the dreadful
lines: when he had finiſhed, the paper dropt from
his unnerved hand. “Gracious heaven!” ſaid he,
“could Charlotte act thus?” Neither tear nor ſigh
eſcaped him; and he ſat the image of mute ſorrow,
till rouſed from his ſtupor by the repeated ſhrieks of
Mrs. Temple. He roſe haſtily, and ruſhing into the
apartment where ſhe was, folded his arms about her
and ſaying—“Let us be patient, my dear Lucy,”
nature relieved his almoſt burſting heart by a friendly
guſh of tears.
[Page 071]
Should any one, preſuming on his own philoſophic
temper, look with an eye of contempt on the man
who could indulge a woman's weakneſs, let him remember
that man was a father, and he will then pity
the miſery which wrung thoſe drops from a noble,
generous heart.
Mrs. Temple beginning to be a little more composed,
but ſtill imagining her child was dead, her
huſband, gently taking her hand, cried—“You are
miſtaken, my love. Charlotte is not dead.”
“Then ſhe is very ill, elſe why did ſhe not
come? But I will go to her: the chaiſe is ſtill at
the door: let me go inſtantly to the dear girl. If
I was ill, ſhe would fly to attend me, to alleviate
my ſufferings, and chear me with her love.”
“Be calm, my deareſt Lucy, and I will tell you
all,” ſaid Mr. Temple. “You muſt not go, indeed
you muſt not: it will be of no uſe.”
“Temple,” ſaid ſhe, aſſuming a look of firmneſs
and compoſure, “tell me the truth I beſeech you.
I cannot bear this dreadful ſuſpenſe. What misfortune
has befallen my child? Let me know the worſt,
and I will endeavour to bear it as I ought.”
“Lucy,” replied Mr. Temple, “imagine your
daughter alive, and in no danger of death: what
misfortune would you then dread?”
“There is one misfortune which is worſe than
death. But I know my child too well to ſuſpect—”
“Be not too confident, Lucy.”
[Page 072]
“Oh heavens!” ſaid ſhe, “what horrid
images do you ſtart: is it poſſible ſhe ſhould forget—”
“She has forgot us all, my love; ſhe has preferred
the love of a ſtranger to the affectionate protection
of her friends.”
“Not cloped?” cried ſhe eagerly.
Mr. Temple was ſilent.
“You cannot contradict it,” ſaid ſhe. “I ſee
my fate in thoſe tearful eyes. Oh Charlotte! Charlotte!
how ill have you requited our tenderneſs!
But, Father of Mercies,” continued ſhe, ſinking on
her knees, and raiſing her ſtreaming eyes and
claſped hands to heaven, “this once vouchſaſe
to hear a fond, a diſtracted mother's prayer.
Oh let thy bounteous Providence watch over
and protect the dear thoughtleſs girl, ſave her
from the miſeries which I fear will be her portion,
and oh! of thine infinite mercy, make her not
a mother, leſt ſhe ſhould one day feel what I now
ſuffer.”
The laſt words faultered on her tongue, and ſhe
fell fainting into the arms of her huſband, who had
involuntarily dropped on his knees beſide her.
A mother's anguiſh, when diſappointed in her
tendereſt hopes none but a mother can conceive.
Yet, my dear young readers, I would have you
read this ſcene with attention, and reflect that
you may yourſelves one day be mothers. Oh my
[Page 073]
friends, as you value your eternal happineſs,
wound not, by thoughtleſs ingratitude, the peace
of the mother who bore you: remember the tenderness,
the care the unremitting anxiety with
which ſhe has attended to all your wants and
wiſhes from earlieſt infancy to the preſent day;
behold the mild ray of affectionate applauſe that
beams from her eye on the performance of your
duty: liſten to her reproofs with ſilent attention;
they proceed from a heart anxious for your future
felicity: you muſt love her; nature, all-powerful
nature, has planted the ſeeds of filial affection in
your boſoms.
Then once more read over the ſorrows of poor
Mrs. Temple, and remember the mother whom
you ſo dearly love and venerate will feel the ſame,
when you, forgetful of the reſpect due to your
maker and yourſelf, forſake the paths of virtue for
thoſe of vice and folly.
Chapter XV.
EMBARKATION. It was with the utmoſt difficulty that the united
efforts of Mademoiſelle and Montraville could
ſupport Charlotte's ſpirits during their ſhort ride
from Chicheſter to Portſmouth, where a boat waited
to take them immediately on board the ſhip in
which they were to embark for America.
[Page 074]
As ſoon as ſhe became tolerably compoſed, ſhe
entreated pen and ink to write to her parents. This
ſhe did in the moſt affecting, artleſs manner, entreating
their pardon and bleſſing, and deſcribing
the dreadful ſituation of her mind, the conflict ſhe
ſuffered in endeavouring to conquer this unfortunate
attachment, and concluded with ſaying, her only
hope of future comfort conſiſted in the (perhaps delusive)
idea ſhe indulged, of being once more folded
in their protecting arms, and hearing the words of
peace and pardon from their lips.
The tears ſtreamed inceſſantly while ſhe was
writing, and ſhe was frequently obliged to lay down
her pen: but when the taſk was completed, and ſhe
had committed the letter to the care of Montraville
to be ſent to the poſt office, ſhe became more calm,
and indulging the delightful hope of ſoon receiving
an anſwer that would ſeal her pardon, ſhe in ſome
meaſure aſſumed her uſual chearfulneſs.
But Montraville knew too well the conſequences
that muſt unavoidably enſue, ſhould this letter
reach Mr. Temple: he therefore wiſely reſolved to
walk on the deck, tear it in pieces, and commit
the fragments to the care of Neptune, who might
or might not, as it ſuited his convenience, convey
them on ſhore.
All Charlotte's hopes and wiſhes were now
centered in one, namely that the fleet might be detained
at Spithead till ſhe could receive a letter
[Page 075]
from her friends: but in this ſhe was diſappointed,
for the ſecond morning after ſhe went on board,
the ſignal was made, the fleet weighed anchor,
and in a few hours (the wind being favourable)
they bid adieu to the white cliffs of Albion.
In the mean time every enquiry that could be
thought of was made by Mr. and Mrs. Temple:
for many days did they indulge the fond hope that
ſhe was merely gone off to be married, and that
when the indiſſoluble knot was once tied, ſhe
would return with the partner ſhe had choſen, and
entreat their bleſſing and forgiveneſs.
“And ſhall we not forgive her?” ſaid Mr. Temple.
“Forgive her!” exclaimed the mother. “Oh
yes, whatever be our errors, is ſhe not our child?
and though bowed to the earth even with ſhame
and remorſe, is it not our duty to raiſe the poor
penitent, and whiſper peace and comfort to her
deſponding ſoul? would ſhe but return, with rapture
would I fold her to my heart, and bury every
remembrance of her faults in the dear embrace.”
But ſtill day after day paſſed on, and Charlotte
did not appear, nor were any tidings to be heard
of her: yet each riſing morning was welcomed by
ſome new hope—the evening brought with it disappointment.
At length hope was no more; despair
uſurped her place; and the manſion which was
once the manſion of peace, became the habitation
of pale, dejected melancholy.
[Page 076]
The chearful ſmile that was wont to adorn the
face of Mrs. Temple was ſled, and had it not been
for the ſupport of unaffected piety, and a consciousness
of having ever ſet before her child the fairest
example, ſhe muſt have ſunk under this heavy
affliction.
“Since,” ſaid ſhe, “the ſevereſt ſcrutiny cannot
charge me with any breach of duty to have
deſerved this ſevere chaſtizement, I will bow before
the power who inflicts it with humble resignation
to his will; nor ſhall the duty of a wife be
totally abſorbed in the feelings of the mother; I
will endeavour to appear more chearful, and by
appearing in ſome meaſure to have conquered my
own ſorrow, alleviate the ſufferings of my huſband,
and rouſe him from that torpor into which this
misfortune has plunged him. My father too demands
my care and attention: I muſt not, by a
ſelſiſh indulgence of my own grief, forget the interest
thoſe two dear objects take in my happineſs
or miſery: I will wear a ſmile on my face, though
the thorn rankles in my heart: and if by ſo doing,
I in the ſmalleſt degree contribute to reſtore their
peace of mind, I ſhall be amply rewarded for the pain
the concealment of my own feelings may occaſion.
Thus argued this excellent woman: and in the
execution of ſo laudable a reſolution we ſhall leave
her, to follow the fortunes of the hapleſs victim of
imprudence and evil counſellors.
[Page 077]
Chapter XVI.
NECESSARY DIGRESSION.
On board of the ſhip in which Charlotte and
Mademoiſelle were embarked, was an officer
of large unincumbered fortune and elevated rank,
and whom I ſhall call Crayton.
He was one of thoſe men, who having travelled
in their youth, pretend to have contracted a
peculiar fondneſs for every thing foreign, and to
hold in contempt the productions of their own
country; and this affected partiality extended even
to the women.
With him therefore the bluſhing, modeſty and unaffected
ſimplicity of Charlotte paſſed unnoticed; but
the forward pertneſs of La Rue, the freedom of her
converſation, the elegance of her perſon, mixed
with a certain engaging je ne ſais quoi , perfectly enchanted
him.
The reader no doubt has already developed the
character of La Rue; deſigning, artful, and ſelſiſh,
ſhe had accepted the devoirs of Belcour becauſe
ſhe was heartily weary of the retired life ſhe led
at the ſchool, wiſhed to be releaſed from what ſhe
deemed a ſlavery, and to return to that vortex of
folly and diſſipation which had once plunged her
into the deepeſt miſery; but her plan ſhe flattered
herſelf was now better formed: ſhe reſolved to
put herſelf under the protection of no man till ſhe
[Page 078]
had firſt ſecured a ſettlement; but the clandeſtine
manner in which ſhe left Madame Du Pont's
prevented her putting this plan in execution,
though Belcour ſolemnly proteſted he would make
her a handſome ſettlement the moment they arrived
at Portſmouth. This he afterwards contrived
to evade by a pretended hurry of buſineſs; La
Rue readily conceiving he never meant to fulfil
his promiſe, determined to change her battery, and
attack the heart of Colonel Crayton, She ſoon discovered
the partiality he entertained for her nation;
and having impoſed on him a feigned tale of
diſtreſs, repreſenting Belcour as a villain who had
ſeduced her from her friends under promiſe of marriage,
and afterwards betrayed her, pretending
great remorſe for the errors ſhe had committed,
and declaring whatever her affection for Belcour
might have been, it was now entirely extinguiſhed,
and ſhe wiſhed for nothing more than an opportunity
to leave a courſe of life which her ſoul abhorred;
but ſhe had no friends to apply to, they had
all renounced her, and guilt and miſery would undoubtedly
be her future portion through life.
Crayton was poſſeſſed of many amiable qualities,
though the peculiar trait in his character, which
we have already mentioned, in a great meaſure
threw a ſhade over them. He was beloved for his
humanity and benevolence by all who knew him,
but he was eaſy and unſuſpicious himſelf, and became
a dupe to the artifice of others.
[Page 079]
He was, when very young, united to an amiable
Pariſian lady, and perhaps it was his affection
for her that laid the foundation for the partiality he
ever retained for the whole nation. He had by her
one daughter, who entered into the world but a few
hours before her mother left it. This lady was universally
beloved and admired, being endowed with
all the virtues of her mother, without the weakneſs
of the father: ſhe was married to Major Beauchamp,
and was at this time in the ſame fleet with her father,
attending her huſband to New-York.
Crayton was melted by the affected contrition
and diſtreſs of La Rue: he would converſe with her
for hours, read to her, play cards with her, liſten
to all her complaints, and promiſe to protect her
to the utmoſt of his power. La Rue eaſily ſaw his
character; her ſole aim was to awaken a paſſion in
his boſom that might turn out to her advantage, and
in this aim ſhe was but too ſucceſsful, for before the
voyage was finiſhed the infatuated Colonel gave her
from under his hand a promiſe of marriage on their
arrival at New-York, under forfeiture of five thousand
pounds.
And how did our poor Charlotte paſs her time
during a tedious and tempeſtuous paſſage? naturally
delicate, the fatigue and ſickneſs which ſhe endured
rendered her ſo weak as to be almoſt entirely
confined to her bed: yet the kindneſs and attention
of Montraville in ſome meaſure contributed
[Page 080]
to alleviate her ſufferings, and the hope of hearing
from her friends ſoon after her arrival,
kept up her ſpirits, and cheered many a gloomy hour.
But during the voyage a great revolution took
place not only in the fortune of La Rue but in
the boſom of Belcour: whilſt in purſuit of his
amour with Mademoiſelle, he had attended little
to the intereſting, inobtruſive charms of Charlotte,
but when, cloyed by poſſeſſion, and diſguſted with the
art and diſſimulation of one, he beheld the simplicity
and gentleneſs of the other, the contraſt
became too ſtriking not to fill him at once with
ſurpriſe and admiration. He frequently converſed
with Charlotte; he found her ſenſible, well informed,
but diffident and unaſſuming. The languor
which the fatigue of her body and perturbation of
her mind ſpread over her delicate features, ſerved
only in his opinion to render her more lovely:
he knew that Montraville did not deſign to marry
her, and he formed a reſolution to endeavour to
gain her himſelf whenever Montraville ſhould leave
her.
Let not the reader imagine Belcour's deſigns
were honourable. Alas! when once a woman has
forgot the reſpect due to herſelf, by yielding to the
ſolicitations of illieit love, they loſe all their consequence,
even in the eyes of the man whoſe art has betrayed
them, and for whoſe ſake they have ſacrificed
every valuable conſideration.
[Page 081]
The heedleſs Fair, who ſtoops to guilty joys,
A man may pity—but he muſt deſpiſe.
Nay, ever libertine will think he has a right to inſult
her with his licentious paſſion; and ſhould the unhappy
creature ſhrink from the inſolent overture, he
will ſneeringly taunt her with pretence of modeſty.
Chapter XVII.
A WEDDING. On the day before their arrival at New-York,
after dinner, Crayton aroſe from his ſeat,
and placing himſelf by Mademoiſelle, thus addreſſed
the company—
“As we are now nearly arrived at our deſtined
port, I think it but my duty to inform you, my
friends, that this lady,” (taking her hand,) “has
placed herſelf under my protection. I have ſeen
and ſeverely felt the anguiſh of her heart, and
through every ſhade which cruelty or malice may
throw over her, can diſcover the moſt amiable
qualities. I thought it but neceſſary to mention
my eſteem for her before our diſembarkation,
as it is my fixed reſolution, the morning after we
land, to give her an undoubted title to my favour
and protection by honourably uniting my fate to
hers. I would wiſh every gentleman here therefore
to remember that her honour henceforth is
[Page 082]
mine, and,” continued he, looking at Belcour,
“ſhould any man preſume to ſpeak in the leaſt, disrespectful
of her, I ſhall not heſitate to pronounce
him a ſcoundrel.”
Belcour caſt at him a ſmile of contempt, and bowing
profoundly low, wiſhed Mademoiſelle much joy
in the propoſed union; and aſſuring the Colonel
that he need not be in the leaſt apprehenſive of any
one throwing the leaſt odium on the character of his
lady, ſhook him by the hand with ridiculous gravity,
and left the cabin.
The truth was he was glad to be rid of La Rue,
and ſo he was but freed from her, he cared not who
fell a victim to her infamous arts.
The inexperienced Charlotte was aſtoniſhed at
what ſhe heard. She thought La Rue had, like
herſelf, only been urged by the force of her attachment
to Belcour, to quit her friends, and follow
him to the ſeat of war: how wonderful then, that
ſhe ſhould reſolve to marry another man. It was
certainly extremely wrong. It was indelicate. She
mentioned her thoughts to Montraville. He laughed
at her ſimplicity, called her a little ideot, and
patting her on the cheek, ſaid ſhe knew nothing of
the world. “If the world ſanctifies ſuch things, 'tis
a very bad world I think,” ſaid Charlotte. “Why I
always underſtood that they were to have been married
when they arrived at New-York. I am ſure
Mademoiſelle told me Belcour promiſed to marry
her.”
[Page 083]
“Well, and ſuppoſe he did?”
“Why, he ſhould be obliged to keep his word I
think.”
“Well, but I ſuppoſe he has changed his mind,”
ſaid Montraville, “and then you know the caſe is
altered.”
Charlotte looked at him attentively for a moment.
A full ſenſe of her own ſituation ruſhed upon her
mind. She burſt into tears, and remained ſilent.
Montraville too well underſtood the cauſe of her
tears. He kiſſed her cheek, and bidding her not
make herſelf uneaſy, unable to bear the ſilent but
keen remonſtrance, haſtily left her.
The next morning by ſun-riſe they found themselves
at anchor before the city of New-York. A
boat was ordered to convey the ladies on ſhore.
Crayton accompanied them; and they were ſhewn
to a houſe of public entertainment. Scarcely were
they ſeated when the door opened, and the Colonel
found himſelf in the arms of his daughter, who had
landed a few minutes before him. The firſt transport
of meeting ſubſided, Crayton introduced his
daughter to Mademoiſelle La Rue, as an old friend
of her mother's, (for the artful French woman had
really made it appear to the credulous Colonel that
ſhe was in the ſame convent with his firſt wife, and,
though much younger, had received many tokens of
her eſteem and regard.)
“If, Mademoiſelle,” ſaid Mrs. Beauchamp,
[Page 084]
“you were the friend of my mother, you muſt
be worthy the eſteem of all good hearts.”
“Mademoiſelle will ſoon honour our family,”
ſaid Crayton, “by ſupplying the place that valuable
woman filled: and as you are married, my dear,
I think you will not blame—”
“Huſh, my dear Sir,” replied Mrs. Beauchamp:
“I know my duty too well to ſcrutinize
your conduct. Be aſſured, my dear father, your
happineſs is mine. I ſhall rejoice in it, and sincerely
love the perſon who contributes to it. But
tell me,” continued ſhe, turning to Charlotte,
who is this lovely girl? Is ſhe your ſiſter, MadeMoiselle?”
A bluſh, deep as the glow of the carnation, suffused
the cheeks of Charlotte.
“It is a young lady,” replied the Colonel,
“who came in the ſame veſſel with us from England.”
He then drew his daughter aſide, and told her
in a whiſper, Charlotte was the miſtreſs of Montraville.
“What a pity!” ſaid Mrs. Beauchamp ſoftly,
(caſting a moſt compaſſionate glance at her.)
“But ſurely her mind is not depraved. The goodness
of her heart is depicted in her ingenuous countenance.”
“Charlotte caught the word pity. “And am
I already fallen ſo low?” ſaid ſhe. A ſigh eſcaped
her, and a tear was ready to ſtart, but
[Page 085]
Montraville appeared, and ſhe checked the riſing emotion.
Mademoiſelle went with the Colonel and his
daughter to another apartment. Charlotte remained
with Montraville and Belcour. The next morning
the Colonel performed his promiſe, and La Rue
became in due form Mrs. Crayton, exulted in her
own good fortune, and dared to look with an eye
of contempt on the unfortunate but far leſs guilty
Charlotte.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
$$$
