

- 



xiiitftnnfitwftwyfutttt" 







LI B RA RY 

OF THL 

U N I VERS ITY 

or ILLINOIS 

823 

R.252clo 
1878 

v.a 



CENTRAL CIRCULATION AND BOOKSTACKS 

The person borrowing this material is 
responsible for its renewal or return 
before the Latest Date stamped below. You 
may be charged a minimum fee of $75.00 
for each non-returned or lost item. 
Theft, mutilation, or defacement of library materials can 
be causes for student disciplinary action. All materials 
owned by the University of Illinois Library are the 
property of the State of Illinois and are protected by 
Article 16B of Illinois Criminal Law and Procedure. 
TO RENEW, CALL (217) 333-8400. 
University of Illinois Library at Urbana-Champaign 



JAN 27 2006 



When renewing by phone, write new due date 
below previous due date. LI 62 



(( 



CHERRY RIPE!" 



Jl ?!i0miincc. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 

COMIN' thro' the rye," " THE TOKEN OF THE 
SILVER LILY." 



' Could ye come back to me, Douglas, Douglas, 
In the old likeness that I knew, 
I could be so loving, so tender and true, 
Douglas, Douglas, tender and true." 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. U. 




LONDON : 

RICHARD B E N T L E Y AND SON. 

1878 

[A// Rii^hfs Reserved.] 




^^CHERRY RIPE! 



BOOK IL 

FRUIT. 



CHAPTEE I. 



^'^AT BIGNOn's." 



" Whoso encamps 
To take a fancied city of delight, 
! what a wretch is he ! and, when 'tis his 
After long toil and suffering, to miss 
The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile !" 

OPt what we are going to receive," 
said Mignon distinctly, with folded 
hands, " the Lord make us truly 
thankful. Amen." 

The superb and benign Henri, who himself 
condescended to remove the cover from the 
VOL. II. ^0 




" CHERRY RIPE /" 



soup, all used to English folks and ways as 
he was, turned aside to avoid a smile. One 
or two pretty, frail Americans, dining at ad- 
jacent tables with their husbands, looked 
quickly up, interested and amused. A young 
mademoiselle, who dined alone, with perfect 
unconcern and serious gravity (for to the true 
Parisienne her dinner is every whit as solemn, 
and exacts quite as much discrimination as 
does her toilette), shrugged the shoulders that 
are to a Frenchwoman what a fan is to a 
Spaniard, the gesture saying as plain as it 
could speak, '^ What can you expect from 
' une Anglaise'T' Monsieur, eating slowly 
and heedfully, for to dine at Bignon's every 
day comes not to the average Frenchman, 
regarded the English girl, firstly with grave 
deliberation, lastly, and by successive stages, 
with warm and candid approval. Probably 
no man on earth is a better judge of a 
woman's looks than he ; his j udgment is 
never given until he has carefully and con- 
scientiously examined the object of his criti- 



FRUIT. 



€ism from head to foot. Led away by no 
fascination of glance, or fugitive richness of 
colouring, he will permit no detail of either 
face, figure, or style to escape him ; and when 
he has noted all, from the fashion of her hair 
to the set of her gowm and the shape of her 
foot, he will be in a position to tell you 
whether by one hair's-breadth she falls short 
of absolute excellence, or is perfect at all 
points. In the latter case, he is capable of 
appreciating her more thoroughly than would 
any other man of any other nationality under 
the sun. 

Adam, his soup finished, looked across at 
Mignon, who, in her white gown with its 
black ribbons, had nothing whatever in fice, 
look, or manner to lead one to suppose she 
was married, save the plain gold ring and 
keeper on her little hand. 

To his surprise she was looking at him. . . 
It was but rarely, indeed, that he was able to 
win her full regard. The old fearless gaze 
had died out of her eyes since her marriage, 

20—2 



CHERRY RIPET 



her glance ever turned aside from meeting 
his, as though she were frightened or ashamed 
.... but now he was quick to note how a 
tinge of colour had stolen into those snow- 
white cheeks, how a ripple of laughter 
trembled upon her lips, and how for the first 
time in all the past fortnight she seemed, for 
the moment at least, so exhilarated by the 
novelty and gaiety of the scene about her as 
absolutely to hsive forgotteii. 

"■ You like it ?" he said. '' You are Q:lad 
that we came, Mignon ?" 

" Yes, indeed I" she said. ''It is dehtjht- 
ful — ever so much f>leasanter than dining in 
our own rooms, with nobody in the world to 
look at but one another and Alphonse." 

" He is, at any rate, more merciful to our 
nerves than are these gargonny'' said Adam 
calmly. " If the equanimity with which 
eveiy one endures the noises made by himself 
were not an established fact, what terrible 
lives these fellows would lead !" 

*' No doubt if we waited upon theiii they 



FRUIT, 



would suffer as much at our hands as we do 
at theirs," said Mignon gaily ; " but I am 
quite willing to put up with all their crashes 
if you will bring me here again to-morrow T 

" Of course we will come again," he said, 
''if you wish it." 

" We mil dine at quite a fashionable hour," 
cried Mignon, '' eight o'clock, exactly the 
time that I used to go to bed at Rosemary 
until I was fifteen, and I will order the dinner 
and the wines and the liqueurs, and every- 
thing ! And just you see," she added trium- 
phantly, '' if I don't manage to spend just as 
much money on it as ijoii would !" 

" Only I am afraid you would come to 
grief over the menu,''' said Adam, laughing ; 
" for you know, Mignon, that though Mdlle. 
Lacroix reckoned you her best French scholar, 
you do not always call things and jDcrsons by 
their right names, and it was only this after- 
noon that you wounded the feelings of our 
driver by addressing him as ' cochonT 

*' Anybody might make such a mistake as 



''CHERRY RIPE!" 



that !" said Mignon, with dignity. " It is 
perfectly ridiculous that any language should 
have two words so wonderfully alike — and I 
shall always think that I know as much real 
French as you do — only you have got all the 
accent, while I have none !" 

''Have you not?" said Adam, gi'avely. 
" Now do you know, Mignon, that I should 
have said you had a great deal ! For instance, 
when you went into that shop this afternoon, 
and asked for a box of ^1. PancjJcs " 

'' At any rate," said Mignon, with red 
cheeks, "" I got what I wanted ; they under- 
stood me per/eci5?y/ / Whereas if you had 
gone in, you would have put so much fine 
accent and so little sense into the request, 
that very likely you would not have got them 
at all !" 

" In short," said Adam, seriously, '' we 
make one excellent French scholar between 
us ; but, like the two-headed nightingale, it 
would be death to separate us." 

''If it came to translating a i)age of 



FRUIT. 



Telemaque," said Mignon, nodding wisely, 
" I know which would get the best of it ; 
some day we'll try." 

Telemaque. . . . how the familiar name 
sent his thoughts travelling backwards. . . . 
Mignon must have been a baby in arms when 
he was studying his. 

" Adam," she said, dropping her voice to a 
discreet whisper, " have I got a large black 
on my nose T 

'' No r 

^' Nor a crooked parting " (she had removed 
her hat), " nor — nor anything remarkable, 
nothing one way or the other to make a per- 
son Izeej) on staring at me ?" 

Adam looked across at the winsome Eno-- 
lish face, that in the streets, the j^ublic pro- 
menades, the theatres (wherever, indeed, it 
appeared), drew all eyes after it as the sun 
does the flowers, and wondered in liis heart 
how much longer she would retain that rarest 
and most priceless crown of beauty — uncon- 
sciousness. 



8 ''CHERRY RIPET 

'' No," he said, ''I don't see anything amiss 
with you. Why T 

" Would you mind very nmch if I were to 
make a face at somebody 1" she said, still 
disregarding his question. 

'' I should mind it very much indeed I" he 
said hastily. " What on earth can make you 
wish to do that, Mignon ?" 

'' Because there is a rude man who has 
done nothing but stare at me since he came 
in — and a moment ago he deliberately smiled 
at me !" 

" Did he indeed ?" said Adam, smiling him- 
self ; "never mind, dear, don't look at him." 

" But he is sitting just behind you," she 
said, frowning, " and every time I look at you 
I can't help seeing him /" 

" Then you must not look at me I" he 
said, leaning forward, as though the direc- 
tion taken by his own looks formed no part 
of the agreement. 

She was holding a rich red strawberry to 
the still riper, sweeter fruit of her pouting 



FRUIT, 



lips, and as he looked, a dimple in one 
cheek peeped suddenly out like a truant 
schoolboy, then seeming to repent of its 
sally, went in again. 

" But supposing I like to look at you ?" 
she said. In her fresh, clear young voice 
was neither falter nor sign of hesitation. 
The tone might have been that of a sister 
to brother, or of one hon camarade to 
another ; nevertheless it set her husband's 
heart beating, and his pulses bounding 
madly. 

*' L' amour /" sighed a fat Frenchman, who 
sat en famille with his wife and two 
daughters at a table close by. (Was the 
family of a Frenchman ever known to con- 
sist of more than two ? To have none is 
to fail in his duty ; to have more is 
wickedly to tempt Providence.) Armed 
with the inevitable toothpick, and thoroughly 
well satisfied with the dinner he had eaten, 
he was regarding the spectacle of two young 
people, who had apparently paused in the 



10 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



business of dessert to stare at one another, 
with sensations of the profoundest pity. 

"• Bah I" said his wife, sallow, stout and 
greedy, the mother of his children, the object 
of his parents' choice, but by no means the 
ideal of his heart. " They are brother and 
sister — she can be no older than our Fihne — 
one does not marry a child like that !" 

Madame has not half the sentiment of her 
lord, or a hundredth part of his imagination. 
She regulates her kitchen and household 
admirably ; attends to the cutting out, 
making, and mending of the family clothes ; 
amasses a dot for Marie, chooses a calling or 
profession for Jean, and rarely or never de> 
velops a soul. 

Should she be a childless, rich woman, she 
flirts after a practical, systematic fashion until 
she is forty-five, after which she seeks in re- 
ligion the excitement that, in one shape or 
another, she finds it absolutely impossible to 
hve without. 

Mignon s eyes strayed past Adam, and he 



FRUIT, 11 



saw by the sudden contraction of the pupils 
that they were intently regarding something 
or somebody in the distance. 

He did not turn his head, although every 
moment he expected to hear a hasty step, a 
loud voice .... and then wild words, per- 
haps blows, a scene, to follow. 

'' What are you looking at, Mignon T he 
said quietly. 

" At a young man," she said, '' and O t 
such a wonderful one ! I am sure Count 
D'Orsay in his palmiest days could not have 
beaten him. Did you not tell me the other 
day that these men are called Gommeux f 

"• So they are," he said, a weight lifted 
from his mind ; " and after all," he thought, 
" I am not to have this, the happiest evening 
I have ever known with her, destroyed by 
him. And under Henri III. they were 
called — what do you think T 

'' The IncroyaUes f 

" No I they had your very name — they 
were called Miijnons ; wliile under the Re* 



12 " CHERR y RIPE /" 



gency they were dubbed routs, because of 
Louis Philippe's well-known speech that 
every one of them deserved to be rom, or 
broken on the wheel." 

''What is a roxicT said Mignon, tracing 
out a fanciful pattern on her dessert-plate 
with her strawberry stalks. 

Adam, looking up, and encountering the eyes 
of a man who was at that moment passing 
him, felt it to be one of those odd coincidences 
of which life is full, that at the very moment 
when he was hesitating as to what reply he 
should give her, a sufficiently striking illustra- 
tion in the flesh should appear before him. 

''A bad man, Mignon," he said. 

And even as he spoke he was looking 
Philip La Mert, who had seated himself at a 
table placed against the wall innnediately 
behind Mignon, as calmly in the face as 
though he were a perfect stranger, whose ap- 
pearance at Bignon's called for no more sur- 
prise on his own part than that of any other 
person present. 



FRUIT. 13 



" And so," thought Adam, '' he does not 
intend to make a scene, he knows that it 
would do no good, his 2)lot is something 
deeper ; nevertheless — ^courage !" 

Mignon had left off trifling Avith her stalks,. 
and was now drinking coffee. 

The brightness of her mood had suddenly 
passed away ; the anxious look had crept back 
to her eyes ; the colour had faded out of her 
cheeks, leaving her, like Christabel, 

" Fair, not pale." 

And it seemed to Adam — and the time 
came when what then seemed like an unrea- 
sonable fancy recurred to him with all the 
force of a fulfilled prophecy — that the mere 
shadow of this man falling upon the girl had 
power to dim her brightness, and check the 
timid, gentle growth of those slender, lovely 
tendrils of regard that she was mth hesitation 
beginning to put forth to himself 

" You tliink there will be a letter from 
Prue to-morrow T she said, looking at him 



14 " CM ERR V RIPE /' 

anxiously. '' I have not heard for two whole 
days, you know, and perhaps something may 
have happened. ..." 

" You are sure to hear from her to-morrow," 
he said hastily, for just now the one object of 
his life was to keep her from thinking, and 
though it is usually no such difficult matter 
to woo the very young from thought, he had 
never until to-night induced, for even one 
brief hour, this girl to see the sunlight of To- 
day save chequered with the dark shadows of 
Yesterday. 

" And perhaps you will get a letter, too," 
she said wistfully, '' with the good news in it 
for which I am hoping and waiting, and 
then we will go straight home, will we not ? 
For O !" she added, shaking her head, '' al- 
though we have seen and done so much, it 
seems a long, long time since the day that we 
Avere married !" 

Her clear voice, distinct and pure as that 
of a child — and we all know how much farther 
a child's voice will travel than that of a orrown 



FRUIT. 15 



person — reached to Mr. La Mert's ears, 
and, his eyes meeting those of Adam, he 
smiled. 

Such a smile, on such a face ! 

One would have said that this man must, 
by sheer force of will, have raised himself 
from a bed of sickness, to which he was bound 
to return so soon as the fictitious strength 
that now supported him should be exhausted. 
One would have said, too, that behind those 
burning eyes of his, raged a devil of reckless- 
ness and daring that boded mischief to some- 
one, unless, indeed, it was to have its recoil 
violently upon himself. 

" I am sorry you have found the time so 
long, Mignon," said Adam, quietly, '' but 
cheer up — it is very nearly over now." 

" And this day week," she said, her face 
one big smile, " we shall very likely be back 
again at the old place, and I shall have got 
my Prue again ; and if you were to wake up 
in your own house, and / in Kosemary, we 
should both rub our eyes and think we had 



16 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

been dreaming, and that we had never been 
manied at all /" 

" Should we T he said, smiHng ; ay, he 
could even smile under the eyes of the man 
who sat and watched him yonder. " And 
now, if you are quite ready, Mignon" (he 
had paid the bill some time since) ; " shall we 
go? 

'^ I am quite ready," she said, stretching 
out her hand for her hat. And then he fell 
to wondering whether she would put it on 
without looking in the glass, or turn to the 
mirror behind her, and so come face to face 
with Philip La Mert. 

Now w^hen a woman puts on either hat, 
cloak, or bonnet without once looking to see 
if they are straight or awry, one may be 
positively certain that there is something 
radically wrong with that woman, either in 
heart, mind, or body, or that in her character 
there is some queer twist, that has placed her 
womanliness in abeyance, and si:>oiled her for 
those useful and lovely purposes for which she 



FRUIT, 17 



was created. Without being coquette, it is 
natural to every woman to do the best she 
can for herself; it is, moreover, as disrespect- 
ful to society as to herself to appear in the 
guise of a sloven. 

And so it was that Mignon, rising from her 
seat, did turn, and looking neither to the 
right nor left, but at the mirror before her, 
put up her slender hands to smooth her hair 
and fasten her hat, and, still regarding herself, 
saw Adam come from behind, and put her black 
silk cloak over her shoulders. Then she tied 
her ribbons, leisurely tucked up a stray love- 
lock that had escaped from the rest, the while 
her dress actually brushed Philip La Mert's 
arm ; the while she must, had she given one 
glance downwards, have met the gaze of the 
man upon whose unconscious face she had 
showered such bitter tears on her wedding 
morning, fourteen days ago. 

Then she began to draw on her gloves, 
turned away, and passed down through the 
crowded room with her husband. 

VOL. II. 2JI 



18 ''CHERRY RIPET 



Their disappearance seemed to break the 
spell that had held Mr. La Mert inert, as one 
dead, through the foregoing perfomiance, and 
dashing down a gold piece upon the table 
where he had been making a pretence of 
dining, he rose up and followed them. He 
was trembling as though with an ague fit, his 
senses were reeling with passion and despair ; 
the mere sound of her voice, the sight of her 
face had affected his brain as may strong wine 
the man whose body is enfeebled by privation 
and abstinence ; the sight of what he had lost 
engendered in him a yet more deadly concen- 
trated fury than he had known even in the 
first awful frustration of his hopes, and if on 
all the earth that night there was a man ripe 
for crime, it was Philip La Mert. 

In the countenances of those he passed, 
he read some reflection of the madness of his 
own, for as that haggard face, lit by those 
flaming eyes, went by, all shrank from him as 
though he brought death in his track. 

As he stood without, his brain somewhat 



FRUIT, 19 



steadied by the cool night air, he saw in a 
volt lire moving rapidly away, a bit of white 
and a black silk cloak, and inside that white 
gown and black cloak was, he well knew, 
Mignon. 

In another moment he, too, was in a car- 
riage, following them. '' Thank God !" he 
cried aloud, lifting his eyes, impious as his 
words, to heaven, *' that she does not love 
him. No, nor ever shall T he added, with 
clenched hand. ^' He stole her from me, aye ! 
let him look to it that I do not take my own 
back again, a something better than the love- 
less girl who gave her vows — no more — who 
shall yield up to me her heart, her soul — 
all !" 

On, on, they drove, the pursuer and the 
pursued, through the brilliant streets of the 
beautiful city, that is surely as enchanted as 
any of which we read with bated breath in 
our nursery days, and loved and believed in 
with so unswerving a faith and devotion that 
I venture to think it would not have surprised 

21-~i> 



20 ''CHERRY RIPEf 

US much, if in our infant travels we had 
chanced upon them, and discovered our fa- 
vourite heroes and heroines aUve and happy, 
enjoying themselves just like other people. 

Well, there is one city that all who seek 
may find, but if we would see her as she 
should be seen, let us not wait until we are 
old and sad, but go to her in the days of our 
youth, in the freshness of the spring-tide 
of our lives, when our consciences are pure, 
and our souls unsoiled by the smirch and 
the shame of sin and sorrow ; when our steps 
move to the very rhythm and tune of the song 
of gladness, that bubbles up from the well- 
spring of joy that dwells in our hearts. 

Above all, let us cast our memory behind 
us, and if we have studied history well, recall 
that which we have read concerning this city, 
less as a living, breathing record of facts, than 
as a brilliant and terrifying fable that does 
but entice and fascinate us the more .... 
then, and then only, can we draw her into our 
very blood as a thing of beauty that 



FRUIT. 21 



" Will never 
Pass into nothingness, but still will keep 
A bower quiet for us, and a sleep 
Full of sweet dreams, and health and quiet breathing. 
. . . . Yea, in spite of all, 
Some shape of beauty moves away^the pall 
From our dark spirits." 

And even if we are no longer very young and 
very happy^ as we pass her portals does not 
dnll Care step down from the pillion behind 
us, knowing that to him all entrance is de- 
nied ? No sooner do we breathe her air than 
we are infected by that gaiete de ccciir, that 
is the distinguishing characteristic of the 
Parisian, and our hearts quicken into vivid, 
healthy enjoyment. '' See Naples and die," 
runs the j^roverb ; let us rather say, " See 
Paris and live !" For there is an intoxication 
of life in her very air, and she is emphatically 
a city of neither yesterday nor to-morrow, but 
— to-day. All she asks of us is to take the 
present between our lips, and suck its sweet- 
ness slowly out, as oblivious of her past, as 
careless of her future as she. For she rcmem- 



22 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

bers not her reverses and her humihations, 
only in her heart hve fresh and green her 
glories, her victories, and the crowns of her 
heroes. Emerging with radiant smile from 
the darkest abysm of shame and degradation, 
she dashes the blood from her brow, the foam 
from her lips, and crowning herself with 
lilies, calls upon her children to arise and 
rejoice with her. 

Such an one, though stricken oft and vio- 
lently by fate, outraged and rent in twain by 
the passions evoked by her own strength, can 
never die ; though her glory be dimmed, yet 
can it never be utterly quenched, for the life 
she bears is a charmed one, and no more 
to be destroyed than the rainbow, whose 
colours fade indeed, but only to return again 
in all their splendour. 

And so it is, that her children, though 
oftentimes, in their mad and senseless fury, 
they turn upon and rend the bosom that 
warmed and nourished them, yet love he 
with a deep and exceeding love, that is 



FRUIT, 23 



stronger than the love of wife, and home, and 
children .... that she is the idol of the 
Frenchman's youth, maturity, and old age ; 
and that as Paris is the very core of his 
heart, so does he die with her name upon his 
lips. 

'' Mignon," said Adam, rousing himself as 
the carriage stopped at the place where they 
usually descended for the Champs Elysees, 
" I beg your pardon for being such a dull 
companion, but I have been — thinking " 

'' Hark !" she said, lifting her hand as they 
stood together on the veritable Elysian fields, 
where thousands of lamps glittered, and 
thousands of people went to and fro, "' do 
you hear, that girl's voice yonder ? Let us 
ofo and listen !" 

A few steps, and they passed into one of 
those strange, poetic, open-air concerts, 
" Untev den Linden,'' with the blue sky for 
a spangled canopy, the grass for a carpet, 
through the sea of up-turned faces, all 
directed towards the gaily-dressed, sweet- 



24 " CHERRY RIPE /" 

voiced woman who faced them, smiling from 
the centre of the brilHantly-Ht, gaudy stage 
before them. 

Mignon, glancing up at the low screen of 
delicate leaves that alone came betwixt her 
brow and heaven, met the eyes of a man who 
was passing by to his place. '' Adam," she 
said, pulling gently at his hand with a certain 
hurry and excitement in her soft voice, " did 
you see that ? Is it possible ? Could it have 
been — Him T 




CHAPTER II. 

" 'Tis the pest 
Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest ; 
That things of delicate and tenderest worth 
Are swallowed all, and made a second dearth 
By one consuming flame . . . ." 

OMEBODY was leaning out of one 
of the windows of the Hotel Bris- 
tol, engaged in dropping small 
pieces of bread-and-butter, one by one, on 
to something or somebody below. She was 
such a long, long way up, and the object 
of her attention such a long, long way 
beneath, that her missiles seemed to fall quite 
slowly, and were every one wide of the mark. 
At last, however, by dint of most careful per- 
severance and practice, she succeeded in hit- 




26 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 



ting the exact centre of that feature of the 
face which is perhaps more provocative of 
blows, as it is certainly more prone to resent 
them than any other, viz., the nose. The 
particular nose that was just then the target 
at which Mignon shot her unskilful arrows, 
belonged to the driver of a voiture de remise 
that was drawn up, apparently waiting for 
some person or persons to come out of the 
hotel and take their seats in it. 

Disgracefully awakened from the doze into 
which he had fallen, and looking all about 
him and finally upwards, he at last discovered 
far above him the charming head thrust out 
through an open window that nodded with 
much energy, saying, as plainly as it could 
speak, and with the broadest emphasis, 
"' AttendezT 

The man, recoofnising^ her, made a cresture 
to show that he understood, then sat immov- 
able as before. 

Adam, entering the salon just as Mignon's 
most energetic nods and becks were going 



FRUIT. 27 



forward, stopped short with a sudden and 
most disagreeable sensation of surprise, then, 
advancing to her side, put out his head and 
looked down also. 

'^ It was so lucky I saw him," said Mignon, 
drawing in her head, and blinking both her 
sun-dazzled eyes. ''I do believe he was on 
the point of going away, quite out of patience, 
when I made him look up, and I would not 
have had him go for the world !" 

Mr. Montrose, looking abroad and about 
with keen, quick scrutiny, could discover 
nothing, or at any rate nothing that he had 
expected or feared to see. Then a thought 
struck him. 

" He is coming up T he said calmly. *' It 
was to him, then, that you were beckoning." 

'' Coming up T she said, staring at him ; 
'^ why should he do that, and how can he leave 
his horse and carriaore ?" 

Adam broke into sudden relieved laughter 
us he- looked out again, and recognised the 
conveyance, that, from the height whence he 



28 "" CHERRY RIPE/' 

regarded it, reminded him irresistibly of the 
chariot horsed and driven by the Industrious 
Fleas. 

^'I do believe," he said, ''that it is your 
cochon, Mignon I But what is he doing there?" 

'' Have you forgotten," said the girl, pop- 
ping her head out again to make sure that he 
had not gone, ^' that we told him to come for 
us at ten o'clock this morning punctually f 
And now," she added reproachfully, as she 
drew her flushed face in again, " it is nearly 
half-past !" 

" And whose fault is that, Mignon V said 
Adam, laughing ; '^ did you not persist in 
sacrificing comfort to a fine view ? — and when 
people live in the clouds, must you not make 
allowance for the time it takes to descend and 
get up again 1" 

" There is always the lift !" said Mignon, 
putting on her hat, and taking her cloak from 
a chair hard by, '* and it does seem such a 
pity to waste the morning hours, the best of 
all the day." 



FRUIT. 29 



The July sun was pouring his flood of hght 
full upon the gay, bright salon, upon the man 
who leant his shoulders against the window- 
frame, and looked at his wife, upon the girl 
who stood thoughtfully tying her strings, 
altoo'ether unconscious of his reo^ard. 

*^Mignon," said Adam, looking at her 
^riticall}^, '' I don't know much about those 
matters — but isn't your cloak a little — a little 
old-fashioned, dear ?" 

^' How long ago did Ked Riding Hood 
hve 1" said the girl. '^ A hundred — five hun- 
dred years — a thousand ? I can't fancy our 
grandmothers, however remote, could have 
been veal children, without knowing her story 
by heart ! And just as old as she is, so old 
is my cloak, for if it were made in red instead 
of black it would be the very counterpart of 
hers !" 

'^ We must buy you a new one," he said ; 
'' though I don't think we can aflbrd Worth!'* 
he added, lau2rhin^\ 

^' He would show me the door if I went," 



30 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

said Mignon, with conviction, as she drew a 
'' Marshal Niel " rose from the bouquet that 
Adam had just brought in and laid upon the 
table. '' Did you not tell me yesterday that 
from the depths of his soul he despises an 
insignificant slender person, while he loves to 
dress a fine large woman with a presence T 

'' Then," said Adam, glancing at the svelte 
gracious proportions of a figure that from 
crown to heel was of nature's proudest, most 
fastidious fashioning, '' we will wait, Mignon, 
until you have developed into a fine woman, 
or at any rate something very different to 
what you are now !" 

'' Shall we overcome here again, I wonder'?" 
she said half to herself, her eyes straying 
past him to the goodly city stretched out at 
her feet. " I hope not . . .at least without 
herr 

'' You have not yet given me a flower for 
my button-hole," said Adam quietly. 

Every morning, and to him it was the 
shortest, sweetest minute of the whole day, 



FRUIT. 31 



she was wont to fasten a flower in his coat,, 
and had it j)leased her to place in it a nosegay 
as big as footmen wear on a drawing-room 
day, he would have worn it without a murmur 
until she gave him a fresh one. 

" I beg your pardon !" she said, turning at 
once, and selecting a pale bud from among its 
brighter sisters, with her eyes still full of 
thought, put up her little gloved hands and 
fastened the flower in its place. 

The stalk Avas troublesome, she was a little 
longer than usual over her task, yet he stood 
perfectly still and silent, scarcely glancing, to 
all appearance, at the blue violets of her eyes,^ 
half seen through the brown fringe that cur- 
tained them, nor at the sweet tender mouthy 
of which he was in truth saying to himself, 

" Her lips were all my own, and — ah, ripe sheaves 
Of happiness ! ye on the stubble droop, 
Yet never may be garnered . . . ." 

How gentle he had to be with her, how 
patient, no one would ever know. Not one 
sweet overt violence of love did he permit 



32 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 



himself .... in her own good time she 
would come to him, until then he would put 
no pressure upon her, nor cast away the rich 
fruit that he saw ripening to him in the future, 
for the green unripe one of the present. 

He had by now so schooled himself in self- 
command, that she never dreamed how the 
mere light touch of her hand upon his coat 
set his pulses throbbing, his heart beating 
madly, or how the temptation often rose Avitliin 
him like a giant to take her in his arms (for 
was she not his own ?) and pray her, for dear 
God's sake, to try and learn to love him a 
little — only a little, and so give back for the 
plenty he poured upon her, some better return 
than the heart-bareness that was his portion. 
But Mignon knew nothing of this. To all 
appearance he was flir more indifferent and at 
his ease than she. In the dejDths of her eyes 
he sometimes thought he discovered a some- 
thing that was not fear, but rather a dumb 
and piteous reproach, inducing in him some 
such shame as a man may experience who has 



FRUIT. 33 



taken from a child's ignorant generous hand, 
a toy, of which it knew not then the exceed- 
in,^ value, but to the loss of which, awakening 
by-and-by, it falls to regarding with helpless 
condemnation the man that reft it from him. 

'' There 1" said Mignon, stepping back and 
looking at the now garnished button-hole, '^ it 
really is very pretty indeed ! I never fastened 
a better ! But indeed that poor old fellow 
will think we are playing him a trick, and we 
have such a lot to do to-day I" 

^^ Yes," said Adam, " there is a great deal 
to do to-day !" but he was thinking of other 
matters than she. As they left the room to- 
gether, it suddenly occurred to him how, each 
time Philip La Mert had spoken with Mignon, 
she had worn a rose at her breast, and she 
was wearing one to-day ! 

The faithful coclier w^as still at his post — 
fast asleep. 

Why is it usually so much more easy to 
come out of all pleasant things, tlian to enter 
into them ? And from tluit choicest good on 

VOL. II. ^2 



;j4 ''CHERRY RlPEf 

earth, sleep, we emerge even more quickly 
than from any of the rest. 

So that it took but a moment to make a 
very happy man a very careworn, troubled 
one, and away they went through the clear 
bright morning, along the cool freshly- watered 
streets, while the divine early summer fruits, 
that seemed to have overflowed the shops to 
the pavements beyond, were here, there, and 
everywhere, as also the countless flowers that, 
in their gay profusion, seemed to tell how, 
out yonder, beyond the great city, the world 
was all ablaze with summer's jocund mirth. 
And who that has seen Paris in her early 
morning robe Avill deny that in it she is every 
whit as f\iir as in her crowded noonday bright- 
ness, and dazzling midnight splendour ? 

'' What a delightful thing it is," said Mio- 
non, with a sigh of relief, " to be for once be- 
hind a horse that will go. All the others we 
have had simply crawled." 

'' Yes," said Adam, absently, and wishing 
with all his heart that the animal in question 



FRUIT, 35 



would go faster still ; for one backAvard glance, 
given immediately after leaving the hotel, 
had informed him that they were followed. 

In the midst of liis pre-occupation he could 
not help smiling. . . . this wild-goose chase 
seemed to him so laughable an affair ; and, 
after all, what did the pursuer promise him- 
self ? A scene of stormino- and ravinof, after 
the good old melodramatic fashion ; an invi- 
tation to fight for the lady somewhere out of 
sight, yet near enough for her to hear the 
pistol-shots, and rush upon the scene tear- 
ing her beautiful fair hair ? — a forcible ab- 
duction in the streets of Paris ? — but no ! the 
days of brave Lochinvar Avere over, though 
they were very good, bright, Avholesome days, 
and ten thousand times sweeter and purer 
than any Ave ever get noAv !" 

" Would you mind A^ery nnicli if we drove 
in the Bois first, and to the Poste Pestante 
afterAvards, Mignon ?" said Adam. 

It Avas their custom to fetch the letters 
daily, and afterAA^ards read them as they Avent 

99 o 



36 "CHERRY RIPE/' 



on their expeditions ; but the girl was always 
restless and anxious until she knew for cer- 
tain whether there was, or was not, a letter 
from Prue, so her face fell, and Adam saw it. 

** You will not go very far ?" she said. 
" For I have got it in my head that there 
will be some news to-day." 

" We will go no farther than you wish," 
he said — then gave some rapid order to the 
driver that she could not catch. 

It was with a feeling of unconquerable dis- 
taste, and almost fear, that Adam shrank 
from the moment when Mignon should come 
face to face with her past (nay, was he not 
her present Vj lover again. That wedding 
morning of his. . . . would he ever forget it 
— when he found his young wife, pale and 
unresisting, clasped in the embrace of Philip 
La Mert ? Not even a lifelong happiness 
with her could ever efface that bitter, galling 
memory. 

They were passing through the Place de 
La Concorde, where — 0, mockery of name ! — 



FRUIT, 37 



had once been shed the blood of some of the 
purest and noblest, as of the vilest and most 
infamous, of France. Hither came proud, 
ever-beautiful Marie Antoinette, expiating 
by the heroism of her death, the heartlessness 
and frivolity of her life ; and hither, too, 
brave Charlotte Corday, and noble Madame 
E-oland ; while stepping lightly after (for 
they knew how to die, these proud and 
haughty aristocrats, who accepted death with 
less scorn than life, at the hands of the low 
and brutal canaille), came the flower of the 
French nobility, a gay and winsome array of 
courtly shapes in ruffled lawn and silks, for 
they went not meanly clad to their last great 
levee in those days ! 

What manner of looks were those, I 
wonder, that they cast downwards upon the 
famous tricoteuses who circled round the 
guillotine, knitting quietly between the inter- 
vals of the brilliant ghastly show 1 Even 
such as the king of the forest may give in 
dying, to the currish, slinking shapes who 



? 8 " CHERR Y RIPE /" 

gather about him, knowing that he is power- 
less as of old to scatter or destroy them. . . . 

*' I wonder," said Mignon, thoughtfully, as 
they passed swiftly along the famous Avenue 
that, not so long ago, was the vantage-ground 
of luxury and folly, *' whether it would be 
better to begin climbing L'Arc de Triomphe 
over night, or start very early in the 
morning, and so have a reasonable chance of 
reaching the top before dark T 

" Get up early in the morning, by all 
means," said Adam, "as I wish you to see 
Paris from it by night, when the lamps are 
lit ; but there are not quite so many stairs as 
you suppose !" 

" It ought to be very good," said Mignon, 
'^ considering the trouble it is to get there ! 
So far as I can make out, the Monument 
was the vaere^t joke to it !" 

"• And did you ever climb that — really 1" 

" Yes, indeed, the whole school ! But 
w^hen I got to the top — I don't know how it 
was — but I could only walk two-double ! I 



FRUIT. 39 



had a dreadful feeling that if I stood upright 
it would all topple over ! And once — I 
thought I should have died of fright — it 
actually shooh" 

^^ I can faithfully promise you that the Arc 
de Triomphe will not !" said Adam, gravely, 
'' no, not if it were burdened with ten thou- 
sand such thistledown slips of girls as you, 
Mignon !" 

They are in the Bois now. Mignon comes 
to it every day, and always at an unfashion- 
able hour, either quite early, or rather late, 
and she knows every winding way, and nook 
and corner, and there is not one dell to which 
she has not pierced, or one mysterious glade 
that she has not traversed. When she first 
beheld it, she was wild with joy and sur- 
prise, but now she enjoys it in that best and 
most perfect of all ways, silence. And she 
finds the daisies and woodland flowers that 
gem its carpet no whit the less fair and sweet 
that they have been watered again and again 
with the blood of man ; that hither, as though 



40 ''CHERRY RIPE/ 



the world were not wide enough to furnish 
any other spot on which they could draw their 
swords, men must come to the place where 
God and they alike have shown their choicest 
handiwork. 

'' But are we not going to get out "?" said 
Mignon in surprise, as they still went swiftly 
on. 

" Not to-day," said Adam. 

'' And after all," she said, " the sooner we 
leave here, the sooner we shall get the 
letters !" 

Leaving the Bois by a different outlet^ 
they came ere long to a more crowded part 
of the city, where, as Adam knew, the traffic 
would render it difficult for one caiTiaofe to 
closely follow another, provided the first had 
a good start. Giving some brief order ta 
the driver, the latter obeyed his instructions 
so well that in a few moments there inter- 
vened between the two carriages a block of 
conveyances that Mr. La Mert would not find 
it an easy matter to pass. Presently, to- 



FRUIT. 41 



Mignon's astonishment, the driver turned 
sharply in at the courtyard of the Louvre. 

'' But the letters," she cried, " the letters !'* 

*' You shall have them almost immediately," 
he said, leaping out and looking back, 
^^ Meanwhile, come, Mignon, come !" 

He held out his hand, the girl put her& 
into it, wondering and a little afraid ; his 
voice recalled to her so vividly the morning 
when he had bade her follow him, and she 
had willed to stay. 

'' But I have seen all these things before," 
said Mignon, a little vexed, as they passed 
through the museum of ancient and modern 
sculpture, where men and women 

"Not yet dead, 
But in old marble ever beautiful," 

looked down upon the perishable atoms of 
humanity that had been coming and going, 
going and coming, before their eyes this 
thousand years and more. 

We call this, our nineteenth century, the 
age of progress and civilisation, and look 



42 " CHERR Y RIPE / " 

back with disdainful scorn on the old benighted 
days, although we admit that here and there 
might be found in them a great poet, sculp- 
tor, or architect. We hug ourselves on our 
culture, our art, our improvements ; we 
imagine that our feet are set on a path illu- 
mined by the searching rays of truth, yet 
what are our boasts, our mouthings, our vain 
pretensions, to the accomplished deeds of 
those mighty men who, living in those splen- 
did and so-called days of darkness, talked not 
of their works, but accomplished them, con- 
tent to leave their fame in the hands of pos- 
terity ? Be sure that they were not for ever 
looking backward to decry the past, or for- 
ward to anticipate the future ; they just took 
their lives in their hands, and, unlike us, they 
did act 

" In the living present, 
Heart within, and God o'erhead !" 

It would puzzle us, indeed, to find in our 
midst a Homer, a Phidias, a Socrates, or a 
Zeuxis, and yet, forsooth, they walked in the 



FRUIT, 43 



darkness of ignorance, while we, a puny 
struggling throng, holding out blind hands to 
that which we can never reach, are bathed in 
the light of truth ! 

Adam suddenly caught Mignon's arm and 
drew her behind a group of statuary that 
stood near. She stared at him in amazement, 
but he was not looking at her, but at Rideout, 
who had just entered, and was casting his 
€yes about, plainly in search of them. 

He saw neither her nor Adam, and with 
hasty step sprang up the stairs and vanished. 
*^ We will go now," said Adam. 
His voice and manner had suddenly changed, 
he looked bright and happy ; his spirits rose 
like quicksilver at the thought that he had 
shaken off his shadow, and now was free, for 
an hour or two at least, from the haunting 
€onsciousness of being dogged wherever he 
went. 

'* But," said Mignon, '' as we are here, I 
should like to see the Kauffmann's pictures 
again, and " 



44 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

^^ To-morrow," said Adam, hurrying on. 
^' Here is the caniage ; jmiip in, Mignon^ 
quick !" 

Puzzled and bewildered, Mignon took her 
place, Adam sprang in beside her, the driver 
cracked his whip, they were off I 

'' After all," said Adam to himself, with as 
much glee as though he w^ere a runaway 
schoolboy, ^' I do believe I have given him 
the slip ; and for at least an hour longer 
there will be no one to come between my 
little sweetheart and me/' 




CHAPTER III. 



What ! friffhted with false fire?" 




IGNON had received her letter, 
and, after tearing it open with her 
usual devouring eagerness, had 
been met by the usual disappointment. 
Adam, too, had got a budget, but after 
glancing at, and frowning over the first of the 
batch, he had thrust them all into his pocket, 
resolved to permit nothing to cast a shadow 
upon the brightness of these hours that he 
somehow felt to be stolen. And this notion 
gave to them the zest that uncertainty alone 
can bestow, for is it not one of the oddest con- 
tradictions of human nature that we should 
only be capable of a full appreciation of our 



46 ''CHERRY RIPET 

joys when we hold them but on the frailest 
and most uncertain tenure ? 

But now, as he stands with her under the 
roof of N6tre Dame, his mood changes, he 
grows thoughtful ; while something of the 
feeling of the man who wrote in energetic 
doggerel anent the glori es of Niagara — 

" When standing under the Horse-shoe Fall 
Didn't it look great? didn't /look smalU" 

steals into Mignon's mind. She has never 
consciously measured herself in any way, by 
any standard, but now it is suddenly borne 
in upon her what an insignificant petty speck 
she is. 

She has it not in her thouo-hts that some 
day she will describe with her weak fingers, 
or paltry tongue, her impressions of this vast 
and superb cathedral, therefore she strikes no 
attitudes indicative of an enormous amount of 
appreciation, combined with a totally inade- 
quate power of receptivity ; nor does she gaze 
exhaustively at the roof, the floor, the whole 



FRUIT. 47 



magnificent cou'p d'oeil, then fall to taking 
notes distractedly, as though these splendours 
could be transferred to the paper, or carried 
away in her pocket by a mere violent effort of 
will. An old-young lady standing near, who 
is attired with the usual stern economy of the 
British female when she goes abroad, is going 
through all these evolutions, but Mignon just 
stands hushed and solemn, feeling (as she has 
never before felt under vault made by human 
hands) that here one might look up, up, and 
seem to see the blue heavens shininof throuoii 
the apj)arently illimitable distance above. In- 
voluntarily she has clutched at Adam's hand, 
like a frightened child, and holds it fast, while 
he, who has seen it all before, is seeing it all 
over again, with the girl's beautiful startled 
eyes, in the quiver of her 2^roud sensitive lips, 
in the colour that comes and ffoes in her 

cheeks 

After all, he says to himself, he has not 
quite sounded the depths or mastered the in- 
tricacies of his young wife's heart. It was 



48 ''CHERRY RIPEf 

but a minute ago that, standing in the Sa- 
cristies she had proved herself wholly unim- 
pressed by the gold and silver treasures of the 
cathedral, nay, in the very midst of an obvious 
fable recounted by the Sacristan, had re- 
marked, in her clear English voice, ''I do 
not believe that !" 

But now she doubted and questioned 
nothing, she simply saw, and understood. 

There are men and women who live and 
die without understanding, who go through 
life with unseeing eyes, unhearing ears, who 
are never even dimly conscious of the un- 
grasped treasures strewn in their path, whose 
insensibility to noble influences is so profound, 
that they are not so much as aware of lack- 
ing the one divine spark that will kindle 
the soul into life, and turn the commonest 
things on earth to beauty, the very pebbles of 
hard experience to jewels of gold and silver. 

Therefore Adam rejoiced when he saw how 
this child, whom no one could reckon wise, 
and by some might be counted as frivolous 



FRUIT. 49 



and shallow, was so blessed by Heaven as to 
possess '' the seeing eye." 

How small the people looked as they went 
to and fro ! They appeared to crawl upon 
the face of the great enclosure like flies, while 
their puny voices made not so much as one 

faint echo throuoii the silence Stranore 

that mp.n, the director and controller of such 
gigantic forces, should ever appear confounded 
before the mioiit of his own Avorks. Strano-e 
that, after toiling long and successfully at 
some great undertaking that has brought him 
fame, he should never feel his insisfnificance 
and evanescence so keenly as when he steps 
back to behold it in the full majesty of its 
completion. It requires a bold and even re- 
bellious spirit to enable him to stand his 
ground firmly before the dumb witness that 
proclaims how it will endure when the sul:)tle 
brain that conceived, the nervous cunning 
hand that formed it, shall have reverted to its 
native dust. It is to the unenlightened eye 
the triumph of matter over mind, of dull 

VOL. II. 2S 



50 "'CHERRY RIPE/' 

reality over genius, of the supremacy of the 
things that remain over those that wither and 
pass away. And yet there are spirits, bold 
and brave enough to sweep aside with scorn 
the mere outward appearance of perpetuity, 
and looking with clear eyes to the heijond, 
behold the living fire of the essence that shall 
outlive the accomplished work, even as the 
work has in its turn outlived the ephemeral 
dust, and in that consciousness will dare with 
unabashed front to contemplate the creation 
of their own hands. 

Loosing her hand from Adam's, Mignon 
paused before that marvellous piece of sculp- 
ture that represents a man half lifting himself 
from his open coffin, ghastly, trembling, 
nerveless, yet borrowing in that awful ex 
tremity of weakness, a strength more terrible 
in its impotence than liad been an utter col- 
lapse, with the sweat of exhaustion on his 
brow, the foretaste of the tortures of the 
damned in his blank and awful eyes, and the 
secrets of the charnel-house locked Avithin 



FRUIT. 51 

those frozen lips .... imperishable record 
of a story so supernatural and romantic as to 
haunt the memory of him who hears it for 
many a long day. 

Wandering still hither and thither, she all 
at once discovered Adam to be no longer by 
her side. It is easily accomplished, a separa- 
tion in an unknown place, one false step to 
the right or to the left, and each effort to re- 
trace it, results in setting the seekers farther 
and farther from each other. 

Mignon, however, made no very diligent 
search after her companion, she was neither 
lonely nor afraid, for was not Muriel with 
her in the spirit if not in the body, now and 
always \ 

It mattered little, as Adam had one day 
said to himself, the manner of man by whose 
side she walked through life, for she heeded 
no face, hearkened to no voice, as she followed 
the beckoning will-o'-the-wisp of her sister's 
unknown fate. 

Presently she found herself once more at 

23—2 

UNIVLK5I1Y UF ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 



52 ''CirERRY RIPET 



the entrance to the cathedral, and — yes — there 
was the old cocker fast asleep on the box as. 
asual, or pretending to be. 

How hot the sun was ; how burning the 
pavement underfoot ! For the first time that 
day the sun was making himself actively and 
tyrannically disagreeable, and Mignon looked 
about her, seeking some shady place in which 
to hide herself and wait for Adam's appear- 
ance. Not being able to find the desired 
haven she strolled round the cathedral, to see 
how it looked from an outside view, and as 
the last flutter of her dress vanished, the 
cocher opened one of his sleepy old eyes, and 
recognised her. Somebody else too, at a 
considerable distance, and scarcely believing 
in his good fortune, hastened forward in pur- 
suit. Following her fancy the girl came to a 
j^romenade planted with trees, and adorned in 
the centre with a fountain that ought to have 
been playing, but was not. A few bonnes 
were sitting there, knitting and gossiping 
while they overlooked certain odd, old- 



FRUIT, 53 



fashioned children, the like of whom one 
never sees out of France. 

Half-a-dozen soldiers in their ugly red and 
blue coats, and with their impossible waists 
and fearful and wonderful nether garments, 
were standing about, shrugging their shoul- 
ders, gesticulating, gabbling as only a Parisian 
knows how, and Mignon looked at them with 
an amused smile, mentally measuring their 
proportions with those of the stalwart, broad- 
shouldered red-coats, of whom she has seen 
so many in her time at home. 

A market-woman or two were passing by, 
in their homely thrifty dress, and clean close 
white caps, refreshing spectacles in these days 
of tawdry cheap finery and pretension, when 
every serving-maid makes it her aim to copy 
her mistress as closely as she can, and the 
line of demarcation between the higher and 
lower orders has long been passed. All young 
women are young ladies nowadays, the mil- 
liner's apprentice, the bar-room maid, equally 
with the daughters of an earl, and the good 



54 ''CHERRY RIFET 



old title of '' a young lady of quality " has 
gone out for ever with the departed days 
when only gentlewomen and persons of rank 
wore brocade and lawn, while the middle 
and lower classes Avere clad in homespun and 
dufHe gTey. 

Still wandering idly on, Mignon came out 
upon an odd-looking, low white building, 
that attracted her attention in the first place 
by its extreme ugliness, and in the second by 
the unceasing stream of men, women, and 
children who were pouring in and out of it. 
They seemed to be for the most part artisans, 
and quite poor people, although a few car- 
riages waited without. Grown used to the 
open exhibitions of Paris, that, unlike those 
of London, are generously thrown open, free 
to the public, Mignon drew nearer, stepped 
over the threshold and entered. 

At first she could make out nothing. 
Whatever show there might be was in some 
place beyond, she thought, as the out-coming 
people jostled her in the narrow entrance. 



FRUIT. 55 



And then she began to wonder why all these 
people looked at her so strangely, why a 
whisper suddenly passed from lip to lip, while 
one or two men, as though unconsciously, put 
up their hands as if to stay her progress. 

She was so young, so entirely alone, so 
innocent of regard, moreover her beauty was 
of so gay and cUhonnaire a character that one 
would have taken her to be on her way to 
some joyous spectacle, some comely, pleasant 
sight — '' therefore," muttered these poor 
people beneath the breath, " what did she 
here f" 

She was Anglaise, it was true, and that 
would account for a good deal, but did these 
English ladies go in such careless, happy 
fashion to seek a lost father, brother, or sweet- 
heart ? 

Another step or two, and, no one hindering 
her, she found herself in what appeared to 
be a large and shabby room, a portion of 
which was shut off from the rest by a high 
glass partition. 



56 ''CHERRY RJPEf 



This transparent ^vall was lined by a row 
of persons who all appeared to be gazing in 
intent silence at some object, or objects that 
lay beyond. Facing her as she entered was 
a whitewashed wall, upon which hung in 
straight formal folds, like headless imitations 
of pinioned bodies, a strange collection of 
garments, for the most part ragged, but all 
soiled and discoloured by the (apparent) action 
of water. 

Mignon, looking all about her in perplexity, 
yet with a certain sense of pleasurable excite- 
ment and anticipation, for her curiosity was 
by now thoroughly aroused, stepped lightly 
towards the glass wall, with its fringe of ab- 
sorbed human beings. 

An old woman, hardened in sin and sorrow, 
with a heart that had outlived all sympathy 
with human misery, turning and seeing that 
unconscious, blooming face behind her, sud- 
denly, and not knowing why, though the in- 
stinct was the same as prompts one to rescue 
a child who wanders blindfold into dange r 



FRUIT, 57 



lifted her hand with a sudden gesture, and 
waved the ^irl back. But Mignon, under- 
standing nothing, and disregarding that kindly 
warning, pressed nearer, and looking over the 
woman's shoulder through the glass beyond, 
beheld — this. 

Upon a black marble slab immediately 
below her eyes was stretched the body of a 
young girl. 

Partially covered by a rude board, the 
limbs were bare, the bosom was shrouded 
by a veil of rich wet brown hair, over which 
a small stream of water flowed sluggishly. 

The face — God ! the face, on which the 
stiffness of death had already set in, whose 
was it — ivhose ? 

Could those heavy-lidded eyes lift their 
glance to Mignon's, would they not be 
revealed as richly brown as that veil of 
dripping hair ? 

Could those silent, beautiful lips utter sound, 
would they not shriek aloud, '^ Gahrielle ! 
GahrieUe /" 



58 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

Or had those nerveless arms power to uplift 
themselves, would they not close with breath- 
less, loving gladness upon the girl who stood, 
an image of stone, gazing downwards with 
eyes more fearful than even those heavy- 
lidded ones of the dead ? 

Those little feet that lay so still and quiet, 
had they not trodden the selfsame path from 
early childhood that the living ones yonder 
had pressed, and being parted by the cruel 
intervention of fate, and set upon divergent 
paths, had they at last again met together — 
thus? 

Mignon's dull brain did not turn, her tongue 
did not cry aloud, her numb heart was pulse- 
less and still as that of the piteous drowned 
thing yonder, as she withdrew her eyes from 
it and looked at the only other occupant of 
the enclosure. A man in the meridian of his 
strength and early manhood, upon whose brow 
death had set an untroubled serene majesty 
that its comeliness had never known in life, 
that never indeed comes to any man until he 



FRUIT. 59 



has tasted of the fruit of the immortals, nor 
is ever seen upon his face in the hour of his- 
greatest happiness, his most unalloyed con- 
tent. 

If one has ever doubted that the joys of 
heaven are greater than those of earth, need 
one go farther than the common everyday 
sight of a dead man or woman's face ? Mig- 
non's eyes travelled slowly back to the thing 
that lay before her. 

*^ Muriel . . . ." she said in a whisper, 
" Muriel .... I have not welcomed you, 
my darling .... because I did not under- 
stand just at first that I had really found you 
. . . . found you . . . ." she paused, looked 
vacantly about, then back again at the girl 
she addressed. " Can you not come to me ?" 
she said, still in the same tone, '' for I 
cannot get to you — see there is this cruel 
glass between us, and I can't .... I 
can't . . . ." 

" Why are you here, my darling T she 
went on monotonously, ^' with all these people 



GO ''CHERRY RIPEf 

•staring in upon you .... and you must be 
cold, my heart .... cold .... are you 
asleep ? I have waited for you so long, but 
now I have found you . . . ." 

On either side the people had fallen away 
before her, staring and wondering, as she 
leaned her brow against the glass talking, 
or (as those who listened expressed it) gibber- 
ing quietly to herself 

'* It is time for you to awake, Muriel . . ." 
she said, '' the sun is shining ; how can you 
sleep so soundly with it full upon your eyes ? 
Do you not know that it is summer-time ? — 
the time that you always loved . . . ." 

The girl's voice changed, and there fell from 
her lips, as though unconsciously, a snatch of 
the old talismanic song : 

" Cherry ripe, cherry ripe, ripe, I cry ; 
Full and fair ones, come and buy, 
Come and buy . . ." 

She broke off, put up her hand to her head, 
gazed uncertainly on the ftices around her 
.... heard one woman say to another, " Is 



FRUIT. 61 

she mad ? To be talking— to be singing — 
to the dead T 

She caught the word morte, and the un- 
known nameless fear that had been creeping 
and shuddering through her mind, took shape 
and substance, and clothed in words, rose up 
a living shape to confront her with its hideous 
existence. 

It was suddenly borne in upon her that 
the something strange upon Muriel's face, 
that she had vainly tried to understand, was 
indeed something that by its strangeness was 
set far beyond her power of comprehension^ 
and to which the rude lips of the Avoman who 
spoke, had given a name that she could not 
have found for herself .... that not on 
Death's counterfeit, sleep, she looked, but on 
Death himself, who had entered into his 
kingdom, and with silent majesty taken the 
place of that counterfeit for ever and ever. 

In that supreme moment, and seeing that 
all power of expression by word or deed 
was denied to her, it may be that the poor 



62 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



overtasked, and already tottering brain 
would have turned, had not help arrived 
— help under strange guise, from a strange 
hand ! 

Some one grasped her hand suddenly and 
firmly, a voice urgent and wild cried, " Come 
away, Mignon ! come away !" 

Turning she saw close to her own, a face 
that seemed familiar to her, yet knew not 
whose it was, or where, or when, she had 
last beheld it. 

And the new comer, as he looked into her 
blue eyes, blank as death, clear as crystal, at 
her lips, those once lovely, laughing lips that 
he so well and passionately remembered, now 
drawn convulsively back from the small 
clenched white teeth, at the whole fiice from 
whence every trace of youth and tenderness 
had departed, might well believe himself to 
be in the presence of one who, in tlie first 
measureless dread and wonder of an a^vful, 
and hitherto unimagined sight, had been 
struck to stone, each feature frozen into the 



FRUIT. 63 



expression they took on the first lightning- 
stroke of revelation. 

" Do you know what is there ?" she said in 
a whisper, the power of speech returning to 
her, and pointing Avith her lifted forefinger 
at the glass ; " do you know idio it isy I 
say? 

'' Yes, yes," he said, looking only at her, 
'' I know — only come away, Mignon — such 
sights as these are enough to kill you — 
come !" 

'' No," she said calmly ; " you cannot know, 
or you would not talk of my coming away 
. . . . T heard some one say she w^as .... 
dead . . . ." she went on, pressing nearer to 
him, and, gazing at him with her beautiful 
wild eyes, " but it is not possible that it is 
true, only there is a look upon her face .... 
a look .... that I never saw on Muriel's 
face before . . . ." He dropped her hand as 
though it were an adder that had stung 
him. 

'' Muriel? . . . ." he stammered out, " whom 



64 ''CHERRY RIPET 

do you know of that name ? Why do you use 
it ... . why . . . ." 

Of all names under heaven there could not 
be to him a more terrible one uttered by 
Mignon's lips than this. 

" She is there," said the girl, still in that 
slow, terrible whisper, and pointing again at 
the glass. 

Philip La Mert, with a face that reflected 
back the horror of her own, stared at her as 
a man may at some mocking spirit that having 
stolen his thoughts, takes human shape, and 
echoes them in human language. 

" Muriel in there !" he said, pale as ashes, 
and taking a step back. '' What are you say- 
ing, Mignon .... and what is Muriel to 
you 5 

" She was my life," said Mignon wildly, 
'' but now she is ... . see," she cried, and 
snatched his hand and pulled him forwards, 
for she was by now abandoned to a fury of 
unconsciousness to all, save one overmastering 
idea. She remembered not that this man 



FRUIT. (Sb 



had once been her lover, she knew only that 
she had found her sister, found her .... 
thus. 

Instantaneous as had been her gesture, 
thought Avith him had been more rapid still. 
'' There are more Muriels than one in the 
world" — had flashed through his mind in 
that moment's space. 

And then, compelled by her, he looked — 
looked, and recoiling violently as from one 
who had suddenly leaped out from ambush to 
smite him his death-blow, covered his face 
with his hands, as though he would shut out 
from his eyes, as from his thoughts, the sight 
that confronted him. 

The crowd shrugged its shoulders in con- 
temptuous wonder. What were these Englisli 
people making such a ridiculous fuss about [ 
First tlie girl, then the man — Bah \ One 
would think tliey had neither of them ever 
seen iiae cadarre in tlieir lives before, and 
what was there to be afraid of, pray, in those 
itwo wholesome pleasant corpses yonder ? 

VOL. II. 24 



6G ''cherry RIPEf 

Sometimes, to be sure, there were spectacles 
here calculated to give timid people a turn, 
but to-day, why there was nothing, absolutely 
nothing ! 

''You are sorry?" said Mignon, gently, 
finding it but natural that his agitation should 
be excessive, his air that of a madman, that 
his frame should shudder and bow as one 
under the stroke of an awful and irreversible- 
fate ; for was not Muriel dead, Muriel, 

"The sweetest flower of all the field — " 

and would it not be strange if all creation did 
not mourn the loss of its loveliest, brightest 
favourite, froi'n whose fair body the warm life 
had fled away for evermore ? 

All things, animate and inanimate, would 
surely weep and cry aloud for her, for the 
girl who had loved them all so well, wliose 
life had indeed been one long lesson of love 
from its joyous dawn, to this, the inconceiv- 
able horror and degradation of its accom 
plished end. . . . 



FRUIT. ^"J 



" I thought she was asleep," said Mignon, 
*' but she is dead .... quite dead .... 
and in her hand there is no flower, and 
she always bade us, when she should die, 
to rain them down upon her lips, and brow, 
and breast, and all of white .... pure 
white . . . ." 

'• Come away 1" cried Philip La Mert 
hoarsely, lifting his face from the hands that 
were powerless as the glass before him to 
shield what lay beyond from his conscious- 
ness. 

Even as he did so, the dreadful fascination 
that ever drags our eyes to the sight that is 
the most heartrending the whole world can 
afford to us, impelled him to look again at 
the object before him. 

Something — what Avas it ? — suddenly 
arrested that swift abhorrent glance, trans- 
forming it instantly to a keen and collected 
scrutiny that he pursued with indomitable 
will, inexorable patience : feature by feature, 
line by line, slowly and carefully as a painter 

O 1 o 



68 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

who scans his work ere sendinor it forth to 

o 

challenge the criticism of* the world, he 
examined the lineaments and fonn of the 
drowned girl before him. 

Then, a change, striking and marvellous, 
slowly crept over him. The colour rushed 
back to his cheeks, the light to his eyes, as 
throw^ing back his arms with a gesture of 
ineffable relief, and exjDanding his breast as a 
man, who, perishing for lack of air, finds him- 
self once more breathing the bounty of God's 
air, "■ It is not Muriel .'" he said. 




CHAPTER IV. 




When devils will their blackest sins put on 
The}- do suggest it first with heavenly show." 

'HEIIE are times when we accept 
human voices as though they were 
sent straight from heaven, when 
some instinct tells us that they are true, and 
it does not even occur to us to question them ; 
and the occasion of Philip La Mert's making 
the above remarkable speech was one of them. 
Mignon looked in his face and knew. 

Then, the shock of joy being even more 
awful than had been the revelation, her brain 
reeled, and she fell down as one dead at his 
feet. He was j^owerless to raise her, he him- 
self staggered as he stood .... lawless and 



70 ''ClIJiRRY RIPET 

extravagant in all his emotions, he had dunng 
the past few niomuiits been possessed suc(;es- 
sively by the most powerful and irresistiV)le 
passions that sway mankind. 

Pursuing with headlong fury the ardently 
loved and wildly-coveted object of his desires, 
he had been suddenly called upon, in the full 
tide of tumultuous passion, to experience an 
equally violent emotion in a totally opposite 
direction. The intensest love that a man can 
know, the profoundest remorse that the human 
heart can experience .... these were the 
opposing currents that had met in shock so 
fearful that it was matter for small marvel if 
brain and soul bent beneath the strain im- 
posed upon it, and that he was, in the whirl- 
wind of conflicting sensations, as one from 
whom his wits have been stolen by wine. 

A hasty step, a parting of the staring, ges- 
ticulating crowd, and Adam appeared, his 
eyes taking in, with one lightning-glance, the 
tableau before him. 

His wife stretched, insensible, at the feet 



FRUIT. 71 



of her former lover . . . that lover gazing 
down upon her, wild, disordered, pale as she, 
with love, horror, and a nameless something 
that w^as not, yet touched nearly upon, 
despair. 

For a moment the sight arrested the 
husband's swift, on-coming steps — for a 
moment there flashed in his eyes the ominous 
Qfleam tliat had dwelt there on his weddins^ 
morninof when he had found his hour-old wife 
in the arms of the man w4io now stood before 
him — then, advancing, he kneeled down, and 
lifting in his arms that little quiet, helpless 
figure, he carried her out of the building. 

He called for water, and after a slight de- 
lay, some one brought it. Not for long, 
however, lasted this, her first lapse of con- 
sciousness. With a gasping sob and sigh, 
she opened her eyes, her hand wandered up- 
wards in bewilderment to her brow, she 
moved her head from side to side, and looked 
-around. 

At that moment, a young man in the dress 



'' ClIliRRV RIPE f' 



of an artisan pushed his way roughly through 
the crowd, ;ind Avith Imrried steps entered the 
place they had just quitted. A moment later, 
a sharp, quick cry Avas heard Avithin, then 
complete silence followed. 

A crowd is formed hy one caj)rice, it is dis- 
persed by another ; its curiosity is so insati- 
able that having bolted one morsel, it instantly 
demands another. In a few seconds, there- 
fore, Mignon, her husband, and Philip La 
Mert were standing alone, the rabble having 
disappeared into the Morgue in the confident 
expectation of seeing something like a tragedy. 
As to that business out there — bah ! it Avas 
imbecile, a ridiculous fuss about nothinsf — be- 
cause, forsooth, a silly Amjhihc could not 
stand the sight of two corpses, and such fme 
handsome bodies too, quite a picture ! Va! 
what could be more pleasant and comely ? 

I wonder, can auv shameless thin<2" under 
God's sky equal the hardened, brutal indif- 
ference of the Parisian crowd, that visits its 
dendhouse as it o^oes to the iilav, reoardiiiir 



FRUIT. 73: 



them equally in tlic liolit of a show, and 
manifesting as complete an unconcern at the 
one as at the other, save when they revel in, 
and gloat upon, the horrors spread before 
them ? 

Mignon slipped from Adam's arms, and 
half supported by him, looked uncertainly 
aljout her. Where was she and what did it 
all mean ? Then her Avandering eyes fell 
upcni Phihp, and her husband, who was watch- 
ing her, saw a sudden, quick look of recogni- 
tion, o'ladness — what was it I — tiash in her 
eves, and brighten her reheard. 

In an instant — and surely no bird ever flew 
to her mate with more rapidity or eagerness 
— she had left her liusband, and was at Mr. 
La Mert's side, clasping his arms with both 
hands, and gazing upwards into his face with 
a passion of entreaty and eagerness, her eyes 
asking tlie question that her lips refused to 
speak. 

Adam, stirring neither hand nor foot, but 
looking passively on, ^\as conscious of a sen- 



74 "'CHERRY RIPEr 



sation as of cold fincfers olosinof fi^entlv about 
his heart. 

Before Mr. La IMcrt liad time to speak, 
several people came out of tlie Morgue all 
talking together. 

" Did you hear liini C said a young woman 
in French, shrusfijfinix her shoulders with in- 
difference ; ^^ she was his sweetheart, you 
understand, and he was jealous and left her 
— so she was fool enough to drown herself, 
and now, raon Dieu! he is like a madman, 
trying to get to her — he wants to kiss 
her, he says .... to kiss lier ! and she is 
dead !" 

"You hear them, Mignon ?" cried Philip, 
in his pre-occupation, using the only name by 
which he had ever known her. " You under- 
stand what they are saying ? That .... 
which you saw was only a ])0(n' (/rt'sctfc, the 
man who went in was her lover .... the 
extraordinary resemblance was a chance one 
. . . ." He ceased speaking suddenly, whither 
Were his words leadino- him ? Other ears than 



FRUIT. 75 



those of a half- crazed gkl were open to him 
now. 

'' Only a poor grisetter said Mignon in a 
clear, intense whisper, while her hands nn- 
clasped themselves from his arm and fell 
heavily by her sides, " only a grisette, but per- 
haps her life was sweet to her .... and O !"' 
she added Avith a very bitter cry, "it onight 
have been Muriel T 

It Avas to herself that she spoke, not to 
Philip .... yet through his triple armour 
of impenitence, Avorldliness and passion, those 
unconscious w^ords pierced to and awoke that 
disregarded and half-dead '^sentinel of virtue" 
his conscience, pointing Avith divine finger of 
light to the path of duty that stretched be- 
fore him. In that instant of roA' elation, and 
with the bold decision that so pre-eminently 
distinguished this man for both good and evil 
(that quality which, turned in the right direc- 
tion makes the hero and the saint, in the 
Avrong, the rebel and the infidel) he saAv his 
duty plain and clear, and resolved to do it. 



7G "CHERRY RIPE r 



'' It mifjht hdir hcen Muriel . . . ." his lips 
moved, Ik- \vas diniibly repeating Mignon's 
Avoids over to liiinself. 

As he stood there, silent, do^viicast, the 
disorder and struggle suddenly gone out of his 
i'ace, the reckless look of evil faded from brow 
and lip, and in its jjlace a faint day-dawn of 
something better, that might, God Avilling, in 
tlie fulness of time grow to a meridian of 
strength and goodness .... how was it 
possible that any one should know of the 
baUle that had been fought, the victory that 
h«nd been won in those few moments ? 

Not Adam .... not Mignon .... only 
Ik himself was beginning to understand .... 
boirinnino- to see the licvht shinino- beyond the 
distant mountain-tops .... to feel that the 
wiong was turning to right, the crooked 
l)uzzle of evil to the clear and noble explana- 
tion of good, that for him as for others, there 
was a place, however poor and paltry, among 
the workers in the great scheme of life. 

Adam too was silent — those words of 



FRUIT. 77 



Mignon's were Greek to him, totally igno- 
rant as he was of all that had gone before. 
What could he think but that she had been 
speaking to Philip La Mert of her sister, 
placing a confidence in him that made his own 
blood boil with rage .... that she should 
betray to this man, this almost stranger, that 
blot on her name which he himself endured, 
yet never forgot .... and for the first time 
(and in this he was cruelly unjust) the childish 
innocence that he had so loved in the girl, 
appeared to him almost in the light of a mis- 
fortune to herself, a sin aofainst him. 

He was entirely unaware of any cause that 
should have stretched her unconscious at 
Philip La Mert's feet, and afterwards have 
drawn her from her husband's arms to Philip 
La Mert's side, save that she loved hhn, had 
loved him all alongr althoug^h she mi^^it not 
have fully realised the fact until she expe- 
rienced the shock of meeting him again. 

Was he perpetually (he asked himself) to 
assist at these unseemly and degrading scenes ? 



78 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

— was he always to be placed in the despicable 
position of a man who could win, yet could 
not hold, who grasped the shadow of rights, 
while the substance for ever eluded him ? 

Without a word he took Mignon's hand 
(she Avas not heeding him, to the last her eyes 
were fixed upon Philip) and led her to the 
carriage that was waiting. 

Speech was impossible to him .... a 
demon had broke loose and was working wild 
havoc in his l)reast .... broad daylight 
though it was, he could scarcely see to guide 
his own and Mignon's footsteps. 

She, too, could not speak ; she was utterly 
exhausted by the alternate agony and relief 
that had so rapidly succeeded each other. 
Yet it had been well if she could have spoken 
ere he turned away, and removed from liis 
mind the impression that the events of the 
past five minutes had burned in on it. 

What a misleading, mischief-working, life- 
spoiling thing is this same '' impression !" It 
^rows out of the air, it is formed bv a o-lance. 



FRUIT. 79 



a sigh, a gesture ; susj)icion endows it with 
life, jealousy nurses it to maturity, and by us 
it is accepted as a fact, nay, as more — for a 
fact is a substantial reality, capable of expla- 
nation or palliation, but this flimsy intangible 
'^ impression " is not to be combated — we can- 
not wage war against an airy phantom, and 
so it remains with us unchalleno-ed to our 
dying day. 

Having placed Mignon in the carriage, 
Adam paused a moment, regained possession 
of his voice, told the driver to w^ait, and re- 
traced his steps to the spot where Philip La 
Mert still stood. 

The eyes of the two men met. No un- 
worthy combatants they, and in the regard 
of each shone forth a fearless, intrepid spirit 
that made them, even in their enmity, akin, 
while something of 

" The stern joy th;it warriors feel 
Of foenian worthy of their steel " 



ran like fire through the veins of both. 



80 ''CHEKKY KIJ'K :' 

Judginj^ (from Adam's point of view) by 
what had lately passed, it was fur him to 
look the role of the despicable, derided hus- 
band (for a woman degrades her husband 
even more than Jierself when slie stoops to 
compromise her honour in liowsoever a small 
degree), for the other, the triunij)hant, success- 
ful lover, to be master of the occasion — yet, 
in the conversation that followed, it was 
Adam, not Philip, who took, and lield the 
supremacy. 

" Mr. La Mert," he said quietly, '' it has 
pleased you to follow my wife t(^ Paris, t«^ 
dog her footsteps wherever she may go, and 
finally to force yourself upon her so soon as 
you discovered her to be unfortunately alone. 
and deprived of my protection. 

'' I have to ask you wliether it W- yuur 
intention to persist in the prosecution of this 
unmanly pursuit, also — for I imagine that 
you have some idtimate views — wliat may be 
the end that you propose to yourself ?" 

" My intentions were,'' said ^Fr. La Mert 



FRUIT, 81 



slowly, '^ to follow her and you— wherever 
you might go — to the world's end if needs 
were, but to be always at your elbow, you, 
whom I counted to be the thief that had, in 
my absence, stolen that which I believed 
to be all my own — nor knew of any other 
rash hand stretched out to grasp it, else I 
had guarded it with a care that it had gone 
hard with me if you found means to 
outwit. 

'' I purposed to watch and wait, whether 
it were days, or months, or years, but sooner 
or later to get speech with her, to arouse in 
her breast a feeling of contempt for you, of 
pity for me (and she has a very tender and 
pitiful heart), the rest I left to time, my own 
patience and c unning and the devil's help, 
believing that I should win her away from 
you, back to me, at last. I would have kept 
to the last letter the words I swore to her 
Avhen first I had speech with her — how if any 
other man stole her from me, I would move 
heaven and earth to regain lier. 

VOL. 11. 2[y 



82 " CHERRY RIPE f 

" You love her," he said Avith a gesture of 
indescribable bitterness, ** therefore you are 
able to comprehend something of the loss I 
have sustained : and I love her too — as I have 
loved her from the first day I saw her inno- 
cent face ; as I shall love her still to the day 
of my death." 

'^ Enough," said Adam sternly, to wliom 
this avowal on the part of a man of Mr. La 
Mert's antecedents and confessed designs ap- 
peared to be the worst possible taste, " of 
your past intentions — what are your present 
ones « 

"■ To abandon my pursuit of her, at once 
and for ever. To love her indeed, but with 
a love that shall be no disgrace to her, no oc- 
casion for self-despisal to myself, t(^ be her 
true and faithful friend always, if ever occa- 
sion place it in my power to do her some such 
service as a brother might — these are my 
present resolves — not intentions." 

He paused a moment, his eyes travelling 
past Adam to the infinite peace and beauty 



FRUIT, 83 



of the cloudless vault of heaven, then went 
on again. 

" Also, to retrieve a past injury, to reverse 
a cruel injury, to bring such peace as I may, 
to a heart that has through me made harsh 
acquaintanceship with sorrow .... no matter 
that in the so doing I condemn myself to a 
life-long bondage, to a companionship that is 
the symbol of a sinful and unhappy past — 
even as your Mignon was to me the embodi- 
ment of a pure and hopeful future." 

Mr. La Mert paused again, and Adam, re- 
garding him with a keen and unwavering 
scrutiny, asked himself, was this man mad 
enough to expect him to accept this unasked- 
for and astounding declaration \ 

Utterly unaware of the revolution that had 
taken place in Philip's mind, thoroughly 
acquainted with the reckless audacious cha- 
racter of the man before him, and how he 
was notorious for never relinquishing his 
pursuit of any woman who had caught his 
fancy until overtaken, there was about 

25—2 



84 ''CHERRY RIPE 



this suddenly changed aspect of affaii-s, an 
iinreahty and incongruity that struck liim 
as ahnost grotesque. 

No longer ago than last night had Philip 
La Mert silently flung down the gage of de- 
fiance at his feet — not one hour ago had 
he been hotly pursuing Mignon — how, then, 
came in a breath, a moment, this sudden and 
miraculous conversion % Adam's silence, his 
glance, instantly informed the other of the 
incredulity that filled his mind. 

'* I cannot expect you to understand," said 
Philip with a sudden heightening of colour, 
and a momentary return to the old pride 
and hauG^htiness of res^ard and bearino^, 
" neither can I explain — my future actions 
will speak for me, as no expressed words can 
do — nevertheless I swear to you as between 
man and man and in the sight of God, that 
henceforth your wife is sacred to me, and that 
never by thought, word or deed, will I do 
violence to her honour, and my own vow. 
You believe me T 



FRUIT. 85 



" I do," said Adam. In spite of himself, 
and in the teeth of all the evidence to the 
contrary, the accent of truth in the voice of 
the other carried an irresistible conviction to 
his mind that he felt bound to accept. 

How could he tell that the day was not far 
distant when these words of Philip La Meit 
should recur to liim as the veriest inspiration 
of the Father of Lies? That he would look 
back to this hour when they two stood to- 
ofether, and marvel that a bolt had not been 
loosed from heaven to strike one of th^m dead 
for the blasphemy that he feared not to take 
between his lips ? 

And now that Philip had volunteered, and 
Adam had accepted the assurances given by 
the former of future good behaviour, it might 
have been expected that a better fee ling- 
would exist between them, that the attitude 
of hostiUty assumed by each would give place 
to a more harmonious one — might have 
been, but was not ; enemies they had been 
•from the first day their eyes had met, 



SG ''CHERRY RIPE r 

enemies they would be until death overtook 
them. 

Each man believed himself to have sus- 
tained from the other the deepest injury that 
it was in his power to bestow. The one 
had stolen the mrl's outward vows of alleo-i- 

o o 

ance, the other had (or so Adam believed) 
possessed himself of her heart ; what 
chance, therefore, could there be of aofree- 
ment between them now, or at any future 
time ? 

In neither of them was there one particle 
of that maudlin, sickly sentimentality, that 
might have impelled some men, after the 
foregoing scene, into a wholly weak, half- 
hysterical proffer of friendship. Too boldly 
and robustly formed for vacillation, strong 
and thorough in both their likes and dislikes, 
they know how to divide the former from the 
latter by the hard and fast line that our 
ancestors drew — that is every day becoming 
more and more rare in this aofe of mental foo^s 
and obscurity, in which we make haste to j^ull. 



FRUIT, 87 



down all the grand old landmarks, and call 
good evil, and evil good. 

We have no heartiness either in our hatred 
or our love in this nineteenth century of ours. 
We scarcely kno^^' our friends from our 
enemies, and instead of a wholesome hking, 
a vigorous dislike, we smile on all indif- 
ferently, and bide our time to give a covert 
thrust in the dark to the objects of our luke- 
warm detestation. We have so jumbled up 
all the good old titles for sin with those for 
virtue, that we have almost persuaded our- 
selves the former no longer exists — and are 
assuredly doubtful as to where the one ends 
and the other begins. 

" There is one point," said Adam after a 
short pause, " on which I have to ask your 
forgiveness. When I found that you were 
paying your suit to Miss Ferrers, I protected 
her against you by every means in my 
power, for I had, as I believed, ample proof 
that you were not free to woo her to bo 
your wife. Believing this, I caused to bo 



" CHERRY RIPE .'" 



conveyed to her the fact that you ^vere 
married." 

'' And yet," exclaimed Philip, frowning and 
looking downwards, " it is strange that, know- 
ing something of me, you should not have 
heard all the circumstances — it is a very 
well-known story, and has been bandied from 
lip to lip with as shameless a frequency as 
the cuckoo's cry !" He laughed harshly. 
" At the time I first saw and loved Miss 
Ferrers," he went on, " I was practically a 
single man ; my divorce suit, to which there 
could be but one issue, was then pending. 
As soon as the decree was pronounced I pur- 
posed asking Mignon to be my wife. Not 
wishing her to be insulted by any knowledge 
of the disgraceful affair, I made myself known 
to her, not under the name of La Mert, but 
of Rideout, my second name. Well, you 
have won — I have lost her .... and her 
loss sets me free to commit an act of repara- 
tion that I could not have done had she been 
mine, not yours .... it may be that the day 



FRUIT. 89 



will come when I shall be grateful to you that 
you saved her from me .... but not now 
. . . . not now . . . ." 

He repressed himself by a violent effort and 
went on again. 

" I have one question to ask of you," lie 
said. '' Your .... ^^ife exhibited excessive 
agitation at sight of a — body " (he shuddered) 
^' in yonder building, that seemed to bear an 
extraordinary resemblance to some one whom 
she called— Muriel !" 

The w^ord left his lips in strange, unwilling 
fashion, as though it were a name familiar, 
yet terrible. 

'' What !" cried Adam, stepping back in 
horror. *' You were not in time to prevent 
her seeing the ghastly sights of that accursed 
charnel-house T For in the confusion and 
pre-occupation of his mind, he had possessed 
eyes and thoughts for nothing but tlie atti- 
tude of his wife and her lover towards each 
other. 

'' No," said Phih'p, looking down, '' I was 



90 ''CHERRY RIPE!" 

not in time .... when I sfot there she 
sucnied to be tottering' on the very ver^fe of 
madness .... She was gibbering and talk- 
ing to a poor drowned creature before her, 
whom she called — Muriel I" 

" Good God !" cried Adam, striking his 
forehead with his clenched hand. '' What a 
1)rute — what a madman I have been! — to 
take so little care of her as to let her run the 
chance of such a fearful shock — when I have 
been so careful too to keep from her know- 
ledge that there was any such place in 
Paris " 

For the first time his eyes turned towards 
the pale and wistful flice in the distance that 
had looked in wonder at him many times, but 
to which La Mert's glance (although he knew 
all too well just where she w\as) had not once 
wandered. 

" That there should be anything so fatal, 
so incredible," went on Adam vehemently, 
"that she should see a chance resemblance 
like that — to the creature in whom her very 



FRUIT. 91 



life is bound up — " lie paused abruptly, 
struck, through all the excitement that pos- 
sessed him, by the expression of Philip La 
Mert's face. 

'• And that other," said Philip breathlessly, 
"- who is she .... what was she to ... . 
your wife T 

" They are sisters," said Adam. 

Was every passion and emotion by which 
man is capable of being convulsed, to be ex- 
perienced by Philip La Mert that day 1 

All that had gone before was as nothing 
to the last, the crowning agony that came to 
him then. 

Kecoiling before the speaker, holding up 
his arms as though to ward off some imminent 
and frightful danger, while beads of sweat 
gathered and stood upon his brow. 

" It is false . . . ." he cried, in a low 
hoarse whisper, " false .... that they two 
. . . O God ! . . . they two . . . out of all 
women upon earth should be ... . sisters 
. . . it is monstrous . . . incredible, I say. . . " 



92 ''CHERRY Rll'E /" 

He dashed both hands before his eyes, 
tore them away again, turned as one who 
flees from an avenging Nemesis, and ming- 
Hng with tlie crowd, was lost to sight in a 
moment. 




CHAPTEE V. 

" Enchantment 
Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent." 

;W0 people were standing on the- 
summit of L'Arc de Triomphe de 
I'Etoile, looking down on the 
magical scene spread out below. Probably 
from this eminence alone, is one able to ap- 
preciate in all its magnificence the central 
idea that governs the architecture of Paris^. 
and exalts it, on mere aesthetic grounds alone, 
above every other city in the world. 

Nevertheless the name of the man who so 
beautified and enriched this city that he loved, 
is writ in water, while that of the great scourge 



94 ''CHERRY RIFE/" 



of his country is carved in the hearts of his 
people; and while the one has faded away 
like a breath from the surface of a mirror, the 
other shall live among the great ones of the 
earth for ever and ever. 

For the latter understood the nature of the 
French through and through, and thus under- 
standing, knew how to master them ; even in 
dying, do not his subtly- conceived words speak 
to and thrill them for all time ? 

" Je desire que ones cendres reposent skt les 
bords de la Seine, ait milieu de ce j^^ujylefran- 
gais quefai tant aimeJ" 

And yet this manslayer on so superb and 
gigantic a scale, had so much of the little- 
mindedness and malignity of a mere cowardly 
murderer, that he was able to leave a legacy 
of ten thousand francs to the man who tried 
to assassinate the hero who conciueri'd him 
(Napoleon) at Waterloo ! 

Mignon, as she gazed down (.)n the number- 
less lines of light that radiated, like the 
jewelled spokes of some gigantic, dazzling 



FRUIT. 95 



wheel, from every side of the building on 
which she stood, upon the myriad lamps that 
trembled over the vast enceinte and the ram- 
parts beyond, as though indeed the great 
armies of the heavens had stepped down to 
scatter their fire over the breast of the city, 
did she not, looking upwards, behold shining 
far above her, the sky, 

" Over-spangled with a million 
Of little eyes as though thou wert to shed 
Over the darkest, lushest blue-bell bed, 
Handfuls of daisies — " 

felt herself, in presence of the immensity all 
about her, to be so paltry an atom in the 
great scheme planned by the Creator, that for 
a brief space she forgot her misery even as 
she forgot herself, being merged into, and lost 
in, the silent, ineffable splendour of the night. 
When we are able to recognise the great 
truth that we are but infinitesimal portions 
of the great heart of creation, that our cries, 
our struggles, our ambitions, will not quicken 
or arrest one smallest pulse of it, then some- 



9G " CIIKRRV RIPE 



thing of the knowledo^e of the utter useless- 
ness of our frantic efforts is borne in upon us, 
and unconsciously we draw a higher, purer 
wisdom into our souls, and catch some faint 
and distant echo of that divinest of all gifts — 
peace. 

Presently she shivered, then crept a little 
nearer to her husband, and looking anxiously 
up into his face, ^' Adam," she said, " I have 
been thinking .... and do you know that 
it is all so much more hopeful than I thought 
at first ; and it seems to me that if I only 
wait, and am quite patient, it will all come 
right at the last .... And I will l>e 
patient . . . ." she added with a half sob,. 
" and brave. I will never give up again as I 
did yesterday . . . only when I saw that . . ." 
(her little restless hands clasped his arm more 
tightly) '' so like, so fearfully like, I did not 
think I could ever pray again .... every- 
thing seemed to be ovevy done with .... and 
it all rose up before me like a vision, all that 
she nmst have suffered, all that she must have 



FRUIT. 97 



gone through ere she came to be lying there 
so still and quiet, with the Avater trickling 
over her dead face .... And even now 
when I hiow that it was not Muriel, I still 
can't keep it out of my head that perhaps 
Muriel is enduring all that the poor creature 
I saw endured, ere she found death at last 
.... And yet it is a foolish fancy, is it not T 
she said, looking up into her husband's face 
with a wistful, tender smile, that made his 
heart ache for her as he saw it. '^ This after- 
noon," she went on, ^' I took courage to read 
Miss Sorel's letter over again, for the first 
time since that terrible day when I got news 
of my darling .... and I found in it a dif- 
ferent meaning to the one that it had for me 
before ; yes, I saw quite clearly that it w^as 
possible, even likely, that Miss Sorel had 
been mistaken, for all that she was so wise 
and good — for do you not say yourself that no 
one can look into another person's mind, the 
most that one can do is to guess at it ?" 
Adam, his head turned away from the 
VOL. II. 26 



'98 " CHERRY RIPE /" 



piteous scrutiny of her blue eyes, murmured 
some inarticulate reply. 

" And so it came to me," said the girl, " all 

of a sudden that Miss Sorel had been quite 

ivrong in her notion about Muriel, that after 

all there might be some explanation that she 

'did not know of — that Muriel might have 

been married, only her husband did not wish 

■it to be known just yet, and she was afraid 

that some wicked person or other might be 

tr3dng to set me against her by telling me 

wicked stories, and so she asked Miss Sorel 

that strange question about me .... 

'' You did not deceive me," she said, taking 
one of Adam's hands and holding it fast 
between both her ovm, " and I was not sweet 
or good, or beautiful, like Muriel, and you 
would not be likely to love me so well as she 
would be loved .... but you took me to 
your heart and home, though I was so silly, 
and ignorant, and young, just as that other 
unknown man has taken my darlinor. ..." 



Adam shuddered .... he too was begin- 



FRUIT. 99 



ning to understand many things that had 
seemed dark to him before, but, alas ! the 
Hght that shone across the past was by no 
means the mild benignant one of hope. 

'' And so," said Mignon, sighing, '' I have 
made up my mind not to fret about her any 
more, but just to wait — and sooner or later 
it mil all come straight — I am sure of it." 

He did not reply, but seemed lost in 
thought. A few moments later he spoke, 
but in his voice there was a hesitation very 
unusual with him as he said : 

^^You are quite sure, Mignon, that Mr. 
La Mert told you that what you saw .... 
was not Muriel, before the young artisan 
came whose sweetheart so strangely resembled 
her r 

"• Of course I am sure," said Mignon, 
looking startled ; '' it was when he said so 
that I fainted — he told me about that poor 
girl afterwards. I did not think about it 
then — indeed it seemed natural to me that 
he should understand all about her .... but 

2G— 2 



100 ''CHERRY RIPET 

I have ever since been thinking that it was 
— odd — unless he knew her by sight? 
Perhaps/' she added, looking anxiously and 
eagerly into Adam's face, '' he had seen her 
somewhere before ; it was not a face one 
could easily forget, and she may have met 
him in Dublin, or been his friend's wife. ..." 

" His friend's wife . . . ." It was well that 
her husband had turned aside, and that she 
could not see the expression in his eyes. He 
was recalling a story he had heard long ago, 
of Mr. La Mert and something that had 
happened in Ireland. 

*' And I have been wondering," she went 
on feverishly, " how soon we are likely to see 
him again. He may be able to give me 
news of her — just to think of it ! and I have 
been so careless as to let liim go away with- 
out asking him a single question ! Do you 
think we are likely to see him again before 
we go away — or after ?" 

God forgive him if, as he looked down on 
that im])loring childish face, he thought he 



FRUIT. 101 



found somethinof more in it than mere 
anxiety to see this man again for her sister's 
sake. ... if he read there a restless longing, 
an unsatisfied yearning of which she was too 
ignorant to be herself fully aware .... nay, 
if he saw trembling on her lips and in the 
depths of her eyes the dawn of the soul that 
he believed to be as yet unawakened, but 
that he had so fondly and faithfully believed 
would sooner or later awaken to Mm .... no 
other. . . . 

*' You are not likely to see him again," he 
said quietly. No, it was not probable, he 
thought, that Philip La Mert would again 
desire to have speech with Mignon. . . . He 
was a more hardened man than Adam 
believed him to be, were he capable of meet- 
ing her glance and replying to her questions 
concerning her sister. 

" But Paris is not so big a place but that 
one might run up against somebody else," 
she said, with a very perceptible fall in her 
voice, *^ and I dare say he came for more than 



lOQ. ''CHERRY RIFET 

just a day or two. If we keep our eyes well 
open we may catch a glimpse of him yet, for 
we shall not be going away yet awhile." 

''But I thought you were in such a hurry 
to get back to Lily town," he said; "it was 
only yesterday morning that you said " 

" Only you see," she said, interrupting 
him, " I did not know what was going to 
happen — that I should see li'un — " 

Now, if there be any parallel to the extra- 
ordinary and perverse dislike (of which I 
have before made mention) that a woman has 
to being called a woman, it is that of the 
objection a man has to hearing his wife or 
sweetheart speak of any one under the sun 
save himself as him. 

Adam drew his hand suddenly out of his 
wife's clasp ; he was angry ; worse still, he had 
lost his patience, but he w^as too thorouglily 
manly and chivalrous to vent his irritation on 
this slender, defenceless girl, who had so 
great a claim upon his love and forbearance. 

She looked at him in surprise, not knowino- 



FRUIT, 103: 



in what way she had displeased him. ... To 
be innocent had its drawbacks ; had she 
possessed experience she would have dis- 
covered the rock of offence, and in future 
steered clear of it. Only in that case she 
would not have been the Mignon that he 
loved. Well, men are hard to please, and 
they expect, and oftener than not they 
demand, utterly irreconcilable qualities. 

'^ Mignon," he said a moment later in his 
usual tone, ^^ I have some good news for you 
that I received this morning. And yet it is 
almost inhuman to say that it is good, although 
Mr. Sorel is your enemy " 

" What of him T cried Mignon breathlessly, 
then, suddenly sobered ; ^' he is not — dead T 
she said. 

" No — not dead ; but grief and excitement 
have so worked upon him as to render him 
insane." 

" Then there is no chance," cried Mignon^ 
clasping her hands in despair, '' of our ever 
getting Rosemary. You said it was not 



104 "'CHERRY RIPE/' 

likely that he would wish to retain the house, 
and that by setting an agent to watch, and 
giving him instructions to take the house in 
his own name and transfer it to you after- 
wards, Mr. Sorel would never suspect we had 

got it, but 7iOiv " 

^' But now," said Adam, " the thing has 
passed beyond possibilities, Mignon, it is 
done. Mr. Sorel's next-of-kin, a shrewd man 
of business, without an ounce of romance in 
his composition, upon whom devolved the 
task of settling all Mr. Sorel's affairs, when 
he found from Prue how matters lay, that 
Miss Sorel had kept the school against her 
brother's wishes, and from the landlord that 
the lease had expired in June, but was to 
have been renewed on Miss Sorel's return, he 
simply declined committing any such folly in 
the existing state of Mr. Sorel's health, placed 
the matter in the hands of the very asrent I 
had put to watch, accepted a sum for fixtures, 
etc., caused to be removed to the How all 
personal belongings of Miss Sorel, and the 



FRUIT. 105 



T/hole thing is settled. I have written to town 
to have certain things sent in to make the 
place decent, and we will set out, if you are 
ready, Mignon, the day after to-morrow." 

She did not immediately speak ; she was 
dumb beneath the weight of joy his words 
ofave her, then she took both his hands 
between both her own, and kissed them 
passionately. 

''To be able to watch and wait for her 
always — like that 1" she said, "to be i^uve of 
never missing her, come when she will by 
night or day, and it is all your doing, all. 
.... You are good," she said with almost 
a sob in her voice, '' and I am not worthy 
of you, though indeed, indeed I will try to 
be. . . ." 

'' Do not 1" he cried almost harshly as he 
took her in his arms, " do you hear me '? I 
forbid it, Mignon — only try ! — is it so very 
hard a thing, sweetheart, to love me ?" 

She shrank from his embrace, his words ; 
it was not often that he permitted himself the 



1 () G " CHERR V RIPE .'" 

folly of either. " Love " was a word that 
he had hitherto been shy of using with the 
girl, and now he said to himself that he had 
been mad to use it; she would be scared 
and ill at ease with him. He knew also that 
when the first seedling shoot of that which 
in time should become a stately flower 
begins to stir in the warm brown earth, it is 
folly indeed to seize and drag it into day- 
light, seeking to wrest from it its yet unborn 
secret of colour and perfume. Yet it was 
difficult not to believe that the germ de- 
veloped but slowly, slowly, nay, there were 
times when he doubted if it were there 
at all, and, in that case, how long and weary 
would be the waiting for that which should 
never come ? 

" And now we wdll o-o home and beofin to 
pack up," said Mignon feverislily, and turn- 
ing to depart without one backward look at 
the magnificent panorama that had but now 
so electrified her, '' only," she added, stop- 
ping short as though a thought had suddenly 



FRUIT. 107 



struck her, ^' we shall not have many chances 
of seeing Mr. La Mert again if we go the 
day after to-morrow ; nevertheless " (her face 
brisfhtened, for a moment she looked once 
again the joyous, happy-hearted girl of a 
month ago) "it is more than possible that 
we shall run up against him some day in 
Lilytown !" 




CHAPTER VI. 

" There's not a breath 
Will mingle kindly with the meadow air, 
Till it has panted round and stolen a share 
Of passion from the heart I" 




PEUE !" cried Mignoii, taking 
one %ing leap out of the car- 
riage straight into Prue's arms, 
'' it is worth all — all the disaorreeableness of 
getting married and going away, to come 
•back to you and Rosemary again !" 

" Hush, Miss Mignon ! — I beg pardon, 
Qna'am" said Prue, with a hasty glance at 
Mr. Montrose, but reassured by his unruffled 
•countenance, '' O ! it's glad I am to see your 
bonnie face again " — she held the girl away 



FRUIT. \m 



from her, regarding her with fondest love and 
pride — ''for long and dreary the time has 
been without you !" 

''Prue," said Mignon solemnly, as they 
w^ent along the familiar approach to the house 
together, " are you quite sure that we've not 
all been dreaming ^ Do you know," she grew 
pale, and stopped short, " that I cannot help 
fancying I have been away for the holidays, 
and that I shall find her standing just inside 
the door ?" 

'' No, no, Miss Mignon," said Prue sadly,. 
"■ you'll just see two new maids, for cook left 
a while ago, and there's a bit change in the- 
house." 

And indeed when Mignon stepped over the 
threshold, she found that all Avas not just as 
it used to be. 

From the school window had for ever dis- 
appeared the dismal wire blind that had been 
the despair of the young and idle male popu- 
lation of Lily town, and in its place hung 
curtains of crimson silk and white lace, while 



110 " CHERRY RIPE /" 

through the open window came the perfume 
of roses and mignonette. Prue's careful 
formal fingers had also arranged nosegays 
wherever she could find a place to set them, 
for did she not know the passion her little 
mistress had for those delicate ornaments 
of creation, that are oftentimes so infi- 
nitely better worth looking at than human 
beings ? 

The coloured maps still hung on the wall, 
in one corner of the room stood the globe 
over which her weary fingers had travelled so 
many, many times, but the desks, foims and 
black-board had all disaj^peared to make place 
for such pleasant handsome furniture as be- 
seemed the dining-room of a gentleman who 
was bringing home his young wife. She ran 
into the drawing-room. That was also a 
curious mixture of past and present; for 
though the bunch of painted flowers still 
hung upon the wall, and Diana was bus}' 
blowing an imaginary horn in the distance, 
some good fairy had been at worl; and turned 



FRUIT. Ill 



the schoolish chilly room into a bower of bhie 
and white, that must have been sj^ecially 
chosen, one would say, with regard to the 
character of Mignon's beauty. 

She was standing in the middle of the 
room, herself the prettiest thing in it, or so 
thought Adam, w4io was silently watching 
her from the doorway, when she spied him 
and ran forward. 

^^ You like it?" he said simply, and smooth- 
ing her ruffled, dust-powdered hair away from 
her blue eyes 

'^ Yes," she said softly, '' I like it." One 
little fluttering hand stole timidly up and 
rested on his breast, then standing on tiptoe, 
she lifted her lips — it was not far — to his, 
with as light, as kind, as affectionate a kiss, 
as though he had been her brother or her 
father, or anything on earth but her lover or 
her husband. 

"• And indeed I like yoii'^' she said heartily ; 
^'^ I think I grow to like you better and 
better every day; in time 1 do believe I 



112 ''CHERRY rirkT 

shall get almost as fond of you as I am of 
Prue !" 

His arms slackened their hold upon her ; 
she stood alone. 

** And when she comes," continued Mignon, 
looking about her with a beaming countenance 
of utter delight, '' how happy we shall be, to 
be sure !" 

" And until then ?" he said quietly. 

'* O !" she said, her face falling somewhat, 
'^I have not thought much about it ; but 
with so much to look forward to we can't be 
very dxdJs can we T 

When, some half-an-hour later, Adam found 
himself seated at one end of the table, and 
Mignon, in a fresh muslin gown with a rose 
in her belt at the other, he said to himself 
that he was an ingrate to fortune in that he 
received her favours with such scanty thanks. 
Only to think that Mignon was there y that 
she would be at his table always , that when- 
ever he came home this little shape would be 
•within reach of his hand and glance of his 



FRUIT. 113 

eye, that he would never more be tormented 
by stolen and hasty peeps that only left him 
more hungry than they found him, that for 
to-day, to-morroAY, for ever, she was safely 
his wife, unloving may be, but still, lii^ 
ou:n. 

'' Mignon," said Adam, when the servant 
had finally left the room, and the girl was 
half way through* her grapes, '' has it ever 
occurred to you that I have got a 
father T 

" No," she said, '' I have never thought 
about it " — and it Avas true. Tn the intensely 
selfish isolation of her sorrow she had 
thought but little of Adam, still less of his 
belongings. 

Adam left his place and came and sat down 
beside her. 

"And Iiave you never heard, Mignou," he 
said seriously, " that sometimes fathers do not 
like their sons to marry, especially wIumi tlu' 
sons have not asked their advice C 

'' Is he ciugnj?'' said Mignou, laying down 

VOL. II. .,^7 



114 ''cherry rtpeT 

a berry in dismay. '' Will ho come roimrl 
here and scold us ?" 

" He is far too dignified to scold," said 
Adam, laughing, " but I expect he will be — 
angry." 

'^ Let us go and ask him to forgive us," said 
Mignon promptly, "and I will tell him how 
it all happened, and that it was eveiy bit my 
fault. He couldn't possibly blame you for 

itr 

'' Poor little sinner !" said Adam gently, 
^' you will make a great confession of misdeeds, 
will you not, and I shall stand quietly by 
and listen to the same. Meanwhile I had 
better prepare him gently. So in half an 
hour's time, Mignon, I sliall go and tell 
him." 

He spoke less as a beloved son who is about 
to sue for pardon, than as a man who goes to 
announce a fact, and assert his rio-ht to self- 
government. 

" And then will ho como and soo mo ?" said 
Mignon, laying one little anxious, sticky liand 



FRUIT. 115 



on Adam's arm. " Do you think that he 
will say wicked — things, as that other old 
man did T 

^' Good heavens, no !" said Adam in horror, 
"And do not fear," he added^ "but that I 
shall know how to protect my own. I shall 
take you to see him to-morrow morning — 
when you will also make the acquaintance of 
—Flora." 

'^ But you said she was married V 

" So she is." 

'^ And does she live with your father ?" 

" She is paying him a visit." 

" With her husband ?" 

" Yes— Colin is there.'' 

His voice took that tone which one man 
never uses in speaking of another, unless he 
heartily likes him. 

'^ And she is quite young T said Mignon. 

'^ Let me see," said Adam. " She was 
married at eighteen, and Taffy must be eight 
years old by now — I suppose she is some- 
where about seven and twenty." 

27—2 



116 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

'' Then she is quite old," said Mignon, dis- 
consolately, " only two years younger than 
you are ! Is she pretty V 

'' Some people think so." 

'' And good-tempered T 

^^ So her admirers say." 

''But," said Mignon, blankly, '' I did not 
know that w^hen people were married they 
had admirers f " 

'' Do they not T he said, looking keenly 
at the girl, '' well, I suppose Flora is 
an exception to the rule, for she has 
several !" 

'' And are you very fond of lier ?" said 
Mignon, puzzled by a certain unaccountable 
hardness in his manner. 

*' I am not fond of her at all." 

" ^oi fond of her ?" cried Mignon, staring 
at him, '' your own sister, the only one you 
have— just the same to you, as Muriel is to 
me?" 

'' No," said Adam, " I am not fond of lier; 
on the contrary," he threw his head back 



FRUIT. 117 



and looked ceilingAvards half ruefully, half 
impatiently, '^ I am afraid there cannot be 
the smallest doubt in the world that I do not 
like her at all 1" 




CHAPTER VII. 

" With unladen breasts, 
Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount 
To their spirit's perch, their being's high account ; 
Their tip-top nothings, their dull skies, their thrones.' 




OW then!" said Flora, '^put 
your hands behind your backs, 
and for your lesson to-day 



learn that 



" ' A frog he would a- wooing go, 

Whether his mother would let him or no, 
Heigho ! says Roly.' " 

Two childish voices repeated the ancient 
nursery classic with a readiness that would 
have been laudable and surprising, had 
they now uttered it for the first time. 



FRUIT, 119 



" And what does wooing mean T said 
Flora, surveying the atoms before her with 
invincible gravity. 

" Getting married," said Taffy. 

'' Kissing," said Colin, solemnly. 

Their mother broke into a sudden peal of 
laughter. Her laughter was like herself, 
abundant ; for nature had assuredly not 
found herself skimped for material, when she 
created Flora. No, nor for colour, for though 
ail about her was a great blaze of scarlet, 
yellow^, and blue flowers, her own tints in no 
wa^^s suffered by comparison, for they were 
every whit as vivid, and saucy, and daring as 
theirs. 

" There is/' says a famous French writer, 
'' but one way in which a woman can be 
handsome, but a hundred thousand ways in 
which she can be pretty." This being trans- 
lated, means, I take it, that the devil's 
beauty of extreme youth, a joyous mood, a 
becoming gown, the neighbourhood of a 
favoured lover, or any other pleasurable 



120 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

;ind fugitive emotion is able to tiansfoiiii a 
negatively plain woman into a positively 
|)retty one. 

Now Flora's good looks in no way depended 
on any of the adventitious aids before enume- 
rated, nevei-theless it was a fact that she just 
missed being extremely handsome, through 
the one feature of the face that is so often the 
stumbling-block over which female beauty 
trips — the nose. 

Lovely eves are }»k'ntiiiil as blackberries, 
lovelier perhajDs among the humble ones of 
the earth than the great ; cherry lips are as 
often to be met with as the })ietty fools to 
Avhom they would seem to especially belong, 
but — a handsome nose ! Is there any man 
who can reckon among all his ac(|uaintancc 
moi'c than a cou})le of perfectly shaped pro- 
])oscides ? So far as my own experience 
goes, I have never discovered a phenomenon 
of this kind, save on the countenances of 
one or two intensely irritable people. 

'' In jK'tit nvz refrou^^c hotdcrcr^-c /cs /o<V 



FRUIT, 12 1 



d'un empire,'' but when there is no empire to 
overturn, Chloe is apt to grow dissatisfied 
with what Providence has seen fit to send her, 
and to glance with envy at the classic features^ 
of Amaryllis, her rival, and Flora would 
have cheerfully parted Avith one of her own 
plump fingers, if by so doing she could 
have made that pretty little disdainful nose of 
hers straight. 

With women Flora did not find favour ; 
they affected to consider her coarse, but that 
she was not, only her splendid physique and 
robust viofour of constitution made her anta- 
gonistic to, and intolerant of, those lymphatic 
and half- starved souls, who were not able to 
take a good free breath of anything, whethei- 
of life, air, or beauty, without wincing and 
shivering, and suffering acute moral indiges- 
tion afterwards. 

There was about this young matron a bold, 
gay honJiomie, that might be no inore than a 
mere animal delight in existence, the out- 
come of a sensuous and a pleasure-loving 



122 ''CHERRY RIPE!' 

temperament, but, on the other hand, and on 
this point opinions were extremely diverse, 
be no less an admirable quahtv, tlian solid 
Christian charity and goodness of heart. 
Complexion, constitution, and digestion alike 
precluded the possibility of her being per- 
sistently ill-humoured, and to do her justice 
she seldom was, unless the admiration and 
attention, that were food and drink to her, 
were diverted on their Avay to her by a fair 
and skilful sister bandit. Nevertheless on 
occasion she was capable of entertaining for 
certain people a strong dislike, and of these 
23ersons her brother Adam was one. Her 
nerves, too, were excellent, enabling her to 
bear the discordant shrieks of a paroquet who 
w^as strutting on the lawn before her with 
perfect equanimity and indifterence. 

The two boys who faced her luid not a 
tithe of their mother's good looks. Well, 
we take incredible pains with the breed of 
animals, Ave eradicate certain vices and 
l)lemishes, and labour long and patiently to 



FRUIT. J 23 



transmit certain perfections and qualities, but 
with that of our men and women, the rulers 
of the universe, do we ever concern ourselves 
at all ? 

We let them mate anyhow, whereas if the 
same pains were taken with them that are 
expended on the beasts, a race of men and 
women would spring up, strong, brave and 
beautiful as were the fabled gods of old. 

*'And pray," said Flora, with mock 
solemnity, '' what is the difference between 
kissing and getting married T 

" Nurse got married,'' said Taffy thought- 
fully, " but we never saw anybody kiss her — 
and Anne gets kissed, but she doesn't get 
married — " Here the infant mind paused 
on the threshold of a definition, and could 
get no farther on its way. 

" So Anne gets kissed !" said Flora coolly, 
^' and pray who kisses Anne V 

Taffy, who had all the elements of a lirst- 
rate sneak about him, was about to reply, 
when a sharp and sudden pinch in liis rear 



124 "'CHERRY RIPE r 



from Colin the Yoiinger's small hand caused 
him to stammer and hesitate. 

"- Now, then !" said Flora imperiously, 
*' who kisses Anne T 

But Taffy's enforced indecision had, for 
the nonce, saved the recital of Anne's delin- 
quencies, for at this moment there appeared 
upon the scene no less a person than — Mr. 
Montrose. 

"• So, so ! Lessons, 1 perceive," he said 
benignly, yet irritably, as his eyes fell on his 
grandsons ; " nevertheless, if not on any sub- 
ject of moment, my dear Flora" (he bo^ved 
gracefully towards his daughter), "perhaps 
you will do me the favour to dismiss them — 
as there are matters upon whicli--in short, 
you will understand, I am sure — " 

" Certainly, father," said Flora, and at 
a signal from her the boys vanished. Mr. 
Montrose drew out his watch and looked 
at it. 

''Five minutes to eleven," he said solemnly, 
" in five minutes they will be here." 



FRUIT. 125 



He replaced his watch with slow delibera- 
tion, then commenced to pace the gravel walk 
with steps that he w^as evidently at consider- 
able pains to keep within the measured 
bounds that he had long ago laid down as. 
suitable to a man of his years and moral 
excellence. For, unlike some persons who 
are quite above taking the trouble to con- 
vince the world of the validity of their pre- 
tensions to perfection, he was ever trying to 
act up to his own standard of what he thought 
right and becoming. Thus he never lost his 
self- consciousness, beholding, not tlie people 
he addressed, but the attitude he himself 
maintained towards them, wdiether of the at- 
tentive host, the affectionate yet severe 
parent, or the generous friend ; in short, 
finding in everybody a reflection of — himself. 

'' They won't come any the sooner for your 
fidgeting, father," said Flora tranquilly, as 
she inserted a stitch or two in her lace- 
work, and meditated on Amur's osculatory 
escapades. 



1 2G ^' CHERRY RIPE r 

The colour in Mr. Montrose's face 
deepened perceptibly ; he continued his walk, 
but with an air of offence. For if there be 
one thing on earth that instates a fussy per- 
son more than another, it is to be told that he 
is fussy, since in his own mind he invariably 
sees himself the only collected person present. 

'' I am not aware of fidgeting," he said 
stiffly, '' and I am sorry to be compelled to 
remark (you being a married woman and no 
longer subject to my authority) that there is 
— ah — a tone of levitu about your whole re- 
ception of this unfoi-tunate affiiir that seri- 
ously displeases me. When your brother 
came here last night, after a most unaccount- 
able absence of some weeks, and announced 
with a coolness highly unbecoming in so 
young a j.nan, that he was actually married, 
in what way did you receive the intelligence ? 
With indifference and an epigram ! Now 
that I display a pardonable impatience to be- 
hold my daughter-in-law, I am told that — I 
fidget !" 



FRUIT. 127 



" I beg your pardon, father," said Flora, 
"but when Adam walked in and told us 
that he was married, at the same time 
volunteering not the slightest information as 
to the lady's antecedents or surroundings, a 
vision suddenly rose up before me of what 
she would probably be like that quite upset 

my gravity " 

She paused expressively, and shrugged her 
shoulders. 

''You have not, then, a high opinion of 
your brother's taste V said Mr. Montrose, 
coming to a full-stop before his daughter, and 
handling his eye-glasses nervously. 

'' Adam the gardener's taste !" said Flora 
slightingly ; " if he has married according to 
lih taste, father, it is not difficult to imagine 
what that will be. Probably this young- 
woman is some gardener's daughter with 
whom he has become enamoured while 
pursuing the congenial occupation of lielp- 
ing to pot out her father's herbs and 
bulbs !" 



128 ''CHERRY RIPJC f' 



" God bless my soul !" said Mr. Montrose 
■with much earnestness, all his little pompous 
air utterly put to flight for the moment, ''you 
Burely don't conceive such a thing possible ! 
With all your brother's peculiarities and odd 
choice of amusements, he would not, I hope 
and believe, so far forget himself as to intro- 
duce into our family circle a young person 
'who — who " 

He paused, utterly overcome by the visions 
of the " young person " suggested by Flora's 
words. 

" There is no knowino- what Adam w ill do 
when once he takes an idea into his liead," 
said his sister. '' So long as he himself were 
satisfied, he would not care a button what 
you or I or anybody else might tliiiik of the 
matter." 

Not often did Flora venture to make so 
bold a speech as the foregoing, and now she 
glanced from under her long eyelashes to see 
how it told. 

Mr. Montrose was irritably glancing across 



FRUIT. 129 



to where, in dim perspective, was visible that 
trim and well-stocked kitchen garden in 
which Adam had dug, and delved, and accom- 
plished his destiny. 

" Yom' brother is his own master," he said 
stiffly ; " owing to your departed mother's 
injudicious bequest to him, he is in no 
way dejDendent upon me, and although it is 
true I might show my displeasure by refusing 
to receive him and his wife, still — a family 
scandal " (he made a gesture of disgust, much 
as thouorh he had lio^hted on some noxious 
and disgusting insect) "• has always been my 
special abhorrence ; besides " (here he raised 
his eyes to the surrounding walls), '' how is 
it possible to be on unfriendly terms with a 
son who actually lives next door to you ?" 

"" How on earth he got there is a mystery 
to me !" said Flora, yawning ; '' the servants 
say it is a school or something of the kind — 
perhaps the schoolmistress improves the 
shining hour by taking in boarders while lier 
pupils are away !" 

VOL. II. 28 



1 30 " CHERR V RIPK f 

But Mr. Montrose was not attending — for 
the first time in his life he felt himself to be 
in a dilemma. 

Hitherto, he had under all circumstances 
been equally pleased and satisfied with him- 
self in all that he did, and with unruffled 
dignity had acted up to what he conceived to 
be a right and proper standard of excellence, 
and since he was never called upon to fill any 
situation with which his previous experiences 
did not enable him to deal, he had been saved 
from even the mere suspicion of the barren- 
ness of his resources. 

Now, suddenly confronted w^ith an unex- 
pected exigency, he was entirely at a loss how 
to meet it, and in this disagreeable revelation 
to himself of his own helplessness and inca- 
pacity, felt an added cause of resentment 
against the person who had been its occasion. 
As a Roman father, renouncing his oftspring 
in well-rounded periods, and enunciating 
highly moral sentiments from a lofty height 
of virtue, Mr. Montrose would have been 



FRUIT. 131 



quite in his element ; he would even have 
figured handsomely as the stately yet con- 
descending parent who received a privileged 
and duly approved of daughter-in-law into 
his bosom ; but as a parent who disliked a 
match concerning which he was yet by cir- 
cumstances compelled to spare the thunders 
of his righteous indignation, he felt himself 
to be placed in a false position, from whence 
he knew not how to extricate himself with 
dignity. 

'^ And Miss McClosky is coming here 
to-day !" he said at last. *' A most estimable 
young woman who would have suited him in 
every way, who is, so far as her maidenly 
modesty permits one to judge, by no means 
indifferent to your brother, and to whom, if 
I am not much mistaken, this news will 
come with as great a shock as it does 
to us." 

'' Poor PhilHs !" said Flora not unkindly, 
*' I wish she had not been coming ; it would 

28—2 



132 *' CHERR V RIPE /" 

have been so much better to write and tell 
her ; but — unless at the eleventh hour some 
accident happens to prevent her — she will 
come !" 

Mr. Montrose put out his hands in depre- 
cation, and resumed his measured walk. 

Across the silence that had fallen between 
father and daughter, came the cool splash of 
a fountain, and the distant laughter of Taffy 
and Colin the Younger, who were evidently 
having a good time somewhere out of sight. 
Although the morning was one of intolerable 
heat, in this corner of the garden were shade 
and coolness in plenty. 

" They are late," remarked Flora presently, 
laying down her work and regarding it criti- 
cally. ^' Doubtless the bride is arraying her- 
self in her Sunday go^^^l, and Adam, poor 
man, is doing his best to tone down the 
colours a little. Or perhaps — " she paused 
suddenly, her lips closed, then opened again 
in a little quick gasp of astonishment, as she 



FRUIT, 133 



looked up and saw her brother and the girl, 
who came stepping towards her by his side. 

Here was no gardener's daughter, but a 
woman in whose veins ran blood every whit 
as blue as her own, in whose bearing was a 
pride of race even greater than her own, 
moreover who was possessed of one supreme 
advantage that she herself lacked, the fresh- 
ness and incomparable bloom of extreme 
youth. 

If there was a moment of hesitation it did 
not proceed from those whose province it may 
have been to display it, for Adam, leading 
Mignon forward, '' Father/' he said, " this is 
my wife." 

Something that did not often make itself 
felt, stirred in the old man's selfish yet not 
unkindly heart, as he looked down on the 
girl's gentle face, and felt her slight hand 
close upon his. Perhaps there was more of 
human nature in him than he suspected, or 
some thrill of healthy young life passed from 
her palm to his and unconsciously freshened 



134 " CHERRY RIPE /" 



him, yet when he did speak, it was only to 
add one more to those countless billions of 
unanswered " How do you do's ?" of which 
English air suffers a plethora, and that are 
about as reasonable as the habit that still pre- 
vails in some parts of the globe, of rubbing 
one's nose ao^ainst a friend's, or offerinof him 
a taste of one's own choice and particular 
lump of salt. 

" And this is my sister, Mrs. Dundas," said 
Adam, turning to Flora, who, with a very 
perceptible increase of colour, had risen to 
greet her new sister-in-law. 

" How do you do ?" she said in her turn^ 
but the meaningless words had a jovial, gay 
ring in them, and Mignon, turning her eyes 
from Mr. Montrose's uninteresting, not to 
say stupid, countenance, to Flora's blooming, 
good-humoured one, was instinctively at- 
tracted towards her. 

^' This seat is not a large one, and I am 
not a small person," said Flora, laughing, 
*' nevertheless I think that it will hold two T 



FRUIT. 135 



And with a o-esture of invitation she sank 
into the wooden contrivance from whence she 
had risen. 

" What a lovely garden !" said Mignon in- 
voluntarily, and mentally comparing this 
smiHno: Eden with the wilderness on the other 
side of the wall. 

" Is not yours as good ?" said Flora, who 
was thinking, '^ How this chit's blue eyes will 
put out my grey ones !" 

" No," said Mignon, "it is bare and ugly, 
and though I have planted lots of things, 
somehow they never seem to come up right !" 

" Oh !" said Flora, glancing at her brother 
(and it was significant of the relations exist- 
ing between the brother and sister that they 
had hitherto made each other no sort of greet- 
ing), " Adam will soon change all that 1 He 
will rout the slugs, pickle the snails, and keep 
you in flowers and vegetables all the year 
round — in short, I believe that at a pinch he 
Avould not be above doing a little— weeding !" 

She flashed her eyes full on Adam's (very 



136 " CHERR V RIPE /" 

like her own, by the way, in shape and colour, 
but how different in expression) with an inso- 
lence that he was not slow to appreciate ; but 
Miofnon, believing: this to be an intentional 
allusion to a matter of which she could never 
think without intense shame and vexation, 
blushed furiously, and with the unwise, im- 
petuous courage of youth, exclaimed, *^ And 
why should he not ? It is a very right 
thing to do, and a very Jdnd one ! And I 
was very much obliged to him for making 
those shabby old garden walks look so 
beautiful !" 

" He did /" said Flora, opening her eyes to 
their utmost extent; " ^vell, I knew Cupid did 
odd things sometimes, but — iceeding /" 

'^ I am not aware," said Mr. Montrose, 
addressing Flora in a tone of dignified rebuke, 
'' that there is anything derogatory to a young 
man in the act of weeding — on the contrary, 
it appears to me an earnest of industry, and 
industry in the young is a very excellent 
quality. There is moreover," here he bowed 



FRUIT, 137 



gracefully towards Mignon, '' a delicacy in 
the idea of a lover tending his mistress's 
flowers, a poetry in the image of him 
presenting her with a cluster that he has 
preserved from untoward influences — " 

'' But he wasn't a lover," said Mignon un- 
expectedly. 

" Not a lover !" cried Flora, "• and what 
was he then, pray T 

^^ I thought he was the gardener," said 
Mignon in an exculpatory tone. 

" There !" said Flora triumphantly, '' did 
I not always tell you so, that you looked like 
a gardener ? After all, the nickname I gave 
you was well chosen !" 

He glanced across at her contemptuously, 
then back again at his wife. 

" But it was nothing to do Avith his looks," 
said Mignon hotly, "it was all my stupid 
mistake and — and his coming over the w.dl 
that morning." 

'' Over the wall !" echoed Mr. Montrose, 
in deepest bass tones of horror ; " do I under- 



138 " CHERR Y RIPE /" 



stand you to say that my son came over the 
ivalir 

'' To be sure !" said Mignon, nodding, 
'^ after snails — at least I supposed so then, as 
there was nothing else — only you see he found 
• — me ! 

"■ And may I ask," said Mr. Montrose, his 
countenance becoming positively vacuous 
under the influence of the amazement that 
filled him, " if my son's intrusion into your 
garden was the occasion of your ^rs^ introduc- 
tion to each other T 

" The very first !" said Mignon, nodding 
again. ^^ I just asked him his name, you 
know, and he told me — and that's how it nil 
happened !" 

*' Good heavens I" ejaculated Mr. Mon- 
trose, dropping his eye-glass in a spasm of 
outraged decorum, "' and wliat did your 
people — your father — your mother say ?" 

^' I have no father and no mother !" 

'^ Your nearest relatives then — your lawful 
guardians ?" 



FRUIT. 139 



'^ Haven't got any," said Mignon^ sighing, 
'' I've nobody in the world but one person 
and Prue — and Adam," she added, as an 
after- thought, glancing up at him with so 
cold and kind a glance, as to convince Flora 
that for whatever reason this mysterious and 
candid young lady had married Adam, it cer- 
tainly was not for love. 

'' And who is Prue T said Mr. Montrose, 
'^ a female relative, I presume ?" 

'^ She is a housemaid," said Mignon. 

".But," said Mr. Montrose, almost gasp- 
ing, " your chaperon at your interviews with 
my son — there must surely have been some 
oner 

" There was nobody," said Mignon, '^ un- 
less " — she added meditatively, '' you would 
call Bumble a person !" 

"And who is— ah— Bumble ?" said Mr. 
Montrose, his hopes reviving at the mention 
of so eminently resjiectable a name. 

" A fowl," said Mignon ; " Adam used to 
help me catch him — or try to I" 



140 ''CHERRY RIPEf 

"Is it the punishment of mine enemy, that 
he should marry a fool T thought Flora, glanc- 
ing at Adam, who stood, bareheaded, listening 
to his young wife's disclosures as calmly as 
though she were presenting those unwritten 
vouchers of respectability that society expects 
and demands. And yet no man living was 
better aware than he, of how severe is the 
worlds condemnation of any intrigue, howso- 
ever pure in motive and intent, that traverses 
its laws. 

'' Good heavens !" said Mr. Montrose again, 
his usual noble panoply of words utterly fail- 
ing him, and reverting unconsciously to the 
simple and forcible language that he may 
have used in the less distinguished and ornate 
days of his youth. 

*' Are you angry ?" said ^lignon, looking 
attentively at the vacuous fleshy face before 
her, in which there was not one line that said, 
" I have suffered, I have conquered, I know,'' 
— *' but you must not blame Adam, for it was 
everu hit my fault that we got married — you 



FRUIT. 141 



see, I was so lonely, and poor, and miserable^ 
with no one but Prue to take care of me, and 
he was so sorry for me !" 

^' Not because he was sorry for you," said 
Adam quietly, '^ but because he loved you." 

'^ So, so !" said Flora to herself, " you love 
her, do you, my model brother \ Take care 
that I don't find out a way through her of 
paying off some very old scores.'' 

'^ In my young days," said Mr. Montrose, 
recovering his usual stately flow of language, 
'^it was not usual for a young woman to 
marry a young man, because he expressed 
himself sorry for her — on the contrary, I may 
say that the whole process of courtship 
(resulting in matrimony) was an extremely 
gradual and delicate one, extending over a 
very considerable space of time. First came 
a proper and admiring regard, then a heedful 
and respectful approach on the part of the 
gentleman (with the cognizance and full ap- 
proval of his family) to the lady, then a duly 
considered and well-digested declaration of 



142 ''CHERRY RIPE 



love, followed by a period of anxious suspense 
on the part of the gentleman, of modest hesi- 
tation on hers, after which, if she answered 
him in the affirmative, there ensued a decent 
and enjoyable interval of courtship, and 
finally a marriage celebrated in the presence 
of the assembled relatives of the bride and 
bridegroom." 

''Then I'm afraid," said Mignon, shaking 
her head with an air of conviction, '' that our 
courtship was hopelessly ivvomj from begin- 
ning to end ! There w^as no asking anybody's 
permission, no suspense (I said Yes the minute 
he asked me) ; and as to having a lot of rela- 
tions to see us married, why we had not got 
one between us !" 

" I don't think that you can mean that," 
said Mr. Montrose rebukingly. '' I should be 
quite sorry to think that you really mean us 
to understand you accepted my son without a 
moment's hesitation ; it would augur a curious 
lack of delicacy that I should deeply regi*et 
to discover in you. There must have been 



FRUIT. 143 



a period of hesitation, of maidenly — 
ah " 

He paused, the right word not having pre- 
sented itself, and he being of so conscientious 
a turn of mind, that he would rather keep his 
audience waiting five minutes than affront it 
with one not exactly suited to the occasion. 

Unfortunately it often happens that while 
the proper noun, adjective, or what-not is 
being sought, the vagrant mind of the ex- 
pectant auditor sets off with a skip in search 
of other pabulum, so that when Mr. Montrose 
had satisfied his critical taste, it was to dis- 
cover that Mignons whole attention was 
given to the paroquet, who had been for the 
last few moments viciously regarding the pink 
ribbons in Flora's mob-cap as though he 
meditated taking a bit out of them. 

''Self-examination," said Mr. Montrose, his 
glance wandering from one to another, in 
that search of a home that is so ludicrous to 
the indifferent, so painful to the sympathetic 
observer — '' Self -examination,'' said Mr. Mon- 



144 " CHERR Y RIPE f 



trose, raising his voice a little and growing 
very red in the face. 

" Ha ! ha ! ha !" went the parrot in an 
ecstasy of mirth, and, alas ! whether it were 
the force of that godless bird's example, or 
the provocation of a certain something in 
Flora's eye, Mignon broke into a peal of 
laughter that astounded Mr. Montrose as 
much as though she had suddenly hopped 
up, and dealt him a facetious dig in the 
ribs. 

He began to think that there were worse 
things about this young person than making 
love over a garden wall, and saying " yes " 
the moment she was asked in marriage. 

^' I am not aware," he said majestically, 
" that I have said anything extraordinarily 
ludicrous — still I am sure I am always happy 

to amuse " 

So saying, and wishful to mark his sense 
of Mignon's impropriety by a very proper 
haughtiness of bearing, he stepped back a 
pace or two, when, alas ! that little imp who 



FRUIT, 145 



ever seems to be at hand to make a mock of 
dignities, caused him to stumble over a foot- 
stool in such wise that he found himself seated 
with excessive harshness on a wooden chair 
that stood hard by. 

Even Mignon felt the occasion to be too 
awful for laughter, much less smiles, so sat in 
a, scarlet agony, biting her lips and puckering 
her forehead into a frown in her violent efforts 
to preserve a decent gravity; nevertheless, 
as Mr. Montrose glanced from her to his 
daughter, whose nose rested on her lace- work, 
and from his daughter to Adam, who had 
carefully turned his head away, he felt burn- 
ing within him the righteous anger histori- 
cally supposed to be cherished by wise men 
for fools. 

What was there to laugh at, he would like 
to know ? He would not have laughed at 
any one under the same circumstances ; on the 
contrary he would have felt and expressed 
sympathy. There was to him something ex- 
tremely coarse in these repressed manifesta- 

voL. II. 20 



146 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

tions of mirth, and indeed it is one of the 
hardest problems on earth to decide where 
humour ends, and levity begins, where our 
subtle and keen appreciation of the incon- 
gruities and inconsistencies of human nature 
deteriorates into a bold and irreverent license 
that does us an infinite discredit. 

At this moment, and surely no winged 
Mercury of good tidings was ever more wel- 
come, a footman noiselessly approached, and 
appearing in their midst, handed to Flora a 
telegram. 

She bowed in apology to Mignon, opened 
the missive, read and handed it to her 
father. 

'' What an extraordinary thing," she said 
dryly, '* Mr. McClosky has fallen ill — and 
can't sj)are his daughter ! (Has a little bird 
whispered the news ?)" she added in an aside 
audible only to Mignon. 

Meanwhile, the paroquet, abandoning his 
intentions on Flora's ribbons, and perhaps 
feeling certain memories of the tropical 



FRUIT. 147 



climate from whence he had been torn in his 
youth awakened in him by the sight of 
James's canary- coloured livery, at this mo- 
ment elected to make a sudden dash at the 
man's arm and swarm up his shoulder. 
James, neglecting in his flurry to lift his 
shoulder for the bird's support, the latter, 
feehng himself to be slipping, laid hold of the 
man's ear, to which he clung like grim death, 
while the luckless victim, not daring to utter 
a sound before his master, leaped at least a 
foot in the air with anguish. I wonder what 
unseemly impulse is that which sets us 
smiling when we see injuries of a ludicrous 
character inflicted upon others ? why we 
think it an exquisite joke when, at the panto- 
mime, one clown gives another a sounding- 
crack on the pate, and why we feel our pulses 
pleasantly quickened when the villain of the 
piece receives the trouncing he so richly 
merits % Mr. Montrose, who was a stranger 
to self-analysis, and only beheld himself as 
that which he was not, could not for the life 

29—2 



148 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



of him have explained why, when Adam had 
interfered, and James dej^arted a sadder if 
not a wiser man, he should have had a far 
less vivid consciousness of his own Avrongs 
than was his before the episode occurred, and 
even be equal to discussing the subject of 
Miss McCloskv's non- arrival with his usual 
dignity. 

Not that he would have retained his irri- 
tation long, for it takes such a tremendous 
effort of inagination on the part of a stupid 
man to convince him that you are laughing 
at him, that he is only too glad to dismiss it, 
and revert to his usual consciousness of per- 
fectibility with solid satisfaction and comfort. 

"And who is Miss McClosky ?" said 
Mignon, presently. 

" Who is she V said Flora, " well, she is 
Miss McClosky ! Thougli if she could have 
had her own way, she Avould be — somebody 
else !" 

" But how could she be that T' said Mignon, 
much puzzled. 



FRUIT. 149 



''Ask Adam !" said his sister. 

Mignon looked at him, trying to under- 
stand, then all at once a light flashed upon her. 

" / know !" she said, clapping her hands, 
" Miss McClosky was in love with Adam, or 
he was in love with her T 

''Yes," said Flora, grave and amused, "it 
was one of the two !" 

" Were you very fond of her T said 
Mignon to her husband, without one flicker 
of colour in the cool delicate cheeks whence 
the blushes had long ago faded. 

"But he married you, not Miss McClosky!" 
said Flora. 

" People don't always marry the ones they 
like best," said Mignon with a look in her 
blue eyes that struck Adam like a blow, and 
gave birth to fifty hitherto formless suspicions 
in Flora's busy brain. 

" And now, Mignon, if you are ready, we 
will go," said Adam ; and the girl stood up 
and put her hand in Flora's. 

" I hope we shall be good friends," said the 



150 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

latter in her hearty, ringing voice, ** although 
we are relations, and do live on opposite sides 
of the wall ! I won't inflict myself upon you 
too often, but I'll come — sometimes." 

*' Come oftenl' said Mignon impressively, 
*' come twice, three times every day if you are 
able, for oh ! though I was as dull as dull 
could be before I got married, I am ten 
thousand times duller noxo /" 




CHAPTER VIII. 

" Pleasure is oft a visitant, yet pain 
Clings cruelly to us like the gnawing sloth 
On the deer's tender haunches." 




I RE you very busy V said Mignon, 
putting her head in at the half- 
opened door of the room that now 
went by the name of Adam's study, but re- 
treating when she saw how he sat, his head 
buried in his hands, at a large table covered 
with books. 

*^ I am not too busy to attend to you," he 
said, coming forward, and leading her in. 

'' Where will you sit ?" he added, looking 
about him in some perplexity, for every chair 



152 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

was piled as high with dusty tomes as was the 
table. 

'^ Are you doing lessons T said Mignon, 
looking about her with considerable awe as she 
sat down on the big easy-chair that he had 
swept clear of its contents and placed for her ; 
*' why I thought— I thought " 

" You thought that because a man gets 
married he leaves off learning anything?" 
said Adam, laughing. 

'^ No," she said, still looking about her, 
*' but I had a notion, an impression, that you 
never did anything but gardening !" 

'^ To garden is the occupation of my leisure 
hours," he said ; '^ I have periods of work as 
well, Mignon. Has it never occurred to you 
to wonder how I managed to amuse myself 
during the many hours a day that you are 
working, or gossiping with Prue T 

She looked across at him with a sudden, 
quick compunction — no — it had never oc- 
curred to her to wonder what he might, or 
might not do, so thoroughly had she been 



FRUIT. 153 



engrossed by her own thoughts, hopes, and 
fears. 

'^ Has it been lonely for you," she said, 
*' all by yourself? Do you come and read 
these dusty, stupid books because you have 
nobody to S2:)eah to ? You see," she went on, 
drawinof a little nearer, and lookino^ at him 
with anxious, gentle consideration, *' it is not 
a thing to get used to all at once — a husband, 
and sometimes I forget all about you ! Do 
you know that one morning I actually got up 
early because I thought that it was my morn- 
ing to practise before breakfast, and only 
when I was walking past your door, re- 
collected I was married ?" 

"You will get more used to it in time," he 
said encouragingly, "perhaps — who knows ? — 
forget to learn your gospel and collect as you 
did last Saturday night, for Sunday !" 

" But that was because I had taken off my 
wedding ring when I washed my hands, and 
forgotten to put it on again," said Mignon 
hastily; "you see it is so bright and new and 



154 " CHERR Y RIPE f 

pretty, it would be a thousand pities to spoil 
it!" 

Yes, that was what a woman's badge of 
life-long duty and devotion was to her, no 
more and no less than a pretty shining 
toy. 

" And these books," she said, touching one 
of the heavy tomes before her, " what are 
they ? geography ? history ? mathematics 1" 

'' Something far more serious and disagree- 
able," he said, '' law !" 

"• You are studying it ?" she exclaimed, 
looking at him with respect; ''and why do 
you do that ?" 

" Because," he said, '' to live one must eat, 
Mignon, and to eat, costs money; and if one has 
not a great deal, why then one must do one's 
best to earn it I" 

'' But have you not got plenty T said 
Mignon in surprise. *' Do you mean to say 
that you have got to work for it T 

^' I intend to do so," he said, '' but until 
now, Mignon, I have been somewhat idle — 



FRUIT, 155 



indeed for the past two months before our 
marriage I never opened a book or a paper — 
though I am afraid it will be a long business, 
this making money, and that I shall be an 
old man before I begin to grow rich !" 

" But I have got some money," said 
Mignon triumphantly, ''oh, a great deal, and 
I can draw it out whenever I please ; and 
you shall have it all, every penny of it, to do 
just as you like with it !" 

" No, no," he said kindly ; *' we w^on't take 
the little woman's hoard away from her. 
Perhaps she'll find it useful some day, when 
she wants to run away from her husband." 

'^ I Iznow I am a great expense to you," said 
Mignon, not heeding his latter words, her 
mind anxiously bent upon her own short- 
comings. '^ And I have a very large appe- 
tite, and I bought a pair of new boots yester- 
day ! But I won't buy any more," she added, 
shaking her head with immense decision ; 
" at least not out of your money, I'll use 
some of my own !" 



156 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

'^ But I thought you were going to give 
it to me, Mignon ?" said Adam gravely. 

^' So I was !" she said, looking rather chap- 
fallen. '' So I will ! Only you see, now that 
I know you are not very rich, I shall hate to 
come and ask you for so much as a penny !" 

*^ You must try and get over that !" said 
Adam. " It would be such a thousand 
pities to touch a tremendous sum like that, 
Mignon ! No, no, as soon as we come to the 
last bit of bread in the pan, and meat in the 
larder, we will begin to draw out your hoard 
— a pound at a time !" 

"■ But are we as poor as all that T said 
Mionon in awe-struck tones. 

"We are not rich," he said lightly, ''and 
to beg I am ashamed — and to earn money at 
the bar is not easy, Mignon " 

'' You are a barrister," she exclaimed, " and 
some day you will wear a wig and a silk 
gown? 

'' If I live long enough," he said, laughing, 
** thouQ^h I am afraid that the wio- and o-own 



FRUIT. 157 



will be the most important part of the con- 
cern, for until a man is forty, his briefs are 
usually conspicuous by their absence !" 

" But I thought — " she said, '' I have heard 
Miss Sorel say, that barristers usually live in 
chambers — in the Temple T 

" So they do," he said ; '■' and I have a 
little den of my own there. When I was 
eating my dinners I lived there altogether, 
but now that I have married a wife," he 
added, leaning forward and patting her cheek 
with his forefinger, " why, Mignon, I thought 
I would study at home, so had some books 
sent down — voila tout'' 

" But why did you do that ?" she said. 
'' It was a great deal of trouble, and you 
might have gone up as often, and stopped as 
long as you liked." 

" In short," he said, with a very unusual 
touch of bitterness in his voice, " I might as 
well have gone — and stopped altogether, 
Mignon, for any difference that it would have 
made to you !" 



158 " CHERR Y RIPE /" 

" There you are mistaken /" said Mignon 
quickly, ''for I should miss you very much 
indeed. Ask Prue if I did not stand at the 
gate a whole hour yesterday, watching for 
you, and only came in because a rude young 
man would walk u]^ and down, and kiss his 
hand to me !" 

" And yet, Mignon," he said, " and yet—" 
but he proceeded no farther in his speech. 

The sweetness that is not love, the gentle- 
ness that is not affection, the sense of pleasure 
in a person s society that yet is not sympathy, 
are they not harder to fight against than 
positive indifference, suspicion, and dislike ? 

It is in the capacity we possess to move 
people that we are able to estimate the extent 
of our power over them, and of such power 
over Mignon, Adam knew that he possessed 
not so much as the shadow. 

And about her, too, was that somewhat 
rare quality in a nineteenth-century maiden, a 
"gentle hard-heartedness" that some Arater 
has ascribed to Miss Austen's heroines, and 



FRUIT, 159 



that is more difficult to overcome than the 
aversion of an obstinate, self-willed virago. 

The girl had risen, and was looking down 
on a book before her that had opened at the 
title-page. 

" You have a second name T she exclaimed, 
putting her finger down on the book, ^^ and 
such a pretty one too ! Why do not Flora 
and 3^our father call you by it V 

'' My mother always did," he said ; and 
how different was the tone in which he said 
'^ my mother" to the one in which he habitu- 
ally said " my father !" 

"You loved her ?" said Mignon, gently. 

*^ Aye !" he said, leaning his head on his 
hand, " home was home to me while she 
lived." 

" And afterwards T 

''Afterwards," he said, with a short im- 
patient sigh, " it was — different. My father 
and I had but little in common. Flora and I 
still less ; they were as uncongenial to me as I 
to them — they went their way, I went mine, 



IGO '' CHERRY RIPE f 

and yet we managed to clash pretty well 
sometimes." 

*' Did Flora marry Colin /or loveT said 
Mignon irrelevantly, her eyes wandering to 
the open \vindow, through the curtains of 
which showed a patch of blue sky, set about 
by a frame of scorched Virginia creeper. 

" Why do you ask ?" he said. 

" But did she T persisted Mignon. 

'' Do wives always love their husbands V 
he said, and looked hard at her. Then he 
burst out laughing. ''What a couple of 
Quakers we are, to be sure, with our cross- 
questions ! If you want to know, Mignon, 
you must ask Flora herself — she won't hesi- 
tate to tell you the truth, and as to hurting 
her feelings on any point except her com- 
plexion, it's utterly impossible." 

'' It is very odd," said Mignon, '' but though 
he seems so fond of her, they never go out 
together by any chance. He never proposes, 
•nor does she seem to expect it." 

*' Colin is a wise man," said Adam, " and 



FRUIT. IGl 



perhaps when you have been out once or 
twice with Madam Flora, you will the better 
understand why he permits her to take her 
airings alone." 

'' But what does she do T said Mignon, 
thoroughly puzzled. 

'' What does she not do?" he said with much 
disgust. '' Well, Mignon, she has asked you 
again and again to drive to town with her, 
and by my desire you have each time refused, 
but the next time she asks you to do so — go ! 
And if you ever want to go with her a second 
time, then I am very much mistaken." 

" One sees a great many people when one 
goes to town T she said. 

" A great many." 

" One stands a good chance of meeting the 
people one wishes to see T 

"• No, not a very good one ; it is a big place, 



Mignon." 

She was standing directly before liim ; slie 
had put her hands behind her back, and was 
regarding him veiy thoughtfully, 

VOL. II. .;() 



162 ''CHERRY RIPEr 

Some emotion was working in her mind, 
and had brought a faint colour to her cheek ; 
a question trembled in her eyes and seemed to 
seek the answer in his ; unconsciously he put 
out his hand and drew her down to his 
knee. 

" Do you think that I should be likely to 
run uy) against hmi there ?" she said. 

He started up, setting her on the ground, 
his face chans^'ed from the warmth of flesh and 
blood, to rigidity of steel as he said, ''Of 
whom are you speaking T 

" Of Mr. E-ideout," she said, looking sur- 
prised and rather out of breath ; "of whom 
else should I speak T 

" There are other men in the world,'* said 
Adam ; " why cannot you call him by his 
name V 

" Because," she said with conviction, "some- 
how he always has been — always will be — 
him to me ! You see he was the first person 
who ever fell in love with me, he wrote me 
my first love letter — and altogether I really 



FRUIT. 163 



think that if T hve to be a hundred, he will 
always be — Ifiim /" 

Had the air suddenly grown stifling, or was 
the mere touch of Mignon's gown too irri- 
tating to be borne, that Adam turned abruptly, 
and going to the open casement, leaned far 
out into the garden air ? 

"" I am nearly positive," she went on, '' that 
he told me that he was living near here, that 
he was constantly in and out of Lilytown — 
and if so he is sure to come back sooner or 
later, and we are bound to meet him, are we 
not, somewhere or other ?" 

No reply. 

'' Though I should think it was most likely 
that if he were passing this way, he would 
come in and see us ?" 

Adam left the window, turned and faced 
her. 

" And does your happiness depend on your- 
meeting this man again ?" he said sternly ; " do 
you look forward to such a meeting with feel- 
ings of interest and pleasure ?" 

30—2 



164 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

" I look forward to seeing him so much," 
she said vehemently, *' that if I thought I was 
going to see him this very minute I should 
jum-p for joy. There is no one on earth (save 
her) that I so Jomj to see as I do to see 
him !" 

'' And you say this to me," he said in an 
intensely low, clear voice — " to me. . . .'" 

" And to Avhom then should I say it l)ut 
to you ?" said the girl gently. 

'' Tell it to the winds — to Flora — whom 
you will — but bring me no more of your con- 
fidences ; I will have none of them. Do you 
hear me, Mignon % I will have none of 
them I" 

His clenched fist came down with a crash 
on the table by which he stood. 

She looked at him with a sudden fear and 
wonder in her blue eyes. 

*' And if I may not come to you with my 
hopes, and thoughts, and fears," she said with 
a certain sweet and simple dignity, *' then 
there is no one else to whom it is meet that I 



FRUIT. 165 



should go, for it is not to Flora, no, indeed, 
that I should speak of such matters. And I 
will not trouble you again, nor vex you with 
my troubles and desires, you, who have been 
so good and kind to me always. ..." 

Her voice ceased in a little sob, then she 
turned and went quietly away, and all the 
sunHght and sweetness of the summer day 
seemed to merge themselves in her garments 
and go out with her through the oj^en door, 
leaving the man who stood in the midst of 
his room looking very cold, and j^ale and 
weary, as one who in the battle of life flags 
suddenly, and weary of the rout, feels that he 
has no longer heart or vigour to continue the 
A\ ar with any hope of success. 





CHAPTER IX. 

" If you cannot inspire a woman with love of you, fill 
lier aliove the brim with love of herself; all that runs 
over will be yours." 

BEG your pardon," said Flora, 
" but I have knocked three times; 
and — have you and Adam been 
qvarrdling?" she added abruptly as, ad- 
vancing, she caught sight of Mignon sitting 
like Niobe in grief, with tears splashing 
heavily down upon her clasped hands. 

" No," said Mignon, dashing her tears away 
and sitting erect, " we have not been quarrel- 
ling." Her right hand instinctively tightened 
on that oft-perused, closely-guarded letter of 
Miss Sorel's that now told a flattering tale of 



FRUIT, 1G7 



love and hope, and now one of utter despair 
.and desolation. 

''It is rather early days to begin," said 
Flora ; '' so far as I can remember Colin and 
I were perfect turtle-doves for the first month 
we were married — though to be sure/' she 
added meditatively, as she sank into an easy- 
chair, "- we have foug^ht without intermission 
ever since ! It is always a great mistake to 
cry," she went on with conviction ; '' to get 
into a rage is not half so disfiguring to one's 
appearance, and answers the purpose just as 
well 1" 

'' But," cried Mignon, '' we have not been 
■quarrelling — I have not even seen Adam 

since breakfast, and " 

"- Then have you been indulging in senti- 
mental poetry, or are you a prey to melan- 
choly T said Flora. '' If the latter, I can 
tell you of an excellent cure I saw in a book 
for it the other day : ' It is no small remedy to 
cure melancholj/, to nib your body all over ivith 
.nettles,' I can't say I liave evci- tried it, 



168 '' chi:rry ripe f 



but 1 inaku y(ju a present of the sugges- 
tion I" 

Flora liad risen and was surveying her- 
self froiJi head to foot in a swinj^-t^lass Avitli 
sincere admiration, and indeed it must be con- 
fessed that Flora in out-of-door attire was 
every whit as fine a woman as Flora in a 
white morning cap and gown ; the only pity 
was that she struck one as being almost to(y 
line, one felt a sensation as of catching one's 
breath in the effort to get her all into one's 
eye at once. 

Some persons have a distinct personality 
of their own, one picks them out instinctively 
from the ruck of breathing automata by Avhicli 
one finds oneself surrounded in all places ; we 
are conscious of the presence of the otliers, but 
we do not look at or observe them, whereas 
tt> those who distinctly impress themselves 
upon us ^^ par sons y we give our full and criti- 
cal attention. 

Now Flora's personality was \ ery great — 
Mignon could have found it in her heart ta 



FRUIT. 16i> 



wish there were less of it, as she sat looking^ 
at her sister-in-law, and wondering how it was 
that though other women wore oddly-shaped 
head-gear, and curiously blended colours, they 
never contrived to look half as remarkable as 
she did. 

'' I am not quite sure," said Flora, taking up 
a liand-glass, and surveying herself with grave 
deliberation, " wliether this shade of tea-rose is 
not rather too deep for my complexion. Of 
course it's all very well for those whitey- 
brown women who can't supply any colour 
themselves, but when one has a skin like a 
peach, why one is obliged to be careful !" 

Flora had long ago come to regard Mignon 
as a little, harmless, pretty schoolgirl, without 
an idea in her head, or even the sense to 
observe Avhen she (Flora) made a fool of her- 
self. 

*' It is very odd," said that young matron, 
as she slowly revolved before tlie present- 
ment of her cliarms, "■ but wear Avhat I will^ 
people stare at me when I go out as if they 



170 ''CHERRY RlPIZf 

had never seen a woman in all their Hves 
before ! It used to make Colin furious, he 
a,ctually had the impertinence to declare that 
it was ray fault ; but now he goes his way, and 
I mine, and if we were to take a drive to- 
gether, I am sure we should both feel as if 
the world were coming to an end !" 

'^And where is he this afternoon?" said 
Mignon, rousing herself with a great effort. 

" Gone to town with Taffy and Colin the 
Younger," said Flora. '' But come !" she 
added, walkincr brisklv to the window, and 
lifting the blind, '' put on your hat and cloak, 
for if Ave dawdle about in this fjishion we shall 
never get out to-day." 

"But I am not going out," said ^lignon, 
Avho had by this time put away her letter and 
dried her eyes. 

" But indeed you are !" said Flora. ** Why 
I do believe," she added suddenly, " that 
Simon Pure is going to town himself, for he 
has got on a respectable hat, ^nd his nether 
garments dimly suggest a wedding ! So 



FRUIT. 171 



you liavc been quarrelling," she said, turning 
sharply round on Mignon, '' and he is striding 
away, 

" ' All in his Sunday best,' 

to sue for a divorce or catch the tidal-boat 
from Folkestone ! My dear, I know his Httlo 
ways, and there is — there certainly is — (oi- 
can it be merely the unusual elegance of his 
coat ?) an unutterable somethmg about his 
back that speaks volumes !" 

A rustling of petticoats, a scramble of feet, 
the blind lifted a few inches higher, and 
Mignon, with an odd and unaccountable sink- 
ing at her heart, was also regarding the 
unusual spectacle of Adam in perfectly ortho- 
dox attire, disappearing in the distance. 

"• I wonder where he is going V she said, 
dropping the blind and looking at Flora 
anxiously ; ''he scarcely ever goes out in the 
afternoon " 

''So he did not tell you he was going 
out," said Flora calmly, " I thought as mucli. 



172 ''CHERRY RIPE 



Well — take iny advice, iny dear, don't stand 
any nonsense Avitli liini — bring hiin down 
on his marrow- bones, and, for you're quite 
pretty enough, keep him there ! When 
I married," she continued, returning to the 
contemplation of lier charms, " I made ujv 
my mind never to yield a point, whether I 
was right or wrong, particularly if I were 
wrong, and I never did ! It is only a question 
of pull devil, pull baker, and whichever pulls 
hardest and lonofest, wins !" 

" Poor Colin !" thouHit Mionun with a sifjh. 

" Here is your hat," said Flora, who had 
fallen to rummacrino- amono- various band- 
boxes. " My dear, why do all your garments 
look as if they came out of Arcadia I How 
on earth you contrive to look such a piece of 
innocence I can't imagine; I'm sure 7 did not 
at your age !' 

Mignon, glancing across at her sister-in- 
law, could not find it easy to. suppose that at 
any time her looks could ha^•o erred on the 
side of innocence. 



FRUIT, i7:» 



'' Shall I go ?" said the girl doubtfully, half 
to herself, half to Flora. 

Five minutes ago the visit to town had 
been instantly negatived. Now she hesi- 
tated ; what had happened in the interval to 
work the chano^e in her mind ? 

"■ Of course you Avill !" said Flora ; "as 
that husband of yours has gone out himself 
he can't possibly object to your going, or 
want you for this, that, or the other, as he 
generally does !" 

No, indeed, it was rarely enougli that 
Adam ever wanted her for anvthinof now, 
thought Mignon, as she took up her gloves 
and followed Flora downstairs. 

Without, Mr. Montrose's men-servants were 
simmering in the sun with patient disgust, 
while Mr. Montrose's horses were champing 
their bits and pawing the gravel in a fury of 
impatience to be gone. 

Whatever might be the quality of the old 
gentleman's wits, his taste in horseflesh was 
unimpeachable, and no tightly bearing-reined 



174 ''CHERRY RIPE f 

showy screw ever disgraced the respectability 
of his family chariot. 

''After all," said Flora, as they rolled 
away, *' it was very foolish of me to come out 
this broiling afternoon," she moved her pale 
2:>ink parasol a few inches and glanced up at 
the blazing sun overhead, ^' and very kind of 
you, I am sure, to accompany me !" 

Mignon did not reply ; she was wondering 
whether Adam had made up his mind to go 
out before or after Flora had appeared. 

Her speculations w^ere, however, cut short 
by the discovery that to go out with Mrs. 
Dundas was to assist at a- raree show, to 
which all comers were welcome, and no one 
paid a penny for the treat. 

For every head to turn as on a pivot as she 
passed, for the stolid faces of passers-by to 
rapidly change from indifference to an open- 
eyed and wondering regard, na}^, for the very 
carters on their perches to remove their pipes 
the better to favour Flora with a broad and 
familiar stare, surely there must be something 



FRUIT. 175 



hopelessly wrong somewhere, or did all \Yomen 
of quality and fashion conduct themselves 
thus when they went abroad ? 

" It really is very singular," said Flora, 
with much, complacency; '^but the way 
people ivill stare at me is perfectly ridi- 
culous ! Now do you know " (she j^aused to 
j^ursue with her eyes and wrest from a man 
who was passing, a glance of bold admiration), 
'•'that although you are very pretty in your 
way, yet for one person who looks at you 
there are twenty who look at me ?" 

" I dare say !" said Mignon, smiling in 
spite of her heavy heart. 

" It was always the same," said Flora, j^en- 
sively. '' Colin declares that it is because I 
stare about, but other women stare about 
enough, goodness knows, and nobody looks 
at them.'' 

And she spread out her plump hand with 
a slightly theatrical gesture, that made 
Mignon, scarcely knowing why, shrink 
farther back into her corner. 



176 " CHERR V RIPE /' 

At that moment a man in a mail pliat'ton, 
who had been passing and re- passing the 
carriage for some minutes, apparently deem- 
ino- the free and easy gesture a sign of en- 
couragement, turned slowly round and looked 
at Flora with the covert smile, that from a 
strangfer is so deliberate an insult (if she did 
but know it) to the woman who has pro- 
voked it. 

'' People are so ill-natured in this world," 
said Flora, a momentary flicker in her eyes 
betraying that she had accepted, not repelled 
the impertinence ; '^ would you believe there 
are actually people who call me — fast ? And 
if there is one thing on earth more than 
another that I have a horror of," she added 
piously, ''it is a frisky matron !" 

It is a peculiarity worth observing in 
human nature, that having taken mentiil 
photographs of ourselves, the result should 
.always be the exact reverse (^f what we 
.aj^pear to our friends. 

" Did you see that ?" suddenly exclaimed 



FRUIT. 177 



Flora, laughing heartily. " A man on a cart 
was so engaged in staring at me, that he 
actually /e// off\ns> seat !" 

" Did he T said Mignon, her pale cheeks 
growing scarlet, glancing apprehensively at 
the grey backs of the coachman and footman 
before her. Verily we should pay good 
wages to our servants, who, however flagrantly 
we may sin or misconduct ourselves, dare not 
treat us with anything but absolute respect ! 
When they trip and fall, their shrift is apt to 
be short indeed. 

As they neared town, the fun grew fast 
and furious. Flora's form seemed to grow 
larger and more striking, she sat erect, her 
eyes darting hither and thither, missing not 
one glance of admiration, from the whip who 
tooled his four-in-hand by, to the hurdy-gurdy 
man with a monkey, who dared to lift his 
eyes to hers with as bold an appreciation of 
her beauty as the other. A fine, free woman 
is fine and free for prince and peasant alike, 
and the latter is in no way impressed by the 

VOL. II. 31 



178 " CHERR Y RIPE /" 



sober respectability of her servants or the 
irreproachable character of her equipage ; she 
may be a duchess for all he knows or cares, 
her levity brings her down to his own level. 

" The park," said Flora, as the footman 
turned and touched his hat for orders. 

'' Not that there will be a soul there," she 
added to Mignon ; " how can you expect 
people to remain in town the last week in 
July, when they have a chance of getting out 
of it ? If there is one thing on earth I made 
a mistake in," she went on with conviction, 
" it was in marrying — Colin ! Boxed up in 
the Highlands for three j^arts of the year, 
with a visit to his frumpish old mother in 
Piccadilly, in June, a month with papa in 
July and August, these, including a visit to 
Ireland in the winter, are all the amusements 
I get ; and really, except the winter trip, 
there's not an ounce of fun to be got out of 
the whole twelve months ! It all comes," she 
continued impressively, " of marrying a man 
who has not come into the title and estates. 



FRUIT. 179 



and ^^4lo has an old father who literally seems 
to intend to live for ever ; and until Sir 
Peter dies, we have nothing, absolutely 
nothing^ to make life bearable !" 

They were by now in the park, and though, 
according to the shibboleth talked by the 
fools of fashion, there mio;ht not be a soul 
present, still there were a good many bodies 
riding, driving, and walking about, who did 
not seem to find the lack of the spiritual 
essence before alluded to, to trouble them in 
the least. 

It was all new to Mignon, and from be- 
neath her white sun-shade she looked about 
her with eager, curious interest. 

There were men in the company of their 
wives looking bored and extinguished, men 
acting the part of cavalier i servcnti, looking 
alert and happy ; the right Jill with the 
wrono^ Jack, the rio^ht Jack with the wroncr 
Jill ; here and there a pair of lovers properly 
matched, the man having that contented air 
which is his nearest approach to happiness in 

Gl— 2 



180 

public, the girl pervaded with that ineffable 
air of hieii ctre that nothing short of the right 
man in the right place ever produces ; women 
who were pretty by nature, and ridiculous by 
fashion ; women who spent half their lives in 
trying to persuade the world that they were 
beautiful, and who had all the tastes of 
pretty women, Avith none of the means of 
gratifying them ; and who could not be made 
to understand that beauty does not consist in 
a careful arrano-ement of the hair or deft 

o 

application of paint, but is something grand, 
simple, harmonious, that lies in the curve of 
a lip, the glance of an eye, the moulding of a 
cheek, and is no acquired gift, but a birthright 
from Heaven. 

But if Mignon was anuised, so was not 
Flora. The carriage had been drawn up 
under the trees, and as the minutes wunt by 
and the stream of carriages on the one side, 
of people on the other, iloweil slowly past, 
she grew more and more impatient, her line 
colour o-rew tiner still, her roving glance 



FRUIT. 181 



flitted incessantly from one to the other of 
the passing faces. Now and again a hat was 
raised to lier, but the owner of the same, 
after a more or less admiring glance at her 
blooming countenance, invariably passed 
on. 

Flora Dundas might be a very lovely and 
charming woman to flirt with at home, or on 
the quiet, but in public — no, thank you ! 
She had an awkward knack of attracting 
general attention to herself, of conducting her 
flirtations in the broadest light of day, so 
tha,t all who ran might read, and men as a 
rule prefer a little secrecy about the matter, 
and are far oftener found faithful to the plain 
married woman, whose behaviour is irre- 
proachable abroad, than to the im])rudent 
beauty who has thrown the challenge down 
to society, with a foolhardy defiance that, 
by some curious process of reasoning, she 
justifies by the name of courage. 

In vain Flora bowed with chai-miug cm- 
pressemrnt, in vain she threw arcliest luvita- 



182 ''CHERRY RIPE f 

tion into her eyes, the carriage in which she 
sat remained unbesieged, while those of in- 
finitely less attractive women w^ere sur- 
rounded. Her gay smiles began to fade, the 
corners of her lips to fall, she was indeed in- 
tensely conscious of looking that shorn and 
incomplete splendour, a handsome Avoman. 
from whom the indispensable adjunct, man, 
was missing. 

Nevertheless there was balm to be found in 
Gilead, when, by-and-by, a languid voice 
murmured, "■ How d'ye do, Mrs. Dundas T 
into the back of Flora's pink bonnet, and 
turning with instantly - recovered good- 
humour, she found herself face to face Avith 
one of those frock-coated, tight-booted, eye- 
glassed gentlemen whose object in life apj^ears 
to be to prove how contemptible and worth- 
less a creature man can be when he has 
nothing to occupy either his mind or his 
hands. 

" How do you do ?" said Flora with great 
animation, '' and where on earth do you: 



FRUIT, 183 



spring from ? Why, I have not seen you 
since — since " 

'' Lady Waterdale's garden-party," he said, 
taking her hand and gently squeezing it, 
while his languid glance dwelt on her face as 
though, on the whole, he rather admired, and 
liked looking at it. Rather, not much, for 
this person's manner gave one the impression 
that it would be absolute death to him to be 
in earnest about anything. 

'' Mr. Colquhon — my sister, Mrs. Mon- 
trose," said Flora, turning to Mignon, and 
with faint reluctance Mr. Colquhon withdrew 
his gaze from the one occupant of the carriage 
to the other. 

There is that in every woman's eyes which 
will instantly determine a man's glance either 
in the direction of respect or freedom. It is 
no more than the work of a moment, yet the 
woman's place in the man's estimation is then 
fixed for ever. 

Thus Mr. Colquhon, as he raised his hat 
to Mignon, became all at once aware that he 



184 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

was in the presence of some one altogether 
different from, and by no means to be con- 
founded with, Flora. 

"' Is your husband here T he said to the 
latter, his tone changing, his familiar, loung- 
ing attitude insensibly becoming more re- 
spectful. 

Flora stared at him for a moment in 
silence. Was the man mad ? Could any 
past or present admirer commit a more 
glaring solecism than to make inquiries after 
the lawful lord and master of one who her- 
self totally ignored him ? 

" I believe he is very well," she said with 
a slight shrug of the shoulders, and then was 
piqued to discover that Mr. Colquhon ^^as 
not listening for her reply, or indeed looking 
at her at all, but at Mignon. 

He leaned over Mrs. Dundas. '' Miss 
Montrose surely T he said in a very low 
voice, " not Mrs. T 

"- She is my brother's wife," said Flora 
coldly. 



FRUIT, 185 



"■ How d'ye do, Mrs. Diindas % How d've 
do, Colquhon T 

And another dandy, even more fearfully 
and wonderfully made by his tailor than the 
man he addressed, paused to smirk, and bow, 
and murmur his little nothings by the side of 
Flora's landau. 

Flora was now in her element, coquetting, 
smiling, ogling, making herself, in short, as 
detestable as a woman in whom vanity has 
obliterated all traces of good breeding, pos- 
sibly can. 

In all this mirth Mignon took no j^art. 
Almost hidden beneath her white umbrella, 
she watched the passers-by, and dreamed her 
dreams undisturbed, and the two men, find- 
ing it imjDossible to w^in one look from those 
misty, exquisite blue eyes, devoted themselves 
to Flora and her follies, laughing loud and 
long at her sallies with the laughter that is 
not with the person who provokes it, but 
.against him. 

It was deplorable to see this woman, en- 



186 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



dowed with more than averaofe inteUiorence. 
shrewd, well-read, and with an excellent 
notion of her world and its manners, be- 
come, so soon as her inordinate vanity and 
greed of admiration were called into play, 
a butt for the derision of all who beheld 
her. 

'' There is Colin !" exclaimed Mio^non sud- 
denly, feeling the sight of Colin's ugly honest 
countenance to be a refreshing one, and wish- 
ing with all her heart that she could pluck up 
enough spirit to jump out of the carnage and 
ask him to take care of her, with Taffy and 
his brother. 

"■ Is that you, Colin ?" said Flora in her 
loud, clear voice, a voice that set the passers- 
by turning round to see from whom it pro- 
ceeded. '' Come here, I want you." 

At hearing himself addressed by his wife 
he started, winced visibly, then raised his 
hat, nodded, and jDassed on. 

He had no taste for the role of moyi com- 
plaiscmtj and his wife's conduct in public had 



FRUIT. 187 



an unfortunate knack of making him appear 
to fill the character whether he would or 
no. 

" Upon my word !" said Flora, reddening, 
and biting her lips as she caught a covert 
smile upon the faces of the two men beside 
her. 

'' How is Mrs. Crawley's husband ?" Lord 
Steyne sometimes used to inquire of the im- 
mortal Becky. 

It spoke something for Colin's manliness of 
character, that in spite of all that notorious 
flirt Flora Dundas might do^ he w^as not known 
in society as Mrs. Dundas's husband. 

" It is quite a family gathering, I am sure," 
said Flora, sarcastically. " Is not that " 
(turning to Mignon) '' your amiable spouse, 
yonder T 

Mignon looked up quickly; yes, sure 
enough, at a little distance, and apparently 
watching her intently, was Adam. He too, 
w^hen he found himself observed, waved his 
hand and disappeared in the crowd, his great 



188 ''CHERRY RIPE 



stature marking him out to her eyes for some 
distance. 

There came into her face so lovely a rush 
of colour, into her eyes so proud yet Avistful 
a regard, that Mr. Colquhon, after duly noting 
these signs, turned and looked about him for 
their cause, with true masculine presumption 
concluding that they must be caused by one 
of his own sex. 

'' Is it possible ?" suddenly exclaimed Flora 
in tones of intense excitement, her brilliant 
colour paling a little, her breath coming and 
going quickly, '^ yes — no — ijes — it really is^' 
and regardless of the sun s scorching rays, 
she leaned eagerly forward to look at some one 
wdio was advancing slowly along the gravel 
walk. 

Both men turned to stare ; Mignon, catch- 
ing something of Flora's excitement, also bent 
forward and beheld — Philip La Mert. 

Haggard, ill-dressed, worn, strangely out 
of place in this arena of frivolity and foshion, 
brought hither by no thought of distraction 



FRUIT. IS^* 



or amusement, but seeking here, as in other 
places, for that which he feared to find, loath- 
ing the search that in all its hideous length 
and breadth he was compelled to 2:)rosecute, 
a shadow indeed of the handsome, devil- 
may-care fellow who had shaken Prue into 
bringing Mignon her first love-letter not twa 
months ago. 

" He does not see me," cried Flora breath- 
lessly, too taken up Avith herself to see how' 
the girl by her side Avas gazing at him with 
flushed cheeks, and her soul in her eyes, only 
prevented from uttering his name aloud by a 
sudden shyness, and almost fear that his looks 
induced in her. 

But he saw neither her nor Flora, his gaze 
was bent beyond them both, bent on a person 
who seemed to have for him as great a fasci- 
nation as he had for them. 

Involuntarily Flora and Mignon turned to 
see what it was that he regarded, the two men 
turned also, and as they looked, made up their 
mouths into that whistle which is a man's 



190 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

invariable method of showing surprise or 
concern, and to which the fair sex has no 
equivalent. 

A block in the carriages had occurred, and 
drawn up so close to Mr. Montrose's that 
Flora might have put out her hand to touch 
its sole occupant, was a Victoria, in which 
was seated a woman whose face, manner, and 
costume were as irreproachably faultless as 
her equipage and horses. 

Cold, chaste, pure-looking as the snowdrops 
that rested on her pale hair, she was the very 
impersonation of chilly innocence, of passion- 
less perfection, and a greater contrast to the 
man whose eyes at that moment met her own 
could not well be conceived. It was as it 
should be — he was the sinner, she the sinned 
against ; and as she looked, there da\\Tied 
slowly on her lips a faint and haughty smile 
of triumph. 

It was the work of a moment, then the 
carriage moved on, Philip La Mert had passed 
on his way, and. 



FRUIT, 191 



"" Who was that woman T cried Mi^non 
breathlessly, something in that fair, cold face, 
that transient yet cruel regard, impressing 
her so strangely, that she did not even note 
the disappearance of the man whom she had 
so ardently longed to see again. 

" That," said Flora, drawing a deep breath, 
''was — Mrs. LaMert,7io2^ is^ — Miss Dorillon!" 

'' And will be Mrs. Des Voeux before three 
months are out," said Mr. Colquhon, shrug- 
ging his shoulders, adding sotto voce and with 
more real disgust than one would have be- 
lieved him capable of entertaining, ^'Demrned 
bad taste on her part to show so soon after 
the esclandre. I really couldn't have believed 
it of a woman whose taste in dress and every- 
thing was always so good, while as to La 
Mert — Que diable allait il /aire dans cette 
yaUre T 




■tj^,^—^'' 



'""^"^^H^M^^^^^ 







CHAPTER X. 

"Good name in man and woman . . . . 
Is the immediate jewel of their soul>." 




iHE sensation of the afternoon wa» 
over. 

The shglit confused murmur that 
had passed from carriage to carriage, and from 
Hp to Hp of the circulating crowd at the- 
spectacle of the meeting between the lately 
divorced husband and wife, had ceased, and 
as the lady passed on her way, the gentleman 
on his, a quick fire of exclamation, question 
and answer, ensued on all sides, to which 
Miixnon listened with chill hands and throb- 
bins: heart, lonoin^r, with an intensitv that 



FRUIT, 193 



was almost a spoken prayer, to see him re- 
ifcm'ning, to behold in his eyes the recognition 
for her that they had but a moment ago 
accorded to the handsome, cold-faced woman, 
whom she instinctively, and without either 
rhyme or reason, hated. 

Other people, too, Avere on the look-out for 
Philip's return. Always a man of note, one 
upon whom men of fashion in vain strove to 
model themselves, and at whose glance the 
proudest woman melted, he had by recent 
events become more notorious still, and his 
sudden re-a23pearance in a well-known haunt 
simultaneously with the first "show" in public 
of Miss Dorillon, afforded endless ground of 
discussion, sending an electric shock of excite- 
ment through the languid veins of the person- 
ages, who, in the capacity of on-lookers, had 
^assisted at the comedy from the first act to 
the last. 

For to the majority of tli em it was a comedy, 
no more, the heroine of the i)iece deserving 
special commendation for the address with 

VOL. II. S2 



194 ''CHERRY RTPEf 

which she had played her cards, and the signal 
skill with which she had turned the tables on 
one by whom her own sex had been so often 
and flagrantly wronged. It might have been 
expected that for this reason she would obtain 
the countenance and gratitude of her o^vn sex^ 
but such was by no means the case. 

For women, and curiously enough, often 
the noblest and the best, are irresistibly at- 
tracted by men whose success as heart-breakers 
has passed into a proverb, and far from com- 
prehending all that the name implies, they 
are apt to think that some special virtues and 
excellencies must adorn a man who is so 
universally yielded to and adored. Well, 
occasionally they are right ; there was reason 
in the victories of Julius Cresar and Sir Philip 
Sidney, two great men, to whom women were 
no less dangerous than they themselves were 
to women, and in this perhaps lay the great 
secret of the charm they exercised over the 
fair sex, that the attraction was mutual ; but, 
on the other hand, we arc filled with marvel 



FRUIT. 195 



as we read of the brilliant successes of such 
men as the gross and repulsive Pietro Aretino ; 
the hideously deformed and ribald Scarron ; 
of the reckless dare-devil soldier Trenck, who, 
in spite of ugliness of the most positive kind, 
was as splendidly successful in every assault 
of love as of arms ; of the infamous John 
Wilkes, at once the most frightful and disso- 
lute man in England ; or of Marshal de 
Richelieu, over whom that famous duel be- 
tween Mesdames de Polisfnac and de Nesle 
was fouo^ht in the Bois de Boulos^ne, and for 
whom those lovely young Princesses de Charo- 
lais and de Valois pulled caps, and intrigued 
and sacrificed themselves, to be rewarded (as 
w^as his way of rewarding all the women who 
so fondly and truly loved him) when the 
time for serving him had gone by, with abso- 
lute indifference and nesrlect. 

Philip La Mert was neither a Julius Caesar 
nor a Scarron ; his vices and virtues were 
originally pretty evenly balanced, but as each 
ran into excess, liis moral nature had become 



li)G ''CHERRY RIPE 



somethin:^ of* a quagniiru from whence all 
distinguifshiiig- landmarks had aj^parently 
vanished. 

Flora, in the midst of ejaculations, sur- 
mises, and many cranings of her neck in 
search of the returning form of Philip, was 
interrupted by Mignon, who, leaning forward, 
said in tones of intense anxiety : ^* Do you 
think that Mr. Hideout will come back T 

''Mr. Rideout!" repeated Flora, ''why, 
who on earth do you mean, child ? I don't 

know any Mr. Rideout " 

" But that ^^ as he/*' said Mignon, rather 
impatiently ; " he i)assed just now, and you 

told me that lady was his- -his wife, and " 

" That was Mr. La Mert," said Flora ; 
" but how on earth do you come to know 
anything about him'f she added quickly; 
then, in the same breath, " Oh ! Adam has 
told you about him of course ! No, my dear, 
I do not think lu^ is coming back ; I am afraid 
there is no such luck. If it had not been for 
that horrid woman passing just when she did, 



FRUIT. 197 



he could not have helped seeing me, and I 
should have been able to introduce you to the 
most charming man in town 1" 

Introduce her ! Mignon grew first red, 
then pale, as Flora spoke, but as the latter 
turned to Mr. Colquhon, the moment for 
acknowledging her previous acquaintance 
with Philip passed by, and somehow there 
never afterwards seemed to come to her an 
opportunity of saying : '' He was my lover 
once, and asked me to marry him." 

The moment was lost, never to be regained, 
although the tacit deceit, if such it might be 
called, would be better described as part of 
that intense shrinking from the betrayal to 
Flora of any portion of her inner life, that 
had prevented her ever uttering the name of 
Muriel to her sister-in-law, much less can- 
^•assing the hopes and fears that made her 
life one April day of alternate storm and 
sunshine. 

It is often but a triHe that dutermincs 
a man's destiny, it is often but a slight 



198 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

puerile cause that separates two friends and 
lovers, 

" It is the little rift within the lute 
That by-and-by will make the music mute, 
And ever widening, slowly silence all;" 

and in the days that came after, it seemed to 
more than one, that if Mignon, hardening 
herself against all fanciful, foolish scruples, 
had told her sister's story and her own to 
Flora, the end would not have been what it 
was .... She did not again seek to engage 
Flora's attention. She sat quite still, a deadly 
feeling of disappointment that was almost 
despair settling slowly round her heart. At 
sight of Philip, a sudden joy, a breathless 
gladness, a sensation as of one who comes 
face to face with a thing longed for yet totally 
unexpected, had possessed her with a vehe- 
mence that left her no power of speech, else 
had she called upon him by name, heedless of 
all save that once more she found herself in 
his presence. Then, some fascination drawing 
her eyes to the woman whose gaze he was 



FRUIT. 199 



returning, her attention had become fixed, 
and when she turned with a start in search of 
him, he had disappeared. 

In vain Phihp La Mert's numerous ac- 
vquaintances lounged, and watched, and 
waited ; he did not return. Neither was 
Miss Dorillon again visible, thereby severely 
disappointing those many dear friends who 
had barely caught a glimpse of her in passing, 
and who were naturally anxious to see how 
she looked under her present peculiar circum- 
stances. It is the instinct of a man, when a 
woman is suffering acute shame or pain of 
mind, to avert his eyes from her; it is dis- 
agreeable, even painful to him to witness it, 
no matter how thoroughly she may have 
brought her punishment upon herself: the 
impulse of a sister woman is in a totally 
opposite direction. A vivisectionist is cruel 
in the interests of science ; the pangs which 
he inflicts will be the means of saving count- 
less precious human lives in the future, and 
he uses his scalpel, not out of wantonness, or 



200 ''CHERRY RIPEf 

because his work is agreeable to him, l)ut 
because it is necessaiy. Well, we make a 
great fuss over the poor dumb creatures, but 
who ever heard of a oTeat amtation meeting" 
over the cruelties inflicted upon women by 
women ? An amount of pluck is required bv 
the unsesthetised human victim under tor- 
ture, that is most assuredly not required by 
the brute. 

'^ You are not going home ?" exclaimed 
Mignon, rousing herself as Flora, after taking 
an effusive farewell of her popinjays, and many 
parting wavings of her pink hand, had given 
the order '' home." 

'^But indeed I am," said Flora, setthng 
herself luxuriously into her cornur ; " have 
you forgotten that there is such a thing as 
dinner in the world ? Still, I AM)uld Avill- 
ingly wait half-an-hour longer, dinner not- 
withstanding, if I tliought there was the 
ghost of a chance of seeing Pliilip La Mert 
again !" 

*^ You know him?" said Mi^-nou timidlv.. 



FRUIT. 201' 



" / kiioAv him, my clear ? Of course I do 
— who doesn't ? He ahvays was a well-known, 
man, but now " 

" But what has he done T said Mignon 
eagerly. 

'' If you ask mo what he lias done,'' said 
Flora profoundly, *' I am bound to tell you 
that one volume, ten, twenty, would not con • 
tain the record of his deeds, good, bad, and 
indifferent ; but if you ask me what he has 
not done, why, I could answer you far more 
easily !" 

'' Is it a bad thing," said Mignon, '' to be 
divorced from a wife '?" 

'^ It is a very excellent thing indeed," said 
Flora, " when the wife happens to be a Miss 
Dorillon; but as a rule, my dear, Mrs. Grundy 
does not approve of her maidens efHorescing 
from Misses into Madams, and from Madams 
back again into Misses, and so she is apt to 
look unkindly on the men who are instru- 
mental in these violent changes of designa- 



tion." 



202 " CHERRY RIPE /' 

''But was Miss Dorilloii— wicked ?" said 
Mignon below her breath. 

"" In the eyes of tlie world," said Flora, 
"' she is as white as the snowdrops she wears 
to-day on her bonnet, while Philip La Mei-t 
is the dme damnee to whom it has been her 
unfortunate fate to be linked, but the few 
Avho are behind the scenes, who are acquainted 
with the story from beginning to end, think — 
differently." 

" And what is the story ?" said Mignon 
eagerly; ''he loved her, I suppose, and she 
did not love him, Avas that it T 

For lately, Mignon has been reading more 
than one love story ; moreover she has been 
thinking, and has somehow arrived at a far 
better notion of love and love's requirements, 
than she ever had before. 

" Tf a man's love for a woman may be 
gauged by the pains he is at to win her," 
said Flora, " then Philip loved the fair Una 
very much indeed ; if you measure it by his 
behaviour to her after he has obtained her. 



FRUIT. Ii03 



I should say that he disHked her ex- 
tremely !" 

" But why did he marry her tlien ?" said 
Mignon impetuously, '^ or perhaps," she 
added in a lower key, '' it was out of h'uid- 
ness f " 

" Dear me, no !'' said Flora, '' he was by 
no means a man to sacrifice himself upon the 
altar of duty ! Have you never heard the 
Frenchman's witty definition of nne j^ctssion '< 
—Une grande caprice enflammec par des 
obstacles, and that was precisely Mr. La 
Mert's feeling for her, my dear ; half the so- 
called unselfish, one-sided love in the world is 
pure obstinacy. It makes me laugh when I 
hear people admiring the dogged perseverance 
of a man who persists in his suit to a woman 
who can't bear him ; the good souls think that 
as there is no return, his must be pure dis- 
interested love, but not a l)it of it ! Oftener 
than not he is angry and piqued (and pique 
will drive a man into anything), and because 
he is determine<:l that neither she iKjr the 



204 " CHERRY RIPE /" 

world shall have the laugh against him, and 
if at length his fervour melts her coldness, ten 
to one but as she thaws, he will freeze, re- 
venging himself richly upon her for her pre- 
vious insolence and disdain. A man may, 
and often does, forgive you for breaking his 
heart, but for the wound you have inflicted on 
his vanity ? Never !" 

" Then she did not love him T said 
Mignon. 

"iVo," said Flora, reflectively, ''she most 
certainly did not." 

" It is a long tale," she added, after a short 
pause devoted to the silencing of one or two 
scruples of conscience as to the desirability of 
acquainting this child with the details of so 
unedifying a story as Avas that of Mr. La 
Mert's life. Adam would be furious if he 
knew it, but what did his fury matter to her \ 
And after all, was not this girl a married wo- 
man, and must she not sooner or later become 
acquainted with the backsliding ways of this 
wicked world ? 



FRUIT. 205 



" A oerij long story !" repeated Flora, 
*' thougfh for the matter of that, it is one that 
does not take very long to tell. The saddest 
stories are usually summed up in the fewest 
words !" 

"■ It iH a sad one then T exclaimed Mignon 
involuntarily. 

'' Can you look him in the face and doubt 
it ?" said Flora. " My dear, he is one of 
those mortals upon whom the fairies at birth 
bestow every good gift a mail c[in desire, but 
the queen of the fairies who comes last, angry 
perhaps at the lavish generosity of the others, 
makes him — unlucky ! With advantages in 
his favour that make other men ready to die 
of envy, luck has always gone dead against 
him, and I feel convinced, always will to his 
dying day ! 

"They used to say," she went on, ''that 
he scarcely ever stirred without something 
untoward happening to liim. If he rode a 
race the horse was sure to come to grief; if 
he backed one, it was bound to lose ; he lost a 



20r» ''CHERRY RIPKf 



fortune at cards, and never appeared upon the 
box seat of the coach of his regiment, without 
causing the other men present to tremble for 
their Hves. However, if he was unlucky in 
all else, he was brilliantly successful in one 
thing — Love." 

" And yet you say his wife did not care for 
him T said Mignon quickly. 

'' No, she did not. There the inevitable 
evil genius of his destiny stepped in. I 
should have said that he was brilliantly suc- 
cessful with women up to a certain point — 
beyond it his bad luck asserted itself, and he 
was as unlucky in his relations with women 
as with everything else. 

'' Have you ever read the life of Bums T 
she went on, her colour coming and going, 
" and do you remember the Duchess of Gor- 
don saying that nobody had ever so completely 
carried her off her feet as Kobei*t Burns did ? 
Well, no one ever so comi)letely carried me 
off my feet as Philip La Mert did ! Not that 
he was ever an admirer ol* mine/' she sighed 



FRUIT. 207 



impatiently, '' but I used to meet him Avinter 
after winter in Dublin, and " 

" In Dublin /" repeated Mignon, sitting 
bolt upright, and regarding Flora with breath- 
less eagerness — '^ in Dublin did you say ?" 

" To be sure — why not ?" said Flora, some- 
what impatiently, who hated to be interrupted 
in the midst of what she was saying. 

" Did you know a Mrs. Faulkner ?" said 
Mignon, leaning forward and laying her eager 
hand on Flora's plump arm. 

'^ No," said Flora after a few moments of 
unwilling reflection, " I did not ! One can't 
know everybody in Dublin, you know, and 
very likely she was some old frump, wIkj did 
not go into society T 

" I don't know," said Mignon, trembling, 
'^ but perhaps her daughters, who were nearly 
grown up, did. You are sure that you never 
met them out — or their governess, a Miss 
Brook r 

" Never !" said Flora with calm decision ; 
'^ I feel quite sure that I have never met the 



208 ''CHERRY Rirjif' 

Misses Faulkner or their governess ! Gover- 
nesses and lady-helps are not as a rule met 
Avith in general society, I think ! 

*' However, to continue, it must he — let me 
see — quite four years since I first met Philip 
La Mert in Dublin. He was then the mad- 
dest of all the mad fellows of the — th 
Dragoons then quartered in that city. 

" For some reason or other, perhaps liis 
•extraordinary good looks, his wealth, wit, or 
fascination, he was the rage, and wherever he 
went he was caressed, besieged, spoiled, and 
flattered to an extent that would have turned 
.any other man's head, but which seemed to 
make no impression upon him, for with all 
his faults, and they were pretty numerous, 
Mr. Philip was no coxcomb." 

"" And he was a fiivourite with women, you 
say T said Mignon, sighing. 

"• He had the reputation," said Flora, look- 
ing absently out at the hedgerows all powdered 
and whitened with the same " strange snow" 
i/hat made the carriage-wheels go noiselessly 



FRUIT. *209 



as on velvet, " of never failino' to wi 



in 



any 

woman who Avas beautiful enough to please 
his fastidious taste, and from what I myself 
have seen, I believe rumour in this instance 
to speak no more than the truth. He was 
the terror of every husband or father who 
owned a handsome wife or dauQfhter, and I 
naver shall forget the flutter there used to be 
in the dovecots when Mr. Philip would come 
swaggering into a ball or reception-room, 
very late, with half the beauties in the room 
sitting down because they would not hll up 
their cards till he had taken such dances as 
he pleased ! All the lawful guardians and 
duennas gathering their chickens under their 
wings, and he just throwing his bold eyes 
hither and thither among them, and then it 
was ten to one if he did not walk up to the 
most closely guarded of them all, and carry 
her off from under her husband's very nose, 
for he made no secret of the fact that he 
infinitely preferred married women to girls ! 
It was said," ^he went on, "- that when he 

VOL. II. So 



210 " CHERR y RIPE r 



got raaiTied every husband who o^vned a 
pretty wife, rang a peal of joy-bells on his own 
account ; but if they did they were somewhat 
premature in their rejoicings, for Philip mar- 
ried, was even worse than Philip single." 

'^ And his marriage T said Mignon im- 
patiently, ^' when and how did that happen ? 
and " 

■" My dear," said Flora calmly, '' are you 
aware that it is extremely ill-bred to interrupt 
a person who is telling you a story ? If you 
Avill have a little patience, I shall come to 
that in good time. It was in — let me see — 
the second winter, I think, of my acquaint- 
ance with Philip La Mert, two years and a 
half ago, that something — happened. He fell 
in love, or pretended to do so. Hitherto, it 
had been well known that for all his brilliant 
successes with women, he had never in his 
life had more than a passing fiincy for one, 
and that, in spite of the looseness of his life 
and morals, there was no man living who 
had a keener appreciation of, or reverence 



FRUIT, 211 



for, feminine virtue and purity than he. So 
that when in the winter I mention he was 
found paying his hottest court to Miss 
Dorillon, a cold, heavy blonde, who was by 
some people suspected of being by no means as 
modest as she looked, everybody marvelled, 
firstly at his bad taste, secondly at her in- 
difference, for indifferent she undoubtedly 
Avas, in this respect differing totally from 
every other woman upon whom Mr. Philip 
had ever deigned to cast a favouring eye. 
Some people said, ill-naturedly enough, that 
it was her stupidity that attracted him, that 
his own vitality being so intense, he found in 
her torpidity a welcome rest — and, indeed, 
did not Clive Newcome himself lay down the 
axiom that some women ought to be stupid ? 
' What you call dulness, I call repose,' says 
he. ^ Give me a calm woman, a slow woman, 
a lazy, majestic woman ! . . . . A lively 
woman would be the death of me !' Well, 
there are many such men in the world as Mr. 
«Clive, and upon my word when all is said and 

33—2 



212 ''CHERRY RIPET 



done, I think those dull majestic creatures 
i^et the best of it ! 

" Women professed to wonder at what the 
men could see in Miss Dorillon, but un- 
doubtedly she was handsome in her cold 
passionless way. Not beautiful ; had she 
been so, the question would never have been 
raised, for, my dear, there is a royalty about 
real beauty that the world, spiteful as it is, 
never fails to recognise ; it is like diamonds, 
or talent of any kind, and always commands 
its market, so when you hear people disputing 
hotly about So-and-So's good looks, make up 
your mind that she is handsome, odd, fasci- 
nating or lovable — but really beautiful I — not 
a bit of it. 

" She certainly was the Avhitest creature I 
ever saw ; you could pick her out of a crowd 
of bare-necked women by her snowy shoulders 
alone, but she had no conversation, never 
exerted herself to amuse anybody, and to old, 
young, handsome and ugly men alike, ex- 
hibited a profound indifference, that disgusted 



FRUIT. 213 



,some, j)iquecl others, and of these latter was 
PhiHp La Mert. 

'' Always an aclmker of hlonde women, his 
roving eyes had rested u^ion her w^ith more 
approbation than they usually expressed, but 
when he found that she treated him precisely 
the same as she did the youngest and pertest 
subaltern in his regiment, he was disagreeably 
astonished, he felt his pride to be touched, he 
was by no means used to be beaten in any- 
thing, least of all at a game at which he had 
hitherto so signally distinguished himself, 
and the icy resistance she made him, quickly 
transformed a mere passing admiration into 
an exciting chase that led him farther than 
he ever intended to go, when he began it — 
headstronof, reckless, unluckv fellow ! 

'' Well, as I have said before, the spectacle 
i)f that confirmed flirt, Mr. La Mert, paying 
serious court to that solemn goddess. Miss 
Dorillcn, filled all beholders with amazement. 
Some thought he was amusing himself as 
usual, others that he was now in earnest for 



214 ''CHERRY RIPE P' 



the first time in his hfe ; the women were- 
beside themselves with envy and jealousy, 
and seeing how well coldness seemed to 
succeed with him, were fain to try it them- 
selves, but, my dear, that is the sort of thing 
that must be tried first — not last. 

''As to Miss Dorillon, the most consummate 
coquette living could not have played her 
cards better than she (if her object was to 
win Philip La Mert) ; to all appearance she 
had thoroughly mastered the first and most 
important axiom of a practised flirt : ' First 
attract — then keep cool !' only, as it turned 
out afterwards, her frigidity was not acting at 
all, but good, honest, downright indifference. 
She was a mulish creature without a ray of 
imagination, or surely her heart must have 
been touched by a man who knew how 
to make love as charmingly as did Mr. 
Philip." 

'' But the story," said Mignon, heaving 
just such a little quick short sigh as children 
give when they are told the " crisis " of the 



FRUIT. '^15 



fairy tale is coming, '' the story ! I want to 
know how it all ended !" 

" We shall come to that presently/^ said 
Flora, in a tone of rebuke. " Well, time 
went by, a month, six weeks, and the position 
of affairs between the two remained precisely 
the same as before. The lady had not abated 
\\&Y froideuv in the smallest degree, the gentle- 
man had not advanced an inch, yet showed 
no slightest intention of abandoning his attack 
of the fortress, and of com'se he got mimerci- 
fully chaffed by the men, and was more than 
ever spoiled by those sighing beauties who 
Avould gladly have consoled him for Miss 
Dorillon's insensibility by their own kindness 
had he so permitted them, but he did not. 
And one fine morning Dublin was electrified 
by the news that Mr. La Mert and Mis& 
Dorillon were engaged, and would be married 
very shortly indeed. 

'' It was a nine days' wonder. I don't 
know which fact excited the most astonish- 
ment, that lie should have proposed to her. 



216 ''CHERRY RIPET 

or that she should have accepted him ; only 
the day before she had been as indifferent 
to him as ever — something had happened in 
the interim to make her change her mind — 
but what ? no one could find out. 

'' They appeared everywhere in public to- 
gether, there was now nothing to choose 
between their demeanour, for the one was as 
cool as the other, and many people hopefully 
enough foretold that the match would never 
come off — but it did. 

" With pomp and show, and much 
pageantry and ringing of bells, those two 
were made one, and I am bound to say that 
a handsomer pair than Una and Philip La 
Mert never walked out of a church door 
together. 

" They went away for two months, and 
when they re-appeared, it was plain that if 
they had departed with but little love between 
them, they returned with still less, while the 
hearts of certain of the women \vere ofladdened 
by the discovery that Mr. Philip was quite as 



FRUIT. 217 



ready a lover, and even more delightful an 
one, than he was before. 

'* Well, people blamed him of course, and 
looked upon him as a hopeless black sheep, 
all but a few, who knew that bad as he was, 
in this case he had some excuse for his con- 
•duct. I don't suppose a dozen people knew 
the story, at least not at that time, but I 
happened to be one of them." 

^^ And what was it T cried Mio-non, as 
Flora paused in reflection. 

'' It is not a nice story," said Flora, making 
a face, and looking half repentantly at Mig- 
non's eager eyes and flushed cheeks, "by no 
means one to tell to such a little innocent as 
you, still, as I have begun, I suppose I may 
as well go on. 

" Well, my dear, it seems Mr. Philip had 
not been married a month, when lie oi)ene(l 
by accident a letter addressed to his wife. 
Its contents were such as to make liim search 
amoniif her belonoino-s for others in a like 
handwriting. He found sufficient to ])rove 



218 ''CHERRY RIPE f 

conclusively that he had been 2:)rofoundly 
hoodwinked and deceived Ijy the handsome 
stupid woman he had made his wife. Duly 
set forth in black and white, he discovered 
how she had loved, by no means wisely or 
well, another man, how want of money on 
both sides had been the barrier between them, 
how, two months previously, this man had 
married a woman whom he did not love, and 
how the hasty step on his part had caused 
lier to accept Philip La Mert's offer. Farther, 
how she still madly loved this man, nay, 
had seen him since her marriage, was shortly 
to see him again, for this cold, sluggish 
creature, where her passions were concerned, 
was perfectly reckless, and only by a hair's- 
breadth did the wording of these letters escape 
establishing a charge that would for ever have 
freed her husband from her by law. 

"• It is said that the subject was never 
mentioned between them, that she missed the 
letters and drew her own conclusions, only 
one thino' is certain, that luck ha vino- favoured 



FRUIT. 219 



lier ill this instance, she took excellent care 
never to test it again, and thenceforward 
behaved in so unimpeachable a manner that 
her greatest enemy could not have found a 
single stone to throw at her. 
. *^ Some people said Mr. Philip was not 
very much to be pitied. He had married her 
from motives little less w^orthy than her own, 
but he thought himself extremely ill-used 
(men always do when they find that a woman 
has not brought a triple dower of innocence, 
beauty, and goodness, to meet the dry husks 
that he is graciously pleased to provide), and 
if he had liked her but little before, now 
positively loathed her, and with his character- 
istic promptitude and recklessness, made up 
his mind that as the law gave liun no redress, 
he would comjDel her to invoke it on her own 
behalf, and thereupon (for free of her he 
vowed to be) he ordered his life In such 
fashion that no woman of any pride or self- 
respect could be expected to remain under 
his roof a sin < do dav. 



•220 'CHERRY RIPK 



'' Her family Avere furious, lier friends were 
prodio'al with their l>ity, she herself made no 
sign, uttered no complaint, appeared, fault- 
lessly attired, in public as usual, with perfect 
ease and unconcern, behaved, in short, so like 
a modern Grissel, that by those who did not 
know her, she was regarded as a model of 
wifely long-suffering and forbearance, while 
those who did, speculated in vain as to what 
her tactics mio-ht be. 

" The world in general called her stupid, 
but the world was mistaken, she was a 
very clever woman. She had made herself 
thoroughly acquainted with the law of divorce, 
and knew tliat the remedies of husbands and 
Avives w^ere by no means similar. Could her 
husband have proved her misconduct he could 
at once have obtained a (Hvorce, but were she 
to proceed against liiin slie could obtain no 
more than a judicial separation, under which 
she Avould not be free to marry ao-ain, and 
this would by no means have served her 
*:in({iif so she watched and waited and bided 



FRUIT. 221 



her time, Avith a cat-like persistence and 
patience that must nearly liave driven hinv 
crazy. 

*' It was said that again and again she did 
her utmost to provoke him to strike her, for 
could she once establish a charge of cruelty 
her object was gained, but he never stooped 
so low as that, intensely though he must have 
been irritated by her presence ; and so, foiled 
in this, she quietly sat down and waited until 
such time as it should please him openly to 
desert her. 

'' Meanwhile the wife of the man she loved 
died very suddenly, leaving him rich and 
free. I fancy that under her Spartan cloak 
of indifference the fox was gnawing her vitals 
rather cruelly about this time, but she made 
no sign, received everybody, went everywhere, 
and answered all polite inquiries concerning 
her absent husband with incomparable suavity 
and unconcern, in short, was the wonder of 
one-half of Dublin, while he was the scandal 
of the other. Poor PhiHp ! He was a very 



222 ''CHERRY RIPE f 



black sheep indeed in those days, and all the 
good people groaned, turned up the whites of 
their eyes, and passed him by on the other 
side, though indeed there were fair Samaritans 
and to spare, more than willing to take out 
their twopence of kindness, and that with \)\\\j 
small chance of recompense ! 

" We were in Dublin during the court- 
ship ; w^e were there when the young couple 
returned after the marriage, but soon after- 
wards Colin whisked me off to those detest- 
able Highlands, and the rest of the story I 
got from hearsay, though the facts of the 
case were so simple that they did not admit 
of much exaggeration, one way or the other. 
Mr. Philij), then, after conduct that would 
have worn out the patience of any other 
woman, but w^hich this exemplary creature 
endured with great piety and foiiitude, one 
fine morning resigned his commission (he was 
within six weeks of getting his company), 
and disappeared altogether, but not, it was 
said, alone. It was true that Dolly Folliott 



FRUIT. 223 



disappeared about that time, and though her 
people hushed it up, saying she had gone 
abroad for a time, and so on, nobody beUeved 
them ; she had gone with somebody, but wlio 
that somebody was, no one could find out any 
more than Avho it was that accompanied Mr. 
La Mert. He has been seen or heard of 
from time to time in odd out-of-the-way 
places, and always, strange to say, with the 
same woman, who is, if rumour speaks truth, 
very lovely, and indeed she must be a paragon 
to have made such a man as he — constant ! 
It was actually said that when he should be 
free of his wife that he meant to marry 
the woman, and, indeed," she added, shrug- 
ging her shoulders, ^' he had a noble heart, 
and was generous to a fault, so that it is, 
alas, only too possible that he might 
be guilty of even such a crowning folly as 
that I" 

" You call that a folly T said Mignon, pale 
with trembling lips, " a folly to keep faith 
with a o'cntlc lovimx creature who trusted 



224 " CHERR I ' RIPE /" 



him ? 1 for shame, for shame! You cannot 
mean that !" 

''My clear child," said Flora placidly, "why 
do you attempt to talk about things of which 
you understand nothing ? Mr. La Mert's 
divorce will not make the difference of a rush 
to him ; he will still be welcomed in societ}', 
and free to choose a wife out of one of the 
best famihes in England, but to marry a crea- 
ture like that would simply be social ruin, and 
I should say no one was better aware of the 
fact than he is." 

Mignon did not reply She was re- 
calling his words on that sole occasion of his 
wooino' when he had bade her remember 
always in the days to come how he had loved 
her in spite of all — all, and she understood 
now that he was alluding to that poor girl 
who had loved him, even as it might be 
Muriel had trusted and loved some other 
man .... 

'' I think I have told you all the story," 
said Flora briskly ; " all, that is to say, that 



FRUIT. 225 



is of any consequence. By the way, though, 
I forgot to say that when Mrs. Phihp found 
herself actually deserted by her husband, she 
went back to her mother, and there dwelt in 
the sight of all the world, virtuous, modest, 
resigned, her every action open to the closest 
scrutiny, until the two years had elapsed that, 
as proving unreasonable desertion, alone 
enabled her to sue for a divorce. She last 
month obtained it, and in the eyes of the 
Tvorld is a woman without speck or flaw in 
her moral character, at whom no one, how- 
ever rash, would dare to point the finger 
of calumny. She now figures before us for 
a short time as Miss Dorillon ; as soon as 
decency permits (one is expected to mourn 
rather longer for a husband of whom the law 
has just rid one, than if lie had merely died), 
the curtain will fall on that discreetest and 
most virtuous of young matrons as ]\rrs. Des 
Yoeux. 

**ButMr. PhiHj) — his adventures are by 
IK) means over, or I am mucli mistaken. He 

VOL. II. .;j. 



226" ''CHERRY RIPEf 

is one of those people who seem born for 
no other reason than to distinguish them- 
selves in some unfortunate manner, and to 
whom death itself does not come in the com- 
mon way. 

'' He looked as though things were going 
very wrong with him," shaking her head. 
'^ I never saw any one so fearfully changed. 
I wish I could have spoken to him — though, 
for goodness' sake, child," she added hastily, 
as the carriage rolled swiftly round the plot 
of evergreens opposite Rosemary, and the 
horses drew up before the door with a 
flourish, ^^ don't tell either father or Colin 
that I meditated any such crime, for I 
verily believe that they would consider His 
Satanic Majesty an agreeable, harmless sort 
of companion, compared with the man whose 
history I have just given you !" 





CHAPTER XI. 

Mistress, know yourself ; down on your knees 
And thank heaven fasting for a good man's love." 

.HUE," said Mignon, ^' don't you 
think that if one got married at 
all, it would be better to marry 
somebody that one loved T 
^' Yes, Miss Mignon, I do." 
" And would you consider it a very bad 
thing for a person to run a\\'ay with some- 
body else, if he or she had a wife or 
husband that it was not possible to like or 
7'efipect P" 

" T slioukl think it just about as bad as 
V)ad cnnld be," said Vvnc, in horror ; *' people 

34—2 



228 

as like each other well enough to marry 
ought to stick together as well for worse as 
for better." 

"• But supposing," said Mignon, '' that 
they didn't get married because they liked 
each other — indeed rather the contrary than 
otherwise — why, what then, Prue V 

Somebody who was busying himself with 
a blown-down creeper outside the open 
window, and had perforce heard every word 
of the foregoing conversation, involuntarily 
made a step forward, as though to see what 
expression the speaker's face wore, as she 
asked Prue the question with which her 
speech concluded. 

Instantly checking himself, however, he 
ihrew down the garden implement he held, 
and moved quickly away. 

"■ What Avas that ?" exclaimed Prue, hear- 
ing the sound of retreating footsteps, then, 
advancing to the window, and looking out, 
her face became anxious as she recognised 
in the vanishing personage, Adam. "0, 



FRUIT. 229 



Miss Mignon," she said, turning back, " that 
was the master, and he must have heard 
every word that you said !" 

God forgive the girl if the ungenerous 
thouofht flashed throusrh her mind that he 
was at his old tricks again, listening. She 
had been thinking very often during the 
past Aveeks of those unauthorised peeps over 
the wall to which he had confessed, and it 
was simiificant of some o-rowth in her feel- 
ings, whether of like or of dislike, that such 
should be the case, for until very lately she 
had thought too little of him in any way to 
reflect with heat upon his misdeeds. 

'* And why should I mind if he did hear 
me ?" she said proudly ; ** is he an ogre that 
you should always be saying ' Miss Mignon, 
you must not say tliis, and you must not say 
tliat, for master won't like it V " 

" He's no ogre," said Pruc, " lie's real good. 
There's them as has nasty corners and nooks 
in their hearts out of which a little misty devil 
pops every now and then, and gives you a 



230 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



scare, and there's tliem as seems better and 
better the longer you lives with them, and 
never sui^rises you but with somethini^ 
pleasant ; and master's one of 'em, as you'll 
find out some day. Miss Mignon." 

Long ago Prue had dropped Mignon 's 
matronly prefix, habit proving too strong for 
her. 

" And do you supj^ose I have not found 
that out already T said Mignon ; ^' do you 
suppose that a single day passes that I do not 
tell myself how much I owe him, and what a 
miserable, homeless little wretch I should be 
if he had not taken pity on and married me T 

She concluded her speech with one of those 
old wilful stamps of the foot that had lately 
been so conspicuous by their absence, and 
that Prue had grown to miss rather 
sadly. 

" Eh !" she said, looking in astonishment at 
the girl, " it's not tliat way, dear heart, he'd 
be wishing you to think, to say nothing of its 
not being the truth, Miss Mignon, for don't 



FRUIT, 231 



-we all know as how he married you for pure 
love, and nothing else besides T 

''You don't understand, Prue," said the 
girl, turning aside ; "he asked me because — 
because it was his nature to be good and kind, 
and he pretended to want me very badly that 
I might not feel he was doing me a great 
favour, but he cannot hide from me, no, nor 
from himself, that he is sorry now for what 
he did so hastily, and I — " She threw 
<lown the needlework, and covered her scarlet 
face with both her hands, " I wake up 
-sometimes in the night and blush all over 
when I think it is all my own doing, that if I 
had not called him that evening, probably I 
should never have seen him again ; he would 
not even have thought of such a thing as 
.marrying me !" 

" He thouofht of it lonjx afore that," said 
Prue with decision ; " he've watched you 
growing up this two years and allers meant to 
get you sooner or later. And as to liis being 
sorry, Miss Mignon, why that's a most re- 



232 ''CHERRY RlRKr 

diklous idea ; it ain't prating of love as proves 
it, it's actions, and niaster's good enough at 

" He promised to help me find Ac/*; but do 
you know" — she pressed nearer to the woman, 
looking anxiously at her with lovely, troubled 
eyes — *' that sometimes I almost think that 
it ^vould not trouble him very much if my 
poor love navev came back to me at all f 

Prue, with a strange i^ang at her heart, 
looked back into the wistful, childish face so 
near her own, and said never a word. 

Trouble was beginning to tell upon the 
girl ; constant thought and restless wakeful 
nights were by degrees robbing licr of that 
lovely look of youth that, let folks say what 
they will, is not compensated for by any after 
beauty of expression, intellect, or the chastened 
])eace that is tlic crown of oTcat suffering'. 
Already the softness on brow and lip, the 
nnworn look that is never seen upon the face 
<jf the man or woman who in the battle of 
life has borne the burden and heat of the day^ 



FRUIT, 233 



was fading away, and dark shadows were 
beginning to be apparent beneath the blue 
eyes that two months ago were lustrous with 
health and spirits. 

Her voice, too, had grown starved and thin, 
and in no one respect does the weal or woe of 
the soul and body show so unmistakably as in 
the quality of the voice. The round full 
notes that come straight from the joyous 
heart tell their own tale, even as do those 
others that speak of a life barren and 
destitute of the love and nourishment it 
demands. 

" He seemed to understand," she Avent on, 
thinking aloud. '' That day, that awful, 
never-to-be-forgotten day, I don't think he 
could have been more sorry and distressed if 
it had been his own sister ; and if he had not 
been there to tell me it was not my darling 
I think I should have gone quite mad," — she 
paused, growing rigid, and turning as wliite 
as snow. 

-Oh!" said rnic, wli<» had looked 



234 "'CHERRY RIREf 

thoroughly mystified, ''you mean Mr. Kide- 
out, Miss Mignon { Ah, well ! I don't 
reckon you owe iiiucli thanks to li'nn about 
nothing I Many's the time I've been down 
on my bones in a regler bust of thanks- 
giving that 'twas master you married, not 
him !" 

" He would have helped me to find her," 
said Mignon, starting up restlessly. '' I could 
not tell any one why I did, Avhy I do feel 
that he was interested in Muriel, that he 
knew her, had spoken to her ; how else could 
he have told me that day that . ... it was 
not her T 

Prue shook her head doubtfully, Init made 
no reply. With dismay, the woman had 
beheld the orradual ohano-e in ^Misfnon's atti- 
tude towards this lover wlio had formerly 
pleased her no whit, either in looks or ways, 
while with even e'reater concern she recos^nised 
the relations that existed between the young 
husband and wife, and sorrowfully enough 
foresaw that there was trouble in store for the 



FRUIT, 235 



girl whom she had so fondly believed to be 
safely placed beyond the storm and struggle 
of life. 

It was not for Prue to guess how, gradu- 
ally but surely, Philip La Mei-t had assumed 
in Mio^non's mind the character of a friend to, 
even a deliverer of, Muriel, and how he was 
consequently exalted in the girl's mind (no 
matter how unw^orthy he might be in other 
respects) into a creature who called forth her 
warmest gratitude, while Adam, alas ! was 
fast becoming to her the cold and indifferent 
guardian, who had no sympathy with either 
her love or anxiety for Muriel, and who, 
if he would not actually hold up his hand to 
keep her back, w^ould assuredly not raise it 
to help her. 

And in her heart she said that it was all of 
a piece with the rest of his behaviour, that he 
should have broken his promise of helping to 
find Muriel — though in this she was unjust, 
for what opportunity had as yet offered for 
either of them to do aught but sit (juictly 



23 G ''CHERRY ripe:'' 

down, and wait ? And even as she was 
engrossed by her selfish thoughts and sorrow, 
so perhaps was he by his. Moreover there 
was a reason why the merest allusion to 
Muriel's return should be intolerable to him ; 
more than ever complicated had matters 
become of late, and there were times when he 
felt himself absolutely appalled at the possi- 
bilities of the future. 

" Sometimes I think," said the girl, clasp- 
ing her little hands upon her heart and sighing 
wofully, " tliat after all Miss Sorel was right 
and 1 am wronof, and that she will never come 
])ack : or perhaps she has grown as weary of 
lier life as that poor (jrlsette did, and sorne- 
(chere she is lying cold, and drowned and stitl', 
just like that other. . . . There is scarcely a 
night that I do not wake up with that face 
before me, and then I long with all my lieart 
to see Jouii, who will tell me that 1 am mis- 
taken, that it is not so ; for do you know that 
for a long while he lived in Dublin, and most 
likely saw lier there, and tliat was whv he 



FRUIT. 237 



was able to tell me that what I saw was not 
my darling T 

" Young ladies as has any care for their 
good names isn't likely to see much of Mm',' 
said Prue thoughtlessly, '' leastways I mean, 
Miss Mignon " 

" What do you know of him I should like 
to know," cried Mignon passionately, " that 
you take upon yourself to say he is this or 
that ? To hear people talk one would think 
he was the wickedest man that ever lived, 
instead of being ill-used and deceived just 
like anybody else, for I am sure he looks sad 
and miserable enough to make anij one pity 
him !" 

" He did look very bad when he went away 
from here," said Prue, relenting a little, '^ but 
there, his heart was just as wicked as ever, 
as was easy to tell by the way he ran on 
when — " she paused abruptly. 

" He found me gone," said Mignon. ''But 
what did he say, and was lie unconscious 
long T 



238 ''CHERRY RIPE! 



" He come to himself soon after you went," 
said Prue reluctantly. " What did he say, 
miss ? 'Tvvould be foolisli work to repeat it; 
he was mad and angry, and folks never mean 
what they say when they're like that — I've 
forgot." 

" And did you tell him we had gone to 
Paris ?" persisted Mignon, who had never 
been able to induce Prue to give her a cir- 
cumstantial account of what occurred that 
day after her departure. 

"I? no, mdeed !" said Prue in horror. 

" Then it wan by chance that we met him 
there," said Mignon half aloud, "pure chance 
— though indeed," she added, sighing, ''it was 
a very lucky one, for if we had not, Prue, I 
think I should be where Silas Sorel is now." 

'' Ah ! poor man !" said Prue, shivering, 
*' really them few days after that telegram 
came, was regler battle, murder, and sudden 
death, nothing but horrid things coming one 
a-top of another, and not time to draw breath, 
so to speak, between 'em !" 



FRUIT. 239^ 



" Tell me about Silas," said the girl, draw- 
ing nearer to the woman ; '^ youVe only told 
me about it in fits and starts, and I want to 
hear it right through from beginning to end." 
'' Well, Miss Mignon," said Prue, thread- 
ing her needle with an air of importance, 
*' 'twas about five o'clock in the afternoon, and 
I'd pretty nigh got over the fright Mr. Ride- 
out had 2:ive me, and was havino- a bit of a 
cry in the kitchen, when who should walk 
straight in but Mr. Sorel. 

" He stood looking at me a minute, then 
said : ' So that pair of fools has got married, 
have they X 

" Said I : 'If you mean my master and 
mistress, sir, they have.' 

"" He pulled down the corners of his lips at 
that, and said : ' How was it you didn't go 
with 'em ? T 'spose three simpletons could 
travel about as well as two X 

*' So I said, ' I didn't know as any of us 
was more foolish than our neighbours, and I'd 
only stopped in the house because I didn't 



240 '■ CHERRY RlPhir 

like to leave it to itself (cook being gone and 
all) till he sent somebody in to take charge of 
it.' Not to mention, Miss Mignon, that you'd 
give me most perticler orders to sit down out- 
side the gates (as soon as he'd turned me out) 
and not stir from 'em night and day till you 
come back, in case Miss Muriel should walk 
in unexpected, and find nobody here." 

" Did I really tell you to do that, Prue V 
said Mignon, smiling in spite of herself 

'' You did, Miss Mignon, and though I'd 
have done my best, still I couldn't quite pro- 
mise to do that. 

''Well, Mr. Sorel he looked me up and 
down sharp like, and then said he, ' I may 
find you useful by-and-by, so just you stop 
where you are, and don't leave this house till 
I tell you to,' which I thought pretty good 
imperence ; but as stopping in the house was 
a sight better than hanging about outside, 
with the perlice for everlasting telling you to 
keep moving on, why I thought I'd stop and 
•see what 'd come next. 



FRUIT. 241 



" Mr. Sorel lie went upstairs and all over 
the house, looking here and there, and every- 
where, and last of all he went into poor 
missus's room, and shut the door. 

'^ T didn't hear a sound of him till 'twas 
nearly dark, then he rang the bell and I went 
up. He was sitting before her ^vriting-table, 
with his head bent down over something in 
his hand, but when I come back with the 
lio^ht he'd told me to brinof, his hand was 
empty, and his eyes was hard and dry as 
stones. He said I was to wait, opened the 
desk and took out a j)iece of paper Miss Sorei 
had set just inside. 'Twas a list of the 
names and addresses of all the young ladies 
as had been at Rosemary for the half before, 
and was expected for the next, and he read 
'em out to me one by one, and asked me if 
they was all right. I told him yes, and then 
he said I could go down, he'd call me when I 
was wanted, and I saw no more of him till 
half-past ten o'clock, when he come down with 
a great budget of letters, and said he, putting 

VOL. II. oO 



242 ''CHERRY RIPE r 



one of his fingers on 'em, ' You'll never see 
any more of these young ladies again, for 
I've written to tell 'em my sister is dead — is 
dead.' Just like that, then he stared about 
him a bit confused-like, and went away with- 
out saying any more. 

*' Next morning he come again, and said he 
was going away for a while, but I was to take 
care of the place, and not let a soul come nigh 
it but tradespeople. He'd got to look veiy 
broken and ill, and stared about as if it was 
all strange to him, and once or tmce he got 
suspicious, and asked me where you might be, 
and if you was likely to be coming back, and 
if I dared to let you come inside the gates he 
would punish me by the law ; but for all liis 
talk he seemed just spent-like and feeble, and 
as if he'd got no strength to go into a passion 
about it. And then he went away, I think 
'twas somewhere to see about her tomb, for 
he'd took her all the way from Paris back to 
her old home to be buried. 

" 'Twas a foiiniirht before he came back, 



FRUIT, 243 



und then he looked worse than ever. He 
told me to make up a bed in the room next 
Miss SoreFs, and when night come, he just 
crept into it. 

" The next day he wrote a letter and gave 
it to me to post, and I looked hard at it to 
know the address again, for he seemed to 
me to be going very queer, and I was getting 
in a fright to know what I should do if he 
got real bad. He scarcely touched nothing, 
and snapped and snarled at me if I tried to 
get him to eat, but 'twas all over very soon. 
On the third day after he come back, I heard 
a strange sort of noise upstairs about the time 
of dusk, and though I was terrible frightened, 
being all alone in the house, I crept upstairs 
and listened, and the door being open of Miss 
Sorel's room, I looked in. 

" He was kneeling by the bedside with his 
arms spread out over the coverlid, and talking 
to her, like as if he thought she was there, 
seeming to fancy they was both little chil- 
dren again together, and going out in the 

35—2 



244 " CHERRY RIPE .' 



woods a-maying .... and then I knew how 
it was with him, Miss Mignon, and just shut 
the door and come softly away, for somehow 
I wasn't a bit afraid of the poor soul ; but I 
wrote off to the address I'd seen, and by 
the next evening a gentleman, Mr. Sorel's 
cousin he said he was, had come. 

*'Mr. Silas didn't seem to know him a bit^ 
only laughed and cried all in a breath, when 
they tried to take him home, but at last they 
got him away by telling him he would find 
Ifier there. He was but a few years older than 
Miss Sorel, yet you'd have said he was 
an old man, Miss Mignon, as they led him 
away, and you never would have known him 
to be the same as said such wicked words to 
you out yon, when master come over the wall 
to the rescue. 

" The cousin, he put me in charge of all 
while he went to Yorkshire, but he was soon 
back again, and asked me about things, and 
without more ado he just went to an agents 
and said Mr. Sorel wasn't likely to be ever 



FRUIT. 245 



ixny better, and as he was next-of-kin and 
had to act for Mr. Silas, he'd be glad to get rid 
of Kosemaiy, and Mr. Montrose's agent being 
on the look-out, it all got managed very easy 
and quick, for all the world just like a fairy 
tale I used to think. I didn't write nothing 
to you till 'twas all done, but master he knew 
all about it. There was a siij^ht of letters 
come from Mr. Sorel, and I lianded 'em over 
to the cousin, and there was two or throe for 
me, one in perticler from Miss Lu-Lu, want- 
ing to know all about it, and where you was, 
und what you meant to do. So I just wrote 
and said you was married, and I guess, Miss 
Mignon, she didn't get over tlmt bit of news 
for a week." 

" We had some happy times together, she 
and I," said Mignon witli a heavy sigh : 
*' what fun we used to have over that book we 
were writinof, and that we shall never finish 
now ! I miss the girls,' she went on sadly, 
-"'and the noise they made, and the hard 
lessons we had to leain. At any ratr, our 



24 G ''CHERRY RIPE r 



days were well filled, we had not over much 
time to ihiiiik ! You know I always dreaded 
the holidays, always found it dreadfully dull 
to talk to Bumble and play croquet all alone, 
but now that it is one long indefinite holiday, 
with no day to look forward to when they 
will all be coming back again, it is much 
worse, and if she does not come, it may go on 
for ever, and ever, and ever ! Indeed, IVe 
got a dreadful sort of feeling, Prue, that if 
anybody happened to be walking by Rose- 
mary a hundred years hence, he would find 
you an old mummy in the kitchen, Mr. Mon- 
trose melted into a mound of dust in the midst 
of his books, and me sitting on the wooden 
chair in the kitchen garden, watching still for 
somebody who never came !" 



CHAPTER XII. 

" The education of life perfects the thinking mind, but 
depraves the frivolous." 

' J^^^IHE mystic hour draws nigh," said 
Flora, "that will consign us one 
and all to the dungeon keep of 
Glen-luce. 

*' To-day is the sixth, on the tenth a pro- 
cession of men and women, footmen and 
maids, children, babies, horses, dogs, and 
animals will be formed ; father, being the 
least competent for the post, will assume the 
baton of command, and having fussed one half 
of us into tears and the other half into act) vq 
ill-temper, will land us all triumphantly at 
the ancestral barn somewhere towards the 



248 ''CHERRY RIPE/" 



small hours of the morning. Why on eartli 
cannot balloons be made practicable for 
trav^ing purposes 1 Avonder ? Just fancy 
the delight of stepping in, bag and baggage, 
and not having to stir until one got to one's 
journey's end ! I have no doubt our grand- 
children will enjoy the luxury, while we have 
to suffer for being born a hundred years too 
soon !" 

" But why is Glen-luce like a dungeon ?" 
said Mignon, who sat on the grass with hands 
clasped about her knees, and a weary look in 
her blue eyes. 

" How can a place be anything else when 
there is scarcely a soul in it, who is not your 
husband, or your father, or your brother ? 
People rave about the scenery, and ask me 
how I can be dull in the midst of so much 
beauty ; but I should like to know who would 
not get sick of looking at the same thing day 
after day, week after week, year after year ! 
Can trees and rocks and waterMls taR to 
you, I should like to know 'I Admiring the 



FRUir. 249 



-beauties of nature all alone is something like 
looking at the moon by yourself, extremely 
unsatisfactory work !" 

" But I thought you had some neigh- 
bours ?" said Mignon, '' the McCloskys." 

" Just so, my dear, the McCloskys, for there 
is nobody else. We are five miles from the 
nearest town, three from a doctor, two from 
the kirk, and ten from anything like a pleasant 
or entertainino' neiofhbour. Bluebeard him- 
self would be hailed witli rejoicing if he rose 
from the dead and settled down in Glen- 
luce." 

" And your father's house, where is that ?" 

" Strathsaye ? Oh, near enough. The 
Montrose and Dundas estates adjoin each 
other ; I don't know of any other reason why 
father gave his consent to my marrying Colin. 
There never was a father yet to whom a ring- 
fence was not irresistible, you know. It must 
have been a dreadful blow to lilm about the 
McClosky estates," she added, shaking her 
smooth head ; ''he had quite set his hearten 



250 ''CHERRY RIPE f 



Adam's marrying the daughter, and then the 
whole of the Glen would have been in the 
family." 

*' And was the young lady — willing X' said 
Mignon, turning her head aside. 

^' Yes ; in that case Barkis ivas willing. 
But where was I ? Oh ! talking about that 
dreadful old barn. Of course when I married 
(John I had no idea those two old people, 
Sir Peter and his wife, would take it into 
their heads to live in the town-house and give 
us the one in the Highlands. What on earth 
can they want with a house in Piccadilly I 
should like to know, at their time of life ? 
And, of course, as they are within reach of 
the best advice, they are as likely as not to 
liveyb?' ever r 

'' But is not Colin attached to them ?" said 
Mignon, regarding Flora with warm dis- 
approval. 

*' Oh ! I believe so — especially to his 
mother ; indeed, it is all her doing that he has- 
such absurdly narrow-minded ideas about 



FRUIT. 251 



everything. However, she is a sensible old 
soul, and never attempts to interfere with me 
in any way, and as I come to town every 
spring, and it is less trouble and expense than 
taking a furnished house, I never quarrel with 
her. 

*' And has your father lived here long ?" 
said Mignon, glancing at the pleasant-look- 
ing white house wdiose upper windows were 
visible in the distance. 

" Oh ! yes, a long time, six or seven years 
quite. He spends one half the year here, and 
the other half at Strathsaye ; but my charming 
brother, since he has become studious, lives 
here pretty well all the year round. It was 
a most ridiculous place to come to, not suffi- 
ciently near town to be convenient, and yet 
not far enough out to command good grounds 
and real country. However, you'll have 
country enough and to spare at Glen-luce for 
the next three months, / can tell you !" 

'* But I am not going," said Mignon, 
thoroughly startled; *' why should I do that ? 



252 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

How can I do that ? At any moment some- 
body may come." — She paused, bkished deeply 
and said no more. 

" Somebody may come T repeated Flora, 
looking at the girl's averted facewith suddenly 
aroused, quick curiosity, " but I thought 
there was nohody — that you had no relations, 
no friends, no anything — who then may be 
this mysterious somebody ?" 

Mignon, turning her head still farther 
aside, shamed through and through at the 
deceit she was maintaining, none the less 
found it impossible to put confidence in 
Flora Dundas. 

That young matron, laying down her 
needlework, was meanwhile surveying the 
girl from an entirely new point of view. What 
did this confusion mean .... after all, was 
the explanation of Mignon's coldness to her 
husband, to be found in the fact that she had, 
in schoolgirl fashion, fixed her childish heart 
upon somebody else ? 

If so, wliat a glorious ])unisliment was 



FRUIT. 253' 



in store for Adam the gardener, to be 
sure ! 

"■ Upon my word, child, you began pretty 
early," she said at last with some envy in her 
voice ; " how you ever got opportunities for 
such jinks I'm sure I don't know ; / didn't 
when I was at school. There was one young 
man," she added meditatively, " that I posi- 
tively adored — I actually lost my appetite on 
his account for a whole w^eek — and thouofh, of 
course, we never exchanged a word, we used 
to write each other love-letters, but in case we 
were found out, lie used to sign himself ' Lily- 
white/ and / used to sign myself ^ The Rat- 
catcher's Daughter.' We put our letters in 
a hole in the wall just outside the garden 
gates, but one fine morning we were caught, 
so there was an end of that; but I'm sure my 
heart never thumped as hard and fast for 
Colin, as it did for that moon-faced young 
man in drab inexpressibles I" 

As though to illustrate the adage, Coliu 
himself at this moment appeared upon the 



254 "'CHERRY RIPE/" 

scene with his idolised Httle daughter Floss 
perched high on his shoulders. 

With one hand he held her chubby legs 
fimily under his chin, the other thro^vn behind 
him afforded her a sufficient support, while 
his hair had all the appearance of being 
triumphantly crowned, as the tiny hands that 
clutched it were full of flowers. 

"Do for goodness' sake put that child 
down," said Flora as they drew near ; " what 
you can be made of to drag her about in such 
heat as this, I'm sure I can't imagine !" 

*^ We don't find the heat particularly over- 
powering, do we, Floss ?" said Colin, placidly, 
as he gently lowered himself to the grass 
beside Mignon, and set Floss's feet upon the 
ground ; '' and we're very happy, aren't we ?" 

a We're very 'appy," said Floss, looking 
across her father's head at her mother, with 
that half-impudent, half alarmed defiance that 
is so ludicrous when exhibited by mere babies 
to those whom they know to be set in 
authority over them. 



FRUIT. 255 



" I can not understand how it is/' said Mrs. 
Dundas crossly, "that every one of my 
children should drop their h's as they do. 
They never hear me drop mine, and I am 
always most particular in engaging my nurses 
to ascertain that they speak correctly, but 
it is all of no use, for neither Taffy, Colin, 
nor Floss have s^ot one sino^le ' h ' between 
them !" 

" It saves a lot of trouble, doesn t it, Floss T 
said Colin, around whose neck his little 
daughter's arms were now clasped in a throt- 
tling embrace. A very wilful blooming little 
rose was she, her face a tiny and absurd copy 
of her mother's, but with a heart like her 
father's beating bravely in her breast. 

" How you can talk such nonsense to the 
child 1" said Flora languidly. *' Really it is 
not to be wondered at that you have no 
authority over the children, and that I always 
have to punish and kcc]) tlicm in order 
myself!" 

Flora's notions of the nuinaoement of 



2dC) ''cherry RIPE!'' 

children were extremely simple, and resolved 
themselves into two processes — spoiling and 
slapping. When they were good, and looked 
handsome enough to be a credit to herself, 
she would indulge them just so far as such 
indulgence did not interfere Avith her own 
personal comfort ; when they were naughty 
or tired, or unsatisfactory in any way, she 
slapped them, and between these two extremes 
she never hesitated for a single moment. 
The workings of the infant minds given 
over to her keeping were puzzles that she 
never dreamed of trying to solve. 

Colin understood all about it, and could 
talk nonsense to them by the hour. But, O 
careless mother, it was wise, tender, gentle 
nonsense that it would have been well for you, 
could your lips have brought themselves ta 
utter .... 

" Floss shall be taught the ten command- 
ments without loss of time," said Colin 
gravely, " and then perha])s she will better 
understand her duty to her ftither. Mean 



FRUIT, 257 



while, if the question be not an impertinent 
one, do we interrupt a cabinet council ? If so, 
we will retire, and come back when it is 
over." 

'' We were talking about the approaching 
exodus," said Flora, " and I have been dis- 
coursino' in vain to Mio-non on the varied 
delights of Glen-luce, for — what do you think'? 
— she says she is not going /" 

" Not going !" repeated Colin in tones of 
amazement, and turning quickly towards 
Mignon, '' and why not ? Are you afraid 
that — that you will not be comfortable with 

us r 

'' Don't trouble yourself on that point," said 
Flora tranquilly ; " I have not been ill-using 
the child, and we never light ; she can't go 
because, because she is expecting somebody I" 

" But can't you bring whoever it is with 
you ?" said Colin with real anxiety, for inde- 
pendently of his firm friendship for Adam, he 
liked this girl ; the two had been fast friends 
from their first hour of meeting, and lie luid 

VOL. II. ,j() 



258 ''CHERRY RIPEf 

looked forward to having them both to 
brighten the not too Hvely Glen-luce. 

^' No," said Mignon, drooping her head, " T 
cannot bring that person with me, and I must 
stay here; but Adam will not mind going 
without me, I am sure " 

" Go without you T said Flora, her voice 
rising a little higher with every word, '' and 
leave you here alone ?" 

'' Yes, why not ? I have Prue to take care 
of me, though what harm is likely to come to 
me at Kosemary ?" 

" Oh !" said Flora ironically, '' I don't 
know of anybody who is prepared to eat you 
up at a mouthful, and of course it is the most 
natural thing in the world for a young man 
to go away and leave his bride of a few wrecks 
all by herself ! Indeed, I have little doubt 
but that you wall be able to carry out the ar- 
rangement, as, if there is one reasonable 
amusement on earth that Adam has the sense 
to enjoy, it is his shooting." 

''Of course, he will not go without Mignon," 



FRUIT. 259 



said Colin, trying to keep the disappointment 
owi of his voice. 

" I am by no means so sure of that," said 
Flora decidedly. ''However, wonderful to 
relate, here he comes, so you can ask him for 
yourself 1" 

" But I do not wish him to remain with me," 
said Mignon earnestly; '' I shall be rejoiced for 
him to go; it will be a change for him, and — " 

''What is Mignon going to be so rejoiced 
about ?" said Adam, throwing himself down 
on the grass beside Colin, and giving Floss's 
-downy cheek a pincL 

"At the prospect of remaining at Rosemary 
all by herself," said Flora with a shrug, " for 
she says she is not going to Glen-luce." 

" She is expecting somebody," said honest 
Colin, at which his wife frowned, laughed, 
and then looked at Adam to see how he took 
the remark. 

He was looking at his wife, marking how 

*' A paleness beauteous as the lily's mix't 
With the sweet violet's, like a gust of wind 
Flits o'er her face . . . ." 

30— 2 



260 ''CHERRY RIPE/" 



and his thoughts, through much brooding, 
having now become unhealthy and coloured 
with but one idea, the conclusion was in- 
stantly formed in his own mind, that tliis 
somebody was Philip. 

There was an instant's pause, then he 
spoke. 

*' It would be strange," he said calmly, '' if 
my wife should wish to go to Glen-luce, since 
I remain here. I have work tliat must be 
done, and cannot spare the time." 

One person alone out of the three who 
heard, believed him to be speaking the truth. 
She clasped her hands with a gesture that 
might have been relief, disappointment, or 
surprise. 

'' Well,'' said Flora, drawing a deep breath, 
and addressing Mignon. " I should ver}' 
much like to see Colin give up liis shooting 
or anything else for mc. Not tliat I complain, 
fortunately I am not selfish, and though of 
course I should infinitely prefer taking the 
children to Cowes or Scarborough that they 



FRUIT, 261 



might have the benefit of the sea air, still I 
hope I know iny duty as a wife, and — what 
is more — do it." 

" Ah !" said Colin, who was tying up a 
nosegay for Floss with a dry wisp of 
i2:rass. 

Flora glanced sharply at her husband, but 
he appeared so perfectly innocent and absorbed 
in his task, that she looked away again. 

" Mignon's duty in this case is identical 
with my own,'* said Adam dryly, " so I need 
not call ujion her to make any sacrifice on 
my behalf When do you go, old felloAV ?" 
he added, turning to Colin. 

'^On the 10th." 

'' Poor Miss McClosky I" said Flora mali- 
ciously, '' she will be in despair ! Half a loaf 
is better than no bread, and doubtless she 
would prefer seeing the married man to not 
seeing him at all." 

" You have no riu'ht to talk about Phillis 
in such a manner," said Colin indignantly. 
^' a more modest girl never breathed — and I 



262 ''ClfJ-lRRY RIPE f 

won't hear her name taken in vain, the sonsie^ 
gentle, wee body." 

'' Her name is PhilKs ?" said Mignon 
eagerly. 

'' Yes/' he said, " and it exactly suits her." 

Phillis . . . what a pretty old-world name. 
To Mignon it brought up the picture of a 
fresh, rosy, dimpled, country maiden, with a 
something coy and winsome about her that is 
not usually associated with our notions of the 
daughter of a j)arvenu cotton-spinner. 

" Phillis would not deny the soft impeach- 
ment if she were here," said Flora, serenely. 
'' I do believe that if she tried to tell a orood 
big story it would choke her on the spot. She 
is a little fool who doesn't know her own ad- 
vantages, for, in spite of that terrible red 
brick mansion, and McClosky J9^?t, she might, 
with her quarter of a million of money and 
little dollish, presentable person, maiTy almost 
anybody." 

"What would a young womon do with Mr. 
Anybody for a husband ?" said Colin gravely^ 



FRUIT. 2G^ 



"' and Phillis is rather pai-ticular — she might 
object." 

'' She has got some absurd rubbish into her 
head," continued Flora, pursuing her own train 
of thought, " that it is her money that every- 
body is in love with, not herself, and I should 
not wonder in the least at any imprudent 
thing she did ; she would marry a shoeblack, 
I verily believe, if she thought he was dis- 
interested !" 

" She may even descend to the lower deeps 
of the columns of the Matrimonial Naws,^ 
said Colin, in feigned alarm, '' and get married 
on the sly as 

" * A penniless lass wi' a lang pedigree,' 
while the curtain might descend on the affect- 
ing tableau of Pliillis presenting the gentle- 
man Avith her money-bags as the reward of 
virtue !" 

'' And what is Mr. McClosky like ?" said 
Mignon, who seemed to have been steadily 
asking questions ever since she got up that 



mornmg. 



2G4 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



'* I can compare him to. nothing on earth 
so much as his house !" said Flora, fanning 
herself with vigour. ''The latter is of red 
brick, that makes you glow all (jver to look 
at on the coldest December day, and it matches 
the colour of his cheeks and nose exactly, while 
the pale- blue satin furniture in the drawing- 
room (where the carpet is deeply, darkly, 
beautifully red), seems expressly made to ex- 
tinguish his vacuous rolling eye ; the only 
difference is, that his crest, which is upon 
everything — over the mirrors, on the cornices, 
the door-handles (on the very bottoms of the 
chairs, I do believe, if one only had the 
courage to surreptitiously examine them), is 
nut emblazoned on his back, though the jewel- 
lery he wears stands sponsor handsomely for 
the hricklehracky as he calls it, in his drawing- 
room !" 

" Poor Phillis 1" said Mignon softly. 

'' When it was all completed," said Flora^ 
" he walked about with his hands under his 
coat-tails, saying to everybody, * Everj^thing 



FRUIT. 2G5 



very plain, ma'am, but — neat.' It did remind 
me so of ' Neat, but not gaudy, as the Devil 
said when he painted his tail pea-green.' " 

'' Nevertheless," said Colin, stoutly, "" not 
even a red and blue drawing-room, a yellow 
and green boudoir, or a ball-room tastefully 
arranged in pink and mauve, can vulgarise 
Phillis. In her plain gown, without an orna- 
ment or scrap of finery, she holds her own 
bravely enough, and not one of the high-born 
lassies who go there can put her out of 
countenance. The only mistake was that she 
should have been born a rich girl, instead of 
a moderately poor one." 

'' Oh ! it is all very fine," said Flora, with 
trenchant emphasis, '* for those people with 
w^hom money is a mere dmg, a superfluity, to 
aftect to despise it, but just let them be with- 
out it for a little while, and then see if they 
would talk in that ridiculous fashion ! For 
my part, short of death, I know oi nothimj 
more agonising than to be constantly wanting 
things one can't ^ut. Talk about a ofood 



266 '"CHERRY RIPE f 

conscience, why a good fat purse is twice as 
comforting and conducive to sound moral feel- 
ing, and for my part I can't understand rich 
people doing wicked things. I'm sure I could 
be perfectly good and amiable if I had every- 
thing on earth that I fancied !" 

" No doubt !" said Colin, adding, as he 
rubbed his cheek against his little daughter's, 
*' nevertheless we know of something far worse 
than a pocket without any money in it, don't 
we, Floss 1 And that is to put our hand in, 
and find no sweeties !" 

Floss shook her head gravely and sighed ; 
that was bad and no mistake. 

" I'se got an 'ole shilling," she said, patting 
his cheeks lovingly, '' and you sail 'ave it all. 
P'raps mummy let us go to Lunnun t'morrow 
to spend it T 

" Oh ! Floss, Floss ! you are a very ex- 
travagant young woman with your one shil- 
ling I" said Colin. " Now do you know that 
if you came into a fortune to-morrow, of say 
a pound, all in sixpences, you would become 



FRUIT, 267 



a perfect little screw, and drive Colin and Taffy 
away with ignominy when they came to bor- 
row a penny or twopence of you T 

" Really," said Flora with contempt, "■ I 
do Avonder at your folly, Colin ; you will make 
the child just as whimsical and ridiculous as 
yourself !" 

Colin turned his head, which was on a level 
with Floss's, and looked at her. The smile 
on his face was reflected in the many dimples 
of hers, but he did not speak ; there was never 
any need for speech with these two ; between 
the somewhat weary man of thirty-six and the 
joyous fresh young child of four, there existed 
a very perfect understanding. Worn out and 
disgusted as he often was by the follies of his 
wife, he could find it in his heart to forgive 
her all, when the touch of his daughter's tiny 
hands were about him, when he looked into 
those innocent crystal clear eyes and found 
in them nothing but absolute purity and 
love. 

His heart might have grown arid and 



268 '•CHERRY RIPE 



bitter but for this cool and quiet shadow that 
the child made in it, and through his love for 
her he became a better, more patient, and self- 
denying man than he had been without her. 
A child .... that will come to you of its 
own free will, that will look fearlessly into 
your eyes, put out its scrap of a hand to touch 
your face, that will trust you, love you, obey 
and folloAv you without a single doubt or 
scruple — is there any other God-given thing 
on earth that will so waken the good, so quell 
the evil that dwells in us ? He who would 
keep heart and lips and life clean, let him go 
as often as may be into the company of very 
young children, win their love if he is able, 
and then thank God for the liumanising, 
ennobling influence tlioy will have u]ion 
liim. 

A little silence followed on Flora's petulant 
apostrophe to her husband. 

Adam was lookino* at Mii>-non, notinu' all 
too plainly the weary droo}) of the slender 
figure, the enforced })atience of the empty 



FRUir. 269' 



hands, and the outhne of features as colourless 
as the gown she wore. 

Colin, too, was regarding his wife atten- 
tively, and wondering what had happened 
that morning to ruffle her usually placid 
brows. He knew her thoroughly, this wdfe 
of his, her follies, her weaknesses, her over- 
weening vanity, her profound selfishness ; his 
taste Avas outraged, his heart was wrung by 
her every day of his life, and yet — he loved 
her. 

It may be questioned whether love does not 
strengthen with the faults of the person be- 
loved, instead of growing weaker. 

We may regret our passion, we may even 
struggle fiercely against it, but struggle and 
pain alike serve but to rivet the chains the 
deeper, and each fresh instance of worthless- 
ness, though it may wound our hearts, has 
no power to touch the core of our allegiance. 
" If thy right eye oftend thee, pluck it 
out." 

We are not all so sternly made that we can 



270 " CHERRY RIPE P 



act upon the cruel command, and to Colin, 
sorely tried though he might be, no such 
remedy would ever present itself. He had 
married this woman, and he would abide by 
the consequences of his deed. 

There is something noble and pathetic in 
these silent heroes who stand so staunchly by 
their trumpery bargains, only thankful if the 
world do not see the rents and stains, the 
coarse veneer and tawdry gilding as plainly 
as they themselves do, who utter no com- 
plaint, give no sign, and are by the world in 
general accepted as poor sightless doting fools, 
who have neither eyes to perceive, nor wit to 
recognise their own disgrace. 

" Here is father !" exclaimed Flora in tones 
of consternation ; " his face is as long as my 
arm ; he has a bundle of formidable papers, 
his very waistcoat looks as if it is primed and 
loaded with dry-as-dust facts, that will as- 
suredly give us all moral apoplexy I I 
fancy I hear baby crying — indeed I am sure 
of it " — in a moment lace, work, scissors, and 



FRUIT. 271 



thimble were rolled securely up, and with that 
nimble dexterity which would seem to be one 
of the especial prerogatives of the fat ones of 
the earth, she had glided round a corner, 
and was lost to sight in a moment. 




CHAPTER XIII. 

" Jidia. His little speaking shows his love but small. 
Liicetta. Fire that i^ closest kept burns most of all.' 




^AN proposes ; God disposes." 

It was not disposed that Flora 
and her family should depart for 
Glen-luce, with her husband and father, on 
the 10th. 

On the morning of the 9tli, Mignou, in the 
midst of one of those breathless struo^orles with 
the intricacies of the butcher s book, in which 
she had felt it her duty to engage since her 
discovery that Adam was not rich, found her- 
self all at once confronted by the disreputable 
little person of Colin the Younger. Always 



FRUIT. 273 



remarkable for the ease of his toilet, he 
looked to-day as though he had been a focus 
for the four winds of heaven, and, from the 
crown of his head to the sole of his foot, was 
about as forlorn-looking an urchin of five as 
could well be met with on a summer's day. 

'' Oh ! poor little Taify 1" he said, shaking 
his head, ''he's very ill; got weazles, and 
such a pain in his tummick !" 

*' Taffy has got the measles !" she said. 
''' Then mamma won't go to the Highlands 
to-morrow T 

"' No," he said gravel}^ "■ Grandpa and 
father's goin' t'morrow ; ^fc'se not goin' ; and 
mummy's slapped us all round, and sent 
Taffy to bed." 

'' Oh, she has, has she V said Mignon, 
lauo^hinof outriofht. '' Poor little souls !" 

Then a thought came into lier head that 
])ut tlic woes of Taffy and his brethren out of 
it, and slie jumped up so hastily as to deposit 
the representatives of butcher, grocer, and 
.baker, in a lieap on the ground. 

VOL. II. P»7 



274 " CHERRY RIPE /' 

'* You must run home now, Colin," she 
said absently ; '' and by-and-by if Taffy likes, 
I'll come over and tell him all about ' Puss 
in Boots.' " 

" That's what I'se come for," said Colin the 
Younger, practically ; " me stealed out all 
lone ; mummy didn't know, nurse didn't 
know, nobody knowed, and I'se to give you 
Taffy's most i^ertiiler love, and you'se to come 
over d'reckly ; and nurse says he may eat 
barley-sugar and bistiks, but no candies and 
no cokoly creams — Taffy says." 

^* I'll come presently," said Mignon, smiling 
acrain ; and then the small tatterdemalion 
vanished, and she found herself hurrying out, 
at a great pace, so possessed by one idea, that 
not until she had reached tlie inner garden, 
and was actually in Adam's presence, did she 
recall the fact that the day Avhcn slie had 
gone to him with any notion that might come 
into her head had passed, and that perhaps 
he would be as much surprised at her appear- 
ance, as she was at herself for coming. Adam 



FRUIT. 275 



saw her approaching, and noted how the 
eager step changed suddenly to a lagging one, 
how the bright face became clouded and dull, 
and he said to himself that it was because she 
had expected to find the garden empty, and 
was disappointed at finding him there. 

He stood awaiting her, some slight tool in 
his hand ; he wore no hat, and was in his 
shirt-sleeves : so Mignon, looking up as she 
drew near to him, saw him for the last time 
in her life as Adam the gardener. 

Whither had departed the ample stock of 
words with which she had started off to him 
in such a prodigious hurry ? 

Not one word could she find to say, 
except : 

'^ Taffy's got the measles." 
" Yes ?" he said, and waited for more. 
She stood, folding a corner of her little 
apron round and round her forefinger, then 
took a covert fiance at his face as thoucrh in 
hopes of finding something there to encourage 
her. 

37—2 



27G 

She found nothing ; he was awaiting her 
next words with attention, no more. 

'' Of course they will not be able to go to 
the Highlands now," she said in a lame, hesi- 
tating fashion ; ''at least Flora and the 
children will not — but Mr. Montrose and 
Colin are going to-morrow." 

" I suppose so." 

*' And I was thinking," she said, feeling 
strangely disheartened, and hanging her head 
down, '^ that as Flora and the children will be 
here, and you will have no need to think 
me lonely, or be uneasy about leaving me, 
perhaps you too would go and have a good 
time at Strathsaye — and may I tell Prue to 
get your things ready so that you will be 
able to start to-morrow ?" 

" No," he said ; '' you will tell Prue to do 
nothing of the kind. Do you think I have a 
mind like a weathercock," he added, half- 
bitterly, half-sternly, " that I can change it 
every hour in the day to please you, Mignon'?" 

^' No," she said gently, '' but I cannot he^P 



FRUIT, Til 



thinking, though you said it was the work 
prevented you, that it was because of me that 
you decided not to go, and now that it is all 
quite pleasant and natural that you should 
accompany your father and Colin, it is a pity^ 
a very great pity, for you to stay here, for 
you will be thinking of the shooting every 
day." 

''If ever I am compelled to leave my wife 
under the care of any one," he said, '' I trust 
it will be somebody more competent to accept 
the trust than my sister Flora. It seems a 
hard thing for a brother to say of his own 
flesh and blood, but I disapprove of her in 
every way, and consider her a very bad com- 
panion for you. Had she been permanently 
established where she now is, I could not, 
even for your sake, have settled in this 
house." 

" She is very good-humoiu*ed," pleaded 
Mignon, '' and she does not mean all the 
things she says ; it is only her way " 

'' It is a very bad way," he said with dis- 



27^ " CHERR Y RIPE /' 

gust, " and unfortunately it is ten thousand 
times worse when she is abroad, than when 
she is at home ; a housemaid would know 
better how to behave herself in public than 
she !" 

Mignon looked up quickly, wondering if he 
were alluding to Flora's follies on the day 
when she had caught that one precious, pass- 
ing glimpse of Philip. 

'' Her choice of companions is in about as 
bad taste as her dress and manner," continued 
Adam ; "all her friends are fops, fools, or 
worse, and her women acquaintances are not 
much better. She has a weakness for men of 
doubtful character — " he paused to look keenly 
at Mignon, whose eyes were downcast, " and, 
in direct defiance of Colin's command, will 
encourage their attentions, whenever she gets 
a chance. She may even introduce such 
persons to you." He paused again, closely 
watching her features for any betraying sign. 
He had seen Philip La Meii; in the Park 
that day ; he knew his sister to be acquainted 



FRUIT. 279 



with him, and he Avas burning to know if 
Mignon had been brought face to face with, 
had spoken to him. 

But Mignon did not utter a syllable. Her 
husband had once bade her carry her con- 
fidences to any one rather than himself, and 
she had taken him at his word. 

All at once he became conscious that tears 
Avere starting from beneath her eyelids, that 
her lips were taking the odd, convulsive 
•curves of one who fi^rhts ao^ainst emotion that 
will not be repressed. 

He saw these tears with a sti'ange indiffer- 
ence, irritation of mind had begotten a tem- 
porary hardness of heart, and the appetite 
for wooing had so entirely left him of late, 
that he did not feel the smallest temptation 
to entreat her to dry them. She herself 
<30uld not have told why she wept, save that 
all things with her now tended towards tears, 
as formerly all had tended to joy. One must 
have had more than one bitter experience 
before one rccoo-nises in the smallest mis- 



280 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

fortune the carrying out of a settled plan 
.... it is the accumulated load that saddens 
. . . . the occasional hardship, no matter how 
severe, falling on a robust and healthy state 
of moral feeling, causes no rankling wound, 
forms no precedent by which we assure to 
ourselves future sorrow — in a word, if by 
repeated shocks our nerve is once lost, we 
are at the mercy of our troubles and will 
infallibly be overcome by them. Adam had 
turned aside, much as though he were anxious 
to return to his work. 

Something of a woman's reticence came to 
Mignon then, as she choked back her tears 
and clasped her throat with one little hand as 
though to keep down the lump that seemed 
to be there. '* I have displeased you," she 
said, after some moments of struggle with 
herself; '' somehow I seem very often to do 
so now ; and I am sorry, for indeed I w^ould 
gladly do all that I could for you, who have 
done so much for me. ..." 

He did not reply. If her own heart did 



FRUIT. 281 



not su^s'est to her what she mioht do to re- 
pay hhn, then he would not tell her ; there 
are some things that a proud man cannot do^ 
and this seemed to him to be one of them. 

Shaking her head sorrowfully, she said to 
herself that ho was angry, and she did not 
wish him to be that ; she could not be happy 
when quarrelling with any one ; and then a 
bright idea came into her head, upon which 
she immediately proceeded to act. 

With a mixture of anxiety and trepidation, 
she advanced a step or two till she was close 
to Adam, then said, " Would you — would you 
like to kiss me T 

He turned sharply, saw those dewy lips, so 
absolutely perfect in form and colour, lifted 
to his own, lips that well might give 

" al'icsh 
The life she had so tangled in their me«h," 

and having seen them, turned back silcntl}' 
to his tiowers. 

He wanted no child's kiss, but a woman's^' 



282 ''CHERRY RlPJi r 



passionate and clinging as liis own; till he 
could have that, lie would have nothing. 

'' I am busy," he said ; '' I have no time 
for such nonsense," and went on with his 
work. Mio'non watched his movinof hands 
for a moment or so, then she tried again. 

'' It would not take loiujy' she said in a 
tone of consideration, and still surveviner him 
with anxiety. 

Adam turned his head awa}', on his face 
that queer contortion that a man s may wear 
when some irresistibly ludicrous idea obtrudes 
itself in the midst of stern and serious 
thought. 

'' No/' he said, '' it would not take \evy 
long ! Still, some other time perhaps, Mig- 



non." 



'' And you are not cross ?" she said, look- 
ing relieved, for though she had made the 
offer in all good faith, she was very glad that 
it was not accepted. 

'' Not in the least !" 

'' Thai's a good job f .she said, heaving a 



FRUIT. 283 



sigh, " for only just think if we were to go to 
sleep quarrelling, and one of us died in the 
night, how sorry we should both be when we 
woke up in the morning, to be sure !" 

After which astounding Irishism she went 
her way, perfectly satisfied with the result of 
her attempt at peacemaking. 







ifz-^v. t-:jJ/->^ii^<:-iW:-. j^H 



CHAPTER XIV. 

And to be "wroth with one we love 
I )oth work like madness in the bmin.' 




T was a luonth since Mr. Montrose, 
with shorn sj)lendonr and abated 
retinue, had dejiarted witli Coh'n 
for the Hio'hlands. 

Thirty mornings, thirty evenings, thirty 
noons, had gone by, and the measles still held 
the day, occasiomng as much trouble as if 
tlie complaint had been a majestic and dreaded 
scourge, instead of a tritling, undignified 
inatter, tliat when mentioned, oftener than 
not provokes a smile. 

With })erverse ingenuity each child had 



FRUIT, 



sickened for the complaint a fortnight be- 
hind the other, and now that Cohn was in 
the convalescent stage, and Floss just begin- 
ninsf to fall ill, Flora felt it to be somethinu' 
altogether beyond her philosophy that the 
baby should be chuckling and enjoying jokes 
all to himself, heartlessly indifferent to tlie 
woes of his sister and brethren. 

Until this last scion of the liouse of Dundas 
had given up being jolly and taken to ;i 
hoarse whimper, half strangled in a dry burn- 
ing throat, abundant sneezing and an irritable 
disinclination to be looked at, spoken to, or 
amused by anybody, it was idle to think of 
makino- a move for Glen-luce. 

"It is enough to drive one crazy !" said 
Flora almost in tears, as she sank in the 
softest chair the nursery afforded, and sur- 
veying her sick, convalescent, and healthy 
•offspring ; '' you deserve to l)e soundly 
Avhipped, every one of you, for I feel quite 
certain that you could (dl have taken it at 
the same time if you liad chosen I" 



'28G ''CHERRY RIPET 

Tciffy, who sat on the floor enjoying a soHtary 
game of marbles, raised his head at this, and 
looked about him with an air of complacency. 
Re, had taken it first and done Ids duty, but 
Colin, who sat up in bed looking rather 
miserable, and Floss, who lay tossing about 
restlessly, had not done theirs at all. 

^' Poor little souls !" said Misfnon, who sat 
by Floss's side ; ^^ I don't suppose it is any 
pleasure to them to be shut up here for a 
month ! Have you Avritten to tell Colin tliat 
Floss is ill r 

'^ He is coming," said Flora carelessly ; 
^' I got a telegram from him just now, to say 
that he would be here late to-night ; he only 
got my letter this morning — it is perfectly 
ridiculous !" 

Mignon knelt down and whispered some- 
thing to the child, who at intervals moaned 
" Papa ". . . and she sprang up radiant, but 
the girl softly pressed the little head back 
upon the pillow and drew the clothes about 
her shoulders. She had grown quite ex- 



FRUIT. 



perienced in nursing during this past month 
of illness, and that mother's instinct, which 
lies dormant in every good and true woman's 
breast, had awakened in hers. These chil- 
dren had grown to listen for the sound of her 
footfall as for music, to look for her coming as 
sunshine, and Flora, who was ill at ease in 
the sick-room, and indeed more rarely to be 
found in it than any other room in the house, 
was glad enough to have Mignon devote her- 
self to the task of tending and amusing them.. 
" It is always the way," she said, tapping 
her shapely foot impatiently against the floor ; 
" as sure as ever there is any fun going on in 
that old barn, I am certain to be aw^ay, and 
of course because Colin has got a few pre- 
sentable men this year instead of the old 
frumps ho generall}" brings together, I am 
planted here dancing attendance on these 
provoking children ! The McCloskys, too, 
have got a houseful, but by the time I get 
back all the shooting ^^artics will have broken 
up, and the glen will liave returned to its. 



288 ''CHERRY RIP/:.'' 

usual state of flatness, staleness, and unprofit- 
ableness." 

'^You won't Imve to stay here so very 
nnich longer if* baby sickens soon," said 
Mignon encouragingly, who was tying the 
ribbons of her cloak preparatory to departure. 

** Does he look as if he meant to do any- 
thing of the kind V said Flora, surveying 
her blooming infant with unqualified dis- 
approbation. '' No, no ! He will wait until 
Floss is Avell and then he will make a start, 
•and I dare say October wdll find me expiating 
my sins here, without a soul to speak to." 

And she sailed angrily away. A chorus of 
small voices was uplifted as Mignon too 
showed signs of departure. 

'^You're coming back, Auntie ?" 

" You 7iever telled us the end of the ^ Free 
Bears ' !" 

'^ Arty tumminr/ back ?" said Floss in tones 
of despair, and raising licr little flushed face 
from the pillow. 

"Yes, yes," sho said, sighlno-, '' I'm coming 



FRUIT. 289 



back ; and I'll tell you the end of the story, 
Colin, by-and-by !" 

Somebody who was standing on the other 
side of her own gate, in the act of lifting the 
latch, saw her coming quietly through the 
adjoining one, and said to himself that no 
one would ever believe it possible that she 
had been something of a hoyden once, or gone 
riding in a wheel-barrow, so subdued and 
gentle was she now in all her ways. A step 
that lagged, a glance but seldom lifted, a 
voice but rarely heard ; were these the 
tributes paid to him for the care and love 
with which he had vowed to encompass 
her \ 

Putting out her hand to the latch, she 
started violently as it touched his, then as he 
swung the gate back for her to enter, she 
recovered herself, and made a step or two 
forward. 

" You are going to town T she said hesi- 
tatingly, as she glanced at the great book 
under liis arm. 

VOL. II. SS 



290 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

" No," he said, " I am going for a walk." 

'^ In .such heat as this T she exclaimed. 
*' Along these dusty roads ? You will get a 
sunstroke !" 

'' But I am not going along the roads," he 
said, still holding the gate open. '' I am 
going to a place that you would not believe it 
possible could be in or near Lilytown." 

" Is it a cool place ?" said Mignon, who 
had by this time unfurled her umbrella ; " is 
it green, and could one get a real breath of 
good fresh air there, and perhaps see a daisy 
or two ?" 

" Yes," he said, showing signs of moving 
on, " one could do all that. I will show it 
you some day, and then you can go and sit 
there, whenever you please, with Prue." 

" With Prue !" Somehow the notion of 
this sylvan retreat in that estimable 
woman's company did not recommend itself 
to Mignon's favour. 

"■ Could you not show it me to-day f she 
said. Then, seemingly alarmed at her own 



FRUIT, 291 



boldness, added, '' I'll promise to be very 
quiet and not disturb you a bit in your read- 
ing, and I've got some work in my pocket — " 

" Won't you find it very hot ?" he said, 
Avishinof with all his heart that he had o^ot 
away a few moments earlier. 

It was no pleasure to him to be with her, 
to look at her ; and if her mood were a 
kind one, why it tortured him even more than 
if it were cold. 

She saw his hesitation, and with a suddenly 
heightened colour and trembling lip, walked 
past him towards the house. 

But she had not gone six paces when she 
was overtaken, and without ceremony made 
to wheel about, for he had put her hand under 
his arm, and away they went together. Darby 
and Joan fashion, each perhaps feeling a little 
foolish at the unusual propinquity. 

She wondered whither he was taking her, 
as they went along the shady side of the 
road, and came by-and-by to such a lane as well 
might pass muster as a country one. It was 

38—2 



292 " CHERR V RIPE /" 

one of the least known and frequented alleys 
that led to the park of the great lady of the 
neighbourhood, and from whence the general 
public was rigorously excluded ; but Adam 
being privileged to enter, presently drew a 
key from his pocket, which he apphed to a 
small door in the stonework of one of the 
great walls, and Mignon, stepping lightly 
through the opening, found herself ankle- 
deep in the verdure of a carpet that the 
shadows cast by the giant trees around had 
kept fresh as in early spring-time. 

He led her on to where there was a comer 
whence they could, 

" In deep dell below 
See through the trees a little rivergo 
All in its mid-day gold and glimmering." 

"Oh!" said Mignon, clasping her hands, 
''to think of there being such a place as 
this, not one mile from Lily town, and that I 
should never have known of it until summer 
is gone, and autumn almost here !" 



FRUIT, ■ 293 



'' I did not know of it myself until lately," 
he said, stretching himself upon the grass 
and opening his book. '' I have only been 
here three times in my life, including to- 
day." 

Now that he had acceded to her request, 
and brought her to all that she most particu- 
larly desired, coolness, verdure, daisies, even 
a brook for which she had not bargained, he 
seemed to consider that she required no farther 
care from him, and took no heed of her 
wanderings hither and thither, though indeed, 
if he forgot all about her, so did she about 
him, as she pursued her delighted search for 
such unsatisfactory wild flowers as early 
September afforded. Dandelions she found 
in plenty, or rather those downy puff-balls 
that are steady as rocks when fine weather is 
assured, but at the slightest sign of approach- 
ing rain, fly hither and thither, the sport of 
every wind that blows. 

She discovered a slender Aaron's rod, but 
feared to approach, nuich less gather it, sine© 



294 ''CHERRY RIPE f 



it wa,s the swaying centre of a swarm of 
eager bees, who ruthlessly sucked the sweet- 
ness from out of its golden blossoms. 

After all, she only got some late-tarrying 
knot-grass, a few flowers of the great scentless 
bindweed, some ladies'-tresses, a stem of the 
awkward straggling ragwort, and some nodd- 
ing Quaker's grass. Looking about her, she 
fancied that such grass as this might in spring- 
time grow cowslips, or Paigle, as the country 
folks to this day call those graceful golden- 
headed beauties, and hitherto she had believed 
that real cowslips could not be induced to 
grow within less than twenty miles of London 
town. 

She at last came back to \vhere Adam lay, 
and sat down a little apart from him, trying 
to weave her spoils into a nosegay, but they 
would not be so woven, so at last she laid 
them down on her lap and took out that 
everlasting piece of needlework that was as 
far from being concluded as ever. The 
pattern was in leaves, and when she had 



FRUIT. 295 



embroidered one, she laid it down and looked 
at her husband. He was apparently immersed 
in his book, his brows were slightly knitted, 
he had the air of a person struggling with 
some tough fact or legal problem, and book 
and eflPort alike seemed out of place in the 
soft seductive warmth and splendour of this 
early September afternoon. She could not 
have learned a lesson to save her life, with 
those ofolden motes oflancino: hither and 
thither on the page, with an impertinent 
grasshopper playing at leap-frog over her 
back, and Avith the subdued chorus of nature 
ringing faintly yet sweetly in her ears. 
Four stone walls would be infinitely more 
conducive to absorbed study, she felt quite 
sure. 

And he had only to lift his eyes from that 
dull page to see the great cool sweep of the 
velvet sward melting into the bracken, where 
the antlered-heads of the deer glanced in the 
sunlight. But he saw nothing, not even 
a rabbit who came peeping out of his hole 



296 

and looked at these two quiet people with its 
dark bright eyes, as though in doubt whether 
or no they were part of the landscape, then 
when Adam turned a page, scuttled away in 
its usual tell-tale fashion. 

A sunbeam was playing at hide-and-seek 
on his hair ; it had got to the page — surely 
he must close the book now ? Not a bit of 
it ! He didn't seem to know it was there. 
An emmet crawled up his hand, then angry 
at its mistake, stung him ; he shook it off, 
and went on reading as before. A grass- 
hopper, his transparent green body glistening 
in the sun, weary of every other acrobatic 
feat, distinguished himself by jumping over 
his nose, w^hereat Mignon felt herself rapidly 
becoming as dangerous as a small boy in 
church, who, forbidden under awful 2)enalties 
to laugh, is irresistibly tempted to break into 
acclamations long and loud. 

For there was something about this man 
that awed her, in spite of herself. 

As she looked at him, she found it difficult 



FRUIT. 297 



to believe that he had ever weeded her gravel 
walks, or Avished her orood morninof three 
times running, or called her miss, or been 
anything but masterful and proud and self- 
contained. . . . and that she had called him 
to his face a liar, a thief, and a spy ; that 
she had presented him with a jam tart and 
half a crown, and recommended him to study 
English history, she never could believe. 
She must have dreamt it all ... . also that 
he had said he loved her . . . for how w^as 
it possible to associate love with anything^ 
so indifferent and cold as he % 

He had grown much thinner of late, his- 
features were sharj), and the lines about his 
mouth were firm and closely set, the expres- 
sion of his face too had altered, the candid, 
bright look having given place to one that in 
its hardness sat strangely ill upon him. 

It was but rarely that she had a good 
view of him ; in fact she did not remember 
ever having really studied his face before, 
though of late she had s^ot into a way of 



29 S " CHERRY RIPE f 



taking covert peeps at him when she thought 
herself unobserved. 

She fell to studying his face intently, and 
a-s he seemed perfectly unconscious of her 
scrutiny, was Avithheld by no fears that it 
might prove disagreeable to him. 

She paused and frowned a little over her 
survey of that feature which is indifferently 
regarded as a vehicle for the conveyance of 
smells, good and bad, or as a convenient 
handle for a saucy fellow who w^ants to 
insult you, and made up her mind that it 
was by no means such a nose as would be 
likely to belong to a hero of romance, indeed, 
she and Lu-Lu had both made it a sine qud 
non in that great unfinished romance of 
theirs, that the hero, and, for the matter of 
that, the villain of the story, should possess 
the most fiercely-aquiline nose ever visible 
on the face of man. They had selected that 
type because it was associated in their minds 
with a haughty and truculent bearing ; but it 
is needless to say that of the science of 



FRUIT. 299 



nasology they knew nothing, and had by 
no means learned to regard that feature as 
the index to character that it is. Of passion 
and temper it professes no knowledge, but of 
taste, talent, energy, and the peculiar bent of 
the mind, it is an infallible guide, and one 
that may be better trusted than either the 
eyes or lips. 

Who will deny that a paltry-nosed man or 
woman is usually found to have a correspond- 
ing meanness of mind, or that the hitched- 
up, curled nose of arrogant conceit does not 
exactly reflect the jDurse-proud, vulgar spirit 
within % Or is a woman ever met with, 
possessing the true celestial nose, who is not 
endued with an astounding assurance and 
impudence that makes one wink again with 
amazement ? Napoleon was a Arm nasologist, 
and used to select his men by the size and 
shape of their noses. '' Give me," said he, 
''a man with a good allowance of nose. 
Strange as it may appear, when I want any 
good head-work done, I choose a man — pro- 



300 ''CHERRY RIPE! 



vided his education has been suitable — with 
a long nose." Perhaps by a long nose he 
meant a cogitative one, widening gradually 
towards the end, this width denoting power 
of concentrated thought, and habits of close 
and absorbed meditation. 

And this shape, that is neither Roman nor 
Greek, neither handsome nor unhandsome, 
and for that very reason did not, on Adam's 
countenance, find favour in Mignon's eyes, 
has been shared in common by almost all 
2)rofound thinkers, or men of especial excel- 
lence who have obtained eminence in the 
widely different departments of war, theology, 
science and art. Homer, Goethe, Michael 
Angelo, Galileo, Cromwell, Talleyrand, Usher, 
and Hume, are a few instances of the famous 
men in whom the nose cogitative is remarkably 
apparent. 

Finally making up liur mind that Adam's 
nose was too peaceable for a man, Mignon 
turned her eyes away from him to the green 
and swelUng lines of the beautiful park. 



FRUIT, 301 



Nevertheless, little madam, had he possessed 
the Roman or aquiline feature that you con- 
sider essential, and with it the selfishness, 
vigour, sternness and pluck that are almost 
invariably its attributes, together with a 
power of subduing all things to himself by 
sheer will, and an imperious disregard of the 
likings of all the world, himself included, 
then it may well have been that he would 
have brooked none of your fancies and 
scruples, but have mastered and broken you 
to his will once and for all, leaving it in your 
own hands whether you struggled out your 
life as a slave, or found comfort in your 
captivity in learning to kiss the rod that 
chastised you. 

Lest, however, we excite laughter where 
w^e are fain to evoke admiration, let us not 
pause to speculate farther as to the possible 
influence exercised by Adam's nose over his 
own and Mignon's destiny. 

One thing only is certain, that if the time 
devoted by Mignon that afternoon to the 



302 CHERRY RIPE 



study of that feature, had been spent in 
arrivinof at a better understanding^ with her 
husband, then her story would not have been 
what it was, nor would her adventures ever 
have been chronicled in these pages. 

For though she knew it not, in that hour 
came to her the golden minute that comes to 
all, and that decides the weal or woe of 
almost every human life, came and passed ; 
nor gave one warning whisper that said, " I 
come ... I pass .... I stand by your side 
.... stretch out your hand and stay me, for 
to you I come never again . . . ." 

Ay, the opportunity had passed, but in 
vanishing did it not unconsciously sweep 
some chord in her heart, else why was it that 
across her memory came straying and fashion- 
ing itself in dumb music upon her lips, a verse 
of that old matchless song, than which there is 
not one more exquisite written upon the 
hearts of men ? 

" Could ye come back to me, Douglas, Douglas, 
In the old likeness that I knew, 



FRUIT. 303 



I could be so loving, so tender and true, 
Douglas, Douglas, tender and true." . . . 

She had heard it drummed out scores and 
scores of times by the stiff uninformed fingers 
of her schoohiiates, but until this moment the 
song had held no meaning for her .... out 
of what mystery of sky and earth had it then 
so suddenly come to her ? 

" Stretch out your arms to me, Douglas, Douglas ! 
Drop forgiveness from heaven like dew, 
As I lay my heart on your dead heart, Douglas, 
Douglas, Douglas, tender and true." 

She wondered what the true story of that 
song Avas . . . she would like to have some 
notion of the man's face, the girl's . . . she 
fancied she could picture both, and she closed 
her eyes to the smiling landscape so long that 
Adam, glancing at her at last, thought she 
had fallen asleep. But when she opened her 
eyes he seemed just as much absorbed in his 
book as ever, only ho had dropped his pencil, 
and it now lay on the grass between them. 



^04 " CHERRY RIPE /' 

She stooped forward, picked it up and tried 
to draw a face on her thumb-nail, school- 
girl fashion, but lead-pencil and pen and 
ink are very different matters, and she 
soon gave up the attempt in disgust. 
Then a thought seemed to strike her, and 
diving hopefully into her pocket her face 
brightened as she found and produced a 
letter. It was tumbled and rather the worse 
for wear, but on one side there was no 
writing, and she Avas about to commence her 
portraits on a more satisfactory footing, 
when something seemed to arouse her atten- 
tion, and quickly unfolding the paper, her 
countenance became overspread with one of 
those painful stinging blushes, that even com- 
municate to the beholder some of their o\y\\ 
miserable discomfort. 

Adam, apparently unobservant, had been 
aware of the failure of the thumb-nail portrait, 
he had seen her produce the letter, but with 
the extraordinary emotion she displayed, his 
attention became arrested. 



FRUIT. 305 



Hitherto, that disease of Httle minds, 
suspicion, had found no place in him, but 
now, aware that there was only one person on 
earth whose letters could cause her such 
painful confusion, it occurred to him that this 
one was probably clandestine, and if so, it 
behoved him to see it, that she might if 
possible be saved from the consequences of 
her own folly. 

As he so thought, their eyes met. He 
imao^ined that he read defiance in hers, but it 
really was a species of fear, and fear was to her 
something strange and new, and accepted by 
her, as by all young, shy, untried creatures, 
fiercely. Altogether misunderstanding her 
glance, he received it as a challenge, and 
replied to it as such. 

As every one knows, when a pitcher is 
filled to the brim, the slightest touch will 
cause it to run over. Even so may dissatis- 
faction accumulate for days, weeks, even 
months, until the last straw is added, the 
overtasked strength gives way, and we break 

VOL. II. 30 



306 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

out with a strencrth and passion that to 
the offender appears altogether dispropor- 
tionate to the offence. 

Thus Adam was carried away by a greater 
storm of rage than had ever swayed him, as 
he said quietly, 

" You will let me see that letter T 

She looked at him; but, save that her 
hand closed more tightly on the paper, she 
never moved. 

" You will give me that letter ?" he said, 
and held out his hand for it. 

'' And why should I do that T she said 
proudly; ''it is written not to you, but to 
me, and it may be that he would not desire 
that I should give it to you to read . . . ." 

When a man of the lower orders is mad- 
dened past endurance by the woman who is 
only a shade less rough and degraded than 
himself, it is not his wont to punish her with 
those sarcastic speeches and keen-edged 
words that are the weapons with which a 
gentleman stabs the wife or sweetheart who 



FRUIT. 307 



lias angered him ; he keeps all his witty, 
eloquent, or cutting speeches in his fists, and 
informs her with them until he has thoroughly 
conveyed their various meanings to her mind. 
The savag^e instinct that s^uides the two men 
is precisely similar ; it does but take different 
forms of expression. 

Fortunately for Mignon, this taint of 
cruelty that is the direct oifsp ring of jealousy, 
and that debases its origin as much as it 
outrages its object, was entirely absent in 
Adam ; therefore, exasperated though he was 
by her last speech, he merely held out his 
hand for the third time. 

" Do not compel me to take it from you," 
he said. 

At that her face flamed up, and with a 
passionate gesture she flung the letter from 
her. 

It fell almost into his hands ; and though 
he had a mind to compel her to present it in 
more respectful fashion, lie tliought he w^ould 
let lier off* that time^ and proceeded to unfold 

39—2 



308 ''CHERRY RIPE r 

the paper. The date was June : it was the 
love-letter that he himself had stolen and 
afterwards returned to her. 

So she had religiously kept and carried it 
everywhere with her all these months, she 
could yet feel so freshly about it as to blush 
at its mere sight and touch. 

'' You value this letter ?" he said, re- 
folding it, without having read one word of 
its contents. 

'' It was my first love-letter," she said,, 
hanging down her head. 

*'And I deeply regret," he said calmly, 
'' that I should, by marrying you, have 
deprived you of the pleasure of receiving 
many more such epistles." 

She looked at him in sudden horror ; her 
lips parted, but no sound issued from them. 

It had come at last, this thing that she had 
feared. All along she had been quite sure 
that he had married her out of kindness, but 
now he was going to tell her so. 

For many past weeks she had felt his con- 



FRUIT. 309 



stant care and attention to be withdrawn 
from her, and had grown chill and sad under 
their bereavement, for not until they had 
ceased did she discover how sweet and 
valuable they were to her, or how much her 
trouble concerning Muriel was soothed by the 
watchfulness and thought that had hitherto 
so amply encompassed her. 

Well, he had grown weary of doing his 
duty gracefully, and since he gave her shelter, 
and food, and clothing, doubtless considered 
he had done all that was necessary or to be 
expected of him. 

She felt herself turning cold and sick with 
dread of what his next words would be . . . 
Yet, after all, it was she who spoke first, not 
Adam. 

"• You are sorry," slie said, with trembling 
lips, '' that you burdened yourself with me ; 
and I have seen it, oil, yes I I have seen it 
for a lung while past — and — and you cannot 
be more sorry for it than I am." 

They had both risen, her carefully 



310 " CHERR Y RIPE /" 

gathered spoils lay scattered on the ground 
between them. 

" Why did you do it ?" she cried, smiting 
her hands passionately together ; *^you thought 
to do a very good and noble thing, but it was 
a fatal mistake, a mistake that we can never 
undo, for the longer we live the worse it will 
grow^ and it is a terrible thought that only 
deaili can stoj) our being sony or set us 
free from one another." 

" You are right," he said quietly, '' it was 
a mistake from first to last, and before God I 
swear that if it were possible I would gladly 
undo that morning's work ; but as it is, and 
since our hopes of liberation must be far 
distant, we will try to make the best of a bad 
business, and go our different ways, neither 
considering nor thwaiiing one another. Had 
you any relative to whose care I might 
confide you " 

'' If only she would come," broke in the 
girl, wringing her hands in a strange piteous 
agony, '' we would go away together, and you 



FRUIT. 311 



should be troubled with me never any more 
.... but, oh ! it will never be the same, for 
go where I w411 I shall be bound to you 
always, and if it were not for that, how happy 

we might have been " 

Unconsciously her hand tightened on the 
letter that Adam had long ago returned 
her ; and Adam, perceiving that gesture, 
and believing it to express vehement regret 
that she was not free to marry the man 
she loved, felt himself all at once carried 
away by an impulse of uncontrollable fury, 
and snatching the letter from her, he tore it 
into a hundred pieces, ground them beneath 
his heel, then turned and strode rapidly away, 
leaving the girl standing in the midst of the 
soft woodland beauty, with chill and pallid 
lips, and heart that fluttered awhile with 
fear, then sank in her breast cold and heavy 
as any stone. 





CHAPTER XV. 

" I dare do all that doth become a man ; 
Who dare do more is none." 

T is a bad thing \vlien a man, sitting 
soberly down to take count of the 
faihires and successes of his Hfe, 
is compelled to acknowledge to himself that 
in his choice of a wife he has made a terrible 
mistake. 

We will suppose that he has not arrived at 
this conclusion all at once ; that he has taken 
time to consider the matter from every point 
of view ; consequently, that the decision 
which is arrived at without heat or excite- 
ment is presumably a correct one. 



FRUIT. 313 



There are men who will not acknowledge 
the false steps they have taken, even to their 
own hearts ; it is intolerable to them to have 
their lack of shrewdness forced upon them, 
or to stand convicted of a fatal error of judg- 
ment. But Adam was not one of those men, 
and had a way of facing his difficulties as he 
went, that, while it required some strength of 
mind in the present, saved him from much 
trouble and mortification in the future. 

It had been slowly growing upon him for 
some time past, the consciousness of this mis- 
take of his, but he had not positively made 
up his mind to it until the morning that fol- 
lowed the walk which had begun with amity 
and ended in so unseemly an outbreak on 
his part. 

As he sat with folded arms at the table, 
his eyes fixed on the blank sheet of paper 
before him, there seemed to pass in array the 
different events that, one by one, had brought 
this conviction home to him. There flitted 
before him a series of tableatiXy in the first of 



314 " CHERR V RIPE /" 



which he beheld his hour-old wife pillowing 
on her breast the head of her unconscious 
lover, by whose side she was frantically 
desirous of remaining, even when her hus- 
band bade her follow him .... the second 
picture represented the same actors, but this 
time it was the woman who was unconscious, 
the man who gazed down upon her distracted 
by love, disappointment, and despair .... 
anon the scene changed, and the gazer saw a 
slim young girl, who, with clasped hands and 
a passion of earnestness in her blue eyes, 
asked, '^ Do you think we shall ever see lihn 
again T And there yet rang in his ears the 
question put by her to Prue on a subsequent 
occasion, '' If one got married at all, might it 
not be better to marry somebody that one 
loved T 

And lastly, and freshest of all in his mind, 
since he had beheld it but yesterday, he saw 
the same girl sitting on the grass with her 
lap half full of wild flowers, and in her hand a 
letter, fondly hoarded, closely cherished, while 



FRUIT. 315 



guilty blushes painted her cheeks, and angry 
defiance flashed from her eyes. Here the 
series ended ; but doubtless there were plenty 
more in store for him, in which he would cut 
the same sorry, despicable figure that it had 
been his lot to do since his marriage. 

The contemptible position he filled was be- 
coming absolutely intolerable to him. Once 
or twice lately he had said to himself that he 
would throw the whole thing up and go 
away ; then the thought that by so doing he 
acknowledged himself beaten, acknowledged 
that the task he had set himself was one that 
he had neither skill nor strength to perform, 
stepped in and held him back. What ! aban- 
don with such haste a pursuit to which he had 
sworn to devote every energy he possessed, 
to which he had vowed to brinof the most 
entire love, the most inexhaustible patience, 
and the practice of every delicate and gentle 
art that would be likely to woo the heart out 
of a woman's breast ? Well, there are some 
things a proud man cannot do, there are posi- 



^316 ''CHERRY RIPEf 



tions that a man of self-respect cannot be 
expected to fill, and he was growing weary of 
striving to wear his cap and bells gracefully, 
and while he would have moved heaven and 
earth to win her when he believed that her 
love was a treasure no man had yet won, the 
same efforts went terribly against the grain 
with him now that he thought he possessed 
damning evidence of her passion for Philip 
La Mert. 

There is an enormous diflference in men's 
fashion of loving. Some are better lovers 
when piqued and provoked by women ; pro- 
vocation attracts, and contradiction fixes 
them ; they are indeed only satisfactory and 
agreeable as lovers so long as they are kept 
hungry. But where a man is thorough, and 
demands an undivided love, moreover, having 
that within him which makes satiety impos- 
sible to him, then he will be satisfied with 
no half-gift, and if he is not able to possess 
that which he covets in its intesrritv, he will 
reject it altogether. 



FRUIT. 317 



Adam was one of these men, and he said 
to hmiself that he ^yould no longer seek to 
bring back her wandering allegiance ; nay, a 
something stifFand hard within him rose up, and 
rebelled against the constant repulses he had 
met, and, alas ! he was beginning to pass from 
the healthy, if tormenting, stage of suffering, 
to the toqoid disease of indifference. He found 
himself contemplating the possibility of her 
fancy for Philip fading away, to be gradually 
replaced by a liking for himself (for girls are 
heedless creatures, and apt to confound their 
fancies and their hearts) with positive aver- 
sion. 

And the bitterest part of the whole thing 
was, that the fault lay with himself 

He had not behaved fairly towards her ; 
he had been absolutely dishonest in the ad- 
vantage he had taken of her youth and in- 
experience. He should have waited, should 
have given her time to learn her own mind 
before, instead of after, her marriage, have 
won or lost her in fair fight; instead of which 



318 ''CHERRY RIPE/' 

he had hurried her, and, now that she had 
grown more wise, she despised him for it. 

It had begun badly .... it had ended 
worse. The deception he had practised on 
her was bringing forth bitter fruit, and though 
good might at first have appeared to come 
out of evil, it was not really so. No edifice, 
however stately, can rest securely on a shift- 
ing foundation. 

If it were not for the belief he entertained 
that Philip was the destroyer of Muriel 
(although of this he had no proof, and might 
be altogether mistaken), he thought it might 
have been better that Miofnon should have 
married him, for of this man's love for her 
there could be no doubt, and he had grown 
weary of wickedness, and influenced by her, 
might have led a better life, especially as she 
.... loved him 

'' Why, man alive !" said Colin, entering 
suddenly, " what on earth is the matter ? 
Have you got a murder on your mind, or are 
you only meditating one ?" 



FRUIT. 319 



Adam's brow relaxed, his clenched hand 
straio^htened itself : but none the less honest 
Colin, as he sat down opposite his brother-in- 
law, shook his head with very real concern. 

" You're all wrong, old fellow," he said — 
'* look as if you meant going in for a fever, 
or something of that sort. What you really 
want is your feet on the stubble, and your 
favourite gun in your hand. It's your High- 
land air 3^ou're pining for, and it's my belief 
you'll be no better till you've got it." 

'^ That is out of the question," said Adam, 
rising and going to the window. ^^ You see 
I've work to do, and " 

^' Ah, yes — well — too much work is bad 
for you," here he looked keenly at Adam, 
then shook his head again, unobserved by 
the other, — '' and you're not used to it, and 
— and we miss you awfully at Glen-luce ; even 
your governor seems really vexed you're not 
there — and we have a very pleasant party of 
fellows ; Phillis, too, is holding a small court, 
and I've never known the place more jolly. 



320 

Come back with me to-morrow, stop a fort- 
night, and then return to your work, freshened 
up and better in every way." 

" I can't leave my wife here alone," said 
Adam, but with a momentary hesitation in 
his tone that Colin instantly detected. 

'^ What harm can she possibly come to ?" 
said Colin quickly. '' She is at our place 
from morning till night with the children ; 
and I should think Prue would be a perfect 
dragon where she is concerned ; and — you 
won't think me intrusive or taking a liberty, 
old fellow, but women are sometimes best 
left to themselves for a bit — they're full of 
fancies, poor souls, and often don't know 
what they want, or what is good for them, 
and " 

Here his flounderings came to an end, and 
Adam, turning from the window, in spite of 
himself, burst out laughing. 

'' All right, old man," he said; '' I'll think 
it over, and let you know this evening. 
How's Floss r 



FRUIT. 321 



*' Not particularly bright, poor little soul. 
And don't thhik about coming, but come," he 
added, as he took his departure. 

After all, thought Adam, he had a great 
mind to q:o . . . . At that moment the 
temptation to get clear away from the cark- 
ing worries that embittered his life, was well- 
nigh irresistible. 

And of late he had been suffering from a 
species of nostalgia, both his waking and 
dreaming thoughts being full of Strathsaye, 
for his love for his Highland home was very 
great. An intense longing was upon him for 
a great free breath of air on his own hills, for 
the pleasant stir and bustle of his favourite 
sport ; above all, for a complete change of 
air, scene, and companionship, that would 
restore the tone to his nerves, and shake the 
cobwebs from his weary brain. 

And then, having almost decided that he 
would go, the thought of leaving Mignon 
entirely alone, and with no better guardians 
than Flora and Pruc, caused him to ask hini- 

VOL. II. J^o 



322 

self if he were mad to think of thus abandon- 
ing her ? 

PhiHp La Mert might apj^ear upon the 
scene, although that was scarcely probable, 
as only a week ago had he seen an announce- 
ment in some paper of the departure of that 
gentleman for the Continent; or Flora might, 
by hook or crook, obtain the society of one or 
another of those objectionable friends in whom 
her soul delighted ; or bad news might come 
to Mignon of her sister, and there would be 
nobody by to soften the blow to her. And 
yet these objections rose one by one, simply 
to be demolished. Of evil intent to Mignon, 
Adam firmly believed Philip to be guiltless, 
and for many reasons it was improbable 
that he should desire to place himself in 
her way. As to Flora's acquaintances, 
she would find it a difiicult matter to dis- 
cover one within fifty miles of London 
town; and as to Muriel, he had his own 
reasons for believing that she was not to 
approach Mignon. 



FRUIT. 323 



^' Our first and third thoughts," says 
Dugald Stewart, '^ will be found to coin- 
cide." 

It was in accordance with this theory that 
Adam presently rang the bell, sent for Prue, 
and desired her to have everything in readi- 
ness for his departure early the following 
morning. 

Returning to her mistress and acquainting 
her with the orders just given, that young- 
lady received the intelligence without utter- 
ing a single word. 

In the dead of the night Adam suddenly 
awoke with a start, and a conviction that 
something unusual had just happened, or was 
happening. Had he heard the touch of a 
hand upon his door, or the sound of a footfall 
on the gravel without, or did some voice call 
upon him in that urgent imperative whisper 
that suffices to awaken the deepest sleeper ? 
He could not tell. 

Springing from his bed he went to the 

40—2 



324 " CHERRY RIPE /" 

open window and looked abroad. He could 
just make out tlie outlines of the trees and 
bushes ; but in the garden nothing stirred, 
and the midnight silence was intense and un- 
broken. And yet he was certain that the 
sound by which he had been awakened was 
an unusual one. There is within us some 
vigilant quality that is only exercised when 
every other faculty is at rest, that permits 
all ordinary sounds to pass unheeded while 
we sleep, but that instantly sounds the 
alarum when anything unusual or fraught 
with danger to us is at hand ; and Adam 
never doubted that he had been awakened 
by some cause that it behoved him to at once 
ascertain. 

He hastily threw on some clothes, and 
softly unlatching his door, went out into the 
passage, which was in total darkness. Noise- 
lessly proceeding along it, he came to 
Mignon's door, and with a start of fear, found 
that it was a little way open, usually it was 
closely shut. 



FRUIT. 325 



Was she walking in her sleep, and, 
possessed by the thought of Muriel even in 
her dreams, had she wandered out of her 
room into the garden or road in search 
of her % 

He hesitated a moment, pushed the door 
open, and entered. His heart was beating 
violently ; he could have faced the most 
frightful danger with a cooler hand, a steadier 
pulse than he now boasted ; the ugly feelings 
of the assassin or the thief seemed to be upon 
him as he advanced to the centre of the 
apartment and looked around him. Then, as 
he looked, he forgot himself in a keen sensa- 
tion of relief Whatever the sound might 
have been that awakened him, it was not 
caused by Mignon, who lay asleep on the 
bed^ her face disclosed by the subdued light 
of a taper that burned on a little table by 
her side. 

She was there, Adam had no occasion for 
uneasiness concerning her ; having assured 
himself therefore of the fact of her safety, 



526 ''CHERRY RIPE 



why did he not retire as noiselessly as he 
had entered ? 

Instead of which he stood, his feet rooted 
to the ground, absolutely without power to 
move, and Jiad she opened her eyes at that 
moment he could not have made good his 
escape ; his whole being was merged in tlie 
rapture, the luxury of regarding her . . . . 

" sideways lur face reposed 
On one white arm, and tenderly unclosed 
By tenderest pressure a faint damask mouth, 
To slumbering pout ; just as the morning south 
Disparts a dew-lipped rose . . . ." 

He had said to himself that very morning 
that he did not love her, nay, that he would 
not have her love if he could .... but to- 
night the veil of deceit fell from his heart, 
and he knew that the choicest good that 
earth contained for him was boimd up in that 
lovely, sleeping maiden yonder .... How 
young she looked, how innocent ! no more 
than a child that has fallen asleep with a 
«mile on its lips, and not a care or a thought 
for the morrow .... He crept a pace or 



FRUIT. 327 



two nearer, nearer yet, knelt beside her, 
then saw with a pang how dark were the 
shadows under her eyes, how thin the Uttle 
hand had grown, that slender blue-veined 
hand, with its mockery of a circlet shining 
upon it ! 

It was so near to him that his moustache 
actually brushed it, and as he looked, carried 
away by a wild, uncontrollable longing, he 
set his lips against it with a touch no rougher 
than that of a feather might be ; but light as 
it was, the touch sufficed to scatter her 
dreams, to unseal her blue eyes, and as, 
half-waking, she stretched out her white 
arms towards him, he fell face downwards 
on the ground, lying hidden in the shadow 
of the bed. "■ Muriel /" she murmured, 
" Muriel /" then sighing, she sank into 
slumber again : 



*' Self-folding, like a flower 



That faints into itself at evening hour." 



At the same moment that Mignon in her 



328 *' CHERRY RIPE /" 

sleep uttered her sister s name, a woman who 
stood without in the garden, her face turned 
upwards to the window in which the faint 
light shone, stretched out her yearning arms 
towards the unconscious girl. 

" Thou art safe, my beloved," she whis- 
pered, '^ . . . . in the keeping art thou of 
one who loves and will guard thee .... safe " 
.... She bowed her head upon her hands, 
shaken by an agony of longing, then 
stretched out her arms again, crying, *' if I 
might come to thee — my heart .... my 
heart .... if I might come to thee .... 
but to me .... to me . . . ." she shuddered, 
drew her cloak more closely about her, as 
though the night winds chilled her to the 
bone, then with a last look upwards, and a 
voiceless prayer, faded away in the half-light 
like a shadow. 

Thus, love's vigil kept over her from within, 
from without, Mignon slept, and they who 
watched knew not how powerless was the 
love of either to shield her from the fate that 



FRUIT. 329 



was creeping upon her, nor guessed that never 
had she stood in peril so dire as that which 
menaced her now. 

Could Adam have known, could he have 
foreseen the future, he would have gathered 
her there and then to his breast, he would 
have braved her dislike, even her loathing, 
rather than have left her exposed to the 
fearful risks she afterwards ran ; aye, he 
would have forfeited the chance of that 
voluntary relinquishment of herself to him, 
that he had all along vowed to be the only 
gift from her that could perfectly satisfy and 
content him. 

A little longer therefore he knelt beside 
her; then, lifting one of those long bright 
tresses that flooded all the pillow with their 
sunshine, to his lips, he rose and went quietly 
away. So, in the time to come, he saw her 
always, a child with the innocence of child- 
hood on brow and lip ; nor could he ever 
picture her as any other than she looked that 
night, not even when he knew that he ought 



330 

— « 

to think of her with the brand of shame 
upon her brow ; nay, this presentment of her 
as she had been, was afterwards to come 
between him and the hkeness of her as she 
was, so that he should know not her 
features, nor recognise in the outcast, the 
beautiful little child- wife that he had so 
madly loved. 



END OF VOL. IT. 



BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, SURREY. 

& <tH. 



