Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto the Third [Review]
Author: Jeffrey, Francis.
Publication info: Contributions To the Edinburgh Review . 4 v. London: Longman, Brown, Green, And Longmans, 1844.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto the Third. By Lord Byron ... The Prisoner of Chillon, and other Poems. By Lord Byron ... [Review] [in, Contributions to the Edinburgh Review. By Francis Jeffrey ... In Four Volumes]
[Page 164]
Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto the Third . By Lord Byron. 8vo. pp. 79. London: 1816. The Prisoner of Chillon, and other Poems . By Lord Byron. 8vo. pp. 60. London: 1816. (December, 1816.) 1 If the finest poetry be that which leaves the deepest impression on the minds of its readers—and this is not the worst test of its excellence—Lord Byron, we think, must be allowed to take precedence of all his distintinguished contemporaries. He has not the variety of Scott—nor the delicacy of Campbell—nor the absolute truth of Crabbe—nor the polished sparkling of Moore; but in force of diction, and inextinguishable energy of sentiment, he clearly surpasses them all. “Words that breathe, and thoughts that burn,” are not merely the ornaments, but the common staple of his poetry; and he is not inspired or impressive only in some happy passages, but through the whole body and tissue of his composition. It was an unavoidable condition, perhaps, of this higher excellence, that his scene should be narrow, and his persons few. To compass such ends as he had in view, it was necessary to reject all ordinary agents, and all trivial combinations. He could not possibly be amusing, or ingenious, or playful; or hope to maintain the requisite pitch of interest by the recitation of sprightly adventures, or the opposition of common
[Page 165]
characters. To produce great effects, in short, he felt that it was necessary to deal only with the greater passions—with the exaltations of a daring fancy, and the errors of a lofty intellect—with the pride, the terrors, and the agonies of strong emotion—the fire and air alone of our human elements.
In this respect, and in his general notion of the end and the means of poetry, we have sometimes thought that his views fell more in with those of the Lake poets, than of any other existing party in the poetical commonwealth: And, in some of his later productions especially, it is impossible not to be struck with his occasional approaches to the style and manner of this class of writers. Lord Byron, however, it should be observed, like all other persons of a quick sense of beauty, and sure enough of their own originality to be in no fear of paltry imputations, is a great mimic of styles and manners, and a great borrower of external character. He and Scott, accordingly, are full of imitations of all the writers from whom they have ever derived gratification; and the two most original writers of the age might appear, to superficial observers, to be the most deeply indebted to their predecessors. In this particular instance, we have no fault to find with Lord Byron: For undoubtedly the finer passages of Wordsworth and Southey have in them wherewithal to lend an impulse to the utmost ambition of rival genius; and their diction and manner of writing is frequently both striking and original. But we must say, that it would afford us still greater pleasure to find these tuneful gentlemen returning the compliment which Lord Byron has here paid to their talents; and forming themselves on the model rather of his imitations, than of their own originals. In those imitations they will find that, though he is sometimes abundantly mystical, he never, or at least very rarely, indulges in absolute nonsense—never takes his lofty flights upon mean or ridiculous occasions—and, above all, never dilutes his strong conceptions, and magnificent imaginations, with a flood of oppressive verbosity. On the contrary, he is, of all living writers, the most concise
[Page 166]
and condensed; and, we would fain hope, may go far, by his example, to redeem the great reproach of our modern literature—its intolerable prolixity and redundance. In his nervous and manly lines, we find no elaborate amplification of common sentiments—no ostentatious polishing of pretty expressions; and we really think that the brilliant success which has rewarded his disdain of those paltry artifices, should put to shame for ever that puling and self-admiring race, who can live through half a volume on the stock of a single thought, and expatiate over diverse fair quarto pages with the details of one tedious description. In Lord Byron, on the contrary, we have a perpetual stream of thick-coming fancies—an eternal spring of fresh-blown images, which seem called into existence by the sudden flash of those glowing thoughts and overwhelming emotions, that struggle for expression through the whole flow of his poetry—and impart to a diction that is often abrupt and irregular, a force and a charm which frequently realise all that is said of inspiration.
With all these undoubted claims to our admiration, however, it is impossible to deny that the noble author before us has still something to learn, and a good deal to correct. He is frequently abrupt and careless, and sometimes obscure. There are marks, occasionally, of effort and straining after an emphasis, which is generally spontaneous; and, above all, there is far too great a monotony in the moral colouring of his pictures, and too much repetition of the same sentiments and maxims. He delights too exclusively in the delineation of a certain morbid exaltation of character and of feeling—a sort of demoniacal sublimity, not without some traits of the ruined Archangel. He is haunted almost perpetually with the image of a being feeding and fed upon by violent passions, and the recollections of the catastrophes they have occasioned: And, though worn out by their past indulgence, unable to sustain the burden of an existence which they do not continue to animate:—full of pride, and revenge, and obduracy—disdaining life and death, and mankind and himself—and trampling, in
[Page 167]
his scorn, not only upon the falsehood and formality of polished life, but upon its tame virtues and slavish devotion: Yet envying, by fits, the very beings he despises, and melting into mere softness and compassion, when the helplessness of childhood or the frailty of woman make an appeal to his generosity. Such is the person with whom we are called upon almost exclusively to sympathise in all the greater productions of this distinguished writer:—In Childe Harold—in the Corsair —in Lara—in the Siege of Corinth—in Parisina, and in most of the smaller pieces.
It is impossible to represent such a character better than Lord Byron has done in all these productions— or indeed to represent any thing more terrible in its anger, or more attractive in its relenting. In point of effect, we readily admit, that no one character can be more poetical or impressive:—But it is really too much to find the scene perpetually filled by one character— not only in all the acts of each several drama, but in all the different dramas of the series;—and, grand and impressive as it is, we feel at last that these very qualities make some relief more indispensable, and oppress the spirits of ordinary mortals with too deep an impression of awe and repulsion. There is too much guilt, in short, and too much gloom, in the leading character;—and though it be a fine thing to gaze, now and then, on stormy seas, and thunder-shaken mountains, we should prefer passing our days in sheltered valleys, and by the murmur of calmer waters.
We are aware that these metaphors may be turned against us—and that, without metaphor, it may be said that men do not pass their days in reading poetry—and that, as they may look into Lord Byron only about as often as they look abroad upon tempests, they have no more reason to complain of him for being grand and gloomy, than to complain of the same qualities in the glaciers and volcanoes which they go so far to visit. Painters, too, it may be said, have often gained great reputation by their representations of tigers and other ferocious animals, or of caverns and banditti—and poets
[Page 168]
should be allowed, without reproach, to indulge in analogous exercises. We are far from thinking that there is no weight in these considerations; and feel how plausibly it may be said, that we have no better reason for a great part of our complaint, than that an author, to whom we are already very greatly indebted, has chosen rather to please himself, than us, in the use he makes of his talents.
This, no doubt, seems both unreasonable and ungrateful: But it is nevertheless true, that a public benefactor becomes a debtor to the public; and is, in some degree, responsible for the employment of those gifts which seem to be conferred upon him, not merely for his own delight, but for the delight and improvement of his fellows through all generations. Independent of this, however, we think there is a reply to the apology. A great living poet is not like a distant volcano, or an occasional tempest. He is a volcano in the heart of our land, and a cloud that hangs over our dwellings; and we have some reason to complain, if, instead of genial warmth and grateful shade, he voluntarily darkens and inflames our atmosphere with perpetual fiery explosions and pitchy vapours. Lord Byron's poetry, in short, is too attractive and too famous to lie dormant or inoperative; and, therefore, if it produce any painful or pernicious effects, there will be murmurs, and ought to be suggestions of alteration. Now, though an artist may draw fighting tigers and hungry lions in as lively and natural a way as he can, without giving any encouragement to human ferocity, or even much alarm to human fear, the case is somewhat different, when a poet represents men with tiger-like dispositions:—and yet more so, when he exhausts the resources of his genius to make this terrible being interesting and attractive, and to represent all the lofty virtues as the natural allies of his ferocity. It is still worse when he proceeds to show, that all these precious gifts of dauntless courage, strong affection, and high imagination, are not only akin to guilt, but the parents of misery;—and that those only have any chance of tranquillity or happiness in this world, whom it is the object of his poetry to make us shun and despise.
[Page 169]
These, it appears to us, are not merely errors in taste, but perversions of morality; and, as a great poet is necessarily a moral teacher, and gives forth his ethical lessons, in general with far more effect and authority than any of his graver brethren, he is peculiarly liable to the censures reserved for those who turn the means of improvement to purposes of corruption.
It may no doubt be said, that poetry in general tends less to the useful than the splendid qualities of our nature—that a character poetically good has long been distinguished from one that is morally so—and that, ever since the time of Achilles, our sympathies, on such occasions, have been chiefly engrossed by persons whose deportment is by no means exemplary; and who in many points approach to the temperament of Lord Byron's ideal hero. There is some truth in this suggestion also. But other poets, in the first place, do not allow their favourites so outrageous a monopoly of the glory and interest of the piece—and sin less therefore against the laws either of poetical or distributive justice. In the second place, their heroes are not, generally, either so bad or so good as Lord Byron's—and do not indeed very much exceed the standard of truth and nature, in either of the extremes. His, however, are as monstrous and unnatural as centaurs, and hippogriffs—and must ever figure in the eye of sober reason as so many bright and hateful impossibilities. But the most important distinction is, that the other poets who deal in peccant heroes, neither feel nor express that ardent affection for them, which is visible in the whole of this author's delineations; but merely make use of them as necessary agents in the extraordinary adventures they have to detail, and persons whose mingled vices and virtues are requisite to bring about the catastrophe of their story. In Lord Byron, however, the interest of the story, where there happens to be one, which is not always the case, is uniformly postponed to that of the character itself—into which he enters so deeply, and with so extraordinary a fondness, that he generally continues to speak in its language, after it has been dismissed from the stage; and
[Page 170]
to inculcate, on his own authority, the same sentiments which had been previously recommended by its example. We do not consider it as unfair, therefore, to say that Lord Byron appears to us to be the zealous apostle of a certain fierce and magnificent misanthropy; which has already saddened his poetry with too deep a shade, and not only led to a great misapplication of great talents, but contributed to render popular some very false estimates of the constituents of human happiness and merit. It is irksome, however, to dwell upon observations so general—and we shall probably have better means of illustrating these remarks, if they are really well founded, when we come to speak of the particular publications by which they have now been suggested.
We had the good fortune, we believe, to be among the first who proclaimed the rising of a new luminary, on the appearance of Childe Harold on the poetical horizon, —and we pursued his course with due attention through several of the constellations. If we have lately omitted to record his progress with the same accuracy, it is by no means because we have regarded it with more indifference, or supposed that it would be less interesting to the public—but because it was so extremely conspicuous as no longer to require the notices of an official observer. In general, we do not think it necessary, nor indeed quite fair, to oppress our readers with an account of works, which are as well known to them as to ourselves; or with a repetition of sentiments in which all the world is agreed. Wherever a work, therefore, is very popular, and where the general opinion of its merits appears to be substantially right, we think ourselves at liberty to leave it out of our chronicle, without incurring the censure of neglect or inattention. A very rigorous application of this maxim might have saved our readers the trouble of reading what we now write—and, to confess the truth, we write it rather to gratify ourselves, than with the hope of giving them much information. At the same time, some short notice of the progress of such a writer ought, perhaps, to appear in his contemporary journals, as a tribute due to his eminence;—and a zealous critic
[Page 171]
can scarcely set about examining the merits of any work, or the nature of its reception by the public, without speedily discovering very urgent cause for his admonitions, both to the author and his admirers.
Our last particular account was of the Corsair;—and though from that time to the publication of the pieces, the titles of which we have prefixed, the noble author has produced as much poetry as would have made the fortune of any other person, we can afford to take but little notice of those intermediate performances; which have already passed their ordeal with this generation, and are fairly committed to the final judgment of posterity. Some slight reference to them, however, may be proper, both to mark the progress of the author's views, and the history of his fame.
Lara was obviously the sequel of the Corsair —and maintained, in general, the same tone of deep interest, and lofty feeling;—though the disappearance of Medora from the scene deprives it of the enchanting sweetness, by which its terrors were there redeemed, and make the hero on the whole less captivating. The character of Lara, too, is rather too laboriously finished, and his nocturnal encounter with the apparition is worked up too ostentatiously. There is infinite beauty in the sketch of the dark page—and in many of the moral or general reflections which are interspersed with the narrative. The death of Lara, however, is by far the finest passage in the poem, and is fully equal to any thing else which the author has ever written. Though it is not under our immediate cognisance, we cannot resist the temptation of transcribing the greater part of the passage—in which the physical horror of the event, though described with a terrible force and fidelity, is both relieved and enhanced by the beautiful pictures of mental energy and redeeming affection with which it is combined. Our readers will recollect, that this gloomy and daring chief was mortally wounded in battle, and led out of it, almost insensible, by that sad and lovely page, whom no danger could ever separate from his side. On his retreat, slaughter and desolation falls on his disheartened followers;
[Page 172]
and the poet turns from the scene of disorder—
“Beneath a lime, remoter from the scene,
Where but for him that strife had never been,
A breathing but devoted warrior lay:
'Twas Lara bleeding fast from life away!
His follower once, and now his only guide,
Kneels Kaled watchful o'er his welling side,
And with his scarf would staunch the tides that rush,
With each convulsion, in a blacker gush;
And then, as his faint breathing waxes low,
In feebler, not less fatal tricklings flow:
He scarce can speak; but motions him 'tis vain,
And merely adds another throb to pain.
He clasps the hand that pang which would assuage,
And sadly smiles his thanks to that dark page
Who nothing fears, nor feels, nor heeds, nor sees,
Save that damp brow which rests upon his knees;
Save that pale aspect, where the eye, though dim,
Held all the light that shone on earth for him!
“The foe arrives, who long had search'd the field,
Their triumph nought till Lara too should yield;
They would remove him; but they see 'twere vain,
And he regards them with a calm disdain,
That rose to reconcile him with his fate,
And that escape to death from living hate:
And Otho comes, and leaping from his steed,
Looks on the bleeding foe that made him bleed,
And questions of his state: He answers not;
Scarce glances on him as on one forgot,
And turns to Kaled:—each remaining word,
They understood not, if distinctly heard;
His dying tones are in that other tongue,
To which some strange remembrance wildly clung,” &c.
Their words though faint were many—from the tone
Their import those who heard could judge alone;
From this, you might have deem'd young Kaled's death
More near than Lara's, by his voice and breath;
So sad, so deep, and hesitating broke
The accents his scarce-moving pale lips spoke;
But Lara's voice though low, at first was clear
And calm, till murm'ring death gasp'd hoarsely near:
But from his visage little could we guess,
So unrepentant, dark, and passionless,
Save that when struggling nearer to his last,
Upon that page his eye was kindly cast;
And once as Kaled's answ'ring accents ceast,
Rose Lara's hand, and pointed to the East.—
[Page 173]
“But gasping heav'd the breath that Lara drew,
And dull the film along his dim eye grew;
His limbs stretch'd flutt'ring, and his head dropp'd o'er
The weak, yet still untiring knee that bore!
He press'd the hand he held upon his heart—
It beats no more! but Kaled will not part
With the cold grasp! but feels, and feels in vain,
For that faint throb which answers not again.
‘It beats!’ Away, thou dreamer! he is gone!
It once was Lara which thou look'st upon.
“He gaz'd, as if not yet had pass'd away
The haughty spirit of that humble clay;
And those around have rous'd him from his trance,
But cannot tear from thence his fixed glance;
And when, in raising him from where he bore
Within his arms the form that felt no more,
He saw the head his breast would still sustain,
Roll down, like earth to earth, upon the plain!
He did not dash himself thereby; nor tear
The glossy tendrils of his raven hair,
But strove to stand and gaze; but reel'd and fell,
Scarce breathing more than that he lov'd so well!
Than that He lov'd! Oh! never yet beneath
The breast of Man such trusty love may breathe!
That trying moment hath at once reveal'd
The secret, long and yet but half-conceal'd;
In baring to revive that lifeless breast,
Its grief seem'd ended, but the sex confest!
And life return'd, and Kaled felt no shame—
What now to her was Womanhood or Fame?”
We must stop here;—but the whole sequel of the poem is written with equal vigour and feeling; and may be put in competition with any thing that poetry has ever produced, in point either of pathos or energy.
The Siege of Corinth is next in the order of time; and though written, perhaps, with too visible a striving after effect, and not very well harmonised in all its parts, we cannot help regarding it as a magnificent composition. There is less misanthropy in it than in any of the rest; and the interest is made up of alternate representations of soft and solemn scenes and emotions—and of the tumult, and terrors, and intoxication of war. These opposite pictures are perhaps too violently contrasted, and, in some parts, too harshly coloured; but they are in general exquisitely designed, and executed with the
[Page 174]
utmost spirit and energy. What, for instance, can be finer than the following night-piece? The renegade had left his tent in moody musing, the night before the final assault on the Christian walls:
“ 'Tis midnight! On the mountain's brown
The cold, round moon shines deeply down;
Blue roll the waters; blue the sky
Spreads like an ocean hung on high,
Bespangled with those isles of light,
So wildly, spiritually bright;
Who ever gaz'd upon them shining,
And turn'd to earth without repining,
Nor wish'd for wings to flee away,
And mix with their eternal ray?
The waves on either shore lay there,
Calm, clear, and azure as the air;
And scarce their foam the pebbles shook,
But murmur'd meekly as the brook.
The winds were pillow'd on the waves;
The banners droop'd along their staves,
And, as they fell around them furling,
Above them shone the crescent curling;
And that deep silence was unbroke,
Save where the watch his signal spoke,
Save where the steed neigh'd oft and shrill,
And echo answer'd from the hill,
And the wide hum of that wild host
Rustled like leaves from coast to coast,
As rose the Muezzin's voice in air
In midnight call to wonted prayer.”—
The transition to the bustle and fury of the morning muster, as well as the moving picture of the barbaric host, is equally admirable.
“The night is past, and shines the sun
As if that morn were a jocund one.
Lightly and brightly breaks away
The Morning from her mantle grey,
And the Noon will look on a sultry day!
Hark to the trump, and the drum,
And the mournful sound of the barb'rous horn,
And the flap of the banners, that flit as they're borne,
And the neigh of the steed, and the multitude's hum,
And the clash, and the shout, ‘They come, they come!’
The horsetails are pluck'd from the ground, and the sword
From its sheath! and they form—and but wait for the word.
[Page 175]
The steeds are all bridled, and snort to the rein;
Curv'd is each neck, and flowing each mane;
White is the foam of their champ on the bit:
The spears are uplifted; the matches are lit;
The cannon are pointed, and ready to roar,
And crush the wall they have crumbled before!
Forms in his phalanx each Janizar;
Alp at their head; his right arm is bare;
So is the blade of his scimitar!
The khan and the pachas are all at their post;
The vizier himself at the head of the host.
When the culverin's signal is fir'd, then on!
Leave not in Corinth a living one—
A priest at her altars, a chief in her halls,
A hearth in her mansions, a stone on her walls!
God and the Prophet!—Alla Hu!
Up to the skies with that wild halloo!
    “As the wolves, that headlong go
On the stately buffalo,
Though with fiery eyes and angry roar,
And hoofs that stamp, and horns that gore,
He tramples on earth, or tosses on high
The foremost, who rush on his strength but to die:
Thus against the wall they went,
Thus the first were backward bent!
Many a bosom, sheath'd in brass,
Strew'd the earth like broken glass,
Shiver'd by the shot, that tore
The ground whereon they mov'd no more:
Even as they fell, in files they lay,
Like the mower's grass at the close of day,
When his work is done on the levell'd plain;
Such was the fall of the foremost slain!
As the spring-tides, with heavy plash,
From the cliffs invading dash
Huge fragments, sapp'd by the ceaseless flow,
Till white and thundering down they go,—
Like the avalanche's snow
On the Alpine vales below;
Thus at length, outbreath'd, and worn,
Corinth's sons were downward borne
By the long, and oft renew'd
Charge of the Moslem multitude!
In firmness they stood, and in masses they fell,
Heap'd, by the host of the infidel,
Hand to hand, and foot to foot:
Nothing there, save death, was mute;
Stroke, and thrust, and flash, and cry
For quarter, or for victory!
[Page 176]
But the rampart is won, and the spoil begun,
And all but the after-carnage done.
Shriller shrieks now mingling come
From within the plunder'd dome:
Hark to the haste of flying feet!
That splash in the blood of the slippery street!”
Parisina is of a different character. There is no tumult or stir in this piece. It is all sadness, and pity, and terror. The story is told in half a sentence. The Prince of Esté has married a lady who was originally destined for his favourite natural son. He discovers a criminal attachment between them; and puts the issue and the invader of his bed to death, before the face of his unhappy paramour. There is too much of horror, perhaps, in the circumstances; but the writing is beautiful throughout; and the whole wrapped in a rich and redundant veil of poetry, where every thing breathes the pure essence of genius and sensibility. The opening verses, though soft and voluptuous, are tinged with the same shade of sorrow which gives its character and harmony to the whole poem.
“It is the hour when from the boughs,
The nightingale's high note is heard;
It is the hour when lovers' vows
Seem sweet in every whisper'd word;
And gentle winds, and waters near,
Make music to the lonely ear!
Each flower the dews have lightly wet;
And in the sky the stars are met,
And on the wave is deeper blue,
And on the leaf a browner hue,
And in the heaven that clear obscure,
So softly dark, and darkly pure,
Which follows the decline of day,
As twilight melts beneath the moon away.
But it is not to list to the waterfall
That Parisina leaves her hall, &c.
    “With many a ling'ring look they leave
The spot of guilty gladness past!
And though they hope and vow, they grieve,
As if that parting were the last.
The frequent sigh—the long embrace—
The lip that there would cling for ever,
While gleams on Parisina's face
The Heaven she fears will not forgive her!
[Page 177]
As if each calmly conscious star
Beheld her frailty from afar.”
The arraignment and condemnation of the guilty pair, with the bold, high-toned, and yet temperate defence of the son, are managed with admirable talent; and yet are less touching than the mute despair of the fallen beauty, who stands in speechless agony beside him.
“Those lids o'er which the violet vein—
Wandering, leaves a tender stain,
Shining through the smoothest white
That e'er did softest kiss invite—
Now seem'd with hot and livid glow
To press, not shade, the orbs below;
Which glance so heavily, and fill,
As tear on tear grows gath'ring still.—
“Nor once did those sweet eyelids close,
Or shade the glance o'er which they rose,
But round their orbs of deepest blue
The circling white dilated grew—
And there with glassy gaze she stood
As ice were in her curdled blood;
But every now and then a tear
So large and slowly gather'd, slid
From the long dark fringe of that fair lid,
It was a thing to see, not hear!
To speak she thought—the imperfect note
Was chok'd within her swelling throat,
Yet seem'd in that low hollow groan
Her whole heart gushing in the tone.
It ceas'd—again she thought to speak
Then burst her voice in one long shriek,
And to the earth she fell, like stone
Or statue from its base o'erthrown.”
The grand part of this poem, however, is that which describes the execution of the rival son; and in which, though there is no pomp, either of language or of sentiment, and every thing, on the contrary, is conceived and expressed with studied simplicity and directness, there is a spirit of pathos and poetry to which it would not be easy to find many parallels.
“The Convent bells are ringing!
    But mournfully and slow;
In the grey square turret swinging,
    With a deep sound, to and fro!
[Page 178]
Heavily to the hart they go!
    Hark! the hymn is singing!—
The song for the dead below,
    Or the living who shortly shall be so!
For a departing Being's soul
The death-hymn peals and the hollow bells knoll:
He is near his mortal goal;
Kneeling at the Friar's knee;
Sad to hear—and piteous to see!—
Kneeling on the bare cold ground,
With the block before and the guards around—
While the crowd in a speechless circle gather
To see the Son fall by the doom of the Father!
    “It is a lovely hour as yet
Before the summer sun shall set,
Which rose upon that heavy day,
And mock'd it with his steadiest ray;
And his evening beams are shed
Full on Hugo's fated head!
As his last confession pouring
To the monk, his doom deploring
In penitential holiness,
He bends to hear his accents bliss
With absolution such as may
Wipe our mortal stains away!
That high sun on his head did glisten!
As he there did bow and listen!—
And the rings of chesnut hair
Curled half down his neck so bare;
But brighter still the beam was thrown
Upon the axe which near him shone
With a clear and ghastly glitter!---
Oh! that parting hour was bitter!
Even the stern stood chill'd with awe:
Dark the crime, and just the law—
Yet they shudder'd as they saw.
    “The parting prayers are said and over
Of that false son—and daring lover!
His beads and sins are all recounted;
His hours to their last minute mounted—
His mantling cloak before was stripp'd,
His bright brown locks must now be clipp'd!
'Tis done—all closely are they shorn—
The vest which till this moment worn—
The searf which Parisina gave—
Must not adorn him to the grave.
Even that must now be thrown aside,
And o'er his eyes the kerchief tied;
But no—that last indignity
Shall ne'er approach his haughty eye.
[Page 179]
‘No!—yours my forfeit blood and breath—
These hands are chain'd—but let me die
At least with an unshackled eye—
Strike!’—and as the word he said,
Upon the block he bow'd his head;
These the last accents Hugo spoke:
‘Strike!’—and flashing fell the stroke!—
Roll'd the head—and, gushing, sunk
Back the stain'd and heaving trunk,
In the dust,—which each deep vein
Slak'd with its ensanguin'd rain!
His eyes and lips a moment quiver,
Convuls'd and quick—then fix for ever.”
Of the Hebrew melodies—the Ode to Napoleon, and some other smaller pieces that appeared about the same time, we shall not now stop to say anything. They are obviously inferior to the works we have been noticing, and are about to notice, both in general interest, and in power of poetry—though some of them, and the Hebrew melodies especially, display a skill in versification, and a mastery in diction, which would have raised an inferior artist to the very summit of distinction.
Of the verses entitled, “Fare thee well,”—and some others of a similar character, we shall say nothing but that, in spite of their beauty, it is painful to read them —and infinitely to be regretted that they should have been given to the public. It would be a piece of idle affectation to consider them as mere effusions of fancy, or to pretend ignorance of the subjects to which they relate—and with the knowledge which all the world has of these subjects, we must say, that not even the example of Lord Byron, himself, can persuade us that they are fit for public discussion. We come, therefore, to the consideration of the noble author's most recent publications.
The most considerable of these, is the Third Canto of Childe Harold; a work which has the disadvantage of all continuations, in admitting of little absolute novelty in the plan of the work or the cast of its character, and must, besides, remind all Lord Byron's readers of the extraordinary effect produced by the sudden blazing
[Page 180]
forth of his genius, upon their first introduction to that title. In spite of all this, however, we are persuaded that this Third Part of the poem will not be pronounced inferior to either of the former; and, we think, will probably be ranked above them by those who have been most delighted with the whole. The great success of this singular production, indeed, has always appeared to us an extraordinary proof of its merits; for, with all its genius, it does not belong to a sort of poetry that rises easily to popularity.—It has no story or action—very little variety of character—and a great deal of reasoning and reflection of no very attractive tenor. It is substantially a contemplative and ethical work, diversified with fine description, and adorned or overshaded by the perpetual presence of one emphatic person, who is sometimes the author, and sometimes the object, of the reflections on which the interest is chiefly rested. It required, no doubt, great force of writing, and a decided tone of originality to recommend a performance of this sort so powerfully as this has been recommended to public notice and admiration—and those high characteristics belong perhaps still more eminently to the part that is now before us, than to any of the former. There is the same stern and lofty disdain of mankind, and their ordinary pursuits and enjoyments; with the same bright gaze on nature, and the same magic power of giving interest and effect to her delineations—but mixed up, we think, with deeper and more matured reflections, and a more intense sensibility to all that is grand or lovely in the external world.—Harold, in short, is somewhat older since he last appeared upon the scene—and while the vigour of his intellect has been confirmed, and his confidence in his own opinions increased, his mind has also become more sensitive; and his misanthropy, thus softened over by habits of calmer contemplation, appears less active and impatient, even although more deeply rooted than before. Undoubtedly the finest parts of the poem before us, are those which thus embody the weight of his moral sentiments; or disclose the lofty sympathy which binds the despiser of Man to the glorious
[Page 181]
aspects of Nature. It is in these we think, that the great attractions of the work consist, and the strength of the author's genius is seen. The narrative and mere description are of far inferior interest. With reference to the sentiments and opinions, however, which thus give its distinguishing character to the piece, we must say, that it seems no longer possible to ascribe them to the ideal person whose name it bears, or to any other than the author himself.—Lord Byron, we think, has formerly complained of those who identified him with his hero, or supposed that Harold was but the expositor of his own feelings and opinions;—and in noticing the former portions of the work, we thought it unbecoming to give any countenance to such a supposition. —In this last part, however, it is really impracticable to distinguish them.—Not only do the author and his hero travel and reflect together—but, in truth, we scarcely ever have any distinct intimation to which of them the sentiments so energetically expressed are to be ascribed; and in those which are unequivocally given as those of the noble author himself, there is the very same tone of misanthropy, sadness, and scorn, which we were formerly willing to regard as a part of the assumed costume of the Childe. We are far from supposing, indeed, that Lord Byron would disavow any of these sentiments; and though there are some which we must ever think it most unfortunate to entertain, and others which it appears improper to have published, the greater part are admirable, and cannot be perused without emotion, even by those to whom they may appear erroneous.
The poem opens with a burst of grand poetry, and lofty and impetuous feeling, in which the author speaks undisguisedly in his own person.
    “Once more upon the waters! yet once more!
    And the waves bound beneath me, as a steed
    That knows his rider. Welcome, to their roar!
    Swift be their guidance, wheresoe'er it lead!
    Though the strain'd mast should quiver as a reed,
    And the rent canvass fluttering strew the gale,
    Still must I on; for I am as a weed,
    Flung from the rock, on Ocean's foam, to sail
Where'er the surge may sweep, the tempest's breath prevail.
[Page 182]
    “In my youth's summer, I did sing of One,
    The wand'ring outlaw of his own dark mind;
    Again I seize the theme then but begun,
    And bear it with me, as the rushing wind
    Bears the cloud onwards. In that tale I find
    The furrows of long thought, and dried-up tears,
    Which, ebbing, leave a sterile track behind,
    O'er which all heavily the journeying years
Plod the last sands of life,—where not a flower appears.
    “Since my young days of passion—joy, or pain,
    Perchance my heart and harp have lost a string,
    And both may jar. It may be, that in vain
    I would essay, as I have sung to sing.
    Yet, though a dreary strain, to this I cling;
    So that it wean me from the weary dream
    Of selfish grief or gladness!—so it fling
    Forgetfulness around me—it shall seem
To me, though to none else, a not ungrateful theme.”
After a good deal more in the same strain, he proceeds,
“Yet must I think less wildly:—I have thought
Too long and darkly; till my brain became
In its own eddy boiling and o'erwrought,
A whirling gulf of phantasy and flame:
And thus, untaught in youth my heart to tame,
My spring's of life were poison'd.”—
“Something too much of this:—but now 'tis past,
And the spell closes with its silent seal!
Long absent Harold re-appears at last.”
The character and feelings of this unjoyous personage are then depicted with great force and fondness;—and at last he is placed upon the plain of Waterloo.
“In ‘pride of place’ where late the Eagle flew,
Then tore with bloody talon the rent plain,
Pierc'd by the shaft of banded nations through!”—
“Fit retribution! Gaul may champ the bit
And foam in fetters;—but is Earth more free?
Did nations combat to make One submit;
Or league to teach all kings true sovereignty?
What! shall reviving Thraldom again be
The patch'd-up idol of enlighten'd days?
Shall we, who struck the Lion down, shall we
Pay the Wolf homage?”---
“If not, o'er one fall'n despot boast no more!”
[Page 183]
There can be no more remarkable proof of the greatness of Lord Byron's genius than the spirit and interest he has contrived to communicate to his picture of the often-drawn and difficult scene of the breaking up from Brussels before the great battle. It is a trite remark, that poets generally fail in the representation of great events, when the interest is recent, and the particulars are consequently clearly and commonly known: and the reason is obvious: For as it is the object of poetry to make us feel for distant or imaginary occurrences nearly as strongly as if they were present and real, it is plain that there is no scope for her enchantments, where the impressive reality, with all its vast preponderance of interest, is already before us, and where the concern we take in the gazette far outgoes any emotion that can be conjured up in us by the help of fine descriptions. It is natural, however, for the sensitive tribe of poets, to mistake the common interest which they then share with the unpoetical part of their countrymen, for a vocation to versify; and so they proceed to pour out the lukewarm distillations of their phantasies upon the unchecked effervescence of public feeling! All our bards, accordingly, great and small, and of all sexes, ages, and professions, from Scott and Southey down to hundreds without names or additions, have adventured upon this theme—and failed in the management of it! And while they yielded to the patriotic impulse, as if they had all caught the inspiring summons—
“Let those rhyme now who never rhym'd before
And those who always rhyme, rhyme now the more—”
The result has been, that scarcely a line to be remembered had been produced on a subject which probably was thought, of itself, a secure passport to immortality. It required some courage to venture on a theme beset with so many dangers, and deformed with the wrecks of so many former adventurers;—and a theme, too, which, in its general conception, appeared alien to the prevailing tone of Lord Byron's poetry. See, however, with what easy strength he enters upon it, and with how much
[Page 184]
grace he gradually finds his way back to his own peculiar vein of sentiment and diction.
    “There was a sound of revelry by night;
    And Belgium's capital had gather'd then
    Her beauty and her chivalry; and bright
    The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men.
    A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
    Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
    Soft eyes look'd love to eyes which spake again,
    And all went merry as a marriage bell;
But hush! hark! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell!”
    “Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
    And gath'ring tears, and tremblings of distress,
    And cheeks all pale, which but an hour ago
    Blush'd at the praise of their own loveliness;
    And there were sudden partings; such as press
    The life from out young hearts; and choking sighs
    Which ne'er might be repeated:—who could guess
    If ever more should meet those mutual eyes,
Since upon nights so sweet such awful morn could rise?
    “And there was mounting in hot haste: the steed,
    The must'ring squadron, and the clatt'ring car,
    Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
    And swiftly forming in the ranks of war;
    And the deep thunder, peal on peal afar;
    And near, the beat of the alarming drum
    Rous'd up the soldier ere the morning star.
    “And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
    Dewy with Nature's tear-drops, as they pass!
    Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves,
    Over the unreturning brave,—alas!
    Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
    Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
    In its next verdure! when this fiery mass
    Of living valour, rolling on the foe
And burning with high hope, shall moulder cold and low.”
After some brief commemoration of the worth and valour that fell in that bloody field, the author turns to the many hopeless mourners that survive to lament their extinction; the many broken-hearted families, whose incurable sorrow is enhanced by the national exultation that still points, with importunate joy, to the scene of their destruction. There is a richness and energy in the following passage which is peculiar to Lord Byron,
[Page 185]
among all modern poets,—a throng of glowing images, poured forth at once, with a facility and profusion which must appear mere wastefulness to more economical writers, and a certain negligence and harshness of diction, which can belong only to an author who is oppressed with the exuberance and rapidity of his conceptions.
    “The Archangel's trump, not Glory's, must awake
    Those whom they thirst for! though the sound of Fame
    May for a moment soothe, it cannot slake
    The fever of vain longing; and the name
So honour'd but assumes a stronger, bitterer claim.
    “They mourn, but smile at length; and, smiling, mourn!
    The tree will wither long before it fall;
    The hull drives on, though mast and sail be torn;
    The roof-tree sinks, but moulders on the hall
    In massy hoariness; the ruin'd wall
    Stands when its wind-worn battlements are gone;
    The bars survive the captive they enthral;
    The day drags through, though storms keep out the sun;
And thus the heart will break, yet brokenly live on:
    “Even as a broken mirror, which the glass
    In every fragment multiplies; and makes
    A thousand images of one that was,
    The same, and still the more, the more it breaks;
    And thus the heart will do which not forsakes,
    Living in shatter'd guise, and still, and cold,
    And bloodless, with its sleepless sorrow aches,
    Yet withers on till all without is old,
Showing no visible sign,—for such things are untold.”
There is next an apostrophe to Napoleon, graduating into a series of general reflections, expressed with infinite beauty and earnestness, and illustrated by another cluster of magical images;—but breathing the very essence of misanthropical disdain, and embodying opinions which we conceive not to be less erroneous than revolting. After noticing the strange combination of grandeur and littleness which seemed to form the character of that greatest of all captains and conquerors, the author proceeds,
    “Yet well thy soul hath brook'd the turning tide
    With that untaught innate philosophy,
    Which, be it wisdom, coldness, or deep pride,
    Is gall and wormwood to an enemy.
[Page 186]
    When the whole host of hatred stood hard by,
    To watch and mock thee shrinking, thou hast smil'd
    With a sedate and all-enduring eye;—
    When fortune fled her spoil'd and favourite child,
He stood unbow'd beneath the ills upon him pil'd.
    Sager than in thy fortunes: For in them
    Ambition steel'd thee on too far to show
    That just habitual scorn which could contemn
    Men and their thoughts. 'Twas wise to feel; not so
    To wear it ever on thy lip and brow,
    And spurn the instruments thou wert to use
    Till they were turn'd unto thine overthrow:
    'Tis but a worthless world to win or lose!—
So hath it prov'd to thee, and all such lot who choose.
    But quiet to quick bosoms is a hell,
    And there hath been thy bane! There is a fire
    And motion of the soul which will not dwell
    In its own narrow being, but aspire
    Beyond the fitting medium of desire;
    And, but once kindled, quenchless evermore,
    Preys upon high adventure; nor can tire
    Of aught but rest; a fever at the core,
Fatal to him who bears, to all who ever bore.
    This makes the madmen, who have made men mad
    By their contagion; Conquerors and Kings,
    Founders of sects and systems,—to whom add
    Sophists, Bards, Statesmen, all unquiet things,
    Which stir too strongly the soul's secret springs,
    And are themselves the fools to those they fool;
    Envied, yet how unenviable! what stings
    Are theirs! One breast laid open were a school
Which would unteach mankind the lust to shine or rule:
    Their breath is agitation; and their life,
    A storm whereon they ride, to sink at last;
    And yet so nurs'd and bigotted to strife,
    That should their days, surviving perils past,
    Melt to calm twilight, they feel overcast
    With sorrow and supineness, and so die!
    Even as a flame unfed, which runs to waste
    With its own flickering; or a sword laid by
Which eats into itself, and rusts ingloriously.
    He who ascends to mountain-tops, shall find
    The loftiest peaks most wrapt in clouds and snow;
    He who surpasses or subdues mankind,
    Must look down on the hate of those below.
    Though high above the sun of glory glow,
    And far beneath the earth and ocean spread,
    Round him are icy rocks; and loudly blow
    Contending tempests on his naked head,
And thus reward the toils which to those summits led.”
[Page 187]
This is splendidly written, no doubt—but we trust it is not true; and as it is delivered with much more than poetical earnestness, and recurs, indeed, in other forms in various parts of the volume, we must really be allowed to enter our dissent somewhat at large. With regard to conquerors, we wish with all our hearts that the case were as the noble author represents it: but we greatly fear they are neither half so unhappy, nor half so much hated as they should be. On the contrary, it seems plain enough that they are very commonly idolised and admired, even by those on whom they trample; and we suspect, moreover, that in general they actually pass their time rather agreeably, and derive considerable satisfaction from the ruin and desolation of the world. From Macedonia's madman to the Swede—from Nimrod to Bonaparte, the hunters of men have pursued their sport with as much gaiety, and as little remorse, as the hunters of other animals—and have lived as cheerily in their days of action, and as comfortably in their repose, as the followers of better pursuits. For this, and for the fame which they have generally enjoyed, they are obviously indebted to the great interests connected with their employment, and the mental excitement which belongs to its hopes and hazards. It would be strange, therefore, if the other active, but more innocent spirits, whom Lord Byron has here placed in the same predicament, and who share all their sources of enjoyment, without the guilt and the hardness which they cannot fail of contracting, should be more miserable or more unfriended than those splendid curses of their kind:—And it would be passing strange , and pitiful, if the most precious gifts of Providence should produce only unhappiness, and mankind regard with hostility their greatest benefactors.
We do not believe in any such prodigies. Great vanity and ambition may indeed lead to feverish and restless efforts—to jealousies, to hate, and to mortification—but these are only their effects when united to inferior abilities. It is not those, in short, who actually surpass mankind, that are unhappy; but those who struggle in vain to surpass them: And this moody temper, which eats into
[Page 188]
itself from within, and provokes fair and unfair opposition from without, is generally the result of pretensions which outgo the merits by which they are supported— and disappointments, that may be clearly traced, not to the excess of genius, but its defect.
It will be found, we believe, accordingly, that the master spirits of their age have always escaped the unhappiness which is here supposed to be the inevitable lot of extraordinary talents; and that this strange tax upon genius has only been levied from those who held the secondary shares of it. Men of truly great powers of mind have generally been cheerful, social, and indulgent; while a tendency to sentimental whining, or fierce intolerance, may be ranked among the surest symptoms of little souls and inferior intellects. In the whole list of our English poets, we can only remember Shenstone and Savage—two, certainly, of the lowest—who were querulous and discontented. Cowley, indeed, used to call himself melancholy;—but he was not in earnest; and, at any rate, was full of conceits and affectations; and has nothing to make us proud of him. Shakespeare, the greatest of them all, was evidently of a free and joyous temperament;—and so was Chaucer, their common master. The same disposition appears to have predominated in Fletcher, Jonson, and their great contemporaries. The genius of Milton partook something of the austerity of the party to which he belonged, and of the controversies in which he was involved; but even when fallen on evil days and evil tongues, his spirit seems to have retained its serenity as well as its dignity; and in his private life, as well as in his poetry, the majesty of a high character is tempered with great sweetness, genial indulgences, and practical wisdom. In the succeeding age our poets were but too gay; and though we forbear to speak of living authors, we know enough of them to say with confidence, that to be miserable or to be hated is not now, any more than heretofore, the common lot of those who excel.
If this, however, be the case with poets, confessedly the most irritable and fantastic of all men of genius— and of poets, too, bred and born in the gloomy climate
[Page 189]
of England, it is not likely that those who have surpassed their fellows in other ways, or in other regions, have been more distinguished for unhappiness. Were Socrates and Plato, the greatest philosophers of antiquity, remarkable for unsocial or gloomy tempers?—was Bacon, the greatest in modern times?—was Sir Thomas More—or Erasmus—or Hume—or Voltaire?—was Newton—or Fenelon?—was Francis I., or Henry IV., the paragon of kings and conquerors?—was Fox, the most ardent, and, in the vulgar sense, the least successful of statesmen? These, and men like these, are undoubtedly the lights and the boast of the world. Yet there was no alloy of misanthropy or gloom in their genius. They did not disdain the men they had surpassed; and neither feared nor experienced their hostility. some detractors they might have, from envy or misapprehension; but, beyond all doubt, the prevailing sentiments in respect to them have always been those of gratitude and admiration; and the error of public judgment, where it has erred, has much oftener been to overrate than to undervalue the merits of those who had claims on their good opinion. On the whole, we are far from thinking that eminent men are actually happier than those who glide through life in peaceful obscurity: But it is their eminence, and the consequences of it, rather than the mental superiority by which it is obtained, that interferes with their enjoyment. Distinction, however won, usually leads to a passion for more distinction; and is apt to engage us in laborious efforts and anxious undertakings: and those, even when successful, seldom repay, in our judgment at least, the ease, the leisure, and tranquillity, of which they require the sacrifice: but it really passes our imagination to conceive, that the very highest degrees of intellectual vigour, or fancy, or sensibility, should of themselves be productive either of unhappiness or general dislike.
Harold and his poet next move along the lovely banks of the Rhine, to which, and all their associated emotions, due honour is paid in various powerful stanzas. We pass on, however, to the still more attractive
[Page 190]
scenes of Switzerland. The opening is of suitable grandeur.
    “But these recede. Above me are the Alps,
    The palaces of Nature, whose vast walls
    Have pinnacled in clouds their snowy scalps,
    And throned Eternity in icy halls,
    Of cold sublimity, where forms and falls
    The avalanche—the thunderbolt of snow!
    All that expands the spirit, yet appals,
    Gather around these summits, as to show
How Earth may pierce to Heaven, yet leave vain man below.”
On this magnificent threshold, the poet pauses, to honour the patriot field of Morat, and the shrine of the priestess of Aventicum; and then, in congratulating himself on his solitude, once more moralises his song, with something of an apology for its more bitter misanthropies.
“To fly from, need not be to hate, mankind;
All are not fit with them to stir and toil,
Nor is it discontent to keep the mind
Deep in its fountain, lest it overboil
In the hot throng,” &c.
    “The race of life becomes a hopeless flight
    To those that walk in darkness; on the sea,
    The boldest steer but where their ports invite,
But there are wanderers o'er Eternity
Whose bark drives on and on, and anchor'd ne'er shall be.
Is it not better, then, to be alone,
And love Earth only for its earthly sake?
By the blue rushing of the arrowy Rhone,
Or the pure bosom of its nursing lake,
Which feeds it as a mother who doth make
A fair but froward infant her own care,
Kissing its cries away as these awake.”
The cliffs of Meillerie, and the groves of Clarens of course, conjure up the shade of Rousseau; whom he characterizes very strongly, but charitably, in several enchanting stanzas;—one or two of which we shall cite as a specimen of the kindred rapture with which the Poet here honours the Apostle, of Love.
“His love was passion's essence! As a tree
On fire by lightning, with ethereal flame
Kindled he was, and blasted; for to be
Thus, and enamour'd, were in him the same.
[Page 191]
    But his was not the love of living dame,
    Nor of the dead who rise upon our dreams,
    But of ideal beauty; which became
    In him existence, and o'erflowing teems
Along his burning page, distemper'd though it seems.
This breath'd itself to life in Julie, this
Invested her with all that's wild and sweet.” &c.
    “Clarens! sweet Clarens, birth-place of deep Love!
    Thine air is the young breath of passionate thought!
    Thy trees take root in Love; the snows above
    The very Glaciers have his colours caught,
    And sun-set into rose-hues sees them wrought
    By rays which sleep there lovingly! The rocks,
    The permanent crags, tell here of Love; who sought
    In them a refuge from the worldly shocks,
Which stir and sting the soul with hope that woos, then mocks.
    “All things are here of him ; from the black pines,
    Which are his shade on high, and the loud roar
    Of torrents, where he listeneth, to the vines
    Which slope his green path downward to the shore,
    Where the bow'd waters meet him, and adore,
    Kissing his feet with murmurs; and the wood,
    The covert of old trees, with trunks all hoar,
    But light leaves, young as joy, stands where it stood,
Offering to him, and his, a populous solitude.”
Our readers may think, perhaps, that there is too much sentiment and reflection in these extracts; and wish for the relief of a little narrative or description: but the truth is, that there is no narrative in the poem, and that all the descriptions are blended with the expression of deep emotion. The following picture, however, of an evening calm on the lake of Geneva, we think, must please even the lovers of pure description—
    “Clear, placid Leman! thy contrasted lake,
    With the wide world I dwelt in, is a thing
    Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
    Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring.
    This quiet sail is as a noiseless wing
    To waft me from distraction! Once I lov'd
    Torn ocean's roar; but thy soft murmuring
    Sounds sweet, as if a sister's voice reprov'd,
That I with stern delights should e'er have been so mov'd.
    “It is the hush of night; and all between
    Thy margin and the mountains, dusk, yet clear,
    Mellow'd and mingling, yet distinctly seen,
    Save darken'd Jura, whose capt heights appear
[Page 192]
    Precipitously steep! and drawing near,
    There breathes a living fragrance from the shore,
    Of flowers yet fresh with childhood; on the ear
    Drops the light drip of the suspended oar,
Or chirps the grasshopper one good-night carol more!
“At intervals, some bird from out the brakes,
Starts into voice a moment, then is still.
There seems a floating whisper on the hill;
But that is fancy!—for the starlight dews
All silently their tears of love instil,
Weeping themselves away, till they infuse
Deep into nature's breast the spirit of her hues.”
The following sketch of a Midsummer night's thunder storm in the same sublime region, is still more striking and original—
“The sky is chang'd!—and such a change! Oh night,
And storm, and darkness, ye are wondrous strong!
Yet lovely in your strength, as is the light
Of a dark eye in woman! Far along,
From peak to peak, the rattling crags among
Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
But every mountain now hath found a tongue,
And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud!
“And this is in the night:—Most glorious night!
Thou wert not sent for slumber! let me be
A sharer in thy fierce and far delight,—
A portion of the tempest and of thee!
How the lit lake shines, a phosphoric sea!
And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!
And now again 'tis black,—and now, the glee
Of the loud hills shakes with its mountain-mirth.”
In passing Ferney and Lausanne, there is a fine account of Voltaire and Gibbon; but we have room for but one more extract, and must take it from the characteristic reflections with which the piece is concluded. These, like most of the preceding, may be thought to savour too much of egotism: But this is of the essence of such poetry; and if Lord Byron had only been happier, or in better humour with the world, we should have been delighted with the confidence he has here reposed in his readers:—as it is, it sounds too like the last disdainful address of a man who is about to quit a
[Page 193]
world which has ceased to have any attractions—like the resolute speech of Pierre—
“For this vile world and I have long been jangling,
And cannot part on better terms than now.”—
The reckoning, however, is steadily and sternly made; and though he does not spare himself, we must say that the world comes off much the worst in the comparison. The passage is very singular, and written with much force and dignity.
    “Thus far I have proceeded in a theme
    Renew'd with no kind auspices.—To feel
    We are not what we have been, and to deem
    We are not what we should be;—and to steel
    The heart against itself; and to conceal,
    With a proud caution, love, or hate, or aught,—
    Passion or feeling, purpose, grief or zeal,—
    Which is the tyrant spirit of our thought,
Is a stern task of soul!—No matter!—it is taught.
“I have not lov'd the world—nor the world me!
I have not flatter'd its rank breath; nor bow'd
To its idolatries a patient knee,—
Nor coin'd my cheek to smiles,—nor cried aloud
In worship of an echo. In the crowd
They could not deem me one of such; I stood
Among them, but not of them,” &c.
    “I have not lov'd the world, nor the world me!—
    But let us part fair foes; I do believe,
    Though I have found them not, that there may be
    Words which are things,—hopes which will not deceive,
    And virtues which are merciful, nor weave
    Snares for the failing! I would also deem
    O'er others' griefs that some sincerely grieve;
    That two, or one, are almost what they seem,—
That goodness is no name, and happiness no dream.”
The closing stanzas of the poem are extremely beautiful; —but we are immoveable in the resolution, that no statement of ours shall ever give additional publicity to the subjects of which they treat.
We come now to “The Prisoner of Chillon.” It is very sweet and touching—though we can afford but a short account of it. Chillon is a ruined castle on the Lake of Geneva, in the dungeon of which three gallant brothers were confined, each chained to a separate pillar,
[Page 194]
till, after long years of anguish, the two younger died, and were buried under the cold floor of the prison. The eldest was at length liberated, when worn out with age and misery—and is supposed, in his joyless liberty, to tell, in this poem, the sad story of his imprisonment. The picture of their first feelings, when bound apart in this living tomb, and of the gradual sinking of their cheery fortitude, is full of pity and agony.
“We could not move a single pace;
We could not see each other's face,
But with that pale and livid light
That made us strangers in our sight;
And thus together—yet apart,
Fetter'd in hand, and pin'd in heart;
'Twas still some solace in the dearth
Of the pure elements of earth,
To hearken to each other's speech,
And each turn comforter to each,
With some new hope, or legend old,
Or song heroically bold;
But even these at length grew cold!
Our voices took a dreary tone,
An echo of the dungeon-stone,
    A grating sound—not full and free
    As they of yore were wont to be:
    It might be fancy—but to me
They never sounded like our own.”
The return to the condition of the younger brother, the blooming Benjamin of the family, is extremely natural and affecting.
“I was the eldest of the three,
And to uphold and cheer the rest,
I ought to do—and did my best:
And each did well in his degree.
The youngest, whom my father lov'd,
Because our mother's brow was giv'n
To him—with eyes as blue as heav'n,
For him my soul was sorely mov'd;
And truly might it be distrest
To see such bird in such a nest;
For he was beautiful as day—
(When day was beautiful to me
As to young eagles, being free)—
And thus he was as pure and bright,
And in his natural spirit gay,
With tears for nought but others' ills:
And then they flow'd like mountain rills.
[Page 195]
The gentle decay and gradual extinction of this youngest life, is the most tender and beautiful passage in the poem.
“But he, the favorite and the flow'r,
Most cherish'd since his natal hour,
His mother's image in fair face,
The infant love of all his race,
His martyr'd father's dearest thought,
My latest care, for whom I sought
To hoard my life, that his might be
Less wretched now, and one day free!
He, too, who yet had held untir'd
A spirit natural or inspir'd—
He, too, was struck! and day by day
Was wither'd on the stalk away.
He faded; and so calm and meek,
So softly worn, so sweetly weak,
So tearless, yet so tender—kind,
And griev'd for those he left behind;
With all the while a cheek whose bloom
Was as a mockery of the tomb,
Whose tints as gently sunk away
As a departing rainbow's ray—
An eye of most transparent light,
That almost made the dungeon bright,
And not a word of murmur!—not
A groan o'er his untimely lot,—
A little talk of better days,
A little hope my own to raise,
For I was sunk in silence—lost
In this last loss, of all the most;
And then the sighs he would suppress
Of fainting nature's feebleness,
More slowly drawn, grew less and less!
I listen'd, but I could not hear!—
I call'd, for I was wild with fear;
I call'd, and thought I heard a sound—
I burst my chain with one strong bound,
And rush'd to him!—I found him not,
I only stirr'd in this black spot,
I only liv'd— I only drew
Th' accursed breath of dungeon-dew.”
After this last calamity, he is allowed to be at large in the dungeon.
“And it was liberty to stride
Along my cell from side to side,
And up and down, and then athwart,
And tread it over every part;
[Page 196]
And round the pillars one by one,
Returning where my walk begun,
Avoiding only, as I trod,
My brothers' graves without a sod.”
He climbs up at last to the high chink that admitted the light to his prison; and looks out once more on the long-remembered face of nature, and the lofty forms of the eternal mountains.
“I saw them—and they were the same,
They were not chang'd like me in frame;
I saw their thousand years of snow
On high—their wide long lake below,
And the blue Rhone in fullest flow;
I heard the torrents leap and gush
O'er channell'd rock and broken bush;
I saw the white-wall'd distant town,
And whiter sails go skimming down;
And then there was a little isle,
Which in my very face did smile,
    The only one in view;
A small green isle; it seem'd no more,
Scarce broader than my dungeon floor,
But in it there were three tall trees,
And o'er it blew the mountain breeze,
And by it there were waters flowing,
And on it there were young flow'rs growing,
    Of gentle breath and hue.
The fish swam by the castle wall,
And they seem'd joyous, each and all;
The eagle rode the rising blast;
Methought he never flew so fast
As then to me he seem'd to fly.”
The rest of the poems in this little volume, are less amiable—and most of them, we fear, have a personal and not very charitable application. One, entitled “Darkness,” is free at least from this imputation. It is a grand and gloomy sketch of the supposed consequences of the final extinction of the Sun and the Heavenly bodies—executed, undoubtedly, with great and fearful force—but with something of German exaggeration, and a fantastical selection of incidents. The very conception is terrible, above all conception of known calamity—and is too oppressive to the imagination, to be contemplated with pleasure, even in the faint reflection of poetry.
                                         “The icy earth
Swung blind and blackening in the moonless air.”
[Page 197]
Cities and forests are burnt, for light and warmth.
“The brows of men by the despairing light
Wore an unearthly aspect, as by fits
The flashes fell upon them! Some lay down
And hid their eyes and wept; and some did rest
Their chins upon their clenched hands, and smil'd!
And others hurried to and fro, and fed
Their funeral piles with fuel, and look'd up
With mad disquietude on the dull sky,
The pall of a past world! and then again
With curses cast them down upon the dust,
And gnash'd their teeth, and howl'd!”
Then they eat each other: and are extinguished!
“—The world was void,
The populous and the powerful was a lump,
Seasonless, herbless, treeless, manless, lifeless—
A lump of death—a chaos of hard clay!
The rivers, lakes, and ocean all stood still,
And nothing stirr'd within their silent depths;
Ships sailorless lay rotting on the sea,
And their masts fell down piecemeal: As they dropp'd
They slept on the abyss without a surge—
The waves were dead; the tides were in their grave,
The moon their mistress had expir'd before;
The winds were wither'd in the stagnant air,
And the clouds perish'd; Darkness had no need
Of aid from them—She was the universe.”
There is a poem entitled “The Dream,” full of living pictures, and written with great beauty and genius— but extremely painful—and abounding with mysteries into which we have no desire to penetrate. “The Incantation” and “Titan” have the same distressing character —though without the sweetness of the other. Some stanzas to a nameless friend, are in a tone of more open misanthropy. This is a favourable specimen of their tone and temper.
“Though human, though didst not deceive me,
    Though woman, thou didst not forsake,
Though lov'd, thou foreborest to grieve me,
    Though slander'd, thou never couldst shake,—
Though trusted, thou didst not disclaim me,
    Though parted, it was not to fly,
Though watchful, 'twas not to defame me,
    Nor, mute, that the world might belie.”
Beautiful as this poetry is, it is a relief at least to close
[Page 198]
the volume. We cannot maintain our accustomed tone of levity, or even speak like calm literary judges, in the midst of these agonizing traces of a wounded and distempered spirit. Even our admiration is at last swallowed up in a most painful feeling of pity and of wonder. It is impossible to mistake these for fictitious sorrows, conjured up for the purpose of poetical effect. There is a dreadful tone of sincerity, and an energy that cannot be counterfeited, in the expression of wretchedness and alienation from human kind, which occurs in every page of this publication; and as the author has at last spoken out in his own person, and unbosomed his griefs a great deal too freely to his readers, the offence now would be to entertain a doubt of their reality. We certainly have no hope of preaching him into philanthropy and cheerfulness; but it is impossible not to mourn over such a catastrophe of such a mind; or to see the prodigal gifts of Nature, Fortune, and Fame, thus turned to bitterness, without an oppressive feeling of impatience, mortification and surprise. Where there are such elements, however, it is equally impossible to despair that they may yet enter into happier combinations,—or not to hope that “this puissant spirit”
                                         “yet shall reascend
Self-rais'd, and repossess its native seat.”
NOTES
1 I have already said so much of Lord Byron with reference to his Dramatic productions, that I cannot now afford to republish more than one other paper, on the subject of his Poetry in general: And I select this, rather because it refers to a greater variety of these compositions, than because it deals with such as are either absolutely the best, or the most characteristic of his genius. The truth is, however, that all his writings are characteristic; and lead, pretty much alike, to those views of the dark and the bright parts of his nature, which have led me, I fear (though almost irresistibly) into observations more personal to the character of the author, than should generally be permitted to a mere literary censor.
$$$
