Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



2^ 



IgXoo 




Ja^y m/ii !.'» 7& - TV") v-i 



.'fr':i,te. 



CHRISTMAS BOOKS 



MRS. PERKINS'S BALL. 



OUR STREET. 



DR. BIRCH. 



BY W. M. THACKERAY. 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY THE AUTHOR. 



NEW EDITION IN ONE VOLUME. 



LONDON : 
CHAPMAN & HALL, 193, PICCADILLY. 

1857. 



LONDON : 
BRASBUBT AKP EVANS» FftlNTEBB, lYHITEFRIARS. 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



MRS. PERKINS'S BALL. 

♦ 



GEAND POLKA Frontispiece. 

TITLE PAQB 

THE MULLIGAN AND MR. M. A. TITMABSH i 

THE MULLIGAN AND MISS FANNY PERKINS 10 

MR. FREDERICK MINCHIN 12 

THE BALL ROOM DOOR 15 

liADY BACON, THE MISS BACONS, AND MR. FLAM . . . , 17 

MR. LARKINS 18 

MISS BUNION 20 

MR. HICKS 22 

MISS MEGGOT 24 

MISS RANVILLE, REV. MR. TOOP, MISS MULLINS, AND MR. 

WINTER 26 



IV LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

MISS JOY, MIL AND MRS. JOY, MR. BOTTER 28 

MR. RANVILLE RANVILLE AND JACK HUBBARD , ... 29 

MRS. TROTTER, MISS TROTTER, MISS TOADY, LORD METHUSELAH 31 

MR. BEAUMORIS^ MR. GRIG, MR. FLYNDERS 33 

CAVALIER SEUL 36 

M. CANAILLARD, LIEUTENANT BARON DE BOBWITZ . . . . 38 

THE BOUDOIR, MR. SMITH, MR. BROWN, MISS BUSTLETON . . 39 

GEORGE GRUNDSELL 43 

MISS MARTIN AND YOUNG WARD 46 

THE MULLIGAN AND MR. PERKINS . 47 



LIBT OF XLLVS^rRAUOVB. V 



OUR STREET. 



-♦- 



A STUDIO IN OUE STREET 4 

A STREET COURTSHIP 8 

CAPTAIN AND MRS. BRAGG OP OUR STREET 9 

SOME OP OUR GENTLEMEN 17 

WHY OUR NURSEMAIDS LIKE KENSINGTON GARDENS . . . 22 

A STREET CEREMONT 23 

THE LADY WHOM NOBODY KNOWS 26 

THE MAN IN POSSESSION 31 

THE LION OP THE STREET , , . 36 

THE DOYE OP OUR STREET 39 

VENUS AND CUPID 46 

THE SIREN OP OUR STREET 46 

THE STREET DOOR KEY 49 

A SCENE OP PASSION 61 

THE HAPPY PAMILY . 52 



yi LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



DR BIECH. 



A YOUNG RAPHAEL 4 

THE LION AND THE LITTLE CUBS 7 

RIVAL FORCES 8 

THE LITTLE SCHOOL-ROOM • . .10 

■ 

THE DEAR BROTHERS 13 

THE. LAST BOY OF ALL 15 

WHO STOLE THE JAM? 20 

A SERIOUS CASE , . . 21 

A HAMPER FOR BRIGGS 22 

SURE TO SUCCEED IN LIFE 2a 

THE PIRATE 29 

HOME, SWEET HOME 32 

A RESCUE 84 

MISS BIRCH'S FLOWER GARDEN 38 

WANTED A GOVERNESS 43 



MES. PERKINS'S BALL. 



THE MULLIGAN (OF BALLYMULLIGAN), 



AND HOW WK WBNT TO 



MRS. PERKINS'S BALL. 



I DO not know where Ballymulligan is, and never knew any 
body who did. Once I asked the Mulligan the question, when 
that chieftain assumed a look of dignity so ferocious, and 
spoke of " Saxon curiawsitee," in a tone of such evident dis- 
pleasure, that as after all it can matter very little to me where- 
abouts lies the Celtic principality in question, I have never 
pressed the inquiry any farther. 

I don't know even the Mulligan's town residence. One 
night, as he bade us adieu in Oxford Street, — " I live there" 
says he, pointing down towards Uxbridge, with the big stick 
he carries: — so his abode is in that direction, at any rate. 
He has his letters addressed to several of his friends' houses, 
and his parcels, &c., are left for him at various taverns which 
he frequents. That pair of checked trowsers, in which you 



2 MRS. Perkins's ball. 

see him attired, he did me the favour of ordering from my own 
tailor, who is quite as anxious as any body to know the address 
of the wearer. In like manner my hatter asked me, '* Oo was 
the Hirish gent as ad ordered fpur 'ats and a sable boar to be 
sent to my lodgings ?!* As I did not know (however I might 
guess), the articles have never been sent, and the Mulligan has 
withdrawn his custom from the " infernal four-and-nine-penny 
scoundthrel," as he calls him. The hatter has not shut up 
shop in consequence. 

I became acquainted with the Mulligan, through a distin- 
guished countryman of his, who, strange to say, did not know 
the chieftain himself. But dining with my Mend Fred. 
Clancy of the Irish bar, at Greenwich, the Mulligan came up 
"inthrojuiced" himself to Clancy as he said; claimed relation- 
ship with him on the side of Brian Boroo, aud drawing his 
chair to our table, quickly became intimate with us. He took 
a great liking to me, was good enough to find out my address, 
and pay me a visit: since which period often and often on 
coming to breakfast in the morning, I have found him in my 
sitting-room on the sofa engaged with the rolls and morning 
papers: and many a time, on returning home at night, for 
an evening's quiet reading, I have discovered this honest 
fellow in the arm-chair before the fire, perfuming the apartment 
with my cigars, and trying the quality of such liquors as might 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 8 

be found in the sideboard. The way in which he pokes fun 
at Betsy, the maid of the lodgings, is prodigious. She begins 
to laugh whenever he comes ; if he calls her a duck, a diwle, 
a darlin, it is all one. He is just as much a master of the 
premises as the individual who rents them at fifteen shillings 
a week ; and as for handkerchiefs, shirt collars, and the like 
articles of fugitive haberdashery, the loss since I have known 
him, is uncountable. I suspect he is like the cat in some 
houses : for, suppose the whiskey, the cigars, the sugar, the 
tea-caddy, the pickles, and other groceries disappear, all is 
laid upon that edax-rerum of a Mtdligan. 

The greatest offence that can be offered to him, is to call 
him Mr. Mulligan. " Would you deprive me, Sir," says he, 
" of the title which was bawrun be me princelee ancestors in 
a hundred thousand battles ? In our own green valleys and 
fawrests, in the American Savannahs, in the Sierras of Speen, 
and the Flats of Flandthers, the Saxon lias quailed before me 
war-cry of Mulligan Aboo ! Mr. Mulligan ! I'll pitch any 
body out of the window who calls me Mr. Mulligan." He 
said this, and uttered the slogan of the Mulligans with a shriek 
so terrific, that my uncle (the Eev. W. Gruels, of the Indepen- 
dent Congregation, Bungay), who had happened to address him 
in the above obnoxious manner, while sitting at my apart- 
ments drinking tea after the May meetings, instantly quitted 

B 2 



) 



MRS. FEBKINS'S BALL. 



the room, and has never taken the least notice of me since, 
except to state to the rest of the family that I am doomed 
irrevocably to perdition. 

Well, one day last season I had received from my kind and 
most estimable friend, Mrs Perkins, of Pooklington Square 
(to whose amiable family I have had the honour of giving 
lessons in drawing, French, and the German flute), an invita- 
tation couched in the usual terms on satin gilt-edged note 
paper, to her evening party ; or, as I call it, " Ball." 

Besides the engraved note sent to all her friends, my kind 
patroness had addressed me privately as follows : — 

" Mt dear Mr. Titmarsh, 

"If you know any very eligible yonng man, we give you leave to 
bring him. You gentlemen love your dubs so much now, and care so little for 
dancing, that it is really quite a accmdcU. Come early, and before every body, and 
give us the benefit of all your taste and continental skill, 

** Your sincere 

"Emily Fbrkiits.*' 

Whom shall I bring? mused I, highly flattered by this 
mark of confidence ; and I thought of Bob Trippett ; and little 
Fred. Spring, of the Navy Pay Office ; Hulker, who is rich, 
and I know took lessons in Paris ; and a half score of other 
bachelor friends, who might be considered as very eligible — 
when I was roused from my meditation by the slap of a hand 
on my shotdder ; and looking up, there was the Mulligan, who 
began, as usual, reading the papers on my desk. 



THE MULLIBAN AND ME. M. A. TITMAKSH. 



HBS. PEBXINS'S BALL. 



" Hwhat's this," says he, " who's Perkins ? Is it a supper- 
ball, or only a tay-ball ? " 

" The Perkinses, of Pocklington Square, Mulligan, are tip- 
top people," says I, with a tone of dignity ; " Mr. Perkins's 
sister is married to a baronet, Sir Charles Bacon, of Hogwash, 
Norfolk. Mr. Perkins's uncle was Lord Mayor of London ; 
and he was himself in Parliament, and may be again any day. 
The family are my most particular friends. A tay-ball indeed ! 
why Gunter » » » " Here I stopped, I felt I was com- 
mitting myself. 

" Gunter ? " says the Mulligan, with another confounded 
slap on the shoulder ; " Don't say another word, FU go widg 
you, my boy." 

" You go. Mulligan," says I : " why, really — I — it's not my 
party." — 

" Your hwhawt ? hwhat's this letter ? an't I an eligible 
young man? — Is the descendant of a thousand kings unfit 
company for a miserable tallow-chandthlering cockney ? Are 
ye joking wid me ? for, let me tell ye, I don't like them jokes. 
D'ye suppose I'm not as well bawrun and bred as yourself, or 
any Saxon Mend ye ever had ? " 

" I never said you weren't, Mulligan," says I. 

" Ye don't mean seriously that a Mulligan is not fit com- 
pany for a Perkins ? " 



6 MBS. Perkins's ball. 

" My dear fellow, how could you think I could so far insult 
you," says I. " Well then/* says he, " that's a matter settled, 
and we go." 

What the deuce was I to do ? I wrote to Mrs. Perkins ; 
and that kind lady replied, that she would receive the Mulli- 
gan, or any other of my friends, with the greatest cordiality. 
Fancy a party, all Mulligans ! thought I, with a secret terror. 



MR. AND MRS. PERKINS, THEIR HOUSE, AND 

THEIR YOUNG PEOPLE. 



Following Mrs. Perkins's orders, the present writer made 
his appearance very early at Pocklington Square ; where the 
tastiness of all the decorations elicited my warmest admiration. 
Supper, of course, was in the dining-room, superhly arranged 
by Messrs. Grigs and Spooner, the confectioners of the neigh- 
bourhood. I assisted my respected friend Mr. Perkins, and 
his butler, in decanting the Sherry, and saw, not without 
satisfaction, a large bath for wine under the sideboard, in 
which were already placed very many bottles of champagne. 

The Back Dining-koom, Mr. P.'s study (where the venerable 
man goes to sleep after dinner), was arranged on this occasion 
as a tea-room, Mrs. Flouncy (Miss Fanny's maid) officiating in 
a cap and pink ribbons, which became her exceedingly. Long, 
long before the arrival of the company, I remarked Master 
Thomas Perkins and Master Giles Bacon, his cousin (son 
of Sir Giles Bacon, Bart.), in this apartment, busy among the 
macaroons. 



8 MBS. PEBEINS*S BALL. 

Mr. Gregory, the butler, besides John the footman, and Sir 
Giles's large man in the Bacon livery, and honest Grundsell, 
carpet-beater and green grocer, of Little Pocklington Buildings, 
had, at least, half a dozen of Aides-de-camp, in black and white 
neckcloths, like doctors of divinity. 

The Back Deawing-boom door on the landing, being taken 
oflf the hinges (and placed up stairs under Mr. Perkins's bed), 
the orifice was covered with muslin, and festooned with elegant 
wreaths of flowers. This was the Dancing Saloon. A linen 
was spread over the carpet, and a band, consisting of Mr. 
Clapperton, piano, Mr. Pinch, harp, and Herr Spoflf, comet- 
s-piston ; arrived at a pretty early hour, and were accommo- 
dated with some comfortable Negus in the tea-room, previous 
to the commencement of their delightful labours. The boudoir 
to the left was fitted up as a card -room; the drawing-room 
was, of course, for the reception of the company ; the chande- 
liers and yellow damask being displayed, this night, in all their 
splendour; and the charming conservatory, over the landing, 
was ornamented by a few moon-like lamps, and the flowers 
arranged, so that it had the appearance of a fairy bower. And 
Miss Perkins (as I took the liberty of stating to her mamma) 
looked like the fairy of that bower. It is this young creature's 
first year in public life : she has been educated, regardless of 
expense, at Hammersmith ; and a simple white muslin dress 



MBS. P£RK[NS'S BALL. 9 

and blue ceinture set off charms, of which I beg to speak with 
respectful admiration. 

My distinguished Mend, the Mulligan of BallymuUigan, was 
good enough to come, the very first of the party. By the way, 
how awl:ward it is to be the first of the party ! and yet you 
know somebody must ; but for my part, being timid, I always 
wait at the comer of the street in the cab, and watch until 
some other carriage comes up. 

Well, as we were arranging the Sherry, in the decanters, 
down the supper-tables, my Mend arrived : " Hwhares me 
Mend, Mr. Titmarsh," I heard him bawling out to Gregory in 
the passage, and presently he rushed into the supper-room, 
where Mr. and Mrs. Perkins and myself were, and as the 
waiter was announcing, " Mr. Mulligan ; " " THE Mulligan 
of Ballymulligan, ye blackguard!" roared he, and stalked 
into the apartment, " apologoizing," as he said, for introducing 
himself. 

Mr. and Mrs. Perkins did not perhaps wish to be . seen in 
this room, which was for the present only lighted by a couple 
of candles ; but he was not at all abashed by the circumstance, 
and grasping them both warmly by the hands, he instantly 
made himself at home. " As friends of my dear and talented 
Mend Mick," so he is pleased to call me, " I'm deloighted. 
Madam, to be made known to ye. Don't consider me in the 



10 MBS. PEBKINS'S BALL. 

light of a mere acquaintance ! As for you, my dear Madam, 
you put me so much in moind of my own blessed mother, now 
resoiding at Ballymulligan Castle, that I begin to love ye at 
first soight." At which speech, Mr. Perkins, getting rather 
alarmed, asked the Mulligan, whether he would take some 
wine, or go up stairs. 

" Faix," says Mulligan, ** it's never too soon for good 
dthrink ; *' and (although he smelt very much of whiskey 
already) he drank a tumbler of wine, " to the improvement 
of an acqueentence which comminces in a manner so de- 
loightful." 

" Let's go up stairs Mulligan," says I, and led the noble 
Irishman to the upper apartments, which were in a profound 
gloom, the candles not being yet illuminated, and where we 
surprised Miss Fanny, seated in the twilight, at the piano, 
timidly trying the tunes of the Polka, which she danced so 
exquisitely that evening. She did not perceive the stranger 
at first; but how she started, when the Mulligan loomed 
upon her. 

" Heavenlee enchanthress ! " says Mulligan, " don't floy at 
the approach of the humblest of your sleeves ! Reshewm your 
pleece at that insthrument, which weeps harmonious, or smoils 
melojious, as you charrum it ! Are you acqueented with the 
Oirish Melodies ? Can ye play, * Who Fears to Talk of Nointy- 



THE MULLIGAN AND MISS FANNY PEEKIN8. 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 11 

eight ; ' the * Shan Van Voght ; ' or the ' Dirge of OUam 
Fodhlah ? ' " 

" Who's this mad chap that Titmarsh has brought ? " I 
heard Master Bacon exclaim to Master Perkins. '* Look ! how 
frightened Fanny looks ! " 

" O poo ! gals are always frightened," Fanny's brother 
replied ; but Giles Bacon, more violent, said, " I'U tell you 
what, Tom ; if this goes on, we must pitch into him." And 
80 I have no doubt they would, when another thimdering knock 
coming, Gregory rushed into the room, and began lighting all 
Ihe candles, so as to produce an amazing brilliancy. Miss 

* 

Fanny sprang up, and ran to her Mamma, and the young 
gentlemen slid down the banisters to receive the company in 
the hall. 



EVEEYBODY BEGINS TO COME, BUT 
ESPECIALLY ME. MINCHIN. 



" It's only Me and my sisters," Master Bacon said ; though 
" only " meant eight in this instance. All tiie young ladies had 
fresh cheeks and purple elbows; all had white frocks, with 
hair more or less auburn ; and so a party was already made 
of this blooming and numerous family, before the rest of the 
company began to arrive. The three Miss Meggots next 
came in their fly; Mr. Blades and his niece from 19 in the 
square: Captain and Mrs. Struther, and Miss Struther: 
Doctor Toddy's two daughters and their mamma : but where 
were the gentlemen ? The Mulligan, great and active as he 
was, could pot suffice among so many beauties. At last came 
a brisk neat little knock, and looking into the hall, I saw a 
gentleman taking off his clogs there, whilst Sir Giles Bacon's 
big footman was looking on with rather a contemptuous air. 

"What nanxe shall I enounce?" says he, with a wink at 
Gregory on the stair. 



s gentlsmftii— dos't 70a b< 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 13 

The Gentleman in clogs said, with quiet dignity, — 

MR. FREDERICK MINCHIN. 

"Pump Court, Temple," is printed on his cards in very 
smaU type: and he is a rising barrister, of the Western 
Circuit. He is to be found at home of mornings : afterwards 
"at Westminster," as you read on his back door. "Binks 
and Minchin's Reports" are probably known to my legal 
Mends : this is the Minchin in question. 

He is decidedly genteel, and is rather in request at the balls 
of the Judges* and Serjeants' ladies ; for he dances irreproach- 
ably, and goes out to dinner as much as ever he can. 

He mostly dines at the Oxford and Cambridge Clubs, of 
which you can easily see by his appearance that he is a 
member; he takes the joint and his half-pint of wine, for 
Minchin does everything like a Gentleman. He is rather of 
a literary turn ; still makes Latin verses with some neatness ; 
and before he was called, was remarkably fond of the flute. 

When Mr. Minchin goes out in the evening, his clerk brings 
his bag to the Club, to dress ; and if it is at all muddy, he 
turns up his trowsers so that he may come in without a speck. 
For such a party as this, he will have new gloves ; otherwise, 
Frederic, his clerk, is chiefly employed in cleaning them with 
India-rubber. 

He has a number of pleasant stories about the Circuit and 



14 MRS. Perkins's ball. 

the University, which he tells with a simper to his neighbour 
at dinner; and has always the last joke of Mr. Baron Maule. 
He has a private fortune of five thousand pounds ; he is a dutiful 
son; he has a sister married, in Harley Street; and Lady 
Jane Banville has the best opinion of him, and says he is a 
most excellent and highly-principled young man. 

Her Ladyship and daughter arrived, just as Mr. Minchin 
had popped his clogs into the umbrella-stand, and the rank 
of that respected person, and dignified manner in which he 
led her up stairs, caused all sneering on the part of the 
domestics to disappear. 



TEE SALL-KOOM DOOB. 



THE BALL-ROOM DOOR. 



A HUNDRED of knocks follow Frederick Minchin's : in half 
an hour Messrs. Spoff, Pinch, and Clapperton^ have begun 
their music, and Mulligan, with one of the Miss Bacon's, is 
dancing majestically in the first quadrille. My young friends, 
Giles and Tom, prefer the landing-place to the Drawing- 
rooms, where they stop all night robbing the refreshment- 
trays as they come up or down. Giles has eaten fourteen 
ices, he will have a dreadful stomach-ache to morrow. Tom 
has eaten twelve, but he has had four more glasses of Negus 
than Giles. Grundsell, the occasional waiter, from whom 
Master Tom buys quantities of ginger-beer, can of course 
deny him nothing. That is Grundsell, in the tights, with 
the tray. Meanwhile direct your attention to the three 
gentlemen at the door, they are conversing. 

let Gent Who's the man of the house — ^the bald man ? 

2nd Gent Of course. The man of the house is always 
bald. He's a stockbroker I believe. Snooks brought me. 



16 MBS. P£BEINS*S BALL. 

let Gent Have you been to the tea-room ? There's a 
pretty girl in the tea-room ; blue eyes, pink ribbons, that kind 
of thing. 

2nd Gent Who the deuce is that girl with those tremendous 
shoulders ? Gad ! I do wish somebody would smack 'em. 

3rd Gent Sir — that young lady is my niece. Sir, — ^my niece 
— my name is Blades, Sir. 

2nd Gent Well, Blades! Smack your niece's shoulders; 
she deserves it, begad! she does. Come in. Jinks, present 
me to the Perkinses. — Hollo ! here's an old country acquaint- 
ance — Lady Bacon, as I live ! with all the piglings ; she never 
goes out without the whole litter. {Exeunt Ist and 2nd Gent) 



LADT BACOTJ, THE MISS BACONS", AND MR. FL.U(. 



LADY BACON, THE MISS BACONS, ME. FLAM. 



' Lady B. — Leonora f Maria ! Ameliia ! Here is the gentleman 
we met at Sir John Porkington's. 

• ' \The Misses Bacoit, expecting to he 'ashed to danie, smile simidtUneoxtsly, 

and hegin to smooth their ttbcJcers."] 

Mr. Flam. — Lady Bacon ! I couldn't be mistaken in you ! 
Won't you dance, Lady Bacon ? 

Lady B. — Go away, you droll creature ! 

Mr. Flam, — ^And these are your ladyship's seven lovely 
sisters, to judge from their likenesses to the charming Lady 
Bacon ? 

Lady B. — ^My sisters, he ! he ! my daughters, Mr. Flam, and 
they dance, don't you, girls ? 

The Misses Bacon. — yes ! 

Mr. Flam. — Gad ! how I wish I was a dancing man ! 

[JSxU Flam. 



ME. LAEKINS. 



I HAVE not been able to do justice (only a Lawrence could do 
that) to my respected friend Mrs. Perkins, in this picture ; but 
Larkins's portrait is considered very like. Adolphus Larkins 
has been long connected with Mr. Perkins's City Establish- 
ment, and is asked to dine twice or thrice per annum. 
Evening parties are the great enjoyment of this simple youth, 
who after he has walked from Kentish Town to Thames Street, 
and passed twelve hours in severe labour there, and walked 
back again to Kentish Town, finds no greater pleasure than to 
attire his lean person in that elegant evening costume which 
you see, to walk into town again, and to dance at any body's 
house who will invite him. Islington, PentonviUe, Somers 
Town^ are the scenes of many of his exploits; and I have 
seen this good-natured fellow performing figure dances at 
Notting-hill, at a house where I am ashamed to say there 
was no supper, no negus even to speak of, nothing but the 
bare merits of the Polka in which Adolphus revels. To 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 19 

describe this gentleman's infatuation for dancing, let me say, 
in a word, that he will even frequent boarding-house hops, 
rather than not go. 

He has clogs, too, like Minchin : but nobody laughs at him. 
He gives himself no airs ; but walks into a house with a 
knock and a demeanour so tremulous and humble, that the 
servants rather patronise him. He does not speak, or have 
any particular opinions, but when the time comes, begins to 
dance* He bleats out a word or two to his partner during 
this operation, seems Very weak and sad during the whole 
performance ; and, of course, is set to dance with the ugliest 
women everywhere. 

The gentle, kind spirit ! when I think of him night after 
night, hopping and jigging, and trudging off to Kentish Town, 
so gently, through the fogs, and mud, and darkness ; I do not 
know whether I ought to admire him, because his enjoyments 
are so simple, and his dispositions so kindly ; or laugh at him, 
because he draws his life so exquisitely mild. Well, well, we 
can't be all roaring lions in this world; there must be some 
lambs, and harmless, kindly, gregarious creatures for eating 
and shearing. See! even good-natured Mrs. Perkins is 
leading up the trembling Larkins to the tremendous Miss 
Bunion ! 



o 2 



MISS BUNION. 



The poetess, author of *^ Heartstrings," *' The Deadly 
Nightshade," "Passion Flowers/* &c. Though her poems 
breathe only of love. Miss B. has never been married. She is 
nearly six feet high ; she loves waltzing beyond even poesy ; 
and I think lobster-salad as much as either. She confesses to 
twenty-eight ; in which case her first volume, " The Orphan 
of Gozo," (cut up by Mr. Bigby, in the Quarterly, with his 
usual kindness) must have been published when she was 
three years old. 

For a woman all soul, she certainly eats as much as any 
woman I ever saw. The sufferings she has had to endure, 
are, she says, beyond compare ; the poems which she writes 
breathe a withering passion, a smouldering despair, an agony 
of spirit that would melt the soul of a drayman, were he to 
read them. Well, it is a comfort to see that she can dance of 
nights, and to know (for the habits of illustrious literary 
persons are always worth knowing) that she eats a hot 



MISS BUNION. 



MRS. Perkins's ball. 21 

mutton chop for breakfast every morning of her blighted 
existence. 

She lives in a boarding-house at Brompton, and comes to 
the party in a fly. 



ME. HICKS, 



It is worth twopence to see Miss Bunion and Poseidon 
Hicks, the great poet, conversing with one another, and to 
talk of one to the other afterwards. How they hate each 
other ! I (in my wicked way) have sent Hicks ahnost raving 
mad, by praising Bunion to him in confidence ; and you can 
drive Bunion out of the room by a few judicious panegyrics 
of Hicks. 

Hicks first burst upon the astonished world with poems, in 
the Byronic manner : " The Death- Shriek," " The Bastard of 
Lara," " The Atabal," " The Fire Ship of Botzaris," and other 
works. His " Love-Lays," in Mr. Moore's early style, were 
pronounced to be wonderfully precocious for a young gentle- 
man then only thirteen, and in a commercial academy, at 
Tooting. 

Subsequently, this great bard became less passionate and 
more thoughtful ; and, at the age of twenty, wrote 
" Idiosyncracy " (in 40 books, 4to.): "Ararat," "a stupendous 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 23 

epic," as the reviews said ; and " The Megatheria," " a mag- 
nificent contribution to our pre-adamite literature," according 
to the same authorities. Not having read these works, it 
would ill become me to judge them; but I know that poor 
Jingle, the publisher, always attributed his insolvency to the 
latter epic, which was magnificently printed in elephant folio. 

Hicks has now taken a classical turn, and has brought out 
" Poseidon ; " " lacchus ; " ^* Hephaestus ; " and I dare say is 
going through the mythology. But I should not like to try 
him at a passage of the Greek Delectus, any more than twenty 
thousand others of us who have had a '' classical education." 

Hicks was taken in an inspired attitude, regarding the 
chandelier, and pretending he didn't know that Miss Pettifer 
was looking at him. 

Her name is Anna Maria (daughter of Higgs and Pettifer, 
Solicitors, Bedford Eow), but Hicks calls her " lanthe," in his 
album verses, and is himself an eminent drysalter in the city. 



MISS MEGGOT. 



Poor Miss Meggot is not so lucky as Miss Bunion. 
Nobody comes to dance with her, though she has a new 
frock on, as she calls it, and rather a pretty foot, which she 
always manages toi stick out. 

She is forty-seven, the youngest of three sisters, who live 
in a mouldy old house near Middlesex Hospital, where they 
have lived for I don't know how many score of years ; but 
this is certain, the eldest Miss Meggot saw the Gordon riots 
out of that same parlour window, and tells the story how her 
father (physician to George III.) was robbed of his queue in 
the streets on that occasion. The two old ladies have taken 
the brevet rank, and are addressed as Mrs. Jane and 
Mrs. Betsy : one of them is at whist in the back drawing- 
room. But the youngest is still called Miss Nancy, and is 
considered quite a baby by her sisters. 

She was going to be married once to a brave young officer, 
Ensign Angus Macquirk, of the Whistlebinkie Fencibles ; but 



MISB MEGGOT. 



MBS. PEBEINS'S BALL. 25 

he fell at Quatre Bras, by the side of the gallant Snuffmull, 
his commander. Deeply, deeply did Miss Nancy deplore him. 

But time has cicatrized the wounded heart. She is gay 
now, and would sing or dance, ay, or marry if any body 
asked her. 

Do go, my dear friend — I don*t mean to ask her to marry, 
but to ask her to dance. — Never mind the looks of the thing. 
It will make her happy ; and what does it cost you ? Ah, my 
dear fellow! take this counsel; always dance with the old 
ladies — always dance with the governesses. It is a comfort to 
the poor things when they get up in their garret that some- 
body has had mercy on them. And such a handsome fellow 
as you too ! 



MISS KANVILLE, KEY. ME. TOOP. 
MISS MULLINS, MR. WINTER. 



Mr. W. — Miss. Mullins, look at Miss Ranville, what a picture 
of good humour. 

Miss M, — you satirical creature ! 

Mr. W. — Do you know why she is so angry ? She expected 
to dance with Captain Grig, and, by some mistake, the Cam- 
bridge Professor got hold of her : isn't he a handsome man ? 

Miss M. — you droll wretch ! 

Mr. W. — ^Yes, he's a fellow of college — fellows mayn't marry, 
Miss Mullins — poor fellows, ay. Miss Mullins ? 

Miss M. — La ! 

Mr. W. — And Professor of Phlebotomy in the University. 
He flatters himself he is a man of the world. Miss Mullins, 
and always dances in the long vacation. 

Miss M. — ^You malicious wicked monster ! . 

Mr.W. — Do you know Lady Jane Ranville ? Miss Ranville's 
mamma. A ball once a-year; footmen in canary- coloured 



MISS SAHTIU.K, REV. MR. TCOP, MISS MULLINS, AND MR. WINTEE. 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 27 

livery; Baker Street; six dinners in the season; starves all 
the year round; pride and poverty, you know; I've been to 
her ball once. Kanville KanvUle's her brother ; and between 
you and me — ^but this, dear Miss Mullins, is a profound secret, 
— I think he's a greater fool than his sister. 

Miss M, — 0, you satirical, droll, malicious, wicked thing, you ! 

Mr. W. — ^You do me injustice, Miss Mullins, indeed you do. 

[Chaine Anglaise,] 



MISS JOY, MR AND MRS. JOY, ME. BOTTEE. 



Mr, B, — What spirits that girl has, Mrs. Joy ! 

Mr. J. — She's a sunshine in a house, Better, a regular sun- 
shine — when Mrs. J. here's in a bad humour, I * * * 

Mrs, J. — Don't talk nonsense, Mr. Joy. 

Mr. B. — There's a hop, skip, and jump for you ! Why, it 
beats Ellsler ! Upon my conscience it does ! It's her fourteenth 
quadrille, too. There she goes ! She's a jewel of a girl, though 
I say it, that shouldn't. 

Mrs, J, {laughing), — ^Why don't you marry her, Botter? 
Shall I speak to her ? I dare say she'd have you. You're not 
so very old. 

Mr, B, — Don't aggravate me, Mrs. J. You know when I 
lost my heart in the year 1817, at the opening of Waterloo 
Bridge, to a young lady who wouldn't have me, and left me 
to die in despair, and married Joy, of the Stock Exchange. 

Mrs, J, — Get away, you foolish old creature. 

[Mb. Joy looks on in ecstasies cU Miss Joy's agility, L^dt Jane Rakyille, 
of Baker Street, pronounces her to he an exceedingly forward person. 
Captain Dobbs lUces a girl who Juts plenty of go in Tier ; and as for Fbbd. 
Sfabks, he is over head and ears in love with Aer.] 



S TOT, MB. AND MBS. JOT, ME. BOTTEH. 



HK. EANTILLE RANVILLE AUD JACK EUBBASD. 



ME. KANVILLE EANVILLE AND JACK HUBBAKD. 



This is Miss Kanville Eanville*s brother, Mr, Kanville 
Ranville, of the Foreign Office, faithfully designed as he was 
playing at whist in the card-room, Talleyrand used to play 
at whist at the Travellers', that is why Eanville Eanville 
indulges in that diplomatic recreation. It is not his fault if 
he be not the greatest man in the room. 

If you speak to him, he smiles sternly, and answers in mono- 
syllables ; he would rather die than commit himself. He never 
has conmiitted himself in his life. He was the first at school, 
and distinguished at Oxford. He is growing prematurely bald 
now, like Canning, and is quite proud of it. He rides in 
St. James's Park of a morning before breakfast. He dockets 
his tailor's bills, and nicks off his dinner notes in diplomatic 
paragraphs, and keeps precis of them all. If he ever makes a 
joke, it is a quotation from Horace, like Sir Eobert Peel. The 
only relaxation he permits himself, is to read Thucydides in 
the holidays. 



30 MBS. Perkins's ball. 

Everybody asks him out to dinner, on account of his brass 
buttons with the Queen's cipher, and to have the air of being 
well with the Foreign Office. "Where I dine," he says 
solemnly, " I think it is my duty to go to evening parties." 
That is why he is here. He never dances, never sups, never 
drinks. He has gruel when he goes home to bed. I think it 
is in his brains. 

He is such an ass and so respectable, that one wonders he 
has not succeeded in the world; and yet, somehow, fhey laugh 
at him ; and you and I shall be ministers as soon as he will. 

Yonder, making believe to look over ihe print-books, is that 
m£rry rogue, Jack Hubbard. 

See how jovial he looks ! He is the life and soul of every 
party, and his impromptu siBging after supper mR make you 
die of laughing. He is meditating an impromptu now, and at 
the same time thinking about a bill that is coming due next 
Thursday. Happy dog ! 



MKS. TKOTTEE, MISS TBOTTEE, MISS TOADT, LOED METHUSELAH. 



MRS. TROTTER, MISS TROTTER, MISS TOADY, 

LORD METHUSELAH. 



Dear Emma Trotter has been silent and rather ill-humoured 
all the evening until now her pretty face lights up with smiles. 
Cannot you guess why? Pity the simple and affectionate 
creature ! Lord Methuselah has not arrived until this moment ; 
and see how the artless girl steps forward to greet him ! 

In the midst of all the selfishness and turmoil of the world, 
how charming it is to find virgin hearts quite imsullied, and to 
look on at little romantic pictures of mutual love ! Lord 
Methuselah, though you know his age by the peerage — ^though 
he is old, wigged, gouty, rouged, wicked, has lighted up a pure 
flame in that gentle bosom. There was a talk about Tom 
Willoughby last year ; and then, for a time, young Hawbuck 
(Sir John Hawbuck's yoimgest son) seemed the favoured man ; 
but Emma never knew her mind until she met the dear 
creature before you in a Rhine steam-boat. " Why are you so 
late, Edward ? " says she. Dear artless child ! 



82 MRS. PEREINS*S BALL. 

Her mother looks on with tender satisfaction. One can 
appreciate the joys of such an admirable parent ! 

" Look at them 1 " says Miss Toady. " I vow and protest 
they're the handsomest couple in the room ! " 

Methuselah's grandchildren are rather jealous and angry, 
and Mademoiselle Ariane, of the French theatre, is furious. 
But there's no accounting for the mercenary envy of some 
people ; and it is impossible to satisfy everybody. 



UE. BEAirUOBIS, MB. GBIQ, US. FLYSDEB6. 



MB. BEAUMOEIS, ME. GRIG, ME. FLYNDEES. 



Those three young men are described in a twinkling: 
Lieutenant Grig of the heavies; Mr. Beaumoris, the hand- 
some young man; Tom Flinders (Flynders Flynders, he now 
calls himself), the fat gentleman who dresses after Beaumons. 

Beaumoris is' in the Treasury: he has & salary of eighty 
pounds a year, on which he maintains the best cab and horses 
of the season; and out of which he pays seventy guineas 
merely for his subscription to clubs. He hunts in Leicester- 
shire, where great men mount him ; is a prodigious favoutite 
behind the scenes at the theatres; you may get glimpses of 
him at Eichmond, with all sorts of pink bonnets ; and he is 
the sworn friend of half the most famous roues about town, 
such as Old Methuselah, Lord Billygoat^ Lord Tarquin, and 
the rest; a respectable race. It is to oblige the former that 
the good-natured young fellow is here to-night; though it 
must not be imagined that he gives himself any airs of supe- 
riority. Dandy as he is, he is quite affable, and would borrow 

D 



34 MBS. F£REINS*S BALL. 

ten guineas from any man in the room, in the most jovial way 
possible. 

It is neither Beau's birth, which is doubtful ; nor his money, 
which is entirely negative ; nor his honesty, which goes along 
with his money-qualification; nor his wit, for he can barely 
spell, — ^which recommend him to the fashionable world: but 
a sort of Grand Seigneur splendour, and dandified Je ne S9ais 
quoi, which make the man he is of him. The way in which 
his boots and gloves fit him is a wonder, which no other man 
can achieve ; and though he has not an atom of principle, it 
must be confessed that he invented the Taglioni shirt. 

When I see these magnificent dandies yawning out of 
White's, or caracoling in the Park on shining chargers, I like 
to think that Brummell was the greatest of them all, and that 
Brummell's father was a footman. 

Flynders is Beaumoris's toady: lends him money; buys 
horses through his recommendation; dresses after him ; clings 
to him in Pall Mall, and on the steps of the clubs ; and talks 
about * Bo' in all societies. It is his drag which carries down 
Bo's friends to the Derby, and his cheques pay for dinners 
to the pink bonnets. I don't believe the Perkinses know what 
a rogue it is, but fancy him a decent reputable City man, like 
his father before him. 
As for Captain Grig, what is there to tell about him ? He 



MBS. FEBEINS'S BALL. 35 

performs the duties of his calling with perfect gravity. He 
is fanltless on parade ; excellent across country ; amiable when 
drank, rather slow when sober. He has not two ideas, and is 
a most good-natured, irreproachable, gallant, and stupid young 
officer. 



j> 2 



CAVALIER SEUL. 



This is my friend Bob Hely, performing the Cavalier seul 
in a quadrille. Bemark the good-humoured pleasure depicted 
in his countenance. Has he any secret grief? Has he a pain 
anywhere ? No, dear Miss Jones, he is dancing like a true 
Briton, and with all the charming gaiety and abandon of our 
race. 

When Canaillard performs that Cavalier seul operation, 
does he flinch ? No : he puts on his most vainqiLeur look, 
he sticks his thumbs into the armholes of his waistcoat, and 
advances, retreats, pirouettes, and otherwise gambadoes, as 
though to say, " Regarde moi, O monde ! Venez, O femmes, 
venez voir danser Canaillard!" 

When de Bobwitz executes the same measure, he does it 
with smiling agility, and graceful ease. 

But poor Hely, if he were advancing to a dentist? his face ^ 
would not be more cheerful. All the eyes of the room are 
upon him, he thinks ; and he thinks he looks like a fool. 



^ 



CATALIER 8EXJL. 



MBS. FEBEINS'S BALL. 87 

Upon my word, if you press the point with me, dear Miss 
Jones, I think he is not very far from right. I think that 
while Frenchmen and Germans may dance, as it is their 
nature to do, there is a natural dignity about us BritcHis, 
which debars us from that enjoyment. I am rather of 
the Turkish opinion, that this should be done for us. I 
think » » » 

Good-by, you envious old fox-and-the -grapes, says Miss 
Hones, and the next moment I see her whirling by in a polka 
with Tom Tozer, at a pace which makes me shrink back with 
terror into the little boudoir. 



M. CANAILLAED, CHEVALIEE OF THE LEGION 

OP HONOUR. 

LIEUTENANT BAEON DE BOBWITZ. 

— • — 

Canaillard. ces Anglais ! quels hommes, mon Dieu ! 
Comme ils sont habill6s, comme lis dansent ! 

Bobwitz. Ce sont de beaux hommes bourtant ; point de 
tenue militaire mais de grands gaillards ; si je les avais dans 
ma compagnie de la Garde, j*en ferai de bons soldats. 

Canaillard, Est il bete, cet Allemand ! Les grands hommes 
ne font pas toujours de bons soldats, Monsieur. II me semble 
que les soldats de France qui sont de ma taille, Monsieur, 
valent un peu mieux * * 

Bobwitz. Vous croyez ? 

Canaillard. Comment je le crois. Monsieur ? J'en suis sur ! 
II me semble. Monsieur, que nous Tavons prouv6. 

Bobwitz {impatiently). Je m'en vais danser la Bolka. Ser- 
viteur. Monsieur. 

Canaillard. Butor ! (He goes and looks at himself in the 
glass, when he is seized by Mrs. Perkins for the Polka.) 



|;,i'' : %K 



'1 



U. CAHAILLAED, LIEUTENAST BittON DE BOBWITZ. 



THE BOUDOia-MR. SMITH, MR. BROWW, HISS BUSTLETON.' 



THE BOUDOIR, 
MR. SMITH, MR. BROWN, MISS BUSTLETON. 



Mr, Brown. You polk. Miss Bustleton ? I'm so delaighted. 
Miss Bustleton. [Smiles and prepares to rise.] 
Mr. Smith. D puppy. 

{Poor Smith don't polk) 



"* 



GEAND POLKA. 



Though a quadrille seems to me as dreary as a funeral, yet 
to look at a polka I own is pleasant. See ! Brown and Emily 
Bustleton are whirling round as light as two pigeons over a 
dove-cot; Tozer, with that wicked, whisking, little Jones, spins 
along as merrily as a May-day sweep ; Miss Joy is the partner 
of the happy Fred. Sparks ; and even Miss Eanville is pleased, 
for the faultless Captain Grig is toe and heel with her. Beau- 
moris, with rather a nonchalant air, takes a turn with Miss 
Trotter, at which Lord Methuselah's wrinkled chops quiver 
uneasily. See ! how the big Baron de Bobwitz spins lightly, 
and gravely, and gracefully round; and lo! the Frenchman 
staggering under the weight of Miss Bunion, who tramps and 
kicks like a young cart-horse. 

But the most awful sight which met my view in this dance, 
was the unfortunate Miss Little, to whom fate had assigned 
The Mulligan as a partner. Like a pavid kid in the talons 
of an eagle, that young creature trembled in his huge Milesian 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 41 

grasp. Disdaining the recognised form of the dance, the Irish 
chiefikam accommodated the music to the dance of his own 
green land, and performed a double shuffle jig, carrying Miss 
Little along with him. Miss Banville and her Captain shrank 
back amazed ; Miss Trotter slurried out of his way into the 
protection of the astonished Lord Methuselah ; Fred. Sparks 
could hardly move for laughing ; while, on the contrary, Miss 
Joy was quite in pain for poor Sophy Little. As Canaillard 
and the Poetess came up, The Mulligan, in the height of his 
enthusiasm, lunged out a kick which sent Miss Bunion 
howUng ; and concluded with a tremendous Hurroo ! a war cry 
which caused every Saxon heart to shudder and quail. 

0. that the earth would open and kindly take me in ! I ex- 
claimed mentally ; and slunk oflf into the lower regions, where 
by this time half the company were at supper. 



THE SUPPER. 



The supper is going on behind the screen. There is no need 
to draw the supper. We all know that sort of transaction : the 
squabbling, and gobbling, and popping of champagne ; the 
smell of musk and lobster salad ; the dowagers chumping away 
at plates of raised pie ; the young lasses nibbling at little 
titbits, which the dexterous young gentlemen procure. Three 
large men, like doctors of divinity, wait behind the table, and 
furnish everything that appetite can ask for. I never, for my 
part, can eat any supper for wondering at those men. I believe 
if you were to ask them for mashed turnips, or a slice of 
crocodile, those astonishing people would serve you. What 
a contempt they must have for the guttling crowd to whom 
they minister — ^those solemn pastrycook's men! How they 
must hate jellies, and game -pies, and champagne in their 
hearts ! How they must scorn my poor friend Grundsell, 
behind the screen, who is sucking at a bottle ! 



SEOBQE GBUNDSELL. 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 43 



GEORGE GRUNDSELU 

GREEN-GROCER AND SALESMAN, 

9 LITTLE POOKLINGTON BUILDINGS, 

Z.ATB COimOBIfTIAI> BBBTAB* XV *HB VAMILT OV 

THE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON. 



Carpets Beat. — Enives and Boots cleaned per contract. — Errands 
fiiithfiilly performed. — G. G. attends Ball and Dinner parties, and 
from his knowledge of the most distinguished Families in London, 
confidently recommends his services to the distinguished neigh- 
bourhood of Focklington Square. 



This disguised green-grocer is a very well-known character 
in the neighbourhood of Focklington Square. He waits at the 
parties of the gentry in the neighbourhood, and though, of 
course, despised in families where a footman is kept, is a person 
of much importance in female establishments. 

Miss Jonas always employs him at her parties, and says to 
her page, "Vincent, send the butler, or send Desborough to 
me ; " by which name she chooses to designate G. G. 

When the Miss Frumps have posthorses to their carriage, 
and pay visits, Grundsell always goes behind. Those ladies 
have the greatest confidence in him, have been godmothers to 
fourteen of his children, and leave their house in his charge 
when they go to Bognor for the summer. He attended those 



44 MBS. PEKKINS'S BALL. 

ladies when they were presented at the last drawing-room of 
Her Majesty Queen Charlotte. 

Mr. Grundsell's state costume is a blue coat and copper 
buttons, a white waistcoat, and an immense frill and shirt- 
collar. He was for many years a private watchman, and 
once canvassed for the office of parish clerk of St. Peter's, 
Pocklington. He can be intrusted with untold spoons ; with 
any thing, in fact, but liquor; and it was he who brought 
round the cards for Mrs. Perkins's Ball. 



AFTER SUPPER. 



I DO not intend to say any more about it. After the people 
had supped, they^went back and danced. Some supped again. 
I gaye Miss Bunion, with my own hands, four bumpers of 
champagne : and such a quantity of goose liver and truffles, 
that I don't wonder she took a glass of cherry-brandy after- 
wards. The grey morning was in Pocklington Square as she 
drove away in her fly. So did the other people go away. 
How green and sallow some of the girls looked, and how 
awfully clear Mrs. Colonel Bludyer's rouge was ! Lady Jane 
Banville's great coach had roared away down the streets long 
before. Fred. Minchin pattered off in his clogs : it was I who 
covered up Miss Meggot, and conducted her, with her two old 
sisters, to the carriage. Good old souls ! They have shown 
their gratitude by asking me to tea next Tuesday. Methuselah 
is gone to finish the night at the Club. " Mind to-morrow," 
Miss Trotter says, kissing her hand out of the carriage. 
Canaillard departs, asking the way to * Lesterre-squar.' They 
all go away — ^life goes away. 



46 MBS. Perkins's ball. 

Look at Miss Martin and young Ward ! How tenderly the 
rogue is wrapping her up ! how kindly she looks at him ! The 
old folks are whispering behind as they wait for their carriage. 
What is their talk, think you ? and when shall that pair make 
a match? When you see those pretty little creatures with 
their smiles and their blushes, and their pretty ways, would 
you like to be the Grand Bashaw ? 

"Mind and send me a large piece of cake," I go up and 
whisper archly to old Mr. Ward : and . we look on rather 
sentimentally at the couple, almost the last in the rooms 
(there, I declare, go the musicians, and the clock is at five), 
when Grundsell with an . air effari, rushes up to .me, and 
says, " For Ev'n sake. Sir, go into the supper-room : there's 
that Hirish gent, a pitchiu into Mr. P." 



HISS HABTIN AND TOUNQ WASH. 



THE MDLUGAN AND ME. PEKKIK3. 



THE MULLIGAN AND ME. PEEKINS. 



It was too true. I had taken him away after supper (he ran 
after Miss Little's carriage, who was dying in love with him, 
as he fancied), but the brute had come back 'again. . The 
doctors of divinity were putting up their condimeiits: every- 
body was gone; but. the abominable Mulligan sate swinging 
his legs at the lonely supper-table ! 

Perkins was opposite, gasping at him. 

The Mulligan. I tell ye, ye are . the butler, ye big* fat 
man. Go get me some more champagne: it's good at this 
house. . 

Mr. Perkins {with dignity). It is good at this house; 
but—. 

The Mulligan. Bht hwhat? ye goggling, bow-windowed 
jackass. Go get the wine, and we'll dthrink it together, my 
old buck. 

Mr. Perkins. My name, Sir, is Pebkins. 

The Mulligan. Well, that rhymes with gerkins and Jerkins, 



48 MBS. Perkins's ball. 

my man of firkins ; so don't let us have any more shirkings 
and lurkings, Mr. Perkins. 

Mr, Perkins {with apoplectic energy). Sir, I am the master 
of this house ; and I order you to quit it. 1*11 not be insulted, 
Sir. m send for a policeman, Sir. What do you mean, 
Mr. Titmarsh, Sir, by bringing this — ^this beast into my 
house, Sir? 

At this, with a scream like that of a Hyrcanian tiger. 
Mulligan, of the hundred battles, sprang forward at his prey; 
but we were beforehand with him. Mr. Gregory, Mr. Grund- 
sell. Sir Giles Bacon's large man, the young gentleman, 
and myself, rushed simultaneously upon the tipsy chieftain, 
and confined him. The doctors of divinity looked on with 
perfect indiflference. That Mr. Perkins did not go off in a 
fit is a wonder. He was led away heaving and snorting 
frightfally. 

Somebody smashed Mulligan's hat over his eyes, and I led 
him forth into the silent morning. The chirrup of the birds, 
the fireshness of the rosy air, and a penn'orth of coffee that I 
got for him at a stall in the Eegent Circus, revived him some- 
what. When I quitted him, he was not angry, but sad. He 
was desirous, it is true, of avenging the wrongs of Erin in 
battle line ; he wished also to share the grave of Sarsfield and 
Hugh O'Neill ; but he was sure that Miss Perkins, as well as 



MBS. Perkins's ball. 49 

Miss Little, was desperately in love with him; and I left him 
on a door-step in tears. 

"Is it best to be laughing-mad, or crying-mad, in the 
world ? *' says I, moodily, coming into my street. Betsy, the 
maid^ was already up and at work, on her knees, scouring 
the steps, and cheerfully beginning her honest daily labour. 



OUE STREET. 



OUR STREET. 



OuE Street, from the little nook which I occupy in it, and 
whence I and a fellow-lodger and friend of mine cynically 
observe it, presents a strange motley scene. We are in a state 
of transition. We are not as yet in the town, and we have left 
the country where we were when I came to lodge with Mrs. 
Cammysole, my excellent landlady. I then took second-floor 
apartments at No. 17, Waddilove Street, and since, although I 
have never moved (having various little comforts about me), 
I find myself living at No. 46 a, Pocklington Gardens. 

Why is this ? Why am I to pay eighteen shillings instead 
of fifteen ? I was quite as happy in Waddilove Street ; but the 
fact is, a great portion of that venerable old district has passed 
away, and we are being absorbed into the splendid new white- 
stuccoed Doric-porticoed genteel Pocklington quarter. Sir 
Thomas Gibbs Pocklington, M.P. for the borough of Lathan- 
plaster, is the founder of the district and his own fortune. 



2 OUR STREET, 

The PockliDgton Estate Office is in the Square, on a line with 
Waddil — with Pocklington Gardens, I mean. The old inn, 
the Earn and Magpie, where the market-gardeners used to 
bait, came out this year with a new white face and title, the 
shield, &c. of the Pocklington Arms. Such a shield it is ! 
Such quarterings ! Howard, Cavendish, De Eos, De la Zouche, 
all mingled together. 

Even our house, 46 a, which Mrs. Cammysole has had 
painted white in compliment to the Gardens of which it now 
forms part, is a sort of impostor, and has no business to be 
called Gardens at all. Mr. Gibbs, Sir Thomas's agent and 
nephew, is furious at our daring to take the title which belongs 
to our betters. The very next door (No. 46, the Honourable 
Mrs. Mountnoddy) is a house of five stories, shooting up 
proudly into the air, thirty feet above our old high-roofed low- 
roomed old tenement. It belongs to Captain Bragg, not only 
the landlord but the son-in-law of Mrs. Cammysole, who lives a 
couple of hundred yards down the street, at " The Bungalow." 
He was the Commander of the Eam Chunder East Indiaman, 
and has quarrelled with the Pocklingtons ever since he bought 
houses in the parish. 

He it is who will not sell or alter his houses to suit the 
spirit of the times. He it is who, though he made the widow 
Cammysole change the name of her street, will not pull down 



OUR BTBEETd 8 

the house next door, nor the baker's next, nor the iron-bedstead 
iuad feather warehouse ensuing, nor the little barber's with the 
pole, nor, I am ashamed to say, the tripe shop, still standing. 
The barber powders the heads of the great footmen from Pock- 
lington Gardens ; they are so big that they can scarcely sit in 
his little premises. And the old tavern. The East Indiaman, 
is kept by Bragg's ship steward, and protests against the 
Pocklington Arms, 

Down the road is Pocklington Chapel, Rev. Oldham Slocum 
—in brick, with arched windows and a wooden belfry ; sober, 
dingy, and hideous. In the centre of Pocklington Gardens 
rises St. Waltheof s, the Rev. Cyril Thuryfer and assistants — 
a splendid Anglo-Norman edifice, vast, rich, elaborate, bran 
new, and intensely old. Down Avemary Lane you may hear 
the clink of the little Romish Chapel bell. And hard by is a 
large broad-shouldered Ebenezer (Rev. Jonas Gronow), out of 
the windows of which the hymns come booming all Sunday 
long. 

Going westward along the line we come presently to Coman- 
dine House (on a part of the gardens of which Comandine 
Gardens is about to be erected by his lordship) ; farther on, 
•* The Pineries," Mr. and Lady Mary Mango : and so we get 
into the country, and out of Our Street altogether, as I may 
say- But in the half mile, over which it may be said to 

B 2 



4 OITB STBEET. 

extend, we find all sorts and conditions of people — from th6 
Bight Honourable Lord Comandine down to the present 
topographer ; who, being of no rank, as it were^ has the fortiine 
to be treated on almost friendly footing by all, from his lord- 
ship down to the tradesman. 





p 



4 STUDIO IN OUB 8TEEET. 



OUR HOUSE IN OUR STREET. 

We must begin our little descriptions where, they say, 
Charity should begin — ^at home. Mrs. Cammysole, my land<*> 
lady, will be rather surprised when she reads this, and finds 
that a good-natured tenant, who has never complained of her 
impositions for fifteen years, imderstands every one of her 
tricks, and treats them, not with anger, but with scorn— with 
silent scorn. 

On the 18th of December, 1837, for instance, coming gently 
down stairs, and before my usual wont, I saw you seated in 
my arm-chair, peeping into a letter that came from my aunt in 
the country, just as if it had been addressed to you, and not 
to " M. A. Titmarsh, Esq." Did I make any disturbance ? 
far from it ; I slunk back to my bed-room (being enabled to 
walk silently in the beautiful pair of worsted slippers Miss 

Penelope J s worked for me ; they are worn out now, dear 

Penelope !), and then, rattling open the door with a great noise, 
descended the stairs, singing " Son vergin vezzosa " at the top 
of my voice. You were not in my sitting-room, Mrs. Cammy- 
sole, when I entered that apartment. 



6 OUR STREET, 

You have been reading all my letters, papers, manuscripts, 
hrouillons of verses, inchoate articles for the Morning Post and 
Morning Chronicle, invitations to dinner and tea — all my family 
letters, all Eliza Townley's letters, from the first, in which she 
declared that to be the bride of her beloved Michelagnolo was 
the fondest wish of her maiden heart, to the last, in which she 
announced that her Thomas was the best of husbands, and 
signed herself " Eliza Slogger ; " all Mary Farmer's letters, all 
Emily Delamere's; all that poor foolish old Miss Mac Whirter's, 

whom I would as soon marry as ; in a word, I know that 

you, you hawk-beaked, keen-eyed, sleepless, indefatigable, old 
Mrs. Cammysole, have read all my papers for these ten years, 

I know that you cast your curious old eyes over all the 
manuscripts which you find in my coat pockets and those of 
my pantaloons, as they hang in a drapery over the door-handle 
of my bed-room. 

I know that you count the money in my green and gold 
purse, which Lucy Netterville gave me, and speculate on the 
manner in which I have laid out the diflference between to-day 
and yesterday. 

I know that you have an understanding with the laundress 
(to whom you say that you are all-powerful with me), threat- 
ening to take away my practice from her, unless she gets up 
gratis some of your fine linen. 



OUR STREET. 7 

I tnow that we both have a pennyworth of cream for 
breakfast, which is brought in in the same little can ; and I 
know who has the most for her share. 

I know how many lumps of sugar you take from each pound 
as it arrives. I have counted the lumps, you old thief, and 
for years have never said a word, except to Miss Clapperclaw, 
the first-floor lodger. Once I put a bottle of pale brandy into 
that cupboiard, of which you and I only have keys, and the 
liquor wasted and wasted away until it was all gone. You drank 
the whole of it, you wicked old woman. You a lady, indeed ! 

I know your rage when they did me the honour to elect 
me a member of the Poluphloisboiothalasses Club, and I ceased 
consequently to dine at home. When I did dine at home, on 
a beefsteak, let us say, I should like to know what you had for 
supper. You first amputated portions of the meat when raw ; 
you abstracted more when cooked. Do you think I was taken 
in by your flimsy pretences ? I wonder how you could dare to 
do such things before your maids (you, a clergyman's daughter 
and widow, indeed !), whom you yourself were always charging 
with roguery. 

Yes, the insolence of the old woman is unbearable, and I 
must break out at last. If she goes off in a fit at reading this, 
I am sure I shan't mind. She has two unhappy wenches, 
against whom her old tongue is clacking from morning till night ; 



H CUB STREET. 

she pounces on them at all hours. It was but this morning at 
eight, when poor Molly was brooming the steps, and the baker 
paying her by no means unmerited compliments, that my land- 
lady came whirling out of the ground-floor front, and sent the 
poor girl whimpering into the kitchen. 

Were it but for her conduct to her maids I was determined 
publicly to denounce her. These poor wretches she causes to 
lead the Uves of demons ; and not content with buUying them 
all day, she sleeps at night in the same room with them, so 
that she may have them up before daybreak, and scold them 
while they are dressing. 

Certain it is, that between her and Miss Clapperclaw, on the 
first floor, the poor wenches led a dismal life. My dear Miss 
Clapperclaw, I hope you will excuse me for having placed you 
in the title-page of my little book, looking out of your accus- 
tomed window, and having your eye-glasses ready to spy the 
whole street, which you know better than any inhabitant of it. 

It is to you that I owe most of my knowledge of our neigh- 
bours ; from you it is that most of the facts and observations 
contained in these brief pages are taken. Many a night, over 
our tea, have we talked amiably about our neighbours and their 
little failings ; and as I know that you speak of mine pretty 
freely, why let me say, my dear Bessy, that if we have not built 
up Our Street between us, at least we have pulled it to pieces. 



A STSEET C0DKT8EIP. 



h;iMi 




CAPTAIN AND MRS. BEAGG OP OTTB 8TBEET. 



THE BUNGALOW— CAPTAIN AND MRS. BRAGG. 



Long, long ago, when Our Street was the country — a stage- 
coach between us and London passing four times a-day — ^I do 
not care to own that it was a sight of Flora Canunysole's face, 
under the card of her mamma's " Lodgings to Let," which first 
caused me to become a tenant of Our Street. A fine good* 
humoured lass she was then ; and I gave her lessons (part out 
of the rent) in French and flower-painting. She has made a 
fine rich marriage since, although her eyes have often seemed 
to me to say, "Ah, Mr. T., why didn't you, when there was 
yet time, and we both of us were free, propose — ^you know 
what ? " " Psha ! Where was the money, my dear madam ? " 

Captain Bragg, then occupied in building Bungalow Lodge — 
Bragg, I say, living on the first floor, and entertaining sea- 
captains, merchants, and East Indian friends with his grand 
ship's plate, being disappointed in a project of marrying a 
director's daughter, who was also a second cousin once removed 
of a peer, sent in a fury for Mrs. Cammysole, his landlady, and 
proposed to marry Flora ofif-hand, and settle four hundred 



10 OUR STREET. 

a-year upon her. Flora was ordered from the back parlour 
(the Ground-floor occupies the Second-floor bed-room), and 
was on the spot made acquainted with the splendid offer which 
the First-floor had made her. She has been Mrs. Captain 
Bragg these twelve years. 

You see her portrait, and that of the brute, her husband, on 
the opposite side of the page. 

Bragg to this day wears anchor-buttons, and has a dress- 
coat with a gold strap for epaulets, in case he should have a 
fancy to sport them. His house is covered with portraits, busts, 
and miniatures of himself. His wife is made to wear one of the 
latter. On his sideboard are pieces of plate, presented by the 
passengers of the Ram Chunder to Captain Bragg. ** The Ram 
Chunder East Indiaman, in a gale, off Table Bay;" "The 
Outward-bound Fleet, imder convoy of Her Majesty's frigate 
Loblollyboy, Captain Gutch, beating off the French squadron, 
under Commodore Leloup (the Ram Chunder, S.E. by E., is 
represented engaged with the Mirliton corvette) ; " " The Ram 
Chunder standing into the Hooghly, with Captain Bragg, his 
telescope and speaking-trumpet on the poop ; " " Captain Bragg 
presenting the Officers of the Ram Chunder to General Bona* 
parte at St. Helena " — Titmarsh (this fine piece was painted 
by me when I was in favour with Bragg) ; in a word, Bragg 
and the Ram Chunder are all over the house. 



OUR STBBET* 11 

Although I have eaten scores of dinners at Captain Bragg*^ 
charge, yet his hospitality is so insolent that none of us who 
frequent his mahogany, feel any obligation to our braggart 
entertainer. 

After he has given one of his great heavy dinners he always 
takes aHj opportunity to tell you, in the most public way, how 
many bottles of wine were drunk. His pleasure is to make his 
guests tipsy, and to tell everybody how and when the period 
of inebriation arose. And Miss Clapperclaw tells me that he 
often comes over laughing and giggling to her, and pretending 
that he has brought me into this condition — a calumny which 
I fling contemptuously in his face. 

He scarcely gives any but men's parties, and invites the 
whole club home to dinner. What is the compliment of being 
asked^ when the whole club is asked too, I should like to know? 
Men's parties are only good for boys. I hate a dinner where 
there are no women. Bragg sits at the head of his table, and 
bullies the solitary Mrs. Bragg, 

He entertains us with stories of storms which he, Bragg, 
encountered — of dinners which he, Bragg, has received from 
the Governor- General of India — of jokes which he, Bragg, has 
heard; and however stale or odious they may be, poor Mrs. B. 
is always expected to laugh. 

Woe be to her if she doesn't, or if she laughs at anybody 



12 CUB STREET. 

else's jokes. I have seen Bragg go up to her and squeeze her 
arm with a savage grind of his teeth, and say, with an oath, 
^*Hang it, madam, how dare you laugh when any man but 
your husband speaks to you? I forbid you to grin in that 
way. I forbid you to look sulky. I forbid you to look happy, 
or to look up, or to keep your eyes down to the ground. 
I desire you will not be trapesing through the rooms. I order 
you not to sit as still as a stone," He curses her if the wine 
is corked, or if the dinner is spoiled, or if she comes a minute 
too soon to the club for him, or arrives a minute too late. He 
forbids her to walk, except upon his arm. And the conse* 
quence of his ill-treatment is, that Mrs. Cammysole and Mrs. 
Bragg respect him beyond measure, and think him the first of 
hiunan beings. 

" I never knew a woman who was constantly bullied by her 
husband who did not like him the better for it," Miss Clap- 
perclaw says. And though this speech has some of Clapp's 
usual sardonic humour in it, I can't but think there is some 
truth in the remark. 



LEVANT HOUSE CHAMBEHS. 
MB. EUMBOLD, A.R.A., AND MISS EUMBOLD. 



When Lord Levant quitted the country and this neighbour- 
hood, in which the tradesmen still deplore him, No 56, known 
as Levantine House, was let to the Pococurante Club, which 
was speedily bankrupt (for we are too far from the centre of 
town to support a club of our own) ; it was subsequently hired 
by the West Diddlesex Eailroad ; and is now divided into sets 
of Chambers, superintended by an acrimonious housekeeper, 
and by a porter in a sham Uveiy, who, if you won't find him at 
the door, you may as well seek at the Grapes public-house, in 
the little lane round the comer. He varnishes the japan-boots 
of the *dandy lodgers ; reads Mr. Pinkney's Morning Post 
before he lets him have it; and neglects the letters of the 
inmates of the Chambers generally. 

The great rooms, which were occupied as the salons of the 
noble Levant, the coffee-rooms of the Pococurante (a club 
where the play was furious, as I am told), and the board-room 



14 OUB STBEET. 

and manager's-room of the West Diddlesex, are tenanted now 
by a couple of artists; young Pinkney the miniaturist, and 
George Eumbold the historical-painter. Miss Eumbold, his 
sister, lives with him, by the way ; but with that young lady 
of course we have nothing to do. 

I knew both these gentlemen at Eome, when George wore 
a velvet doublet and a beard down to his chest, and used to 
talk about high art at the Caf6 Greco. How it smelled of 
smoke, that velveteen doublet of his, with which his stringy 
red beard was likewise perfumed ! It was in his studio that I 
had the honour to be introduced to his sister, the fair Miss 
Clara ; she had a large casque with a red horse-hair plume (I 
thought it had been a wisp of her brother's beard at first), and 
held a tin-headed spear in her hand, representing a Roman 
warrior in the great picture of Caractacus George was painting 
— a piece sixty-four feet by eighteen. The Eoman warrior 
blushed to be discovered in that attitude : the tin-headed spear 
trembled in the whitest arm in the world. So she put it down, 
and taking off the helmet also, went and sat in a far comer of 
the studio, mending George's stockings ; whilst we smoked a 
couple of pipes, and talked about Eaphael being a good deal 
overrated. 

I think he is ; and have never disguised my opinion about 
the "Transfiguration." And all the time we talked, there 



CUB STREET. 15 

Were Clara's eyes looking lucidly out from the dark comer in 
which she was sitting, working away at the stockings. The 
lucky fellow ! They were in a dreadful state of bad repair 
when she came out to him at Borne, after the death of their 
father, the Eeverend Miles Rumbold. 

George while at Home painted " Caractacus ; ** a picture of 
**Non Angli sed Angeli," of course ; a picture of "Alfred in the 
Neat-herd's Cottage," seventy-two feet by forty-eight ; (an idea 
of the gigantic size and Michael-Angelesque proportions of 
this picture may be formed, when I state that the mere muffin, 
of which the outcast king is spoiling the baking, is two feet 
three in diameter) ; and the deaths of Socrates, of Bemus, and 
of the Christians under Nero respectively. I shall never forget 
how lovely Clara looked in white muslin, with her hair down, 
in this latter picture, giving herself up to a ferocious Camifex 
(for which Bob Gaunter the architect sat), and refusing to 
listen to the mild suggestions of an insinuating Flamen ; which 
character was a gross caricature of myself. 

None of George's pictures sold. He has enough to tapestry 
Trafalgar Square. He has painted siace he came back to 
England " The flaying of Marsyas ; " " The smothering of the 
httle boys in the Tower ; " "A plague scene during the great 
pestilence;'* "Ugolino on the seventh day after he was deprived 
of victuals," &c. For although these pictures have great merit, 



16 OUB STREET. 

and the writhings of Marsyas^ the convulsions of the little 
prince, the look of agony of St. Lawrence on the gridiron, 
&c., are quite true to nature, yet the subjects Somehow are not 
agreeable; and if he hadn't a small patrimony, my friend 
George would starve. ^ 

Fondness for art leads me a great deal to this studio. George 
is a gentleman, and has very good friends, and good pluck too. 
When we were at Bome there was a great row between hin^ and 
young Heeltap, Lord Boxmoor's son, who was uncivil to Miss 
Bumbold ; (the young scoundrel— had I been a fighting man 
I should like to have shot him myself!) Lady Betty Bulbul 
is very fond of Clara, and Tom Bulbul, who took George's 
message to Heeltap, is always hanging about the studio. At 
least I know that I find the young jackanapes there almost 
every day ; bringing a new novel, or some poisonous French 
poetry, or a basket of flowers, or grapes, with Lady Betty's 
love to her dear Clara — a young rascal with white kids, and 
his hair curled every morning. What business has he to be 
dangling about George Eumbold's premises, and sticking up 
his ugly pug-face as a model for all George's pictures ? 

Miss Clapperclaw says Bulbul is evidently smitten, and 
Clara too. What ! would she put up with such a little fribble 
as that, when there is a man of intellect and taste who — ^but I 
won't believe it. It is all the jealousy of women. 



SOME OF OUR QENTLEKEN, 



SOME OF THE SERVANTS IN OUR STREET. 



These gentlemen have two clubs in our quarter — ^for the 
butlers at the Indiaman, and for the gents in livery at the 
Paddington Arms — of either of which societies I should like 
to be a member. I am sure they could not be so dull as Our 
Club at the Poluphloisboio, where one meets the same neat 
clean respectable old fogies every day. 

But with the best wishes, it is impossible for the present 
writer to join either the Plate Club or the Uniform Club (as 
these r&umons are designated), for one could not shake hands 
with a friend who was standing behind your chair — or nod a 
how-d'ye-do to the butler who was pouring you out a glass of 
wine ; — so that what I know about the gents in our neighbour- 
hood is from mere casual observation. For instance, I have a 
slight acquaintance with, 1, Thomas Spavin, who commonly 
wears the above air of injured innocence, and is groom to 
Mr. Joseph Green, of Our Street. " I tell why the Brougham 
OSS is out of condition, and why Desperation broke out all in 



18 OUR STREET. 

a lather ! Osses will this eavy weather ; and Desperation was 
always the most mystest hoss I ever see. — I take him out with 
Mr. Anderson's ounds — I*m above it. I allis was too timid to 
ride to ounds by natur ; and Colonel Sprigs* groom as says he 
saw me, is a liar," &c., &c. 

Such is the tenor of Mr. Spavin's remarks to his master. 
Whereas all the world in Our Street knows that Mr. Spavin 
spends at least a hundred a-year in beer; that he keeps a 
betting-book ; that he has lent Mr. Green's black Brougham 
horse to the omnibus driver; and at a time when Mr. G. 
supposed him at the veterinary surgeon's has lent him to a 
livery stable, which has let him out to that gentleman him- 
self, and actually driven him to dinner behind his own horse. 

This conduct I can understand, but I cannot excuse — Mr. 
Spavin may; and I leave the matter to be settled betwixt 
himself and Mr. Green. 

The second is Monsieur Sinbad, Mr. Clarence Bulbul's 
man, whom we all hate Clarence for keeping. 

Mr. Sinbad is a foreigner, speaking no known language, but 
a mixture of every European dialect — so that he may be an 
Italian brigand, or a Tyrolese minstrel, or a Spanish smuggler, 
for what we know. I have heard say that he is neither of 
these, but an Irish Jew. 

He wears studs, hair-oil, jewellery, and linen shirt fronts, 



0T7B STREET. ' 19 

very finely embroidered but not particular for whiteness. 
He generally appears in faded velvet waistcoats of a morning, 
and is always perfumed with stale tobacco. He wears large 
rings on his hands, which look as if he kept them up the 

ft 

chimney. 

He does not appear to do anything earthly for Clarence 
Bolbul, except to smoke his cigars, and to practise on his 
guitar. He will not answer a bell, nor fetch a glass of water, 
nor go of an errand, on which, au reste^ Clarence dares not 
send him, being entirely afraid of his servant, and not daring 
to use him, or to abuse him, or to send him away. 

3. Adams — ^Mr. Champignon's man — a good old man in an 
old livery coat with old worsted lace — so very old, deaf, surly, 
and faithful, that you wonder how he should have got into the 
family at all, who never kept a footman till last year, when 
they came into the street. 

Miss Clapperclaw says she believes Adams to be Mrs. 
Champignon's father, and he certainly has a look of that lady, 
as Miss C. pointed out to me at dinner one night, whilst old 
Adams was blundering about amongst the hired men from 
Gunter's, and falling over the silver dishes. 

4. Fipps, the buttoniest page in all the street, walks behind 
Mrs. Grimsby with her prayer-book, and protects her. 

*' If that woman wants a protector" (a female acquaintance 

c 2 



20 OUR STREET. 

remarks), " Heaven be good to us — she is as big as an ogress, 
and has an upper lip which many a Comet of the Life Guards 
might envy. Her poor dear husband was a big man, and she 
could beat him easily, and did too. Mrs. Grimsby, indeed ! 
Why, my dear Mr. Titmarsh, it is Glumdalca walking with 
Tom Thumb." 

This observation of Miss C/s is very true, and Mrs. Grimsby 
might carry her prayer-book to church herself. But Miss 
Clapperclaw, who is pretty well able to take care of herself too, 
was glad enough to have the protection of the page when she 
went out in the fly to pay visits; and before Mrs. Grimsby 
and she quarrelled at whist at Lady Focklington's. 

After this merely parenthetic observation, we come to 5, one 
of her ladyship's large men, Mr. Jeames— a gentleman of vast 
stature and proportions, who is almost nose to nose with us as 
we pass her ladyship's door on the outside of the omnibus. 
I think Jeames has a contempt for a man whom he witnesses 
in that position. I have fancied something like that feeling 
showed itself (as far as it may in a well-bred gentleman accus- 
tomed to society) in his behaviour, while waiting behind my 
chair at dinner. 

But I take Jeames to be, like most giants, good-natured, 
lazy, stupid, soft-hearted, and extremely fond of drink. One 
night, his lady being engaged to dinner at Nightingale House, 



OUR STREET. 21 

I saw Mr. Jeames resting himself on a bench at the Pockliiig- 
ton Arms: where, as he had no liquor before him, he had 
probably exhausted his credit. 

Little Spitfire, Mr. Clarence Bulbul*s boy, the wickedest 
little varlet that ever hung on to a cab, was " chaffing" Mr. 
Jeames, holding up to his face a pot of porter almost as big as 
the young potifer himself. 

" Vill you now, Bigun, or vont you ?" Spitfire said ; " if 
you're thirsty, vy don't you say so and squench it, old boy ?" 

" Don't ago on making fun of me — ^I can't abear chaffin," 
was the reply of Mr. Jeames, and tears actually stood in his 
fine eyes, as he looked at the porter and the screeching little 
imp before him. 

Spitfire (real name unknown) gave him some of the drink : 
I am happy to say Jeames's face wore quite a different look 
when it rose gasping out of the porter ; and I judge of his 
dispositions from the above trivial incident. 

The last boy in the sketch, 6, need scarcely be particular- 
ised. Doctor's boy; was a charity-boy; stripes evidently 
added on to a pair of the doctor's clothes of last year — Miss 
Clapperclaw pointed this out to me with a giggle. — Nothing 
escapes that old woman. 

As we were walking in Kensington Gardens she pointed me 
out Mrs. Bragg's nursery-maid, who sings so loud at church. 



22 OUR STREET. 

engaged with a Life Guardsman, whom she was trying to 
convert probably. My virtuous friend rose indignant at the 
sight. 

" That's why these minxes like Kensington Gardens," she 
cried. " Look at the woman : she leaves the baby on the 
grass, for the giant to trample upon ; and that little wretch of 
a Hastings Bragg is riding on the monster's cane." 

Miss C. flew up and seized the infant, waking it out of its 
sleep, and causing all the gardens to echo with its squalling. 
" 1*11 teach you to be impudent to me," she said to the nursery- 
maid, with whom my vivacious old friend, I suppose, has had 
a difference ; and she would not release the infant until she 
had rung the bell of Bungalow Lodge, where she gave it up to 
the footman. 

The giant in scarlet had slunk down toward Knightsbridge 
meanwhile. The big rogues are always crossing the Park and 
the Gardens, and hankering about Oiu: Street. 



WHY ODB HDKSEltilDS LIKE KEK8INGT0N GAJBDENS. 



A STREET CEREMONY. 



WHAT SOMETIMES HAPPENS IN OUR STREET, 



It was before old Hunkington's house that the mutes were 
standing, as I passed and saw this group at the door. T'he 
charity-boy with the hoop is tlie son of the jolly-looking mute ; 
he admires his father, who admires himself too, in those bran- 
new sables. The other infants are the spawn of the alleys 
about Our Street. Only the parson and the typhus fever visit 
those mysterious haunts, which lie couched about our splendid 

houses like Lazarus at the threshold of Dives. 

« 

Those little ones come crawling abroad in the simshine, to 
the annoyance of the beadles, and the horror of a number of 
good people in the street. They will bring up the rear of the 
procession anon, when the grand omnibus with the feathers, 
and the fine coaches with the long-tailed black horses, and the 
gentlemen's private carriages with the shutters up, pass along 
to Saint Waltheof s. 

You can hear the slow bell tolling clear in the sunshine 
already, mingling with the crowing of Punch, who is passing 



24 OUR STREET. 

down the street with his show ; and the two musics make a 
queer medley. 

Not near so many people, I remark, engage Punch now as in 
the good old times. I suppose our quarter is growing too 
genteel for him. 

Miss Bridget Jones, a poor curate's daughter in Wales, 
comes into all Hunkington's property, and will take his name, 
as I am told. Nobody ever heard of her before. I am sure 
Captain Hunkington, and his brother Barnwell Hunkington, 
must wish that the lucky young lady had never been heard of 
to the present day. 

But they will have the consolation of thinking that they did 
their duty by their uncle, and consoled his declining years. It 
was but last month that Millwood Hunkington (the Captain) 
sent the old gentleman a service of plate ; and Mrs. Barnwell 
got a reclining carriage at a great expense, from Hobbs and 
Dobbs's, in which the old gentleman went out only once. 

" It is a punishment on those Hunkingtons," Miss Clap- 
perclaw remarks ; " upon those people who have been always 
living beyond their little incomes, and always speculating upon 
what the old man would leave them, and always coaxing him 
with presents which they could not afford, and he did not 
want. It is a punishment upon those Hunkingtons to be so 
disappointed." 



OUR STREET. 25 

" Think of giving him plate," Miss C. justly says, " who 
had chests-full : and sending him a carriage, who could afford 
to huy all Long Acre. And everything goes to Miss Jones 
Hunkington. I wonder will she give the things back ?" Miss 
Clapperclaw asks. " I wouldn't." 

And indeed I don't think Miss Clapperclaw would. 



SOMEBODY WHOM NOBODY KNOWS, 



That pretty little house, the last in Pocklington Square, was 
lately occupied by a young widow lady who wore a pink bonnet, 
a short silk dress, sustained by crinoline, and a light blue 
mantle, or over-jacket (Miss C. is not here to tell me the name 
of the garment) ; or else a black velvet pelisse, a yellow shawl, 
and a white bonnet ; or else — but never mind the dress, which 
seemed to be of the handsomest sort money could buy — and 
who had very long glossy black ringlets, and a peculiarly 
brilliant complexion, — No. 96, Pocklington Square, I say, 
was lately occupied by a widow lady named Mrs. Stafford 
Molyneux. 

The very first day on which an intimate and valued female 
friend of mine saw Mrs. Stafford Molyneux stepping into a 
Brougham, with a splendid bay horse, and without a footman 
(mark, if you please, tliat delicate sign of respectability), and 
after a moment's examination of Mrs. S. M.'s toilette, her 
manners, little dog, carnation-coloured parasol, &c.. Miss 



THE LADY WHOM HOBODY KNOWS. 



OUR STREET. 27 

Elizabeth Clapperclaw clapped to the opera-glass with which 
she had been regarding the new inhabitant of Our Street, 
came away from the window in a great flurry, and began 
poking her fire in a fit of virtuous indignation. 

" She's very pretty," said I, who had been looking over Miss 
C.'s shoulder at the widow with the flashing eyes and drooping 
ringlets. 

" Hold your tongue, sir," said Miss Clapperclaw, tossing up 
her virgin head with an indignant blush on her nose. " It's a 
sin and a shame that such a creature should be riding in her 
carriage, forsooth, when honest people must go on foot." 

Subsequent observations confirmed my revered fellow-lodger's 
anger and opinion. We have watched Hansom cabs standing 
before that lady's house for hours ; we have seen Broughams, 
with great flaring eyes, keeping watch there in the darkness ; 
we have seen the vans from the comestible shops drive up 
and discharge loads of wines, groceries, French plums, and 
other articles of luxurious horror. We have seen Count 
Wowski's drag. Lord Martingale's carriage, Mr. Deuceace's 
cab drive up there time after time ; and (having remarked 
previously the pastry-cook's men arrive with the trays and 
entries) we have known that this widow was giving dinners at 
the little house in Pocklington Square — dinners such as decent 
people could not hope to enjoy. 



28 OUR STREET. 

My excellent friend has been in a perfect fury when Mrs. 
Stafford Molyneux, in a black velvet riding-habit, with a hat 
and feather, has come out and mounted an odious grey horse, 
and has cantered down the street, followed by her groom upon 
a bay. 

" It won't last long — it must end in shame and humiliation," 
my dear Miss C. has remarked, disappointed that the tiles 
and chimney-pots did not fall down upon Mrs. Stafford 
Molyneux's head, and crush that cantering audacious 
woman. 

But it was a consolation to see her when she walked out 
with a French maid, a couple of children, and a little dog 
hanging on to her by a blue ribbon. She . always held down 
her head then — her head with the drooping black ringlets. 
The virtuous and well-disposed avoided her. I have seen the 
Square-keeper himself look puzzled as she passed ; and Lady 
Kicklebury walking by with Miss K., her daughter, turn away 
from Mrs. Stafford Molyneux, and fling back at her a ruthless 
Parthian glance that ought to have killed any woman of decent 
sensibility. 

That wretched woman, meanwhile, with her rouged cheeks 
(for rouge it is, Miss Clapperclaw swears, and who is a better 
judge ? ) has walked on conscious, and yet somehow braving 
out the Street. You could read pride of her beauty, pride of 



OUR STREET. 29 

her fine clothes, shame of her position, in her downcast 
black eyes. ' 

As for Mademoiselle Trampoline, her French maid, she 
would stare the sun itself out of countenance. One day she 
tossed up her head as she passed under our windows with a 
look of scorn that drove Miss Clapperclaw back to the fire- 
place again. 

It was Mrs. Stafford Molyneux's children, however, whom I 
pitied the most. Once her boy, in a flaring tartan, went up to 
speak to Master Boderick Lacy, whose maid was engaged ogling 
a policeman ; and the children were going to make Mends, 
being united with a hoop which Master Molyneux had, when 
Master Eoderick's maid, rushing up, clutched her charge to 
her arms, and hurried away, leaving little Molyneux sad and 
wondering. 

" Why won't he play with me, mamma ? " Master Molyneux 
asked — and his mother's face blushed purple as she walked 
away. 

" Ah — ^Heaven help us and forgive us ! " said I ; but Miss 
C. can never forgive the mother or child ; and she clapped 
her hands for joy one day when we saw the shutters up, bills 
in the windows, a carpet hanging out over the balcony, and 
a crowd of shabby Jews about the steps — giving token that 
the reign of Mrs. Stafford Molyneux was over. The pastry- 



30 OUR STREET. 

cooks and their trays^ the bay and the grey, the Brougham and 
the groom, the noblemen and their cabs, were all gone ; and 
the tradesmen in the neighbourhood were crying out that 
they were done. 

" Serve the odious minx right ! " says Miss C. ; and she 
played at picquet that night with more vigour than I have 
known her manifest for these last ten years. 

What is it that makes certain old ladies so savage upon 
certain subjects ? Miss C. is a good woman ; pays her rent 
and her tradesmen ; gives plenty to the poor ; is brisk with 
her tongue — ^kind-hearted in the main ; but if Mrs. Stafford 
Molyneux and her children were plunged into a cauldron of 
boiling vinegar, I think my revered friend would not take 
her out. 



. iJ 



THE MAN IN POSSESSION. 



THE MAN IN POSSESSION. 



For another misfortune which occurred in Our Street we 
were much more compassionate. We liked Danby Dixon, and 
his wife Fanny Dixon still more. Miss C. had a paper of 
biscuits, and a box of preserved apricots always in the cup- 
board, ready for Dixon's children — ^provisions by the way 
which she locked up under Mrs. Cammysole's nose, so that 
our landlady could by no possibility lay a hand on them. 

Dixon and his wife had the neatest little house possible 
(No. 16, opposite 96), and were liked and respected by the 
whole street. He was called Dandy Dixon when he was in 
the Dragoons, and was a light weight, and rather famous as a 
gentleman rider. On his marriage, he sold out and got fat ; 
and was indeed a florid, contented, and jovial gentleman. 

His little wife was charming — ^to see her in pink, with some 
miniature Dixons in pink too, round about her, or in that 
beautiful grey dress, with the deep black lace flounces, which 
she wore at my Lord Comandine's on the night of the private 



32 OUK STREET. 

theatricals, would have done any man good. To hear her sing 
any of my little ballads, "Know'st thou the Willow-tree ?" for 
instance, or " The Eose upon my balcony," or " The Humming 
of the Honey-bee " (far superior, in my judgment, and in that of 
some good judges likewise, to that humbug Clarence Bulbul's 
ballads) — ^to hear her, I say, sing these, was to be in a sort of 
small Elysium. Dear, dear, little Fanny Drson ! she was like 
a little chirping bird of Paradise. It was a shame that storms 
should ever ruffle such a tender plumage. 

Well, never mind about sentiment — ^Danby Dixon, the owner 
of this little treasure, an ex-captain of Dragoons, and having 
nothing to do, and a small income, wisely thought he would 
employ his spare time, and increase his revenue. He became 
a Director of the Comaro Life Insurance Company, of the 
Tregulpho tin-mines, and of four or five railroad companies. 
It was amusing to see him swaggering about the City in his 
clinking boots, and with his high and mighty dragoon manners. 
For a time his talk about shares after dinner was perfectly 
intolerable ; and I for one was always glad to leave him in the 
company of sundry very dubious capitalists who frequented his 
house, and walk up to hear Mrs. Fanny warbling at the piano 
with her little children about her knees. 

It was only last season that they set up a carriage— the 
modestest little vehicle conceivable — driven by Kirby, who had 



OUB STREET. 83 

been in Dixon's troop in the regimefit, and had followed him 
into private life as coachman, footman, and page. 

One day lately I went into Dixon*s house, hearing that 
some calamities had befallen him, the particulars of which 
Miss Clapperclaw was desirous to know. The creditors of the 
Tregulpho mines had got a verdict against him as one of the 
directors of that company ; the engineer of the Little Diddlesez 
Junction had sued him for two thousand three hundred 
pounds — the charges of that scientific man for six weeks* 
labour in surveying the line. His brother directors were to be 
discovered nowhere ; Windham, Dodgin, Mizzlington, and the 
rest, were all gone long ago. 

When I entered, the door was open — ^there was a smell of 
smoke in the dining-room, where a gentleman at noon-day was 
seated with a pipe and a pot of beer — a man in possession 
indeed, in that comfortable pretty parlour, by that snug round 
table where I have so often seen Fanny Dixon's smiling face. 

Kirby, the ex-dragoon^ was scowling at the fellow, who lay 
upon a little settee reading the newspaper, with an evident 
desire to kill him. Mrs- Kirby, his wife, held little Danby, 
poor Dixon's son and heir. Dixon's portrait smiled over the 
sideboard still, and his wife was up stairs in an agony of fear, 
with the poor little daughters of this bankrupt, broken family. 

This poor soul had actually come down and paid a visit 



34 OUR STREET. 

to the man in possession. She had sent wine and dinner to 
" the gentleman down stairs," as she called him in her terror. 
She had tried to move his heart, by representing to him how 
innocent Captain Dixon was, and how he had always paid, and 
always remained at home when everybody else had fled. As if 
her tears, and simple tales and entreaties, could move that 
man in possession out of the house, or induce him to pay the 
costs of the action which her husband had lost. 

Danby meanwhile was at Boulogne, sickening after his wife 
and children. They sold everything in his house — all his smart 
furniture, and neat little stock of plate ; his wardrobe and his 
linen, " the property of a gentleman gone abroad ;" his carriage 
by the best maker ; and his wine selected without regard to 
expense. His house was shut up as completely as his opposite 
neighbour's ; and a new tenant is just having it jfresh painted 
inside and out, as if poor Dixon had left an infection behind. 

Kirby and his wife went across the water with the children 
and Mrs. Fanny — she has a small settlement ; and I am bound 
to say that our mutual friend Miss Elizabeth C. went down 
with Mrs. Dixon in the fly to the Tower Stairs, and stopped in 
Lombard Street by the way. 

So it is that the world wags : that honest men and knaves 
alike are always having ups and downs of fortune, and that 
we are perpetually changing tenants in Our Street. 



THE LION OF THE 8TEEET. 



THE LION OF THE STEEET. 



What people can find in Clarence Bulbul, who has lately 
taken upon himself the rank and dignity of Lion of our Street, 
I have always been at a loss to conjecture. 

" He has written an Eastern book of considerable merit," 
Miss Clapperclaw says ; but hang it, has not everybody written 
an Eastern book ? I should like to meet anybody in society 
now who has not been up to the second cataract. An Eastern 
book, forsooth ! My Lord Castleroyal has done one — an honfest 
one ; my Lord Youngent another — an amusing one ; my Lord 
Woolsey another — a pious one ; there is " The Cutlet and the 
Cabob " — a sentimental one ; " Timbuctoothen " — a humorous 
one, all ludicrously overrated, in my opinion, not including 
my own little book, of which a copy or two is still to be had 
by the way. 

Well, then, Clarence Bulbul, because he has made part of 
the little tour that all of us know, comes back and gives himself 
airs, forsooth, and howls as if he were just out of the great 
Libyan desert. 

D 2 



86 OUR STREET. 

When we go and see him, that Irish Jew courier, whom I 
have before had the honour to describe, looks up from the 
novel which he is reading in the ante-room, and says, ** Mon 
maitre est au Divan," or, " Monsieur trouvera Monsieur dans 
son serail," and relapses into the Comte de Montechristo 
again. 

Yes, the impudent wretch has actually a room in his apart- 
ments on the ground-floor of his mother's house, which he 
calls his harem. When Lady Betty Bulbul (they are of the 
Nightingale family) or Miss Blanche comes down to visit him, 
their slippers are placed at the door, and he receives them on 
an ottoman, and these infatuated women will actually light his 
pipe for him. 

Little Spitfire, the groom, hangs about the drawing-room, 
outside the harem forsooth! so that he may be ready when 
Clarence Bulbul claps hands for him to bring the pipes and 
coffee. 

He has coffee and pipes for everybody. I should like you 
to have seen the face of old Bowly, his college-tutor, called 
upon to sit cross-legged on a divan, a little cup of bitter black 
Mocha put into his hand, and a large amber-muzzled pipe stuck 
into his mouth by Spitfire, before he could so much as say it 
was a fine day. Bowly almost thought he had compromised 
his principles by consenting so far to this Turkish manner. 



OUR STREET. 37 

Bulbul's dinners are, I own, very good ; his pilaflEs and curries 
excellent. He tried to make us eat rice with our fingers, it is 
true; but he scalded his own hands in the business, and 
invariably bedizened his shirt, so he has left off the Turkish 
practice, for dinner at least, and uses a fork like a Christian. 

But it is in society that he is most remarkable ; and here he 
would, I own, be odious, but he becomes delightful, because all 
the men hate him so. A perfect chorus of abuse is raised 
round about him. " Confounded impostor," says one ; " Impu- 
dent jackass," says another; " Miserable puppy," cries a third; 
"I'd like to wring his neck," says Bruff, scowling over his 
shoulder at him. Clarence meanwhile nods, winks, smiles, and 
patronises them all with the easiest good-humour. He is a 
fellow who would poke an archbishop in the apron, or clap a 
duke on the shoulder, as coolly as he would address you and me. 

I saw him the other night at Mrs. Bumpsher's grand let-off. 
He flung himself down cross-legged upon a pink satin sofa, 
so that you could see Mrs. Bumpsher quiver with rage in the 
distance, Bruff growl with fury from the further room, and 
Miss Pirn, on whose frock BulbuFs feet rested, look up like a 
timid fawn. 

" Fan me, Miss Pim," said he of the cushion. " You look 
like a perfect Peri to-night. You remind me of a girl I once 
knew in Circassia — ^Ameena, the sister of Schamyle Bey. Do 



38 OUR STREET. 

you know, Miss Pirn, that you would fetch twenty thousand 
piastres in the market at Constantinople ? " 

" Law, Mr. Bulbul ! " is all Miss Pirn can ejaculate ; and 
having talked over Miss Pirn, Clarence goes off to another 
houri, whom he fascinates in a similar manner. He charmed 
Mrs. Waddy by telling her that she was the exact figure of the 
Pacha of Egypt's second wife. He gave Miss Tokely a piece 
of the sack in which Zuleikah was drowned ; and he actually 
persuaded that poor little silly Miss Vain to turn Mahometan, 
and sent her up to the Turkish Ambassador's, to look out 
for a mufd. 




THE DOTE OF 'I'HK BTBXET. 



THE DOVE OF OUR STEEET. 



If Bulbul is our Lion, Young Oriel may be described as 
The Dove of our Colony. He is almost as great a pasha 
among the ladies as Bulbul. They crowd in flocks to see him 
at Saint Waltheof s, where the immense height of his forehead, 
the rigid asceticism of his surplice, the twang with which he 
intones the service, and the namby-pamby mysticism of his 
sermons, has turned all the dear girls' heads for some time past. 
While we were having a rubber at Mrs. Chauntry's, whose 
daughters are following the new mode, I heard the following 
talk (which made me revoke by the way) going on, in what was 
formerly called the young lady's room, but is now styled the 
Oratory. 

THE OEATOET. 

MISS CHAUlfTRY. MISS ISABEL CHAUNTRY. 

MISS DE L' AISLE. MISS PYX. 

REV. L. ORIEL. REV. 0. SLOCUM—[/» «^ /ter*^ room.] 

Miss Chauntry {sighing), — Is it wrong to be in the Guards, 
dear Mr. Oriel ? 



40 OUR STREET. 

« 

Miss Pyx. — She will make Frank de Boots sell out when he 
marries. 

Mr. Oriel. — To be in the Guards, dear sister ? The church 
has always encouraged the army. Saint Martin of Tours was 
in the army ; Saint Louis was in the army ; Saint Waltheof, 
our patron. Saint Witikind of Aldermanbury, Saint Wamba, 
and Saint Walloff were in the army. Saint Wapshot was 
captain of the guard of Queen Boadicea ; and Saint Werewolf 
was a major injthe Danish cavalry. The holy Saint Ignatius 
of Loyola carried a pike, as we know ; and 

Miss de V Aisle. -^'WUl you take some tea, dear Mr. Oriel ? 

Oriel. — This is not one of my feast days, Sister Emma. It 
is the feast of Saint Wagstaff of Walthamstow. 

The Young Ladies. — And we must not even take tea ! 

Oriel. — Dear sisters, I said not so. You may do as you 
list ; but I am strong (with a heart-broken sigh) ; don't ply me 
(he reels). I took a little] water arid a parched pea after 
matins. To-morrow is a flesh day, and — and I shall be better 
then. 

Bev. 0. Slocum (from within). — Madam, I take your heart 
with my small trump. 

Oriel. — Yes, better! dear sister; it is only a passing — a — 
weakness. 

Miss I. Chauntry. — He's dying of fever. 




OUR STREET. 41 

Miss Chauntry. — I*m so glad De Boots [need not leave the 
Blues. 

Miss Pyx. — He wears sackcloth and cinders inside his 
waistcoat. 

Miss De VAisU. — He*s told me to-night he is going to — ^to — 
Eo-o-ome. [Miss De V Aisle bursts into tears.] 

Rev. 0. Slocum. — My lord, I have the highest club, which 
gives the trick and two by honours. 

Thus, you see, we have a variety of clergymen in Our Street. 
Mr. Oriel is of the pointed Gothic school, while old Slocum is 
of the good old tawny port- wine school ; and it must be con- 
fessed that Mr. Gronow, at Ebenezer, has a hearty abhorrence 
for both. 

As for Gronow, I pity him, if his future lot should fall 
where Mr. Oriel supposes that it will. 

And as for Oriel, he has not even the benefit of purgatory, 
which he would accord to his neighbour Ebenezer ; while old 
Slocum pronounces both to be a couple of humbugs ; and Mr. 
Mole, the demure little beetle-browed chaplain of the little 
church of Avemary Lane, keeps his sly eyes down to the ground 
when he passes any one of his black-coated brethren.* 

There is only one point on which, my friends, they seem 
agreed. Slocum likes port, but who ever heard that he 



42 OUR STREET. 

neglected his poor ? Gronow, if he comminates his neigh- 
bour's congregation, is the affectionate father of his own. Oriel, 
if he loves pointed Gothic and parched peas for breakfast, 
has a prodigious soup-kitchen for his poor; and as for little 
Father Mole, who never lifts his eyes from the ground, ask 
our doctor at what bedsides he finds him, and how he soothes 
poverty and braves misery and infection. 



THE BUMPSHEBS. 



No. 6, Pocklington Gardens (the house with the quantity of 
flowers in the windows, and the awning over the entrance), 
George Bumpsher, Esquire, M.P. for Humborough (and the 
Beanstalks, Kent). 

For some time after this gorgeous family came into our 
quarter, I mistook a bald-headed stout person, whom I used to 
see looking through the flowers on the upper windows, for 
Bumpsher himself or for the butler of the family; whereas it 
was no other than Mrs. Bumpsher, without her chestnut wig ; 
and who is at least three times the size of her husband. 

The Bumpshers and the house of Mango at the Pineries vie 
together in their desire to dominate over the neighbourhood ; 
and each votes the other a vulgar and purse-proud family. The 
fact is, both are City people. Bumpsher, in his mercantile 
capacity, is a wholesale stationer in Thames Street ; and his 
wife was daughter of an eminent bill-broking firm, not a thou- 
sand miles from Lombard Street. 



44 OUR STREET. 

He does not sport a coronet and supporters upon his London 
plate and carriages ; but his country-house is emblazoned all 
over with those heraldic decorations. He puts on an order 
when he goes abroad, and is Count Bumpsher of the Roman 
States — ^which title he purchased from the late Pope (through 
Prince Polonia the banker) for a couple of thousand scudi. 

It is as good as a coronation to see him and Mrs. Bumpsher 
go to Court. I wonder the carriage can hold them both. On 
those days Mrs. Bumpsher holds her own drawing-room before 
her Majesty's ; and we are invited to come and see her sitting 
in state, upon the largest sofa in her rooms. She has need of a 
stout one, I promise you. Her very feathers must weigh some- 
thing considerable. The diamonds on her stomacher would 
embroider a full-sized carpet-bag. She has rubies, ribbons, 
cameos, emeralds, gold serpents, opals, and Valenciennes lace, 
as if she were an immense sample out of Howell and James's 
shop. 

She took up with little Pinkney at Eome, where he made a 
charming picture of her, representing her as about eighteen, 
with a cherub in her lap, who has some liking to Bryanstone 
Bumpsher, her enormous, vulgar son; now a Comet in the 
Blues, and anything but a cherub, as those would say who saw 
him in his uniform jacket. 

I remember Pinkney when he was painting the picture, 



M'( 



VENUS AND CUPID. 



OUK BTBEET. 45 

Bryanstone being then a youth in what they call a skeleton suit 
(as if such a pig of a child could ever have been dressed in 
anythiDg resembling a skeleton) — I remember, I say, Mrs. B. 
sitting to Pinkney in a sort of Egerian costume, her boy by 
her side, whose head the artist turned round and directed it 
towards a piece of gingerbread, which he was to have at the 
end of the sitting. 

Pinkney, indeed, a painter ! — a contemptible little humbug, 
and parasite of the great ! He has painted Mrs. Bumpsher 
younger every year for these last ten years — and you see in the 
advertisements of all her parties his odious little name stuck in 
at the end of the list. I'm sure, for my part, I'd scorn to 
enter her doors, or be the toady of any v 



JOLLY NEWBOY, ESQ., M.P. 

¥— 

How diflferent it is with the Newboys, now, where I have an 
entree — (having indeed had the honour in former days to 
give lessons to both the ladies) — and where such a quack as 
Pinkney would never be allowed to enter ! A merrier house 
the whole quarter cannot furnish. It is there you meet 
people of all ranks and degrees, not only from our quarter 
but from the rest of the town. It is there that our great 
man, the Bight Honourable Lord Comandine, came up and 
spoke to me in so encouraging a manner that I hope to be 
invited to one of his lordship's excellent dinners (of which I 
shall not fail to give a very flattering description) before the 
season is over. It is there you find yourself talking to states- 
men, poets, and artists — ^not sham poets like Bulbul, or quack 
artists like that Pinkney — ^but to the best members of all 
society. It is there I made this sketch while Miss Chester- 
forth was singing a deep-toned tragic ballad, and her mother 
scowling behind her. What a buzz and clack and chatter 



I 



THE SIBEN OF ODE SntBBT. 



OUR STREET. 47 

there was in the room to be sure ! When Miss Chesterforth 
sings everybody begins to talk. Hicks and old Fogy were 
on Ireland ; Bass was roaring into old Pump's ears (or into 
his horn rather) about the Navigation Laws ; I was engaged 
talking to the charming Mrs. Short ; while Charley Bonham 
(a mere prig, in whom I am surprised that the women can see 
anything) was pouring out his fulsome rhapsodies in the ears 
of Diana White. Lovely, lovely Diana White ! were it not for 
three or four other engagements, I know a heart that would 
suit you to a T. 

Newboy's I pronounce to be the jolliest house in the street. 
He has only of late had a rush of prosperity, and turned Par- 
liament man ; for his distant cousin, of the ancient house of 

Newboy of shire, dying, Fred — ^then making believe to 

practise at the bar, and living with the utmost modesty in 
Gray's Lan Boad — ^found himself master of a fortune, and a 
great house in the country, of which getting tired, as in the 
course of nature he should, he came up to London, and took 
that fine mansion in our Oardens. He represents Mum- 
borough in Parliament, a seat which has been time out of mind 
occupied by a Newboy. 

Though he does not speak, being a great deal too rich, 
sensible, and lazy, he somehow occupies himself with reading 
blue books, and indeed talks a great deal too much good sense 



48 OUB STREET. 

of late over his dinner-table, where there is always a cover 
for the present writer. 

He falls asleep pretty assiduously too after that meal — a 
practice which I can well pardon in him — ^for, between our- 
selves, his wife, Maria Newboy, and his sister, Clarissa, are the 
loveliest and kindest of their sex, and I would rather hear their 
innocent prattle, and lively talk about their neighbours, than 
the best wisdom from the wisest man that ever wore a beard. 

Like a wise and good man he leaves the question of his 
household entirely to the woman. They like going to the play. 
They like going to Greenwich. They like coming to a party 
at bachelor's hall. They are up to all. sorts of fun, in a word ; 
in which taste the good-natured Newboy acquiesces, provided 
he is left to follow his own. 

It was only on the 17th of the month, that, having had the 
honour to dine at the house, when, after dinner, which took 
place at eight, we left Newboy to his blue books, and went up 
stairs and sang a little, to the guitar afterwards — it was only on 
the 17th December, the night of Lady Sowerby's party, that 
the following dialogue took place in the boudoir, whither 
Newboy, blue books in hand, had ascended. 

He was curled up with his House of Commons boots on his 
wife's arm-chair, reading his eternal blue books, when Mrs. N. 
entered from her apartment, dressed for the evening. 



THE STBEET DOOB KET. 



OUB STREET. 49 

Mrs. N. — Frederic, won't you come ? 

Mr. N.— Where ? 

Mrs. N. — To Lady Sowerby's. 

Mr. Ni — I'd rather go to the black hole in Calcutta. 
Besides, this Sanitary Report is really the most interesting — 
[he begins to read.] 

Mrs. N. (piqued)— Wen ; Mr. Titmarsh will go with us. 

Mr. N.—Wm he ? I wish him joy ! 

At this puncture Miss Clarissa Newboy enters in a pink 
paletot,, trimmed with swansdown — ^looking like an angel— and 
we exchange glances of — ^what shall I say ? — of sympathy on 
both parts, and consummate rapture on mine. But this is 
by-play. 

Mrs. N. — Good night, Frederic. I think we shall be late. 

Mr. N. — ^Ybu won't wake me, I daresay ; and you don't 
expect a pubHc man to sit up. 

Mrs. N. — It's not you, it's the servants. Cocker sleeps 
very heavily. The maids axe best in bed. and are aU iU with 
the influenza. - 1 say, Frederic dear, don't you think you had 
better give me your chubb key ? 

This astonishing proposal, which violates every recognised 
law of society — this demand which alters all the existing state 
of things — this fact of a woman asking for a door-key, struck 
me with a terror which I cannot describe, and impressed me 



50 0X7B STREET. 

with the fact of the vast progress of Our Street. The door- 
key ! What would our grandmother, who dwelt in this place 
when it was a rustic suburb, think of its condition now, 
when husbands stay at home, and wives go abroad with 
the latch-key ? 

The evening at Lady Sowerby's was the most delicious we 
have spent for long, long days. 

Thus it will be seen that everybody of any consideration in 
Our Street takes a line. Mrs, Minimy (34) takes the homoeo- 
pathic line, and has soirees of doctors of that faith. Lady 
Pocklington takes the capitalist line; and those stupid 
and splendid dinners of hers are devoured by loan-contractors, 
and railroad princes. Mrs. Trimmer (38) comes out in the 
scientific line, and indulges us in rational evenings, where 
histoiy is the lightest subject admitted, and geology and the 
sanitary condition of the metropolis form the general themes 
of conversation. Mrs. Brumby plays finely on the bassoon, 
and has evenings dedicated to Sebastian Bach, and enlivened 
with Handel. At Mrs. Maskleyn's they are mad for charades 
and theatricals. 

They performed last Christmas in a French piece, by Alex- 
andre Dumas, I believe — '* La Duchesse de Montefiasco," of 
which I forget the plot, but everybody was in love with every- 
body else's wife, except the hero, Don Alonzo, who was ardently 



A SCENE OF PASSION. 



OUB STREET. 51 

attached to the Duchess, who turned out to be his grandmother. 
The piece was translated by Lord Fiddle-faddle, Tom Bulbul 
being the Don Alonzo ; and Mrs. Eoland Calidore (who never 
misses an opportunity of acting in a piece in which she can 
let down her hair) was the Duchess. 

Alonzo. 

You know how well he loves you, and you wonder 

To see Alouzo suffer, Cunegunda ? — 

Ask if the chamois suffer when they feel 

Plunged in their panting sides the hunter's steel ? 

Or when the soaring heron or eagle proud. 

Pierced by my shaft, comes tumbling from the cloud, 

Ask if the royal birds no anguish know. 

The yictims of Alonzo*s twanging bow ? 

Then ask him if he suffers — him who dies. 

Pierced by the poisoned glance that glitters from your eyes ! 

[ff$ staggers fiom the tffect of the poison. 

The Duchess. 

Alonzo loves — Alonzo loves 1 and whom ? 
His grandmother t hide me, gracious tomb ! 

[JTier Chrace faints away. 

Such acting as Tom BulbuFs I never saw. Tom lisps 
atrociously, and uttered the passage, ''You athk me if I 
thuffer," in the most absurd way. Miss Clapperclaw says he 
acted pretty well, and that I only joke about him because I am 
envious, and wanted to act a part myself. — ^I envious indeed ! 

But of all the assemblies, feastings, junkettings, d^jeunes, 

E 2 



52 OUB STREET. 

soirees, conversaziones, dinner-parties, in Our Street, I know 
of none pleasanter than the banquets at Tom Fairfax's ; one of 
which this enormous provision-consumer gives seven times a 
week. Hfe lives in one of the little houses of the old Waddi- 
love Street quarter, built long before Pocklington Square and 
Pocklington Gardens and the Pocklington family itself had 
made their appearance in this world. 

Tom, though he has a small income, and lives in a small 
house, yet sits down one of a' party of twelve to dinner every 
day of his life ; these twelve consisting of Mrs. Fairfax, the 
nine Misses Fairfax, and Master Thomas Fairfax — ^the son 
and heir to two-pence hal^enny a year. 

It is awkward just now to go and beg pot-luck from such 
a femily as this ; because, though a guest is always welcome, 
we are thirteen at table — an unlucky number, it is said. This 
evil is only temporary, and will be remedied presently, when 
the family will be thirteen without the occasional guest, to 
judge from all appearances. 

Early in the morning Mrs. Fairfax rises, , and cuts bread 
and butter from six o'clock till eight ; during which time the 
nursery operations upon the nine little graces are going on. 
We only see a half dozen of them at this present moment, and 
in the present authentic picture, the remainder dwindling oflf 
upon little chairs by their mamma. 



TEE HAPPY FAMILY. 



OUR STREET. 63 

The two on either side of Fairfax are twins — awarded to 
him by singular good fortune ; and he only knows Nancy from 
Fanny by having a piece of tape roimd the former's arm. 
There is no need to give you the catalogue of the others. She, 
in the pinafore in front, is Elizabeth, goddaughter to Miss Clap- 
perclaw, who has been very kind to the whole family ; that 
young lady with the ringlets is engaged by the most solemn 
ties to the present writer, and it is agreed that we are to be 
married as soon as she is as tall as my stick. 

If his wife has to rise early to cut the bread and butter, 
I warrant Fairfax must be up betimes to earn it. He is a 
clerk in a Government Office ; to which duty he trudges daily, 
refusing even twopenny omnibuses. Every time he goes to 
the shoemaker's he has to order eleven pairs of shoes, and so 
can't afford to spare his own. He teaches the children Latin 
every morning, aad is already thinking when Tom shaU be 
inducted into that language. He works in his garden for an 
hour before breakfast. His work over by three o'clock, he 
tramps home at four, and exchanges his dapper coat for that 
dressing-gown in which he appears before you, — a ragged but 
honourable garment in which he stood (unconsciously) to the 
present designer. 

Which is the best, his old coat or Sir John's bran new one ? 
Which is the most comfortable and becoming, Mrs. Fairfax's 



54 OUB STREET. 

black velvet gown, (which she has worn at the Pocklington 
Square parties these twelve years, and in which I protest she 
looks like a queen,) or that new robe which the milliner has 
just brought home to Mrs. Bumpsher's, and into which she 
will squeeze herself on Christmas day ? 

Miss Clapperclaw says that we are all so charmingly con- 
tented with ourselves that not one of us would change with 
his neighbour ; and so, rich and poor, high and low, one person 
is about as happy as another in Our Street. 









. Sthrnjvn\p 



DR BIECH. 



DOCTOR BIRCH. 



THE DOCTOR AND HIS STAFF. 



There is no need to say why I became Assistant Master and 
Professor of the English and French languages, flower-painting, 
and the German flute, in Doctor Birch's Academy, at Eodwell 
Begis. Good folks may depend on this that it was not for 
choice, that I left lodgings near London, and a genteel society, 
for an under-master's desk in that old school. I promise you 
the fare at the Usher's table, the getting up at five o'clock in 
the morning, the walking out with little boys in the fields, (who 
used to play me tricks, and never could be got to respect my 
awful and responsible character as teacher in the school,) Miss 
Birch's vulgar insolence. Jack Birch's glum condescension, and 
the poor old Doctor's patronage, were not matters in themselves 
pleasurable : and that that patronage and those dinners were 
sometiraes cruel hard to swallow. Never mind — my connexion 

B 



2 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

with the place is over now, and I hope they have got a more 
eflBcient under-master. 

Jack Birch (Rev. J. Birch, of St. Neot's Hall, Oxford,) is 
partner with his father the Doctor, and takes some of the 
classes. Ahout his Greek I can't say much; but I will 
construe him in Latin any day. A more supercilious little 
prig, (giving himself airs, too, about his cousin, IVIiss Baby, 
who lives with the Doctor,) a more empty pompous little 
coxcomb I never saw. His white neckcloth looked as if it 
choked him. He used to try and look over that starch upon 
me and Prince the assistant, as if we were a couple of footmen. 
He didn't do much business in the school ; but occupied his 
time in writing sanctified letters to the boys' parents, and in 
composing dreary sermons to preach to them. ' 

The real master of the school is Prince ; an Oxford man too : 
shy, haughty, and learned ; crammed with Greek and a quantity 
of useless learning; imcommonly kind to the small boys ; pitiless 
with the fools and the braggarts; respected of all for his honesty, 
his learning, his bravery, (for he hit out once in a boat-row in 
a way which astonished the boys and the bargemen,) and for a 
latent power about him, which all saw and confessed somehow. 
Jack Birch could never look him in the face. Old Miss Z. 
dared not put off any of her airs upon him. Miss Bosa made 
him the lowest of curtsies. Miss Eaby said she was afraid of 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 8 

him. Good old Prince ; we have sat many a night smoking in 
the Doctor's harness-room, whither we retired when our boys 
were gone to bed, and our cares and canes put by. 

After Jack Birch had taken his degree at Oxford — a process 
which he effected with great difficulty — this place which used 
to be called " Birch's," " Dr. Birch's Academy," and what not, 
became suddenly " Archbishop Wigsby's College of Eodwell 
Regis." They took down the old blue board with the gold 
letters, which has been used to mend the pig-stye since. Birch 
had a large school-room, run up in the Gothic taste, with 
statuettes, and a little belfry, and a bust of Archbishop Wigsby 
in the middle of the school. He put the six senior boys into 
caps and gowns, which had rather a good effect as the lads 
sauntered down the street of the town, but which certainly 
provoked the contempt and hostility of the bargemen ; and so 
great was his rage for academic costumes and ordinances, that 
he would have put me myself into a lay gown, with red knots 
and fringes, but that I flatly resisted, and said that a writing- 
master had no business with such paraphernalia. 

By the way, I have forgotten to mention the Doctor himself. 
And what shall I say of him ? Well, he has a very crisp gown 
and bands, a solemn air, a tremendous loud voice, and a grand 
and solemn air with the boys' parents, whom he receives in a 
study, covered round mth the best bound books, which imposes 

B 2 



DOCTOR BIRCH, 

I 



I 



upon many — upon the women especially — and makes them 
fancy that this is a Doctor indeed. But, Law bless you ! He 
never reads the books ; or opens one of them, except that in 
which he keeps his bands — a Dugdale's Monasticon, which 
looks like a book, but is in reality a cupboard, where he has 
his port, almond cakes, and decanter of wine. He gets up his 
classics with translations, or what the boys call cribs; they 
pass wicked tricks upon him when he hears the forms. The 
elder wags go to his study, and ask him to help them in hard 
bits of Herodotus or Thucydides : he says he will look over the 
passage, and flies for refuge to Mr. Prince; or to the crib. 

He keeps the flogging department in his own hands ; finding 
that his son was too savage. He has awful brows and a big 
voice. But his roar frightens nobody. It is only a lion's skin, 
or, so to say, a muff. 

Little Mordant made a picture of him with large ears, like a 
well-known domestic animal, and had his own justly boxed for 
the caricature. The Doctor discovered him in the fact, and 
was in a flaming rage, and threatened whipping at first ; but in 
the course, of the day an opportune basket of game arriving 
from Mordant's, father, the Doctor became mollified, and' has 
burnt the picture with the ears. However I have one wafered 
up in my desk by the hand of the same little riascal : and the 
frontispiece of this very book is drawn firom it* 



OK^^\ 




AND HIS YOUNG FBIENDS. 



THE COCK OF THE SCHOOL. 



I AM growing an old fellow — and have seen many great folks 
in the course of my travels and time — Louis Philippe coming 
out of the Tuileries, His Majesty the King of Prussia and the 
Eeichsverweser accolading each other, at Cologne at my elbow; 
Admiral Sir Charles Napier (in an omnibus once), the Duke of 
Wellington, the immortal Goethe at Weimar, the late benevo- 
lent Pope Gregory XVI., and a score more of the famous in this 
world — the whom, whenever one looks at, one has a mild shock 
of awe and tremor. I like this feeling and decent fear and 
trembling with which a modest spirit salutes a Great Man. 

Well, I have seen Generals capering on horseback at the 
head of their crimson battalions; Bishops sailing down cathedral 
aisles, with downcast eyes, pressing their trencher caps to their 
hearts with their fat, white hands ; College heads when her 
Majesty is on a visit ; the Doctor in all his glory at the head 
of his school on Speech day^ a great sight, and all great men 
these. I have never met the late Mr. Thomas Cribb, but I 



6 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

have no doubt should have regarded him with the same feeling 
of awe with which I look every day at George Champion, the 
Cock of Dr. Birch's school. 

When, I say^ I reflect as I go up and set him a sum, that he 
could whop me in two minutes, double up Prince and the other 
assistant, and pitch the Doctor out of window, I can't but think 
how great, how generous, how magnanimous a creature this is, 
that sits quite quiet and good-natured, and works his equation, 
and ponders through his Greek play. He might take the 
school-room pillars and pull the house down if he liked. He 
might close the door, and demolish every one of us like Antar, 
the lover of Ibla, but he lets us live. He never thrashes Biiy- 
body without a cause, when woe betide the tyrant or the sneak ! 

I think that to be strong, and able to whop everybod}^ — (not 
to do it, mind you, but to feel that you were able to do it,) — 
would be the greatest of all gifts. Th^re is a serene good 
humour which ]3lays about George Champion's broad face, 
which shows the consciousness of this power, and lights up his 
honest blue eyes with a magnanimous calm. 

He is invictus. Even when a cub there was no beating this 
lion. Six years ago the undaunted little warrior actually stood 
up to Frank Davison, — (the Indian oflBcer now — poor little 
Charley's brother, whom ]\Iiss Raby nursed so affectionately,) 
— ^then seventeen years old, and the Cock of Birch's. They 



The Lion and llie lude Cubs. 



1 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 7 

were obliged to drag oflf the boy, and Frank, with admiration 
and regard for him, prophesied the great things he would do. 
Legends of combats are preserved fondly in schools ; they have 
stories of such at Eodwell Eegis, performed in the old Doctor's 
time, forty years ago. 

Champion's affair with the Young Tutbury Pet, who was 
down here in training,— with Black the Bargeman, — ^with the 
three head boys of Doctor Wapshot's academy, whom he caught 
maltreating an outlying day-boy of ours, &c., — are known to all 
the Rodwell Regis men. He was always victorious. He is 
modest and kind, like all great men. He has a good, brave, 
honest understanding. He cannot make verses like young 
Pinder, or read Greek like Wells the Prefect, who is a perfect 
yowng abyss of learning, and knows enough. Prince says, to 
furnish any six first-class men; but he does his work in a 
sound, downright way, and he is made to be the bravest of 
soldiers, the best of 'country parsons, an honest English 
gentleman wherever he may go. 

Old Champion's chief friend and attendant is young Jack 
Hall, whom he saved when drowning, out of the Miller's Pool. 
The attachment of the two is curious to witness. The smaller 
lad gambolling, playing tricks round the bigger one, and per- 
petually making fun of his protector. They are never far 
apart, and of holidays you may meet them miles away from the 



8 DOCTOK BIRCH, 

school. George sauntering heavily down the lanes with his big 
stick, and little Jack larking with the pretty girls in the cottage- 
windows. 

George has a boat on the river, in which, however, he com- 
monly lies smoking, whilst Jack sculls him. He does not play 
at cricket, except when the school plays the county, or at 
Lord's in the holidays. The boys can't stand his bowling, and 
when he hits, it is like trying to catch a cannon-ball. I have 
seen him at tennis. It is a splendid sight to behold the young 
fellow bounding over the court with streaming yellow hair, like 
young Apollo in a flannel jacket. 

The other head boys are Lawrence the Captain, Bunce, 
famous chiefly for his magnificent appetite, and Pitman, sur- 
named Boscius, for his love of the drama. Add to these 
Swanky, called Macassar, from his partiality to that condiment, 
and who has varnished boots, wears white gloves on Sundays, 
and looks out for Miss Pinkerton's school (transferred from 
Chiswick to Eodwell Begis, and conducted by the nieces of the 
late Miss Barbara Pinkerton, the friend of Our Great Lexico- 
grapher, upon the principles approved by him, and practised 
by that admirable woman) as it passes into church. 

Bepresentations have been made concerning Mr. Horace 
Swanky's behaviour ; rumours have been uttered about notes 
in verse, conveyed in three-cornered puffs, by Mrs. Buggies, 



Rival Forces, 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 9 

who serves Miss Pinkerton's young ladies on Fridays, — and 
how Miss Didow, to whom the tart and enclosure were ad- 
dressed, tried to make away with herself by swallowing a ball 
of cotton. But I pass over these absurd reports, as likely to 
aflfect the reputation of an admirable Seminary conducted by 
irreproachable females. As they go into church, Miss P. 
driving in her flock of lambkins with the crook of her parasol, 
how can it be helped if her forces and ours sometimes collide, 
as the boys are on their way up to the organ loft ? And I 
don't believe a word about the three-cornered puff, but rather 
that it was the invention of that jealous Miss Birch, who is 
jealous of Miss Raby, jealous of everybody who is good and 
handsome, and who has her own ends in view, or I am very 
much in error. 



10 DOCTOR BIBCH, 



THE LITTLE SCHOOL-EOOM. 



What they call the little school-room is a small room at the 
other end of the great school ; through- which you go to the 
Doctor's private house, and where Miss Raby sits with her 
pupils. She has a half-dozen very small ones over whom she 
presides and teaches them in her simple way, until they are 
big or learned enough to face the great school-room. Many of 
them are in a hurry for promotion, the graceless little sim- 
pletons, and know no more than their elders when they are 
well off. 

She keeps the accounts, writes out the bills, superintends the 
linen, and sews on the general shirt-buttons. Think of having 
such a woman at home to sew on one's shirt-buttons ! But 
peace, peace, thou foolish heart ! 

Miss Raby is the Doctor's niece. Her mother was a beauty 
(quite unlike old Zoe therefore) ; and she married a pupil in 
the Old Doctor's time, who was killed afterwards, a Captain in 
the East Lidia service, at the siege of Bhurtpore. Hence a 



i i ! 



The litlle school ronni , 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 11 

number of Indian children come to the Doctor's, for Baby was 
very much liked, and the uncle's kind reception of the orphan 
has been a good speculation for the school-keeper. 

It is wonderful how brightly and gaily that little quick crea- 
ture does her duty. She is the first to rise, and the last to 
sleep, if any business is to be done. She sees the other two 
women go off to parties in the town without even so much as 
wishing to join them. It is Cinderella, only contented to stay 
at home — content to bear Zoe's scorn and to admit Flora's 
superior charms, — and to do her utmost to repay her uncle for 
liis great kindness in housing her. 

So you see she works as much as three maid-servants for 
the wages of one. She is as thankful when the Doctor gives 
her a new gown, as if he had presented her with a fortune : 
laughs at his stories most good-humouredly, listens to Zoe's 
scolding most meekly, admires Flora with all her heart, and 
only goes out of the way when Jack Birch shows his sallow 
face : for she can't bear him, and always finds work when he 
comes near. 

How different she is when some foUs approach her ! I won't 
be presumptuous; but I think, I think, I have made a not 
unfavourable impression in some quarters. However, let us be 
mum on this subject. I like to see her, because she always 
looks good-humoured ; because she is always kind, because she 



12 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

is always modest, because she is fond of those poor little brats, 
— orphans some of them — because she is rather pretty, I dare 
sa3% or because I think so, which comes to the same thing. 

Though she is kind to all, it must be owned she shows the 
most gross favouritism towards the amiable children. She 
brings them cakes from dessert, and regales them with Zoe's 
preserves ; spends many of her little shillings in presents for 
her favourites, and will tell them stories by the hour. She has 
one very sad story about a little boy, who died long ago ; the 
younger children are never weary of hearing about him ; and 
Miss Raby has shown to one of them a lock of the little chap's 
hair, which she keeps in her work-box to this day. 




Tlie ]")ear Brothers. 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 13 



THE DEAR BROTHEES. 

^ fEelotiranta in Sebetal l^ouitDs* 
— « — 

The Doctob. 

Mr. TiFPEB/Uncle to the Masters Boxall. 
BoxALL Major, Boxall Minor, Brown, Jones, Smith, 
Robinson, Tiffin Minimus. 



* e 



B, Go it, old Boxall ! 

J. Give it him, young Boxall ! 

J?. Pitch into him, old Boxall ! ' • 

S» Two to oiie on young Boxall! 

\Bnter Tiffin" Minimus, running.'] 

Tiffin Minimus. Boxalls ! you're wanted. 

{The Doctor to Mr, Tipper,) . Every boy in the school loves 
them, my dear sir; your nephews are a credit to my establish- 
ment. They are orderly, well-conducted, gentleman-like boys.' 

Let us enter and find'them at their studies. 

[Enter The Doctor o?wZ Mr. Tipper.] 

GRAND TABLEAU. 



14 DOCTOR BIRCH, 



A HOPELESS CASE. 



Let us, people who are so uncommonly clever and learned, 
have a great tenderness and pity for the poor folks who 
are not endowed with the prodigious talents which we have. 
I have always had a regard for dunces; — those of my own 
school-days were amongst the pleasantest of the fellows, and 
have turned out by no means the dullest in life; whereas many 
a youth who could turn oflf Latin hexameters by the yard, 
and construe Greek quite glibly, is no better than a feeble 
prig now, with not a pennyworth more brains than were in his 
head before his beard grew. 

Those poor dunces ! Talk of being the last man, ah ! what 
a pang it must be to be the last boy — ^huge, misshapen, four- 
teen years of age, and " taken up " by a chap who is but six 
years old, and can't speak quite plain yet ! 

Master Hulker is in that condition at Birch's. He is the 
most honest, land, active, plucky, generous creature. He can 
do many things better than most boys. He can go up a tree, 



Thr last lioj rf all 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 15 

pump, play at cricket, dive and swim perfectly — he can eat 
twice as much as almost any lady (as Miss Birch well knows), 
he has a pretty talent at carving figures with his hack-knife^ 
he makes and paints little coaches, he can take a watch to 
pieces and put it together again. He can do everything but 
learn his lesson; and then he sticks at the bottom of the 
school hopeless. As the little boys are drafted in from Miss 
Raby'8 class, (it is true she is one of the best instructresses 
in the world,) they enter and hop over poor Hulker. He 
would be handed. over to the governess only he is too big. 
Sometimes I UBed io think, that this, desperate stupidity was 
a stratagem .of the poor rascal^s ; and that he shammed dulness 
so that he might be degraded, into Miss Baby's claas — if she 
would teach me, I know, before George, I would put on a 
pinafore and a little jacket' — ^bui no, it is a naturt^l incapacity 
for the Latin Grammarl - 

If you could see his grammar, it is a perfect curiosity of 
dog's ears. The leaves and cover are all curled and ragged. 
Many of the pages are worn away, with the rubbing of his 
elbows as he sits poring over 'the hopeless volume, with the 
blows of his fists as he thumps it madly, or with the poor 
fellow's tears. You see him wiping them away with the back 
of his hand, as he tries and tries, and can't do it. 

When I think of that Latin Grammar, and that infernal 



16 DOCTOR BmCHy 

As in Prsesenti, and of other things which I was made to learn 
in my youth : upon my conscience, I am surprised that we ever 
survived it. When one thinks of the hoys who have been 
caned because they could not master that intolerable jargon ! 
Good Lord, what a pitiful chorus these poor little creatures 
send up ! Be gentle with them, ye schoolmasters^ and only 
whop those who worCt learn. 

The Doctor has operated upon Hulker (between ourselves), 
but the boy was so little affected you would have thought he 
had taken chloroform. Birch is weary of whipping now, and 
leaves the boy to go his own gait. Prince, when he hears the 
lesson, and who cannot help making fun of a fool, adopts the 
sarcastic manner with Master Hulker, and says, " Mr. Hulker, 
may I take the liberty to inquire if your brilliant intellect has 
enabled you to perceive the difference between those words 
which grammarians have defined as substantive and adjective 
nouns ? — ^if not, perhaps Mr. Ferdinand Timmins will instruct 
you." And Timmins hops over Hulker's head. 

I wish Prince would leave off girding at the poor lad. He 
is a boy, and his mother is a widow woman, who loves him 
with all her might. There is a famous sneer about the suck* 
ling of fools and the chronicling of small beer ; but remember 
it was a rascal who uttered it. 



I AND HIS YOUNG FBIENDS. 17 



A WOED ABOUT MISS BIECH. 

— • 

"The Gentlemen, and especially the younger and more 
tender of these Pupils, will have the advantage of the constant 
superintendence and aflfectionate care of Miss Zoe Birch, 
sister of the Principal : whose dearest aim will he to supply 
(as far as may he) the absent maternal friend." — Prospectus 
ofRodwell Regis School. 

This is all very well in the Doctor's prospectus, and Miss 
Zoe Birch — (a pretty blossom it is, fifty-five years old, during 
two score of which she has dosed herself with pills; with 
a nose as red and a face as sour as a crab-apple) — this is 
all mighty well in a prospectus. But I should like to know 
who would take Miss Zoe for a mother, or would have her 
for one ? 

The only persons in the house who are not afraid of her are 
Miss Flora and I — no, I am afraid of her, though I do know 
the story about the French usher in 1830— ^but all the rest 
tremble before the woman, from the Doctor down to poor 



18 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

Francis the knife-boy, and whom she bullies into his miserable 
blacking-hole. 

The Doctor is a pompous and outwardly severe man — ^but 
inwardly weak and easy: loving a joke and a glass of Port wine. 
I get on with him, therefore, much better than Mr. Prince, 
who scorns him for an ass, and under whose keen eyes the 
worthy Doctor writhes like a convicted impostor ; and many a 
sunshiny afternoon would he have said " Mr. T., Sir, shall we 
try another glass of that yellow sealed wine wliich you seem 
to like ? " (and which he likes even better than I do), had not 
the old harridan of a Flora been down upon us, and insisted 
on turning me out with her abominable weak coffee. She a 
mother indeed! A sour milk generation she would have 
nursed. She is always croaking, scolding, bullying — yowling 
at the housemaids, snarling at Miss Baby, bowwowing after 
the little boys, barking after the big ones. She knows how 
much every boy eats to an ounce — and her delight is to ply 
with fat the little ones who can't bear it, and with raw meat 
those who hate underdone. It was she who caused the Doctor 
to be eaten out three times; and nearly created a rebellion 
in the school because she insisted on his flogging Goliath 
Longman. 

The only time that wom^n is happy is when she comes in of 
a morning to the little boys' dormitories with a cup of hot 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 19 

Epsom salts, and a sippet of bread. Boo ! — ^the very notion 

makes me quiver. She stands over them. I saw her do it to 

yomig Byles only a few days since — and her presence makes 

the abomination doubly abominable. 

As for attending them in real illness, do you suppose that 

she would watch a single night for any one of them ? Not she. 

"When poor little Charley Davison (that child, a lock of whose 

soft hair I have said how Miss Raby still keeps) lay ill of scarlet 

fever in the holidays — for the Colonel, the father of these boys, 

was in Indiia — it was Anne Raby who tended the child, who 

watched him all'through the fever, who never left him while it 

lasted, or until she had closed the little eyes that were never to 

brighten or moisten more. Anny watched and deplored him, 

but it was Miss Birch who wrote the letter announcing his 

demise, and' got the gold chain and locket which the Colonel 

ordered as a memento of his gratitude. It was through a row 

with Miss Birch that Frank Davison ran away. I promise you 

that after he joined his regiment in India, the Ahmednuggar 

Irregulars, which his gallant father commands, there came over 

no more annual shawls and presents to Dr. and Miss Birch, and 

that if she fancied the Colonel was coming home to marry her, 

(on account of her tenderness to his motherless children, which 

he was always writing about), that notion was very soon given 

up. But these affairs are of early date, seven years back, and 

2 



20 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

I only heard of them in a very confused manner from Miss 
Baby, who was a girl, and had just come to Bodwell Begis. 
She is always very much moved when she speaks about those 
boys, which is but seldom. I take it the death of the little 
one still grieves her tender heart. 

Yes, it is Miss Birch, who has turned away seventeen ushers 
and second masters in eleven years, and half as many French 
masters, I suppose, since the departure of her favourite, 
M. Grinche, with her gold watch, i&c. ; but this is only surmise 
— that is from hearsay, and from Miss Bosa taunting her aunt, 
as she does sometimes, in her graceful way ; but besides this, 
I have another .way of -keeping her in order. 

Whenever she is particularly odious or insolent to Miss Baby, 
I have but to introduce raspberry jam into the conversation, 
and the woman holds her tongue. She will understand me. 
I need not say more. 

Note, \%th December.-r-l may speak now. I have left the 
place and don't mind. I . say then at once, and without caring 
twopence for the consequences, that' I saw this woman, this 
mother of the; boys, eating jam with a spoon out op Master 
WiGGiNs's- TRUNK IN THE BOX-ROOM; and of this I am ready to 
take an affidavit any day. 



V:u, Stole die J a 



AND HIS YOUNG FEIENDS. 21 



A TRAGEDY. 

THIS DRAMA OUGHT TO BE BEFBESENTED IN ABOUT SIX ACTS. 

[The School is huthed, Lawbence the Prefect, and Custoe of the rode, is 
marching after the Doctob into the operating-room, Masteb Backhouse 
is ahout to follow.] 

Master Backhouse, It's all very well, but you see if I don't 

pay you out after school — you sneak, you. 

Master Lurcher » If you do I'll tell again. 

[Exit Backhouse. 

[Tke rod is heard from the adjoining apartment, Ewhish — Hwhisfi — 
hwish — hvnsJi — hwish — htoish — htoish,'] 

[He-enter Backhouse. 



22 DOCTOR BmCHy 



BRIGGS IN LUCK 



Enter the Knife-hoy. — Hamper for Briggses ! 

Master Brown. — Hurray, Tom Briggs ! 1*11 lend you my knife. 



If this story does not carry its own moral, what fable does, 
I wonder ? Before the arrival of that hamper. Master Briggs 
was in no better repute than any other young gentleman of the 
lower school; and in fact I had occasion myself, only lately, to 
correct Master Brown for kicking his friend's shins during the 
writing-lesson." But how this basket directed by his mother's 

« 

housekeeper, and marked " Glass with care," (whence I con- 
clude that it contains some jam and some bottles of wine pro- 
bably as well as the usual cake and game-pie, and half a 
sovereign for the elder Master B., and five new shillings for 
Master Decimus Briggs) — how, I say, the arrival of this basket 
alters all Master Briggs*s circumstances in life, and the esti- 
mation in which many persons regard him ! 

If he is a good-hearted bo}^ as I have reason to think, the 



.\ Hajiiuer for Rf 



AND mS YOUNG FRIENDS. 23 

very first thing he will do, before inspecting the contents of the 
hamper, or cutting into them with the knife which Master 
Brown has so considerately lent him, will be to read over the 
letter from home which lies on the top of the parcel. He 
does so, as I remark to Miss Eaby (for whom I happened 
to be mending pens when the little circumstance arose) with a 
flushed face and winking eyes. Look how the other boys are 
peering into the basket as he reads. — I say to her, " Isn't it a 
pretty picture ? " Part of the letter is in a very large hand. 
That is from his little sister. And I would wager that she 
netted the little purse which he has just taken out of it, and 
which Master Lynx is eying. 

" You are a droll man, and remark all sorts of queer things," 
Miss Eaby says, smiling, and plying her swift needle and fingers 
as quick as possible. ** I am glad we are both on the spot, and 
that the little fellow lies under our guns as it were, and so is 
protected from some such brutal school-pirate as young Duval 
for instance, who would rob him probably of some of those good 
things, good in themselves, and better because fresh from home. 
See, there is a pie as I said, and which I daresay is better than 
those which are served at our table (but you never take any 
notice of these kind of things. Miss Eaby), a cake of course, a 
bottle of currant wine, jam-pots, and no end of pears in the straw. 
With their money little Briggs will be able to pay the tick 



24 DOCTOR BmCH, 

which that imprudent child has run up with Mrs. Buggies ; and 
I shall let Briggs Major pay for the pencil-case which Bullock 
sold to him. — It will be a lesson to the young prodigal for the 
future. 

" But, I say, what a change there will be in his life for some^ 
time to come, and at least until his present wealth is spent ! 
The boys who bully him will mollify towards him, and accept 
his pie and sweetmeats. They will have feasts in the bed-room ; 
and that wine will taste more deliciously to them than the best 
out of the Doctor's cellar. The cronies will be invited. Young 
Master Wagg will tell his most dreadful story and sing his 
best song for a slice of that pie. What a folly-night they will 
have! when we go the rounds at night, Mr. Prince and I 
will take care to make a noise before we come to Briggs's 
room, so that the boys may have time to put the light out, 
to push the things away, and to scud into bed. Doctor Spry 
may be put in requisition the next morning." 

** Nonsense ! you absurd creature," cries out Miss Baby, 
laughing; and I lay down the twelfth pen very nicely 
mended. 

" Yes ; after luxury comes the doctor, I say ; after extrava- 
gance a hole in the breeches pocket. To judge from his 
disposition, Briggs Major will not be much better ofif a couple 
of days hence than he is now^ and^ if I am not mistaken, will 



AND HIS YOUNG FBIENDS. 25 

end life a poor man. Braire wiU be kicking his shins before 
a week is over, depend upon it. There are boys and men of 
all sorts, Miss B. — ^there are selfish sneaks who hoard until the 
store they daren't use grows mouldy — there are spendthrifts 
who fling away, parasites who flatter and lick its shoes, and 
snarling curs who hate and envy, good fortune." — I put down 
the last of the pens, brushing away with it the quill-chips from 
her desk first, and she looked at me with a kind wondering 
face. I brushed them away, clicked the pen-knife into my 
pocket, made her a bow, and walked ofif — ^for the bell was 
ringing for school. 



26 DOCTOR BIRCHy 



A YOUNG FELLOW WHO IS PEETTY SUKE TO 

SUCCEED. 



If Master Biiggs is destined in all probability to be a poor 
man, the chances are, that Mr. Bullock will have a very different 
lot. He is a son of a partner of the eminent banking firm of 
Bullock and Hulker, Lombard Street, and very high in the 
upper school — quite out of my jurisdiction, consequently. ' 

He writes the most beautiful current hand ever seen ; and 
the way in which he mastered arithmetic (going away into 
recondite and wonderful rules in the Tutor's Assistant, which 
some masters even dare not approach) is described by the 
Doctor in terms of admiration. He is Mr. Prince's best 
algebra pupil ; and a very fair classic, too, doing everything 
well for which he has a mind. 

He does not busy himself with the sports of his comrades, 
and holds a cricket bat no better than Miss Eaby would. He 
employs the play -hours in improving his mind, and reading the 
newspaper ; he is a profound politician, and, it must be owned. 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 37 

on the Liberal side. The elder boys despise him rather; and 
^Yhen Champion Major passes, he tmns his head, and looks 
down. I don't like the expression of Bullock's narrow, green 
eyes, as they follow the elder Champion, who does not seem to 
know or care how much the other hates him. 

No. Mr. Bullock, though perhaps the cleverest and most 
accomplished boy in the school, associates with the quite little 
boys when he is minded for society. To these he is quite 
affable, courteous, and winning. He never fagged or thrashed 
one of them. He has done the verses and corrected the exer- 
cises of many, and many is the little lad to whom he has lent a 
little money. 

It is true he charges at the rate of a penny, a weei for every 
sixpence lent out, but many a fellow to whom tarts are a pre- 
sent necessity is happy to pay this interest for the loan. These 
ti-ansactions are kept secret. Mr. Bullock, in rather a whining 
tone, when he takes Master Green aside and does the requisite 
business for him, says, *^ You know you'll go and talk about it 
everywhere. I don't want to lend you the money, I want to 
buy something with it. It's only to oblige you ; and yet I am 
sure you will go and make fun of me." Whereon, of course. 
Green, eager for the money, vows solemnly that the transaction 
shall be confidential, and only speaks when the payment of 
the interest becomes oppressive. 



28 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

Thus it is that Mr. Bullock's practices are at all known. At 
a very early period indeed his commercial genius manifested 
itself; and by happy speculations in toffey; by composing a 
sweet drink made of stick liquorice and brown sugar, and 
selliug it at a profit to the younger children ; by purchasing a 
series of novels, which he let out at an adequate remuneration ; 
by doing boys' exercises for a penny, and other processes, he 
showed the bent of his mind. At the end of the half year he 
always went home richer than when he arrived at school, with 
his purse full of money. 

Nobody knows how much he brought : but the accounts are 
fabulous. Twenty, thirty, fifty — it is impossible to say how 
many sovereigns. When joked about his money, he turns pale 
and swears he has not a shilling : whereas he has had a banker's 
account ever since he was thirteen. 

At the present moment he is employed in negotiating the 
sale of a knife with Master Green, and is pointing out to the 
latter the beauty of the six blades, and that he need not pay 
imtil after the holidays. 

Champion Major has sworn that he will break every bone in 
his skin the next time that he cheats a little boy, and is bearing 
down upon him. Let us come away. It is frightful to see that 
big peaceful clever coward moaning under well deserved blows 
and whining for mercy. 



Sure to succeed in life , 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 89 



DUVAL, THE PIRATE. 



(Jones JAivtmjjb poutes, laden toUh tarU,) 

Duval. Hullo ! you small boy with the tarts ! Come here, 
Sir. 
Jones Minimus, Please, Duval, they ain't mine. 
Duval. you abominable young story-teller. 

IHe confiscates tJte goods. 

I think I like young Duval's mode of levying contributions 
better than Bullock's. The former's, at least, has the merit of 
more candour. Duval is the pirate of Birch's, and lies in wait 
for small boys laden with money or provender. He scents 
plimder from afar oflf : and pounces out on it. Wo betide the 
little fellow when Duval boards him ! 

There was a youth here whose money I used to keep, as he 
was of an extravagant and weak taste ; and I doled it out to 
liim in weekly shillings, sufficient for the puj:chase of the 
necessary tarts. This boy came to me one day for half a 
sovereign, for a very particular purpose, he said. I afterwards 
found he wanted to lend the money to Duval. 



30 DOCTOB BIRCH, 

The young ogre burst out laughing, when in a great wrath 
and fury I ordered him to refund to the little boy : and proposed 
a bill of exchange at three months. It is true Duval's father 
does not pay the Doctor, and the lad never has a shilling, save 
that which he levies ; and though he is always bragging about 
the splendour of Freenystown, Co. Cork, and the fox-hounds 
his father keeps, and the claret they drink there — there comes 
no remittance from Castle Freeny in these bad times to the 
honest Doctor, who is a kindly man enough, and never yet 
turned an insolvent boy out of doors. 



AKO HIS YOUKO FBIENDS. 31 



THE DORMITORIES. 



MASTER HEWLETT AND MASTER NIGHTINGALE. 

{ReUher a cM vnnUr night.) 

Hewlett (flinging a shoe at Master Nightingale's bed, with 
which he hits that young gentleman). Hullo ! You ! Get up 
and bring me that shoe. 

Nightingale. Yes, Hewlett. (He gets up.) 

Hewlett. Don't drop it, and be very careful of it. Sir. 

Nightingale. Yes, Hewlett. 

Hewlett. Silence in the Dormitory! Any boy who opens 
his mouth I'll murder him. Now, Sir, are not you the boy 
what can sing ? 

Nightingale. Yes, Hewlett. 

Hewlett. Chaunt then till I go to sleep, and if I wake when 
you stop, you'll have this at j^our head. 

[Master Hewlett lays hU BlwUvera on the hedy ready to thy <U Master 
Nighti/ngMe head in the ccue contemplated. 

Nightingale (timidly). Please, Hewlett ? 



32 



DOCTOR BIRCH, 



Hewlett Well, Sir. 

Nightingale. May I put on my trowsers, please ? 

Hewlett, No, Sir. Go on, or 1*11 — 

Nightingale. 

'* Through pleasures and palaces 
Though we may roam, 
Be it eyer so humble. 
There's no place like home." 



' f 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 33 



A CAPTURE AND A EESCUE. 



My young friend, Patrick Champion, George's younger 
brother, is « late arrival among us ; has much of the family 
quality and good-nature; is not in the least a tyrant to the 
small boys, but is as eager as Amadis to fight. He is boxing 
his way up the school, emulating his great brother. He fixes 
his eye on a boy above him in strength or size, and you hear 
somehow that a difference has arisen between them at football, 
and they have their coats off presently. He has thrashed 
himself over the heads of many youths in this maimer : for 
instance, if Champion can lick Dobson, who can thrash Hob- 
son, how much more, then, can he thrash Hobson. Thus he 
works up and establishes his position in the school. Nor does 
Mr. Prince think it advisable that we ushers should walk 
much in the way when these little differences are being 
settled, unless there is some gross disparity, or danger is 
apprehended. 

For instance, I own to having seen the row depicted here as 

D 



34 DOCTOR BmCH, 

I was shaving at my bed-room window. I did not hasten 
down to prevent its consequences. Fogle had confiscated a 
top, the property of Snivins, the which, as the little wretch 
was always pegging it at xny toes, I did not regret. Snivins 
whimpered ; and young Champion came up, lusting for battle. 
Directly he made out Fogle, he steered for him, pulling up his 
coat-sleeves, and clearing for action. 

" "Who spoke to you, young Champion ? " Fogle said, and he 
flung down 4he top to Master Snivins. I knew there would be 
no fight ; cmd perhaps Champion, too, was disappointed. 



jiAl&^v 




Miss Bircli's flower g'arden . 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 39 



THE GAKDEN, 

WHBBB THB FABLOUR^OAHDEBS QO* 



-r*- 



NoBLEMEN have been rather scarce at Birch's — ^but the heir 
of a great Prince has been living with the Doctor for some 
years. — He is Lord George Gaunt's eldest son, the noble Blan- 
tagenet Gaant Gaunt, and nej^ew of the Most Honourable the 
Marquis of Steyne^ 

They are very proud of him at the Doctor's—and the two 
Misses and Papa whenever a stranger comes down whom they 

* 

want to dazzle^ are pretty sure to bring Lord Steyne into the 
conversation, mention the last party at Gaunt House, and 
eursonly to remark that they have with them a young Mend 
who will be in all human probability Marquis of Steyne and 
Earl of Gaunt, &c« 

Flantagenet does not care much about these future honours : 
provided he can get some brown sugar on his bread and 
butter, or sit wiUi three chairs and play at coach and horses, 
quite quietly by himself, he is tolerably happy. He saunters 

B 2 



86 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

in and out of school when he likes, and looks at the masters 
and other boys with a listless grin. He uded to be taken to 
church, but he laughed and talked in odd places, so they are 
forced to leave him at home now. He will sit with a bit of 
string and play cats-cradle for many hours. He likes to go 
and join the very small children at their games. Some are 
frightened at him, but they soon cease to fear, and order him 
about. I have seen him go and fetch tarts from Mr. Buggies 
for a boy of eight years old ; and cry bitterly if he did not get 
a piece. He cannot speak quite plain, but very nearly ; and is 
not more, I suppose, than three-and-twenty. 

Of course at home they know his age, though they never 
come and see him. But they forget that Miss Bosa Birch is no 
longer a young chit as she was ten years ago, when Gaunt was 
brought to the school. On the contrary, she has had no small 
experience in the tender passion, and is at this moment smitten 
with a disinterested affection for Plantagenet Gaunt. 

Next to a little doll with a burnt nose, which he hides away 
in cunning places, Mr. Gaunt is very fond of Miss Bosa too. 
What a pretty match it would make ! and how pleased they 
would be at Gaunt House, if the grandson and heir of the 
great Marquis of Steyne, the descendant of a hundred Gaunts 
and Tudors, should marry Miss Birch, the schoolmaster's 
daughter! It is true she has the sense on her side, and 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 87 

poor Plantagenet is only an idiot: but there he is, a zany, 
mih such expectations and such a pedigree ! 

If Miss Rosa would run away with Mr. Gaunt, she would 
leave off bullying her cousin, Miss Anny Eaby. Shall I put 
her up to the notion, and offer to lend her the money to run 
away ? Mr. Gaunt is not allowed money. He had some once, 
but Bullock took him into a comer, and got it &om him. He 
has a moderate tick opened at the tart-woman's. He stops at 
Bodwell Begis through the year, school-time and holiday-time^ 
it is all the same to him. Nobody asks about him, or thinks 
about him, save twice a-year, when the Doctor goes to Gaunt 
House, and gets the amount of his bills, and a glass of wine in 
the steward's room. 

And yet you see somehow that he is a gentleman. His 
manner is different to that of the owners of that coarse table 
and parlour at which he is a boarder, (I do not speak of Miss 
B. of course, for her manners are as good as those of a 
Duchess). When he caught Miss Bosa boxing little Fiddes's 
ears, his face grew red, and he broke into a fierce inarticulate 
rage. After that, and for some days, he used to shrink from 
her ; but they are reconciled now. I saw them this afternoon 
in the garden where only the parlour-boarders walk. He was 
playful, and touched her with his stick. She raised her 
handsome eyes in surprise, and smiled on him very kindly. 



88 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

The thing was so clear, that I thought it my duty to speak 
to old Zoe about it The wicked old catamaran told me she 
wished that some people would mind their own business, and 
hold their tongues — ^that some persons were paid to teach 
writing, and not to tell tales and make mischief: and I have 
since been thinking whether I ought to commimicate with 
the Doctor. 



AKD HIS TOmrCt FRIENDS. 39 



THE OLD PUPIL. 



As I came into the play-grounds this morning. I saw a 
dashing young fellow^ with a tanned face and & blonde 
xDOtistache, who was walking up and down the green arm- 
in-arm with Champion Major, and followed by a little crowd 
of boys. 

They were talking of old times evidently. "What had 
become of Irvine and Smith ? "^ — " Where was Bill Harris and 
Jones, not Squinny Jones, but Cocky Jones ? " — and so forth. 
The gentleman was no stranger ; he was an old pupil evidently, 
come to see if any of his old comrades remained^ and revisit 
the cari luogi of his youth. 

Champion was evidently proud of his arm-fellow. He espied 
his brother, young Champion, and introduced him. " Come 
here, Sir," he called* " The young'un wasn't here in your 
time, Davison." " Pat, Sir," said he, " this is Captain Davison, 
one of Birch's boys. Ask him who was among the first in 
the lines at Sobraon ? '' 



40 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

Pat's face kindled up as he looked Davison fall in the face, 
and held out his hand. Old Champion and Davison both 
blushed. The infantry set up a " Hurray, hurray, hurray," 
Champion leading, and waving his wide-awake. I protest that 
the scene did one good to witness. Here was the hero and 
cock of the school come back to see his old haunts and cronies. 
He had always remembered them. Since he had seen them 
last, he had faced death and achieved honour. But for my 
dignity I would have shied up my hat too. 

With a resolute step> and his arm still linked in Champion's, 
Captain Davison now advanced^ followed by a wake of little 
boys, to that comer of the green where Mrs. Buggies has her 
tart-stand. 

" Hullo, Mother Buggies ! don't you remember me ? " he 
said, and shook her by the hand. 

" Lor, if it ain't Davison Major ! " she said. " Well, Davison 
Major, you owe me fourpence for two sausage-roUs from when 
you went away." 

Davison laughed, and all the little crew of boys set up a 
similar chorus. 

" I buy the whole shop," he said. " Now, young 'uns — eat 
away ! " 

Then there was such a " Hurray ! hurray ! " as surpassed 
the former cheer in loudness. Everybody engaged in it except 



AND HIS YOUNG rRIENDS. 41 

Piggy Duff, who made an instant dash at the three-cornered 
puffs, but was stopped by Champion, who said there should 
be a fair distribution. And so there was, and no one lacked, 
nei^er of raspberry, open-tarts, nor of mellifluous bulls' eyes, 
nor of polonies, beautiful to the sight and taste. 

Th6 hurraying brought out the old Doctor himself, who put 
his hand up to his spectacles and started when he saw the old 
pupil. Each blushed when he recognised the other; for seven 
years ago they had parted not good friends. 

" "What — Davison ? " the Doctor said, with a tremulous voice. 
"God bless you, my dear fellow ; " — and they shook hands. " A 
half-holiday, of course, boys," he added, and there was another 
hurray : there was to be no end to the cheering that day. 

" How's — show's the family, Sir ? " Captain Davison asked. 

" Come in and see. Flora's grown quite a lady. Dine with 
us, of course. Champion Major, come to dinner at five. Mr. 
Titmarsh, the pleasure of your company ? " The Doctor swung 
open the garden gate : the old master and pupil entered the 
house reconciled. 

I thought I would first peep into Miss Eaby's room, and tell 
her of this event. She was working away at her linen there, 
as usual quiet and cheerful. 

" You should put up," I said with a smile ; " the Doctor has 
given us a half-holiday." 



43 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

" I never have holidays," Miss Kaby replied. 

Then I told her of the scene I had just witnessed, of the 
arrival of the old pupil, the purchase of the tarts, the proclama- 
tion of the holiday, and the shouts of the boys of " Hurray 
Davison." 

" Who is it ? " cried out Miss Baby, starting and turning as 
whit^ us a sheet. 

I told her it was Captain Davison from India, and described 
the appearance and behaviour of the Captain* When I had 
finished speaking, she asked me to go and get her a glass of 
water ; she felt unwell* But she was gone when I came back 
with the water. 



1 know all now. After sitting for a quarter of an hour with 
the Doctor, who attributed his guest*s xmeasiness no doubt to 
his desire to see Miss Laura Birch, Davison started up and 
said he wanted to see Miss Baby. " You remember, Sii*, how 
kind she was to my little brother, Sir," he said. Whereupon 
the Doctor, with a look of surprise, that any body should want 
to See Miss Baby, said she was in the little school-room, whither 
the Captain went, knowing the way from old times* 

A few minutes afterwards. Miss B. and Miss 2. returned 
from a drive with Plantagenet Gaunt in their one-horse fly, and 
being informed of Davison's arrival, and that he was closeted 



Wanted a Goviirness , 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 43 

with Miss Baby in the little school-room, of course made for 
that apartment at once. I was coming into it from the other 
door. I wanted to know whether she had drunk the water. 

This is what both parties saw. The two were in this very 
attitude. "Well, upon my word!" cries out Miss Zoe; but 
Davison did not let go his hold ; and Miss Eaby*s head only 
sank down on his hand. 

" You must get another governess, Sir, for the little boys," 
Frank Davison said to the Doctor. "Anny Eaby has pro- 
mised to come with me." 

You may suppose I shut to the door on my side. And 
when I returned to the little school-room, it was black and 
empty. Everybody was gone. I could hear the boys shouting 
at play in the green outside. The glass of water was on the 
table where I had placed it. I took it and drank it myself, to 
the health of Anny Eaby and her husband. It was rather a 
choker. 

But of course I wasn't going to stop on at Birch's. When 
his young friends re-assemble on the 1st of February next, 
they will have two new masters. Prince resigned too, and is 
at present living with me at my old lodgings at Mrs. Cammy- 
sole's. If any nobleman or gentleman wants a private tutor 
for his son, a note to the Eev. F. Prince will find him there. 

Miss Clapperclaw says we are both a couple of old fools ; 



44 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

and that she knew when I set ofif last year to Eodwell Regis, 
after meeting the two young ladies at a party at General 
Champion's house in our street, that I was going on a goose's 
errand. I shall dine there on Christmas-day ; and so I wish 
a merry Christmas to all young and old boys. 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 45 



EPILOGUE. 



The play is done ; the curtain drops, 
Slow falling, to the prompter's bell : 
A moment yet the actor stops, 
And looks aroand, to say farewell. 
It is an irksome word and task ; 
And when he's laughed and said his say, 
He shows, as he removes the mask, 
A face that's anything but gay. 

One word, ere yet the evening ends, 
Let 's close it with a parting rhyme. 
And pledge a hand to all young friends. 
As fits the merry Christmas time. 
On life's wide scene you, too, have parts, 
That Fate ere long shall bid you play ; 
Good night ! with honest gentle hearts 
A kindly greeting go alway ! 



46 DOCTOB BIBCHy 

Good night ! I 'd say : the griefs, the joys, 
Just hinted in this mimic page, 
The triumphs and defeats of boys, 
Are but repeated in our age. 
I *d say, your woes were not less keen, 
Your hopes more vain, than those of men ; 
Your pangs or pleasures of fifteen, 
At forty-five played o*er again. 

I 'd say, we suflter and we strive 
Not less nor more as men than boys ; 
With grizzled beards at forty-five. 
As erst at twelve, in corduroys. 
And if, in time of sacired youth, 
We learned at home to love and pray, 
Pray Heaven, that early Love and Truth 
May never wholly pass away. 

And in the world, as in the school, 

I 'd say, how fate may change and shift ; 

The prize be sometimes with the fool, 

The race not always to the swift. 

The strong may yield, the good may fall. 

The great man be a vulgar clown, 



AND HIS YOUNG TBIENDS. 47 

The knave be lifted over all, 
The kind cast pitilessly down. 

Who knows the inscrutable design ? 

Blessed be He who took and gave: 

Why should your mother, Charles, not mine, 

Be weeping at her darling's grave ? * 

We bow to Heaven that will'd it so 

That darkly rules the fate of all. 

That sends the respite or the blow. 

That's free to give or to yecal. 

This crowns his feast with wine and wit : 
Who brought him to that mirth and state ? 
His betters, see, below him sit. 
Or hunger hopeless at the gate. 
Who bade the mud from Dives' wheel 
To spurn the rags of Lazarus ? 
Come, brother, in that dust we'll kneel, 
Confessing Heaven that ruled it thus. 

So each shall mourn in life's advance. 
Dear hopes, dear friends, untimely killed ; 

* C. B., ob., Dec. 1843, set. 42. 



48 DOCTOR BIRCH, 

Shall grieve for many a forfeit chance, 
A longing passion unfulfilled. 
Amen : whatever Fate be sent, — 
Pray God the heart may kindly glow, 
Although the heart with cares be bent, 
And whitened with the winter-snow. 

Come wealth or want, come good or ill, 
Let young and old accept their part, 
And bow before the Awful Will, 
And bear it with an honest heart. 
Who misses, or who wins the prize ? 
Go, lose or conquer as you can : 
But if you fail, or if you rise. 
Be each, pray God, a gentleman, 

A gentleman, or old or young : 
(Bear kindly with my humble lays), 
The sacred chorus first was sung 
Upon the first of Christmas days. 
The shepherds heard it overhead — 
The joyful angels raised it there : 
Glory to heaven on high, it said. 
And peace on earth to gentle men. 



AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS. 49 

My song, save this, is little worth ; 

I lay the weary pen aside, 

And wish you health, and love, and mirth, 

As fits the solemn Christmas tide. 

As fits the holy Christmas birth, 

Be this, good friends, our carol still — 

Be peace on earth, be peace on earth. 

To men of gentle will. 



BRAOBUBT AND KYANB, PBIKTKR8, WHTTBrRTARS. 



f 






