Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




6000670278 




CHEISTOWBLL. 



^ Bartmoor ^ale. 



BY 

E. D. BLACKMOEE, 

AUTHOR OF "MART ANERLKT," ETC. 



Splendid^ mendax. 



IN THREE VOLUMES, 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: 
SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE & RIVINGTON, 
CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET. 

1882. 

{All rights reserved.) 



A. 



^s/. n . Ml 



"} 



V4MAY83^ 



• LONDON: 
ntnn'KD bt wiluam cloWes aitd soks, lthtted, 

STAMFOBD STBEKT AMD CHABIKQ CROSS. 



CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 



CHAPTER PAOK 

I. Fair Flowers ... * ... ... 1 

II. Potter's Vessels ... ... ... 9 

III. Parson Short ... ... ... 24 

IV. Lark's Cot ... ... ... 37 

V. Among the Bqds ... ... ... 51 

VI. A Tingle and a Tangle ... ... 66 

VII. House-Breaking ... ... ... 81 

VIII. Colonel Westcombe ... ... 98 

IX. The Ked-Faced Man ... ... ... 114 

X. Angelic Peeps ... ... ... 136 

XI. Mother Dear ... ... ... 153 

XII. "Nous" ... ... ... 165 

XIII. Old Friends, and Young ones ... ... 183 

XIV. A Small Commission ... ... 203 

XV. The Dancing Tree ... ... ... 222 

XVI. "TheEaven" ... ... ... 246 

XVII. On the Brink, and over it ... ... 262 

XVIII. Wet, and Dry ... ... ... 287 



CHRISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER I. 



PAIR FLOWERS. 



In the fresh young vigour of an April sun, the 
world has a cheerful aspect, and is doubly- 
bright, and vastly warmer, when beheld through 
good flint-glass. Especially while the east 
winds hold, which never now forget to hold 
the spring of England, heart and throat. But 
forty years ago, there were some springs of 
gentle quality. 

Upon a pleasant April morning, of the sweet 
inconstant kind, such as we vainly sigh for 
now, a gardening man, with a quick step, came 
into his happy greenhouse. A door from his 
favourite sitting-room led into this still more 
favoured place; and the smile with which he 

VOL. I. B 






^ 



2 CHRISTOWELL. 

entered showed that he expected to find pleasure 
here. It was a long, low, span-roof house, with 
no side-lights, and very simple, not even framed 
with rafters. Yet snug from violence of wind, 
and bright with every sunbeam; this humble 
house was rich with joy, for all who love good 
health, and peace. 

Here, were the sweet obedience, and the gay 
luxuriance of the vine ; than which no lovelier 
creature grows. Broad leaves, spreading into 
pointrels, waved and cut with crisp indenture, 
coving into, or overlapping, the ripple of each 
other ; clear round shoots, cresting up like 
swans, and sparkling with beads of their own 
breath ; infant bunches, on the bend as yet, but 
promising to straighten, as the berries got 
their weight ; some bravely announcing grapes 
already, some hoping to do so before nightfall, 
through the misty web of bloom ; others only 
just awaking into eyes of golden dust ; yet all 
alike rejoicing, shining, meeting the beauty of 
the early sun, and arousing their own to 
answer it. 

And here was a multitude of pretty things as 
well, that will not be chambered with the vine 
too long, yet gladly accept a kind lift upon the 
road from winter to summer, which her auspice 



FAIR FLOWERS. d 

yields. Boxes, and little tubs, and pots, and 
pans, and frames of willow, and biscuit-cases, 
were cropped with growth in different stages, 
and of divers orders, through all the in- 
numerable tones of green, and all the infinite 
variety of form. But all, to the keenest human 
eye, brisk, and clean, and in their duty. 

The man, who had shaped these things, and 
led them (under the Maker's loftier will) was 
coming to them now, with a cheerful heart, and 
faith in his own handiwork. The finest gar- 
dener, that ever grew, knows well that he 
cannot command success, and has long survived 
young arrogance. Still he continues to hope 
for the best ; for the essence of the gentle craft 
is hope, rooted in labour, and trained by love. 
So this man took a short taste of the air, 
glanced at the glass, and the glitter of the 
vines, and felt the climate of the house, as 
keenly as if he were a plant therein. For the 
moment, there was no fault to find. Genial 
warmth was in the air, and gentle dew on 
every leaf; in the slope of early sun through 
glass, no harsh heat quivered, and no fierce 
light glared; but morning-tide spread all soft 
herbage with a silvery tissue. 

"Now I like to see things look like this," 



4 CHRISTOWELL. 

said the man, as he very well might say ; " but 
here are at least a score of bunches crying aloud 
for the thinning scissors. And where is Rose, 
who ought to be at them, before the sun gets 
up too high ? Rose of roses, where are you ? " 

To his cheerful shout no answer came ; and 
being of a well-contented mind, he went on to 
his own business. His happy nature found its 
province in promoting happiness, whether of 
beast, or bird, or life whose growth is its only 
movement. To all of these he felt that loving- 
kindness, which is nature's gift ; not the 
brightest of her graces, but the largest, and the 
best. Without that one redeeming gift, of 
which grand intellects often fail, this man 
being sorely tried in life, would have passed 
into the bitter vein, so miserable to itself, and 
all. His face had the lines of resolute will, and 
of strenuous energy ; and his bodily force was 
but little abated by three score years of exercise. 
For his back was as straight as a soldier's on 
drill ; his legs were stout and steadfast ; and 
although he fed well, and without anxiety, 
none but envious whipper-snappers would have 
dared to call him fat. 

For the other part, his mind was not dis- 
agreeably large or noble ; but just in front, by 



( 



FAIR FLOWERS. 6 

the proper peg, of the general mind it met with. 
The general mind, that is to say, of educated 
people, at any rate in that part of the world, 
which is as wise as any other. " Captain 
Larks " (as this good stranger had been called 
by the native voice, when first he came to 
ChristoweU) was a simple, unpretentious man, 
who gave himself no title. His only desire 
seemed to be for plain life, and retirement. 

These he surely might here obtain, to the 
utmost of all heart's desire; so far away was 
ChristoweU from busy mart, or town, or street, 
or even road of carriage power. No better 
place could have been discovered by a man 
sincerely desirous of dealing as little as possible 
with mankind. For here were people enough 
to make a single head no rarity ; yet not enough 
to force any sort of head into grievous eminence. 
All the inhabitants, without exertion, were 
important enough to feel satisfied; or at any 
rate to feel the duty of it; while universal 
opinion stopped any man from indulging in his 
own. It may be denied by young spread- 
eagles, of competitive and unruly mind, that 
this is the highest form of human life. But 
such an one should soar aloft, and perch upon 
some higher one. 



6 CHRISTOWELL. 

To Cliristowell, ambition was no more than a 
longer name for itcli. Every village-man grew 
wiser by due seniority ; and no mind, while its 
father lived, succeeded to authority. Youth 
was kept in its place, and taught that the ear 
must take the seed of thought, until the white 
hair shows it ripe ; and women were allowed 
their proper weight, 

" Christowell is all very well," the gardener 
went on thinking; "but if ever there was a 
slow place under the sun, it is one of the slowest. 
Pugsley will never bring my pots." 

Making up his mind to the manner of man- 
kind, with a cultivator's patience, he passed 
beneath clusters encroaching on the headway, 
and went into a tiny transept, parted from the 
rest of the house, by a narrow door of glass. 
Here was a separate shrine for flowers, in- 
tolerant of heat, and demanding air, beyond the 
young vine's capacity. Choice geraniums lived 
here, and roses, heaths, and epacrids, and double 
violets, lilies of the valley (sweetest of all 
bloom). Daphne, and the graceful deutzia, pansies 
also, freaked with velvet braid, the double black 
polyanthus, and the white chalice of azalea. 
But best, and dearest of all to him, and set in a 
separate nook — as in a glazed bureau with lift- 



FAIR ELOWERS. 7 

ing glass — that exquisite flower of exclusive 
worship, that gorgeous instance of nature and 
art combined to do their utmost, the magically 
beautiful auricula. 

No gardener is worth his manure, who has 
not a fine conceit of his own skill, " I should 
like to have some of those Lancashire fellows, 
or a few of those Kentish braggarts here," this 
man said aloud, being apt to encourage his 
thoughts, when alone, with the company of 
words ; " if I know anything of the matter, this 
green-edged seedling, beautifully named ' Dart- 
moor Oasis,' by my Rose ; and this grand self, 
one could gaze at all the day ; and above 
all this white-edge, this glorious white-edge, 
worthily entitled * Cream of Devon,' — have they 
anything fit to hold a candle to them ? Con- 
sider the paste, take the measure of the thrum, 
dwell upon the band ; can you spy a single slur ? 
Above all, if you have a particle of judgment, 
observe the equality of the pips, the perfection 
of fulness, and true circle of the truss, and the 
grand, columnar, mealy, magnificent, staunchly 
upright, and splendidly proportioned — really 
you might say, pillar of the stalk ! " 

Overpowered, alike by his eloquence, and the 
beauty that produced it, he stopped for a moment. 



8 OHRISTOWELL. 

with some' gravel in his hand (with which he 
was going to top-dress his pots), when the little 
door was opened, and his Rose came in ; whose 
presence, might compel the wildest gardener to 
despise his own auriculas. 



( 9 ) 



CHAPTER II. 



potter's vessels. 



To a mind with Kmited powers of inquiry, such 
as most of us are blest with, a great truth 
stands forth in robust relief, without being 
bound to show what it stands on, or where it 
came from, or anything else. In this frank 
spirit must be accepted the incontestable fact 
that "Latham" (an ancient and very good 
surname) takes, upon the ordinary tongue of 
Devon, the brief, but still excellent form of 
** Larks." It made no difference, from their 
lofty point of view, that the Captain's name 
was not "Latham" at all, any mdre than he 
called himself a captain ; but when he first 
appeared among the natives of this part — some 
fifteen years ago perhaps — his rather scanty 
luggage was ticketed " L. Arthur," in flowing 
and free manuscript. The leading genius of 
Christowell — a premature intellect now removed 



10 CHEISTOWELL. 

from the stabs of contumely, to higher claims — 
pronounced at a glance that the word spelled 
" Latham ; " whilst some, almost equally capable 
of reading, confessed, and some denied it. 

The landlord of the Three Horse-shoes^ who 
could not sign his name (though he drew 
three horse-shoes, at the bottom of a bill, more 
correctly ttan many an artist could), at once 
backed up the decision of the wit, and settled 
the question, by declaring that his guest had 
the very same walk, all over the world, as 
Corporal Larks to Teigncombe had. So before 
Mr. Arthur was one dinner-time older, he came 
forth upon the public as " Captain Larks ; " and 
finding that people only shook their heads, and 
looked very knowing, if he said another word, 
he let them have their way, until his ears 
and mind grew used to it. 

Through an agent at Exeter, whose name 
was " Tucker," a neat little cottage, and some 
twenty acres of land near the moor, had been 
bought for him cheaply. Then the cottage 
was furnished very simply ; and here he hoped 
to spend in peace, and solitude, his remaining 
days. 

As yet, there was not a grey hair on his 
head, though his face bore marks of evil climate. 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 11 

and uncourteous usage, in deep-grained sun- 
burn, and scar of steel, permanent in three 
places. Tliis, and a pair of shaggy eyebrows, 
gave him a formidable aspect, much against 
the meaning of his mind. But eyes of a soft 
bright blue, as clear as a child's, and a nose 
of genial turn, and a really pleasant and hearty 
smile, showed plenty of good-will towards man- 
kind; whatever man might have done to him. 
Moreover, his large and well-knit frame, active 
step, and resolute bearing, commanded the good 
word of womankind, the. better half of the 
entirety. 

Then Parson Short, becoming now prime 
minister of Christowell, said his say about 
Captain Larks, which was to the purpose, as 
usual. "Under a cloud — fine fellow by his 
face — gentleman, according to his speech and 
manner. He wants to be quiet ; it is none of 
our business. Let him alone, till he comes 
to us." 

The settler asked for nothing better than 
this course of treatment. The stir of his arrival 
soon settled, like himself, into gentle quietude ; 
the men of the village were kind and respectful 
— as men still are in Devonshire — and the 
women, though longing to know more about 



12 CHRISTOWELL. 

him, felt for him deeply as "the lonely gentle- 
man," and hoped he would get over it, and 
have another wife. 

Whatever his trouble, he sought no pity, nor 
even appeared despondent ; but lived upon his 
bit of land, and worked, and whistled among 
his trees, as sweetly as the blackbirds that came 
to answer. In spite of his maturity, or perhaps 
by reason of it, many a village girl, too young 
to dream of any courting — except in dim 
wonder at the number of the babies — resolved 
to be his wife, as soon as time should qualify 
her, and came up the steep hill, every fine 
evening, to peep through the hedge at him, 
and perhaps to get an apple. He, having love 
of children, as of all things that are natural, 
would rest from his work, and come out at the 
stile, and pat their curly heads, and ask the 
history of the babies, and cut for them chips, 
with his pruning-knife, from a big stick of 
liquorice in his waistcoat pocket. 

Whether he had kith or kin, or any soft 
belongings, was a moot point at the Church- 
yard gate, and by many smouldering peat-fires ; 
until, about four years after his coming, a lively, 
and lovely, little girl was delivered at his gate, 
by Tim Pugsley, the carrier. Tim went round 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 13 

about it, as a fox goes to his hole, and avoided 
the village on his way from Moreton ; but in 
spite of all that, they were spied by a woman 
with a bundle of furze at the top of the cleve ; 
and when human nature, with five shillings in 
its pocket, compelled Master Pugsley to pull up 
and bait, at the Three Horse-shoes^ upon his 
homeward course, he had no call so much as 
to change his crown ; so liberal was the desire 
to treat him, for the sake of the light that he 
could shed. The grateful carrier first drank 
his beer, then shook his head, as vehemently as 
if it had been labelled " glass with care ; " and 
then enlightened the company with a piece of 
news beyond all price — "Every man should 
first tend his own business." 

For nine or ten years, every summer, and 
weighing more upon each delivery, this con- 
signment came' to pass ; and Pugsley (like his 
cart-tilt, which was of some high new patent 
stuff) grew dryer and dryer, every time he was 
wetted ; till Christowell understood at last, that 
if anybody was to blame, for keeping the parish 
so unsettled, it was no less a person than the 
famous Bishop of Exeter. For Pugsley told 
them to go to the bishop, if they wanted to 
know all the rights ; and the next confirmation 



14 CHBISTOWELL. 

in that neighbourhood was largely attended by- 
fathers and mothers. It did them good to be 
confirmed again, because of their principles 
wearing out ; and the landlord of the inn was 
pleased with the evening they spent after it. 

Thus when Rose came down at last, " to 
have holiday for ever " (as she told Mr. Pugsley, 
every time he stopped to put a stone behind 
the wheel), there was scarcely any one in 
Christowell old enough to rejoice, who failed 
of that most Christian duty. The captain for 
once came out of his garden, and made a great 
bonfire of his weeds upon the beacon, and with 
his own hands rolled up a great barrel of cider 
unknown to the natives, whose ignorance 
culminated towards their heads. For he now 
grew apples of a lordly kind, which they 
(having faith in their grandsires only) dis- 
dained, till it turned the tables on them. 

Almost everybody said, that night, or else 
on the following morning, that for certain sure, 
such a lively maid could never abide in a place 
like that. Or if she did, she must soon go 
doiled — -so tarble weist, and crule unkid as it 
was. For according to the way Captain Larks 
held his head up, in spite of demeaning himself 
now lately, his daughter must count upon 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 15 

having to behave like a lady, and not going 
to and fro, and in and out with the other 
young folk, as the butcher's, and grocer's girls 
might do. 

And who was there likely to ask her in 
marriage, or to take her to dance, or a fairing, 
or a club, comely as she was, and so nice- 
spoken ? Why, Parson Tom Short was the 
only gentry-man, unless you went so far as 
Touchwood Park ; and if ever there was a set 
bachelor in the world. Parson Short was one 
of them ; let alone that his hair was all going 
from his poll, and his cook, Mrs. Aggett, would 
have no young doings. 

Up to the present time, however, though 
nearly two years were gone by. Rose Arthur 
had complained to no one, of discontent, or 
loneliness. Her father, and her work, and 
books, sufficed to her for company ; and her 
lively nature filled itself with interest in all 
things. She knew everybody in the village 
now, and every flower in the garden ; and her 
father's lonely life was blessed by her young 
enjoyment of the world. 

Pugsley (who lived at Moreton, and traded 
twice a week from Exeter, when the weather 
and the roads encouraged him) now began to 



16 CHRISTOWELL. 

find bis horse wink one eye, at the turn towards 
Christowell. So many trifles went to and fro, 
and some boxes that made the axle creak, and 
some quite large enough to sit upon. Even 
before this, he had taken mauns of plants, and 
baskets of choice pears, and grapes, to Exeter ; 
when the captain began to " demean " himself in 
the village esteem by traffic. But now the 
commerce increased, and throve, as Rose threw 
her young life into it. 

If Pugsley had been a small-minded man, he 
must have gone promptly to Tavistock fair, and 
bought a new horse, to attend to this traffic; 
for his ancient nag, whose name was " Teddy," 
began to find the hills grow steeper, as the 
weight of years increased. But the carrier was 
of gentle tone, and largely generous sentiments ; 
and hours of reflection made him wipe his head 
with loftier feeling. Therefore he would not 
deny his good neighbours the pleasure of bene- 
volence, but allowed them to lend him a horse 
as often as they wished, and sometimes oftener. 

Now Teddy was crawling up the hill, that 
beautiful April morning, with the long-desired 
load of pots. Three-quarters of a mile of jagged 
lane, or sometimes of roaring watercourse, led 
from the village to " Larks' Cot," as irreverent 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 17 

people called it. At best, and even for a fresh 
young horse, it was a tough piece of collar- 
work ; but Teddy, ancient though he was, 
would never have grumbled, if the lane had 
been wide enough for corkscrew. But in this 
part of Devon, the rule of the road is, to make 
it just wide enough for one cart, and a cow to 
go past it without losing milk. If two carts 
meet, one must back to a gateway; and whether 
of the twain shall back, depends upon the issue 
which of the drivers is " the better man." 

Therefore this Teddy had a hard time of it — 
a long pull, a stong pull, and worst of all, a 
straight pull. And while he was pausing, to 
pant, and to think, and his master whistled 
softly, Jem Trickey the cobbler came merrily 
down a steep place, and stopped to look at them. 

" Mamin to 'e, Tim," shouted Trickey, for 
his breath was as *' plim " as a football newly 
filled ; " what have 'e got then, this time, 
carryer ? " 

" No consarn of thine. Cobbler Trickey ; " 
Pugsley made stout answer, being cross, and 
short-fetched in the wind ; " cobblers is not 
excisemen yet." 

" Potses, and pauses again, as sure as I be a 
zinner ! Cappen Larks ought to be shamed of 

VOL. I. c 



18 CHRISTOWELL. 

hiszelf. Lor' A'miglity never made his works 
to grow in crockery. And you'm a gwain 
outside your trade. Backard and forrard is 
your proper coorse. Let me conzeider of they 
potses." 

" Ye be welcome to conzeider of them, cobbler, 
A niver zeed sich coorous cloam. Look'e yeer, 
they little holes hurneth all round 'em ! Cap- 
pen's own diskivry, I do hear tell." 

The carrier loosened the cord of one crate, 
and allowed the intelligent Trickey to gaze, 
while he drew it towards the cart-tail. Trickey, 
though large enough of mind, was small of 
body ; and he lifted himself by the lade, to see 
things justly. 

*'You be bound by my advice," he cried, 
retreating hastily; "you take the next turn 
down to brook, and heft they into the watter. 
They was made for the witches, and no mistakk 
about 'em." 

" Zo I wull," Tim Pugsley answered, pre- 
tending to share his neighbour's fright, for he 
was a dry man, and full of book-learning. 
"Thank'e kindly for thy counsel, Jem. Into 
the watter they gooth, zure enough. Only thou 
must pay for the vally of 'em, and the carryage 
too. Cobbler Trickey." 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 19 

" Go thy way with thy witchcraft," the other 
replied. " Do 'e know what I call thee, Carryer 
Pugsley ? I call thee a poor time-sarver, and a 
carryer of no conzistency." 

" I carry better stuff than thou dost," Pugsley 
shouted after him; as the shoe-maker, with a 
springy step, set off down the hill, for fear of 
worse. " Do I zwindle the public with brown 
papper ? Do I putt 'ooden pegsin, and zwear 
they be stitched ? Do I clam on the heel-ball, 
to hide my scamping ? Do I " 

Master Pugsley cut short his list of libels, as 
he saw Master Trickey, at a decent distance, 
deliver a gesture of supreme contempt, by turn- 
ing up his coat-tail, and administering a slap to 
the quarter of his body which was latest in 
retreat. 

" Do 'e do the like of that to I ? " the carrier 
inquired superfluously ; "If it twadn't for 
business, and the blessed law — ^howsomever, a 
bain't worth thinking on ; Teddy, gee wugg ! 
It be your vault mainly." 

The old horse, wont as he was to bear the 
blame of troubles far outside of his own shafts, 
rallied with a shiver and a rattle of his chains, 
and threw himself forward upon the strain. 
For a very stiff tug arose just here, for a horse 



20 OHRISTOWELL. 

who had been to Exeter and back, with a tidy- 
load, only yesterday ; and whose knowledge of 
com was too superficial, getting more of the 
husk than the kernel for its study. And the 
manner of a Devonshire lane is such, that 
dogmatic humps stand up, in places, where 
nothing seems to warrant them. The meadows, 
to the right and left, may be as pleasant as you 
please to walk upon, with a sleek benevolence, 
a velvet pile, and a spring of supple freshness. 
And yet, within a landyard the lane is jumping 
scraggily, with ribs of solid rock, and pits and 
jags of bold abruptness. The nag, being born 
to such conditions, plodded on without repining ; 
but in spite of all spirit, and skill, and care, 
he suddenly fell into sad disgrace. 

For just as the near wheel was creaking, on 
the verge of a steep slide of granite, where his 
turn-about was due — for the lane there allowed 
him chance of a little bit of slanting — Teddy 
did a thing that any other horse might do, or 
even a man in his position. He mistook a large 
stone-fly, just arisen from the Christow, for a 
genuine sestrus, a bot-fly, whame, or tabanus. 
If he had thought of the present time of year, 
he must have known better ; but instead of 
thinking, he acted on his nerves, which struck 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 21 

into him like a spur. Up went his head, as 
if he were four years old, instead of going on 
for forty ; and his old bones shook with indigna- 
tion, at the pestilent state the world was come 
to. " Steady, you old fool ! Who'm a-gwain 
for to kill'e?" the carrier exclaimed with a 
little friendly thump ; but the mischief was 
done, while he was speaking. For the jump of 
the horse gave a jerk to the shaft, and this ran 
amiss into the axle-tree, 'gave a lollop to the 
near wheel, already on the wamble ; and down 
went the felly, with a blue griad of iron, into 
the very hole they meant to shun. The hole 
was more than deep enough to hold a good 
nine gallons ; and the wheel ground down into 
its deepest depth, while the other took advan- 
tage of the position for a holiday, and proved 
itself the off-wheel, by going off towards heaven. 

" WuU now ! " said the carrier, without much 
haste, for his mind travelled slowly up the 
obstacles of thought ; " this be a tarble dicky- 
ment ; and here coom'th arl the cloam ! Drat 
that old cobbler chap, 'twor arl his doings." 

An avalanche of pots, from the unroped crate, 
fell around him and upon him, while he reasoned 
thus. Like a quick shower of acorns from the 
shaken oak, but alas, much heavier, and more 



22 CHRISTOWELL. 

valuable, they rattled on the carrier, and 
thumped his poor chest, and a far more tender 
and impassioned part of man, till he fairly 
turned back, and let them roll upon his spine. 

" Jem, neighbour Jem, do'e come back, that's 
a dear ; " he shouted, as loud as his drummed 
condition furnished, to the cobbler in the dis- 
tance at the bottom of the hill. That good 
neighbour not only heard him, but replied right 
pleasantly, with a gladsome laugh, and a smart 
repetition of his gay defiance ; then hastened on 
his course, with a step more nimble than his 
customers generally could compass from his 
shoes. 

" All men is clay," said the carrier, recovering 
his native equanimity, and wiping the red dust 
from his fustian suit ; " all men is clay ; and 
the Lord hath not intended us to putt His 
material into these here shapes, with a C. R. 
upon 'em, maning carrier's risk. Wull, a carn't 
brak' no more of 'un nor there be, now can 'e, 
Teddy ? Smarl blame to thee, old chap. We'll 
both of us toorn to our brexass. This hosebird 
job hath coom, I rackon, 'long of doing of 
despite to the gifts of the Lord." 

Beholding a very nice place to sit down, and 
content with the cart in its present firm fixture. 



POTTER'S VESSELS. 23 

he pulled out the nosebag, and buckled it for 
Teddy, so that he might cast one eye down at 
his lip-service. Then he drew forth his own 
provender, and seasoned it, by dwelling on its 
beauties with his broad brown thumb. " Nation 
good, nation good ! " he could not help exclaim- 
ing ; " a good waife is the making of a man's 
front-piece. A vartuous woman laveth no occa- 
sion for a man to think twice of his vitteling, or 
zeek to read the papper. Best use of papper is 
to putt up bakkon in 'un." 

Sorrow, and breakage, and the other plagues 
of life, began to use less and less of pressure oa 
his heart, as he sat upon a lady-fern (not yet 
plumed for dancing, but rich with soft beauty 
for a heavy man to sit upon) and biting out the 
cork from a flat stone bottle, moistened down 
the roadway for the bread and meat to follow. 
Then he fell to very heartily, and in less than 
half an hour began to feel nicely refreshed, and 
fit to encounter the issue before him. 



24 CHRISTOWELL, 



CHAPTER III. 



PARSON SHORT. 



" I AM almost sure tliat he must have broken 
down," said the fairest of his flowers to the 
gardener ; " he is the most punctual man in the 
county, and scarcely ever more than three days 
late. I saw him not more than three miles off, 
on the top of the hill above Lustleigh, before 
the sun was three yards high; and he must 
have been here, wiping his head, as a delicate 
hint for cider, two hours ago, if he had gone on 
well." 

" Perhaps he has gone on too well, my dear, 
by taking the turn to the Three Horse-shoes. 
Not that I would cast any slur upon your pet ; 
but still such things will happen." 

" To other people perhaps they might. But 
never to him — I am quite sure of that. The 
last time I saw him, he lamented cordially ' the 
mischief of them publics.' " 



PARSON SHORT. 25 

" That was very good of him, and showed 
high principle, as well as a tender conscience," 
Mr. Arthur replied, while he took good care 
that his daughter should not observe his smile ; 
for life enough was before her yet, for correction 
of faith in human nature. " Pugsley has the 
elements of a lofty character, industry, honesty, 
philosophy — in the sense of that word at pre- 
sent." ' 

"Father," cried Eose, having finished her 
bunch, and running up to him, with the long 
grape-scissors in her hand, and a trail of bast 
around her neck ; " have I got the elements of 
a lofty character — industry, certainly, just look 
at those ten bunches ; honesty, perhaps to a 
reasonable extent ; but scarcely a bit of philo- 
sophy, I'm afraid ? " 

" Certainly not too much of that," her father 
answered quietly ; " but run in, and see about 
the breakfast, darling; or perhaps you may 
discover some defects in mine." 

"How I wish that I could! But I shall 
never do that, if philosophy means good temper. 
Now come and see my work, sir, and say if it is 
good." 

"It is good sound work; far better than 
Lord Bicton's head-gardener, at any money, 



26 CHRISTOWELL. 

could produce, in vineries like a cathedral. 
However it is not faultless yet ; though I don't 
mean to say, that I could do it better, even if 
my eyes were as young as yours. You under- 
stand thoroughly the bunch, as it is ; and you 
shape it beautifully for the time ; nothing could 
be neater, or more justly placed. But you have 
yet to learn the fine perception of the future, 
the bending of the footstalk, as the berries 
grow in weight, and the probable drop of the 
shoulders. And practice alone can teach you 
the different ins and outs of each kind of grape, 
in swelling." 

"The subject appears to me to be endless. 
How shall I ever attain to such knowledge ? " 

" By watching the results of your own work, 
and by never giving over." 

" Till old experience do attain to something 
like prophetic strain. But father, how did you 
thus attain it ? Have you ever been apprenticed 
to a gardener ? " 

" Little pitchers may have long ears ; but 
they must not have curious tongues ! " he replied, 
with a kiss on her forehead, to heal the rebuke. 
"Now let us go to breakfast; and then seek 
Pugsley." 

Hence it came to pass that while the good 



PARSON SHORT. 27 

carrier was still regarding the position of his 
cart, and the attitude of his ancient horse, with 
calm eyes, and well-kindled pipe, a spirited 
young lady stood before him, and did not share 
his patience. 

" Grood morning, Master Pugsley ; and you 
seem to think it good. But I always have 
understood, that a cart ought to stand upon both 
wheels." 

" So her did. You'm right there. Miss," the 
carrier answered, with a quiet grin. " But there 
be times when her doth'nt do her dooty, but 
go'oth contrairy, like the wominvolk." 

" And you mean to let her stay like that, for 
ever! And my father's pots lying in a heap 
upon the road ! " 

" Cappen is a just man, and a' wuU look auver 
it. Partikler now you've zeed it. Miss, and 
can sartify 'twor no hooman doin's." 

" All I can certify is, that you seem cdntent 
to stay here for the rest of the day. Do please 
to get out of that hole at once, and bring all the 
pots you have managed not to break." 

" Lor', how natteral you do spake ! It doth a 
man good to hear'e. Miss. Here us must baide, 
nolum wolum, till sich taime as Farmer Willum 
coom'th." 



28 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Farmer William may not come at all, or at 
any rate not till twelve o'clock. Now do put 
your shoulder to the wheel yourself. I am very 
strong, and I will help you." 

The carrier was too polite to laugh, though he 
cherished that disdain of female prowess, against 
which the chivalrous author of " Dorothy " 
couches his elegiac lance. But this man only 
puffed the pipe of silence. 

, " You fancy that I can do nothing, I suppose," 
cried Rose, who was as prickly as a moss-rose, 
when provoked ; " but I can do a whole quantity 
of things, such as would quite surprise you. I 
can milk a cow, and pot a vine, and bed down a 
pony, and salt a silverside, and store apples, and 
fry potatoes, and fill a pipe. And if all that is 
nothing, as you might be apt to think, because 
of being a man, Mr. Pugsley, I can answer for 
taking a hive of bees, without hurting one of 
them. Can you do that ? " 

*'The Lord forbid ! He hath made 'em to be 
smoked, zoon as ever they a' done their work. 
But, Missy, it amooseth me to hear you tell up. 
You tell up a sight of things as a well-inven- 
tioned man can do, or if not one, mebbe then 
anither of 'em. But you never tak' no count on 
the hardest thing of arl, the like of which no 



PARSON SHORT. 29 

man can do in this here county. You knows 
what I mane, Miss Eose ; and winderful it is to 
me, for sich a babe and suckling ! " 

"Oh! I know what you mean quite well. 
You have made me do it in the cart so often. 
But I do assure you that it is quite easy.'* 

"Aisy a' can never be," said the carrier 
decisively ; " although a' zimth as some can do 
'un, droo years of arly lanin*. To play the 
piander is winderful ; but a varmer's datter may 
coom to that, bein' outside of her dooty; but 
niver can her coom to spakin of the bad Vrench 
langoowich." 

" I tell you. Master Pugsley, that every one 
can do it, in my proper rank of life. You are 
not stupid enough to suppose that because I pot 



Vines * 



" Noo, noo. Miss ; axing of your pardon for 
breaking in upon you. I knows as well as the 
Royal mail doth, that you be one of the karlity. 
None but a vule could look twice at you, and 
veel any doubt whatsomdever about that, my 
dear. And Cappen Larks, though he dooth 
quare things, is the very same ; at any rate to 
my mind." 

" And to everybody's mind, I should hope, 
Mr. Pugsley. But he must not, and he shall 



30 CHRISTOWELL. 

not be called ' Captain Larks ; ' as you know, if 
nobody else does. Now please to get out of 
your rut, and come on." 

The nature truly noble, and the mind of lofty 
power, reluctant as they always are to make 
disclosure of themselves, and shunning as they 
always do the frippery of random praise, un- 
wittingly are revealed sometimes by the conduct 
of tobacco-smoke. Shallow men, or hasty 
fellows, or small sons of discontent, labour hard 
with restless puffs, and vex the air with turbid 
fumes, promiscuously tossed from lip or bowl. 
How different is the process of the large, self- 
balanced, contemplative pipe! No swirling 
tempest battles round the brow, no waste of 
issue clouds the air ; but blue wreaths hover far 
asunder, circling placidly as they soar, like 
haloes round the head of peace ; the cool bowl 
shines without exuding, like the halcyon of the 
charm and calm, and sweet rest satisfies the 
spirit of the man, gratefully ministering the gift 
divine. 

In a state of mind thus serene and lofty. 
Master Pugsley smoked his pipe. Maiden im- 
patience stirred him not, nor the casual shords 
of a slight mishap, nor the general fragility 
of human kind. If his cart was not upon 



PARSON SHORT. 31 

a level axle, should that disturb his own equi- 
poise ? So he sat down again, in a courteous 
manner, and delivered very sound advice ; 
while the young lady ran away, and left him 
to enjoy it, for she saw that help was near at 
hand. 

Now a man of good sense, and strong wiU, led 
the simple people of Christowell. In any trouble 
or turning of the mind, as well as in bodily 
ailments, there was not a grown-up man, or 
woman, who sought to go further than Parson 
Short. The Rev. Tom Short, vicar of the 
parish, coming to an utterly neglected place, 
had quietly made his way, by not insisting upon 
it unduly. Resolute good-will, plain speech, 
and fair allowance for adverse minds, together 
with a comfortable income of his own, enabled 
him to go on well, and to make his flock do 
likewise. He addressed them "on papper" 
only once a week, which was quite as much as 
they required ; and that they did with diffidence. 
He, however, was well convinced of the mutual 
duty thereby discharged. No other preacher in 
the diocese could say so much in the time 
allowed, which was never more than five 
minutes; and no other congregation listened 
with attention so close, and yawns so few. 



32 CHEISTOWELL. 

In other matters, his style was dry, and terse,. 
and quick to the purpose; yet seldom rough, 
and never arrogant or overbearing. Steadfast 
Tory as he was, he respected everybody's rights, 
and felt due sympathy for their wrongs, when- 
ever he could see them. His education had been 
good at Winchester, and New College ; whence 
he had taken high classical honours, though his 
college was then exempt from test. For hi& 
manner of sticking to the point at issue, and 
knowing nothing — unless he knew it well — ^was 
just what Oxford then encouraged. His bodily 
appearance was not grand, nor large, nor at all 
imposing; and the principal weakness of hia 
mind was a morbid perception of that defect. 
Not that he could be called a dwarf, or plain, or 
at all unsightly ; only that his spirit, being very 
great had a hankering for larger tenement. 
This feeling perhaps had saved his freedom, by 
making him shy of long-bodied ladies, while it 
kept him from admiring short ones. So now ho 
was nearing his fortieth year, with a prospect 
of nothing but bachelorhood, which his cook 
was determined to maintain on his behalf. Yet 
many a young lady of exalted stature would 
gladly enough have become Mrs. Short. 

For this was a ruddy, brisk, and very cheerful 



PARSON SHORT. 33 

man, bald it is true, on the top of his head, but 
plenteously whiskered, largely capable of beard 
— if clerical principles should ever close the 
razor, which they were beginning even now to 
do in London — gifted moreover with a very 
pleasant smile, a short waggish nose, and keen 
blue eyes. No better man could fill his shoes, 
or at any rate could get into them, so well 
compressed was his material, and so good the 
^ staple. 

It was not only this, nor yet the graceful 
increment of his income, nor even the possession 
of a spiritual turn, that led the young ladies to 
be thinking of him, whenever any settlement in 
life was mentioned. He inspired large interest 
by his own merit, but a feeling yet larger and 
deeper, by his present sad position. To rescue 
him from the despotism of Mrs. Aggett, his 
widowed cook, was the lofty aim of almost every 
other female. But he bore his yoke with 
patience, and preferred the known to the un- 
known ill. ' 

" How now, Pugsley ? Stuck fast like this, 
and the captain's pots smashed up like that ! " 
this bachelor shouted, as he marched up briskly, 
saw the position, and understood the large 
resignation of the native mind. 

VOL. I. D 



34 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Stuck slow, I karls it, Passon Shart. And 
thicky cloam be smashed, more down than oop. 
If her baided oop, her wud 'a been all zound." 

" Come, Master Tim, get out your levers, 
instead of argifying." 

" Passon, I wuU ; if so be I've got 'un. The 
Lord know'th, whether they be here, or to 
home." 

'* Here they are, more peart than you be ; " 
Mr. Short replied, turning up some old rubbish 
from the bottom of the cart, and drawing forth 
two spars of ash ; " now wugg on, Teddy, when 
I give the word." 

" No man as ever I see yet," said the carrier, 
through a blue ring of smoke, "hath received 
the power to make Teddy wugg, when a' hath 
his nosebag on ; avore such time, as his tongue 
have been into the uttermost corners of the 



zame." 



Parson Short, without any answer, unbuckled 
the strap of the hairy wallet, gently withdrew 
it from the old fellow's nose (though he put up 
one foot to protect it), and marching sternly up 
the hill, hung this fine temptation upon a hazel 
bush, at the first corner. Teddy, with a whinny 
of soft remonstrance, pricked up his ears, and 
looked anxious to proceed. 



PARSON SHORT. 35 

" Passons has no conscience whativer," said 
the carrier, pocketing his pipe ; " they dis- 
tresses all the hanimals, like the better sort, 
on Zindays. Niver lets nobody baide at 
peace." 

" Cease from weak reflections, and take to 
action," the inexorable Short replied. " If yonr 
time is worthless, mine is not. Stir him up, 
Pugsley, while I start the wheel." 

" I vear your reverence be a'most too small," 
said Pugsley, with much good will, but touching 
the vicar in his most tender part. Mr. Short 
took off his coat, folded it carefully, and laid it 
on a rock-moot, because it was a very good 
one ; then turning up shirt-sleeves of fair white 
linen, he showed a pair of arms as well-com- 
plexioned as a lady's, but thick-set, bossy, and 
substantial. " Lor' a' mussy," cried the carrier, 
" thou should'st niver have a goon on ! " 

Deigning no answer, the sturdy parson 
seized the bigger of the two ash staves, and 
laying the butt of the other for a fulcrum, gave 
the stuck wheel such a powerful heft, that the 
whole cart rattled, and the crates began to 
dance. 

" Zober, passon, zober ! Or ee'U heft 'un 
over tother zide," said Pugsley, rimning up 



36 CHRISTOWBLL. 

to the horse's head ; " now, Teddy, taste thy 
legs, and strive at 'un." 

At a touch of the whip on his legs, the old 
nag threw his chest out, and grappled the 
ground with his hoofs. Then he cast his 
weight forward, and strained to the tug, with 
his back on the stretch, and his ribs like hoops, 
and even his tail stiffened up like a hawser. 

**Heave-oh!" shouted Parson Short, suiting 
the action to the word ; " well done then, old 
horse, we are out of the hole I " 



< 37 ) 



CHAPTER IV. 



lark's cot. 



Christowbll village (in full view of which, the 
horse, cart, and driver, had rested so long) 
aflfbrds to the places above it, or below, fair plea 
for contemplation. Many sweet beauties of 
tempered clime flower the skirts of the desolate 
moor, and the sweetest of these is Christowell. 
Even the oldest inhabitant cannot, to the best 
of his recollection, say, whether he ever did hear 
tell, that the place was accounted beautiful. He 
knoweth that picture-men do come, and set up 
three-legged things, and stand, as grave as 
judges, to make great maps, like them that be 
hanging in the schoolroom; but he never yet 
hath known any odds to come of it ; the rocks 
abide the same, as if they never had been 
drawed, and the trees — ^you may look for your- 
self, and say whether they have fetched another 
apple. For when the Lord rested on Saturday 



38 OHBISTOWBLL. 

night, His meaning was not, that the last of His 
works should fall to, and make strokes of the 
rest of them. 

Sound sense of such lofty kind is the great 
gift of this village. Every man here would be 
contented, if he only had his due; failing of 
that, he keeps his merit to the mark of his 
wages, by doing his day's work gently. If a 
neighbour gets more than himself, he tries hard 
to believe that the man should have earned it ; 
and even his wife is too good to declare, what she 
thinks of the woman next door to her. Among 
themselves sometimes they manage to fall out 
very cordially ; but let anybody sleeping out of 
the parish, have an unbecoming word to say 
of his betters who are inside it, and if he walk 
here, without a magistrate behind him, scarcely 
shall he escape from the sheep-wash corner in 
the lower ham. 

For a beautiful brook of crystal water, after 
tumbling by the capta,in's cot, makes its own 
manner of travelling here, rarely allowing the 
same things to vex it, or itself to complain of 
the same thing, twice. From crags, and big 
deserts, and gorges full of drizzle, it has 
scrambled some miles, without leisure for learn- 
ing self-control, or patience. And then it 



LABK'S (JOT. 39 

comes suddenly, round a sharp corner, into the 
quiet of Christowell, whose church is the first 
work of man it has seen, except that audacious 
cottage. Then a few little moderate slips, which 
are nothing, compared with its higher ex- 
perience, lead it with a murmur to a downright 
road, and a ford where men have spread it 
gently, and their boys catch minnows. Here it 
begins to.be clad with rushes, and to be curbed 
by jutting trees, and lintelled by planks, for 
dear gossip and love ; for cottages, on either 
bank, come down, and neighbours full of nature 
inhabit them. 

Happy is the village that has no street, and 
seldom is worried by the sound of wheels. 
Christowell keeps no ceremonial line of street, 
or road, or even lane, but goes in and out, as 
the manner of the land may be, or the pleasure 
of the landlords. Still there is a place where 
deep ruts grow, because of having soft rock 
under them ; and this makes it seem to be the 
centre of the village, and a spot where two carts 
meet sometimes ; for the public- house is handy. 
Once upon a time, two carts met here, and here 
they spent a summer's day, both being driven 
by obstinate men, who were not at all their 
owners. Neither would budge from his own 



40 CHBISTOWELL. 

rut, and the horses for several hours rubbed 
noses, or cropped a little grass, while the men 
lay down. Being only first cousins, these men 
would not fight ; as they must have done, if they 
had been brothers. Yet neither of them would 
disgrace his county — fair mother of noble stub- 
bornness — by any mean compromise, or weak 
concession ; so they waited until it grew dark ; 
and then, with a whistle of good will, began to 
back away together, and as soon as they found 
room to turn, went home to supper from a well- 
spent day. 

But such a fine treat and stir of interest was 
rare, and the weather was the only thing that 
could be trusted for supplying serious diversion. 
Herein nobody was wronged of subject ; for the 
weather was so active, that the hardest-working 
man could spend his time in watching it. No 
sooner had he said that it must be fine, than ere 
he could catch up his spade again, it was flying 
in his face, and he was eating his own words. 
Herein alone, is variety enough to satisfy people 
of contented heart. For scarcely ever did the 
same things look the same, for two hours to- 
gether. 

Upon a day of well-conducted weather, be- 
ginning brightly in the morning, a stranger 



LARK'S COT. 41 

newly arrived from town may feed, and gaze, 
alternately. At sunrise, he is in bed of course ; 
largely saving the disappointment, which the 
lavish promise of the east might bring. But 
even at eight of an average morning, when he 
wants his breakfast, the world is spread before 
him well, with soft light flowing up the plains, 
and tracing lines of trees, and bends of meadow. 
He stands, or sits down to his bacon and eggs, 
twelve hundred feet above sea-level, with fair 
land, and bright water, spreading three-fourths 
of the circle around him. To the east, some 
five leagues off, are the dark square towers of 
Exeter cathedral, backed by the hazy stretches 
of Black-down ; on the right are glimpses of 
the estuary of Exe, from Powderham Castle 
towards Starcross. Outside them, and beyond, 
and overlapping every landmark, the broad 
sweep of the English Channel glistens, or darkens, 
with the moods above it, from the Dorset head- 
lands to the Start itself. Before he has time to 
make sure of all this, the grand view wavers, 
and the colours blend; some parts retire, and 
some come nearer ; and lights and shadows flow 
and flit, like the wave and dip of barley, feather- 
ing to a gentle July breeze. The lowland 
people descry herein the shadow of the forest 



42 CHRISTOWELL. 

as they call it ; and the " Dartymorevolk," look- 
ing down upon them, are proud to have such a 
long " tail to the moor." 

For the line of the land is definite here, as 
the boundary of a parish is. In many other 
parts it is not so, and the moor slopes off into 
farmland; but here, like the fosse of an old 
encampment, the scarp of the moor is manifest. 
Over this, that well-fed stream, the Christow, 
takes a rampant leap, abandoning craggy and 
boggy cradle, desolate nurture, and rudiments 
of granite, for a country of comparative ease, 
where it learns the meaning of meadow. And 
its passage, from rude into civilized life, occurs 
in the garden of the " Captain." Brief is its 
course, and quickly run; for in the morass, 
where it first draws breath, three other rivers 
of wider fame arise, and go their several ways ; 
and one of them, after twenty miles of crooked 
increase round the North, quietly absorbs poor 
Christow brook, and makes no gulp of acknow- 
ledgment. Without wasting one pebble in 
calculation, or a single furrow upon forethought, 
the merry brook hurries to whatever may befall 
it, and never fails to babble of whatever comes 
across it. 

Now it happened that the vicar of the parish. 



LARK'S CX)T. 43 

Mr. Short, was a " higlily temperate " man, as 
all who love cold water are supposed to be; 
although they may love many other things 
therewith. No sooner had he seen Master 
Pugsley up the hill, with a strong shove to 
second old Teddy's motion, than he left those 
two to go in, and deliver the relics of their 
cargo, and their own excuses. 

** Do'e come in now, and break it to the cap- 
pen," the carrier vainly pleaded to him ; " do'e 
like a dear good minister." 

" Tell your own lies, your own way," the 
parson answered pleasantly ; " if I were there, 
I should have to contradict you." 

" How partikkler you be — outzide of the pul- 
pit ! " said Pugsley with a sigh, yet a grin at 
his own wit. 

Well seasoned to such little jokes, the Vicar 
looked at him seriously, so that the carrier felt 
sorry for his wit ; and then, with a smile, Mr. 
Short went back to the place where he had left 
his coat. This was just over against the pile of 
pots, which had found the ground too hard, and 
had lost all tenure of it for ever. Looking at 
these, as he donned his coat, the parson said, 
" Ha ! The newest, I believe, of that wonderful 
man's inventions ! Let me take the liberty of 



44 CHBISTOWBLL. 

looking at the fragments." This he soon ac- 
complished to his heart's content, but failed to 
make head or tail of them, because he was not a 
bom gardener. Then he took up a shord of 
one rounded side and went down to the river, 
with that for his cup. Not that he felt any 
thirst, although he had worked very hard — for 
a parson ; but that a certain school of doctors 
had arisen, and said that every man, who 
wished to live, must take his cold pint every 
morning of his life. Some ten years later, 
every man, desirous to prolong himself and his 
family, was bound to take four gallons, shed 
outside him. And now he takes shivering 
claret inside. 

For the nostrums of the moment Mr. Short 
cared little ; but people had praised him, for 
liking now and then a draught of cold water ; 
and this made him try to do it. With his slip 
of pantile, as he called it (in large ignorance 
of garden ware) he passed through a gap in 
the hedge of the lane, and walked down to the 
brook, and scooped up a little drink. 

Assuring himself how delicious it was, he was 
going to pitch the shord into the stream, when 
he spied on its inner rim certain letters, in- 
visible until the cloam was wetted. 



LARK'S COT. 45 

" What a queer thing ! And how could it 
have been done ? " he thought, as he began to 
peer more closely; and then he made out the 
words — " Pole's patent." He tried it, several 
times, and he turned it several ways ; but 
nothing else was to be made of it. And pre- 
sently his own surprise surprised him, for what 
was there marvellous in the matter ? Nothing 
whatever ; but it was rather queer that the 
brand should be inside the pot (which must 
have required a convex mould) and the name 
not that of Mr. Arthur, although the design 
was entirely his, as Mr. Short knew, from 
having seen the drawings. 

" What a blessing for me that I am not gifted 
with much curiosity ! " said the vicar to him- 
self, as he turned the last corner of the lane, 
and sat down by the captain s gate, to wait till 
the carrier's job was done. " Nine out of ten 
of my brother clerks would have it on their 
conscience, to rout up this question. A mystery 
in one's own parish is a pest, when the man at 
the bottom of it comes to church. Otherwise one 
might wash one's hands. But this man is honest, 
and God-fearing, and a gentleman ; and the only 
one fit to smoke a pipe with in the parish ! " 

Mr. Short sighed; for he liked his feUow- 



46 CHBISTOWBLL. 

men, and was partly cut off from them by his 
condition, or at least by his own view of it. 
Though many of the moorland pastors still 
looked after their flock, in a gregarious manner, 
not disdaining their assemblage at the public- 
house sometimes. " Our mysterious friend," he 
continued, as he gazed, "not only has a very 
large amount of taste, but also much strategic 
power. How well he has made his garden fit 
the stream, so that the stream seems to follow 
the garden ! Grass in the proper place, beds 
in the proper place, and trees planted cleverly 
to drink the water, and flourish like the 
righteous man ! But greatest device of all, and 
noblest, because of its pure simplicity, the safe- 
guard against morning calls, and the check to 
inquisitive ladies ; for instance, Lady Touch- 
wood. How I should like to know that man's 
history ! * Hi, there, Pugsley ! Grive me a lift 
over. I can't jump, as I used to do." 

A man's resemblance to a tree has been dis- 
covered, and beautifully descanted upon — from 
nethermost tail of tap-root, to uttermost twig, 
and split sky-leaf — by hundreds of admirable 
poets. But thoroughly as these have worked 
out the subject, they seem to have missed one 
most striking analogy. A man (like a tree) 



LARK'S COT. 47 

can have no avail of comfort, unless there be- 
longs to him the margin of a brook, to part 
him from the brambles, and the ruffle, and the 
jostle of the multitudinoj^p thicket of the world. 
" Lark's Skt " — ag^^^lffr. Arthur's home was 
called by the natives, and even by himself, at 
last — was gifted with a truly desirable brook 
— the Christow, as aforesaid. The cot stood 
about a mile above the village, under a jagged 
tor, known as " the beacon," and in a south- 
eastern embrasure of the moor. This lonely, 
quiet, and delightful spot looked as if it ought 
to have no road to it, or at any rate none to go 
any farther. Upon its own merits indeed it 
never would have earned or even claimed a 
road: but it fell into the way of one, by a 
" casual haxident," as Devonshire people term it. 
For it happened, that one of the feeders of the 
main Roman road, across the desert, helped itself 
up the steep labour of the heights, by the 
crooked balustrade of the Christow brook. This 
lane, every now and then, cold-shouldered the 
merriment of the brook, with a stiff dry hedge, 
and feigned to have nothing to do with it ; yet 
times there were, and as much as a fortnight of 
Sundays in a downright season, when lane and 
brook made exchange of duty, as lightly as two 



i 



48 CHRISTOWELL. 

parsons do. And the public, — so faithful to 
variety it proves — was pleased in this case, as it 
is in the other ; and after a while found a new 
charm, in recurring to its veteran and inveterate 
ruts. 

But in moderate weather, and decent seasons, 
the Christow keeps to its natural bed, strewn 
with bright pebbles, and pillowed with rock. 
Through the garden of the captain, its glitter- 
ing run is broken, by some little zig-zags of 
delay, and many laughing tumbles ; at one of 
which, it does some work, by turning a wheel, 
when driven to it. And when the gardener's 
day is done, and the sun is gone to the western 
world, while the apple with uplifted, and the 
pear with pensive eye, stand forth of their dim 
leafage, in the rounding of the light — then down 
here, by the fluid steps, and twinkling passage 
of the stream, a bench is hung with clematis, 
and tented round with roses, for leisure, and 
the joy of rest, and bliss of admiration. 

Now dwelliug here, and seeing how the land 
was in his favour, the captain helped the hand 
of nature, to secure his quietude. The cliff on 
the west of his garden had offered possibility of 
descent, to ladies of clear head, and strong ankle. 
This bad temptation he soon removed, by a few 



LAKE'S COT. 49 

charges of rock-powder ; and then towards the 
north, where the ground was softer, he planted 
a brake of the large-flowered gorse, having 
thorns of stiff texture and admirable teeth. 
The bloom of this was brighter than the fairest 
maiden's tresses, even of the now most fashion- 
able ochre ; and the rustle of the wind, among 
the tufts, was softer than the sweetest silvery 
nonsense. 

Thus he well established ramparts, solid and 
ispinous, all about his rear ; and then he had 
leisure to improve his front, and eastern flank 
towards the village. Nature had defended 
these, fairly and honestly enough^ by sending 
a nice watercourse around them. Still there 
were lapses in the vigilance of the brook, where 
a lady, with her skirts up, might flip through, 
or even, with a downward run, spring over ; and 
having milch experience of the world, he knew 
how slow they were to hesitate, with curiosity 
behind them. So, with a powerful spade, and 
stout dredging-rake, he made good those weak 
places ; and then looking round, with glad de- 
fiance, suddenly espied at his very threshold 
a traitorous inroad, a passage for the evil one. 
For here was a series of wicked stepping-stones, 
coming across a shallow width of water, as old 

VOL. I. B 



i 



60 CHRISTOWELL. 

as the hills, and looking quite as steadfast. 
Strictly heeding these, and probing vigorously 
with a crowbar, he found one towards the 
further side, which was loose in its socket, like 
a well-worn tooth ; and after a little operation, 
he contrived to leave a fine gap in the series. 
Curiosity on tiptoe might come thus far, but 
without winged toes, or wading boots, was sure 
of catching cold, if it came any further. Thus 
a gentleman's wife, from a parish down below, 
who kept the spy-glass of the neighbour- 
hood, was obliged to stop there; and at once 
pronounced him a vastly superior, and most 
interesting man, but undoubtedly a noted 
criminal. 



( 61 ) 



CHAPTER V. 



AMONG THE BUDS. 



"How beautiful everything looks, and how 
large and early all your bloom is ! People may 
talk about Torquay. But I was down there 
yesterday, and I find you a week in front of 
them. Well done, Christowell! Torquay has 
not a pear-bloom open yet, even in Morgan's 
garden. But perhaps you grow the earlier 
sorts." 

Parson Short, and Captain Larks, were hearty 
friends by this time ; for each of them loved the 
truthful staple, and kindly heart of the other. 
The clergyman had too much self-respect, to 
pry into the layman's history. He took him 
as he found him, a gentle, intelligent, peaceful, 
and orthodox ratepayer. 

" The earliest fruit is not the first to bloom,^ 
the gardener answered, with his pruning-knifo 




52 CHRISTOWELL. 

at work ; " or at any rate, not of necessity. 
The later kind often is the first in bloom." 

" Well, I never knew that. But I see the 
reason. Slow fellows want a good start, as in 
a race. I like to hear of little things, that I 
have never noticed ; for an apple and a pear are 
pretty much the same to me. And that reminds 
me of the thing I came to ask you. Yesterday 
I rode down to Torquay, because the dog Nous 
wanted exercise ; and there, upon the pier, I 
met an ancient friend, whom I value and admire 
greatly. By the death of an uncle, he has 
come into a large estate, on the west side of the 
moor ; and there he is going to improve the 
garden. He has never had a chance of garden- 
ing much ; but he loves it, almost as much as 
you do, especially the fruit, and the vegetable 
stuff. He knows next to nothing about it ; 
but that adds enormously to the enchantment. 
He has heard of you, as a mighty man of fruit, 
from nurserymen near Exeter. And instead 
of burning, as he should have done, to come 
and see me, the parson, all he seemed to care 
about was to see you ; you, the gardener, and 
your garden ! 

" 1 ought to be obliged to him, even more 
than I am," Mr. Arthur answered plainly. 



AMONG THE BUDS. 63 

" One of the many plagues of gardening is that 
the public regard it as a mere amusement, 
which is carried on, for them to stare at, like 
cricket on the village-green. The general idea 
of a garden is — a place to sit down in, and 
smoke pipes." 

" And the right view of the subject too," 
replied Mr. Short, who understood his man, and 
how soon his petulance broke up into a smile. 
** My friend, I will take your hint. My pipe is 
ready. I will sit, and watch your labours, and 
learn much." 

"That you will never do," the other 
answered, smiling at the turn of the mood upon 
him ; " simply because it is not in you. From 
morning till night, you might think you were 
watching, and go away, not a twig the wiser, 
because you were not born for it ; any more 
than I for Greek verbs, and pithy sermons. 
Why do I cut to this bud now ? I have 
told you fifty times, but you cannot tell me 



now." 



" Slash away all the buds," said Mr. Short, 
for fear of making a wrong hit' at it ; " so long 
as you know, and the bud understands it — but 
here comes the fairest bud of all, my little 
Rose-bud — ^how are you, my dear ? And why 



64 CHRISTOWELL, 

does your father cut back to you ? Is it because 
you grow in the right direction ? " 

" I have stopped growing long ago in every 
direction ; " she answered, looking far away 
above the hat of Mr. Short ; for her views of 
life were becoming large ; and it liked her not 
to be called " my dear," even from the force of 
habit. And then she feared that she had gone 
too far, especially in looking such a height above 
him. So she blushed, in pure penitence, — and 
was almost ready to offer her father's friend a 
kiss, as used to be done of old, when she met 
him on the first morning of the holidays. But 
the vicar took no offence, and heeded not her 
communings, for he did not want to enter into 
young girls' minds. 

" Now what would this child do, to express 
her gratitude " — he put it to her father with a 
nod of understanding ; " supposing that I were 
to bring her a hero ? A genuine hero, of valour 
and of chivalry, such a man as she has only 
dreamed of — or perhaps read about him, and got 
tired." 

" I never get -tired of reading of heroes ; and 
how could I get tired of looking at them ? " 

**That is quite another pair of shoes, Miss 
Eose. My friend is not wonderful to look at, as 



AMONG THE BUDS. 55 

the men seldom are, who have wrought great 
wonders. But you could not help liking and 
admiring him, because he does it to himself so 
little. And he will admire you, I can tell you. 
Coax your dear father to let me bring him." 

" My poor little place, and my puny experi- 
ments," Mr. Arthur said, with that large 
hxtmiUty, which marks the true gardener (as 
long as he is praised), "are always at the 
service of the lover of the craft, who is good 
enough to think, that I can teach him something. 
At the same time, it must be kindly borne in 
mind, that I am but a learner, and make no pre- 
tence to knowledge." 

" To be sure, my dear sir. All allowance 
will be made. We cannot, for instance, expect 
you to be like the great Scotch gardener, at 
Lord Bicton's place." 

" It would grieve me, and disgrace me, to be 
like that fellow. I would not let him come here, 
with his crooked-bladed knife, if he paid me £5 
a day for it. Miserable numskull ! " 

" Even I should know better than to do what 
he does," cried Rose, running up to a fine pear- 
tree. " He nails the young wood of a wall-tree 
down the trunk, like this positively ; and drives 
the great nails into the poor thing's breast ! " 



66 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Excellent idea ! " cried Mr. Short, laughing 
at the horror on the maiden's face. " So he 
makes the tree really self-supporting; and it 
feeds its young, like a pelican, out of its own 
breast." 

"No; it feeds the nails, like that," she 
answered ; " the great rusty nails, and the dirty 
weeds, and snails ; and no nourishment for the 
poor fruit at all. Oh, Mr. Short, how very 
little you do know ! " 

" How may I attain to such rare knowledge ? 
If I only had the stuff in me, you might improve 
it. But alas, I have not the most raw material. 
But my old friend across the moor has got the 
making in him ; and he seems to see the prin- 
ciples, if he could only get the practice." 

" So far as concerns my scraps of knowledge,, 
and my humble premises," the owner answered, 
as he looked about him, with no other flourish 
than a clapping of his clips ; " they are wholly 
at the service of a friend of yours. It will give 
me great pleasure to see him, when he pleases. 
And if you will let me know the day, 1 will 
have my little drawbridge down." 

" Now, I call that really kind of you ; because 
I know that you are pressed for time just now. 
And. that made me enlist little Rosie on my side. 



AMONG THE BUDS. 67 

I will write at once to Colonel Westcombe ; he 
will ride over to my early dinner, at which I 
shall be proud if you, and your dear child, will 
join us. Then we will have the old four-wheel 
put, and come up the hill all together." 

" Oh, what a pleasure it will be ! Papa, you 
had better not say *No'; or you never shall 
hear the last of it. But what have you dis- 
covered so important in the brook ? Is it a 
salmon ? No, they can't get up here. It must 
be the otter once more. Mr. Short, oh do come 
with Nous^ and your double-barrelled gun." 

" It is not at all an easy thing to shoot an 
otter," said the parson, a dear lover of the rod 
and gun ; " but if you have an otter here, he 
will harry your trout dreadfully. The only 
way to get a shot is to lie hid for hours. Nous 
would do more harm than good, freely as he 
takes the water. But, Arthur, you understand 
all that. I am sure that you are an old sports- 



man." 



*' I used to be fond of the gun," said his host ; 
" but I never shoot now ; and shall never shoot 
again." 

Mr. Short was surprise^d at the tone of his 
voice, and the change- in his face, and manner. 
What was become of his frank complacence, and 



58 CHRISTOWBLL. 

light smile at his own conceit, and glances of 
fatherly pride at his Rose ? Instead of all that 
he looked troubled, and perplexed, and preparing 
to contend with some new grief. Even his 
lively child saw this ; though as yet she had not 
learned to study a face, whose only expression 
for her was love. 

" I fear that I have vexed yOu," the clergy- 
man said kindly; "by striving to draw you 
from your good and quiet habits. I can well 
understand your dislike to be disturbed, such a^ 
I very often have myself. Leave it to me to 
settle with Colonel Westcombe. I can easily 
do it^ without offending him. The fault has 
been wholly my own, for not considering. I 
hope that you will pardon me ; and I am sui-e 
that Westcombe will ; for he is one of the 
noblest-hearted fellows living." 

"That he is. Eight well I know it," Mr. 
Arthur answered, with mbre warmth than pru- 
dence. " But alas, what a number of my pots 
are broken ! Let us go in. The sun is 
droughty. We have hit upon a most prime 
blend of cider ; but I dare not bottle any, till I 
have your imprimatur.'' 

" You shall have the full benefit of my judg- 
ment," the parson answered briskly ; " after the 



AMONG THE BUDa 69 

tug of the morning, I deserve even better than 
Christow water; My acquaintance with fruit is 
chiefly liquid, in spite of all your lectures. Miss 
Rose, answer me one question, if you can ; and 
young ladies now-a-days are taught all para- 
doxes. Why should milk become solid, and 
apples liquid, by the self-same process of 
thumping ? " 

"Because, because — because I don't know. 
And can you explain to me, Mr. Short, how a 
man can be beaten black, and blue ? If he is 
black, he can never be blue." 

" Nothing can be simpler; At first he is 
black ; and as he begins to get better he turns 
blue." 

Such nonsense they were talking, not of their 
own folly, but simply to carry off the awkward 
time, as they followed Captain Larks to the 
cottage. He turned round, now and then, to 
seem to heed them ; but they knewj better than 
himself perhaps, that his mind was far away, 
and that his cheerfulness was gone. Then he 
roused up his spirits, to discharge fair duties as 
a host, at which he was always good, with the 
very few whom he received as guests. His 
graceful young daughter, with her hat thrown 
off, and clusters of nut-brown hair tied back, 



60 CHRISTOWELL. 

flitted across the bars of sunshine chequered by 
some Banksian sprays, while she spread upon 
the table shadow, and still better, substance of 
the things that nourish life. Bread, that is to 
say, and butter (beaded as with meadow dew) ; 
honeycomb, gladdened with the moorland scent, 
and the thick-set mettle of a home-fed ham, 
where fat and lean played into one another 
sweetly — like moonlight among roses. In the 
thick of temptation reposed Cos-lettuce — cold 
and crisp, and beautiful, and justly divided by 
a thin, sharp knife, showing follicle, frill, and 
crimp broidery of gold, in and put of cells, and 
fronds, and filigree of carved ivory. Neither 
were the fluid creatures absent ; cider was there, 
like an amber fountain springing into beads of 
pearl, and bright ale, comrade of the labours of 
mankind ; and, for the weaker vessels, water. 
Not yet was vapid claret shed, like vinegar on 
the English rock. 

Distributing good supply, and partaking 
fairly to commend it, the host began to regard 
the world, with larger benevolence, and hope. 
He looked at his child, who was doing her best 
to smile away sudden disturbance, and to set 
their visitor at his ease ; and then he looked at 
this pleasant friend, who had shown such good 



AMONG THE BUDS. 61 

breeding, and submission to his mood. And 
with that, Mr. Arthur was fain to confess, that 
he had allowed himself to be surprised out of 
his usual respect for others. 

The vicar, (although a testy man, with 
strangers, or with upstarts,) not only did not 
show, but did not even feel resentment now. 
He had faith in his friend, that there must be 
sound reason for the refusal of his request ; and 
he fully expected some explanation, perhaps 
•when Rose should be out of the way. So he 
thoroughly enjoyed the simple fare, and resolved 
to enrage his cook, Mrs. Aggett, by a fulsome 
description of the captain's ham. For this he 
deserved to have his banquet interrupted, and 
so it was very speedily. 

"Well, I do declare," cried the quick-eyed 
Rose, as she helped him to some honey for the 
crown of his repast, " the very queerest figure 
that you can imagine is trying to get across our 
steps ! " 

" Ungrateful damsel ! " Mr. Short replied, as 
he went to the bud-covered lattice. " Have 
you no sense of a most distinguished honour ? 
It is the mighty Solomon, and he bears a 
letter." 

" Surely you don't mean Betty Cork's boy, 



62 CHRISTOWELL. 

who went about for Doctor Perperaps? The 
one that rose into the ' loftier spear ? ' " 

" To be sure ; Lady Touchwood's page he is. 
And she so arrays him, that our wag, the 
cobbler's boy, who used to call him * Solomon 
Senna,' now has dubbed him ' Solomon's Glory.' " 

" Glorious he may be,'' said Rose ; " but he 
seems in a very sad fright at present ; and he 
cannot take my jump. Father, dear, shall I 
go, and ask him what he wants ? " 

"After all, the honour is not for you, but 
my humble self," interposed Mr. Short. " He 
is screaming at the top of his voice ' Passon 
Shart.' Don't think of letting down the draw-* 
bridge. I will make him walk through, just to 
spoil his grand livery." 

" Oh, if you are not afraid of ' my lady,' da 
make him walk through the water, while I see^ 
him." 

"Rose, you are too mischievous," said Mr. 
Arthur, getting up. " I will go and take the 
boy's message myself. We must not carry 
things too far." 

In a minute or two, he returned with a letter, 
sealed with a formidable coat of arms, and 
addressed to " The Revd. Tom Short, Christo- 
well Yicarage. Important^* 



AMONG THE BUDS. 63 

" Plague upon the woman ! " cried the 
reverend gentleman; "she wants me on the 
instant, about something most momentous ! And 
Mrs. Aggett has been stupe enough to send the 
boy on here. It is nothing but one of her little 
tetopers. However, I must go home, and ride 
away at once, though my horse is entitled to a 
good day in stable." 

" I wanted to show you a whole quantity of 
things," replied his host with unfeigned disap- 
pointment; for the bloom of the pleasure of 
good work fades, when nobody comes to admire 
it. "It is more than a fortnight since you 
were here ; and a fortnight of April is as much 
as a month, at almost any other time. And if 
you care little for fruit, you love flowers." 

" The rose, the rose, the rose for me ! " Mr. 
Short exclaimed, with a smile at the blushing 
specimen before him. "I shall write you the 
song of the rose some day. I know a little 
Rose, who considers me a nightingale. Even 
so, I must fly immediately. May I let down 
the planch for myself, good host ? " 

They would not hear of this, but bore him 
dompany down the winding walk; where the 
pear-tree was clustering its petal'd cups of 
snow, and the apple beginning, in the slant sun- 



64 CHRISTOWELL. 

fihine, to unravel the down of its bossy green 
truss. Then the gardener himself let down his 
"planch," over the wavering glitter of the 
brook ; and crossing the meadow, where Mopsy 
the cow lived, they came to the private door 
into the lane. Here Christowell shone, in the 
haze of spring below them, and the hoary old 
church, beyond the flash of hasty waters, looked 
holy, and peaceful, as the tombs around it. 

"Be sure that you come again soon," cried 
Rose, running lightly back to the lane, while 
her father was going home across the mead; 
" Please to come to-morrow, if you possibly can, 
and tell us every syllable about that Lady 
Touchwood ; she puzzles me so dreadfully, Mr; 
Short ! " 

" Lady Touchwood will say, when she hears 
where I have been, ' Tell me every syllable 
about that Miss Arthur ; she is such a puzzle to 
me, Mr. Short r" 

No sooner had he spoken than he deeply 
regretted his stupid little slip of tongue ; because 
he saw that he had given pain. Rose made no 
answer, but coloured deeply, and turned away 
with a curtsey ; then, rejoining her father, she 
clung closely to his arm. 

" Poor dear ! " thought the vicar, who loved 



AMONG THE BUDS. 65 

his light-hearted, and sweet parishioner, pastor- 
ally, "I heartily trust, that I am altogether 
wrong. But, if I know anything of the world, 
that pretty girl, and good girl, has a troublous 
time before her." 



VOL. I. T 



66 CHEISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER VI, 

A TINGLE AND A TANGLE, 

Touchwood Park, as the owners loved to call 
it, diflfered from Lark's Cot, almost as much as 
Sir Joseph Touchwood from " Captain Larks." 
Brilliance without shade, but striped, and barred 
with brighter brilliance, and slashed across with 
all bold hues (in diaper pattern, glittering like 
a newly varnished oil-cloth) with stucco pilasters 
to relieve it (but all too shallow to help them- 
selves, or carry their white perukes of pie- 
crust), and topped with a stuck-up roof of tile, 
and puckered things called "minarets," but 
more like stable-lanterns —the gazer found solace 
in shutting both eyes, and hoping that the 
money had done good elsewhere. 

" Winderful to my maind, winderful they 
arktexts be ! " said John Sage, of Christowell, 
to his wife. " Blest if they han't diskivered a 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 67 

plan, to make tower of Babel, out of Noah's 
rainbow ! " 

" What odds to thee ? " replied his good wife 
sharply ; " our Bill hath drawed his ladder 
wages, riglar, every Zatterday." 

Truly, it made smaU difference to the quiet 
folk of Christowell, whether the mansion were 
tall or short, dazzling or soothing to the eye ; 
because it was out of their parish — which marks 
a broad line in all matters of feeling — and also, 
because it was out of their sight, till they 
mounted a gristly and scraggy bone of hill. 
Some of them looked upon this as a great 
denial, and grumbled, at going so far, to see the 
big house on a Sunday. But most people said 
it was wisely ordained, lest the liver'd young 
men should come courting their daughters, 
and drive up the price of beer at the Horse- 
shoes. 

Sir Joseph Touchwood had a right to please 
himself; as indeed he always did, having vast 
self-complacence, which was justified by his 
success in life. Beginning his career, as a boy 
of all work, he had made his way into a little 
grocer's shop at Stonehouse, and so into the 
Pursera' rooms, and thence into Admiralty 
contracts, lucrative, and elastic. He cheated as 



68 OHRISTOWELL. 

little as he could help, until he could do it, on a 
worthy scale, and in superior company. 

Rising thus, he was enabled, by-and-by, to be 
the superior company himself, to reward those 
who helped him, and make it more expedient, to 
shake the head, than to wag the tongue about 
him. And little as he cared for the shadow, or 
even the sparkle of his object, while he grasped 
the substance, the showy part also was rendered 
to him, by a pleasing and natural incident. 

Lord Wellington's men having worn out 
their shoes, by constant pursuit of the enemy^ 
our Government took measures to prepare to 
shoe them, by the time they had learned to 
march barefoot. Joseph Touchwood got the 
contract ; his beef had been found of such 
durable texture, that the hides, in all reason, 
must last for ever. The order was placed in 
Northampton ; the shoes were made in a jiffy, 
and came to Plymouth, two-and-twenty thousand 
of them, all of a size, not in pairs, but poly- 
gamous; being shaped so admirably, as to fit 
either human foot alike. They passed a 
triumphant examination, and were happily 
shipped to a Spanish port, which fell into the 
hands of Marshal Soult, on the very day of their 
arrival. 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 69 

That great commander rejoiced exceedingly ; 
for his men were bare-footed, from running 
away; and he rigged out eleven thousand 
Gallic heroes, in captured British leather — or 
the like. On the very next day, a great battle 
eame oflF, and the right side won it, — ^that is to 
say, ours. Then every Frenchman (shot, lanced, 
or taken prisoner) was proved to be as lame as 
a cock on a glassed wall; and although no 
sdlowance was made for that drawback, the 
hand of Providence was discovered in it. It 
was useless for Touchwood to deny that he had 
foreseen this result, and produced, at great out- 
lay^ a patriotic stratagem. In a word, with no 
more waste of time^ than was needful for the 
British Cabinet to conceive, ponder, and deliver 
a large budget of jokes at the Frenchman's 
expense, of his vain attempt to fill British 
leather, and getting into the wrong pair of 
shoes, etc. — amid public applause, they ma'de 
the contractor a baronet, instead of paying him. 

Sir Joseph would liefer have received the 
money; for the shoes stood him fairly in 9d. 
a-piece; and he counted for a further loss his 
non-gain of three shillings, upon every one of. 
them. He had no honest ground for complaint 
however, having run a good cargo of French 



70 CflRISTOWELL. 

goods homeward, as well as established a per- 
manent basis for supplying the French, through 
the rest of that campaign, with slop-flannel 
trousers, as blue as their legs. 

Sir Joseph worked harder than ever, although 
universally respected by this time. And though 
he cared little for empty honour, he loved fame, 
when it led to business. Lady Touchwood 
began to think more of his opinion, and allowed 
him no longer to be called, " our Joe." He 
flourished exceedingly ; but stuck to business 
still, and left all the decorative part to her. 
This lady was an admirable wife, and mother, 
kind, warm-hearted, fall of interest in things 
that were no concern of hers, an excellent 
adviser, when not consulted, as good to the poor 
as they would let her be, vigilant in her own 
household, and resolute in having her own way 
always. The most captious of critics could find 
no fault in her, except that she was obstinate, 
imperious, narrow-minded, and ridiculously pas- 
sionate, when " put out." And a very little 
thing was enough to put her out; though she 
always believed it to be monstrous. 

** Now I call it very good of you, to come to 
me so promptly ; " she exclaimed, holding out 
both hands to Mr. Short. " I always like people 



A TINGLR AND A TANGLE. 71 

to do that, SO much. Never mind anything. 
Do sit down." 

Mr. Short bowed pleasantly, but made no 
pretty speech ; though the ladies still expected 
such politeness from the gentlemen. For he 
knew that this lady would only cut short his 
oration. 

"I am the most persecuted person in the 
world," she continued, glancing sadly at a 
statuette of Dido ; " no, she was not to be com- 
pared to me, and she did burn the villain who 
betrayed her ! " 

" Sir Joseph ? " inquired Mr. Short with some 
surprise, but too wary to correct the lady's 
memory of the -^neid. 

" Sir Joseph ! How can you be so exceed- 
ingly provoking ? Sir Joseph is a model ; and 
besides that, he knows better. It is my daughter, 
JuKa." 

" I am grieved indeed," Mr. Short said softly, 
and dropping his eyes, lest they should gleam 
with any levity. " The young lady promised 
to behave so well ; and she seemed so truly sorry, 
so affectionate, and dutiful, after having shown 
a little — temper perhaps, on Monday." 

" Then, you shall hear how she has kept her 
promise. This morning, without provocation 



72 CHRISTOWELL. 

or excuse, slie packed up all her property, and 
she left my house ! " 

"Surely, there must have been something 
more than usual ? " 

" Not at all. You shall judge for yourself. 
She is constantly pretending to have judgments 
of her own, and to use what she calls her 
reasoning powers. No good ever comes of such 
a thing as that; But she is at liberty to do it, 
when she pleases ; so long as she only agrees 
with me. But to argue against her own mother, 
Mr. Short ! " 

" Lady Touchwood, I agree with you, that it 
is wrong. But of course, with your superior 
intellect, you convinced her of her error." 

" That I did thoroughly. I boxed her ears ; 
until they were as red as the things they make 
sauce of. Oh, it was such a satisfaction to 
me!" 

Mr. Short stared a little, though he knew the 
lady's temper. Then he thought of the haughty 
tall Julia, whom he admired with a distant 
fervency. Julia, with her pretty ears as red as 
ripe tomatoes ! 

" I hurt my poor hands shockingly, with her 
nasty brilliants. It was too bad of her." Lady 
Touchwood exhibited her dimpled, but vigorous 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 73 

palms, with pink lines on them. " She went to 
bed, as I thought, in a chastened spirit ; and I 
told her to pray for a better frame of mind. 
But instead of that, she has done what I tell 
you." 

" But you know where she is ? You have 
ascertained that, otherwise you would be in great 
tribulation. Is she gone to her father, at Ply- 
mouth ? " 

" Not she indeed. Sir Joseph has too much 
high principle, to encourage her; though he 
would, no doubt, if he dared ; because she can do 
exactly as she likes with him." 

" Then perhaps, to her aunt at Ivybridge ? I 
am sure that you know ; or you would be more 
sorry for what you have done. Lady Touchwood." 

"I do the right thing, and I defy the con- 
sequence. But I know where the hussy is well 
enough. I ought to have taken her purse away. 
She has hired a post-chaise, and driven off for- 
sooth, in noble state, to Westcombe Hall." 

" To Colonel Westcombe's place ! I had not 
the least idea, even that you knew him. I have 
spoken of him, and you made no sign." . Mr. 
Short looked surprised, for he was thinking— 
"Well, you can hold your tongue, when you 
please, as well as people of better temper." 



74 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Oh dear yes," replied Lady Touchwood, as^ 
if she were surprised at his surprise ; " we haye 
known Colonel Westeombe, for years and years, 
in fact he is Julia's godfather, and immensely 
proud she is of him. But circumstances — well 
you know, there was no particular reason why 
one should go running after him, until he came 
into that large property ; and that, as you must 
be aware, was not at all expected." 

" It is an honour to any one, to know Colonel 
Westeombe. Land, or no land, rich, or poor, 
no circumstances make any difference in his 
value." 

" I dare say. But still, you know, it adds to 
his charms, to be in a good position. Sir Joseph 
was thinking of inviting him to dinner ; but 
I must see first, how he behaves about my 
daughter. If he encourages poor Julia in her 
headstrong violence, and evil tempers, he shall 
never sit down in this house, Mr. Short." 

" Whatever he does will be right. Lady 
Touchwood, whatever your opinion may be 
about it. And now, though I am not the 
clergyman of your parish, you have given me 
the right to speak, by sending for me. And 
setting aside all the folly of your conduct, I 
must tell you, that it is very wrong." 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 75 

Mr. Short spoke strongly ; for he feared no 
one, and cared very little for the temper of any 
woman, except his own Mrs, Aggett. He 
expected to be shown to the door, with much 
despatch. But instead of that, his hostess bore 
meekly with him, and even seemed to Usten 
with attention. For she knew in her heart, 
that she had gone a little too far, peradventure, 
and she respected the established church, when- 
ever she was not furious. In her youth, she had 
been a quiet, gentle-looking person, with large 
blue eyes, and a plump round face, and delicate 
complexion. But, even then, the doubling of 
the chin, the bold cut of nostril, and fulness 
of the eyelid, showed that mischief might come 
out, and patience not strike root in age. 

" Is your homily over ? " she inquired with a 
smile, which saved her words from rudeness ; for 
like many other quick-tempered persons, she 
had a very pretty smile, to put her in the right. 
" You are famous for very short sermons, with 
a very great deal in them. How I wish you 
were our vicar here, instead of Mr. Barker! 
He always goes on, for three quarters of an 
hour." 

" Barker is a very sound and excellent divine. 
Many of my people long for him. I always get 



76 CHEISTOWBLL. 

him over, for collection-Sundays. He draws 
half-a-crown, where I draw a shilling. My 
farmers say, * short time makes short wages.* 
But, what have you sent for me to do, about 
your fair deserter ? " 

" To advise me, Mr. Short ; because you are 
so clever. People are so liable to misunderstand 
me. They never make allowance for the trials 
I encounter. Sir Joseph is all the week long at 
his office ; and I have to go through every hard- 
ship by myself. Even if he were here, this 
moment, I could not allow him to interfere; 
because he is so one-sided. He looks upon 
Julia, as a perfect angel, because she understands 
his snuff so well. She gets on her father's blind 
side so cleverly, the crafty young time-server ! " 

" But your son, Lady Touchwood — your ad- 
mirable son ? " 

" Dicky is a model of every known virtue ; 
but he spends all his time, with the rat-catcher's 
dogs. At this time of year, it is most important 
to get the rats thinned off, you know. And, 
besides that, he takes such extraordinary views, 
that he goes against me very often. I have 
felt it my duty, to have this matter kept from 
him, for fear of his taking it, in an unbecoming 



manner." 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 77 

" Which, means, in plain English, that he 
would side with his sister. It was very good of 
her, to go away, without involving him. But 
something must be done, and done at once, if 
possible. You have not allowed the servants to 
discover, I suppose, the cause of this sudden 
departure/' 

" Their opinions are nothing whatever to me. 
If they form nasty ones, I discharge them. But 
Julia has much more dignity, I should hope, 
than to whine, about what she has brought upon 
herself. She could not help feeling, that she 
brought it on herself." 

" Very well, then," replied Mr. Short, to avoid 
that difficult subject, " we may treat the matter, 
as a simple visit of the young lady to her dear 
godfather. The servants, and the stable-men, 
may be wroth, at being dispensed with, or 
endeavour to be so; but upon the whole, the 
less they have to do, the more thoroughly they 
enjoy it. You, on the other hand, show no 
anxiety, but leave the fair fugitive to her own 
devices. She, in her exile, begins to pin© for 
her birds, and her books, her flowers, her piano, 
and her pet dog, Elfie." 

" No, not Elfie. She has taken that wretch 
with her. You may trust her, never to stir a 



78 OHRISTOWELL. 

yard, without darling Elfie. She may pine, as 
you say, if she is capable of it ; but surely, the 
first thing she should pine for, is her own good 
mother," 

" So she will, and very painfully indeed. And 
the end of it is, that she writes a touching letter, 
and comes home, with a wholesome knowledge, 
that the ears must expiate the tongue's 
offences." 

" You know nothing at all about her," Lady 
Touchwood answered, with a mother's smile. 
" What does a bachelor know of women ? They 
calculate on them, from their own reason. For 
instance, do you think, that I could wait a 
month, with my daughter in the hands of other 
people, and learning all sorts of tricks, against 
her own mother ? I can be very patient, and 
most long-suffering, when I am convinced that 
my trials require it. But as for sitting down 
like this, and thinking, and hoping for people to 
be reasonable, your own sense must show you 
that I never, never could put up with it. Surely 
you must have some wiser plan than that ! " 

" I will tell you then, what I will do, if you 
think fit. I will call upon my old friend. 
Colonel Westcombe, if you wish me to do so, 
and see Miss Touchwood." 



A TINGLE AND A TANGLE. 79 

** Not as if you came from me, of course. 
Julia would get the upper hand directly. But 
why not go to-day, Mr. Short ? The days are 
getting nice and long, and it is not very far." 

" Twelve good miles, as the crow flies," said 
her visitor, thinking to himself that she deserved 
some brisk anxiety ; " and the crow would have 
miany steep hills, to fly over. My horse took 
me forty miles yesterday, and more. And if I 
went now, it would look as if you were devoured 
with regret, and penitence ; and that would be 
below your dignity. To-morrow, I have an 
engagement of importance. But, unless you 
send to stop me, I shall make a point of being 
there in good time, on Saturday morning. You 
will see her on Saturday, by dinner-time ; it 
takes a little time, to get over such things." 

" It ought to be sooner, but it must not be 
later. Remember that Sir Joseph will be home 
that evening ; and if he should not have done 
well, that week, he might make a whole string 
of troublesome inquiries. You must not think 
me selfish. That is the last thing to be said of 
me. But I like people to be considerate to me, 
and amiable, and sweet-tempered. And I have 
a good right to expect it, Mr. Short, for I am 
always so to others — when they let me." 



80 CHBISTOWELL. 

" Ah, yes, I see. But how fond you are of 
self-examination. Lady Touchwood! Is it 
because you find the result so favourable ? " 

" I am never put out, by sarcastic speeches ; 
because I don't understand them. I hope you 
will come, and dine with us on Sunday, if that 
dreadful Mrs. Aggett will allow you." 

The vicar was never ashamed to say, that he 
heartily loved a good dinner. How many a 
parson has got his living, by knowing what 
good living is ? Wherefore are college kitchens 
far more glorious than the lecture-rooms, and 
why does the buttery excel the chapel ? There- 
fore Mr. Short said yes, with a very cheerful 
countenance ; and observed with tender resigna- 
tion, as he rode home through the park, that 
the fattest of the bucks was absent. 



( 81 ) 



CHAPTER VII. 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 



As with, many species of monoecious plants, so 
with some families of human kind, the female 
flower transcends the male, in beauty, size, and 
dignity. In all these points. Sir Joseph Touch- 
wood, and Richard, his only son, fell far below 
the mark of the ladies they belonged to. The 
father, and founder, was an admirable man, when 
regarded from a national, that is to say, from 
a business point of view. He had never been 
known, except by himself, to miss a chance 
of getting on; and from day to day, he be- 
came more honest, as his character increased. 
Plymouth began to respect him deeply, as she 
found his vigour enlarge her trade, and some 
Radical deputations begged him to go up to 
Parliament. However, he had too much sense 
for that ; and managed to get out of it, without 
offence to any one. But several of his school- 

VOL. I, G 



82 CHRISTOWELL. 

fellows, who had not got on so well, thoroughly 
agreed with one another, that " Sandy Joe " 
(as they still called him) was making a fool of 
himself, in building, over there by Dartmoor, that 
popinjay, pack-of-cards, peep-show thing, like 
the Lord Mayor's coach in London ; and, unless 
they were very much mistaken, such a stuck-up 
lot would come down headlong. Sir Joseph, as 
soon as he heard of these sentiments, proved the 
largeness of his mind, by inviting all the critics 
to his great house-warming; and the few of 
them who went were so well treated, that they 
put down all the rest, who had no coats to go in. 
A man who succeeds, with the hardest thing 
of all, and the highest in his opinion, that is to 
say, the money, is apt to believe that he can 
have his own way— if he chooses to assert it— 
in the lesser matters of life, such as family love, 
and respect, and the character of his children. 
The great contractor, perceiving that his son 
had no special turn for business, resolved to give 
him a fine education, and harness him afterwards, 
if needful. He sent him to a private school, and 
thence to Cambridge, and was proud to hear him 
called " the Cantab." The youth learned little, 
but was not dissatisfied, either with himself, or 
the world around him. For everybody looked 



HOUSE-BKEAKING. 83 

upon him, as a pleasant fellow, free-handed, care- 
less, and good-natured in his way, talkative, 
full of small adventures of his own, and not 
disagreeably truthful. He was never long 
without some mighty hero, whom he worshipped, 
for strength, or ability, or knowledge of the 
world, and who could have done better what- 
ever was done well, and with less than a quarter 
of the trouble. Though indolent enough of 
mind, he was very restless bodily, and would 
keep the whole house upon the fidget, unless he 
got his daily exercise. And now, as he was 
missing his term at Cambridge, and no field- 
sports were toward, his mother considered it a 
special grace of Providence, in favour of her 
Dicky, that Dartmoor was invaded by a mighty 
host of rats. For, if there was anything that 
Dicky Touchwood thoroughly enjoyed, it was a 
good rat-hunt. 

Now the fact that every one, high or low, 
who possessed the pleasure of his acquaintance 
— and one need not be very high to do that — 
called him without hesitation, "Dicky Touch- 
wood," is as clear a proof as can be given, of his 
easy, careless style. His mother, and sister, had 
bravely striven, at the dates of his breeching, 
and then of his horsing, and then of his having 



84 CHRISTOWELL. 

a tail thrown over, to redeem him from a Dicky, 
into Richard, Dick, or Richie, or even the old- 
fared Dickon. At each of these epochs, their 
struggle was vain ; but they rallied for a final 
stand, upon the breastwork of his matriculation. 
For many a mile, and league around them, none, 
but some half a score of parsons, knew the 
meaning of that mighty word ; and possibly it 
might have triumphed over nature, if the latter 
had not ignobly adopted the argumentum ad 
hominem. For the Cantab, upon his return, as 
arranged by his mother, in full academical 
plight, as he leaped from the chariot of the 
Park, in the presence of the whole population, 
upset the entire effect, by shouting — "Three 
cheers, for Dicky Touchwood ! " 

His only sister, Julia, was of a very different 
order. Tall, and handsome, and resolute, and 
straight-forward, she kept her own place, and 
followed her own liking. She reigned over her 
father, when he was at home, and was fairly 
reducing her mother to subjection, in spite of 
some violent outbreaks. The latest of these 
had filled her with amazement, even more than 
with indignation; until she perceived, being 
very clear-sighted, that it was a last despairing 
effort, to cast off the tightening yoke. With 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 85 

skilful management on her part, it would prove 
the final clenching of the link. Dicky was a 
far more uncertain subject, for there was not 
substance enough in him to bind. 

The sportive Dicky made few inquiries, as to 
the reason of his sister's absence. When she was 
gone, he could have his own way, without let, or 
hindrance, until something disagreed with his 
mother. For he was her darling, her pet, and 
her idol, and he alone of mortals might ever 
contradict her. So now, he resolved to make the 
most of this fine opportunity, and be master, so 
far as he cared to be, which was chiefly in 
matters of sport, and of feeding. Ordering the 
household right and left, that very afternoon 
he sent for three rat-catchers, and commanded 
them to sink their feuds, till Sunday, and be 
ready for him at the Park-gate, the next morn- 
ing, with every dog, and ferret, they could hear 
of, together with their shovels, wire-cages, 
knobsticks, and all the other items of their 
interesting gear. "With the prospect of a 
guinea, and the certainty of beer, they were 
punctual as the sun, at ten o'clock ; and a motley 
host of bipeds, quadrupeds, and tripods — for 
some of the dogs had only three feet left — set 
forth gallantly, to invade the rats of Dartmoor, 



i 



86 CHRISTOWELL. 

Meanwhile, on this same Friday morning, 
Mr. Arthur (generally known as " Captain 
Larks ") was busy with a lot of little vines in 
pots, which were crying out for more room, and 
more nurture. He had brought them, from his 
span-roof forcing-house, to a little glazed build- 
ing of his own construction, snugly ensconced 
beneath the cliff. And here, with half a 
hundred of his new patent pots, he was craftily 
preparing a delicious compost, of mealy sod, 
mellow manure, and spicy bone-dust, enough 
to make the little mouths of dainty creatures 
water. At this he worked hard, without sparing 
his hands, pulling asunder the fibrous clods, 
but not reducing them to siftage, nipping in 
twain every wireworm, and grub, carefully dis- 
tributing the sweet-stuff from the linhay, and 
the benefit of happy bones, that should never 
ache again, and lightly, with his open fingers, 
carding up the mixture; until the whole was 
sleek, and fragrant, with the vital gifts of 
earth. 

None but a very gruff fellow, unworthy to 
love, or be loved by, nature, can minister thus 
to his little dependants, without ministering 
also to his own cares. Captain Larks was 
down-hearted, and perplexed, and quavery, when 



HOUSE-BKEAKING. 87 

lie drew his hand to do this work ; but courage 
came to him, and the love of life, and the 
golden touch of hope, as he went on. The in- 
terest in other things beyond himself grew 
bright and gladsome, as he worked for good; 
and without thinking of it, he began to whistle 
the old English tune, "We won't give up." 
Last night he had said to himself, " I must 
give up. Fate is too much for me, and all 
things go against me. I must fly from this 
refuge of many quiet years, and of pet things, 
the fruit of my own work. I must fly some- 
where else, and begin once more, with the loss 
of all the little relics of my money, and rheuma- 
tism settling in my left shoulder-blade. And, 
worst of all, with darling Eose astray, and quite 
bewildered." 

But now, he was hoping for the best, and well 
believing that fear had made too much of his 
imaginary trouble. The day was fine, and the 
sunshine brisk, enlivening mankind, and espe- 
cially those, who live among the offspring of the 
sun. The soft spring air, afloat with sunbeams, 
brought the blue distance of the heavens to the 
earth; and the white blossoms shone upon it, 
ad if they saw it. The gardener, as he plied 
Jiis work, was breathing sweet contentment, for 



88 CHRISTOWELL. 

his heart drank in the beauty ; and, better 
still, at every breath, he felt that fruit was 
setting. 

" Father, how glad I am, to see you look like 
your old self again ! " cried Rose, coming in 
from the grass- walk. "Mr. Short is wonder- 
fully good and kind ; but I should simply hate 
him, if he were to begin to disturb your mind. 
You never ate as much as my thumb for supper ; 
and you couldn't look worse, if I ran away from 

you." 

" I scarcely know, how much your thumb eats 
for supper," her father replied, as his pleasure 
increased, with gazing at her bright, and affec- 
tionate face ; " but, if it has not over-eaten itself, 
I would beg some help from it, with the ball of 
this vine." 

" Now, if you don't know, papa, you ought to 
know," she said in a low voice, as they worked 
together ; " and you ought to be punished, for 
not knowing well, that I am come to years of 
full discretion." 

" It is a fine thing, to have a good opinion 
of oneself. There, you have proved your words, 
by snapping this root-fibre ! " 

Although he spoke thus, he was thinking to 
himself — "this daughter of mine is discreet, 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 89 

beyond her years. How she would enjoy her 
youth, if it were the same as other girls have ! 
And hqw beautiful she is, the pretty darling ! " 

As for that he was right beyond all doubt ; 
though a father's pride goes astray sometimes, 
from cleaving, over-fondly, to the grooves of 
love. A very sweet face has its sweetness 
trebled, when tender doubt, and a light shade 
of anxiety, soften the bloom of thq cheeks, and 
deepen the lustre of inquiring eyes. Rose 
Arthur (with the sun-gleam on her hair, and 
the pure white forehead touched with thought, 
and the delic^-te oval of the face enhanced by 
the suppliant curve of . neck) was not only 
charming to look at, but alsp bewitching to 
think of afterward^. 

" How cai^ X bavQ at all a good opinion of 
myself," she asked her father, with some twinkle 
of a tear, " when nobody considers me of any 
use at all ? " 

" What a bare-faced bit of fishing for a com- 
pliment ! Can I ever do anything, without you 
now ? And when have I failed to praise you, 
up to your deserts ? " 

"I don't mean suph trumpery things as 
potting — or at least they arg not at all trumpery, 
I know — but what I mean is great things, about 



90 CIIRISTOWELL. 

people's lives, and reasons for doing things, and 
not telling other people." 

" My darling," said her father, without dis- 
pleasure^ for he saw that she was trembling at 
her own audacity, " I will not pretend to mis- 
understand you ; neither have I any right to 
blame you. You want to know, why I live a 
different life from other people, whom you know ; 
why I am so reserved, and lonely, and keep you 
shut up in this dull place." 

" Father, I never had such an idea. The 
place is quite good enough for me^ I should 
hope, if it is good enough for you.^ And, as for 
being lonely, what more can I want, than to 
have you, and help you, and try to be half as 
good to you, as you are to me ? " 

" Well, my little Rosy one, that is all very fine 
in theory. The practice, however, goes other- 
wise ; or why are you asking questions now ? " 

" I never would have said a word, dear father, 
except that I cannot bear to see you vexed. It 
does not matter about myself; but when it 
comes to you, it is dreadful." 

" But suppose, my pet, that it is only for you, 
that I care much about anything. Suppose 
that, for reasons which are not my own to tell, 
I am bound to keep my darling child from the 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 91 

roughness of the world ; and can do it only, -by 
keeping outside of the world, altogether. If 
that were so, you would have faith enough, to 
believe that I acted for the best, and love enough 
not to increase my cares, by questions which I 
cannot answer." 

" Oh, father, I wish that I had bitten out my 
tongue, before I asked a single question. I 
will never be so cruel, and undutiful, again. 
But you will forgive me, for this once ? " 

" Rosy, I am very glad you did ask. It will 
make things happier between us, on the whole. 
You must have thought, a thousand times, that 
there was something odd about us. It is better 
to make up your mind to that, than to live in 
a doubtful suspicion of it. In the course of 
time, you will know the whole. But I fear that 
it will not be, while I live/' 

" Then I hope that it will never be, in this 
world, father. Whatever should I do without 
you ? It is too dreadful ! " 

" There now, my darling, let us talk no more 
about it," said the father, with his child's tears 
on his cheeks ; " we have got a lot of work to 
do ; and let us give our minds to it. After all, 
there are millions of people in the world, not a 
thousandth part so happy as you, and I, may 



92 CHRISTOWELL. 

be, while we have one another's love to help 



us." 



"I should like to see anybody impudent 
enough, to be happier than I am, all day long; 
I have never known an atom of unhappiness, in 
my life." 

She gave a little sob, to prove her words, 
and caught her breath quickly, at such a mis- 
take. Then she tossed up a heavy pot, and 
turned her sleeves up, to show what energetic 
arms she had. 

" How they have grown in the night ! Look 
at this ! " she exclaimed, with a smile, that was 
full of delight. " Father, there is nothing, in 
all the world, more lovely than a baby vine, 
just when it begins to understand things, and 
offer its innocent hands to us. Look, for one 
moment, at this little darling ; now, doesn't it 
seem to be toddling to me, with its tiny hands 
spread out ? Papa,^ I am sure, there is nothing 
in the world half so beautiful as gardener's 
work. What are jewellers, or watchmakers, or 
ivory-carvers, or even painters, to compare with 
a genuine gardener? The things that they 
handle are dead, and a^rtificial, and cannot know 
the meaning of the treatment they receive. But 
our work is living, and natural, and knows us, 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 93 

and adapts itself to follow our desires, and please 
us ; and has its own tempers, and moods, and 
feelings, exactly the same as we have. For 
people to talk about ' sensitive plants ' does seem 
to be such sad nonsense, when every plant that 
lives is sensitive. You are very busy ; 'but just 
spare time, to look at this holly-leafed baby 
vine, with every tiny point cut like a prickle, 
yet much too tender and good to prick me. It 
follows every motion of my hand; it crisps 
its little veinings up, whenever I come near 
it ; and it feels, in every fibre, that I am looking 
at it." 

"It is in my power to swallow tales of 
gigantic bulk," Mr. Arthur replied, and then 
opened his mouth, to show its noble capacity ; 
*' especially, when they come from you, my dear. 
Nevertheless, after watching my vines for many 
years, I have never had the luck to receive such 
reciprocity. Please to show me, the next time 
you see them looking at you." 

"As if I would be guilty of such treachery, 
papa ! They know that I am foolish, and they 
like me for it. But you are much too wise for 
them, and scare them of their confidence. Stop 
a moment ; did you hear that noise again ? 
There has been such a noise, going on around 



94 CHRISTOWELL. 

the beacon. The glass has prevented you from 
hearing it, I suppose. I meant to have told 
you, till we spoke of something else. There 
seems to be a quantity of men, and dogs, up 
there, shouting, and barking, and screaming 
out, and' making the greatest uproar." 

" Whatever it is, I would strongly recom-^" 
mend them, to keep it outside of my premises. 
Halloa ! " 

Well indeed might he thus exclaim. A dark 
bulk fell upon the glittering roof; at the crash 
a shower of flashing splinters flew, like a burst- 
ing firework, and a human form tumbled in, all 
doubled up, and rolled upon a newly-potted 
platoon of those sensitive vinelets. 

" Oh, he must be killed ! " cried Rose, running 
up to him. " The poor unfortunate little boy ! 
I have got his head up on a pot. Father, hold 
him up, till I get the water." 

Rose herself was bleeding sadly, from the 
arrowy sleet of glass ; but without two thoughts, 
she was off, and came back, with a long-spouted 
can, and put a copper spreader on it. 

" No," said her father, as she held up the can, 
to water this gentleman freely ; " not a drop of 
water. I have seen much bloodshed. Water 
would be wrong, in a case like this. Leave him 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 95 

to me. Eun for bandages quickly; and send 
Moggy off, the short way to the village, quick 
foot, for Dr. Perperaps." 

Rose was off, like a deer ; and the gardener 
began, after drawing out one or two splinters 
of glass, and placing the youth in a better 
position, to close the worst cuts, with cotton 
wool (which he always kept in the greenhouse) 
tightly bound with broad strips of bast. Then 
he soaked the wool with cold water; and the 
patient gave a long gasp, and began to look 
about him. 

" Not dead yet, my boys ! " He tried to 
shout, but only muttered; "At him again, 
Tiger, at him again ! Get him by the scruff. 
Bob; don't be an idiot. Hurrah, well done, 
Peppercorns ! " 

" Hold your tongue, sir, and shut your eyes," 
Mr. Arthur broke in, with his deepest tone; 
and the youth stared at him, and obeyed his 
voice, after putting up his lips, as if he longed 
to whistle. And while his mind went wander- 
ing, into wonder, and distant dimness, a little 
dog, with all his wits about him, came in at the 
door ; and, making obeisance with a tremulous 
tail, asked courteous leave to sniff at him. Mr. 
Arthur, being fond of dogs, said, " Yes ; " and 



96 CHRISTOWELL. 

before this dog could have satisfied his mind, 
two more came in, to help him. But the first 
dog, being of a kingly order, signified to them 
that they were not wanted; and when they 
retired at his growl, he joined them, and the 
three held council. As sagely as any three 
M.D.'s they conducted their consultation, with 
their ears upon the curl, and their tails upon 
the wag, so far as men had spared them. But 
suddenly all three stumps fell flat, and quivered 
with humility ; for, lo ! there stood their wor- 
shipful masters, puffing, and blowing, and in- 
clined to swear, at having only two legs each, 
to bring them down the wall of crag. 

" Cappen Larks, be 'un killed ? " they cried, 
all scared to go into the greenhouse. " The 
young Squire Dicky, oh lor, oh lor ; and all the 
vault to be laid on us! Back there with 'e, 
every one o' you chaps ! Us'U lash the legs of 
any chaps, as trieth it. These be Cappen's own 
privy grounds, and no blackguards admitted in." 

" Be off every one of you," the owner shouted, 
with a smile, which went against his words ; 
*' or in two minutes, you will be prosecuted, 
with the utmost rigour of the law." 

" Cappen Larks, don't ye be so haish, for to 
deny us a zaight o' the poor Master Dicky. 



HOUSE-BREAKING. 97 

I 

There never wor a better one, to work a rat out ; 
and if a' be killed, ns '11 niver hunt again." 

"My good fellows, he is not killed, and he 
won't be, if you will get out of the way. But 
I won't answer for it, if you come plaguing here. 
Be off, if you care for his life, this moment." 

"Cappen, us '11 get out of the wai, quick- 
sticks. It goo'th to our hearts, to zee 'un blading 
so. But, to vare up they stones again, is beyond 
our breeches." 

" Fare out this way, then ; across the water. 
But tell me first how the young man fell, and 
what his name is, and where he lives." 

" 'Twor all by rason of the bottled beer, sir. 
Do'e see thiccy moot-stoon, round the cornder ? 
Us had a score of bottled beer, up yonner ; and 
young Squire Dicky's hat were too small to hold 
'un. Squire Dicky Touchwood, to Touchwood 
Park. Whatever will my lady zay to us ? " 

" You had better, go and see ; but tell her not 
to be uneasy. The doctor will be here at once ; 
and the lad will soon come round. Clear out, 
this very instant, dogs and men." 

For by this time, thirty dogs, of every 
genealogy, were poking about, among the cap- 
tain's pots. 



VOL. I. 



98 CHRISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE, 



While ihe sportive Cantab thus broke into 
Mr. Arthur's humble greenhouse, his sister 
Julia was enjoying the keen air of the western 
moors, and passing through it swiftly, and 
sweetly, with the cheerful aid of a well-bred 
horse. Miss Touchwood always looked well in 
the saddle ; and a lady's riding-habit was a 
graceful dress at that time, although the hat 
was hideous. But this young lady, thinking 
for herself, would not wear the hideous hat ; but 
designed, in lieu thereof, a sensible and becoming 
head-gear, and got it made at Devonport. With 
its curving rim turned up at one side, and a 
grey feather pluming round the front, without 
any monstrous buckle, it sat lightly over her 
long dark eyebrows, clear eyes, and expressive 
face. 

" What a booty her be ! " said a tramp, to 
whom she had thrown a shilling, graciously. 



COLONEL WESTCOMBB. 99 

"So her maight be," his wife replied, "so 
long as her getteth her own way." 

Riding with her, across the moor, was her 
host, and godfather, Colonel Westcombe, a plain, 
stout man, of average stature, thick-set, broad 
across the back, and looking as if no tailor's art 
could make his clothes sit well to him. But 
that consideration moved him not, so long as he 
had plenty of room inside them. He thought 
of appearances, no more than " Captain Larks " 
himself did ; though he liked to see ladies nicely 
dressed, and young men looking tidy. Upon 
his face, his charactei' was as clearly outlined as 
his nose — a distinct, and eloquent feature. Any 
one could see, that he was simple-minded, slow 
at working out the twists of thought, accus- 
tomed to let his ideas flow into the mould of 
words, before dealing with them, gently re- 
luctant to think evil of mankind, concerning 
any matter, in which he had not as yet been 
robbed atrociously, compassionate, fearless, and 
as hopeful as a child, and properly indignant 
when he came across a rogue. But large as the 
field was for that right feeling, (even in those 
more upright days), the Colonel was larger than 
to stay there very long; for his knowledge of 
the world must not harden him so much. 



100 CHRISTOWELL. 

After many years of scrimped penurious life, 
such as behoves the British officer (especially 
when he has done great things, and must pay 
for the honour of doing them) this Colonel 
suddenly came into possession of large property. 
Diggory Westcombe, his father's elder brother, 
(who never would have anything to do with 
them in life, through some bitterness of blood), 
forgave upon his death-bed all the injuries he 
had done, and left all his property, when quite 
despaired of, to his next of kin, and right heir, 
Colonel John Westcombe. 

That well-known warrior, and strong sharp- 
shooter against the sap-work of poverty, was 
amazed at being taken in the rear like this, and 
surrounded with an army bearing gifts. For a 
month of market-days, he was out of sorts, at 
not having to do his own marketing; for his 
clear sense told him, that what used to be 
economy, would now be no better than meanness. 
For the sake of his wife, whose health was weak, 
and of his son, who had the world before him, 
he was bound to rejoice at this access of wealth ; 
but for himself, as he was laid upon the shelf, he 
would rather have rested on an oaken, than a 
golden one. 

"If you please, Uncle John," said his fair 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE. 101 

god-daughter, who had leave to call him so, 
though she was only of church-kin to him ; " I 
cannot allow you to stay in this silent mood, 
which is growing over you." 

" My dear, I beg your pardon," he answered, 
with his simple courtesy, and pleasantness ; " I 
am sure, I would have talked, if I had anything 
to say. But surely with all this noble prospect 
— hills, and valleys, and watercourses, and the 
gorse coming out, and the sheep, and the ponies 
— you would much rather look about, than talk. 

" Not for a moment ; I am used to all that. 
It comes, and goes, just the same, and tells me 
nothing. I would rather have one of your stories 
of the war, than all the hills of Dartmoor, and 
the valleys full of water, and the sheep, that 
must terminate in tough mutton. And the 
beauty of your stories is that they must be true ; 
because you always tell them, in the very same 
words, and with the very same look, every 
time." 

"What a prosaic companion you have got! 
They say that Charles II. told his stories always 
so ; but I hope that I resemble him, in few other 
points. Now, which of my stories do you wish 
me to begin ? " 

" The two. Uncle John ; the famous pair. 



102 CHRISTOWELL. 

which yoTi promise to tell, when you have had 
a good dinner. You must know the two I mean, 
as well as I do. The first is, about the bravest 
man you ever met with ; and the second ought 
to be, about the noblest man. The one I have 
heard always makes me proud of being born in 
England. I would rather hear such, than see 
fifty miles of moorland, or even a waterfall fifty 
feet high ; because they stir me into great ideas, 
without making me seem small. Oh, how can 
poor Dicky spend the best of his time in rat- 
hunting ? " 

" Different people look at things, from different 
points of view, my dear," said the colonel, who 
liked a rat-hunt himself, and also was fond of a 
waterfall, and a fine view from the saddle. For 
although he never noticed things, particularly 
much, he was pleased that they should pass by 
him nicely, without obliging him to think, any 
more than change of air might do. " As long 
as I can remember, Julia, I have been an 
admirer of fine landscapes ; and, indeed, I saw 
very beautiful things, in Spain; yet I do not 
know enough about such matters, to deny that — 
that what you may call human affairs should 
have the preference. Certainly the bravest man, 
I ever yet have met with " 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE. 103 

"Uncle John, if yon dare to begin it like 
that, you will flounder before you have come 
to the snuflF place ; and if you were to hesitate, 
you would begin to shake my perfect faith 
in it, 

" Julia, is it possible that you can entertain 
the mere shadow of a doubt, about the very least 
particular? If I could imagine, that you did 
that, you should never again — I mean that I 
should never take any further pleasure, in 
relating to you that, or any other fact again." 

" Now^ Uncle John, you really must not be 
so exceedingly savage, and peppery. You begin 
to remind me of— well, never mind." 

"My dear," said the colonel, "I beg your 
pardon heartily, if I have hastily expressed 
myself. I am well aware, that I sometimes do 
so ; since I came into what people will insist 
upon calling my improved position. But I 
never mean anything by it, my dear child ; and 
I am always sorry afterwards." 

" Then you have no right to be so, and ought 
to go on more. Your only fault is, that you are 
too fond of letting people triumph over you. 
But now be quick, that's a dear Uncle John, 
and make amends by beginning it aright. You 
know that it always begins, like this, — * Towards 



104 CHRISTOWELL. 

the close of thq hardest, perl^aps, of the many 
hard conflicts pur great cjommandqr ' — ^but stpp, 
till I come the right way of the wind." 

" I am not at all sure," her companion 
answered, as thq young lady drew her horse to 
the leeward side pf his, and "looked at him, with 
an encouraging smile ; " that it is in my power 
to do justice to that remarkable little incident, 
while I am riding a fast-trotting horse, I was 
thoroughly used to a horse in my youth, for my 
father did afford to keep one, and I was on his 
back perpetually. And in the Peninsula, I have 
ridden some thousands of miles, with despatches. 
But, for five-and-twenty years, since I have not 
been wanted, our circumstances did not permit 
of much riding ; and it takes a little time to be 
comfortable again." 

" You ride like a Centaur, Uncle John. It is 
impossible for anybpdy tp ride better. But still 
I can easily understand^ that you like to do 
things in the regular way. Look, here are two 
great stones that seem to have dropped from the 
sky, on purpose to be sat upon. Suppose we 
jump off, and rest the horses ; and you can enjoy 
all the landscape, while you talk." 

By the side of the long and lonely track, these 
hoary granite blocks invited the traveller to a 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE. 105 

breezy rest. A tranquil mind would not have 
found that invitation marred, because accepted, 
through long ages now, by those who have the 
rest, without the breeze. The stones are the 
well-known " CoflSn-stones ; " whereat, for more 
than six hundred years, the bearers of the dead 
across the moor have halted from their heavy 
plod, laid down their burden on the stones, to 
take its latest stretch of mountain, and spread 
their own bodies on the grass around, to talk of 
what would happen to themselves ere long. Of 
these things the young lady had no knowledge, 
else would she never have sat down there ; 
neither did her companion know ; but the know- 
ledge would not have moved him, more than to 
make him sit bare-headed. 

" Let the popr things graze ; the grass is 
sweet," he said, as he took the bridles off ; and 
the nags, after jerking their noses with surprise, 
pricked their ears forward — not enough for him 
to catch them — and looked at him with well- 
meaning doubt. "Yes, you go, and crop, I 
say. The Lord has given you good teeth. And 
be sure you come at once, when you hear me 
whistle." 

Obedient to his vpipe, they went, with a little 
tenderness pf step at first, because it was long 



106 CHRISTOWELL. 

since they had crushed the blade ; but presently 
the joy of nature's colour, and the taste, broke 
forth in them; they pranced, and threw up 
their heels, and capered ; and the gentleman's 
horse made his stirrups clash beneath him, then 
fearing td waste one precious moment, they fell 
to, and worked the best mowing machine that 
has ever been invented. The colonel, more 
happy than a king, smiled at them, rested on his 
elbow, and began his tale. 

" Towards the close of the hardest, perhaps, 
of the many hard conflicts our great commander 
won, by the aid of a gracious Providence, and 
his own unwearied vigilance ; although the posi- 
tion of the enemy was turned, and the issue 
of the day scarcely doubtful, one very im- 
portant post held out, and had repulsed all our 
attempts to carry it. The difficulties of the 
ground were great ; not only was the approach 
very ste6p, and intersected by a watercourse, 
but also the French artillery, beautifully served, 
at grapeshot range, poured a crossing fire upon 
our attack. At the same time, our own guns 
could not be brought to bear, with any good 
effect, upon this crest, which was defended with 
admirable spirit, by a body of seasoned veterans, 
as calm, and steady, as our very best brigade. 



COLONEL WESTCOMBB. 107 

In shorty there seemed no chance of carrying 
the position, without fearful sacrifice; or even 
with it. 

" The line of the enemy, as I have said, was 
being driven in, at almost every other point ; 
and our great commander, perceiving that we 
must eventually obtain this post, sent orders 
that, as we could not take it, we should maintain 
our position, until the post was taken for us. 

" Grentlemen, — or rather I should say, ^ my 
dear,' — it is impossible for me to make you 
understand, what the feeling of our division 
was, when we received that message." 

" Yes, Uncle John, I can understand it 
thoroughly. I should have been ready to 
knock my head, against the first French cannon 
I could find. But here you always take a pinch 
of snuflF, with permission of the ladies, if any 
are present. You have my permission, and 
more than that, my orders. You will never 
take that post, without it." 

" I know how incapable I am," resumed the 
colonel, in a loftier tone, " of describing the 
condition of the human mind ; but all around 
me being Englishmen — or, at least, an English 
lady — I need only say, that we were vexed. 
Because we had always supposed ourselves — 



108 CHMSTOWELL. 

whether rightly, or "wTongly, is not for me to 
say — to be the flower of the whole British army. 
Every man of ns was burning to be at it, once 
again ; and yet we knew better, than to set at 
nought our orders, by attempting another direct 
assault. I remember, as. if I were looking at 

him now, how the indomitable General H 

turned from the staff-oflScer, and spat upon the 
ground, to save himself from swearing at our 
great commander. But while we were all of us 
as red as a rocket, a young fellow, who had 
lately joined our division, a lieutenant in the 
^ Never mind what Hussars,' as we called them 
from their recklessness, came sheepishly up to 

our Greneral H , and asked for a private 

word with him. The general knew something 
of his family, I believe ; and that makes no small 
difference, even with the strictest discipline. So, 
in spite of his temper, which was very bad just 
then, he led the young man apart ; and presently 
came back, with his usual smile recovered, while 
the young man remounted his horse, and rode 
away. 

" To us, it had been a most irksome thing, to 
wait there, doing nothing, but hearing in the 
distance the laughter of the enemy, and re- 
ceiving, now and then, a round shot ; and when 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE. 109 

there was a call for some forty vohmteers, who 
coTild handle an axe, and haul trees away, the 
only trouble was to choose the men. Having 
been lucky enough to do something, which 
pleased the general, that morning, and being 
rather supple-jointed in those days, I obtained 
the command of this little detachment, under 
very simple orders. Our duty was nothing 
more than to draw three corks, as the general 
said, with a laugh at his own wit ; and I never 
draw a cork now, or get it done for me— since 
I lost the right of doing my own work — with- 
out thinking, what a hard job it was, on that 
occasion. 

" It seems, that the young man, I told you of 
just now, was very fond of wandering among 
the woods alone, whenever he could get the 
opportunity, without actual breach of orders ; 
and he had just recognized the spur of the hill, 
which the enemy held so stubbornly, as a spot 
well known to him from a former visit. And 
unless his memory deceived him altogether, a 
narrow neck of land would be found, running 
down slantwise from the hill on our right, into 
the very heart of the position. With a hundred, 
or a hundred and fifty horse, dashing down 
upon the guns, while engaged in front, the 



110 CHRISTOWELL. 

whole must fall into onr hands at once. Only 
there was no possibility of a charge, while three 
young cork-trees, which stood upon the neck, at 
its narrowest point, were standing. 

" Now the diflSculty was, as yon will see at 
once, if yon honour me by following my story, 
gentlemen, not only to cut down those three 
trees, but to get them clean out of the way, ere 
ever the enemy should have time to learn what 
was intended, and bring their guns to bear in 
that direction. In such a case, cavalry crowded 
together would simply be blown away, like 
wads ; so that we were forced to go to work 
very warily, taking advantage of the sham 
attack in front. 

" The trees were quite young, and the soft- 
ness of the bark dulled the sound of our axes, 
as well as their edge; and being partly shel- 
tered from the outlook of the enemy, by the 
form of the ground, we were getting on quite 
nicely, and had cleared away two of the trees, 
and felled the third, and were rolling it out of 
the way, before giving the signal for the charge, 
when the whistle of grape-shot told us that we 
had been discovered. One man fell, and we 
lifted him aside, that the horses might not tread 
on him; and then at any risk, I gave the 



COLONEL WESTCOMBE. Ill 

signal ; because it must be now or never. Our 
volunteers were ordered to slip off, right and 
left, as two other guns were brought to bear on 
us ; but my duty compelled me, very much 
against my liking, to stop in the middle of the 
drift, to show our cavalry where the obstruction 
was. For the smoke was hanging low upon 
the ground, just like a fog. 

" Now while I stood there, without any con- 
sideration, and spread out like a finger-post — 
for I had not the courage to be careful — the 
enemy sent another volley up the drift, and 
much of it fell to my share. So that if they 
had measured their powder aright, I had never 
lived to find fault with it. Down I went, just 
in the stream of the track, and for three months 
heard no more of it, 

" But the men at the side, who were out of 
the way, gave a very clear history of what 
happened, when the shower of grape went past 
them. The charge, which must have trampled 
me to death, was stopped by the young officer 
commanding, with a wave of his sword, and his 
horse reined across ; and then he leaped off, and 
came alone to where I lay. In the thickest of 
the fire, he lifted me, they said, as calmly as a 
nurse takes a baby from the cradle, and placed 



112 CHRISTOWELL. 

me behind the cork-tree, where shot could 
never touch me, and the hoof must turn aside. 
Then he tore off the scarf from his neck, and 
bound up a wound, that was draining my body : 
while the Frenchmen perceived him, as the 
smoke rolled off, and like truly noble fellows, 
forbore their fire. He kissed his hand to them, 
in acknowledgment of this ; and then shouting 
to them that the fighting was resumed, returned 
to his horse, gave the signal to charge, and 
carried their guns in a twinkling. Now, such 
a deed as that makes one pro ad to be an 
Englishman." 

"Or even a good Frenchman," fair Julia 
replied. " I scarcely know, which of them be- 
haved the best. And though you make so 
little of your own part, I think you were the 
hero of the whole thing. Uncle John. But 
of course you found out the young oflBcer's 
name? And now for the other story, Uncle 
John. I have heard this story of the bravest 
man, a lot of times ; and I like it better almost 
every time. But I have never heard the story 
of the noblest man ; and I dare say that is finer 
still." 

" It is," the colonel answered, in his simple 
way. "But I never like to tell that tale, in 



COLONEL WESTOOMBE. 113 

cold blood, or before my dinner^ And even so, 
I must have people, who can enter into it. 
And even then, one ought to have a heavy cold, 
to explain the condition of the eyes that comes 
of it." 

" The heavy cold you will certainly have ; if 
you sit on these cold stones so long. And here 
comes a hailstorm, the delicate attention of soft 
April to Dartmoor. Oh, I shall be blind, if it 
goes on lik^ this. Whistle for the horses, uncle, 
dear." 



VOL. I. 



114 OHKISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER IX. 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 



Before ^* the ever loyal city," as Exeter loves 
to call itself, was undermined with iron bars, 
beneath its castle-ramparts, Northernhay was 
a quiet place, aside of the noisy London road, 
and pleasant for a Sunday walk. Here, in a 
good old ivied house, snugly encompassed by 
thick cob walls, was living, and well deserved 
to live, a gentleman of the ancient name of 
" Tucker." Also his Christian name was 
ancient ; being " Caleb," and no more. 

This gentleman lived with his widowed sister, 
Mrs. Giblets, late of Barnstaple, whose two boys 
went to the high grammar-school, as often as 
they could not help it. The deceased Mr. 
Giblets, a currier of repute, had thrice been 
Mayor of Barnstaple, and had sacrificed his life 
to his festive duties, at the time of the Reform 
Bill. His relict was a lady of like dignity, and 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 116 

virtue, convinced (as all Barnm people are) of 
the vast superiority of that town ; yet affable 
to the Mayor of Exeter. Their daughter, Mary 
Griblets, was a very nice young lady, a thorough 
girl of Devon, with a round rosy face, a smile 
for everybody, and almost at everything, a pair 
of brisk substantial feet, and a special turn for 
marketing. 

Caleb Tucker, the owner of the house, but 
not the master always, had long been in busi- 
ness, as a timber-merchant, and still would make 
a purchase, or a sale, upon occasion, although 
he had retired from the firm, which he had 
reared. Honesty, industry, enterprise, and 
prudence, had won for him nearly quite enough 
of money, to live upon happily, and want no 
more. In the vigour of life, when the hearts 
of men are as quick of warmth, as a fire at its 
prime, he had incurred a very serious loss, 
never to be balanced in £ s. d. The wife of 
his love, and the little ones of theirs, went all 
to the grave, between a Sunday and a Saturday, 
through a storm of fever, called in Devonshire 
" the plague." This sorrow took the zeal out 
of his existence, and left him a grave, well- 
balanced man, who had learned that the poise of 
life is not troy-weight 



116 CHRISTOWELL. 

Now, in the holiday of calm age, Caleb Tucker 
was a venerable person; slow to move, except 
with pity ; and tranquil in the steadfast hope 
of finding, in a larger world, the losses of this 
little one. His sister was twenty years younger 
than himself, and her children were his succas- 
sors ; and he meant to do his duty to his own 
kin, instead of founding charities, to be jobbed 
by aliens. Under these circumstances, it was 
right of Mrs. Q-iblets, to make much of him, and 
encourage him to gave, and increase, his cash. 

^^ How sudden the changes of the weather 
seem to be ! " he was saying to his sister, as 
they sat out in the garden, on the Saturday, 
the very day after the colonel's tale had been 
hurried by the hailstorm ; " the spring weather 
never used to change like this; at least when 
the turn of the days was over. How bright it 
was yesterday, until it began to rain ! Then 
the hills, towards Dartmoor, were covered with 
snow, or hail, or whatever it may have been." 

" It must have been either hail, or snow, if 
it was white," Mrs. Giblets replied, being proud 
of perfect accuracy ; " the weather is continually 
changing ; but the only white things in it are 
snow, and hail." 

" Certainly, Mollikins, and frost as well. It 



THE BED-PACED MAN. 117 

might have be^n the white frost on the moord. 
But whatever it was, it made me think, this 
morning, as I looked at it from my bedroom 
window, of that poor gentleman I bought the 
land for. He has made such a beautiful garden 
up there, and I fear that the frost will destroy 
all his bloom." 

" He must suffer the will of the Lord, I sup- 
pose ; as everybody else is obliged to do. Some- 
times I lose my patience with him ; because you 
never tell me, who he is. Why should a gentle- 
man come down here, and buy a little far-off 
place like that, and work like a common labourer? 
No one would dare to attempt such a thing, in 
the neighbourhood of Barnstaple. It would be 
the duty of the mayor, to find him out. But in 
this part of the world, conspirators carry on, 
just as they please." 

"Sister, you talk a great deal too fast. If 
you ever know the truth, you will be sorry for 
your words. Women are so fond of rushing to 
the worst conclusions." 

" Some of them do so ; but whose fault is it ? 
You know that I do the very opposite, Caleb, 
whenever I am not denied the knowledge. I 
wish, with all my heart, that I had never heard 
about him; although I liked him very much. 



118 CHRISTOWELL. 

the only time I saw him. But I always take 
things, as I find them. I have no curiosity 
whatever, about anything." 

" Molly, you are very wise," answered Mr. 
Tucker ; " we have all of us enough of trouble, 
with our own affairs. And here comes pretty 
Mary, for to tell us something pleasant." 

" No, indeed, uncle, it is quite the other 
way," cried Mary, as she hurried up the walk, 
from the side-door ; "I took the short cut, and 
I left all the nuts I was buying for Bob, and for 
Harry, to tell you not to see the man — or the 
gentleman at least, who is riding up the hill, to 
look for you. Oh, uncle, dear, he is such a 
nasty man ; and has the evil eye, if ever any- 
body had it ! Oh dear, I turned my Testament 
in my pocket — mischief will come of it, as sure 
as I'm alive." 

" If ever there was a little goose, in the King's, 
or rather, in the Queen's dominions now, her 
name is Mary Giblets." Though he spoke thus 
bravely, Mr. Tucker did not like it ; and his 
sister said— 

" Mary, fie for shame ! Look at your gathers. 
Miss ! " 

" I had no time to think about anything at 
all," she answered, with her colour ripened, from 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 119 

the peach-bloom into peach ; " he was asking at 
Besley's, and Snell's, and Sharland's, where Mr. 
Caleb Tucker lived ; and he called you * the land- 
agent.' Mr. Snell told him, you had never been 
that, but a strictly retired gentleman ; and then 
the man laughed — such a nasty laugh, mamma ; 
and young Tom Besley, who is always such a 
stupid, looked up from the copper mill, where he 
was grinding pepper, and he says, * That young 
lady will show you, sir ; that's his own niece. 
Miss Giblets.' I felt, as if I could have boxed 
his ears. And the red-faced man rode up to 
me, with his hat off, and said, ' Miss Giblets, 
will you be my charming guide ? ' And I 
couldn't think of anything to say ; he looked so 
impudent. But I made him a curtsy, and 
began walking up the hill ; and then I thought 
to myself, that I would pay him out. So I 
turned down Black Horse Alley, towards the 
cut across parson's meadow (which is the 
nearest way, you know) and left him to follow, 
or not, as he pleased. Well, it pleased him to 
come, and to want to talk to me ; just as if I 
were nothing but a shop-girl. I looked at him, 
over my shoulder, now and then ; and said yes 
and no, for a quarter of a mile ; and likely, he 
considered me as stupid as Tom Besley. Then 



120 CHBISTOWBLL. 

suddenly, we came upon the high [tum-stile of 
parson's meadow, where the bull is; and I 
slipped through, like anything. * Halloa ! Do 
you expect me to ride over this?* he said. 
And I said, * Oh dear ! Oh dear ! How very 
stupid of me ! But you only asked me for the 
shortest way, sir. I dare not stop, to give you 
any more directions, because of the bull, in the 
bottom of the ham.' And away I ran, and here 
I am." 

" My darling, what a risk to run ! I have 
told you not to do it," her mother exclaimed, as 
she finished her tale ; " that bull has tossed 
three people." 

" I am ten times more afraid of a bad man, 
than a bull. Now be sure that you refuse to 
see him. Uncle Caleb." 

"My dear," said Mr. Tucker, "you are 
scarcely old enough, to be reproached with want 
of reason. I dare say, the gentleman has no 
harm in him ; although he may be a little for- 
ward. If so, he had his match in a very 
modest girl ; though one of strong prejudices, I 
am afraid. Let us go into the house ; perhaps 
he will be here directly." 

Before they had time to put their garden- 
chairs away, the rusty wire beneath the thatch 



THE RED-PACED MAN. 121 

of the warm cob-wall, that sheltered them, gave 
a Blow, reluctant, creaking jerk, and then a quick 
rattle, as it was pulled again ; and the big bell, 
swinging in the ivy of the house-porch, threw 
up its mouth, like a cow about to bellow, and 
fell back upon its wagging tongue, through a 
rustle of crisp leafage. " Let him ring again," 
said Mr. Tucker ; " when a man is in a hurry, 
I have known it do him good. Don't go away, 
sister; I will see him here. I am too old a 
soldier, to be carried by storm, in this way. 
Mary, you be off, my dear ; as if the bull was 
after you." 

Miss Giblets withdrew, but much against her 
will, for she had a fine stock of healthy curiosity, 
and had made up her mind, that the red-faced 
man was come upon an interesting errand. 
Then Bill, the boy of all work, came grinning, 
with a card in one hand, and a shilling in the 
other. "A' gied me this," he said, showing 
first the shilling, as the more important object 
of the two. " Be I to kape 'un, or gie 'un to 
you?" 

" Grie 'un to your mother," replied his master, 
as he took the card, and read the words " Mr. 
George Gktston," with no address beneath them. 

" Ha, sir, and how are you to-day ? " The 



122 CHMSTOWELL. 

visitor shouted, with a hearty voice. " I have 
taken the liberty of following my pasteboard. 
I hope I see the lady quite well also. Madam, 
your servant ! I am quite old-fashioned. I 
glory in the society of the ladies; but my 
manners are comparatively out of date, I fear." 

The widow of the mayor possessed a shrewd 
tongue, as well as a stately reserve, sometimes ; 
and the former was burning to say, that the 
sooner such manners were positively out of date, 
the better. Like her daughter, the lady con- 
ceived an extraordinary hatred of this man, at 
sight; but she only showed it, by a careful 
bow, and a gaze of reasonable surprise. 

" Excuse me, sir — Mr. Gaston, I suppose," 
said Caleb Tucker, rising slowly, and lifting his 
hat from his silvery curls ; " but I doubt nbt 
that, if you are come upon business, you have 
brought me a letter of introduction ; I do very 
little in the way of business now, and only with 
people, who are known to me. And I have not 
the honour of remembering your name." 

" You are quite right. Everything you do 
is right, according to the account I have re- 
ceived of you. Shall I take this chair ? But it 
would make me wretched^ to think that I had 
banished Mrs. Tucker." 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 123 

" That lady is my sister, sir — Mrs. Giblets, 
formerly of Barnstaple." 

*' Bless my heart ! I never heard of such a 
thing. Have I met Mrs. Giblets at last, with- 
out knowing her ? My cousin, Sir Courtenay, 
is always speaking of her, and her graceful, and 
refined hospitality. But too exclusive — he told 
me as much. Like all the superior ladies, you 
are too exclusive, Mrs. Giblets." 

" That charge has been brought against me, 
I confess," the lady replied with dignity ; " but 
wherever would you be, sir, without you drew 
a line, between wholesale, and retail ? " 

Mrs. Giblets retired, with a gracious bow, 
but some doubt still about the good faith of the 
visitor ; for although he was older than herself, 
as her conscience (which she always consulted 
on the subject) told her, he wore a red-striped 
neckerchief, and a cut-away coat, of bright green, 
with gilt buttons. Moreover, his voice was 
loud and harsh, his manner too bold, his figure 
burly, and his gestures impatient, and almost 
imperious ; while his face, though resolute and 
rather handsome, expressed, more than impressed, 
good opinion of himself. His forehead was high 
and square, his eyes piercing but not steadfast, 
his nose strong and aquiline, and chin very 



124 CHBISTOWELL. 

firm, and prominent. But the colour of the 
cheeks was fiercely red, the mouth very wide 
and voracious; and instead of a curve at the 
hinges of the jaws, there occurred a conspicuous 
angle. Boys, who have powers of observation, 
happily extinguished in later life, dubbed him 
at school, " G-eorge Coffin-face ; '* but when his 
brow expanded, the name no longer suited him, 
except as regards the part below the ears, where 
a few white whiskers showed the harshness of 
the angle, now become more prominent, from 
years of zealous exercise ; while his very florid 
colour, and thick crop of tawny hair, gave 
abundance of life to his countenance. 

" No, Mr. Tucker, I have ridden a long way," 
he began, after looking round, and bringing his 
chair nearer, " upon a matter, really of no im- 
portance to me, in any other light than this- — 
that I may do a kindness, and help a fellow- 
creature. Probably, I shall not even earn so 
much as thanks ; and you know how little those 
are worth. I do not pretend to be moved by 
any Quixotic ardour, or Christian duty, or 
broad philanthropy, or any romantic motive* 
But a sense of gratitude for a good turn done 
me, five-and-twenty years ago, together with 
some natural desire to baffle selfish roguery — 



THE BED-FAOED MAN. 125 

although it is no concern of mine, yon see — 
has led me to sacrifice some valuable time, and 
trespass perhaps on yours, sir." 

" Not at all. Don't speak of it. I am glad 
to be of service," Mr. Tucker replied, in his 
regular way. ^^ But did I understand, that you 
had brought a letter to me ? " 

*' Not a syllable of any kind. I make a point 
of never insulting anybody. And to suppose 
that a man, of your experience, could fail to 
know a gentleraan at first sight, would be most 
impertinent. And let me remind you," con- 
tinued Mr. Graston, perceiving that the other 
looked a little glum at this, ^'^that I am not 
come, upon any business question, where my 
solvency, and so on, might require to be estab- 
lished. My object is simply to perform a kind- 
ness ; and your aid will cost you nothing, neither 
risk a single penny. I ask you no favour ; I 
simply propose it, as a duty to yourself, that 
you should enable me to confer a benefit, upon a 
most deserving, and ill-treated fellow-Christian. 
Instead of losing anything by it, you will gain 
very largely. For you will thus restore to 
position, and some wealth, a man of most grate- 
ful, and generous nature. I have no cant 
about me, and it is my abhorrence ; but it 



126 CHRISTOWELL. 

would be too much of the opposite extreme, to 
deny that the hand of a good Providence is 
here." 

^* Sir, you speak well, and very sensibly so 
far ; " answered the cautious timber-merchant, 
trying to conquer his unreasonable dislike of 
the red-faced gentleman at first sight ; " if you 
will kindly tell me, what it is that I can do, I will 
do it, unless there should be reason to the con- 
trary, or at any rate necessity for consideration." 

" Oh, it does not require half a moment's 
hesitation ; you will say that I have made much 
ado about nothing. All I want to know, is the 
address of a gentleman, for whom you bought a 
small estate, from fifteen to twenty years ago ; 
probably the shorter date is the more correct 
one — rather a tall man, with a military manner." 

" I am not a land-agent," Mr. Tucker replied ; 
" neither do I meddle with the lawyer's business. 
But at one time, from my knowledge of the 
county, and purchase of timber, and so on, I 
was frequently asked to obtain a purchaser for 
small outlying properties, perhaps belonging to 
the gentlemen, who were selling me their 
timber. Of course, the matter afterwards passed 
through the proper hands ; and I never thought 
of making any charge for what I did. Still 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 127 

there were so many cases, that without par- 
ticulars, I cannot pretend to say anything." 

" But, you must have known, in almost every 
case, who the purchaser was, what made him 
buy, where he lived, what he did with himself, 
&c. Officers seldom turn farmers, I believe, 
and seldom have managed, from their miserable 
pay, to save money to buy land with." 

" I am ready to oblige you, Mr. Q-astoli, if I 
can, without any breach of confidence. Your 
inquiry is unusual, as you must know; and 
unless you can manage to be more precise, I see 
no possibility of helping you. If you can supply 
me with the name, and date, I may have some 
recollection of the matter you refer to. Also it 
is only fair to ask, how you have heard of me, 
and my share in the business. You can scarcely 
consider that question rude." 

" Certainly not, my dear sir," replied the 
visitor ; " everything is plain, and above board 
here. I only regret, that from my own ignorance, 
I should have to give you so much trouble. 
But in your desire to do good, you will excuse 
me. The case has some little peculiarities ; 
which, with your permission, I will recount. 
Only, let me ask you first, if you are sure that a 
long tale will not weary you." 



128 OHRISTOWELL. 

" Nothing will weary me about — I mean in a 
case of so much interest." 

" How good of you, to feel such interest with- 
out any knowledge of the people implicated! 
But alas, Mr. Tucker, I am suflFering from thirst. 
I have ridden nearly fifty miles, since noon ; now 
all very pure air, such as that of Devon, contains 
saline particles ; and in the distance, I behold a 
pump. I would crave your hospitable leave, to 
go, and move the handle." 

"Mr. Gaston, I humbly beg your pardon," 
said the ancient gentleman, arising with a sigh ; 
^ but my mind is not as present to me, as it 
used to be. We have not the name of inhos- 
pitality, as a rule, in Devonshire ; but I give you 
my honour, sir, that it quite escaped me. And 
after your ride — what will my sister say? I 
beg you to come into our little parlour. It is 
getting rather cold out here, and not so com- 
fortable. Perhaps you have never even dined ? 
Oh dear ! " 

" I shall go to the pump, and that alone, if 
you say another syllable, my dear sir. But if 
you make a point of it, I will go in. But, 
nothing to eat, sir — not one morsel. My dinner 
is a trifle to a man like me ; and I have made 
arrangements about it. Anything, anything — 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 129 

a glass of cold water, with a quarter of a knob 
of sugar, suits me well." 

However, like most men who speak thus, the 
traveller was better in his deed, than word ; so 
that three large tumblers of hot rum and water 
confessed him more capacious than themselves, 
before he had much to say to them. 

" It is a curious story. Yon misdoubted me 
out there," he began, with a wave of his glass 
drumstick towards the garden. " But, Tucker, 
I have found yon now, to be a hearty fellow. 
The heart, after all, is the real driving power 
with good fellows, such as you and I are. 
Hang it, I don't suppose, one man in fifty 
thousand would have taken up this thing, like 
me, from pure love of the specie." 

" Of the human species," his host amended 
gently ; then, fearful of any rudeness, added — 
*'no doubt you are right, however; the two 
words are much the same, I do believe.*^ 

" To me no matter is of any moment," resumed 
the red-faced man, with his roses deepening into 
mulberries, " in comparison with the glow of 
heart, produced by a noble action. And when 
we can benefit ourselves as well, what a poor 
heart it must be, that hesitates ! Look at the 
case, which I have in hand. An amiable but 

VOL. I. K 



130 CHRISTOWELL. 

eccentric man, a pattern of every virtue, except 
the rare one of common sense, takes a turn 
against all his family ! He fancies that they are 
all get against him, that their views are sordid, 
and his alone are large ; that, as he cannot alter 
them, his best plan is, to have nothing to do with 
them, and keep out of their sight. Also he 
believes, that a man's truest work is, to earn his 
own living, with his own hands, and wash them 
clean of all the vices of the world. In a word, 
he has crotchets, about* society, nature, and 
things of that sort, to put it clearly. Well, he 
disappears, without rhyme or reason, having 
lost the only link that retained him in society, a 
charming young wife, who was a beauty of this 
county. He buries himself, in some outlandish 
region, although he belongs to a distinguished 
family, and has done a good deal to distinguish 
himself. No doubt, he believes that he has 
acted for the best ; that he is fulfilling what is 
called in the cant of the day, " a lofty mission ; " 
that he stood across the light of other people's 
prospects, and was bound in duty to obliterate 
himself; whereas, in reality, he is consulting 
his own tastes, which are out of all reason, and 
fantastic. 

" Let us say, that his family have long looked 



THE KED-FACED MAN. 131 

upon him as an excellent, but misguided fellow ; 
not a black sheep, but a stray sheep, which will 
have its own way; and hoping for his happi- 
ness, they make no fuss about him. But in the 
course of years, he becomes more needful ; as a 
snug little property falls to him by succession, 
and his signature is needed, as a matter of 
formality, in a settlement of importance. In 
such a case, he must abandon for a moment his 
hermitage, receive his dues, and perform his 
duty. Possibly, he may be induced to return 
altogether to civilized existence. If so, he will 
be welcomed by enthusiastic friends, and his 
history shall appear, in letters of pure gold. On 
the other hand, if he prefers the seclusion, which 
must have become his second nature now, he may 
return to it, with his wheels greased — excuse 
the coarseness of the allusion, my dear sir; what 
I mean is, with more butter for his farmhouse 
bread. Now, what do you think of my proposal ?" 

" I do not appear to have quite understood," 
Mr. Tucker replied, very quietly, and slowly, 
" what proposal there is before me ; or even that 
there is any at all. If not a rude question, in 
my own house, I would venture to ask, sir, 
without oflFence, whether you are a solicitor ? " 

" Come now, my friend, you are a little too 



132 CHRISTOWELL. 

hard on me. When I have tried to make it 
clear to you, that I desire to do good ! " 

" I am sure I beg your pardon, sir. But so 
they may sometimes ; I do assure you, I have 
known it. But since you are not in the law, I 
may speak freely. And to save you further 
trouble, I will own right out, that I am pretty 
sure, by^this time, of the gentleman you mean. 
I know of no great mystery in the matter ; and 
such things are not at all in my line. He 
wished to be quiet, and undisturbed, as a man 
might well do in a sad affliction ; and as every 
man has a right to do, if he chooses. I felt the 
same feeling myself, Mr. Gaston, in the days 
when the Lord afflicted me." 

The voice of the old man trembled slightly, 
for his affliction was life-long; and this had 
helped to draw him towards the man in like 
distress, who had made up his mind, to retire 
from the world. 

" You too have lamented ? " said the red-faced 
man. " It is the lot of us all, my dear sir. 
But the duty of the strong man is, to up, cast 
off, and gird himself." 

" I will not deny it. But it takes a time to 
do it, as well as a clear view of the world. And 
for looking at the world, there are quite as many 



THE RED-FACED MAN. 133 

hills, as there are men to stand on tliem. But I 
am keeping you long from your dinner, Mr. 
G-aston, which I believe you have ordered. 
You do not expect me to tell you, I suppose, all 
I know about the gentleman you ask of ? " 

" If there is anything that I avoid. Tucker," 
the visitor replied, as he compounded for himself 
a fourth instalment of rum-punch — " it is the 
barest semblance of a liberty. Your excellent 
health, my dear friend! I have never en- 
countered a more harmonious soul. No, no ; I 
only ask you, for the gentleman's address, to do 
him a genuine, and great kindness.** 

" It will give me real pleasure," said the host, 
who was standing, and bowing at the generous 
carousal in his honour, " to place you in commu- 
nication with him ; upon the receipt of his per- 
mission. That is a thing for him to give ; and 
not for me to take as granted. Shall I write, 
and inform him of your application ? Or will 
you write yourself, Mr. Gaston, and leave it 
with me to be forwarded ? You do not know 
the name, I think you say — the present name of 
the gentleman. But if you will use the name 
you know him by, I wiU answer for safe delivery. 
We may save the post, if you begin at once. 
Here is all you want, including seaUng-wax ; 



134 CHRISTOWELL. 

and I will leave the room while you write, if 
you think proper." 

^* Well ! " cried the visitor, jumping up, with a 
force that shook the room, and made the glasses 
rattle, while his face turned white, and its glow 
flew to his eyes ; " is that all you mean to tell 
me?" 

" I can tell you nothing more," the old man 
answered, looking at him firmly, but with great 
surprise ; " nothing more ; until I get permis- 
sion. Surely you would not " 

" I forgot one little thing," the other inter- 
rupted, as he thrust his hand so violently into 
a breast-pocket, that the host nearly made up his 
mind to see a pistol ; " I forgot that nothing is 
to be had for nothing. My mind is so set upon 
discovering that man, that if fifty pounds — well 
then, a hundred pounds " 

" Not a thousand, sir ; no, nor fifty thousand," 
Caleb Tucker broke in sternly. " You must be 
a heartless man, whatever you may say about 
your heart, to insult me so. It is lucky for you, 
that I am not a young man. Leave my house. 
I am not accustomed to entertain such visitors." 

"Over-righteous Caleb," said the red-faced 
man, recovering his colour, and his temper, or 
enough of it to supply cool insolence ; " we have 



THE BED-FACED MAN. 135 

no faith in all this noble indignation. You 
know, my remarkably stingy host, upon which 
side your bread is buttered. And you think to 
make a good thing, of what you have got out of 
me. Ta, ta, Master Dry-rot ! Your very cheap 
rum has spoiled my appetite for dinner. I shall 
go to your cathedral, and pray to be delivered 
from the company of ancient hypocrites." 



136 CHRISTOWEUi. 



CHAPTER X, 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 



In the waxing of the moon, there are great 
things done, upon this world of moonshine. 
Then is the time, to plant the vine, the medlar, 
and the apple-tree, to :ping the store-pig, to 
inaugurate the capon, and rppe the roguish 
onion — crafty contraband of maiden's lips. Then 
also, is the time for loftier, and more subtle 
enterprise; to tempt, or steal, the shy young 
glance — the flutter of inquiring eyes, the touch 
clandestine, the irrelevant remark, the sigh 
about nothing, yet productive of a blush, the 
blush that increases the confusion it betrays — 
and a million other little ways of wonder, in 
the wondrous maze of love. 

Even so, and with a multitude of pieces of 
16 oz. glass — so called in the trade, but really 
never more than 14 oz. — sticking in his wounds, 
with the putty still upon it, Dicky Touchwood 



ANGELIG PEEPS. 137 

came to himself; and lost it, ere ever lie had 
time to scratch it ; which is the first of all 
bodily instincts. For over him leant the very 
loveliest creature, ever seen out of a dream, or 
in it. Deep compassion, sweet anxiety, and an 
inborn dread of the coroner, or the doctor who 
precedes him, filled the beautiful eyes of Eose 
Arthur. The youth looked up, and had a very 
clear idea of having flown up, to what our poets 
call " the blue." 

" Hush ! " the maiden whispered, as his lips 
began to move; "keep your head upon the 
flower-pot, and try to think of nothing. Never 
mind, about all the things you have broken. 
You did not mean to do it, and it can't be 
helped now. The only thing you have to do, is 
to keep as still as possible. Papa is gone to 
meet Dr. Perperaps, and he may be expected, at 
any moment. You are to go to sleep, until he 
comes." 

The heavily wounded youth, instead of obey- 
ing orders, gazed the more. To look at her 
was poetry, and to listen to her was music. 
But she turned away, and left him nothing for 
his eyes. 

"It must have been an angel. But they 
have no papas," he began to reason with him- 



138 CHRISTOWELL. 

self aloud ; " and they never would havi3 sent 
for Dr. Perperaps. None but the devil could 
have sent for him. Oh, where can I be ? What 
is the meaning of it? And what is this 
mysterious substance, all around me ? " 

" Brewer's grains," the silvery voice replied ; 
" we have it every spring, to datch the slugs 
with ; and my father put it down, to keep you 
cool, and moist; It smells very nice ; you 
should be thankful for it." 

" So I aln. Oh, I am thankful now to be able 
to smell any beer at all. • But I seem to be full 
of holes, and sore places, and pieces of stuflf 
sticking into me ! " 

" You could hardly expect, to have no holes 
yourself, after making such a great hole in our 
glass ; but you must not let that dwell at all 
upon your mind. My father is a gentleman, 
who does his own glazing. And really, if you 
must fall, you have fallen very luckily. Al- 
though, when first you look at it, it seems 
almost an enormous hole, for a smallish boy to 
have made so quickly." 

Richard Touchwood, Esquire, jumped up, 
when he heard himself called " a smallish boy." 
Or rather, he tried to jump up, but his swath- 
ings stopped him, and then a very jagged barb 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 139 

of pain ; and then a light hand replanted him, 
among the grains, and upon the pot. 

" You are too bad," she said ; " you want to 
go everywhere, where you have no business. 
But oh, I am so sorry for your pain, poor boy ! 
If you would only cry a little, it would do you 
so much good." 

" Cry ! " exclaimed Dicky, in a high tone of 
disdain, yet not wholly out of concert with the 
course suggested ; " have you never even heard 
that I am a Caius-College man, the place where 
the very best physicians come from ? " 

" No, I never heard of that. I have heard of 
hospitals, and the wards that belong to them ; 
but never of keys colleges. Since you are in 
training for the medical profession, you ought 
to try more than you do, to enter into your 
own position. It is a strict necessity, for you 

to lie still ; but instead of doing that Oh, 

here comes Dr. Perperaps, crossing our bridge 
very nicely indeed! And he has brought his 
daughter, Spotty, with him. He never goes 
anywhere, without Miss Spotty. Now you will 
be in better hands than mine. Good-bye." 

" Oh, I implore you not to go away. Who- 
ever you are — and I have hardly seen you 
yet, although I have told you all about my- 



140 CHRISTOWELL. 

self — do try to see that Dr. Perperaps doesn't 
kill me." 

" Oh no ! He is the most kind-hearted man ; 
and exceedingly clever, for a doctor. And when 
he does happen to make a mistake, his daughter 
puts it right for him. They are very nice 
people, and so natural." 

" Don't I know him too well ? He pulled out 
my wrong tooth ; and how could his daughter 
put it in again ? I had a bad knee, and he 

» 

blistered the other, to produce counter-irritation. 
And once, when a piece of camp-stool ran into 

me Oh, I had better hold my tongue ! I 

know his footstep. I'll be dead — to save him 
trouble." 

" Ah, ha ! What have we here ? Very sad 
indeed. Most serious case. Our valued young 
friend — let us turn him over. A spirited youth 
— too spirited, in fact. Our great universi- 
ties produce a kind of comatosis. They over- 
tax corporeal, and relax the mental energies. 
The result of such a system is before us 



now." 



Dr. Perperaps, as he came to this conclusion, 
turned to his daughter, who was standing in 
the doorway ; and she said, " Yes. But he has 
tumbled through the glass." 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 141 

** That is a minor, but a logical result, of the 
vicious system I describe. The physical powers 
have been overdone. The judgment was dor- 
mant ; or he would not have tried the leap. 
Now both pay the penalty of disproportion. 
He does not know me, the truest friend he ever 
had. It is a beautiful instance of our inter- 
dependence." 

" Here are the bandages," his daughter said 
concisely ; " and here is cold water. We may 
be glad, Miss Arthur, of a little warm, if con- 
venient." 

" These hasty ways," the doctor whispered to 
Mr. Arthur, while his daughter set to work, 
"are entirely the result of the Reform Bill. 
Spotty was a good girl, until that passed ; and 
so far as that goes, she is a good girl still. 
But it caused a feminine upheaval, sir ; and the 
wisest man dare not predict the issue. She 
does the preliminaries ; she is wonderfully 
sagacious ; and then the scientific element steps 
in. Be careful, my dear ; be very careful. Lady 
Touchwood thinks so much of him." 

Spotty, who acted as her father's assistant, 
and better half in his profession, proceeded very 
strongly, and most skilfully, with her work ; 
while the doctor serenely discussed the case. 



142 CHRISTOWELL, 

The hapless rat-hunter had fainted in earnest, 
at the very first symptom of medical relief ; and 
this was the best thing he could have done. 
" His wounds were very interesting, and likely 
to be painful ; but properly speaking, not really 
dangerous to a Cambridge man. No limbs were 
broken ; although the descent was calculated to 
produce much fracture. And unless inflam- 
matory action supervened, recovery was only a 
question of time, and of skilful, and unremitting 
curative appliances." Thus said the doctor; 
and such was his report, by a boy upon a pony, 
to Touchwood Park. 

While these things were toward, and theory 
and practice were kissing one another — as they 
generally do, when the money goes into the 
same bag — Rose was seeking, at her father s 
order, a redoubtable person to lend a hand. 
Captain Larks, with the instinct of a soldier, 
knew that the medical proceedings would ter- 
minate in carrying, as they generally do. 
Therefore, he got his hand-barrow ready, and 
sent for an able-bodied man, to share the weight 
of it. And this was a good workman, when he 
liked to work, Sam Slowbury, of Brent-fuzz 
corner. 

Slowbury disliked all activity, as heartily as 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 143 

anybody in the parish ; and could shirk it, as 
thoroughly as any man. He entered well into 
the humour of the contract, in virtue of which 
a man gets as much money, on a Saturday 
night, for doing nothing, as for working hard 
throughout the week, and husbands at once his 
own resources, and prospective value, by pro- 
longing his job to the uttermost penny. 

Such was the integrity of this man, and his 
principles so uncompromising; so thoroughly 
did he respect himself, and dignify his vocation, 
that whether he were out of sight, or whether 
he were strictly watched, his behaviour was the 
same. In neither case, would he do a stroke of 
work, except as the exception. This conduct 
ensured him universal regard, and more work, 
than even he could leave undone. 

After large, and sweet experience of the 
British workman, Mr. Arthur had come to the 
definite conclusion, that these are the men 
whom it is wisest to employ. Because there is 
no disappointment with them ; no qualm of con- 
science, at neglecting to look after them ; no loss 
of time, in absurd endeavours to make them do 
a little work, now and then. There are few 
greater pleasures, than to contemplate repose ; 
especially when honourably purchased by one- 



144 CHRISTOWELL. 

self; and any employer of Sam Slowbury might 
always enjoy that pleasure in perfection. But 
Sam, to-day, was comparatively at work, having 
made up his mind to a holiday, and to spend it 
in the perilous pursuit of the rat. The catas- 
trophe of that great expedition left his mind in 
a gentle, head-scratching condition, candidly 
open to a pint of cider ; and here he stood now, 
at one end of the bier. 

" Steady ! " said the captain, a needless ex- 
hortation to a man of Sam's philosophy; then 
liting his end of the barrow,* upon which the 
casual visitor had been laid, he led them, down 
tbe bloom-roofed alleys, to his cheerful cottage- 
door. For the green-house, under the cliflF, was 
nearly two hundred yards from his dwelling- 
place. 

" Pardon me, sir, if I speak amiss," said Dr. 
Perperaps, when they stopped here ; " but may 
I ask you a somewhat important question, round 
the corner? Spotty, attend to the patient. 
Now, sir, it is this," he continued in a low tone, 
as soon as Mr. Arthur followed him, " we have 
reason to believe, that you value very highly, 
as every good Englishman has a right to do, 
your privacy, your retirement — I might say, 
your charming seclusion from the world. Now, 



ANGEUO PEEPS. 145 

this boy 'a mother, Lady Touchwood, is — ah 
well — ^you understand me/* 

"I have merely heard her name; I know 
nothing mbr6 about her. What is she, for me 
to be afraid of ? " 

" Not at all, my dear sir j you misunderstand 
me. Her ladyship is a delightful person, until 
— until her feelings overpower her. Charitable, 
kind-hearted, hospitable, devout, elegant in her 
manners, and fond of making presents — ^a very 
fine quality growing rarer every yearj — still, 
she does want to get to the bottom of every^ 
thing; doubtless from intensity of sympathy. 
And if anybody baffles her, she becomes the very 
devil. Pardon me. Captain Larks, I speak in 
strictest confidence ; but I have reason to believe, 
that her ladyship's attention has been directed,, 
with some interest^ to you. If once she gets 
admission to your little household (which you 
cannot well deny her, if you take in her son), 
as soon as her alarm about him is over, she wiH 
begin to feel an undesirable interest, in every-^ 
thing concerning you." 

" Dr. Perperaps," answered Mr. Arthur, " it 
is most obliging of you, to show such con- 
sideration for my wishes." 

The doctor, a short, well rounded man, came 

VOL. I. L 



146 CHRISTOWELL. 

one step nearer, and behind the silver head of 
the black bamboo, which he always carried, 
relaxed his dignity with a wink. 

" It is not altogether that," he said ; " I con- 
sider my own convenience also. I am not so 
yonng as I was ; and I don't want to walk up 
your hill, twice a day. And distance is a pro- 
fessional element. Touchwood Park is three 
times as far off; and a carriage would be sent 
for me. The patient may very well be taken, 
as he is, to my little residence, and go home, 
upon springs, in a day or two. His affectionate 
mother would send for me, twice every day; 
and with prophylactic, as well as remedial 
measures *' 

" I am much obliged to you ; but it will not 
do. The boy has been wounded on my pre- 
mises; and with me he shall stay, until his 
relatives remove him. I should feel that I had 
done an inhuman thing, if I sent him from my 
door, in his present condition. Say no more 
about it, sir ; but come in, and help us." 

The doctor gave in, as he could not help 
doing, but said to himself, that he should have 
his revenge ; for he knew a little more of Lady 
Touchwood, than Captain Larks could dream of. 
And he saw a good chance of some pleasant 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 147 

excitement, and matters of deep interest to be 
told to his good wife, when Spotty, and the 
little ones, were gone to bed, and the toddy was 
being measured in the Apostle's spoon. Like 
nearly all medical men in country places, he 
had a hard time of it ; being at everybody's 
beck, and call ; and called for almost everything, 
except to take his money. 

And so, when evening came down upon the 
hills, and the hills tried to pass it off in shadow 
to the valleys, there was no more comfortable 
fellow to be founds within the enclosure of their 
deepening folds, than little Dicky Touchwood 
at Larks' cot. By the strong arms of Spotty, 
and the nimble hands of Rose, a bed was pro- 
vided for him, in the captain's sitting-room — 
a pretty little place, with a door opening into 
the span-roof vinery. Here lay the youth, 
upon the best bed of the cottage; with three 
bottles of mixture, tied over at the top with 
white, like sisters of mercy, and a basin of 
soup keeping warm, upon one of Mr. Arthur's 
devices for slaying green-fly; and best of all 
cordials — in his present state of heart — bright 
glimpses of the lovely Rose, that flitted to and 
fro. 

He would have known better, than to let his 



148 CHRISTOWELL. 

mind wander, abont pretty figures, and after 
sweet faces, and into, and ont, of a thousand 
vagaries of smile, and of sigh, and of tremulous 
delight, if the glass of the green-house had 
begun to hurt him yet, or the putty to torment 
him, as they meant to do to-morrow. For the 
present, he was grateful for every single hole 
made in him (so long as lard, and liniment, pre- 
vented it from smarting) as a trifle of punctua- 
tion, needful before the great impression of his 
life was struck. 

" Now, Master Touchwood, how often must 
I tell you," said Spotty, who was left, to help as 
nurse, " that you are not to roll, like that ? It 
loosens all the fastenings, and it will set up in- 
flammation. 

" I don't care two skips of a — flower, if it 
does. I must see my angel; and I can't see 
through the bed-post." 

" I tell you once more, there is no angel here. 
The old women call me a ministering angel, 
when the parish allows them a noggin of gin. 
But I know well enough, that I am not angelic." 

" As if I meant you ! " the patient answered, 
with more sincerity than courtesy. " You are 
very kind indeed, and you rub up the rags, like 
silver paper, and you make them soft. But the 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 149 

other — oh, Miss Perperaps, what a perfect, 
perfect angel ! " 

"It is time for you to have this draught. 
Your tongue is white. That comes of talking 
about angels so. To make a face is useless. 
You must have it. I dare say it is nasty. 
Shall the angel come, and give it you ? " 

" Oh no ! Please not to let her see me take 
it. I always make such horrid faces. And I 
want her to think, how nice I am. If I could 
only get it down, while she is round the 
comer." 

" Wait, till I shake the bottom up. The best 
of the flavour is always there. Now take it, 
like a man ; and I will let her know, how brave 
you were." 

" But Spotty — or at least I mean, Miss Per- 
peraps, do you think it will really make any 
difference with her ? Are you sure that she 
will have a high opinion of me — if — if I 
do it ? " 

"I am certain that she will. She sighed, 
and she said * Poor fellow ! ' twice over, when 
she saw the bottles come. If you wish to be 
a hero, put your head the proper way, and open 
your mouth, and shut both eyes." 

So absorbing was the power of love at first 



150 CHRISTOWELL. 

sight, that Dicky took his medicine like a 
martyr, and even pretended that he found it 
nice. 

" Here is your reward ! I will tell her of 
yonr goodness ; how pleased she will be ! " ex- 
claimed his nurse ; " because she knows so well, 
what a job it is to make you. She will hardly 
believe her own ears." 

" I don't understand you. How can she 
know about it, when she never set eyes on me, 
before to-day ? " 

" I don't mean the angel," answered Spotty, 

with a laugh ; " or at least, I mean your proper 
one — your dear mamma. Here comes Lady 
Touchwood." 

" Oh, bother ! " cried the young squire ; " don't 
let her in. Say, that you've got orders — say, 
that it will kill me — say anything you like — 
say they're laying me out." 

" Oh, Master Dicky, you ungrateful wretch ! 
If I only had a mother, to make a fuss about 
me ! "Would I ever shut her out, that I might 
carry on with angels ? " 

Poor Spotty was the daughter of a departed 
Mrs. Perperaps; and her stepmother (having 
many interesting babes, of far greater value 
than Sporetta) employed that young lady, for 



ANGELIC PEEPS. 161 

the best part of her time, in the genial occupa- 
tions of the nursery, and wash-house. This 
damsel, being gifted with a great love of the 
healing art, was now beginning to revolt at 
large, from the drudgery of pail, and pan ; and 
her father, who was not a fool (although he 
used the jargon of that race), perceived, in this 
daughter, a revival of the fine enthusiasm, which 
had pulled him down. In the fervour of youth, 
he had nourished gay ideas of making great 
discoveries, and doing lots of good ; and happily 
he did no harm, except unto himself. Among 
his lucid theories, was a grand one about spores, 
as the protoplasm, or proto-phantasm, of all 
sporadic existence. And his child appearing, 
on the same day as his book, in spite of her 
mother, he would have her name — " Sporetta." 
Her name lasted longer than the book, because 
it appealed to a larger audience, and nobody 
could make out what it meant. But soon even 
this sweet association vanished; for Sporetta 
took the chicken-pox, before her skin was 
hardened ; and no hundred-headed Stentor, with 
a high-pressure boiler, and three steam-whistles 
in his every mouth, nay, nor even the foremost 
statesman of the age, might ever have stormed 
people's eyes, through their ears, to believe that 



162 CHRISTOWELL. 

the child was not spotty. Her name had begun 
to be " Spotterer " ah^ady ; and now as the 
polystigmatic view deepened, her name accrusted 
finally to th© ppQitiye form of " Spotty^" 



( 163 ) 



CHAPTER XI. 



MOTHER DEAR. 



Whew two persons, as widely asunder in nature, 
as she ever lets ns be, having long held 
imaginary notion of each other, for the first 
time come together in the bodily form, under 
stress of circnmstance, what becomes of all they 
meant to do ? Some men have had the happi- 
ness to see two dogs, who have been chained 
np, for some months of moonlight, within bark- 
ing distance of each other, and having higher 
gifts than we possess, have appraised one 
another without interview, according as the 
wind blew to or fro — to behold these twain 
dogs meet upon the highway, at length and at 
last, for the very first time, on a day when 
there is wind enough to blow their tails oflF. 
Either dog has made his mind up, as to how he 
will behave ; each knows every comer of his 
adversary's mouth, and which of his teeth has 



164 CHRISTOWELL. 

been broken by a bone ; be bas learned every 
item of bis brotber barker's story (from bis 
howls to tbe man in tbe moon, to come and 
belp bim), and sitting on bis banncbes, be bas 
fifty times rehearsed bis proceedings with that 
noisy dog, when be shall come across him. 
Yet now, when tbe blissful opportunity is 
come, when the other dog is looking at him, 
smaller than bis bark was, and easier to thrash 
than be ever has imagined him, does be fall 
upon, and rend him ? No, not be ; tails wag 
across the gale, with growing cordiality ; snifis 
try to baffle facts ; good will is mutual ; the 
weather is too bad, for any dog to say a word 
upon any other subject. In half a minute, they 
have managed to smell up a fundamental friend- 
ship ; and henceforth, if they bark of nights, it 
will not be at, but with, each other. 

Now Lady Touchwood, and Captain Larks, 
acted very differently from this. Their manner 
was as full of common sense, and of waiting for 
a leading question from each other, as Caesar's, 
and Lion's, may be at first sight ; but they failed 
of the insight, which man, (the only animal 
capable of envy), decries as instinct. 

"I suppose this is the bouse of Captain 
Larks," said tbe lady in tbe little porch, looking 



MOTHER DEAR. 155 

at the owner, who had got his bridge down, 
and his door wide open. "Dr. Perperaps is 
with me. I am come to see my son, who has 
met with a very sad accident, I fear. Perhaps 
you are Captain Larks himself." 

"I believe that I have the honour to bear 
that name," Mr. Arthur replied, with a very 
stiff bow ; " at least in this part of the country. 
The boy is in no danger ; but severely cut, and 
shaken." 

" I suppose you will not refuse me liberty to 
see him. Perhaps in such a question, the very 
best judge is his mother." Lady Touchwood 
spoke sharply, and with what she took for 
irony. 

" There is not any question in the case, that 
I am aware of. And there can be no question, 
as to your right to see him. Be careful, if you 
please ; there is an awkward step here. Rose, 
my darling. Lady Touchwood will follow you. 
Hold your candle higher, that's a dear little 
child. My daughter. Lady Touchwood ! Allow 
me to introduce her." 

" Well ! " communed the visitor, with her own 
heart only; "things must be come to a very 
pretty pass, when a man, who has run away 
from justice, and Uves by seUing pears, and 



156 CHRISTOWELL. 

apples, introduces his daughter to me, and 
orders me to follow her ! And Mr. Short up- 
braids me with my quick temper ! If he could see 

me now But never mind ; they shall know 

my opinion of them, when Dicky can be moved." 

In a very few minutes, however. Lady 
Touchwood began to waver largely, in her 
opinion of them ; even as the tail of the inimical 
dog — ^whose "emotional condition" has been 
analysed above — unconsciously relaxes, from the 
wiry cock of defiance, first to the crisp bend of 
inquiry, then to the pleasing wave, of interest 
and sympathy, and lastly to the woolly wag, of 
amity, and brotherhood. So pervading is the 
tendency towards good will, in the breast of all 
genuine mammalia. 

There could be no doubt, that much trouble 
had been taken, for the comfort and welfare of 
the adventurous rat-hunter : the motherly per- 
ception took this in, at a glance ; and the deep 
sleep of the wounded one (which he suddenly 

accomplished) appealed to the tenderest, and 
most sacred feelings of maternity. 

" Poor darling ! " the mother whispered, hav- 
ing kissed his marble forehead ; " how beauti- 
fully regular his breathing is ! He always had 
that gift, whatever happened to him. Can I 



MOTBEB DBAR. 157 

ever show my gratitude to heaven, Miss Larks, 
for the providential fact, that his features are 
nninjured? His features have been declared, 
by the first sculptor of the age, to be of the 
very purest classical ideal. Whether he said 
Doric, or Ionic, or perhaps Gothic, I will not 
be certain, at this exciting period/' 

" We made sure at first, that his nose was cut 
in two," replied Spotty Perperaps, who had 
done the lion's share, and would not be put in 
the background, like that ; " but it turned out 
to be a stripe of red lead, my lady ; and when I 
sponged it off, I found his dear nose all right." 

" His dear nose, indeed ! Who is this young 
female ? Oh, the doctor's daughter. Spotty ! 
Yes, I heard that you were here." 

" And a good job for Master Dicky, that I 
came up with father," said the spirited Miss Per- 
peraps, in a tone of self-assertion ; " such little 
things as this always come into my compass." 

The sturdy manner, and rather rough appear- 
ance of the damsel — too important as she was, 
to be affronted just now — brought into sweet 
contrast the gentle demeanour, and sympathis- 
ing glances of the other young lady ; who kept 
herself in the background, and then retired into 
the passage. 



158 CHRISTOWELL. 

"Poor darling! Precious sufferer! I will 
disturb him no longer," Lady Touchwood 
whispered gently, as she tucked her Dicky's 
ears up. " Though it would have been such a 
rapture, to hear him even breathe my name. 
But heaven, in its wisdom, has sent this balmy 
slumber. Come forward, my dear; you are a 
very nice young lady. Miss Larks, I am 
pleased with you. Your behaviour is most 
becoming. You have never said a word,"since 
I came in ; though you cordially feel for me, in 
this sad affliction. Of course you are not a 
nurse, or anything of that kind. Miss Perperaps, 
who is so clever, and accustomed to it, will be 
quite indefatigable, I am sure, and will find me 
full of gratitude. But you, my dear, may also 
be of very great assistance to us ; and I am 
certain, from your lovely eyes, that you are 
kind, and gentle." 

Rose Arthur, being very shy with strangers, 
and reluctant always to be made conspicuous, 
came forward, just as far as manners, and her 
sense of obedience prescribed. There, the light 
of two candles (a gallant dip, and a lordly 
tallow-mould) combined to play upon her blush- 
ing cheeks, white forehead, and softly sparkling 
eyes. And strange to say, another pair of eyes 



MOTHER DEAR. 159 

(supposed to be buried in deep repose) contrived 
to unclose themselves, and steal a narrow glance, 
through glimmering lashes, as children " draw 
straws " from the fire. 

" If I can be of any use," said Rose, " in any- 
way whatever — I mean of course for messages, 
or outdoor work'* — she qualified her offer, 
because she met the patient's eager gaze at 
her — " any little things, to save Miss Perperaps 
from — from coming away too much ; I shall be 
very glad to be of use, I*m sure." 

" I thought that I heard a heavy sigh," — 
Lady Touchwood turned, as she spoke; — " surely 

our precious sufferer Dicky, dear, are you 

conscious of my presence, and pining for me ? " 

A snore of the highest artistic order, superior 
to nature's sweetest effort, conveyed, to the 
mother's yearning heart, a solace at the same 
time, and yet a disappointment. 

" I will suppress my very natural desire," she 
whispered to Rose, while Spotty turned away, 
and indulged in a broad grin, out of the window ; 
" my fond wish to hear, if it were but a single 
syllable, from those dear lips. It is wrong, and 
selfish of me. How thankful should I be, for 
the balmy depth of this repose ! That is how 
he always sleeps, Miss Larks, ever since he fell 



160 GHRigTOWELL. 

and indented his ligaments, the day he was put 
into small clothes. I never quite understood 
what the process was ; the result, however, has 
been remarkable. On no account let him be 
disturbed to-night, by so much as the mention 
of my name. He will not awake, for ten hours 
now. I know all his ways, sa thoroughly. 
Sleep on, darling, and the angels be with you." 

" You don't deserve to have such a ma," said 
Spotty, running up to her patient, as soon as 
his mother was out of ear-shot ; " not to give 
her a kiss, or so much as a word ! " 

" It is all very fine for you to talk," the 
youth replied, to soothe his conscience, by strong 
statement of his case ; " you don't know any- 
thing at all about it. Do you suppose, that I 
could put up, with being cried over, and kissed, 
and cuddled, and called all soorts of nursery 
names, in the sight and hearing of — I mean 
while she — while other persons at least, who 
cannot be expected to know my proper 
age 

" Oh, indeed ! I see. To be sure ! " ex- 
claimed Miss Perperaps ; " you want to be 
taken for a man, before your time. You seem 
to have conceived an extraordinary affection, for 
somebody, instead of your mother. Lady Touch- 



MOTHER DEAB. 161 

wood is talking with Captain Larks ; now it 
will make her more happy, if I tell her all 
about it." 

" If you do, I will tear every bandage off, 
and my death will lie at your door. Spotty. I 
have got an old watch, that I had at school ; it 
is out of fashion now, but it goes very well ; 
and I'll give it to you, if you only do your duty 
to me. People run you down, I know ; but in 
my opinion, you are wonderfully clever." 

" No, Master Dicky, I am not at all that. 
But I see a great many stupid things done by 
people, who ought to know better. Marrying 
again, for instance, and having other children ; 
what do you think of that, Mr. Touchwood ? " 

" A man when he marries," said Dicky with 
solemnity, and hoping that somebody might be 
listening in the passage, " swears upon the 
Bible, to have only one wife, to cleave to her, to 
stick to her, to love, honour, and obey her. 
How can he do that, I should like to know, if 
he goes, and gets married to another woman ? 
Besides, we are told, and I have to attend 
Divinity lectures, I assure you, that no man 
can be blameless, except he be the husband of 
one wife. And that is how I intend to conduct 
myself." 

TOL. I. u 



162 OHRISTOWELL. 

"How I wish that my pa," said Miss Per- 
peraps, with a sigh, " had attended Divinity 
lectures. But hush, Master Dicky, I can hear 
my lady going, and my dear papa is doing 
Dixon to her ; you know what that means in 
our practice, I suppose ? " 

" No, I never heard of it. They don't show 
us things at Cambridge. Oh, Spotty, I do like 
you so, because you don't care ! " 

" But I do care. And that makes me see how 

things are. A Dixon is a swing-cask, a sort of 

water-barrow, a tub upon pins between two 

wheels, for going down the walks with. They 

have got one, in your father's place. They are 

all very well, while they stand at the pump, 

because there is a shore to them. But if you 

want to make them go, you have to be very 

careful. If you put too much in them, they 

kick up one way ; and if you put too little, they 

kick up the other, and your trouble goes for 

nothing." 

"I can understand that well enough," 

answered Dicky, whose jnind was by no means 

of electric speed ; " but what has it got to do, 

with the doctor, and my mother ? " 

"Everything," said Spotty, with a look of 

some contempt ; " if my father were to make 



MOTHER DEAR. 163 

too mucli of your injuries, he would terrify your 
mother, and she would fetch a man from Exeter. 
So the tub would go over, from having too much 
in it. But if he made too little of your mishap, 
why then it would be almost worse, for the tub 
would go over the other way, because of being 
empty." 

" I wish you would talk plain English, Spotty. 
All your stuff comes in bottles. What have 
tubs got to do with it ? But perhaps you make 
enough to last the twelvemonth, at one brewing. 
I can see what you mean, about another man 
coming ; but I don't see what harm could come 
of making little of it." 

"Yery well, if you can't seQ, you are not 
worth telling, I would not have told you what 
I have, only for the way in which they trampled 
upon me. My dear pa is gone to see my lady 
to her carriage, that wouldn't come up the hill, 
because it is so rocky. Ah, I do admire Captain 
Larks, for living where people must alight from 
their chariots, to get at him." 

" Spotty, you are a radical. I used to be one, 
when I was very young, and could not see the 
mischief of it. Wise people must be made to 
leave it off. But politics always make me 
sleepy. Go, and see whether my mother is clean 



164 CHRISTOWELL, 

gone, and whether your father means to plague 
me any more. It shall never be said of me, that 
I made a fuss about a trifle. I dare say you 
would like to hear me groan. Girls always do ; 
because then they can boast about having their 
teeth out, and all that, better than we men do. 
But I am as game, as a three-legged rat." 

** Just you wait a bit, before you boast," Miss 
Perperaps answered, as she went to fetch her 
father ; " your troubles are not begun yet, 
Master Dicky ; the wound in your tibia has got 
some bull's-eye glass in it, and what is worse to 
my mind, green scum of rotten whiting. If you 
don't begin to squeak to-morrow, for certain you 
will, on Sunday." 



.( 165 ) 



CHAPTER XII. 



" NOUS." 



" The idea is a good one. Sometimes there is a 
dove-tail to be made, of cross purposes, when laid 
aright." Mr. Short said this, to his well-beloved 
NouSy as they sat down together, to consider 
their breakfast and the business of the day, on 
a very nice Monday morning. Monday morning 
is the sweetest of the week, not only for parsons, 
but for dogs as well ; for they both have passed 
through tribulation yesterday, and are all the 
better for it; and best of all, have six days 
before them, ere the trial comes again. 

Perhaps, it would be too wide a statement, to 
aver that a parson is bound officially to feel a 
depression of his bright, elastic, and naturally 
large mind, and to get up at a low level, upon a 
Sunday morning. He means to preach admirably, 
and he does it (often with some drain upon 
his own resources) ; he has many sound ideas. 



166 christO^elL. 

which he wants to watch, in their movement into 
wakeful minds ; and perhaps the very last of his 
desires is, to let anybody else come, and do it 
better for him. Still he is glad, and it is a 
proof of his humility to be so, when he has done 
his duty. 

His dog, on the other hand, if tenderly 
attached to him — as a parson's dog is sure to be 
— rejoices with a treble bark, when the trying 
day is over. In the present " distracted condi- 
tion of the church," he is not allowed to go 
there, though his clerical ancestors may have 
made a point of it. Sitting on the bricks, out- 
side his kennel, he hears the fine call of the 
bells, and he smells the swing of the man, and 
the boy, who are ringing, because they both 
work in the vicarage garden. Then he sees a 
lot of people in the foot-path meadow (where a 
hare has a seat, to his certain knowledge, and 
a wedded pair of partridges come almost every 
evening) gingerly walking, with their best 
clothes on, and trying not to make too much 
noise, because they are getting near the church- 
yard. They have got a dog with them ; and 
his jealousy suggests, that a lay dog will be let 
in, where he is not. He quickens in his fore- 
legs, and gives a distant " wuff " at him, with a 



M 



NOUS." 167 



shake of his ears, and a toss of his nose, and i 
hope that he may know how to behave himself; 

Then comes his final misery, the last straw 
that breaks his back. H^ has seen the two 
girls go, with their Sunday stripes, and flarings 
on, and their yellow cotton gloves, too fine for 
him to sniff at ; also the boy who sweeps him 
up is gone — which was a pang to him, greater 
than that of petticoats — but when his master 
comes out the back way, locks the door, and 
hides the key in a clump of violets, and then 
with his sermon in the Spanish leather-case, 
scarcely vouchsafes him a one-handed pat, with 
a long reach, and a sidelong passage (because of 
his best black kersey), and is gone round the 
corner, with a flutter of his tails, too full of 
eloquence to talk to a dog — then he puts down 
his tail in the hole, he scratched advisedly, sits 
down, to keep down with it, and humbles all his 
arrogance, and the best-plumed portions of his 
very noble frame, by revolving on his haunches, 
with his nose up high supinely, and his heart 
appealing to his hmgs, to come up with it in an 
unexampled howl. 

NouSj having passed through all this anguish 
yesterday, as usual, was now in the highest of 
high spirits, this fine Monday morning. He 



168 CHRISTOWELL, 

had heard his master order the horse Trumpeter 
to be thoroughly well-fed, and ready for a long 
ride, at half-past nine o.'clock ; and Nous had 
ascertained, without putting one objectionable 
question, that he was to go too. He had been 
to the stable, and the kitchen, and the larder, 
and several other places too ; and all of these, 
with one accord, announced that Nous was going. 
If there had been any doubt about it, even at 
the pessimistest moment, the quantity of really 
fine victuals set before him was enough to con- 
vince him most delightfully. "Lay you in a 
broad, and good foundation for the day, my 
friend," said his master to him ; and it would 
have been surplusage to repeat the order. 

But apart from the question of nourishment, 
however urgent and agreeable, this dog deserves, 
and in his own right demands, consideration. 
He was not one of those gigantic fellows, who 
are patronized with some tender alarm concern- 
ing the issue, if they take it amiss ; neither was 
he one of those little whipper-snappers, whom it 
is not worth while to propitiate. The first 
question asked about a dog, by a man, is almost 
sure to be an invidious, and rude one, and mainly 
ungrammatical — " What breed is he ? " 

When John Sage of Christowell, who was 



"NOUS." 169 

famous for shedding his own light on things, 
was told that a nobleman (too well known in 
that neighbourhood) was of very long descent, 
he shook his head, and said that he could under- 
stand it now. "He hath not dooed it, of a 
zudden then," said John ; " he hath a' been 
coomin' down, all that wai." But Nous^ though 
of long descent, was not come down like that ; 
and the purity of his lineage shone forth in 
every lineament. A setter of generous birth 
was he, sable, distinguished with spots and gold, 
such as we men call " black and tan;" flued, and 
feathered, and fringed with gold, so that while 
drawing on a covey up the gale, he resembled 
sombre night prolonged in pencils of Aurora. 
This may seem a rose-coloured picture of the 
dog, to those who have not the delight of look- 
ing at him, which really prevented some sports- 
manlike artists from hitting the partridges, when 
they got up. Still even now, in his homelier 
moments, while begging for bacon, or chewing 
the rind (which seems to puzzle dogs' teeth, 
more than tougher substance does), he deserved 
to be regarded, with eyes as attentive as his 
own, than which no more can well be said. For 
nothing was small enough to escape his eyes, or 
large enough to out-gauge them ; but in his 



170 CHRISTOWfiLL. 

broad, calm pupils, all might be discovered, as 
in a lens, reposing, for him to think about. The 
clear depth of the rich brown iris spoke of con-^ 
templation, placid, and too profound for doubt^ 
and a sensitive yearning to be praised, and 
patted. The loveliest lady in the land has not 
such eloquent, lucid, loving eyes; and even if 
she had, they would be as nothing, without 
the tan spot over them. Neither might any 
lady vie with him, for accuracy, length, and 
velvet texture, and delicately saline humidity 
of nose. 

^' Nous,'' said his master, whose thoughts 
were quick enough for one of our race, but very 
slow against a dog's, " things have turned out 
very pleasantly for us. If I had been obliged 
to go on Saturday, I should have doubted about 
taking you, because I must have meditated over 
my sermon, and you are a distracting animal. 
If you come across grouse on the hills, or even 
a snipe, or a plover, you insist upon working 
the question out, without any regard for their 
connubial state. But now upon a Monday, I 
am as free as you are. You shall enjoy your- 
self ; and so will I." 

For the vehement lady herself had called, 
upon her return from the " scene of probation " 



" NOUS.- 171 

— meaning Mr. Arthur's cottage — and begged 
the good vicar to put off his trip ; for she could 
not think twice about the wilful Julia, while 
her dear obedient boy lay on a bed of suffering, 
through his self-sacrificing heroism. Oh, if it 
only had been Julia, she said, it would have 
been so much nicer then, to recognize the hand 
of Providence ! Mr. Short smiled dryly, and 
revolved in his mind some rumour that had 
reached him, concerning bottled beer. But he 
gladly put off his long ride, till the Monday, and 
paid a short visit, on Saturday, to the interesting 
Dicky, who was now shedding salt tears into 
water-gruel, and gazing at three bottles, hatted 
with pill-boxes, and booted to the knees with 
slimy sediment. Spotty stood before him, and 
he knew that words were vain, and the deepest 
sigh would be no more than a signal for a 
gargle. 

Now, Mr. Short loved both his horse, and his 
dog ; and to see them thus full of the joy of the 
outbreak, from stable and kennel, and the glory 
of the air, and the hope of adventure, and dis- 
tinction, and renown, was sure to set his own 
spirit capering with theirs, and the dark soul 
of man flitting into sunny places, and even the 
mind soaring into the air, out of which it was 



172 CHRISTOWELL. 

taken, and to which it shall return. The air 
was more delightful than the mind to-day ; 
and to ride was far better than to reason. 

" Halloa, Nous^ you should have done your 
pranks by this time," the master shouted to 
him, as the dog stood still, suddenly, amazedly, 
and with a headlong point; as a young dog, 
rashly scouring, does too late, when he is almost 
on the tails of game ; " an old stager, like you, 
should know better than that. No birds can 
be here ; yet you never stand a lark. A hare 
on her form, no doubt of it. Down wind on 
a hare, with his nose upon her back. Nous 
would stay there all day; I must go up, and 
see/' 

It is a fine, and ardent sight, to see a noble 
dog, ranging as freely as the wind, check his 
long stride, stand still, and stiffen, with his fore 
feet planted upon the advance, his arched loins 
straightened into a hard strung line, his head 
(that was tossing on high just now) levelled, 
and rigid as an auvil's nose; his upper lip 
quivering, despite hip iron will, and the fixed 
eyes labouring to learn from their own whites, 
whether the master is hurrying up to shoot. 
Meanwhile the hare — for a bird very seldom 
abides to be considered so intently — crouches 



*• Kous." 173 

into the closest compass, with every sinew on 
the spring, yet still; and suppressing every 
ruffle of her gingery fluff, lowers the lids of her 
soft bright eyes, for fear of a sparkle through 
the russet of her flax ; while she watches every 
hair's breadth of her enemy, and hopes that 
nobody has seen her. 

Expecting to rejoice in this well-known sight, 
and the blissful bound of the unchased hare, 
when the dog lies down, and never stirs an 
inch, but bedews the ground from the fountain 
of his mouth, the vicar turned Trumpeter s head, 
and rode up, to release the good dog from his 
statuary state. " Toho, Nous I " he said, just 
to keep up the tradition ; though the dog was 
too wise to want admonition. But to his sur- 
prise, a great change came over the spirit of 
the animal, and his body also, ere ever the 
horse's hoofs were nigh. The first sign of 
weakness was a flutter of the tail, a delicate 
tremor of the golden brush, in which an artistic 
dog concludes. Then the firm line of the back 
relaxed, the curved ears fell, and the counte- 
nance looked foolish ; and after a feeble sniff, or 
two, the whole dog set off helter skelter, down 
the dingle, at whose head he had been standing, 
like a statue. There was no hare before him ; 



174 CHRISTOWELL. 

neither anything moving, in the long desolation, 
except himself, 

" Now, this is to my mind a horrible puzzle," 
the vicar exclaimed, as he pulled up at the spot, 
where the false point had so long held good ; 
" Nous never chases fur, or feather ; and if he 
did, there is none to be chased. He has made 
a thorough fool of himself for once. But no, I 
beg his pardon. There has been some scamp 
here, and he has killed a sheep, I see ! Come 
back, come back, my darling, or you will get 
a knife stuck into you." 

In an agony of dread, for he loved his dog 
most dearly, and the rocky dell forbade all hop€> 
of riding to his succour, he put his nails 
between his lips, and gave a long shrill whistle ; 
and the dog's obedience saved his life. In the, 
distance, down at the end of the combe, a pala 
blue mist overhung a morass, in which a little 
stream lost itself. Nous^ in full gallop down 
the grass-track, stopped short at the whistle, 
with a big stone just beside him, and a heavy 
charge of duck-shot scattered peat, and moss, 
around him. But the big stone had sheltered 
him, and not a hair was hurt of him, while the 
roar of the gun rang up the hollow, and the 
smoke of strong powder spread a dirty blur 



** NOUS.** 175 

before the clean blue mist. From the mixture 
of vapours, a figure with a long gun strode forth 
rapidly, to bag poor Notts ; but he, with his inno- 
cent tail between his legs, and a deep (but brief) 
sympathy for creatures that are shot at, was 
swallowing the hard ground, best foot foremost, 
by the way that he came, and thanking his stars 
to be rid of a rogue, and to see his good master. 
If ever, in the history of the church, any 
parson has been unfitted by his own " emotions " 
— which is now become the proper English 
name of wrath, shame, desire, revenge, and 
other good and bad feelings — for delivering 
with emphasis one short, and strong command- 
ment, and thoroughly fitted for the breach of 
that same, that man was now Vicar of Christo- 
well. Saddened, and cowed by the narrow 
escape, which had shaken his faith in humanity 
(because he understood a gun so well, and took 
such pleasure in its proceedings, when it shot 
at the proper animals). Nous lay down, before 
Trumpeters feet, and panted, and looked very 
piteously up ; for his self-esteem held two deep 
wounds, of the false point, and of being fired at. 
Having been at Winchester, and New College 
(seats of the Muses, where they are so much at 
home, that their language is not always foreign), 



176 CHRISTOWELL. 

Parson Short used a short word ; who shall heed 
what it was, if it bettered his philanthropy? 
Then he jumped from his horse, and bent over 
the dog, in quick fear of finding some big shot- 
hole; so sad were his favourite's attitude, and 
gaze. 

Like every other creature, this dog most 
heartily loathed examination, and strove to 
escape it, by offering paws, and by putting up 
his nose, as no candidate can do. 

"You old humbug, you are not hurt a bit. 
All that you want is, to be made much of; be- 
cause you have made such a fool of yourself. 
Hi, find ! — fetch — drop ! Now you are yourself 
again. Let us see, what there has been here, to 
make such a mighty fuss about." 

Nous J having flipped in, and out of, the 
heather, after his master's glove, and brought it, 
with the greater agility of the canine mind, 
had recovered his balance, and was equal to his 
duties. With his valuable nose, he described 
exactly the outline of the form, which he had 
taken for a hare's, and dwelled more especially 
upon those spots, which retained the warmest 
impression of the shape we so admire. "He 
had no more than two legs," — Nous pronounced 
as he smelled him out — " and two things here, 



"NOUS." 177 

that you call arms ; and lie lay upon his back, 
and he had no tail. And my opinion of him is, 
that he was very dirty." 

" Never mind ; it is no use to think any more 
about it," Mr. Short replied, as his manner was, 
to his dog's observations ; " there is no getting 
near the fellow, be he who he may. And since he 
has not hit you, my good Nous^ I have chiefly 
to regret, that the arch-enemy was so sharp, as 
to take advantage of my anxiety about you." 

Thus, in a comparatively thankful mood, these 
two went upon their way together ; for the 
nature of the ground forbade all hope of pur- 
suing the hang-dog skulker. But Mr. Short 
felt that his spirits were dashed, and docked of 
their bright April flow, by such e nasty out- 
rage, within five miles of his own warm, and 
hospitable roof. His character was well known, 
and valued, all over the eastern side of the moor, 
among the few people, who dwelled, or wandered 
there. Not a whit less known was the character 
of Nous, wherever there was any heart capable 
of valuing integrity, docility, gallantry, and 
faith. No moorman would ever dream " of 
letting off his gun " — as they always express 
it — at Parson Short's Nous ; even if he had a 
gun, which was not a common thing with them. 

yoL. I. N 



178 CHRISTOWELL. 

It must be some fellow, of the outlaw sort, 
was the only conclusion Mr. Short could form 
— such as came harbouring, and harassing most 
grievously, treading the loose foot-prints of the 
Gl-ubbins' family, striking every traveller with 
terror, and dismaying all quiet people, round 
the verges of the waste. The great Castle- 
prison, in which all the sadness of the long 
moor culminates, was empty at this time, and 
faced the sunshine — whenever there was any — 
with peaceful moss. Neither warrior, nor felon, 
could have crept from out its gloom, to crouch 
in the bog by day, and prowl among the sheep 
at night. 

However, Mr. Short, possessing that invalu- 
able gift, a sweet and happy mind, rode on; 
and a league, or two, of moorland breeze, in 
trackless space, where distant tors are the 
traveller's direction-posts, began to make him 
feel, how small, and ludicrous is human wrath. 
His course lay, as nearly as might be, north- 
west, over some of th'e highest land of Dart- 
moor ; for his old friend's house, which he had 
not yet seen, stood below the north-western 
parapet of highland, two, or three, miles to the 
south-west of Okehampton, and a little way 
back from th§ Tavistock road. Well as he 



" NOUS." 179 

knew his own side of the moor, he was taken 
aback by some pieces of travel, which he met 
between Yes-tor and Cranmere pool ; but hitting 
the West Ockmerit, near Black-tor, he contrived 
to get down to Okehampton Park. 

On the Tavistock road, which he was truly- 
glad to reach, he saw, as he rode up the bank 
from the river, a young man Walking briskly, 
with a handsome setter-pup, about six months 
old, and of white and lemon colour, with legs, 
and tail, as yet unfringed. The motto of Nous^ 
as of all dogs then, was " canis sum^ nihil eaniniy'* 
&c. ; and therefore up he ran, though his bronzy 
toes were becoming rather sore, to pass the time 
of day, to this young member of his race. The 
white and lemon animal saluted him, as was 
decent, and then kindly submitted to further 
olfaction, lowering his tail, in token of com- 
munion with his elder, with a dog of dignity, 
and established position in the world. Nous 
was naturally pleased with this, although it is 
the duty which all pups render — if they desire 
to grow on into tax-payers — and he pleasantly 
allowed the adolescent dog to skip, and vault 
around him; while he wagged his own tail 
slightly, and sniifed, with a critical air, at the 
salutation offered. Then the dog of experience 



180 CHRIRTOWELL. 

warned the pup, that he had said his say, and 
been accepted with indulgence, and must con- 
sider this interview closed, unless he were pre- 
pared to have tooth, instead of tongue. Nous 
was very seldom crusty ; but to be shot at, and 
to jog along for hours, without seeing game, 
and to get raw toes, tries even a dog's philosophy. 

" I take leave to apologize, for my dog's 
growls," said Mr. Short, riding up with Trum- 
peter^ who shook his legs out, as he felt them 
on a tidy road once more ; " but he will not 
hurt your young dog, sir." 

" Thank you ; I am not afraid of that," 
replied the other ; " I was only looking at your 
dog, because I like them ; and he seems a very 
fine one." 

" He is a very fine one, and not to be 
matched, I believe, in the four counties. But 
will you kindly tell me, where Colonel West- 
combe lives ? It must be somewhere about 
here." 

"Not more than a mile; and I am going 
straight home. You have ridden far to-day, sir, 
and come across the moor. My father has long 
been hoping to see an old friend — Mr. Short, of 
Christowell." 

"I am the man; and you are young Jack 




" NOUS." 181 

Westcombe; or at least you ought to be, 
because there is no other." The vicar was so 
pleased to see his old friend's son, and to find 
him to his liking, that he shaped his sentence 
anyhow, got off his horse, and took him by 
both hands, and examined him, as carefully as 
if he were a nag, whose price he meant to have 
£5 off. 

Knowing that he meant him well, and was 
not trying to abate him. Jack Westcombe 
looked him in the face, with a shy, but pleasant 
expression, and a twinkle of goodwill. 

Then the vicar said, " Yes, you are the image 
of your father; only taller, and slighter, and 
your nose is straighter ; and you look as if you 
stood upon your own rights more. I fear, you 
will never be quite equal to him. That, of 
course, is not to be expected. Still, you may 
do well enough, for the rising generation. We 
don't expect the young dogs to come up to the 
old ones. But march on, and let me have a 
good look at you. You are like your father, in 
one thing, and that a very great one — you 
don't want to talk too fast, young Master Jack." 

The young man, smiling at the short ways of 
the parson, did as he was ordered ; Trumpeter^ 
being gifted with a Roman nose, tossed it, and 



182 CHRISTOWELL. 

made good his name, by a lively blare to some 
large stables, which he espied in the distance, 
and hoped to flourish there in, a stall, and a 
store non ignobilis ott In reply, the rooks 
began to caw, the queists to flit out of the ivied 
elms, the little dog, and the big dog, to yelp and 
bay, respectively, the gardener (who was resting 
on his laurels) to get up, the young lady, read- 
ing in a snaily chair, to gaze about ; and all the 
other things began to embrace the rare oppor- 
tunity of saluting a new arrival, at an ancient 
country-house. 



( 183 ) 



CHAPTER XIII. 

OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 

Sheltered from the west winds, by the first of 
the range of hills, that trend away towards 
Cornwall, and from the east, by Dartmoor, 
Westcombe Hall is as nice a place, as any lover 
of a samely life, and a changeful landscape, may 
desire. For the beauty of the hills is variety 
of rigour, and the beauty of the valley is 
variety of softness; and the comfort of the 
home-life, is to see them, and be steadfast. 
Colonel Westcombe entered into such things 
calmly, without any consideration of them, after 
the battle of life, he had been through. 

The cawing of the rooks was a settled plea- 
sure to him, and the lowing of the distant cows 
a space of soothing interest ; the trees, and all 
the garden-plants (of which he had small know- 
ledge) excited him to think about them, from 
the sense of ownership ; and he began to study 



184 CHBISTOWEtL. 

cocks, and hens, without any skewers through 
them. For still he was as lively as ever he had 
been ; and the quantity of carnage, he had 
smelled in fields of glory, acquitted these, his 
elder days, of the younger duty to destroy. 

'' Short, you see those trees," he said, as he 
sauntered forth, with that old friend, after 
dining at the old-fashioned hour, five o'clock ; 
" wait a moment, come in here ; never mind 
the young folk, they will get on well enough ; 
though I don't want Jack to have her. Now 
here we can have a delicious little smoke. You 
like a pipe, so do I ; not cigars — I have seen 
too much of the way they make them. Very 
well; help yourself. How very glad I am to 
see you ! " This was the fiftieth time of saying 
that ; but the parson said, " And so am I," 
very nearly every time. '' You see those trees 
there," continued Colonel Westcombe, leaning 
back in his bower arm-chair ; " they are a little 
green with moss, and so on — soft to the eye, I 
should call it. Short." 

"It is the duty of a tree to be as green as 
possible ; " Mr. Short answered, with a puff of 
blue smoke. 

" You always cut my corners off. I mean, 
that the trunks of the trees are green ; and that 



OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 185 

is not their duty. Well, this fellow, who is 
considered, and may be, the shining light of the 
neighbourhood, counselled me to peel oflF all the 
green, and treat* the fine old fellows to three 
coats of whitewash. A pleasant view we should 
have had, from the windows, all the summer ! 
What do you say to that ? You know every- 
thing." 

" Do I ? I don't know that, to begin with. 
The extent of my knowledge is, to know how 
much I don't know ; for which I heartily thank 
Oxford. But I do know a man, who under- 
stands such things, and could give you the very 
best advice. Or rather I mean, — he is not to 
be had now; no, no, we must not think of 
him." 

" That reminds me," his host replied, " of the 
wonderful fellow in your parish. Short. A 
gentleman, you say he is ; and you are no bad 
judge. You held out some hopes, that we might 
see his place ; and what would please me even 
more, see him. You know that I am foolish, as 
my nature is,' about things that come up, and 
take my fancy. I don't want to spend a lot of 
cash, of course ; nobody ever does ; and how 
can I tell, that I may not be turned out again, 
neck and crop ? Another will might be dis- 



186 CHRISTOWELL. 

covered ; or what not ? And I am not sure tliat 
I should lament it very much. I like to do 
things for myself; and I believe every man 
imder Wellington got into that style. We had 
no fine gentlemen, I can tell you ; none of your 
Pompey's officers. But no more of that — you 
have heard it too often. All I meant to say is, 
that I want to get this place into a little better 
order; partly, because I like to see things 
decent, and partly because the people round 
about are not very well off; and yet to offer 
them money, except as wages, is an insult." 

This was a very long piece of discourse, for 
Colonel Westcombe to get through, without 
stopping ; although he could tell a long story 
pretty well, when he thought it his duty, and got 
a good start. Meanwhile, Mr. Short was in a 
sad dilemma, (although he had foreseen this, and 
rehearsed it long) between his warm frankness 
to his old friend, and his duty, and goodwill, to 
that one living in his own dear parish. But he 
settled aright, and against his own desire — 
which is one of the true tests of right decision 
— to leave the captain dark as ever, in his own 
recess, and to stave off the colonel's curiosity 
about him. To the former, it might be a matter 
of great moment ; whereas it is very little loss to 



OLD PEIENDS, AND YOUNa ONES. 187 

any man, to be robbed of a thing that he never 
uses, unless he has paid for it heavily — advice. 

" You ought to begin at once, if you mean to 
do much good," said the vicar, looking round at 
the overhung lawn, and the trees moustached 
with moss, and fungus ; " you are six weeks 
later, on this side of the moor, than we are at 
Christowell. But even here, not a day is to be 
lost, if you mean to do planting. My friend 
cannot possibly leave home now ; and an acci- 
dent has happened (a very sad affair, of which 
you will hear by-and-by) not on his threshold, 
but much worse — through the roof of his 
favourite vinery. I would not spoil your 
dinner, and some other little doings, by making 
your dear godchild anxious. And in reason, 
there need not be a shadow of anxiety, except 
for those wondrous doctors. Old Betty Sage, 
John Sage's Betty, would have put Dicky 
Touchwood on his pins in three days, with her 
simples, and careful diet. But our Dr. Per- 
peraps, a truly fine practitioner, and a man of 
solid grounding, will scarcely get him out of 
hand, within three weeks, and may have to 
make three months of it." 

" What has happened to poor Dicky then ? 
And why is Julia not to know ? " The colonel 



188 CHRISTOWELL. 

gave a short, quick puff of smoke, because he 
hated mystery. 

" There is no mystery at all about it," replied 
Mr. Short, who had his own turn of temper, 
and knew every nerve of his old friend's mind ; 
" Dicky Touchwood tumbled through the roof of 
a greenhouse, or vinery, or something — I don't 
understand their distinctions — and he cut his 
legs, or what he calls his legs, as much as such 
nonentities could well be cut. He came down, 
like a tipsy-cake stuck with splinters ; and 
tipsy he was, unless they told me lies. But 
our place is not to jeer, but sympathize. I 
have not ventured into this short narrative, till 
now, because one can never tell, how anything 
will act upon another mind, or at any rate, a 
female one." 

" Short, you are right. I have observed that, 
often. The women know best in the end, I 
believe ; but you never can tell, how they know 
it. Julia is full of sense ; wonderfully so, to my 
mind ; she gets at almost anything, five minutes 
before I do ; and she sticks to it too ; and that 
proves that she is right. But between you, 
and me, and the bedpost. Short — as the old 
ladies say — I don't want Jack to have her. 
There could not be a better girl, in many ways 



OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 189 

of looking at her. But she must have her own 
way, although she gets it gently. Jack, on the 
other hand, is very easy-tempered ; but turn 
him you cannot, when once he has made his 
mind up. His wife, when he is old enough to 
want one, which we never used to think of, 
when I was young, should be amiable, gentle, 
.fond of little jokes, and capable of making them 
when he wants them, well-bred, and totally 
indifferent about dress — the new fashions, I 
mean, and all that rubbish, that some women 
study, more than their own behaviour — also she 
ought to be diligent, and thrifty, tidy, and par- 
ticular to keep him to his meal-times, an ex- 
perienced judge of meat, and butter, full of 
understanding about doors, and windows, 
thoroughly warm-hearted, and not inclined to 
cough, when she smells tobacco-smoke." 

" To think of such a wife, makes a man's 
mouth water," Mr. Short answered, with a 
serious look ; " there used to be some of them ; 
but the young women now think more of them- 
selves, than of anything else. It is my place, to 
pay attention to the women — well, not in the 
way that you are smiling at, my friend — what I 
mean to say is " 

" Well done. Short ! " cried the colonel, put- 



190 CHRJSTOWELL. 

ting down his pipe, and laughing heartily; 
" well done, my dear fellow ! To be sure it is. 
And you magnify your office. I shall tell my 
dear wife that." 

" Now don't you be too clever ; but just hear 
me out. A parson must attend to his women, 
not only for their own sake, but also to get at 
the men. You understand all about regiments, 
and that ; but you never even heard perhaps of 
* parish work.' It is almost a new idea, in the 
Church as yet ; and I am not at all sure, that it 
will do much good, because it comes from the 
Dissenters, I believe. If we come to make a 
fuss of it, it will do a lot of harm, and .make our 
flocks take it into their heads, that our object is 
to drive them. They like very much to be 
driven, by fellows they can turn out, as soon as 
they are tired of them ; but they never will be 
driven by a gentleman ; so that all these doings 
must be done with skill." 

" I don't like to hear of such absurd inven- 
tions. When I was a boy, I knew a good deal 
of the clergy ; and in Spain I came across some 
priests, who were very good and holy. But to 
come back to the women. Short — you under- 
stand them, do you ? " 

"No, I never said anything to that effect. 



OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 191 

Only, that I have to study them ; which is a 
dilFerent thing altogether. You were talking 
about Miss Touchwood, and the sort of wife your 
son should have. I know the very girl for him 
— such a beauty — and a first-rate gardener ; as 
well as all that you require. But two people 
cannot be matched by pattern. I have made a 
lot of matrimony, fetching them up to it, when 
it was needful, and reading the bans, and going 
through with it ; and unless there is very bad 
temper on both sides, they get on respectably 
afterwards. But I am talking horn-book." 

"Horn-book ought to be talked much more, in 
the present wild days," said the colonel. " Soon 
there will be nothing sacred. Every idiot 
laughs at institution. However, to come back 
to Julia. She is a very handsome girl ; and 
Jack — well, I don't want her to be too much 
here. She came to us suddenly ; I don't know 
why ; but rather out of spirits, and I could not 
ask the reason. My dear wife, who might have 
got it out of her quite prettily, has been laid up 
all the while, with a very bad attack ; but she 
told me, in confidence, that it ought to be a 
love-affair." 

" Kather the contrary," answered the parson ; 
" but as she has not told you, I will not. Her 



192 CHRISTOWELL. 

mother was unkind to her, to put it mildly. 
You know that ' my lady ' — as she loves to be 
called — is sometimes very prompt of action. 
However, there are worse people in the world ; 
and I trust that they are burning to be recon- 
ciled. I brought as good a message to Miss 
Touchwood, from her mother, as could be ex- 
pected, considering their relation. Also I said, 
that poor Dicky wanted her ; and she promised 
to go home to-morrow." 

" Short, you are a public benefactor. Three 
cheers for the influence of the clergy. I shall 
be sorry to lose Julia, of course ; but still I 
would rather lose her, than Jack. Young fellows, 
nowadays, think very little of the wisdom of 
their parents. But who is the girl, that he 
ought to have? I shall come, and see her, if 
she lives at Christowell." 

" Time enough to think of that, my friend. 
No one admitted, except on business. You will 
have to send your card in, and write upon it, ' I 
want to see the young lady, Jack ought to have.' 
But what a hurry you are in, about him ! He is 
only three-and-twenty, according to my reckon- 
ing. ' Let un 'baide,' as John Sage says, ' let 
un 'baide, till a' getteth a buzzum.' By-the-by, 
our John would suit you well, for laying out 



OLD FRIENDS, AM) YOUNG ONES. 193 

ground, or for seeing to your trees, or shaping 
out a new kitchen-garden. All flowers ha 
despises, except cauliflowers. He says that 
the Lord made the flowers to grow wild, on 
purpose to vex Solomon ; but Solomon, and 
the Lord together, couldn't grow cabbage, 
without manure — or * manner ing,' as he calls it. 
He knows the Old Testament, ten times as well 
as I do." 

"Short, I will have him; if only for that. 
Such men are obstinate ) but brave, and honest. 
I have seen lots of them, in the army, generally 
Scotchmen. No infidel Frenchman could stand 
before them. How much money will he want, 
a week ? " 

"Eight shillings is the proper thing at 
Christowell. But then they get pickings, that 
work it up to nine, and even ten, in harvest- 
time. But 1 am not at all sure, that he would 
go from home. Our people know, when they 
are well ofi"." 

" Let him come to me, for three months, and 
go home for the harvest. I will give him twelve 
shillings a week, and house-room. And if we 
get on together, he may settle here." 

" Tell it not, on our side of the moor ; and 
warn him, not to speak of it. Every solid head 

VOL. I. 



194 CHRISTOWELL. 

in our parisli would be turned; but Sage can 
keep bis own counsel. He shall come to you, 
by this day week ; but only on a three months' 
lease, at the longest. Christowell will not be 
itself, without him ; and if anything important 
comes to pass, we shall have to send for him, to 
pronounce upon it. I shall miss him in church, 
more than a big pewful ; he nods at me always, 
when I say the right thing, and he taps on the 
floor, with his ground-ash stick." 

" We will not rob you of such a hearer. 
Short," said the colonel, perceiving what a 
sacrifice he asked ; " your church, and parish, 
shall enjoy him, on a Sunday. I told you that I 
had taken, from the Duchy, a lease of the sport- 
ing over some ten thousand acres, upon which 
there may be ten head of game, in a favourable 
season. But, at £10 a year, it is cheap enough ; 
and I may improve it, if I can. It was done 
through my old friend, General Punk, who has 
interest with the steward, and who promised to 
come down, every year, if I would do it ; and it 
is cheap enough to see an old friend, at that rent. 
And Jack was quite up for it, when I told him ; 
for he likes to march forty miles a day, I do 
believe ; which is all very well, when you choose 
for yourself your route, your weather, and your 



OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 195 

toggery. I intend to try red grouse there, as 
well as black. They do in bleaker places than 
Dartmoor even. It is not a new experiment — I 
know that. But experiments require luck, and 
perseverance, even more than skill, I do believe. 
At any rate, I mean to try it." 

" You are a sanguine man," the vicar 
answered ; " I wish that I could say so, of 
myself. But try it, my dear fellow; by all 
means, try it. But John Sage does not under- 
stand game-keeping." 

" And I don't want him to understand it," 
returned the gallant colonel ; " it is not like 
pheasant-hatching, or skilled work. You turn 
out your grouse, with their wings a little tipped, 
and you let them take their chance ; that is my 
idea. Only they must not be harassed, just at 
first, until they learn their whereabouts ; or oif 
they go. And it must be done, at the right time 
of year, and according to the season. Some of 
my birds are turned out already. Another 
batch comes next week ; and failing these, I shall 
try a lot of cheepers, in June, if I can get them. 
You know that I am not a strict game-preserver. 
I would never insist upon * pheasants v. peasants' 
— as the radical papers term it. But my little 
crotchet can breed no ill-will ; for everybody 



196 CHRISTOWELL. 

about here is delighted with it ; and it will put 
money in some honest fellow's pocket." 

" But how will John Sage help, in this little 
scheme ? He may be the wisest of mankind, as 
everybody knows, and especially himself — but 
he doesn't know a grouse from a game-cock, or 
at any rate, not a red one." 

" So much the better. He will take more 
interest in the subject, from its novelty. But 
have no fear. Short, of my perverting your 
Solomon, into a Nimrod. Nothing of the kind 
is in my thoughts. My grouse hobby only 
concerns him thus — I have made a little hut in 
the shelter of a tor — I think they call it Weist- 
tor, but I never know their tors — where a man 
may be comfortable, and put up his pony. I 
want an honest man to be there, every now and 
then ; or to have it supposed, that he may be 
there. It is about half way, to your delightful 
parish ; which seems to be the home of every 
virtue. Very well ; Sage shall have the old grey 
pony, who knows every stone upon the moor, I 
do believe ; and every Saturday, if he likes to 
do it, he shall set off for his native place, with a 
gallon of cider, and a bag of kitchen-victuals, 
and be his own master till Monday morning. 

" It is well discovered, and it shall come true, 



»» 

>» 



OLD FRIENDS, A-^D YOUNG ONES. 197 

Mr. Short answered, with a smile at thinking of 
the figure Sage would cut, and the importance 
he would show ; " the old man understands the 
moors, as wqU as a pee- wit ; and better than your 
red grouse will. But one thing you forget — 
the superstition of the race. Weist-tor is almost 
as awful, to the native mind, as Wistman's wood, 
or even Cranmere pool itself. If you gave John 
Sage £10 every time, he would not go there at 
night-fall." 

" We will get over that, somehow, or other. 
Entrap him there once, and he will grow 
foolhardy. I can always make men go, where 
I want to send them. I have set my mind on 
this, because it will keep up regular communi- 
cation between us. I shall send you butter, 
and grapes, when I get any ; and you can send 
me, now and then, a comb of the honey, for 
which Christowell is famous. You get about 
half the rain, that we do, I believe. But what 
a time Manx is, with our coffee! I must go 
and rout him up, I do believe." 

** Here comes our coffee ; well done, cup- 
bearer ! The best, and the cleverest dog, in the 
world. No, not to me first; to the colonel 
first, because, though I am the visitor, you are 
my butler. That's right. Did you see, my 
dear fellow, how he balanced it ? " 



198 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Talk about reasoning powers ! " said the 
colonel ; " I never saw any man do it, half so 
well. And this is your dog, Nous^ then ? I am 
not given to envy ; but — my goodness — did 
you notice how he wagged his tail ? He would 
not do it, till you took the cup, for fear of 
spilling. Well, I have seen the very best-bred 
footman laugh, at a joke of his betters (as they 
call themselves), and spoil a lady's dress, while 
she was putting in her cream. And they talk 
of these dogs having no mind. Short ! " 

" Not only does Nous understand plain Eng- 
lish," answered Mr. Short, as the dog laid down 
the little butter tub, which had contained the 
cups, " but he knows what is passing in a man's 
mind, better, very often, than the man himself 
does. But women are a dreadful puzzle to him." 

" So they ought to be ; I admire him the 
more. Come here, and let me thank you, good 
dog, and clever one. Short, you are too sharp 
for me. I never even knew this dog was here. 
You arranged it all with Manx, as to what he 
was to do." 

" Not a bit of it. I told the man, that he 
could wait at table ; but he laughed at me ; and 
thus is he discomfited. I told your stableman, 
when he knotted Nous up, that no knot known 



OLD FRIENDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 199 

in the Eoyal Navy would hold the dog, more 
than two hours ; but he laughed, and said that 
unless he bit the rope through, he was fast for 
ever. He never attempts to bite any rope now, 
because I smacked him for it, once ; but he 
unties any knot, with nose, tongue, and foot." 

" It has made your poor nose bleed, old 
doggie ; show us what it is then ? You mustn't 
be so clever." Colonel Westcombe loved dogs ; 
and they always felt it. 

" It must be something else. Upon my word, 
the wretch has hit him. Just a graze on the 
tip of his sensitive nose ; and his labour at the 
knot has set it off." 

Then the vicar, in hot indignation, poured 
forth his grievance against that low skulk with 
a gun, which he had not spoken of at dinner- 
time, for fear of spoiling cheerfulness. His 
host listened gravely, and was shocked at such 
low villainy ; and said that he had heard of a 
desperate fellow, lurking in the depths of the 
moor, and killing sheep ; and the moor-men 
were afraid of him, because he had a gun. 

" Sooner, or later, we shall catch him," he 
continued ; " I have heard of him, from our chief 
constable. He believes him to be a noted 
murderer ; a fellow who has killed two women, 



200 CHRISTOWELL, 

in cold blood. Let ns say no more about bim. 
Do you see Julia ? How noble sbe looks, when 
her spirit is up ! Master Jack has got more 
than he can do, to hold his own.'' 

With the pair in the distance, who had no 
coffee, things were going on, even as he said. 
Jack Westcombe, although he had taken his 
degree, or perhaps for that reason, was shy 
with young ladies 5 of whom he knew little, 
having never a sister, to lead him amongst 
them, and describe their little tricks. Miss 
Touchwood knew this, and made the most of it. 

" Do you mean to say, Mr. Westcombe," she 
went on ; " that you mean to do nothing, and be 
nothing, in the world? It does seem such ^ 
waste of power, in these very earnest tipf^es." 

" My great aunt was asking me abpu^ it the 
other day," said Jack, who had a dry way, 
when heavily attacked, of r-emitting his assail- 
ants to their own business \ " and she has a 
right to ask, because she means to leave me 
something." 

" Yes, to be sure ; how good of her ! She 
must have entered into the more recent spirit, 
the glorious development of mind, and matter. 
What a joy it is, to find that these high per- 
ceptions are penetrating, even to the passing 



OLD FRIElfDS, AND YOUNG ONES. 201 

generation ! What an incentive to the younger 
n^ind! l)id she propose any definite work, 
anything earnest, and advancing ? " 

" She did ; an advance very definite indeed ; 
l)ut scarcely of a nature, perhaps, to interest 
young ladies. I will tell Lady Touchwood of 
it, when I come over." 

"My mother takes very little interest in 
improvement. She seems to think it quite 
enough, to be no worse than we used to be." 

" But your brother, Miss Touchwood ; surely 
he may be developed, elevated, rendered pro- 
gressive, and all that ? " 

^'Unfortunately, my brother has no mind," 
she replied, with firm se^renity ; " but many 
people seen^ to like him alj the better for it ; 
particularly, J. belieye, at Can^bridge, But you 
are very different. Your father has been telling 
me, how muqh he is afraid that you will be too 
intellectual." 

"My father is the kindest-hearted man, in 
all the world. And since he came into this 
property, he thinks it his very first duty to be 
cheated, right and left j especially by his very 
intellectual son." 

" How I admire this grand old place ! " the 
young lady cried, as she sprang upon a bank of 



202 CHRISTOWELL. 

moss, besieged with primroses ; " any one, who 
lives here, ought to be cheated ; just to balance 
nature's gifts. Look, how the sunset warms, 
and deepens^ the crimson of the bricks, and the 
grey granite facings, and the glitter of the ivy 
round the bows ! And the grand old trees, full 
of mystery, and honour ; and the beautiful slope 
of the lawn, unbroken by patches of glaring 
ugly dazzle, and patterns of hideous stiffness ; 
and the murmur of the brook, like a soft strain 
of music, coming through the joyful buds of 
spring. Oh, how I wish our place was like 
this ! " 

" I have never been at Touchwood Park," 
said Jack, looking slyly at his beautiful com- 
panion, whose colour was heightened, and figure 
set forth, by excitement ; " but from all, that I 
hear, it is a brilliant place, one of the highest 
developments of the age. This is a very old, 
humdrum, benighted, obsolete product of the 
darker ages. I am sure, you would never like 
to live here*" 

" Wouldn't I? If I only had the chance ! " 
Then Julia blushed deeply, as her eyes met his ; 
and even Jack's cheeks, which were always 
rather ruddy, showed sympathy with the sun- 
set, as the fair one turned away. 



( 203 ) 



CHAPTER XIV. 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 



Upon the dreary moor, there is little pleasure 
of spring, or joy of summer, because of the 
absence of that beauty (transcending the love- 
liest daughter of mankind), the excellent beauty 
of the trees ; which man was me^tnt to nourish, 
but loves better to demolish. 

Only in the softer wrinkles, where the hard 
face of the land relaxes into a smile aside, has 
any tree a hope of standing, against the fierce 
wind, and scowling sky. But in the few spots, 
where shelter helps them, and frugal virtue of 
the soil gives food, the pleasure of surprise 
multiplies their beauty ; and the jagged granite 
sets their green off, with a spiked white chain 
around their necks. These quiet dingles are 
the very sweetest places, for any man to wander 
through, with the spring of the year around 



204 CHRISTOWELL. 

him, and the sound of crispness following his 
steps, and plenty of time to see things grow. 

When the smiting wind, from the wilderness, 
leaps over the bristly ramp of furze, and after 
a few dying kicks, expires ; the soft kind 
creatures, that have finer feelings, rejoice down 
below, and hug themselves. For here, they 
have safety, and comfort, and repose, and a soil 
glad with sweet ooziness ; and the sprinkle of 
tempestuous air ruffles through them peacefully, 
and the hushing of the wind is music. 

In such a gentle place, set largely with pro- 
miscuous hope, and strewn with more than 
good intentions of the modest work of spring, 
the foot of a savage man crushed the moss, and 
a tumult, harsher than that of the wildest wind, 
stirred through the branches. Forsaken of all 
his fellows' love, and disdainful of his Maker's, 
as wild a man as ever trod the earth ; because 
he had no love of anything. Even as a baby 
of low nature may be known, by its cruel look 
at a little bird, or fly, and a boy of nasty in- 
stincts, by his torture of a frog ; so a thoroughly 
hard man shows himself, by doing despite to 
the goodwill of his mother earth. 

This man came along, with a fierce glitter in 
his eyes, and a slouching of his lumpy neck, 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 206 

and scorn of men stamped upon his bulky- 
forehead, gingery brows, and grimy cheeks. 
The shape of his face had once been fine, the 
features strong, and regular; and a mighty 
strength of will had made it, in the prosperous 
days, impressive. . But no one would think of 
considering it now, as a matter of kind interest ; 
the impulse, of any one beholding it, would be 
to prefer the other side of Dartmoor. 

The man, who was tall, and of vigorous frame> 
contrived to crush everything, that could be 
crushed by one pair of feet, planted recklessly. 
His coat was of undressed sheepskin, with the 
wool torn, and worn, by the briars, and rocks ; 
his breeches were of rickcloth, sewn roughly by 
himself; his cap of badger-skin; and about 
him there was nothing of tradesman's work, 
except his boots. These had been stolen, from 
a shop, or cart, or perhaps from some gentle- 
man's dwelling-house ; for clearly enough, they 
were boots of good art, flexible, shapely, strongs 
and lively, and really inclined to be waterproof, 
on the feet of a clever wearer. They had a 
very clever wearer now, who, instead of crack- 
ing them with blacking, anointed them daily 
with raw fat, which they sucked into their con- 
stitution. 



206 CHRISTOWELL. 

There were many who desired to catch this 
man, for a heavy reward was upon him; but 
any one, looking at him, would think twice, 
before raising hand, to lay hold of him. For 
he carried a big double-barrelled gun, of heavy 
bore, not too long to be handy, and having per- 
cussion locks, a novelty as yet among the simple 
sportsmen of the moor. Wild, and ravage, and 
reckless as he looked, with the stain of the bogs, 
and the fray of the rocks, and ravellings of time, 
and weather ; it was manifest, that he set store 
by his gun, which was clean, well-oiled, and in 
good condition. Even now, fiercely as he trod 
his way, among delicate growth, frail bud, and 
gentle flower, he bore his heavy weapon care- 
fully, and watchfully, lest any bough should 
bruise, or sharp rock scratch it. Also he kept 
his keen eyes on the strain, for he was going 
to a doubtful, and perilous appointment. 

" If he has doubled on me, he dies first," was 
the comfort he kept on administering to him- 
self, although it did not make him comfortable ; 
" he would turn upon himself, if he were paid, 
and could run away from it. There are many 
blackguards in the world ; but none fit to hold 
a candle, to my clever, and exalted friend. He 
has thriven, and I have failed ; because I had 



% 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 207 

scruples, and lie had none. But I have one 
pull upon him— his life is much to him ; mine 
is a very small thing to me." 

In the bend of this glen, where the wood 
grows thickest, there is a little driblet of a 
spring, that falls — by way of an early lesson to 
itself— almost as soon as it has done rising, over 
a rib of its hard mother granite. Certainly a 
few things fond of water come to alleviate its 
first nfishap — moss for instance, and the stems 
of wet-bine, and crinkled caddis reeds, that in- 
troduce themselves, as conduits. Still there the 
fall is, and it must be fallen, even though it^ be 
five bad yards deep, amid a little jubilee of 
fluttering expectants, flower, and leaf, and 
crocketed frond, jerk-tailed gnat, and snub- 
nosed fernweb, the little mouse that lives in a 
gossamer almost, and the rabbit who builds him 
a castle of sand — all of them rejoicing in the 
tiny spout of crystal, the jeopardy of a sprinkle, 
from a whiff of wind across it, and the fresh- 
ness of the seed-pearls, that glisten in the sun- 
shine, or make a sliding string of some long 
flower-stem they have stolen. 

Upon a slab of granite, near a stool of budding 
hazel, where the clear little thread of water 
frayed itself into a fantastic knot» at the base 



208 CHRISTOWELL. 

of the crag that shaped it, there sat a man 
of impatient mind, high colour, and strong 
character. Not such ^character, perhaps, as those 
who aim at the welfare of the human face 
would desire to increase, and multiply; but such 
as many positive moralists prefer to what they 
call " the washed out type of persons, without 
any will of their own." In a word, here was 
the red-faced man. 

The style of courteous bluflfness, and of 
pleasant arrogance, which liked him well, and 
made clever women hate him so, was not at all 
the cue to suit him now. For now he had to 
deal, with a man that knew him, and felt for 
him even less respect, than he still was able to 
nourish for himself. On this account, George 
Graston allowed himself to look as nearly as 
possible the animal he was — an ill-bred, ill-con- 
ditioned man ; who had chosen the evil, rather 
than the good ; and despised the good, because 
he never could regain it. 

Gruy Wenlow, the murderer of two women — 
if verdicts could be trusted — and now the out- 
cast of the moor, was forcing his overhung, and 
tangled way, to the place of appointment, with 
such a reckless noise ; partly through ferocity, 
and partly of set purpose* For he wanted to 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 209 

show that he was not afraid of any one, but 
could roam where he pleased, like a gentleman 
at large. 

Generally, when two big villains meet, for 
concoction of further villainy, one of them takes 
the upper hand, and keeps it, in virtue — if the 
word may so be used — of more skilful, and 
masterful villainy. This was what Graston in- 
tended to do ; and Wenlow was equally resolved 
to do it. But a man who has dwelt in the 
desert for a twelvemonth, and mainly been deal- 
ing with the larger forms of nature, lies at a 
sad disadvantage before his fellow, who has 
never missed a day, in the factory, and mart of 

lies. 

George Giiston smiled at his former comrade, 
as he broke from the covert into the rugged 
opening, with his gun at full-cock, and eyes 
flashing defiance. " Did you think that I 
would harm you ? " he asked rather sadly ; " is 
there no confidence, among old friends ? " 

" Talk no rubbish," the old friend replied ; 
**if you could gain sixpence by hanging me, 
and keep your own body out of it, you would 
do it. What do you want with me ? My time 
is short." 

" Your time will be shorter, if you so misuse 

VOL. I. p 



210 CHRISTOWELL. 

it. You are soured by retirement, instead of 
growing mellow. I am disappointed, by your 
want of cordiality." 

The man of the sheepskins turned away with 
.an oath, and threw his gun on his shoulder. 
" I came a long way to oblige you," he said ; 
" Good-bye ! You will swing before I do." 

" Civilization has no sweets for him. There 
was a time, when he loved potted char. But 
now he cares only for Dartmoor mutton." 

" Graston," cried the other, coming back with 
dignity, and yet with some signs of desire about 
his mouth, " is it potted char ? What a memory 
you have ! If you only knew, how sick I am 
of mutton ! " 

" It is potted char, from the only house pos- 
sessing any connection with the genuine fish. 
The brand is on the top, and the bottom, and 
the sides, and especially over the place to put 
the knife in ; because of the sad increase of com- 
mercial roguery. The smell alone will indicate 
how genuine it is. A 3 lb. pot, for old lang 
syne. But alas, there is no true friendship left ! " 

" How many pots of it have you brought ? 
This is truly kind, on your part, George. No 
one has shown a bit of care about my likings, 
ever since every one turned against me. But 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 211 

what is it you want of me, in return for all this 
bribery ? " 

" Only a little thing, Gruy Wenlow ; a trifle 
altogether, for a man of your position. I am 
half ashamed to give you such a trumpery com- 
mission. But it may lead to better things for 
both of us, hereafter/' 

" No mealy mouth about it, G-eorge, I care 
very little what I do now." 

" Well, this is a thing that you will like to 
do. You hate any fellow, that sticks up to be 
a wonder ? " 

" That I do, with all my heart. It is hum- 
bug, rank humbug. We are all alike. You 
know it, as well as I do." 

" Never mind moralizing now. Do you re- 
member a tale I told you, that night when the 
lightning was so frightful on the heath ? " 

" Every word of it," answered the other, with 
a laugh ; " for it let me into a lijttle secret, that 
even Greorge Graston was afraid of something. 
* Let us talk of something good,' you said, ' the 
weather is so awful ; let us talk of something 
good.' Fie, Greorge, fie, to be a coward of a 
thunder-cloud ! " 

" If you had seen what I have, ay and felt it 
too, you would sing another song, Guy Wenlow. 



212 CHRISTOWELL. 

Some men attract it, some repel. Twice have I 
been struck ; and the colour of my face— but 
never mind now— it never thunders here." 

"That shows your ignorance of the moor. 
You should hear it rattle round the tors, some- 
times. But what am I to do for you ? And 
how much for it ? " 

" All you have to do for me, is to tnock down 
a small boy. And for that you shall have £5 in 
gold. Unless you like to do it, from good feel- 
ing only. For what chance can you get of 
spending any money ? " 

" Gaston, you always were a despicable screw. 
To knock down a boy. costs five shillings, and 
expenses. For £5, twenty boys should be 
knocked down ; and you are not the man to 
pay too much. What you want, is a bigger job 
than that. Out with it ! " 

" Well, if you want a big name for it, and 
small crimes do not suit you, Guy, you may call 
it the robbery of Her Majesty's mail, as repre- 
sented by a cobbler's boy. The man of whom I 
told you that fine story, a cock-a-hoop, a high- 
flyer, a romantic fool of honour " 

"You called him none of that, George Gaston, 
when the lightning was around you. He was a 
marvel of good works then ; and to praise him 
seemed to protect you in your trembles," 



k 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 213 

*• Pest upon that! I was nervous, I confess. 
Every one has his weak point, I suppose. What 
he may he, is no concern of yours. All you 
have to do, is to look after him for me. And if 
you do it well, you shall have handsome pay. 
Even in the wilderness, you want money. 
Without it, you would have heen taken long 
ago. And, to hreak into farm-houses, is hut 
onions, and hacon. A little healthy business, on 
the outskirts of the moor, will cure you of bog 
ague, and put cash in your woolly pockets. 
Wenlow, I congratulate you, on your brave ap- 
pearance." 

" Any fool can laugh. You are wasting time. 
I cannot. My day is divided ; and I never 
knew the value of time, till I had to score it by 
the shadows." 

" And to keep on the shadowy side of the 
score. Impatient man, I will be brief. Have 
you ever heard of Christowell ? " 

" Yes, I know all about it. I have got an 
eye to the parson's house. You may hear of 
something I do there." 

"Try nothing of the kind. It is a very 
quiet hole, and must be treated quietly. Under 
the beacon, lives our friend, who made such a 
fool of himself years back. There he has got 



214 . CHRISTOWELL. 

a sort of hut, and garden — a craze, a bit of mad- 
ness, suited to his strange propensities. He 
was knocked on the head, in some battle, I 
believe ; and the earth went in upon his brain, 
and stayed there. He is cracked about garden- 
ing, and the things the worms do. He pounds 
away, and labours with his naked arms, as if he 
had been bom in a brick-field. I saw him 
myself, or I could not have believed it. I was 
let in, by a man who knows every rat-hole of the 
premises. The fellow was a mass of mould, and 
grime, when he might have been rolling in 
guineas." 

" I like a man of that sort. He cannot be a 
sneak," Black Wenlow replied, with a look that 
meant, * like you my friend.' " It will take. more 
than £5, to make me go against him." 

" What a sentimental turn that is ! Such a 
lesson in morality is worth £5. A man is 
enabled to charge for his work, according to his 
character ; £10 will be very handsome, for a man 
of yours. You know the man I mean, from my 
description. The chaw-bacons call him ' Cap- 
tain Larks.' I have no time to tell you, how I 
am concerned with his affairs ; and if I had, it 
would do no good. The practical part of the 
matter is, that I want to keep him as he is — 



A SMALL COMMISSION, 215 

retired, industrious, respectable, and wholly in 
the dark about his family affairs. He has 
quitted the world, of his own acQord ; he is as 
happy as a king ; and I wish him to continue 
so. His return to civilized life would be a 
plague to me, as well as a misery to himself. I 
wish him well, with all my heart ; for I always 
liked a magnanimous fool, a boy who sees the 
world through his own pea-shooter. Perhaps 
he has never even heard of me; for I have arisen 
since his day." 

" I have no time to hearken to all these items. 
I have to watch the shadows, as a painter does. 
Tell me what I have to do ; and never mind the 
reasons." 

" All you have to do is, to keep watch upon 
the man. He must not go from home, without 
my hearing of it, by a letter through the old 
rogue at the Raven. And another thing, still 
more important, is that he must not receive any 
letters. I shall leave Exeter, by the Quick- 
silvery this evening, having discovered all I 
want to know at present. On Monday, the 
lawyers of the family will write to him, having 
at last found him out, through me, after a score 
of advertisements had failed. That letter will 
be due to me ; and I must have it. It must go 



216 CHRISTOWELL. 

through the post, and bear the proper post- 
marks ; but instead of being delivered to Captain 
Larks, it must be handed over to your humble 
servant." 

" And you wanted me to rob the mail for £5 ! 
Many things amaze me in your nature ; but one 
thing astounds me — ^your quantity of brass." 

" Cheek is now the word for it, since your 
disappearance from polite society. But the 
name is bigger than the job, Gruy Wenlow. 
To-morrow will be the first of May. On Wed- 
nesday morning, the letter will come to Christo- 
well, about ten o'clock as usual, and be left at 
the house of James Trickey, the cobbler. A 
new postage * envelope,' some new-fangled 
crotchet for cheap letters, is to be issued on the 
first of May; with the postage paid, or some 
such stuflF. All Christowell will be goggle-eyed, 
for a long time after these come to hand. I 
shall send two dozen dummies to people, whose 
names I have picked up. Trickey will be 
mazed, as they call it about here, and attribute 
all these wonders to the Pixies, and the witches. 
He won't venture out of sight of his own door, 
that day; especially at such a time of year, 
when the evil spirits do their worst. His little 
boy Bob, who is too young to be afraid, will be 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 217 

sent up the hill with the captain's letter. Scare 
him to the point of death ; but don't hurt him." 

" You need not tell me that ; I am benevo- 
lence itself. Yery well, I take his letter; and 
what then ? On the moor are no post-offices." 

"But the man at the Raven can be trusted. 
He makes a good thing out of you. For any 
pretty bit of skill, a noble door is opened by all 
this new nonsense about cheap letters, and 
paying for their carriage beforehand. When 
there was eightpence to pay, it could be shown 
whether anybody paid the eightpence ; but who 
will know now, what becomes of a letter, when 
the interest of the post-office is to take the dirty 
penny, and have no more bother with it ? Such 
a plan may last a month perhaps ; and through- 
out that month, will be a muddle. All that I 
have foreseen ; and timed your little plan accord* 
ingly. A hideous thing, called an ' envelope ' 
— because there is no English name for it — ^will 
contain this letter for Captain Larks, All you 
have to do, is to take it from the boy, go to the 
Raven the same night with it, before any fuss 
arises, find my instructions, and follow them." 

" That is all very simple, and a credit to you, 
Gaston. But excuse my anxiety about the cash. 
The sum is a small one ; but the times are bad 




218 CHRISTOWELL. 

with me. These miserly clod-hoppers smuggle 
off their money to a bank, instead of their 
bolster, or the thatch. For a month, I have not 
known where to turti, for a hit of honest plunder. 
Even the Raven begins to look askew at me." 

^* That shall be righted ; and you must not be 
too active now, except upon my business. You 
have your head-quarters, the Lord knows where, 
in the depth of this horrible wilderness. The 
man of the Raven is a very decent fellow, and 
would sell his good old wife, for a fair con- 
sideration. The moor is delightful, at this time 
of year, and the air ecstatically bracing. Stock 
yourself well, to the extent of a sovereign (which 
I will leave with mine host on account), spend a 
few days healthfully, in the boggiest quarters of 
your beat, enjoy my potted char, and some very 
choice pig-tail, which I will leave for you — a 
perfect charm for all aches, and agues — and 
then, on Wednesday morning, earn your balance, 
repair to the trysting-place, and get it." 

" You go on so fast, when you want to slur a 
point. Slow and sure, is my style of business. 
Am I to look for you, at that filthy hole, on 
Wednesday ? " 

" Is there no meaning in the English 
language ? I said that you then would find my 



A SMALL COMMISSION. 219 

instructions, and according to them, send back 
the letter. After that, your care of Captain 
Larks begins. Lest haply he should hear of 
things, from any other quarter, which it is his 
hearty desire, and truest interest, not to know. 
Having hit upon a clue to him, some half yeat 
ago, I have employed some nicety in placing all 
advertisements, or at least in suggesting the 
quarter for them, so that none of them should 
hit him. But now I make a clean breast to the 
men of law, who have a perfectly just faith in 
me. By vast exertions, I have found the man. 
They will write to him, after much sage counsel, 
a letter for which they will charge two guineas, 
though it is to go two hundred miles, for one 
penny. For another penny, it comes back to 
them. Wonderful is the insolence of this age. 
How happy are you, who live out of it ! Steam- 
coaches are beginning to run madly all about. 
Next year they are to come to Bristol. They 
are taking everybody's land, without his leave. 
That has something to do with the urgency of 
this matter. It outrages all one's sense of 
justice. But, thank heaven, there are still 
some people, who know what is right, and stick 
to it ! " 

" And foremost of them all, George Gaston. 



220 CHRISTOWELL. 

Very well, I know now what you want, and will 
carry it out most faithfully. Where will the 
tobacco be ? I want that first. If you knew 
what stuff I am obliged to smoke " 

" You shall have it to-night, with your outfit, 
at the Raven. Lay aside, once and for all, 
your most narrow idea, that I stint anything. 
Of all men, I am the most liberal, when it 
pays." 

"To me, you should be more than liberal, 
Greorge. Whose doing is it, that I lead this 
life ? Who first led me, to despise my home, to 
want to be more than I was meant for, to 
gamble away my poor father's savings, to rob 
my sister, to break my mother's heart " 

" Gruy Wenlow, this tenderness is not thrown 
away on me. It proves that your heart is in 
the right place still ; though it may have sadly 
roamed away from it. But we must not linger. 
The whole world is in a hurry. Nobody looks 
back ; everybody forward. Repentance, and 
remorse, are a pair of old samplers. The Quick- 
silver average is fourteen miles an hour; and 
the horses must be changed, in thirty seconds, 
to show that they can beat steam-coaches. 
When you were a sporting character, Guy 
Wenlow, with £50 on each side of your 




A SMALL COMMISSION. 221 

stomacli, how you would have loved to sit 
behind those horses ! But they summon me ; 
I seem to hear them neigh." 

The better of the two men turned away, to 
hide the tear which the memory of his mother, 
or perhaps of the horses, had called forth. 
Then he swung his heavy gun, upon his 
shoulder, and made off. " One little trifle I 
forgot to mention," the other shouted after him, 
" a thing that will make you stick the closer to 
your duty. The captain's daughter is the 
loveliest girl, that can be found, even in Devon- 
shire. You are an admirer of the sex. Verbum 
sat" 

" We are told, that the devil lives on Dart- 
moor," cried the outcast ; " but now he means 
to come to and fro, by the Quicksilver.'' 

" Go thy way. The fool, and the woman, 
have privilege of last word," Gaston muttered. 
Then putting, away a pistol, which had been 
hidden near his fingers, he discharged into his 
mouth a more peaceful implement, known 
among travellers by the same name. With his 
high colour heightened, he arose, and left the 
dell; whose beauty was not impaired by his 
departure. 



222 CHRISTOWELL, 



CHAPTER XV. 



THE DANCING TREE. 



Among the few places that now keep shops, on 
the threadbare skirt of Dartmoor, one of the 
kindest, and most tranquil-minded, is that little 
town, Moreton Hampstead. 

A man of fine leisure, and liberal ease, with a 
ripe turn for contemplation, may be looked for 
— if any one is rude enough to want him — first 
near the tap of his favourite inn ; then about the 
reading-room, or post-office ; after that, clearly 
at the farrier's shop ; and for the rest of the 
day, on the bridge, with a pipe in his mouth, 
and hands in pocket. 

The great defect of Moreton is therefore this, 
that it owns no bridge of any kind, for such 
transcendent uses. But in plea of that, it may 
well be urged -(if any man there can be urgent) 
first that if any bridge were needed, no one 
could ever find the energy to build it ; and next 



THE DANCING TREE. 223 

that no genuine Moreton man would go forth to 
a bridge, for his lounge, while lie can get it, right 
happily, on his own window-ledge. If ever he 
is wanted, which very seldom happens, there he 
may be found, during those short periods, when 
he is not feeding, or profoundly asleep. Now 
as to those two alibis^ the former is strictly 
sacred. The . shop-door is bolted, and the bell 
unhung ; and from twelve o'clock, till two, the 
only business considered, is the commerce of the 
interior. Then if anybody, scanty of good 
manners, thumps upon the door, why just let 
him thump again. With a relish, as of pickles, 
or of very cool cucumber, the hearty tradesman 
'smacks his lips, and labours at the self-help 
most congenial to him, — a large help of very 
lofty order of mutton. If, at two o'clock, he 
unbolts his door, and rehangs his bell, he may 
be taken at the moment, and goaded into a 
shout to his wife, to know the price of some- 
thing, now hanging in his window. However, 
if his wife makes no reply — as generally hap- 
pens, for she is of his own race — he will ask the 
brisk customer, how much he has been in the 
habit of giving for the article. If the customer 
forgets, or prefers not to tell, because he expects 
to get it cheaper here, the worthy shopkeeper 



224 • OHRISTOWELL. 

talks about invoices, which he cannot lay his 
hand upon just now, but will do so at his 
earliest leisure, and the gentleman may take it, 
and come, and know the price to-morrow. Then 
he retires for his afternoon nap, having done a 
striking stroke of business. 

Nevertheless, there are two people often wide- 
awake at Moreton. One is the boy, with two 
buckets, and a mop, who invades the gentle 
streets, soon after breakfast, and stirs the narrow 
echoes with his constant cry — " Wash yer win- 
ders for 'ee ! " As nobody ever washes his own 
windows, and the wind asserts its hereditary, 
and perhaps etymologic, right to invest every 
window with a coat of granite grime, this boy 
has got to move both arms at once, and becomes 
a pleasant sight, for those who never do so. 

Or rather, those who do so, only when they 
are a-dancing. Because of so being asleep all 
day, and having no bridge to yawn upon, 
Moreton is — or was, until a railway rushed into 
the bottom — " the chiefest place for dancing, to 
be found in merry Devonsheer." While a man 
slumbers sweetly, against the partition, that 
severs his nice little parlour from his shop (it 
is needless to say, upon which side he is) another 
man, knowing the trick of the door, runs in 



THE DANCING TEEE. 225 

(though nothing else could ever make him run) 
and handling him by the head, against the wall, 
pulsatively, stirs up the muffled drum of his 
outer ear, by blowing down the donch of his 
other palm into it — "Ball to-night! Zax 
o'clock." " How much be tickutts ? " asks the 
firm reposer, with a rub of his eyes, and a 
tingle in his head. " Zaxpince aich — dree vor 
a zhillun." Then he feels in the fork of his 
clothes, and pays a shilling. 

This is the other man, who keeps on moving, 
and whips round the corners, quicker than a 
window can go up. He gets up the dances, 
and he knows the way to do it, Calling on the 
ladies first, and putting clearly to them, that all 
the gentlemen in the place ate wild, about 
getting them to come, but on no account would 
trouble them to come, except just as they are. 
Nothing in the way of dress could make them 
look better than they do now ; and he chins up 
his fiddle, and touches two strings. Every 
lady looks demure, and says that she really 
dislikes dancing, and did hope to have heard 
the last of it. But rather than disappoint her 
neighbours, she will take one ticket. Then 
he twangs again; and with an eye to strict 
economy, she takes six. 

VOL. I. Q 



226 CHRISTOWELL. 

Behold, how unjust a thing it is to attempt to 
be too accurate ! There is another active man 
in Moreton Hampstead, and his name is Timothy 
Pugsley. Happily for the town, which never 
could endure three moving spirits, the greater 
part of his time goes away, among the lanes, and 
across the hills. When he comes home at night, 
with Teddy, the two of them want stable. 
They are stiff about their joints, and say to 
theipselves, and to one another, that they would 
go ten miles more, if needful, but can see no 
more to do to-day, except victuals ; and are glad 
of it. Teddy has a mash, with hay to follow, 
and oats enough to dream of ; and Timothy has 
a pan of fried potatoes, browning on the fire, 
with a plate turned over them, and bacon making 
little pops around the plate's edges, and jump- 
ing up at every pop, in a hurry to be tasted. 

Timothy feels, as well as smells, after twelve 
hours on the moor, this joy ; and he thanks the 
Lord, to find a warm house round him, a safe 
deliverance from robbers, storm, and accident, 
an uncommonly sharp appetite, with victuals 
fit to sharpen it, and a wife, who keeps his house 
in order, and can fry potatoes. 

Yet, the most lively, and dissipated being, in 
all the town of Moreton, is neither the window- 



THE DANCING TREE. 227 

washing boy, nor the great ChoraBgus, nor even 
Timothy Pugsley ; but a tree, of great weight, 
and very prominent position, and old enough to 
know better. Whether its lineage is from one 
that danced to the lyre of Orpheus, or whether 
any Dryad with a tripping foot possesses it,— at 
any rate, this is the dancing tree. For many 
years now, it has left off dancing, even if it ever 
did begin, and has to be contented with the 
legal truth — " who does through another, does 
the thing himself." And to make sure, it does 
it, through a great many others. 

Especially, on the first of May, when the 
festival of Pales — as the learned tell us — is well 
observed by Christians. Instead of putting up 
a May-pole then, and frolicking around it, in a 
Pixy ring, the young folk of Moreton have 
their frisks among the verdure, without dread 
of dewy feet, or toes stuck in a mole-hill. 
High up in the tree, which stands in an elbow 
of scraggy street, they hoist, and fix a timber 
platform, strong enough to bear the vehemence 
of feet, not too aerial. The boughs of the 
patulous tree, above the bole, afford a noble 
amplitude ; and a double ring of hay-rope, 
roven fast around the branches, provides the 
most headlong couple with a chance of preserv- 
ing their necks, when valuable. 



228 CHRISTOWELL. 

"Missy, you'm looking crule weist, and 
peaky," said Master Pugsley to Miss Arthur, 
when he was come with another load of pots, 
towards the end of April ; " rackon, that Dicky 
Touchwood be a' plaguing on 'e. I knows 
what it be, my own sen, Missy; my good 
Missus, forgive me for the zame ! Never could 
I zee a purty wench, when I were young, 
wi'out longing to make up to her. Excoose 
of me. Missy, if too free of spache. I only 
tarks what coometh natteral. To my rank 
of laife, and conzeiderin' the difference. And 
you knows it too, by the colour , on your 
chakes." 

"Mr. Pugsley, you should mind your own 
business. Your business is to deliver 144 pots, 
without any cracks in them." 

" Bless 'e, Miss Rose, and I have doed it. 
They little sniggers is what cometh in the 
baking. Never yet sot I down a deliverance 
more claner. But you was a very little one, 
when first I knowed you, and growing bigger 
every spare-time, wi'out conzeiderin' of it. Why 
you used to make nort of kissing me, and never 
ax wuther no pots was cracked ! But the chillers 
grow'th up. Miss, by will of the Lord, and doeth, 
like their veythers, and their moothers doed 



THE DANCING TREK 229 

avore them. And it coom across my maind, 
Miss, by rason of the dancing-time, that you 
was to be wameded of being a young 'ooman 
now, and no moother to look arter 'e. My waife 
zaith to me, afore prim taime of slumbering — 
*no moother, Tim, to look arter her; and the 
cappen no better than a hanvil-smiter ; her 
wanteth a light hand ; Tim, you do it.' Zura- 
taimes, my waife gooeth wrong about men's 
business, or consarning of me, or even of my 
datters, when they don't desarve it ; but never 
in her judgment of the gentry. Miss." 

" I am very much obliged, I am sure, to any- 
body, who wishes to be kind to me, and fancies 
that I want it. But none of you seem to under- 
stand, that I have nothing to complain of. I 
have heard enough, of what ladies do, from a 
young lady, who is here, staying in our house ; 
and if nobody wanted pity more than I do, the 
world would be very h^ppy, Mr. Pugsley." 

" Zo 'un be," replied the carrier stoutly. " I 
zung a zong, all the way from Marton, 's mam- 
ing; and a' can zing a zong, wi' ony of the 
gallery. But I likes to see the young volk 
a dancing too. The Lard hath made it natteral 
to 'un. And when I zeed your little voot, a' 
com in from your petty goat, I said to myzell, 



230 CHRISTOWELL. 

what a dancer her would make ! Do 'e come, 
and zee our May-dancing, that's a dearie." 

" I dare say, your May-dance is very pretty, 
or at any rate very queer," said Rose ; " but it 
is not a fit place for ladies, I'm afraid. How 
can you keep rough people out ? " 

" If any man offendeth, in zider, ale, or 
langowich," the carrier answered austerely ; " us 
kicketh 'un out o' the tree, wi'out no rasoning, 
and a' cometh down zober, on the backside of his 
head. Never has no call to do it twice, Miss. 
'Twud do 'e good to zee 'un ; and our upstair 
windy looketh down into the thick of it, like a 
bird's nestie. WuU 'e coom, if Cappen be agray- 
able thereto ? " 

Rose laughed at the idea that her father 
would consent, and cheerfully promised to go, if 
he should do so. Then Master Pugsley, in a 
bold yet crafty manner, made approaches to the 
captain ; and if truth ever did admit ductile, or 
elastic, fibre into the close grain of her heart, the 
carrier found out how to make her, " wi'out 
teUing no lies ": — as he himself acknowledged. 

In this way it was settled then, that Mistress 
Pugsley (who could drive, as well as her hus- 
band — and her husband as well, according to 
some folk, whose business it was none of) should 



k 



THE DANCING TREE. 231 

come in the Sunday-shay, at one o'clock on 
Monday, and put up the horse (who was to be 
borrowed, from a man who owed a bill of two 
years' standing) and dine in the kitchen, with 
Moggy the maid ; though the captain said no ; 
but Tim Pugsley was firm, that his wife should 
not sit to a red-legged table, and the life he 
would lead with her afterwards. " Her could 
do up all the chany, and the zilver, like a 
looking-glass;" he said, for fear of having 
seemed to go against her dignity. 

Then, about three o'clock, they were to start, 
in the Sunday-shay borrowed from the White 
Hart Inn ; and so (inasmuch as it would be 
absurd to spare a horse belonging to a man who 
owed him money) they might get to Moreton 
very well, by half-past four, and show Miss the 
shops, and the Punch and Judy, and wise pig, 
come from Exeter. 

Nothing can ever hope to be done now, 
according to its calculation ; because of the many 
other things, all equally busy, that come in the 
way of it. But forty years ago, the rush was 
scarcely half-begun yet ; and there still was time 
to live in. Mrs. Pugsley came, with the light 
shay, and the pony, who could properly afford to 
be thrashed, because his master could not pay< 



232 CJHRISTOWELL. 

And Rose, althougli her mind miglit be con- 
sidered rather large, was nnable to help getting 
into high spirits, at the little change, and bit of 
fun, in front of her. But anpther, and a far 
more important person, was grieved, and sore 
wounded at heart, by such an outbreak. 

"Then, am I to be left to myself all the day, 
while you go to see the chaw-bacons capering?" 
Dicky Touchwood asked, when he heard of what 
was toward ; and bis voice was rich with a 
melancholy sound. 

" You must not be left alone, because you are 
never any company to yourself," his fair atten- 
dant answered, in the kindest manner ; " but 
that has been provided for, before this was 
thought of. Miss Perperaps has promised to 
come up, and sit with you, and read you a story- 
book, until you go to sleep, And J am to be 
home again, by one o'clock tormorrow ; you will 
scarcely even know, that I have been away at 
all. And perhaps, I shall be able to make you 
laugh. I never saw anybody laugh like you. 
I am only afraid that it is bad for you." 

" Do I laugh ? Then I am sure I never 
mean it. It is all Spotty 's fault ; because she 
never cares for anything. I don't like young 
ladies of that character at all." 



THE DANCING TREE. 233 

"You must never say that. It sounds un- 
grateful. If Miss Perperaps had been your own 
sister, she could not have done more for you." 

" That makes it all the worse, and drives me 
wild. Why should people I don't care for, do 
me all the good that gets done for me ; and the 
really nice ones take ^o notice? And they 
never seem to know, how it urges me ! " 

"Mr. Touchwood, it seenis to me that you 
should rather ask, why you (Jon't care for the 
people that are kind to you, and do you all the 
good, that would npt get done for you, unless 
you had them to do it." 

" Very well. I (Jare say you think me un- 
grateful. But I am put out, because I shall not 
see you, very likely for two whole days. And 
the only pleasure I get now, is to look at you. 
Miss Arthur." 

" Good-bye. Your dear mamma will be here 
at three o'clock ; and I hope that she will say 
you are a great deal better. It is most unlucky, 
that whenever she comes, you should happen to 
fall back so, and be so languid, and low-spirited. 
It makes Lady Touch woocj disbelieve the doctor ; 
and she goes away, with such a sigh. Even if 
you feel worse than usual, you should try to put 
a cheerful face on ; and especially to-day, when 



234 CHRISTOWELL. 

your sister is coming, for the first timej to see 
you. I am sure that you can walk very nicely^ 
if you tryt" 

"You never seem to enter into my case at 
all," Dicky Touchwood complained, as she passed 
out of hearing ; " I don't want to go aWayi I 
like the place; I like the captain; I like the 
apple-fritters ; and somebody even better stilL 
In fact, I like everything^ except the medicines. 
And if they would only allow me the right 
thing in malt, I'll be blest ^ if I'd ever get well 
again." 

But his lovely young hostess, with all her 
good nature, was getting rathei* tired of his 
vapours, and vagaries. Her main delight was 
to be with her father, to help him, and hand him 
his needs, and be ready with a smile (when that 
was one of them) and be able, at supper-time, to 
tell him how much he had done, if he dared 
to reproach himself. But ever since this boy 
tumbled in among them^ instead of looking after 
her vines and roses, she must give up her time 
to be looked at by him. And this made her glad, 
to get away to Moreton. 

Timothy Pugsley's " little ouze" — as he called 
his most highly respectable dwelling — was as 
full of deep corners, and heavy over-hangings, 



THE DANCING TREE. 235 

and loopings, and humpings^ and jags, and 
juttings, as the loftiest artist could desire to find, 
on a tour, or upon a friend's property. We take, 
at the present moment, deep interest in our 
forefathers ; because they were so ignorant, in 
comparison with ourselves ; and we doubt their 
differentia — as it used to be called, and used to 
be settled, before all wisdom went to flux. But 
if anything can be inferred about them (where 
all is inference, deference none), it seems to be, 
that they were fond of corners. They loved a 
deep corner ; a;s we love a flat, whether vertical, 
or horizontal ; and they liked to see shadow, as 
much as we hate it. 

The carrier's house went up and down, and 
in and out, almost as freely as his cart did on 
the roads ; and the roof carried fodder enough 
for a horse, as Teddy observed, with a watering 
mouth. No climbers were wanted, to cluster 
the windows, for the droopers clothed them 
amply — creeping Jenny, and run-away Jack, and 
the many forms of house-leek, with golden moss 
to brighten them. No rakes came near them, 
neither besom of destruction ; their only enemy 
was the wind ; and that they passed on into the 
chimney-pots. 

" Now, if you plaize, Miss, this cornder hath 



230 CHRISTOWELL. 

been claned for 'e," said Master Pugsley to Miss 
Arthur, after a magnificent tea downstairs. 
" 'Tis the very best place in all Marton town, 
for spyin' of they ranties. And wi'out you 
putts your head var vorth, ne'er a wan of 'em 
can see 'e. Viddles be toonin' up, a'ready. 
Many is the time, I've a' doed it, with the best of 
'em. Zumtin^es I wush I wor a lad again, and 
no vam'ly. Don't 'e tell that to my Missus, 
though." " 

" I've aheered 'e," said Mrs. Pugsley, panting 
up the creaky stairs, for she was fat exceed- 
ingly ; " I've aheered 'e, Tim ; and I be 'sheamed 
of 'e. Lor, Miss Eose, when my Timmy wor 
a buy, you could have put your two hands 
round him, what with his chronicles, and his 
asterisks ! Nobody said a' wud ever grow up ; 
but a' did ; and a' wanteth to do so again, 
wi'out no waife to do's vittles for 'un." 

" You've dooed your own too," said the carrier 
with a smile. "How well her look'th. Miss 
Rosie, and chakes so bright as you'rn a'most ! " 

" By rason I gotten a good man to keep me. 
Now Missy, shall I stop with you, and tell 'e 
who the vork be; or wad 'e zoonder baide 
aloun ? Tim must be off, adoin' of a zaight of 
things. Nort can be done in this here town, 
wi'out Tim Pugsley." 



THE DANCING TREE. 237 

"Oh, please to stop with me," said Eose; 
" I should never know anything about it — and 
indeed I would not stop, to shut you out from 
your own window. And Sally, and Milly, and 
Billy, must come. Why, what are they going 
to do already? The sunset is on the church- 
tower still, and the moon is as pale as an oyster- 
shell ; but they mean to begin — I declare they 
do!" 

They meant to begin, and more than that, 
they did begin without delay, and with strong 
intention to go on. For the girls there was a 
tallat ladder, to be mounted, according to their 
manifold natures ; some making a great fuss (for 
fear of falling, without being noticed), some 
skipping up shyly, before any one could think 
of them, some ascending slowly, with a gaze of 
large unconsciousness ; and others smiling, with 
their skirts tucked in, to prove what manage- 
ment can do. The lads, upon the other hand, 
had too much of their own to do, to be over- 
nice in criticism. Their only way up to the 
dancing-stage, was a half-inch rope, hanging 
down from a bough, and anointed well with 
mutton-suet. Also, at the landing place, where 
an active lad might stick his heels in, invidious 
fellows, who had climbed already, and wished 



238 CHRISTOWELL. 

to keep the platform to themselves, showed a 
narrow-minded tendency to push away any 
better-looking lad, who was aspiring to the 
girls. And a combat ensued, which was pleasant 
to behold. 

"They've been, and gotten our best stable 
lantern ! " Mrs. Pugsley cried indignantly. 
" Fie upon Tim, they get over him so ! One of 
them scrapers scrapeth with a book. Some 
saith 'tis lamin', and some saith 'tis hignorance. 
Girt hignorance, to my mind, vor to viddle wi' 
a copy-book. There they gooth — fust couple 
right, and turn once ! Zim'th no more nor 
yesterday, as I wur doin' of it. Vaive and 
thirty years agone, miss ; and us used to cry 
* Boney ' for the gals to shake to ; and if you 
said it now, they would stare, and ax the 



• > 55 

manin . 



" But they seem to shake very well, without 
it, Mrs. Pugsley. How wonderfully they go 
in and out ! I never saw anything half so 
pretty. And how beautifully they keep time ; 
though they seem to be laughing, instead of 
being serious ! I have seen a ball of very high 
society at Exeter, just that I might know how 
to understand it, through the cracks of the 
door, and from the cock-loft ; but it frightened 



THE DANCING TREE. 239 

me sadly to look at them ; because they seemed 
to dance one step, and frown two." 

^* The karlity knows what is best for 'em, 
miss " — Mrs. Pugsley had been cook in a very 
good family, and never meant to sink the differ- 
ence, — " but our lads, and wenches, if soever 
they comes crossways, with royal authority, and 
the viddles going twang, and the moon a' shain- 
ing bright, and a man like Tim, and a 'ooman 
like me, looking on agin' all unpropriety, they 
sayeth to themselves, and to wan anither — * us 
may carry on now, and spake the word that 
cometh upward.' And then they goo'th on, for 
more nor thiccy." 

" Whatever they are thinking of, they look 
very nice, and they do it very well, and their 
manners are so good ! Why, they bow to one 
another continually ! " 

" Not they, miss ; never a one of them. 'Tis 
the branches makes them duck their heads, for 
fear of an orkard clout on 'em. Good manners 
coom'th convanient so." 

Whatever their manners were, they enjoyed 
them, and with nature's help looked well. For 
the large moon began to come loftily into the 
middle of their doings, and to make them clear. 
The maidens were the first to feel her influence, 



240 CHRISTOWELL. 

and look at her, and hold their heads tip well, 
and have deep imaginations. Then the youths 
took the temper of the moment from them, and 
found a higher beauty of the distance in their 
eyes, and upon their lips a graver, and a sweeter, 
turn of smiling. 

Even the fiddlers three, and the piper, worthy 
to perform before King Cole, took a softer stroke 
of melody, and worked their funny-bones more 
gently. Perched up in the branches, with a 
rope to keep them to it, and a tankard refilled 
at the end of every tune, they set their heels 
firmer, and bedewed their hands, and nodding 
to one another, glided sweetly, into a plaintive 
and wistful air, with their pots shining chastely, 
in the light across the churchyard. To the 
movement of their music, lads and lasses circled 
slowly, well content with measure more sedate, 
and time for serious steps. 

For the moonlight wavered in the play of 
their vibration, and put a selvage to their 
shadows (where the lamp shone in), and fol- 
lowed in and out of pale innumerable buds, and 
rested upon nothing, but the rugged lines of 
heart-wood, scarred with the jocosities of by- 
gone dancers ; whose names were wearing out, 
upon the tombstones down below. 



THE DANCING TREE. 241 

" Now, Missus Littlejan, you can't get out 
of it no more," Rose heard Carrier Pugsley say 
to a very pretty woman, wlio was standing in 
a doorway. "You was the sproylest of the 
lot, dree years running, and not a maid aniong 
'em can put a foot out wi' 'e, now times. You 
be burnin' to be at it, and your chakes con- 
fesseth. They be arl gooin' on, crule weist, and 
heavy like. I dunno, what hath come across 
the lads, since I wbr on6 of 'em. Call your 
good man, that's a dear, and g6o up the skip to 
aupway." 

" And I can goo up, as suent as ev6r," the 
young matron answered, with a longing glgrnce ; 
" in the looment of the laight, they do zim weist. 
But conzeider the babby, Maister Pugsley, con- 
zeider of my husband's babby." 

"Drat the babby; or bless 'un, I shud zay. 
Our Zally will tend 'un. Zally coom peart, and 
vang Mrs. Littlejan's babby." 

Then Rose saw the brisk little woman go up, 
and heard a loud hail to her, the Queen of 
former May times ; and a merry tune broke 
forth, and the mood was all quick stroke again. 
Then Pugsley, rejoicing to see a bright success, 
went up the ladder to the dance himself; for 
he could tread a measure still, with, heels, in 

VOL. I. B 



242 CHRISTOWELL. 

lieu of toeing it. But Sally, who would have 
to give account of his doings to her mother, 
fastened upon him the whole speculation of her 
blue eyes, and left the infant Littlejohn to the 
Hiinistry of angels. 

.** Do you see that wild horse up the hill?" 
cried Rose ; " he is tossing, and straining, apd 
dashing at his reins ; I expect to see him break 
loose every moment." 

" Lor, miss, no ! Never trouble about he," 
Mrs. Pugsley answered calmly. "'Tis only 
baker Pollard's young gray nag; he hooketh 
him up there, twaice a day. And he riglar 
furmiteth about, like that." 

"What is there to stop him, if he breaks 
loose with the cart ? And here come those 
Punch and Judy people, close behind him ! Oh, 
he is loose, he is off I " 

Without another word, she too was off, down 
the crooked staircase, like a rabbit through a 
hole, and out at the front door, which luckily 
was open. The baby of the Littlejohns was in 
the street before her, making just a little crawl, 
and trying to say "boo," with the mad horse 
striking fire, in his dash down hill upon it, and 
the wheels behind him flying, like a kettle at a 
dog's tail. Away ran a score of louts snigger- 



THE DANCING TREE, 243 

ing, and yelling ; and women justly screamed ; 
for death was dashing on the baby. 

With a set heart, and firm bound of all 
the life within her, Rose Arthur stood in the 
very middle of the narrow roadway, before the 
poor baby, and pulled her white hat off, and 
threw it at the forehead of the horse, almost 
upon her. Swerving with a wild plunge— for 
check himself he could not — he flung the cart 
high in the air, and flew on, with the reins, like 
a lasso, whirling after him. The loop caught 
the leg of baby Littlejohn ; but Rose threw it 
up ; and the tire of the jumping wheel tore off 
a lock of her long scattered hair. With a dash, 
and a clash, all the peril was gone by, and the 
roar, and the scream, echoed further down the 
street. 

Rose Arthur lay stunned by the whirr of 
the wheel, within a single inch of her lovely 
little ear ; if the wheel had not leaped, at the 
plunge of the horse, it must have gone over her 
slim white neck. When she came to herself, 
she was in the strong arms of a young man, 
who had rushed forth to save her, but too late 
to do more than pick her up, and worship her. 

" She is killed, I do believe, you disgraceful 
pack of cowards ! " he cried to the fellows, who 



244 CHRISTOWELL. 

came crowding now around. " I never saw 
anything so grand, and so barbarous. Go, and 
fetch your mothers ; it is all that you are fit for." 
There were plenty of brave young men around ; 
but their presence of mind had failed them. 

" Thank you ; I don't think that I have been 
hurt," said the maiden in a whisper, and looking 
shyly up at him ; " only stupidly frightened. 
But how is the baby ? " 

"The baby is laughing in the arms of its 
mother. But you, who are worth ten thousand 
babies " 

"Please to put me down, sir. I am not so 
giddy now. Oh, here comes Mrs. Pugsley! 
I am most thankful to you, though I cannot 
tell you properly." 

" You be off, young man ! " cried the carrier's 
wife, for the Westcombes were unknown on 
this side of the moor ; " you han't done no 
harm, and you han't done no good. Be off, 
I tell /e. Bain't no place for you. Hus be 
going to examine this young leddy." The dis- 
missal was urgent ; there was no plea for 
lingering. Everybody seemed to say, " What 
do you want here ? Who are you, to abuse the 
Moreton folk ? " With a deep bow, meant for 
Eose, but received by Mrs. Pugsley, in the 



THE DANCING TREE. 245 

ample region where she tied her apron strings, 
he accepted the decision of the public, and 
was off. 

But all excellent intentions must have some 
luck somewhere ; if capable of paying for it, and 
eager so to do. And Pollard, the baker, who 
was sitting on his flour-bin, sadly scoring, with 
his white material, a loss of more than £3 IO5., 
from the breakage of shaft, and bolt, and panel, 
and a spring of five leaves, and the gray colt's 
knee, and a host of little items of the ruefullest 
arithmetic — he did signal justice to that young 
man's lofty character, without assigning reason. 

But Mrs. Pollard knew the reason ; and she 
kept it close as dough, until the brewer's charm 
begins. The reason was, that young Jack 
Westcombe, before he started for his long night- 
walk, provided a curl paper for a curl. Or, to 
put it more precisely, he gave a £5 note for the 
silky tress, which he had discovered between the 
sprung tire, and cracked felloe, of the cart's sur- 
viving wheel. He might have had it gladly 
for five shillings ; but love scorned such an 
insult. 



246 CHRISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER XYI. 



"the raven." 

Much has been said well, and written even 
better, about the vast progress of the age, in all 
things, except honesty, courage, and kindliness. 
These are of small account ; when a man runs, 
his loose ends must blow out behind him. 

Everybody said, in Christowell, where the 
people have always been considered very wise, 
that the Government of the United Kingdom 
was conspiring to rob honest people. When a 
man got a letter, his first business used to be, to 
pay for it, and then to stick it on his mantel, for 
a picture ; until such time, as a great book-scholar 
should be in need of twopence, for a glass of 
beer. But whoso got a letter for a penny, or a 
thank'e, was it fair to expect him to pay two- 
pence, every time he got it read to him ? The 
opinion of Christowell, headed by the landlord 
(into whose till, every twopence must have 



"THE RAVEN.*^ 247 

travelled), was distinctly, and deliberately, this 
— that the post had no right to deliver letters 
for a penny, without providing somebody, to 
come and read them gratis. 

This matter had scarcely been under discus- 
sion, so much as four months, when a new upset 
arose. The cobbler, in every village good 
enough to have one, was regarded by the 
Grovernment, in all the new arrangements, as 
the first claimant to the postmastership, in 
right of his professional complicity with wax. 
Hence it will be manifest, that Mr. James 
Trickey, though curt perhaps of graceful 
courtesy, was strictly correct from an official 
point of view, in his highly suggestive demon- 
stration to Carrier Pugsley, when rooted in the 
rut. No man should ever be condemned, at 
first sight, whatever part of his organization is 
foremost to woo stern criticism. 

The mind of that postmaster was in a state 
of unusual tension, and wholly indifferent, as 
the mind in office must be, to any good works 
beyond its own vocation. His appointment 
was new, and he had to justify it ; for the 
village, having done without a post-office for 
centuries, not only saw no need of it, but had 
a right to be indignant ; though the elder folk, 



248 CHRISTOWELL. 

having larger toleration, said, " Let un coom ; 
her taime wun't be long. 'Tis a get up to sell 
gate-postesses ; and nubbody buyeth they, in 
these here parts." 

Master Trickey Knew better, and was proud 
to do so ; and holding himself above inquiries, 
would neither take, nor make them. In refusing 
to answer, he was right, as a man always is, 
when he knows nothing ; but in sternly resolv- 
ing not to ask, he showed perhaps less wisdom. 
For although he could read with some fluency 
in the Bible, and do the fourteen generations, 
he could not make out the tremendous words, 
in which the vast era of progress began. He 
was told, in his orders, to " communicate, in 
anticipation of emergency, with the central 
administration." This puzzled him, for it 
sounded like the Prayer-bopk, pnly bigger. 

Now if he had taken this question to his 
minister (as exhorted to do, in a book, whose 
clear English shall never be surpassed by the 
very biggest writer), his difficulties might have 
been duly solved, and he must have got an 
order for a pair of fishing-boots; which by 
reason of his " reticence," was quite lost to the 
parish, and even went as far away as Newton 
Abbot. For Mr. Short made a point of know- 




" THE RAYEN." 249 

ing, what his own folk were up to, and a point 
of honour when his letters were concerned ; 
and he never made surer of anything in his 
life, than that such a wiseacre as Jem Trickey 
would be at his door, thrice every day, with 
something to be explained three times. There 
scarcely coul4 be a more liberal man than the 
parsqn, a strict Conservative — a race of men 
who practise true, and let the others prabble 
truculent philosophy. And now the parson 
proved all this ; for he paid 5^. epstra, rather 
than wear a pair of boots, to the profit of such a 
Radical. 

Master Trickey felt these things, and lamented 
in the bosom' qf his fapaily. In public however, 
he declared, that puch qonsiderations were 
beneath him, that an oflBcer of the Crown must 
be above small byses, either of leather or of 
learning; and parson's behaviour should have 
no effect upon him, no more than to keep one 
pew buttoned on a Sunday, and the letters for 
the vicarage to the tail of the delivery. But 
even before his grievance ripened, or the vicar 
knew that it was growing, this haughty layman 
bit the dust, at the feet of Mother Church, and 
Father Short. 

For a very remarkable thing happened now, 




250 CHRISTOWELL. 

one of those facts which defy defiant reason, 
and set at nought all purest process of induc- 
tion, deduction, or reductio ad absurdum. Christo- 
well remembered many things, that could not be 
explained; but these had left off happening 
lately, so that the upstarts grew too bold, and 
the veterans (rasped of the crust of rdasbn, by 
the roughness of hard life) told one anothei* 
that the Lord was now clock-time, to read they 
young cockahoops a warning. And a Tvf^arning 
now was read to them, which made thdm shake 
in their moonlit beds, and turned all argument 
into agreement, and stupid young fancy into 
stubborn faith again. For the author of evil, 
who never can be satisfied even with his own 
exertions, and is famed for " looking over Darty- 
more," as keenly as over his own pet Lincoln, 
in this crisis of "postal development," came 
loflScially, as the great father of lies, to look 
after letters, and robbed the mail. 

Jem Trickey had a son whose name was Bob, 
a truthful boy (comparatively speaking) and 
one who could be trusted largely, if he were 
not tempted. Neither was that the only thing 
remarkable about him; for he was also a boy 
that kept his pockets buttoned, and his heels 
together. He had tight little calves, like smart 



"THE RAVEN." 251 

balls of blue worsted, and forks of Nankin — 
called in high society ** breeches" — which ran 
np to his middle, when his legs began to run. 
And his legs ran often; for he was a very- 
earnest boy, eager to be the very foremost of 
his age, an example to the other boys— the 
which they pelted stones at — to the girls a 
riddle, and in larger view intended for a post- 
man of letters at a penny. 

This boy was fortunate in the possession of a 
parent, who not only had keen perception of his 
genius, but also the power to make it pay. 
Under the new Act of Parliament, Bob, being 
early of age at fourteen, was appointed to the 
salary of head-postman, and his father cut him 
out a pair of cowskin gaiters. No other postal 
district could compare with this, for innocence, 
and charity, and the absence of ill-will ; because 
the population was so scanty. Yet even here, 
there were people found to say, that sometimes 
it was possible to have too much leather. 

Now the weather was fine, and the time of 
year beginning to be cheerful, and abundant, with 
variety of flowers. Every man, leaning on his 
shovel in a meadow (which is one of the things 
that he is most inclined to do) was pleased, and 
yet saddened to behold the same things coming 



252 CHRISTOWELL. 

up, that used to come up a great many years 
ago, when he was a child, and spent hours with 
them. Ah, the times were better then! He 
got his victuals, without labouring, he ran about, 
and played, and slept, whenever he was minded ; 
the taste of everything was better, and the size 
much larger, and every year put on his life was 
strength, instead of stiffness. But for all that, 
if the Lord came now, and said, " Will you go 
back again ? " — he would think no more of 
doing so, than the flowers to shrink back into 
bud, and be buried in the root again, 

Sam Slowbury did not particularly go through 
that, or any other process of mind, as he was 
leaning on his shqvel ; for his nature was not to 
think a thought that it could help, any more 
than to dream a dream — which he did yearly — 
or to do a rapid stroke of work, the which he did 
never. But conscience is the guide of duty, as 
many learned moralists have shown, and can 
show again ; and the proof of the pudding is in 
the after-taste. Sam Slowbury's conscience only 
told him, that he ought to have more wages. 
Captain Larks, who could not afford to give 
romantic wages, was paying Sam now, one and 
tenpence a day, and Sam did the value of ten- 
pence. He was turning up a mixen, in a 



" THE RAVEN." 253 

meadow near the lane, or rather he was helping 
it- to turn itself; while Mopsy, the cow, with 
creative pride looked on, and increased in her 
own self-esteem. Then Slowbnry stood more 
still than ever, if possible, while he stroked the 
cow; and she^ like a very faithful creature, 
made no other movement than a kinkle in her 
tail. Everything was pleasant, everything was 
gracious ; there seemed to be a richness of green 
upon the grass, and a delicate blue in the air, 
and a desire of the weather to be kind, and 
happy. Sam felt it ; and it added to his leisure, 
and benevolence, and the way in which he 
looked about. 

" I dun'now as ever I zeed a vainer marnin' 
coom out o' the top of the sky," he said, with a 
truth pf observation, not often to be found in 
our most accomplished weather-clerks ; for if 
the fine morning comes from the horizon, the 
issue of' the day is doubtful. "But who be 
thiccy coming up by graveyard ? Jem Cobbler's 
buy, zure as I be a zinner ! " The identity of 
the boy was the most important question, that 
had occurred since breakfast-time. Sam even 
went a yard or two, up the bank, to get a more 
masterly view of him, and established his shovel 
in the happiest attitude, for support and comfort. 



/ 



254 , CHRISTOWELL, 

But SO persistent is human care, and so vast 
the activity of the human mind, that no sooner 
was it settled beyond dispute, that the figure 
approaching was the cobbler's son, than another 
question, even more absorbing, rose defiantly — 
Whatever could be compelling this scion of 
leather, to wear out his paternal boots, like that? 

For Slowbury could not see, although he used 
his eyes with diligence, the thing the boy had 
in his hand, and largely in his head as well. It 
was one of the new " Mulready envelopes," just 
come down from London ; and the head of the 
boy was unsound about it ; bjBcause he had never 
seen the likes before ; and now he had got five- 
and-twenty of them, mainly for people who could 
not read. " Deliver fust to they as can intar- 
pret," his father, who was nearly mazed at the 
size of the bags, gave orders ; " 'tothers may 
baide up to next church-time. Goo with Cap- 
pen's fust ; them as payeth for their boots 
desarveth fust shoeleather." 

Slowbury stood, and watched the progress of 
this boy with pleasure. But presently he beheld 
a thing, which made him throw his shovel down, 
and sit, and bless the angels, who alone can fend 
the pixies. From the corner of the churchyard, 
where the tombs lay thickest, a tall figure, 



" THE RAVEN," 255 

flaring in the sun, leaped forth, with a wonderful 
explosion, and a cloud of pitchy smoke. Sam 
was ready to swear that he was not mistaken, in 
seeing nothing more for at least five minutes, 
and then if it was anything to bear an affidavit, 
it was the chap from the gravestones jumping, 
out of the cloud, to the top of the church-tower, 
And sure enough, when seven unmarried men 
were sent to the top of the church-tower, they 
found a place where the moss had been knocked 
off, and they came down according to their 
speed, declining (as soon as their breath was 
restored to them) to go up any more, unless 
they were strung up to the bell-beams. This 
proved every syllable, that came from the mouth 
of Slowbury; out of which came very little 
(as soon as he knew what he was about) without 
a great deal of very solid, and highly liquid 
substance going in, at the sole charge of the 
inquirer. 

There is no justice to be traced, in the affairs 
of men or boys, without dreadful ingenuity. 
What had Sam done, to make a pocket out of 
this affair, more than lean on his shovel, and 
arouse himself to look a bit, and regard with 
satisfaction the distance of the miracle ? Even 
when the cloud passed off, and the church was 



i 



256 CHRISTOWELL. 

as bright as she ought to be, this man discovered 
that his duty to his master strictly forbade him 
to approach what he had witnessed. He re- 
treated to another mixen, nearer to the house, 
where a man at work might hear the wholesome 
cocks a-crowing, and the thumping of the churn 
at dairy. And he took Mopsy with him, for 
company, because his heart was in the frimitts. 

On the other hand, the ]*eal hero of this 
strange adventure not only sucked no profit 
thereout, and no increase of character, but 
received knotted strap from his father, and was 
threatened of his life, if he told a word of it. 
And so do the greatest events get deformed, 
(when chance has protected them from smother- 
ing), that only two people in Christowell — the 
postmaster, and his gaitered son, could find any 
motive for that outbreak of the Evil One, except 
the sad nature of his constitution. 

But the nature of the human creature always 
has some spotty places, where the good light 
enters. Black Wenlow was glad, that his out- 
rush from the tombs, and shower of fireworks 
of his own construction, scared the poor boy 
so, that no blow was needed ; as he fell on his 
back and cast away the letter ; for feeling is 
swifter than thought, and Bob felt that these 



** THE RAVEN." 257 

wicked inventions brought Satan upon him. 
Then the sheep-skinned villain vanished, not 
over the tower, but into a cross cut which led 
him to the moor. 

There is a house, or at any rate was then, far 
away, among the hills, and hollows, from any 
other place, where people dwell. How anybody 
came to dwell there, none but those, who knew 
the ins and outs of mining on the waste, can 
pretend to say, if even they can do it. But 
there this miserable building stood ; and a man, 
who was no more miserable than his fellow-men, 
had his home there. The savage wilderness, 
iron-browed hills, and rocks of peaky profile, 
like a row of hideous giants, were more to the 
taste of G-ruff Howell, than the sweetest land- 
scape, and the kindest sun. To take the rough 
and the smooth together, is a test of magnan- 
imity ; but Howell took the rough, without the 
smooth, in fare and footing, in climate and in 
clothes, and in company, whenever he got any 
to enjoy. 

It was said, by the gentler folk afar, that he 
deserved no better ; himself not being fit com- 
pany for a Christian ; and if he had his due, he 
would be swinging now in chains, as a pirate, 
on the hill of landscape looking over Plymouth 

VOL. I. 8 



i 



L 



268 CHRISTOWELL. 

Sound. But instead of that, he kept the 
Baverij by the side of a mine-road long dis- 
used ; and no idle rumour disturbed him there ; 
for his customers were the moor-men only, a 
silent, hard-living, and wandering race. But 
even they asked one another, sometimes, about 
the queer couple, Grriffith Howell, and his wife. 

The house had been built by the miners of 
old, and therefore was substantial, and well- 
squared. For some granite masonry, as fair as 
need be wished for — including the tower of 
Christowell church, which they built in whole- 
some gratitude for a great success — has been 
done around the moor, and upon it, by the 
miners. And they must have been sturdy 
fellows, to have reared the Haven, without 
being blown out of the windows. 

For here are strong concourse, and mighty 
deliverance, of every wind that sweeps the sea, 
buffets the land, or scours the sky. It is a 
hollow of the hill-crest well contrived, as the 
chimneys of new houses are, to suck down the 
gust that is wandering overhead, as well as to 
catch up the rollicking blast that follows the 
floor of the country. Not a tree, nor a shrub, 
scarcely even a furze-mote, or a stub of dead 
ground-oak, varies with a looser twang the per- 



"THE BAVEN." 269 

petually tense wail of the wind on granite — a 
tone too dismal, and too dreary, for echo, or 
description. 

Gruff Howell was sleeping, like a lawyer's 
conscience, richly, and without prejudice. He 
never went to bed much, but achieved his rest, 
like a warrior on a tomb, with his clothes on. 

To-night, the wind was scarcely even keeping 
itself in practice ; and the moon was having 
an unusual turn of insight into the Raven. 
All around the hills were silent ; and the long 
pale shadows lay, like flaws of calm on tidal 
waters ; while the " holy circles," where unholy 
deeds had stained the moor, stood up, like 
ghosts that have no churchyard. Only the 
solemn bird, that watches the dim night for a 
century, and times its slow watches with a 
croak, was moving, uneasily moving his long 
gaunt body, with the platform of his frayed nest 
waiting in the crag, for him to mend. 

Suddenly the poor old mastiff-bitch, who 
wandered round the house at night, gave three 
sharp yelps, and made a spring ; but re- 
ceiving a blow on the nose fell back, and in that 
position became qualified to digest a kick in the 
stomach. Then a storm of thumps broke upon 
the hob-nailed door, and a mighty noise rang 





260 OHRISTOWELL. 

throTigh the house ; till the master looked out of 
the window, with an oath, and pointed a long 
gun at his own porch. " Come down," said a 
stem voice ; and down he went, while his wife 
shivered worse than at fifty burglars. 

Old Griffith Howell now was longing, as his 
wife sincerely hoped, to turn a new leaf of his 
life, to cast away the works of darkness, brew 
his own beer, and give no credit. For since 
the penny-post came in, the heavens had blessed 
him with a great surprise. He had heard of 
his only son, a soldier, long astray in foreign 
parts, and long despaired of in home quarters ; 
and without falling under proper average of 
reason, he placed such a piece of news entirely 
to the credit of the penny-post. And this made 
him pay attention now to the doings of his 
visitor. 

"The candle is enough. Rake the fire 
together, and put a block of dry peat on. Gro 
for the loaf, and the streaky bacon, and the 
sharp knife with the heel to it. Very well. 
This packet is for me, with urgency ? Leave 
me to consider it, while you see to the victual- 
ling. Don't draw the ale, till I tell you, mind. 
When my supper is ready, you may go to bed 
again." 



"THE RAVEN." 261 

With these words, the man of the sheep- 
skins, looking thoroughly weary, sat heavily 
down at the oaken board set up for a table; 
with a jerk of his thumb, he broke the seal of 
the letter, which Howell had given him, and 
read it by the grimy yellow light. And though 
he was glad -to find little to do, his nasty temper 
made him grumble at it. 

" Child's work — mere child's work — an insult 
to me," he muttered, while Howell went 
fumbling about ; " even the forgery all done to 
hand, and directions, as if I were a stupid 
errand-boy. ' Put this slip in with the opened 
letter, seal with the seal enclosed, and post it, 
but not at Christowell, to-morrow.' Very good ; 
very well ; it shall be done, sir ; as the fates 
have made you my master for the present; 
though you don't catch me going near a post- 
office. No sham civilization for me. I have 
taken to the moor, and mean to stick to it." 



262 CHRISTOWELL. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 

Ignorant of all plots against him, and even of 
any occasion for them. Captain Larks was pro- 
ceeding steadily, with the garden-labours of the 
year. For May is a month of urgent call, and 
claim, from every rooted being, whether from 
under the blurred and mottled sky, which man 
spreads over them, or from beneath the clearer 
blue of nature's glazing only. This is the time, 
to rise right early, to breathe crisp air, and 
tread fresh earth, and do brisk work, that shall 
brighten up the heart, with beauty, and with 
goodly relish, in the by-and-by of resting. 

Shall we be content, to maunder, and to Idt 
the right hand flag, among the many works 
that claim it, for no better reason than some 
trivial flout within ourselves ? Somebody has 
run down our work ; some boy has thrown a 
stone, and sped away rejoicing ; some jealous 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 263 

brother of the spade declares, that we are but a 
tinkling cymbal ; worst of all, some foe has 
darkly re-assessed us, when we paid three times 
too much already — yet all these woes, though a 
single day inflict them, shall not stay the true 
hand, one half-hour. 

" I find it like this," said Captain Larks, as he 
set his heel firmly on a leather-coated grub, 
" that if I begin to think, think I may, and be 
nowhere at all, but only grow * weist,' as they 
call it about here, instead of growing wise. 
But if I begin to work, there I am ; something 
to show, and something to grow ; and a thank- 
ful heart, and a peaceful spirit. Now for the 
last, and the maddest of my crazes, according 
to some of the wiseacres ; though in bare fact, a 
great success already." 

Has there ever been a craze, that was not a 
great success, in the opinion of the crazy one ? 
Not that the captain deserved to be so called, 
by reason of his present crotchet; for verily 
there was good sense in it, as well as small 
risk, and much beautiful amusement. What he 
wanted to establish, was an English vineyard ; 
the which used to flourish many centuries ago, 
and is to be heard of, every now and then, as 
flourishing here and there, down to the present 



264 CHRISTOWELL. 

time ; with taste, skill, and money, and good 
luck, to help it. 

Bacchus loves the hills, as the ancient writers 
tell us; and yet he detests rough mountain 
winds. Let a nook be found for him, with crag 
enough to shelter, and sun enough to warm his 
graceful curls, and soil enough to feed his juicy 
growth ; then let human skill nurse him daily, 
human force scatter his countless foes, and For- 
tune and Providence alike smile on him — and 
in a fine season, there may be some sour grapes. 

Here, beneath the rough crest of the moor, 
thfe home and shelter had been found, the nurture 
of light shelf-land, and reflected warmth of sun, 
whenever he came out. However there had 
been no grapes as yet ; but nothing could be 
simpler than the reason — they were not going 
to begin too soon. "Everybody knows," said 
Mr. Arthur, " what is the consequence of allow- 
ing the vine to fruit prematurely. Eager 
young people, like my daughter Rose, may 
long to see a dozen bunches upon every vine, 
before the stem is thicker than a knitting 
needle. But that is not my system, sir." 

The third season's growth was now begin- 
ning; and the sight was very pretty to a 
gardening mind. For a nook of cliflF, per- 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 265 

pendicular above, and shelfing at the bottom, 
had been well fenced off, so as to help the 
native curtain of the rock, in fending the summer 
gale ; and also to shut out wandering pigs, and 
gormandizing cows, and the graceless sheep, 
without even a horn to drag him to the altar 
by. And now, in the shelter of their sloping 
nest, more than three hundred maiden vines 
were peeping at the prospect of the sky. 
Whether should they come out of bud, throw 
forth another joint of growth, with a heel of 
leaf to stand upon, and a comb (like the fringes 
of a moth) to go on with ; or whether should 
they abide a wee bit longer, within the golden 
eider of their mantles ; and thus reserved give 
the sun to understand, that his meaning was 
kind and cordially welcome, but not yet estab- 
lished against white frost. Some did the one 
thing, and some did the other ; according to the 
impetuosity of sap. 

What a pleasure it is, to see a man look 
happy ! Partly, no doubt, because that pleasure 
is so rare. But now Captain Larks, with his 
leathern apron on, and leather behind him for 
to sit upon, and a great many pockets full of 
everything he wanted, sat down among his 
vines, and did look happy. For these came 



266 CHRISTOWELL. 

along the ground, not ramping upward, neither 
flabbing downward with a dissolute redundancy ; 
but curt, and vigorous, and robust, with every 
joint as ripe as a boiled ox-ta.il. Like the 
fingers of a star, they were spread above the 
earth, led horizontally to catch ground heat, at 
a height of about nine inches ; and a man 
might sit upon the ground among them, and 
lift his head, as in an orchestra of fiddling, and 
thank the Lord, who made him, for the better 
music here. 

" Father, I tell you, once more, that you are 
too bad, when you get into this dreadful 
corner," young Rose almost shouted out; so 
jealous was she of this little vineyard, in which 
she was not allowed to work as yet, because she 
did not understand it; "and I assure you, 
without exaggeration, that I must have been 
half an hour looking for you; and here you 
are, just as if nobody ever had serious business 
to attend to ! " 

" Well, let us have the serious business. I 
see a great deal too serious here." The captain 
had found five snails stuck together, looking 
into one another's windows, as they will. 

" I intend to come up ; though I dare say you 
don't want me," cried Rose, as she gathered in 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 267 

her skirts, and stepped lightly ; " there now, I 
have not even frightened a bud. You will have 
to call me in, to help you soon, jealous as you 
are, dear father. Now my news is, that a 
gentleman is come, who wants leave to fish in 
our little stream, so please you." 

" I can't attend to him now]; and I can't have 
him flogging away, through my pear-trees. 
Don't you see, that I have got nearly thirty 
bushels of old tan, to spread along the ground, 
before these vines are one day older ? And all 
to do myself — every bit of it, myself. I can't 
have clumsy fingers here. Tell him to go, and 
fish some other river." 

" That would be a nice thing for me to say, 
papa, to a gentleman who caught me up, when 
the horse knocked me down so, at Moreton." 

" Kose, sometimes you are quite as provoking, 
as a full-grown married woman. Was I to 
know, by instinct, who this man is ? If he has 
been kind to you, he may fish for ever. Tell him 
so, with my compliments ; and say that when 
he has done, I shall hope to see, and thank 
him. But fishermen never want to be dis- 
turbed." 

" Like certain other people, who are too busy 
to be mentioned. This gentleman's name is 



268 CHRISTOWELL. 

* Washton,' I believe ; and he wants some trout 
for a sick lady. If it were not for that, he 
never would have taken the liberty of asking 
leave." 

" Fishermen always want fish for sick ladies. 
And they mainly take the liberty, of not asking 
leave. However, let him fish, to his heart's 
content, if he doesn't hook my pear-trees. I 
dare say, he doesn't know a trout from a Forelle." 

" If he gets a good catch, you shall have a 
dish for supper. I shall watch him in the dis- 
tance; I love to watch a fisherman; his looks 
are solid wisdom." 

" Short is the only man, who can make head, 
or tail, of the fish in this water ; but let Mr. 
Washton try his hand, my darling. A very sick 
lady could eat more than he will catch to-day." 

" He looks as if he could fish well," said Rose, 
hastening with bright cheeks, and brilliant eyes 
— for she still was a child when excited — to 
authorize, and behold the sport, if any. 

" Don't rob him of his fish, you greedy little 
creature," her father shouted after her, down 
the vineyard hollow; "let the sick lady have 
every one he catches." 

Rose kissed her hand, to show that she would 
be obedient ; and then at a very nimble pace 



ON 'I'HB BRINK, AND OVER IT. 269 

set off, with her slender form glancing in and 
out of tender foliage, towards the bottom of 
the meadow, sacred to the good cow " Mopsy." 

For here it was, that she had been at work, 
and singing pleasantly, weaving a disc of prim- 
rose-buds, with purple shade of violets, when a 
fishing-rod came through the hedge, and a hat 
full of amazement after it. " You have made a 
mistake," said Rose, looking as calmly as Mopsy 
at him, " this is my father's property. We are 
very particular about our fences." 

The ingenuous youth betrayed much confu- 
sion, or at any rate tried to do so ; and tried 
very cleverly, with the stern truth against him 
— that he knew all these things, and now was 
here, in virtue of that knowledge. 

" How stupid I am ! I beg a thousand par- 
dons," he answered with profound humility; 
"but I thought these moorland streams were 
free. But I see that there is a most lovely 
place here — a gentleman's private residence. 
Forgive me ; I was thinking of a lady who is 
ill ; and I wanted a few trout so sadly." 

" Don't go away, you shall have them," said 
Rose ; " if I can find my father ; and if you can 
catch them." 

With admirable patience, he had waited, 



270 CHRISTOWELL. 

gazing into the desired land, and envying the 
Christow at leisure straying through it, the cow, 
that could come up, and breathe on Rose's 
shoulder, and even the grass, that such a blessed 
cow made milk of. For verily, this young man 
was stricken with a great and lifelong blow, from 
simply opening his arms, and finding a maiden 
there, in the street of Moreton. No mere flash 
of fancy, or dazzle of sight, or sparkle of ad- 
miration, but a deep and high power of a larger 
existence than his own, and a rapture of en- 
noblement. For a week, he had seemed to be 
walking in a dream, and his tongue had turned 
white, though he used it very sparingly. There 
was no cure for him, but a hair of the dog — but 
out upon such low metaphors ! 

Now, as he sat upon the bank, outside of his 
Paradise, pretending to be busy with his fly- 
book, he espied, through a neat little peep-hole 
of twigs, the maiden of his heart coming back to 
him. And being at such a respectful distance, 
he was not afraid to watch her ; which the bash- 
fulness of love prevented him from doing at close 
quarters. Surely, there never was till now a 
form so graceful, a walk of such sweetly flowing 
elegance, a poise of the head so delicate and 
maidenly — ah, now she was coming, and he 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 271 

could not look ! He would wait for the heavenly 
music of her voice. 

" Plaise, sir, be 'e the young man, as wor 
axing lave, vor to vish in this here watter ? '* 

The capricious Rose had stopped at home, and 
sent Moggy to represent her. Jack Westcombe 
was so vexed, that he scarcely cared to answer, 
but jumped up, and stared at Moggy, with 
cheeks even redder than her own. 

" 'Cos if 'e be," said Moggy, " Cappen zeth 'e 
be kindly welcome. And a' will come and look 
arter 'e, for fraid of 'e kitching of our vroot 
plantesses." 

This little addition was of Moggy's own in- 
vention ; for she said to herself — " Where be the 
young chap's manners ? A' standeth there like 
a stuck pig, as if I wor a Bartlemy ! " Then off 
she walked, with a sharp toss of her head, and 
a strong impress of heels upon the soft grass of 
the meadow. She considered herself a very 
pretty girl ; and she liked other people to agree 
with her. 

Westcombe's mind was as reasonable perhaps, 
as any mind can hope to be, at the age of three- 
and-twenty ; and he might have been sure, that 
no gentleman would have sent him that rude 
message. At first however, he turned round in 



272 CHRISTOWELL. 

dudgeon, and began to take the fly-collar ofiF his 
fishing-line; and if there had not been a hitch 
about this, his life might have hung upon a 
very different loop. But when a man is in a 
hurry, (and for certain, if his hurry be knotted 
with wrath,) every little thing that can converge 
to a confluence of tangles, rushes into every 
kind of complication, with a subtlety that 
proves the multiplicity of the devil. 

Now many young fellows would have gnashed 
their teeth, pulled out a seven-bladed knife, and 
slashed away. But Jack was gifted with a 
turn of obstinacy, equal to any ingenuity of gut; 
and instead of growing pettish, he became more 
calm, while he worked with his fingers ex- 
pediently. Presently, this patience and con- 
sideration spread from his fingers to his mind, 
through that sympathy between them, which 
compels the mind to clench the fingers, when it 
waxes wrathful. And thus he began to see 
the folly, and the littleness of taking offence, 
where none is offered. 

" The captain is fond of his little joke, per- 
haps," he said to himself, taking up his rod 
again ; " and probably he agrees with Dr. John- 
son, in the greatest mistake of that great bear. 
Never mind, I shall go on, and take my chance. 



ON THE BMNK, AND OVER IT. 273 

Possibly, I may see somebody again ; or at any 
rate, I may think of her." 

It happened to be both the hour, and the day, 
when fish with one accord begin to feed. The 
eldest, truest, and deepest chip of the ancient 
block of Zebedee (who is pretty sure, even in 
these tumble-down times, to be of Apostolical 
succession), however shrewd his study of the 
loaves, and^fishes, cannot predict when the fish 
will want their loaf, but is ready to present 
them with the hook, upon demand. The water 
is the same, and the weather has not changed ; 
to the keenest human eye and sense, there is no 
sign of difference; yet certain it is, that for 
hours together, no trout will even look at the 
very finest fare ; and then all of a sudden, as if 
the dinner-bell rang, off scampers every trout to 
his private napkin-ring, wags his tail, and fans 
his fins, and goes up and down, like a Corporation 
saying grace. 

Westcombe was not at all a mighty dab at 
angling. That noble absorption of all conscious 
existence, upon the behaviour of a small cock's 
hackle, that absolute devotion of entire brain, 
and heart, to the humours of a slippery speckle, 
just beginning to outgrow a tadpole — those high 
and wondrous powers of nature, which turn a 

VOL. L T 



/ 



274 CHRISTOWELL. 

man into a fisherman, had not been vouchsafed 
to this young fellow. However, he could throw 
a fly very neatly, and pull out a fish, when the 
hook stuck in him; and elated with unusual 
success, he worked away, to surpass all pre- 
vious record. And at least a score of trout 
were considering, with gasps, the texture of a 
Plymouth basket, by the time that he came to 
the captain's drawbridge, and doubted about 
going higher up the stream. For here were 
flower-beds, and pretty walks of gravel, and pet 
places looked upon by modest cottage- windows. 
Fearing to trespass upon favour, he turned at 
this point, and began considering. Beyond 
doubt, a dish of fish was due to the good owner, 
together with the decency of thanks for his per- 
mission. And yet it would be an awkward 
thing, to march up to the door, knock, and 
introduce himself, and seem to want to disturb 
the captain in his well-known retirement. So 
he thought, that he would fish his way back 
again down stream and find perhaps some work- 
man, or some messenger to send. He forgot 
that the weather, which makes trout feed (un- 
accountably, as aforesaid) has a thoroughly 
national, and rational effect, upon the British 
workman, despatching him, without delay, to 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 275 

the happy realms of slumher. The only failure 
of accord between them, was that Sam Slowbury 
felt the weather, even more promptly than the 
trout, and had his mouth wide open for the flies, 
five minutes before theirs were ready. At a 
comer of the brook, about an hour ago, the 
fisherman either heard, or seemed to hear, a very 
loud sound in the distance of the land, regular, 
and to some extent harmonious ; which he took 
for the roaring of a bull upon the moor. 

" At it again ! It is really too bad," suddenly 
Jack Westcombe heard a lively voice pronounc- 
ing ; " an hour and a half, is his allowance after 
dinner ; and now he must have been four hours 
at it, solidly ; not to mention all his little dozes 
on his shovel. Rose, if you insist upon my 
keeping such a fellow, I shall call upon you to 
pay his wages." 

" But think of all the very small Slowburies^ 
papa. And if he is not very quick, remember, 
how thoroughly good-natured, and quiet he is." 

" Quiet indeed ! Do you call that quiet ? I 
call it the very loudest snore I ever heard. 
And here is the gentleman fishing. I was 
coming to look for you, and thank you, Mr. 
Washton, for your kindness to my dear child 
the other day. Don't think me ungrateful for 



276 CHRISTOWELL. 

having been so long. I expected to have seen 
you further up, long since ; and being very busy, 
I forgot how time goes by. You might have 
filled your basket, up the brook, by this time. 
I heard the trout leaping there continually.'* 

" Oh, thank you, I have done quite as well as 
I could wish. I fear that you will think me 
very greedy, when you see them. I am sure, I 
am very much obliged to you, sir. May I go 
to your door, and leave a few with the servant ? 
I have had famous sport, much more than 
enough for my dear mother, and all of us.'* 

With these words Jack Westcombe leaped up 
the bank, as gracefully as stiff legs could do it — 
for the sake of Rose — and with a brave bow, but 
a very timid glance at her, spread the contents 
of his basket at her feet. There was not a fish 
of more than half a pound among them ; but 
still they made a handsome show, by reason of 
their number. 

"Many of the poor things are alive," cried 
Rose ; " surely you don't let them die so slowly? 
I suppose it is their nature to be caught ; but 
stiU '* 

" Nine fishermen out of ten do it," said the 
captain ; for he saw that his visitor was troubled, 
and surprised ; " but a touch in the right place 



ON THE BBINK, AND OVER IT. 277 

saves them pain ; and what is more important 
from the human point of view, they are crisper 
in the pan from the happy despatch. But they 
are a pretty lot. You must be a skilful angler. 
Our trout are very hard to catch, I know. A 
friend of mine says, that they are like the ladies. 
Sometimes they won't look at you ; and then 
again — but never mind. He is an ancient 
bachelor." 

Westcombe stole a clever glance at Miss 
Arthur, to ask what her opinion was upon 
this question; but being a diffident young 
maiden, she looked down, and began to count the 
trout sedately. Just at the moment, when she 
was doing this, opening and closing her rosy 
lips, like a school-girl doing arithmetic, and jog- 
ging one finger at every little fish,* the westerly 
sun, gliding out from a cloud, glanced over the 
dance of the water, and through a tissue of 
young leaves upon her. The sweetness and 
innocence of her face were lit up, like an open- 
ing rose ; every delicate line, and soft clear 
colour of the perfect oval, was enlivened with 
thoughtful pleasure, kind will, and the bloom of 
faith in everything ; while the power of loving, 
as none but women can love, waited in the clear 
depth of her eyes. 



278 CHRISTOWELL. 

" Now don't be greedy, Rose, my dear," Mr. 
Arthur said, with a truly parental, and prosaic 
turn of thought, which set young Westcombe's 
teeth on edge, for his rapturous gaze had sealed 
his fate ; " not one of those fish shall you have 
for supper, though you long to exhibit your 
frying powers. We thank you heartily, Mr. 
Washton ; but we can always have them when 
we like. Pack them all again, in your basket. 
Rose, there are many things for you to do. 
This gentleman will excuse you." 

In a moment, the light of the world was gone, 
with a curtsy, from Jack Westcombe's eyes; 
and he began to put his poor fish away, with a 
very gloomy air. 

"You must not think," said the captain, 
observing his manner with surprise, "that I 
am ungrateful ; but I wish you to have a good 
dish ; and as I said, we can always get them. 
From the freshness of the water, the Christow 
trout are as good on the third day as on the 
first ; or better, according to a friend of mine. 
You are welcome to fish here, whenever you 
like. Will you come up to the cottage, and 
taste my cider ? We have a very decent ham 
in cut." 

" The thought is very kind. But I have far 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 279 

to go ; and the moon will not be up till late 
to-night. I will thank you once more, and say 
^ good-bye,' " 

Mr. Arthur, by this time, was so ingrained 
to the pleasures of a lonely life (which are the 
most trustworthy) that he was generally glad 
to say, " good-bye." But the young man 
lingered, and looked at him; and observing 
him now for the first time closely, the elder 
took a liking to him. In spite of wide philo-p 
sophy, and vast philanthropy, most of us like, 
or dislike, at first touch. 

" I want to tell you one thing," said young 
Westcombe, blushing deeply, and with the full 
sense of it, looking firmly at the man he spoke 
to; "it was not the fishing, that I came for. 
I came in the hope of seeing Miss Arthur. 
Because-^because I never yet saw anybody like 
her. You have been kind to me ; and I should 
be a sneak, if I did not tell you." 

" What ! " cried the captain ; " do you mean 
my Kose ? " 

" I mean the young lady, who has been here 
with us. The only young lady in the whole 
world to me. The one who sprang out, into 
the middle of the road, before a mad horse, to 
save a baby, without a single thought of her 



280 CHBIBTOWELL. 

own dear life. And by the most wonderfdl 
presence of mind, she saved the baby ; but the 
Lord alone saved her. You look, as if I were 
exaggerating." 

" Her account of the matter was entirely 
diflferent." Mr. Arthur spoke coldly ; but the 
quick warmth of pride in his daughter flushed 
his cheeks and brow. 

" Of course it was. She made it out to be 
nothing. Her nature would compel her to do 
that," Westcombe exclaimed, as if he knew the 
maiden, ten times better than her father did ; 
" my dear sir, I saw the whole of it, although 
I was too far off to stop it ; and I tell you there 
never was a grander thing done, by any one so 
young, and so beautiful." 

" I scarcely see how that last point bears 
upon the merits of the exploit," Mr. Arthur 
answered, with a little of the bluntness, which 
always comes of solitude ; " however, I am glad 
to hear, that my daughter did her duty." 

" It was not her duty. It is no one's duty, 
to risk a precious life in that way. I beg your 
pardon, for going on about it. The difference 
is, that I saw it, and you hear of it. And 
because there was no fuss made about it, you 
think that I exaggerate." 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVEE IT. 261 

" I think nothing of the kind. I know the 
nature of my child. And I thank you, sir, for 
valuing it. Also I thank you, for your manly 
truth, and honesty, in telling me what has 
brought you here. But I grieve to say — be- 
cause I like you, and you remind me of a dear 
old friend — ^that you must not come here any 
more." 

" I hope, sir, — ^I beg of you," the young man 
answered, noticing the kind, but resolute, look 
of the elder, with a wistful glance, " not to 
think ill of me, because I came this morning 
under false pretences. I never did anything 
like that before ; and now that I think of it, I 
am quite ashamed. I tried to do without it, 
and really fought against it. But ever since 
that day at Moreton, I have not been like 
myself." 

"I forgive you most freely for that little 
crime," Mr. Arthur replied with a hearty smile : 
" it was nothing but a young man's trick. 
Another thought would have put a stop to 
it." 

" Then why am I to come no more ? I will 
pledge my honour, to do nothing underhanded. 
I tell you the truth. I shall never care for 
any one in all the world, except your daughter. 



/ 



282 OHRISTOWELL. 

It will make no difiference in my feelings, if I 
have to wait fifty years for her. At the same 
time, I beg to state, that I hope to get her 
sooner; but without attempting anything out- 
side your knowledge. I know well enough, 
that I am not to be compared with her, in 
any of the higher attributes. And I know 
her too well, to suppose that she would think 
twice of any of the lower ones. But for all 
that, I am not going to be discouraged. My 
father never meant a thing, without going 
through with it. And I am as like him as two 
peas ; though not to be compared with him, for 
goodness." 

" Your father must have been a peculiar 
gentleman, if you resemble him in character." 

"My father is living, sir, and not at all 
peculiar. Unless it is peculiar, to be brave and 
upright, generally admired, and universally 
beloved. He is not known yet, upon this side 
of Dartmoor ; but everybody knows him in the 
western parts ; and his name will last for ever, 
in the history of the war. You may have 
heard of Colonel Westcombe." 

" What a wooden brain I have ! " thought 
Mr. Arthur, sitting down, to hide a change of 
countenance ; " so much stooping dims percep- 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVER IT. 283 

tion. He is the very image of his father, 
though taller, and stronger, and better looking. 
Once and for all, it must be stopped." 

Meanwhile Jack was looking brightly at him, 
and saying to his hopeful heart — " Come now ! 
I put it very mildly ; but it must tell for some- 
thing." 

" My daughter told me that your name was 
* Washton ; ' and she very seldom makes mis- 
takes." Mr. Arthur went into this side-issue, 
partly perhaps to get time for thinking. 

" The Moreton people, when they found my 
name out," Jack replied, with a quiet smile, 
" made * Wasshcum ' of it, with a sharp a, as 
in ^cash,' according to their manner of pro- 
nouncing. And so, I dare say, it got into 
' Washton.' We seem to speak better, upon our 
side of the moor. You should come over, and 
hear us, sir." 

" I fear there is no chance of it. You are a 
very young man ; and I shall very soon be an 
old one. It would grieve me that your father's 
son, or indeed that any gentleman, should have 
reason to believe me churlish. I will tell you, 
if you will promise to keep what I tell you in 
strict confidence, even from your father, why 
you must never come here more." 



284 OHBISTOWBLL. 

"I will give you my honour, sir, not to 
speak of it to any one." 

" Thank you ; I know that I can trust you. 
The reason is simply this. Very strange cir- 
cumstances, which I must not enter into, have 
made it the first duty of my life, to obliterate 
myself entirely — to conceal my existence — to 
desire to be dead, except for one pure precious 
sake. While I live in this way, my child must 
do the same. Not that I shall sacrifice her 
better life to mine. If she gives her heart to 
any one, and he is worthy of her, they shall 
not find me an obstacle. But as yet, she is too 
young to judge, or even think of it. And I 
have a right to keep her to myself, and to live 
as the story of my life demands; until my 
child's welfare compels me to do otherwise. I 
see that you clearly understand me." 

"I am trying to do so," the young man 
answered, with a very dismal gaze at him; 
" and I am sure, that I am very much obliged 
to you, for trying to explain it. But I can- 
not see, why I should be forbidden to come 
any more, if I do no harm, and do not even 
see the young lady. It seems very hard, as 
you must acknowledge. Even to see the 
house where she lives, and to get a glimpse 



ON THE BRINK, AND OVBB IT. 285 

of your hat, without coming near you, would 
be the greatest comfort to me, and give me 
some idea of kindness. I am sure, that you 
have known my father, sir, from the manner 
of your eyes just now ; and I never yet met 
anybody, who had known him, without liking 
him." 

" You are right, my lad, I have known your 
father well," Mr. Arthur answered warmly ; 
" and a nobler man I never knew ; and that 
is why I trust you. The greatest mistake in 
the world is, to allow, when once the mind is 
made up, a middle course. And I will have 
nothing of that sort now. But if it will do 
you any good, or ease your mind, to be upon 
my premises now and then, for the purpose of 
catching a fish or two, I am not sure that I 
should prosecute you. Only, of course, you 
must confine yourself strictly to your angling ; 
and only come just now and then, at consider- 
able intervals ; and feel yourself entirely on 
your honour, when you do come." 

" I thank you with all my heart, and I will 
observe your conditions strictly. I shall make 
a point of never coming more than once a 
week, and of never intruding on your pleasure- 
grounds. And if I ever send a few fish to the 




286 CHRISTOWELL. 

house, it shall be quite anonymous, and by the 
man that snores so. You have taken a great 
weight off my mind ; and I tell you fairly, that 
I mean to hope; but nothing whatever shall 
be done, I mean, of course, upon your own 
place, without your entire knowledge." Jack 
Westcombe tried to wring the captain's hand, 
but got rather the worst of that; for of all 
things potting is most hardening. 



( 287 ) 



: CHAPTEE XYIII. 



WET, AND DRY. 



Like every other ancient faith, the angler's firm 
belief, that fish refuse all food with rain impend- 
ing, has now been scattered to the wind and 
clouds. The opinion of many ages was, that 
having by instinct surer knowledge, than all 
mankind by science get, of the things that shaU 
occur to-morrow, these finny sages fear to spoil 
their relish for the coming treat of worms, and 
slugs, and grubs, more luscious than the fattest 
"native," to unvitiated taste. All these will 
fall into their mouths to-morrow ; let them fast, 
to keep the feast. 

It is now denied by men of science — scornful 
of all reasoning beyond their own — that a trout 
surpasses them so immensely, in the science of 
meteorology ; of which they are bound to confess 
that they know nothing. And feeling some 
reasonable doubt of that denial, they add the 



288 CHBISTOWBLL. 

insidious remark (engendered by their own 
"inner consciousness") that even if the fish 
knew what was coming, they would never keep 
their mouths shut, by reason of their know- 
ledge. 

Be that as it will, one thing is certain, the 
liberal rise of the Christow fish to the hook of 
Jack Westcombe did not preclude a heavy rain 
from setting in, next morning. Whoever has 
the pleasure of an intimate acquaintance — and 
in such a case there truly is no superficial know- 
ledge — with a genuine hearty Dartmoor rain, 
will be ready to admit, that it has some meaning. 
Its main point of difference from most other 
rains is, that it combines all their bad qualities, 
and omits their good ones. However, to abuse 
it, only makes it rain the harder. 

To prove that he was " game," and to cele- 
brate becomingly his " most Providential restor- 
ation," — as Lady Touchwood called it — ^young 
Squire Dicky had prepared an expedition against 
the rats of Dartmoor, transcending his defeated 
invasion, as largely as the armament of Xerxes 
surpassed that of Darius. A triduum of solid 
combat, (such as Greeks and Romans had, but 
civilized armies now eschew,) was ordered to 
begin, upon this great morning ; for Dicky's 



WET, AND DRY. 289 

heart needed some repose from love ; but lo, the 
very terriers, best waterproofed with wire, bore 
upon their flanks such bars, as the young of the 
salmon tribe have, or a race-horse after a heavy 
gallop ; and such as no washing may produce 
upon a dog, nor anything else but a thick, steady 
rain, that hits them against, and up, the grain 
of their dear coats, and so pursues them, imtil 
their sweet skins become oozy. 

Now Dr. Perperaps, beyond emphasis, and 
therefore in a whisper which outwent voice, had 
ordered, that the thing of all things his precious 
patient must most avoid, was the very slightest 
damp. 

" And it ain't slight damp ; " said Dicky, in 
his slang way, to his darling mother, as she 
told him this ; " my name's * ratter,' this juicy 
day, and no mistake. Find the beggars all at 
home, this weather. I've got my army ready, 
and I mean to march. Old Dr. Perperaps went 
on about 'slight damp;' but he never said a 
word against such heavy wet as this. Hi there, 
you fellows, I'll be down in a jiffy." 

In a jiffy, he was down, but not as he in- 
tended; for his mother, being ample, and of 
very hearty substance, laid one strong arm 
across his back, and the other in the hollow of 

VOL. I. u 



290 CHRIS TOWELL. 

his knees ; and thus having whisked him off his 
feet, bore him right easily to his bed-room, laid 
him on his bed, and locked him in. Then she 
sent orders to his army, to march to the brew- 
house, and have some beer, and a shilling apiece, 
and retire to their tents, until the next fine 
morning. 

When the whole expedition was thus dis- 
banded, Dicky was released ; and recovering 
quickly from his indignation — for he never bore 
resentment long — he sauntered to his sister 
Julia's room, to tease her pet dog ElfiCj and to 
talk about matters of importance, as he called 
them. 

" Judy, shove aside your daubs," he said, for 
she was just pointing up, with fine grey eye- 
brows, a spirited sketch of Colonel Westcombe ; 
" I want to consult you about a thing, that men 
cannot be expected much to enter into. I have 
already informed you, that my affections at last 
are permanently engaged." 

" So they always are. To a new one, every 
month. Be constant, Dicky, this time, if you 
can ; for I rather like Spotty Perperaps." 

" What a pest you are ! The spotty little 
fright ! I am two inches taller than she is. 
Five feet four is the extreme lowest measure, as 



WET, AND DRY. 291 

we say at Cambridge, of any girl I ever should 
make up to. You are such a height that you 
don't care. In fact, you had better have some 
short fellow ; if you are not too proud to have 
anybody." 

"How does this bear upon your permanent 
affections ? " 

" In this kind of way ; as you ought to know, 
if your reasoning process was like ours. I 
scout the idea of Spotty Perperaps ; and I love 
Eose Arthur." 

" Yery well, let it be so. It is no con- 
cern of mine. Nothing ever comes of your 
adorations. The last was for a hideous bull- 
terrier. And^ probably the next will be for a 
badger." 

" Judy, I came for your advice ; and not to 
be scoffed at with nasty levity. You thoroughly 
understand women, because you have got all 
their dodges in your nature. And all I ask 
you is a very simple thing — how would you 
recommend me to go on ? " 

" I have never seen the girl. How can I tell 
you ? " Miss Touchwood answered, with ferge 
contempt. " Boys, like you, have a weak idea 
that all the women in the world are just alike, 
and as utter fools as they are themselves. I 



292 . CHRISTOWELL. 

can only say this, — if you want to get on, be 
as unlike yourself as possible. 

"If you had tried for an hour, even you 
could hardly have said a more nasty thing. It 
makes me wonder, when I come across nice 
girls, whether they would talk like you, after 
they got married. It makes one afraid to have 
anything to do with them. Nobody can have 
a finer nature than I have; but nothing ever 
comes of it." 

" A very fine nature is its own reward," said 
Julia, touching up Colonel Westcombe. " But, 
Dicky, it never talks about itself." 

" Yery well. Let it do anything it pleases. 
I never stand up to be wonderful at all ; but 
every man who keeps a dog is fond of me. 
And if all the girls think that I am to be got, 
by snubbing me, they will find themselves in the 
wrong box." 

" Surely," said Julia, who after all was 
jealous, at hearing so much of Rose Arthur, 
'' your new angel does not snub you, as if you 
did not even keep a dog." 

"t'hat is the very point," answered Dicky, 
coming up, and showing many blue pricks in 
one leg ; " these things made her take a liking 
to me ; and I made the very most of them, 



WET, AND DRY. 293 

tearing every hole that I could find, as game 
as if I meant to die for it. And for a long 
time, that scored three, every time I frightened 
her. But when I began to have Guinness, 
and to put one leg across the other, she seemed 
very suddenly to lose faith, and to think that I 
ought to put my boots on." 

" Then she showed some sense, and I respect 
her for it. What a plague you must have 
been ! Even when you are well, you can't stay 
still. And I dare say, you danced one foot all 
day. And you cannot say a word, about any- 
thing but vermin. How can you expect a 
pretty girl to like you ? " 

" It does not matter about that. They do," 
Dicky replied, as one who cites a fact, in lieu of 
argument ; " I believe that it has something to 
do with this, that they think they can have 
their own way with me. That is the first thing 
all you women want. But she is very different 
from all you common females. Her mind is 
exalted, and her thoughts are large." 

" It is a delight to hear that," Miss Touch- 
wood answered, without leaving off her work ; 
"because it might be a very awkward thing, 
if she were to consider you worth catching. 
Gossip is entirely below my notice. But the 



294 CHRISTOWELL. 

rather haughty gentleman — I suppose he is a 
gentleman — who calls himself ' Captain Larks/ 
lies under some cloud of mystery, at present. 
Of course, it may be nothing ; but you know as 
well as I do, that many people say he is a 
criminal in hiding. Yery likely that is rubbish. 
But till something inore is known, the less we 
have to do with them, the better." 

" Such nonsense drives me wild. What do 
you know of the world? You wanted to 
patronize Mr. Arthur — who never yet called 
himself Captain anything, and cares not a rap 
-what fools say of him — and he put you down 
very neatly, and completely, simply by his 
manner, and without a word. It was a bitter 
pill for you, Miss Judy. But a bit of humble- 
pie every day, would do you good. The captain 
is the kindest man that ever lived. Many 
people think me a softy, and a fool. And 
I don't stick up to be a wonder. But I do 
know when people have been good to me, and 
put themselves out of their way, to help me. 
And I tell you, you are not fit to dust their 
floor for them. Put that in your pipe, and 
smoke it." 

With this elegant counsel. Squire Dicky ran 
away, stopping both ears, as if to keep out 



WET, AND DRY. 295 

wicked language ; while his sister only smiled, 
for she loved to irritate him, but never allowed 
him to do the like to her. But she could not 
help thinking of his very frank remarks, about 
her own character, and wondering whether 
there might be a grain of truth at the bottom 
of them. 

" Hurrah ! Here comes somebody ! A 
plucky cove, whoever *he may be," shouted the 
excitable Dicky, in the "corridor" — as Lady 
Touchwood loved to call it ; " Judy, shut up 
your lozenge-box, as soon as you have put a 
little lake upon your cheeks. I was just going 
to send to the stable for a halter ! But here 
comes a visitor, to ruin the new velvet. Her 
ladyship will be in a precious state of mind. I 
defy him to sit down, without a quart of drain- 
age. And the new peach-colour runs, if a 
fellow sneezes in the next room." 

Her ladyship however was a match for the 
emergency. The front-door bell had not ceased 
clanging, ere the much keener jingle of her 
own was heard, and the footman knew well 
which required first attention. " The little 
study, James, whoever it is! And put the 
big Bible open in the easy-chair, first." The 
man understood, made the only cushioned chair 



296 CHRISTOWELL. 

pretty safe from invasion ; and then showed in 
Mr. Short. 

" Capital device ! I give her credit for it," 
said the vicar to himself, while the man went 
to announce him. 

" Now I do call this very good of you indeed," 
Lady Touchwood exclaimed, without a hit of 
falsehood, as she came in, and made her sleeve 
go up, in a manner understood hy women only, 
for fear of his fingers having dribbles to them ; 
" an otter, or an oyster, or a conger-eel, is the 
only thing fit to be out, on such a day." 

"I rather like it;" said the parson, with a 
countenance which did not express any very 
keen delight, except such as a joint may find in 
basting; "at any rate, no weather ever stops 
me, except such a snow as we had, two years 
ago. You sent for me urgently; and I was 
bound to come." 

" No. I have not sent for you. It has been 
raining, I cannot say how long. Would I 
dream of sending for you, in such weather ? I 
never do anything outrageous." 

" I thought you might have boxed — the com- 
pass in such weather. Here is your letter, your 
own handwriting — though the ink may have 
run, with more rain, than sand upon it." 



WET, AND DRY. 297 

" There is both rain, and sand upon it," the 
lady answered, drawing back both hands ; " but 
I never wrote a word of it. You know that 
I never use sand now. I keep it in the ink- 
stand; but I scarcely ever use it, except from 
habit, when I happen to forget. This is not 
my writing. At what time did you get it ? " 

"About twelve o'clock. Trickey leaves my 
letters to the last, because of these boots you 
see. I will tell you that, another time. What 
you say makes me a little uncomfortable. I 
could have sworn, this was your handwriting." 

" It not only is not my handwriting, but it 
is a very clumsy imitation of it. And do I put 
it this way — 'Lady Touchwood presents her 
compliments to Mr. Short ' — after all the years 
that I have known, and liked you ? " 

"I know that you never begin like that; 
except when something has put you out. But 
excuse my remembering, that you did write so, 
about six months back, when I had vexed you. 
And I thought that you might have been 
annoyed again, though I could not call to mind 
my fault. And that made me order my horse 
at once ; for I had some idea — ^but never mind 
that." 

Mr. Short's futile idea had been, that Lady 



298 CHRISTOWELL. 

Touchwood must have discovered, at last, his 
admiration of her daughter; and this had 
brought him straightway, to face the question. 

"That letter was posted at our post-office, 
and in one of those horrid new envelopes," the 
lady proceeded, with that calm judgment which 
we all exert, upon tbe troubles of our friends ; 
" you may depend upon it, that you have been 
decoyed from home, for some bad purpose. 
Either to rob you on your road, or to rob your 
house, while you were away. Everybody says 
how rich you are." 

" It is good to have the highest of all charac- 
ters. Since you have not sent for me, and do 
not want me in this morassy state ; I will say 
* good-morning,' Lady Touchwood." 

" You shall do nothing of the sort, until you 
have had one of those long twisted glasses 
(from some undiscovered country) of my white- 
currant cordial. There is no Mrs. Short to look 
after you, or to reproach me for not doing so." 
Lady Touchwood gave a sly glance herewith, 
for she was much too sharp, not to know of his * 
weakness for Julia, and had no fear of it. 
"But you came through the rain, to oblige 
me, as you thought ; and you are frightfully 
soaked; and riding home you will have the 



WET, AND DRY. 299 

wind on your back, and get lumbago. You 
know my patent. cordial, don't you? None of 
your currant wine — oh, Lord! — but the very 
finest whisky and white currants, done by a 
very old receipt, and bottled to stand upright 
for at least seven years." 

" It sounds very good. But shall I stand 
upright, or sit upright in the saddle, with the 
wind upon my back, and lumbago coming ? I 
will take nothing more than a glass of your old 
ale, the golden ale made of the Wiveliscombe 
malt ; and then I will ask your good son Dicky, 
for one of his long old tough cigars. With the 
wind on the crupper, it will last me all the 
way." 

. These things were sent for, and the horse 
was ordered (much against his liking, for he 
was just doing nicely), and then Lady Touch- 
wood took the opportunity of putting a word 
in season, just at the genial moment of good 
relish, which a fine ham-sandwich gives to ale. 
" And how is Captain Larks getting on ?" said 
she. "Everything he does is so delightful. 
When will you bring him over ? " 

" As soon as he will come," replied the wary 
parson. " Why should I hurry him ? Am I 
bound to commit social suicide ? I feel myself 



300 CHRISTOWELL. 

cast into the stade already, because there is no 
romance about me." 

" No, no, you are never in the shade,'* cried 
the lady, being dull at metaphor ; " everybody 
knows every atom about you. He is the one, 
that is in the shade. But I am sure, that he 
never deserved it." 

" He appears very honest, and he may be 
that," said the vicar, with a solemn shake 
of head ; " but where did he get his silver 
spoons ? " 

" Come now, you are a great deal too jealous." 
Lady Touchwood always supposed a person, 
who did not smile, to be in earnest. " If there 
is anything the matter with him, it must be 
at least of the upper classes. He has been 
accustomed to the best society. I am sure, he 
never would do anything, of a lower rank than 
forgery." 

" Let us make a round-robin, and put in the 
middle — ' Is it forgery, is it homicide, is it 
treason? Your hearty well-wishers feel con- 
fident, that you have done something respect- 
able.' If I prepare the document, will you 
sign it at the top ? " 

*' Go along. Here is your horse at the door. 
There never is any reasoning with you. But 



WEI, AND DRY. 301 

I do hope that you will not catch cold, or find 
anything at home, to vex you." 

"I am not afraid^ My house can defy the 
world, with Mrs. Agget in it, and good Nous 
upon guard. Oh, here comes Squire Dicky, 
just in time to say * good-bye.' How well he 
looks ! Why, my good friend, glass and putty 
seem to suit your constitution. • I must build 
a new greenhouse, for you to tumble through 
it." 

" I am pretty sure of one thing ; if I did, 
you would never be like Captain Arthur. You 
would make me pay for it, and for all the 
plants too." 

" What a wise babe it is ! He has hit the 
mark. Lady Touchwood, the Cantabs always 
do. But don't come out in the rain, my friend. 
Your glazing is not water proof." 

" I hope he will find his old house robbed ; " 
said Dicky, as the parson rode away, and the 
story of the letter was repeated. " It would be 
worth a hundred pounds to me, to have a rise 
taken out of him. He thinks himself so con- 
foundedly clever ; and he never lets another 
fellow say a single word almost." 

" Now, don't be so spiteful, my dear. I am 
sure, that you always hold your own with him. 



302 CHRISTOWELL. 

It amuses me sometimes, to hear you get so 
very much the better of him." 

But Dicky shook his head. For he was a 
candid youth, and knew that he had no chance 
with Mr. Short, in any other view than his 
dear mother's. 



END OF VOL. I. 



LONDON: PRINTBD BT WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, llXITSDy 
STAMFOBD 8T&BET AND CHABINO G&088. 



I 



a. 



I 




V'- 






