Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 




CLARA IN 
BLUNDERIAND 



CAROLINE LEWIS 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



CLARA 
IN BLUNDERLAND 



Digitized by Google 



Some press ©pinions. 

The Athenceum — " The parody is one of the best 
specimens of that kind of literature, and the political 
satire is extremely good. " 

The Academy. — " 'Clara in Blunderland ' is sure of 
an uproarious reception on both sides of the House, and 
it might have useful results, for many true words are 
spoken in jest in its pages." 

The World. — " Both the prose and the verse of the 
famous companion volumes are imitated with unflagging 
cleverness and point in this diverting political skit. The 
author has maintained the parody throughout with a 
skill and ingenuity which will be keenly appreciated by 
all who know their Lewis Carroll and their contemporary 
statesmen." 

The Pall Mall Gazette.— ■" 4 Clara in Blunderland ' will 
give everybody who takes even the most superficial 
interest in politics a hearty laugh. . . . While the prose 
is good, the adaptation of the familiar lyrics are excellent. 
. . . Take it for all in all it is excellent fooling." 

The Daily Telegraph. — " It is good fun and there are - 
some shrewd hits in its pages. The parody is sufficiently 
bright and amusing and S.R.'s illustrations, burlesquing 
the famous pictures of Sir John Tenniel, achieve consider- 
able success." 

The Globe.—" It is thoroughly up-to-date and its por- 
traits of prominent politicians are unmistakable. . . . 
It should prove entertaining to politicians of all parties, 
for its satire is as impartial and comprehensive as it is 
witty and genial." 

The Scotsman. — " A really clever political skit. Both 
as a parody and a vehicle for a good deal of satire it is 
distinctly clever." 

The Daily Chronicle. — "The satire is good-humoured 
and its cleverness is unquestionable." 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



" Beware the Porlokrock, my Joe!" {Page 18.) 



Digitized by Google 



CLARA 
IN BLUNDERLAND 



BY 

CAROLINE LEWIS 



WITH FORTY ILLUSTRATIONS 
BY S. R. 



LONDON 
WILLIAM HEINEMANN 
1902 



Digitized by Google 




/Yr.v/ Impression, February 1902 
Second Impression, March 1902 
Third Impression, March 1902 
Fourth Impression, March 1902 
Fifth Impression, April 1902 



All rights reserved 



Digitized by Google 



WITH THE MOST PROFOUND AFFECTION 
AND RESPECT TO THE MEMORY OF 

LEWIS CARROLL, 

TO WHOM THE AUTHOR IS AS MUCH 
INDEBTED FOR THE TEXT AS THE 
ILLUSTRATOR TO SIR JOHN TENNIEL 
FOR THE ENSUING PARODIES OF HIS 
PERFECT PICTURES. 

ALSO 

WITH THE PUBLISHER'S COURTEOUS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT TO 
MESSRS. MACMILLAN, 
THE GODFATHERS OF THE ORIGINAL 
"ALICE." 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



.DRIFTING. 



All o'er the sea of Politics 

Full leisurely we glide ; 
And Britain 7 s bark, with little skill, 

And little care we guide, 
While little minds make little plans, 

And stronger hands are tied. 



Digitized by Google 



Ah, cruel fate ! to make us tell 

This very plaintive story, 
Of Clara's trip to Blunder land y 

Of creatures bold and boery ; 
And clothe in garb of fantasy 

Prosaic Whig and Tory. 

A sense of Duty urged us first 

To " hurry and begin it? 
Fatuity then whispered low, 

It won't take half a minute ! 
We laughed to scorn the bare idea 

That there was money in it. 

So far we have confined our words 

To merely pointless chatter, 
As fiat as other prefaces, 

Perhaps a trifle flatter ; 
But, as the reader always skips 

This part, it does not matter. 

One serious word — we have to pay 

Our tribute to those sages 
Who wrote and drew that " Wonderland" 

On which are based these pages. 
A classic tvhich in nursery land 

Will stand the test of ages. 
x 



Digitized by Google 



We claim that naught within these leaves 
Has been set down in ma/ice, 

That certainly against the State 
By us there no cabal is — 

And, reader, if youve praise to give, 
Bestow it all on Alice. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. I'AGE 

I. IN A HOLE AGAIN I 

II. A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR . 1 3 

III. THE CONSERVATORY ... 29 

IV. THE MAD PARTY 39 

V. CRUMPTY-BUMPTY . . . . .48 
VI. BOERDOM 68 

VII. BEKNIGHTED 78 

VIII. FRIEND OR F.O. ? ' 97 

IX. FLAMJINGOS 104 

X. QUEENS AND QUESTIONS . . . . I 1 5 

XI. DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE . .124 

XII, ON THE CARpS , 1 38 

xiii 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



" Beware the Porlokrock, my Joe " . . . . Frontispiece 

Paze 

Drifting ix 

Clara felt very listless i 

" Time! Time ! " 6 

44 It will make you grow out of all conscience " . . . 8 

Certainly she was growing io 

" I^can't— go— your— pace " gasped Clara . . . . n 

Chestnut Land T ^ 

A Mushroom Caterpillar . Z y 

44 You thought you could shoot that wildebeeste on your 

head " 22 

44 You could knock out the stuffing from him " . . .23 

' 4 Pray, how do you manage to swallow ? " .... 24 

44 ArenH you afraid it will bite you ? " 25 

She came across a little house 

Nursing the Voter ^ 2 

The Goose -baby ^ 

44 Up a tree again ? " said Clara 36 

Like tht pictures in a biograph 

44 Your views want broadening" said the Hatter ... 40 

xv 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 
Potted Dormouse . 

"/ should let you down more gently than some 

know " 
Ploughing the sands . 
" Get on to Joe!" 
" I bawled in his ear" 
" Two dear little Crumpty-Bumptics " 
Boerdom Beasts t 

" We're a-paintin' of old Kroojer's face " 
The White Knight 
" I shook him" . 
The Rocking-Horse Fly 
" If you'd been a foreigner " . 
" »7V *o use," said the Red Queen 

Clara Flamjingoing . 
The Examination 
" /V^ ^o* « sermon to prepare " 
" Will you join our little gamble ?" 
The Trial . 

Between finger and thumb . 
The creatures came flying 



46 



xvi 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 

Clara felt very listless and stupid that 
afternoon. 

You see she had so many governesses and 
they taught her such very dull lessons. There 
was Miss Bowles, who tried to instruct her in 
facts and figures, and all sorts of stupid things 
of that kind, and Miss Yerburgh, who wanted 

A 



Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 



her to learn about China and other places in 
which she never could feel any interest, and 
another lady to teach her the use of the Globe ; 
but nobody to give her nice little lessons in 
kindergarten philosophy, or even to help her 
and her sister Geraldine in making Irish 
stew. 

No wonder she felt dull ; and there was no 
occasion for surprise when, purely in search of 
distraction, she went right into a hole on the 
putting green to fetch out her ball. People do 
and say such funny things when they are bored 
at golf. 

You may think it wonderful that such a 
big girl as Clara could get down a hole of 
this sort, but she had a marvellous gift in that 
way, and it was said that she could get into 
a hole when no one else would have found it 
possible ; so you see she had no difficulty 
about it. 

This particular hole, however, appeared to 
be bottomless, and the moment she got into 
it she began to fall, which made her say at 
once to herself, " Dear me ! I must be dream- 
ing again, for of course in real life I could 



Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 3 

never fair at all. My Aunt Sarum would not 
allow it" 

But she fell, 
and fell, 
and fell. 
Down, 
down, 
down, 

until she began to fear that she would fall right 
down to the level of the Aberrationals, and come 
out in Ireland, where the inhabitants are all 
cannibals, and the resources of civilisation have 
long ago been exhausted. 

" I do wish," she said, as she was falling, " I 
had Geraldine with me. Then I could hide in 
some Cabinet or other where I should never be 
noticed and, perhaps, when the Aberrationals 
had eaten her, they wouldn't be hungry for 
me. I never knew anybody except Auntie for 
whom one of the family was not quite enough." 

She was, so she thought, years and years in 
falling, and once she nearly saved herself by 
catching hold of an Old Age Pension which 
was sticking out of a pigeon-hole in the wall, 
with nobody to look after it. But it pulled itself 



Digitized by Google 



4 IN A HOLE AGAIN. 

back and hissed at her, "just," as she said 
afterwards, "like a Snake in the Grass." So 
you see it only caused her to slacken in her 
downward career for the moment. 

A little later she saw in another recess a arge 
and very dusty jar labelled PROGRAMME. 
She snatched it off the shelf eagerly, as she 
passed, for she was hungry by this time. t: This 
ought to be good," she said to herself ; but, 
alas ! it was empty, and with a sigh she placed 
it on a lower shelf. 

And still she went 
down, 
down, 
down. 

At last, however, the great fall was over, 
and Clara found that she was not nearly so 
much hurt as she expected. 

She found herself sitting on a nice little seat 
which was as safe as you can imagii^e, and 
which was situated in a large hall full of green 
chairs. In the highest of these sat a very sedate 
White Rabbit, who said, "Order! Order!" 
in a loud voice ; but as nobody brought any 
refreshments, and as he said he was " now 



Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 5 

going to read the bill," Clara thought she had 
better try to find some way out, as she did not 
wish to pay for food she had not had. 

All the doors were locked, but through the 
key-hole of one (which bore the inscription 
" Noblesse Oblige. Admittance ,£20,000 a 
year. Liberal discount to Successful Brewers 
and Unsuccessful Generals/') she could see a 
beautiful garden, carpeted with flowers of here- 
ditary intellect, and filled with hundreds upon 
hundreds of happy children, of whom three 
formed a quorum, and of whom some seemed to 
be more than half awake. " I shall call that the 
Palace of Sleeping Beauties," cried Clara, in 
ecstasies, quite forgetting that a garden can't be 
a palace. 

She tried very hard to get through the key- 
hole into this charming place, but it was of no 
use, and when she found that she would have 
to stop in the hall with the green chairs and 
hear the White Rabbit read the bill, she sat 
down and cried and cried. 

"Must I stop here for ever and ever?" she 
moaned. 

u My dear," answered the White Rabbit, 



Digitized by Google 



6 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 



"I am afraid you will never leave this house 
until it is dissolved." 

" Oh dear, oh dear,'' she said, despairingly, 
" Why was it built on such solid foundations ? ." 

" You ought 
to be very thank- 
ful," he added, 
"after your great 
come down, to 
be here at all 
when you think 
how many 
strange crea- 
tures are trying 
to get in and 
can't." 

After the bill 
was read the 
serious business 
began. The hall 
became full of all sorts of animals. "Both 
quadrangles and biceps/' as she told Geraldine 
afterwards. There were a good many geese, 
a very ugly duckling, some saucy monkeys, 
wolves in sheeps' clothing, parrots in eagles' 




Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 7 

feathers, guinea pigs looking about for guineas, 
pigeons, cuckoos, and any quantity of rats. 
These strangely assorted creatures began at 
once to wrangle, and insult each other, and 
soon there was a free fight, which lasted, 
Clara could not say how long. 

At length, however, the White Rabbit rose 
from his seat, and pulled out his watch, crying, 
"Time! Time!" 

Then the animals and birds trooped out of 
the hall, and Clara found herself hustled by the 
crowd out into the lobby. 

When the noisy party had thinned down 
somewhat, a stately Dodo approached Clara 
diplomatically, and said politely, 44 I have been 
watching you for some time in the house, and, 
if you will excuse my saying so, my dear, 
admiring your way of looking on while other 
people did the business. It seems to me that 
you have grasped the meaning of that policy of 
masterly inactivity which is the key-note to our 
Party Tactics." 

Clara did not understand the meaning of all 
these long words, but she smiled prettily. 

" You are still a comparatively innocent 



Digitized by Google 



8 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 




child," continued the Dodo, with kindly 
patronage, "and what you want is Protection." 

" I do wear a chest protector in the winter," 
said Clara, "and I don't like it, but Aunt 
Sarum makes " 

"Tut! tut! my dear, you want more than 
that, you want protecting everywhere, and 
against everything. Confide in me.* I will 
protect you. Take this bottle and drink its 
contents. You must drink it all if you want to 
be thoroughly protected." 



Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 9 

"It would be very nice to be protected," said 
Clara, " for some of those beasts are rather 
terrify ing." She looked up into the fatherly 
face of the Dodo and could not help having 
confidence in him ; he was so ponderous and 
bland. 

She took the bottle in her hand. "Is it 
nice ? " she asked. 

" Delicious, my dear," he replied. " It is 
all sugar on the top and there are lots of plums 
in it. 

Clara had noticed the Red Queen, standing 
by the door and eyeing her narrowly, and every 
now and then, when the Dodo wasn't looking, 
she seemed to be signing to Clara not to drink 
the stuff. 

Clara hesitated. 

" Come, come, my dear," said the Dodo, 
persuasively. "It's so nice, besides it will make 
you grow out of all conscience. Drink it 
up-" 

She uncorked the bottle cautiously, and 
sniffed at the contents. It was quite white, 
and didn't smell nasty ; besides Clara had a vague 
ambition to become something big. The Red 



Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 



Queen was still beckoning to her, but Clara 

threw prudence to 
the winds and took 
a sip. 
Certainly she was 

growing 

Crash ! Bang ! ! 
What was the 
matter ? Clara had 
shot up so rapidly 
that her head had 
struck the chan- 
delier, and the 
shock had caused 
her to drop the 
bottle, which now 
lay shattered by 
her far off feet. 

"Ah ! you foolish 
girl," cried the 
Dodo, angrily, 
"you have lost 
your chance of be- 
coming one of us. 
Unless the whole 




Digitized by Google 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 



ii 



is swallowed the effect will not last. See, you 
are shrinking again already. You naughty 
child," he continued, working himself up into 
a passion, "you have wasted all that old and 
crusted spirit of conservatism ; and there is 




very little of the genuine article left in the 
country. We can only get the real thing in 
China now, and we have found the Chinese 
article very expensive lately." 

" Oh, please !" sobbed Clara, "I'm so sorry 
— I'm sure, I " 

" What would have happened I really don't 



Digitized by Google 



12 



IN A HOLE AGAIN. 



know," said Clara, afterwards, "he was so 
angry." 

Just then, however, the Red Queen saved 
the . situation by rushing furiously up to the 
Dodo. " Why can't you leave the girl alone ? " 
she cried, and turning to" Clara, she said, "The 
Dodos aims are too high for you, my dear. 
What you want is speed, not height. Come 
along with me." 

Seizing Clara unceremoniously by the hand, 
she hurried her off the terrace. Out into the 
country they sped at a terrible rate which was 
ever increasing. It was not running. It was 
not flying. It was shooting. On, on, they 
shot till the little girl was giddy and terrified. 

"Stop! stop! I'm a — fraid — I — can't — go 
— your — pace," gasped Clara. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

" Faster — Faster ! " cried the Red Queen, 
as she dragged Glara along until the breath had 
nearly left her body, and she felt as if cold water 
were being poured down her back. 

" Where are you taking me to ? " Clara 
panted, " I can't help thinking " 

" If you want to do that" said the Red 
Queen, "you and I must part. I never permit 
any one to think in my presence. Its rude ;' it's 
unnecessary." 

Saying this, she let go her hand, with the 
unkind remark that there wasn't room for both 
of them in the same country. 



Digitized by Google 



14 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

"When," she continued, icily, "you know 
more I'll take you up again ; then perhaps you 
will follow me blindfold, and won't get giddy. 
Meanwhile I leave you here. It is an excellent 
place for acquiring knowledge, though let me 




advise you to believe nothing you see, and only 
half you read, even in print." 

With that the Red Queen sped away on her 
reckless course, leaving Clara in the centre of a 
vast desolate plain, covered with newspapers, 
arranged in black and white squares, something 
like a chestnut board. 

Clara knew that no good little girl ever reads 
such things as newspapers, and, indeed, she 
prided herself on never having dipped into one 



Digitized by Google 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 15 

in all her life. So you see she did not quite 
like the place in which she found herself. 

In the distance, however, she espied an old 
and withered chestnut-tree to which she de- 
termined to make her way, " for," as she very 
wisely said to herself, " chestnuts are always 
safe, I remember how pleased they all were 
when I brought some into the house last 
Thursday." 

Just as she got to the chestnut-tree she noticed 
a tall mushroom, on the top of which was seated 
a very green Caterpillar, who was writing at a 
great pace, and imbibing gas through the tube 
of a strangely constructed hookah. 

Picking up a signed article which had fallen 
off the mushroom, Clara saw that the insect 
belonged to the species Winstoniensis Vulgaris, 

For some hours the Caterpillar took no notice 
of her, and she was beginning to think that she 
had better go away without disturbing it, when 
it slowly raised its head, and, without remov- 
ing the pipe from its lips, remarked acidly, 
"YOU'RE WRONG!" 

" But/' said Clara, " I haven't said anything." 

" I know you haven't, and that is wrong, and 



Digitized by Google 



16 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

when you do say something that is wrong 
too." 

" But why am I wronger than other people? " 

" I didn't say you were. Everybody is 
wrong, and I am here to tell them so." 

" And how do you think you will put them 
right?" 

" I don't think ; I talk. I don't put them 
right. It takes me all my time to tell them 
they are wrong. The point is — what do you 
want ? " 

" I'm not quite sure, if you please, sir," said 
Clara, timidly, "things are so funny to-day." 

" Things are never funny ; they are only 
wrong," said the Caterpillar. "You are not 
sure what you want, I am. What you want is 
advice." 

" But you can't think what a lot of advice I've 
had to-day," replied Clara, distractedly, " and 
I don't think it's done me one bit of good." 

" That's because it wasn't mine,'' said the 
Caterpillar. " I shall now read you the leading 
article I am cabling home." 

" I didn't know people ever cabled leaders," 
said Clara. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



18 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

" It is long, but it's very, very clever. It has 
been written entirely for your improvement." 

Clara felt that after this she could not refuse 
to listen, and the Caterpillar still sucking the 
pipe, from which it seemed to draw its inspira- 
tion, read, as follows : — 

PORLOKROCKY. 

'Tis warrig and the slinky Pros 
Do snibe and squirgle in the dark; 
All boersome are the interfoes, 
And the frogrags outyark. 

Beware the Porlokrock, my Joe ! 
The Orange Peel, the Olive patch ! 
Beware the Brussels Spouts, and O ! 
Mark well the Kaiser spatch. 

They packed their Milner to the Cape : 
Long time they drawled on this and that — 
So footled they on the dum-dum lay, 
And piffled as they sat. 

And as in snifty mood they piffed, 
The Porlokrock, with soul aflame, 
Came slimming through the spruity drift, 
Pom-pomming as he came ! 



Digitized by Google 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 



One! — two! — three!— four! disasters came, 
The buckled blades went snipper snap; 
They left it dead — Thafs what they said, 
Vermilioning the map. 

And will you slay the Porlokrock ? 
(Come to Pall Mall, my brittle Brod!) 
Perchance you may, if some fine day 
You catch him on the nod. 

J Tis warrig and the slinky Pros 
Do snibe and squirgle in the dark; 
All boersome are the interfoes, 
And the frogrags outyark. 

" Thank you, sir," said Clara, when the Cater- 
pillar had finished, "I'm very much obliged to 
you, but I can't quite understand it." 

" I never expected you would," said the 
Caterpillar. 

" But is it any good to give people advice 
when they don't understand ? " asked Clara, in a 
puzzled tone. 

" Of course it is," answered the Caterpillar. 
"It teaches them how stupid they are." 

" I know I'm stupid," said poor Clara, very 



Digitized by Google 



20 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

humbly, "at least everybody seems to think 
so to-day, and yet there was a time when 
they all praised me, and said how clever I 
was." 

"Ah !" remarked the Caterpillar, "that must 
have been before you tried to keep pace with 
the Red Queen, wasn't it ? " 

"Yes," said Clara, almost in tears, "I may 
be silly, but Aunt Sarum will tell you that I 
know my lessons by heart, and I can say poetry 
too — so there ! " 

" What can you say ? " 

"Well, do you know," said Clara, brightening 
up, '* when I saw you sitting up there writing 
so hard I could not help thinking of ' How 
doth the little busy bee ' ? " 

" Repeat it," said the Caterpillar, in a some- 
what softened tone. 

And Clara, putting her hands behind her 
back, began : — 

How doth the arm-chair strategist 

Improve each censored cable, 
Converting it by natty twisty 

Into egregious fable. 



Digitized by Google 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 21 

So airily he seems to wrtte, 

So redolent his leader 
Of personalities and spite, 

It flabbergasts the reader. 

" Oh, dear me ! " said Clara, " Pm afraid that 
won't do. Your leading article put me out. 
What does warrig mean ? " 

" Warrig means the time when you begin to 
prepare for a war which is nearly over." 

" I see,'* said Clara, "and I suppose slinky 
Pros are sly and slinking Pro- Boers." 

" Of course," said the Caterpillar, "and to 
sntbe is to sneer and jibe, and to squirgle is to 
squirm and wriggle, while a frograg is a foreign 
newspaper, and outyarking is saying the sort of 
things foreign newspapers do say. Now try, 
' You are old, Father William/ " said the Cater- 
pillar, condescendingly. " Shut your eyes and 
take a long breath." 

So Clara made a fresh start : — 



Digitized by Google 



22 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 




" You are old, Father Johnnie, 1 the Strategist said, 

"And its years since you 1 d had a tough fight; 
Yet you thought you could shoot that wildebeeste on your 
head — 

Do you think, after all, you were right? " 



"In my youth, v said John Bull, " I developed my hand 
" Upon Arabs, and Niggers, and such ; 

And I thought that these Boers were of similar brand ; 
But I found I was out of it — much? 



Digitized by Google 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 




" You are old, Father John, as I mentioned before, 

And your body and ways are not slim — 
Did you think that by bouncing on Stead's 'brother 
Boer* 

You could knock out the stuffing from him ? " 



"In my youth," said John Bull, " it was ever my plan 

To win victory after defeat; 
And I certainly thought that, the worse I began, 

The better my chances to beat. 11 



Digitized by Google 



24 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 




" You are old, Father John, and your teeth must be 
few, 

For your cheeks are both sunken and hollow; 
Yet this trashy and most indigestible stew, 

Pray, how do you manage to swallow ? " 



u In mv youth" said John Bull, " I gave appetite scope 
Upon kingdoms and countries galore. 

Now with Salisbury's peptonised bluff and soft soap, 
I can swallow just that and no more." 



Digitized by Google 



■4 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 25 




" You are old, Father John, one could hardly have 
guessed 

That your nerve allows nothing to fright you; 
Yet I notice you cherish that snake in your breast — 
Pray, arerit you afraid it will bite you ? " 



"In my youth" said John Bull, " / always was told 

The vilest of beasts not to hurt ; 
This one's creepy, and crawly, and clammy and cold, 

But his venom can't gel through my shirt." 



Digitized by Google 



26 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

" Oh, dear me," groaned the Caterpillar, 
" that's worse than ever. You seem to have 
strategists on the brain. I think you were 
better with the ' Busy bee ' than with this. Try 
that over again, and remember that it is about 
bees, not strategists." 

So Clara tried once more : — 

How doth a timely vulture lend 

Improvement to a la/e, 
A Verne- Munchausen- Crusoe blend, 

Which makes de Rougemont pale. 

" There, that's quite enough ! " screamed the 
Caterpillar, highly incensed. " Run away and 
play. Go and bother Crumpty-Bumpty, or 
Twiddle-Thumb and Twaddle-D." 

" But do tell me that vulture tale," pleaded 
Clara, " I should so love to hear it from you. 
Why did it keep following you from Pretoria ? 
Why are the birds so fond of you? I have 
read of people who are always seeing snakes, 
and Aunt Sarum says she could make French- 
men see stars any time of the day, if she liked, 
but of course she doesn't, she's so kind. Why 
did that bird follow you ? " 



Digitized by Google 



A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 27 

" Well, you see," said the Caterpillar, * 4 birds 
are like human beings, they are wrong. Now 
that silly bird, in spite of my strikingly hand- 
some appearance " 

He stopped abruptly. 

"Well," said Clara, encouragingly, " please 
don't stop, it's getting so exciting." 

" Well then, that bird, you must know, was 
very hungry, and when it saw me, a brilliant 
mushroom caterpillar, its idea was to treat me 
merely as a little grub." 

"That was certainly rather humiliating," said 
Clara, sympathetically, " but after all grubs and 
caterpillars are rather alike. Why didn't it 
eat you ? " 

"It might have done that, had it not been 
for my verbal armour. You see the vulture 
couldn't swallow my statements." 

"And how did you get rid of it?" asked Clara. 

" You won't tell anybody if I tell you ? " said 
the Caterpillar. 

" No." 

"Well, then I sang to it." 
" Can you sing ?" asked Clara, clasping her 
hands rapturously together. 



Digitized by Google 



28 A MUSHROOM CATERPILLAR. 

" Oh ! quite easily ; I sang to him : — 

Swallow on, swallow on; 

You may eat whatever you see, 
You may even swallow Official Reports, 

But you'll never swallow me. 

"When I gave him 4 The Belle of New 
York/ he flew away," said the Caterpillar, 
turning round to the spot where Clara had been 
standing. 

But Clara, like the vulture, had flown. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



THE CONSERVATORY. 

"No! they'll never swallow him, that's cer- 
tain," said Clara to herself, as she fled from the 
plain of dead chestnuts. 

" What a talkative creature to be sure, and 
how beautifully green he is ! No ! they'll never 
swallow him — but I do wish that vulture had." 

After she had run a mile or two through the 
desert, she came across a little house on the 
door of which was written : — 

THE CONSERVATORY. 
"This," she said, joyfully, "looks just like 



Digitized by Google 



30 



THE CONSERVATORY. 




home. I'm sure they will be glad to see me if 
I go in." 

A polite old frog-gardener opened the little 
door for her, and she found herself at once in a 
small kitchen which was full of fog from one 
end to the other. 

The Duchess was sitting on tenter-hooks 
nursing a baby which seemed to dislike the 
process very much. At any rate the poor little 
thing screamed and howled, without intermis- 



Digitized by Google 



THE CONSERVATORY. 31 

sion, which was not very surprising, as the 
Duchess alternately slapped and pinched it, 
and occasionally put a wet blanket on its head. 

The Cook, in the intervals of stirring the 
soup, hurled everything she could think of at 
the baby's head, and frequently threw dust in 
its eyes. " In order," she said, " to arouse it to 
a sense of its responsibilities." 

The Duchess did not seem to mind the pots 
and pans, even when they hit her, which wasn't 
often, and she seemed pleased whenever the 
Dalmeny Cat, who appeared to be trying to 
escape observation in a hot corner of the 
kitchen, got a particularly hard knock. 

" You see," she said to Clara, " that Cat does 
not really belong to this house." 

4 * How do you make it stop here?" asked 
Clara. " Have you buttered its feet ? " 

"We've buttered it all over, my dear, at 
times, and yet it won't stop." 

"It seems a very nice Cat," said Clara ; " but 
I don't see that it will be much use here, and 
I'm sure there's no room for it in this pokey 
little kitchen." 

" Ah ! my dear, you don't know what respec- 



Digitized by Google 



32 THE CONSERVATORY. 

tability a real Dalmeny Cat, one that can appear 
and disappear just as it likes, and that does 
nothing but sneer, lends to an establishment of 
this sort. We found it, 4 mee-yowing,' in a 
lonely furrow, sneering so dreadfully because 




the people next door had turned it out, that we 
determined to offer it a home. ,, 

All this time the Cat did nothing but sneer at 
Clara, and wink solemnly, as if it understood 
all about the Duchess and the baby, and the 
Cook ; and Clara thought to herself it wouldn't 
stop long in their company. 



Digitized by Google 



THE CONSERVATORY. 33 

"Please, would you tell me," said Clara, 
" why your Cat mews like that ? " 

" It's because it knows we can't put salt on 
its tail. You see it hasn't got one now ; it lost 
it when it quarrelled with Crumpty-Bumpty, 
and now nobody can persuade it to stop more 
than a week anywhere." 

" What a very unsatisfactory Cat," said Clara, 
" I must say I never expected to see it in this 
house." 

"No, my dear, you wouldn't, and perhaps 
you didn't expect to find that Cook here either ; 
but if you knew the nasty spiteful things people 
have been saying about my keeping the whole 
kitchen for my nephews and nieces, you 
wouldn't wonder at it. Nobody can say that 
the Cook, who is really only a charwoman from 
over the way, or the Cat, are relations of mine." 

The baby was getting blacker and blacker in 
the face, and it was hard to say whether it 
disliked the Duchess, the Cook, or the Cat, the 
most. Whenever the Duchess spoke to it it 
howled, whenever its eyes fell on the Cook it 
screamed, and whenever the Cat glanced in its 
direction it squirmed. 

c 



Digitized by Google 



34 THE CONSERVATORY. 

"Here!" said the Duchess to Clara, "you 
take it and nurse it," and as she spoke she 
threw it into Clara's arms. "I've got more 
important things to see to than trying to get an 
ungrateful little creature like that into a good 

temper. IVe taken 
a shilling out of its 
money box already, 
and I don't believe 
it would have done 
it a bit more good 
if I'd made it 
eighteen pence, but 
I'm going to try 
next year." 

Clara caught the 
baby with some 
difficulty and car- 
ried it outside in the hope of soothing the 
poor little thing, but its sobs only got more 
and more like hisses, and its hair more and 
more like feathers till she became quite excited ; 
"for," as she said to herself, "if it is really 
going to turn into a goose, I think I shall be 
able to manage it quite nicely." 




Digitized by Google 



THE CONSERVATORY. 35 

But everything seemed to go wrong with 
poor Clara that day, and though the baby 
looked exactly like a goose in the dim light of 
the wood into which she had wandered, it 
turned out to be not half such a goose as it 
looked when they came out into the daylight. 

" Unless you'll promise to be a good obedient 
little gosling," said Clara, " I won't have any- 
thing more to do with you." And as the goose- 
baby hissed at her again, she let it drop. 

" Oh ! you cruel girl," it hissed, as it waddled 
off into obscurity, " I shall go and ask that 
kind Crumpty-Bumpty to nurse me now." 

"There's one comfort," said Clara, " I could 
never have taken it home, for it might have 
begun to think for itself, and then what would 
have happened ? " 

" Oh ! " cried Clara ; for there just above her 
head, sneering at her from the branches of a 
gum tree, sat the Dalmeny Cat, already escaped 
from the Duchess's house. 

"Up a tree again?" said Clara, when she 
had got over her shock a little ; "I wish you 
wouldn't always sneer at me like that, you 
nasty thing. There would be some sense if 



Digitized by Google 



36 



THE CONSERVATORY. 




you would tell me which 
way I ought to go, but 
going on sneering and 
doing nothing else is 
enough to make one quite 
cross." 

-Smiling, I call it," 
said the Cat, " not sneer- 
ing. You should always 
be polite, even to your 
superiors." 

" Oh, call it what you like," returned Clara, 
" but do stop and tell me where to go." 

" Well," said the Cat, "that depends where 



Digitized by Google 



THE CONSERVATORY. 



37 



you want to get to, and you don't seem to 
know yourself." 

" You see," said Clara, " I've tried the Dodo 
and he's too old-fashioned ; and the Red 
Queen, she's too fast ; and the Duchess, she's 
too slow ; and the Caterpillar, hes too — too 
cock-sure," and she blushed a little at the use 
of an expression which she knew was slang, 
for her Aunt had told her never to pay any 
attention to the words of the man in the 
street. 

" I don't much care where I go," she con- 
tinued, 4 'so long as I get somewhere." 

" You'll do that," said the Cat, " but whether 
you'll like it or not when you get there I can't 
say." 

" In that direction" (waving its right paw) 
" lives a Hatter ; and in that " (waving its left) 
" lives a March Hare. Visit either you like, 
they're both mad." 

4< But I don't want to go among mad people." 

4 4 Then you shouldn't have come to Blunder- 
land at all. We are all mad here, and if any 
body isn't mad when he comes, we very soon 
make him. But it's usually unnecessary." 



Digitized by Google 



38 THE CONSERVATORY. 




As it was speaking, the Cat began to flicker 
and change just like the pictures in a biograph, 
but, whenever it seemed likely to turn into 
something interesting, it always faded and went 
out with a fizzle, leaving nothing behind it but 
the sneer, which was always there. 

" I do wish you wouldn't go on chopping 
and changing like that," Clara cried at last, 
"you'll really make me Dizzy." 

" Oh dear no! " said the Cat, " you'll never 
be that" 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE MAD PARTY. 

At a turning of the road Clara came upon the 
March Hare and the Grey Hatter at tea, and she 
thought it would be only polite to join their 
Party; " although," said Clara, "it must only 
be temporary, of course." 

There was a table under a tree, and an 
essentially Liberal Dormouse was seated at it 
between the Hatter and the Hare. "Very 
uncomfortable for the Dormouse," thought 
Clara; for the Hatter and the March Hare 
were resting their elbows upon it, and talking 
over its head. " But then," said Clara to her- 
self, " they always do talk over everybody's 



Digitized by Google 



4 ) THE MAD PARTY. 

head." And saying this, she sat down at the 
table. 

" No room! No room!" cried the March 
Hare, with a strong Irish brogue. 

" There's plenty of room ! " said Clara ; 




" why/ there are more tea-cups than people, 
ever so many. Besides, I didn't know it was 
your table." 

This made the March Hare laugh a great 
deal. " It isn't a table at all," he said. " It's 
a platform. It's not all mine. The part above 
board belongs to him " — pointing to the Hatter 



Digitized by Google 



THE MAD PARTY. 41 

with his spoon — " and all the rest to me. 
The Dormouse thinks he has a share in it too, 
but he hasn't. That's only our fun, you know." 

"Your views want broadening," said the 
Hatter, suddenly. He had been looking at 
Clara for some time with great curiosity. 

" Why ? " asked Clara. 

" You'd understand the Dormouse then," 
answered the Hatter, " and you'd see how 
splendid it is to sit as we do with it in the 
middle. I can't abide the March Hare, and 
the March Hare, he doesn't really like me, but 
you see, we can each talk to the Dormouse. 
Our Liberal Party we call it." 

" But don't you have differences among 
yourselves ? " asked Clara. 

The Dormouse groaned in its sleep. 

" Differences ! Differences ! " cried the 
Hatter. "Why, that's the whole point of 
the matter. If we didn't have differences we 
should go to sleep, like that thing," jogging the 
Dormouse with his elbow as he spoke. 

"Don't you think," asked Clara, "don't you 
think you would be happier if you did go to 
sleep ? " 



Digitized by Google 



42 THE MAD PARTY. 

"If they only would ! " sighed the Dormouse. 

" What century is this ? " asked the Hatter 
suddenly, pulling out his watch and banging it 
on the table. 

" Its the beginning of the eighteenth," Clara 
answered. 

" Getting very near Doomsday as far as 
you're concerned,' ' muttered the Dormouse, 
looking sleepily at Clara with one eye. 

"The hands go round different ways/' 
sighed the Hatter. " I told you dynamite 
wouldn't suit the works ! " he added, looking 
angrily at the Hare. 

"It was the best non-explosive," the Hare 
replied, meekly. 

" Yes, but it must have got mixed with some 
continental gas," the Hatter grumbled ; " you 
shouldn't have put it in by Moonlight." 

" The Dormouse is asleep again ! " cried the 
Hare, angrily, and he poured some dreadfully 
hot water upon its nose. 

The Dormouse shook its head impatiently, 
and said, without opening its eyes, " Of course, 
of course ; just what I was going to remark 
myself. Hear, hear ; hear, hear ! " 



Digitized by Google 



THE MAD PARTY. 43 

" Does the Dormouse ever open both its 
eyes ? " asked Clara. 

" Only when it gets right into the hot water," 
said the Hare; "that makes it open its eyes, 
I can tell you." 

" But why does it get into hot water at all ? " 
Clara asked. 

" I'm always putting it there," said the Hare. 

"You see," said the Hatter, "this Dormouse 
is such a sleepy old thing, that if I alone were 
on this side to keep it awake it would go to 
sleep on the other. So we have to sit on both 
sides of it, and when we both begin pinching it 
together you have no idea how it wakes up. 
Why it even speaks, then ! " 

" What does it say ? " asked Clara 

" O, the first thing that comes into its head," 
replied the Hatter. 

" Generally something foolish ! " cried the 
Hare, thumping the Dormouse in the side. 

" Quite so, quite so," sighed the poor 
Dormouse ; €i hear, hear ; certainly, cer- 
tainly." 

" Has it a mind of its own ? " asked Clara. 
"It had once," replied the Hare, "but not 



Digitized by Google 



44 THE MAD PARTY. 

since I got hold of its tail. Its mind belongs 
to me now." 

" Half of it," snapped the Hatter. 

" All of it," said the Hare. 

"That's ridiculous," retorted the Hatter; 
" you may have got the tail, but I've got the 
whig end, anyhow." 

" Were the halves of different sizes ? " 
asked Clara, whose head was beginning to 
spin. 

" Some of them," answered the Hatter. 

At this point the Hatter pinched the Dor- 
mouse on one side, and the Hare pinched it on 
the other, and both cried : " Wake up, and say 
something ! Wake up, and say something ! " 

" Yes, do," said Clara. 

"Once upon a time there were three little 
sisters," the Dormouse began, in a great hurry; 
"and their names were Patty, Primrose, and 
Plantagenetta ; and they lived at the bottom of 
a well " 

"Why? "asked Clara. 

" Because they thought Truth was there," 
answered the Dormouse. 

" And was it ? " Clara asked. 



Digitized by Google 



THE MAD PARTY. 45 

u Only a weekly edition," sighed the Dor- 
mouse. 

" And what did they live on ? " asked Clara. 

" Mostly on things beginning with an M," 
replied the Dormouse, "such as mistakes, 
mysteries, muddles, mortification, and mud- 
larks. " 

"They couldn't have done that, you know," 
Clara gently remarked ; " they'd have been 
ill." 

"So they were," said the Dormouse, "very ill." 

" What happened ? " Clara asked. 

" They quarrelled," sighed the Dormouse. 
" Primrose said they must have a big house, 
Plantagenetta said a little one would do, and 
Patty said she must have one of her own with 
a large nursery for her grievances." 

" And did they part ? " Clara asked. 

" Nobody knows ; they don't even know 
themselves." 

" How foolish of them ! " said Clara ; " but 
what did they do ? " 

"O, they went on quarrelling," said the Dor- 
mouse. 

" Was that all ? " asked Clara. 



Digitized by Google 



THE MAD PARTY. 



41 It took up all their time," explained the 
Dormouse. 

' ' And are they still at the bottom of the 
well ? " said Clara. 

" No ; they're at the bottom of the poll now," 
sighed the Dormouse ; " and it's very un- 
comfortable." 

" After that—" said the Hare to the Hatter, 
h t\ m a threatening 

IBw/ rfm> \ i tone. 



getting very hungry, and at last she said, 
"Aren't you going to get on with your tea? 
I think I should like to have an egg, please." 

"You can't have one now," said the Hatter ; 
" they're not in season, you must wait for the 
elections. But you shall have some potted 
Dormouse, if you wait." 

Thereupon the March Hare and the Hatter 




y "the Dormouse 
I must be sup- 
~ pressed." 



" I quite agree," 
said the Hatter, 



All this time 
Clara had been 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE MAD PARTY. 47 

seized the wretched Dormouse and forced it 
into the teapot. 

" And now, my dear," said the Hare, " if 
you will hold out your cup " 

This was more than Clara could stand, so 
she jumped up and ran away. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 

Perhaps it was be- 
cause Clara was thinking 
so much about the egg, 
which she did not get at 
the Mad Party, that the 
appearance of something 
round and white in the 
distance caught her eye 
almost at once as she 
walked away. When she 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 49 

came nearer the thing got more and more 
like a real egg until, as she came close up 
to it> she exclaimed, in surprise, "Why, it's 
Crumpty-Bumpty himself, and how exactly like 
an egg he is!" It was indeed that celebrated 
character, and, just as she expected, he was 
sitting on a wall. 

For some time Clara gazed at him in 
silence, admiring the immense expanse of 
cheek he presented to the public, and the skill 
with which he maintained his position on the 
wall. 

Meanwhile Crumpty-Bumpty gave no sign of 
life whatever, and Clara began to think he 
wasn't really alive after all, but only a figure, 
such as she had often seen at Madame Tus- 
saud's, " in which case," she said, " even a pin- 
prick will let all the sawdust out." 

Unfortunately she made the last remark out 
loud, and it seemed to hurt Crumpty-Bumpty s 
feelings very much indeed, for his mouth was 
suddenly opened, and he said, in a very loud 
and emphatic tone of voice, " I regard you as a 
barbarian with loathsome methods." 

" I beg your pardon sir? " said Clara. 

D 

Digitized by Google 



5o CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 

" But," he went on, always avoiding Clara's 
eye, and looking straight in front of him, 
"when I say 1 barbarian/ of course I mean a 
a civilised barbarian, and I shall be really 
displeased if you persist in considering the 
expression ' loathsome methods ' at all cen- 
sorious. There are many loathsome methods, 
particularly in war, which are quite nice when 
you get to know them well, and which ought to 
be employed on proper occasions. Take special 
notice, my dear, that I said • employed/ not 
' used/ They should never be used." 

" It sounds very beautiful, sir," said Clara, 
respectfully, "but I'm afraid I don't understand 
you." 

" No ? " returned Crumpty-Bumpty. " Well, 
you mustn't be discouraged. I know it's hard. 
Why, very often I can't understand what I say 
myself until it's explained the next morning in 
the newspapers. There are hundreds of 'em 
that make a living out of explaining r ME. 
That's what you call fame you know." 

" I don't think I do," said Clara, doubtfully. 

" Of course it is," answered Crumpty-Bumpty, 
impatiently, "anybody knows that. Don't 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 51 

stand there looking as if you didn't understand, 
but tell me your name and your business." 

" My names Clara, Miss Clara, and I'm 
beginning to think that I haven't got any 
business in Blunderland at all, but " 

' ' There, there, child, that'll do," interrupted 
Crumpty-Bumpty, "of course I could see at a 
glance that you hadn't ; but your name's very 
pretty and appropriate. It's so expressive. " 

" Is it?" said Clara, in rather a melancholy 
tone, " I suppose it is," and tears came into the 
poor child's eyes. 

" Don't cry," said Crumpty-Bumpty, kindly, 
" remember it might have been much worse. 
You might have been christened ' Buckshot.' 
And now just tell me what it is you want to 
know, because I suppose you didn't come to 
see an important person like myself out of 
curiosity ? " 

"Oh no, sir," answered Clara, eagerly, "of 
course not, nobody would do that. What I 
really want to know is — whether you would like 
our soldiers to win in South Africa or not." 

"That's a very easy question to answer," 
said he. " Of course I want them to win, pro- 



Digitized by Google 



52 CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 

vided, mind you, I say provided, they don't 
beat the enemy. I could never countenance 
THAT." 

" Couldn't you really ?" said Clara, with 
great curiosity. " It's so interesting to 
know you want the English to win without 
the Boers being beaten— or is it the other way 
about? I never saw anybody at all like you 
before." 

" No, and you won't either," went on 
Crumpty-Bumpty ; " but then you don't know 
what a wonderful person I am. Why, I can 
not only sit on a fence for days and days 
together without ever falling off, but I can sit 
on both sides of the fence at the same time. 
There's dexterity for you. That's what you 
call being a real leader of men." 

Clara didn't know what to answer to this, so 
by way of changing the conversation, she 
suddenly remarked, " What a beautiful hyptien 
you've got! at least," she corrected herself, "a 
beautiful equator, I should have said — No, a 
hyphen, I mean — I beg your pardon," she 
added in dismay, for Crumpty-Bumpty looked 
dreadfully offended. 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 53 

At last he said, angrily, " It's a most pro- 
voking thing when a person doesn't know a 
hyphen from an equator. Its a hyphen, as you 
ought to know by this time, and it's the most 
valuable thing in the world. Pulls me together, 
you know. But it costs a dreadful lot to keep 
up. It was a present to me from my colleagues, 
they said I was so changeable that I must wear 
something by which they could always know 
me." 

4 4 What are colleagues?" asked Clara. "I 
should like to know so much." 

" My dear," said Crumpty-Bumpty, " col- 
leagues are things that fly off at tangents. 
I've got lots of 'em, and I never know what 
they'll be up to next ; but I've managed to 
tame a brace of 'em, a Walrus and a Carpenter, 
both very ferocious specimens. I've taught 
them to do nearly everything I tell them now. 
It 'was all done by kindness, and just as you 
came along I was composing a poem about 
them." 

" Oh ! do say it," cried Clara. 
So, hitching up his hyphen, Crumpty- 
Bumpty began : — 



Digitized by Google 



54 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 




The sun was bumping round the sky, 

Bumping with all his might. 

He did his level best to set 

On Britain's Appetite, 

But, tho 1 he always rose betimes, 

He couldn't do it quite. 



The moon was chuckling icily, 
Because she said the sun 
Was like a little Englander 
(That made him swear like fun), 
She said he ought to take a tour 
With Cook or Doctor Lunn. 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



55 



The ocean serged with navy blue, 
The lands were red as red, 
And even clothed in khaki was 
The Tauchnitz which you read, 
Ubiquitous Britannia kept 
Apollo out of bed. 

The Walrus and the Carpenter 
Were ploughing in the sand, 
They wept like one o'clock to sec- 
Such lots of British land, 
" If this belonged to France or Spain, 1 ' 
They said, " it would be grand. 11 



" If dear Lloyd George and Honest Burns 

In Downing Street did sup, 

Do you suppose 1 ' the Walrus asked, 

" That they could bust us up ? 11 

"Let 's try 'em, v sighed the Carpenter, 

And hidd dyspeptic cup. 



" O Voters, come and join with us, 11 

The Walrus did beseech, 

t( As many rads, as many fads, 

As little hands can reach; 

Bring all the blessed lot, dear friends, 

We'll find a hand for each 1 ' 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMfTY. 



The sober Voters looked at him, 
Their followers were many, 
The sober Voters winked their eye, 
And did not give a penny, 
Meaning to say, tho much obliged, 
They were not taking any. 

But some young Voters hurried up, 

All glad to air their views. 

They said the Truth was what they sought 

(TerewtKs the word they use). 

And this is odd, because, you see, 

They read the D — ly N-ws f 



The Walrus and the Carpenter 
Talked on, but no more came, 
And so they sat them down to think, 
And said it was a shame, 
While all the foolish Voters said — 
" Now, whafs your little game ? " 

" The time has come* the Walrus said, 

" To talk like Mother Gamps, 

Of pubs, and pumps, and Chamberlain, 

Of Concentration Camps, 

And how our military men 

Are murderers and scamps? 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY.BUMPTV. 



57 



" But half a mo ! " the Voters said, 

" This talk may go too far, 

For some of us have friends, and some 

Have children at the War!' 

The Carpenter, he cleared his throat, 

" We blame the offisar ! " 



" The Upper Class" the Walrus said, 
" Is what we must attack, 
The Private is a moral man, 
We knife the General's back, 
Now if you! re ready, Voters dear, 
We can begin to hack." 

" But how is this ? " the Voters cried, 

Turning a little white, 

" This wont increase a daily wage 

And help a bloke get tight ! " 

" The end is pure," the Walrus said, 

" Did you admire John Bright ? 

" Yours is the power to turn the scale, 

Yours is the hand we lick!* 

The Carpenter said nothing but, 

" Give Joe another brick. 

I wish you wouldn't wander so, 

It's him we've got to stick!' 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 




" It seems a shame" the Walrus said, 
" To let our programme go, 
Might we not give Home Rule a turn, 
Or bring the High Church low ? " 
The Carpenter said nothing but, 
" Dash it, get on to Joe ! " 



" / weep for him" the Walrus said, 

" All strife I deprecate," 

With studious care he sorted out 

Words of infernal hate, 

Hurling with might at Joseph's head 

The fishiest Billingsgate. 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



59 



" O Voters ! " cried the Carpenter, 

" When all is said and done, 

Shall we not turn the Tories out ? " — 

But answers came there none. 

And this was scarcely odd ; they had 

Disgusted everyone ! 

" They're nasty, horrid, things, but I don't 
hate the Walrus as much as the Carpenter, he 
wasn't quite so spiteful," said Clara. 

"No! but he was more blood-thirsty," said 
Crumpty-Bumpty. 

" Then I like the Carpenter best." 

" Ah ! but he was as blood-thirsty as he dare 
be." 

" Well, then I hate them both," said Clara. 
"Tell me something about the others. I'm 
sure you must have some nice colleagues some- 
where." 

"No end of them," said Crumpty-Bumpty* 
" All the colours of the rainbow. But you'd 
better go and see them. I keep all my bright 
specimens in my garden. It's a beautiful spot, 
and it's called Boerdom." 

" But it's too hot for gardens," pleaded Clara. 

" But Boerdom is a very shady place, I can 



Digitized by Google 



6o 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



tell you," said Crumpty-Bumpty, and he pointed 
away to the Extreme Left. 

The effort nearly caused him to over- 
balance himself. 

" Oh ! do take care, you're so roley-poley, you 
know," cried Clara, and she went on anxiously, 
" I'm sure you must get giddy up there." 

" Everybody says I'm giddy," said Crumpty- 
Bumpty, "but I'm not, though I admit I feel a 
bit addled at times. But it's better for me to 
maintain my equilibrium, for," he continued, 
with great solemnity, " I'm always afraid that 
if I were to fall, I should become quite 
cracked." 

"That would be dreadful," said Clara, " be- 
sides I think I've read somewhere that, All 
the Kings horses, and all the Kings men, 
couldnt " 

" Of course they couldn't. They'd have a try 
though. But they couldn't do it without money. 
Money will do anything. But you see I'm 
not a Jingo, so I can't say, * I've got the 
money too.' I went to see the man with the 
money the other day, and tried to persuade 
him to promise to have me mended, but he was 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



61 




"I bawled in his ear " 



Digitized by Google 



62 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



very deaf. At last I bawled in his ear, 4 If I 
were to fall what would happen ? ' " 

" Did he hear that ? " asked Clara. " What 
did he say ? " 

" He only said, ' I should smile.' 1 ' 

" How horrid of him," said Clara, indignantly. 
" What would become of you, then ? " 

"Well," said Crumpty-Bumpty, with a wink, 
" I have a card up my sleeve. The other day 
I held a secret meeting to which the news- 
papers were invited— some of them — and I made 
them promise that, whenever I fall, they will 
patch me up somehow." 

"And can they do it, do you think? " asked 
Clara. 

" Of course they can. Newspaper people are 
so handy with paste and scissors. " 

" It would be very difficult," said Clara. 
" Come ! you had better let me help you off the 
wall. I'm a very careful little girl, and I'm sure 
I should let you down more gently than some 
people I know." 

" Would you really, my dear ? " said Crumpty- 
Bumpty, and he put out his hand. But poor 
little Clara was not quite tall enough, and in 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 63 

the effort to touch her fingers Crumpty-Bumpty 
overbalanced, and fell with a 
CRASH !!!! 



to the ground. 
Clara hid her face, and began to cry a little. 
When she opened her eyes again, she saw, 




standing among a lot of broken egg-shell, two 
fat little men. They were so exactly alike that 
no one could have told them apart except for 
the names on their collars. 

" Ah ! " they exclaimed together, " you didn't 
expect that, did you ? That's what you call a 
political metamorphosis, that is." 



Digitized by Google 



64 CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 

" Why, I do declare," cried Clara, " you're 
two dear little Crumpty-Bumpties, ,, for she 
saw the hyphen was still there, though it now 
seemed to link the two men. " How in the 
world did you change like that? " 

"We were Crumpty-Bumpty, but we are 
not now. We disown him," they said, to- 
gether. 

" I'm Twiddle-Thumb," said one. 
"I'm Twaddle-D, with a very big D," said 
the other. 

"I'm purely ornamental," said Twiddle- 
Thumb. 

" I'm perfectly useless," said Twaddle-D. 

Clara was rather confused, and did not quite 
know what to do. She was anxious, as always, 
to make herself pleasant. At last she said, " I 
should think you were more comfortable when 
you were one person. It must be dreadfully 
confusing to come in two like that." 

" Nohow ! " cried Twiddle-Thumb. 

" Contrariwise ! " said Twaddle-D. " You 
see when we had the misfortune to be one 
person we were always fighting inside Crumpty- 
Bumpty, and that upset his digestion most 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 65 

dreadfully. In fact it was our pulling different 
ways that really brought him down. 

"You've no idea of the difficulties it got us 
into," said Twiddle-Thumb. 

" Why, there was that unfortunate message to 
the Tail, and all that. Did you never hear of 
it ? " said Twaddle- D. And without waiting for 
Clara to reply, the two little men began to 
repeat together, and in exactly the same tone, 
this poem : — 

/ sent a message to the Tail, 

I asked them, " Is the show to fail ? " 

The party Tail they did agree 
To send an answer back to me. 

The Tail replied, with much regret, 
" We will support you, Sir, and yet — " 

/ sent to them again to say, 

u It must be either Aye or Nay I " 

The Tail made answer, with a pooh ! 
" This isn't, Sir, a bit like you!* 

I held a meeting large and strong, 
I made a speech, and it was long. 

E 



Digitized by Google 



66 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 



/ said, u I'll end this Dreadful Mess f 
Fit abdicate at once, unless — " 

Then some one came to me and said, 
u The Tail has really lost its head." 

I said to him, I said it plain, 

" The Tail has everything to gain. 1 * 

But he was very old and chill, 

He said he worshipped me, but still — 

/ took a corkscrew from the Shelf 
I boldly tried to draw myself 

And when I saw that I was double, 
I said it saved a deal of trouble. 

And when I found the door unshut, 
I swore that I was happy, but 



" Is that all ?" asked Clara, surprised at the 
sudden stoppage of the voices in the middle of 
a sentence. 

"Yes," they answered together, "you can 
invent the rest for yourself. You see we 
have to please so many people that we always 



Digitized by Google 



CRUMPTY-BUMPTY. 67 

talk like missing-word competitions. They're 
very popular, and anybody can guess what 
they like." 

Clara was getting tired of the twins. 
" Please, " she said, " can you tell me where 
Crumpty - Bumptys beautiful garden is 
situated ? " 

" It isn't situated" said Twaddle-D ; " it lies 
— over there." 

"Is there no one to show me the way ?" said 
Clara. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



BOERDOM. 

" Nohow, my dear," said Twiddle-Thumb, 
" I cannot go with you." 

" Contrariwise/' said Twaddle-D, " you must 
go by yourself." 

Then they said together, " You see, we can- 
not both go the same way, and we cannot 
separate from each other. The Hyphen would 
be angry," and with that they left her. 

" Perhaps its as well," thought Clara, " for 
they don't seem able to walk straight. 
Probably they're inebriated with the exuber- 
ance of their own verbosity." 

She was not sorry, then, to get rid of the 



Digitized by Google 



BOERDOM. 69 

twins ; they were too talkative for her. Besides 
. she was not quite sure she agreed with all they 
said. You see they talked in such a contra- 
dictory way. 

She was, however, delighted to go into the 
garden all by herself, for she was a dreamy 
child, and loved flowers, "and, when you are 
by yourself, you know," she said, " there's 
nobody to tell you to keep off the grass, and 
all that sort of thing." 

There didn't seem to be any fence or wall 
round the place, but there was a sort of line 
which indicated in a vague way the limits of 
the garden. When she came nearer she saw 
that what had looked like a line was really a 
deepish ditch, at which a number of ordinary- 
looking people seemed to be digging. 

" What are you all doing that for ? " asked 
Clara, of a man in the street. 

" Well, I'm not very particular, miss, but I'm 
drawing the line here," he answered ; " we all 
are, and I advise you to do so, too. Its a 
nasty place you're going into there." 

"Oh! what a story-teller Crumpty-Bumpty 
must be," thought Clara; "he said that every- 



Digitized by Google 



7© BOERDOM. 

thing in the garden was lovely. Why!" 
she continued, turning to the man, "they told 
me, for one thing, that it was full of beautiful 
creepers." 

" So it is," he answered, " there are plenty of 
creepers, and crawlers as well. They are 
beauties too, the lot of 'em ; but that's not my 
idea of a garden." 

" But you see I'm not going to stay," said 
Clara, disheartened; "I'm only going to see what 
its like." And she wandered dreamily on. 

At last she came to an archway over which 
was written the word Boerdom, and, with a 
little shiver, she walked through. " This is a 
dirty place," she said, as ^he passed under the 
archway. "It's more like a menagerie than a 
garden." 

She found herself standing close by a thing 
like a water butt, and all round her were hideous 
creatures, "just like," as she explained, "the 
things that come and sit on your chest in bed 
after you've been dining with the Souls." 

" These must be the creepers," said she. 

But Clara was a brave little girl, and she 
went straight up to one of the beasts, who had 



Digitized by Google 




"What are you doing? I'm sure you will 
break it if you aren't careful," said Clara. 

" That's all right !" growled the odd beast. 
"It's only my play ; I'm not really a try in* to 



Digitized by Google 



72 BOERDOM. 

smash the old Mug, not me ! Why, I couldn't 
get on without it. 

" I wasn't thinking of the Mug. It was your 
poor nose," answered Clara. " Isn't it very 
sore r 

" Oh, it burns a bit," said the creature ; " but 
its been put out of joint long ago by these 
other animals. I'm only here, you know, 
because just now there ain't nothink in my 
line to do elsewhere. That's to say nothing 
striking. You see I'm one of the 'orny 'anded 
myself — one of them blokes wot's willin' to 
work, but won't. I've always got to seem to be 
a-pickin' 'oles in somethin' or else my mates 
wouldn't keep me goinV 

" What are you ? " asked Clara. 

" By purfession," said the beast, "I'm wot 
they call a 'anger-on." 

" I've never heard of that as a plant, but it 
sounds like a sort of creeper," mused Clara; 
"and what are those things that look like 
hedgehogs walking about on hairpins ? " 

" Those are the Slinky Pros you heard 
about before. They're called Pros, you see, 
because they're against everything English." 



Digitized by Google 



BOERDOM. 73 

"Then they ought to be called Antis notPros." 

" So they did, miss, but you see they're for 
everything that's an ti- English, and there are 
such a lot of respectable Antis that we were 
obliged to call 'em Pros." 

" And are those other things pigs ? " 

" Lor bless yer, miss, those ain't pigs. 
They're Welsh rabbits, leastwise two on 'em is, 
and the third one with his back to you, 'e's no 
class, so we just lumps 'im in with them. 
Them two real Welsh rabbits is very fine 
specimens. One is the amateur Bobby of 
Llanystumdwy, and the other is known as the 
chess-playing Bunny of Llandymwunblwoth- 
bellllt." 

4 4 And what are they doing here?" asked 
Clara, 

"Can't you see ? They're snorting in the air." 

" What good does that do ? " 

"It annoys the neighbours." 

" And why do you all keep on waltzing 
round this old water butt ? " 

" It ain't a water butt. It's a tub for thump- 
ing. You see we must thump something, and 
that can't hit us back." 



Digitized by Google 



74 BOERDOM. 

" Are there no flowers in this garden ? " said 
Clara. " I mean, of course," she added, 
politely, " except the creepers. ,, 

" Why, we're all flowers here. We're daisies 
I can tell you." 

" That old Pro there, with the spectacles," 
said Clara, "I'm sure he isn't a flower." 

" Of course 'e is, miss ; why, e's the flower of 
the flock." 

u No, but I mean real flowers, on stalks, you 
know." 

"Oh yes ! you'll find more than you want if 
you go along that path and turn round the 
corner. " 

So Clara went on and soon came to a 
flower bed with the strangest flowers she had 
ever seen in her life. Instead of box, or grass, 
or tiles, the beds were edged with dead cats, 
half bricks, and very inexpensive eggs, and the 
flowers themselves had faces with flat noses 
and thick lips. 

Though Clara never read newspapers, 
her Aunt allowed her sometimes, when 
• she had been good, to look at the pictures 
in the weekly ones, and so she knew who 



Digitized by Google 



BOERDOM. 75 

these flower- people were. There were Dr. 
Leyds, and Mr. Hoffmeyer, and Mr. Steyn, 
and Herr von Schreiner, and ever so many 
more. 

" It's no use my talking to them" she said. 
" They can only speak double Dutch, and I 
shouldn't believe what they said if I did under- 
stand it." So she walked along, with her head 
in the air. 

What a lot there were, to be sure ! 

Cronje, and Smuts, and Te Water, and 
Delarey, and Viljoen, and Grobelaar, and — 
- and — Yes ! there he was, and she clapped her 
hands for joy. 

Yes! 

It was de Wet. 

" Now I have got you," she cried, and tried 
to pick him. " For," said she, " Auntie would 
so like to put him in water." 

But when she put out her hand she pricked 
her finger with a thorn. " Oh you nasty 
thing ! " she exclaimed, as she sucked the 
injured finger. 

And when she looked up the flower had 
faded away. 



Digitized by Google 



76 BOERDOM. 

She liked the flowers better than the beasts, 
however. They were not beautiful, but, at any 




rate, they looked less creepy than the creep- 
ing things. 

There were beds and beds of these Boer 
flowers, but she missed one face, and a face 
Clara knew far better than all the others. 
"Why isn't it here?" she asked herself, and 



Digitized by Google 



BOERDOM. 77 

just then she saw three gardeners busily paint- 
ing a large rose tree. 

" That's a funny thing for gardeners to be 
doing," she said to herself, as she went up to 
them. 

" How dare you ? " she said angrily, for she 
had heard that it was the height of folly to try 
and paint the lily, and knew it must be quite as 
bad to colour the rose. 

" Hush ! my dear," said one of the gardeners, 
who had just finished wrangling with the 
others. " Don't make a noise. You see, we're 
a paintin' of old Kroojer's face on all these 
flowers, because he's left this garden long ago. 
He's made his pile and gone into private life, 
and he don't take no interest in the place now. 
But we've got to pretend he's here or else our 
job would be gone. The whole garden would 
collapse if people knew he was out of it." 

And then strange to say it did collapse. 
" Well, not exactly collapse," explained Clara, 
to Gerald ine, when she was telling her of these 
wonderful adventures. " The flowers and the 
gardeners seemed to be lost in obscurity, and I 
found myself close to a very thick wood." 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VII. 



BEKNIGHTED. 

On the edge of the wood Clara suddenly 
came across a most curious figure riding to- 
wards her on something that looked partly like 
a horse, but more like an obstinate old Bull. 

The rider was dressed in white armour of 
very old pattern, and she wondered whether he 
really went into battle in such antiquated 
harness, and could not help thinking that it was 
apwonder that he came out alive, if he did. On 
his head was a helmet shaped like a donkey's 
head so that she could not see his face. She 
was sorry for this, as she was sure that he must 
be a funny-looking man. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



8o 



BEKNIGHTED. 



His horse was hung around with strange 
weapons — a broken wooden sword which did 
not look as if it could ever have done much 
damage even when new, and a heavy spiked 
club with which he belaboured his old horse, 
whose hide, however, was fortunately very 
thick. 

Just as Clara was about to run away and 
hide herself from this terrifying creature, she 
heard a voice in the distance, shouting, " Ulti- 
ulti-ulti-matum ! " and a Knight in red armour 
dashed out of the wood on the other side. 

Coming up to the other, he saluted gravely, 
and said, " We will have a Peace Conference, 
and then a fight. " 

The White Knight, after thinking for some 
time, remarked, " You will, I presume, observe 
the Rules of Battle." 

" Certainly," replied the other, "you will 
observe your rules, and I'll observe miner 

" That is fair," said the White Knight, " I 
will now read you my rules so that there shall 
be no mistake." 

Thereupon he took from his pocket a lengthy 
paper, and after clearing his throat, began : — 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 



81 



" Rule i. Whereas I bind myself to bind my- 
self with every sort of restriction. 

" Rule 2. Whereas the aforesaid ME engages 
himself that I shall only use the oldest 
weapons obtainable, unless there are 
others still older. 

" Rule 3. Whereas it being understood that I 
of the one part am not to fire on red 
crosses or white flags. 

" Rule 4. Moreover, any prisoners taken 
in fair fight by the hereinbefore ME 
shall be supplied with feather beds, 
punkas and electric light, and shall be 
treated as British Generals. 

" Rule 5. In so much as I of the one part am 
to indulge in no Dum Dums or Flank 
Attacks. 

" Do you agree to these terms?" asked the 
White Knight. 

" Yes," said the other. " I understand that you 
are of the one part, and I am certainly of the 
other. In other words, as my rules are just 
the reverse of yours, I need not put you to the 
trouble of hearing them. ,, 

" No," said the White Knight, " I am 



Digitized by Google 



82 BEKNIGHTED. 

acquainted with your methods, and I know you 
will adhere to them strictly, therefore we will pro- 
ceed to fight, each according to his own rules." 

Then they went at it hammer and tongs, the 
Red Knight of course using the hammer, and 
the White Knight, the tongs. 

An unwritten rule seemed to be that each 
combatant should exclaim at intervals that he 
had " surrounded " his opponent, whereupon 
he stood still until the surrounded one knocked 
him off his horse. After each had been 
knocked off fourteen times, the battle ended by 
the Red Knight dismounting his opponent, 
capturing his tongs, and riding away with them. 

For some time the poor White Knight lay 
unconscious, though Clara did everything she 
could to bring him to, even burning under his I 
nose a copy of the Report on Army Reform , 
which she fortunately had in her pocket. The 
smell of the dead ashes seemed to revive him a 
little, and when he came to himself, he said to 
her, with a faint smile, " Thank you, my dear, it 
was a glorious victory, wasn't it ? " 

" Well," replied Clara rather doubtfully, 'I 
don't know so much about that. It seemed to 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 83 

me that you got the most hurt, and then he went 
away with your arms." 

" You will see, my dear, that in the censored 
cable that will be described as ' the enemy 
having, when things were at their hottest, 
beaten a hasty and undignified retreat.' " 

"I'm afraid," continued the Knight, " you 
don't understand these things. One of my 
rules, which I forgot to read out just now, is 
that, whatever the result may be, the victory 
always remains on my side. Besides, you 
know, that fellow had a horse. Think of that!" 

" But you've got a horse too," said Clara, 
" haven't you ?" 

14 Oh yes! of course," replied the Knight, 
"but then you see I always take it for granted 
that nobody will be fitted out like me." 

" Oh ! he was much better off for all those 
things than you," said Clara, hoping to 
propitiate him. 

" I didn't say that he was not better equipped 
than I, but not like me. You see, I spend 
half my time in inventing things for fighting 
with, and the other half in preventing other 
people from doing so." 



Digitized by Google 



84 BEKNIGHTED. 

" I don't see how you can keep other people 
from inventing things," said Clara. " Surely 
you can't ? " 

" You couldn't," returned the Knight, " but/ 
do. You see, I am the great war inventor in 
these parts. Years and years before you were 
born I invented a way of saving money by not 
paying the soldiers their wages. The patent 
for that, however, has run out long ago, and 
lots of my opponents follow that plan now. It 
is the regular practice in countries as far off as 
China and Turkey." 

c< But yet," said Clara, " I don't understand 
how you keep other people from inventing 
things." 

"Well," said the Knight, a beautiful look of 
peace and contentment suffusing his masked 
face, "it's done in this way. Everybody has 
to send his invention to me, and then I put 
it away in a box, and tell him that I'll let him 
know about it IN DUE COURSE. I 
suppose you don't know what * due course ' 
means, do you ? " 

" No, I don't," said Clara. 

" Ah ! you've never had a departmental 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 85 

training, you see. ' Due course ' means just 
when I choose, and I generally don't choose. 
When I do choose, I tell him that his invention 
isn't any use at all, and that he musn't come 
bothering us any more. Then he goes away 
quite satisfied." 

" But doesn't he sometimes take it else- 
where ? " asked Clara, who was very much 
puzzled. 

The poor Knight looked annoyed. " You 
ought not to say things like that," he said, very 
slowly, " they wound my feelings. There 
have been one or two people who have done 
that sort of thing, and the worst of it is that 
that Red fellow, who was here just now, has 
bought some of their rubbish, which isn't fair." 

Clara didn't quite know what to say in 
answer to this, for the Knight groaned in such 
a dreadful way when he thought about it that 
she was quite distressed, so, by way of turning 
the conversation, she said : " That's a very fine 
animal you're riding." 

"Ah! you may well say that," said the 
Knight, evidently pleased, 4< isn't he ? This 
horse has been in my family for years and 



Digitized by Google 



86 



BEKNIGHTED. 



years and years, and indeed, he was bred 
specially for me to ride on." 

As he spoke, he pulled the wrong rein, and 
the horse immediately plunged him into the 
ditch at the side of the road. 

When she had helped the Knight up into 
the saddle again, Clara said: " If you've had 
him all that time, I wonder you can't ride better 
by now." 

" The great art of riding," said the Knight, 
in some surprise, " is to hold your horse in 
tight on the curb, with a strong red tape bridle. 
Mine is of the strongest, and if this horse were 
to kick his hind legs off — and he does kick like 
a grasshopper sometimes — he couldn't get rid 
of that, and as long as I hold on tight to 
the bridle, I am all right. See how easily I 
guide him." 

" You don't guide him at all," thought Clara, 
to herself, "and I shouldn't be surprised if he 
were to run away from you altogether some 
day." But she only said : " Dear me." 

Clara was evidently bursting to ask some- 
thing, but yet she hesitated. At last she said : 
"And how do you guide yourself? You 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 87 

seem to have rules for everything. What are 
your rules for your daily life ? " 

"I invented maxims," said the White Knight, 
complacently. 

"And Nordenfeldts ? " suggested Clara, for 
she was anxious to show off her knowledge. 

"No, nothing so paltry as that, a book of 
maxims, I mean. Here it is. Let me read 
some of them to you : — 
• Procrastination is the life of the Army, 

Spare the Brod and spoil the rates, 

Never attack sideways ; it isnt fair, 

All we fritter is not gold, 

Powder should be seen and not felt, 

The Yeoman s pay is faraway, 

Ifs a wrong statesman that does no turning, 

All work and no pay makes Jack a handy 
man. 

Do you want to hear any more ? " 

" No, thank you," said Clara, " they are all 
very nice, I am sure, but do you think these 
maxims of yours would be sufficient to guide 
you in an emergency ? Supposing you were to 
have a real war, what then ? " 

" Don't talk like that, child," the Knight 



Digitized by Google 



88 



BEKNIGHTED. 



exclaimed, excitedly, " You make my blood 
run cold. There couldn't be such a thing, but 
even if there were — mind you, I say if there 
were — I should be equal to the occasion. Yes ! 
I have made arrangements to deal even with 
the impossible. What do you think of that ?" 

"Well! what would you do?" asked Clara, 
breathless with excitement. 

" I SHOULD RESIGN/' said the Knight, 
with solemn dignity. 

Clara was disappointed. " I knew a man who 
did that once," she said, "and do you know, 
the funny thing was that when it was all over 
they wouldn't have him back. Said they didn't 
know what they paid him for, and lots of other 
rude things." 

"That's all very well for common people," 
the Knight rejoined, airily ; " but it couldn't 
happen to me. You see I am what they call 
an integral factor in the Constitution — you'd 
better look that out in the dictionary, when you 
get home — and they cant do without me. I'm 
the only one who can damp military ardour, 
and I was never so unhappy as when I found 
I couldn't damp colonial patriotism. Why ! I 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 89 

nearly succeeded in keeping the Volunteers in 
their right place. But for me, the Volunteers 
would have guns — real guns, mind you ; guns 
that kill people. They are so insanely 
zealous. Then the colonial troops wanted to be 
treated like real soldiers. They went to war 
with the unchristian intention of fighting — and 
killing. Fighting — pshaw ! a brutal thing I've 
always despised. The colonial troops," he con- 
tinued, with a groan, " know how to ride, and 
are prepared to rough it most abominably. Ah ! 
there's nobody else who can snub them into 
propriety. They .^ay that Nero was a brave 
man for playing the fiddle while Rome was 
burning ; but bless you, bless you, I should be 
found fiddling with new caps and things while 
London was being invaded. That is what the 
French call sang froid, my dear." 

And the old Knight, who had been growing 
more and more excited as his discourse con- 
tinued, pitched himself off his horse into the 
ditch again, and snorted. 

" Leave me here a while, my dear/' he said, 
to Clara. " My thoughts are more coherently 
expressed up-side-down. 



Digitized by Google 



90 BEKNIGHTED. 

And the patient old horse winked the other 
eye at Clara. 

Presently the Knight calmed down, and 
when Clara had packed him into the saddle 
once more, she said to him, "Tell me some- 
thing more about your wonderful inventions." 

" I will sing to you of the worries of an in- 
ventors life," said he, and he began to the 
tune of / take thy all, I can no more\ — 




41 Fll tell thee everything I can, 
There* s plenty to relate" 

Thus spake a weary soldier man, 
A -sitting on a gate. 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 



9i 



" Who are you, weary man ?" I said, 
4< How came you in this state ? " 

And his answer rattled on my head. 
Like peas upon a plate: 

He said, il Though sitting on this gate 

May all be very well, 
Fm forced to hang about and wait 

Instructions from Pall Mall 
Vm told to stop, and then to go, 

And fight, and stand the racket, 
And then, whatever / may do, 

The Government dont back it" 

But I was thinking of a scheme 

For patching soldiers' boots 
With paper, at a bob a ream, 

Made up from cast off suits. 
So, having pigeon-holes to fill 

With " VERY URGENT" letters, 
I treated all his talk as nil, 

Or insult to his betters. 

He said, 4< No doubt they'll tell me soon 

To scramble up a spire, 
And fetch for them some buttered moon, 

And set the Thames on fire. 



Digitized by Google 



92 



BEKNIGHTED. 



But, fettered in a red tape trap, 
Pm hampered in my movements ; 

And, though Pve got a German cap, 
I've nought in true improvements." 

But I was thinking how I could 
Improve our war equipment, 

By making swords of tin and wood 
And thus reduce the shipment. 

I shook him well from side to side, 

Until I bust his buttons ; 

II Come tell me what you want," I cried, 
" Revenons a nos muttons" 

" You say" said he, 11 Vm lacking care' 

(I hadn't really said it) ; 
" My long report would make you stare, 

But then you've never read it : 
A propos ! Why make us embark 

On all this futile writing ? 
You want a continental clerk, 

And not a man for fighting" 

" But kindly tell me why you ask 

So many senseless riddles ? 
Perchance you seek a means to mask 

Your public tarradiddles ? 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 



93 



Yours to work out the task has been 

The soldiers' evolution, 
I am the outcome of routine — 

Rot and circumlocution." 

I heard him then, for I had planned, 

A scheme, by means of plaster 
To hide our faces in the sand, 

And thus escape disaster. 
I thanked him (I applaud his nerve), 

And made a note by stealth, 
That candid officers deserve 

Promotion to the shelf 

And now whene'er I draw my screw, 

For playing loose and fast, 
I snigger in my sleeve anew, 

I think upon the past. 
And when my conscience whispers, ° O / 

You've such a dirty slate" 
I smile, for it reminds me so 

Of that poor man I used to know, 
Whose ways were blunt, whose methods slow, 

Who was with ardour all aglow, 
Whose arm could deal sledge-hammer blow % 

Who never feared a mortal foe, 



Digitized by Google 



94 



BEKNIGHTED. 



Who ran at gate like buffalo. 

Who fell like ninepins in a row, 
Who counselled " Yes " when we said " No," 

Whom we kept dodging to and fro, 
Until he knew not where to go, 

But never let his gee-gee Whoa ! 
Who always looked so comme-il-faut, 

Who took to war his piano, 
And whom we used uncommon low, 

I proudly slap my chest and crow ; 
For it was I who made him so — 

A-sitting on a gate. 

When he had finished, Clara threw herself 
down on the grass, and burst into a flood of 
tears. 

" You don't seem to laugh as heartily as 
I had expected," said the Knight, with a 
somewhat offended air. " That was a comic 
song." 

" I know, I know," sobbed Clara ; " but it 
seems to me that it was very sad too in places, 
though perhaps you did not mean it to be 
go." 

With an effort, however, the brave little girl 



Digitized by Google 



BEKNIGHTED. 95 

mastered her grief, and started at once on a 
topic that evidently lay very near heart. 

" So you invented the typical soldier, did 
you?" asked Clara, admiringly. " It was very 
clever of you. And all those other wonderful 
inventions of yours, however do you manage 
it? That last one in your song, you know, 
about escaping disaster by hiding your face in 
the sand. That is very wonderful and original." 

" Yes, it is very wonderful, and very original, ,, 
agreed the Knight. " I invented it last week, 
but would you believe it ? " and his helmet 
bristled as he spoke, " that unscrupulous 
Foreign Office of ours has been making use 
of it for years and years and years. I am think- 
ing of prosecuting them for infringement. " 

" Why don't you point out to them that you 
invented it, and ask them to give you lots and 
lots of money for it? I'm sure they would, if 
they only knew," suggested Clara, who was 
a very practical little girl. 

" Let us try," she continued, for she was 
very pleased with her idea ; and between them 
they concocted a report on the invention, which 
Clara wrote in her best copy-book hand on 



Digitized by Google 



96 BEKNIGHTED. 

large official paper, of which the White Knight 
had a plentiful supply. 

" How shall we address it?" asked Clara. 
44 Who attends to this sort of communication ? " 

44 That has always been a mystery," said the 
White Knight. 44 Address it in a vague way, 
but be sure and put a very long reference 
number on the top. Anyone there will under- 
stand it. You see they all speak French so 
nicely at the Foreign Office." 

Clara's face had quite brightened up by this 
time, and she felt that she was on such friendly 
terms with the old Knight that she could now 
venture to ask him a question that had been on 
the tip of her tongue ever since she saw him. 
So, while she was folding up the letter, she 
looked up at him, and said, 44 Oh, do tell me why 
you wear that funny looking thing on your 
head." 

44 You see," answered the Knight, evidently 
pleased, 44 it is an invention of my own for 
saving my face in China." 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



FRIEND OR F.O. ? 

" There ! That's done ! " said Clara, as she 
stuck up the envelope, and gave it a little thump 
with her fist, " and now who shall we get to 
take it ? " 

" You had better go yourself/' said the 
White Knight. " No one would suspect any- 
one with a face like yours of having an ulterior 
motive." 

"I'd rather not," cried Clara, " I should be 
afraid. Why don't you go ? " 

" Tut, tut, child, that shows how little you 
know of procedure. Why," continued he, with 
great solemnity, " for one Department to com- 

G 



Digitized by Google 



98 FRIEND OR F.O. ? 

municate with another in that off-hand manner 
would constitute a breach of etiquette ; it would 
create a precedent." 

" How awful" said Clara, stopping her ears. 
" Well," said she, more to pacify him than any- 
thing else, " there's the Red Queen, she would 
make a capital messenger ; see how fast she 
runs." 

" Excuse me, my dear, this requires serious 
thought. Allow me to think." 

Thereupon the White Knight once more 
threw himself head foremost into the ditch. 
His attitude had the desired effect, and at the 
end of a moment or two his voice was heard. 
The words sounded, thought Clara, like a 
phonograph ; doubtless because his mouth was 
half full of dead leaves. " There's no help for 
it, you must take it yourself." 

So Clara, like the obedient little girl she 
was, started off, turning instinctively towards 
the thickest part of the wood. 

The Foreign Office, as she expected, was 
surrounded by a thick belt of officialdom, and 
Clara slackened her pace, as she approached it. 
You see it was so very shady and mysterious. 



Digitized by Google 



FRIEND OR F.O. ? 



99 



She felt too frightened just then to try and 
penetrate far into its obscurity, and so sat down 
under a tree. 

Suddenly she noticed a small insect bobbing 
up and down incessantly in a sort of rut, and 
being devoted to natural history, and not at all 
alarmed, she ran up to see what it was. 

It was an in- 
significant thing, 
though with a 
ludicrously self- 
satisfied air. There 
it remained in the 
same rut, proudly 
rocking itself to and 
fro, and making no 
headway. It had a large wooden head, and 
some awkward flappers on its back, which it 
waggled about continually ; but its whole 
appearance was so strange that Clara could not 
decide whether it was animal, vegetable, or 
mineral. 

" What are you ? " asked Clara. " Are you in 
pain ? You are a curious looking creature/' 
" I am the Rocking-Horse Fly," said the 




Digitized by Google 



IOO 



FRIEND OR F.O. ? 



creature, looking up, and continuing its foolish 
exercise, until Clara felt quite sea-sick. 

"And why are you called that?" asked 
Clara, "you don't look as if you could 
fly." 

"Ah! but I can though," answered the 
Insect, proudly, " you should just see me flying 
in the face of Providence ; why, I'm at it all the 
time." 

" What funny legs you have got ! " 

" Yes, you see I'm supported by large screws 
and cranks ; the ones useful, and the others 
ornamental." 

" Are there many more beautiful flies like 
you in the world ? " 

" No ! " said it, with great dignity. " I am 
essentially one-horse." 

" You seem to be badly bunkered just now ; 
can I help you out ? " asked Clara, kindly. 

" No, my dear, you are not nearly strong 
enough to do that. Besides, I am used to my 
groove. In fact, I revel in it" 

As Clara saw that it would be useless to try 
and help the foolish creature, and as her spirits 
were adapting themselves to the surrounding 



Digitized by Google 



FRIEND OR F.O. ? 101 

gloom, she made her way, without further 
hesitation, to the Foreign Office itself. 

Again Clara's courage began to forsake her 




when she found herself gazing at this fine 
architectural pile. " What a lot of room there 
must be in a place like that — for improvement, " 
she said to herself. 



Digitized by Google 



102 



FRIEND OR F.O.? 



At the door was standing a very handsome 
footman, who was busily engaged in twiddling 
his thumbs. 

He glanced at Clara, superciliously, but not 
unkindly. " Q'est-ce que vous voulez, made- 
moiselle ? " said he, shrugging his shoulders 
gracefully. 

" Oh ! " said Clara, " why does he speak like 
that?" 

"You are Ingleesh, mees. What for you 
come here ? " 

" I want to see Mr. Downing, or somebody, 
and give him this letter." 

"You cant do that," said the flunky, "this 
is the Foreign Office." And he showed her a 
card on which was printed : — 



CAUTION 

NO ENGLISH 
NEED APPLY 



" Now you'll understand," he said, " why 
its called the Foreign Office. You see, if you'd 



Digitized by Google 



FRIEND OR F.O. ? 103 

been a foreigner, Mr. Downing might have seen 
you, and he might have given you something 
nice. Master's so kind to foreigners, particularly 
Germans. He's fond of feeding them on slices 
of British Empire." 

Clara wondered why she had not thought of 
this before she came, and was so impressed by 
the good sense of the footman's remarks that 
she handed him the letter without a word, and 
walked sadly away. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IX. 

FLAMJINGOS. 

" Now it's no use," said the Red Queen, who 
seemed to have sprung up out of the ground, 
and stood right in front of Clara. " Its no use 
your bothering about that sort of thing. You 
can't change our established institutions, and 
you'll never get on in Blunderland until you 
have learnt that. Bless you, child, years and 
years ago I thought there were lots of things I 
could improve, and I used to talk of ' Reform * 
and all that rubbish ; but, mark my words, you 
must take things as you find em, if you want to 
be happy here." 

" Now, don't argue with me," she said, to 



Digitized by Google 



FLAMJINGOS. 105 

Clara, who had been standing with her hands 
behind her back, not even trying to get a word 




in edgeways. ' ' Don't argue with me. Come 
and see the Demonstration." 

She had hardly spoken when a cry was raised 
of " The Procession's coming," and a most 
brilliant and exclusive company began to stream 
into view. The Red Queen at once took the 



Digitized by Google 



106 FLAMJINGOS. 

lead. " You see," she said, to Clara, " if I don't 
somebody else will, and then the muddle would 
be awful." The Duchess was there, looking 
crosser than ever, and trembling all over when- 
ever her eye caught the Queens. The Welsh 
Rabbit was sniffing suspiciously at a leek which 
they'd offered to him, but as he'd eaten a large 
one at Birmingham, he said he never took them 
now unless they were forced upon him. Then 
there was the White Rabbit in a new wig, the 
March Hare and the Hatter, and the Cat. And 
there, right in the background, propped up 
somehow on his wall again, was poor old 
Crumpty-Bumpty. He looked very dismal, 
and seemed quite out of shape, and when Clara 
came closer to him, she found that he was quite 
cracked about the Hyphen, and only held 
together by extracts from the Star and the 
Daily News. 

"How dare you go near that creature ? " 
said the Red Queen, angrily, to Clara. " Come 
away at once." 

" I only looked super — super — ciliously at 
her, when she talked tome like that," explained 
Clara, to Geraldine afterwards, 



FLAMJINGOS. 



107 




After a painful pause the Red Queen said to 
Clara, " Child, come and be a muddied oaf." 
Clara only curtsied, and joined the Procession, 
though as a matter of fact, she really didn't know 
the difference between that and a flannelled fool. 

" It's only her fun, you know/' Clara found 
the Duchess whispering in her ear, " we're 
not really going to play with all these people, 



Digitized by Google 



108 FLAMJINGOS. 

my nerves wouldn't stand it. Were going to 
watch the Flamjingos play/' 

"Who are the Flamjingos?" asked Clara. 
" I don't think I ever heard of them before." 

* 4 Well," replied the Duchess, " nobody seems 
quite to know, but they're very useful creatures, 
when they don't get too excited, and it's very 
pretty to watch them at play. She'' pointing 
with her chin at the Red Queen, as she spoke, 
"would like to join in the game herself, but we 
restrain her." 

" I wonder how you do it," said Clara. 

" Hush, my dear," the Duchess whispered, 
"some subjects are too sacred to be talked 
about, and that's one of them." 

As she spoke the Procession entered a large 
open space in which, to her great delight, Clara 
saw hundreds upon hundreds of Flamjingos 
running about, and cackling as loudly as ever 
they could. 

They certainly were the most curious birds 
she had ever seen and were even more peculiar, 
though not of course so repulsive, as the strange 
creatures she had left behind her in Boerdom. 
They were painting everything red when Clara 



Digitized by Google 



FLAMJINGOS. 109 

came up, and each had a tin trumpet in its 
hand, and, tied to the feathers of its tail, a small 
Union Jack, which it continually waggled in 
the breeze. When they all blew and waggled 
together — which they did every three minutes 
— the effect was indescribable, and Clara felt as 
though she must choke with the patriotic feel- 
ings which the magnificent spectacle aroused in 
her breast. At the same time they all sang 
different songs, such as " Rule Britannia," 
" Soldiers of the Queen," " The Absent- Minded 
Beggar," and " The British Navy," and as none 
of them knew all the words of any of the songs, 
and sang what they did know to tunes which 
they invented as they went on, you will under- 
stand that the noise was deafening. 

For a long time Clara could not make out 
what they were playing at, but at last she found 
out that it was a kind of football, in which the 
balls were things like hedgehogs, which every 
now and then came out of holes in the ground 
in which they lay concealed. These creatures 
turned out to be really Slinky Pros, which had 
left their garden to try and get other creatures 
to come and live with them in Boerdom. 



Digitized by Google 



no FLAMJINGOS. 

Whenever one of these showed itself, which, 
being very persistent beasts, happened every 
now and then, all the Flamjingos who caught 
sight of it immediately rushed at it, and tried to 
kick it to the other end of the ground. As far 
as Clara could make out, the game consisted in 
the Slinky Pros trying to meet, and the Flam- 
jingos trying to prevent them. Whenever two 
of them managed to keep together for three 
seconds that scored one to them, and when the 
Flamjingos kicked them apart before this 
happened they marked ten points, and sang as 
much of the National Anthem as they could 
remember on the spur of the moment. 

The Pros didn't seem to like the game at all, 
and one or two of them, who had had the 
spines rubbed off their backs by all the pushing 
and kicking they went through, threatened to 
tell Truth. And one very slinky one indeed 
only managed to escape being kicked to death 
by disguising himself as an honest policeman. 
Nobody, however, seemed to think the be- 
haviour of one or the other at all extraordinary, 
since, as the Red Queen very appropriately 
put it, this was " a place where girt with friends 



Digitized by Google 



FLAMJINGOS. in 

or foes a man might speak the thing he would, 
and clump over the head anybody who spoke 
the thing he wouldn't." 

Clara couldn't feel very much pity for the 
Pros, for they seemed such dirty little creatures, 
and she noticed that whenever two of them did 
manage to meet they always began to explain 
to one another what wicked people their rela- 
tions were, and how their brothers revelled in 
atrocities of the most awful kind. 

She paid very little more attention to them, 
saying to herself, that it didn't matter very 
much after all if the Flamjingos did kick them 
to death, though she didn't quite like to see 
them doing it. So like the others she shut her 
eyes to it. 

" What do you think of the game ? " asked 
the Duchess, rather anxiously. 

"Well," said Clara, "I'm afraid I don't 
quite follow it. It's very muddly up, I think." 

" You see," said the Red Queen, decisively, 
"it suffers, like all football at the present day, 
from too much of the Pro element." 

The strength of the Flamjingos appeared to 
be extraordinary, and Clara, who always took 



Digitized by Google 



ii2 FLAMJINGOS. 

great interest in questions of eating and drink- 
ing, asked the Red Queen what they fed on. 

" Declarations of war, my dear," answered 
the Queen, "and Regrettable Incidents." 

"It must be rather an expensive sort of food," 
said Clara, thoughtfully. 

" You may say that, child," said the Red 
Queen, " but it doesn't matter very much. The 
Duchess has to pay for them ; I don't. And 
the Pros, as you know, belong to Crumpty- 
Bumpty." 

All this time the Dalmeny Cat kept appear- 
ing and disappearing in the air, until at last the 
Red Queen noticed it and said in a very decided 
voice, " That Cat must be destroyed." 

"Why?" asked Clara, " I'm sure it's a very 
pretty Cat, and I don't see that it is doing any 
harm. It's not as though it were a real Cat, 
you know." 

"I don't know," retorted the Queen, "but I 
do know that I am going to call the executioner 
and have its head chopped off at once." 

" You can't," said Clara, " it hasn't got body 
enough for that." 

When the executioner, who turned out to be 



Digitized by Google 



FLAMJINGOS. 113 

the Duchess in disguise, came up, there was 
the most tremendous row. She couldn't hit 
the head of the Cat, who disappeared whenever 
she struck at it, and then turned up again in a 
fresh place while part of the crowd cheered her 
efforts and the rest said, 
" Shame, Shame," until 
she was more nervous 
than ever. 

At last the hubbub 
and confusion grew so 
great that Clara thought 
she would never get 
out of it alive, and she 
said afterwards that she 
was sure she would 
never have escaped if 
it hadn't been for the 
Red Queen, who said, 
in the kindest way, 
" Just watch me, my dear, and do as I do." 

With that the Queen and the Duchess each 
caught a Flamjingo, and got upon its back, and 
Clara after a good deal of trouble did the same. 
It was dreadfully uncomfortable on the Flam- 

H 




Digitized by Google 



ii 4 FLAMJINGOS. 

jingo's back, and Clara couldn't help feeling that 
she looked very ridiculous, but still there seemed 
to be no other way of escape, so she clung on, 
and the Flamjingos soon carried all three out of 
danger. 

44 I told you," said the Duchess, with a soft 
sleepy chuckle, as she hung on to the Flam- 
jingo's neck, 44 that sometimes they are very 
useful birds." 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER X. 

QUEliNS AND QUESTIONS. 

Clara could never remember afterwards 
whether they left the Flamjingos or the Flam- 
jingos left them ; all she knew was that after 
riding for a long, long way through a great deal 
of mud, which splashed her frock most dread- 
fully, she found herself with a sort of crown on 
her head sitting between the Red Queen and 
the Duchess, who appeared to be very much 
out of temper with one another. 

" You may say what you like," the Duchess 
was saying, in a discontented voice, " but I shall 
never get used to that kind of thing. We 
needn't have ridden those birds half so hard as 



Digitized by Google 



n6 QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 

we did. It's not respectable, and at my time 
of life I don't like it." 

"Of course you don't," retorted the Red 
Queen, turning up her nose as she spoke, 
"you've never known how to move with the 
times." 

" It's not at all necessary," said the Duchess, 
with conviction. "The Times always moves 
with me, except — except in China." 

" If it hadn't been for me, I don't know what 
would have happened to you." 

" Lots of things have happened to me that I 
don't like," said the poor Duchess, "and, do 
you know ? I sometimes feel as if you were 
one of them, but," she went on, hastily, "don't 
suppose that I'm not grateful, your Majesty, 
but you do hustle me so, and it's not good for 
me. You know I lost my nerve ever so long 
ago. I wish you'd let Clara take my place." 

"If she'll always do exactly what I tell her, 
I don't mind," said the Queen, "but she must 
pass the proper examination first." 

" I didn't know one had to be examined for 
the higher offices," said Clara, very much sur- 
prised, " I thought it was only for the really 



Digitized by Google 



QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 117 

important ones — the permanent ones I mean, 
you know." 

"That," answered the Queen, " shows how 
little you know of the Cabinet System. Why 
we're always examining one another here. 
She," pointing at the Duchess, "has been 




plucked three times already, but we keep her 
on because she's very quiet and harmless now, 
and shes so respectable." 

The poor Duchess could only wave her 
hands feebly in protest, and the Queen went 
on, "I proceed with the examination. Take 
his pay from a Yeoman and what remains ? 
Don't answer hurriedly — its a departmental 



Digitized by Google 



n8 QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 

question, remember — and don't forget to say 
'your Majesty/" 

Clara thought for a long while, and at last 
she said, " Please, your Majesty, I'm not quite 
sure. The pay couldn't remain if it were taken 
away, and I shouldn't think the Yeoman would 
remain if he were not paid." 

" So you think nothing would remain, do 
you?" 

" Yes," answered Clara, thoughtfully, " I 
think that must be the answer." 

"Wrong," said the Red Queen, "the Yeoman 
would remain. He always does, and you may 
thank your lucky stars it is so." 

And the Duchess said, " Really, Clara, I'm 
surprised at you. Any corporal could have 
told you that." 

Clara didn't feel at all comfortable at the way 
they spoke to her, but she was afraid to cry 
before the Red Queen, and resolved to do 
better next time. 

" If," asked the Duchess, " you were really 
a queen — which you aren't yet you know — and 
somebody like her Red Majesty kept pushing 
you into all sorts of places you didn't like, and 



Digitized by Google 



QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 119 

making you say all sorts of things you didn't 
really mean, what would you do ? " 

" I don't know, I'm sure," said Clara, "but I 
think I should run away." 

" I only wish / could," answered the poor 
Duchess, with tears in her eyes, "but," looking 
sulkily at the Queen, "if she were too fast for 
you, you couldn't. But," sighing gently, "that 
wasn't an examination question, you know. I 
only asked for information." 

" Your grace is a great deal too fond of in- 
formation of that sort," growled the Queen, 
" you'll be getting some that's unauthentic and 
therefore inaccurate, if you don't take care." 

The Duchess turned pale. "You needn't bring 
up things like that," she said, " or I shall begin 
to talk about three acres and a cow. So there ! " 

After this they were both silent for some 
time, during which each seemed to be thinking 
of something very unpleasant, but at last the 
Queen said, in a milder tone, "What's your 
way of keeping a House clean ? " 

" To stay away from it as much as ever I 
can," answered Clara, promptly, for she felt sure 
she was right this time. 



Digitized by Google 



120 QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 

' ' Quite right, my dear," said the Duchess, 
eagerly, " that's just what I always say. No- 
body sees the dust if you don't stir it up. And, 
if you must go indoors, keep in bed as much as 
possible. ,, 

" It's not a bit right," complained the Queen, 
" the proper way is to call the servants all the 
names you can think of. I'm afraid you're 
totally unfitted for domestic legislation." 

" I'll do my best," said Clara, humbly, "if 
you'll only teach me." 

" That's a good child," said the Queen, kindly, 
"come to me whenever you're in a difficulty 
and I'll either get you out or " 

" Or what, your Majesty ? " asked Clara. 

" Or get you deeper in, of course," an- 
swered the Red Queen, " really you are very 
dull." 

Clara didn't know quite what to say to this 
kind offer so she only curtsied and laid her 
crown at the Queen's feet. 

" There, there, child," said the Queen, 
impatiently, "put it on again. You don't sup- 
pose it's a real one, do you ? If you want it to 
shine at all you will have to manage to keep 



Digitized by Google 



QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 121 

close to me, and then it may catch a little 
reflected glory from mine." 

" What a very disagreeable creature she is," 
thought Clara, to herself, and she was just going 
to declare that she would have nothing more to 
do with her, when the Queen said, in a very 
peremptory tone : — 

" Where's your programme ? " 

" If you please, your Majesty/' said Clara, 
hastily, " they didn't give me one." 

" Rubbish," retorted the Queen, " why there 
are any amount of old ones lying about all over 
the place. You should have picked one up." 

" But wouldn't that be stealing ? " asked 
Clara, who was a very honest little girl. 

"Certainly not," answered the Queen, 
4 4 they're mostly unauthorised, and the others 
are discarded. Anybody's free to pick 'em up. 
You can have one of my old ones, if you like." 

"Thank you very much indeed," said Clara, 
" but it can't be much use, I'm afraid, if it 
doesn't say what you are really going to do." 

" Tut, tut, child, you don't understand. 
Programmes never tell what's going to happen. 
They only tell what's not going to happen, and 



Digitized by Google 



122 QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 

there's such a lot of that it doesn't much matter 
what's on them so long as they keep clear of 
facts." 

" Dear me," said Clara, "do you know I 
never saw it in that light before, but of course 
I understand now. I think I should like one 
of the Duchess's if I might," she added. 

" I lost mine years and years ago," whimpered 
the poor Duchess. " I'm sure you're quite 
welcome to it if you can find it, but I've for- 
gotten what it was all about. I know there 
was something to do with a turkey and a bear 
in it, but I backed the wrong horse just about 
that time, and I've never been able to remember 
things properly since." 

" You'll have to take one of mine, only not 
that which says I was a Home Ruler before 
Gladstone. You'd better tear that up quietly 
if you come across it. There are lots of others 
to choose from," said the Queen. "You can't 
go about looking ridiculous without one, and I 
can let you have one all in words of one syllable. 
Then you'll be quite happy." 

" Couldn't I make up one of my very own? " 
asked Clara, eagerly. " You mayn't believe it, 



Digitized by Google 



QUEENS AND QUESTIONS. 123 

but I can write quite nicely, and it would be 
such fun." 

" You dare to do anything of the kind," 
screamed the Red Queen, in a great passion, 
" and Til have you superseded before you know 
where you are." 

" I only wish I did know where I was," said 
poor little Clara. 

" Come along, my dear, I'll show you," said 
the Duchess, kindly. " Come along with me. 
You mustn't mind her." 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER XI. 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

"You haven't got a mission, have you?" 
said the Duchess to Clara, rather anxiously. 

"Certainly not," Clara replied, in great sur- 
prise, " I've always been taught that it's most 
vulgar to have anything of the kind. I don't 
think," she added, thoughtfully, " I should even 
know a Cassowary if I met one." 

" Ah ! " said the Duchess, in a tone of great 
relief, " then I can take you to see the Dragon 
and the Turnturtle. They're both perfectly 
tame, except the Dragon. He goes mad when- 
ever he sees a missionary. I should like you to 
see how ready they are to eat out of my hand." 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 125 

" Did you tame them ? " asked Clara. 

"Well, yes, so the papers say, my dear," 
answered the Duchess, blushing a little. 

" Do they come to you, when you call 
them?" 

" Well, not exactly, they never did that, and 
I don't suppose they ever will. You see my 
method has always been to be very gentle with 
them. And now they're so docile that I can 
make them do just what they like," said the 
Duchess, triumphantly. " Come and look at 
them." 

So Clara and the Duchess left the Red 
Queen (who said she wanted to come and stir 
the Turnturtle up with a long spoon, and hear 
him quote texts, but was persuaded to remain 
behind), and made their way along Imperial 
Road, at the extreme end of which the Duchess 
said the two animals lived. 

After some time they came in sight of the 
two creatures sitting on the ground and telling 
one another sad stories of the deaths of kings. 
They received the Duchess very politely, 
though Clara could not help thinking there was 
a scornful glint in the Dragon's eye whenever 



Digitized by Google 



iz6 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 



he looked at her, and the Turnturtle muttered 
something about wishing the Duchess was the 
Dalmeny Cat. 

However, they both seemed very relieved 
when they learned that the Red Queen had 
been left behind. 

44 A nasty, spiteful thing," the Turnturtle 
called her, while the Dragon said he had never 
had the pleasure of meeting her, but understood 
she had no feelings, and fewer manners. 

"You may thank your lucky stars you've 
never had anything to do with the Red Queen," 
said the Turnturtle. 

44 I can't stop, myself," said the Duchess, after 
Clara had timidly taken each of the great 
creatures by the paw, 44 because it's spring 
cleaning in the House, and I've got to shift 
some heavy responsibilities, but the young lady 
has come because she wanted to hear your 
histories, and I couldn't tell her much about you. 
I hope you'll tell them as truly as you can." 

44 That's not saying much," muttered the 
Dragon, aside, but he only said out loud, 
44 Delighted, I'm sure. Shall I begin, Turtle, 
or will you ? " 



p r i t i^H h Coo aIp ^ _ 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 127 

" Oh, you," replied the Turn turtle, " mine's so 
sad, and besides I've got a sermon to prepare 




on brotherly love, with an excursus on the 
proper treatment of our black brother, and I 
can be thinking it out while you're talking." 



Digitized by Google 



128 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

" Once," said the Dragon, " I was a real 
Dragon." And then he remained silent for so 
long, looking at his damaged claws, that Clara 
was very nearly thanking him for his story, 
and asking the Turnturtle for his. 

However, after signing several queer looking 
documents with a red pencil, the Dragon seemed 
to recover himself, and he went on, " But now, 
as you see, I'm only paper, and they say I 
shall soon have to be cut up into little bits and 
used for Christmas decorations." 

" You'll leave me a slice in your will, won t 
you ? " said Clara, eagerly. " I should so like to 
take it home. It would be quite a diplomatic 
triumph." 

"You shouldn't use such long words," said 
the Dragon. "I'm sure you don't know the 
meaning of the word diplomacy. Nobody does 
where you come from." 

* 4 There was a time," continued the Dragon, 
mournfully, " when you might have had as many 
slices as you liked, but I've made other arrange- 
ments now. If I've got to be cut up, I may as well 
get the best terms I can, and I know a party — 
an overbearing sort of chap he is too — who'll 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 129 

keep the dissectors away from me for ever so 
long on condition he has my head when they do 
begin." 

" But wouldn't the Duchess protect you ? " 
asked Clara, in surprise. 

Both creatures burst into a roar of laughter. 

" She protect me ! " cried the Dragon. 

" Why/' bellowed the Turnturtle ; "she can't 
even protect herself against a simple rustic 
person like me. You've only to roar at her 
and she runs away at once." 

" You surprise me," said Clara, " I always 
understood she had such a resolute disposition." 

The Dragon grinned. " Ask her about Port 
Arthur," he said. 

"And Venezuela," said the Turnturtle. 

"You see," said the Dragon, "she never 
went to a really good school like we did." 

"I've been to a good school too," said Clara, 
" if it comes to that." 

" What did they teach you there ? " inquired 
the Turnturtle, anxiously. 

" Reading, Writing and Arithmetic," replied 
Clara, "but I'm afraid I was never much good 
at the last." 

1 



Digitized by Google 



130 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

14 At ours," said the Dragon, 44 they taught 
us Bleeding and Blighting, thoroughly." 

44 And," said the Turnturtle, " I was taught 
Mathematics — Sedition, Abstraction, Stultifica- 
tion, and Provision." 

" What's the use of Provision ? " asked 
Clara. 

" To teach you how to provide for yourself, 
of course," said the Turnturtle. 44 I mastered 
that rule." 

44 But didn't they teach you any real sums like 
the Rule-of-Three ? " asked Clara. 

44 No," replied the Turnturtle, scornfully, " I 
worked that out for myself, and the answer was, 
'Steyn, Schreiner, and ME.' " 

The Dragon, who didn't seem to care much 
for questions of modern education, said abruptly 
to the Turnturtle : 44 That professional spouter 
of yours, Doctor Leyds, wasn't exactly a top- 
side success, was he? Clever young fellow, 
too. Nice, gentleman-like manners, good 
address. Christian, too, I understand ? " 

44 They imposed upon him," snapped the 
Turnturtle; 44 and he, poor fellow, without 
knowing it, I'm sure, imposed upon me." 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 131 

The Dragon rolled with laughter. " I nearly 
died of suffocation," he said, " when I saw in 




the papers that you expected France and 
Germany to fight your battles. Why, my dear 
fellow, it was a monstrous thing. They can't 
even afford to fight each other ! " 



Digitized by Google 



132 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

Leyds did his best/' sighed the Turnturtle ; 
" but what makes it so bitter is the money it 
cost. Why ! weVe been keeping the editorial 
staffs of Continental newspapers for the last 
ten years." And then, spreading out his 
fins in despair, he broke into the following 
dirge : — 

" Will you join our little gamble ? " said the Doc/or to 
the Gauls, 

u There'll be heaps of pretty pickings when the monster 
Britain falls ; 

See how Christianlike the journalists of Christian Part* 
write I 

Sin$e we've paid them to shout 1 Kroojer f ; will you 
come and join the fight ? 
Will you, won't you, will you, won 9 1 you, will you join 
the fight? 

Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join 
the fight?" 

" You can really have no notion how your commerce will 
get on, 

We can go for Sam together, when we've kicked the life 
from John ; " 

But the Gaul replied, " My hands are full," and shut his 
pocket tight, 

Said he thanked the Doctor kindly, but he would not join 
the fight, 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 133 

Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not 

join the fight, 
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not 

join the fight. 

" O think of the religious life!" the wily Boer 
replied, 

u While Britain's here we cannot tan the Kaffir's 

heathen hide ; 
The further off is England the more we can unite, 
To sweat the blacks, with lash and tax, so come and 
join the fight / 
Will you, worit you, will you, worit you, will you join 
the fight? 

Will you, worit you, will you, worit you, worit you join 
the fight? 19 

When the Turnturtle broke off, sobbing un- 
constrainedly, the Dragon turned to Clara, and 
solemnly winked his eye. 

" You know better than that, don't you ? " he 
asked. " Now, just oblige me, little girl, by 
standing up, hands behind your back, and re- 
peating, ' Tis the voice of the Sluggard.' It 
will do our friend here a world of good. Begin 
firmly, and grow feeble as you go on." 

Clara was so used to being ordered about by 



Digitized by Google 



134 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

this time that she never thought of refusing this 
request, and standing up immediately, she re- 
cited the well-known poem, in the following 
fashion : — 

'Tis the voice of Aunt Sarum — " You'd better take 
care, 

If you do that again I shall ruffle your hair" 
As the sand to an Ostrich, so words are to her, 
She can bury herself in a threat, and not stir. 
When the foe's giving in, she's as fierce as a Dragon, 
She will pull off his clothes till he hasn't a rag on ; 
But when he says li NO ! " and stamps hard on the 
ground, 

Her voice has a timid and tremulous sound. 

"The next verse," said the Dragon. " It 
begins with, '/ passed by his garden.' Go 
ahead." 

And Clara went on : — 

/ looked in at China and marked without fright, 

How the Bear and the Froggy were putting things right; 

The Froggy got promises splendid and grand 

While the Bear was content with a bird in the hand ; 

When the bargain was over, the Bear, rather blown, 

With great condescension accepted a loan, 

While the Froggy received only papers and seals t 

And concluded the business by kic " 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 135 

" What is the use of repeating all that stuff? " 
interrupted the Turnturtle. " It doesn't contain 
one word about independence ! Pure balder- 
dash ! " 

" Yes, I think you'd better leave off/' said 
the Dragon, uneasily. " I didn't at all like your 
reference to the Bear, though your omission 
of England from the conclusion of the bargain 
was remarkably fine — remarkably. Quite 
masterly ! " 

"England!" cried the Turnturtle; " the 
name is poison to me ! And oh, I used to think 
that it was poison to everybody else, and I 
thought I had only to say, ' Down with Eng- 
land/ and all the rest of the world would flock 
sword in hand to South Africa." 

" Well, so they did, some of them," answered 
Clara. " There were the Australians and 
Canadians, and contingents from India and 
Ceylon. Did you want any more ? " 

" Not of that sort," sighed the Turnturtle. 
" And they came mounted ! " 

Clara grew a little red, " They're still a little 
uncivilised in those parts," she said, apologeti- 
cally, "and we tried to stop them, you know," 



Digitized by Google 



136 DRAGON AND TURNTURTLE. 

"Come, come," cried the Dragon, "you two 
are enough to give anybody a fit of the dumps. 
Cheer up, cheer up ! " And digging the Turn- 
turtle in the place where most people's ribs 
grow, the Dragon implored the old creature 
to sing something really bright and catchy. 
" Sing that jolly little thing you and Steyn 
composed about two years ago," he said. 

" Its a duet," objected the Turnturtle, 44 and 
there's no one now to take Steyn's part." 

44 Oh, Til do that," laughed the Dragon. 44 I 
don't mind facing the music for him — not in 
the least. Now then, One ! — two ! — three ! " 

And they sang as follows : — 

Beautiful war so pure and right, 
Christian Burghers love a fight, 
Europe, of course, will join the Boer, 
War against England, Beautiful war ! 
War against England, Beautiful war ! 

Beau — ootiful Wa — ar ! 

Beau — ootiful Wa — ar I 
Wa — ar against Eng — Eng — land, 

Beautiful, Beautiful War ! 

Beautiful War ! The Boers are 'cute, 
White is the flag y neath which they shoot, 



Digitized by Google 



DRAGON AND TUKNTURTLE. 137 

Break their oath, and sing hymns before 
Potting an ambulance — beautiful War ! 

Beau — ootiful Wa — ar ! 

Beau — ootiful Wa — ar f 
Wa — ar against Eng — Eng — land, 

Beautiful, beauti-¥\\\ WAR ! 

" Chorus again ! " cried the Dragon, who was 
laughing consumedly, but the Turnturtle burst 
into such a flow of tears that Clara, who was 
really very tender-hearted, and who feared she 
might be tempted to give the Turtle anything 
he asked, took to her heels and ran with all her 
might to find the Red Queen. 

"I feel rather faint," she thought, 4 'and I 
want a little bolstering up." 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER XII. 



ON THE CARDS. 

But while Clara was running along to find 
the Red Queen she met the White Rabbit 
again, who shouted to her to stop. 

" I've got email here," he said, showing her 
piles and piles of stamped and addressed 
envelopes. 

" All what?" asked Clara. 

" Why these, don't you see they're the writs ? " 

" Then you ought to take them to the 
County Court at once," said Clara, who was a 
very clever little girl, and knew that respect- 
able people were never seen with anything of 
the kind, except in Ireland. 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 139 

"Oh, they're not that sort at all, Miss," said 
the Rabbit, very politely, " these are the writs 
inviting everybody to the great trial where 
there's no prisoner, and where pretty nearly all 
the company ought to be in the dock. IVe 
got one for you among the rest." 

" But I don't belong to the trial at all," com- 
plained Clara. " I'm what you call detached." 

" Well you'll find you'd better come, whether 
or no," retorted the Rabbit. " I suppose you 
don't want to have the verdict go against you, 
do you ? " 

At this moment there was a great ringing of 
bells, and blowing of fog-horns, and, as every- 
thing seemed to be dissolving all round her, 
Clara ran as hard as she could to the big 
building which the Rabbit said was the Court- 
Hi ouse. 

When she got inside she found that the trial 
had already begun, and that everybody was 
accusing everybody else of all the crimes he 
could think of. 

On the bench sat Britannia (" looking for all 
the world like a middle-aged mermaid without 
a tail," said Clara, afterwards). She seemed 



Digitized by Google 



140 ON THE CARDS. 

dreadfully confused by all the noise and bluster. 
She wore her helmet over her wig, and was 




trying very hard to look judicial, but it was 
quite plain that she could not make out in the 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 



141 



least what all the dispute was about, and again 
and again implored somebody to tell her. By her 
side crouched a stuffed lion, with a much twisted 
tail, which roared mechanically when she dug 
it in the ribs. This she did, whenever she 
did not quite know what else to do. 

" You see, I don't understand politics, and I 
don't know why they make me pretend that I 
care what happens," said Britannia, to Clara. 

" You're evidently quite at sea here," piped the 
White King, in a squeaky voice, as he struggled 
hard to climb up the pinnacle of fame. 

" At sea ? " cried Britannia. " I wish I was 
at sea. The Flamjingos keep telling me I rule 
the waves, but I can't rule a straight line in 
politics anyhow. Nobody can.'' 

" I'll guide your hand, when I get up there," 
squeaked the White King, swarming up the 
pinnacle, as if he thought the lion was going to 
bite him. 

He puffed and blew so hard that Clara 
picked him up between her finger and thumb, 
and placed him safely on the top of the wool- 
sack. 

" You know," he said, looking round the 



Digitized by Google 



142 



ON THE CARDS. 



Court, "I could have got up all by myself, if I'd 
liked." 

The White Kings notion of guiding 
Britannia's hand was to bellow advice into her 
ear, and he used such long words that poor 
Britannia got more confused than ever. 

Of course, directly Clara entered the Court, 
she had tried to 
take her seat, but 
this was just what 
she was not allowed 
to do. The ushers 
explained to her that 
it was altogether il- 
legal while the trial 
was going on, " un- 
less, indeed," as one 
of them said, " no- 
body has anything to say against you, which," he 
rather rudely added, " I know isn't the case with 
you." 

It was quite extraordinary to see what 
tremendous excitement the entrance of Clara's 
various acquaintances created. The March 
Hare and the Hatter, who came in fighting, 




Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 



*43 



and trying to strangle one another, were 
received with cheers and groans, and the Walrus 
and the Carpenter with groans and cheers. 
The Duchess, who tried to push a great many 
people in through a side door, was turned out 
again with extreme violence, and told to mind 
her own business, and the fitful appearances of 
the Dalmeny Cat were greeted with tempests of 
execration. Some of the people pretended to 
be very fond of the Cat, and called, " Puss ! 
puss ! " but when it came close to them they 
abused it, and tried to hit it. 

At last it became so disgusted that it 
threatened to vanish for good and all, and 
never come near the Court again ; but it kept 
returning fitfully. At last Clara thought it 
had really gone ; but, suddenly, she looked up, 
and there it was with Britannia and the White 
King on the platform. 

"What are you doing up there?" asked 
Clara, surprised. " That's the place for the 
Judges." 

" I know," said the Cat, " I have elected 
myself a judge of things in general. It's 
not so worrying." And the Court agreed 



Digitized by Google 



M4 ON THE CARDS. 

to look upon it in that capacity for the 
future. 

" What are all those oysters in that box for ? " 
asked Clara, of the White Rabbit, " and why do 
they keep writing crosses on bits of paper ? " 

" Those are the people that ran away from 
the Walrus and the Carpenter. They're the 
jury, who have to come to decisions, and they 
make those marks to show that they are all at 
cross purposes and don't know their own minds." 

The noise was so great that it was all the 
White Rabbit could do to make himself heard. 
He shouted, " Order ! Order ! " continually, and 
at last he said to Britannia, almost crossly, " I 
do wish you wouldn't make that lion roar so." 

When the tumult had a little subsided 
Crumpty-Bumpty, who was heavily fettered by 
prejudice, managed somehow to attract the 
attention of the jury, and demanded to be 
allowed to give his evidence. 

" But," said poor Britannia, " there isn't any- 
body to give evidence against, and I'm sure I 
don't know what you're all talking about." 

" You just wait, Mum," shouted Crumpty- 
Bumpty, " till you've heard what I've got to say 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 



145 



against Clara there. She'll be in the dock in 
two twos, if only you'll listen to me." And 
without waiting for permission, he immediately 
began : — 

They told me what I had to do 

Could easily be done : — 
" You've got to split yourself in Two, 

And say you feel like One" 

They said, Fd got to keep my heady 

And keep a valiant heart, 
And keep {the very words they said) 

The heads and tails apart. 

She gave the Voters This and That, 
She gave them Black and White, 

She gave them Tit, she gave them Tat, 
She gave them Left and Right. 

I said li The Boers have got to live, 
I'll give them place and sway, 

And when Tve nothing else to give, 
I'll give myself away" 

My notion was to hunt with Perks, 

And run with Labouchere ; 
But she maintains that only works 

When Lloyd-George isn't there. 

K 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 



Dottt let them think I want to lead, 

For what I want to be 
Must ever be a secret creed, 

Between myself and me. 

When Crumpty-Bumpty had finished, there 
was a dead silence for a minute or two, and 
then the March Hare suddenly began to scream, 
" Suppress that Clara ! Behead that Clara ! 
Put that Clara in Kilmainham, and cut her hair 
short ! " and was led out foaming at the mouth. 

" What a very disagreeable person ! " thought 
Clara, to herself. " I wonder if he's always like 
that/' 

" You will please," said Britannia, in a solemn 
voice, " address yourself to the very serious 
charges brought against you by the last witness. 
The March Hare's remarks may be dis- 
regarded—the Court is perfectly acquainted 
with his somewhat perfervid temperament — but 
to the evidence of Crumpty-Bumpty you must 
offer some reply or suffer the extreme penalty 
of the law." 

While Clara was racking her brains to think 
of something to say in answer to Crumpty- 
Bumpty, she was conscious of a most curious 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 147 

sensation as though she was getting bigger and 
bigger every minute. For some time past she 
had felt a great deal too big for her boots, and 
had grown accustomed to the feeling, but this 
was something quite different. She appeared 
to herself to be getting too big for the Court 
altogether, and even Britannia appeared quite a 
tiny little figure, when she compared her with 
herself. 

"If you go on swelling like that," said the 
Red Queen, who was standing beside her, and 
who had done nothing but shout " Traitor " 
since the trial began, " there won't be room for 
two of us in the same room. Disgraceful, I 
call it." 

" I can't help it," pleaded poor Clara, " one 
must develop, you know." 

" Nobody ever developed quicker than I 
did," retorted the Red Queen, in a very sulky 
tone ; " but there's reason in all things, and if 
you're going to grow into a giantess before my 
very eyes, you may manage Crumpty-Bumpty 
for yourself." 

" Please stay and help me," implored Clara, 
" I can't think what to say, and I am depending 



Digitized by Google 



HS otf THE CARDS. 

on you." But all the time she kept on feeling 
herself growing stronger, and bigger, and bigger, 
and stronger, until she said to herself, " I don't 
care if she does go. Half the creatures here 
are make-believe, and the rest pasteboard. 
Why I believe they're only a pack of rubbish 
after all." 

' ' Pack," cried the Red Queen, "well, what 
do you expect at a political meeting ? We have 
to pack them all at the present day." 

Then everything became confused and all 
sense of proportion was lost. The furniture 
began to move about, and the building rocked 
to its foundations. People who were seated 
found themselves suddenly out in the cold, and 
people who were standing were unexpectedly 
hustled into most uncomfortable seats. Every- 
thing trembled in the balance. Above the con- 
fusion rose cries of "Bribery," "Corruption," 
" Lies," and all sorts of creatures crowded upon 
poor Clara until she cried out for her Aunt 
Sarum to take her home. 

But the more she cried the more they all 
hustled her, until at last all the creatures rose 
in the air and came flying in her face. 



Digitized by Google 



ON THE CARDS. 



t 4 9 




Digitized by Google 



ISO ON THE CARDS. 

" Why, I do belie ve," said Clara, " that youre 
nothing but a lot of pictures. There's nothing 
in you after all." 

But Clara was mistaken, for when they fell 
face downwards Clara saw that on their backs 
were the most dreadful legends ; such as — 

" City of London — Two Anti -Vaccin- 
ationists, Seven Vegetarians, and 

an Anti-Gambler ; " 
" Kent — Seven Teetotalers, and a 

Deceased Wife's Sister ; " 
" Birmingham — Four Socialists, Two 
Peculiar People, and a Field Cornet," 

and things like that. She closed her eyes so 
as not to read the writing upon them, but they 
only came thicker and thicker, and faster and 
faster until 

*it* *it* 41 s %p 

4fc *X* 

^fc ij^i ^ 

Clara thought she had better wake up. 

*!f* "if* "JJ* "if* 

# # # 

# # # # 

And it was time. 



Digitized by Google 



Printed by 
Ballantynk, Hanson &* Co. 
London &» Edinburgh 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 



Harvard College } 
Cambridge, MA 021: 


OTdenerLibran 






Ibeo2| 


1 s 







Please handle with care. 

Thank you for helping to preserve 
library collections at Harvard. 



r 



ligitized by Google 



