The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 1 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Cradock Nowell, Vol. 1 (of 3)
       A Tale of the New Forest.

Author: Richard Doddridge Blackmore

Release Date: October 9, 2014 [EBook #47084]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                            CRADOCK NOWELL

                       A Tale of the New forest.

                                  BY
                    _RICHARD DODDRIDGE BLACKMORE_,
                      AUTHOR OF “CLARA VAUGHAN”.

     “You have said: whether wisely or no, let the forest judge”.

                    AS YOU LIKE IT, Act III. Sc. 2.

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                                VOL. I.

                                LONDON:
                  CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY.
                                 1866.

               [_The right of Translation is reserved._]




                                LONDON:
            PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




                             To the Memory

                                  OF

                            MY DEAR FRIEND

                          THOMAS JAMES SCALÉ,

                               THIS WORK

          (IN WHICH, FROM MONTH TO MONTH, HE TOOK THE KINDEST
                               INTEREST)

                                  IS

               IN GRATITUDE, AFFECTION, AND AFFLICTION,

                              DEDICATED.

                                                  R. D. B.




CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

CHAPTER                         PAGE

     I.                            1

    II.                           10

   III.                           17

    IV.                           26

     V.                           42

    VI.                           46

   VII.                           54

  VIII.                           66

    IX.                           75

     X.                           81

    XI.                           95

   XII.                          102

  XIII.                          113

   XIV.                          125

    XV.                          134

   XVI.                          145

  XVII.                          158

 XVIII.                          170

   XIX.                          185

    XX.                          195

   XXI.                          204

  XXII.                          210

 XXIII.                          222

  XXIV.                          239

   XXV.                          265

  XXVI.                          281

 XXVII.                          293

XXVIII.                          309




                            CRADOCK NOWELL




CHAPTER I.


Within the New Forest, and not far from its western boundary, as
defined by the second perambulation of the good King Edward the First,
stands the old mansion of the Nowells, the Hall of Nowelhurst. Not
content with mere exemption from all feudal service, their estate
claims privileges, both by grant and custom. The benefit of Morefall
trees in six walks of the forest, the right of digging marl, and
turbary illimitable, common of pannage, and license of drawing
akermast, pastime even of hawking over some parts of the Crown
land,—all these will be catalogued as claims quite indefeasible, if
the old estates come to the hammer, through the events that form my
story. With many of these privileges the Royal Commissioners will deal
in a spirit of scant courtesy, when the Nowell influence is lost in the
neighbouring boroughs; but as yet these claims have not been treated
like those of some poor commoners.

“Pooh, pooh, my man, donʼt be preposterous: you know, as well as I do,
these gipsy freedoms were only allowed to balance the harm the deer
did”.

And if the rights of that ancient family are ever called in question,
some there are which will require a special Act to abolish them. For
Charles the Second, of merry memory (saddened somewhat of late years),
espied among the maids of honour an uncommonly pretty girl, whose name
was Frances Nowell. He suddenly remembered, what had hitherto quite
escaped him, how old Sir Cradock Nowell—beautiful Fannyʼs father—had
saved him from a pike–thrust during Cromwellʼs “crowning mercy”. In
gratitude, of course, for this, he began to pay most warm attentions
to the Hampshire maiden. He propitiated that ancient knight with the
only boon he craved—craved hitherto all in vain—a plenary grant of
easements in the neighbourhood of his home. Soon as the charter had
received the royal seal and signature, the old gentleman briskly thrust
it away in the folds of his velvet mantle. Then taking the same view of
gratitude which his liege and master took, home he went without delay
to secure his privileges. When the king heard of his departure, without
any kissing of hands, he was in no wise disconcerted; it was the very
thing he had intended. But when he heard that lovely Fanny was gone in
the same old rickety coach, even ere he began to whisper, and with no
leave of the queen, His Majesty swore his utmost for nearly half an
hour. Then having spent his fury, he laughed at the “sell”, as he would
have called it if the slang had been invented, and turned his royal
attention to another of his wifeʼs young maidens.

Nowelhurst Hall looks too respectable for any loose doings of any sort.
It stands well away from the weeping of trees, like virtue shy of
sentiment, and therefore has all the wealth of foliage shed, just where
it pleases, around it. From a rising ground the house has sweet view
of all the forest changes, and has seen three hundred springs wake in
glory, and three hundred autumns waning. Spreading away from it wider,
wider, slopes “the Chase”, as they call it, with great trees stretching
paternal arms in the vain attempt to hold it. For two months of the
twelve, when the heather is in blossom, all that chase is a glowing
reach of amaranth and purple. Then it fades away to pale orange, dim
olive, and a rusty brown when Christmas shudders over it; and so
throughout young green and russet, till the July tint comes back again.
Oftentimes in the fresh spring morning the blackcocks—“heathpoults” as
they call them—lift their necks in the livening heather, swell their
ruffing breasts, and crow for their rivals to come and spar with them.
Below the chase the whiskers of the curling wood converge into a giant
beard, tufted here and there with hues of a varying richness; but for
the main of it, swelling and waving, crisping, fronding, feathering,
coying, and darkening here and there, until it reach the silver mirror
of the spreading sea. And the seaman, looking upwards from the war–ship
bound for India, looking back at his native land, for the last of all
times it may be, over brushwood waves, and billows of trees, and the
long heave of the gorseland: “Now, thatʼs the sort of place”, he says,
as the distant gables glisten; “the right sort of berth for our jolly
old admiral, and me for his butler, please God, when weʼve licked them
Crappos as ought to be”.

South–west of the house, half a mile away, and scattered along the
warren, the simple village of Nowelhurst digests its own ideas. In and
out the houses stand, endwise, crossways, skewified, anyhow except
upside down, and some even tending that way. It looks like a game of
dominoes, when the leaves of the table have opened and gape betwixt the
players. Nevertheless, it is all good English; for none are bitterly
poor there; in any case of illness, they have the great house to help
them, not proudly, but with feeling; and, more than this, they have
a parson who leads instead of driving them. There are two little
shops exceedingly anxious to under–sell each other, and one mild
alehouse conducted strictly upon philosophic principles. Philosophy
under pressure, a caviller would call it, for the publican knows, and
so do his customers, that if poachers were encouraged there, or any
uproarious doings permitted (except in the week of the old and new
year), down would come his license–board, like a flag hauled in at
sunset.

Pleasant folk, who there do dwell, calling their existence “life”, and
on the whole enjoying it more than many of us do; forasmuch as they
know their neighbours far better than themselves, and perceive each
cousinʼs need of trial, and console him when he gets it. Not but what
we ourselves partake the first and second advantages, only we miss the
fruition of them, by turning our backs on the sufferer.

Nowelhurst village is not on the main road, but keeps a straggling
companionship with a quiet parish highway which requires much
encouragement. This little highway does its best to blink the many
difficulties, or, if that may not be, to compromise them, and
establish a pleasant footing upon its devious wandering course from
the Lymington road to Ringwood. Here it goes zig to escape the frown
of a heavy–browed crest of furzery, and then it comes zag when no
soul expects it, because a little stream has babbled at it. It even
seems to bob and dip, or jump, as the case may be, for fear of prying
into an old oakʼs storey or dusting a piece of grass land. The
hard–hearted traveller who lives express, and is bound for the train
at Ringwood, curses, too often, up hill and down dale, the quiet
laneʼs inconsistency. What right has any road to do anything but go
straight on end to its purpose? What decent road stops for a gossip
with flowers—flowers overhanging the steep ascent, or eavesdropping
on the rabbit–holes? And as for the beauty of ferns—confound them,
they shelter the horse–fly—that horrible forest–fly, whose tickling no
civilized horse can endure. Even locusts he has heard of as abounding
in the New Forest; and if a swarm of them comes this very hot weather,
good–bye to him, horse and trap, newest patterns, sweet plaid, and
chaste things.

And good–bye to thee, thou bustling “traveller”—whether technically
so called or otherwise,—a very good fellow in thy way, but not of
natureʼs pattern. So counter–sunk, so turned in a lathe, so pressed
and rolled by steam–power, and then condensed hydraulically, that the
extract of flowers upon thy shirt is but as the oil of machinery.
But we who carry no chronometer, neither puff locomotively—now he is
round the corner—let us saunter down this lane beyond the mark–oak
and the blacksmithʼs, even to the sandy rise whence the Hall is
seen. The rabbits are peeping forth again, for the dew is spreading
quietude: the sun has just finished a good dayʼs work and is off for
the western waters. Over the rounded heads and bosses, and then the
darker dimples of the many–coloured foliage—many–coloured even now
with summerʼs glory fusing it—over heads and shoulders, and breasts of
heaving green, floods the lucid amber, trembling at its own beauty—the
first acknowledged leniency of the July sun. Now every moment has
its difference. Having once acknowledged that he may have been too
downright in his ride of triumph, the sun, like every generous nature,
scatters broadcast his amends. Over holt, and knoll, and lea, and
narrow dingle, scooped with shadow where the brook is wimpling, and
through the breaks of grass and gravel, where the heather purples,
scarcely yet in prime flush, and down the tall wood overhanging, mossed
and lichened, green and grey, as the grove of Druids—over, through, and
under all flows pervading sunset. Then the birds begin discoursing of
the thoughts within them—thoughts that are all happiness, and thrill
and swell in utterance. Through the voice of the thicket–birds—the
mavis, the whinchats, and the warblers—comes the tap of the yaffingale,
the sharp, short cry of the honey–buzzard above the squirrelʼs cage,
and the plaining of the turtle–dove.

But from birds and flowers, winding roads and woods, and waters where
the trout are leaping, come we back to the only thing that interests a
man much—the life, the doings, and the death of his fellow–men. From
this piece of yellow road, where the tree–roots twist and wrestle, we
can see the great old house, winking out of countless windows, deep
with sloping shadows, mantling back from the clasp of the forest, in
a stately, sad reserve. It looks like a house that can endure and not
talk about affliction, that could disclose some tales of passion were
it not undignified, that remembers many a generation, and is mildly
sorry for them. Oh! house of the Nowells, grey with shadow, wrapped
in lonely grandeur, cold with the dews of evening and the tone of
sylvan nightfall, never through twenty generations hast thou known
a darker fortune than is gathering now around thee, growing through
the summer months, deepening ere the leaves drop! All men, we know,
are born for trial, to work, to bear, to purify; but some there are
whom God has marked for sorrow from their cradle. And strange as it
appears to us, whose image is inverted, almost always these are they
who _seem_ to lack no probation. The gentle and the large of heart, the
meek and unpretending, yet gifted with a rank of mind that needs no
self–assertion, trebly vexed in this wayfaring, we doubt not they are
blest tenfold in the everlasting equipoise.

Perhaps it was the July evening that made me dream and moralise; but
now let us gaze from that hill again, under the fringe of autumnʼs
gold, in the ripeness of October. The rabbits are gone to bed much
earlier—comparatively, I mean, with the sunʼs retirement—because
the dew is getting cold, and so has lost its flavour; and a nest
of young weasels is coming abroad, “and really makes it unsafe, my
dear”, says Mrs. Bunny to her third family, “to keep our long–standing
engagements”. “Send cards instead”, says the timid Miss Cony; “I can
write them, mamma, on a polypod”.

Now though the rabbits shirk their duty, we can see the congregation
returning down the village from the church, which is over the bridge,
towards Lymington, and seems set aside to meditate. In straggling
groups, as gossip lumps them, or the afternoon sermon disposes, home
they straggle, wondering whether the girl has kept the fire up. Kept
the fire “blissy” is the bodily form of the house–thought. But all the
experienced matrons of the village have got together; and two, who
have served as monthly nurses, are ready to pull side–hair out. There
is nothing like science for setting people hard by the ears and the
throat–strings. But we who are up in the forest here can catch no buzz
of voices, nor even gather the point of dispute, while they hurry on to
recount their arguments, and triumph over the virile mind, which, of
course, knows nothing about it.

The question is, when Lady Nowell will give an heir to the name,
the house, the village, the estates, worth fifty thousand a year—an
heir long time expected, hoped for in vain through six long years,
now reasonably looked for. All the matrons have settled that it
must be on a Sunday; everybody knows that Sunday is the day for all
grand ceremonies. Even Nanny Gammonʼs pigs——But why pursue their
arguments—the taste of the present age is so wonderfully nice and
delicate. I can only say that the Gammers, who snubbed the Gaffers
upon the subject, miscarried by a fortnight, though right enough
hebdomadally. They all fixed it for that day fortnight, but it was
done while they were predicting. And not even the monthly nurses
anticipated, no one ever guessed at the contingency of—twins.




CHAPTER II.


“Whishtrew, whishtrew, every bit of me! Whativer will I do, God knows.
The blue ribbon there forenint me, and the blessed infants one to aich
side”!

The good nurse fell against a chest of drawers, as she uttered this
loud lament; the colour ebbed from her cherry cheeks, and her sturdy
form shook with terror. She had scarcely turned her back, she could
swear, upon her precious charges; and now only look at the murder
of it! Two little cots stood side by side, not more than four feet
asunder; and on each cot fast asleep lay a fine baby, some three or
four days old. Upon the floor between them was a small rosette of blue
ribbon. The infants were slumbering happily; and breathing as calmly as
could be. Each queer little dump of a face was nestled into its pillow;
and a small red podge, which was meant for an arm, lay crosswise upon
the flannel. Nothing could look more delicious to the eyes of a fine
young woman.

Nevertheless, that fine young woman, Mrs. Biddy OʼGaghan, stood gazing
from one cot to the other, in hopeless and helpless dismay. Her comely
round face was drawn out with horror, her mouth wide open, and large
tears stealing into her broad blue Irish eyes.

“And the illigant spots upon them, as like as two Blemishing spannels;
nor the blissed saints in heaven, if so be they was tuk to glory, afore
they do be made hairyticks, cudnʼt know one from the ither, no more nor
the winds from the brazes. And there go the doctorʼs bell again! Oh
whurra–strew, whurra, whurra”!

Now Biddy OʼGaghan would scarcely have been head–nurse at Nowelhurst
Hall, before she was thirty years old, but for her quick self–reliance.
She was not the woman therefore to wring her hands long, and look
foolish. Her Irish wit soon suggested so many modes of solution, all so
easy, and all so delightfully free from reason, that the only question
was how to listen to all at once. First she went and bolted carefully
both the doors of the nursery. Then, with a look of triumph, she rushed
to her yellow workbox, snatched up a roll of narrow tape, some pins,
and a pair of scissors, and knelt upon the floor very gingerly, where
the blue ribbon lay. Then, having pinned one end of the tape to the
centre of the rosette, and the rosette itself to the carpet, she let
the roll run with one hand, and drew the tape tight with the other,
until it arrived at the nose of the babe ensconced in the right–hand
cot. There she cut it off sharply, with a snip that awoke the child,
who looked at her contemplatively from a pair of large grey eyes.
Leaving him to his meditations, she turned the tape on the pin, and
drew it towards the nasal apology of the other infant. The measure
would not reach; it was short by an inch and a half. What clearer proof
could be given of the title to knot and pendency?

But alas for Biddyʼs triumph! The infant last geometrised awoke at that
very moment, and lifting his soft fat legs, in order to cry with more
comfort, disclosed the awkward fact that his left knee was nearer by
three inches to the all–important rosette, than was any part of his
brother. Biddy shook anew, as she drew the tape to the dimples. What is
the legal centre of a human being? Upon my word, I think I should have
measured from the _ὀμφαλός_.

Ere further measurement could be essayed, all the premises were gone
utterly; for the baby upon the right contrived to turn in the flannels,
as an unsettled silkworm pupa rolls in his cocoon. And he managed to
revolve in the wrong direction; it was his fate through life. Instead
of coming towards the rosette, as a selfish baby would have done, away
he went, with his grey eyes blinking at the handle of the door. Then he
put up his lips, like the ring of a limpet, and poked both his little
fists into his mouth.

“Well, I never”, cried Bridget; “that settles it altogether. Plase the
saints an’ he were a rogue, itʼs this way heʼd ha’ come over on his
blessed little empty belly. My darlin’ dumplin’ dillikins, itʼs you as
it belongs to, and a fool I must be to doubt of it. Donʼt I know the
bend o’ your nose, and the way your purty lips dribbles, then? And to
think I was near a robbing you! What with the sitting up o’ nights, and
the worry of that carroty spalpeen, and the way as they sends my meals
up, Paddy OʼGaghan, as is in glory, wud take me for another manʼs wife”.

With great relief and strong conviction, Mrs. OʼGaghan began to stitch
the truant rosette upon the cap of the last–mentioned baby, whence
(or from that of the other) it had dropped through her own loose
carelessness, before they were cuddled away. And with that ribbon she
stitched upon him the heritage of the old family, the name of “Cradock
Nowell”, borne by the eight last baronets, and the largest estates and
foremost rank in all the fair county of Hants.

“Sure an’ it wonʼt come off again”, said Biddy to the baby, as she
laid down her needle, for, like all genuine Irishwomen, she despised a
thimble; “and itʼs meself as is to blame, for not taking a nick on your
ear, dear. A big fool I must be only to plait it in afore, and only
for thinkin’ as it wud come crossways, when you wint to your blissed
mammy, dear. And little more you be likely to get there, Iʼm afeared,
me darlinʼ. An’ skeared anybody would be to hoort so much as a hair oʼ
your skull, until such time as you has any, you little jule of jewels,
and I kisses every bit on you, and knows what you be thinking on in the
dead hoor of the night. Bless your ticksy–wicksies, and the ground as
you shall step on, and the childer as you shall have”.

Unprepared as yet to contemplate the pleasures of paternity, Master
Cradock Nowell elect opened great eyes and great mouth, in the
untutored wrath of hunger; while from the other cot arose a lusty yell,
as of one already visited by the injustice of the world. This bitter
cry awoke the softness and the faint misgivings of the Irishwomanʼs
heart.

“And the pity of the world it is ye canʼt both be the eldest. And bedad
you should, if Biddy OʼGaghan had the making of the laws. There shanʼt
be any one iver can say as ye havenʼt had justice, me honey”.

Leaving both the unconscious claimants snugly wrapped and smiling, she
called to her assistants, now calmly at tea in an inner room. “Miss
Penny, run down now just, without thinking, and give my compliments,
Mrs. OʼGaghanʼs kind compliments to the housekeeperʼs room, and would
Mrs. Toaster oblige me with her big square scales? No weights you
neednʼt bring, you know. Only the scales, and be quick with them”.

“And please, maʼam, what shall I say as you wants them for”?

“Never you mind, Jane Penny. Wait you till your betters asks of you.
And maynʼt I weigh my grandfatherʼs silver, without ask you, Jane
Penny? And likely youʼd rather not, and good reason for that same, I
dessay, after the way as I leaves it open”.

Overlooking this innuendo, as well as the slight difficulty of
weighing, without weights, imaginary bullion, Miss Penny hurried
away; for the wrath of the nurse was rising, and it was not a thing
to be tampered with. When Jane returned with the beam of justice, and
lingered fondly in the doorway to watch its application, the head–nurse
sidled her grandly into the little room, and turned the key upon her.

“Go and finish your tea, Miss Penny. No draughts in this room, if you
please, miss. Save their little sowls, and divil a hair upon them. Now
come here, my two chickabiddies”.

Adjusting the scales on the bed, where at night she lay with the
infants warm upon her, she took the two red lumps of innocence in her
well–rounded arms, and laid one in either scale. As she did so, they
both looked up and smiled: it reminded them, I suppose, of being laid
in their cradles. Blessing them both, and without any nervousness—for
to her it could make no difference—she raised by the handle the
balance. It was a very nice question—which baby rose first from the
counterpane. So very slight was the difference, that the rosette
itself might almost have turned the scale. But there was a perceptible
difference, of perhaps about half an ounce, and that in favour of the
sweet–tempered babe who now possessed the ribbon; and who, as the
other rose slowly before him, drew up his own little toes, and tried
prematurely to crow at him. Prematurely, my boy, in many ways.

No further mistrust was left in the mind of Mrs. OʼGaghan. Henceforth
that rosetted infant is like to outweigh and outmeasure his brother, a
hundredfold, a thousandfold, in every balance, by every standard, save
those of self, and of true love, and perhaps of the kingdom of Heaven.




CHAPTER III.


The reason why Mrs. OʼGaghan, generally so prompt and careful, though
never very lucid, had neglected better precautions in a matter so
important, was simply and solely this—Lady Nowell, the delicate
mother, was dying. It had been known, ever since the birth, that she
had scarcely any chance of recovery. And Biddy loved her with all her
warm heart, and so did every one in the house who owned a heart that
could love. In the great anxiety, all things were upside down. None of
the servants knew where to go for orders, and few could act without
them; the housekeeper was all abroad; house–steward there was none;
head–butler Hogstaff cried in his pantry, and wiped his eyes with
the leathers; and, as for the master of them all, Sir Cradock Nowell
himself, he rarely left the darkened room, and when he did he could not
see well.

A sweet frail creature the young mother was, wedded too early, as
happens here more often than we are aware of. Then disappointed, and
grieving still more at her husbandʼs disappointment, she had set her
whole heart so long and so vainly upon prospective happiness, that now
it was come she had not the strength to do anything more than smile
at it. And smile she did, very sweetly, all the time she knew she was
dying; she felt so proud of those two fine boys, and could not think
how she had them. Ever so many times Sir Cradock, hanging fondly over
her wan, sweet face, ordered the little wretches away, who would keep
on coming to trouble her. But every time she looked up at him with
such a feeble glory, and such a dash of humour,—“Youʼve got them at
last, and now you donʼt care a bit about them; but oh! please do for my
sake”; every time her fading eyes followed them to the door, so that
the loving husband, cold with the shadow of the coming void, had to
whisper, “Bring them back, put them here between us”.

Although he knew that she was dying, he could not feel it yet; the mind
admitted that fearful truth, but the heart repulsed it. Further as
she sunk, and further yet, from his pleading gaze, the closer to her
side he crept, the more he clasped her shadowy hands, and raised her
drooping neck; the fonder grew the entreating words, the whispers of
the love–time, faint smiles that hoped to win her smile, although they
moved in tears. And smile she did once more on earth, through the ashy
hue—the shadow of the soulʼs wings fluttering—when two fresh lives,
bought by her death, were shown for the farewell to her.

“And if itʼs wrong, then, sheʼll make it right”, thought the
conscientious Biddy. “I can take my oath onʼt she knowed the differ
from the very first; though nobody else couldnʼt see it, barring the
caps they was put in. Now, if only that gossoon will consent to her see
them, once more, and it canʼt hurt, the poor darlinʼ—and the blessing
as comes from the deathʼs gaze——”

Mrs. OʼGaghanʼs doubts were ended by the entrance of the doctor, a
spare, short man, with a fiery face, red hair, and quick little eyes.
He was not more than thirty years old, but knew his duties thoroughly;
nevertheless, he would not have been there but for the sudden
emergency. He was now come to fetch the nurse, having observed that the
poor motherʼs eyes were gleaming feebly, once and again, towards the
door that led to the nursery; and at last she had tried to raise her
hand, and point in that direction. So in came Biddy, sobbing hard, with
a babe on either arm; and she curtseyed cleverly to Sir Cradock without
disturbing the equipoise. But the motherʼs glance was not judicial, as
poor Biddy had expected—her heart and soul were far beyond rosettes,
and even titles. In one long, yearning look, she lingered on her
new–born babes, then turned those hazy eyes in fondness to her kneeling
husbandʼs, then tried to pray or bless the three, and shivered twice,
and died.

For days and weeks Sir Cradock Nowell bore his life, but did not live.
All his clear intellect and strong will, noble plans, and useful
labours, all his sense of truth and greatness, lay benumbed and frozen
in the cold track of death. He could not bear to see his children, he
would not even hear of them; “they had robbed him of his loved one, and
what good were they? Little red things; perhaps he would love them when
they grew like their mother”. Those were not his expressions, for he
was proud and shy; but that was the form his thoughts would take, if
they could take any. No wonder that he, for a time, was lost beyond the
verge of reason; because that blow, which most of all stuns and defeats
the upright man, had descended on him—the blow to the sense of justice.
This a man of large mind feels often from his fellow–men, never from
his Maker. But Sir Cradock was a man of intellect, rather than of mind.
To me a large mind seems to be strong intellect quickened with warm
heart. Sir Cradock Nowell had plenty of intellect, and plenty of heart
as well, but he kept the two asunder. So much the better for getting
on in the world; so much the worse for dealing with God. A man so
constituted rarely wins, till overborne by trouble, that only knowledge
which falls (like genius) where our Father listeth. So the bereaved man
measured justice by the ells and inches of this world.

And it did seem very hard, that he who had lived for twenty years,
from light youth up to the balance age of forty, not only without
harming any fellow–mortal, but, upon fair average, to do good in the
world—it seemed, I say—it was, thought he—most unjust that such a man
could not set his serious heart upon one little treasure without losing
it the moment he had learned its value. Now, with pride to spur sad
memory—bronze spurs to a marble horse—he remembered how his lovely
Violet chose him from all others. Gallant suitors crowded round her,
for she was rich as well as beautiful; but she quietly came from out
them all for him, a man of twice her age. And he who had cared for none
till then, and had begun to look on woman as a stubby–bearded man looks
back at the romance of his first lather, he first admired her grace and
beauty, then her warmth of heart and wit, then, scorning all analysis,
her own sweet self; and loved her.

A few days after the funeral he was walking sadly up and down in his
lonely library, caring no whit for his once–loved books, for the news
of the day, or his business, and listless to look at anything, even
the autumn sunset; when the door was opened quietly, and shyly through
the shadows stole his schoolfellow of yore, his truest friend, John
Rosedew. With this gentleman I take a very serious liberty; but he
never yet was known to resent a liberty taken honestly. That, however,
does not justify me. “John Rosedew” I intend to call him, because
he likes it best; and so he would though ten times a Bachelor of
Divinity, a late Vice–Principal of his college, and the present Rector
of Nowelhurst. Formerly I did my best, loving well the character, to
describe that simple–minded, tender–hearted yeoman, John Huxtable, of
Tossilʼs Barton, in the county of Devon. Like his, as like any two of
Natureʼs ever–varied works, were the native grain and staple of the
Rev. John Rosedew. Beside those little inborn and indying variations
which Nature still insists on, that she may know her sons apart, those
two genial Britons differed both in mental and bodily endowments, and
through education. In spite of that, they were, and are, as like to
one another as any two men can be who have no smallness in them. Small
men run pretty much of a muchness; as the calibre increases, so the
divergence multiplies.

Farmer Huxtable was no fool; but having once learned to sign his name,
he had attained his maximum of literary development; John Rosedew, on
the other hand, although a strong and well–built man, who had pulled a
good oar in his day, was not, in bulk and stature, a match for Hercules
or Milo. Unpretending, gentle, a lover of the truth, easily content
with others, but never with himself, even now, at the age of forty, he
had not overcome the bashfulness and diffidence of a fine and sensitive
nature. And, first–rate scholar as he was, he would have lost his class
at Oxford solely through that shyness, unless a kind examiner, who saw
his blushing agony, had turned from some commonplace of Sophocles to a
glorious passage of Pindar. Then, carried away by the noble poet, John
Rosedew forgot the schools, the audience, even the row of examiners,
and gave grand thoughts their grand expression, breathing free as the
winds of heaven. Nor till his voice began to falter from the high
emotion, and his heart beat fast, though not from shame, and the tears
of genius touched by genius were difficult to check, not till then knew
he, or guessed, that every eye was fixed upon him, that every heart
was thrilling, that even the stiff examiners bent forward like eager
children, and the young men in the gallery could scarcely keep from
cheering. Then suddenly, in the full sweep of magnificence, he stopped,
like an eagle shot.

Now the parson, ruddy cheeked, with a lock of light brown hair astray
upon his forehead, and his pale, blue eyes looking much as if he had
just awoke and rubbed them, came shyly and with deep embarrassment
into the darkening room. For days and days he had thought and thought,
but could not at all determine whether, and when, and how, he ought to
visit his ancient friend. His own heart first suggested that he ought
to go at once, if only to show the bereaved one that still there were
some to love him. To this right impulse—and the impulse of a heart
like this could seldom be a wrong one—rose counter–checks of worldly
knowledge, such little as he had. And it seemed to many people strange
and unaccountable, that if Mr. Rosedew piqued himself upon anything
whatever, it was not on his learning, his purity, or benevolence, it
was not on his gentle bearing, or the chivalry of his soul, but on a
fine acquirement, whereof in all opinions (except, indeed, his own) he
possessed no jot or tittle—a strictly–disciplined and astute experience
of the world. Now this supposed experience told him that it might seem
coarse and forward to offer the hard grasp of friendship ere the soft
clasp of love was cold; that he, as the clergyman of the parish, would
appear to presume upon his office; that no proud man could ever bear
to have his anguish pryed into. These, and many other misgivings and
objections, met his eager longings to help his dear old friend.

Suddenly and to his great relief—for he knew not how to begin, though
he felt how and mistrusted it—the old friend turned upon him from his
lonely pacing, and held out both his hands. Not a word was said by
either; what they meant required no telling, or was told by silence.
Long time they sat in the western window, John Rosedew keeping his eyes
from sunset, which did not suit them then. At last he said, in a low
voice, which it cost him much to find—

“What name, dear Cradock, for the younger babe? Your own, of course,
for the elder”.

“No name, John, but his sweet motherʼs; unless you like to add his
uncleʼs”.

John Rosedew was puzzled lamentably. He could not bear to worry his
friend any more upon the subject; and yet it seemed to him sad,
false concord, to christen a boy as “Violet”. But he argued that, in
botanical fact, a violet is male as well as female, and at such a
time he could not think of thwarting a widowerʼs yearnings. In spite
of all his worldly knowledge, it never occurred to his simple mind
that poor Sir Cradock meant the ladyʼs maiden surname, which I believe
was “Incledon”. And yet he had suggestive precedent brought even
then before him, for Sir Cradock Nowellʼs brother bore the name of
“Clayton”; which name John Rosedew added now, and found relief in doing
so.

Thus it came to pass, that the babe without rosette was baptized as
“Violet Clayton”, while the owner of the bauble received the name
of “Cradock”—Cradock Nowell, now the ninth in lineal succession.
The father was still too broken down to care about being present;
godfathers and godmothers made all their vows by proxy. Mrs. OʼGaghan
held the infants, and one of them cried, and the other laughed. The
rosette was there in all its glory, and received a tidy sprinkle; and
the wearer of it was, as usual, the one who took things easily. As the
common children said, who came to see the great ones “loustering”,
the whole affair was rather like a white burying than a baptism.
Nevertheless, the tenants and labourers moistened their semi–regenerate
clay with many a fontful of good ale, to ensure the success of the
ceremony.




CHAPTER IV.


It is not pleasant to recur, to have a relapse of chronology, neither
does it show good management on the part of a writer. Nevertheless,
being free of time among these forest by–ways, I mean to let the pig
now by the ear unfold his tail, or curl it up, as the weather suits
him. And now he runs back for a month or two, trailing the rope from
his left hind–leg.

Poor Lady Nowell had become a mother, as indeed we learned from the
village gossip, nearly a fortnight before the expected time. Dr.
Jellicorse Buller, a very skilful man, in whom the Hall had long
confided, was suddenly called to London, the day before that on which
we last climbed the hill towards Ringwood. With Sir Cradockʼs full
consent, he obeyed the tempting summons. So in the hurry and flutter
of that October Sunday, it seemed a most lucky thing to obtain, in a
thinly–peopled district, the prompt attendance of any medical man. And
but that a gallant regiment then happened to be on the march from
Dorchester to Southampton, there to embark for India, no masculine aid
would have been forthcoming till after the event. But the regimental
surgeon, whose name was Rufus Hutton, did all that human skill could
do, and saved the lives of both the infants, but could not save the
young mother. Having earned Sir Cradockʼs lasting gratitude, and Biddy
OʼGaghanʼs strong execrations, he was compelled to rejoin his regiment,
then actually embarking.

The twins grew fast, and throve amain, under Mrs. OʼGaghanʼs motherly
care, and shook the deep–rooted country faith, that children brought
up by hand are sure to be puny weaklings. Nor was it long till nature
reasserted her authority, and claimed her rights of compensation. The
father began to think more and more, first of his duty towards the
dead mother, and then of his duty towards his children; and ere long
affection set to work, and drove duty away till called for, which
happened as we shall see presently. By the time those two pretty babies
were “busy about their teeth”, Cradock Nowell the elder was so deep in
odontology, that Biddy herself could not answer him, and was afraid
to ask any questions. He watched each little white cropper, as a girl
peers day by day into a starting hyacinth. Then, when they could walk,
they followed daddy everywhere, and he never was happy without them.
It was a pretty thing to see them toddling down the long passages,
stopping by the walls to prattle, crawling at the slippery parts,
where the newly–invented tiles shone. And the father would dance away
backwards from them, forgetting all about the grand servants, clapping
his hands to encourage them, and holding an orange as prize for a
crawling–race—then whisk away round a corner, and lay his cheek flat
to the wainscot, to peep at his sons, and learn which of them was the
braver. And in those days, I think, he was proud to find that Cradock
Nowell, the heir of the house, was by far the more gallant baby.
Which of the two was the prettier, not even sharp Biddy could say; so
strongly alike they were, that the palm of beauty belonged to the one
who had taken least medicine lately.

Then, as they turned two years and a half, and could jump with both
feet at once, without the spectator growing sad on the subject of
biped deficiencies, their father would lie down on the carpet, and
make them roll and jump over him. He would watch their little spotted
legs with intense appreciation; and if he got an oral sprinkle from
childhoodʼs wild sense of humour, instead of depressing him, I declare
it quite set him up for the day, sir. And he never bothered himself or
them by attempts to forecast their destinies. There they were enjoying
themselves, uproariously happy, as proud as Punch of their exploits,
and the father a great deal prouder. All three as blest for the moment,
as full of life and rapture, as God meant His creatures to be, so often
as they are wise enough; and, in the name of God, let them be so!

But then there came a time of spoiling, a time of doing just what they
liked, even after their eyes were opening to the light and shadow of
right and wrong. If they smiled, or pouted, or even cried—though in
that they were very moderate—in a fashion which descended to them from
their darling mother, thereupon great right and law, and even toughest
prejudice, fell flat as rolled dough before them. So they toddled about
most gloriously, with a strong sense of owning the universe.

Next ensued a time of mighty retribution. Astræa, with her feelings
hurt, came down for a slashing moment. Fond as he was, and far more
weak than he ever had been before, Sir Cradock Nowell was not a
fool. He saw it was time to check the license, ere mischief grew
irretrievable. Something flagrant occurred one day; both the children
were in for it; they knew as well as possible that they were jolly
rogues together, and together in their childish counsel they resolved
to stand it out. The rumour was that they had stolen into Mrs.
Toasterʼs choicest cupboard, and hardly left enough to smell at in a
two–pound pot of green–gage jam. Anyhow, there they stood, scarlet
in face and bright of eye, back to back, with their broad white
shoulders, their sturdy legs set wide apart, and their little heels
stamping defiantly. Mrs. Toaster had not the heart to do anything but
kiss them, with a number of “O fies”! and they accepted her kisses
indignantly, and wiped their lips with their pinafores. They knew that
they were in the wrong, but they had not tried to conceal it, and
they meant to brazen it out. They looked such a fine pair of lords
of the earth, and vindicated their felony with so grand an air; such
high contempt of all justice, that Cookey and Hogstaff, empannelled
as jury, said, “Drat the little darlings, let ’em have the other pot,
mem”! But as their good star would have it, Mrs. OʼGaghan came after
them. Upsetting the mere _nisi prius_ verdict, she marched them off,
one in either hand, to the great judge sitting _in banco_, Sir Cradock
himself, in the library. With the sense of heavy wrong upon them,
the little hearts began to fail, as they climbed with tugs instead
of jumps, and no arithmetic of the steps, the narrow flight of stone
stairs that led from regions culinary. But they would not shed a tear,
not they, nor even say they were sorry, otherwise Biddy (who herself
was crying) would have let them go with the tap of a battledore.

Poor little souls, they got their deserts with very scanty ceremony.
When Biddy began to relate their crime, one glance at their fatherʼs
face was enough; they hung behind, and dropped their eyes, and flushed
all under their curling hair. Yet little did they guess the indignity
impending. Hogstaff had followed all the way, and so had Mrs. Toaster,
to plead for them. Sir Cradock sent them both away, and told Biddy to
wait outside. Then he led his children to an inner room, and calmly
explained his intentions. These were of such a nature that the young
offenders gazed at each other in dumb amazement and horror, which very
soon grew eloquent as the sentence was being executed. But the brave
little fellows cried more, even then, at the indignity than the pain of
it.

Then the stern father ordered them out of his sight for the day, and
forbade every one to speak to them until the following morning; and
away the twins went, hand in hand, down the cold cruel passage, their
long flaxen hair all flowing together, and shaking to the sound of
their contrite sobs and heart–pangs. At the corner, by the stewardʼs
room, they turned with one accord, and looked back wistfully at their
father. Sir Cradock had been saying to himself, as he rubbed his hands
after the exercise—“A capital dayʼs work: what a deal of good it will
do them; the self–willed little rascals”! but the look cast back upon
him was so like their motherʼs when he had done anything to vex her,
that away he rushed to his bedroom, and had to wash his face afterwards.

But, of course, he held to his stern resolve to see them no more that
evening, otherwise the lesson would be utterly thrown away. Holding
to it as he did, the effect surpassed all calculation. It was the
turning–point in their lives.

“My boy, you know it hurts me a great deal more than you”, says
the hypocritical usher, who rather enjoys the cane–swing. The boy
knows it is hypocrisy, and is morally hurt more than physically. But
wholly different is the result when the patient knows and feels the
deep love of the agent, and cannot help believing that justice has
flogged the judge. And hitherto their flesh had been intemerate and
inviolable; the strictest orders had been issued that none should
dare to slap them, and all were only too prone to coax and pet the
beautiful angels. Little angels: treated so, they would soon have been
little devils. As for the warning given last week, they thought it a
bit of facetiousness: so now was the time, of all times, to strike
temperately, but heavily.

That night they went to bed before dark, without having cared for tea
or toast, and Biddyʼs soft heart ached by the pillow, as they lay
in each otherʼs arms, hugged one another, having now none else in
the world to love, and sobbed their little troubles off into moaning
slumber.

On the following morning, without any concert or debate, and scarcely
asking why, the little things went hand in hand, united more than ever
by the recent visitation, as far as the door of their fatherʼs bedroom.
There they slank behind a curtain; and when he came out, the rings
above fluttered with fear and love and hope. Much as the fatherʼs heart
was craving, he made believe to walk onward, till Craddy ran out, neck
or nothing, and sprang into his arms.

After this great event, their lives flowed on very happily into
boyhood, youth, and manhood. They heartily loved and respected their
father; they could never be enough with John Rosedew; and although
they quarrelled and fought sometimes, they languished and drooped
immediately when parted from one another. As for Biddy OʼGaghan, now
a high woman in the household, her only difficulty was that she never
could tell of her two boys which to quote as the more astounding.

“If you plase, maʼam”, she always concluded, “thereʼll not be so
much as the lean of a priest for anybody iver to choose atwane the
bootiful two on them. No more than there was on the day when my blissed
self—murder now!—any more, I manes, nor the differ a peg can find
’twane a murphy and a purratie. And a Murphy I must be, to tark, so
free as I does, of the things as is above me. Says Patrick OʼGeoghegan
to meself one day—glory be to his sowl, and a gintleman every bit of
him, lave out where he had the small–pux—ʼBiddy’, he says, ’hould your
pratie–trap, or Iʼll shove these here bellises down it’. And for my
good it would have been, as I am thankful to acknowledge that same,
though I didnʼt see it that day, thank the Lord. Ah musha, musha, a
true gintleman he were, and lave me out his fellow, maʼam, if iver you
comes acrass him”.

But, in spite of Biddyʼs assertion, there were many points of
difference, outward and inward too, between Cradock and Clayton Nowell.
By this time the “Violet” was obsolete, except with Sir Cradock, who
rather liked it, and with young Crad, who had corrupted it into the
endearing “Viley”. John Rosedew had done his utmost to extinguish the
misnomer, being sensitive on the subject, from his horror of false
concord, as attributed to himself. Although the twins were so much
alike in stature, form, and feature that it required care to discern
them after the sun was down, no clear–sighted person would miscall them
when they both were present, and the light was good. Clayton Nowellʼs
eyes were brown, Cradockʼs a dark grey; Cradockʼs hair was one shade
darker, and grew more away from his forehead, and the expression of
his gaze came from a longer distance. Clayton always seemed up for
bantering; Cradock anxious to inquire, and to joke about it afterwards,
if occasion offered. Then Cradockʼs head inclined, as he walked, a
little towards the left shoulder; Claytonʼs hung, almost imperceptibly,
somewhat to the right; and Cradockʼs hands were hard and dry, Claytonʼs
soft as good French kid.

And, as regards the inward man, they differed far more widely. Every
year their modes of thought, fancies, tastes, and habits, were
diverging more decidedly. Clayton sought command and power, and to be
admired; Cradockʼs chief ambition was to be loved by every one. And so
with intellectual matters; Clayton showed more dash and brilliance,
Cradock more true sympathy, and thence more grasp and insight. Clayton
loved the thoughts which strike us, Cradock those which move us
subtly. But, as they lived not long together, it is waste of time to
_finesse_ between them. Whatever they were, they loved one another, and
could not bear to be parted.

Meanwhile, their “Uncle John” as they always called Mr. Rosedew—their
uncle only in the spirit—was nursing and making much of a little
daughter of his own. Long before Lady Nowellʼs death, indeed for ten
long years before he obtained the living of Nowelhurst, with the little
adjunct of Rushford, he had been engaged to a lady–love much younger
than himself, whose name was Amy Venn. Not positively engaged, I mean,
for he was too shy to pop the question to any one but himself, for more
than seven years of the ten. But all that time Amy Venn was loving him,
and he was loving her, and each would have felt it a grievous blow,
if the other had started sideways. Miss Venn was poor, and had none
except her widowed mother to look to, and hence the parson was trebly
shy of pressing a poor manʼs suit. He, a very truthful mortal, had pure
faith in his Amy, and she had the like in him. So for several years he
shunned the common–room, and laid by all he could from his fellowship,
college–appointments, and professorship. But when his old friend Sir
Cradock Nowell presented him to the benefice—not a very gorgeous one,
but enough for a quiet parsonʼs family—he took a clean white tie at
once, vainly strove to knot it grandly, actually got his scout to brush
him, and after three glasses of common–room port, strode away to his
Amy at Kidlington. There he found her training the apricot on the south
wall of her motherʼs cottage, one of the three great apricot–trees
that paid the rent so nicely. What a pity they were not peaches; they
would have yielded so fit a simile. But peachbloom will not thrive at
Kidlington, except upon ladies’ faces.

Three months afterwards, just when all was arranged, and Mrs. Venn
was at last persuaded that Hampshire is not all pigs and rheumatism,
forests, and swamps, and charcoal, when John, with his voice rather
shaky, and a patch of red where his whiskers should have been, had
proclaimed his own banns three times—for he was a very odd fellow in
some things, and scorned the “royal road” to wedlock—just at that time,
I say, poor Lady Nowellʼs confinement upset all calculation, and her
melancholy death flung a pall on wedding–favours. Not only through
respect, but from real sympathy with the faithful friend, John Rosedew
and Amy held counsel together, and deferred the long–pending bridal.
“_Ὅσῳ μακρότερον, τόσῳ μακάρτερον_”, said John, who always thought
in Greek, except when Latin hindered him; but few young ladies will
admit—and now–a–days they all understand it—that the apophthegm is
applied well.

However, it did come off at last; John Rosedew, when his banns had been
rolling in his mind, in the form of Greek senarii, for six months
after the first time of out–asking, set to and read them all over
again in public; to revive their efficacy, and to surrebut all let
and hindrance. He was accustomed now to so many stops, that he felt
surprised when nobody rose to interpellate. And so the banns of John
Rosedew, bachelor, and Amy Venn, spinster, &c., were read six times
in Nowelhurst Church, and six times from the desk at Kidlington. And,
sooth to say, it was not without significance.

  “Tantæ molis erat to produce our beautiful Amy”.

On the nuptial morning, Sir Cradock, whom they scarcely expected,
gathered up his broken courage, sank his own hap in anotherʼs, and was
present and tried to enjoy himself. How shy John Rosedew was, how sly
to conceal his blushes, how spry when the bride glanced towards him,
and nobody else looked that way—all this very few could help observing;
but they liked him too well to talk of it. Enough that the friend of
his youth, thoroughly understanding John, was blessed with so keen a
perception of those simple little devices, that at last he did enjoy
himself, which he deserved to do for trying.

When the twins were nearly three years old, Mrs. Rosedew presented John
with the very thing he wished for most, an elegant little girl. And
here the word “elegant” is used with forethought, and by prolepsis;
though Mrs. OʼGaghan, lent for a time to the Rectory, employed that
epithet at the first glance, even while announcing the gender.

“Muckstraw, then, and sheʼs illigant intirely; an’ itʼs hopin’ I be as
thereʼll only be two on her, one for each of me darlin’ boys. And now
cudnʼt you manage it, doctor dear”?

But alas! the supply was limited, and no duplicate ever issued. Lucina
saw John Rosedewʼs pride, and was afraid of changing his character.
To all his Oxford friends he announced the fact of his paternity in
letters commencing—“Now what do you think, my dear fellow, what do
you think of this—the most astounding thing has happened”, &c. &c. He
thought of it himself so much, that his intellect grew dreamy, and he
forgot all about next Sundayʼs sermon, until he was in the pulpit. And
four weeks after that he made another great mistake, which horrified
him desperately, though it gratified the parish.

It had been arranged between his Amy and himself, that if she felt
quite strong enough, she should appear in church on the Sunday
afternoon, to offer the due thanksgiving. In the grey old church at
Nowelhurst, a certain pew had been set apart, by custom immemorial,
for the use of goodwives who felt grateful for their safe deliverance.
Here Mrs. Rosedew was to present herself at the proper period, with
the aid of Biddyʼs vigorous arm down the hill from the Rectory. As yet
she was too delicate to bear the entire service. The August afternoon
was sultry, and the church doors stood wide open, while the bees among
the churchyard thyme drowsed a sleepy sermon. As luck would have it,
a recruiting sergeant, toling for the sons of Ytene, finding the road
so dusty, and the alehouse barred against him, came sauntering into
the church during the second lesson, for a little mild change of air.
Espying around him some likely rustics, he stationed himself in the
vacant “churching pew”, because the door was open, and the position
prominent. “All right”, thought the rector, who was very short–sighted,
“how good of my darling Amy to come! But I wonder she wears her scarlet
cloak to come to church with, and in such weather! But perhaps Dr.
Buller ordered it, for fear of her catching cold”. So at the proper
moment he drew his surplice round him, looked full at the sergeant
standing there by the pillar, and commenced majestically, though with a
trembling voice—

“Forasmuch as it hath pleased Almighty God of His goodness to give
you safe deliverance, and hath preserved you in the great danger of
childbirth, you shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God and say——”

The sergeant looked on very primly, with his padded arms tightly
folded, and his head thrown back, calling war and victory into his
gaze, for the credit of the British army. Then he wondered angrily what
the——those chawbacons could see in him to be grinning at.

“I am well pleased”, &c., continued John Rosedew, sonorously; for he
had a magnificent voice, and still regarding the sergeant with a look
of tender interest. Even Sir Cradock Nowell could scarcely keep his
countenance; but the parson went through the whole of it handsomely and
to the purpose, thinking only, throughout it, of Godʼs great mercies
to him. So beloved he was already, and so much respected, that none of
the congregation had the heart to tell him of his mistake, as he talked
with them in the churchyard; though he thought even then that he must
have his bands, as he often had, at the back of his neck.

But on his way home he overtook an old hobbler, who enjoyed a joke more
than a scruple.

“How are you, Simon Tapscott? How do you do to–day? Glad to see you at
church, Simon”, said the parson, holding his hand out, as he always did
to his parishioners, unless they had disgraced themselves.

“Purty vair, measter; purty vair I be, vor a woald galley baggar as
ave bin in the Low Countries, and dwoant know sin from righteousness”.
This last was a gross perversion of a passage in the sermon which
had ruffled ancient Simon. “Canʼt goo much, howiver, by rason of the
rhymatics. Now cud ’e do it to I, measter? cud ’e do it to I, and Iʼll
thraw down bath my critches? Good vor one sojer, good vor anoother”.

“Do what for you, Simon? Fill your old canteen, or send you a pound of
baccy”? asked the parson, mildly chaffing.

“Noo, noo; none o’ that. There baint noo innard parts grace of the Lord
in that. Choorch I handsomely, zame as ’e dwoed that strapping soger
now jist”.

“What, Simon! Why, Simon, do you know what you are saying——” But I
cannot bear to tell of John Rosedew humiliated; he was humble enough by
nature. So fearful was the parson of renewing that recollection within
the sacred walls, that no thanks were offered there for the birth of
sweet Amy Rosedew, save by, or on behalf of, that recruiting sergeant.




CHAPTER V.


When Cradock and Clayton were ten years old, they witnessed a scene
which puzzled them, and dwelt long in their boyish memories. Job
Hogstaff was going to Ringwood, and they followed him down the passage
towards the entrance–hall, emphatically repeating the commissions with
which they had charged him. Old Job loved them as if they were his
grandsons, and would do his utmost to please them, but they could not
trust his memory, or even his capacity.

“Now, Job”, cried little Cradock, pulling at his coat–lappet, “itʼs
no good pretending that you know all, when you wonʼt even stop to
listen. Iʼm sure youʼll go and make some great mistake, as you did last
Tuesday. Mind you tell Mr. Stride itʼs for Master Cradock Nowell, and
they must be sure to give you a good one, or I shall send it back. Now
just tell me what I have told you. I ought to have written it down, but
I wasnʼt sure how to spell ‘groove’”.

“Why, Master Crad, Iʼm to say a long spill, very sharp at the end”.

“Sharp at the _point_, Job, not blunt at the end like a new black–lead
pencil”.

“And whatever you do, Job, donʼt forget the catgut for my cross–bow,
one size larger than last time”.

“Hold your jaw, Viley, till Iʼve quite finished; or heʼll ask for a top
made of catgut”.

Both the boys laughed at this; you could hear them all down the long
passage. Any small folly makes a boy laugh.

“Well, Master Crad, you _must_ think me a ‘muff’, as you call it. And
the groove is to go quite up to the spill; there must be two rings
below the crown of it”.

“Below the crown, indeed! On the fat part, I said three times. Now,
Viley, you know you heard me”.

“Well, well”, cried Job in despair, “two rings on the fat part, and
no knot at all in the wood, and at least six inches round, and, and,
well—I think thatʼs all of it, thank the Lord”.

“All of it, indeed! Well, you _are_ a nice fellow! Didnʼt I tell you
so, Viley? Why, youʼve left out altogether the most important point of
all, Job. The wood must be a clear bright yellow, or else a very rich
gold colour, and Iʼm to pay for it next Tuesday, because I spent my
weekʼs money yesterday, as soon as ever I got it, and—oh, Viley! canʼt
you lend a fellow sixpence”?

“No, not to save my life, sir. Why, Craddy, you know I wouldnʼt let you
go tick if I could”.

The boys rushed at one another, half in fun and half in affection, and,
seizing each other by the belt of the light–plaid tunic, away they went
dancing down the hall, while Hogstaff whistled a polka gently, with his
old eyes glistening after them. A prettier pair, or better matched,
never set young locks afloating. Each put his healthy, clear, bright
face on the shoulder of the other, each flung out his short–socked
legs, and pointed his dainty feet. You could see their shapely calves
jerked up as they went with double action, and the hollow of the back
curved in, as they threw asunder recklessly, then clasped one another
again, and you thought they must both reel over. Sir Cradock Nowell
hated trousers, and would not have their hair cropped, because it was
like their motherʼs; otherwise they would not have looked one quarter
so picturesque.

Before the match was fairly finished—for they were used to this
sort of thing, and the object always was to see which would give in
first—it was cut short most unexpectedly. While they were taking a
sharp pirouette down at the end of the hall—and as they whirled round
I defy their father to have known the one from the other—the door of
the stewardʼs room opened suddenly, and a tall dark woman came out. The
twins in full merriment dashed up against her, and must have fallen
if she had not collared them with strong and bony arms. Like little
gentlemen, as they were, every atom of them, they turned in a moment
to apologise, and their cheeks were burning red. They saw a gaunt old
woman, wide–shouldered, stern, and forcible.

“Oo, ah! a bonnie pair yeʼve gat, as I see in all my life lang. But
yeʼll get no luck o’ them. Takʼ the word o’ threescore year, yeʼll
never get no luck o’ them, you that calls yoursel’ Craydock Nowell”.

She was speaking to Sir Cradock, who had followed her from the
stewardʼs room, and who seemed as much put out as a proud man of
fifty ever cares to show himself. He made no answer, and the two poor
children fell back against a side–bench.

“Iʼll no talk o’ matters noo. Youʼve a giʼen me my refoosal, and I tak’
it once for all. But yeʼll be sorry for the day ye did it, Craydock
Nowell”.

To the great amazement of Hogstaff, who was more taken aback than
any one else, Sir Cradock Nowell, without a word, walked to the wide
front door with ceremony, as if he were leading a peeress out. He did
not offer his arm to the woman, but neither did he shrink from her;
she gathered her dark face up again from its softening glance at the
children, and without another word or look, but sweeping her skirt
around her, away she walked down the broad front road, as stiff and as
stern as the oak–trees.




CHAPTER VI.


The lapse of years made little difference with the Reverend John
Rosedew, except to mellow and enfranchise the heart so free and rich
by nature, and to pile fresh stores of knowledge in the mind so stored
already. Of course the parson had his faults. In many a little matter
his friends could come down upon him sharply, if minded so to do. But
any one so minded would not have been fit to be called John Rosedewʼs
friend.

His greatest fault was one which sprang from his own high chivalry. If
once he detected a person, whether taught or untaught, in the attempt
to deceive or truckle, that person was to him thenceforth a thing to be
pitied and prayed for. Large and liberal as his heart was, charitable
and even lenient to all other frailties, the presence of a lie in the
air was to it as ozone to a test–paper. And then he was always sorry
afterwards when he had shown his high disdain. For who could disprove
that John Rosedew himself might have been a thorough liar, if trained
and taught to consider truth a policeman with his staff drawn?

Another fault John Rosedew had—and I do not tell his foibles (as
our friends do) to enjoy them—he gave to his books and their bygone
ages much of the time which he ought to have spent abroad in his
own little parish. But this could not be attributed to any form of
self–indulgence. Much as he liked his books, he liked his flock still
better, but never could overcome the idea that they would rather not be
bothered. If any one were ailing, if any one were needy, he would throw
aside his Theophrastus, and be where he was wanted, with a mild sweet
voice and gentle eyes that crannied not, like a craneʼs bill, into the
family crocks and dustbin. It was a part, and no unpleasant one, of his
natural diffidence, that he required a poor manʼs invitation quite as
much as a rich oneʼs, ere ever he crossed the threshold; unless trouble
overflowed the impluvium. In all the parish of Nowelhurst there was
scarcely a man or a woman who did not rejoice to see the rector pacing
his leisurely rounds, carrying his elbows a little out, as men with
large deltoid muscles do, wearing his old hat far back on his head, so
that it seemed to slope away from him, and smiling quietly to himself
at the children who tugged his coat–tails for an orange or a halfpenny.
He never could come out but what the urchins of the village were down
upon him as promptly as if he were apple–pie; and many of them had the
impudence to call him “Uncle John” before his hair was grey.

Instead of going to school, the boys were apprenticed to him in the
classics; and still more pleasantly he taught them to swim, and fish,
and row. Of riding he knew but little, except from the treatise of
Xenophon, and a paper on the Pelethronian Lapiths; so they learned it
as all other boys do, by dint of crown and hard bumpage. Moreover, Mark
Stote, head gamekeeper, took them in hand very early as his pupils in
woodcraft and gunnery. To tell the truth, Uncle John objected to this
accomplishment; he thought that the wholesome excitement and exercise
of shooting afforded scarcely a valid reason for the destruction of
innocent life. However, he recollected that he had not always thought
so—his conversion having been wrought by the shrieks of a wounded
hare—neither did he expect to bind all the world with his own girdle.
Sir Cradock insisted that the young idea should be taught to shoot, and
both the young ideas took to it very kindly.

Perhaps on the whole they were none the worse for the want of
public–school training. What they lost thereby in quickness, suspicion,
and effrontery, was more than balanced by the gain in purity,
simplicity, love of home, and kindliness. For nature had not gifted
them with that vulgar arrogance, for which the best prescription is
“calcitration nine times a day, and clean the boots for kicking you”.
Every year their father took them for a month or two to London, to
garnish with some courtly frilling the knuckles of his Hampshire hams.
But they only hated it; thorough agricoles they were, and well knew
their own blessings: and sweet and gladsome was the morning after each
return, though it might be blowing a gale of wind, or drizzling through
the ash–leaves. And then the headlong rush to see beloved Uncle John.
Nature they loved in any form, sylvan, agrarian, human, when that human
form was such as they could climb and nestle in. And there was not in
the parish, nor in all the forest, any child so rough and dirty, so
shock–headed, and such a scamp, that it could not climb into the arms
of John Rosedewʼs fellow–feeling.

But I must not dwell on these pleasant days, the fatherʼs glory,
the hopes of the sons, the love of all who came near them, and the
blessings of Mrs. OʼGaghan.

They were now to go to Oxford, and astonish the natives there, by
showing that a little _hic_, _hæc_, _hoc_, may come even out of
Galilee; that a youth never drawn through the wire–gauge of Eton,
Harrow, or Rugby, may carry still the electric spark, and be taper and
well–rounded. Half their learning accrued _sub dio_, in the manner of
the ancients. Uncle John would lead them between the trees and down
to some forest dingle, the boy on his right hand construing aloud
or parsing very slowly, the little spark at his left all glowing to
explode at the first mistake. _Δεξιύσειρος_ made the running, until he
tripped and fell mentally, and even then he was set on his legs, unless
the other was down upon him; but in the latter case the yoke–mate
leaped into the harness. The stroke–oar on the river that evening was
awarded to the one who paced the greatest number of stades in the
active voice of expounding. The accuracy, the caution, born of this
warm rivalry, became at last so vigilant, that the boy who won the toss
for the right–hand place at starting, was almost sure of the stroke–oar.

So they passed the matriculation test with consummate ease, and
delighted the college tutor by their clear bold writing. They had
not read so much as some men have before entering the University,
but all their knowledge was close and firm, and staunch enough for a
spring–board. And they wrote most excellent Latin prose, and Greek
verse easily flowing. However, Sir Cradock was very nervous on the eve
of their departure for the first term of Oxford residence, and led John
Rosedew, in whose classical powers he placed the highest confidence,
into his private room, and there begged him, as a real friend, tested
now for forty years, to tell him bluntly whether the boys were likely
to do him credit.

“Donʼt spare me, John, and donʼt spare them: only let us have no
disappointment about it”.

“My dear fellow, my dear fellow”! cried John, tugging at his collar,
as he always did when nonplussed, for fear of losing himself; “how on
earth can I tell? Most likely the men know a great deal more in the
University now than they did when I had lectures. Havenʼt I begged you
fifty times to have down a young first–classman”?

“Yes, I know you have, John. But I am not quite such a fool, nor so
shamelessly ungrateful. To upset the pile of your ten years’ labour,
and rebuild it upon its apex! And talk to me of young first–classmen!
Why, you know as well as I do, John, that there is not one of them,
however brilliant, with a tenth part of your knowledge. It could never
be, any more than a young tree can carry the fruit of an old one. Why,
when you took your own first–class, they could only find one man to put
with you, and you have never ceased to read, read, read, ever since you
left old Oriel, and chiefly in taste and philology. And such a memory
as you have! John, I am ashamed of you. You want to impose upon me”.

And Sir Cradock fixed the parsonʼs eyes with that keen and point–blank
gaze, which was especially odious to the shy John Rosedew.

“I am sure I donʼt. You cannot mean that”, he replied, rather warmly,
for, like all imaginative men, when of a diffident cast, he was
desperately matter–of–fact the moment his honour was played with.
His friend began to smile at him, drawing up his grey moustache, and
saying, “Yes, John, you are a donkey”.

“I know that I am”, said John Rosedew, shutting his eyes, as he loved
to do when he got on a favourite topic; “by the side of those mighty
critics of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries—the Scaligers,
the Casaubons, the Vossii, the Stephani,—what am I but a starving
donkey, without a thistle left for him? But as regards our English
critics—at least too many of them—I submit that we have been misled by
the superiority of their Latin, and their more slashing style. I doubt
whether any of them had a tenth part of the learning, or the sequacity
of genius——”

“Come, John, I canʼt stand this, you know; and the boys will be down
here directly, they are so fond of brown sherry”.

“Well, to return to the subject—I own that I was surprised and hurt
when a former Professor of Greek actually confounded the Æolic form of
the _plusquam perfectum_ of so common a verb as——”

“Yes, John, I know all about that, and how it spoiled your breakfast.
But about the boys, the boys, John”?

“And again, as to the delicate sub–significance, not the well–known
tortuousness of _παρά_ in composition, but——”

“Confound it, John. Theyʼve got all their things packed. Theyʼll be
here in a moment, pretending to rollick for our sakes; and you wonʼt
tell me what you think of them”.

“Well, I think there never were two finer fellows to jump a gate since
the days of Castor and Pollux. ‘_Hunc equis, illum superare pugnis._’
You remember how you took me down for construing ‘_pugnis_’ wrongly,
when we were at Sherborne”?

“Yes, and how proud I was, John! You had been at the head of the form
for three months, and none of us could stir you; but you came back
again next day in the fifth Æneid. But here come the villains—now itʼs
all over”.

And so the boys went away, and their father could not for his life
ascertain what opinion his ancient friend had formed as to the chances
of their doing something good at Oxford. Simple and straightforward as
Mr. Rosedew was, no man ever lived from whom it was harder to force an
opinion. He saw matters from so many aspects, everything took so many
facets, shifting lights, and playing colours, from the versatility
of his mind, that whoso could fix him at such times, and extort his
real sentiments, might spin a diamond ring, and shave by it. He had
golden hopes about his “nephews”, as he often called them, but he
would not pronounce those hopes at present, lest the father should be
disappointed. And so the boys went up to Oxford, half a moon before the
woodcocks came.




CHAPTER VII.


I do not mean to write at large upon University life, because the theme
has been out–thesed by men of higher powers. It is a brief Olympic,
a Derby premature, wherein to lose or win depends—training, health,
ability, and industry being granted—upon the early stoning or late
kernelling of the brain. Without laying claim to much experience, any
one may protest that our brains are worked a deal too hard at the
time of adolescence. We lose thereby their vivific powers and their
originality. The peach throws off at the critical period all the fruit
it cannot ripen; the vine has no such abjective prudence, and cripples
itself by enthusiasm.

The twins were entered at Merton, and had the luck to obtain adjoining
garrets. Sir Cradock had begun to show a decided preference for
Clayton, as he grew year by year more and more like his mother. But
this was not the only reason why he would not listen to some foolʼs
suggestion, that Cradock, the heir to the property, should be ranked
as a “gentleman–commoner”. That stupid distinction he left for men who
require self–assertion, admiring as he did the sense and spirit of that
Master, well known in his day, who, to some golden cad insisting that
his son should be entered in that college as a gentleman–commoner,
angrily replied, “Sir, _all_ my commoners are gentlemen”.

But the brothers were very soon parted. Clayton got sleeved in a
scholarʼs gown, while Cradock still fluttered the leading–strings. “_Et
tunicæ manicas_—you effeminate Viley”! said Cradock, admiring hugely,
when his twin ran up to show himself off, after winning a Corpus
scholarship; “and the governor wonʼt allow me a chance of a parasol for
my elbows”. Sir Cradock, a most determined man, and a very odd one to
deal with, had forbidden his elder son to stand for any scholarship,
except those few which are of the University corporate. “A youth of
your expectations”, he exclaimed, with a certain bitterness, for he
often repined in secret that Clayton was not the heir, “a boy placed as
you are, must not compete for a poor young ladʼs _viaticum_. You may
go in for a University scholarship, though of course you will never
get one; an examination does good, I have heard, to the unsuccessful
candidates. But donʼt let me hear about it, not even if, by some
accident, you should be the lucky one”. Craddy was deeply hurt; he had
long perceived his fatherʼs partiality for the son more dashing, yet
more effeminate, more pretentious, and less persistent. So Cradock set
his heart upon winning Craven, Hertford, or Ireland, and never even
alluding to it in the presence of his father. Hence it will be evident
that the youth was proud and sensitive.

“Amy _amata, peramata a me_”, cried the parson to his daughter, now a
lovely girl of sixteen, straight, slender, and well–poised; “how glad
and proud we ought to be of Claytonʼs great success”!

“Pa, dear, he would never have got it, I am quite certain of that,
if Cradock had been allowed to go in; and I think it is most unfair,
shamefully unjust, that because he is the eldest son he is never to
have any honour”. And Amy coloured brilliantly at the warmth of her own
championship; but her father could not see it.

“So I am inclined to think”—John Rosedew was never positive, except
upon great occasions—“perhaps I should say perpend, if I were fond of
hybrid English. I donʼt mean about the unfairness, Amy; for I think I
should do the same if I were in Sir Cradockʼs place. I mean that our
Crad would have got it, instead of Clayton, with health and fortune
favouring. But it stands upon a razorʼs edge, _ἐπὶ ξυροῦς ἵσταται
ἀκμῆς_. You can construe that, Amy”?

“Yes, pa, when you tell me the English. How the green is coming
out on the fir–trees! So faint and yet so bright. Oh, papa, what
Greek sub–significance, as you sometimes call it, is equal to that
composition”?

“Well, my poppet, I am so short–sighted, I would much rather have a
triply composite verb——”

“Than three good kisses from me, daddy? Well, there they are, at any
rate, because I know you are disappointed”. And the child, herself
more bitterly disappointed, as becomes a hot partisan, ran away to sit
under a sprawling larch, just getting new nails on its fingers, for the
spring was awaking early.

It was not more than a week after this, and not very far from
All–Foolsʼ–day, when Clayton, directly after chapel, rushed into
Cradockʼs garret, hot, breathless, and unphilosophical. Cradock, calm
and thoughtful, as he usually was, poked his head through the open
slide of the dusthole called a scoutʼs room, and brought out three
willow–pattern plates, a little too retentive of the human impress, and
an extra knife and fork, dark–browed at the tip of the handle. Then he
turned up a corner of tablecloth, where it cherished sombre memories
of a tearful teapot, and set the mustard–pot to control it. Nor long
before he doubled the coffee in the strainer of the biggin, and shouted
“Corker”! thrice, far as human voice would gravitate, down the well of
the staircase. Meanwhile Master Clayton stood fidgeting, and doffed not
his scholarly toga. Corker, the scout, a short fat man, came up the
stairs with dignity and indignation contending. He was amazed that any
freshman “should have the cheek to holler so”. Mr. Nowell was such a
quiet young man, that the scout looked for some apology. “Corker, a
commons of bread and butter, and a cold fowl and some tongue. Be quick
now, before the buttery closes. And, as I see I am putting you out in
your morning work, get a quart of ale at your dinner–time”. “Yes, sir,
to be sure, sir; I wish all the gentlemen was as thoughtful”.

“No, Craddy, never mind that”, cried his brother, reddening richly, for
Clayton was fair as a lady, “I only want to speak to you about—well,
perhaps, you know what it is I have come for. Is that fellow gone from
the door”?

“I am sure I donʼt know. Go and look yourself. But, dear Viley, what is
the matter”?

“Oh, Cradock, you can so oblige me, and it canʼt matter much to you.
But to me, with nothing to look to, it does make such a difference”.

Cradock never could bear to hear this—that his own twin–brother should
talk, as he often did, so much in the pauper strain. And all the while
Clayton was sure of 50,000_l._ under their motherʼs settlement. But
Crad was full of wild generosity, and had made up his mind to share
Nowelhurst, if he could do so, with his brother. He began to pull
Claytonʼs gown off; he would have blacked his shoes if requested. He
always thought himself Vileyʼs prime minister.

“Whatever it is, my boy, Viley, you know I will do it for you, if it is
only fair and honourable”.

“Oh, it is no great thing. I was sure you would do it for me. To
do just a little bit under your best in this hot scrimmage for the
Ireland. I am not much afraid of any man, Crad, except you, and Brown,
of Balliol”.

“Viley, I am very sorry that you have asked me such a thing. Even if it
were in other ways straightforward, I could not do it, for the sake of
the father, and Uncle John, and little Amy”.

“Donʼt you know that the governor doesnʼt want _you_ to get it? You
are talking nonsense, Cradock, downright nonsense, to cover your own
selfishness. And that frizzle–headed Amy, indeed”!

“I would rather talk nonsense than fraud, Clayton. And I canʼt help
telling you that what you say about my father may be true, but is not
brotherly; and your proposal does you very little honour; and I never
could have thought it of you; and I will do my very utmost. And as for
Amy, indeed, she is too good for you to speak of—and—and——” He was
highly wroth at the sneer about Amyʼs hair, which he admired beyond
all reason, as indeed he did every bit of her, but without letting any
one know it. He leaned upon the table, with his thumb well into the
mustard–pot. This was the first real quarrel with the brother he loved
so much; and it felt like a skewer poked into his heart.

“Well, elder brother by about two seconds”, cried Clayton, twitching
his plaits up well upon his coat–collar. “Iʼll do all I can to beat
you. And I hope Brown will have it, not you. Thereʼs the cash for my
commons. I know you canʼt afford it, until you get a scholarship”.

Clayton flung half–a–crown upon the table, and went down the stairs
with a heavy tramp, knocking over a dish with the college arms on,
wherein Corker was bringing the fowl and the tongue. Corker got all the
benefit of the hospitable doings, and made a tidy dinner out of it, for
Cradock could eat no breakfast. It was the first time bitter words had
passed between the brothers since the little ferments of childhood,
which are nothing more than sweetword the moment they settle down. And
he doubted himself; he doubted whether he had not been selfish about it.

It was the third day of the examination, and when he appeared at ten
oʼclock among the forty competitors, he was vexed anew to see that
Clayton had removed to a table at the other end of the room, so as
not to be even near him. The piece of Greek prose which he wrote that
morning dissatisfied him entirely; and then again he rejoiced at the
thought that Viley need not be afraid of him. He had never believed
in his chance of success, and went in for the scholarship to please
others and learn the nature of the examination. Next year he might
have a fairer prospect; this year—as all the University knew—Brown, of
Balliol, was sure of it.

Nevertheless, by the afternoon he was in good spirits again, and found
a mixed paper which suited him as if Uncle John had set it. One of the
examiners had been, some twenty years ago, a pupil of John Rosedew, and
this, of course, was a great advantage to any successor alumnus; though
neither of them knew the other. It is pleasant to see how the old ideas
germinate and assimilate, as the olive and the baobab do, after the
fires of many summers.

Clayton, a placable youth (even when he was quite in the wrong, as in
the present instance), came to Craddyʼs rooms that evening, begged him
not to apologise for his expressions of the morning, and compared notes
with him upon the doings of the day.

“Bless you, Crad”, he cried, after a glass of first–rate brown
sherry—not the vile molassied stuff, thick as the sack of Falstaff,
but the genuine thing, with the light and shade of brown olives in
the sunset, and not to be procured, of course, from any Oxonian
wine–dealer;—“oh, Crad, if we could only wallop that Brown, of Balliol,
between us, I should not care much which it was. He has booked it for
such a certainty, and does look so cocky about it. Did you see the
style he walked off, before hall, arm in arm with a Master of Arts, and
spouting his own iambics”?

“First–rate ones, I dare say, Viley. Have a pipe, old fellow. After
all, it doesnʼt matter much. Folk who have never been in them think a
deal the most of these things. The wine–merchant laughs at beeswing;
and so, I suppose, it is with all trades”. Cradock was not by any means
prone to the discourse sententious; and the present lapse was due, no
doubt, to the reaction ensuing upon his later scene with Viley, wherein
each had promised heartily to hold fast by the brotherhood.

On the following Saturday morning, John Rosedewʼs face flushed
puce–colour as he opened his letters at breakfast–time. “Hurrah! Amy,
darling; hurrah, my child! _Terque quaterque, et novies evoe!_ Eat all
the breakfast, melimel; I wonʼt tell you till I come back”.

“Oh, wonʼt you, indeed”? cried Amy, with her back against the door
and her arms in mock grimness folded. “I rather think you will, papa;
unless you have made up your mind to choke me. And you are half way
towards it already”.

John saw that peculiar swell of her throat which had frightened him so
often—her dear mother had died of bronchitis, and he knew nothing of
medical subjects—and so he allayed her excitement at once, gave her
over to Miss Eudoxia, who was late in her bedroom as usual, and then
set off at his utmost speed to tell his old friend, Sir Cradock. And
a fine turn of speed he still could show, though the whiskers under
his college–cap (stuck on anyhow in the hurry) were as white as the
breast of a martin quivering under the eaves. Since he lost his wife
he had never cared to walk fast, subsiding into three miles an hour,
as thoughtful and placid men will do, when they begin to thumb their
waistcoats. But now through the waking life of “the Chase”, where the
brown fern–stalks bent over the Ammon horn of the lifting frond, and
the fescue grass was beading rough with dew already, here and among the
rabbit–holes, nimbly dodging the undermine, ran as hard as a boy of
twelve, the man of threescore, John Rosedew. Without stopping to knock
as usual, he burst in upon Sir Cradock, now sitting all alone at his
simple, old–fashioned breakfast. Classical and theological training
are not locomotive, as we all know to our cost; and the rector stood
gasping ever so long, with both hands pressed to his side.

“Why, John; quick, quick! You frighten me. Is your house on fire”?

“Old fellow—old fellow; such news! Shake hands—ever since the _charta
forestæ_; shake hands again. Oh, I feel rather sick; pray excuse me;
_ἄνω κάτα στρέφεται_”.

“What is it, John? Do be quick. I must send for Mrs. OʼGaghan and the
stomach–pump”. Biddy was now the licensed doctoress of the household,
and did little harm with her simples, if she failed of doing good.

“_Times_ there? Open it; look, University news! Crad and Clayton”.

Wondering, smiling, placidly anxious, Sir Cradock tore open the
paper, and found, after turning a great many corners, the University
news. Then he read out with a trembling voice, after glancing over it
silently:

“The Ireland scholarship has been awarded to Cradock Nowell, of Merton
College. Proxime accessit Clayton Nowell, scholar of Corpus Christi.
Unless we are misinformed, these gentlemen are twin–brothers”.

  “Grintie, grintie, grunt,
  Oos be arl tew blunt;
  Naw oose Hampshire hogs,
  But to zhow the way in bogs”.

So John Rosedew quoted in the fulness of his glory from an old New
Forest rhyme. Johnʼs delight transcended everything, because he had
never expected it. He had taken his own degree ere ever the Ireland
was heard of; but three pupils of his had won it while he was still
in residence. Of that he had not thought much. But now to win it by
proxy in his extreme old age, as he began to consider it, and from all
the crack public schoolmen, and with his own pet alumni, whom no one
else had taught anything—such an Ossa upon Pelion, such an Olympus on
Ossa—no wonder that the snow of his whiskers shook and the dew trembled
under his eyelids.

Sir Cradock, on the other hand, had never a word to say, but turned his
head like one who waits for a storm of dust to go by.

“Why, Cradock, old friend, what on earth is the matter? You donʼt seem
at all delighted”.

“Yes, I am, of course, John; as delighted as I ought to be. But I wish
it had been Viley; he wants it so much more, and he is so like his
mother”.

“So is Crad; every bit as much; an enlarged and grander portrait. Canʼt
you see the difference between a large heart and a mere good one? Will
no one ever appreciate my noble and simple Craddy”?

John Rosedew spoke warmly, and was sorry before the breath from his
lips was cold. Not that he had no right to say it, but because he felt
that he had done far more harm than good.




CHAPTER VIII.


Honours flash in the summer sun, as green corn does in the morning;
then they gleam mature and mellow at the time of reaping; they are
bagged, perhaps by a womanʼs arm, with a cut “below the knees”; set
on their butt for a man to sit under while eating his bread and
cheese; then they wither, and are tossed into chaff by a contumelious
steam–engine with a leathern strap inflexible.

Cradockʼs “Ireland” has gone by, and another has succeeded it, and
this has fallen, as most things fall, to the sap of perseverance,
steel–tipped with hard self–confidence—this Ireland has fallen to the
lot of Brown Balliolensis. Clayton would not go in for it; his pride,
or rather vanity, would not allow him to do so. Was he going to take
Cradockʼs leavings, and be a year behind him, when he was only two
minutes younger? However, he went in for the Hertford, and, what was
a great deal more, he got it; for Cradock would not stand; and, even
if he had, perhaps the result would have been the same. Viley had made
up his mind to win it, and worked very hard indeed; and so won it very
easily. Cradock could usually beat him in Greek, but not so often in
Latin. And Clayton wrote the prettiest, most tripping, coquettish,
neat–ankled hendecasyllables that ever whisked roguishly round a
corner, wondering where Catullus was.

Ah! light–hearted poet, sensitively sensuous, yet withal deep–hearted,
with a vein of golden philosophy, and a pensive tenderness, now–a–days
we overlook thee. Horace is more fashionable, more suited to a flippant
age, because he has no passion.

Early on a sunripe evening in the month of June, “when the sun was
shifting the shadows of the hills, and doffed the jaded oxenʼs yoke,
distributing the love time from his waning chariot”, a forest dell,
soft, clear, and calm, was listening to its thrushes. And more than at
the throstleʼs flute, or flageolet of the blackbird, oaks and chestnuts
pricked their ears at the voice of a gliding maiden. Where the young
fern was pluming itself, arching, lifting, ruffling in filigree, light
perspective, and depth of Gothic tracery, freaked by the nip of fairy
fingers, tremulous as a coral grove in a crystal under–current, the
shyer fronds still nestling home, uncertain of the world as yet, and
coiled like catherine–wheels of green; where the cranesbill pushed
like Zedekiah, and the succory reared its sky–blue windmill (open
for business till 8 P.M.); where the violet now was rolled up in the
seed–pod, like a stylite millipede, and the great bindweed, in its
crenate horn, piped and fluted spirally, had forgotten the noonday
flaunt: here, and over the nibbled sward, where the crisp dew was not
risen yet, here came wandering the lightest foot that ever passed,
but shook not, the moss–bed of the glow–worm. Under the rigorous oaks
(so corded, seamed, and wenned with humps of grey), the stately,
sleek, mouse–coloured beech, the dappled, moss–beridden ash, and the
birch–tree peeling silverly, beneath the murmuring congress of the
sunproof leaves; and again in the open breaks and alleys, where light
and shade went see–saw; by and through and under all, feeling for and
with every one, glanced, and gleamed, and glistened, and listened the
loveliest being where all was love, the pet in the nest of nature.

Of all the beauty in that sweet dell, where the foot of man came
scarcely once in a year; of all the largesse of earth and heaven; of
all the grace which is Natureʼs gratitude to her heavenly Father: there
was not one, from the lily–bell to the wild rose and the heather–sprig,
fit for a man to put in his bosom, and look at Amy Rosedew.

It is told of a certain good manʼs child, whose lineage still is
cherished, that when she was asked by her father (half–bantering, half
in earnest) to tell him the reason why everybody loved her so, she
cast down her eyes with a puzzled air, then opened them wide, as a
child does to the sunrise of some great truth—“Father, perhaps it is
because I love everybody so”. Lucan has it in a neater form: “amorem
quæris amando”. And that was Amy Rosedewʼs secret, by herself undreamed
of—lovely, because she could not help loving all our God has made.
And of all the fair things He has made, and pronounced to be very
good, since sunshine first began to gleam, to glow, and to fade away,
what home has beauty found so bright, so rich in varied elegance, so
playfully receptive of the light shed through creation—the light of
the Makerʼs smile—as a young maiden, pure of heart, natural, true, and
trusting?

She came to the brink of a forest pool, and looked at herself in the
water. Not that she thought more than she could help of the outward
thing called “Amy”, but that she wondered how her old favourites,
Cradock and Clayton Nowell, would esteem her face and style of dress
now she was turned seventeen. Most likely they had seen ever so many
girls, both at Oxford and in London, compared with whom poor Amy was
but a rustic Phidyle, just fit to pick sticks in the New Forest.

The crystal mirror gave her back even the shade on her own sweet face,
which fell from the cloud of that simple thought; for she stood where
the westering sunshine failed to touch the water, but flushed with
rich relief of gold the purity of her figure. Every sapling, dappled
hazel, sloughing birch, or glabrous maple, glistened with the plumes
of light, and every leaf was twinkling. The columns of the larger trees
stood like metal cylinders, whereon the level gleam rules a streak,
and glints away round the rounding. Elbows, arms, and old embracings,
backed with a body–ground of green, laced with sunsetʼs golden bodkin,
ever shifting every eyelet,—branch, and bough, and trunk, and leaves,
ruffling and twisting, or staunch and grand, they seemed but a
colonnade and arch, for the sun to peep through at the maiden, and tell
of her on the calm waters.

Floating, fleeting, shimmering there, in a frame of stately summer
flags, vivid upon the crystal shade, and twinkling every now and then
to the plash of a distant moorhen, or the dip of a swallowʼs wing, lay
her graceful image, wondering in soft reply to her play of wonder. She
took off her light chip hat, and laughed; lo! the courteous picture
did the same. She offered, with a mincing air, her little frail of
wood–strawberries; and the shadowy Amy put them back with the prettiest
grace ever dreamed of. Then she cast the sparkling night of her tresses
down the white shoulders and over her breast; and the other Amy was
looking at her through a ripple of cloudiness, with the lissom waist
retiring. She smoothed her hair like a scarf around her, withdrew her
chin on the curving neck, and bowed the shapely forehead, well pleased
to see thus the foreshortening undone, and the pure, bright oval shown
as in a glass. Then, frightened almost at the lustrous depth of her
large grey eyes, deep–fringed with black, she thought of things all
beyond herself, and woke, from Natureʼs innocent joy in her own brief
luck of beauty, to the bashful consciousness, the down of a maidenʼs
dreamings. Bridling next at her mirrored face, with a sudden sense
of humour, all the time she watched the red lips, and the glimmer of
pearls between them, “Amy”, she cried, “now, after this, donʼt come to
me for a character, unless you want one, you pretty dear, for conceit
and self–admiration”.

So saying, she tossed her light head at herself, and looked round
through her flickering cloudlets. What did she see? What made the
dark water flame upon the instant with a richer glow than sunset? The
delicate cheeks, the fair forehead and neck, even the pearly slope of
the shoulders, were flooded with deepest carmine. Her pride fell flat,
as the cistus stamen at a touch droops away on the petal. Then she
shrank back into a flowering broom, and cowered among the spikelets,
and dared not move to wipe away the tears she was so mad with. Oh! the
wretched abasement earned by a sweet little bit of vanity!

How she hated herself, and the light, and the water, her senseless
habit of thinking aloud, above all, her despicable fancy that she was
growing—what nonsense!—such a pretty girl! Thenceforth and for ever,
she felt quite sure, she never could look in a glass again, unless it
were just for a moment, to put her hair to rights, when she got home.

“To think of my hair all down my neck, and the way I had turned in the
gathers”!—the poor little thing had been making experiments how she
would look in a low–necked dress—“Oh! that was the worst thing of all.
I might have laughed at it but for that. And now I am sure I can never
even peep at his face again. Whatever will he think of me, and what
would my papa say”?

After crying until she began to laugh, she resolved to go straight
home, and confess all her crime to Aunt Eudoxia, John Rosedewʼs maiden
sister, who had come to live with him when he lost his wife, three
dreary years agone. So Amy rolled up her long hair anyhow, without a
bit of pride in it, shrank away and examined herself, to be sure that
all was right, and, after one peep, came bravely forth, trying to look
as much as possible like her good Aunt Doxy; then she walked at her
stateliest, with the basket of strawberries, picked for papa, in one
hand, and the other tightly clasped upon the bounding of her heart. But
her eyes were glancing right or left, like a fawnʼs when a lion has
roared; and even the youngest trees saw quite well that, however rigid
with Miss Eudoxia the gliding form might be, it was poised for a dart
and a hide behind them at every crossing shadow.

But fortune favours the brave. She won her own little sallyport
without the rustle of a blackberry–leaf, and thereupon rushed to a
hasty and ostrich–like conclusion. She felt quite sure that, after
all, none but the waters and winds could tell the tale of her little
coquetry. Beyond all doubt, Cradock Nowell was deep in the richest
mental metallurgy, tracing the vein of Greek iambics, as he did before
his beard grew; and she never, never would call them “stupid iambics”
again.

Cradock, who had seen her, but turned away immediately (as became a
gentleman), did not, for the moment, know his little Amy Rosedew. A
year and a half had changed her from a stripling, jumping girl to a shy
and graceful maiden, dreadfully afraid of sweethearts. She had not been
away from Nowelhurst throughout that year and a half, for her father
could not get on without her for more than a month at a time, and all
that month he fretted. But the twins had spent the last summer in
Germany, with a merry reading (or talking) party; and their Christmas
and Easter vacations were dragged away in London, through a strange
whim of Sir Cradock Nowell; at least, they thought it strange, but
there was some reason for it.

Young Cradock Nowell was not such a muff as to be lost in Greek
senarii; no trimeter acatalectics of truest balance and purest fall
could be half so fair to scan; not “Harmony of the golden hair”, and
her nine Pierid daughters round the crystal spring, were worth a
glance of the mental eye, when fortune granted bodily vision of our
unconscious Amy. But he did not stand there watching mutely, as some
youths would have done; for a moment, indeed, he forgot himself in
the flush of admiration. The next moment he remembered that he was a
gentleman; and he did what a gentleman must have done—whether marquis
or labourer: he slipped away through the bushes, feeling as if he had
done some injury. Then the maiden, glancing round, caught one startled
glimpse, as Nyssia did of the stealthy Gyges, or Diana of Actæon. From
that one glimpse she knew him, though he was so like his brother; but
he had failed to recognise the Amy of his boyhood.




CHAPTER IX.


Miss Eudoxia was now the queen of the little household, and the
sceptre she bore was an iron one to all except her niece. John—that
easy, good–natured parson, who, coming in from the garden or parish,
any summer forenoon, would halt in the long low kitchen, if a nice
crabbed question presented itself, take his seat outright upon the
corner of the ancient dresser, and then and there discuss some moot
point in the classics, or tie and untie over again some fluffy knot
historical (which after all is but a pucker in the tatters of a
scarecrow); and all the while he would appeal to the fat cook or the
other maid—for the house only kept two servants; and all the while
Miss Amy, _διαφυλάττουσα θέσιν_ would poke in little pike–points of
impudence and ignorance—John, I must confess at last, was threatened
so with dishclouts, pepper, and even rolling–pins, that the cook began
to forget the name of Plato (which had struck her), and the housemaid
could not justly tell what Tibullus says of Pales.

“John, you are so lamentably deficient in moral dignity! And the mutton
not put down yet, and the kidney–beans getting ropy! If you must sit
there, you might as well begin to slice the cucumber. I dare say youʼd
do that even”.

“To be sure, Doxy; so I will. I sharpened my knife this morning”.

“Doxy, indeed! And before the servants! I am sure Johanna must
have heard you, though she makes such a rattle in there with the
rolling–pin, like a doctorʼs pestle and mortar. She always does when
I come out, to pretend she is so busy; and most likely she has been
listening for half an hour, and laughing at your flummery. What do
I care about Acharnius?—now donʼt tell me any jokes, if you please,
brother John; with butter on both your legs, too! Oh, if I could only
put you in a passion! I might have some hopes of you then. But I should
like to see the woman that could; you have so little self–respect”.

“Eudoxia, that is the very converse of Senecaʼs proposition”.

“Then Seneca didnʼt know how to converse, and I wonʼt be flouted with
him. Seneca to me, indeed, or any other heathen! Let me tell you one
thing, John Rosedew”—Miss Eudoxia now was wrathful, not nettlesome
only, but spinous; perhaps it would be rude to hint that in this
latter word may lurk the true etymon of “spinster”—“let me tell you
one thing, and perhaps youʼll try to remember it; for, with all your
wonderful memory, you never can tell to–morrow what I said to–day”.

“Surely not, dear Doxy, because you talk so much. It is related of that
same Seneca that he could repeat——”

“Fiddlesticks. Now you want to turn off the home–truth you feel to be
coming. But you shall have it, John Rosedew, and briefly, it is this:
Although you do sit on the dresser, your taste is too eclectic. You are
a very learned man, but your learning gilds foul idols. You spend all
your time in pagans’ company, while the epistles and gospels have too
little style for _you_”.

“Oh, Aunt Eudoxia, how dare you talk to my papa like that, my own
daddy, and me to hear you? And just now you flew into a pet because
you fancied Johanna heard him call you ‘Doxy’. I am astonished at it,
Aunt Doxy; and it is not true, not a word of it. Come with me, father,
dearest, and we wonʼt say a word to her all the afternoon”.

Even young Amy saw that her father was hit very hard. There was so much
truth in the accusation, so much spiteful truth—among thy beauties,
_nuda veritas_, a smooth skin is not one—that poor John felt as if
Aristophanes were sewn up henceforth in a pig–sack. He slunk away
quietly to his room, and tried to suck some roots Hebraic, whence he
got no satisfaction. He never could have become a great theological
scholar. After all, a man must do what God has shaped his mind for.
So in a week John Rosedew got back to his native element; but sister
Doxyʼs rough thrust made the dresser for many a month like the bottom
of a pincushion, when the pins are long, and the bran has leaked out at
the corner.

Now Miss Eudoxia Rosedew was always very sorry when she had indulged
too much in the pleasure of hurting others. It was not in her nature
to harm any living creature; but she could not understand that hurt is
the feminine of harm—the feminine frequentative, if I may suggest that
anomaly. She had a warm, impulsive heart, and sided almost always with
the weaker party. Convinced profoundly, as she was, of her brotherʼs
great ability, she believed, whenever a question arose, that the
strength was all on his side, and so she went “dead against him”. One
thing, and the most material one, she entirely overlooked, as a sister
is apt to do: to wit, the breadth and modesty of her brotherʼs nature.
One thing, I say, for the two are one, so closely are they united.

It is a goodly sight to see John Rosedew and his sister upon their way
to church. She supporting the family dignity, with a maid behind her
to carry the books—that it may please thee to defend us with a real
footman!—just touching Johnʼs arm with the tips of her glove, because
he rolls so shockingly, and even his Sunday coat may be greasy; then,
if a little girl comes by, “Lady Eudoxia”—as the village, half in joke,
and half in earnest, has already dubbed her—Lady Eudoxia never looks at
her (they are so self–important now, even those brats of children!),
but she knows by instinct whether that little girl has curtseyed. If
she has, it is nicely acknowledged; but if she has not, what a chill
runs down the ladyʼs rigid spine!

“John, did you see that”?

“See what, Doxy?—Three sugar–plums, my little dear, and a few of our
cough–lozenges. I heard you cough last Sunday; and you may suck them in
the sermon time, because they donʼt smell of peppermint, and they are
quite as nice as liquorice. How is your mammy, my darling”?

“Well, John—well, Mr. Rosedew!—If you have no more sense of
propriety—and so near the house of God——”

And Miss Eudoxia walks on in front, while the girl who failed to
curtsey has thrust one brown hand long ago into the parsonʼs ample
palm, and with the other is stoking that voracious engine whose
vernacular name is “mouth”. Amy, of course, is at the school, where
this little girl ought by rights to have been, only for her cough,
which would come on so dreadfully when the words were hard to
spell; and, when they meet Amy by the gate (the double gate of the
churchyard—both sides only opened for funerals), how smooth, and rich,
and calm she looks—calm, yet with a heart of triumph, as her own class
clusters round her, and wonʼt even glimpse at the boys—not even the
very smallest boy—one of whom has the cheek to whistle, and pretends
that he meant the “Old Hundredth”.

But, in spite of all this Eudoxian grandeur, there was not a poor
man in Nowelhurst—no, nor even a woman—who did not feel, in earnest
heart, faith and good–will towards her. For the worldly nonsense was
cast aside when she stood in the presence of trouble, and her native
kindness and vigour shone forth, till the face of grief was brightened.
Then she forgot her titled grandmother—so often quoted and such a bore,
the Countess of Driddledrum and Dromore—and glowed and melted, as all
must do who are made of good carbon and water. So let her walk into
the village church with the pride which she is proud of, her tall and
comely figure shown through the scarf of lavender crape, her dark silk
dress on the burial flags, wiping dust from the memory of John Stiles
and his dear wife Susan. And oh, Johanna, thou goodly fat cook–maid,
dishing up prayer–books, and Guides to the Altar, and thy gloves on
the top ostentatiously—gloves whose fingers are to thine as vermicelli
to sausages: Johanna, spoil not our procession by loitering under the
hollow oak to wink at thy sweetheart, Jem Pottles. Neither do thou, oh
hollow oak, look down upon us, and tell of the tree only one generation
before thee. Under thy branches, the Arab himself had better not talk
of lineage. Some acorn spat forth, half–crunched and bedribbled, by the
deer or the swine of the forest, and in danger perhaps of being chewed
afterwards by the ancestors of royalty—our family–trees are young
fungus to thee, and our roots of nobility pignuts.




CHAPTER X.


The scenery of the New Forest is of infinite variety; but the wooded
parts may be ranged, perhaps, in a free, loose–branching order (as
befits the subject), into some three divisions, which cross and
interlace each other, as the trees themselves do.

First, and most lovely, the glades and reaches of gentle park and
meadow, where the beech–tree invades not seriously, or, at any rate,
not with discipline, but straggles about like a tall centurion amused
by ancient Britons. Here are the openings winged with fern, and
ruffling to the west wind; and the crimped oval leaves of the alder
rustle over the backs of the bathing cows. In and out we glance, or
gaze, through the groined arcade of trees, where the sun goes wandering
softly, as if with his hand before his eyes. Of such kind is the
Queenʼs Bower Wood, beside the Boldre Water.

Of the second type, most grand and solemn, is the tall beech–forest,
darkening the brow of some lonely hill, and draping the bosomed
valleys. Such is Mark Ash Wood, four miles to the west of Lyndhurst.
Overhead, is the vast cool canopy; underfoot, the soft brown carpet,
woven by a thousand autumns. No puny underwood foils the gaze, no
coppice–whispers circulate; on high there moves one long, unbroken,
and mysterious murmur, and all below grey twilight broods in a lake
of silent shadow. Through this the ancient columns rising, smooth,
dove–coloured, or glimpsed with moss, others fluted, crannied, bulging,
hulked at the reevings of some great limb; others twisted spirally and
tortuously rooting; a thousand giants receding, clustering, opening
lattice–peeps between them, standing forth to stop the view, or
glancing some busy slant of light—in the massive depth of gloom they
seem almost to glide.

The third and most rudely sylvan form is that of the enclosures, where
the intolerant beech is absent, and the oak, the spruce, and the
Spanish chestnut protect the hazel, the fern and bramble, the dog–rose
and the honeysuckle.

In a bowering, gleaming, twinkling valley, such as I have first
described, we saw Miss Amy Rosedew admiring her own perfections;
and now, some three months afterwards, a certain young lady, not
wholly unlike her, is roaming in a deep enclosure, thick with oaks
and underwood. It lies about a furlong from the western lodge of
Nowelhurst, and stretches away towards the sunset, far from the eye
of house or hut. Even the lonely peatman, who camps (or camped, while
so allowed) beneath the open sky, wherever the waste yields labour
freely, and no prescription bars him—even he finds nothing here to draw
his sauntering footstep. The gorse prefers more open places, the nuts
are few and hard to reach, the fuel–turf is not worth cutting, and the
fuel–wood he dare not hew. In short, there is nothing there to tempt
him. As for shade, and solitude, and the crystal rill, he gets a deal
too much of that sort of thing already.

By the side of that crystal rill, and where the trees hung thickest, in
the grey gloom of that Michaelmas evening, walked the aforesaid maiden,
and (what we had not bargained for) a gentle youth beside her. The
light between the lapping boughs and leaves—whose summer whisper grew
hoarse in autumnʼs rustle—the clouded light fell charily, but showed
the figures comely, as either could wish of the other.

The maidenʼs face was turned away, but one hand lay in her loverʼs;
with the other she was drawing close the loose folds of her mantle—her
flushing cheek was glad of shade, and the grass thought her feet were
trembling.

His eager, glistening, wavering eyes told of hope with fear behind it;
and all his life was waiting for a word or look. But for the moment
neither came. She trembled more and more before him, and withdrew a
little, as the silver–weed at her feet withdrew from the runnelʼs
passion. She thought he would yet say more—she longed for him to say
more; oh that her heart would be quiet!

But never another word he said, till she turned to him, sadly and
proudly, with her soft eyes full of tears.

“Mr. Nowell, you are very eloquent; but you do not know what love is”.

She lifted her left hand towards her heart, but was too proud to put it
there, and dropped it, hiding the movement.

“I not know what love is! And I have been saying things I should have
laughed at any fellow for saying, though I am fit to cry while I say
them. Oh, how cold–blooded you are; for I cannot make you feel them”!

He looked at her so ardently, that her sweet gaze fell like a violet in
the May sun.

“No, Mr. Clayton Nowell, I am not cold–blooded; but, at least, my blood
is pure, though not in the eyes of the world so high and refined as
your own”.

“What has that got to do with it? My own—own—own——” He was in a great
hurry to embrace her, because she looked at him tenderly, to palliate
the toss of her head.

“Wait, if you please. Throughout all your rhapsody” (here she smiled
so that none could be angry) “you have not said a single word to show
whether—that is—I mean to say whether——”

She burst into tears, turned from him, and clung to the dead arm of the
old oak.

“Whether what”? asked Clayton, sharply, in spite of her deep distress;
for he began to doubt if he truly were loved, and to tire of the
highstrung suspense. “Whether I have got money enough to support us
both _respectably_? Isnʼt that the proper word for it? And because I am
the younger son”?

He frowned very hard at the bark of the oak, and crushed the grey
touchwood under his foot, though his hand was still seeking for hers.
Then she turned full upon him suddenly, too proud to dissemble her
tears.

“Oh, Clayton, Clayton Nowell, can you think me so mean as that? Though
my father would cast me off, perhaps, in his gratitude to Sir Cradock,
do you think I would care for all the world, so long as I only had you?
What I meant was only that you never said if you meant me to be—to
be—your wife”. Her long lashes fell on her glistening cheeks, like the
willow–leaves over the Avon.

“Why, what—well, that beats cockfighting!—why, what else did you
suppose I meant, you darling of all born darlings”?

“I am sure I donʼt know, Clayton. Only I beg your pardon”.

He gave her no time to beg it twice, with those wistful eyes upon him,
but made her earn it thoroughly, with her round arms on his neck, and
other proceedings wherewithal we have no right to meddle.

“Yes, you may call me now your own”—ever so many interruptions—“your
own; yours only, for ever”.

“And you would rather have me than my elder brother”?

“Sooner than a thousand elder brothers, all as grave as Methusalem”.

Clayton was so delighted hereat, that he really longed to squeeze her,
although it is a thing which young ladies now–a–days never think of
allowing. Let them hope that he did not do it. The probabilities are in
their favour.

“Oh, Clayton, how can I be such a simpleton? What _would_ my father say
to me”?

“What do I care, my gem, my jewel, my warm delicious pearl? For three
long months I have been dying to kiss you; and now I wonʼt be cheated
so. Surely you are not afraid of me, my beautiful wild rose”?

Her gardening hat had fallen off, her eyes were bright with tears, and
the glow upon her cheeks had faded to a pellucid gleam. So have I seen
the rich red Aurora weep itself, in a pulse–throb, to a pearly and
waxen pink.

“No, Clayton, I am not afraid of you. I know that you are a gentleman”.

“Well”, thought Clayton, “she must be a witch, or the cleverest girl
in the universe, as well as the most beautiful. She knows the way to
manage me, as if we had been married fifty years”.

He looked so disconcerted at the implied rebuke, that she could have
found it in her sweet heart to give him fifty kisses; but, with all
her warmth of passion, she was a pure and sensitive maiden, full of
self–respect. Though abashed for the moment, and bowing her head to the
sunrise of young affection, she possessed a fine and very sensible will
and way of her own. She was just the wife for Clayton Nowell—a hot,
impulsive, wayward youth; proud to be praised by every one, more than
proud of deserving it. With such a wife, he would ripen and stiffen
into a fine, full character; with a weak and volatile spouse, he would
swing to and fro to his ruin. His goodness as yet was in the material;
only a soft, firm hand could fashion it.

So she kept him at his distance; except every now and then, when her
warm, loving nature looked forth from her eyes, for fear of hurting
his feelings. Hand in hand they walked along, as if they still were
children, and held much counsel, as they went, about the difficulties
between them. But happen what would, they made up their minds about one
thing; and for them henceforth both plural and singular were entirely
merged in the dual. That sentence is priggish and pedantic, but I think
young lovers can solve it; if not, let them put their heads together,
and unriddle it in _labiates_.

Nothing ever, ever, ever, in the world of fact, or in the reach of
imagination, should hold apart that faithful pair, whose all in all
was to each the other. This they settled with much satisfaction, before
discussing anything else.

“Except, of course, you know, darling”, said the more thoughtful
maiden, “if either of us should die”.

Clayton shuddered at the idea, for it was a dark place of the wood, and
the rustle of the ivy–leaves seemed to whisper “die”. Then he insisted
upon his amends for such a nasty suggestion; and she, with the tender
thought moving her heart, could not refuse strict justice.

“And so you say, love, I must stay at Oxford until I take my degree.
What a long time it does seem! Doesnʼt it”?

“Never mind, dearest, how long it is, if we are true to one another”.

“Oh, that of course thereʼs no doubt about. And you think I must tell
my father”?

“Of course you must, Clayton. We are not very old, you know; he will
think that he can part us, and that may make him less angry”,—here she
laughed at her own subtlety,—“and putting that out of the question,
neither of us could bear to be deceiving him so long. After all, you
are but a younger son; and I am a lady, I hope. I have been thoroughly
educated; and there is nothing but money against me”.

She looked so proud in the shade of the spruce, that he was obliged to
stop and admire her. At least he thought it his duty to do so, and the
opinion did not offend her.

“But what will your brother Cradock say? He is so different from you.
So odd, so determined and—upright”.

“I donʼt care _that_ for what he says. Only he had better be civil. He
treated me very badly that time about the Ireland. I have a very great
regard for Cradock; he is a very decent fellow; but I must teach him
his proper place”.

“And you can beat him easily in Latin; my father says you can. What a
shame that he would not go in for the Hertford, that you might turn the
tables upon him! He would not even have got a proxy, or whatever it was
he gave you”.

“I donʼt know that”, said Clayton, who was truthful in spite of vanity;
“very likely he would have beaten me. But I have cut him out in two
things; for I canʼt help thinking that he has a hankering after you”.

He looked at her with a keen, shrewd glance, for he was desperately
jealous. She saw it, and smiled, and only said—“Would you believe that
he could help it? But it happens that I know otherwise”.

“Oh, then, you would have had him, if you could”?

“Now, Clayton, donʼt be childish. In your heart you know better”.

Of course he did, a great deal better. Then there was that to make up
again, because she looked so hurt and so charming. But we canʼt stop
here all day, or follow all these little doings, even if honour allowed
us.

“And another thing, not so important, though, I have cut him out in,
most decidedly”, said Clayton, lifting his head again; “the governor
likes me long chalks better than he does Cradock, I can tell you”.

“No doubt of it, I should say, dear. But I donʼt think you ought to
talk of it”.

“No, only to you. No secrets from oneʼs wife, you know. But you wonʼt
tell your father yet, till Iʼve opened upon Sir Cradock”?

“Why not? I intend to tell him directly I get home. And one thing is
certain, Clayton, he will be more angry than yours will”.

Clayton found it very difficult to change her determination. But at
last he succeeded in doing so.

“But only for a week, mind; I will only put it off for a week, Clayton;
and I would not do that, only as you say he would rush off at once to
Sir Cradock; and I must give you time to take your father at the very
best opportunity”.

“And when will that be, my sweet prime minister, in your most sage
opinion”?

“Why, of course, on my dear loveʼs birthday, next week, when all those
rejoicings are to be at his brother becoming of age”.

The young lady meant no mischief at all, but her lover did not look
gracious.

“My brother! oh yes, to be sure, my brother! And I dreamed last night
that I was the elder. He used to talk about giving me half; but I
havenʼt heard much of that lately. As for my majority, as the lawyers
are pleased to call it, nobody cares two straws for that. All my life I
shall be a minor”.

“Yes, somebody cares for it, darling; and more than all the hundreds
put together who will shout and hurrah for your brother”.

And she looked at him fondly from her heart. What a hot little
partisan! The whole of that heart was now with Clayton, and he felt its
strength by sympathy. So he lifted her hand to his lips, as a cavalier
does in a picture. For the moment all selfish regrets lost their way in
the great wide world of love.

“And my fealty shall be to you”, he cried, kneeling half in play before
her; “you are my knightly fee and fortune, my castle, my lands, and my
home”.

They had stopped at a point where two forest–paths met, and the bushes
fell back a little, and the last of the autumn sunset glanced through
the pales of a moss–grown gate, the mark whereby some royalty, or right
of chase, was limited. Kneeling there, Clayton Nowell looked so courtly
and gentle, with the bowered light of the west half saddening his
happy, affectionate countenance, that his newly–betrothed must needs
stoop graciously, and kiss his uncovered forehead.

While Clayton was admiring secretly the velvet of her lips, back she
leaped, as if stung by a snake; then proudly stood confronting. Clayton
sprang up to defend her; but there was no antagonist. All he saw was
a man on horseback, passing silently over the turf, behind a low bank
crowned with fern. Here a narrow track, scarce visible, saved the
traveller some few yards, subtending as it did the angle where the two
paths met. Clayton could not see the horse, for the thick brake–fern
eclipsed him. But he felt that the nag was rather tired, and getting
sad about supper–time. The rider seemed to be making a face, intended
to express the most abstract philosophy possible, and superlunary
contemplation. Any rabbit skilled in physiognomy would have come
out of his hole again, quite reassured thereby. A short man he was,
and apparently one meant by his mother for ruddiness; and still the
brick–red of his hair proclaimed some loyalty to her intention. But his
face was browned, and flaked across, like a red potato roasting, and
his little eyes, sharp as a glazierʼs diamond, and twinkling now at
the zenith, belied his absent attitude. Then as he passed by a shadowy
oak, which swallowed him up in a moment, that oak (if it had been duly
vocal) would have repeated these words—

“Well, if that ainʼt the parsonʼs daughter, grind me under a
curry–stone. What a sly minx!—but devilish pretty. Youʼre a deal too
soft, John Rosedew”.

As he passed on towards Nowelhurst the lovers felt that they had
been seen, and perhaps watched ever so long; and then they felt
uncomfortable. The young lady was the first to recover presence of
mind. She pressed on her glossy round head the hat which had been so
long in her left hand, and, drawing a long breath, looked point–blank
at the wondering stare of her sweetheart.

“Well, Clayton, we may make up our minds for it now”.

“For what, I should like to know? Who cares for that interloping,
beetroot–coloured muff”?

“He is no muff at all, I can tell you, but an exceedingly clever man.
Do you mean to say you donʼt know him”?

“Not I, from Esau or Ishmael. And he looks like a mixture of both”.

“He is Doctor Rufus Hutton”.

Clayton indulged in a very long whistle, indrawn, and not melodious.
’Twas a trick he had learned at Oxford; it has long been discarded
elsewhere, but at both Universities still subsists, as the solace of
newly–plucked men; the long–drawn sound seems to wind so soothingly
down the horns of dilemma. Then the youth jumped up, and gathered a
nut, cracked it between his white front teeth, and offered it, husk and
all, without any thought of hygrometry, to his beautiful frightened
darling. She took it, as if his wife already, and picked out the thin
shell, piece by piece, anxiously seeking the kernel. He all the while
with admiration watched the delicate fingers moving, the reflex play of
the lissome joints, the spiral thread and varying impress of the convex
tips, and the faintly flushing pink beneath the transparency of her
nails. Then she laughed and jumped, as it proved to be a magnificent
double nut—two fat kernels close together, shaped by one another. Of
course she gave him one, and of course we know what they did about
it. I will only state that they very soon forgot all about Dr. Rufus
Hutton, and could scarcely part where the last branch–path was quite
near to the maidenʼs window. Even there, where the walks divided, when
neither could see the other, each stepped aside, very proud of loveʼs
slyness, to steal the last of the otherʼs footfall; and soon, with a
blush of intuition, each knew that the other was lingering, and each
felt ashamed of himself or herself, and loved the other all the more
for it. So they broke from the bushes, detected and laughing, to put
a good face upon it, and each must go to tell the other how it came
about. They kissed once more, for they felt it was right now that the
moon was risen; then home ran both, with a warmth of remembrance and
hope glowing in the heart.




CHAPTER XI.


Whatever the age, or the intellect of the passing age, may be, even
if ever arise again such a galaxy of great minds as dawned upon this
country three hundred years ago, though all those great minds start
upon their glorious career, comprising and intensifying all the light
engendered by, before, and since the time of Shakespeare, Bacon,
Newton; then, though they enhance that light tenfold by their own
bright genius, till a thousand waking nations gleam, like hill–tops
touched with sunrise—to guide men on the human road, to lead them
heaven–ward, all shall be no more than a benighted river wandering away
from the stars of God. Do what we will, and think as we may, enlarging
the mind in each generation, growing contemptuous of contempt, casting
caste to the winds of heaven, and antiquating prejudice, nevertheless
we shall never outrun, or even overtake Christianity. Science,
learning, philosophy, may regard it through a telescope: they touch it
no more than astronomy sets foot upon a star. To a thoughtful man, who
is scandalized at all the littleness felt and done under the holy name,
until he almost begins to doubt if the good outweigh the evil, it is
reassurance to remember that we are not Christians yet, and comfort to
confess that on earth we never can be. For nothing shows more clearly
that our faith is of heaven, than the truth that we cannot rise to it
until it raise us thither. And this reflection is akin to the stately
writerʼs sentiment, that our minds conceive so much more than our
bodies can perform, to give us token, ay, and earnest, of a future
state.

Of all the creeds which have issued as yet from God, or man, or
the devil, there is but one which is far in advance of all human
civilization. True Christianity, like hope, cheers us to continual
effort, exalts us to unbounded prospect, flies in front of our best
success. Let us call it a worn–out garb, when we have begun to wear it;
as yet the mantle is in the skies, and we have only the skirt with the
name on it.

Such thoughts as these were always stirring in the heart of a man of
power, a leading character in my story, a leading character everywhere,
whithersoever he went. Bull Garnet was now forty–five years old, and
all who met him were surprised at his humble place in the commonwealth.
A sense of power so pervaded even the air he breathed, that strong men
rebelled instinctively, though he urged no supremacy; weak men caught
some infection from him, and went home and astonished their families.
Strong and weak alike confessed that it was a mysterious thing how
a man of such motive strength, and self–reliance illimitable, could
be content with no higher post than that of a common steward. But
neighbourly interest in this subject met with no encouragement. Albeit
his views of life expanded into universal sympathy, his practice now
and then admitted some worldly–wise restrictions. And so, while really
glad to advise on the doings of all around him, he never permitted
brotherly interference with his own.

Whoever saw Bull Garnet once was sure to know him again. If you met
him in a rush to save the train, your eyes would turn and follow him.
“There goes a man remarkable, whether for good or evil”. Tall though he
was, and large of frame, with swinging arms, and a square expression,
it was none of this that stopped the bystanderʼs glance into a gaze. It
was the cubic mass of the forehead, the span between the enormous eyes,
and the depth of the thick–set jowl, which rolled with the volume of a
tigerʼs. The rest of the face was in keeping therewith: the nose bold,
broad, and patulous, the mouth large and well banked up, the chin big
and heavily rounded. No shade of a hair was ever allowed to dim his
healthy colouring, his head was cropped close as a Puritanʼs, and when
beard grew fast he shaved twice in a day. High culture was a necessity
to him, whether of mind, or body, or of the world external; he would
no more endure a moustache on his lip than a frouzy hedgerow upon his
farm. That man, if you came to think about him, more and more each time
you saw how different he was from other men. Distinctness is a great
merit in roses, especially when the French rosarians have so overpiled
the catalogue. It is pleasant to walk up to a standard, and say, “You
are ‘Jules Margottin’, and your neighbour the ‘Keepsake of Malmaison;’
I cannot mistake you for any other, however hot the weather may be”.
Distinctness is also a merit in apples, pears, and even peaches; but
most of all in man. And so, without knowing the reason, perhaps,
we like a man whom we cannot mistake for any other of our million
brethren. The same principle tells in love at first sight. But, lo!
here again we are wandering.

Mr. Garnetʼs leading characteristic was not at first sight amiable. It
was, if I may be allowed for once, upon the strength of my subject,
not to mince words into _entremets_—a furious, reckless, damnable,
and thoroughly devilish temper. All great qualities, loving–kindness,
yearnings for Christian ideals, fell like sugar–canes to a hurricane in
the outburst and rush of that temper. He was always grieved and deeply
humbled, when the havoc was done; and, being a man of generous nature,
would bow his soul in atonement. But in the towering of his wrath, how
grand a sight he afforded! as fine as the rush of the wild Atlantic
upon St. Davidʼs Head. For a time, perhaps, he would chafe and fret
within the straits of reason, his body surging to and fro, and his mind
making grasp at boundaries. Then some little aggravation, some trifle
which no other man would notice—and out would leap all the pent–up fury
of his soul. His great eyes would gather volume, and spring like a
mastiff from a kennel; his mighty forehead would scarp and chine like
the headland when the plough turns; and all his aspect grow four–square
with more than hydraulic pressure. Whoever then could gaze unmoved at
the raging fire of his eyes must be either a philosopher or a fool—and
often the two are synonymous.

But touch him, even then, with a single word of softness, the thought
of some one dear to him, a large and genial sentiment, or a tender
memory—and the lines of his face would relax and quiver, the blazing
eyes be suffused and subdued to a tremulous glow; and the man, so far
beyond reasonʼs reach, be led back, like a boy, by the feelings.

All who think they can catch and analyze that composite, subtle,
volatile gas—neither body nor spirit, yet in fief to the laws of
either—which men call “human nature”, these, I say, will opine at
once, from even this meagre description, that Mr. Bull Garnetʼs
nature was scant of that playful element, humour. If thought be (as
German philosophers have it) an electric emanation, then wit is the
forked flash, gone in a moment; humour the soft summer lightning
that shows us the clouds and the depth, the background and night of
ourselves. No man of large humour can be in a passion, without laughing
inwardly at himself. And wrath, which laughs at itself, is not of
much avail in business. Mr. Garnetʼs wrath, on the contrary, was a
fine, free–boiling, British anger, not at all amenable to reason,
and therefore very valuable. By dint of it, he could score at night
nearly twice as much work done in the day as a peaceable man could have
reckoned. Man or woman, boy or girl, Mr. Garnet could extract from each
all the cubic capacity, leaving them just enough of power to crawl home
stiff, and admire him. For the truth of it is, as all know to their
cost, who have had much to do with spade or plough, hod or hammer, that
the British workman admires most the master who makes him sweat most.
Perhaps it ought not to be so. Theoretically, we regard it thus, that a
man ought to perspire, upon principle, when he is working for another
man. But tell us where, and oh! where, to find the model British
labourer who takes that view of the subject.

Sith it will na better be, let us out and look for him. The sky is
bright blue, and the white clouds flock off it, like sheep overlapping
each other. What man but loves the open air, and to walk about and
think of it, with fancies flitting lazily, like fluff of dandelion?
What man but loves to sit under a tree, and let the winds go wandering,
and the shadows come and play with him, to let work be a pleasant
memory, and hurry a storm of the morning? Everybody except Bull Garnet.




CHAPTER XII.


All the leaves of the New Forest, save those of the holly and
mistletoe, some evergreen spines, and the blinder sort, that know not
a wink from a nod—all the leaves, I mean, that had sense of their
position, and when to blush and when to retire, and how much was due
to the roots that taught them—all these leaves were beginning to feel
that their time in the world was over. The trees had begun to stand
tier upon tier, in an amphitheatrical fashion, and to sympathise more
with the sunset; while the sun every evening was kissing his hands, and
pretending to think them younger. Some outspoken trees leaned forward,
well in front of the forest–galleries, with amber sleeves, and loops of
gold, and braids of mellow abandonment, like liberal Brazilian ladies,
bowing from the balconies. Others drew away behind them, with their
mantles folded, leaning back into unprobed depths of semitransparent
darkness, as the forest of the sky amasses, when the moon is rising.
Some had cast off their children in parachutes, swirling as the linden
berries do throughout September; some were holding their treasures
grimly, and would, even when they were naked. Now the flush of the
grand autumnal tide had not risen yet to its glory, but was freaking,
and glancing, and morrising round the bays and the juts of the foliage.
Or it ruffled, among the ferny knaps, and along the winding alleys. The
sycamores truly were reddening fast, and the chestnut palms growing
bronzy; the limes were yellowing here and there, and the sere leaves
of the woodbine fluttered the cob of clear red berries. But the great
beechen hats, which towered and darkened atop of the moorland hollows
and across the track of the woodman—these, and the oaks along the rise,
where the turtle–dove was cooing, had only shown their sense of the age
by an undertint of olive.

It was now the fifth day of October—a day to be remembered long by all
the folk of Nowelhurst. Mr. Garnet stood at the end of his garden,
where a narrow pinewood gate opened to one of the forest rides. Of
course he was doing something, and doing it very forcibly. His life
was a fire that burned very fast, having plenty of work to poke it.
But the little job which he now had in hand was quite a relaxation:
there was nothing Bull Garnet enjoyed so much as cutting down a tree.
He never cared what time of year it was, whether the leaves were on
or off, whether the sap were up or down, as we incorrectly express
it. The sap of a tree is ever moving, like our own life–blood; only
it feels the change of season more than we who have no roots. Has a
dormouse no circulation, when he coils himself up in his elbowed hole?
Is there no evaporation from the frozen waters? The two illustrations
are wide apart, but the principle is the same. Nature admits no
absolute stoppage, except as death, in her cradle of life; and then
she sets to, and transmutes it. Why Bull Garnet so enjoyed the cutting
down of a tree, none but those who themselves enjoy it may pretend to
say. Of course, we will not refer it to the reason assigned in the
well–known epigram, which contains such a wholesale condemnation of
this arboricidal age. In another century, London builders will perhaps
discover, when there are no trees left, that a bit of tuck–pointing by
the gate, and a dab of mud–plaster beside it, do not content the heart
of man like the leaves, and the drooping shadowy rustle, which is the
type of himself.

Bull Garnet stood there in the October morning, with the gate wide
open, flung back by his strong hand upon its hinges, as if it had no
right to them. The round bolt dropped from the quivering force, dropped
through the chase of the loop, and bedded deep in the soft, wet ground.
With much satisfaction the gate brought up, and felt itself anchored
safely; Bull Garnet gave the bolt a kick, which hurled all the rusty
screws out. Then he scarcely stopped to curse the blacksmith; he wanted
the time for the woodcutters. At a glint from the side of his vast
round eyes—eyes that took in everything, and made all the workmen
swear and believe that he could see round a corner—he descried that
the axemen were working the tree askew to the strain of the ropes. The
result must be that the comely young oak, just proud of its first big
crop of acorns, would swerve on the bias of the wind, stagger heavily,
and fall headlong upon the smart new fence. There was no time for
words—in a moment he had kicked the men right and left, torn off his
coat, and caught up an axe, and dealt three thundering strokes in the
laggard twist of the breach. Away went the young oak, swaying wildly,
trying once to recover itself, then crashing and creaking through the
brushwood, with a swish from its boughs and leaves, and a groan from
its snaggy splinters. A branch took one of the men in his face, and
laid him flat in a tussock of grass.

“Serve you right, you lubber; Iʼm devilish glad”, cried Bull Garnet;
“and I hope you wonʼt move for a week”.

The next moment, he went up and raised him, felt that his limbs were
sound, and gave him a dram of brandy.

“All right, my fine fellow. Next time youʼll know something of the way
to fell a tree. Go home now, and Iʼll send you a bottle of wine”.

But the change of his mood, the sudden softening, the glisten that
broke through the flash of his eyes, was not caused this time by the
inroad of rapid Christian feeling. It was the approach of his son that
stroked the down of his heart the right way. Bull Garnet loved nothing
else in this world, or in the world to come, with a hundredth part of
the love wherewith he loved his only son. Lo, the word “love” thrice in
a sentence—nevertheless, let it stand so. For is there a word in our
noble tongue, or in any other language, to be compared for power and
beauty with that little word “love”?

Bob came down the path of the kitchen garden at his utmost speed. He
was like his father in one or two things, and most unlike in others.
His nature was softer and better by far, though not so grand and
striking—Bull Garnet in the young Adam again, ere ever the devil came.
All this the father felt, but knew not: it never occurred to him to
inquire why he adored his son.

The boy leaped the new X fence very cleverly, through the fork of the
fingers, and stood before his father in a flame of indignation. Mr.
Garnet, with that queer expression which the face of a middle–aged man
wears when he recalls his boyhood, ere yet he begins to admire it,
was looking at his own young life with a contemplative terror. He was
saying to himself, “What cheek this boy has got”! and he was feeling
all the while that he loved him the more for having it.

“Hurrah, Bob, my boy; youʼre come just in time”.

Mr. Garnet tried very hard to look as if he expected approval. Well
enough all the time he knew that he had no chance of getting it. For
Bob loved nature in any form, especially as expressed in the noble
eloquence of a tree. And now he saw why he had been sent to the village
on a trifling errand that morning.

“Just in time for what, sir”? Bobʼs indignation waxed yet more. That
his father should dare to chaff him!

“Just in time to tell us all about these wonderful red–combed fungi.
What do you call them—some long name, as wonderful as themselves”?

Bob kicked them aside contemptuously. He could have told a long story
about them, and things which men of thrice his age, who have neglected
their mother, would be glad to listen to. Nature, desiring not revenge,
has it in the credulous itch of the sons who have turned their backs on
her.

“Oh, father”, said Bob, with the tears in his eyes; “father, you canʼt
have known that three purple emperors came to this oak, and sat upon
the top of it, every morning for nearly a week, in the middle of July.
And it was the most handsomest thirty–year oak till you come right to
Brockenhurst bridge”.

“Most handsomest, Bob”! cried Mr. Garnet, glad to lay hold of anything;
“come along with me, my son; I must see to your education”.

Near them stood a young spruce fir, not more than five feet high. It
had thrown up a straight and tapering spire, scaled with tender green.
Below were tassels, tufts, and pointlets, all in triple order, pluming
over one another in a pile of beauty. The tips of all were touched with
softer and more glaucous tone. But all this gentle tint and form was
only as a framework now, a loom to bear the web of heaven. For there
had been a white mist that morning—autumnʼs breath made visible; and
the tree with its net of spiderʼs webs had caught the lucid moisture.
Now, as the early sunlight opened through the layered vapours, that
little spruce came boldly forth a dark bay of the forest, and met all
the spears of the orient. Looped and traced with threads of gauze, the
lacework of a fairyʼs thought, scarcely daring to breathe upon its veil
of tremulous chastity, it kept the wings of light on the hover, afraid
to weigh down the whiteness. A maiden with the love–dream nestling
under the bridal faldetta, a child of genius breathing softly at his
own fair visions, even an infantʼs angel whispering to the weeping
mother—what image of humanity can be so bright and exquisite as a
common treeʼs apparel?

“Father, can you make that”? Mr. Garnet checked his rapid stride; and
for once he admired a tree.

“No, my son; only God can do such glorious work as that”.

“But it donʼt take God to undo it. Smash”!

Bob dashed his fists through the whole of it, and all the draped
embroidery, all the pearly filigree, all the festoons of silver, were
but as a dream when a yawning man stretches his scraggy arms forth.
The little tree looked wobegone, stale, and draggled with drunken tears.

“Why, Bob, I am ashamed of you”.

“And so am I of you, father”.

Before the bold speech was well out of his mouth, Bob took heartily to
his heels; and, for once in his life, Mr. Garnet could not make up his
mind what to do. After all, he was not so very angry, for he thought
that his son had been rather clever in his mode of enforcing the moral;
and a man who loves ability, and loves his boy still more, regards with
a liberal shrewdness the proof of the one in the other.

Alas, it is hard to put Mr. Garnet in a clear, bold stereoscope,
without breach of the third commandment. Somehow or other, as fashion
goes—and happily it is on the go always—a man, and threefold thrice
a woman, may, at this especial period, in the persons of his or her
characters, break the sixth commandment lightly, and the seventh with
great applause. Indeed, no tale is much approved without lèse–majesté
of them both. Then for what subterranean reason, or by what diabolical
instrumentality (that language is strictly parliamentary, because it
is words and water), is a writer now debarred from reporting what his
people said, unless they all talked tracts and milk, or rubrics and
pommel–saddles? In a word—for sometimes any fellow must come to the
point—Why do our judicious and highly–respected Sosii score out all our
d—ns?

Is it not true that our generation swears almost as hard as any?
And yet it will not allow a writer to hint the truth in the matter.
Of course we should do it sparingly, and with due reluctance. But,
unless all tales are written for women, and are so to be accepted, it
is a weak attempt at imposture on our sons and grandsons to suppress
entirely in our pictures any presence not indecent, however unbecoming.

Mr. Garnet was a Christian of the most advanced intelligence, so far as
our ideas at the present time extend. He felt the beauty and perfection
of the type which is set before us. He never sneered, as some of us do,
at things which were too large for him, neither did he clip them to the
shape of his own œsophagus. Only in practice, like the rest of us, he
was sadly centrifugal.

Now with his nostrils widely open, and great eyes on the ground, he was
pacing rapidly up and down his sheltered kitchen garden. Every square
was in perfect order, every tree in its proper compass, all the edging
curt and keen. The ground was cropped with that trim luxuriance which
we never see except under first–rate management. All the coleworts for
the winter, all the wellearthed celery, all the buttoning Brussels
sprouts, salsify just fit to dig, turnips lifting whitely forth (as
some ladies love to show themselves), modest savoys just hearting in
and saying “no” to the dew–beads, prickly spinach daily widening the
clipped arrowhead—they all had room to eat and drink, and no man
grudged his neighbour; yet Puck himself could not have skipped through
with dry feet during a hoar–frost. As for weeds, Bull Garnet—well, I
must not say what he _would_ have done. Suddenly a small, spare man
turned the corner upon him, where a hedge of hornbeam, trimmed and
dressed as if with a pocket–comb, broke the south–western violence.
Most men would have shown their hats above the narrow spine, but Rufus
Hutton was very short, and seldom carried a chimney–pot.

“Sir, what can I do for you”? said Mr. Garnet, much surprised, but
never taken aback.

“Excuse me, sir, but I called at your house, and came this way to find
you. You know me well, by name, I believe; as I have the pleasure of
knowing you. Rufus Hutton; ahem, sir! Delightful occupation! I, too, am
a gardener. ‘Dumelow Seedling’, I flatter myself. Know them well by the
eye, sir. But what a difference the soil makes! Ah, yes, let them hang
till the frost comes. What a plague we have had with earwigs! Get into
the seat of the fruit; now just let me show you. Ah, you beggars, there
you are. Never take them by the head, sir, or theyʼd nip my fingers.
Take them under the abdomen, and they havenʼt room to twist upon you.
There, now; what can he do”?

“Not even thank you, sir, for killing him. And now what can I do for
you”?

“Mr. Garnet, I will come to the point. A man learns that in India.
Too hot, sir, for much talking. Bless my heart, I have known the
thermometer at 10 oʼclock P.M., sir—not in the barracks, mind me, nor
in a stifling nullah——”

“Excuse me, I have read of all that. I have an engagement, Dr. Hutton,
at eight minutes past eleven”.

“Bless my heart, and I have an appointment at 11.9 and five seconds.
How singular a coincidence”!

Bull Garnet looked down at the little doctor, and thought him too small
to be angry with. Moreover, he was a practical man, and scarcely knew
what chaff meant. So he kept his temper wonderfully, while Rufus looked
up at him gravely, with his little eyes shining like glow–worms between
the brown stripes of his countenance.

“I have heard of you, Dr. Hutton, as a very skilful gardener. Perhaps
you would like to look round my garden, while I go and despatch my
business. If so, I will be with you again in exactly thirty–five
minutes”.

“Stop, stop, stop! youʼll be sorry all your life, if you donʼt hear my
news”.

So Rufus Hutton thought. But Mr. Garnet was sorry through all the rest
of his life that he ever stopped to hear it.




CHAPTER XIII.


Bull Garnet forgot his appointment for eight minutes after eleven;
indeed it was almost twelve oʼclock when he came out of the summerhouse
(made of scarlet–runners) to which he had led Dr. Hutton, when he
saw that his tale was of interest. As he came forth, and the noonday
sun fell upon his features, any one who knew him would have been
surprised at their expression. A well–known artist, employed upon a
fresco in the neighbourhood, had once described Mr. Garnetʼs face in
its ordinary aspect as “violence in repose”. Epigrammatic descriptions
of the infinite human nature are like tweezers to catch a whale with.
The man who unified so rashly all the Garnetian impress, had only met
Mr. Garnet once—had never seen him after dinner, or playing with his
children.

Now Rufus Hutton, however garrulous, was a kind and sensible man, and
loth to make any mischief. He ran after Mr. Garnet, hotly. Bull Garnet
had quite forgotten him, and would take no notice. The doctor made a
short cut through a quarter of Brussels sprouts (which almost knocked
off his wide–awake hat) and stood in the arch of trimmed yew–tree,
opening at the western side upon the forest lane. Here he stretched his
arms to either upright, and mightily barred all exit. He knew that the
other would not go home, because he had told him so.

Presently Bull Garnet strode up: not with his usual swing, however;
not with his wonted self–confidence. He seemed to walk off from a
staggering blow, which had dulled his brain for the moment. He stopped
politely before Mr. Hutton (who expected to be thrust aside), and asked
as if with new interest, and as if he had not heard the tale out—

“Are you quite sure, Dr. Hutton, that you described the dress
correctly”?

“As sure as I am of the pattern of my own unmentionables. Miss Rosedew
wore, as I told you, a lavender serge, looped at the sides with
purple—a pretty dress for Christmas, but it struck me as warm for
Michaelmas. Perhaps it was meant for the Michaelmas daisies; or perhaps
she suffers from rheumatism, or flying pains in the patella”.

“And the cloak and hat, as you described them—are you sure about them”?

“My dear sir, I could swear to them both if I saw them on a scarecrow.
How can I speak of such a thing after that lovely creature? Such an
exquisite fall of the shoulders—good wide shoulders too—and such a
delicious waist! I assure you, my dear sir, I have seen fine women in
India——”

“Dr. Hutton”, said Mr. Garnet, sternly, “let me hear no more of that.
You are a newly–married man, a man of my time of life. I will have no
warm description of—of any young ladies”.

Rufus Hutton was a peppery man, and not very easily cowed.
Nevertheless, his mind was under the pressure of a stronger one. So he
only relieved himself with a little brag.

“Why, Mr. Garnet, you cross–examine me as I did the natives when I
acted as judge in Churramuttee, when the two chuprassies came before
me, and the water–carrier. I tell you, sir, I see more in a glance than
most men do in a long set stare, when they are called in to appraise
a thing. I could tell every plait in your shirt–front, and the stuff
and cut of your coat, before you could say ‘good morning’. It was only
last Thursday that Mrs. Hutton, who is a most remarkable woman, made an
admirable observation about my rapid perception”.

“I have not the smallest doubt of it. And I believe that you fully
deserved it. You will therefore perceive at once that this matter must
go no further. Did you see my—son at the house here”?

“No. Only the maid–servant, who directed me where to find you”.

“Then you did not go in at all, I suppose”?

“No; but I admired greatly your mode of training that beautiful
tropæolum over the porch. I must go and look at it again, with your
kind permission. I never neglect the chance of a wrinkle such as that”.

“Another time, Dr. Hutton, I shall hope to show it to you; though
you must have seen it all at a glance, for it is simpler than my
shirt–fronts. But my business takes me now to the Hall, and I shall be
glad of your company”.

“Hospitable fellow, with a vengeance”! thought little Rufus. “And I
heard he had some wonderful sherry, and itʼs past my time for a snack.
Serves me right for meddling with other peopleʼs business”.

But while he stood hesitating, and casting fond glances towards the
cottage, Mr. Garnet, without any more ado, passed his powerful long arm
through the little wing of Rufus, and hurried him down the dingle.

“Excuse me, sir, but I have never much time to waste. This, as you
know, is a most busy day, and all the preparations are under my sole
charge. I laugh at the fuss, as a matter of course. But that question
is not for me. Cradock Nowell is a noble fellow, and I have the highest
respect for him”.

“Well, I rather prefer young Clayton. Having brought them both into
the world, I ought to understand them. But I hope he wonʼt make a fool
of himself in this matter we have been talking of”.

Mr. Garnet jerked his companionʼs arm, and his face went pale as
Portland stone.

“Make a d—d rogue more likely. And he wonʼt be the first of his family”.

“Yes, as you say”, replied the doctor to all he could catch of the
muttered words, which flew over the crown of his hat, “beyond all doubt
the first family in this part of the kingdom, and so they must have
their jubilee. But I trust you will use with the utmost caution what
I thought it best to confide to you, under the bond of secrecy. Of
course, I could not think of telling papa, either of lady or gentleman;
and knowing how you stand with the family, you seemed to me the proper
person to meet this little difficulty”.

“Beyond a doubt, I am”.

“Pooh, sir, a boy and a girl. I wonder you think so much about it. Men
never know their own minds in the matter until they arrive at our age.
And as for the chits on the other side—whew, they blow right and left,
as the feathers on their hats do”.

“That is not the case with _my_ family. We make up our minds, and stick
to them”.

“Then your family is the exception, which only proves my rule; and I am
glad that it is not concerned in the present question”.

When they came to that part of the lawn in front of the ancient Hall
where the fireworks’ stage had been reared on a gently–rising mound,
Cradock Nowell met them, with a book in his hand. To–morrow he would be
twenty–one; and a more honest, open–hearted fellow, or a better built
one, never arrived at manʼs estate, whether for wealth or poverty.
He had not begun to think very deeply; indeed, who could expect it,
where trouble had never entered? It is pain that deepens the channel
of thought, and sorrow that sweeps the bar away. Cradock as yet was
nothing more than a clever, fine young man, an elegant and accurate
scholar, following thought more than leading it. Nevertheless, he had
the material of a grand unselfish character—of a nature which, when
perfected, could feel its imperfections. Sorrow and trial were needed
for him; and God knows he soon got enough of them.

He shoved away his Tauchnitz Herodotus in his shooting–coat pocket.
Neither of the men he met was a scholar; neither would feel any
interest in it. Being driven forth by his fatherʼs grumbling at the
little pleasure he showed in the fuss that was making about him, he
had brought his genial, true cosmopolite to show him a thing which his
heart would have loved. Cradock had doubled down the leaf whereon was
described the building of the boat–bridge over the Hellespont. Neither
had he forgotten the interment of the Scythian kings. It was not that
he purposed to instruct the carpenters thence, or to shed any light on
their doings; but that he hoped to learn from them some words to jot
down on the margin. He had discovered already, being helped thereto by
the tongue of Ytene, that hundreds of forcible Saxon words still lurk
in the crafts to which the beaten race betook itself—words which are
wanted sadly, and pieced out very unpleasantly by roundabout foreign
fanglements.

Even the gratitude now due to the good–will of all the neighbourhood,
had failed to reconcile his mind to the turgid part before him. At
Oxford he had been dubbed already “Caradoc the Philosopher”; and the
more he learned, the less he thought of his own importance. He had
never regarded the poor around him as dogs made for him to whistle
to; he even knew that he owed them some duties, and wondered how to
discharge them. Though bred of high Tory lineage, and corded into it
by the twists of habit and education, he never could hang by neck and
gullet; he never could show basement only, as a well–roped onion does.
Encased as he was by strict surroundings, he never could grow quite
straight and even, without a seed inside him, as a prize cucumber does
in the cylinder of an old chimney–glass.

Some of this dereliction sprang, no doubt, from his granulation, and
some from the free trade of his mind with the great heart called “John
Rosedew”.

Now he came up, and smiled, like a boy of fourteen, in Mr. Garnetʼs
face; for he liked Bull Garnetʼs larger qualities, and had no fear of
his smaller ones. Mr. Garnet never liked; he always loved or hated. He
loved Cradock Nowell heartily, and heartily hated Clayton.

“Behind my time, you see, Cradock. I am glad you are doing my duty.—Ha,
there! _I see you, my man_”.

The man was skulking his work, in rigging out with coloured lamps an
old oak fifty yards off. That ancient oak, the pride of the chase, was
to represent, to–morrow night, a rainbow reflecting “Cradock Nowell”.
Young Crad, who regarded it all as ill–taste, if it were not positive
sin, had lifted his voice especially against that oakʼs bedizenment.
“It will laugh at us from every acorn”, he had said to his father.
But Sir Cradock was now a man of sixty; and threescore resents being
budded. The incision results in gum only.

At the sound of that tremendous voice, the man ran recklessly out
on the branch, the creaking of which had alarmed him. Snap went the
branch at a cankered part, and the poor fellow dropped from a height of
nearly forty feet. But the crashing wood caught in the bough beneath,
which was sound and strong, and there hung the man, uninjured as yet,
clinging only by one arm, and struggling to throw his feet up. In a
moment Cradock had seized a ladder, reared, and fixed, and mounted
it, and helped the poor fellow to slide off upon it, and stayed him
there gasping and quivering. Bull Garnet set foot on the lowest rung,
and Rufus Hutton added his weight, which was not very considerable.
A dozen workmen came running up, and the man, whose nerves had quite
failed him, was carefully eased to the ground.

“Mr. Garnet”, said Cradock, with flashing eyes, “would you have walked
on that branch yourself”?

“To be sure I would, after I had looked at it”.

“But you gave this poor man no time to look. Is it brave to make
another do what you yourself would fear”?

“Give me your hand, my boy. I was wrong, and you are right. I wish
every man to hear me. Jem, come to my house this evening. You owe your
life to Mr. Cradock”.

Nature itself is better than the knowledge of human nature. Mr. Garnet,
by generosity quicker than quickest perception, had turned to his
credit an incident which would have disgraced a tyrant. A powerful
manʼs confession of wrong always increases his power. While the men
were falling to work again, every one under the stewardʼs eyes, Sir
Cradock Nowell and Clayton his son came cantering up from the stables.
The dry leaves crackled or skirred away crisply from their horsesʼ
feet, for the day was fine and breezy; the nags were arching their
necks and pricking their ears with enjoyment; but neither of the riders
seemed to be in high spirits. The workmen touched their hats to them in
a manner very different from that with which they received Mr. Garnet
or Cradock Nowell. There was more of distant respect in it, and less of
real interest.

Sir Cradock now was a perfect specimen of the well–bred Englishman at
threescore years of age. Part of his life had been touched by sorrow,
but in the main he had prospered. A man of ability and high culture,
who has not suffered deeply, is apt, after passing middle age, to
substitute tact for feeling, and common sense for sympathy. Mellow and
blest is the age of the man who soberly can do otherwise.

Sir Cradock Nowell knew his age, and dressed himself accordingly.
Neither stiffness nor laxity, neither sporting air nor austerity,
could be perceived in his garb or manner. He respected himself and
all whom he met, until he had cause to the contrary. But his heart,
instead of expanding, had narrowed in the loneliness of his life; and
he really loved only one in the world—the son who rode beside him. He
had loved John Rosedew well and truly for many an honest year; of late,
admiration was uppermost, and love grown a thing to be thought about.
The cause of the change was his own behaviour, and Johnʼs thorough hate
of injustice. That old friend of the family could not keep silence
always at the preference of Clayton, and the disparagement of Cradock.
The father himself could not have told whence arose this preference.
Year by year it had been growing, for a long time unsuspected;
suspected then and fought with, then smothered at once and justified;
allowed at last to spread and thrive on the right of its own existence.
And yet any one, to look at Sir Cradock, would have thought him justice
personified. And so he was, as Chairman of the Quarter Sessions. Clear
intelligence, quick analysis, keen perception of motive in others,
combined with power to dispense (when nature so does) with reason, and
used with high sense of honour—all these things made him an oracle
to every one but himself. Although he had never been in the army, he
looked like a veteran soldier; and his seat on horseback was stiff
and firm, rather than easy and graceful. Tall, spare figure, and grey
moustache, Roman nose, and clear, bright eyes, thin lips, and broad
white forehead—the expression of the whole bespoke an active, resolute,
upright man, not easily pleased or displeased.

As every one was to keep holiday, the farmers had challenged the
Ringwood club to play them a game of cricket, and few having seen a
bat till now, some practice seemed indispensable. Accordingly, while
Bull Garnet was busy among the working men, the farmers, being up for
play, were at it in hard earnest, labouring with much applause and
merriment, threshing or churning, mowing or ploughing, and some making
kicks at the ball. Rufus Hutton looked on in a spirited manner, and
Cradock was bowling with all his might at the legs of a petty tyrant,
when his father and brother rode up between the marquees and awnings.
The tyrannical farmer received a smart crack on the shin, and thought
(though he feared to say) “d—n”.

“Hurrah, Crad! more jerk to your elbow”! cried Clayton, who also
disliked the man; “Blackers, you mustnʼt break the ball, itʼs against
the laws of cricket”.

Grinning sympathy and bad wit deepened the bruise of the tibia, till
Farmer Blackers forgot all prudence in the deep jar of the marrow.

“Boul awai, meester, and be honged to you. I carries one again _you_,
mind”.

To the great surprise of all present there, Sir Cradock did not look at
the speaker, but turned on his son with anger.

“Sir, you ought to know better. Your sense of justice will lead you, I
hope, to apologise to that man”.

He did not wait to see the effect of this public reproof, which was
heard by a hundred people, but struck his mare hastily on the shoulder,
called Clayton, and rode away. Cradock, who now had the ball in his
hands, threw it a hundred feet high.

“Catch it who will”, he said; “I shall bowl no more to–day. Farmer
Blackers, I apologise to you; I did not know you were so tender”.

Feeling far more tender himself (for all that was the youthʼs bravado),
he went away, doubting right and wrong, to his own little room on the
ground floor. There he would smoke his pipe, and meditate, and condemn
himself, if the verdict were true. That young fellowʼs sense of justice
was larger, softer, more deeply fibred, than any Sir Cradock Nowellʼs.




CHAPTER XIV.


Men of high culture and sensitive justice, who have much to do with
ill–taught workmen, lie under a terrible disadvantage. They fear to
presume upon the mere accident of their own position, they dread to
extract more dues from another than they in his place would render,
they shrink from saying what may recall the difference betwixt them,
they cannot bear to be stiff and dogmatic, yet they know that any light
word may be taken in heavy earnest. True sympathy is the only thing to
bring master and man together; and sympathy is a subtle vein, direct
when nature hits it, but crooked and ungrammatical to the syntax of
education. Cradock Nowell often touched it, without knowing how; and
hence his popularity among the “lower classes”. Clayton hit upon it
only in the softer sex. Bull Garnet knew how to move it deeply, and
owed his power to that knowledge, even more than to his energy.

Cradock was pondering these things in the pipe of contemplation, when a
pair of keen eyes twinkled in at the window, and a shrewd, shrill voice
made entry.

“Pray let me in, Mr. Cradock Nowell; I want to inquire about the
grapes”.

“What a wonderful man that is”! said Cradock to himself, as he came
from his corner reluctantly to open the French window; “there is
nothing he doesnʼt inquire about. Erotetic philosopher! He has only
been here some three or four days, and he knows all our polity better
than we do! I wish his wife would come; though I believe he is an
honest fellow”.

Unconscious of any satirical antithesis, he opened the window, and
admitted the polypragmonic doctor; and, knowing that homœopathic
treatment is the wisest for garrulous subjects, he began upon him at
once. Nor omitted a spice of domesticity, which he thought would be
sovereign.

“Now, Dr. Hutton, it is too bad of you to wander about like a bachelor.
How long before we have the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Hutton”?

“My dear boy, you know the reason; I hope you know the reason. Your
roads are very rough for ladies, especially when in delicate health,
and our four–wheel is being mended. So I rode over alone; and what
a lovely ride it is! Ah, Clayton—yes, I saw Clayton somewhere. But
your father has promised most kindly to send a carriage to–morrow to
Geopharmacy Lodge—the name of our little place, sir”.

At the thought of his home, the little doctor pulled up both his
shirt–collars, and looked round the room disparagingly.

“Oh, I am very glad to hear it. Meanwhile, you would like to see our
grapes. Let me show you the way to the vinery; though I cannot take you
without misgivings. Your gardening fame has frightened us. Our old man,
Snip, is quite afraid of your new lights and experience”.

“Sensible lad”, muttered Rufus Hutton, who was pleasantly
conceited—“uncommonly sensible lad! I am not at all sure that he isnʼt
a finer fellow than Clayton. But I must take my opportunity now, while
he has his stock off. There is something wrong: I am sure of it”.

“Excuse me a moment”, said Cradock; “I am sorry to keep you waiting,
but I must just put on my neckerchief, if I can only find it. How very
odd! I could have declared I put it on that table”.

“Whatʼs that I see on the floor there, by the corner of the bookcase”?
Rufus pointed his cane at the tie, which lay where himself had thrown
it.

“Oh, thank you; I must be getting blind, for I am sure I looked there
just now”.

While the young man stooped forward, the little doctor, who had posted
himself for the purpose, secured a quick glimpse at the back of his
neck, where the curling hair fell sideways. That glance increased
his surprise, and confirmed his strange suspicions. The surprise and
suspicion had broken upon him, as he stood by the farmerʼs wicket, and
Cradock sprang up to the bowling crease; now, in his excitement and
curiosity, he forgot all scruples. It was strange that he had felt any,
for he was not very sensitive; but Cradock, with all his good nature,
had a certain unconscious dignity, from which Dr. Hutton retreated.

“The grapes I came to inquire about”, said Rufus, with much solemnity,
“are not those in the vinery, which I have seen often enough, but those
on your neck, Mr. Nowell”.

Cradock looked rather amazed, but more at the inquirerʼs manner than at
his seeming impertinence.

“I really cannot see how the ‘grapes’, as some people call the blue
lines on my neck, can interest you, sir, or are important enough to be
spoken of”.

“Then I do, Cradock Nowell. Do you refuse to let me see them”?

“Certainly not; though I should refuse it to almost any one else. Not
that I am sensitive about such a trifle. You, as a medical man, and an
old friend of my father, are welcome to your autopsy. Is not that what
you call it, sir”?

Nevertheless, from the tone of his voice, Rufus Hutton knew that he
liked it not—for it was a familiarity, and seemed to the youth a
childish one.

“Sit down, young man, sit down”, said the doctor, very pompously, and
waiving further discussion. “I am not—I mean to say you are taller than
when I first—ah, yes, manipulated you”.

As the doctor warmed to his subject, he grew more and more
professional, and perhaps less gentlemanly, until his good feelings
came into play, for his heart, after all, was right. All the terms
which he used shall not be repeated, because of their being so medical.
Only this, that he said at last, after a long inspection—

“Sir, this confirms to a nicety my metrostigmatic theory”.

“Dr. Hutton, I know not what you mean, neither do I wish to know”.

Cradock put on his neckerchief anyhow, and walked to his chair by
the mantelpiece, although no fire was burning. The medical man said
nothing, but gravely looked out of the window. Presently the young
gentleman felt that he was not acting hospitably.

“Excuse me, sir, if I have seemed rude; but you do not know how these
things——I mean, when I think of my mother. Let me ring for some sherry
and sandwiches; you have had no lunch”.

“Ring for some brandy, my boy; and give me a cheroot. Fine property!
Look at the sweep of the land—and to think of losing it all”!

Instead of ringing, Cradock went and fetched the cognac himself, and
took down a glass from a cupboard.

“Two glasses, my dear boy, two”.

“No, sir; I never touch it”.

“Then take it now, for the first time. Here, let me feel your pulse”.

“Once for all, I beg you to tell me what is all this mystery? Do you
think I am a child”?

“Fill your pipe again, while I light a cigar”.

Cradock did as he was told, although with trembling hands. Rufus Hutton
went for a wine–glass, filled it with brandy, and pushed it across,
then gulped down half a tumblerful; but Cradock did not taste his.

“Now, my boy, can you bear some very bad news indeed”?

“Anything better than this suspense. I have heard some bad news lately,
which has seasoned me for anything”.

He referred to Amy Rosedew.

“It is this. You are not your fatherʼs heir; you are only the younger
son”.

“Is that all”?

“All! Isnʼt that enough? Good God! What more would you have?—you donʼt
deserve brandy”.

“My father will be glad, and so will Clayton, and—perhaps one other.
But I donʼt mean to say that I am”.

“I should rather fancy not. But you take it most philosophically”!

Dr. Hutton gazed at the poor young fellow in surprise and admiration,
trying vainly to make him out. Then he reached over to Cradockʼs elbow,
took his glass of cognac, and swallowed it.

“This has upset me, my boy, more than you. How miserable I felt about
it! But perhaps you place no faith in the assertion I have made”?

“Indeed, it has quite amazed me; and I have had no time to think of it.
My head seems spinning round. Please to say no more just for a minute
or two, unless you find it uncomfortable”.

He leaned back in his chair, and tried to think, but could not.

Rufus Hutton said nothing. In spite of all his experience, the scene
was very strange to him; and he watched it out with interest, which
deepened into strong feeling.

“Now, Dr. Hutton”, said the youth, trying to look as he thought he
ought, though he could not keep the tears back, “I beg you to think of
me no more. Let us have the strictest justice. I have not known you so
long—so long as you have known me—but I feel that you would not say
what you have said, without the strongest evidence”.

“Confound me for a meddlesome fool! My dear boy, no one has heard us.
Let us sink the matter entirely. Least said, soonest mended”.

“What do you mean? Do you think for a moment that I would be a
blackguard”?

“Hush!—donʼt get so excited. Why, you look as fierce as Bull Garnet.
All I mean is—you know the old saying—ʼQuieta non movere’”.

“The motto of fools and dastards. ‘Have it out’, is an Englishmanʼs
rule. No sneaking tricks for me, sir. Oh, what a fool I am! I beg your
pardon with all my heart; you will make allowances for me. Instead of
being rude, I ought to be grateful for kindness which even involves
your honour”.

And he held out his hand to the doctor.

“Crad, my dear boy”, exclaimed Mr. Hutton, with a big tear twinkling in
each little eye, “the finest thing I ever did was showing you to the
daylight. If I rob you of what has appeared your birthright, curse all
memorandum–books, and even my metrostigmatic treatise, which I fully
meant to immortalize me”.

“And so I hope it may do. I am not so calm as I ought to be. Somehow
a fellow canʼt be, when he is taken off the hooks so. I know you
will allow for this; I beg you to allow for nothing else, except a
gentlemanʼs delicacy. Give me your reasons, or not, as you like. The
matter will be for my father”.

Cradock looked proud and beautiful. But the depth of his eyes was
troubled. A thousand thoughts were moving there, like the springs that
feed a lake.

“Hah, ho, very hard work”! said Rufus Hutton, puffing; “I vote that we
adjourn. I do love the open air so, ever since I took to gardening”.

Rufus Hutton hated “sentiment”, but he could not always get rid of it.




CHAPTER XV.


On the morning of that same day, our Amy at her fatherʼs side, in the
pretty porch of the Rectory, uttered the following wisdom: “Darling
Papples, Papelikidion—is there any other diminutivicle half good enough
for you, or stupid enough for me?—my own father (thatʼs best of all),
you must not ride Coræbus to–day”.

“Amy amata, peramata a me, aim of my life, amicula, in the name of
sweet sense, why not”?

“Because, pa, he has had ten great long carrots, and my best hat full
of new oats; and I know he will throw you off”.

“Scrupulum injecisti. I shouldnʼt like to come off to–day. And
it rained the night before last”. So said the rector, proudly
contemplating a pair of new kerseymeres, which Channing the clerk had
made upon trial. “Nevertheless, I think that I have read enough on the
subject to hold on by his mane, if he does not kick unreasonably. And
if he gives me time to soothe him—that horse is fond of Greek—and,
after all, the ground is soft”.

“No, dad, I donʼt think it is prudent. And you wonʼt have me there, you
know”.

“My own pet, that is too true. And with all your knowledge of riding!
Why, my own seems quite theoretical by the side of yours. And yet I
have kept my seat under very trying circumstances. You remember the
time when Coræbus met the trahea”?

“Yes, pa; but he hadnʼt had any oats; and I was there to advise you”.

“True, my child, quite true. But I threw my equilibrium just as a
hunter does. And I think I could do it again. I bore in mind what
Xenophon says——”

“Pa, here he is! And he does look so fat, I know he will be restive”.

“Prepare your Aunt Doxyʼs mind, my dear, not to scold more than she
can help, in case of the worst—I mean, if the legs of my trousers want
rubbing. How rash of me, to be sure, to have put them on to–day! Prius
dementat. I trust sincerely—and old Channing is so proud of them, and
he says the cut is so fashionable. Nevertheless, I heard our Clayton,
as he went down the gravelwalk, treating, with what he himself would
have called ‘colores orationis’, upon Uncle Johnʼs new bags; _θύλακοι_,
I suppose he meant, as opposed to _ἀναξυρίδες_. I was glad that the
subject possessed so lively an interest for him; notwithstanding
which, I was very glad Mr. Channing did not hear him”.

“The impudence! Well, I am astonished. And to see the things he brought
back from Oxford—quince–coloured, with a stripe that wide, like one of
my fancy gourds. Iʼll be sure to have it out with him. No, I canʼt,
though; I forgot”. And Amy looked down with a rosy smile, remembering
the delicacy of the subject. “But I am quite sure of one thing, pa: Mr.
Cradock would never have done it. Ræbus, donʼt kick up the gravel. Do
you suppose we can roll every day? Oh, you are so fat, you darling”!

“When the sides are deep”, said the rector, quoting from Xenophon, “and
somewhat protuberant at the stomach, the horse is generally more easy
to ride. What a comfort, Amy! Stronger, moreover, and more capable of
enjoying food”.

“He has enjoyed a rare lot this morning. At least I hope you have, you
sweetest. Why, pa, I declare you are whistling”!

“It also behoves a horseman to know that it is a time–honoured precept
to soothe the steed by whistling, and rouse him by a sharp sound made
between the tongue and the palate”.

“Oh, father, donʼt do that. Promise me now, dear, wonʼt you”?

“I will promise you, my child, because I donʼt know how to do it. I
tried very hard last Wednesday, and only produced a guttural. But I
think I shall understand it, after six or seven visiting days. At
least, if the air is sharp”.

“No, pa, I hope you wonʼt. It would be so reckless of you; and I know
you will get a sore throat”.

“Sweet of my world, cor cordium, you have wrapped me with three
involucres tighter than any hazel–nut. They will all go into my pocket
the moment I am round the corner”.

“No, daddy, you wonʼt be so cruel. And after the rime this morning!
Ræbus will tell if you do. Wonʼt you now, my pretty”?

Coræbus was a handsome pony, but not a handsome doer. He could go at
a rare pace when he liked, but he did not often like it. His wind was
short, and so was his temper, and he looked at things unpleasantly.
Perhaps he had been disappointed in love in the tenderness of his
youth. Nevertheless he had many good points, and next to himself loved
Amy. He would roll his black eyes, put his nose to her lips, and almost
leave oats to look at her. His colour varied sensitively according
to the season. In the height of summer, a dappled bay; towards the
autumnal equinox, a tendency to nuttiness; then a husky bristle of
deepest brown flaked with hairs of ginger; after the clips a fine
mouse–colour, with a spirited sense of nakedness, fierce whiskers, and
a love of buck jumps. Then ere the blessed Christmas–tide, nature began
to blanket him with a nap the colour of black frost; and so through
the grizzle of spring he came round to his proper bay once more. Amy
declared she could tell every month by the special hue of Coræbus; but,
albeit she was the most truthful of girls, her heart was many degrees
too warm for her lips to be always at dew–point.

Both in the stable and out of it, that pony had a bluff way with his
heels, which none but himself thought humorous. He never meant any
harm, however—it was only his mode of expressing himself; and he
liked to make a point when he felt his new shoes tingling. But as for
kicking his Amy, he was not quite so low as that. He would not even
jump about, when she was on his back, more than was just the proper
thing to display her skill and figure. “Oh, you sad Coræby”, always
brought him to sadness; and he expected a pat from her little gloved
hand, and cocked his tail with dignity the moment he received it.
Nevertheless, for her father, the rector of the parish, he entertained,
when the oats were plentiful, nonconformist sentiments, verging almost
upon scepticism. He liked him indeed, as the whole world must; he even
admired his learning, and turned up his eyes at the Greek; but he
was not impressed, as he should have been, by the sacerdotal office.
Fatal defect of all, he knew that the rector could not ride. John
Rosedew was a reasoning man, and uncommonly strong in the legs, but a
great deal too philosophical to fit himself over a horse well. He had
written a treatise upon the Pelethronian Lapiths (which he could never
be brought to read before a learned society), he knew all about the
Olympics and Pythics, and Xenophon gave him a text–book; but, for all
that, he never put his feet the right way into the stirrups.

“Look at him now”, said John, as the boy led the pony up and down,
while Amy was knotting the mufflers so that they never might come
undone again; “how beautifully Xenophon describes him! ‘When the horse
is excited to assume that artificial air which he adopts when he is
proud, he then delights in riding, becomes magnificent, terrific,
and attracts attention!’ And again, ‘persons beholding such a horse
pronounce him generous, free in his motions, fit for military exercise,
high–mettled, haughty, and both pleasant and terrible to look on’.
Pleasant, I suppose, for other people, and terrible for the rider. But
why our author insists so much upon the horse being taught to ‘rear
gracefully’, I am not horseman enough as yet to understand. It has
always appeared to me that Coræbus rears too much already. And then
the direction—ʼbut if after riding, and copious perspiration, and when
he has reared gracefully, he be relieved immediately both of the rider
and reins, there is little doubt that he will spontaneously advance
to rear when necessary’. What does that mean, I ask you? I never find
it necessary, except, indeed, when the little girls jump up and pull
my coat–tails, in their inquisition for apples, and then I am always
afraid that they may suffer some detriment. But let us not overtask
his patience; here he comes again. Jem, my boy, lead him up to the
chair”.

“Any jam in your pocket, father”?

“No, my child, not any. Your excellent Aunt Eudoxia has it all under
lock and key. Now I will mount according to Xenophon, though I do not
find that he anywhere prescribes a Windsor chair. ‘When he has well
prepared himself for the ascent, let him support his body with his left
hand, and stretching forth his right hand let him leap on horseback,
and when he mounts thus he will not present an uncomely spectacle to
those behind. There, I am up, most accurately; excellent horse, and
great writer! And now for the next direction: ‘We do not approve of the
same bearing a man has in a carriage, but that an upright posture be
observed, with the legs apart’”.

“How could they be otherwise, pa, when the horse is between them”?

“Your criticisms are rash, my child. Jem, how dare you laugh, sir? I
will buy a pair of spurs, I declare, the next time I go to Ringwood.
Good–bye, darling; Aunt Doxy will take you up to the park, when the sun
comes out, to see all the wonderful doings. I shall be home in time to
dress for the dinner at the Hall”.

Sweet Amy kissed her hand, and curtseyed—as she loved to do to her
father; and, after two or three wayward sallies (repressed by Jem with
the gardening broom), Coræbus pricked his little ears, and shook
himself into a fair jog–trot. So with his elbows well stuck out, and
shaking merrily to and fro, his right hand ready to grasp the pommel in
case of consternation, and one leg projected beyond the other, after
the manner of a fowlʼs side–bone, away rode John Rosedew in excellent
spirits, to begin his Wednesday parochial tour.

Being duly victualled, and thoroughly found, for a voyage of long
duration and considerable hazard, the good ship “John Rosedew” set sail
every Wednesday for commerce with the neighbourhood. This expedition
was partly social, partly ministerial, in a great measure eleemosynary,
and entirely loving and amicable. There was no bombardment of
dissenters, no firing of red–hot shot at Papists, no up with the helm
and run him down, if any man launched on the mare magnum, or any frail
vessel missed stays. And yet there was no compromise, no grand circle
sailing, no luffing to a trade–wind; straight was the course, and the
chart most clear, and the good ship bound, with favour of God, for
a haven beyond the horizon. Barnacles and vile teredoes, algæ and
desmidious trailers:—I doubt if there be more sins in our hearts to
stop us from loving each other than parasites and leeching weeds to
clog a stout shipʼs bottom. Nevertheless she bears them on, beautifies
and cleanses them, until they come to temperate waters, where the harm
has failed them. So a good man carries with him those who carp and
fasten on him; content to take their little stings, if the utterance
purify them.

The parish of Nowelhurst straggles away far into the depths of the
forest. To the southward indeed it has moorland and heather, with
ridges, and spinneys, and views of the sea, and fir–trees naked and
worn to the deal by the chafing of the salt winds. But all away to the
west, north, and east, the dark woods hold dominion, and you seem to
step from the parish churchyard into the grave of ages. The village and
the village warren, the chase, and the Hall above them, are scooped
from out the forest shadow, in the shape of a hunting boot. Lay the
boot on its side with the heel to the east, and the top towards the
north, and we get pretty near the topography. The village scattered
along the warren forms the foot and instep, the chase descending at
right angles is the leg and ankle, the top will serve to represent
the house with its lawns and gardens, the back seam may run as the
little river which flows under Nowelhurst bridge. The shank of the
spur is the bridge and road, the rowel the church and rectory. Away to
the west beyond the toe, some quarter of a mile on the Ringwood–road,
stands the smithy kept by the well–known Roger Sweetland, who can
out–swear any man in the parish, and fears no one except Bull Garnet.
Our sketchy boot will leave unshown the whereabouts of the Garnet
cottage, unless we suppose the huntsman to insert just his toe in
the stirrup. Then the top of the iron rung will mark the house of the
steward, a furlong or so north–west of the village, with its back to
the lane which leads from the smithy to the Hall. And this lane is the
short cut from Nowelhurst Hall to Ringwood. It saves three–quarters of
a mile, and risks a little more than three–quarters of the neck. Large
and important as the house is, it has no high road to Ringwood, and
gets away with some difficulty even towards Lyndhurst or Lymington.
Bull Garnet was always down upon the barbarity of the approaches, but
Sir Cradock never felt sore on the subject, save perhaps for a week
at Christmas–tide. He had never been given to broad indiscriminate
hospitality, but loved his books and his easy–chair, and his friend of
ancient standing.

The sun came out and touched the trees with every kind of gilding,
as John Rosedew having done the village, and learned every gammerʼs
alloverishness, and every gafferʼs rheumatics, drew the snaffle upon
Coræbus longside of Job Smithʼs pigsty, and plunged southward into
the country. He saw how every tree was leaning forth its green with
yellowness; even proud of the novelty, like a child who has lost his
grandmother. And though he could not see very far, he observed a little
thing which he had never noticed before. It was that while the other
trees took their autumn evenly, the elm was brushed with a flaw of
gold while the rest of the tree was verdure. A single branch would
stand forth from the others, mellow against their freshness, like a
harvest–sheaf set up perhaps on the foreground of a grass–plot. The
rector thought immediately of the golden spray of Æneas, and how the
Brazilian manga glistens in the tropic moonlight. Then soothing his
pony with novel sounds, emulous of equestrianism, he struck into a
moorland track leading to distant cottages. Thence he would bear to the
eastward, arrive at his hostel by one oʼclock, visit the woodmen, and
home through the forest, with the evening shadows falling.




CHAPTER XVI.


Beside the embowered stream that forms the eastern verge of the chase,
young Cradock Nowell sat and gazed, every now and then, into the water.
Through a break in the trees beyond it, he could see one chimney–top
and a streak of the thatch of the Rectory. In vain he hoped that Dr.
Hutton would leave him to himself; for he did not wish to go into the
proofs, but to meditate on the consequences. Some bitterness, no doubt,
there was in the corner of his heart, when he thought of all that
Clayton now had to offer Amy Rosedew. He had lately been told, as a
mighty secret, something which grieved and angered him; and the more,
that he must not speak of it, as his straightforward nature urged him.
The secret was that innocent Amy met his brother Clayton, more than
once, in the dusk of the forest, and met him by appointment. It grieved
poor Cradock, because he loved Amy with all his unchangeable heart;
it angered him, because he thought it very mean of Clayton to take
advantage of one so young and ignorant of the world. But never until
the present moment, as he looked at the homely thatch in the distance,
and the thin smoke curling over it, had it occurred to his honest mind,
that his brother might not be like himself—that Clayton might mean ill
by the maiden.

And now for the moment it seemed more likely, as he glanced back at
the lordly house, commanding the country for miles around, and all
that country its fief and its thrall, and now the whole destined for
Clayton. He thought of the meanness about the Ireland, and two or
three other little things, proofs of a little nature. Then he gazed at
the Rectory thatch again, and the smoke from the kitchen chimney, and
seemed to see pure playful Amy making something nice for her father.

“Good God! I would shoot him if he did; or strike him dead into this
water”.

In the hot haste of youth he had spoken aloud, with his fist gathered
up, and his eyes flashing fire. Rufus Hutton saw and heard him, and
thought of it many times after that day.

“Oh, you are thinking of Caldo, because he snapped at me. There are no
signs of hydrophobia. You must not think of shooting him”.

“I was not thinking of Caldo. I hope I did not mean it. God knows, I am
very wicked”.

“So we are all, my boy. I should like to see a fellow that wasnʼt. Iʼd
pay fifty pounds for his body, and dissect him into an angel”.

Cradock Nowell smiled a little at such a reward for excellence, and
then renewed his gaze of dreary bewilderment at the water.

“Now let me show you my tracings, Cradock. Three times I have pulled
them out, and you wonʼt condescend to glance at them. You have made
up your mind to abdicate upon my _ipse dixi_. Now look at the bend
sinister, that is yours; the bend dexter is for the elder brother”.

“Dr. Hutton, it may be, and is, I believe, false shame on my part; but
I wish to hear nothing about it. Perhaps, if my mother were living, I
might not have been so particular. But giving, as she did, her life for
mine, I cannot regard it medically. The question is now for my father.
I will not enter into it”.

“Oh the subjectiveness of the age”! said Rufus Hutton, rising, then
walking to and fro on the bank, as he held discourse with himself;
“here is a youth who ought to be proud, although at the cost of his
inheritance, of illustrating, in the most remarkable manner, indeed
I may say of originating, my metrostigmatic theory. He carries upon
the cervical column a clear impression of grapes, and they say that
before the show at Romsey the gardener was very cross indeed about
his choice Black Hamburgs. His brother carries the identical impress,
only with the direction inverted—dexter in fact, and dexter was
the mark of the elder son. This I can prove by the tracing made at
the time, not with any view to future identification, but from the
interest I felt, at an early stage of my experience, in a question then
under controversy. If I prove this, what happens? Why, that he loses
everything—the importance, the house, the lands, the title; and becomes
the laughing–stock of the county as the sham Sir Cradock. What ought he
to do at once, then? Why, perhaps to toss me into that hole, where I
should never get out again. By Gad, I am rash to trust myself with him,
and no other soul in the secret”! Here Dr. Hutton shuddered to think
how little water it would take to drown him, and the river so dark and
so taciturn! “At any rate, he ought to fall upon me with forceps, and
probe, and scalpel, and tear my evidence to atoms. For, after all, what
is it, without corroboration? But instead of that, he only says, ‘Dr.
Hutton, no more of this, if you please, no more of this! The question
is now for my father’. And he must know well enough to which side his
father will lean in the inquiry. Confound the boy! If he had only
coaxed me with those great eyes, I would have kept it all snug till
Doomsday. Oh what will my Rosa say to me? She has always loved this
boy, and admired him so immensely”.

Perhaps it was his pretty young wifeʼs high approval of Cradock which
first had made the testy Rufus a partisan of Clayton. The cause of
his having settled at “Geopharmacy Lodge” was, that upon his return
from India he fell in love with a Hampshire maiden, whom he met “above
bar” at Southampton. How he contrived to get introduced to her, he
alone can tell; but he was a most persevering fellow, and little
hampered with diffidence. She proved to be the eldest daughter of Sir
Cradockʼs largest tenant, a man of good standing and education, who
lived near Fordingbridge. As Rufus had brought home tidy pickings from
his appointment in India, the only thing he had to do was to secure the
ladyʼs heart. And this he was not long about, for many ladies like high
colour even more than hairiness. First she laughed at his dancing ways,
incessant mobility, and sharp eyes; but very soon she began to like
him, and now she thought him a wonderful man. This opinion (with proper
change of gender) was heartily reciprocated, and the result was that
a happier couple never yet made fools of themselves, in the judgment
of the world; never yet enjoyed themselves, in the sterling wisdom of
home. They suited each other admirably in their very differences; they
laughed at each other and themselves, and any one else who laughed at
them.

“Well, I shall be off”, said Dr. Hutton at last, in feigned disgust;
“you will stare at the water all day, Mr. Cradock, and take no notice
of me”.

“I beg your pardon, I forgot myself; I did not mean to be rude, I
assure you”.

“I know you did not. I know you would never be rude to any one.
Good–bye, I have business on hand”.

“You will be back, Dr. Hutton, when my father returns from his ride? It
is very foolish of me, but I cannot bear this suspense”.

“Trust me. I will see to it. But he will not be back, they tell me,
till nearly four oʼclock”.

“Oh, what a time to wait! Donʼt send for me if you can help it. But, if
he wants me, I will come”.

“Good–bye, my lad. Keep your pecker up. There are hundreds of men in
the world with harder lines than yours”.

“I should rather think so. I only wish there were not”.

Cradock attempted a lively smile, and executed a pleasant one, as Rufus
Hutton shook his hand, and set off upon his business. And his business
was to ride at once as far as the “Jolly Foresters”, that lonely inn
on the Beaulieu–road, at the eastern end of the parish, whereat John
Rosedew baited Coræbus at the turn of the pastoral tour. The little
doctor knew well enough, though he seldom passed that way, how the
smart Miss Penny of former days, Mrs. OʼGaghanʼs assistant, was now the
important Mrs. George Cripps, hostess of the “Jolly Foresters”, where
the four roads met.

Meanwhile, the scaffolds went on merrily under Mr. Garnetʼs care, and
so did the awnings, marquees, &c., and the terraces for the ladies.
The lamps in the old oak being fixed, the boughs were manned, like
a frigateʼs yards, with dexterous fellows hoisting flags, devices,
and transparencies, all prepared to express in fire the mighty name
of Cradock. All the men must finish that night, lest any one lose his
legitimate chance of being ancestrally drunk on the morrow. Cradock
Nowell, wandering about, could not bear to go near them. Those two
hours seemed longer to him than any year of his previous life. He went
and told Caldo all about it; and that helped him on a little.

Caldo was a noble setter, pure of breed, and high of soul, and heavily
feathered on legs and tail. His colour was such a lily white, that
you grieved for him on a wet fallow; and the bright red spots he
was endowed with were like the cheeks of Helen. Delicate carmine,
enriched with scarlet, mapped his back with islands; and the pink of
his cheeks, where the whiskers grew, made all the young ladies kiss
him. His nostrils were black as a double–lined tunnel leading into a
pencil–mine; and his gums were starred with violet, and his teeth as
white as new mushrooms. In all the county of Hants there was no dog to
compare with him; for he came of a glorious strain, made perfect at
Kingston, in Berkshire. Lift but a finger, and down he went, in the
height of his hottest excitement; wave the finger, and off he dashed,
his great eyes looking back for repression. For style of ranging, all
dogs were rats to him, anywhere in the New Forest; so freely he went,
so buoyant, so careful, and yet all the while so hilarious. Only one
fault he had, and I never knew dog without one; he was jealous to the
backbone.

Cradock was dreadfully proud of him. Anything else he had in the world
he would have given to Clayton, but he could not quite give Caldo; even
though Clayton had begged, instead of backing his Wena against him.
Wena was a very nice creature, anxious to please, and elegant; but of
a different order entirely from the high–minded Caldo. Dogs differ as
widely as we do. Who shall blame either of us?

Cradock now leaned over Caldo, with the hot tears in his eyes, and
gently titillating the sensitive part of his ears, and looking straight
into his heart, begged to inform him of the trouble they were both
involved in. “Have they taken the shooting from us”? was Caldoʼs first
inquiry; and his eyes felt rather sore in his head that he should
have to ask the question. “No, my boy, they havenʼt. But we must not
go shooting any more, until the whole matter is settled”. “I hate
putting off things till to–morrow”, Caldo replied, impatiently; “the
cock–pheasants come almost up to my kennel. What the deuce is to
come of it”? “Caldo, please to be frigido. You shall come to my room
by–and–by. I shall be able then to smoke a pipe, and we will talk about
it together. You know that I have never cared about the title and all
that stuff”.

“I know that well enough”, said Caldo; “nevertheless, I do. It gives me
a status as a dog, which I thoroughly appreciate. Am I to come down
from goodly paunches to liver and lights and horses’ heads and hounds’
food? I donʼt think I could stand it. But I would live on a crust a
day, if you would only come and live with me”. And he nuzzled up to his
master, in a way that made his tears come.

Cradock was sent for suddenly. Old Hogstaff trotted across the yard
(wherein he seldom ventured) to say that Sir Cradock Nowell wished
to see his son. Cradock following hastily, with all his heart in his
mouth, wondered at the penny–wort, the wall–rue, and the snap–dragons,
which he had never seen before. Hogstaff tottered along before him,
picking uneasily over the stones, bobbing his chin, and muttering.

Sir Cradock sat in the long heavy room known as the “justice–hall”,
where he and his brother magistrates held oyer of many a culprit.
The great oak table was dabbed with ink, and the grey walls with
mop–shaped blotches, where sullen prisoners had thrown their heads
back, and refused to answer. At the lower end was Rufus Hutton, jerky,
dogmatical, keenly important; while the old man sat at the head of the
table, with his back to the pointed window, and looked (perhaps from
local usage) more like a magistrate than a father. Straight up the long
room Cradock walked, as calmly as if he were going to see where his
quoit was stuck; then he made salutation to his father, as his custom
was, for many bygone fashions were retained in the ancient family.
Sir Cradock was proud of his sonʼs self–command and dignified manly
carriage, and if Dr. Hutton had not been there, he would have arisen to
comfort him. As it was, he only said, with a faint and doubtful smile—

“So, sir, I find that, after all, you are but an impostor”.

Young Cradock was a proud man—man from that day forth, I shall call him
“lad” no longer—ay, a prouder man, pile upon pile, than the father who
once had spoiled him. But his pride was of the right sort—self–respect,
not self–esteem. So he did not appeal, by word or look, to the sympathy
lurking, and no doubt working, in the pith of his fatherʼs heart, but
answered calmly and coldly, though his soul was hot with sorrow—

“Sir, I believe it is so”. His eyes were on his fatherʼs. He longed to
look him down, and felt the power to do it; but dropped them as should
a good son. Although the white–haired man was glad at the promotion of
his favourite, his heart was yearning towards the child more worthy
to succeed him. But his notions of filial duty—which himself had been
called upon to practise chiefly in memory, having seen very little of
his father, and having lost him early—were of the stern, cold order
now, the buckle and buckram style; though much relaxed at intervals in
Master Claytonʼs favour. Finding no compunction, no humility in his
sonʼs look, for a mistake which was wholly of others, and receiving no
expression of grief at the loss of heirship, Sir Cradock hardened back
again into his proper dignity, and resumed his air of inquiry. “I wish
John Rosedew were here”, he thought, and then it repented him of the
wish, for he knew how stubborn the parson was, and how he would have
Craddy the foremost.

Rufus Hutton, all this time, was in the agony of holding his tongue.
He tried to think of his Rosa, and so to abstract himself airily from
the present scene. He had ridden over to see her yesterday, and now
dwelt upon their doings. Rosa was to come to–morrow, and he would go to
fetch his wife in a carriage that would amaze her. Then he met Cradock
Nowellʼs eyes, and wondered what he was thinking of.

“Now, Sir Cradock Nowell, this wonʼt do at all. How long are we to
play fast and loose with a finer fellow than either of us”? Oh, that
hot–headed Rufus, what mischief he did then! “Although I have not
the honour, sir, of being in the commission of peace for this little
county, I have taken magisterial duty in a district rather larger than
Ireland thrown into Great Britain. And I can grow, per acre, thrice the
amount of corn that any of your farmers can”. His colour deepened with
self–assertion, like the central quills of a dahlia.

“We must have you to teach us, Dr. Hutton. It is a thing to be thought
about. But at present you are kindly interested in—in giving your
evidence”.

Even then, if Dr. Hutton, with all his practised acumen, had mixed
one grain of the knowledge of men, he might have done what he liked
with Sir Cradock, and re–established the dynasty; unless, indeed, young
Cradock were bent upon going through with everything. But the only mode
Rufus Hutton knew of meeting the world was antagonism.

“Yes, sir, you may think nothing of it. But I have hunted a thing for
three hundred leagues, and got at it through the biggest liars that
ever stole a white manʼs galligaskins”.

“Thank you, Dr. Hutton”, said Cradock, diverting the contest;
“_λωποδύτης_ is the word you mean. And I fear it applies to me also”.

“Perhaps, young man”, cried Rufus Hutton, “you know more Hindustani
than I do. Translate——”, and he poured out a sentence which I dare not
try to write down. “But, my good fellow, you forget it is we who are
stealing yours”.

“I think”, said Sir Cradock, slowly, and seriously displeased—Good
Heavens! to joke about the succession to the Nowelhurst title and
lands!—“I think, sir, this can hardly be looked upon as evidence. I
always cut short the depositions, sir. As Chairman of the Quarter
Sessions, I always cut short the depositions”.

“And so you wish to cut short, sir, the deposition of your son”. Rufus
laughed at his own bad joke, and expected the others to laugh with him.
It made things worse than ever. Sir Cradock was afraid to speak, lest
he might say anything unseemly to a visitor. The young man saw his
opportunity, and took advantage of it.

“Father, I beg you to let me go. You would not wish me, I am sure, to
be here; only you think it my right to be. If you please, I will waive
that right; I can wholly trust your decision”.

He bowed to his father with cold respect, being hurt at his rapid
conviction, to Rufus Hutton with some contempt and a smile at the
situation. Then he marched down the long room placidly, and whistled
when he was out of it. The next moment he bolted away to his bedroom,
and wept there very heavily.

“Glorious fellow”! cried Dr. Hutton. “But we donʼt at all appreciate
him. Requires a man of mind to do that. And now for Mrs. OʼGaghan”!
Leaving Sir Cradock this speech to digest, he arose and rang the bell
sharply. He felt himself fully invested now with supreme judicial
authority, and he longed to be at the Irishwoman, who had called him a
“red gossoon”.




CHAPTER XVII.


Biddy OʼGaghan was hard at work, boiling down herbs and blessing them,
drying and bottling cleverly, scraping, and picking the cloves out. She
had turned the still–room of the house into her private laboratory; and
she saved all the parish and half of the hundred from “them pisoners,
as called theirselves doctors”. Now, she was one of those powerful
women—common enough, by–the–by—who can work all the better for talking;
and, between her sniffs at the saucepan–lids, and her tests upon the
drying–pans, she had learned that something strange was up, and had
made fifty guesses about it. Blowing the scum and the pearly beads
from a pot of pellitory of the wall (one of her staunch panaceas),
she received a command most peremptory to present herself in the
justice–room.

“Thin was that the way as they said it, Dick? No sinse nor manners
but that! An’ every bit of the blessed while they knowed it for my
bilinʼ–day! Muckstraw, thin, is Bridget OʼGaghan no more count than
a pisonin’ doctor? Hould that handle there, Dick. If iver you stirs
it the bridth of one on your carroty whiskers from that smut on the
firebar, till such time as you sees me agin, Iʼll down with it arl in
your crooked back bilinʼ, and your chilthers shall disinherit it”.

Leaving Dick rooted in trepidation, for she was now considered a witch,
she hurried into her little bedroom; for she had the strongest sense
of propriety, and would not “make herself common”. Then she dashed her
apron aside, and softened the fire–glow from her nose, and smoothed the
creases of her jet–black hair, which curled in bars like crochet–work.
This last she did, with some lubricous staple of her own discovery,
applying it with the ball of her thumb. “The hairs of me head”, as she
always called them, were thick of number and strong of fibre, and went
zig–zag on their road to her ears, like a string of jockeyʼs horses
shying, or a flight of jack–snipes. Then a final glance at her fungous
looking–glass, just to know if she were all right; the glass gave her
back a fine, warm–hearted face, still young in its rapid expression,
Irish in every line of it, glazed with lies for hatred, and beaming
with truth for love. So Biddy gave two or three nods thereat, and knew
herself match for fifty cross–examiners, if she could only keep her
temper.

As she marched up to the table, with her head thrown back, her portly
shape made the most of, and the front of her strong arms glistening,
then dropped a crisp curtsey to Sir Cradock without deigning to notice
his visitor, the little doctorʼs experience told him that he had caught
a thorough Tartar. All his solemn preparations were thrown away upon
her, though the biggest Testament in the house lay on the table before
him; and a most impressive desk was covered with pens, and paper, and
sealing–wax.

Dr. Hutton would not yet open his mouth, because he wished to begin
augustly. Meanwhile, Sir Cradock kept waiting for him, till Biddy could
wait no longer. Turning her broad back full upon Rufus, who appreciated
the compliment, she made another short scrape to her master, and asked,
with an ogle suppressed to a mince—

“And what wud your honour be pleased to want with the poor widow,
Bridget OʼGaghan, then”?

“Bridget, that gentleman, Dr. Hutton, has made an extremely important
discovery, affecting most nearly my honour and that of the family. And
now I rely upon you, Bridget, as a faithful and valued dependent of
ours, to answer, without reservation or attempt at equivocation, all
the questions he may put to you”.

“Quistions, your honour”? and Biddy looked stupid in the cleverest way
imaginable.

“Yes, questions, Bridget OʼGaghan. Inquiries, interrogations—ah! that
quite explains what I mean”.

“Is it axing any harm, thin, any ondacency of a poor lone widder
woman, your honour wud be afther”? She took to her brogue as a tower
of refuge. Bilingual races are up to the tactics of rats with a double
hole.

“Sir Cradock Nowell”, said Rufus, from the bottom of his chest, “you,
I believe, are a magistrate for this county of Hants, Vice–Lieutenant,
Colonel of Yeomanry, the representative of the sovereign. I call upon
you now, in all these capacities, to administer the oath to this
prevaricating woman”.

The penultimate word rather terrified Bridget, for she never had heard
it before; but the last word of all reassured her.

She turned round suddenly on little Rufus, who had jumped from his
chair in excitement, and standing by head and shoulders above him, she
opened her great eyes down upon him, like the port–holes of a frigate.

“Faix, thin, and I niver seen this young man at all at all. Itʼs
between the airms of the cheer he were, and me niver to look so low for
him! ’Tis the black measles as heʼve tuk, and Iʼve seen as bad a case
brought through with. The luck oʼ the blessed saints in glory! Iʼve
been bilin’ up for the same. If itʼs narse him I can to the toorn of
it, Iʼm intirely at your sairvice, Sir Craduck. I likes to narse a base
little chap, sin’ thereʼs no call to fear for his beauty”.

This last was uttered gently, and quite as a private reflection; but
it told more than all the rest. For ever since Dr. Hutton had married
a woman half his age, he had grown exceedingly sensitive as to his
personal appearance. By a very great effort he kept silent, but his
face was almost black with wrath, as he handed the great book to Sir
Cradock. The magistrate presented it very solemnly to Bridget, who
took it as patly as if it had been a flat iron. A score of times she
had sworn according to what was thought good for her, years ago, in
Ireland. At the right moment of dictation, she gave the book a loud
smack that required good binding to stand it, and then crossed herself
very devoutly, to take the taste away. Of a heretic oath she had little
fear, though she would not have told a big lie to her priest. Then she
dropped her eyes, and chastened her aspect, as if overcome by the sense
of solemn responsibility.

“Bridget OʼGeoghegan”, began the worthy doctor, emphasising slowly
every syllable of her name, and prepared to write down her replies,
“you are now upon your solemn oath, to declare the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth. And if you fail in this, remember,
you will place your precious soul in the power of the evil one”.

“Amin to that same, thin. And more power to yer”.

“Bridget, do you remember the night when your masterʼs children were
born”?

“Sure an’ I do, thin. Unless it wur the morninʼ. How wud I help
remimber it”?

“And do you remember the medical gentleman who was suddenly called in”?

“And if I wur ten times on my oath, I donʼt remimber no gintleman.
A bit of a red–haired gossoon there was, as wor on the way to be
transported”.

“Do you remember his name”?

“Remimber it? Let me see, thin. It wor hardly worth the throuble of
forgittin. Button, or Mutton; no, faix I bʼlieve it wor Rubus Rotten”.

“Well, never mind his name——”

“My faith, and I niver did, thin, nor the little spalpin ayther. But to
my heart I was sorry for the dear, good, beautiful lady—glory be to her
sowl—along o’ that ignorant, carroty, sprawlinʼ, big–knuckled omadhawn.
Small chance for her to git over it”.

“Silence, woman, how dare you”? said Sir Cradock, very angrily.

“And I thought it was arl the truth as yer honour said I was to tell”.
Here Biddy looked hurt and amazed. “Have the little clerk got it all in
black and white”? With a sigh for his incapacity, she peered over the
desk at his paper.

“Now, Mrs. OʼGaghan, no trifling”! Her master spoke sternly and
sharply. But Rufus could not speak at all. He was in such a choking
passion.

“If so be I have said any harm, sir, for the best of us is errowneous,
I axes a humble pardon. Iver since I lose my good husband—and a better
husband there cudnʼt be, barrin only the bellises, and I wudnʼt deny
upon my oath but what I desarved the spout now and thin——”

“Mrs. OʼGaghan”, said Dr. Hutton, trying very hard to look amiable, “do
your best for once, I entreat you, to prove yourself, if there is such
a thing, a _respectable Irishwoman_”.

From that moment the tables were turned. Her temper boiled up like a
cauldron. It is quite of a piece with a thing that is all pieces—the
genuine Irish nature—that, proud as they are of their country, they
cannot bear to be told of their citizenship.

“Irish, thin, is it? Irish indade! Well, and I knows Iʼm Irish. And if
I ainʼt, what do I care who knows I am”?

She flung up her head superbly, and great tears ran from her eyes.
Rufus Hutton perceived his advantage, and, though not at all a mean
fellow, he was smarting far too sharply from the many attacks on his
vanity, to forego his sweet revenge.

“You remember, then, when the doctor gave you the first–born child,
that he made some odd remark, and told you to keep it separate”?

“And how can a poor Irishwoman remimber anything at all”?

“Come, you know very well that you remember that. Now, can you deny
it”?

“Is it likely youʼll catch me deny anything as is a lie, then, Irish or
not, as you plases”? Her bosom still was heaving with the ground–swell
of her injury.

“Well, now, for the honour of old Ireland, tell us the truth for once.
What were the words he said”?

“Save me if evir a bit of me can tell. Mayhap I might call to mind, if
I heerʼd them words agin”.

“Were they not these—ʼLeft to right over the shoulder, and a strapping
boy he is?’”

“Bedad thin, and they might have been”.

“I want to know what they were”.

“How can I tell what they were? I only know what they was”.

“Well, and what was that”?

“Thim very same words as youʼve said”. She turned towards the door with
a sullen air, while he looked at Sir Cradock in triumph. Nevertheless,
he still wanted her evidence as to the subsequent mistake. He had been,
as I said, to the “Jolly Foresters” and seen the Miss Penny of old; who
now, as the mother of nine or ten children, was kindly communicative
upon all questions of infancy.

“So then, Mrs. OʼGaghan, with the best intentions in the world, you
marked the elder child with a rosette, as I saw on the following day”.

“Thrue for you as the Gospel. And what more wud you have me do”?

“Nothing. Only take a needle and thread to it; instead of crimping it
into the cap”.

Poor Biddy started from where she stood, and pressed one hand to her
heart. “Itʼs the divil himself”, she muttered. “as turns me inside out
so. And sure that same is the reason he does be so black red”. Then
aloud, with a final rally—

“And who say they iver see me take a needle and thread? And if I did,
what odds to them”?

“No, that was the very thing you omitted to do, until it was too late.
But when you sent to Mrs. Toaster for her large butter–scales, what was
it you put on each side”?

“What was it? No lining at all. Fair play for the both of them, as I
hope to be weighed in purgatory”.

Sir Cradock was looking on, all this while, with the deepest amazement
and interest. He had not received any hint beforehand of this
confirmative evidence. “And, pray, what was the reason that you wanted
to weigh them at all? You know that it is considered unlucky among
nurses to weigh infants”.

“Why else wud I weigh them, except to see which wur the heaviest”?

“And pray, Bridget, which was the heavier”? asked Sir Cradock, almost
smiling.

“Mr. Cradock, as is now, your honour. Iʼd swear it on my dying bed. Did
you think, then, Iʼd iver wrong him, the innocents as they was”?

“And did you weigh them with rosettes on”? Rufus Hutton had not
finished yet.

“How cud I, and only one got it”?

“Oh, then, you had fastened it on again”?

“Do you think they was born with ribbons on”?

This was poor Biddyʼs last repartee. She lost heart and told everything
afterwards. How she had heard that there was some difference in the
marks of the infants, though what it was she knew not justly; having,
like most Irishwomen, the clearest perception that right and left are
only relative terms, and come wrong in the looking–glass, as they do in
heraldry. How, when she found the rosette adrift, she had done the very
best she could, according to her lights, to work even–handed justice,
and up to this very day believed that the heft of the scales was the
true one. Then she fell to a–crying bitterly that her darling Crad
should be ousted, and then she laughed as heartily that her dear boy
Clayton was in for it.

With timid glances at Mrs. OʼGaghan, like a boyʼs at his schoolmaster,
Jane Cripps came in, and told all she knew, saying “please sir”, at
every sentence. She had seen at the time Dr. Huttonʼs sketch, which was
made without Biddyʼs knowledge, because she never would have allowed
it, on account of the bad luck to follow. And Mrs. Cripps was very
clever now everything was known. She had felt all along that things
went queerly on the third day after the babes were born. She had made
up her mind to speak at the time, only Mrs. OʼGaghan was such—excuse
her—such a disciplinarian, that—that—and then Lady Nowell died, and
everything was at sixes and sevens, and no one cried more violent, let
them say what they like about it, than she, Jane Penny as had been.

“If Sir Cradock thought further evidence needful, there was Mrs.
Bowyer, a most respectable woman, who washed thirty shilling a week,
Mrs. Cripps’ first cousin and comate, who had heard at the time all
about the drawing, and had not been easy about the scales, and had
dreamed of it many times afterwards, as indeed her Aunt Betsy know; and
her husband was no man, or he never would have said to her——”

By this time the shadows came over the room, and the trees outside
were rustling, and you could see them against the amber sunset, like a
childʼs scrawling on his horn–book. Volunteers throughout the household
longed to give their evidence. Their self–respect for a week would
be hostile, if it were not accepted. But Sir Cradock kept the door
fastened, till Mrs. OʼGaghan slipped out, and put all the wenches down
the steps backwards. Mrs. Toaster alone she durst not touch; but Mrs.
Toaster will never forgive her, and never believe the case tried on
its merits, because she was not summoned to depose to the loan of the
scales.

Ha, so it is in our country, and among the niggers also. When wealth,
position, title, even bastardom from princes, even the notoriety which
a first–rate murderer stabs for—when any of these are in question,
how we crowd into the witness–box, how we feel the reek of the court
an aureola on our temples. But let any poor fellow, noble unknown, an
upright man now on the bend with trouble, let him go in to face his
creditors, after the uphill fight of years, let him gaze around with
work–worn eyes—which of his friends will be there to back him, who will
give him testimony?

After all, what matters it except in the score against us? We are
bitter with the world, we make a fuss, and feel it fester, we explode
in small misanthropy, only because we have not in our heart–sore the
true balm of humanity. No longer let our watchword be, “Every man
for himself, and God for us all”, but “Every man for God, and so for
himself and all”. So may we do away with all illicit process, and
return to the primal axiom that “the greater contains the less”.




CHAPTER XVIII.


The rays of the level sun were nestling in the brown bosom of the
beech–clump, and the fugitive light went undulating through the
grey–arched portico, like a reedy river; when Cradock and Clayton
Nowell met in the old hall of their childhood. With its deep
embrasures, and fluted piers, high–corniced mantel of oak relieved
with alabaster figures, and the stern array of pike, and steel–cap,
battle–axe, and arquebus, which kept the stag–heads over against them
nodding in perpetual fear, this old hall was so impressed upon their
earliest memories, that they looked upon it, in some sort, as the
entrance to their lives.

As the twins drew near from opposite doors, each hung back for a
moment: knowing all that had passed that day, how would his brother
receive him? But in that moment each perceived how the otherʼs heart
was; Cradock cried, “Hurrah, all right”! and Claytonʼs arms were
round his neck. Clayton sobbed hysterically—for he had always been
woman–hearted—while Cradock coaxed him with his hand, as if he were ten
years the elder. It was as though the days of childhood had returned
once more, the days when the world came not between them, but they were
the world to each other.

“Crad, I wonʼt have a bit of it. Did you think I would be such a
robber, Crad? And I donʼt believe one syllable of their humbugging
nursery stories. Why, every fellow knows that you _must_ be the eldest
brother”.

“Viley, my boy, I am so glad that it has turned out so. You know that
I have always longed to fight my way in the world, and I am fitter for
it than you are. And you are more the fellow for a baronet, and a big
house, and all that sort of thing; and in the holidays I shall come
every year to shoot with you, and to break your dogs, and all that; for
you havenʼt got the least idea, Viley, of breaking a dog”.

“Well, no, I suppose I havenʼt”, said Clayton, very submissively; at
any other time he would have said, “Oh, havenʼt I”? for it was a moot
point between them. “But, Craddy, you _shall_ have half, at any rate. I
wonʼt touch it, unless you take half”.

“Then the estates must go to the Queen, or to Mr. Nowell Corklemore,
your especial friend, Viley”.

Clayton was famed for his mimicry of the pompous Mr. Corklemore, and
he could not resist it now, though the tears were still in his eyes.

“Haw, yes; I estimate so, sir. A mutually agreeable and unobjectionable
arrangement, sir. Is that your opinion? Haw”! and Clayton stroked an
imaginary beard, and closed one eye at the ceiling. Cradock laughed
from habit; and Clayton laughed because Cradock did.

Oh that somebody had come by to see them thus on the very best terms,
as loving as when they whipped tops together, or practised Sir Roger de
Coverley! They agreed to slip away that evening from the noise of the
guests and the winebibbing, and have a quiet jug of ale in Cradockʼs
little snuggery. There they would smoke their pipes together, and
consider the laws of inheritance. Already they were beginning to laugh
and joke about the matter; what odds about the change of position, if
they only maintained the brotherhood? Unluckily no one came near them.
The servants were gathered in their own hall, discussing the great
discovery; Sir Cradock was gone to the Rectory to meet John Rosedew
upon his return, and counsel how to manage things. Even the ubiquitous
Dr. Hutton had his especial _alibi_. He had rushed away to catch Mr.
Garnet and the illumination folk, that the necessary changes might be
made in the bedizenment of the oak–tree.

Suddenly Clayton exclaimed, “Oh, what a fool I am, Craddy! I forgot a
most important thing, until it is nearly too late for it”.

“What”? asked Cradock, eagerly, for he saw there was great news coming.

“When I was out with the governor to–day, what do you think I saw”?

“What, what, my boy? Out with it”.

“Canʼt stop to make you guess. A woodcock, sir; a woodcock”.

“A woodcock so early? Nonsense, man; it must have been a hawk or a
night–jar”.

“Think I donʼt know a woodcock yet? And Iʼll tell you who saw it, too.
Glorious old Mark Stote; his eyes are as sharp as ever. We marked him
down to a T, sir, just beyond the hoar–witheys at the head of Coffin
Wood; and I should have been after him two hours ago if it had not been
for this rumpus. I meant to have had such a laugh at you, for I would
not have told you a word of it; but now you shall go snacks in him.
Even the governor does not know it”.

“Fancy killing a woodcock in the first week of October”! said Cradock,
with equal excitement; “why, theyʼll put us in the paper, Viley”.

“Not unless you look sharp. Heʼs sure to be off at dusk. Heʼs a
traveller, as Mark Stote said: sailed on from the Wight, most likely,
last night; heʼll be off for Dorset, this evening. Run for your gun,
Crad, your pet Purday; Iʼll meet you here with my Lancaster in just two
minutes’ time. Donʼt say a word to a soul. Mind, weʼll go quite alone”.

“Yes; but you bring your little Wena, and Iʼll take my Caldo, and work
him as close as possible. I promised him a run this afternoon”.

Away they ran, out of different doors, to get their guns and accoutre
themselves; while the poor tired woodcock sitting on one leg, under a
holly bush, was drawing up the thin quivering coverlet over his great
black eyes.

Cradock came back to the main hall first, with his gun on his arm, and
his shot–belt across him, his broad chest shown by the shooting–jacket,
and the light of hope and enterprise in his clear strong glance.
Before you could have counted ten, Clayton was there to meet him; and
none but a very ill–natured man could have helped admiring the pair
of them. Honest, affectionate, simple fellows, true West Saxons as
could be seen, of the same height and figure as nearly as could be,
each with the pure bright Nowell complexion, and the straightforward
Nowell gaze. The wide forehead, pointed chin, arched eyebrows, and
delicate mouth of each boy resembled the otherʼs exactly, as two slices
cut from one fern–root. Nevertheless, the expression—if I may say it
without affectation, the mind—of the face was different. Clayton, too,
was beginning to nurse a very short moustache, a silky bright brown
tasselet; while Cradock exulted rationally in a narrow fringe of young
whiskers. And Vileyʼs head was borne slightly on one side, Cradockʼs
almost imperceptibly on the other.

With a race to get to the door first, the twins went out together, and
their merry laugh rang round the hall, and leaped along the passages.
That hall shall not hear such a laugh, nor the passages repeat it, for
many a winter night, I fear, unless the dead bear chorus.

The moment they got to the kennel, which they did by a way of their
own, avoiding all grooms and young lumbermen, fourteen dogs, of
different races and a dozen languages, thundered, yelled, and yelped at
the guns, some leaping madly and cracking their staples, some sitting
up and begging dearly, with the muscles of their chest all quivering,
some drawing along on their stomachs, as if they were thoroughly
callous, and yawning for a bit of activity; but each in his several way
entreating to be the chosen one, each protesting that he was truly the
best dog for the purpose—whatever that might be—and swearing stoutly
that he would “down–charge” without a hand being lifted, never run in
upon any temptation, never bolt after a hare. All the while Caldo sat
grimly apart; having trust in human nature, he knew that merit must
make its way, and needed no self–assertion. As his master came to him
he stood upon his hind–legs calmly, balanced by the chain–stretch, and
bent his forearms as a mermaid or a kangaroo does. Then, suddenly,
Cradock Nowell dropped the butt of his gun on his boot, and said, with
his face quite altered:

“Viley, I am very sorry; but, after all, I canʼt go with you”.

“Not come with me, Craddy, and a woodcock marked to a nicety! And you
with your vamplets on, and all! What the deuce do you mean”?

“I mean just what I say. Donʼt ask me the reason, my dear fellow; Iʼll
tell you by–and–by, when we smoke our pipes together. Now I beg you, as
an especial favour, donʼt lose a moment in arguing. Go direct to the
mark yourself, and straight powder to you! Iʼll come and meet you in an
hourʼs time in the spire–bed by the covert”.

“Crad, itʼs no good to argue with you; that I have known for ages.
Mind, the big–wigs donʼt dine till seven oʼclock, so you have plenty of
time to come for me. But I am so sorry I shanʼt have you there to wipe
my eye as usual. Nevertheless, Iʼll bring home Bill Woodcock; and what
will you say to me then, my boy? Ta, ta; come along, Wena, wonʼt we
astonish the natives? But I wish you were coming with me, Crad”.

The brothers went out at the little gate, and there Cradock stopped and
watched the light figure hurrying westward over the chase, taking a
short cut for the coverts. Clayton would just carry down the spinney,
where the head of the spring was, because the woodcock might have gone
on there; and if ever a snipe was come back to his home yet, that was
the place to meet him. Thence he would follow the runnel, for about a
third of a mile, down to the spot in the Coffin Wood, where the hollies
grew, and the hoar–witheys. When quit of that coppice, the little
stream stole away down the valley, and so past Mr. Garnetʼs cottage to
the Nowelhurst water beyond the church bridge. Now whether this were
the self–same brook on whose marge we observed Master Clayton last week
walking, not wholly in solitude, is a question of which I will say no
more, except that it does not matter much. There are so many brooks in
the New Forest; and after all, if you come to that, how can the most
consistent of brooks be identical with the special brook which we heard
talking yesterday? Isnʼt it running, running on, even as our love does?
Join hands and keep your fingers tight; still it will slip through them.

When Clayton was gone but a little way over the heather and hare–runs,
his brother made off, with his gun uncharged, for the group still at
work in the house–front. Bull Garnet was there, with Rufus Hutton
sticking like a leech to him; no man ever was bored more sharply, or
more bluntly expressed it. The veins of his temples and close–cropped
head stood out like a beech–treeʼs stay roots; he was steaming all
over with indignation, and could not find a vent for it. When Cradock
came up, Bull saw in a glimpse that he was expected to say something;
in fact, that he ought, as a gentleman, to show his interest, not
his surprise. Nevertheless he would not do it, though he loved and
admired Cradock; and for many reasons was cut to the heart by his
paulo–postponement. So he left Craddy to begin, and presented no notch
in his swearing. His swearing was tremendous, for he hated change of
orders.

“Mr. Garnet”, said Cradock, at last, “I have heard a great deal of
bad language, especially among the bargees at Oxford and the piermen
at Southampton; and I donʼt pretend to split hairs myself, nor am I
mealy–mouthed; but I trust you will excuse my observing, that up to the
present moment I have never heard such blackguardly language as you are
now employing”.

Bull Garnet turned round and looked at him. If Cradock had shown any
sign of fear, he would have gone to the earth at once, for his unripe
strength would have had no chance with Garnetʼs prime in its fury. The
eyes of each felt hot in the otherʼs, as in reciprocal crucibles; then
Mr. Garnetʼs rolled away in a perfect blaze of tears. He dashed out his
hand and shook Cradockʼs mightily, quite at the back of the oak–tree;
then he patted him on the shoulders, to resume his superiority; and
said:

“My boy, I thank you”.

“Well”, thought Cradock, “of all the extraordinary fellows I ever came
across, you are the most extraordinary. And yet it is quite impossible
to doubt your perfect sincerity, and almost impossible to call in
question your sanity”.

These reflections of Master Cradock were not so lucid as usual. At
least he made a false antithesis. If it had been possible to doubt
Mr. Garnetʼs sincerity, he would not have been by any means so
extraordinary as he was.

“Not much trouble, after all”, cried Rufus Hutton, rollicking up like
a man of thrice his true cubic capacity; “ah, these things are simple
enough for a man with a little _νοῦς_. I shall explain the whole
process to Mrs. Hutton, she is so fond of information. Never saw a
firework before, sir—at least, I mean the machinery of them—and now I
understand it thoroughly; much better, indeed, than the foreman does.
Did not I hear you say so, George”?

“Eh, my mon, I deed so”—the foreman was a shrewd, dry Scotchman—“in
your own opeenion mainly. But ye havena peyed us yet, my mon, for the
dustin’ o’ your shoon”.

Rufus Hutton began, amid some laughter, to hunt his French purse for
the siller, when the foreman leaped up as if he were shot, and dashed
behind the oak–tree. “Awa, mon, awa, if ye value your life! Dinna ye
see the glue–pot burstinʼ”?

Rufus dropped the purse, and fled for his life, and threw himself flat,
fifty yards away, that the explosion might pass over him. Even then,
when the laugh was out, and Mr. Garnet had said to him, “Perhaps, sir,
you will explain that process for the benefit of Mrs. Hutton”, instead
of being disconcerted he was busier than ever, and took Mr. Garnet
aside some little way down the chase.

“They want to make a job of it, I can see that well enough. To charge
for it, sir; to charge for it”.

“Thank you for your advice, Dr. Hutton”, replied Bull Garnet, crustily;
he was very morose that afternoon, and surly betwixt his violence;
“but perhaps you had better leave them to me, for fear of the glue–pot
bursting”.

“Ah, I suppose I shall never hear the last of that most vulgar
pleasantry. But I tell you they canʼt see it, or else it is they wonʼt.
They are determined to do it all over again, and they need only change
four letters, and the fixings all come in again. For the R they should
put an L, for the D a Y——Bless my soul, Mr. Garnet, what is it you see
there”?

No wonder Rufus Hutton asked what Mr. Garnet saw, for the stewardʼs
eyes were fixed intently, wrathfully, ferociously, upon something
not very far from the place where his home lay among the trees. His
forehead rolled in three heavy furrows, deep and red at the bottom,
his teeth were set hard, and the muscles of his shoulders swelled as
he clenched his hands fast. Dr. Hutton, gazing in the same direction,
could see only trees and heather. “What is it you see there, Mr.
Garnet”? Rufus Hutton by this time was quivering with curiosity.

“Iʼd advise you, sir, not to ask me”: then he added, in a different
tone, “the most dastardly scoundrel poacher that ever wanted an ounce
of lead, sir. Let us go back to the men, for I have little time to
waste”.

“Cool fellow”, thought Rufus; “waste of time to talk to me, is it? But
what eyes the man must have”!

And so he had, and ears too. Bull Garnet saw and heard every single
thing that passed within the rim of his presence. No matter what he was
doing, or to whom he was talking, no matter what was afoot, or what
temper he was in, he saw and heard as clearly as if his whole attention
were on it, every moving, breathing, speaking, or spoken thing, within
the range of human antennæ. So a spider knows if even a midge or a
brother spiderʼs gossamer floats in the dewy unwoven air beyond his
octagonal subtlety. From this extraordinary gift of Bull Garnet, as
well as from his appearance, and the force of his character, the sons
of the forest were quite convinced that he was under league to the
devil.

In half an hourʼs time or less, when the dusk come down like wool,
Cradock cast loose his favourite Caldo, and set out for the Coffin
Wood. From habit more than forethought, and to give his dog some
pleasure, there by the kennel he loaded his double–barrelled gun. He
had made up his mind to shoot no more upon his fatherʼs land, until
he had express permission from Sir Cradock Nowell. This was a whim,
no doubt, and a piece of pride on his part; but the scene of that
afternoon, and his fatherʼs bearing towards him, had left some bitter
feeling, and a sense of alienation. This was the reason why he would
not go with Clayton, much as he longed to do so. Now, with some dull
uncertainty and vague depression clouding him, he loaded his gun in
an absent manner; putting loose shot, No. 6, in one barrel, and a
cartridge in the other. “Hie away, boy”! he cried to Caldo, who had
crouched at his feet the while; then he struck off hot foot for the
westward, with the gun upon his shoulder. But just as he started, one
of the lads, who was often employed as a beater, ran up, and said, with
his cap in his hand, in a manner most insinuating—

“Take I ’long of ’ee, Meestur Craduck. Iʼll be rare and keerful, sir”.

“No, thank you, Charley, not this time. I am not even going shooting,
and I mean to go quite alone”.

Poor Cradock, unlucky to the last. Almost everything he had done that
day had been a great mistake; and now there was only one more to come,
the deadliest error of all.

Whistling a dreamy old tune, he hurried over the brown and tufted land,
sometimes leaping a tussock of bed–furze, sometimes following a narrow
hare–run, a soft green thread through the heather.

The sun had been down for at least half an hour, and under the trees
there was twilight; but here, in the open, a tempered brightness
flowed from some yellow clouds still lingering in the west. You might
still know a rabbit from a hare at fifty or sixty yards off. And in
truth both bunnies and hares were about; the former hopping, and
stopping, and peeping, and pricking their ears as the fern waved, and
some sitting gravely upon a hillock, with their backs like a home–made
loaf; the hares, on the other hand, lopping along, with their great
ears drooping warily, and the spring of their haunches gathered up
for a dash away any whither: but all alike come abroad to look for
the great and kind God who feeds them. Then, from either side of the
path, or the sandy brows of the gravel–pit, the diphthong cry of the
partridge arose, the call that tells they are feeding. Convivial and
good–hearted bird, who cannot eat without conversation, nor without
it be duly eaten; no marvel that the Paphlagonians assign you a brace
of hearts. The pheasants were flown to the coverts long ago (they
are fearful of losing the way to bed), two or three brown owls were
mousing about, and a horned fellow came sailing smoothly from the deep
settlements of the thicket, as Cradock Nowell leaped up the hedge,
a hedge overleaning, overtwisting, stubby, and crowded with ash,
rose, and hazel, the fence of the Coffin Wood. Though Caldo had stood
picturesquely at least a dozen times, and looked back at his master
reproachfully, turning the white of his eye, and champing his under
lip, and then dropped as if he himself were shot, when the game sped
away with a whirr, Cradock, true to his resolution, had not pulled
trigger yet. And though the repression was not entirely based upon
motives humane, our Cradock felt a new delight in sparing the lives of
those poor things who have no other life to look to. At least so we
dare to restrict them. So merry and harmless to him they seemed, so
glad that the dangerous day was done, so thankful for having been fed
and saved by the great unknown, but felt, Feeder, Father, and Saviour.




CHAPTER XIX.


Meanwhile Sir Cradock Nowell had found, at the peaceful Rectory, a
tumult nearly as bad as that which he had left in his own household.
In a room which was called by others the book–room, by herself “the
library”, Miss Eudoxia sat half choked, in a violent fit of hysterics,
Amy and fat Jemima doing their utmost to console her and bring her
round. Sir Cradock had little experience of women, and did the worst
thing he could have done—that is to say, he stood gazing.

“Amy”, groaned Miss Eudoxia—“Amy, if you donʼt want to kill me, get him
out of the room, my child”.

“Go, go, go”! cried Amy, in desperation. “Canʼt you see, godpapa, that
we shall do better without you; oh, ever, ever so much”?

Sir Cradock Nowell felt a longing to box pretty Amyʼs ears; he had
always loved his godchild, Amy, and chastened her accordingly. He now
loved Amy best in the world, next to his pet son, Clayton. To tell the
truth, he had bathed himself in the sunset–glow of match–making, all
the way down the chase. Clayton, proclaimed the heir and all that,
should marry Amy Rosedew; what could it matter to him about money,
and where else would he find such a maiden? Then, in the course of a
few more years—so soon as ever there were five, or, say at the most
six children—he, Sir Cradock, would make over the management of the
property; that is, if he felt tired of it, and they were both very
steady. And what of Cradock, you planning father, what of your other
son, Cradock? In faith, he must do for a parson.

Sir Cradock retired in no small flurry, and went to the garden to look
for Jem. Miss Eudoxia became at once unconscious, as she ought to have
been long ago; and thenceforth she would never acknowledge that she had
seen the intruder at all; or, indeed, that there had been one. However,
it cured her, for a very long time, of those sad attacks of hysteria.

This present attack was the natural result of a violent conflict with
Amy, who was not going to be trampled upon, even by Aunt Doxy. It
appears that, early in the afternoon, the good aunt began to wonder
what on earth was become of her niece. Of course she could not be at
the school, because Wednesday was a half–holiday; she was not in the
library, nor in the back–kitchen, nor even out at Pincherʼs kennel.
No, nor even in the garden, although she had a magnificent lot of
bulbs to plant, for which she had saved up ever so much of her little
pocket–money. “Well”, said Miss Eudoxia, who was thirsting for her
gossip, which she always held after lunch—“well, I must say this is
_most_ inconsiderate of her. And I promised John to take her to the
park, and how am I to get ready? Girls are not what they used to be,
though Amy is such a good girl. They read all sorts of trashy books,
and then they go eloping”.

That last idea sent the good aunt in hot haste to Amyʼs bedroom; and
who should be there, sitting by the window, with a small book in her
hand, but beautiful Amy herself.

“Well”! cried Miss Eudoxia, heavily offended; “indeed, I _am_
surprised. So this is what you prefer, is it, to your own auntʼs
conversation? And, I declare, what a colour you have! And panting, as
if you had asthma! Let me see that book this moment, miss”!

“To be sure, Aunt Eudoxia”, said Amy, rather indignantly; “but you need
not be in a pet, you know”.

“Oh, neednʼt I, indeed, when you read such books as this! Oh, what will
your poor father say? And _you_ to have a class in the Sunday–school”!

Of all the grisly horrors produced to make the travellerʼs hair
creep, one of the most repulsive and glaring was in Amyʼs delicate
hand. A hideous ape, with an open razor, was about to cut a young
ladyʼs throat. Chuckling, he drew her fair neck to the blade by her
dishevelled hair. At her feet lay an elderly woman, dead; while a man
with a red cap was gazing complacently in at the window. The back of
the volume was relieved by a ghost, a deathʼs head, and a pair of
cross–bones.

“Well”! said Miss Eudoxia. Her breath was gone for a long while, and
she could say nothing more.

“I know the cover is ugly, aunt, but the inside is so beautiful. Oh,
and so very wonderful! I canʼt think how any one ever could imagine
such splendid horrible things. Oh, so clever, Aunt Doxy; and full of
things that make me tingle, as if my brain were gone to sleep. And I
want to ask papa particularly about galvanizing the mummy”.

“Indeed; yes, galvanizing! and pray does your father know of your
having this horrible book”?

“No; but I mean to tell him, the moment I have got to the end of it”.

“Good child, and most dutiful! When you have swallowed the poison,
youʼll tell us”.

“Poison indeed, Aunt Eudoxia! How dare you talk to me like that? Do you
dare to suppose that I would read a thing that was unfit for me”?

“No, I donʼt think you would, knowingly. But you are not the proper
judge. Why did you not ask your father or me, before you began this
book”?

“Because I thought you wouldnʼt let me read it”.

“Well, that does beat everything. Candid impudence, I call that,
perfectly candid insolence”! Aunt Doxyʼs throat began to swell; there
was weak gorge in the family. Meanwhile, Miss Amy, who all the time had
been jerking her shoulders and standing upright, in a manner peculiarly
her own—Amy felt that her last words required some explanation. She had
her fatherʼs strong sense of justice, though often pulled crooked by
womanhood.

“You know well enough what I mean, aunt, though you love to
misrepresent me so. I mean that you would not let me read it, not
because it was wrong (which it isnʼt), but for fear of making me
nervous. And upon that subject, at least, I think I have a right to
judge for myself”.

“Oh, I dare say; you, indeed! And pray who lent you that book? Unless,
indeed, in your self–assertion, you went to a railway and bought it”.

“That is just the sort of thing I would rather die than tell, after all
the fuss you have made about it”.

“Thank you; I quite perceive. A young gentleman—not to be
betrayed—_scamp_, whoever he is”. It was Clayton Nowell who had lent
the book.

“Is he indeed? I wish you were only half as upright and honourable”.

Hereupon Miss Eudoxia, who had dragged her niece down to the book–room,
with dialogue all down the stairs, muttered something about her will,
that she had a little to leave, though not much, but honestly her
own—God knew—and down she went upon the chair, with both hands to her
side. At the sequel, as we have seen, Sir Cradock Nowell assisted, and
took little for his pains.

After this, of course, there was a great reconciliation. For they loved
each other thoroughly; and each was sure to be wild with herself for
having been harsh to the other. They agreed that their eyes were much
too red now to go and see the nascent fireworks.

“A gentlemanʼs party to–night; my own sweet love, how glad I am!
I ought to know better, Amy dearest; and they have never sent the
goulard. I ought to know, my own lovey pet, that we can trust you in
everything”.

“No, aunty dear, you oughtnʼt. I am as obstinate as a pig sometimes;
and I wish you would box my ears, aunt. I hope my hair wonʼt be right
for a month, dearest aunt, where you pulled it; and as for the book,
I have thrown it into the kitchen–fire long ago, though I do wish,
darling aunt, you could have read about the descent into the Mäelstrom.
I declare my head goes round ever since! What amazing command of
language! And he knows a great deal about cooking”.

James Pottles, groom and gardener, who even aspired to the hand, or
at any rate, to the lips, of the plump and gaudy Jemima, was not at
all the sort of fellow you would appreciate at the first interview.
His wits were slow and mild, and had never yet been hurried, for his
parents were unambitious. It took him a long time to consider, and a
long time again to express himself, which he did with a roll of his
tongue. None the less for that, Jem Pottles was quoted all over the
village as a sayer of good things. No conclusion was thought quite
safe, at least by the orthodox women, until it had been asked with
a knowing look—“And what do Jem Pottles say of it”? Feeling thus
his responsibility, and the gravity of his opinion, Jem grew slower
than ever, and had lately contracted a habit of shutting one eye as
he cogitated. As cause and effect always act and react, this added
enormously to his repute, until Mark Stote the gamekeeper, and Reuben
Cuff the constable, ached and itched with jealousy of that “cock–eyed,
cock–headed boy”.

Sir Cradock found Jem quite at his leisure, sweeping up some of the
leaves in the shrubbery, and pleasantly cracking the filberts which he
discovered among them. These he peeled very carefully, and put them
in the pocket of his stable waistcoat, ready for Jemima by–and–by.
He swished away very hard with the broom the moment he saw the old
gentleman, and touched his hat in a way that showed he could scarcely
spare time to do it.

“What way, my lad, do you think it likely your master will come home
to–day”?

This was just the sort of question upon which Jem might commit himself,
and lose a deal of prestige; so he pretended not to hear it, and
brushed the very ground up. These tactics, however, availed him not,
for Sir Cradock repeated his inquiry in a tone of irritation. Jem
leaned his chin on the broom–handle, and closed one eye deliberately.

“Well, he maight perhaps come the haigher road, and again a maight come
the lower wai, and Iʼve a knowed him crass the chase, sir, same as
might be fram alongside of Meester Garnetʼs house. There never be no
telling the wai, any more than the time of un. But itʼs never no odds
to me”.

“And which way do you think the most likely now”?

“Not to say ‘now’, but bumbai laike. If so be a cooms arly, a maight
come long of the haigher road as goes to the ‘Jolly Foresters;’ and if
a comʼth middlin’ arly, you maight rackon may be on the town wai; but
if he cometh unoosial late, and a heap of folks be sickenin’ or hisself
hath pulled a book out, a maight goo round by Westacot, and come home
by Squire Garnetʼs wai”. Rich in alternatives, Jem Pottles opened the
closed eye, and shut the open one.

“What a fool the fellow is”! said Sir Cradock to himself; “Iʼll try
the first way, at any rate. For if John is so late, I could not stop
for him, with all those people coming. How I wish we were free from
strangers to–night, with all these events in the family! But perhaps,
if we manage it well, it will carry it off all the better”.

Sir Cradock Nowell was in high spirits as he started leisurely for a
saunter along the higher road. This was the road which ran eastward,
both from the Hall and the Rectory, into the depth of the forest. In
all England there is no lovelier lane, if there be one to compare with
it. Many of the forest roads are in fault, because they are too open.
You see too far, you see too much, and you are not truly embowered. In
a forest we do not want long views, except to rejoice in the amplitude.
And a few of those, just here and there, enlarge the great enjoyment.
What we want, as the main thing of all, as the staple feeling, is the
deep, mysterious, wondering sense of being swallowed up, and knowing
it: swallowed up, not as we are in catacombs, or wine–vaults, or
any railway tunnel; but in our own motherʼs love, with God around
us everywhere. To many of us, perhaps to most, so placed at fall of
evening, there is a certain awe, a dread which overshades enjoyment. If
so, it springs in part at least from our unnatural nature; that is to
say, the education which teaches us so very little of the things around
us.

How the arches spring overhead, and the brown leaves flutter among
them! In and out, and through and through, across and across, with
delicacy, veining the very shadows. For miles we may wander beneath
them, and see no two alike. How, for fear of wearying us, after
infinite twists and turns—but none of them contortions—after playing
across the heavens, and sweeping away the sunshine, now in this
evening light they hover, and rustle like the skirts of death. Is
there one of them with its lichen–mantle copied from its neighbourʼs?
Is there one that has borrowed a line, a character, even a cast of
complexion from its own brother rubbing against it? Their arms bend
over us as we walk, we are in their odour and influence, we know that,
like the Magi of old, they adore only God and His sun; and, when we
come out from under them, we never ask why we are sad.




CHAPTER XX.


There is a long, mysterious thrill, a murmur rather felt than heard,
a shudder of profundity, which traverses the woodland hollows at the
sunʼs departure. In autumn most especially, when the glory of trees is
saddening, and winter storms are in prospect, this dark disquietude
moves the wood, this horror at the nightfall, and doubt of the coming
hours. Touched as with a subtle stream, the pointlets of the oak–leaves
rise, the crimped fans of the beech are fluttered, and lift their
glossy ovals, the pendulous chains of the sycamore swing; while the
poplar flickers its silver skirts, the tippets and ruffs of the ivy are
ruffling, and even the three–lobed bramble–leaf cannot repress a shiver.

Touched with a stream at least as subtle, we, who are wandering among
the dark giants, shiver and shrink, we know not why; and our hearts
beat faster, to feel how they beat. The cause is the same both for tree
and for man. Earthly nature has not learned to count upon immortality.
Therefore all her works, unaided, loathe to be undone.

Whether it were this, or his craving for his dinner, that made Sir
Cradock Nowell feel chilled, as he waited under the shuddering trees
for his friend John Rosedew—far be it from me to say, because it
may have been both, sir. And the other cause to which he always
ascribed it—after the event—to wit, a divine afflatus of diabolical
presentiment, is one we have no faith in, until we own to nightmare.
Anyhow, there he was, for upwards of an hour; and no John Rosedew
came up the hill, which Sir Cradock did not feel it at all his duty
to descend, on the very safe presentiment of the distress _revocare
gradum_.

Meanwhile John Rosedew was speeding merrily, according to his ideas
of speed (which were relative to the last degree), along a narrow
bridle–way, some two miles to the westward. It would be a serious
insult—so the parson argued—to the understanding of any man who
understood a horse, and now John Rosedew had owned Coræbus very nearly
nine months, and though he had never owned a horse before, surely by
this time he could set papers in the _barbara celarent_ of the most
recondite horse–logic—or was it dialectics?—an insult it would be to
that Hippicus who felt himself fit now to go to a fair and discuss many
points with the jockeys, if anybody suggested to him that Coræbus ought
to trot.

“Trot, sir”! cried John Rosedew, to an imaginary Hippodamas, “hasnʼt
he been trotting for nearly an hour to–day, sir? Quite an _equus
tolutarius_. And upon my word, I only hope he is not so sore as I am”.
Then he threw the reins over the ponyʼs neck, and let him crop some
cytisus.

“Coræbus, have no fear, my horse, you shall not be overworked. Or
if Epirus or Mycenæ be thy home and birthplace—_incertus ibidem
sudor_—thrice I have wiped it off, and no oaten particles in it; _urit
avenœ_, so I suppose oats must dry the skin. ‘Ad terramque fluit
devexo pondere cervix’, a line not to be rendered in English, even by
my Cradock. How fine that whole description, but made up from alien
sources! Oh how Lucretius would have done it! Most sad that he was not
a Christian”.

A believer was what John Rosedew meant. But by this time he was
beginning to look upon all his classical friends as in some sort
Christians, if they only believed in their own gods. Wherein, I fear,
he was far astray from the text of one of the Articles.

Cob Coræbus by this time knew his master thoroughly; and exercising
his knowledge cleverly, made his shoes last longer. If the weather
felt muggy and “trying”—from an equine view of probation—if the road
was rough and against the grain, even if the forest–fly came abroad
upon business, Coræbus used (in sporting parlance) to “shut up”
immediately. This he did, not in a defiant tone, not in a mode to
provoke antagonism; he was far too clever a horse for that; but with
every appearance of a sad conviction that his master had no regard
for him. At this earnest appeal to his feelings, John Rosedew would
dismount in haste, and reflect with admiration upon the weeping steeds
of Achilles, or the mourning horse of Mezentius, while he condemned
with acrimony the moral conveyed by a song he had heard concerning
the “donkey wot wouldnʼt go”. Then he would loosen the girths, and,
remonstrating with Coræbus for his want of self–regard, carefully wipe
with his yellow silk pocket–handkerchief first all the accessible parts
of the cob that looked at all uncomfortable, and then his own capacious
forehead. This being done, he would search around for a juicy mouthful
of grass, or dive for an apple or slice of carrot—Coræbus at the same
time diving nasally—into the depths of his black coat pocket, where
he usually discovered his lunch, which he had altogether forgotten.
While the horse was discussing this little refreshment, John would put
his head on one side, and look at him very knowingly, revolving in his
mind a question which very often presented itself, whether Coræbus were
descended from Corytha or Hirpinus.

However this may have been—and from his “staying qualities” one would
have thought him rather a chip from the old block of Troy—he was the
first horse good John Rosedew had ever called his own; and he loved and
admired him none the less for certain calumnies spread by the envious
about seedy–toes, splints, and spavins. Of these crimes, whatever they
might be, the parson found no mention in Xenophon, Pliny, or Virgil,
and he was more than half inclined to believe them clumsy modern
figments. As for the incontestable fact that Coræbus began to whistle
when irrationally stimulated beyond his six miles an hour, why, that
John Rosedew looked upon as a classical accomplishment, and quoted a
line from Theocritus. Very swift horses were gifted with this peculiar
power, for the safety of those who would otherwise be the victims
of their velocity, even as the express train always whistled past
Brockenhurst station.

After contemplating the animal till admiration was exhausted, and
wondering why some horses have hairy, while others have smooth ankles,
he would refresh himself with a reverie about the Numidian cavalry;
then declaring that Jem Pottles was “impolitiæ notandus”, he would pass
his arm through the bridle, and calling to mind the Pæon young lady who
unduly astonished Darius, pull an old book from some inner pocket, and
stroll on, with Coræbus sniffing now and then at his hat–brim.

To any one who bears in mind what a punctual body Time is, this
account of the rectorʼs doings will make it not incredible that he
was often late for dinner. But he never lost reckoning altogether in
his circumnavigation, because his leisure did not begin till he had
passed the “Jolly Foresters”; for there he must be by a certain hour,
or Coræbus would feel aggrieved, and so would Mrs. Cripps, who always
looked for him at or about 1.30 P.M. For some mighty fine company
was to be had by a horse who could behave himself, in the stable
of the “Jolly Foresters”, about middle–day on a Wednesday. Several
high–stepping buggy–mares, one or two satirical Broughamites, even
some nags who gave a decided tone to the neighbourhood, silver–hamed
Clevelands, and champ–the–bit Clydesdales: even these were not too
proud—that they left for vulgarian horses—to snort and blow hard at
the “Forestersʼ” oats, and then eat them up like winking. To this
select circle our own Coræbus had been admitted already, and his
conversational powers admired, when he had produced an affidavit that
his master was in no way connected with trade.

Coræbus now bade fair to be spoiled by all this grand society. Every
Wednesday he came home less natural, more coxcombical. He turned up
his nose at many good horses, whom he had once respected, fellows who
wandered about in the forest, and hung down their chins when the rain
came! And then he became so affected and false, with an interesting
languor, when Amy jumped out to caress him! Verily, friend Coræbus,
thou shalt pay out for this! What call, pray, hast thou to become a
humbug, from seeing how men do flourish?

John Rosedew awoke quite suddenly to the laws of time and season, as
the hazel branches came over his head, and he could see to read no
longer. The grey wood closed about him, to the right hand and to the
left; the thick shoots of the alder, the dappled ash, and the osier,
hustled among the taller trees whose tops had seen the sunset; tufts
of grass, and blackberry–tangles, hipped dog–roses leaning over them,
stubby clumps of buckthorn, brake–fern waving six feet high where the
ground held moisture—who, but an absent man, would have wandered at
dusk into such a labyrinth?

“ʼActum est’ with my dinner”, exclaimed the parson aloud, when he awoke
to the situation; “and what, perhaps, is more important to thee, at
least, Coræbus, thine also is ‘pessum datum’. And there is no room
to turn the horse round without scratching his eyes and his tail
so. Nevertheless, this is a path, or at one time must have been so;
‘semita, callis, tramesʼ—that last word is the one for it, if it be
derived from ‘traho’ (which, however, I do not believe)—for, lo! there
has been a log of wood dragged here even during a post–diluvial period:
we will follow this track to the uttermost; what says the cheerful
philosopher:—‘_παντοίην βιότοιο τάμοις ὁδόν_’. Surely a gun, nay, two,
or, more accurately, two explosions; now for some one to show us the
way. Coræbus, be of good cheer, there is supper yet in thy _φάτνῃ_,
not _ἐϋξέστῳ_; advance then thy best foot. Why not?—seest thou an
_ἔιδωλον_? Come on, I say, mine horse—Great God!——” And he was silent.

Tired as he was, Coræbus had leaped back from the leading rein,
then cast up his head and snorted, and with a glare of terror stood
trembling. What John Rosedew saw at that moment was stamped on his
heart for ever. Across his narrow homeward path, clear in the grey
light, and seeming to creep, was the corpse of Clayton Nowell, laid
upon its left side, with one hand to the heart, the wan face stark and
spread on the ground, the body stretched by the final throe. The pale
light wandered over it, and showed it only a shadow. John Rosedewʼs
nerves were stout and strong, as of a man who has injured none; he had
buried hundreds of fellow–men, after seeing them die; but, for the
moment, he was struck with a mortal horror. Back he fell, and drove
back his horse; he could not look at the dead manʼs eyes fixed intently
upon him. One minute he stood shivering, and the ash–leaves shivered
over him. He was conscious somehow of another presence which he could
not perceive. Then he ran up, like a son of God, to what God had left
of his brother. The glaze (as of ground glass) in the eyes, the smile
that has swooned for ever, the scarlet of the lips turned out with the
chalky rim of death, the bulge of the broad breast, never again to rise
or fall in breathing—is there one of these changes we do not know,
having seen them in our own dearest ones?

But a worse sight than of any dead man—dead, and gone home to his
Father—met John Rosedewʼs quailing eyes, as he turned towards the
opening. It was the sight of Cradock Nowell, clutching his gun with one
hand, and clinging hard with the other, while he hung from the bank
(which he had been leaping) as a winding–sheet hangs from a candle.
The impulse of his leap had failed him, smitten back by horror; it was
not in him to go back, nor to come one foot forward. The parson called
him by his name, but he could not answer; only a shiver and a moan
showed that he knew his baptism. The living was more startled, and more
startling, than the dead.




CHAPTER XXI.


There was a little dog that crept and moaned by Claytonʼs body, a
little dog that knew no better, never having been taught much. It was a
small black Swedish spaniel, skilful only in woodcocks, and pretty well
up to a snipe or two, but actually afraid of a pheasant on account of
the dreadful noise he made. She knew not any more than the others why
her name was “Wena”, and she was perfectly contented with it, though it
must have been a corruption. The men said it ought to be “Winifred”;
the maids, more romantic, “Rowena”; but very likely John Rosedew was
right, being so strong in philology, when he maintained that the name
was a syncopated form of “Wadstena”, and indicated her origin.

However, she knew her masterʼs name better than her own. You had only
to say “Clayton”, anywhere or anywhen, and she would lift her tangled
ears in a moment, jerk her little whisk of a tail, till you feared
for its continuity, and trot about with a sprightly air, seeking all
around for him. Now she was cuddled close into his bosom, moaning,
and shivering, and licking him, staring wistfully at his eyes and the
wound where the blood was welling. She would not let John Rosedew touch
him, but snapped as he leaned over; and then she began to whimper
softly, and nuzzle her head in closer. “Wena”, he said, in a very low
voice—“pretty Wena, let me”. And then she understood that he meant
well, and stood up, and watched him intently.

John knew in a moment that all was over between this world and Clayton
Nowell. He had felt it from the first glance indeed, but could not
keep hope from fluttering. Afterwards he had no idea what he did, or
how he did it, but the impression left by that short gaze was as stern
as the death it noted. Full in the throat was the ghastly wound, and
the charge had passed out at the back of the neck, through the fatal
grape–cluster. Though the bright hair flowed in a pool of blood, and
the wreck of life was pitiful, the face looked calm and unwrung by
anguish, yet firm and staunch, with the courage summoned to ward death
rather than meet it.

John Rosedew, shy and diffident in so many little matters, was not a
man to be dismayed when the soul is moving vehemently. Now he leaped
straight to the one conclusion, fearful as it was.

“Holy God, have mercy on those we love so much! No accident is this,
but a savage murder”.

He fell upon his knees one moment, and prayed with a dead hand in his
own. He knew, of course, that the soul was gone, a distance thought can
never gaze; but prayer flies best in darkness.

Then, with the tears all down his cheeks, he looked round once, as if
to mark the things he would have to tell of. In front of the corpse lay
the favourite gun, with the muzzle plunged into the bushes, as if the
owner had fallen with the piece raised to his shoulder. The hammer of
one barrel was cocked, of the other on half–cock only; both the nipples
were capped, and, of course, both barrels loaded. The line of its fire
was not towards Cradock, but commanded a little by–path leading into
the heart of the wood.

Meanwhile, Cradock had fallen forward from the steep brow of the
hedge–bank; the branch to which he clung in that staggering way
had broken. Slowly he rose from the ground, and still intent and
horror–struck, unable to come nearer, looked more like one of the
smitten trees which they call in the forest “dead men”, than a living
and breathing body. John Rosedew, not knowing what he did, ran to the
wretched fellow, and tried to take his hand, but the offer was quite
unnoticed. With his eyes still fixed on his twin–brotherʼs corpse,
the youth began fumbling clumsily in the pocket of his shooting–coat;
he pulled out a powder–flask, and rapidly, never once looking at
it, dropped a charge into either barrel. John heard the click of the
spring—one, two, as quick as he could have said it. Then the young man
drew from his waistcoat–pocket two thick patent wads, and squeezed one
into either cylinder. All at once it struck poor “Uncle John” what he
was going to do. Preparing to shoot himself!

“Cradock, my boy, is this all the fear of God I have taught you”?

Cradock looked at him curiously, and nodded his head in acknowledgment.
It was plain that his wits were wandering. The parson immediately
seized the gun, and sowed the powder broadcast, then wrenched the flask
away from him with a hand there was no resisting. Then for the first
time he observed Caldo in the hedge, “down–charging”; the well–trained
dog had never moved from the moment his master fired.

“Come with me at once, come home, Cradock; boy, you _shall_ come home
with me”!

But the man of threescore was not quick enough for the young despair.
Cradock was out of sight in the thicket, and Caldo galloped after
him. Wild with himself for his slowness of wit, John Rosedew ran to
poor Claytonʼs gun, for fear of his brother finding it. Then he took
from the dead boyʼs pocket his new and burnished powder–flask, though
it went to his heart to do it, and leaped upon the back of Coræbus,
without a thought of Xenophon. Only Wena was left to keep her poor
master company.

How the rector got to the Hall I know not, neither has he any
recollection; but he must have sat his horse like a Nimrod, and taken
a hedge and two ditches. All we know is that he did get there, with
Coræbus as frightened as he was, and returned to the place of disaster
and death, with three men, of whom Dr. Hutton was one. Sir Cradock was
not yet come back to his home, and the servants received proper orders.

As the four men, walking in awe and sorrow, cast the light of a lamp
through the bushes, they heard a quick rustle of underwood, and crackle
of the dead twigs, but saw no one moving.

“Some one has been here since I left”, exclaimed John Rosedew,
trembling; “some one has lain beside the body, and put marks of blood
on the forehead”.

Each of the men knew, of course, what it was—Cradock embracing his
brother!

“A good job you took the gun away; wonder you had the sense, though”,
said Rufus Hutton, sharply, to pretend he wasnʼt crying; “I only know
what I should have done, if I had shot my brother so—blown out the
remains of my brains, sir”!

“Hush”! said John Rosedew, solemnly, and his deep voice made their
hearts thrill; “it is not our own life to will or to do with. In the
hands of the Lord are our life and our death”.

They knelt around the pale corpse tenderly, shading the lamp from the
eyes of it; even Rufus could not handle it in a medical manner. One
of the men, who always declared that he had saved Claytonʼs life in
his childhood, fell flat on the ground, and sobbed fearfully. I cannot
dwell on it any more; it makes a fellow cry to think of it. Only, thank
God, that I am not bound to tell how they met his father.




CHAPTER XXII.


Mark Stote, the head–gamekeeper on the Nowelhurst estate, was a true
and honest specimen of the West Saxon peasant—slow, tenacious, and
dogged, faithful and affectionate, with too much deference, perhaps,
to all who seemed “his betters”. He was now about fifty years old, but
sturdy and active as ever, with a weather–beaten face and eyes always
in quest of something. His home was a lonely cottage in one of the
plantations, and there he had a tidy and very intelligent wife, and a
host of little anxieties. His children, the sparrow–hawks, the weasels,
the young fellows who “called theirselves under–keepers, and all they
kept was theirselves, sir”,—what with these troubles, and (worst,
perhaps, of all) that nest of charcoal–burners by the bustle–headed
oak, with Black Will at the head of them, sometimes, Mark Stote would
assure us, his head was gone “all wivvery[1] like”, and he could get no
sleep of night–time.

A mizzly, drizzly rain set in before the poor people got home that
evening with the body of Clayton Nowell. Long mournful soughs of wind
ensued, the boughs of the trees went heavily, and it blew half a gale
before morning; but it takes a real storm to penetrate some parts of
the forest. Once, however, let the storm get in, and it makes the
most of the opportunity, raging with triple fury, as a lion does in a
compound—the rage of the imperious blast, when it finds no exit.

In the grey of the morning, two men met, face to face, in the
overhanging of the Coffin Wood. Which was the more scared of the
two, neither could have said; although each felt a little pleased at
the terror of the other. The one of strong nerves was superstitious;
the other, though free from much superstition, was nervous under the
circumstances. The tall and big man was Mark Stote, the little fellow
who frightened him Dr. Rufus Hutton. The latter, of course was the
first to recover presence of mind, for Mark Stoteʼs mental locomotion
was of ponderous metal.

“What brings you here, Mr. Stote, at this time of the morning”?

“And what brings you here, Dr. Hutton”?

Mark might have asked with equal reason. He wondered afterwards why he
did not; the wonder would have been if he had. As it was, he only said—

“To see the rights o’ my young meester, sir”.

“The wrongs, you mean”, said Rufus; “Mark Stote, there is more in this
matter than any man yet has guessed at”.

“You be down upon the truth of it, my word for it but you be, sir.
Iʼve a shot along o’ both of ’em, since ’em wor that haigh, and seeʼd
how they thought of their guns, sir; Meester Clayton wor laike enough
to shoot Meester Cradock ’xidentually; but never wicey warse, sir, as
the parson sayeth, never wicey warse, sir, for I niver see no one so
cartious laike”.

“Mark Stote, do you mean to say that Cradock shot his brother on
purpose”?

Mark stared at Rufus for several moments, then he thrust forth his
broad brown hand and seized him by the collar. Dr. Hutton felt that he
was nothing in that big manʼs grasp, but he would not play the coward.

“Stote, let me go this instant. Iʼll have you discharged this very day
unless you beg my pardon”.

“That you moy then, if you can, meester. A leetle chap coom fram
Ingy, an’ we bin two hunner and feefty year ’long o’ the squire and
his foregoers”! Nevertheless he let Rufus go, and looked over his hat
indignantly.

“You are an honest fellow”, cried Hutton, when he got his breath again;
“an uncommonly honest fellow, although in great need of enlightenment.
It is not in my nature, my man”, here he felt like a patron, getting
over his shaking, so elastic was his spirit; “I assure you, Luke—ah no,
your name is Matthew; upon my word, I beg your pardon, I am almost sure
it is Mark—Mr. Mark, I shall do my utmost for your benefit. Now talk no
more, but act, Mark”.

“I oodnʼt a talked nothing, but for mating with your honour”.

“Then resume your taciturnity, which I see is habitual with you, and
perhaps constitutional”.

Mark Stote felt sore all over. Dr. Hutton now was the collarer. Mark,
in his early childhood, had been to school for a fortnight, and ran
away with a sense of rawness, which any big word renewed.

“Mr. Stote, I will thank you to search in that direction, while I
investigate this way”.

Mark Stote longed to suggest that possibly Dr. Hutton, being (as you
might say) a foreigner, was not so well skilled in examining ground
as a woodman of thirty years’ standing; and therefore that he, old
Mark, should have the new part assigned to him, before it was trampled
by Rufus. But the gamekeeper knew not how to express it; sure though
he was (as all of us are, when truth hits the heart like a hammer)
that something evil would come of slurring the matter so feebly. But
who are we to blame him?—we who transport a poor ignorant girl for
trying to hide her ignominy, while we throttle, before she can cry,
babe Truth, who should be received in society with a “Welcome, little
stranger”!

With the heavy rain–drops hanging like leeches, or running together, as
they do, at every thorn or scale of the bark, seeking provocation to
come down the nape of the neck of any man, Rufus Hutton went creeping
under, trying not to irritate them, pretending that he was quite at
home, and understood them like a jungle. Nevertheless he repented, and
did not thoroughly search more than ten square yards. The things would
knock him so in the face, and the stumps would stick in his trousers
so, and the drops were so bad for his rheumatism; and, as it was quite
impossible for any man to make way there, what on earth was there to
look for?

In spite of all this, he did find something, and stowed it away in his
waistcoat pocket, to be spoken of, or otherwise, according to the turn
of events. And by this he meant no dishonesty, at least in his own
opinion, only he pitied young Cradock most deeply, and would do all he
could in his favour. At the side of the narrow by–path leading from
that woodmanʼs track (by which John Rosedew had approached) into the
far depth of the thicket, Dr. Hutton found, under a blackberry–bush, a
little empty tube, unlike any tube he had seen before. It was about two
inches and a half in length, and three–fourths of an inch in diameter.
Sodden as it was with the rain, and opened partway along the seam, it
still retained, unmistakably, the smell of exploded powder. It seemed
to be made of mill–board, or some other form of paper, with a glaze
upon the outside and some metal foil at the butt of it. What puzzled
Rufus most of all was a little cylinder passing into and across the
bottom, something like a boot–tag.

Dr. Hutton was not at this time skilled in modern gunnery. He knew
how to load a fowling–piece, and what the difference was between a
flint–gun and a percussion–gun; moreover, he had been out shooting once
or twice in India, not from any love of the sport, but to oblige his
neighbours. So he thought himself both acute and learned in arriving at
the conclusion that this was a cartridge–case.

“Mark, does Mr. Cradock Nowell generally shoot with cartridges”?

“He laiketh mostways to be with a curtreege in his toard barryel, sir”.

“Oh, keeps a cartridge in his left barrel, does he; and fires first the
right, I suppose”?

Leaving Mark to continue the search, Rufus returned to the Hall, after
carefully taking the distances between certain important points.
He was bound, as he felt, to lose no time in making the strictest
examination of the poor youthʼs body. For now, in this great calamity,
the management of everything seemed to fall upon Rufus Hutton. Sir
Cradock, of course, was overwhelmed; John Rosedew, although so deeply
distressed, for the boys were like his own to him, was ready to do his
utmost; but, as every one knew, except himself, he was not a man of the
world. Unluckily, too, Mr. Garnet, always the leading spirit wherever
he appeared, had not yet presented himself in this keen emergency.
But his son came up, in the course of the day, to ask how Sir Cradock
Nowell was, and to say that his father was quite laid up with a violent
bilious attack.

Dr. Hutton worked very hard, kept his mind on the stretch continually,
ordered every one right and left. He even contrived to repulse all the
kindred, to the twentieth collateral, who were flocking in, that day,
to rejoice at the manhood of the heir. From old Hogstaff, who knew
all the family, kith and kin, and friends and enemies, he learned the
names of the guests expected, and met them with laconic missives handed
through the closed gates at the lodges. In many cases, it is to be
feared, indignation overcame sympathy; “upstart insolence”! was heard
through the clatter of carriage–windows, very nearly as often as, “most
sad occurrence”! However, most of them were consoled by the prospect of
learning everything at the inquest on the morrow. What could be clearer
than that Cradock must be hanged for Claytonʼs murder? The disgrace
would kill the old baronet. “And then, it would be very painful, but my
wife would be bound, sir, for the sake of her poor children, to prove
her direct descent from that well–known Sir Cradock Nowell, who shot a
man in the New Forest. Ah, I fear it runs in the family”.

But their wrath was most unphilosophical, unworthy of any moralists,
when they found that Rufus had cheated them all as to the time of the
inquest. In every direction he spread a report that the coroner could
not attend until three oʼclock on Friday, while he had arranged very
quietly to begin the proceedings at noon. And he had taken good care
to secure the presence of all the chief men in the neighbourhood—the
magistrates, the old friends of the family, all who were interested
in its honour rather than in its possessions. As none of the baffled
cousins could solace themselves with outcry that the matter had been
hushed up, they discovered that kind feeling had made the scene too sad
for them.

The coroner sat in the principal room at the “Nowell Arms”; the jury
had been to see the body lying at the Hall, and now were to hear
the evidence. Six or seven of the county magistrates sat behind the
coroner, and their clerk was with them. Of course they did not attend
officially, their jurisdiction being entirely several from that of the
present court. But there could be little doubt that their action would
depend, in a great measure, upon what should now transpire.

The jury was chosen carefully to preclude, so far as might be, the
charge of private influence. They were known, for the most part, as men
of independence and probity, and two of them as consistent enemies to
the influence of the Hall. As for general spectators, only a few of the
village–folk allowed their curiosity to conquer their good feeling, or,
perhaps, I should say their discretion; for all were tenants under Sir
Cradock; and, though it was known by this time that Bull Garnet was
ill and in bed, prostrated by one of his old attacks, everybody felt
certain that he would find out who dared to be present, and visit them
pretty smartly.

It would be waste of time to recount all the evidence given; for we
know nearly all that Dr. Hutton and the clergyman would depose. Another
medical man, Dr. Gall, had also examined poor Claytonʼs remains; and
the healing profession, who cure us (like bacon) after they have killed
us, are remarkable for agreeing in public, and quarrelling sadly in
private life. So Dr. Gall deposed exactly as _Mr._ Hutton had done. He
was very emphatic towards Rufus, in the use of the proper prefix; but
we who know the skill displayed presuppose the game certificate.

One part, however, of the medical evidence ought to be repeated. Poor
Clayton had not died from an ordinary small–shot wound or wounds, but
from a ghastly hole through his throat, cut as if by a bullet. As Dr.
Gall, who knew something of guns, very concisely put it, the hole was
like the hole in a door, when boys have fired, as they sometimes do, a
tallow–candle through it. And yet it was fluted at the exit, in the
fleshy part of the neck, as no bullet could have marked it. That was
caused by the shot diverging, beginning to radiate, perhaps from the
opposition encountered.

“In two words”, said Dr. Gall, when they had badgered him in his
evidence, “the deceased was killed either by a balled cartridge, or by
a charge of loose shot fired within six feet of him”.

“Very good”, thought Rufus Hutton, who heard all Dr. Gall said; “Iʼll
keep my cartridge–case to myself. Poor Crad shanʼt have that against
him”.

Hereupon, lest any mist (which goddesses abound in, _vide_ Homer
_passim_) descend upon the eyes or mind of any gentle follower of
my poor Craddyʼs fortunes, let me endeavour to explain Dr. Gallʼs
obscurities.

Cartridges, as used by sportsmen with guns which load at the muzzle,
are packages of shot compact, and rammed down in a body. Some of
them have spiral cases of the finest wire, covered round with paper;
others, used for shorter distance, have only cylinders of paper to
enclose the shot. The interstices between the shots are solidified with
sawdust. The only use of these things is—for they save little time in
loading—to kill our brother bipeds, or quadrupeds, if such we are, at
a longer distance. The shots are prevented from scattering so widely
as they love to do, when freed from the barrelʼs repression. They
fly in a closer body, their expansive instincts being checked, when
first they leave the muzzle, by the constraint of the case and the
tightness of their brotherhood. But it sometimes happens, mainly with
_wire_–cartridges, that the shot can never burst its cerements, and
flies in the compass of a slug, until it meets an obstacle. When this
is so, the quarry escapes; unless a bullet so aimed would have hit it.
This non–expansion is called, in good English, the “balling” of the
cartridge. And those which are used for the longest distance, and for
wild–fowl shooting—green cartridges, as they are called, containing
larger shot—are especially apt to ball.

Dr. Gall was aware, of course, that no one beating for a woodcock would
think of putting a green cartridge into his gun at all; but it seemed
very likely indeed that Cradock might have used a blue one, for a
longer shot with his left barrel; and the blue ones, having wire round
them, sometimes ball, though not so often as their verdant brothers. It
only remains to be said that when a cartridge balls, it flies with the
force, as well as in the compass, of a bullet. With three drachms of
powder behind it, it will cut a hole at forty yards through a two–inch
deal.

Whether it were a balled cartridge or a charge of loose shot at six
feet distance, was the momentous issue. In the former case, there would
be fair reason to set it down as an accident; for the place where
Cradock had first been seen was thirty yards from Clayton; and he might
so have shot him thence, in the dusk, and through the thick of the
covert. But if that poor boy had died from a common charge of shot,
“Murder” was the only verdict true men could return on the evidence set
before them. For Cradock must have fired wilfully at the open throat of
his brother, then flown to the hedge and acted horror when he saw John
Rosedew. Where was Cradock? The jury trembled, and so did Rufus Hutton.
The coroner repeated the question, although he had no right to do it,
at that stage of the evidence.

“Since it occurred he has not been seen”, whispered Rufus Hutton at
last, knowing how men grow impatient and evil when unanswered.

“Let us proceed with the rest of the evidence”, said his honour,
grandly; “if the young man cares for his reputation, he will be here
by–and–by. But I have ridden far to–day. Let us have some refreshment,
gentlemen. Justice must not be hurried”.




CHAPTER XXIII.


It will have been perceived already that the coroner was by no means
“the right man in the right place”. The legal firm, “Cole, Cole, and
Son”, had been known in Southampton for many years, as doing a large
and very respectable business. The present Mr. Cole, the coroner, who
had been the “Son” in the partnership, became sole owner suddenly by
the death of his father and uncle. Having brains enough to know that he
was far from having too much, he took at once into partnership with him
an uncommonly wide–awake, wary fellow, who had been head–clerk to the
old firm, ever biding his time for this inevitable result. So now the
firm was thriving under the style and title of “Cole, Chope, and Co”.,
Mr. Chope being known far and wide by the nickname of “Coleʼs brains”.
Mr. Cole being appointed coroner, not many months ago, and knowing very
little about his duties, took good care for a time not to attempt
their discharge without having “Coleʼs brains” with him. But this had
been found to interfere so sadly with private practice, that little
by little Cole plucked up courage, as the novelty of the thing wore
off, and now was accustomed to play the coroner without the assistance
of brains. Nevertheless, upon an occasion so important as this, he
would have come with full cerebrum, but that Chope was gone for his
holiday. Mr. Cole, however, was an honest man—which could scarcely be
said of his partner—and meant to do his duty, so far as he could see
it. In the present inquiry he had less chance of seeing it than usual,
for he stood in great awe of Mr. Brockwood, a man of ability and high
standing, who, as Sir Cradock Nowellʼs solicitor, attended to watch the
case, at the suggestion of Rufus Hutton.

Both the guns were produced to the coroner, in the condition in
which they were found, except that John Rosedew, for safetyʼs sake,
had lowered the right hammer of Claytonʼs to the half–cock, before
he concealed it from Cradock. Cradockʼs own unlucky piece had been
found, on the following morning, in a rushy pool, where he had cast
it, as he fled so wildly. Both the barrels had been discharged,
while both of Claytonʼs were loaded. It went to the heart of every
man there who could not think Cradock a murderer, when in reply to a
jurymanʼs question, what was the meaning of certain lines marked with
a watch–spring file on the trigger–plate of his gun, it was explained
that the twins so registered the number and kind of the seasonʼs game.

After this, Mark Stote was called, and came forward very awkwardly
with a deal of wet on his velveteen cuffs, which he tried to keep from
notice. His eyes were fixed upon the coroner, with a kind of defiance,
but even while he was kissing the book, he was glad to sniff behind it.

“Mr. Mark Stote”, said the coroner, duly prompted, “you have, I
believe, been employed to examine the scene of this lamentable
occurrence”?

Mark Stote took a minute to understand this, and a minute to consider
his answer.

“Yees, my lard, I throwed a squoyle at ’un”.

The representative of the Crown looked at Mark with amazement equal at
least to that with which Mark was regarding him.

“Gentlemen”, asked Mr. Cole, addressing the court in general, “what
language does this man talk”?

“West Saxon”, replied Mr. Brockwood, speaking apart to the coroner;
“West Saxon of the forest. He can talk plain English generally, but
whenever these people are nervous, they fall back unconsciously upon
their native idiom. You will never be able to understand him: shall I
act as interpreter”?

“With all my heart; that is to say, with the consent of the jury. But
what—I mean to say, how——”

“How am I to be checked, you mean, unless I am put upon oath; and how
can you enter it as evidence? Simply thus—let your clerk take down the
original answers. All the jury will understand them, and so, perhaps,
will he”.

The clerk, who was a fine young gentleman, strongly pronounced in
attire, nodded a distinct disclaimer. It would be so unaristocratic to
understand any peasant–tongue.

“At any rate, most of the magistrates do. There are plenty of checks
upon me. But I am not ambitious of the office. Appoint any one you
please”.

“Gentlemen of the jury”, said the coroner, glad to shift from himself
the smallest responsibility, “are you content that Mr. Brockwood should
do as he has offered”?

“Certain, and most kind of him”, replied the jury, all speaking at
once, “if his honour was unable to understand old English”.

“Very good”, said Mr. Brockwood; “donʼt let us make a fuss about
nothing. Mr. Stote says he ‘throwed a squoyle;’ that is to say, he
looked at it”.

“And in what state did you find the ground”? was the coronerʼs next
question.

“Twearable, twearable. Dwont ’e ax ov me vor gude now, dwont ’e”. And
he put up his broad hand before his broad face.

“Terrible, terrible”, said the coroner, going by the light of nature in
his interpretation; “but I do not mean the exact spot only where the
body was found. I mean, how was the ground as regards dry and wet, for
the purpose of retaining footmarks”?

“Thar a bin zome rick–rack wather, ’bout a sannit back. But most peart
on it ave a droud up agin. ’Twur starky, my lard, moor nor stoachy”.
Here Mark felt that he had described things lucidly and powerfully, and
looked round the room for approval.

“Stiff rather than muddy, he means”, explained Mr. Brockwood, smiling
at the coronerʼs dismay.

“Were there any footprints upon it, in the part where the ground could
retain them”?

“ʼTwur dounted and full of stabbles, in the pearts whur the mulloch
wur, but the main of ’un tuffets and stramots”.

“That is to say”, Mr. Brockwood translated, “the ground was full of
impressions and footmarks, where there was any dirt to retain them;
but most of the ground was hillocky and grassy, and so would take no
footprints”.

“When you were searching, did you find anything that seemed to have
been overlooked”?

“Yees, my lard, I vound thissom”—producing Cradʼs stubby
meerschaum—“and thissom”—a burnt felt–wad—“and a whaile vurther,
ai vound thissom”. Here he slowly drew from his pocket a very fine
woodcock, though not over fat, with its long bill tucked most carefully
under its wing. He stroked the dead bird softly, and set its feathers
professionally, but did not hand it about, as the court seemed to
anticipate.

“In what part, and from what direction, has that bird been shot”?

“Ramhard of the head, my lard, as clane athert shat, and as vaine
a bird as iver I wish to zee. But, ahʼs me, her be a wosebird, a
wosebird, if iver wur wan”.

Mark could scarcely control his tears, as he thought of the birdʼs evil
omen, and yet he could not help admiring him. He turned him over and
over again, and dropped a tear into his tail coverts. Mr. Brockwood saw
it and gave him time; he knew that for many generations the Stotes had
lived under the Nowells.

“Oh, the bird was shot, you say, on the right side of the head, and
clean through the head”.

“Thank you”, proceeded the coroner. “Now, do you think that he could
have moved after he touched the ground”?

“Nivir a hinch, I allow, my lard. A vell as dead as a stwoun”.

“Now inform the court, as nearly as you can, of the precise spot where
you found it”.

It took a long time to discover this, for Mr. Stote had not been taught
the rudiments of topography. Nevertheless, they made out at last that
the woodcock had been found, dead on his back, with his bill up, eight
or ten yards beyond the place where Clayton Nowell fell dead, and in
a direct line over his body from the gap in the hedge where Cradock
stood. Dr. Hutton must have found the bird, if he had searched a little
further.

“Now”, said the coroner, forcibly. “Mr. Stote, I will ask you a
question which is, perhaps, a little beyond the rules of ordinary
evidence, I mean, at least, as permitted in a court of record”—here
he glanced at the magistrates, who could not claim the rank of
record—“which of these two unfortunate brothers caused, in your
opinion, the death of—of that woodcock”?

Mr. Brockwood glanced at the coroner sharply, and so did his own clerk.
Even the jury knew, by intuition, that he had no right to tout for
opinions.

“Them crink–crank words is beyand me. Moy head be awl wivvery wi’ ’em,
zame as if my old ooman was patchy”.

“His honour asks you”, said Mr. Brockwood, with a glance not lost on
the justices—for it meant, You see how we court inquiry, though the
question is quite inadmissible—“which of the brothers in your opinion
shot the bird which you found”?

“Why, Meester Cradock, o’ course. Meester Cleaton ’ud needs a blowed un
awl to hame, where a stwooud”.

“Mr. Clayton must have blown him to pieces, if he shot him from the
place where he stood, at least from the place where Mr. Clayton fell.
And poor Mr. Clayton lay directly between his brother and the woodcock”?

Mr. Brockwood in his excitement forgot that he had no right to put
this question, nor, indeed, any other, except as formally representing
some one formally implicated. But the coroner did not check him.

“By whur the blude wor, a moost have been naigh as cud be atwane the
vern–patch and the wosebird”.

“Very good. That fern–patch was the place where Mr. Cradock dropped
from the gap in the hedge. Mr. Rosedew has proved that. Now let us have
all you know, Mark Stote. Did you see any _other_ marks, stabbles you
call them, not, I mean, in the path Mr. Rosedew came along, nor yet in
the patches of thicket through which poor Cradock fled, but in some
other direction”?

This was the very question the coroner ought to have put long ago. Thus
much he knew when Brockwood put it, and now he was angry accordingly.

“Mr. Brockwood, I will thank you—consider, sir, this is a court of
record”!

“Then donʼt let it record stupid humbug”! Mr. Brockwood was a
passionate man, and his blood was up. “I will take the responsibility
of anything I do. All we want to elicit the truth is a little skill
and patience; and for want of that the finest young fellow I have ever
known may be blasted for life, for this world and the other. Excuse me,
Mr. Coroner, I have spoken precipitately; I have much reverence for
your court, but far more for truth”.

Here Mr. Brockwood sat down again, and all the magistrates looked at
him with nods of approbation. Human passions and human warmth are sure
to have their way, even in Areopagus. At last the question was put by
the coroner himself. Of course it was a proper one.

“Yees, I zeed wan”, said Mark Stote, scratching the back of his head
(where at least the memory _ought_ to be); “but a wadnʼt of no ’count
much”.

“Now tell us where that one was”.

“Homezide of the rue, avore you coams to them hoar–witheys, naigh whur
the bower–stone stanneth. ’Twur zumbawdy yaping about mebbe after nuts
as had lanced fro’ the rue auver the water–tabble”.

Before this could be translated, a great stir was heard in the
outer–room, a number of people crying “Donʼt ’ee–now”! and a hoarse
voice uttering “I will”. The coroner was just dismissing Mr. Stote with
deep relief to both of them, and each the more respecting because he
could not understand the other.

“Mark Stote, you have given your evidence in a most lucid manner. There
are few people more to be respected than the thorough Saxon gamekeeper”.

“Moy un goo, my lard”? asked the patient Mark, with his neck quite
stiff, as he at first had stuck it, and one eye cocked at the coroner,
as along the bridge of a fowling–piece.

“Mr. Stote, you may now depart. Your evidence does you the greatest
credit, both as the father of a family, and as—as a conservator of
game, and I may say—ah, yes—as a faithful family retainer”.

“Thank ’ee, my lard, and vor my peart I dwoanʼt bʼleeve now as you
manes all the ’arm as most volks says of ’ee”.

Mark was louting low, trying to remember the fashion they taught him
forty years since in the Sunday–school, when the door flew back, and
the cold wind entered, and in walked Cradock Nowell.

As regards the outer man, one may change in fifty ways in half of
fifty hornʼs. Villainous ague, want of sleep, violent attacks of bile,
inferior claret, love rejected, scarlet fever, small–pox, any of these
may make a man lose memory in the looking–glass; but all combined
could not have wrought such havoc, such appalment, such drought in the
fountains of the blood, as that young face now told of. There was not
one line of it like the face of Cradock Nowell. It struck the people
with dismay, as they made room and let him pass; it would have struck
the Roman senate, even with Cato speaking. Times there are when we
forget even our sense of humour, absorbed in the power of passion, and
the rush of our souls along with it. No one in that room could have
laughed at the best joke ever was made, while he looked at Cradock
Nowell.

Utterly unconscious what any fellow thought of him (except perhaps
in some under–current of electric sympathy, whose wires never can be
cut, up to the drop of the gallows), Cradock crossed the chairs and
benches, feeling them no more than the wind feels the hills it crosses.
Yet with the inbred courtesy of natureʼs thorough gentleman, though
he forgot all the people there as thinking of himself, he did not yet
forget himself as bound to think of them. He touched no man on leg or
elbow, be he baronet or cobbler, without apologizing to him. Then he
stood in the foremost place, looking at the coroner, saying nothing,
but ready to be arraigned of anything.

Mr. Cole had never yet so acutely felt the loss of his “brains”; and
yet it is likely that even Chope would have doubted how to manage it.
The time a man of the world might pass in a dozen common–places, passed
over many shrewd heads there, and none knew what to say. Cradockʼs deep
grey eyes, grown lighter by the change of health, and larger from the
misery, seemed to take in every one who had any feeling for him.

“Here I am, and cannot be hurt, more than my own soul has hurt
me. Charge me with murder if you please, I never can disprove it.
Reputation is a thing my God thinks needless for me; and so it is, in
the despair which He has sent upon me”.

Not a word of this he spoke, but his eyes said every word of it, to
those who have looked on men in trouble, and heard the labouring heart.
As usual, the shallowest man there was the first to speak.

“Mr. Nowell”, asked the coroner, blandly, as of a wealthy client, “am I
to understand, sir, that you come to tender your evidence”?

“Yes”, replied Cradock. His throat was tight, and he could not manage
to say much.

“Then, sir, I am bound to administer to you the caution usual on these
occasions. Excuse me; in fact, I know you will; but your present
deposition may be—I mean it is possible——”

“Sir, I care for nothing now. I am here to speak the truth”.

“Very laudable. Admirable! Gentlemen of the jury—Mr. Brockwood, perhaps
you will oblige the court by examining in chief”?

“No, your honour, I cannot do that; it would be a confusion of duties”.

“I will not be examined”, said Cradock, with a low hoarse voice; he had
been in the woods for a day and two nights, and of course had taken
cold,—“I donʼt think I could stand it. A woman who gave me some bread
this morning told me what you were doing, and I came here as fast as I
could, to tell you all I know. Let me do it, if you please, in the best
way I can; and then do what you like with me”.

The utter despair of those last words went cold to the heart of every
one, and Mark Stote burst out crying so loud that a woman lent him her
handkerchief. But Cradockʼs eyes were hard as flint, and the variety of
their gaze was gone.

The coroner hesitated a little, and whispered to his clerk. Then he
said with some relief, and a look of kindness—

“The court is ready, Mr. Nowell, to receive your statement. Only you
must make it upon oath”.

Cradock, being duly sworn, told all he knew, as follows:

“It had been agreed between us, that my—my dear brother should go alone
to look for a woodcock, which he had seen that day. I was to follow in
about an hour, and meet him in the spire–bed just outside the covert.
For reasons of my own, I did not mean to shoot at all, only to meet
my brother, hear how he had got on, and come home with him. However,
I took my gun, because my dog was going with me, and I loaded it from
habit. Things had happened that afternoon which had rather upset me,
and my thoughts were running upon them. When I got to the spire–bed,
there was no one there, although it was quite dusk; but I thought I
heard my brother shooting inside the Coffin Wood. So I climbed the
hedge, with my gun half–cocked, and called him by his name”.

Here Cradock broke down fairly, as the thought came over him that
henceforth he might call and call, but none would ever answer.

“By what name did you call him”? Mr. Brockwood looked at the coroner
angrily. What difference could it make?

“I called, ‘Viley, Viley, my boy!’ three times, at the top of my voice.
I used to call him so in the nursery, and he always liked it. I canʼt
make out why he did not answer, for he must have been close by—though
the bushes were very thick, certainly. At that instant, before I had
time to jump down into the covert, a woodcock, flushed, perhaps, by
the sound of my voice, crossed a little clearing not thirty yards in
front of me. I forgot all about my determination not to shoot that day,
cocked both barrels in a moment, but missed him clean with the first,
because a branch of the hedge flew back and jerked the muzzle sharply.
But the bird was flying rather slowly, and I got a second shot at him,
as he crossed a little path in the copse, too narrow to be called a
ride. I felt quite sure that I shot straight at him, and I thought
I saw him fall; but the light was very bad, and the trees were very
thick, and he gave one of those flapping jerks at the moment I pulled
the trigger, so perhaps I missed him”.

“That ’ee doednʼt, Meester Craydock. Aiʼse larned ’ee a bit too much
for thic. What do ’ee call thissom”? Here he held up the woodcock.
“Meester Craydock, my lard, be the sprackest shat anywhur round these
pearts”.

Poor Mark knew not that in his anxiety to vindicate his favouriteʼs
skill, he was making the case more black for him.

“Mark Stote, no more interruptions, if you please”, exclaimed the
coroner; “Mr. Nowell, pray proceed”.

“Dwoanʼt ’ee be haish upon un, my lard, dwoanʼt ’ee vaind un guilty. A
coodnʼt no how ’ave doed it. A wor that naice and pertiklar, a woodnʼt
shat iven toard a gipsy bwoy. And his oyes be as sprack as a merlinʼs.
A cood zee droo a mokpieʼs neestie”.

Cradockʼs face, so pale and haggard but a minute before, was now of
a burning red. The jury looked at him with astonishment, and each,
according to his bias, put his construction upon the change. Two
of them thought it was conscious guilt; the rest believed it to be
indignation at the idea of being found guilty. It was neither; it was
hope. The flash and flush of sudden hope, leaping across the heart,
like a rocket over the sea of despair. He could not speak, but gasped
in vain, then glutched (to use a forest word, which means gulped down
a sob), and fell back into John Rosedewʼs arms, faint, and stark, and
rigid.

The process of his mind which led him to the shores of light—but only
for a little glimpse, a glimpse and then all dark again—was somewhat
on this wise: “Only a bullet, or balled cartridge, at the distance I
was from him, could have killed my darling Viley on the spot, as I saw
him dead, with the hole cut through him. I am _almost_ sure that my
cartridge was in the left barrel of the gun, where I always put it.
And now it is clear that the left barrel killed that unlucky bird,
and killed him with shot flying separate, so the cartridge must have
opened. Viley, too, was ten feet under the height the bird was flying.
I donʼt believe _that I hit him at all_. I had loose shot in my right
barrel; the one that sent so random, on account of the branch that
struck it. I am _almost_ sure I had, and I fired quite straight with
the left barrel. God is good, the great God is merciful, after all I
thought of Him”. No wonder that he fainted away, in the sudden reaction.

There is no need to dwell any longer on the misery of that inquest. The
principal evidence has been given. The place where Cradock stood in
the hedge, and the place where Clayton fell and died; how poor Cradock
saw him first, in the very act of jumping, and hung like a nut–shuck,
paralysed; how he ran back to his dead twin–brother and could not
believe in his death, and went through the woods like a madman, with
nothing warm about him except his brotherʼs blood,—all this, I think,
is clear enough, as it had long been to the jury, and now was to the
coroner. Only Cradock awoke from his hope—what did he care for their
verdict? He awoke from his hope not in his moral—that there could be no
doubt of—but in his manual innocence; when, to face all circumstances,
he had nothing but weak habit. He could not swear, he could not even
feel confident (and we want three times three for swearing, that
barbarous institution) that he had rammed the cartridge down the left
barrel, and the charge of shot down the right. All he could say was
this, that it was a very odd thing if he had not.

The oddity of a thing is seldom enough to establish its contrary, in
the teeth of all evidence. So the jury found that “Violet Clayton
Nowell had died from a gunshot wound, inflicted accidentally by his
brother Cradock Nowell, whom, after careful consideration, they
absolved from all blame”.




CHAPTER XXIV.


Rufus Hutton rode home that night to Geopharmacy Lodge. He had worked
unusually hard, even for a man of his activity, during the last three
days, and he wanted to see his Rosa again, and talk it all over with
her. Of course he had cancelled her invitation, as well as that of all
others, under the wretched circumstances. But before he went, he saw
Cradock Nowell safe in the hands of the rector, for he could not induce
him to go to the Hall, and did not think it fair towards his wife, now
in her delicate health, to invite him to the Lodge. And even if he had
done so, Cradock would not have gone with him.

If we strike the average of mankind, we shall find Rufus Hutton above
it. He had his many littlenesses—and which of us has few?—his oddities
of mind and manner, even his want of charity, and his practical
faith in selfishness; none the less for all of that there were many
people who loved him. And those of us who are loved of any—save
parents, wife, or daughter—loved, I mean, as the word is felt and not
interpreted,—with warmth of heart, and moistened eyes (when good or ill
befalls us); any such may have no doubt of being loved by God.

All this while, Sir Cradock Nowell had been alone; and, as Homer has
it, “feeding on his heart”. Ever since that fearful time, when, going
home to his happy dinner with a few choice friends, he had overtaken
some dark thing, which he would not let them hide from him—ever since
that awful moment when he saw what it was, the father had not taken
food, nor comfort of God or man.

All they did—well–meaning people—was of no avail. It was not of
disgrace he thought, of one son being murdered, and the other son
his murderer; he did not count his generations, score the number
of baronets, and weep for the slur upon them; rave of his painted
scutcheon, and howl because this was a dab on it. He simply groaned
and could not eat, because he had lost his son—his own, his sweet, his
best–beloved son.

As for Cradock, the father hoped—for he had not now the energy to care
very much about it—that he might not _happen_ henceforth to meet him
(for all things now were of luck) more than once a month, perhaps; and
then they need not say much. He never could care for him any more; of
that he felt as sure as if his heart were become a tombstone.

Young Cradock, though they coaxed and petted, wept before him at
the parsonʼs, and still more behind him, and felt for him so truly
deeply that at last he burst out crying (which did him Heavenʼs own
good)—Cradock, on his part, would not go to his father, until he should
be asked for. He felt that he could fall on his knees, and crawl along
in abasement, for having robbed the old grey man of all he loved on
earth. Only his father must ask for him, or at least give him leave to
come.

Perhaps he was wrong. Let others say. But in the depths of his grief
he felt the need of a fatherʼs love; and so his agony was embittered
because he got no signs of it. Let us turn to luckier people.

“Rufus, why, my darling Rufus, how much more——are you going to put on
that little piece of ground, no bigger than my work–table”?

Mrs. Hutton had been brought up to “call a spade a spade”; and she
extended this wise nomenclature to the contents of the spade as well.

“Rosa, why, my darling Rosa, that bed contains one hundred and
twenty–five feet. Now, according to the great Justus Liebig, and his
mineral theory——”

“One hundred and twenty–five feet, Rue! And I could jump across it! I
am sure it is not half so long as my silk measure in the shell, dear”!

“Dearest Rosa, just consider: my pet, get out your tablets, for you are
nothing at mental arithmetic”.

“Indeed! Well, you never used to tell me things like that, Rufus”!

“Well, perhaps I didnʼt, Roe. I would have forsworn to any extent, when
I saw you among the candytuft. But now, my darling, I have got you;
and from a lofty feeling, I am bound to tell the truth. Consider the
interests, Rosa——”

“Go along with your nonsense, Rue. You talk below your great
understanding, because you think it suits _me_”.

“Perhaps I do”, said Rufus, “perhaps I do now and then, my dear: you
always hit the truth so. But is it not better to do that than to talk
Greek to my Rosa”?

“I am sure I donʼt know; and I am sure I donʼt care either. When have
I heard you say anything, Rufus, so wonderful, and so out of the way,
that I, _poor I_, couldnʼt understand it? Please to tell me that,
Rufus”.

“My darling, consider. You are exciting yourself so fearfully. You make
me shake all over”.

“Then you should not say such things to me, Rufus. Why, Rue, you are
quite pale”!—What an impossibility! She might have boiled him in soda
without bringing him to a shrimp–colour.—“Come into the house this
moment, I insist upon it, and have two glasses of sherry. And you _do_
say very wonderful things, much too clever for me, Rufus; and indeed, I
believe, too clever for any woman in the world, even the one that wrote
Homer”.

Rosa Hutton ran into the house, and sought for the keys high and low;
then got the decanter at last out of the cellaret, and brought out a
bumper of wine. Crafty Rufus stopped outside, thoroughly absorbed in an
autumn rose; knowing that she liked to do it for him, and glad to have
it done for him.

“Not a drop, unless you drink first, dear. Rosa, here under the weeping
elm: you are not afraid of the girls who are making the bed, I hope”!

“I should rather hope not, indeed! Rue, dear, my best love to you. Do
you think Iʼd keep a girl in the house I was afraid to see through the
window”?

To prove her spirit, Mrs. Hutton tossed a glass of wine off, although
she seldom took it, and it was not twelve oʼclock yet. Rufus looked on
with some dismay, till he saw she had got the decanter.

“Well done, Rosa! What good it does me to see you take a mere drop
of wine! You are bound now to obey me. Roe, my love, your very best
health, and that involves my own. Youʼre not heavy on my shoulder,
love”.

“No, dear, I know that: you are so very strong. But donʼt you see the
boy coming? And that hole among the branches! And the leaves coming off
too! Oh, do let me go in a moment, Rue!——”

“Confound that boy! Iʼm blest if he isnʼt always after me”.

The boy, however, or man as he called himself, was far too important a
personage in their domestic economy to be confounded audibly. Gardener,
groom, page, footman, knife–boy, and coachman, all in one; a long,
loose, knock–kneed, big–footed, what they would call in the forest a
“yaping, shammocking gally–bagger”. His name was Jonah, and he came
from Buckinghamshire, and had a fine drawl of his own, quite different
from that of Ytene, which he looked upon as a barbarism.

“Plase, sir, Maister Reevers ave a zent them traases as us hardered”.
Jonahʼs eyes, throughout this speech, which occupied him at least a
minute, were fixed upon the decanter, with ineffable admiration at the
glow of the wine now the sun was upon it.

“Then, Jonah, my boy”, cried Rufus Hutton, all animation in a moment,
“I have a great mind to give you sixpence. Rosa, give me another glass
of sherry. Hereʼs to the health of the great horticulturist, Rivers!
Most obliging of him to send my trees so early, and before the leaves
are off. Come along, Roe, you love to see trees unpacked, and eat the
fruit by anticipation. I believe youʼll expect them to blossom and bear
by Christmas, as St. Anthony made the vines do”.

“Well, darling, and so they ought, with such a gardener as you to
manage them.—Jonah, you shall have a glass of wine, to drink the health
of the trees. He has never taken his eyes off the decanter, ever since
he came up, poor boy”.

Rosa was very good–natured, and accustomed to farm–house geniality.
Rufus laughed and whispered, “My love, my Indian sherry”!

“Canʼt help it”, said Mrs. Hutton; “less chance of its disagreeing with
him. Here, Jonah, you wonʼt mind drinking after your master”.

“Here be vaine health to all on us”, said Jonah, scraping the gravel
and putting up one finger as he had seen the militia men do (in
imitation of the regulars); “and may us nayver know no taime warse than
the prasent mawment”.

“Hear, hear”! cried Rufus Hutton; “now, come along, and cut the cords,
boy”.

Dr. Hutton set off sharply, with Rosa on his arm, for he did not
feel at all sure but what Jonahʼs exalted sentiment might elicit, at
any rate, half a glass more of sherry. They found the trees packed
beautifully; a long cone, like a giant lobster–pot, weighing nearly two
hundred–weight, thatched with straw, and wattled round, and corded over
that.

“Out with your knife and cut the cords, boy”.

“Well, Rufus, you _are_ extravagant”!—“Rather fine, that”, thought Dr.
Hutton, “after playing such pranks with my sherry”!—“Jonah, I wonʼt
have a bit of the string cut. I want every atom of it. Whatʼs the good
of your having hands if you canʼt untie it”?

At last they got the great parcel open, and strewed all the lawn with
litter. There were trees of every sort, as tight as sardines in a
case, with many leaves still hanging on them, and the roots tied up in
moss. Half a dozen standard apples; half a hundred pyramid pears, the
prettiest things imaginable, furnished all round like a cypress, and
thick with blossom–spurs; then young wall–trees, two years’ trained,
tied to crossed sticks, and drawn up with bast, like the frame of a
schoolboyʼs kite; around the roots and in among them were little roses
in pots No. 60, wrapped in moss, and webbed with bast; and the smell of
the whole was glorious.

“Hurrah”! cried Rufus, dancing, “no nurseries in the kingdom, nor in
the world, except Sawbridgeworth, could send out such a lot of trees,
perfect in shape, every one of them, and every one of them true to
sort. What a bore that Iʼve got to go again to Nowelhurst to–day! Rosa,
dear; every one of these trees ought to be planted to–day. The very
essence of early planting (which in my opinion saves a twelvemonth) is
never to let the roots get dry. These peach–trees in a fortnight will
have got hold of the ground, and be thinking of growing again; and the
leaves, if properly treated, will never have flagged at all. Oh, I wish
you could see to it, Rosa”.

“Well, dear Rufus, and so I can. To please you, I donʼt mind at all
throwing aside my banner–screen, and leaving my letter to cousin
Magnolia”.

“No, no. I donʼt mean that. I mean, how I wish you understood it”.

“Understood it, Rue! Well, Iʼm sure! As if anybody couldnʼt plant a
tree! And I, who had a pair of gardening gloves when I was only that
high”!

“Roe, now listen to me. Not one in a hundred even of professional
gardeners, who have been at it all their lives, knows how to plant a
tree”.

“Well, then, Rufus, if that is the case, I think it very absurd of you
to expect that I should. But Jonah will teach me, I dare say. Iʼll
begin to learn this afternoon”.

“No, indeed, you wonʼt. At any rate, you must not practise on _my_
trees; nor in among them, either. But you may plant the mop, dear, as
often as you like, in that empty piece of ground where the cauliflowers
were”.

“Plant the mop, indeed! Well, Dr. Hutton, you had better ride back to
Nowelhurst, where all the grand people are, if you only come home for
the purpose of insulting your poor wife. It is there, no doubt, that
you learn to despise any one who is not quite so fine as they are. And
what are they, I should like to know? What a poor weak thing I am, to
be sure; no wonder no one cares for me. I can have no self–respect. I
am only fit to plant the mop”.

Hereupon the blue founts welled, the carmine of the cheeks grew
scarlet, the cherry lips turned bigarreaux, and a very becoming
fur–edged jacket lifted, as if with a zephyr stealing it.

Rufus felt immediately that he had been the lowest of all low brutes;
and almost made up his mind on the spot that it would be decidedly
wrong of him to go to Nowelhurst that evening. We will not enter
into the scene of strong self–condemnation, reciprocal collaudation,
extraordinary admiration, because all married people know it; and as
for those who are single, let them get married and learn it. Only in
the last act of it, Jonah, from whom they had retreated, came up again,
looking rather sheepish—for he had begun to keep a sweetheart—and spake
these winged words:

“Plase, sir, if you be so good, it baint no vault o’ maine nohow”.

“Get all those trees at once laid in by the heels. What is no fault of
yours, pray? Are you always at your dinner”?

“Baint no vault o’ maine, sir; but there coom two genelmen chaps, as
zays they musten zee you”.

“Must see me, indeed, whether I choose it or no! And with all those
trees to plant, and the mare to be ready at three oʼclock”!

“Zo I tould un, sir; but they zays as they _must_ zee you”.

“In the name of the devil and all his works, but Iʼll give them a
bitter reception. Let them come this way, Jonah”.

“Oh dear, if you are going to be violent! You know what you are
sometimes, Rue—enough to frighten any man”.

“Never, my darling, never. You never find Rufus Hutton formidable to
any one who means rightly”.

“No, no, to be sure, dear. But then, perhaps, they may not. And after
all that has occurred to–day, I feel so much upset. Very foolish of me,
I know. But promise me not to be rash, dear”.

“Have no fear, my darling Rosa. I will never injure any man who does
not insult you, dear”.

While Rufus was looking ten feet high, and Mrs. Rufus tripping away,
after a little sob and a whisper, Jonah came pelting down the walk
with his great feet on either side of it, as if he had a barrow
between them. At the same time a voice came round the corner past
the arbutus–tree, now quivering red with strawberries, and the words
thereof were these:

“Perfect Paradise, my good sir! I knew it must be, from what I heard
of him. Exactly like my friend the Dookʼs, but laid out still more
tastefully. Bless me, why, his Grace must have copied it! Wonʼt I give
him a poke in the ribs when he dines with me next Toosday! Sly bird,
a sly bird, I say, though he is such a capital fellow. Knew where to
come, Iʼm blest if he didnʼt, for taste, true science, and landscape”.

“Haw! Yes; I quite agree with you. But his Grace has nothing so chaste,
so perfect as this, in me opeenion, sir. Haw”!

The cockles of the Rufine heart swelled warmly; for of course he heard
every word of it, though, of course, not intended to do so. “Now
Rosa ought to have heard all that”, was passing in his mind, when two
gentlemen stood before him, and were wholly amazed to see him. One of
them was a short stout man, not much taller than Rufus, but of double
his cubic contents; the other a tall and portly signor, fitted upon
spindle shins, with a slouch in his back, grey eyebrows, long heavy
eyes, and large dewlaps.

The short gentleman, evidently chief spokesman and proud of his
elocution, waved his hat most gracefully, when he recovered from his
surprise, drew back for a yard or so, in his horror at intruding, and
spoke with a certain flourish, and the air of a man above humbug.

“Mr. Nowell Corklemore, I have the honour of making you known to the
gentleman whose scientific fame has roused such a spirit among us.
Dr. Hutton, sir, excuse me, the temptation was too great for us. My
excellent friend, Lord Thorley, who has, I believe, the honour of being
related to Mrs. Hutton, pressed his services upon us, when he knew what
we desired. But, sir, no. ‘My lord’, said I, ‘we prefer to intrude
without the commonplace of society; we prefer to intrude upon the
footing of common tastes, my lord, and warm, though far more rudimental
and vague pursuit of science’. Bless me, all this time my unworthy
self, sir! I am too prone to forget myself, at least my wife declares
so. Bailey Kettledrum, sir, is my name, of Kettledrum Hall, in Dorset.
And I have the enlightenment, sir, to aspire to the honour of your
acquaintance”.

Rufus Hutton bowed rather queerly to Mr. Nowell Corklemore and Mr.
Bailey Kettledrum; for he had seen a good deal of the world, and had
tasted sugar–candy. Moreover, the Kettledrum pattern was known to him
long ago; and he had never found them half such good fellows as they
pretend to think other people. Being, however, most hospitable, as
are nearly all men from India, he invited them to come in at once,
and have some lunch after their journey. They accepted very warmly;
and Mrs. Hutton, having now appeared and been duly introduced, Bailey
Kettledrum set off with her round the curve of the grass–plot, as if he
had known her for fifty years, and had not seen her for twenty–five.
He engrossed her whole attention by the pace at which he talked, and
by appeals to her opinion, praising all things, taking notes, red–hot
with admiration, impressively confidential about his wife and children,
and, in a word, regardless of expense to make himself agreeable.
Notwithstanding all this, he did not get on much, because he made one
great mistake. He rattled and flashed along the high road leading to
fifty other places, but missed the quiet and pleasant path which leads
to a womanʼs good graces—the path, I mean, which follows the little
brook called “sympathy”, a winding but not a shallow brook, over the
meadow of soft listening.

Mr. Nowell Corklemore, walking with Rufus Hutton, was, as he was
forced to be by a feeble nature enfeebled, a dry and pompous man.

“Haw! I am given to understand you have made all this yourself, sir. In
me ’umble opeenion, it does you the greatest credit, sir; credit, sir,
no less to your heart than to your head. Haw”!

Here he pointed with his yellow bamboo at nothing at all in particular.

“Everything is in its infancy yet. Wait till the trees grow up a
little. I have planted nearly all of them. All except that, and that,
and the weeping elm over yonder, where I sit with my wife sometimes.
Everything is in its infancy”.

“Excuse me; haw! If you will allow me, I would also say, with the
exception of something else”. And he looked profoundly mystic.

“Oh, the house you mean”, said Rufus. “No, the house is not quite new;
built some seven years back”.

“Sir, I do not mean the house—but the edifice, haw!—the tenement of the
human being. Sir, I mean, except just _this_”.

He shut one eye, like a sleepy owl, and tapped the side of his head
most sagely; and then he said “Haw”! and looked for approval.

And he might have looked a very long time, in his stupidly confident
manner, without a chance of getting it; for Rufus Hutton disliked
allusions even to age intellectual, when you came to remember that his
Rosa was more than twenty years younger.

“Ah, yes, now it strikes me”, continued Mr. Corklemore, as they
stood in front of the house, “that little bow–window—nay, I am given
to understand, that bay–window is the more correct—haw! I mean the
more architectural term—I think I should have felt inclined to make
that nice bay–window give to the little grass–plot. A mere question,
perhaps, of idiosyncrasy, haw”!

“Give what”? asked Rufus, now on the foam. That his own pet lawn, which
he rolled every day, his lawn endowed with manifold curves and sweeps
of his own inventing, with the Wellingtonia upon it, and the plantain
dug out with a cheese–knife—that all this should be called a “little
grass–plot”, by a fellow who had no two ideas, except in his intonation
of “Haw”!

“Haw! It does not signify. But the term, I am given to understand, is
now the correct and recognised one”.

“I wish you were given to understand anything except your own
importance”, Rufus muttered savagely, and eyed the yellow bamboo.

“Have you—haw! excuse my asking, for you are a great luminary here;
have you as yet made trial of the Spergula pilifera”?

“Yes; and found it the biggest humbug that ever aped Godʼs grass”.

Dr. Hutton was always very sorry when he had used strong language; but
being a thin–skinned, irritable, cut–the–corner man, he could not be
expected to stand Nowell Corklemoreʼs “haws”.

And Mr. Corklemore had of “haw” no less than seven intonations. First,
and most common of all, the haw of self–approval. Second, the haw of
contemplation. Third, the haw of doubt and inquiry. Fourth, that of
admiration. Fifth, that of interlude and hiatus, when words or ideas
lingered. Sixth, the haw of accident and short–winded astonishment;
_e.g._ he had once fallen off a hayrick, and cried “Haw”! at the
bottom. Seventh, the haw of indignation and powerful remonstrance, in a
totally different key from the rest; and this last he now adopted.

“Haw—then!—haw!—I have been given to understand that the Spergula
pilifera succeeds most admirably with people who have—haw!—have studied
it”.

“Very likely it does”, said Rufus, though he knew much better, but now
he was on his own door–step, and felt ashamed of his rudeness; “but
come in, Mr. Corklemore; our ways are rough in these forest outskirts,
and we are behind you in civilization. Nevertheless, we are heartily
glad to welcome our more intelligent neighbours”.

At lunch he gave them home–brewed ale and pale sherry of no especial
character. But afterwards, being a genial soul, and feeling still
guilty of rudeness, he went to the cellar himself and fetched a bottle
of the richest Indian gold. Mrs. Hutton withdrew very prettily; and
the three gentlemen, all good judges of wine, began to warm over it
luminously, more softly indeed than they would have done after a heavy
dinner. Surely, noble wine deserves not to be the mere operculum to a
stupidly mixed hot meal.

“Have another bottle, gentlemen; now do have another bottle”.

“Not one drop more for the world”, exclaimed they both, with their
hands up. None the less for that, they did; and, what was very unwise
of them, another after that, until I can scarcely write straight in
trying to follow their doings. Meanwhile Jonah had prigged three
glassfuls out of the decanter left under the elm–tree.

“Now”, said Rufus, who alone was _almost_ in a state of sobriety,
“suppose we take a turn in the garden and my little orchard–house?
I believe I am indebted to that for the pleasure of your very
disagreeable—ahem, most agreeable company to–day”.

Bailey Kettledrum sprang up with a flourish. “No, sir, no, sir! Permit
me to defend myself and this most marketable—I—I mean remarkable
gentleman here present, Mr. Nowell Corklemore, from any such
dis—dish—sparagus, disparagizing imputations, sir. An orchard, sir,
is very well, and the trees in it are very well, and the fruit of it
is very good, sir; but an orchard can never appear, sir, to a man of
exalted sentiments, and temporal—I mean, sir, strictly intemperate
judgment, in the light of an elephant—irrelevant—no, sir, I mean of
course an equilevant—for a man, sir, for a man”! Here Mr. Bailey
Kettledrum hit himself hard on the bosom, and broke the glass of his
watch.

“Mr. Kettledrum”, said Rufus, rising, “your sentiments do you honour.
Mine, however, is not an orchard, but an orchard–house”.

“Ha, ha, good again! House in an orchard! yes, I see. Corklemore, hear
that, my boy? Our admirable host—no, thank you, not a single drop
more wine—I always know when I have had enough. Sir, it is the proud
privi—prilivege of a man——Corklemore, get up, sir; donʼt you see we are
waiting for you”?

Mr. Corklemore stared heavily at him; his constitution was a sleepy
one, and he thought he had eaten his dinner. His friend nodded gravely
at Dr. Hutton; and the nod expressed compassion tempering condemnation.

“Ah, I see how it is. Ever since that fall from the hayrick, the
leastest little drop of wine, prej—prej——”

“Prejudge the case, my lord”, muttered Mr. Corklemore, who had been a
barrister.

“Prejudicially affects our highly admired friend. But, sir, the fault
is mine. I should have stretched forth long ago the restraining hand of
friendship, sir, and dashed the si—si—silent bottle——”

“Chirping bottle, possibly you mean”.

“No, sir, I do not, and I will thank you not to interrupt me. Who
ever heard a bottle chirp? I ask you, sir, as a man of the world, and
a man of common sense, who ever heard a bottle chirp? What I mean,
sir, is the siren—the siren bottle from his lips. What is it in the
Latin grammar—or possibly in the Greek, for I have learned Greek, sir,
in the faulchion days of youth;—is it not, sir, this: _improba Siren
desidia_? Perhaps, sir, it may have been in your grammar, if you ever
had one, _improba chirping desidia_”. As he looked round, in the glow
and sparkle of lagenic logic, Rufus caught him by the arm, and hurried
him out at the garden door, where luckily no steps were. The pair went
straight, or, in better truth, went first, to the kitchen garden; Rufus
did not care much for flowers; all that he left to his Rosa.

“Now I will show you a thing, sir”, cried Rufus in his glory, “a thing
which has been admired by the leading men of the age. Nowhere else, in
this part of the world, can you see a piece of ground, sir, cropped in
the manner of that, sir”.

And to tell the plain, unvinous truth, the square to which he pointed
was a triumph of high art. The style of it was wholly different from
that of Mr. Garnetʼs beds. Bull Garnet was fond of novelties, but
he made them square with his system; the result was more strictly
practical, but less nobly theoretical. Dr. Hutton, on the other hand,
travelled the entire porker; obstacles of soil and season were as
nothing to him, and when the shape of the ground was wrong, he called
in the navvies and made it right.

A plot of land four–square, and measured to exactly half an acre,
contained 2400 trees, cutting either way as truly as the spindles of
machinery; there was no tree more than five feet high, the average
height was four feet six inches. They were planted just four feet
asunder, and two feet back from the pathway. There was every kind of
fruit–tree there, which can be made by British gardeners to ripen fruit
in Britain, without artificial heat. Pears especially, and plums,
cherries, apples, walnuts (juglans præparturiens), figs, and medlars,
quinces, filberts, even peaches, nectarines, and apricots—though only
one row, in all, of those three; there was scarcely one of those
miniature trees which had not done its duty that year, or now was bent
upon doing it. Still the sight was beautiful; although far gone with
autumn, still Coxʼs orange–pippin lit the russet leaves with gold, or
Beurré Clairgeau and Capiaumont enriched the air with scarlet.

Each little tree looked so bright and comely, each plumed itself so
naturally, proud to carry its share of tribute to the beneficent Maker,
that the two men who had been abusing His choice gift, the vine, felt a
little ashamed of themselves, or perhaps felt that they ought to be.

“Magnificent, magnificent”! cried Kettledrum, theatrically; “I must
tell the Dook of this. He will have the same next year”.

“Will he, though”? said Rufus, thinking of the many hours he had spent
among those trees, and of his careful apprenticeship to the works of
their originator; “I can tell you one thing. He wonʼt, unless he has
a better gardener than I ever saw in these parts. Now let us go to the
orchard–house”.

The orchard–house was a span–roofed building, very light and airy;
the roof and ends were made of glass, the sides of deal with broad
falling shutters, for the sake of ventilation. It was about fifty
feet in length, twenty in width, and fifteen in height. There was no
ventilation at the ridge, and all the lights were fixed. The free air
of heaven wandered through, among peaches, plums, and apricots, some
of which still retained their fruit, crimson, purple, and golden.
The little trees were all in pots, and about a yard apart. The pots
were not even plunged in the ground, but each stood, as a tub should,
on its own independent bottom. The air of the house was soft and
pleasant, with a peculiar fragrance, the smell of ripening foliage.
Bailey Kettledrum saw at once—for he had plenty of observant power,
and the fumes of wine were dispersing—that this house must have shown
a magnificent sight, a month or two ago. And having once more his own
object in view, he tripled his true approval.

“Dr. Hutton, this is fine. Fine is not the word for it; this is grand
and gorgeous. What a triumph of mind! What a lot you must pay for
wages”!

“Thirteen shillings a week in summer, seven shillings a week in the
winter”. This was one of his pet astonishments.

“What! Iʼll never believe it. Sir, you must either be a conjuror, the
devil, or—or——”

“Or a liar”, said Rufus, placidly; “but I am none of the three. Jonah
has twelve shillings a week, but half of that goes for housework.
That leaves six shillings for gardening; but I never trust him inside
this house, for he is only a clumsy dolt, who does the heavy digging.
And besides him I have only a very sharp lad, at seven shillings a
week, who works under my own eye. I have in some navvies, at times,
it is true, when I make any alterations. But that is outlay, not
working expense. Now come and see my young trees just arrived from
Sawbridgeworth”.

“Stop one moment. What is this stuff on the top of the pots here? What
queer stuff! Why, it goes quite to pieces in my hands”.

“Oh, only a little top–dressing, just to refresh the trees a bit. This
way, Mr. Kettledrum”.

“Pardon me, sir, if I appear impertinent or inquisitive. But I have
learned so much this afternoon, that I am anxious to learn a little
more. My friend, the Dook, will cross–examine me as to everything I
have seen here. He knew our intention of coming over. I must introduce
you to his Grace, before you are a week older, sir; he has specially
requested it. In fact, it was only this morning he said to Nowell
Corklemore—but Corklemore, though a noble fellow, a gem of truth and
honour, sir, is not a man of _our_ intelligence; in one word, he is an
ass”!

“Haw! Nowell Corklemore, Nowell Corklemore is an ass, is he, in the
wise opeenion of Mr. Bailey Kettledrum? Only let me get up, good
Lord—and perhaps he told the Dook so. There, itʼs biting me again, oh
Lord! Nowell Corklemore an ass”!

By the door of the orchard–house grew a fine deodara, and behind it
lay Mr. Corklemore, beyond all hope entangled. His snores had been
broken summarily by the maid coming for the glasses, and he set forth,
after a dozen “haws”, to look for his two comrades. With instinct
ampeline he felt that his only chance of advancing in the manner of
a biped lay or stood in his bamboo. So he went to the stick–stand by
the back–door, where he muzzily thought it ought to be. Mrs. Hutton,
in the drawing–room, was rattling on the piano, and that made his head
ten times worse. His bamboo was not in the stick–stand; nevertheless he
found there a gig–umbrella with a yellow handle, like the top of his
fidus Achates. Relying upon this, he made his way out, crying “haw”!
at every star in the oilcloth. He progged away all down the walk, with
the big umbrella; but the button that held the cord was gone, and it
flapped like a mutinous windmill. However, he carried on bravely, until
he confronted a dark, weird tree, waving its shrouded arms at him. This
was the deodara; so he made a tack to the left, and there was hulled
between wind and water by an unsuspected enemy. This was Rufus Huttonʼs
pet of all pet pear–trees, a perfect model of symmetry, scarce three
feet six in height, sturdy, crisp, short–jointed, spurred from keel
to truck, and carrying twenty great pears. It had been so stopped
and snagged throughout, that it was stiffer than fifty hollies; and
Rosa was dreadfully jealous of it, because Rufus spent so much time
there. He used to go out in the summer forenoon, whenever the sun was
brilliant, and draw lines down the fruit with a wet camelʼs hairbrush,
as the French gardeners do. He had photographed it once or twice, but
the wind would move the leaves so.

Now he had the pleasure of seeing Nowell Corklemore flat on his
back, with his pet Beurré Superfin (snapped at the stock), and the
gig–umbrella between his legs, all a hideous ruin. The gig–umbrella
flapped and flapped, and the agonised pear–tree scratched and
scratched, till Nowell Corklemore felt quite sure that he was in the
embrace of a dragon. The glorious pears were rolling about, some
crushed under his frantic heels, the rest with wet bruises on them,
appealing from human barbarism.

“Well”! said Rufus Hutton. He was in such a rage, it would have choked
him to say another word.

“Haw! I donʼt call it well at all to be eaten up by a dragon. Pull him
away for mercyʼs sake, pull him away! and Iʼll tell all about this
business”.

At last they got him out, for the matter was really serious, and Rufus
was forced to hide his woe at the destruction of the pear–tree. And
after all he had no one but himself to thank for it. Why did he almost
force his guests to drink the third bottle of sherry?

“Wonderful, perfectly wonderful”! exclaimed Mr. Bailey Kettledrum, as
Rufus was showing them out at the gate, before having his own horse
saddled. “The triumphs of horticulture in this age are really past
belief. You beat all of us, Dr. Hutton, you may depend upon it; you
beat all of us. I never would have believed that trees ought to be
planted with their heads down, and their roots up in the air. Stupid of
me, though, for I have often heard of root–pruning, and of course you
could not prune the roots unless they grew in that way”.

Rufus thought he was joking, or suffering from vinous inversion of
vision.

“Remember, my good friend Hutton—excuse my familiarity, I feel as if I
had known you for years—remember, my dear friend, you have pledged your
word for next Wednesday—and Mrs. Hutton too, mind—Mrs. Hutton with you.
We waive formality, you know, in these country quarters. Kettledrum
Hall, next Wednesday—honour bright, next Wednesday! You see I know the
motto of your family”.

“Thank you, all right”, said Rufus Hutton; “itʼs a deuced deal more
than I know”, he added, going up the drive. “I didnʼt know we had a
motto. Well, Iʼm done for at last”!

No wonder he was done for. He saw what Kettledrum had taken in the
purest faith. All those lovely little trees, dwarf pyramids, &c., were
standing on the apex. Jonah, after all the sherry given to and stolen
by him, had laid them in by the heels with a vengeance. All the pretty
heads were a foot under ground, and the roots, like the locks of a
mermaid, wooing the buxom air.




CHAPTER XXV.


That evening Dr. Hutton started, on his long swift mare, for the Hall
at Nowelhurst, where he had promised to be. He kissed his Rosa many
times, and begged her pardon half as often, for all the crimes that
day committed. Her brother Ralph, from Fordingbridge, who always slept
there at short notice, because the house was lonely, would be sure
to come (they knew) when the little boy Bob was sent for him. Ralph
Mohorn—poor Rosa rejoiced in her rather uncommon patronymic, though
perhaps it means Cow–horn—Ralph Mohorn was only too glad to come and
sleep at Geopharmacy Lodge. He was a fine, fresh–hearted fellow,
only about nineteen years old; his father held him hard at home, and
of course he launched out all the more abroad. So he kicked up, as
he expressed it, “the devilʼs own dust” when he got to the Lodge,
ordered everything in the house for supper, with a bottle of whisky
afterwards—which he never touched, only he liked the name of the
thing—and then a cardinal, or the biggest meerschaum to be found in
any of the cupboards. His pipe, however, was not, like his grog, a
phantom of the imagination; for he really smoked it, and sat on three
chairs, while he “baited” Rosa, as he called it, with all the bogeys
in Christendom. It was so delicious now to be able to throw her into a
tremble, and turn her cheeks every colour, and then recollect that a
few years since she had smacked his own cheeks _ad libitum_. However,
we have little to do with him, and now he is a jolly farmer.

Rufus Hutton rode through Ringwood over the low bridge where the
rushes rustle everlastingly, and the trout and dace for ever wag their
pellucid tails up stream. How all that water, spreading loosely, wading
over miles of meadows, growing leagues of reed and rush, mistress of
a world in winter, how it all is content to creep through a pair of
little bridges—matter of such mystery, let the Christchurch salmon
solve it. Dr. Hutton went gaily over—at least his mare went gaily—but
he was thinking (beyond his wont) of the business he had in hand. He
admired the pleasant old town as he passed, and the still more pleasant
waters; but his mare, the favourite Polly, went on at her usual swing,
until they came to the long steep hill towards the Picked Post. As
he walked her up the sharp parts of the rise, he began to ponder the
mysterious visit of those convivial strangers. It was very plain that
neither of them knew or cared the turn of a trowel about the frank
art of gardening; that, of course, was only a sham; then what did they
really come for? Rufus, although from childhood upwards he had been
hospitable to his own soul, that is to say, regarded himself with
genial approbation, was not by any means blindly conceited, and could
not suppose that his fame, for anything except gardening, had spread
through the regions round about. So he felt that his visitors had
come, not for his sake, but their own. And it was not long before he
suspected that they wished to obtain through him some insight, perhaps
even some influence, into and in the course of events now toward at
Nowelhurst Hall. They had altogether avoided the subject; which made
him the more suspicious, for at present it was of course the leading
topic of the county.

However, as they were related to the family, while he, Rufus Hutton,
was not, it was not his place to speak of the matter, but to let
his guests do as they liked about it. They had made him promise,
moreover, to dine with the Kettledrums on the very earliest day he
could fix—viz. the following Wednesday—and there he was to meet Mr. and
Mrs. Corklemore. Was it possible that they intended, and perhaps had
been instructed, to subject the guest on that occasion to more skilful
manipulation than that of their rude male fingers?

“Iʼll take Rosa with me”, said Rufus to himself; “a woman sees
a womanʼs game best; though Rosa, thank Heaven, is not very
Machiavellian. How very odd, that neither of those men had the decency
to carry a bit of crape, out of respect for that poor boy; and I,
who am noway connected with him, have been indued by my Roe with a
hat–band”!

Shrewd as our friend Rufus was, he could not be charged with low
cunning, and never guessed that those two men had donned the show of
mourning, and made the most of it round their neighbourhood to impress
people with their kinship to the great Nowells of Nowelhurst, but that
their guardian angels had disarrayed them ere they started, having no
desire to set Rufus thinking about their chance of succession. As the
sharp little doctor began to revolve all he had heard about Corklemore,
his mare came to the Burley–road where they must leave the turnpike.
Good Polly struck into it, best foot foremost, and, as she never would
bear the curb well, her rider had quite enough to do, in the gathering
darkness, and on that cross–country track, to attend to their common
safety.

She broke from the long stride of her trot into a reaching canter,
as the moon grew bright between the trees, and the lane was barred
with shadow. Pricking nervously her ears at every flaw or rustle,
bending her neck to show her beauty, where the light fell clear on the
moor–top, then with a snort of challenge plunging into the black of the
hollows, yet ready to jump the road and away, if her challenge should
be answered; bounding across the water–gulley and looking askance at
a fern–shadow; then saying to herself, “It is only the moon, child”,
and up the ascent half ashamed of herself; then shaking her bridle with
reassurance to think of that mile of great danger flown by, and the
mash and the warm stable nearer, and the pleasure of telling that great
roan horse how brave she had been in the moonlight——

“Goodness me! Whatʼs that”?

She leaped over road and roadside bank, and into a heavy gorse–bush,
and stood there quivering from muzzle to tail in the intensity of
terror. If Rufus had not just foreseen her alarm, and gripped her with
all his power, he must have lain senseless upon the road, spite of all
his rough–riding in India.

“Who–hoa, who–hoa, then, Polly, you little fool, you are killing me!
Canʼt you see itʼs only a lady”?

Polly still backed into the bush, and her unlucky rider, with every
prickle running into him, could see the whites of her eyes in the
moonshine, as the great orbs stood out with horror. Opposite to them,
and leaning against a stile which led to a footpath, there stood a
maiden dressed in black, with the moonlight sheer upon her face. She
took no notice of anything; she had heard no sort of footfall; she did
not know of Pollyʼs capers, or the danger she was causing. Her face,
with the hunterʼs moon upon it, would have been glorious beauty, but
for the broad rims under the eyes, and the spectral paleness. One
moment longer she stared at the moon, as if questing for some one gone
thither, then turned away with a heavy sigh, and went towards the
Coffin Wood.

All this time Rufus Hutton was utterly blind to romance, being
scarified in the calf and thighs beyond any human endurance. Polly
backed further and further away from the awful vision before her—the
wife of the horse–fiend at least—and every fresh swerve sent a new lot
of furze–pricks into the peppery legs of Rufus.

“Hang it”! he cried, “here goes; no man with a haʼporth of flesh in him
could stand it any longer. Thorn for thorn, Miss Polly”. He dashed his
spurs deep into her flanks, the spurs he had only worn for show, and
never dared to touch her with. For a moment she trembled, and reared
upright in wrath worse than any horror; then away she went like a storm
of wind, headlong through trees and bushes. It was all pure luck or
Providence that Rufus was not killed. He grasped her neck, and lay
flat upon it; he clung with his supple legs around her; he called her
his Polly, his darling Polly, and begged her to consider herself. She
considered neither herself nor him, but dashed through the wild wood,
wilder herself, not knowing light from darkness. Any low beech branch,
any scrag holly, even a trail of loose ivy, and man and horse were
done for. The lights of more than a million stars flashed before Rufus
Hutton, and he made up his mind to die, and wondered how Rosa would
take it. Perhaps she would marry again, and rear up another family who
knew not the name of Hutton; perhaps she would cry her eyes out. Smack,
a young branch took him in the face, though he had one hand before it.
“Go it again”! he cried, with the pluck of a man despairing, and then
he rolled over and over, and dug for himself a rabbit–hole of sand,
and dead leaves, and moss. There he lay on his back, and prayed, and
luckily let go the bridle.

The mare had fallen, and grovelled in the rotten ground where the
rabbits lived; then she got up and shook herself, and the stirrups
struck fire beneath her, and she spread out all her legs, and neighed
for some horse to come and help her. She could not go any further;
she had vented her soul, and must come to herself, like a lady after
hysterics. Presently she sniffed round a bit, and the grass smelled
crisp and dewy, and, after the hot corn and musty hay, it was fresher
than ice upon brandy. So she looked through the trees, and saw only
a squirrel, which did not frighten her at all, because she was used
to rats. Then she brought her forelegs well under her stomach, and
stretched her long neck downwards, and skimmed the wet blades with her
upper lip, and found them perfectly wholesome. Every horse knows what
she did then and there, to a great extent, till she had spoiled her
relish for supper.

After that, she felt grateful and good, and it repented her of the
evil, and she whinnied about for the master who had outraged her
feelings so deeply. She found him still insensible, on his back,
beneath a beech–tree, with six or seven rabbits, and even a hare, come
to see what the matter was. Then Polly, who had got the bit out of her
mouth, gave him first a poke with it, and then nuzzled him under the
coat–collar, and blew into his whiskers as she did at the chaff in her
manger. She was beginning to grieve and get very uneasy, taking care
not to step on him, and went round him ever so many times, and whinnied
into his ear, when either that, or the dollop of grass half chewed
which lay on his countenance, revived the great spirit of Rufus Hutton,
and he opened his eyes and looked languidly. He saw two immense black
eyes full upon him, tenderly touched by the moonlight, and he felt a
wet thing like a sponge poking away at his nostrils.

“Polly”, he said, “oh, Polly dear, how could you serve me so? What will
your poor mistress say”?

Polly could neither recriminate nor defend herself; so she only looked
at him beseechingly, and what she meant was, “Oh, do get up”.

So Rufus arose, and dusted himself, and kissed Polly for forgiveness,
and she, if she had only learned how, would have stooped like a camel
before him. He mounted, with two or three groans for his back, and left
the mare to her own devices to find the road again. It was very pretty
to see in the moonlight how carefully she went with him, not even
leaping the small water–courses, but feeling her footing through them.
And so they got into the forest–track, some half mile from where they
had left it; they saw the gleam of Bull Garnetʼs windows, and knew the
straight road to the Hall.

Sir Cradock Nowell did not appear. Of course that was not expected;
but kind John Rosedew came up from the parsonage to keep Rufus Hutton
company. So the two had all the great dinner–table to themselves
entirely; John, as the old friend, sat at the head, and the doctor
sat by his right hand. Although there were few men in the world with
the depth of mind, and variety, the dainty turns of thought, the
lacework infinitely rich of original mind and old reading, which made
John Rosedewʼs company a forest for to wander in and be amazed with
pleasure; Rufus Hutton, sore and stiff, and aching in the back, thought
he had rarely come across so very dry a parson.

John was not inclined to talk: he was thinking of his Cradock, and he
had a care of still sharper tooth—what had happened to his Amy? He
had come up much against his wishes, only as a duty, on that dreary
Saturday night, just that Mr. Hutton, who had been so very kind, might
not think himself neglected. John had dined four hours ago, but that
made no difference to him, for he seldom knew when he _had_ dined, and
when he was expected to do it. Nevertheless he was human, for he loved
his bit of supper.

Mr. Rosedew had laboured hard, but vainly, to persuade Sir Cradock
Nowell to send some or any message to his luckless son. “No”, he
replied, “he did not wish to see him any more, or at any rate not at
present; it would be too painful to him. Of course he was sorry for
him, and only hoped he was half as sorry for himself”. John Rosedew
did not dream as yet of the black idea working even now in the lonely
fatherʼs mind, gaining the more on his better heart because he kept it
secret. The old man was impatient now even of the old friendʼs company;
he wanted to sit alone all day weaving and unravelling some dark skein
of evidence, and as yet he was not so possessed of the devil as to
cease to feel ashamed of him. “Coarse language”! cries some votary
of our self–conscious euphemism. But show me any plainer work of the
father of unbelief than want of faith in our fellow–creatures, when
we have proved and approved them; want of faith in our own flesh and
blood, with no cause for it but the imputed temptation. It shall go
hard with poor old Sir Cradock, and none shall gainsay his right to it.

Silence was a state of the air at once uncongenial to Dr. Huttonʼs
system and repugnant to all his finest theories of digestion. For lo,
how all nature around us protests against the Trappists, and the order
of St. Benedict! See how the cattle get together when they have dined
in the afternoon, and had their drink out of the river. Donʼt they
flip their tails, and snuffle, and grunt at their own fine sentiments,
and all the while they are chewing the cud take stock of one another?
Donʼt they discuss the asilus and œstrum, the last news of the
rinderpest, and the fly called by some the cow–dab, and donʼt they
abuse the festuca tribe, and the dyspepsia of the sorrel? Is the thrush
mute when he has bolted his worm, or the robin over his spiderʼs eggs?

So Rufus looked through his glass of port, which he took merely as a
corrective to the sherry of the morning, cocked one eye first, and then
the other, and loosed the golden bands of speech.

“Uncommonly pretty girls, Mr. Rosedew, all about this neighbourhood”.

“Very likely, Dr. Hutton; I see many pleasant faces; but I am no judge
of beauty”. He leaned back with an absent air, just as if he knew
nothing about it. And all the while he was saying to himself, “Pretty
girls indeed! Is there one of them like my Amy”?

“A beautiful girl I saw to–night. But I donʼt wish to see much more
beauty in that way. Nearly cost me my life, I know. You are up in the
classics so: what is it we used to read at school?—Helene, Helenaus,
Helip—something—teterrima belli causa fuit. Upon my word, I havenʼt
talked so much Latin and Greek—have another glass of port, just for
company; the dry vintage of ’34 canʼt hurt anybody”. John Rosedew took
another glass, for his spirits were low, and the wine was good, and the
parson felt then that he ought to have more confidence in God. Then he
brought his mind to bear on the matter, and listened very attentively
while the doctor described, with a rush of warm language and plenteous
exaggeration, the fright of his mare at that mournful vision, the
vision itself, and the consequences.

“Sir, you must have ridden like a Centaur, or like Alexander. What will
Mrs. Hutton say? But are you sure that she leaped an oak–tree”?

“Perfectly certain”, said Rufus, gravely, “clean through the fork of
the branches, and the acorns rattled upon my hat, like the hail of the
Himalaya”.

“Remarkable! Most remarkable”!

“But you have not told me yet”, continued Dr. Hutton, “although I am
sure that you know, who the beautiful young lady is”.

“From your description, and the place, though I have not heard that
they are in mourning, I think it must have been Miss Garnet”.

“Miss Garnet! What Miss Garnet? Not Bull Garnetʼs daughter? I never
heard that he had one”.

“Yes, he has, and a very nice girl. My Amy knows a little of her. But
he does not allow her to visit much, and is most repressive to her.
Unwise, in my opinion; not the way to treat a daughter; one should have
confidence in her, as I have in my dear child”.

“Oh, you have confidence in Miss Rosedew; and she goes out whenever she
likes, I suppose”?

“Of course she does”, said the simple John, wondering at the question;
“that is, of course, whenever it is right for her”.

“Of which, I suppose, she herself is the judge”.

“Why, no, not altogether. Her aunt has a voice in the matter always,
and a very potent one”.

“And, of course, Miss Rosedew, managed upon such enlightened
principles, never attempts to deceive you”?

“Amy! my Amy deceive me”! The rector turned pale at the very idea. “But
these questions are surely unusual from a gentleman whom I have known
for so very short a time. I am entitled, in turn, to ask your reason
for putting them”. Mr. Rosedew, never suspecting indignities, could
look very dignified.

“Iʼm in for it now”, thought Rufus Hutton; “what a fool I am! I fancied
the old fellow had no _nous_, except for Latin and Greek”.

Strange to say, the old fellow had _nous_ enough to notice his
hesitation. John Rosedew got up from his chair, and stood looking at
Rufus Hutton.

“Sir, I will thank you to tell me exactly what you mean about my
daughter”.

“Nothing at all, Mr. Rosedew. What do you suppose I _should_ mean”?

“You _should_ mean nothing at all, sir. But I believe that you _do_
mean something. And, please God, I will have it out of you”. Rufus
Hutton said afterwards that he had two great frights that evening, and
he believed the last was the worst. The parson never dreamed that any
man could be afraid of him, except it were a liar, and he looked upon
Rufus contemptuously. The man of the world was nothing before the man
of truth.

“Mr. Rosedew”, said Rufus, recovering himself, “your conduct is very
extraordinary; and (you will excuse my saying it) more violent than
becomes a man of your position and character”.

“No violence becomes any man, whatever his position. I am sorry if I
have been violent”.

“You have indeed”, said Rufus, pushing his advantage: a generous man
would have said, “No, you havenʼt”, at seeing the parsonʼs distress,
and so would Rufus have said, if he had happened to be in the right;
“so violent, Mr. Rosedew, that I believe you almost frightened me”.

“Dear me”! said John, reflecting, “and he has just leaped an oak–tree!
I must have been very bad”.

“Donʼt mention it, my dear sir, I entreat you say no more about it.
We all know what a father is”. And Rufus Hutton, who did not yet,
but expected to know in some three months, grew very large, and felt
himself able to patronise the rector. “Mr. Rosedew, I as well am to
blame. I am thoughtless, sir, very thoughtless, or rather I should say
too thoughtful; I am too fond of seeing round a corner, which I have
always been famous for. Sir, a man who possesses this power, this gift,
this—I donʼt know the word for it, but I have no doubt you do—that man
is apt to—I mean to——”

“Knock his head against a wall”? suggested the parson, in all good
faith.

“No, you mistake me; I donʼt mean that at all; I mean that a man with
this extraordinary foresight, which none can understand except those
who are gifted with it, is liable sometimes, is amenable—I mean to—to——”

“See double. Ah, yes, I can quite understand it”. John Rosedew shut
his eyes, and felt up for a disquisition, yet wanted to hear of his
daughter.

“No, my dear sir, no. It is something very far from anything so
commonplace as that. What I mean is—only I cannot express it, because
you interrupt me so—that a man may have this faculty, this insight,
this perception, which saves him from taking offence where none
whatever is meant, and yet, as it were by some obliquity of the vision,
may seem, in some measure, to see the wrong individual”. Here Rufus
felt like the dwarf Alypius, when he had stodged Iamblichus.

“That is an interesting question, and reminds me of the state of
_ἀῤῥεψία_ as described in the life of Pyrrho by Diogenes Laertius;
whose errors, if I may venture to say it, have been made too much of
by the great Isaac Casaubon, then scarcely mature of judgment. It will
give me the greatest pleasure to go into that question with you. But
not just now. I am thrown out so sadly, and my memory fails me”—John
Rosedew had fancied this, by–the–by, ever since he was thirty years
old—“only tell me one thing, Dr. Hutton, and I am very sorry for my
violence; you meant no harm about my daughter”? Here the grey–haired
man, with the mighty forehead, opened his clear blue eyes, and looked
down upon Rufus beseechingly.

“Upon my honour as a gentleman, I mean no harm whatever. I made the
greatest mistake, and I see the mistake I made”.

“Will you tell me, sir, what it was? Just to ease my mind. I am sure
that you will”.

“No, I must not tell you now, until I have worked the matter out. You
will thank me for not doing so. But I apologise most heartily. I feel
extremely uncomfortable. No claret, sir, but the port, if you please. I
was famous, in India, for my nerve; but now it seems to be failing me”.

Rufus, as we now perceive, had fully discovered his mistake, and was
trying to trace the consequences. The beautiful girl whom he saw in the
wood, that evening, with Clayton Nowell, was not our Amy at all, but
Mr. Garnetʼs daughter. He knew the face, though changed and white, when
it frightened his mare in the moonlight; and, little time as he had to
think, it struck him then as very strange that Miss Rosedew should be
there. Bull Garnetʼs cottage, on the other hand, was quite handy in the
hollow.




CHAPTER XXVI.


At this melancholy time, John Rosedew had quite enough to do without
any burden of fresh anxieties about his own pet Amy. Nevertheless,
that burden was added; not by Dr. Huttonʼs vague questions, although
they helped to impose it, but by the fatherʼs own observation of his
darlingʼs strange condition. “Can it be”, he asked himself, and often
longed to ask her, as he saw only lilies where roses had been, and
little hands trembling at breakfast–time, “can it be that this child of
mine loved the poor boy Clayton, and is wasting away in sorrow for him?
Is that the reason why she will not meet Cradock, nor Cradock meet her,
and she trembles at his name? And then that book which Aunt Doxy made
her throw on the kitchen fire—very cruel I now see it was of my good
sister Eudoxia, though at first I did not think so—that book I know was
poor Claytonʼs, for I have seen it in his hand. Well, if it truly is
so, there is nothing to be done, except to be unusually kind to her,
and trust to time for the cure, and give her plenty of black–currant
jam”.

These ideas he imparted to the good Aunt Doxy, who delivered some
apophthegms (which John did not want to listen to), but undertook,
whatever should happen, to be down upon Amy sharply. She knew all
about her tonsils and her uvula, and all that stuff, and she did not
want Johnʼs advice, though she had never had a family; and thank God
heartily for it!

On Monday, when the funeral came to Nowelhurst churchyard, John Rosedew
felt his heart give way, and could not undertake it. At the risk of
deeply offending Sir Cradock, whose nerves that day were of iron, he
passed the surplice to his curate, Mr. Pell, of Rushford; and begged
him, with a sad slow smile, to do the duty for him. Sir Cradock Nowell
frowned, and coloured, and then bowed low with an icy look, when he saw
the change which had been made, and John Rosedew fall in as a mourner.
People said that from that day the old friendship was dissevered.

John, for his part, could not keep his eyes from the nook of the
churchyard, where among the yew–trees stood, in the bitterness of
anguish, he who had not asked, nor been asked, to attend as mourner.
Cradock bowed his head and wept, for now his tears came freely, and
prayed the one Almighty Father, who alone has mercy, not to take his
misery from him, but to take him from it.

When the mould was cast upon the coffin, black Wena came between
peopleʼs legs, gave a cry, and jumped in after it, thinking to retrieve
her master, like a stick from the water. She made such a mournful
noise in the grave, and whimpered, and put her head down, and wondered
why no one said “Wena, dear”, that all the school–girls burst out
sobbing—having had apples from Clayton lately—and Octavius Pell, the
great cricketer, wanted something soft for his throat.

That evening, when all was over, and the grave heaped snugly up, and
it was time to think of other things and begin to wonder at sorrow,
John Rosedew went to Sir Cradock Nowell, not only as a fellow–mourner
and a friend of ancient days, but as a minister of Christ. It had cost
John many struggles; and, what with his sense of worldly favours,
schoolday–friendship, delicacy, he could scarce tell what to make of
it, till he just went down on his knees and prayed; then the learned
man learned his duty.

Sir Cradock turned his head away, as if he did not want him. John held
out his hand, and said nothing.

“Mr. Rosedew, I am surprised to see you. And yet, John, this is kind of
you”.

John hoped that he only said “Mr. Rosedew”, because the footman was
lingering, and he tried not to feel the difference.

“Cradock, you know what I am, as well as I know what you are. Fifty
years, my dear fellow, fifty years of friendship”.

“Yes, John, I remember when I was twelve years old, and you fought Sam
Cockings for me”.

“And, Cradock, I thrashed him fairly; you know I thrashed him fairly.
They said I got his head under the form; but you know it was all a lie.
How I do hate lies! I believe it began that day. If so, the dislike is
subjective. Perhaps I ought to reconsider it”.

“John, I know nothing in your life which you ought to reconsider,
except what you are doing now”.

Sir Cradock Nowell began the combat, because he felt that it must be
waged; and perhaps he knew in that beginning that he had the weaker
cause.

“Cradock, I am doing nothing which is not my simple duty. When I see
those I love in the deepest distress, can I help siding with them”?

“Upon that principle, or want of it, you might espouse, as a duty, the
cause of any murderer”.

The old man shuddered, and his voice shook, as he whispered that last
word. As yet he had not worked himself up, nor been worked up by
others, to the black belief which made the living lost beyond the dead.

“I am sure I donʼt know what I might do”, said John Rosedew, simply,
“but what I am doing now is right; and in your heart you know it. Come,
Cradock, as an old man now, and one whom God has visited, forgive your
poor, your noble son, who never will forgive himself”.

But for one word in that speech, John Rosedew would perhaps have won
his cause, and reconciled son and father.

“My _noble_ son indeed, John! A very noble thing he has done. Shall I
never hear the last of his nobility? And who ever called my Clayton
noble? You have been unfair throughout, John Rosedew, most unfair and
blind to the merits of my more loving, more simple–hearted, more truly
noble boy, I tell you”.

Mr. Rosedew, at such a time, could not of course contest the point,
could not tell the bereaved old man that it was he himself who had been
unfair.

“And when”, asked Sir Cradock, getting warmer, “when did you know my
poor boy Violet stick up for political opinions of his own at the age
of twenty, want to drain tenants’ cottages, and pretend to be better
and wiser than his father”?

“And when have you known Cradock do, at any rate, the latter”?

“Ever since he got that scholarship, that Scotland thing at Oxford”—Sir
Cradock knew the name well enough, as every Oxford man does—“he has
been perfectly insufferable; such arrogance, such conceit, such airs!
And he only got it by a trick. Poor Viley ought to have had it”.

John Rosedew tried to control himself, but the gross untruth and
injustice of that last accusation were a little too much for him.

“Perhaps, Sir Cradock Nowell, you will allow that I am a competent
judge of the relative powers of the two boys, who knew all they did
know from me, and from no one else”.

“Of course, I know you are a competent judge, only blinded by
partiality”.

John allowed even that to go by.

“Without any question of preference, simply as a lover of literature,
I say that Clayton had no chance with him in a Greek examination. In
Latin he would have run him close. You know I always said so, even
before they went to college. I was surprised, at the time, that they
mentioned Clayton even as second to him”.

“And grieved, I dare say, deeply grieved, if the truth were told”!

“It is below me to repel mean little accusations”.

“Come, John Rosedew”, said Sir Cradock, magnanimously and liberally, “I
can forgive you for being quarrelsome, even at such a time as this. It
always was so, and I suppose it always will be. To–day I am not fit for
much, though perhaps you do not know it. Thinking so little of my dead
boy, you are surprised that I should grieve for him”.

“I should be surprised indeed if you did not. God knows even I have
grieved deeply, as for a son of my own”.

“Shake hands, John; you are a good fellow—the best fellow in the world.
Forgive me for being petulant. You donʼt know how my heart aches”.

After that it was impossible to return for the moment to Cradock
Nowell. But the next day John renewed the subject, and at length
obtained a request from the father that his son should come to him.

By this time Cradock hardly knew when he was doing anything, and when
he was doing nothing. He seemed to have no regard for any one, no
concern about anything, least of all for himself. Even his love for
Amy Rosedew had a pall thrown over it, and lay upon the trestles. The
only thing he cared at all for was his fatherʼs forgiveness: let him
get that, and then go away and be seen no more among them. He could not
think, or feel surprise, or fear, or hope for anything; he could only
tell himself all day long, that if God were kind He would kill him. A
young life wrecked, so utterly wrecked, and through no fault of its
own; unless (as some begin to dream) we may not slay for luxury; unless
we have but a limited right to destroy our Fatherʼs property.

Sir Cradock, it has been stated, cared a great deal more for his
children than he did for his ancestors. He had not been wondering,
through his sorrow, what the world would say of him, what it would
think of the Nowells; he had a little too much self–respect to care a
fig for foolʼs–tongue. Now he sat in his carved oak–chair, expecting
his only son, and he tried to sit upright. But the flatness of his
back was gone, never to return; and the shoulder–blades showed through
his coat, like a spoon left under the tablecloth. Still he appeared a
stately man, one not easily bowed by fortune, or at least not apt to
acknowledge it.

Young Cradock entered his fatherʼs study, with a flush on his cheeks,
which had been so pale, and his mind made up for endurance, but his
wits going round like a swirl of leaves. He could not tell what he
might say or do. He began to believe he had shot his father, and to
wonder whether it hurt him much. Trying in vain to master his thoughts,
he stood with his quivering hands clasped hard, and his chin upon his
breast.

So perhaps Adrastus stood, Adrastus son of Gordias, before the
childless Crœsus; and the simple words are these.

“After this there came the Lydians carrying the corpse. And behind it
followed the slayer. And standing there before the corpse, he gave
himself over to Crœsus, stretching forth his hands, commanding to slay
him upon the corpse, telling both his own former stress, and how upon
the top of that he had destroyed his cleanser, nor was his life now
liveable. Crœsus, having heard these things, though being in so great a
trouble of the hearth, has compassion on Adrastus, and says to him——”

“But Adrastus, son of Gordias, son of Midas, this man, I say, who had
been the slayer of his womb–brother, and slayer of him that cleansed
him, when there was around the grave a quietude from men, feeling that
he was of all men whom he had ever seen the most weighed down with
trouble, kills himself dead upon the tomb”.

But the father now was not like Croesus, the generous–hearted Lydian,
although the man who stood before him was not a runagate from Phrygia,
but the son of his own loins. The father did not look at him, but kept
his eyes fixed on the window, as though he knew not any were near him.
Then the son could wait no more, but spoke in a hollow, trembling voice:

“Father, I am come, as you ordered”.

“Yes. I will not keep you long. Perhaps you want to go out” (“shooting”
he was about to say, but could not be quite so cruel). “I only wish so
to settle matters that we may meet no more”.

“Oh, father—my own father!—for Godʼs sake!—if there be a God—donʼt
speak to me like that”!

“Sir, I shall take it as a proof that you are still a gentleman, which
at least you used to be, if you will henceforth address me as ‘Sir
Cradock Nowell’, a title which soon will be your own”.

“Father, look me in the face, and ask me; then I will”.

Sir Cradock Nowell still looked forth the heavily–tinted window. His
son, his only, his grief–worn son, was kneeling at his side, unable to
weep, too proud to sob, with the sense of deep wrong rising.

If the father once had looked at him, nature must have conquered.

“Mr. Nowell, I have only admitted you that we might treat of business.
Allow me to forget the face of a fratricide, perhaps _murderer_”.

Cradock Nowell fell back heavily, for he had risen from his knees. The
crown of his head crashed the glass of a picture, and blood showered
down his pale face. He never even put his hand up, to feel what was the
matter. He said nothing, not a syllable; but stood there, and let the
room go round. How his mother must have wept, if she was looking down
from heaven!

The old man, having all the while a crude, dim sense of outrunning his
heart, gave the youth time to recover himself, if it were a thing worth
recovering.

“Now, as to our arrangements—the subject I wished to speak about. I
only require your consent to the terms I propose, until, in the natural
course of events, you succeed to the family property”.

“What family property, sir”? Cradockʼs head was dizzy still, the
bleeding had done him good.

“Why, of course, the Nowelhurst property; all these entailed estates,
to which you are now sole heir”.

“I will never touch one shilling, nor step upon one acre of it”.

“Under your motherʼs—that is to say, under my marriage–settlement”,
continued Sir Cradock, in the same tone, as if his son were only
bantering, “you are at once entitled to the sum of 50,000_l._ invested
in Three per Cent. Consols—which would have been—I mean, which was
meant for younger children. This sum the trustees will be prepared——”

“Do you think I will touch it? Am I a thief as well as a murderer”?

“I shall also make arrangements for securing to you, until my death, an
income of 5000_l._ per annum. This you can draw for quarterly, and the
cheques will be countersigned by my steward, Mr. Garnet”.

“Of course, lest I should forge. Once for all, hear me, Sir Cradock
Nowell. So help me the God who has now forsaken me, who has turned my
life to death, and made my own father curse me—every word of yours is a
curse, I say—so help me that God (if there be one to help, as well as
to smite a man), till you crave my pardon upon your knees, as I have
craved yours this day, I will never take one yard of your land, I will
never call myself ‘Nowell’, or own you again as my father. God knows I
am very unlucky and little, but you have shown yourself less. And some
day you will know it”.

In the full strength of his righteous pride, he walked for the first
time like a man, since he leaped that deadly hedge. From that moment
a change came over him. There was nothing to add to his happiness, but
something to rouse his manhood. The sense of justice, the sense of
honour—that flower and crown of justice—forbade him henceforth to sue,
and be shy, and bemoan himself under hedges. From that day forth he was
as a man visited of God, and humbled, but facing ever his fellow–men,
and not ashamed of affliction.




CHAPTER XXVII.


With an even step, and no frown on his forehead, nor glimpse of a tear
in his eyes, young Cradock walked to his own little room, his “nest”,
as he used to call it; where pipes, and books, and Oxford prints—no
ballet–girls, however, and not so very many hunters—and whips, and
foils, and boxing–gloves—_cum multis aliis quæ nunc describere longum
est; et cui non dicta_ long ago?—were handled more often than dusted.
All these things, except one pet little pipe, which he was now come to
look for, and which Viley had given him a year ago, when they swopped
pipes on their birthday (like Diomed and the brave Lycian), all the
rest were things of a bygone age, to be thought of no more for the
present, but dreamed of, perhaps, on a Christmas–eve, when the air is
full of luxury.

Caring but little for any of them, although he had loved them well
until they seemed to injure him, Cradock proceeded with great
equanimity to do a very foolish thing, which augured badly for the
success of a young man just preparing to start for himself in the
world. He poured the entire contents of his purse into a little
cedar tray, then packed all the money in paper rolls with a neatness
which rather astonished him, and sealed each roll with his amethyst
ring. Then he put them into a little box of some rare and beautiful
palm–wood, which had been his motherʼs, laid his cheque–book beside
them (for he had been allowed a banking account long before he was of
age), and placed upon that his gold watch and chain, and trinkets, the
amethyst ring itself, his diamond studs, and other jewellery, even a
locket which had contained two little sheaves of hair, bound together
with golden thread, but from which he first removed, and packed in
silver paper, the fair hair of his mother. This last, with the pipe
which Clayton had given him, and the empty purse made by Amyʼs fingers,
were all he meant to carry away, besides the clothes he wore.

After locking the box he rang the bell, and begged the man who answered
it to send old Hogstaff to him. That faithful servant, from whom he had
learned so many lessons of infancy, came tottering along the passage,
with his old eyes dull and heavy. For Job had gloried in those two
brothers, and loved them both as the children of his elder days. And
now one of them was gone for ever, in the height of his youth and
beauty, and a whisper was in the household that the other would not
stay. Of him, whom Job had always looked upon as his future master
(for he meant to outlive the present Sir Cradock, as he had done the
one before him), he had just been scoring upon his fingers all the
things he had taught him—to whistle “Spankadillo”, while he drummed
it with his knuckles; to come to the pantry–door, and respond to the
“Whoʼs there”?—“A grenadier”! shouldering a broomstick; to play on the
Jewʼs–harp, with variations, “An old friend, and a bottle to give him”;
and then to uncork the fictitious bottle with the pop of his forefinger
out of his mouth, and to decant it carefully with the pat of his
gurgling cheeks! After all that, how could he believe Master Crad could
ever forsake him?

Now Mr. Hogstaffʼs legs were getting like the ripe pods of a
scarlet–runner (although he did not run much); here they stuck in, and
there they stuck out, abnormally in either case; his body began to come
forward as if warped at the small of the back; and his honest face
(though he drank but his duty) was Septemberʼd with many a vintage.
And yet, with the keenness of love and custom, he saw at once what the
matter was, as he looked up at the young master.

“Oh, Master Crad, dear Master Crad, whatever are you going to do?
Donʼt, for good now, donʼt, I beg on you. Hearken now; doʼee hearken to
an old man for a minute”. And he caught him by both arms to stop him,
with his tremulous, wrinkled hands.

“O Hoggy, dear, kind Hoggy! you are about the only one left to care
about me now”.

“No, donʼt you say that, Master Crad; donʼt you say that, whatever you
do. Whoever tell you that, tell a lie, sir. It was only last night Mrs.
Toaster, and cook, and Mrs. OʼGaghan, the Irishwoman, was round the
fire boiling, and they cried a deal more than they boiled, I do assure
you they did, sir. And Mr. Stote, he come in with some rabbits, and he
went on like mad. And the maids, so sorry every one of them, they canʼt
be content with their mourning, sir; I do assure you they canʼt. Oh,
donʼt ’ee do no harm to yourself, donʼt ’ee, Mr. Cradock, sir”.

“No, Hoggy”, said Cradock, taking his hands; “you need not fear that
now of me. I have had very wicked thoughts, but God has helped me over
them. Henceforth I am resolved to bear my trouble like a man. It is the
part of a dog to run, when the hoot begins behind him. Now, take this
little box, and this key, and give them yourself to Sir Cradock Nowell.
It is the last favour I shall ask of you. I am going away, my dear
old friend; donʼt keep me now, for I must go. Only give me your good
wishes; and see that they mind poor Caldo: and, whatever they say of me
behind my back, you wonʼt believe it, Job Hogstaff, will you”?

Job Hogstaff had never been harder put to it in all his seventy years.
Then, as he stood at the open door to see the last of his favourite,
he thought of the tall, dark womanʼs words so many years ago. “A
bonnie pair ye have gat; but yeʼll ha’ no luck o’ them. Tak’ the word
of threescore year, yeʼll never get no luck o’ ’em”.

Cradock turned aside from his path, to say good–bye to Caldo. It would
only take just a minute, he thought, and of course he should never see
him again. So he went to that snuggest and sweetest of kennels, and in
front of it sat the king of dogs.

The varieties of canine are as manifold and distinct as those of
human nature. But the dog, be he saturnine or facetious, sociable
or contemplative, mercurial or melancholic, is quite sure to be one
thing—true and loyal ever. Can we, who are less than the dogs of the
Infinite, say as much of ourselves to Him? Now Caldo, as has been
implied, if not expressed before, was a setter of large philosophy
and rare reflective power. I mean, of course, theoretical more than
practical philosophy; as any dog would soon have discovered who tried
to snatch a bone from him. Moreover, he had some originality, and a
turn for satire. He would sit sometimes by the hour, nodding his head
impressively, and blinking first one eye and then the other, watching
and considering the doings of his fellow–dogs. How fashionably they
yawned and stretched, in a mode they had learned from a pointer, who
was proud of his teeth and vertebræ; how they hooked up their tails for
a couple of joints, and then let them fall at a right angle, having
noticed that fashion in ladies’ bustles, when they came on a Sunday to
talk to them; how they crawled on their stomachs to get a pat, as a
provincial mayor does for knighthood; how they sniffed at each otherʼs
door, with an eye to the rotten bones under the straw, as we all smell
about for the wealthy; how their courtesy to one another flowed from
their own convenience—these, and a thousand other dog–tricks, Caldo,
dwelling apart, observed, but did not condemn, for he felt that they
were his own. Now he hushed his bark of joy, and looked up wistfully at
his master, for he knew by the expression of that face all things were
not as they ought to be. Why had Wena snapped at him so, and avoided
his society, though he had always been so good to her, and even thought
of an alliance? Why did his master order him home that dull night in
the covert, when he was sure he had done no harm? Above all, what meant
that moving blackness he had seen through the trees only yesterday,
when the other dogs (muffs as they were) expected a regular battue, and
came out strong at their kennel doors, and barked for young Clayton to
fetch them?

So he looked up now in his masterʼs face, and guessed that it meant a
long farewell, perhaps a farewell for ever. He took a fond look into
his eyes, and his own pupils told great volumes. Then he sat up, and
begged for a minute or two, with a most beseeching glance, to share his
masterʼs fortunes, though he might have to steal his livelihood, and
never get any shooting. Seeing that this could never be, he planted his
fore–paws on Cradockʼs breast (though he felt that it was a liberty)
and nestled his nose right under his cheek, and wanted to keep him ever
so long. Then he howled with a low, enduring despair, as the footfall
he loved grew fainter.

Looking back sadly, now and then, at the tranquil home of his
childhood, whose wings, and gables, and depths of stone were grand
in the autumn sunset, Cradock Nowell went his way toward the simple
Rectory: he would say good–bye there to Uncle John and the kind Aunt
Doxy; Miss Rosedew the younger, of course, would avoid him, as she had
done ever since. But suddenly he could not resist the strange desire to
see once more that fatal, miserable spot, the bidental of his destiny.
So he struck into a side–path leading to the deep and bosky covert.

The long shadows fell from the pale birch stems, the hollies looked
black in the sloping light, and the brown leaves fluttered down here
and there as the cold wind set the trees shivering. Only six days
ago, only half an hour further into the dusk, he had slain his own
twin–brother. He crawled up the hedge through the very same gap, for
he could not leap it now; his back ached with weakness, his heart with
despair, as he stayed himself by the same hazel–branch which had struck
his gun at the muzzle. Then he shivered, as the trees did, and his
hair, like the brown leaves, rustled, as he knelt and prayed that his
brotherʼs spirit might appear there and forgive him. Hoping and fearing
to find it there, he sidled down into the dark wood, and with his heart
knocking hard against his ribs, forced himself to go forward.

All at once his heart stood still, and every nerve of his body went
creeping—for he saw a tall, white figure kneeling where his brotherʼs
blood was—kneeling, never moving, the hands together as in prayer, the
face as wan as immortality, the black hair—if it were hair—falling
straight as a pall drawn back from an alabaster coffin–head. The
power of the entire form was not of earth, nor heaven; but as of the
intermediate state, when we know not we are dead yet.

Cradock could not think nor breathe. The whole of his existence was
frozen up in awe. It showed him in the after time, when he could think
about it, the ignorance, the insolence, of dreaming that any human
state is quit of human fear. While he gazed, in dread to move (not
knowing his limbs would refuse him), with his whole life swallowed up
in gazing at the world beyond the grave, the tall, white figure threw
its arms up to the darkening sky, rose, and vanished instantly.

What do you think Cradock Nowell did? We all know what he ought to
have done. He ought to have walked up calmly, with measured yet rapid
footsteps, and his eyes and wits well about him, and investigated
everything. Instead of that, he cut and ran as hard as he could go;
and I know I should have done the same, and I believe more than half
of you would, unless you were too much frightened. He would never turn
back upon living man; but our knowledge of Hades is limited. We pray
for angels around our bed; if they came, we should have nightmare.

Cradock, going at a desperate pace, with a handsome pair of legs, which
had recovered their activity, kicked up something hard and bright from
a little dollop of leaves, caught it in his hand like a tennis–ball,
and leaped the hedge _uno impetu_. Away he went, without stopping to
think, through the splashy sides of the spire–bed, almost as fast, and
quite as much frightened, as Rufus Huttonʼs mare. When he got well out
into the chase, he turned, and began to laugh at himself; but a great
white owl flapped over a furze–bush, and away went Cradock again. The
light had gone out very suddenly, as it often does in October, and
Cradock (whose wind was uncommonly good) felt it his duty to keep good
hours at the Rectory. So, with the bright thing, whatever it was, poked
anywhere into his pocket, he came up the drive at early tea–time, and
got a glimpse through the window of Amy.

“Couldnʼt have been Amy, at any rate”, he said to himself, in
extinction of some very vague ideas; “I defy her to come at the pace I
have done. No, no; it must have been in answer to my desperate prayer”.

Amy was gone, though her cup was there, when Cradock entered the
drawing–room. “Well”, he thought, “how hard–hearted she is! But it
cannot matter now, much. Though I never believed she would be so”.

Being allowed by his kind entertainers to do exactly as he pleased,
poor Cradock had led the life of a hermit more than that of a guest
among them. He had taken what little food he required in the garret
he had begged for, or carried it with him into the woods, where most
of his time was spent. Of course all this was very distressing to the
hospitable heart of Miss Doxy; but her brother John would have it so,
for so he had promised Cradock. He could understand the reluctance of
one who feels himself under a ban to meet his fellow–creatures hourly,
and know that they all are thinking of him. So it came to pass that
Miss Eudoxia, who now sat alone in the drawing–room, was surprised as
well as pleased at the entrance of their refugee. As he hesitated a
moment, in doubt of his reception, she ran up at once, took both his
hands, and kissed him on the forehead.

“Oh, Cradock, my dear boy, this is kind of you; most kind, indeed, to
come and tell me at once of your success. I need not ask—I know by your
face; the first bit of colour I have seen in your poor cheeks this many
a day”.

“Thatʼs because I have been running, Miss Rosedew”.

“Miss Rosedew, indeed; and _now_, Cradock! Aunt Eudoxia, if you
please, or Aunt Doxy, with all my heart, now”.

He used to call her so, to tease her, in the happy days gone by; and
she loved to be teased by him, her pet and idol.

“Dear Aunt Eudoxia, tell me truly, do you think—I can hardly ask you”.

“Think what, Cradock? My poor Cradock; oh, donʼt be like that”!

“Not that I did—I donʼt mean that—but that it was possible for me to
have done it on purpose”?

“Done what on purpose, Cradock”?

“Why, of course, that horrible, horrible thing”.

“_On purpose_, Cradock! My poor innocent! Only let me hear any one
dream of it, and if I donʼt come down upon them”.

An undignified sentence, that of Aunt Doxyʼs, as well as a most absurd
one. How long has she been in the habit of hearing people dream?

“Some one not only dreams it, some one actually believes that I did it
so”.

“The low wretch—the despicable—who”?

“My own father”.

I will not repeat what Miss Rosedew said, when she recovered from
her gasp, because her language was stronger than becomes an elderly
lady and the sister of a clergyman, not to mention the Countess of
Driddledrum and Dromore, who must have been wholly forgotten.

“Then you donʼt think, dear Aunt Eudoxia, that—that Uncle John would
believe it”?

“What, my brother John! Surely you know better than that, my dear”.

“Nor—nor—perhaps not even cousin Amy”?

“Amy, indeed! I do believe that child is perfectly mad. I canʼt make
her out at all, she is so contradictory. She cries half the night, I
am sure of that; and she does not care for her school, though she goes
there; and her flowers she wonʼt look at”.

Seeing that Cradockʼs countenance fell more and more at all this, Miss
Rosedew, who had long suspected where his heart was dwelling, told him
a thing to cheer him up, which she had declared she would never tell.

“Darling Amy is, you know, a very odd girl indeed. Sometimes, when
something happens very puzzling and perplexing, some great visitation
of Providence, Amy becomes so dreadfully obstinate, I mean she has such
delightful faith, that we are obliged to listen to her. And she is
quite sure to be right in the end, though at the moment, perhaps, we
laugh at her. And yet she is so shy, you can never get at her heart,
except by forgetting what you are about. Well, we got at it somehow
this afternoon; and you should have heard what she said. Her beautiful
great eyes flashed upon us, like the rock that was struck, and gushed
like it, before she ended. ‘Can we dare to think’, she cried, ‘that
our God is asleep like Baal—that He knows not when He has chastened
His children beyond what they can bear? I know that he, who is now so
trampled and crushed of Heaven, is not tried thus for nothing. He shall
rise again more pure and large, and fresh from the hand of God, and do
what lucky men rarely think of—the will of his Creator’. And, when John
and I looked at her, she fell away and cried terribly”.

Cradock was greatly astonished: it seemed so unlike young Amy to be
carried away in that style. But her comfort and courage struck root in
his heart, and her warm faith thawed his despair. Still he saw very
little chance, at present, of doing anything but starving.

“How wonderfully good you all are to me! But I canʼt talk about it,
though I shall think of it as long as I live. I am going away to–night,
Aunt Doxy, but I must first see Uncle John”.

Of course Miss Rosedew was very angry, and proved it to be quite
impossible that Cradock should leave them so; but, before very long,
her good sense prevailed, and she saw that it was for the best. While
he stayed there, he must either persist to shut himself up in solitude,
or wander about in desert places, and never look with any comfort on
the face of man. So she went with him to the door of the book–room, and
left him with none but her brother.

John Rosedew sat in his little room, with only one candle to light him,
and the fire gone out as usual: his books lay all around him, even his
best–loved treasures, but his heart was not among them. The grief of
the old, though not wild and passionate as a young manʼs anguish, is
perhaps more pitiable, because more slow and hopeless. The young tree
rings to the keen pruning–hook, the old tree groans to the grating saw;
but one will blossom and bear again, while the other gapes with canker.
None of his people had heard the rector quote any Greek or Latin for
a length of time unprecedented. When a sweet and playful mind, like
his, has taken to mope and be earnest, the effect is far more sad and
touching than a stern manʼs melancholy. Ironworks out of blast are
dreary, but the family hearth moss–grown is woeful.

Uncle John leaped up very lightly from his brooding (rather than
reading), and shook Cradock Nowell by the hand, as if he never would
let him go, all the time looking into his face by the light of a
composite candle. It was only to know how he had fared, and John read
his face too truly. Then, as Cradock turned away, not wanting to make
much of it, John came before him with sadness and love, and his blue
eyes glistened softly.

“My boy, my boy”! was all he could say, or think, for a very long time.
Then Cradock told him, without a tear, a sigh, or even a comment, but
with his face as pale as could be, and his breath coming heavily, all
that his father had said to him, and all that he meant to do through it.

“And so, Uncle John”, he concluded, rising to start immediately, “here
I go to seek my fortune, such as it will and must be. Good–bye, my best
and only friend. I am ten times the man I was yesterday, and shall be
grander still to–morrow”. He tried to pop off like a lively cork, but
John Rosedew would not have it.

“Young man, donʼt be in a hurry. It strikes me that I want a pipe; and
it also strikes me that you will smoke one with me”.

Cradock was taken aback by the novelty of the situation. He had never
dreamed that Uncle John could, under any possible circumstances, ask
him to smoke a pipe. He knew well enough that the rector smoked a
sacrificial pipe to Morpheus, in a room of his own up–stairs; only one,
while chewing the cud of all he had read that day. But Mr. Rosedew had
always discouraged, as elderly smokers do, any young aspirants to the
mystic hierophancy. It is not a vow to be taken rashly, for the vow is
irrevocable; except with men of no principle.

And now he was to smoke there—he, a mere bubble–blowing boy, to smoke
in the middle of deepest books, to fumigate a manuscript containing a
lifeful of learning, which John could no more get on with; and—oh Miss
Eudoxia!—to make the hall smell and the drawing–room! The oxymoron
overcame him, and he took his pipe: John Rosedew had filled it
judiciously, and quite as a matter of course; he filled his own in the
self–same manner, with a digital skill worthy of an ancient fox trying
on a foxglove. All the time, John was shyly wondering at his own great
force of character.

“Now”, said John Rosedew, still keeping it up, “I have a drop of very
old Schiedam—Schnapps I think, or something—of which I want your
opinion; Crad, my boy, I want your opinion, before we import any more.
I am no judge of that sort of thing; it is so long since I was at
Oxford”.

Without more ado, he went somewhither, after lighting Cradockʼs yard
of clay—which the young man burnt his fingers about, for he wouldnʼt
let the old man do it—and came back like a Bacchanal, with a square
black–jack beneath his arm, and Jenny after him, wondering whether
they had not prayed that morning enough against the devil. It was a
good job Miss Amy was out of the way; the old cat was bewitched, that
was certain, as well as her dear good master. Miss Doxy was happy in
knowing not that she was called “the old cat” in the kitchen.




CHAPTER XXVIII.


“Now, Craddy, my dear, dear boy”, said Uncle John, when things had been
done with lemon and cold water, and all that wherein discussion so
utterly beats description, “you know me too well to suppose that I wish
to pass things lightly. I know well enough that you will look the hard
world full in the face. And so should I do, in your case. All I wish
is that you should do it, not with spite, or bile, or narrowness, but
broadly as a Christian”.

“It is hard to talk about that now”, said Cradock, inhaling charity,
and puffing away all acrimony; “Uncle John, I hope I may come to it as
my better spirit returns to me”.

“I hope it indeed, and believe it, Crad; I donʼt see how it can be
otherwise, with a young man of your breadth of mind, and solid faith to
help you. An empty lad, who snaps up stuff because he thinks it fine,
and garbles it into garbage, would become an utter infidel, under what
you have suffered. With you, I believe, it will be otherwise; I believe
you will be enlarged and purified by sorrow—the night which makes the
guiding–star so much the clearer to us”. John Rosedew was drinking no
Schiedam—allow me to explain—though pretending rare enjoyment of it,
and making Cradock drink a little, because his heart was down so.

After they had talked a pipeful longer, not great weighty sentiments,
but a deal of kindly stuff, the young fellow got up quietly, and said,
“Now, Uncle John, I must go”.

“My boy, I can trust you anywhere, after what you have been telling
me. Of human nature I know nothing, except”—for John thought he did
know something—“from my own little experience. I find great thoughts
in the Greek philosophers; but somehow they are too general, and too
little genial. One thing I know, we far more often mistrust than trust
unwisely. And now I can trust you, Cradock; in the main, you will stand
upright. Stop, my boy; you must have a scrip; I was saving it for your
birthday”.

“You donʼt despise me, I hope”? said Cradock; “you donʼt think me a
coward for running away so? After what has happened to–day, I should go
mad, if I stopped here. Not that that would matter much; only that, if
it were so, I should be sure to _do it_”.

John Rosedew had no need to ask what he meant by the last two words,
for the hollow voice told him plainly. But for him, it is likely enough
that it would have been done ere this; at any rate, in the first
horror, his hand alone had prevented it. The parson trembled at the
idea, but thought best not to dwell upon it.

“‘Reformidare mortem est animi pusillanimi’, but ‘reformidare vitam’
is ten times worse, because impious. Therefore in your case, my boy,
it is utterly impossible, as well as ignoble towards us who love you
so. Remember that you will break at least two old hearts you owe some
duty to, if you allow your own to be broken. And now for your viaticum;
see how you have relieved me. While you lived beneath Hymettian beams
in the goods of Tyre and Cyprus, I, even I your godfather, knew not
what to give you. The thought has been vexing me for months, and now
what a simple solution! You shall have it in the original dross, to pay
the toll on the Appian road, at least the South–Western Railway. Figs
to Athens, I thought it would be, or even as eels to Copaïs; and now
‘serves iturum Cæsarem’. I believe it is at the twenty–first page of my
manuscript, such as it is, upon the Sabellian elements”.

After searching in three or four drawers—for he was rather astray
at the moment, though generally he could put his hand, even in the
dark, upon any particular one of his ten thousand books—he came upon
the Sabellian treatise, written on backs of letters, on posters, on
puffing circulars, even on visiting–cards, and cast–away tradesmenʼs
tickets; and there, at the twenty–first page or deltis, lay a 50l. Bank
of England note, with some very tough roots arranged diamond–wise on
the back, and arrows, and hyphens, and asterisks, flying about thickly
between them. These he copied off, in a moment, on a piece of old
hat–lining, and then triumphantly waved the bank–note in the air. It
was not often poor Uncle John got hold of so much money; too bitterly
knew Aunt Doxy how large was the mesh of his purse.

While Cradock gazed with great admiration, John Rosedew, with his
fingers upon his lips, and looking half ashamed of himself, went to a
cupboard, whose doors, half open, gave a glimpse of countless sermons.
From among them he drew a wide–mouthed bottle of leeches, and set it
upon the table. Then he pulled out the stopper, unplugged it, and lo!
from a hole in the cork fell out two sovereigns and a half one. As this
money rolled on the table, John could not help chuckling a little.

“Ha, good sister Eudoxia, have I overreached thee again? Double
precaution there, you see, Crad. She has a just horror of my sermons,
and she runs at the sight of a leech. ‘Non missura cutemʼ—be sure, not
a word about it, Crad. That asylum is inviolable, and sempitern, I
hope. I shall put more there next week”.

Cradock took the money at once, with the deepest gratitude, but no
great fuss about it; for he saw how bitterly that good man would feel
it, if he were small enough to refuse.

I shall not dwell upon their good–bye, as we have had enough
valediction; only Cradock promised to write from London, so soon as he
could give an address there; then leaving sadness behind him, carried a
deal of it with him. Only something must yet be recounted, which befell
him in Nowelhurst. And this is the first act of it.

While he was in his garret packing a little bag of necessaries,
forced upon him by Miss Doxy from Johnʼs wardrobe and her own almost
indiscriminately, and while she was pulling and struggling up–stairs
with John, and Jemima, and Jenny—for she would have made Cradock, if
she could, carry the entire house with him—he, stowing some things in
his pocket, felt what he had caught up so hastily, while flying out of
the wood. He examined it by the candlelight, and became at once intent
upon it. It had lain beneath a drift of dead leaves backed by a scraggy
branch, whence anything short of a grand “skedaddle” would never have
dislodged it.

And yet it was a great deal too pretty to be treated in that way.
Cradock could not help admiring it, though he shuddered and felt some
wild hopes vanish as he made out the meaning. It was a beautiful gold
bracelet, light, and of first–rate workmanship, harmonious too with its
purpose, and of elegant design. The lower half was a strong soft chain
of the fabric of Trichinopoli, which bends like the skin of a snake;
the front and face showed a strong right arm, gauntleted, yet entirely
dependent upon the hand of a lady. No bezilling, no jewel whatever,
except that a glorious rose–shaped pearl hung, as in contest, between
them.

Cradock wondered for some little time what could be the meaning of it.
Then he knew that it was Claytonʼs offering to the beloved Amy. No
doubt could remain any longer, when he saw in the hollow of the back
the proposed inscription pencilled, “Rosa debita”, for the dead gold of
the ladyʼs palm, “Rosa dedita” for the burnished gold of the cavalierʼs
high pressure. With ingenious love to help him, he made it out in a
moment. “A rose due, now a rose true”. That was what it came to, if you
took it in punster fashion. Just one of poor Vileyʼs conceits.

Cradock had no time to follow it out, for Miss Eudoxia then came in
with a parcel as big as a feather–bed, of comforters, wrappers, and
eatables. But, after he had left the house, he began to think about
it, in the little path across the green to the village churchyard.
He concluded that Amy must have been in the wood that fatal evening.
She must have come to meet Clayton there; and yet it was not like
her. Facts, however, are facts, as sure as eggs are eggs; though our
knowledge makes no great advance through either of those aphorisms.
But a growing sense of injury—though he had no right to feel injured,
however it might be—this sense had kept him from asking for Amy, or
leaving the flirt a good–bye.

He entered the quiet churchyard, with the moon rising over the
tombstones, a mass of shadow cast by the great tower, and some epitaphs
pushing well into the light, like the names which get poked into
history. The wavering glance of the diffident moon, uncertain yet what
the clouds meant, slipped along the buttressed walls, and tried to hold
on at the angles. The damp corner, where the tower stood forth, and
the south porch ran out to look at it, drew back like a ghost who was
curtseying, and declining all further inquiry. Green slime was about,
like the sludge of a river; and a hundred sacred memories, growing
weary and rheumatic, had stopped their ears with lichen.

Cradock came in at the rickety swing–stile, and, caring no shadow for
ghost or ghostess, although he had run away so, took the straight
course to the old black doorway, and on to the heart of the churchyard;
for he must say good–bye to Clayton. All Nowelhurst still admired
that path; but those who had paved and admired it first were sleeping
on either side of it. The pavement now was overlapped, undertucked,
and crannied, full of holes where lobworms lived and came out after
a thunderstorm, and three–cornered dips that looked glazed in wet
weather, but scurfy and clammy in drought. And some of the flags stole
away and gave under, as if they too wanted burial, while others jerked
up, and asserted themselves as superior to some of the tombstones.
There in the dark, no mortal with any respect for his grandfather,
nor even a ghost with unbevilled soles, could go many steps without
tripping.

Who will be astonished, then, when I say that the lightest and
loveliest foot that ever tripped in the New Forest not only tripped
but stumbled there? At the very corner where the side walk comes
in, and the shade of the tower was deepest, smack from behind a
hideous sarcophagus fell into Cradockʼs arms the most beautiful
thing ever seen. If he had not caught her, she must have cut the
very sweetest face in the world into great holes like the pavement.
Stunned for a moment, and then so abroad, that she could not think,
nor even speak—“speak nor think” I would have said, if Amy had been
masculine—she lay in Cradockʼs trembling arms, and never wondered where
she was. Cradock forgot all despair for the moment, and felt uncommonly
lively. It was the sweetest piece of comfort sent to him yet from
heaven. Afterwards he always thought that his luck turned from that
moment. Perhaps it did; although most people would laugh who knew him
afterwards.

Presently Amy recovered, and was wroth with herself and everybody.
Ruddier than a Boursalt rose, she fell back against the tombstone.

“Oh, Amy”, said Cradock, retiring; “I have known it long. Even you are
turned against me”.

“I turned against you, Mr. Nowell! What right have you to say that of
me”?

“No right to say anything, Amy; and scarcely a right to think anything.
Only I have felt it”.

“Then I wouldnʼt give much for your feelings. I mean—I beg your
pardon—you know I can never express myself”.

“Of course, I know that”, said Cradock.

“Oh, canʼt I, indeed”? said Amy; “I dare say you think so, Mr. Nowell.
You have always thought so meanly of me. But, if I canʼt express my
meaning, I am sure my father can. Perhaps you think you know more than
he does”.

“Amy”, said Cradock, for all this was so unlike herself, that, loving
that self more than his own, he scarce knew what to do with it; “Amy,
dear, I see what it is. I suspected it all along”.

“What, if you please, Mr. Nowell? I am not accustomed to be suspected.
Suspected, indeed”!

“Miss Rosedew, donʼt be angry with me. I know very well how good you
are. It is the last time I shall ever see you, or I would not restore
you this”.

The moon, being on her way towards the southeast, looked over the
counter–like gravestone, and Cradock placed on the level surface the
bracelet found in the wood. Amy knew it in a moment; and she burst out
crying—

“Oh, poor Clayton! How proud he was of it! Mr. Nowell, I never could
have thought this of you; never, never, never”!

“Thought what of me, Amy? Darling Amy, what on earth have I done to
offend you”?

“Oh, nothing. I suppose it is nothing to remind me how cruel I have
been to him. Oh no, nothing at all. And all this _from you_”.

In a storm of sobs she fell upon Jeremy Wattleʼs tombstone, and Cradock
put one arm around her, to prevent her being hurt.

“Amy, you drive me wild. I have brought it to you only because it is
yours, and because I am going away”.

“Cradock, it never was mine. I refused it months ago; and I believe he
gave it—you know what he was, poor dear—I believe he transferred it,
and something else—oh no, I canʼt express myself—to—just to somebody
else”.

“Oh, you darling! and who was that other? What a fool he must have
been! Confound it, I never meant that”.

“I donʼt know, Cradock. Oh, please keep away. But I think it was Pearl
Garnet. Oh, Cradock, dear Cradock, how dare you? No, I wonʼt. Yes, I
will, Crad; considering all your misery”.

She put up her pure lips in the moonlight—for Cradock had got her in
both arms by this time, and was listening to no reason—her sweet lips,
pledged once pledged for ever, she put them up in her love and pity,
and let him do what he liked with them. And the moon, attesting a
thousand seals hourly, never witnessed one more binding.

After all, Cradock Nowell, so tried of Heaven, so scourged with the
bitterest rods of despair, your black web of life is inwoven now with
one bright thread of gold. The purest, the sweetest, the loveliest girl
that ever spun happiness out of sorrow, or smiled through the veil of
affliction, the truest and dearest of all Godʼs children, loving all
things, hating none, pours into your heart for ever all that fount
of love. Freed henceforth from doubt and wonder (except at her own
happiness), enfranchised of another world, enriched beyond commercial
thoughts, ennobled beyond self, she blushed as she spoke, and grew
pale as she thought, and who shall say which was more beautiful?
Cradock could tell, perhaps, if any one can; but he only knew that he
worshipped her. And to see the way she cried with joy, and how her
young bosom panted; it was enough to warm old Jeremy Wattle, dead and
buried nigh fourscore years.

Cradock, all abroad himself, full of her existence, tasting, feeling,
thinking nothing, except of her deliciousness, drew his own love round
to the light to photograph her for ever. Poor Clayton was dead; else
Crad would have thought that he deserved to be so, for going away to
Pearl Garnet: but then the grapes were sour. How he revelled in that
reflection! And yet it was very wrong of him.

Amy stood up in the moonlight, not ashamed to show herself. She felt
that Cradock was poring upon her, to stereotype every inch of her; and
yet she was not one atom afraid. She knew that no man ever depreciates
his own property, except in the joke which is brag. It is a most
wonderful thing, what girls know and what they _wonʼt_ know. But who
cares now for reflections?

Her thick hair had all fallen out of her hat, because she had been
crying so; her delicate form, still so light and girlish, leaned
forward in trust of the future, and the long dark lashes she raised for
her lover glistened with the deep light under them. Shame was nestling
in her cheeks, the shame of growing womanhood, the down on the yet
ungathered fruit of love. Then she crept in closer to him, to stop him
from looking so much at her.

“Darling Cradock, my own dear Cradock, donʼt you know me now? You see,
I only love you so because you are so unlucky, and I am so dreadfully
obstinate”.

“Of course, I know all that, my pet; my beauty inexpressible. And,
remember that I only love you so because you are such a darling”.

Then Amy told him how sorry she was for having been so fractious
lately; and that she would never be so again, only it was all his
fault, because she wanted to comfort him, and he would not come and
let her—here the softest gleam fluttered through her tears, like the
Mazarine Blue among dewdrops—and that only for the veriest chance, and
the saucer she had broken—but what of that, she would like to know;
it was the surest sign of good luck to them, although it was the best
service—only for that, her Crad would have gone—gone away for ever, and
never known how she loved him; yes, with all her heart, every single
atom of it, every delicious one, if he _must_ know. And she would keep
it for him for ever, for ever; and be thinking of him always. Let him
recollect that, poor darling, and think of his troubles no more.

Then he told her how Uncle John had behaved—how nobly, how
magnanimously; and had given every bit of money he possessed in the
world for Cradock to start in life with. John Rosedewʼs only child
began to cry again at hearing it, and put her little hand into her
pocket in the simplest way imaginable. “Yes, you will, dear”; “No, I
wonʼt”; went on for several minutes, till Amy nestled quite into his
bosom, and put her sweet lips to his ear.

“If you donʼt, I will never believe that you love me truly. I am your
little wife, you know; and all that I have is yours”.

The marriage–portion in debate was no more than five and sixpence, for
Amy could never keep money long; so Cradock accepted the sweet little
purse, only he must have a bit of her hair in it. She pulled out her
little sewing–case, which she always took to the day–school, and the
small bright scissors flashed in the moonlight, and they made a great
fuss over them. Two great snips were heard, I know; for exchange, after
all, is no robbery.

Then hand in hand they went together to see poor Claytonʼs grave, and
Cradock started as they approached, for something black was moving
there.

“Little dear”, said Amy, as the doggie looked mournfully up at them,
“she would starve if it were not for me. And I could not coax her to
eat a morsel until I said, ‘Clayton, poor Clayton!’ And then she licked
my hand and whined, and took a bit to please me. She has had a very
nice tea to–night; I told you I broke the saucer, but that was all my
own clumsiness”.

“And what has she got there? Oh God! I canʼt stand it; it is too
melancholy”.

Black Wena, when it was dark that evening, and Clayton must have done
dinner, had stolen away to his dressing–room, and fetched, as she had
been taught to do, his smoking–jacket and slippers. It took her a long
time to carry the jacket, for fear it should be wet for him. Then she
came with a very important air, and put them down upon his grave, and
wagged her tail for approval. She was lying there now, and wondering
how much longer till he would be ready.

Cradock sobbed hysterically, and Amy led him softly away to the place
where his travelling–bag was.

“Now, wait here one moment, my poor dear, and I will bring you your
future companion”.

Presently Amy came back, with Wena following the coat and the
slippers. “Darling Cradock, take her with you. She is so true and
faithful. She will die if she is left here. And she will be such a
comfort to you. Take her, Cradock, _for my sake_”.

The last entreaty settled it. Cradock took the coat and slippers, and
carried Wena a little way, while she looked back wistfully at the
churchyard, and Amy coaxed and patted her. They agreed on the road that
Amy Rosedew should call upon Miss Garnet to restore the bracelet, and
should mark how she received it; for Amy had now a strong suspicion
(especially after what Cradock had seen, which now became intelligible)
that Pearl knew more of poor Claytonʼs death than had been confessed to
any one.

“My own Cradock, only think”, said Amy; “I have felt the strongest
conviction, throughout, that you had nothing to do with it”.

“Sweetest one”, he replied, with a desperate longing to clasp her, but
for Wena and the carpetbag, “that is only because you love me. Never
say it again, dear; suspense, or even doubt about it, would kill me
like slow poison”.

Amy shuddered at his tone, and thought how different men were: for a
woman would live on the hope of it. But she remembered those words when
the question arose, and rejoiced that he knew not the whole of it.

And now with the great drops in her eyes, she stood at her fatherʼs
gate, to say good–bye to her love. She would not let him know that she
cried; but Wena was welcome to know it, and Wena licked some tears
off, and then quite felt for Amy.

“Good–bye, my own, my only”, said Cradock, for the twentieth time; even
the latch of the gate was trembling; “God loves us, after all, Amy. Or,
at any rate, He loves you”.

“And you, and you. Oh, Cradock! if He loves one, He must love both of
us”.

“I believe He does”, said Cradock; “since I have seen you, I am sure of
it. Now I care not for the world, except my world in you”.

“Dearest darling, life of my life, promise me not to fret again”.

“Fret, indeed, with you to love me! Give me just one more”.

Cradock, with a braver heart than he ever thought to own again (and
yet with a hole and a string in it, for, after all, he did not own
it), being begged away at last by the one who then went down on her
knees, only to beg him back again,—that hapless yet most blessed fellow
strode away as hard as he could, for fear of running back again; and
the dusky trees closed round him, and he knew and loved every one of
them. Then the latch of the gate for the last time clicked, when he was
out of sight, and the laurustinus by the pier, beginning to bud for the
winter, glistened in the moonlight with a silent storm of tears.


                            END OF VOL. I.

                                LONDON:
            PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




                               FOOTNOTE:

[1] “Wivvery”, _i. e._ giddy and dizzy.—[?] “Weavery”, from the clack
and thrum of the loom; or, more probably, a softer form of “quivery”:
the West Saxon loves to soften words.




                         TRANSCRIBERʼS NOTES:

—Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.

—A Table of Contents was not in the original work; one has been
 produced and added by Transcriber.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 1 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 1 (OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 47084-0.txt or 47084-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/0/8/47084/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 2 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Cradock Nowell, Vol. 2 (of 3)
       A Tale of the New Forest.

Author: Richard Doddridge Blackmore

Release Date: October 9, 2014 [EBook #47085]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                            CRADOCK NOWELL

                       A Tale of the New Forest.

                                  BY

                    _RICHARD DODDRIDGE BLACKMORE_,

                      AUTHOR OF “CLARA VAUGHAN.”

     “You have said: whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.”

                    AS YOU LIKE IT, Act III. Sc. 2.

                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                               VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
                  CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY.
                                 1866.

               [_The right of Translation is reserved._]




                                LONDON:
            PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




          CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.

  CHAPTER                         PAGE

       I.                            1

      II.                           35

     III.                           52

      IV.                           72

       V.                           91

      VI.                          111

     VII.                          128

    VIII.                          147

      IX.                          172

       X.                          190

      XI.                          217

     XII.                          236

    XIII.                          245

     XIV.                          253

      XV.                          274

     XVI.                          287

    XVII.                          300




CRADOCK NOWELL




CHAPTER I.


It was a Tuesday evening when Cradock Nowell and Amy Rosedew signed
and sealed, with the moonʼs approval, their bond to one another. On
the following day, Dr. Hutton and wife were to dine at Kettledrum
Hall; and the distance being considerable, and the roads so shockingly
bad—“even dangerous, I am told, to gentlemen who have dined _with
me_, sir,” said Kettledrum, in his proudest manner—they had accepted
his offer, and that of Mrs. Kettledrum, which she herself came over to
make, that they should not think of returning until after breakfast on
Thursday. In consequence of her husbandʼs hints, Rosa felt the keenest
interest in “that Mrs. Kettledrum. Leave her to me, dear Rufus. You
need not be afraid, indeed. Trust me to get to the bottom of it.” And
so she exerted her probing skill upon her to the uttermost, more even
than ladies usually do, when they first meet one another. Of course,
there was no appearance of it, nothing so ill–bred as that; it was
all the sweetest refinement, and the kindest neighbourly interest.
They even became affectionate in the course of half an hour, and
mutual confidence proved how strangely their tastes were in unison.
Nevertheless, each said good–bye with a firm conviction that she had
outwitted the other. “Poor thing, she was so stupid. What a bungler, to
be sure! And to think I could not see through her!”

But the return–match between these ladies, which was to have come off
at Kettledrum Hall—where, by–the–by, there appeared a far greater
performer than either of them—this interesting display of skill was
deferred for the present; inasmuch as Rosa was taken ill during the
mysteries of her toilet. It was nothing more serious, however, than the
“flying spasms,” as she always called them, to which she had long been
subject, and which (as she often told her husband) induced her to marry
a doctor.

Rufus administered essence of peppermint, and then a dose of magnesia;
but he would not hear of her coming with him, and he wanted to stop
at home with her, and see that she sat by the fire. She in turn would
have her way, and insisted that Rue should go, “for he had made himself
such a very smart boy, that she was really quite proud of him, and they
would all be so disappointed, and he was taller than Mr. Kettledrum,
she felt quite sure he was.” The bearing of that last argument I do not
quite perceive, but dare not say that she erred therein, and to Rue it
was quite conclusive. So Ralph Mohorn was sent for, the pony–carriage
countermanded, and Rufus set forth upon Polly, whose oats were now
restricted.

Kettledrum Hall stood forth on a rise, and made the very most of
itself. Expansive, and free, and obtrusively honest, it seemed to
strike itself on the breast (as its master did) with both gables. A
parochial assessment committee, or a surveyor for the property–tax,
would have stuck on something considerable, if they had only seen
the outside of it. Look at the balustrade that went (for it was too
heavy to run) all along the front of it, over the basement windows. No
stucco, either; but stone, genuine stone, that bellied out like a row
of Roman amphoræ, or the calves of a first–rate footman. After that,
to see the portico, “decempedis metata,” which “excipiebat Eurum”—not
Arcton in this climate. No wonder—although it was rotten inside, and
the whole of it mortgaged ten fathom deep—that Bailey Kettledrum hit
his breast, and said, “Our little home, sir!”

“Your great home, you mean,” said Rufus; “what a noble situation! You
can see all over the county.”

They had come to meet him down the hill, in the kindest country
fashion, Mr. and Mrs. Kettledrum, like Jack and Jill going for water.

“Not quite that,” replied Kettledrum; “but we saw you with my
binocular, between two and three miles off, and became so anxious about
Mrs. Hutton, that I said to my wife, ‘Put your bonnet on;’ and she
only said, ‘Bailey, put your hat on;’ nothing more, sir, I assure you;
nothing more, sir, upon my honour.”

Rufus could not see exactly why there should have been anything more,
but he could not help thanking them for their kindness, and saying to
himself, “What nice people! Quite an agricultural life, I see, in spite
of that grand mansion.”

“Now,” said Mr. Kettledrum, when Polly had been committed to one of
the stable–boys—but Rufus still wanted to look at her, for he never
grew tired of admiring anything that belonged to him, and he knew
they wouldnʼt do her legs right—“now, Dr. Hutton, you have come most
kindly, according to your promise, so as to give us an hour or two to
spare before the dinner–time. Shall we take a turn with the guns? I can
put my hand on a covey; or shall we walk round the garden, and have the
benefit of your advice?”

Rufus looked in dismay at his “choice black kerseymeres;” he had taken
his “antigropelos” off, and was proud to find not a flake on them. But
to think of going out shooting! He ought not to have dressed before he
left home, but he hated many skinnings. And he could only guess the
distance from the lodge to this place. So he voted very decidedly for a
walk in the kitchen–garden.

Into this he was solemnly instituted, and the beauties all pointed
out to him. What a scene of weeds and rubbish! How different from Bull
Garnetʼs dainty and trim quarters, or from his own new style of work at
Geopharmacy Lodge! Rotten beansticks crackling about, the scum of last
summerʼs cabbages, toad–stools cropping up like warts or arums rubbed
with caustic, a fine smell of potato–disease, and a general sense of
mildew; the wall–trees curled and frizzled up with aphis, coccus, and
honeydew; and the standards scraggy, and full of stubs, canker, and
American blight, sprawling, slouching, hump–backed, and stag–headed,
like the sick ward of a workhouse fighting with tattered umbrellas.

“Ah,” said Rufus, at his wits’ end for anything to praise, “what a
perfect paradise—for the songsters of the grove.”

“Oh,” replied Mr. Kettledrum, “you should hear the Dook admire it.
‘Kettledrum, my boy,’ he said, when he dined with me last Friday,
‘there is one thing I do envy you—no, sir, neither your most lady–like
wife, nor yet your clever children, although I admit that neither of
them can be paralleled in England—but, Kettledrum, it is—forgive
me—it is your kitchen–garden.’ ‘My kitchen–garden, your grace,’ I
replied, for I hate to brag of anything, ‘it is a poor thing, my lord
Dook, compared to your own at Lionshill.’ ‘May I be d—d,’ his grace
replied, for I never shall break him of swearing, ‘if I ever saw
anything like it, dear Kettledrum, and so I told the Duchess.’ And
after all, you know, Dr. Hutton, a man may think too little of what it
has pleased God to give him.”

“Well,” said Rufus to himself, “Iʼm blessed if _you_ do. But I donʼt
like you any the worse for a bit of brag. I have met great brags in
India, and most of them honest fellows. But I must peg him down a bit.
I must, I fear; it is my duty as an enlightened gardener.”

“But you see, now,” said Bailey Kettledrum, smacking his lips, and
gazing into profundity, “you see, my dear sir, there is nothing ‘ab
omni parte beatum;’ perhaps you remember the passage in the heroic
epistles of—ah, Cicero it was, I believe, who wrote all those epistles
to somebody.”

“No doubt of it,” said Rufus Hutton, who knew more of Hindustani than
of Latin and Greek combined; “and yet St. Paul wrote some.”

“Not in Latin, my dear sir; all St. Paulʼs were Greek. ‘Nihil est,’ I
now remember, ‘ab omni parte beatum.’ I donʼt know how it scans, which
I suppose it ought to do, but that isnʼt my look–out. Perhaps, however,
you can tell me?”

“Iʼm blowed if I can,” said Rufus Hutton, in the honesty of his mind;
“and I am not quite sure that it has any right to scan.”

“Well, I canʼt say; but I _think_ it ought,”—he was in the mists
of memory, where most of the trees have sensitive roots, though the
branches are not distinguishable. “However, that canʼt matter at all;
I see you are a classical scholar. And, Hutton, I like a classical
scholar, because he can understand me. But you see that these trees are
rather—ah, what is the expression for it——?”

“Cankered, and scabby, and scrubs.”

“That is to say—yes, I suppose, they would crop the better, if that be
possible, for a little root–pruning.”

“You have gathered the fruit for this year, I presume?”

“Well, no, not quite that. The children have had some, of course. But
we are very particular not to store too early.”

“I really donʼt think you need be.”

“Why, many people say, ‘let well alone;’ but my gardener talks of
making——”

“A jolly good bonfire of them, if he knows anything of his business.
Then drain the ground, trench, and plant new ones.”

Mr. Kettledrum looked quite thunderstruck; he caught hold of a tree to
help him, and a great cake of rotten bark, bearded with moss, came away
like the mask of a mummer. It was slimy on the under side, and two of
his fingers went through it.

“Nice state of things,” said Rufus, laughing. “I suppose the Dook likes
lepers?”

“Why, my dear sir, you donʼt mean to say——”

“That I would leave only one of them, and I would hang the
head–gardener upon it.”

That worthy was just coming round the corner, to obtain the applause
of a gentleman well known to the _Gardenerʼs Chronicle_; but now he
turned round abruptly, and scratched his head, and thought of his
family.

When Rufus came down and entered the drawing–room, he was perfectly
gorgeous; for although he had been in full dress for the main, he knew
better than to ride with his Alumbaggah waistcoat on. There was nothing
in all the three presidencies to come up to that waistcoat. It would
hold Dr. Hutton and Rosa too, for they had stood back to back and tried
it. And Rufus vainly sighed for the day when his front should come out
and exhaust it. He stole it, they say, from a petty rajah, who came to
a great durbar with it, worn like an Oxford hood. At any rate, there it
was, and the back of Cashmere stuff would fit either baby or giant. But
the front, the front—oh, bangles and jiminy! it is miles beyond me to
describe it.

All simple writers, from Job and Hesiod downwards, convey an impression
of some grand marvel, not by direct description of it, which would
be feeble and achromatic, but by the rebound, recoil, and redouble,
from the judgment of some eye–witness. If that eye–witness be
self–possessed, wide–awake, experienced, and undemonstrative, the
effect upon the readerʼs mind is as of a shell which has struck the
granite, burst there, and scattered back on him. So will I, mistrusting
the value of my own impressions, give a faint idea of Rufus his
waistcoat, by the dount of it on that assembly.

The host was away for the moment somewhere, perhaps blowing up
the butler, for his wife was telling her sister how nervous and
even fidgety her beloved Bailey was growing; but Mr. Corklemore was
there, and came forth to salute the great Rufus, when his heavy eyes
settled upon the waistcoat, and all his emotions exploded in a “haw”
of incredulous wonder. Mrs. Kettledrum rose at the same instant, and
introduced her sister.

“My sister, Dr. Hutton, whom I have so earnestly longed to make
acquainted with dear Mrs. Hutton, Mrs. Nowell Corklemore; Mr.
Corklemore, I know, has had the pleasure of meeting you. Georgie, dear,
you will like her so—oh, goodness gracious me!”

“I donʼt wonder you are surprised at me, Anna,” exclaimed Mrs.
Corklemore, with wonderful presence of mind. “How stupid I am, to be
sure! Oh, Nowell, why didnʼt you tell me? How shameful of you! But you
never look at me now, I think.” And she swept from the room in the
cleverest manner, as if something wrong in her own dress had caused her
sisterʼs ejaculation.

“Excuse me one moment,” said Mrs. Kettledrum, taking her cue very
aptly; and she ran out, as if to aid her sister, but in reality to
laugh herself into hysterics.

After all there was nothing absurd, _per se_, in Rufus Huttonʼs
waistcoat, only it is not the fashion, just at present, to wear
pictorial raiment; but the worthy doctor could not perceive any reason
why it should not be. He was pleased with the prospect of creating
a genuine sensation, and possibly leading the mode; and having lost
all chance of realizing these modest hopes at Nowelhurst, why, he
must content himself with a narrower stage for his triumphs. He had
smuggled it from home, however, without his wifeʼs permission: he had
often threatened her with its appearance, but she always thought he
was joking. And truly it required some strength of mind to present it
to modern society, although it was a work of considerable art, and no
little value.

The material of it was Indian silk of the very richest quality. It
had no buttons, but golden eyelets and tags of golden cowries. The
background of the whole was yellow, the foreground of a brilliant
green, portraying the plants of the jungle. On the left bosom leaped
and roared an enormous royal tiger, with two splendid jewels, called
“catʼs–eyes,” flashing, and a pearl for every fang. Upon the right side
a hulking elephant was turning tail ignominiously; while two officers
in the howdah poked their guns at the eyes of the tiger. The eyes of
the officers in their terror had turned to brilliant emeralds, and the
blood of the tramping elephant was represented by seed rubies. The
mahout was cutting away in the distance, looking back with eyes of
diamonds.

Beyond a doubt, it required uncommonly fine breeding, especially in
a lady, to meet that waistcoat at a dinner–party, and be entirely
unconscious of it. And perhaps there are but few women in England who
would not contrive to lead up to the subject, quite accidentally, of
course, before the evening was over.

The ladies came back as grave as judges; and somehow it was managed (as
if by the merest oversight) that Dr. Hutton should lead to dinner, not
the lady of the house, whom, of course, he ought to have taken, but
Mrs. Nowell Corklemore. He felt, as he crossed the hall with her, that
the beauty of his waistcoat had raised some artistic emotion in a bosom
as beautiful as its own. Oh, Rufus, think of Rosa!

Let none be alarmed at those ominous words. The tale of Cradock
Nowellʼs life shall be pure as that life itself was. The historian
may be rough, and blunt, and sometimes too intense, in the opinion
of those who look at life from a different point of view. But be
that as it will, his other defects (I trust and pray) will chiefly
be deficiencies. We will have no poetical seduction, no fascinating
adultery, condemned and yet reprieved by the writer, and infectious
from his sympathy. Georgiana Corklemore was an uncommonly clever woman,
and was never known to go far enough to involve her reputation. She
loved her child, and liked her husband, and had all the respect for
herself which may abide with vanity. Nevertheless she flirted awfully,
and all married women hated her. “Bold thing,” they called her, “sly
good–for–nothing; and did you see how she ogled? Well, if I only
carried on so! Oh, if I were only her husband! But, poor man, he knows
no better. Such a poor dear stick, you know. Perhaps that is what makes
her do it. And nothing in her at all, when you come to think of it. No
taste, no style, no elegance! When _will_ she put her back hair up? And
her child fit to put into long–clothes! Did you observe her odious way
of putting her lips up, as if to be kissed? My dear, I donʼt know how
_you_ felt; but I could scarcely stay in the room with her.”

Nevertheless the ladies did stay, and took good care to watch her, and
used to say to her afterwards, “Oh, if I were only like you, dear! Then
I need not be afraid of you; but you are—now donʼt tell stories—_so_
clever, and _so_ attractive. As if you did not know it, dear! Well, you
_are_ so simple–minded. I am always telling my Looey and Maggie to take
you for their model, dear!”

On the present occasion, “Georgie Corklemore,” as she called herself,
set about flirting with Rufus Hutton, not from her usual love of power,
nor even for the sake of his waistcoat, but because she had an especial
purpose, and a very important one. The Kettledrum–cum–Corklemore
conspiracy was this—to creep in once more at Nowelhurst Hall through
the interest of Dr. Hutton. They all felt perfectly certain that
Cradock Nowell had murdered his brother, and that the crime had been
hushed up through the influence of the family. They believed that the
head of that family, in his passionate sorrow and anger, might be
brought to their view of the subject, if he could only be handled
properly; and who could manage that more adroitly than his first cousin
once removed, the beautiful Mrs. Corklemore? Only let her get once
invited, once inducted there, and the main difficulty after that would
be to apportion the prey between them. They knew well enough that the
old entail expired with the present baronet; and that he (before his
marriage) held in fee pure and simple all that noble property. His
marriage–settlement, and its effects, they could only inkle of; but
their heart was inditing of a good matter, and Mr. Chope would soon
pump Brockwood. Not quite so fast, my Amphictyonics; a solicitor thirty
years admitted (though his original craft may not be equal) is not to
be sucked dry, on the surprise, even by spongy young Chope. However,
that was a question for later consideration; and blood being thicker
than water, and cleaving more fast to the ground, they felt that it
would be a frightful injustice if they were done out of the property.

Only two things need be added: one that Sir Cradock had always
disliked, and invited them but for appearance’ sake; the other, that
they fairly believed in the righteousness of their cause, and that
Rufus Hutton could prove it for them, as the principal witness tampered
with.

Mrs. Corklemore was now, perhaps, twenty–five years old, possibly
turning thirty; for that lustrum of a ladyʼs life is a hard one to beat
the bounds of; at any rate, she had never looked better than she did
at the present moment. She was just at the age to spread open, with
the memory of shyness upon them (like the dew when the sun is up), the
curving petals of beauty. Who understands the magnetic current? Who
can analyze ozone? Is there one of us able to formularize the polarity
of light? Will there ever be an age when chemists metaphysical will
weigh—no more by troy weight, and carat, as now the mode is, but by
subtle heart–gas—our liking for a woman? Let us hope there never will
be.

That soft Georgiana Corklemore, so lively, lovely, and gushing,
focussed all her fascinations upon Rufus Hutton. She knew that she had
to deal with a man of much inborn acuteness, and who must have seen
a hundred ladies quite as fair as Georgie. But had he seen one with
her—well, she knew not what to call it, though she thoroughly knew
how to use it? So she magnetized him with all her skill; and Rufus,
shrewdly suspecting her object, and confiding in a certain triarian
charge, a certain thrust Jarnacian, which he would deliver at the
proper moment, allowed her to smile, and to show her white teeth and
dimples of volatile velvet (so natural, so inevitable, at his playful,
delightful humour), and to loose whole quiverfuls of light shafts from
the arch flash under her eyelids. What sweet simplicity she was, what
innocent desire to learn, what universal charity. “How dreadful, Dr.
Hutton! Oh, please not to tell me of it! How could any ladies do it? I
should have fainted at once, and died half an hour afterwards.” She
turned up her large mild eyes, deeply beaming with centralized light,
in a way that said, “If I died, is there any one who would think it a
very, very great pity?”

Rufus had been describing historically, not dramatically, the trials
of the ladies, when following their regiment during a sudden movement
in the perils of the mutiny. With a manʼs far stiffer identity, he
did not expect or even imagine that his delicate listener would be
there, and go through every hour of it. But so it was, and without
any sham; although she was misusing her strange sympathetic power.
Mrs. Nowell Corklemore would have made a very great actress; she had
so much self–abandonment, such warm introjection, and hot indignant
sympathy; and yet enough of self–reservation to hoop them all in with
judgment. Meanwhile Mrs. Kettledrum, a lady of ordinary sharpness,
like a good pudding–apple—Georgie being a peach of the very finest
quality—she, I say, at the top of the table was watching them very
intently—delighted, amused, indignant; glad that none of her children
were there to store up Auntieʼs doings. As for Mr. Corklemore, he
was quite accustomed to it; and looking down complacently upon the
little doctor, thought to himself, “How beautifully my Georgie will
cold–shoulder him, when we have got all we want out of the conceited
chattering jackanapes.”

When the ladies were gone, Mr. Bailey Kettledrum, who had no idea of
playing dummy even to Mrs. Corklemore, made a trick or two from his own
hand.

“Corklemore, my dear fellow, you think we are all tee–totallers. On
with the port, if you please, ‘cessantem Bibuli Consulis amphoram,’
never shall forget that line. The bibulous consul, eh! Capital idea.
Corklemore, you can construe that?”

“Haw! Perhaps I canʼt. Really donʼt know; they beat a heap of stuff
into me when I was a very small boy; and it was like whipping—ha, haw,
something like whipping——”

“Eggs,” said Rufus Hutton, “all came to bubbles, eh?”

“Not at all, sir, not at all; you entirely misunderstand me. I mean
that it was similar to—to the result produced by the whipping of a
top.”

“Only made your head go round,” said Mr. Kettledrum, winking at Rufus;
and thenceforth had established a community of interest in the baiting
of “long Corklemore.” “Well, at any rate,” he continued, “Hutton is a
scholar—excuse my freedom, my dear sir; we are such rustics here, that
I seldom come across a man who appreciates my quotations. You are a
great acquisition, sir, the very greatest, to this neighbourhood. How
can we have let you remain so long without unearthing you?”

“Because,” said Rufus to himself, “you did not happen to want me; when
are you going to offer to introduce me to ‘the Dook?’”

“And now, gentlemen,” continued Mr. Kettledrum, rising, swelling his
chest out, and thumping it athletically, “it is possible that I may
be wrong; I have never been deaf to conviction; but if I am wrong,
gentlemen, the fault is in yourselves. Mark me now, I am ready, such
is the force of truth, I am ready here at my own board (humble as
it is) once for all to admit that the fault is in yourselves. But
the utterance I swell with, the great thought that is within me, is
strife—no, I beg your pardon—is—is—rife and strongly inditing of
a certain lady, who is an honour to her sex. I rise to the occasion,
friends; I say an honour to her sex, and a blessing to the other
one. Gentlemen, no peroration of mine is equal in any way to the
greatness of the occasion; could I say, with Cicero, ‘Veni, vidi,
vici,’ where would be my self–approval? I mean—you understand me. It
is the privilege of a man in this blessed country, the first gem of
the ocean—no, I donʼt mean that; it applies, I believe, to Scotland,
and the immortal Burns—but this, sir, I will say, and challenge
contradiction, a Briton, sir, a Briton, never, never, never will be
free! And now, sir, in conclusion, is there one of you, let me ask, who
will not charge his eyes, gentlemen, and let his glass run over——”

“Haw,” cried Mr. Corklemore, “charge his glass, come, Kettledrum, and
let his eyes run over—haw—I think that is the way we read it, Dr.
Hutton.”

“Gentlemen, I sit down; finding it impossible to obtain an adequate
bearing, I close my poor attempt at cleansing my bosom of the perilous
stuff, sir—you know the rest—the health of Mrs. Hutton, that most
remarkable children—excuse me, most remarkable woman, whose children,
I am quite convinced, will be an honour to their age and sex. Port of
‘51, gentlemen; a finer vintage than ‘47.”

He had told them that it was ‘34, but both knew better; and now “in
vino veritas.”

At last Mr. Bailey Kettledrum had hit the weak point of Rufus, and,
what was more, he perceived it. Himself you might butter and soap for
a month, and he would take it at all its value; but magnify his Rosa,
exalt the name of his Rosa, and you had him at discretion.

“Remarkable, sir,” he inquired, with a twinkle of fruity port stealing
out from his keen little eyes, “you really do injustice; so many ladies
are remarkable——”

“Haw, well, I never heard——”

“Confound you, Corklemore,” said Kettledrum to him aside, “can you
never hold your tongue? Sir,”—to Rufus—“I beg your pardon, if I
said ‘remarkable;’ I meant to say, sir, ‘_most_ remarkable!’ The most
remarkable lady”—this to Corklemore, in confidence—“I have ever been
privileged to meet. ‘What children,’ I said to my wife, but yesterday,
‘what children they will be blest with!’ Oh, heʼs a lucky dog. The
luckiest dog in the world, my boy.”

However, they were not so very far from the sloping shores of sobriety
when they rejoined the ladies, and made much of the small Misses
Kettledrum, tidy children, rather pretty, and all of the pink ribbon
pattern. After some melting melodies from soft Georgieʼs lips and
fingers, Mrs. Kettledrum said,

“Oh, Dr. Hutton, do you ever play chess? We are such players here; all
except my poor self; I am a great deal too stupid.”

“I used to play a little when I was in India. We are obliged to play
all sorts of games in India.” Dr. Hutton piqued himself not a little
on his skill in the one true game. At a sign from their mother, the
small Kettledrums rushed for the board most zealously, and knocked
their soft heads together. Mrs. Corklemore was declared by all to be
the only antagonist worthy of an Indian player, and she sat down most
gracefully, protesting against her presumption. “Just to take a lesson,
you know; only to take a lesson, dear. Oh, please, donʼt let any one
look at me.” Rufus, however, soon perceived that he had found his
match, if not his superior, in the sweet impulsive artless creature,
who threw away the game so neatly when she was quite sure of it.

“Oh, poor me! Now, I do declare—Isnʼt it most heartbreaking? I am such
a foolish thing. Oh, can you be so cruel?”

Thrilling eyes of the richest grey trembled with dewy radiance, as
Rufus coolly marched off the queen, and planted his knight instead of
her.

“Mrs. Corklemore, can I relent? You are far too good a player.” The
loveliest eyes, the most snowy surge, in the “mare magnum” of ladies,
would never have made that dry Rue Hutton, well content with his Rosa,
give away so much as the right to capture a pawn in passing.

Now observe the contrariety, the want of pure reason, the confusion of
principle—I am sorry and ashamed, but I canʼt express these things
in English, for the language is rich in emotion, but a pauper in
philosophy—the distress upon the premises of the cleverest womanʼs
mind. She had purposely thrown her queen in his way; but she never
forgave him for taking it.

A glance shot from those soft bright eyes, when Rufus could not see
them, as if the gentle evening star, Venus herself, all tremulous,
rushed, like a meteor, up the heavens, and came hissing down on a poor
manʼs head.

She took good care to win the next game, for policy allowed it; and
then, of course, it was too late to try the decisive contest.

“Early hours. Liberty Hall, Liberty Hall at Kettledrum! Gentlemen stay
up, and smoke if they like. But early hours, sir, for the ladies.
We value their complexions. They donʼt. That I know. Do you now, my
dearest? No, of course you donʼt.” This was Mr. Kettledrum.

“Except for your sake, darling,” said Mrs. Kettledrum, curtseying, for
the children were all gone to bed ever so long ago.

“Well,” said Georgie, coming forward, because she knew her figure
would look well with three lamps upon it; such a figure of eight! “my
opinion is never worth having, I know, because I feel so much; but I
pronounce——” here she stood up like Portia, with a very low–necked
dress on—“gentlemen, and ladies, I pronounce that one is quite as bad
as the other.”

“Haw!” said Nowell Corklemore. And so they went to bed. And Rufus
Hutton wondered whether they ever had family prayers.

When all the rest were at breakfast, in came Mrs. Corklemore, looking
as fresh as daybreak.

“Oh, I am so ashamed of myself. What a sluggard you will think me! What
is it in the divine song of that great divine, Dr. Watts? Nowell, dear,
you must not scold me. I cannot bear being scolded, because I never
have tit for tat. Good morning, dearest Anna; how is your headache,
darling? Oh, Dr. Hutton, I forgot! No wonder I overlooked you. I shall
never think much of you again, because I beat you at chess so.”

“Game and game,” said Rufus, solemnly, “and I ought to have won that
last one, Mrs. Corklemore; you know I ought.”

“To be sure, to be sure. Oh, of course I do. But—a little thing
perwented him—his antagonist was too good, sir. Ah, weʼll play the
conqueror some day; and then the tug of war comes. Oh, Anna, I am so
conceited! To think of my beating Dr. Hutton, the best player in all
India.”

“Well, darling, we know all that. And we must not blame you therefore
for lying in bed till ten oʼclock.”

“Oh,” said Rufus, with a groan, “do look at ladies’ logic! Mrs.
Corklemore gained one game out of two—only because I was—ah–hem, I
mean by her very fine play—and now she claims absolute victory; and
Mrs. Kettledrum accepts it as a premise for a negative conclusion,
which has nothing on earth to do with it.”

But Rufus got the worst of that protest. He tilted too hard at the
quintain. All came down upon him at once, till he longed for a cigar.
Then Mrs. Corklemore sympathized with him, arose, their breakfast
being over, and made him a pretty curtsey. She was very proud of her
curtseys; she contrived to show her figure so.

“Confound that woman,” thought Rufus, “I can never tell when she is
acting. I never met her like in India. And thank God for that same.”

She saw that her most bewitching curtsey was entirely thrown away upon
him; for he was thinking of his Rosa, and looking out for the good
mare, Polly.

“Dr. Hutton, I thank you for your condescension, in giving me that
lesson. You let me win that last game out of pure good nature. I shall
always appreciate it. Meanwhile I shall say to every one—ʼOh, do you
know, Dr. Hutton and I play even?’ taking very good care meanwhile
never to play again with you. Shocking morality! Yes, very shocking.
But then I know no better, do I, Nowell, dear?”

“Haw! Well, Georgie, I am not so sure of that. My wife is absolute
nature, sir, simple, absolute—haw—unartificial nature. But
unartificial nature is, in my opinion—haw—yes, a very wise nature,
sometimes.”

“Haw!” said his wife, exactly like him, while everybody laughed. Then
she stood upon tiptoe to kiss him, she was so unartificial, even
before the company. All the pretty airs and graces of a fair Parisian,
combined with all the domestic snugness of an English wife! What a fine
thing it is to have a yoke–mate with a playful, charming manner!

“Good–bye, Dr. Hutton. We are on the wing, as you are. I fear you will
never forgive me for tarnishing your laurels so.”

Tarnishing laurels! What wonderful fellow so ingeniously mixed
metaphors?

“Now or never,” thought Rufus Hutton; “she has beaten me at chess, she
thinks. Now, Iʼll have the change out of her. Only let her lead up to
it.”

“Mrs. Corklemore, we will fight it out, upon some future occasion. I
never played with a lady so very hard to beat.”

“Ah, you mean at Nowelhurst. But we never go there now. There is—I
ought to say, very likely, there are mistakes on both sides—still
there seems to exist some _prejudice_ against us.—Anna, dear, you put
a lump of sugar too much in my tea. I am already too saccharine.”

“Well, dear, I put exactly what you always tell me. And you sent your
cup for more afterwards.”

“Matter of fact animal—how can she be my sister?” Georgie only
muttered this. Rufus Hutton did not catch it. Mr. Garnet would have
done so.

“Now is the time,” thought Rufus again, as she came up to shake hands
with him, not a bit afraid of the morning sun upon her smooth rich
cheeks, where the colour was not laid on in spots, but seemed to
breathe up from below, like a lamp under water. Outside he saw pet
Polly scraping great holes in the gravel, and the groom throwing all
his weight on the curb to prevent her from bolting homewards. “Hang
it, she wonʼt stand that,” he cried; “her mouth is like a sea–anemone.
Take her by the snaffle–rein. Canʼt you see, you fool, that she hasnʼt
seven coats to her mouth, like you? Excuse my opening the window,” he
apologized to Mrs. Corklemore, “and excuse my speaking harshly, for if
I had not stopped him, he would have thrown my horse down, and I value
my Polly enormously.”

“Especially after her behaviour the other night in the forest. It
is the same with all you gentlemen; the worse you are treated, the
more grateful you are. Oh yes, we heard of it; but we wonʼt tell Mrs.
Hutton.”

“No, indeed, I hope you wonʼt. I should be very sorry for her to get
even a hint of it.”

“To be sure,” laughed Georgie, “to be sure we will keep the secret,
for ever so many reasons; one of them being that Dr. Hutton would be
obliged to part with Miss Polly, if her mistress knew of her conduct.
But I must not be so rude. I see you want to be off quite as much as
fair Polly does. Ah, what a thing it is to have a happy home!”

Here Mrs. Corklemore sighed very deeply. If a woman who always has
her own way, and a woman who is always scheming, can be happy, she,
Georgie, must be so; but she wanted to stir compassion.

“Come,” she said, after turning away, for she had such a jacket on—the
most bewitching thing; it was drawn in tight at her round little waist,
and seemed made like a horseʼs body–clothes, on purpose for her to trot
out in,—“come, Dr. Hutton, say good–bye, and forgive me for beating
you.” Simple creature, of course she knew not the “sacra fames” of
chess–players.

“We must have our return–match. I wonʼt say ‘good–bye’ until you have
promised me that. Shall it be at my house?”

“No. There is only one place in the world where I would dare to attack
you again, and that is Nowelhurst Hall.”

“And why there, more than anywhere else?”

“Because there is a set of men there, with which I can beat anybody.
I believe I could beat Morphy, with those men at Nowelhurst. Ah! you
think me, I see, grossly and stupidly superstitious. Well, perhaps I
am. I do sympathise so with everything.”

“I hope we may meet at Nowelhurst,” replied Rufus, preparing his blow
of Jarnac, “when they have recovered a little from their sad distress.”

“Ah, poor Sir Cradock!” exclaimed the lady, with her expressive eyes
tear–laden, “how I have longed to comfort him! It does seem so hard
that he should renounce the sympathy of his relatives at such a time
as this. And all through some little wretched dissensions in the days
when he misunderstood us! Of course we know that you cannot do it;
that you, a comparative stranger, cannot have sufficient influence
where the dearest friends have failed. My husband, too, in his honest
pride, is very, very obstinate, and my sister quite as bad. They fear,
I suppose,—well, it does seem ridiculous, but you know what vulgar
people say in a case of that sort—they actually fear the imputation
of being fortune–hunters!” Georgie looked so arrogant in her stern
consciousness of right, that Rufus said, and for the moment meant it,
“How absurd, to be sure!”

“Yes,” said Georgie, confidentially, and in the sweetest of all
sweet voices, “between you and me, Dr. Hutton, for I speak to
you quite as to an old friend of the family, whom you have known
so long”—(“Holloa,” thought Rufus, “in the last breath I was a
‘comparative stranger!’”)—“I think it below our dignity to care for
such an absurdity; and that now, as good Christians, we are bound to
sink all petty enmities, and comfort the poor bereaved one. If you can
contribute in any way to this act of Christian charity, may I rely upon
your good word? But for the world, donʼt tell my husband; he would be
so angry at the mere idea.”

“I will do my best, Mrs. Corklemore; you may rely upon that.”

“Oh, thank you, thank you! I felt quite sure that you had a generous
heart. I should have been so disappointed—perhaps, after all, we shall
play our next game of chess at Christmas with the men I am so lucky
with. And then, look to yourself, Dr. Hutton.”

“I trust you will find a player there who can give me a pawn and two
moves. If you beat him, you may boast indeed.”

“What player do you mean?” asked Georgie, feeling rather less
triumphant. “Any Indian friend of yours?”

“Yes, one for whom I have the very greatest regard. For whose sake,
indeed, I first renewed my acquaintance with Sir Cradock, because I
bore a message to him; for the Colonel is a bad correspondent.”

“The Colonel! I donʼt understand you.” As she said these words, how
those eyes of hers, those expressive eyes, were changing! And her
lovely jacket, so smart and well cut, began to “draw” over the chest.

“Did you not know,” asked Rufus, watching her in a way that made her
hate him worse than when he took her queen, “is it possible that you
have not heard, that Colonel Nowell, Clayton Nowell, Sir Cradockʼs only
brother, is coming home this month, and brings his darling child with
him?” Now for your acting, Georgie; now for your self–command. We shall
admire, henceforth, or laugh at you, according to your present conduct.

She was equal to the emergency. She commanded her eyes, and her lips,
and bosom, after that one expansion, even her nerves, to the utmost
fibre—everything but her colour. The greatest actor ever seen, when
called on to act in real life, can never command colour if the skin
has proper spiracles. The springs of our heart will come up and go
down, as God orders the human weather. But she turned away, with
that lily–whiteness, because she knew she had it, and rushed up
enthusiastically to her sister at the end of the room.

“Dear Anna, darling Anna, oh, I am so delighted! We have been so
wretched about poor Sir Cradock. And now his brother is coming to mind
him, with such delightful children! We thought he was dead, oh, so many
years! What a gracious providence!”

“Haw!” said Nowell Corklemore.

“The devil!” said Bailey Kettledrum, and Rufus caught the re–echo, but
hoped it might be a mistake.

Then they all came forward, gushing, rushing, rapturous to embrace him.

“Oh, Dr. Hutton, surely this is too good news to be true!”

“I think not,” said Rufus Hutton, mystical and projecting, “I really
trust it is not. But I thought you must have heard it, from your close
affinity, otherwise I should have told you the moment I came in; but
now I hope this new arrival will heal over all—make good, I mean, all
family misunderstandings.”

“Colonel Clayton Nowell,” said Mr. Nowell Corklemore, conclusively,
and with emphasis, “Colonel Clayton Nowell was shot dead outside the
barracks at Mhow, on the 25th day of June, sir, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and fifty–six. Correct me, sir, if I am
wrong.”

“Then,” said Rufus, “I venture to correct you at once.”

“Shot, sir,” continued Corklemore, “as I am, I may say—haw,—in a
position to prove, by a man called Abdoollah Manjee, believed to be a
Mussulman. Colonel Clayton Nowell, sir, commanding officer in command
of Her Majestyʼs Companyʼs native regiment, Nº· One hundred and
sixty–three, who was called,—excuse me, sir, designated, the ‘father
of his regiment,’ because he had so many illegitimate—haw, I beg your
pardon, ladies—because of his—ha, yes,—patriarchal manners, sir,
and kindly disposition,—he—haw, where was I?”

“I am sure I canʼt say,” said Rufus.

“No, sir, my memory is more tenacious than that of any man I meet
with. He, Colonel Clayton Nowell, sir, upon that fatal morning, was
remonstrated with by the two—ah, yes, the two executors of his
will—upon his rashness in riding forth to face those carnal, I mean to
say, those incarnate devils, sir. ‘Are you fools enough,’ he replied,
‘to think that _my_ fellows would hurt _me_? Give me a riding–whip, and
be ready with plasters, for I shall thrash them before I let them come
back.’ Now isnʼt every word of that true?”

“Yes, almost every word of it,” replied Rufus, now growing excited.

“Well, sir, he took his favourite half–bred—for he understood
cross–breeding thoroughly—and he rode out at the side–gate, where
the heap of sand was; ‘Coming back,’ he cried to the English sentry,
‘coming back in half an hour, with all my scamps along of me. Keep the
coppers ready.’ And with that he spurred his brown and black mare; and
no man saw him alive thereafter, except the fellows who shot him. Haw!”

“Yes,” said Rufus Hutton, “one man saw him alive, after they shot him
in the throat, and one man saved his life; and he is the man before
you.”

“What you, Dr. Hutton! What you! Oh, how grateful we ought to be to
you.”

“Thank you. Well, I donʼt quite see that,” Rufus replied, most dryly.
Then he corrected himself: “You know I only did my duty.”

“And his son?” inquired Georgie, timidly, and with sympathy, but the
greatest presence of mind. She had stood with her hands clasped, and
every emotion (except the impossible one of selfishness) quivering on
her sweet countenance; and now she was so glad, oh, so glad, she could
never tell you. “His poor illegitimate son, Dr. Hutton? Will he bring
the poor child home with him? How glad we shall be to receive him!”

“The child he brings with him is Eoa, dear natural odd Eoa, his
legitimate daughter.”

“Then you know her, Dr. Hutton; you could depose to her identity?”

A very odd question; but some women have almost the gift of prophecy.

“Oh, yes! I should rather think so. I have known her since she was ten
years old.”

“And now they are coming home. How pleasant! How sweet to receive them,
as it were from the dead! By the overland route, I suppose, and with a
lac of rupees?”

“No,” said the badgered Rufus, “you are wrong in both conjectures.
They come round the Cape, by the clipper–ship _Aliwal_; and with very
few rupees. Colonel Nowell has always been extravagant, a wonderfully
fine–hearted man, but a hand that could never hold anything—except,
indeed, a friendʼs.”

By the moisture in Rue Huttonʼs eyes, Georgie saw that her interests
would fare ill with him, if brought into competition with those of
Colonel Nowell. Meanwhile Polly was raving wild, and it took two
grooms to hold her, and the white froth dribbling down her curb was to
Rufus Hutton as the foam of the sea to a sailor. He did love a tearing
gallop, only not through the thick of the forest.

“Good–bye, good–bye! I shall see you soon. Thank you, I will take a
cheroot. But I only smoke my own. Good–bye! I am so much obliged to
you. You have been so very kind. Mrs. Hutton will be miserable until
you come over to us. Good–bye; once more, good–bye!”

Rufus Hutton, you see, was a man of the world, and could be false
“on occasion.” John Rosedew could never have made that speech on the
back of detected falsehood. Away went Polly, like a gale of wind; and
Rufus (who was no rogue by nature, only by the force of circumstances,
and then could never keep to it), he going along twenty miles an
hour, set his teeth to the breeze, which came down the funnel of his
cigar as down a steamerʼs chimney, stuck his calves well into Pollyʼs
sides, and felt himself a happy man, going at a rocketʼs speed, to
a home of happiness. All of us who have a home (and unless we leave
our heart there, whenever we go away, we have no home at all), all
of us who have a hole in this shifting sandy world—the sand as of
an hour–glass—but whence we have spun such a rope as the devil can
neither make nor break—I mean to say, we, all who love, without any
hems, and haws, and rubbish, those who are only our future tense
(formed from the present by adding “so”)—all of us who are lucky
enough, I believe we may say good enough, to want no temporal augment
from the prefix of society, only to cling upon the tree to the second
aorist of our children, wherein the root of the man lurks, the grand
indefinite so anomalous; all these fellows, if they can anyhow
understand this sentence, will be glad to hear that Rufus Hutton had a
jolly ride.

Rosa waited at the gate; why do his mareʼs shoes linger? Rosa ran in,
and ran out again, and was sure that she heard something pelting down
the hill much too fast, for her sake! but who could blame him when he
knew he was coming home at last? Then Rosa snapped poor Jonahʼs head
off, for being too thick to hear it.

Meanwhile, a mighty senate was held at Kettledrum Hall, Mrs. Corklemore
herself taking the curule chair. After a glimpse of natural life, and
the love of man and woman, we want no love of money; so we lift our
laps (like the Roman envoy) and shake out war with the whole of them.

Fools who think that life needs gilding—life, whose flowing blood
contains every metal but gold and silver—because they clog and poison
it! Blessed is he who earns his money, and spends it all on a Saturday.
He looks forward to it throughout the week; and the beacon of life is
hope, even as God is its pole–star.




CHAPTER II.


Mr. Garnetʼs house, well away to the west, was embraced more closely
and lovingly by the gnarled arms of the Forest than the Hall, or even
the Rectory. Just in the scoop of a sunny valley, high enough to
despise the water, and low enough to defy the wind, there was nothing
to concern it much, but the sighing of the branches. Over the brown
thatch hung two oak–trees, whispering leaves of history, offering the
acorn cup upon the parlour hearth, chafing their rheumatic knuckles
against the stone of the chimneys, wondering when the great storm
should come that would give them an inside view of it. For though the
cottage lay so snugly, scarcely lifting its thatched eyebrows at the
draught which stole up the valley, nevertheless those guardian oaks had
wrestled a bout or two with the tempests. In the cyclone on the morning
of November 29th, 1836, and again on the 7th of January, 1842, they
had gripped the ground, and set hard their knees, and groaned at the
thought of salt water. Since then the wind had been less of a lunatic
(although there had been some ruffianly work in 1854), and they hoped
there was a good time coming, and so spread their branches further and
further, and thought less of the price of timber. There was only one
wind that frightened them much, and that was two points north of west,
the very direction whence, if they fell, crash they must come on the
cottage. For they stood above it, the root–head some ten feet above the
back–floor of the basement, and the branches towering high enough for a
wood–pigeon not to be nervous there.

Now we only get heavy pressure of squalls from the west–north–west
after a thorough–going tempest which has begun in the southward, and
means to box half the compass. So the two great oaks were regarded by
their brethren up the hill as jolly fellows, happy dogs, born with a
silver spoon in their mouths, good for another thousand years, although
they might be five hundred old; unless, indeed—and here all the trees
shuddered—there came such another hurricane as in 1703. But which
of us knows his own brotherʼs condition? Those two oaks stood, and
each knew it, upon a steep bank, where no room was for casting out
stay–roots to east–south–east.

Bull Garnet hated those two trees, with terror added to hatred. Even
if they never crushed him, which depended much on the weather, they
_would_ come in at his bedroom window when the moon was high. Wandering
shapes of wavering shadow, with the flickering light between them,
walking slowly as a ghost does, and then very likely a rustle and tap,
a shivering, a shuddering; it made the ground–floor of his heart shake
in the nightmare hours.

Never before had he feared them so much, one quarter so much, as
this October; and, during the full and the waning moon after Clayton
Nowellʼs death, he got very little sleep for them. By day he worked
harder than ever, did more than three men ought to do, was everywhere
on the estates, but never swore at any one—though the men scratched
their ears for the want of it—laboured hard, and early, and late, if
so he might come home at night (only not in the dark), come home at
night thoroughly weary. His energy was amazing. No man anywhere felling
wood—Mr. Garnetʼs especial luxury—no man hedging and ditching,
or frithing, or stubbing up fern and brambles, but had better look
out what he had in his bag, or “the governor would be there, and no
mistake.” A workman could scarcely stand and look round, and wonder how
his sick wife was, or why he had got to work so hard, could scarcely
slap himself on the breast, or wet his hard hands for a better grip,
but there was Bull Garnet before him, with sad, fierce, dogged eyes,
worse than his strongest oaths had been.

Everybody said it was (and everybody believed it; for the gossip had
spread from the household in spite of the maidens’ fear of him) the
cause of it was, beyond all doubt, the illness of his daughter. Pearl
Garnet, that very eccentric girl, as Rufus Hutton concluded, who had
startled poor Polly so dreadfully, was prostrate now with a nervous
fever, and would not see even the doctor. Our Amy, who pleaded hard to
see her, because she was sure she could do her good, received a stern
sharp negative, and would have gone away offended, only she was so
sorry for her. Not that any fervid friendship, such as young ladies
exult in for almost a fortnight incessant, not that any rapturous love
exclusive of all _man_kind had ever arisen between them, for they had
nothing whatever in common, save beauty and tenacity, which girls do
not love in each other: only that she was always sorry for any one deep
in trouble. And believing that Pearl had loved Clayton Nowell, and was
grieving for him bitterly, how could Amy help contrasting that misery
with her own happiness?

For Amy was nice and happy now, in spite of Cradockʼs departure, and
the trouble he had departed in. He loved her almost half as much, she
believed, as she loved him; and was not that enough for anybody? His
troubles would flow by in time; who on earth could doubt it, unless
they doubted God? He was gone to make his way in the world, and her
only fear was lest he should make it too grand for Amy to share in.
She liked the school–children so, and the pony, and to run out now
and then to the kitchen, and dip a bit of crust in the dripping–pan;
and she liked to fill her dear fatherʼs pipe, and spread a thin
handkerchief over his head. Would all these pleasures be out of her
sphere, when Cradock came back, with all London crowning him the
greatest and best man of the age? Innocent Amy, never fear. “Nemo, nisi
ob homicidium, repente fuit clarissimus.”

Mr. Garnet would have felled those oaks, in spite of Sir Cradockʼs
most positive orders, if there had not been another who could not
command, but could plead for them. Every morning as the steward came
out, frowned and shook his fist at them, the being whom he loved most
on earth—far beyond himself, his daughter, and the memory of their
mother, all multiplied into each other,—that boy Bob came up to him,
and said, “Father, donʼt, _for my sake_.”

We have not heard much of Bob Garnet yet; we have scarcely shaped him
feebly; by no means was he a negative character, yet described most
briefly by negatives. In every main point, except two, he was his
fatherʼs cardinal opposite. Those two were generosity (which combines
the love of truth with a certain warmth of impulse) and persevering
energy. Even those two were displayed in ways entirely different, but
the staple was very similar.

Bob Garnet was a naturalist. Gentle almost as any girl, and more so
than his sister, he took small pleasure in the ways of men, intense
delight in those of every other creature. Bob loved all things God
had made, even as fair Amy did. All his day, and all his life, he
would have spent, if he had the chance, among the ferns and mosses,
the desmidiæ of the forest pools, the sun–dew and the fungi, the
buff–tips and red underwings, privet–hawks, and emperors. He knew all
the children of the spring and handmaids of the summer, all of autumnʼs
laden train and the comforters of winter. The happiest of mankind is he
whose stores of life are endless, whose pure delights can never cloy,
who sees and feels in every birth, in every growth or motion, his own
Almighty Father; and loving Him is loved again, as a child who spreads
his arms out.

Mr. Garnetʼs affection for this boy surpassed the love of women. He
petted, and patted, and coaxed him, and talked nonsense to him by the
hour; he was jealous even of Bobʼs attachment to his sister Pearl; in
short, all the energy of his goodness, which, like the rest of his
energies, transcended the force of other menʼs, centred and spent
itself mainly there. But of late Bob had passed all his time with his
mother—I mean, of course, with Nature; for his mother in the flesh was
dead many a year ago. He had now concluded, with perfect contentment,
that his education was finished; and to have the run of the forest at
this unwonted season more than consoled him for the disgrace of his
recent expulsion from school.

Scarcely any one would believe that Bob Garnet, the best and gentlest
boy that ever cried over Euripides—not from the pathos of the poet
certainly, but from his own—Bob Garnet, who sang to snails to come
out, and they felt that he could not beat them, should have been
expelled disgracefully from a private school, whose master must
needs expel his own guineas with every banished pupil. However, so
it was, and the crime was characteristic. He _would_ sit at night in
the lime–trees. Those lime–trees overhung the grey stone wall of the
playground near Southampton; and some wanton boys had been caught
up there, holding amoibæans with little nursemaids and girls of all
work, come out to get lung–and–tongue food. Thereupon a stern ukase
was issued that the next boy caught up there would be expelled without
trial, as the corrupter of that pure flock. The other boys laughed, I
am sorry to say, when “Bob, the natural,” as they called him, meaning
thereby the naturalist, was the first to be discovered there, crawling
upon a branch as cleverly as a looper caterpillar. Even then the
capital sentence was commuted that time, for every master knew, as well
as every boy, that Bob could never “say bo” to anything of the feminine
gender capable of articulating. So Bob had to learn the fourth Georgic
by heart, and did most of it (with extreme enjoyment) up in that very
same tree. For he kept all his caterpillars there, his beetle–traps,
his moth–nets, even some glorious pupæ, which were due at the end
of August; and he nursed a snug little fernery, and had sown some
mistletoe seeds, and a dozen other delicious things, and the lime–hawks
wanted to burrow soon; in a word, it was Bobʼs hearth and heart–place,
for no other boy could scale it. But just when Bob had got to the
beginning of Aristæus, and the late bees were buzzing around him,
although the linden had berried, an officious usher spied him out—a
dirty little fellow, known and despised by all the more respectable
_σιωπητέαι_ of Southampton. With hottest indignation, that mean low
beggar cried out—

“Boy in the tree there! I see you! Your name this moment, you rascal!”

“Garnet, sir, Bob Garnet. And if you please, sir, I am not a rascal.”

“Come down, sir, this very instant; or else Iʼll come up after you.”

“I donʼt think you can, sir,” replied Bob, looking down complacently;
for, as we shall see by–and–by, he was no coward in an emergency. “If
you please, sir, no boy in the school can climb this tree except me,
sir, since Brown senior left.”

“I can tell you one thing, Garnet: itʼs the last time youʼll ever climb
it.”

“Oh, then I must collect my things; I am sorry to keep you waiting,
sir. But they are such beauties, and I canʼt see well to pack them.”

Bob packed up his treasures deliberately in his red
pocket–handkerchief, and descended very cleverly, holding it with his
teeth. The next morning he had to pack his box, and became in the
school a mere legend.

His father flew into a violent passion, not with the son, but the
schoolmaster: however, he was so transported with joy at getting his
own Bob home again, that he soon forgave the cause of it. So the boy
got the run of the potato–fields, pollard–trees, and rushy pools, and
hunted and grubbed and dabbled, and came home sometimes with three
handkerchiefs, not to mention his hat, full. One lovely day this
October, before the frost set in—a frost of a length and severity most
rare at that time of year—Bob Garnet took his basket and trowel, nets,
lens, &c., and set out for a sandy patch, not far from the stream by
the Rectory, where in his July holidays he had found some Gladiolus
Illyricus, a bloom of which he had carried home, and now he wanted some
roots of it. He could not think why his father left him so very much to
himself now, and had ceased from those little caresses and fondlings,
which used to make Bob look quite ashamed sometimes in the presence of
strangers. He felt that his father loved him quite as much as ever,
and he had found those strong eyes set upon him with an expression,
as it appeared to him, of sorrow and compassion. He had a great mind
to ask what the matter was; but his love for his father was a strange
feeling, mixed with some dread and uncertainty. He would make Pearl
tell him all about it, that would be the best way; for she as well had
been carrying on very oddly of late. She sat in her own room all day
long, and would never come down to dinner, and would never come out for
a stroll with him, but slipped out by herself sometimes in the evening;
that, at least, he was sure of. And to tell him indeed, him going on
now for seventeen years of age, that he was too young to ask questions!
He would let her know, he was quite resolved, that because she happened
to be two years older—a pretty reason that was for treating him like a
baby! She who didnʼt know a wire–worm from a ring–worm, nor an elater
from a tipula, and thought that the tippet–moth was a moth that fed
upon tippets! Recalling fifty other instances of poor Pearlʼs deep
ignorance, Bob grew more and more indignant, as he thought of the way
she treated him. He would stand it no longer. If she was in trouble,
that was only the greater reason—— Holloa!

Helter–skelter, off dashed Bob after a Queen of Spain fritillary,
the first he had ever seen on the wing, and a grand prize for any
collector, even of ten times his standing. It was one of the second
brood, invited by the sun to sport awhile. And rare sport it afforded
Bob, who knew it at once from the other fritillaries, for the shape of
the wings is quite different, and he had seen it in grand collections.
An active little chap it was, greatly preferring life to death, and
thoroughly aware that man is the latterʼs chief agent. Once Bob made
quite sure of it, for it had settled on a blackberry–spray, and smack
the net came down upon it, but a smack too hard, for the thorns came
grinning out at the bottom, and away went the butterfly laughing. Bob
made good the net in a moment with some very fine pins that he carried,
and off again in still hotter pursuit, having kept his eyes on dear
Lathonia. But the prey was now grown wondrous skeary since that narrow
shave, and the huntsman saw that his only chance was a clever swoop in
mid air. So he raised his net high, and zig–zagged recklessly round the
trees, through the bushes, up the banks and down them. At last he got
quite close to her, but she flipped round a great beech–trunk; Bob made
a cast at hazard, and caught not the Queen, but Amy.

Amy was not frightened much, neither was she hurt, though her pretty
round head came out through the net—for she had taken her hat off—and
the ring lay upon her shoulders, which the rich hair had shielded from
bruises. She would have been frightened terribly, only she knew what
was going on, and had stepped behind the tree to avoid the appearance
of interfering. For she did not wish—she knew not why—but, by some
instinct, she did not wish to have much to do with the Garnets. She
regarded poor Bob as a schoolboy, who was very fond of insects, and
showed his love by killing them.

But if Amy was not frightened much, Bob, the captor, was. He dropped
the handle of his net, and fell back against the beech–tree. Then Amy
laughed, and took off the net, or the relics of the gauze at least, and
kindly held out her hand to him, and said,

“Oh, how you are grown!”

“And so are you. Oh dear me, have you seen her? Have you seen her?”

“Seen whom?” asked Amy, “my Aunt Eudoxia? She is on there, by the
ash–tree.”

“The Queen of Spain, Miss Rosedew, the Queen of Spain fritillary! Oh,
tell me which way she went! If I lose her, I am done for!”

“Then, I fear, Master Garnet”—[“Confound it,” thought Bob, “how all
the girls do patronize me!”]—“I am very much afraid you must make up
your mind to annihilation, if by the ‘Queen of Spain’ you mean that
common brown little butterfly you wanted just now to kill so much.”

“Is she gone across the river, then? That is nothing, I assure you. I
would go through fire after her. Oh, tell me, only tell me.”

Amy could not help laughing; poor Bob looked so ridiculous, fitting a
new net all the time upon the ring of the old one, the crown of his hat
come to look for his head, his trousers kicked well up over his boots,
and his coat an undoubted ventilator.

“I really donʼt know,” said Amy; “how could you expect me to see
through your shrimp–net, Master Garnet?”

“Oh, I beg your pardon—how stupid I am, to be sure—I beg your pardon
a thousand times; really I might have hurt you. I would not do that
for——”

“Even the Queen of Spain. To tell you the truth, Master Garnet, if I
knew where she was gone I would not tell you, because I canʼt bear to
have things killed. In my opinion, it is so cruel.”

“Oh!” cried Bob, a very long “oh,” drawn out into half an ell; and he
looked at Amy all the time he was saying it, which was a wonderful
thing for him to do. Then it occurred to his mind, for the first time
possibly, what a beautiful creature she was, more softly shaded than a
Chalk–hill blue, and richer than a cream–spotted tiger–moth! The moment
he felt this Bob was done for; Amy had caught her captor.

Flushed as he was with the long hot chase, his cheeks grew hotter and
redder, as he got a dim consciousness of a few of the things which he
was feeling. He was like a chrysalis, touched in the winter, when it
goes on one side from the crust of the thorax, and sometimes can never
get right again. After having said “oh,” with emphasis and so much
diæresis, Bob did not feel called upon for any further utterance till
Amy was gone to her Aunt Eudoxia; and then he contrived to say, “Ah!”
He was more put out than he had been even when his pet poplar–hawk
caterpillar was devoured alive by ichneumon grubs. He went round the
tree ever so many times, and wondered what was the matter with him, how
he came there, and what he was doing.

Alas, poor Bob! Nature, who overlooks nothing, was well aware of the
difficulties when she cried, “Jump up on my lap, Bob, and never be
weaned from me.” She knew that things of all sorts would come between
herself and her child, some of them drawn from her own mother–milk,
but most of them from manʼs muzzling. Of the latter she had not much
fear with Bob; but the former, she knew, were beyond her, and she had
none but herself to thank for them. She knew that the lad, so strongly
imbued with her own pleasant affluences, was almost sure to be touched
with that one which comes from her breast the warmest. And then what
would become of zoology, phytology, entomology, and all the other
yard–long names which her children spin out of her apron–strings?

While Bob was still fiddling with his fingers, and forgetting all about
butterflies, Miss Eudoxia, fetched by Amy, came to hold discourse with
him.

“Why, Master Robert, I do declare, Robert, my butterfly boy! I have not
seen you for such a time, Robert.” And she held out her hand, which Bob
took with very little sense of gratitude. To be called a “butterfly
boy” before Amy, and Amy to acquiesce in it!

“Ah, you think I have nothing for you, Robert. You school–boys live
upon suction. But just wait a moment, my dear.”

She drew forth an old horn comfit–box, which had belonged to her
grandmother, and was polished up like amber from the chafing of
many a lining. This she opened with much ado, poured three crinkled
sugar–plums on her gloved palm, and a smooth one as large as a
hazel–nut, and offered them all to Robert, with a smile of the finest
patronage.

“No, thank you, Miss Rosedew; no, thank you. I am very much obliged to
you.”

Miss Eudoxia had been wondering at her own generosity, and thought that
he was overcome with it. So her smile became one of encouragement and
assurance against self–sacrifice.

“Oh, you need not be afraid, Robert. And you can put some under your
pillow, and wake up in the night and suck them. How nice that will be,
to be sure! You see I know what boys are. And I have plenty left for
the infant–school. And they donʼt deserve them as you do, Robin.”

“Miss Rosedew,” said Bob, in his loftiest manner, though he was
longing for them, only that Amy was there; “you will believe me when I
assure you that I never touch sweets of any sort; not even at a late
dinner–party.”

Miss Eudoxia turned her eyes up, and almost dropped the sugar–plums.
But Amy, instead of being impressed, merrily laughed, and said,

“Give them to me, then, auntie, please. Some of the men at the
night–school eat sweets after early suppers.”

Bob said “good–bye” disconsolately, for he knew that he had affronted
Miss Doxy, without rising in Amyʼs opinion. He forgot all about the
gladiolus, and let many great prizes escape him; for the day was the
last of the soft and sunny, which tempt forth the forest denizens ere
the frosty seal is set on them. In the glimpses of every brown arcade,
in the jumbled gleam of the underwood, in the alleys between the
upstanding trees, even in the strong light where the golden patches
shone, and the wood fell back to look at them, in all of these he
seemed to see and then to lose his angel. Her face he could not see
clearly yet, hard as he strove to do it; affection is, but love is not,
a photographic power. Still he could see her shadowly; her attitude,
the fall of her hair, the manner of her gestures; even the ring of her
voice would seem to dwell about the image. But he never got them all
together; one each time was the leading thing; vague; and yet it went
through him.

He made one attempt—for he feared from the first, although he never
could feel it so, that his love was a thorough wild–goose chase—the
poor boy made one last attempt to catch at some other pursuit.

“Father,” he said that very same night, after sitting for hours of
wandering, “will you give me a gun and let me take to shooting?”

“A gun!” cried Bull Garnet, starting; “a gun, Bob! What do you mean by
it?”

“I meant nothing at all, father. Only I know the way to stuff birds,
and there are some rare ones here sometimes, and I want to make a
collection.”

“Bob Garnet, as long as I am alive, you never shall have a gun.”

“Then, will you lend me yours, father? I know very well how to use it.
I mean your patent——”

“Never, Bob. My son, if you love me, never speak of it again.”




CHAPTER III.


When Miss Rosedew and her niece came in to get ready for dinner, Amy
cried out suddenly, “Oh, only look at the roses, aunt; how they have
opened to–day! What delicious Louise Odier, and just look at General
Jacqueminot! and I do declare Jules Margottin is finer than he was at
Midsummer. I must cut a few, for I know quite well there will come a
great frost if I donʼt, and then where will all my loves be?”

Amyʼs prediction about the weather was as random a guess as we may find
in great authorities, who are never right, although they give the winds
sixteen points of the thirty–two to shuffle in. But it so turned out
that the girl was right—a point of the compass never hit till a day
too late by our weather–clerks.

That very same night such a frost set in as had not been known in
October for very nearly a century. It lasted nine nights and eight
days; twice the mercury fell more than half way from the freezing
point to zero, and the grass was crisp in the shade all day, though
the high sun wiped off the whiteness at noon wherever he found the
way to it. Boys rejoiced, and went mitching, to slide on the pools of
the open furzery: no boys since the time of their great–grandfathers
had done the heel–tap in October. But the birds did not appreciate
it. What in the world did it mean? Why, there were the hips not ripe
yet, and the hollyberries come to no colour, and half the blackberries
still too acid, and, lo! it was freezing hard enough to make a worm
cold for the stomach, even if you could get him! Surely there was some
stupid mistake of two months in the piperʼs almanac. All they could
say was that, if it were so, those impudent free–and–easy birds who
came sponging on them in the winter—and too stuck up, forsooth! to
live with them after sucking all the fat of the land, and winning their
daughters’ affections—those outlandish beggars—be hanged to them—had
got the wrong almanac too.

Why, they had not even heard the chatter, the everlasting high–fashion
clack, of those jerk–tail fieldfares yet; nor had a missel–thrush
come swaggering to bully a decent throstle that had sung hard all
the summer, just because his breast and his coarse–shaped spots were
bigger. Why, they had not even seen a clumsy short–eared owl flopping
out of the dry fern yet—much good might it do him, the fern that
belonged to themselves!—nor a single wedge of grey–lag geese, nor a
woodcock that knew his business. And those nasty dissolute quacking
mallards that floated in bed all day, the sluggards, and then wouldnʼt
let a respectable bird have a chance of a good nightʼs roost—there
they were still on the barley–stubble; please God they might only get
frozen!

And yet, confound it all, what was the weather coming to? You might
dig, and tap, and jump with both feet, and put your head on one side
in the most knowing manner possible, and get behind a tuft of grass,
and wait there ever so long, and devil a worm would come up! And,
as for the slugs, oh, donʼt let me hear of them! Though the thieves
had not all got home yet, they were ten degrees too cold for even an
oyster–catcherʼs stomach: feathers and pip, my dear fellow! it gives me
the colic to think of one. Put your head under my wing, Jenny Wren; oh,
my darling, how cold your beak is!

Such, so far as I could gather them, were the sentiments of the birds,
and their confabulation, when they went to roost, half an hour earlier
than usual—for bed is the warmest place after all; besides, what was
there to do?—on the 24th of October, 1859. And they felt the cold
rime settling down on grey twig, and good brown leaf. Yet some of the
older birds, cocks of long experience, buffers beyond all chaff, perked
one eye at the eastern heavens, before tucking it under the scapular
down—the eastern heavens all barred with murky red. Then they gave a
little self–satisfied tweedle, which meant to the ear of Melampus,

“Ah ha! an old bird like me knows something about the weather! Bless
my drumsticks and merrythought, I shanʼt be so cold and hungry, please
God, this time to–morrow night.”

Oh you little wiseacres, much you know what impendeth! A worse row than
all the mallards you grumble at could make in a thousand years will
spoil your roost to–morrow night. Think it a mercy if you do not get
your very feathers blown off of you—ay, and the tree of your ancestors
snapped beneath your feet—before this time to morrow night.

John Rosedew met the prettiest bird that ever had nest in the
New Forest, his own little duck of an Amy, in the passage by the
parlour–door, at eight oʼclock in the morning of that 25th of October.
He kissed her white forehead lovingly, according to early usage; then
he glanced at the weather–glass, and went nearer, supposing that his
short sight had cheated him.

“Why, Amy dear, you must have forgotten to set the glass last night.”

“No, indeed, papa. I set it very carefully. You know I can do it as
well as you can, since you showed me the way. It was just a little
hollow last night, and I moved the Verrier scale just a hundredth part
of an inch downwards, and then it was ten oʼclock.”

“Then may the Lord have mercy on all seafaring men, especially our poor
boatmen, and the dredging people off Rushford!”

Mr. Rosedew, as has been said before, was parson of Rushford as well as
of Nowelhurst. At the former place he kept a curate, but looked after
the poor people none the less, for the distance was only six miles; and
now, as his legs were getting stiff, he had bought Coræbus to help him.
Rushford lies towards the eastern end of the great Hurst shingle bank,
the most dangerous part of Christchurch Bay, being fully exposed to the
south–west gales, and just in the run of the double tide; in the eddy
of the Needles.

“Why, what is the matter, papa? Even if it rains, it wonʼt hurt them
much. And itʼs as lovely a morning as ever was seen, and the white
frost sparkling beautifully. What a magnificent sunrise! Or, at least,
a very strange one.”

“ʼSibi temperat unda carinis.’ All is smooth for the present. But I
heard the lash of the ground–sea last night, when I lay awake. Fetch
my telescope, darling, and come with me to the green room. We can see
thence to St. Albanʼs Head; but the danger is for those beyond it. All
the ships on this side of it will have time to work up the Solent.
Never before have I known the mercury fall as it has done now. An inch
and a tenth in only ten hours!”

When they went to bed on the previous night, the quicksilver stood at
30° 10´. Now it was at 29°, and cupped like the bottom of a champagne
bottle, which showed that it still fell rapidly. But as yet the silver
of the frost was sparkling on the lawn, and the morning sun looked up
the heavens, as if he felt all right. Nevertheless, it was but show:
he is bound to make the best of it, and, like all other warm–hearted
beings, sometimes has sorry work there.

When they saw that no large craft had rounded St. Albanʼs Head, only
that the poor cement–dredgers were working away at septaria, John and
his daughter went to breakfast, hoping that no harm would be, while
Miss Eudoxia lay in bed, and reflected on her own good qualities.

Amy came out after breakfast, without any bonnet or hat on, to make her
own observations. That girl so loved the open air, the ever glorious
concave, the frank palm of the hand of God—for in cities we get His
knuckles—that she felt as if she had not bowed before her Friend and
Maker, the all–giving, the all–loving One, until she had paid her
orisons and sung her morning hymn with His own ceiling over her. So now
she walked beneath the branches laden with His jewellery, and over the
ground hard–trodden by ministers doing His will, and beside the spear
and the flat–grass, chilled with the awe of His breath, and among the
wailing flowers, wailing and black and shrivelled up, because His face
was cold to them.

For these poor Amy grieved sadly, for she was just beginning to care
again for the things whose roots were outside of her. Lo the bright
chrysanthemums, plumed, reflex, and fimbriate; lo the gorgeous dahlias,
bosses quilled and plaited tight, and wrought with depth of colour;
and then the elegant asters, cushioned, cochleate, praying only to
have their eyes looked into; most of all, her own sweet roses, chosen
flowers of the chosen land—they hung their heads, and stuck together,
as brown as a quartered apple. Who could look at them, who could think
of them, and not feel as if some of herself were dead?

Now, walking there, this youthful maiden, fairest of all His works
and purest, began to observe, as He has taught us, the delicacies,
the pores, and glints of the grand universal footprint. Not that the
girl perceived one–tenth of the things being done around her, any more
than I can tell them; for observation grows from as well as begets
experience; and the girlish mind (and the boyish too, at any rate for
the most part) has very lax and indefinite communion with nature. How
seldom do we meet a lady who knows what way the wind is! They all
believe that it must freeze harder when the sky is cloudy; not one in
fifty but trembles more at the thunder than at the lightning.

Yet Amy, with true womanʼs instinct, being alarmed for the lives of
others, after her fatherʼs prediction, looked around her narrowly. And
first her eyes went upwards, and they were right in doing so. Of the
sky she knew less than nothing—although herself well known there; but
the trees—come now, she was perfectly sure she knew something about
the trees. So you do, you darling; and yet a very wee little; though
more than half the ladies do. You know an elm from a wych–elm, and a
hornbeam from a beech; and what more can we expect of you?

The rime upon the dark tree–boles and the forward push of the branches,
the rime of white fur, newly breathen but an hour ago, when a flaw
from the east came cat–like, and went through without moving anything;
this delicate down from the lips of morning, silk work upon the
night–fleece, was, as all most beautiful is, the first to fleet and
vanish. Changing into a doubtful glister, which you must touch to be
sure of it, then trickling away into beaded drops, like a tear which
will have no denial, it came down the older and harder rime, and
perhaps would bring that into its humour, and perhaps would get colder
and freeze again into little lumps, like a tap leaking. Then the white
face of the rough pillared trunks, pearled with glistening purity, was
bighted into with scoops and dark bays, like the sweep of a scythe in
the morning. On the bars of the gate, the silver harvest, spiked and
cropping infinitely, began to sheave itself away, and then the sheaves
were full ripe tears, and the tears ran down if you thought of them.

But the notable sight of all, at least to a loitering mind the most
striking, was to see how the hoar–frost gradually was lifting its light
wing from the grass. In little tufts and random patches—random to us
who know not why—the spangles, the spears, and the crusted flakes,
the fairy tinsel, the ermine of dew, the very down of moonlight, the
kiss of the sky too pure for snow, and the glittering glance of stars
reflected—all this loveliness, caught and fastened, by the nightʼs
halourgic, in one broad sheet of virgin white, was hovering off in
tufts and patches, as if a blind angel had breathed on it, with his
flight only guided by pity.

But through, and in, and between it all, the boles of the trees, and
the bars of the gate, the ridge of the ruts, and dapples of lawn, one
thing Amy observed which puzzled her, for even she knew that it was
a thing against all usage. The thaw was not on the south side or the
south–east side of anything, though the sickly sun was gazing there;
but the melting came from the north, and took the frost aback. She
wondered vainly about it, but the matter was simple enough, like most
of the things which we wonder at, instead of at our own ignorance. A
flaw of warm air from the north had set in; a lower warp which shot
through and threaded the cold south–eastern woof. This is not a common
occurrence. Since my vague, unguided, and weak observations began, I
have only seen it thrice. And on each of those three times it has been
followed by a fearful tempest. Usually, a frost breaks up with a shift
of the wind to the south–east, a gradual relaxing, a fusion of warmer
air, and a great effusion of damp, a blanket of clouds for the earth,
and a doubt in the sky how to use them. Then the doubt ends—as many
other doubts end—in precipitation. The wind chops round to the west of
south; the moisture condenses outside our windows, instead of starring
the inside; and then come a few spits of rain. But the rain is not
often heavy at first, although it is stinging and biting,—a rain which
is half ashamed of itself, as if it ought to be hail.

But, after all, these things depend on things we cannot depend
upon,—moods of the air to be multiplied into humours of the earth and
sea, and the product traversed, indorsed, divided, touched, and sliced
at every angle by solar, lunar, and astral influences.

  “Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.”

Lucky the man who knows when to take out his umbrella.

That morning, the north wind crept along, sponging the rime from the
grass, and hustling it rudely from the tree–sprays, on many of which
the black leaves draggled, frozen while yet in verdure. Then the sky
began to be slurred across with white clouds breathing out from it,
as a child breathes on the blade of a knife, or on a carriage window.
These blots of cloud threw feelers out, and strung themselves together,
until a broad serried and serrate bar went boldly across the heavens,
from south–east to north–west. It marked the point whence the gale
would begin, and the quarter where it would end. From this great
bar, on either side, dappled and mottled, like the wash of sepia on a
drawing, little offsets straggled away, and began to wisp with a spiral
motion, slow and yet perceptible.

This went on for an hour or two, darkening and deepening continually,
amassing more and more of the sky, gathering vapours to it, and
embodying as it got hold of them; but still there was some white wan
sunshine through the mustering cloud–blots and the spattering mud of
the heavens; and still the good folks who had suffered from chilblains,
and found it so much milder, exclaimed, “What a beautiful day!”

Then about noon a mock sun appeared, feeble, wild, and haggard, whose
mates on the crown and the east of the arc could scarcely keep him in
countenance. Over all this, and over the true sun and the cirrhous
outrunners, heavily drove at one oʼclock the laden and leaden cumulus,
blurred on the outskirts with cumulostrate, and daubed with lumps of
vapour which mariners call “Noahʼs arks.”

Then came the first sough of the wind, a long, prolonged, deep–drawn,
dry sob, a hollow and mysterious sound, that shivered through the brown
leaves, and moaned among the tree–boles. Away went every beast and bird
that knew the fearful signal: the deer lanced away to the holm–frith;
the cattle in huffs came belloking to the lew of the boughy trees; the
hogs ran together, and tossed their snouts, and skittered home from the
ovest; the squirrel hied to his hollow dray, the weasel slunk to his
tuffet lair, and every rabbit skipped home from grass. The crows and
the magpies were all in a churm; the heavy–winged heron flapped off
from the brook–side; the jar–bird flicked out from the ivy–drum; the
yaffingale darted across the ride with his strange discordant laugh;
even the creepers that ply the trees crept into lichened fastnesses,
lay flat to the bark, and listened.

Nor less the solid, heavy powers that have to stay and break the storm,
no less did they, the beechen clump, the funnelled glens, the heathery
breastwork, even the depths of forest night—whence common winds shrink
back affrighted—even the bastions of Norman oak, scarred by many a
tempest–siege, and buckled by the mighty gale of 1703,—one and all
they whispered of the stress of heaven impending.

First came fitful scuds of rain, “flisky” rain they call it, loose
outriders of the storm, spurning the soft ice, as they dashed by, and
lashing the woodmanʼs windows. Then a short dark pause ensued, in which
the sky swirled up with clouds, and the earth lay mute with terror.
Only now and then a murmur went along the uplands.

Suddenly, ere a man might say, “Good God!” or “Where are my children?”
every tree was taken aback, every peat–stack reeled and staggered,
every cot was stripped of its thatch, on the opposite side to that on
which the blow was expected.

The first squall of that great tempest broke from the dark south–east.
It burst through the sleet, and dashed it upwards like an army of
archers shooting; ere a man could stay himself one way, it had caught
him up from another. The leaves from the ground flew up again through
the branches which had dropped them; and then a cloud of all manner of
foliage, whirling, flustering, capering, flitting, soared high over the
highest tree–tops, and drove through the sky like dead shooting–stars.

All that afternoon, the squalls flew faster, screaming onward to one
another, furious maniacs dashing headlong, smiting themselves and
everything. Then there came a lull. So sudden that the silence was more
stunning than the turmoil. A pause for sunset; for brave men countless
to see their last of sunlight. That evening, the sundown gun from
Calshot was heard over all the forest. I remember to have expected
fully that the next flaw of air would come, like a heavy sigh, from the
south–west. The expectation showed how much I underrated the magnitude
of that broad stormʼs area. If the wind had chopped then, it would have
been only a hard gale, not a hurricane.

Like a wave of the sea, it came on solidly, and from the old direction;
no squall, no blast, any more; but one bodily rush of phalanxed air
through a chasm in the firmament. Black, and tossing stone and metal as
a girl jerks up her hat–plume, it swept the breadth of land and sea, as
bisons horded sweep the snow–drifts, as Niagara sweeps the weeds away.

Where the full force of that storm broke, any man must have been mad
drunk who attempted to go to bed. Houses unroofed, great trees snapped
off and flung into another tree, men caught like chaff from the
winnowing and dropped somewhere in pond or gravel–pit, the carrierʼs
van overthrown on the road, and three oaks come down to lie upon
it,—some blown–away people brought news of these things, and fetched
their breath up to tell them.

Our own staunch hearths rocked under us, and we looked for the walls to
fall in upon us, as every mad rush came plunging.

Miss Eudoxia sat with Amy, near the kitchen fire; at least where
the fire should have been, but the wind had quenched it long ago.
Near them cowered Jemima and Jenny, begging not to be sent to bed.
They had crawled up–stairs to see about it, and the floor came up to
them—so they said—like the shifting plate of the oven. The parlour
chimney–stack had fallen; but, in Godʼs mercy, clear and harmless from
the roof of the house. No fear of the thatch taking fire: that wind
would have blown out the fire of London.

Now as they sat, or crouched and sidled, watching the cracks of the
ceiling above, jumping every now and then, as big lumps of mortar
fell down the chimney, and shrinking into themselves, every time the
great stack groaned and laboured so, Miss Eudoxia, full of pluck, was
reading aloud—to little purpose, for she scarcely could hear her own
voice—the prayers which are meant to be used at sea, and the 107th
Psalm. And who shall say that she was wrong, especially as the devil is
supposed to be so busy in a gale of wind?

Jemima and Amy were doing their best to catch her voice at intervals.
As for Jenny, she did not care much what became of her now. She knew
at the last full moon that her sweetheart was thoroughly up for
jilting her; and now when she had ventured out—purely of her own
self–will—the wind had taken her up anyhow, and whisked her like a
snow–flake against the wash–house door. She was sure to have a black
eye in the morning, and then it would be all up with her; and Jemima
might go sweethearting, and she could not keep her company.

The roar through the wood, the yells at the corners, the bellowing
round the chimneys, the thunder of the implacable hurricane; any mortal
voice was less than a whisper into a steam–whistle. Who could tell what
trees were falling? A monster might be hurled on the roof, and not one
of them would know it until it came sheer through the ceiling. Amy
was pale as the cinders before her, but firm as the bars of iron, and
even trying to smile sometimes at the shrieks and queer turns of the
tempest. No candle could be kept alight, and the flame of the parlour
lamp quivered like a shirt badly pinned on a washing–line. But Amy was
thinking dearly of the father of the household, the father of the
parish, out in the blinding wind and rain, and where the wild waves
were lashing. And now and then Amy wondered whether it blew so hard in
London, and hoped they had no big chimneys there.

John Rosedew had taken his little bundle, in a waterproof case, and
set out on foot for Rushford, when the storm became unmistakeable. He
would not ride Coræbus; first because he would have found it impossible
to wipe him dry, secondly because the wind has such purchase upon a
man when he is up there on the pommel. So the rector strode off in his
stoutest manner, an hour or so before nightfall, and the rain went into
him, neck and shoes, before he got to the peat–rick. To a resolute man,
who feels sometimes that the human hide wants tanning, there are few
greater pleasures than getting basted and cracklined by the wet wind;
only it must not come too often, neither last too long.

So John was in excellent spirits, quelching along and going pop like
a ball of India–rubber, when he came on a weaker fellow–mortal, stuck
fast in a chair of beech–roots.

“Why, Robert!” said Mr. Rosedew, and nine–tenths of his voice went to
leeward; “Robert, my boy;—oh dear!”

That last exclamation followed in vain Johnʼs favourite old hat, which
every one in the parish loved, especially the children. The hat went
over the crest of the hill, and leaped into an oak–tree, and was seen
no more but of turtle–doves, who built therein next summer, and for
three or four generations; and all the doves were blessed, for the sake
of the man who sought peace and ensued it.

“Let me go after it,” cried Bob, with his knees and teeth knocking
together.

“To be sure I will,” replied John Rosedew—the nearest approach to
irony that the worst wind ever took him—“now, Robert, come with me.”

He hooked the light stripling, hard and firm, to his own staunch
powerful frame, and, like a steamer lashed alongside, forced him
across the wind–brunt. And so, by keeping the covered ways, by running
the grooves of the hurricane, they both got safe to Rushford; to
which achievement Bobʼs loving knowledge of every inch of the forest
contributed at least as much as the stern strength of the parson.

Pretty Bob had no right, of course, to be out there at that time; but
he had heard of a glorious company of the deathʼs–head caterpillar,
in a snug potato–field, scooped from out the woodlands. He knew that
they must have burrowed now, and so he set out to dig for them with
his little handfork, directly the thaw allowed him. Anything to divert
his mind, or rather revert it into the natural channel. He had dreamed
about sugar–plums, and Amy, and butterfly–nets, and Queens of Spain,
and his father scowling over all, until his brain, at that sensitive
time, was like a sirex, trying to get out but stuck fast by the
antennæ. Now, Bob, though awake to the little tricks and pleasant ways
of Nature, as observed in cricks and crannies, knew nothing as yet of
her broader moods, her purging sweeps, her clearances,—in a word,
he was a stranger to the law of storms. Therefore he got a bitter
lesson, and one which set him a thinking. John Rosedew, with his grand
bare head bent forward to the wind–blow, and the grey locks sweeping
backward—how Amy would have cried!—towed Bob Garnet down the combe
which spreads out to the sea at Rushford. The fall of the waves was
short and hard—no long ocean rollers yet, only an angry beating surf,
sputtering under the gravel–cliff.

They found some shelter in the hollow, which opens to the
south–south–west; for, though it was blowing as hard as ever, the wind
had not canted round yet; and the little village of Rushford, upon
which the sea is gaining so, was happy enough in its “bunney,” and
could keep its candles burning.

“Iʼll go home with the boy at sundown, when the gale breaks, as I hope
it will. His father will be in a dreadful way, and I know what that man
is. But I could not leave the boy there, neither could I go back again.”

So said John Rosedew, lulled by the shelter, feeling as if he had
frightened himself and all his household for nothing; almost ashamed
to show himself at Octavius Pellʼs sea–cottage, the very last dwelling
of the village. But Octave Pell knew better. He had not lived upon
that coast, fagging out as a cricketer of the Church of England, with
his feet and his hands ready always, and his spiked shoes holding
the ground,—he had not been on the outside of all things, hoping
for innings some day, without looking up at the skies sometimes, and
guessing about promotion. So he knew that his rector, whom he revered
beyond all the fathers of men or women—for he too was soft upon
Amy—he saw that his rector was right in coming, except for his own
dear sake.

John came in, with his shapely legs stuck all tight in the shrunk
kerseymere (shrunk, and varnished, and puckered like plaiting, from the
pelt of the rain), and by one hand still he drew the quenched and welyy
Bob. The wind was sucking round the cliff, and the door flew open hard
enough for a weak manʼs legs to go with it. But “Octave” Pell—as he
was called, because he would sing, though he could not—the Reverend
Octavius was of a sturdy order, well–balanced and steady–going. He drew
in his reeking visitors, and dried, and fed, and warmed them; Bob being
lodged in a suit of clothes which he could only inhabit sparsely. Then
Pell laid aside his rose–root pipe out of deference to his rector, and
made Bob drink hot brandy–and–water till he chattered more than his
teeth had done.

That curate was a fine young fellow, a B.A. of John Rosedewʼs college,
to whom John had given a title for orders—not sold it, as some rectors
do, for a twelvemonthʼs stipend. A tall, strong, gentlemanly parson,
stuck up in no wise, nor stuck down; neither of the High nor Low Church
rut, although an improvement on the old type which cared for none of
these things. He did his duty by his parish; and, as follows almost of
necessity, his parish loved and admired him. He never lifted a poor
manʼs pot–lid to know what he had for dinner; he never made much of
sectarian squabbles, nor tried to exorcise dissent. In a word, he kept
his place, because he felt and loved it.

Only two rooms had Pell to boast of, but he was wonderfully happy in
them. He could find all his property in the dark, and had only one
silver spoon. And the man who can be happy with one, was born with it
in his mouth. Those two rooms he rented from old Jacob Thwarthawse, or
rather from Mrs. Jacob, for the old man was a pilot on the Southampton
Water, and scarcely home twice in a twelvemonth. The little cot looked
like a boat–house at the bottom of the bunney; so close it was to the
high–water mark, that the froth of the waves and the drifting skates’
eggs came almost up to the threshold when the tide ran big, and the
wind blew fresh.

And in the gentle summer night—pray what is it in Theocritus? John
Rosedew could tell, but not I—at least, I mean without looking—

  “Along the pinched caboose, on every side,
  With mincing murmur swam the ocean tide.”

  _Id._ xxi. 17.




CHAPTER IV.


By the time Octavius Pell had clothed, and fed, and warmed his drenched
and buffeted guests, the sun was slipping out of sight, and glad to be
quit of the mischief. For a minute or two, the cloud–curtain lifted
over St. Albanʼs Head, and a narrow bar of lively green striped the
lurid heavens. This was the critical period, and John Rosedew was
aware of it, as well as Octave Pell. Either the wind would shift to
south–west quicker than vanes could keep time with it, and then there
would be a lively storm, with no very wide area; or else it would come
on again with one impetuous leap and roar, and no change of direction,
and work to the south–west gradually, blowing harder until it got
there. The sea was not very heavy yet, when they went out to look at
it; the rain had ceased altogether; there was not air enough to move
the fur of a ladyʼs boa; but, out beyond the Atlantic offing, ridges
like edges of knives were jumping, as if to look over the sky–line.

“Nulla in prospectu navis,” said John Rosedew, who always talked Latin,
as a matter of course, when he met an Oxford man; “at least, so far as
I can see with the aid of my long–rangers.”

“No,” replied Pell, “and Iʼm heartily glad that there is no ship in
sight; for, unless Iʼm much mistaken—run, sir, run like lightning.
_Iʼve got no more dry clothes._”

They ran for it, and were just in time before the fury came down again.
Bob Garnet was ready to slip away, for he knew that his father would be
wild about him; he had taken his drenched hat from the firetongs, and
was tugging at the latch of the door. But now there was no help for it.

“We are in for it now,” cried Mr. Rosedew; “I have not come down for
nothing. It is, what I feared this morning, the heaviest storm that
has broken upon us for at least a generation. And we are not yet in
the worst of it. God grant there be no unfortunate ship making for the
Needles. All our boats, you say, Pell, are in the Solent long ago. Bob,
my boy, you must not expect to see your father to–night. I hope he will
guess what has happened.”

The beach, or pebble bank of Hurst, is a long and narrow spit of land,
growing narrower every year, which forms a natural breakwater to the
frith of the Solent. It curves away to the south of east from the
straighter and more lofty coast of Barton, Hordle, and Rushford. Hurst
Castle, in which it terminates, is the eastern horn of Christchurch
Bay, as Hengistbury Head is the western. The Isle of Wight and the
Needle Rocks protect this bay from the east windʼs power, but a due
south wind brings in the sea, and a south–west the Atlantic. Off this
coast we see at times those strange floating or rising islands known
by the name of the “Shingles;” which sometimes stay above water so
long, that their surface is clad with the tender green of bladderwort
and samphire; but more often they disappear after taking the air for a
few short hours. For several years now they have taken no air; and a
boatman told me the other day, that, from the rapid strides of the sea,
he thought it impossible for the “Shingles” ever to top the waves again.

Up and down the Solent channel the tide pours at a furious speed;
and the rush of the strong ebb down the narrows, flushed with the
cross–tide from St. Helenʼs, combs and pants out into Christchurch Bay,
above the floodmark of two hours since. This great eddy, or reflux,
is called the “double–tide;” and an awkward power it has for any poor
vessel to fall into.

All that night it blew and blew, harder and harder yet; the fishermenʼs
boats on the beach were caught up, and flung against the gravel–cliff;
the stout men, if they ventured out, were snatched up as a mother
snatches a child from the wheels of a carriage; the oaks of the wood,
after wailing and howling, as they had done to a thousand tempests,
found that outcry go for nothing, and with it went themselves. Seven
hundred towers of Natureʼs building showed their roots to the morning.
The old moon expired at O·32; and many a gap the new moon found,
where its mother threw playful shadows. The sons of Ytene are not
swift–witted, nor deeply read in the calendar; yet they are apt to mark
and heed the great convulsions of nature. The old men used to date
their weddings from the terrible winter of 1787; the landmark of the
young menʼs annals is the storm of 1859.

All that night, young Robert Garnet was strung by some strange tension.
Of course he could not sleep, amid that fearful uproar, although he
was plunged and lost from sight in Octavius Pellʼs great chair. The
only luxury Pell possessed—and that somehow by accident—was a deep,
and soft, and mighty chair, big enough for three people. After one of
the windows came in, which it did, with a crash, about ten oʼclock,
scattering Pellʼs tobacco–jars, and after they had made it good with
books and boxes and a rug, so that the wind was filtered through it,
John Rosedew and his curate sat on a couple of hard old Windsors,
watching the castle of Hurst. Thence would come the signal flash, if
any hapless bark should be seen driving over the waters. There they
sat, John Rosedew talking, as he could talk to a younger man, when
his great heart was moved to its depth, and the multitude of his mind
in march, and his soul anticipating it: talking so that Octave Pell,
following his silver tones, even through that turmoil, utterly forgot
the tempest, and the lapse of hours, and let fall on his lap the pipe,
which John had made him smoke.

The thunder of the billows waxing, for the wind was now south–west,
began to drown the roar of the gale, and a storm of foam was flying,
when the faint gleam of a gun at sea was answered by artilleryʼs flash
from the walls of old Henry the Eighth. Both men saw the landward light
leap up and stream to leeward; but only the younger one descried the
weak appeal from the offing.

“Where is she, Pell? Have you any idea?”

“She is away, sir, here to the right: dead in the eye of the wind.”

“Then may our God and Father pity our brothers and our sisters!”

Out ran both those strong good men, leaving poor Bob (as they thought)
asleep in the depth of the easy–chair. The little cottage was partly
sheltered by an elbow of the cliff; otherwise it would have been flying
up the bunney long ago. The moment the men came out of the shelter,
they were driven one against the other, and both against the cliff.

“My castle will go at high–water,” said Pell, though none could hear
him; “but I shall be back in time enough to get the old woman out.”

Then, as far as Pell could make out in the fierce noise and the
darkness, John Rosedew begged him to go back, while himself went
on alone. For it was Johnʼs especial business; he had procured the
lifeboat, chosen the crew, and kept the accounts; and he thought
himself responsible for any wreck that happened. But what good on earth
could Pell do, and all his chattels in danger?

“No good, very likely,” Pell shouted, “and a good deal perhaps
in–doors! Keep the sea out with a besom.”

Octave had a dry way with him, not only when he sang, but when he
thought he saw the right, and did not mean to argue it. So rector and
curate, old man and young man, trudged along together, each bending
low, and throwing his weight, like a quoit, against the wind; each
stopping and crouching at every tenth yard, as the blast irresistible
broke on them. Crusted with hunks of froth pell–mell, like a storm of
eggs on the hustings, drenched by pelting sheets of spray, deafened by
the thundering surf, and often obliged to fly with the wind from a wave
that rushed up scolloping, they battled for that scoop of the bay where
the ship must be flung by the indraught.

Up to the present, Christchurch Point, and St. Albanʼs Head beyond it,
broke (as the wind was westering) some little of the wildest sea–brunt.
But now they stood, or rather crouched, where the mountain rollers
gathering, sweeping, towering onward, avalanche upon avalanche, burst
on their destined barrier. A thousand leagues of water, swelled by
the whole weight of heaven flung on it, there leaped up on the solid
earth, and to the heaven that vexed it. As a strong man in his wrath
accepts his wifeʼs endorsement, so the surges took the minor passion of
a fierce spring–tide, rolled it in their own, and scorned the flat land
they looked down upon. Tush, the combing of their crests was bigger
than any town there. On they came, too grand to be hurried even by
the storm that roused them; each had a quarter of a mile to himself,
and who should take it from him? The white foam fell back in the wide
water valleys, and hissed and curdled away in flat loops, and the storm
took the mountain ridges again and swept the leaping snow off. Anon,
as it struck the shelving shore, each rolling monster tossed its crest
unspeakably indignant; hung with impending volume, curling like the
scroll of God; then thundered, as in judgment, down, and lashed the
trembling earth.

Among them, not a mile from shore, as the breaking daylight showed it,
heaved, and pitched, and wallowed hog–like in the trough of waters, a
large ship, swept and naked. Swept of her masts, of her canvas naked;
but clad, alas! with men and women, clustering, clinging, cowering
from the great white grave beneath them. As she laboured, reeled, and
staggered up to the storm–rent heavens, and then plunged down the
yawning chasm, every attitude, every gesture of terror, love, despair,
and madness could be descried on the object–glass of the too–faithful
telescope. As a ghastly wan gleam from the east lit up all that
quivering horror, all that plight of anguish, John Rosedew turned away
in tears, and fell upon his knees.

But Pell caught up the clear Munich glass, blocked every now and then
with foam; he wiped it with his cuff, and levelled it on a stony ledge.
There he lay behind the pebbles, himself not out of danger, unable to
move, or look away, spellbound by the awe of death in numbered moments
coming. Round him many a sturdy boatman, gazing, listening, rubbing his
eyes, wondering about the wives and children of the brave men there.
The great disaster imminent was known all over the village, and all who
dared to cross the gale had crept, under shelter, hitherwards. None was
fool enough to talk of boat, or tug, or lifeboat; a child who had then
first seen the sea must have known better than that. The best ship in
the British navy could not have come out of the Needles in the teeth of
such a hurricane.

Some of the tars had brought their old Dollonds, preventive glasses
long cashiered, and smugglersʼ night–rakers cheek by jowl, and
every sort of “perspective,” fifty years old and upward, with the
lenses cracked and rattling, and fungoid tufts in the object–glass.
Nevertheless, each man would swear that his own glass was the best of
the lot, and his neighbourʼs “not of much count.” To their minds,
telescopes like spectacles suit the proprietor only.

“By Jove, I believe sheʼll do it!” cried Pell, the chief interpreter,
his glass being the only clear one.

“Do what, sir? what?” asked a dozen voices, hurriedly.

“Get her head round to windward, and swing into smoother water. Theyʼre
in the undertow already. Oh, if they only knew it!”

They knew it, he saw, in a moment. They ran up a spare sail, ere he
could speak, to the stump of the mizen–mast, and a score of brave men
strained on the sheets until they had braced them home. They knew that
it could not stand long; it would fly away to leeward most likely
when once they mounted the wave–crest; but two or three minutes might
save them. With eight hands jamming the helm up, and the tough canvas
tugging and bellying, the ship, with the aid of the undertow, plunged
heavily to windward. All knew that the ship herself was doomed, that
she never could fetch off shore; but, if she could only hold her
course for some half–mile to the westward, she would turn the flank of
those fearful rollers, and a good stout boat might live. For there a
south–western headland broke the long fury of the sea.

Every eye was intent, every bosom drew a deep breath, as the next great
billow rose under the ship, and tossed her up to the tempest. They
had brought her as near to the wind as they dared, so as still to
have steerage way on her, and she took the whole force of the surge on
her port bow, not on her beam, as the people on shore had feared. The
sea broke bodily over her, and she staggered back from the blow, and
shook through every timber, then leaped and lurched down the terrible
valley, but still, with the good sail holding. She was under noble
seamanship, that was clear to every one, and herself a noble fabric. If
she could but surmount two billows more, without falling off from the
wind, within three points of which her head lay, most of the crew might
be rescued. Already a stout galley, manned with ten oars, was coming
out of Christchurch Harbour, dancing like a cork on the waves, though
sheltered by the headland.

Our ship rode over the next billow gallantly; it was a wave that had
some moderation, and the lungs of the gale for the moment were panting,
just as she topped the comb of it. “Hurrah!” shouted the men ashore;
“By God, sheʼll do it yet!”

By God alone could she do it. But the Father saw not fit; the third
billow was the largest of all that had yet rolled up from the ocean.
Beam–end on she clomb the mountain, heeling over heavily, showing to
the shore her deck–seams,—even the companion–finial, and the poor
things clinging there; a wail broke from them as the great sea struck
her, and swept away half a score of them.

“Nowʼs your chance, men. D—n your eyes! She wonʼt hang there two
minutes. Out with the boats you—— lubbers. Look sharp, and be d—d to
you.”

The ancient pilot, Thwarthawse, dancing and stamping, his blue jacket
flapping in the wind, and his face of the deepest plum colour, roared
to windward his whirlwind of oaths up an old split trumpet, down which
the wind came bellowing harder than his voice went up it.

“Stow that, Jacob!” cried an old Scotchman, survivor of many a wreck;
“can ye nae see his reverence, mon? Itʼs an unco thing for an auld
mon like you to swear at your mates in their shrouds, chap. I ken the
skipper of that there ship, and heʼs no lubber, no more than I be.”

Sandy Macbride was known to fear God, and to have fifty pounds in the
savings bank. Therefore no one flouted him.

“Youʼre right, Mac; youʼre right, by George!” cried Pell. “What a
glorious fellow! I can see him there holding on by the stanchion,
giving his orders as coolly as if for the cabin dinner. I could die
with that man.”

The tear in Octavius Pellʼs right eye compelled him to shift the glass
a bit. He was just the man who would have done even as that captain did.

“Hurrah, hurrah! theyʼve got the launch out; only she and the gig are
left. Troops on the deck, drawn up in a line, and the women hoisted in
first. Give them three cheers, men, though they canʼt hear you! Three
cheers, if you are Englishmen! Glorious, glorious! There they go; never
saw such a fine thing in all my life. Oh, I wish I had been a sailor!”

The tears ran down the young parsonʼs cheeks, and were blown into the
eyes of old Macbride; or else he had some of his own.

“Shove off, shove off; nowʼs your time, for the under–current is
failing her. Both of them off, as Iʼm alive; and yet a third boat I
could not see. What magnificent management! That man ought to command a
fleet. Two of them off for Christchurch Harbour; away, away, while the
wind lulls; but what is the third boat doing?” Every one was looking:
no one answered. Old Mac knew what it was, though his eyes were too old
to see much.

“Captain Roberts, Iʼll go bail, at his old tricks again. And thereʼs
none with the sense to mutiny on him, and lash his legs, as we did in
the _Samphire_.”

“At the side of the ship there is some dispute. The boat is laden to
the waterʼs edge, and the ship paying off to leeward, for there is no
man at the wheel; there goes the sail from the bolt–ropes. If they
donʼt push off, ere an oarʼs length, they will all be sucked into the
rollers! Good God! now I see what it is. There is only room for one
more, and not one of those three will take it. Two white–haired men
and a girl. Life against honour with the old men; and what is life
compared with it? Both resolved not to stir a peg; now they join to
make the girl go. Her father has got her in his arms to pitch her into
the boat; she clings around his neck so that both must go, or neither.
He could not throw her; she falls on her knees, and clings to his legs
to die with him. Smack—there, the rope is parted, and it is too late
for further argument. The troops in the boat salute the officer, and he
returns it as on parade.”

“Name of that ship?” said Jacob, curtly, to old Sandy Macbride.

“_Aliwal_, East India trader, Captain Roberts. Calcutta to Southampton.”

“Then itʼs all up now with the _Aliwal_, and every soul on board of
her.”

“Donʼt want a pilot to tell us that,” answered old Mac, testily.
“Youʼve seed a many good craft, pilot, but never one as could last five
minutes on the Shingle Bank, with this sea running.”

“Ropes, ropes!” cried Octave Pell; “in five minutes sheʼll be ashore
here.”

“No, she ‘ont, nor yet in ten,” answered his landlord, gruffly; “sheʼll
fetch away to the eastward first, now she is in the tide again,
specially with this gale on; and sheʼll take the ground over yonner,
and go to pieces with the next breaker.”

She took her course exactly as old Jacob mapped it out for her. He knew
every run and flaw of the tide, and how it gets piled in the narrows by
a very heavy storm, and runs back in the eddy which had saved so many
lives there. This has nothing to do with the “double tide;” that comes
after high–water. As the good ship traced the track of death, doing
as the waves willed (like a little boyʼs boat in the Serpentine), the
people on shore could see those three, who had contested the right of
precedence to another world.

They were all upon the quarter–deck; and three finer figures never
yet came to take the air there, in the weariness of an Indian voyage.
Captain Roberts, a tall, stout man, with ruddy cheeks and a broad white
beard, stood with his hands in his pockets, and his feet asunder,
and a sense of discipline in his face, as of a man who has done his
duty, and now obeys his Maker. No sign of flinching or dismay in his
weather–beaten eyes, as he watched his death roll towards him; though
the gazers fancied that one tear rose, perhaps at the thought of his
family just coming down–stairs at Lymington. The military man beside
him faced his death quite differently; perhaps with even less of
fear, but with more defiance, broken, every now and then, by anguish
for his daughter. He had not learned to fear the Lord, as those men
do who go down into the great deep. He looked as if he ought to be
commanding–officer of the tempest. The ship, running now before wind
and sea, darted along as a serpent darts over the graves in the
churchyard; she did not lurch any more, or labour, but rose and fell,
just showing her fore–foot or stern–post, as the billows passed under
her. And so that young maiden could stand and gaze, with her fatherʼs
arm thrown round her.

She was worthy to be his daughter; tall, and light of form, and calm,
with eyes of wondrous brightness, she was looking at her fatherʼs face
to say the last good–bye. Then she flung both arms around his neck, and
fondly, sadly, kissed him. Meanwhile the ship–captain turned away, and
thought of Susy Roberts. Suddenly he espied a life–belt washed into the
scuppers. He ran for it in a moment, came behind the maid, and, without
asking her consent, threw it over her, and fastened it. There was
little chance of it helping her, but that little chance she should have.

“Sheʼll take the ground next biller,” cried the oracular Jacob; “stand
by there with the ropes, boys.”

On the back of a huge wave rose for the last time the unfortunate
_Aliwal_. Stem on, as if with strong men steering, she rushed
through the foam and the white whirl, like a hearse run away with
in snow–drifts. Then she crashed on the stones, and the raging sea
swept her from taffrail to bowsprit, rolled her over, pitched her
across, and broke her back in two moments. The shock rang through the
roar of billows, as if a nerve of the earth were thrilling. Another
mountain–wave came marching to the roll of the tempest–drum. It curled
disdainfully over the side, like a fog sweeping over a hedgerow;
swoop—it broke the timbers away, as a giant tosses a fir–cone.

“I canʼt look any longer,” cried Pell; “give me something to feel,
men. Quick, there! I see something!”

He seized the bight of a rope, and rushed anyhow into the waters. But
John Rosedew and the life–boatmen held hard upon the coil of it, and
drew him with all their might back again. They hauled Octavius Pell
up in the manner of a cod–fish, and he was so bruised and stupefied,
that he could not tell what he had gone for. They only saw floating
timber and gear, and wreck of every sort drifting, till just for one
sight–flash a hoary head, whiter than driven waters, leaped out of the
comb of the billow. A naval man, or a military—who knows, and to whom
does it matter?

Brave men ashore, all waiting ready, dashed down the steep of death to
save him, if the great wave should toss up its plaything. All Rushford
strained at the cables that held them from the savage recoil. Worse
than useless; the only chance of it was to make more widows. The sea
leaped at those gallant strong men; there were five on either cable;
it leaped at them as the fiery furnace leaped on the plain of Dura. It
struck the two ropes into one with a buffet, as a lionʼs paw shatters
a cobweb; it dashed the menʼs heads together, and flung them all in a
pile on a ballast–heap. Lucky for them that it fought with itself, and
clashed there, and made no recoil. The white–haired corpse was seen no
more; and all Rushford shrunk back in terror.

The storm was now at its height; and of more than a hundred people
gathered on the crown of the shore, and above the reach of the billows,
not one durst stand upright. Nearer the water the wind had less power,
for the wall of waves broke the full brunt of it. But there no man,
unless he were most quick of eye and foot, might stand without great
peril. For scarcely a single billow broke, but what, in the first
rebound and toss, two churning hummocks of surf met, and flashed up
the strand like a mad white horse, far in advance of the rest. Then a
hissing ensued, and a roll of shingle, and the water poured huddling
and lappeting back from the chine itself had crannied.

As brave men fled from a rush of this sort, and cowards on the bank
were laughing at them, something white was seen in the curl of the wave
which was breaking behind it. The ebb of that inrush met the wave and
partly took the crash of it, then the white thing was shot on the shore
like a pellet, and lay one instant motionless. There was no rope there,
and the men hung back; John Rosedew cried “Shame!” and ran for it; but
they joined hands across and stopped him. Before they could look round
again, some one had raised the body. ‘Twas young Bob Garnet, and in his
arms lay the maiden senseless. She had looked at him once, and then
swooned away from the whirl, and the blows, and the terror. No rope
round his body, no cork, no pad; he had rushed full into the raging
waves, as he woke from his sleep of heaviness. He lifted the girl, and
a bending giant hung thirty feet above them.

Then a shriek, like a womanʼs, rang out on the wind, and two great arms
were tossed to heaven. Bull Garnet stood there, and strove to rush on,
strove with every muscle, but every nerve strove against it. He was
balanced and hung on the wind for a moment, as the wave hung over his
heartʼs love. Crash came the wave—what shriek should stop it, after
three hundred miles of rolling?—a crash that rang in the souls of all
whom youth could move or nobleness. Nothing was seen in the depth of
water, the swirling, hurling whiteness, until the billow had spent its
onset, and the curdle of the change was. Then Bob, swept many a fathom
in–shore, but griping still that senseless thing, that should either
live or die with him—Bob, who could swim as well or better than he
could climb a tree, but felt that he and his load were only dolls for
the wave to dandle—down he went, after showing his heels, and fought
the deadly outrush. None but Natureʼs pet would have thought of, none
but the favoured of God could have done, it. He felt the back–wave
tugging at him, he felt that he was going; if another billow broke on
him, it was all up with his work upon wire–worm. Holding his breath,
he flung his right leg over the waist of the maiden, dug his two hands
deep into the gravel, and clapped his feet together. Scarcely knowing
what was up, he held on like grim death for life, and felt a barrowload
of pebbles rolling down the small of his back. Presently he saw light
again, and sputtered out salt water, and heard a hundred people
screaming out “Hurrah!” and felt a strong arm thrown round him—not his
fatherʼs, but John Rosedewʼs. Three senseless bodies were borne to the
village—Bull Garnetʼs, and Bobʼs and the maidenʼs.




CHAPTER V.


Meanwhile that keen engineering firm, wind, wave, and tide, had
established another little business on the coast hard by. This was
the general wreck and crack–up of the stout Pell–castle, a proceeding
unnoticed by any one except good mother Jacob, whose attention was
drawn to it forcibly, as the head of the bed fell in upon her.
Thereupon the stout dame made a rush for it, taking only her cat
and spectacles, and the little teapot of money. As she started at
a furious pace, and presented to the elements a large superficial
area, the wind could not resist the temptation, but wafted her to the
top of the bunney, without her feet so much as once a–touching the
blessed earth—she goes mad if any one doubts it—and planted her in a
white–thorn tree, and brought an “elam” of thatch to shelter her from
her own beloved roof. There, when the wind subsided, she was happily
discovered by some enterprising children; the cat was sitting at her
side; in one blue hand she held her specs, and in the other a teapot.

Poor Pellʼs easy–chair was thrown up, three miles to the westward, in
the course of the next spring–tides, and, being well known all over
the neighbourhood (from his lending it to sick people), was brought to
him, with a round of cheers, by half a dozen fishermen. They refused
the half–crown he offered them, and displayed the greatest anxiety
lest his honour should believe it was them as had taken the shine off.
The workmanship not being modern, the chair was little the worse for
its voyage; only it took six months to dry, and had a fine smell of
brine ever afterwards. Then, having been lent to an old saltʼs widow,
it won such a reputation, all across the New Forest, as a specific for
“rheumatics in the small of the back,” that old women, having _no_
small to their backs, walked all the way from Lyndhurst, “just to sot
themselves down in it, and how much was to pay, please, for a quarter
of an hour?” “A shilling,” said Octave Pell, “a shilling for the new
lifeboat that lives under Christchurch Head.” Then they pulled out
mighty silver watches, and paid the shilling at the fifteen minutes.
The walk, and the thought of the miracle, and the fear of making fools
of themselves, did such a deal of good, that a man got up a ‘bus for
it; but Pell said, “No; none who come by ‘bus shall sit in my chair of
ease.”

The greedy sea returned brave Pell no other part of his property.
His red tobacco–jar, indeed, was found by some of the dredgemen three
or four years afterwards, but they did not know it was his, and sold
it—crusted as it was with testacea, and ribboned with sea–weed—to
the zealous secretary of—I wonʼt say what museum. “Roman, or perhaps
Samian, or possibly Phœnician ware,” cried the secretary, lit
with fine—though, it may be, loose—ideas; and he catalogued it:
“Phœnician in the opinion of an F.A.S. There is every reason to
believe it a vase for Thuricremation.” “Hollo!” cried Pell, when he
went there to lecture upon cricket as played by Ulysses, “why, Iʼm
blessed if you havenʼt got——” “The most undoubted Phœnician relic
contained in any museum!” So he laughed with other peopleʼs cheeks,
like a man of sense.

All the folk of Rushford, and many too of Nowelhurst, contributed to a
secret fund for refurnishing Octavius Pell. So great were the mystery
and speed, and so clever the management of the dissenting parson, that
two great vans were down upon Pell before he had heard a word of it. He
stood at the door of the cobblerʼs shop, and tried to make a speech;
but the hurrahs were too many for him, and he turned away and cried.
Tell me that any man in England need be anything but popular who has a
heart of his own, and is not ashamed of having it!

At the Crown, where the three sick people were, a very fine trade was
doing; but a finer one still upon the beach, as the sea went down
and the choice contents of the _Aliwal_ came up. For that terrible
storm began to abate about noon on the 26th. It had blown as hard
for twenty–four hours as it ever does blow in any land, except in
the gaps of the Andes and during cyclones of the tropics. Now the
core of the storm had no more cells in it; and the puffs that came
from the west and north–west, and so on till it got to the pole–star,
were violent indeed, but desultory, and seemed not to know where they
were going. Finally, about midnight, the wind owned that its turn
was over, and sunk (well satisfied with its work) into the arms of
slumber—“placidâque ibi demum morte quievit.” And its work had been
done right well. No English storm since the vast typhoon of 1703—which
I should like to write about some day if my little life–storm blows
long enough—had wrought such glorious havoc upon that swearing beaver,
man. It had routed his villages at the Landʼs End, and lifted like
footstools his breakwater blocks; it had scared of their lives his
Eddystone watchmen, and put out half his lighthouses; it had broken
upon his royalty, and swept down the oaks of the New Forest; it had
streaked with wrecks the Goodwin Sands, and washed ships out of
harbours of refuge; it had leaped upon London as on a drain–trap, and
jarred it as a man whistles upon his fingers; it had huddled pell–mell
all the coal–trade;—saddest vaunt (though not the last), it had strewn
with gashed and mangled bodies (like its own waves, countless) the
coasts of Anglesea and Caernarvon.

On the morning now of the 27th, with the long sullen swell
gold–beater–skinned by the recovering sun, the shingle–bank was full of
interest to an active trader. They had picked up several bodies with a
good bit of money upon them, and the beach was strewn with oranges none
the worse for a little tossing. For the stout East Indiaman _Aliwal_
had touched at the Western Islands, and taken on board a thousand boxes
of the early orange harvest. And not only oranges were rolling among
the wrack, the starfish, the sharkʼs teeth, and the cuttle–eggs, but
also many a pretty thing, once prized and petted by women. There were
little boxes with gilt and paint, sucked heartily by the salt water,
and porcupine–quills rasping up from panels of polished ebony, cracked
mirrors inside them, and mother–of–pearl, and beading of scented wood;
all the taste and the labour of man yawning like dead cockles, crimped
backward, sodden and shredded, as hopeless a wreck as a drunkard.

Then there were barrels, and heavy chests, planking already like
hemp in the prison–yard, bulkheads, and bulwarks, and cordage, and
reeve–blocks, and ten thousand other things, well appreciated by the
wreckers, who were hauling them up the bunneys; while the Admiralty
droitsmen made an accurate inventory of the bungs and the blacking
bottles. Some of the sailors, and most of the passengers, who had
escaped in the boats to Christchurch, came over to look for anything
that might turn up of their property. Hereupon several fights ensued,
and many poor fellows enjoyed opportunity for a closer inspection
of the Rushford stratum than the most sanguine of their number
anticipated; until the police came down in force, and extinguished at
once all other rights of salvage except their own.

Nevertheless there was yet one field upon which the police could not
interfere; although Jack wished for nothing better than to catch the
lubbers there. This was Jackʼs own domain, the sea, where an animated
search was going on for the body of Colonel Nowell. His servant had
hurried from Christchurch to Nowelhurst to report the almost certain
death of Sir Cradockʼs only brother. He did not go first to ascertain
it; for the road along the cliffs was impassable during the height of
the storm. Sir Cradock received the announcement with very few signs of
emotion. He had loved that Clayton in early youth, but now had almost
forgotten him; and Clayton had never kept his brother at all apprised
of his doings. Sir Cradock had gone into mourning for him, some three
years ago; and Colonel Nowell never took the trouble to vindicate his
vitality until Dr. Huttonʼs return. And, even though they had really
known and loved one another as brothers, the loss would have been but a
tap on the back to a man already stabbed through the heart. Therefore
Sir Cradockʼs sorrow exploded (as we love to make our griefs do, and as
we so often express them) in the moneyed form. “I will give 500_l._ to
the man who finds my poor brotherʼs body.”

That little speech launched fourteen boats. What wrecker could hope
for anything of a tenth part of the value? Men who had sworn that they
never would pull in the same boat again together—might the Great
Being, the Giver of life, strike them dead if they did!—forgot the
solemn perjuration, and cried, “Give us your flipper, Ben; after all,
there are worse fellows going than you, my lad:” and Ben responded,
“Jump into the starn–sheets; you are just the hand as we want, Harry.
Manyʼs the time Iʼve thought on you.” Even the dredging smacks hauled
in–shore from their stations, and began to dredge for the Colonel;
till the small boats resolved on united action, tossed oars, and held
solemn council. Several speeches were made, none of them very long,
but all embodying that fine sentiment, “fiat justitia, ruat cœlum,”
in the form of “fair play, and be d—d to you.” Then Sandy Mac, of the
practical mind, made a suggestion which was received with three wild
rounds of cheers.

“Give ‘em a little ballast, boys, as they be come in–shore to dredge
for it.”

With one consent the fourteen boats made for the shore, like the fleet
of canoes described by the great Defoe. Nor long before each shallopʼs
nose “grated on the golden sands.” The men in the dredging smacks
looked at the sky to see if a squall was coming. And soon they got it,
thick as hail, and as hot as pepper. The fourteen boats in battle array
advanced upon them slowly, only two men rowing in each, all the rest
standing up, and every man charged heavily. When they were at a nice
wicket distance, old Mac gave the signal, and a flight of stones began,
which, in the words of the ancient chroniclers, “well–nigh darkened the
noonday sun.” The bravest dredger durst not show his head above the
gunwale; for the Rushford stones are close of grain, and it is sweeter
to start than to stop them. As for south–westers and dreadnoughts, they
were no more use than vine–leaves in a storm of electric hail.

  “Ah, little then those mellow grapes their vine–leaf shall avail,
  So thickly rattles on _the tiles_ the pelting of the hail.”


  _Georg._ i. 448.

The dredgers gave in, and hoisted a shirt as a signal for a parley.
The Rushford men refused to hear a syllable about “snacks.” What they
demanded was “unconditional surrender;” and the dredgers, having no
cement–stones on board, were compelled to accept it. So they took
up their bags, and walked the smacks off three miles away to their
station, with very faint hopes indeed that the obliging body might
follow them. The boatmen celebrated their victory with three loud
cheers for Sandy Mac, and a glass of grog all round. Then they
returned to the likeliest spot, and dragged hard all the afternoon.

“Tarnation ‘cute body,” cried Ben, “as ever I come across. Whoʼd a
thought as any perfessing Christian would have stuck to Davy Jonesʼs
locker, and refooged the parson and clerk so? Spit on your grapples, my
lads of wax, and better luck the cast after.”

“The Lord kens the best,” replied Sandy Mac, with a long–drawn sigh,
“us poor vessels canna do more than is the will of the Lord, boys.
Howsomever, I brought a bit of bait, a few lug–worms, and a soft crab
or two; and please the Lord Iʼll rig my line out, and see if the bass
be moving. And likely there may be a tumbling cod on the run speering
after the puir bodies. Ah, yes, the will of the Lord; we ates them, and
they ates us.”

The canny old Scotchman, without foregoing his share in the general
venture—for he helped to throw the grapnels, or took a spell at the
rudder—rigged out a hook on his own account, and fastened the line to
the rowlocks.

“Fair play, my son,” cried Ben, winking at his comrades; “us go snacks
in what you catch, mind. And the will of the Lord be done.”

“Dinna ye wish ye may get it?”—the old man glowered at him
indignantly—“Iʼll no fish at all on that onderstanding.”

“Fish away, old boy, and be blessed, then. I see he ainʼt been in
the purwentive sarvice for nothing. But Iʼm blowed if heʼll get much
supper, Harry, if itʼs all to come off that darned old hook.” They all
laughed at old Mac, who said nothing, but regarded his line attentively.

With many a joke and many an oath, they toiled away till the evening
fog came down upon the waters. Then, as they turned to go home, old Mac
felt a run upon his fishing–gear. Hand over hand he began to haul in,
coiling the line in the stern–sheets.

“Itʼs a wapping big fish, as ever I feel, mates; na, na, yeʼll no touch
it, or yeʼll be claiming to come and sup wi’ me. And deil a bit—the
Lord forgive me—will ye haʼ, for grinning at an auld mon the likes of
that, I tell ye. Lord ha’ mercy on me, a wake and sinful crater!”

They all fell back, except Macbride, as before them in the twilight
rose the ashy grey face and the long white hair of Colonel Clayton
Nowell.

Mac stuck to his haul like a Scotchman; to him the main chance was no
ghost. Many a time has he told that story, and turned his quid upon it,
cleverly raining between his teeth with fine art to prolong the crisis.

The line being his, and the hook being his, and the haul of his own
hands only, Sandy Mac could never see why he should not have all the
money. The question came close to litigation; but for that, except as
a word of menace, Mac was a deal too wide awake. He compounded at last
for 300_l._ and let the other four share the residue.

So poor Colonel Nowellʼs countenance, still looking grand and
dignified, was saved from the congers and lobsters; and he sleeps
close by his nephew and namesake in Nowelhurst churchyard. The body
of Captain Roberts was found a long way up the Solent. He had always
carried a weather helm, and shaped a good course for harbour. May they
rest in peace!

I have no doubt that Captain Roberts so rests, and am fain to believe,
in the mercy of God, the same of the brave old Colonel. At least,
we will hope that he is not gone to that eternal punishment, whose
existence our divines contend for in a manner so disinterested. He had
been a harum–scarum man; and now, having drowned and buried him, we may
enter upon his history with the charity due to both quick and dead, but
paid to the latter only.

A soldier is, in many things, by virtue of his calling, a generous,
careless man. We have always credited the sailor with these popular
qualities; hornpipes, national drama, and naval novels imbuing us. I
doubt if the sailor be, on the whole, so careless a man as the soldier.
Jack is obliged, by force of circumstance, to bottle up his money, his
rollicksomeness and sentimentality, and therefore has more to get rid
of, when he comes ashore once in a twelvemonth. But spread the outburst
over the year, strike the average of it, and the rainfall at Aldershot
will equal that at Portsmouth.

Only by watching the Army List—which at length he was tired of
doing—could the English brother tell if the Indian brother were
living. Even the most careful of us begin to feel that care is too much
for the nine lives of a cat, when Fahrenheit scores 110° in the very
coolest corner, and the punkah is too hot to move. So, after one or
two Griffin letters, full of marvels which the writer pretended not to
marvel at, a silence, as of the jungle, ensued, and Sir Cradock thought
of tigers. Then the slides of his own life began to move upon him; and
less and less every year he thought of the boy who had laughed and
cried with him.

Lieutenant Nowell was ordered suddenly to the borders of the Punjaub,
and for twenty years his brother Cradock drank his health at Christmas,
and wondered how about the Article against praying for the dead. The
next thing he heard, though it proved his own orthodoxy, disproved
it by making him swear hard. Clayton Nowell had married; married an
Affghan woman, to the great disgust of his brother officers, and the
furious disdain of her kinsmen. A very fine family of Affghan chiefs
immediately loaded their fusils, and swore to shoot both that English
dog and their own Bright Eyes of the Morning.

“To think,” cried Sir Cradock Nowell, “that a brother of mine should
disgrace himself, and (what matters far more) his family, by marrying a
wretched low Affghan woman!”

“To think,” cried Mohammed Khans, “that a sister of ours should
disgrace herself, and (what matters far more) her family, by marrying
a cursed low English dog!”

Which party was in the right, judge ye who understand the matter. The
officers’ wives got over their prejudice against Bright Eyes of the
Morning, and matronised, and petted, and tried to make a Christian of
her. Captain Nowell adored her; she was so elegant in every motion, so
loving, and so simple. She quite reformed him for the time from his too
benevolent anthropology, from the love of dice, and the vinous doings
which the Prophet does not encourage.

But the poor thing died in her first confinement, while following her
husbandʼs regiment at the foot of the Himalayah, leaving her new–born
babe to the care of a faithful Affghan nurse, who had kept at her dear
ladyʼs side, even among the infidels. This good nurse, being great of
soul, and therefore strong of faith, could not bear that the child of
her mistress, the highest blood of the Affghans, should become a low
Frank idolater. So she set off with it, in the dark night, crouching
past the sentinels, thieves, and other camp followers, and trusted
herself to the boundless jungle, with only the stars to guide her. She
put the wailing child to her breast, for her own dear babe was dead,
and hushed it from the vigilant ears of the man–eating tiger. Then off
again for Affghanistan, six hundred miles in the distance.

How this wonderful woman, soothing and coaxing the little stranger
(obtrusively remarkable for the power of her squalls), how she got on
through the thorns, the fire, the famine, the jaws of the tiger, and,
worse than all, the pestilent fever, bred from the rich stagnation of
that alluvial soil, is more than I, or any other unversed in womanʼs
unity, may pretend to show. Enough that with her eyes upon the grand
religious heights—heathen high places, we should call them—she
struggled along through nearly three–quarters of her pilgrimage, and
then she fell among robbers. A villanous hill–tribe, of mixed origin,
always shifting, never working, never even fighting when they could
run away, hated and despised by the nobler mountain races, the pariahs
of the Himalayah, ignorant of any good, debased as any Africans—in
a single word, Rakshas, or worshippers of the devil. A nice school
of education for a young lady of tender years—or rather months—to
commence in.

The nurse was allotted to one of their chiefs, and the babe was about
to be knocked on the head, when it struck an enlightened priest that in
two years’ time she would make a savoury oblation to the devil; so the
Affghan woman was allowed to keep her, until she began to crawl about
among the dogs and babes of the station. Here she so distinguished
herself by precocious skill in thieving, that her delighted owner
conferred upon her the title of “Never–spot–the–dust,” and even
instructed her how to steal the high priestʼs knife of sacrifice. That
last exploit saved her life. Such a genius had never appeared in any
tribe of the Rakshas until this great manifestation.

So “Never–spot–the–dust” was well treated, and made much of by her
owner, to whom she was quite a fortune; and soon all the band looked up
to her as the future priestess of the devil. For ten years she wandered
about with them, becoming every year more important, proud that none
could approach her skill in stealing, lying, and perjury, utterly void
of all religion, except the few snatches of Moslemism which her nurse
had contrived to impart, and the vague terror of the evil spirit to
whom the wild men paid their vows. But, when she was ten years old, a
tall and wonderfully active child, and just about to be consecrated
by the blood of inferior children, a British force drew suddenly all
around the nest of robbers. Of late the scoundrels had done things
that made John Bullʼs hair stand on end; and, when his hair is in that
condition, sparks are apt to come out of it.

Seeing no chance of escape, and having very faint hopes of quarter,
the robbers fought with a bravery which quite astonished themselves;
but the evil spirit was against them—a rare inconsistence on his
part. Their rascally camp was burnt, which they who had burned some
hundreds of villages looked upon as the grossest cruelty, and more
than half of their number were sent home to their patron and guardian.
Then the Affghan nurse, so faithful and so unfortunate, fled from the
burning camp with her charge, fell before the British colonel, and
poured forth all her troubles. The Englishman knew Major Nowell, and
had heard some parts of his history; so he took “Never–spot–the–dust”
to her father, who was amazed at once and amused with her. She could
run up the punkah, and stand on the top, and twirl around on one
foot; she could cross the compound in three bounds; she could jump
upon her fatherʼs shoulder, and stay there with the spring of her
sole; she could glide along over the floor like a serpent, and hold
on with one hand to anything. And then her most wonderful lightness
of touch; she had fully earned her name, she could brush the dust
without marking it. She could come behind her fatherʼs back, crawling
over the table, and fasten his sword–hilt to his whiskers, without his
knowing a thing of it. She could pick all his pockets, of course; but
that was too rude an operation for her to take any delight in it. What
she delighted to do, and what even she found difficult, was to take
off his shoes and stockings without his being aware of it. It was a
beautiful thing to see her: consummate skill is beautiful, in whatever
way it is exercised. The shoe she could get off easily enough, but
the difficulty was with the stocking; and there the chief difficulty
was through the sensitiveness of the skin, unaccustomed to exposure.
Though she had never heard of temperature, evaporation, or anything
long, her genius told her the very first time where the tug was and how
to meet it. Keeping her little cornelian lips—lips which you could
see through—just at the proper distance, she would breathe so softly
upon the skin that the breath could not be felt, as inch by inch she
lowered down the thin elastic covering. Then she would jump up out of
the ground, and shout into his ears, with a voice of argute silver—

“Faddery, will ‘oo have ‘oor shoe? Fear to go wiyout him?”

She began to talk English, after a bit; and the weather beaten
Colonel—for now he had got that far—who had never looked upon any
child, except as one rupee per month—thinking of his beloved Bright
Eyes of the Morning, who might, with the will of God, have made a
first–rate man of him, only she was too good for him,—thinking of her,
and seeing the gleam of her glorious eyes in her child, he loved that
child beyond all reason, and christened her “Eoa.”

He never took to bad things again. He had something now in pledge with
God; a part of himself that still would live, and love him when he
was skeleton. And that, his better part, should learn how lying and
stealing do not lead to the right half of the other world.

His ideas about that other world were as dormant as Eoaʼs; but now
he began to think about it, because he wanted to see her there. So,
with lots of tears, not only feminine, Eoa Nowell was sent to the best
school in Calcutta, where she taught the other young ladies some very
odd things indeed.

Wherever she went, she must be foremost; “second to none” was her
motto. Therefore she learned with amazing quickness; but it was not so
easy to unlearn.

Then arose that awful mutiny, and the Colonel at Mhow was shot through
the neck, and let lie, by his own soldiers. His daughter heard of it,
and screamed, and no walls ever built would hold her. All the way from
Calcutta, up the dreary Ganges, she forced her passage, sometimes by
boat, sometimes on her weariless feet.

She had never cared much for civilization, and loved every blade of the
jungle. The old life revived within her, as she looked upon the broad
waters, and the boundless yellow tangle, wherein glided no swifter
thing, nothing more elegant, than herself.

She found her darling father in some rude cantonment, prostrate,
helpless, clinging faintly to the verge of death. Dead long ago he
must have been but for Rufus Hutton; and dead even now he would have
been but for his daughterʼs presence. His dreamy eyes went round the
hut to follow her graceful movements; she alone could tend the wounds
as if with the fall of gossamer, she alone could soothe and fan the
intolerable aching. They looked into each otherʼs eyes and cried
without thinking about it.

Then, as he gradually got better, and the surge of trouble passed them,
Eoa showed for his amusement all her strange accomplishments. She had
not forgotten one of them in the grand school at Calcutta. They had
even grown with her growth, and strengthened with her strength.

She would leap over Rufus Huttonʼs head like a flash of light, and
stand facing him, without a muscle moving, and on his back would
be a land–crab; she would put his up–country hat on the floor, and
walk on one foot round the crown of it; she would steal his case of
instruments, and toss them in the air all open, and catch them all at
once.

By her nursing and her loving, her stealing and her mockery, she won
Dr. Huttonʼs heart so entirely that he would have proposed to her, had
she only been of marriageable age, or had come to think about anything.

Then they had all to cut and run, with barely three hours’ notice, for
the ebb of the rebellion swept through that district mightily. Eoa went
to school again, and her father came to see her daily, until he was
appointed to a regiment having something more than name and shadow.

Now Eoa, having learned everything that they can teach in Calcutta, the
Himalayah, or the jungle, was coming to England to receive the down and
crown of accomplishments. Who could tell but what they might even teach
her affectation? Youth is plastic and imitative; and she was sure to
find plenty of models.

Not that the honest Colonel wished to make a sickly humbug of her.
His own views were wide and grand, only too philoprogenitive. Still,
like most men of that class, who, upon sudden reformation, love Truth
so much that they roll upon her, having no firm rules of his own, and
being ashamed to profess anything, with the bad life fresh in memory,
he took the opinion of old fogeys who had been every bit as unblest as
himself, but had sown with a drill their wild oats. The verdict of all
was one—“Miss Nowell must go to England.”

Finding his wound still troublesome, he resolved to retire from
service; he had not saved half a lac of rupees, and his pension would
not be a mighty one; but, between the two, there would be enough for
an old man to live upon decently, and go wherever he was told that his
daughter ought to go.

He had seen enough of life, and found that it only meant repentance;
all that remained of it should be for the pleasure and love of his
daughter. And he knew that there was a sum in England, which must have
been long accumulating—a sum left on trust for him and his children,
under a very old settlement. He would never touch a farthing of it;
every farthing should go to Eoa. Bless her dear eyes; they had the true
light of his own Bright Eyes of the Morning.




CHAPTER VI.


Eoa was now sixteen years old, tall, and lithe, and graceful as the
creepers of tropic woodlands. Her face was of the clearest oval, a
quick concise terse oval, such as we find in the eggs of wild birds
rather than of tame ones. Her eyes were of bewildering brightness,
always flashing, always in motion, rarely allowing the gazer a chance
of guessing what their colour was. Very likely they were of no positive
colour, but a pure dark lustre, such as a clear swift river has, when
overhung by palm–trees. Her complexion, beautifully soft and even, was
toned with a delicate eastern tinge, like that fawn–coloured light
which sometimes flushes a cloudless sky before the midsummer sunrise.
And her warm oriental blood suffused it, at the slightest emotion, as
the leaping sun pervades that sky with a flood of limpid rubies.

She had never been flattened by education: all her qualities and
feelings, like her beauty, were in excess. You could see it in
the quick rise and fall of her breath, in the sudden grace of her
movements, in the infinite variety of her attitudes and aspects.

Whatever she thought, she said at once; yet none ever called her a
bold girl. Her modes of thought were as widely different from those of
an English maiden, as a wild honeysuckle differs in form, habit, and
scent, from a rose. She cared for no oneʼs opinion of her, any more
than the wind cares how a tree swings; unless indeed it were one whom
she loved, and then she would crawl to please him. For she loved with
all her heart and soul, and hated with no less; and she always took
care in either case to apprise the object of it. And yet, with all her
depth of passion, Eoa was pure of heart and mind,—ay, as pure as our
own Amy.

She soon recovered from her bruises, being perfectly healthy, and
elastic as india–rubber. Nevertheless, she would not have been saved
from that terrible sea but for the generosity of poor Captain Roberts,
and the gallantry of Bob Garnet.

Now Bob was hurt rather seriously, and, being (as we are well aware)
an uncommonly shy young fellow, he was greatly astonished, and shocked
a little, when on the Friday morning a beautiful girl, very strangely
dressed, ran to the side of his sofa, threw her arms round him, and
kissed him till he was out of breath, and his face was wet with the
dew of her tears.

“Oh, please donʼt,” said Bob; “I am sure I donʼt deserve it.”

“Yes, you do; and I will marry you when I am old enough. I donʼt know
what you are like, and I donʼt care two straws, directly they told me
what you had done. Only I must have papaʼs leave. Kiss me again, I like
it. Now where is my darling papa?”

“What, donʼt you know? Havenʼt they told you? Oh, poor thing!”

At the tone of his voice she leaped back, like a bird at the gun–flash,
and stood with her little hands clasped on her head, her eyes with
their deep light quivering, and the whole of her form swinging to and
fro, from the wild push of sudden terror. Then she spoke with a hollow
depth, which frightened Bob more than the kissing.

“They told me that he was well, gone to his brother somewhere, and I
thought it wasnʼt like him to leave me so, and—tell me the truth, or
Iʼll shake you to pieces.”

“No, donʼt,” said Bob, as she leaped at him; “I have had shaking
enough.”

“Yes, you poor boy, and for my sake. I am a brute, I know. Tell me the
truth, if you love me.”

“Your dear father is dead. But they have found his body.”

“Do you mean to say that God has been so wicked as to kill my father?”

“God knows best,” said Bob; he could think of nothing else to say.

“No, He doesnʼt. No, He doesnʼt. No, He never knows anything. He
couldnʼt have known who he was, and how terribly I loved him, or He
wouldnʼt have the heart to do it. Oh, you wicked boy; oh, you wicked
boy! I will never forgive you for saving me. Hya, hya, hya!”

Bob never saw such a thing before, and never will again. And he wonʼt
be much the loser; although the sight was magnificent. The screams and
shrieks of the clearest voice that ever puzzled echo brought up the
landlord and landlady, and our good friend Rufus Hutton, who had set
forth full speed from home on hearing about the _Aliwal_. He caught Eoa
in his arms, carried her back to her room, and dosed her. He gave her
some Indian specific, some powder of a narcotic fungus, which he had
brought on purpose.

It stupefied her for nearly three days, and even then she awoke into
the dreamy state of Nirwana, that bliss of semi–consciousness, like
mild annihilation, into which the Buddha is absorbed, and to which all
pious Buddhists look as their eternal happiness. Then she opened her
delicate tapering arms, where you could see the grand muscles moving,
but never once protruding, and she called for her darling father to
come. Finding that he did not come, she was satisfied with some
trifling answer, and then wanted to have Bob instead; but neither was
Bob forthcoming.

On the very day when Dr. Hutton came to look for Eoa, Mr. Garnet found
himself getting better from that wretched low nervous fever into which
his fright had thrown him. Then he asked Dr. Hutton whether there
would be any danger in moving Robert, and, finding that there would
be none whatever, if it were carefully managed, he ordered a carriage
immediately, and with some of his ancient spirit. The Crown, which had
the cross–bar of its N set up the wrong way (as is done, by–the–by,
on the roof of Hampton Court chapel, and in many other places), made
public claim to be regarded as a “commercial hotel and posting–house.”
No Rushford folk having yet been known to post anything, except a
letter at rare intervals, and a bill at rarer, this claim of the
Crown had never been challenged, and strangers entertained a languid
theoretical faith in it. But Mr. Brown looked very blue when Bull
Garnet in reviving accents ordered “a chaise and pair at the door in
half an hourʼs time; a roomy chaise, if you please, because my son must
keep his feet up.”

“Yes, sir; yes, to be sure, sir; I quite understand, sir. It shall be
attended to, sir.”

“Then why donʼt you go and order it?”

“To be sure, sir; I forgot. I will speak to Mrs. Brown, sir.”

Mrs. Brown, being a woman of resource, mounted the boy on her donkey,
the only quadruped she possessed, but a “wonner to go,” as the boy
said, “when you knows the right place to prog him in,” and sent him
post–haste to Lymington, whence the required conveyance arrived in
about an hour and a half.

Rufus Hutton, having promised to be at home that evening, left Eoa to
sleep off her heavy soporific, and followed the carriage on horseback;
neither did he leave its track where the Ringwood Road turns off, for
he had undertaken to tell Sir Cradock how his niece was getting on.
He started nearly half an hour after the Lymington chaise, for Polly
would never demean herself by trotting behind the “posters.” During
that half–hour he drank hot brown brandy–and–water, although he could
not bear it, to ingratiate him with Mrs. Brown for the sake of the poor
Eoa. For Mrs. Brown had no other hot method of crowning the flowing
bowl. And now, while I think of it, let me warn all gentle and simple
people who deign on this tale of the New Forest, never to ask for
pale brandy within the perambulations. How do you think they make it?
By mixing brown brandy with villanous gin. Rufus was up to this, of
course; and, as he must take something for the good of the house, and
to get at the kindly kernel of the heavy–browed hostess, he took that
which he thought would be least for his own evil. Then, leaving Mrs.
Brown (who, of course, had taken her own glass at his sole charge and
largesse, after fifty times “Oh no, sir, never! Oh Lord, how my Brown
would be shocked!”), having imbued that good Mrs. Brown, who really was
not a bad woman—which means that she was a good one, for women have
no medium—with a strong aromatic impression that he was a pleasant
gentleman, and no pride, not a bit of it, in him, no more than you nor
me might,—off he trotted at a furious pace, smoking two cheroots at
once.

I believe that there was and is—for I am happy to say that he still
inhales the breeze of life down his cigar, and looks browner and redder
than ever—I believe that, in spite of all his troubles in connexion
with this story, which took a good deal out of him, there was and is no
happier man in our merry England than the worthy Rufus Hutton. And, as
all happiness is negative, and goes without our knowing it, and only
becomes a positive past for us to look back upon, so his went before it
came, and goes or eʼer it comes. And yet he enjoys it none the less; he
multiplies it by three for the past and by nine for the future, and he
never finds it necessary to deduct for the present moment.

Happy man who never thinks beyond salutary average, who can accept,
in perfect faith, the traditions of his forbears, and yet is shrewd
enough to hope that his grandsons will discard at least a portion of
them,—who looks upon the passing life as a thing he need not move in,
a world which must improve itself, and every day is doing it. And all
the while he sympathises with his fellow–men, enjoys a bit of human
nature, laughs at the cross–purposes of native truth and training,
loves whatever he finds to be true, and does his best to foster it, is
pleased with his after–dinner story, and feels universally charitable;
then smiles at his wife, and kisses his children; and goes to bed with
the firm conviction that they are worth all the rest put together.

Yet this manʼs happiness is not sound, because it is built upon
selfishness.

In Nowelhurst village Dr. Hutton met Mark Stote, the gamekeeper, who
begged him to stop for a moment, just to hear a word or two. Rufus,
after hearing his news, resolved to take the upper road to the Hall,
past Mr. Garnetʼs house; it was not so very far out of his way, and
perhaps he might be of service there, and—ah, yes, Dr. Hutton, this
last was the real motive, though you may not have thought so—what
a fine opportunity to discover something which plagued him! Perhaps
I ought to say rather, the want of which was plaguing him. Rufus
took so kind an interest in his neighbours’ affairs, that anything
not thoroughly luculent in their dealings, mode of life or speech,
or management of their households, was to him the subject–matter of
continual mental scratchings. Ah, how genteel a periphrase, worthy of
Bailey Kettledrum; how happily we have shown our horror of that English
monosyllable, beginning with the third vowel, which must be (according
to Dr. Aldrich) the correlative of scratch! Score two, and go on after
Dr. Hutton.

He overtook the Garnets twain just at their front gate, whence the
house could not be seen, on account of a bank of evergreens. The maid
came out with her cap flying off, and all her mind perturbed. Rufus
Hutton, checking his mare, for the road was very narrow, heard the
entire dialogue.

“Oh, sir! oh, master! have you heard of it? Such a thing, to be sure!”

“Heard of what, Sarah? Of course I have heard of the great disaster at
Rushford.”

“No, no. Here, sir, here! The two big trees is down on the house. Itʼs
a mussy as Nanny and me wasnʼt killed. And poor Miss Pearl have been
in hysterics ever since, without no dinner. There, you can hear her
screeching now, worse than the mangle, ever so much.”

Mr. Garnet did not say a word, but set off for the house full speed,
even forgetting that Bob wanted help to get from the gate to the
doorway.

Rufus Hutton jumped down from his mare, and called to the driver to
come and hold her, just for a minute or two; no fear of _his_ horses
bolting. Then, helping Bob to limp along, he followed through the
shrubbery. When they came within full view of the house, he was quite
amazed at the mischief. The two oaks interlocked had fallen upon it,
and, crashing as they did from the height above, the breaches they
made were hideous. They had cloven the house into three ragged pieces,
from the roof–ridge down to the first floor, where the solid joists
had stopped them. It had happened in the afternoon of the second day
of the tempest; when the heart of the storm was broken, but tremendous
squalls came now and then from the bright north–west. Mr. Garnetʼs own
bed was occupied by the tree which he detested. Pearl had screamed
“Judgment, judgment!” and danced among the ruins; so the maid was
telling Mr. Garnet, as he feared to enter his own door.

“Judgment for what?” asked Rufus Hutton, and Mr. Garnet seemed not to
hear him.

“I am sure I donʼt know, sir,” answered the maid, “for none of us done
any harm, sir; unless it was the bottle of pickled onions, when master
were away, and there was very few of them left, sir, very few, I do
declare to you, and we thought they was on the turn, sir, and it seemed
such a pity to waste them. And please, sir, weʼve all been working like
horses, though frightened out of our lives ‘most; and we fetched down
all the things from your room, where the cupboards was broken open, for
‘fraid it should come on to rain, sir; and weʼve taken all our meals
standing, sir; and made up a bed in the meat–screen, and another upon
the dresser; and Miss Pearl, what turns she have given us—— Here she
comes, I do declare.”

“Dr. Hutton,” said Bull Garnet, hastily, “good–bye; I am much obliged
to you. I shall see you, I hope, next week. Good–bye, good–bye. Excuse
me.”

But, before he could get him out of the way—for Rufus lingered
strangely—Pearl Garnet came into the little hall, with her eyes
distended fearfully. “There, there it is,” she cried, “there it is, I
tell you! No wonder the tree came down upon it. No wonder the house was
crushed for it.” And she pointed to a shattered box, tilted up endwise,
among a heap of account–books, clothes, and furniture.

“Oh yes, you may look at it. To be sure you may look at it. God would
not have it hidden longer. I have done my best, God knows, and my heart
knows, and my—I mean that man there knows. Is there anything more I
can do for you, anything more, _dear father_? You have done so much for
me, you know. And I will only ask you one little thing—put me in his
coffin.”

“The girl is raving,” cried Mr. Garnet. “Poor thing, it comes from her
mother.”

“No, it comes from her father,” said Pearl, going boldly up to him, and
fixing her large bright eyes upon his. “Do as you like with me; I donʼt
care; but donʼt put it on any one else. Oh, father, father, father!”

Moaning, she turned away from him; and then sprang into his arms with
shrieks. He lifted her tenderly, and forgot all about his own safety.
His great tears fell on her wan, sick face; and his heavy heart
throbbed for his daughter only, as he felt hers bounding perilously. He
carried her off to an inner room, and left them to their own devices.

“I should like uncommonly,” said Rufus Hutton, rubbing his chin,
“to know what is in that box. Indeed, I feel it my duty at once to
ascertain.”

“No, you shanʼt,” cried Bob, limping across in front of it; “I know no
more than you do, sir. But I wonʼt have fatherʼs things pryed into.”

“You are very polite,” replied the Doctor; “a chip of the old block,
I perceive. But, perhaps, you will believe me, my boy, when I tell
you that, if ever there was a gentleman totally devoid of improper
curiosity, it is Dr. Rufus Hutton, sir.”

“Oh, I am so glad,” said Bob; “because you wonʼt be disappointed, then.”

Rufus grinned, in spite of his wrath; but he was not to be baffled
so easily. He could not push poor Bob aside, in his present disabled
state, without being guilty of cowardice. So he called in an auxiliary.

“Betsy, my dear, your young mistress wished me just to examine that
box. Be kind enough to bring it to the light here, unless it is too
heavy for your little hands.”

Oh, if he had only said “Miss Sarah,” what a difference it might have
made!

“Betsy, indeed!” cried Sarah, who had followed her mistress, but,
being locked out, had come back to see the end of it; “my name, sir,
is nothing so low as that. My name is Sarah Mackarness, sir, very
much at your service; and my mother keeps a potato–shop, the largest
business in Lyndhurst, sir. Betsy, indeed! and from a stranger, not
to say a strange gentleman, for fear of making a mistake. And as
for my hands”—she thought he had been ironical, for her hands were
above regulation size—“my hands are such as pleased God to make them,
and honest hands, anyhow, and doesnʼt want to interfere with other
peopleʼs business. Oh, what will poor Nanny say, to think of me, Sarah
Mackarness, be permiscuous called Betsy?”

At this moment, when Sarah Mackarness, having recovered breath, was
starting into another native discourse on prænomina, and Rufus was
calling upon his resources for some constitutional measure, Bull Garnet
came back, treading heavily, defiant of all that the world could do.
His quick eyes, never glimpsing that way, but taking in all the room at
once, espied the box unmeddled with, and Bob upon guard in front of it.
He was his own man now again. What did he care for anybody, so long as
he had his children?

“Dr. Hutton, I thought that you were gone.”

“You see I am not,” said Rufus, squaring his elbows, and looking big,
for he was a plucky little fellow, “and, whatʼs more, I donʼt mean to
go till I know what is in that box.”

“Box, box!” cried Bull Garnet, striking his enormous forehead, as if to
recall something; “have we a box of yours, Dr. Hutton?”

“No, no; that box of _yours_. Your daughter told us to examine it. And,
from her manner, I believe that I am bound to do so.”

“Bound to examine one of my boxes!” Bull Garnet never looked once that
way, and Rufus took note of the strange avoidance; “my boxes are full
of confidential papers; surely, sir, you have caught my daughterʼs—I
mean to say, you are labouring under some hallucination.”

“There are no papers in that box. The contents of it are metal. I
have seen one article already through the broken cover, and shall not
forget its shape. Beware; there have been strange things done in this
neighbourhood. If you refuse to allay my suspicions, you confirm them.”

The only answer he received was a powerful hand at the back of his
neck, a sensation of being lifted with no increase of facilities for
placid respiration; finally, a lateral movement of great rapidity
through the air, and a loud sound as of a bang. Recovering reasonʼs
prerogative, he found himself in a dahlia, whose blossoms, turned into
heel–balls by the recent frost, were flapping round his countenance,
and whose stake had gone through his waistcoat back, and grazed his
coxendix, or something; he knows best what it was, as a medical man
deeply interested.

He had also a very unpleasant reminiscence of some such words as these,
to which he had no responsive power—“You wonʼt take a hint like a
gentleman; so take a hit like a blackguard.”

Dr. Rufus Hutton was not the man to sit down quietly under an insult of
any sort. At the moment he felt that brute force was irresistibly in
the ascendant, and he was wonderfully calm about it. He shook himself,
and smoothed his waistcoat, and tried the stretch of his garters;
then never once looked toward the house, never shook his fist, nor
frowned even. He walked off to his darling Polly as if nothing at all
had happened; gave the man a shilling for holding her, after looking
long for a sixpence; then mounted, and rode towards Nowelhurst Hall,
showing no emotion whatever. Only Polly knew that burning tears of a
brave manʼs sense of ignominy fell upon her glossy shoulder, and were
fiercely wiped way.

At the Hall he said nothing about it; never even mentioned that he had
called at Garnetʼs cottage; but told Sir Cradock, like a true man,
of Eoaʼs troubles, of her poor forlorn condition, and power of heart
to feel it. He even contrived to interest the bereaved man, now so
listless, in the young life thrown upon his care, as if by the breath
of heaven. We are never so eloquent for another as when our own hearts
are moved deeply by the feeling of wrong to ourselves; unless, indeed,
we are very small, and that subject excludes all others.

So it came to pass that the grand new carriage was ordered to the door,
and Sir Cradock would himself have gone—only Rufus Hutton had left
him, and the eloquence was oozing. The old man, therefore, turned back
on the threshold, saying to himself that it would be hardly decent
to appear in public yet; and Mrs. OʼGaghan was sent instead, sitting
inside, and half afraid to breathe for fear of the crystal. As for her
clothes, they were good enough, she knew, for the Lord Mayorʼs coach.
“Five–and–sixpence a yard, maʼam, lave alone trimming and binding.”
But, knowing what she did of herbs, she could not answer for the
peppermint.

Of course, they did not intend to fetch poor Eoa home yet; but Biddy
had orders to stay there until the young lady was moveable. Biddy took
to her at once, in her heavy, long–drawn sleep, with the soft black
lashes now and then lifting from the rich brown cheek.

“An’ if she isnʼt illigant, then,” said Biddy to Mrs. Brown, “ate me
wiʼout a purratie. Arl coom ov’ the blude, missus. Sazins, then, if me
and Pat had oonly got a child this day! Belikes, maʼam, for the matter
o’ that, a drap o’ whisky disagrays with you.”

Biddy, feeling strongly moved, and burning to drink her new childʼs
health, showed a bottle of brown potheen.

“To tell you the truth, mem,” said Mrs. Brown, “I know nothing about
them subjects. Spirituous liquors is a thing as has always been beyond
me.”

“Thin Iʼll clap it away again,” said Biddy, “and the divvil only the
wiser. I never takes it alone, marm.”

“It would ill become me, mem,” replied Mrs. Brown, “to be churlish in
my own house, mem. I have heard of you very often, mem. Yes, I assure
you I have, from the people as comes to bathe here, as a lady of great
experience in diseases of the chest. If you recommend any cordial, mem,
on the strength of your experience, for a female of weak witality, I
should take it as a dooty, mem, strictly as a dooty to my husband and
two darters.”

“Arrah, then, Iʼm your femmale. Me witality goes crossways, like, till
I has a drap o’ the crather.” And so they made a night of it, and Mr.
Brown had some.




CHAPTER VII.


Leave we now, with story pending, Biddy and Eoa, Pearl, and even Amy;
thee, too, rare Bull, and thee, O Rufus, overcast with anger. It is
time to track the steps of him whom Fortune, blithe at her cruel trade,
shall track as far as Gades, Cantaber, and wild Syrtes, where the
Moorish billow is for ever heaving. Will he exclaim with the poet, who
certainly was a jolly mortal,—“I praise her while she is my guest. If
she flap her nimble wings, I renounce her charities; and wrap me in my
manhood robe, and woo the upright poverty, the bride without a dower.”
“A very fine sentiment, Master Horace; but were you not a little too
fond even of Sabine and Lesbian—when the Massic juice was beyond your
credit—to do anything more than _feel_ it?”

As Cradock Nowell trudged that night towards the Brockenhurst Station,
before he got very far from Amy, and while her tears were still on his
cheek, he felt a little timid lick, a weak offering of sympathy.

Hereby black Wena made known to him that she was melted by his
misfortunes, and saw that the right and most feeling course, and
the one most pleasing to her dead master, was the transfer of her
allegiance, and the swearing of fealty to the brother. To which
conclusion the tender mode in which she was being carried conduced,
perhaps, considerably; for she was wrapped in Claytonʼs woolly jacket,
enthroned on Cradockʼs broad right arm, and with only her black nose
exposed to the moon. So she jogged along very comfortably, until she
had made up her mind, and given Cradock the kiss of seisin.

“Dear little thing,” he cried, for he looked on her now as Amyʼs
keepsake, “you shall go with me wherever I go. You are faithful enough
to starve with me; but you shall not starve until after me.”

Then he put her down, for he thought that a little run would do her
good, and, in spite of all her misery, Amy had kept her pretty plump,
plumper than she herself was; and it became no joke to carry her, with
a travelling–bag, &c., after the first half mile.

Then Wena capered about, and barked, and came and licked his shoe, and
offered to carry the coat for him. As he would not let her do this,
she occupied her mind with the rabbits, which were out upon the feed
largely, and were the last she would see for a long while, except the
fat Ostenders.

When he got to London, and took small lodgings at a Mrs.
Ducksacreʼs, “greengrocer and general fruiterer, Mortimer–street,
Cavendish–square,”—I quote from the ladyʼs bags: confound it, there! I
am always saying improper things; _honi soit_—I mean, of course, her
paper bags—it was not long before he made two important discoveries,
valuable rather than gratifying.

The first of these discoveries was, that our university portals are
a mere side–postern, and not the great _janua mundi_. He found his
classical scholarship, his early fame at Oxford, his love of elegant
literature, rather a disadvantage than a recommendation for business.

“Prigs, sir, prigs,” said a member of an eminent City firm; “of course,
I donʼt mean to be personal; but I have always found you Oxford men
prigs, quite unfit for desk–work. You fancy you know so much; you are
always discovering mareʼs–nests, and you wonʼt bear to be spoken to,
even if you stick to your work; which, I assure you, is quite the
exception. Then you hold yourself aloof, with your stupid etiquette,
from the other young men, who are quite as good as you are. I assure
you, the place was too hot to hold us with the last Oxford man we
took in the counting–house; he gave himself such airs, the donkey! I
vowed never to do it again: and I never will, sir. Good morning, sir;
Gregson, show this gentleman the way out.”

Gregson did so with a grin, for Cradockʼs face proved that the
principal had not been altogether wrong.

Is this prejudice, or, rather, perhaps, I should say, this aversion,
disappearing now–a–days, or is it upon the increase? At any rate, one
cause of it is being removed most rapidly; for the buckram etiquette of
Oxford will soon become a tradition. We will only hope she may not run
too far into the free and easy.

Cradockʼs other discovery was that 50_l._ is no large capital to
commence in life with, especially when the owner does not find his
start prepared for him; fails to prepare it for himself; and has
never been used to economy. He would not apply to any of his fatherʼs
friends, or of the people whom he had known in London, to help him in
this emergency. He would rather starve than do that; for he had dropped
all name and claim of Nowell, and cut his life in twain at manhood;
and the parts should never join again. Only one feeling should be
common to the two existences, to the happy and the wretched life; that
one feeling was the love of Amy, and, what now seemed part of it, his
gratitude to her father.

John Rosedew had given him a letter to a clergyman in London, a man of
high standing and extensive influence, whom John had known at college.
But the youth had not undertaken to deliver that credential, and he
never did so. It would have kept him to his identity, which (so far as
the world was concerned) he wished to change entirely, immediately, and
irrevocably. So he called himself “Nowell” no longer—although the name
is common enough in one form or another: the Nowells of Nowelhurst,
however, are proud of the double _l_, and think a good deal of the
_w_—and Cradock Nowell became “Charles Newman,” without license of Her
Majesty.

Even before his vain attempts to enter the stronghold of commerce,
and before he had learned that Oxford men are not thought “_prima
virorum_,” he had lifted the latch of literature, but the door would
not swing back for him. The _mare magnum_—to mix metaphors, although
bars are added to the Lucrine—the _mare magnum_ of letters was more
like his native element; and, if he once could have gotten—bare–footed
as we must be—over the jagged rocks which hedge that sea, I believe he
might have swum there.

In one respect he was fortunate. The publishers upon whom he called
were gentlemen, and told him the truth.

“Oh, poetry!” exclaimed one and all, as their eyes fell upon his
manuscript, “we cannot take it on our own account; and, if we published
it at your expense, we should only be robbing you.”

“Indeed!” replied Cradock, in the first surprise; “is there no chance,
then, of a sale for it?”

“None whatever. Poetry, unless it be some oneʼs whose name is well
known, is a perfect drug in the market. In the course of ten or a dozen
years, by advertising continually, by influence among the reviewers,
by hitting some popular vein, or being taken up by some authority, you
might attain an audience. Are you ready to encounter all this? Even if
you are, we must decline, we are sorry to say, to have anything to do
with it.”

“Verse, eh? Better have cut your throat,” more tersely replied an
elderly gentleman, well known for his rudeness to authors. However,
even that last was a friend, when compared with some whom it might have
been his evil luck to consult. They advertise their patent methods
of putting a work before the public, without any risk to the author,
&c. &c. Disinterested gentlemen! They are to have no profit whatever,
except from the sale of the work, and they know they wonʼt sell five
copies.

However, there are not many of this sort in an honourable and most
important profession; and Cradock Nowell was lucky enough not to
fall in with any of them. So he accepted the verdict so unanimously
returned, and stored away with a heavy heart his laborious little
manuscript. It was only a translation in verse of the Halieutics, and a
few short original pieces—the former at any rate valuable, as having
been revised by John Rosedew.

There are courts and alleys in the neighbourhood of Mortimer–street
which, for misery and poverty, dirt and desperation, may vie with
almost any of the more famous shames of London.

Cradockʼs own great trouble, the sympathy he had met with, and the
comfort he received from it, had begun by this time to soften his
heart, and render it more sensitive to the distress of others. At
first, it had been far otherwise. The feeling of bitter injustice,
resentment at, and defiance of, a blow which seemed to him so
unmerited, and, worse than all, his own fatherʼs base and low mistrust
of him—who could have been surprised if these things, acting upon a
sad lone heart, and a bold mind beginning to think for itself, had made
the owner an infidel? And very likely they would have done so, when he
was removed from John Rosedewʼs influence, but for that scene with Amy.
He loved that girl so warmly, so devotedly, so purely, that, when he
found his love returned in equal quantity and quality, it renewed his
faith in justice. He saw that there is a measure and law, even where
all appears to be anarchy and anomaly; that the hand of God is not
stretched forth upon His children wantonly; that we cannot gauge His
circling survey by the three–inch space between human eyes, neither
does He rest His balance on His earthly footstool. So Cradock escaped
the deadly harm, which almost seems designed to poise that noblest
gift of Heaven—a free and glorious intellect—he escaped it through
the mercy which gave him true affection.

And now once more he looked with love upon his fellow–men, such love
as the frigid atheist school shall never form nor educate—which truth
alone to a great heart might be conclusive against that school—the
love which few religions except our own inculcate, and no other takes
for its essence.

As yet he was too young to know the blind and inhuman selfishness,
the formality and truckling, and the other paltry dishonesties, which
still exist and try to cheat us under the name of “Society.” The cant
is going by already. Every man who dares to think knows that its laws
are obsolete, because they have not for their basis either of these
three—truth, simplicity, charity.

Even that young man was astonished at the manner in which society
ignores its broader and only true meaning—fellowship among men—and
renounces all other duties, save that of shaking from its shoes
its fellow–dust. He could not look upon the scenes so nigh to him,
and to each other, parted often by nothing more than nine inches
of brick or two inches of deal; the wealth and the want, the feast
and the famine, the satiety and the ravening, the euphemy and the
blasphemy—though sometimes that last got inside the door, blew its
nose, and was infidelity; the prudery and the indecency, the whispered
lie and the yelled one, the sale of maidens by their mothers, or
of women by themselves—though here again the difference was never
very perceptible; all this impious contrast, spread as if for Godʼs
approval, for the Universal Fatherʼs blessing, in the land most chiefly
blessed by Him: which of His sons, not cast out for ever, could look on
it without weeping?

Cradock did something more than weep. He went with his little stock of
money, though he knew it could not do much; and he tried to help in
little ways, though as yet he had no experience. He bought meat, and
clothes, and took things out of pawn, and tried to make peace where
fights were.

At first he was grossly insulted, as a meddlesome swell; but, when he
had done two or three good things, and done them as a brother should,
he began to be owned among them. In one thing he was right, although he
had no experience; he confined his exertions to a very narrow compass.
Of course he got imposed upon—of course he helped the unworthy; but
after a while he began to know them, and even the unworthy—some two
hundred per cent.—began to have faint ideas of trying to deserve good
luck.

One man who attempted to pick Cradʼs pocket was knocked down by the
biggest thief there. “I wish I had a heap of money,” said Cradock,
every day; “I must keep some for myself, I suppose. Perhaps, after all,
I was wrong, in throwing up so hastily my chance of doing good.”

Then he remembered that, but for his trouble, he might never have
thought of the good to be done. And the good done to him was threefold
as much as he could do to others. Every day he grew less selfish, less
imperious, less exacting; every day he saw more clearly the good which
is in the worst of us.

There is a flint of peculiar character—I know not the local name
of it—which is found sometimes on the great Chissel Bank, and away
towards Lyme Regis. It is as hard, and sullen, and dull a flint (with
even the outside polish lost from the chafing of the waves)—a stone
as grey and foggy–looking;—as ever Deucalion took the trouble to
cast away over the left into an empty world. Yet it has, through the
heart of it, traversing it from pole to pole (for its shape is always
conical) a thread, a spindle, a siphuncle, of the richest golden hue.
None but those who are used to it can see the head of the golden
column, can even guess its existence. The stone is not hollow; it is
quite distinct from all pudding–stones and conglomerates.

Many such flints poor Crad came across, and sought in vain for the
beauty of them. He never tried to split them with a hammer, as too many
do of our Boanergæ; but he was too young to see or feel the chord of
the golden siphuncle. One, especially, one great fellow, was harder and
rougher than any flint, like the matrix of the concentric jasper.

“Confound that fellow,” said Cradock to himself; “I never shall get
at the heart of him. If my pluck were up a little more. Iʼd fight him;
though I know he would lick me. Heʼd be sorry for me afterwards.”

Issachar Jupp could lick any two men in the court. He was a bargee, of
good intentions—at least, when he took to the cuddy; but his horses
had pulled crosswise ever since; and the devil knew, better than the
angels, what his nature now was.

“None of your d—d Scripture–reading for me!” he cried, when Cradock
came near him; though the young man had never attempted anything of the
sort.

He knew that the Word of God is not bread to a blackguardʼs empty
belly. And another thing he knew—that he was not of the age and aspect
for John Bunyanʼs business. Moreover, Jupp was wonderfully jealous
of his wife, a gentle but grimy woman, forty–five years old, whom he
larruped every day; although he might be an infidel, he would ensure
his wifeʼs fidelity. Nevertheless, he had his pure vein, and Cradock at
last got at it.

Mrs. and Miss Ducksacre were very good–hearted women, but, like many
other women of that fibre, whose education has been neglected, of a hot
and hasty order. Not that we need suppose the pepper to be neutralized
by the refinement, only to be absorbed more equably, and transfused
more generally.

A little thing came feeling the way into the narrow, dingy shop, one
dark November evening, groping along by the sacks of potatoes (all of
them “seconds,” for the firm did not deal much in “Ware Regents”),
feeling its way along the sacks which towered above its head, like
bulky snow–giants embrowned with thaw; and then by the legs of the
“tatie–bin,” with the great scales hanging above it, and then by the
heap of lighting–wood, piled in halfpenny bundles, with the ends
against the wall; and so the little thing emerged between two mighty
hills of coleworts, and under the frugal gas–burner, and congratulated
itself, with a hug of the heart, upon safety.

“Take care, my dear,” cried Mrs. Ducksacre, looking large behind the
counter, “or youʼll tumble down the coal–trap, where the black bogeys
lives. Bless my heart, if it ainʼt little Loo! Why, Loo, I hardly knew
you. You ainʼt looking like yourself a bit, child. And who sent you out
at this time of night? What a shame, to be sure!”

Loo, the pride of Issachar Jupp, was rather a pretty little body,
about three and a half years old, “going on for four,” as she loved
to say, if anybody asked her; and her pale but clean face would have
been _very_ pretty, if her mother would have let her hair alone. But
it was all combed back, and tied tightly behind, like the tail of a
horse at a fair, or as affording a spout to pour the little girl out
by. She looked up at Mrs. Ducksacre, while her fingers played with the
coleworts, for her hands were hot, and this cooled them; and then,
with the instinct of nature, she stuck up for her father and mother.

“Pease, maʼam, Loo not fray much,”—though her trembling frock belied
her, all over the throat and the heart of it—“and father don from
home, maʼam, on the Wasintote” [Basingstoke canal], “and mother dot
nobody, onʼy Loo, to do thins. And she send this, ‘cause Looʼs poor
troat be bad, maʼam.”

The little child, whose throat was tied up with worn flannel from the
char–bucket, with the grey edge still upon it, wriggled in and out of
her shape and self, in the way only children can do; and at length
drew, from some innermost shrine, a halfpenny and a farthing.

“And what am I to give you for it, Loo? Oh, you poor little thing, how
very hoarse you are!”

Loo, with a confidence in human nature purely non–Londinian, had placed
her cash upon the altar, upon the inside of which so many worship,
while on the outside so many are sacrificed; without circumlocution,
the counter. Her eyes were below the rim of it, till she stood upon
tiptoe with one foot, while the other was up in the colewort roots, and
then she could see the money, and she poked out her little lips at it,
as if she would fain suck it back again.

“Pease, maʼam, Looʼs troat so bad, mother are goin to make a ‘tew, tree
haʼporth of tipe and a haʼporth of ‘egents, and a fardy of inons!”

“What a splendid stew, Loo!” said Mrs. Ducksacre, seeming to smell
it; “and so you want a haʼporth of taties, and a farthingʼs worth
of onions. And you shall have them, my dear, and as good a three
farthings’ worth as ever was put up in London. Where are you going to
put them all?”

Loo opened her sore throat, and pointed down it. She had not yet lost
her appetite; and that child did love tripe so.

“No, no, I donʼt mean that, Loo. I know you have a nice room inside;
though some will be for mother, wonʼt it, now? I mean, how are you
going to carry it home?”

“In Looʼs pinney,” replied the child, delighted with her success; for
ever so many people had told her, that the Ducksacres now were getting
so high, they would soon leave off making farthings–worths; and any
tradesman who does that is above the sphere of the street–child.

“My dear, your pinney wonʼt hold them, potatoes are so cheap now”—she
had just sworn they were awfully dear to a person she disliked—“I
am sure you canʼt carry a haʼporth. Oh, Mr. Newman, you are so
good–natured”—Cradock was just coming in, rather glum from another
failure—“I really donʼt believe you would think you were bemeaning
yourself by going home with this poor little atom.”

“I should rather hope I would not,” replied Cradock, looking grand.

“Oh, I did not know. I beg your pardon, Iʼm sure. I would go myself,
only Sally is out, and the boy gone home ever so long ago. I beg your
pardon, Iʼm sure, Mr. Newman; I thought you were so good–natured.”

“Mrs. Ducksacre,” said Cradock, “you utterly misunderstand me. I
replied to the form of your sentence, perhaps, rather than to its
meaning. What I meant was, that I should rather hope I would not think
it below me to go home with this little dear. If I could suppose it any
disgrace to me, I should deserve to be kicked by your errand–boy all
round this shop, Mrs. Ducksacre; and I am surprised you misunderstand
me so. Why, I know this little girl well; and her name is Louisa Jupp.”

“Tiss Loo,” said the little child, standing up on tiptoe, and spreading
out her arms to Cradock. All the children loved him, as the little ones
at Nowelhurst would run after Mr. Rosedew. Children are even better
judges of character than dogs.

“Why, you poor little soul,” said Crad, as he seated her on his strong
right arm with her little cheek to his, and she drew a thousand straws
of light through her lashes from the gas–jet, which she had never yet
been so close to, “how hot and dry your lips are! I hope you are not
taking the—sickness”—he was going to say “fever,” but feared to
frighten Loo.

“Mother fray,” cried the small girl, proud of the importance accruing
to her, “Loo dot wever; Irishers dot bad wever on the foor below
mother. Loo det nice thins, and lay abed, if me dot the wever.”

“Put the poor childʼs things, whatever they are, in a basket, Mrs.
Ducksacre. How odd her little legs feel! And a shillingʼs worth of
grapes, if you please, in a bag by themselves. Hereʼs the money for
them. You know Iʼll bring back the basket. But the bags donʼt come
back, do they?”

“No, sir, of course not. Half–a–crown a gross for the small ones, with
the name and the cross–handle basket, and the cabbage and carrots, sir.
Sixpence more for cornopean–pattern with a pineapple, and grapes and
oranges. But lor, sir, the cornopean” [cornucopiæ] “would frighten half
our customers. The basket–pattern pays better for an advertisement than
to get them back again, even if parties would bring them, which I knows
well they never would, sir.”

Then Cradock set forth with the child on his arm, his coat thrown over
his shoulders, and the best shillingʼs worth of foreign grapes—Mrs.
Ducksacre never bought English ones—and the best three farthingʼs
worth of potatoes and onions that was made that day by any tradesman in
any part of London, not excluding “them low costers,” as the Ducksacre
firm expressed it.

Little Loo Juppʼs sore throat proved to be, as Cradock feared it
would, the first symptom of scarlet fever; and the young man had the
pleasure—one of the highest and purest pleasures which any man can
have—of saving a human life. He watched that trembling flame of
life, and fostered it, and sheltered it, as if “the hopes of a nation
hung”—as the penny–a–liners love to say of some babe not a whit more
valuable—upon its feeble flicker. He hired another room for her, where
the air was purer; he made the doctor attend to the case, which at
first that doctor cared little to do; he brought her many a trifling
comfort; in a word, he waited upon her so that the old women of the
court called him thenceforth “Nurse Newman.”

“What, you here again, you white–livered young sneak!” cried Issachar
Jupp, reeling in at the door, just as Cradock was coming out; “take
that, then——” and he lifted a great oak bludgeon, newly cut from the
towing–path of the Basingstoke Canal. If Cradock had not been as quick
as lightning, and caught the stick over the bargemanʼs shoulder, there
would have been weeping and wailing and a lifelong woe for Amy.

“Hush,” he said; “donʼt make such a noise, man. Your child is at the
point of death, in the room overhead.”

Poor Crad, naturally of a bright complexion, but pale from long
unhappiness, might now have retorted the compliment as to the “pallor
jecoris.” The bargee turned so pale, that he looked like a collierʼs
tablecloth. Then he planted his heavy stick on the ground; else he
would have lain flat on his threshold.

“My Loo, my Loo!” was all he could say; “oh my Loo! _Itʼs a lie, sir!_”

“I wish it was,” replied Cradock; “take my arm, Mr. Jupp. Donʼt be
over–frightened. We hope with all our hearts to save her, and to–night
we shall know. Already I think I perceive some change in her breathing,
though her tongue is like a furnace.”

He spoke with a tone and in a voice which no man ever has described,
nor shall, but which every born man feels to be genuine, long ere he
can think.

“[Condemn] me for a [sanguineous] fool,” cried Jupp, with two enormous
tears guttering down the coal–dust, and his great chest heaving and
wanting to sob, only it didnʼt know the way; “[condemn] my eyes for
swearing so, and making such a [female dog] of myself, but what the
[Hades] am I to do? Oh my Loo, my Loo! If you die, Iʼll go to [Hades]
after you.”

Excuse me for washing out this speech to regulation weakness; perhaps
it was entered in white on high, as the turn of a life of blackness.

Cradock turned away, and trembled. Who can see a rugged man split
to the bottom of his nature, and not himself be splintered? I donʼt
believe that any can: not even the cold iron scoundrels whom modern
plays delight in.

“Now come up with me, Mr. Jupp,” said Crad, taking care not to look at
him, “out at this door, in at the other. Poor little soul! she has
been so good. You canʼt think how good she has been. And she has taken
her medicine so nicely.”

“Pray God Almighty not to [condemn] me, for not [condemning] myself
enough,” said Issachar Jupp, below his breath, as he leaned on
Cradockʼs arm.

It was his form of prayer; and it meant more than most of ours do.
Though I may be discarded by turtle–dove quill–drivers for daring to
record it, will he ever be worse for uttering it? Of course, it was
very shocking; but far more so to men than to angels.




CHAPTER VIII.


Little Looʼs fever “took the turn” that night. Cradock went away, of
course, now her own father was come; and the savage bargee would have
gone on his knees, and crawled in that fashion—wherein all fashion
crawls—down the rough stairs, every one of them, if the young man
would only have let him. We are just beginning to scorn the serfdom of
one mind to another. We begin to desire that no man should, without
fair argument, accept our dicta as equal to his own in wisdom. And I
fully believe that if fate had thrown us across Shakespeare, Bacon, or
Newton, we should now refer to our own reason what they said, before
admiring it. For, after all, what are we? What are our most glorious
minds? Only one spark more of God.

And yet the servience, not of the mind, but of the heart to a larger
one, is a fealty most honourable to the giver and the receiver. In
a bold independent man, such as Issachar Jupp was, this fealty was
not to be won by any of that paltry sentiment about birth, clanship,
precedency, position, appearance, &c., which is our national method of
circumcising the New Testament—it was only to be won by proof that the
other heart was bigger than his. Prove that once, and till death it was
granted.

Now, the small Loo Jupp being out of danger, and her father, grinning
like a gridiron with the firelight behind it, every day at her bedside,
the force of circumstances—which, in good English, means the want of
money—sent Cradock Nowell once more catʼs–cradling throughout London,
to answer advertisements. His heart rose within him every day as he set
out in the morning, and in the same relative position fell, as he came
home every evening.

“Do, sir, do,” cried Issachar Jupp, who never swore now, before
Cradock, except under strongest pressure; “do come aboard our barge.
Iʼve aʼmost a–got the appointment of skipper to the _Industrious
Maiden_, homeside of Nine Elms, as tight a barge as ever was built,
and the name done in gold letters. Fact, I may say, and not tell no
secrets; I be safe to be aboord of her, if my Loo allow me to go, and I
donʼt swear hard at the check–house. And, perhaps, I shall be able to
help it, after Loo so ill, and you such a hangel.”

“Well, I donʼt know,” replied Cradock, who could not bear to simulate
intense determination; “I should like a trip into the country, if I
could earn my wages as agent, or whatever it is. But suppose the canal
is frozen up before our voyage begins, Jupp?”

“Oh, d—n that!” cried Issachar, for the idea was too much for him,
even in Cradockʼs presence; “I never yet knew a long winter, sir, after
a wonderful stormy autumn.”

And in that conclusion he was right, to the best of my experience.
Perhaps because the stormy autumn shows the set of the Gulf Stream.

By this time more than a month had passed since Cradock and Wena
arrived in London; half his money was spent, and he had found no
employment. He had advertised, and answered advertisements, till he was
tired. He had worn out his one pair of boots with walking, for he had
thought it better to walk, as it might be of service to him to know
London thoroughly; and that knowledge can only be acquired by perpetual
walking. No man can be said to know London thoroughly, who does not
know the suburbs also—who, if suddenly put down at the Elephant and
Castle, or at Shoreditch Church, cannot tell exactly whither each
of the six fingers points. Such knowledge very few men possess; it
requires the genius loci—to apply the expression barbarously—as well
as peculiar calls upon it. Cradock, of course, could not attain such
knowledge in a month. Indeed, he was obliged to ask his way to so
well–known a part as Hammersmith, when he had seen an advertisement
for a clerk, to help in some coal–office there.

With the water quelching in his boots (which were worn away to the
welting)—for the sky was like the pulp of an orange, and the pavement
wanted draining—he turned in at a little gate near the temporary
terminus of the West London line. In a wooden box, with a kitchen
behind it, he found Mr. Clinkers; who thought, when he saw Cradʼs face,
that he was come to give a large order; and when he saw his boots, that
he was come to ask to be errand–boy. Clinkers was a familiar, jocular,
red–faced fellow, whom his friends were fond of calling “not at all a
bad sort.”

“Take a glass, mister,” said he, when Cradock had stated his purpose;
“wonʼt do you no harm such a day as this, and I donʼt fancy ‘twould
me either. Jenny! Jenny! Why, bless that gal; ever since my poor wife
died, sheʼs along of them small–coals fellows. Iʼll bet a tanner she
is. What do you say to it, sir? Will you bet?”

“Well,” replied Cradock, smiling, “it wouldnʼt be at all a fair bet. In
the first place, I know nothing of Miss Jennyʼs propensities; and, in
the second, I have no idea what the small–coals fellows are.”

The small–coals men are the truck–drivers and the greengrocers in
the by–streets, who buy the crushings and riddlings by the sack, at
the wharf or terminus, and sell them by the quarter hundred–weight,
weight, at a profit of two hundred per cent. Cradock might have known
this, but the Ducksacre firm was reticent upon some little matters.

Mr. Clinkers could not stop to explain; only he said to himself,
“Pretty fellow to apply for a clerkship in the coal–line, and not know
that!”

Jenny appeared at last, looking perfectly self–possessed.

“Jenny, you baggage, two tumblers and silver teaspoons in no time. And
the _little_ kettle; mind now, I tell you the _little_ kettle. Canʼt
you understand, gal, that I may want to shave with the water, but ainʼt
going to have the foot–tub?”

Jennyʼs broad face, mapped with coal–dust, grinned from ear to ear, as
she looked at her master saucily—a proof almost infallible of a very
genial government. She heard that shaving joke every day, and, the more
she heard it, the more she enjoyed it. So the British public, at a
theatre, or an election, appreciates a joke according to the square of
the number of the times the joke has been poked at it. Hurrah for the
slow perception, and the blunt knife that opens the oyster!

“Queer gal, that,” said Clinkers, producing his raw material; “uncommon
queer gal, sir, as any you may have met with.”

“No doubt of it,” replied Cradock; “and now for the cause of my
visit——”

“Hang me, sir, you donʼt understand that gal. I say she is the queerest
gal that ever lived out of a barge. You should see her when she gets
along of some of them small–coals fellows. Blow me if she canʼt twist
a dozen of them round her finger, sir.”

“And her master too,” thought Cradock; “unless I am much mistaken, she
will be the new Mrs. Clinkers.”

Jenny heard most of her masterʼs commentary as she went to and fro, and
she kept up a constant grin without speech, in the manner of an empty
coal–scuttle.

“Ah, sir, grief is a dry thing, a sad dry thing;” and Clinkers banged
down his tumbler till the spoon reeled round the brandy; “no business,
if you please now, not a word of business till we both be below the
fiddle; and, if it isnʼt to your liking, speak out like a man, sir.”

“Below the fiddle, Mr. Clinkers! What fiddle? I donʼt at all understand
you.”

“Very few people does, young man; very few people indeed. Scarcely any,
I may say, except Jenny and the cookshop woman; and the latter have got
encumbrances as quite outweighs the business. Ainʼt you ever heard of
the fiddle of a teaspoon, sir?”

“Oh, very well,” said Cradock, tossing off his brandy–and–water to
bring things to a point. It was a good thing for him that he got it,
poor fellow, for he was sadly wet and weary.

“Lor, now, to see that!” cried Clinkers, opening his eyes; “Iʼm blowed
if you mustnʼt be a Hoxford gent.”

“To be sure, so I am,” replied Cradock, laughing; “but I should not
have thought that you would have known—I mean, I am surprised that
you, at this distance, should know anything of Oxford men.”

“Tell you about that presently. Come over again the fire, sir. Up with
your heel–tap, and have another.”

“No, thank you, Mr. Clinkers. You are very kind; but I shall not take
one drop more.”

“Then you ainʼt been there very long, thatʼs certain. Now you have come
about this place, I know; though itʼs a queer one for a Hoxford gent.
‘Gent under a cloud,’ thinks I, the moment I claps eyes on you. Ah, I
knows the aristocraxy, sir. Now, what might be your qualifications?”

“None whatever, except such knowledge as springs from a good education.”

“Whew!” whistled Mr. Clinkers, and that sound was worth fifty sentences.

“Then you conclude,” said Cradock, not so greatly downcast, for he
had got this speech by heart now, “that I am not fitted for the post
offered in your advertisement?”

“Knows what they Hoxford gents is,” continued Clinkers, reflectively;
“come across a lot of them once, when I was gay and rattling. They
ran into my tax–cart, coming home from Ascot, about a mile this side
of Brentford. Famous good company over a glass, when they drops their
aristocraxy; they runs up a tick all over town, and leaves a Skye dog
to pay for it; comes home about four in the morning, and donʼt know the
latch from the scraper. Always pays in the end, though; nearly always
pays in the end—so a Hoxford tradesman told me—and interest ten per
cent. Differs in that from the medicals; the fast medicals never do
pay, sir.”

“Most unjust,” said Cradock, rising, “a most unjust thing, Mr.
Clinkers; you not only judge the present by the past, but you reason
from the particular to the universal—the most fruitful and womanlike
of the fallacies.”

“It ainʼt anything about fallacy, sir, that makes me refuse you,” cried
Clinkers, who liked this outburst; “Iʼll tell you just what it is. You
Hoxford scholars may be very honest, _but you ainʼt got the grease for
business_.”

Sorely down at heart and heel, Cradock plodded away from the yard of
the hospitable Clinkers, who came to the door and looked after him,
fearing to indulge his liking for that queer young fellow. But he had
taken Cradʼs address; for who knew but something might turn up?

“That man,” said Cradock to himself, “has a kindly heart, and would
have helped me if he could. He wanted to pay my fare back to town, but
of course I would not let him. It was well worth while to come all this
distance, and get wet through twice over, to come across a kind–hearted
man, when a fellow is down so. I began with applying for grand places;
what a fool I was! Places worth 150_l._ or 200_l._ a–year. No wonder I
did not get them: and what a lot of boot I have wasted! Now I am come
down to 50_l._ per annum, and 75_l._ would be a fortune. If I had only
begun at that mark, I might have got something by this time. ‘Vaulting
ambition doth oʼerleap itself.’ And I might have emigrated—good
Heavens! I might have emigrated upon the bounty of Uncle John, to some
land where a man is worth more than the cattle of the field. Only Amy
stopped me, only the thought of my Amy. Darling love, the sweetest
angel—stop, I am so unlucky; if I begin to bless her, very likely
sheʼll get typhus fever. After all, what does it matter what sort of
life I take to? Or whether, indeed, I take the trouble to take to any
at all? Only for her sake. A man who has done what I have lives no
more, but drags his life. Now Iʼll go in for common labour, work of the
hands and muscles; many a better man has done it; and it will be far
wiser for me while my brain is so loose and wandering. I wonder I never
thought of that. Isnʼt it raining, though! What we used, in the happy
days, to call ‘Wood Fidley rainʼ”.

The future chironax trudged more cheerfully after this decision. But he
was very sorry to get so soaked, for he had his only suit of clothes
on. He had brought but one suit of his own; and all he had bought with
the rectorʼs money was six shirts at 3s. 6d., and four pairs of cotton
hose. So he could not afford to get wet.

There could be no doubt that he was shabbily dressed, no rich game to
an hotel–tout, no tempting fare to a cabman; but neither could there be
any doubt that he was a pure and noble gentleman; that was as clear as
in the heyday of finest Oxford dandyism. Only he carried his head quite
differently, and the tint of his cheeks was gone. He used to walk with
his broad and well–set head thrown back, and slightly inclined to one
side; now he bore it flagging, drooping, as if the spring of the neck
were gone.

But still the brave clear eyes met frankly all who cared to look at
him; the face and gait were of a man unhappy but not unmanly. If, at
the time Sir Cradock condemned his only son so cruelly, he had looked
at him once, and read the sorrow so unmistakeable in his face, the old
man might have repented, and wept, and saved a world of weeping. A tear
in time saves ninety–nine; but who has the sense to yield it?

Soaked and tired out at last, he reached his little lodgings—quite
large enough for him, though—and found Black Wena warming the chair,
the only chair he had to sit on. Unluckily, he did not do what a man
who cared for himself would have done. Having no change of raiment—in
plain English, only one pair of trousers—he should have gone to bed at
once, or at any rate have pulled his wet clothes off. Instead of doing
so, he sat and sat, with the wet things clinging closer to him, and
the shivers crawling deeper, until his last inch of candle was gone,
and the room was cold as an icehouse, for the rain had turned to snow
at nightfall, and the fire had not been lit.

Wena sat waiting and nodding upwards, on the yard and a half of brown
drugget, which now was her chiefest _pulvinar_, and once or twice she
nudged her master, and whined about supper and bedtime. But Cradock
only patted her, and improved the turn of his sentence. He was making
one last effort to save from waste and ridicule his tastes and his
education. A craftsman, if he have self–respect, is worthy, valuable,
admirable, nearer to the perception of simple truth than some men of
high refinement. Nevertheless, it is too certain—as I, who know them
well, and not unkindly, can testify—that there is scarcely one in a
dozen labourers, even around the metropolis, who respects himself and
his calling. Whose fault this is, I pretend not—for pretence it would
be—to say. Probably, the guilt is “much of a muchness,” as in all
mismanaged matters. The material was as good as our own; how has it got
so vitiated? It is as lowering to us as it is to themselves, that the
“enlightened working–men of England” cannot go out for their holiday,
cannot come home from their work, cannot even speak among their own
children, and in the goodwifeʼs presence, without words, not of manly
strength, but of hoggish coarseness. In time this must be otherwise;
but the evil is not cured easily. The boy believes it manly to talk as
he hears his father talk; he rejoices in it the more, perhaps, because
the school forbids it. He does not know what the foul words mean; and
all things strange have the grandest range. Those words tell powerfully
in a story, with smaller boys round him upon the green, or at the
street–corner. And so he grows up engrimed with them, and his own boys
follow suit.

Cradock was young and chivalrous, and knew not much of these things,
which his position had kept from him; nor in his self–abandonment
cared he much about them. Nevertheless, he shrank unconsciously from
the lowering of his existence. And now he sat up, writing, writing,
till his wet clothes made little pools on the floor, while he answered
twenty advertisements, commercial, literary, promiscuous. Then he
looked at his little roll of postage–stamps, and with shivering fingers
affixed them. There were only fifteen; and it was too late to get any
more that night; and he felt that he could not afford to use them now
so rashly. So he ran out into the slushy streets, gamboged with London
snow, and posted those fifteen of his letters which were the least
ambitious. By this time he knew that the best chance was of something
not over–gorgeous. Wena did not go with him, but howled until he came
back. Then he gave the poor little thing, with some self–reproach at
his tardiness, all the rest of his cottage loaf, and his haʼporth
of milk, which she took with some protestations, looking up at him
wistfully now and then, to see whether he was eating.

“No, Wena, I canʼt eat to–night; bilious from over–feeding, perhaps.
But Iʼve done a good eveningʼs work, and weʼll be very plucky for
breakfast, girl, and have sixpenceworth of cold ham. No fear there of
making a cannibal of you, you innocent little soul.”

He was desperately afraid, as most young fellows from the country are,
of having unclean animals spicily served up by the London allantopolæ.
This terror is the result for the most part of rustic sham knowingness,
and the British love of stale jokes. However, beyond all controversy,
dark are the rites of sepulture of the measly pigs around London.

He crept, at last, beneath his scanty bedding—clean, although so
patched and threadbare—and the iron cross–straps shook and rattled
with the shudders that went through him.

Wena, who slept beneath the bed in a nest which she made of the
drugget–scrap, jumped upon the blanket at midnight, to know pray what
was the matter. Then she licked his face, and tried to warm him, in his
broken slumbers. That day he had taken a virulent cold, which struck
into his system, and harboured there for a fortnight, till it broke out
in a raging fever.

The next day, Cradock received a letter, of doubtful classicality, and
bearing the Hammersmith post–mark.

 “RESPECTED SIR,—Was sorry after you streaked off yesterday that had
 not kept you longer. You was scarce gone out of the gate as one might
 say, when in comes a gent, no end of a nob, beats you as one might
 say in some respects, and a head of hair as good. Known by the name
 of Hearty,—Hearty Wibraham, Esquire, but friends prefers callin’ him
 Hearty, such bein’ his character. And hearty he were with my brandy, I
 do assure you, and no mistake. This gent say as he want to establish
 a hagency for the sale of first–class Hettons to the members of the
 _bone tons_: was I agreeable to supply him? So I say, ‘Certainly, by
 all means, if I see my way to my money.’ And then he breaks out, in a
 manner as would frighten some hands, about the artlessness of the age,
 the suspiciousness of commercial gents, and confidence between man and
 man. ‘Waste of time,’ says I; ‘coals is coals now, and none of them
 leaves this yard for nothing. Better keep that sort of stuff,’ says I,
 ‘for the green young gent from Hoxford as was here just now.’ ‘What,’
 says he, ‘Hoxford man after a situation?’ ‘ Yes,’ I says, ‘nice young
 gent, only under a cloud.’ Says he, ‘I loves a Hoxford man; hope he
 has got some money.’ ‘ For what?’ I says; ‘have you got anything good
 for him to invest in?’ ‘Havenʼt I?’ he says; ‘take a little more
 brandy, old chapʼ—my own brandy, mind you, blow me if he ainʼt a
 hearty one. Well, I canʼt tell you half he said, not being a talkative
 man myself, since the time as I lost Mrs. Clinkers. Only the upshot of
 it is, I think you couldnʼt do no harm by callinʼ, if he write you as
 he said he would.

 “Yours to command, and hope you didnʼt get wet,

 “ROBERT CLINKERS, Jun., for POKER, CLINKERS, and Co., Coal Merchants,
 West London Terminuss, Hammersmith.

 “N.B.—Coke supplied in your own sacks, on the most moderate terms.”

By the next delivery, Cradock got another letter, far more elegantly
written, but not half so honest.

 “Mr. Hearty Wibraham, having heard of Mr. Charles Newman from a mutual
 friend, Mr. Clinkers, of Hammersmith, presents his compliments to the
 former gentleman, and thinks it might be worth Mr. Newmanʼs while
 to call upon him, Mr. H. W., at six oʼclock this evening, supposing
 the post to do its duty, which it rarely does. Hearty Wibraham, No.
 66, Aurea Themis Buildings, Notting Hill district. N.B.—The above
 is _bonâ fide_. References will be required. But perhaps they may be
 dispensed with.

  “H. W.”

“Well,” said Cradock to Wena, shivering as he said it, for the cold was
striking into him, “you see we are in request, my dear. Not that I have
any high opinion of Mr. Hearty Wibraham; as a gentleman, I mean. But
for all that he may be an honest man. And beggars—as you know, Wena,
dear, when you sit up so prettily—beggars must not be choosers. Do you
think you could walk so far, Wena? If you could, it would do you good,
my beauty; and Iʼll see that you are not run over.”

Wena agreed, rather rashly, to go; for the London stones, to a country
dog, are as bad as a mussel–bank to a bather; but she thought she
might find some woodcocks—and so she did, at the game–shops, and some
curlews which they sold for them—but her real object in going, was
that she had made some nice acquaintances in the neighbourhood, whom
she wanted to see again. She wouldnʼt speak to any low dog, for she
meant to keep up the importance and grandeur of the Nowell family, but
there were some dogs, heigho! they had such ways with them, and they
were brushed so nicely, what could a poor little country dog do but
fall in love with them?

Therefore Wena came after her master, and made believe not to notice
them, but she lingered now and then at a scraper, and, when she
snapped, her teeth had gloves on.

When Cradock and his little dog, after many a twist and turn, found
Aurea Themis Buildings, the master rang at the sprightly door, newly
grained and varnished. Being inducted by a young woman, with a most
coquettish cap on, he told black Wena to wait outside, and she lay down
upon the door–step.

Then he was shown into the “first–floor drawing–room,” according to
arrangement, and requested to “take a seat, sir.” The smart maid, who
carried a candle, lit the gas in a twinkling, but Cradock wondered why
the coal–merchant had no coals in his fireplace.

Just when he had concluded, after a fit of shivering, that this defect
was due perhaps to that extreme familiarity which breeds in a grocer
contempt for figs, Mr. Wibraham came in, quite by accident, and was
evidently amazed to see him.

“What! Ah, no, my good sir, not Mr. Charles Newman, a member of the
University of Oxford!”

“Yes, sir, I am that individual,” replied Cradock, very uncomfortable
at the prominent use of his “alias.”

“Then, allow me, sir, to shake hands with you. I am strongly
prepossessed in your favour, young gentleman, from the description I
received of you from our mutual friend, Mr. Clinkers. Ah, I like that
Clinkers. No nonsense about Clinkers, sir.”

“So I believe,” said Cradock; “but, as I have only seen him once, it
would perhaps be premature of me——”

“Not a bit, my dear sir, not a bit. That is one of the mistakes we
make. I always rely upon first impressions, and they never deceive me.
Now I see exactly what you are, an upright honourable man, full of
conscientiousness, but _not overburdened here_.”

He gave a jocular tap to his forehead, which was about half the width
of Cradockʼs.

“Well,” thought Cradock, “you are straightforward, even to the verge of
rudeness. But no doubt you mean well, and perhaps you are nearer the
truth than the people who have told me otherwise. Anyhow, it does not
matter much.” But, in spite of this conclusion, he bowed in his stately
manner, and said:

“If that be the case, sir, I fear it will hardly suit your purpose to
take me into your employment.”

“Ah, I have hurt your feelings, I see. I am so blunt and hasty. Hearty
Wibraham is my name; and hearty enough I am, God knows; and perhaps a
little too hearty. ‘Hasty Wibraham, you ought to be called, by Jove,
you ought,’ said one of my friends last night, and by Gad I think he
was right, sir.”

“I am sure I donʼt know,” said Cradock; “how can I pretend to say,
without myself being hasty?”

“I suppose, Mr. Newman, you can command a little capital? It is not at
all essential, you know, in a _bonâ fide_ case like yours.”

“Thatʼs a good job,” said Cradock; “for my capital, like the new one of
Canada, is below contempt.”

“To a man imbued, Mr. Newman, with the genuine spirit of commerce, no
sum, however small, but may be the key of fortune.”

“My key of fortune, then, is about twenty pounds ten shillings.”

“A very, very small sum, my dear sir; but I dare say some of your
friends would assist you to make it, say fifty guineas. You Oxford men
are so generous; always ready to help each other. That is why I canʼt
help liking you so. Thoroughly fine fellows,” he added, in a loud
aside, “thoroughly noble fellows, when a messmate is in trouble. Canʼt
apply to his family, I see; but it would be mean in him not to let his
friends help him. I do believe the highest privilege of human life is
to assist a friend in difficulties.”

Cradock, of course, could not reply to all this, because he was not
meant to hear it; but he gazed with some admiration at the utterer of
such exalted sentiments. Mr. Hearty Wibraham, now about forty–five
years old, was rather tall and portly, with an aquiline face, a dark
complexion, and a quick, decisive manner. His clothes were well made,
and of good quality, unpretentious, neat, substantial. His only piece
of adornment was a magnificent gold watch–chain, which rather shunned
than courted observation.

“No,” said Cradock, at last, “I have not a single friend in the world
to whom I would think of applying for the loan of a sixpence.”

“Well, we _are_ independent,” Mr. Wibraham still held discourse with
himself; “but Hearty Wibraham likes and respects him the more for
that. Heʼll get over his troubles, whatever they are. My good sir,”
he continued, aloud, “I will not utter any opinion, lest you should
think me inclined to flatter—the last thing in the world I ever would
do. Nevertheless, in all manly candour, I am bound to tell you that my
prepossession in your favour induces me to make you a most advantageous
offer.”

“I am much obliged to you. Pray, what is it?”

“A clerkship in my counting–house, which I am just about to open,
having formed a very snug little connexion to begin with.”

“Oh!” cried Cradock, for, green as he was, he would rather have had to
do with a business already established.

“I see you are surprised. No wonder, sir; no wonder! But you must know
that I shall have at least my _quid pro quo_. My connexion is of a
very peculiar character. In fact, it lies entirely in the very highest
circles. To meet such customers as mine, not only a man of gentlemanly
manners is required, but a man of birth and education. How could I
offer such a man less than 150_l._ per annum?”

“Your terms are very liberal, very liberal, I am sure,” replied
Cradock, reddening warmly at the appraisement of his qualities. “I
should not be comfortable without telling you frankly that I am worth
about half that yearly sum; until, I mean, until I get a little up to
business. I shall be quite content to begin upon 100_l._ a year.

“No! will you, though?” exclaimed Hearty Wibraham, flushed with a good
heartʼs enthusiasm. “You are the finest young fellow I have seen since
I was your age myself. Suppose, now, we split the difference. Say
125_l._; and I shall work you pretty hard, I can tell you. For we do
not confine our attention exclusively to the members of the Ministry,
and the House of Lords; we also deal with the City magnates, and take
a contract for Somerset House. And remember one thing; you will be in
exclusive charge whenever I am away negotiating. A man deserves to be
paid, you know, for high responsibility.”

“And where will the”—he hardly knew what to call it—“the office, the
counting–house, the headquarters be?”

“Not in any common thoroughfare,” replied Mr. Wibraham, proudly; “that
would never do for a business of such a character. What do you think,
sir, of Howard Crescent, Park Lane? Not so bad, sir, is it, for the
sale of the grimy?”

“I really do not know,” said Cradock; “but it sounds very well. When do
we open the books?”

“Monday morning, sir, at ten oʼclock precisely. Let me see: to–day
is Friday. Perhaps it would be an accommodation to you, to have your
salary paid weekly, until you draw by the quarter. Now, remember, I
rely upon you to promote my interest in every way consistent with
honour.”

“That you may do, most fully. I shall never forget your kind
confidence, and your liberality.”

“You will have two young gentlemen, if not three, wholly under your
orders. Also a middle–aged gentleman, a sort of sleeping partner, will
kindly attend _pro tem._, and show you the work expected of you. I
myself shall be engaged, perhaps, during the forenoon, in promoting the
interests of the business in a most important quarter. Now, be true to
me, Newman—I take liberties, you see—keep your subordinates in their
place, and make them stick to work, sir. And remember that one ounce
of example is worth a pound of precept. If you act truly and honestly
by me, as I know you will, you may look forward to a partnership at no
distant date. But donʼt be over–sanguine, my dear boy; there is hard
work before you.”

“And you will not find me shrink from it,” said Cradock, throwing his
shoulders back; “but we have not settled yet as to the amount of the
premium, or deposit, whichever it may be.”

“Thank you. To be sure. I quite forgot that incident. Thirty guineas, I
think you said, was all that would be convenient to you.”

“No, Mr. Wibraham; I said twenty pounds ten shillings.”

“Ah, yes, my mistake. I knew that there was an odd ten shillings. Say
twenty–five guineas. A mere matter of form, you know; but one which
we dare not neglect. It is not a premium; simply a deposit; to be
returned at the expiration of the first twelve months. Will you send it
to me by cheque? That, perhaps, would be the more convenient form. It
will save you from coming again.”

“I am sorry to say I cannot; for now I have no banker. Neither can I by
any means make it twenty–five guineas. I have stated to you the utmost
figure of my present census.”

“Ah, quite immaterial. I am only sorry for your sake. The sum will be
invested. I shall hold it as your trustee. But, for the sake of the
books, merely to look well on the books, we must say twenty guineas.
How could I invest twenty pounds ten shillings?”

This appeared reasonable to Cradock, who knew nothing about investment;
and, after reflecting a minute or two, he replied as follows:

“I believe, Mr. Wibraham, that I might manage to make it twenty
guineas. You said, I think, that my salary would be payable weekly.”

“To be sure, my dear boy, to be sure. At any rate until further
arrangements.”

“Then I will undertake to pay you the twenty guineas. Next Monday, I
suppose, will do for it?”

“Oh yes, Monday will do. But stop, I shall not be there on that
morning; and, for formʼs sake, it must be paid first. Let us say
Saturday evening. I shall be ready with a stamped receipt. Will you
meet me here at six oʼclock, as you did this evening?”

Cradock agreed to this, and Mr. Hearty Wibraham shook hands with him
most cordially, begging that mutual trust and amity might in no way be
lessened by his own unfortunate obligation to observe certain rules and
precedents.

In the highest spirits possible under such troubles as his were, Crad
strode away from Aurea Themis Buildings, and whistled to black Wena,
whom two of the most accomplished dog–stealers in London had been doing
their best to inveigle. Failing of skill—for Wena was a deal too
knowing—they at last attempted violence, putting away their chopped
liver and hoof–meat, and other baits still more savoury, upon which I
dare not enlarge. But, just as Black George, having lifted her boldly
by the nape of the neck, was popping her into the sack tail foremost,
though her short tail was under her stomach, what did she do but twist
round upon him, in a way quite unknown to the faculty, and make her
upper and lower canines meet through the palm of his hand? It wonʼt do
to chronicle what he said—I am too much given to strictest accuracy;
enough that he let her drop, in the manner of a red–hot potato; and
Blue Bill, who made a grab at her, only got a scar on the wrist. Then
she retreated to her step, and fired a royal salute of howls, never
ending, ever beginning, until her master came out.

“Wena, dear,” he said, for he always looked on the little thing as an
inferior piece of Amy, “you are very tired, my darling; the pavement
has been too much for you. Sit upon my arm, pretty. We are both going
to make our fortunes. And then you ‘shall walk in silk attire, and
siller hae to spare.’”

Wena nuzzled her nose into its usual place in Cradockʼs identicity,
and growled if any other dog took the liberty of looking at him. And
so they got home, singing snug little songs to each other upon the
way; and they both made noble suppers on the strength of their rising
fortunes.




CHAPTER IX.


The following day was Saturday, and the young fellow spent great
part of it in learning the rules, the tables, and statistics of the
coal trade, so far as they could be ascertained from a sixpenny work
which he bought. Not satisfied with this, he went to the Geological
Museum, in Jermyn–street, and pored over the specimens, and laid in a
stock of carbonic knowledge that would have astonished Clinkers and
Jenny. When the building was closed at four oʼclock he hurried back to
Mortimer–street, paid Mrs. Ducksacre for his weekʼs lodgings, and ran
off to a pawnbrokerʼs to raise a little money. Without doing this, he
would not be able to deposit the twenty guineas. Mr. Gillʼs shopman
knew Cradock well, from his having been there frequently to redeem
some trifling articles for the poor people of the court, and felt
some good–will towards him for his kindness to the little customers.
It increased the activity of his trade, for most of the pledges were
repledged or ever the week was out. And of course he got the money for
issuing another duplicate.

“Hope thereʼs nothing amiss, Mr. Newman,” said the pawnbrokerʼs
assistant; “sorry to see you come here, sir, on your own account.”

“Oh, you ought to congratulate me,” returned Cradock, with a knowing
smile: “I am going to pay a premium, and enter into a good position
upon advantageous terms; very advantageous, I may say, seeing how
little I know of the coal trade.”

“Take care, sir, take care, I beg of you. People run down our line of
business, and call it coining tears, &c.; but you may take my word for
it, there is a deal more roguery in the coal trade, or rather in the
pretence of it, than ever there is in the broking way.”

“There can be none in the present case, for the simple reason that I am
not in any way committed to a partnership, neither am I to be at all
dependent upon the profits.” And Cradock looked thankful for advice,
but a deal too wise to want it.

“Well, sir, I hope it may be all right; for I am sure you deserve it.
But there is a man, not far from here, I think you took some things out
for him, by the name of Zakey Jupp; a shrewdish sort of fellow, though
a deal too fond of fighting. Heʼll be up to some of the coal tricks, I
expect, heʼs about in the yards so much; and the whippers and heavers
are good uns to talk. Donʼt you think it beneath you, sir, to consult
with Zakey Jupp, if you have the pleasure of his acquaintance.”

“I am proud to say that I have at last,” replied Cradock, smiling
grimly; “but he went on board the _Industrious Maiden_, at Nine Elms,
yesterday morning, and may not be back for a month. He wanted me to
go with him; but I did not see how to be useful, and had not given my
landlady notice. Now, if you please, I have not a moment to spare.”

The shopman saw that he could not, without being really impertinent,
press his advice any further; and, although Cradock was so
communicative, as young men are apt to be, especially about their
successes, he never afforded much temptation to any one for
impertinence.

“And how much upon them little articles?” was the next question put
to Cradock; and he did not ask any very high figure, for fear of not
getting them out again.

As he set off full speed for Aurea Themis Buildings, without inviting
Wena, it struck him that it would be but common prudence just to look
at the place of business; so he dashed aside out of Oxford–street, at
the rate of ten miles an hour—for he was very light of foot—and made
his way to Howard–crescent, whose position he had learned from the map.
Sure enough there it was, when he got to the number indicated. And what
a noble plate! So large, indeed, that it was absolutely necessary
to have it in two parts. What refulgent brass! What fine engraving,
especially on the lower part! You might call it chalco–illumination,
chromography, chromometallurgy; I do not know any word half grand
enough to describe it. And the legend itself so simple, how could
they have made so much of it? The upper plate, though beautifully
bright, was comparatively plain, and only carried the words, “Wibraham,
Fookes, and Co.;” the lower and far more elaborate part enabled the
public to congratulate itself upon having the above as “Coal Merchants
and Colliery Agents to Her Most Gracious Majesty and the Duchy of
Lancaster. Hours of Business, from Ten till Four.”

Cradock just took time to read this, by the light of the gas–lamp
close to it; then glanced at the house (which looked clean and smart,
though smaller than what he expected), and, feeling ashamed of his mean
suspiciousness, darted away towards Notting Hill. When he arrived at
Aurea Themis Buildings, he was kept waiting at the door so long that
it made him quite uneasy, lest Hearty Wibraham should have forgotten
all about his little deposit. At last the smart girl opened the door,
and a short young man, whose dress more than whispered that he was not
given to compromise his æsthetic views, came out with a bounce, and
clapped a shilling in the hand of the smiling damsel. “There, Polly,
get a peach–coloured cap–ribbon, and wear it in a true knot for my
sake. I fancy Iʼve done your governor. Heʼs a trifle green; isnʼt he?”
But, in spite of his conversational powers, the handmaid dismissed him
summarily, when she saw Cradock waiting there.

The gas in the drawing–room was lit this time, and a good fire burning;
and Mr. Wibraham, in spirits absolutely jocular, sprang forward to meet
Cradock, and cried, “Hail, oh future partner!” Then he offered him
a glass of “rare old Madeira;” and, producing a blank receipt form,
exclaimed, “Whatever you do, my young friend, never let it be known in
the counting–house that I accepted you with so ridiculous a deposit as
the sum of thirty guineas.”

“Twenty, sir, twenty was what you agreed to accept.” Poor Cradock
trembled from head to foot, lest even now, at the last moment, he
should be rejected. But, to his delight, his new principal replied,

“Then, sir, twenty be it: if in a weak moment I agreed. Hearty Wibraham
would rather throw up all his connexion than allow any man to say of
him, sir, that he had departed from his word.” His voice trembled
slightly, and there was a twinkle as of tears in his eyes. Crad began
to apologize, though he could not quite see what harm he had done.

“Dash it, my boy, not another word. We understand each other. There is
your receipt.”

In his confidence, Hearty Wibraham passed the receipt form, now filled
up, to the aspiring coal–merchant, without having seen so much as the
colour of his money. Then Cradock pulled out Amyʼs purse, in which he
had put the cash, for good luck, and paid his footing bravely.

“Sir, I will not thank you,” said Mr. Wibraham, as he took the money,
“because the act would not be genuine. And I am proudly able to declare
that I have never yet done anything, even for the sake of the common
courtesies of life, which has not been thoroughly genuine. My boy, this
paltry twenty guineas is the opening of your mercantile life. May that
life be prosperous; as I am sure you deserve.”

Cradock took another glass of Madeira, as genuine as its owner, and,
after a hearty farewell, felt so rapidly on the rise, so touched, for
the first time of many weeks, by the dexter wand of fortune, that
he bought a quarter of an ounce of birdʼs–eye with an infusion of
“Latakia” (grown in the footpath field at Mitcham), and actually warmed
his dear brotherʼs pipe, which had not once been incremated ever since
the sacred fire of the Prytaneum had languished.

Wena was overjoyed to see him, and she loved the smell of tobacco,
and had often come sniffing about on the hearth–rug (or the bit of
baize that did for it) to know whether it was true that a big man—a
mastiff of a man, they told her—had succeeded in abolishing it; now,
seeing the blue curls quivering nicely, she jumped upon his lap; and,
although she was rather heavy, he thought it would be practice towards
the nursing of Amy, and possibly Amyʼs children. Then, when he thought
of that, he grew more happy than fifty emperors.

Fortune may jump on a young fellowʼs heart, with both heels set
together; but, the moment she takes one off, up it comes, like a
bladder too big to go into the football.

On Monday morning at ten oʼclock, our Crad, in a state of large
excitement, appeared before the gorgeous plate, and rang the bell
thereover. It was answered by an office–boy, with a grin so intensely
humorous that it was worth all the guineas that could have been thrust
into the great mouth he exhibited.

“Mr. Newman?” asked the boy, with a patronizing air, which a little
mind would have found offensive.

“To be sure,” replied Cradock; “I suppose I am expected.”

“That you are,” said the cheeky boy, grinning harder than ever; “the
other three gents is waiting, sir. Get you a penny paper for three
half–pence.”

“Thank you,” answered Cradock, hoping to depress that boy, “I am not
come here, young man, I trust, to waste time in reading the papers.”

“Oh no! oh lor no,” cried the boy as he led the way in; “tip–top
business this is, and all of us wears out our marrow–bones. His Ro–oyal
Highness will be here bumbye. ‘Spect theyʼll appoint you to receive
him, ‘cos you would look such a swell with our governorʼs best boots
on. Donʼt you refoose now, mind me, donʼt refoose, mate, if you loves
me.”

“You want a little whipcord,” said Cradock; “and you shall have it too,
my boy, if you come much into my neighbourhood.”

“There now; there now!” sighed the boy—who would have been worth
something on the stage—“I have never been appreciated, and suppose I
never shall. Whatʼs the odds to a jinker? Cockalocks, there go in, and
let me mind your beaver.”

Cradock was shown into a room furnished as philosophically as the
wash–house of Cincinnatus; still, it looked like business. There was
no temptation to sit down, even though one had rowing–trousers on.
There were four tall desks of deal uncovered; each had four legs, and
resembled a naked Punch–and–Judy box. Hales, the Norfolk giant, could
not have written at either of them, while sitting on any of the stools
there.

Three of these desks were appropriated by three very nice young
gentlemen, all burning to begin their labours. Two of the men were
unknown to Cradock; but the third, the very short one, who had taken a
stool to stand upon, and was mending a pen most earnestly—him Cradock
recognised at once as the disburser of the shilling, the sanguine
youth, of broad views in apparel, who had cheated Mr. Wibraham so.

“Mr. Fookes, I presume,” he exclaimed, with a leap from the stool,
and a little run towards Cradock; “you see we are all ready, sir, to
receive the junior partner. Hardly know what to be up to.”

“I am sure I cannot tell you,” answered Crad, with a smile; “I do not
belong to the firm as yet, although I am promised a partnership at a
date not very distant.”

“So am I,” said the little man, staring; “indeed, I came up from
Cambridge principally upon the strength of it.”

“The deevil you did!” cried a tall, strapping fellow, crossing suddenly
from his desk; “if yeʼll hearken me, my time comes first. The agrahment
was signed for Candlemas, when the gloot of business allows it. And a
Durham man knows what coals are.”

“Agrayment, thin, is it?” exclaimed the fourth, a flourishing,
red–haired Irishman; “do you think Iʼd a left me Oonivarsity, Thrinity
College, Dooblin, wiʼout having it down all black and white? By the
same token, itʼs meself as is foremost. Christmas is the time, me boys;
and the farst dividend on St. Pathrickʼs Day, wakely sthipend in the
intherim. Divil take me sowl, but none o’ ye shall git before Manus
OʼToole.”

“Gentlemen,” said Cradock, “donʼt let us be in a hurry. No doubt Mr.
Fookes will be here presently, and then we can settle precedence. I see
there is work set out for us; and I suppose we are not all strangers
here.”

“Canʼt answer for the other gentlemen,” returned the little Cambridge
man, “but I was never here before, except to see the place on Saturday.”

“And thatʼs joost my own predeecament,” cried the tall man from
Hatfield Hall.

“Chop me up smarl,” said the Irishman, when they turned to him as their
senior, “but the gintleman has the advantage o’ me. I niver was here at
all, at all; and I hope I niver shall be.”

The four young men gathered round a desk, and gazed sadly at one
another. At this moment the office–boy, seeing the distance safe, for
he had been watching through the keyhole, pushed his head in at the
door, and shouted, “Hi! there, young coal–merchants, donʼt yer sell too
much now! Telegram from the Exchange, gents; grimy is on the rise. But
excoose me half an hour, gents; Her Majesty have commanded my presence,
to put the ro–oyal harms on me. Ho–hoop! Iʼm after you, Molly. Donʼt be
afraid of my splashing your legs, dear.”

“Well,” said Cradock, as the rising young coal–merchants seemed to look
to him for counsel, and stood in silent bewilderment—“it appears to me
that there is something wrong. Let us hope that it is a mistake only;
at any rate, let us stop, and see the matter out. I trust that none of
you gentlemen have paid a premium, as I have.”

“I am sure I donʼt know,” said the Cantab, “what the others have done;
but I was allowed to enter the firm for the sum of eighty guineas, a
great deal too little, considering all the advantages offered—the
proper sum being a hundred; but an abatement was made in my favour.”

“Ahty guineas!” cried the Durham man; “why I was admeeted for saxty,
because I had no more.”

“Itʼs me blessed self, then, as bates you all,” shouted the son of
Dublin; “shure and Iʼve made a clear sixty by it, for I hadnʼt no more
than forty.”

“And I,” replied Cradock, with a melancholy air, “was received for the
trifling sum of twenty, on account of my being an Oxford man.”

“Why, gentlemen,” said the little Cantab, “let us shake hands all
round. We represent the four chief universities, only Scotland being
omitted.”

“Catch a Scotchman with salt, me frinds!” cried the red Hibernian,
as they went through the ceremony. “By Jasers, but that infarnal old
Jew would have had to pay the porridge–man, for the pleasure of his
company.”

“Now let us fall to our work, gentlemen” (Crad tried to look hopeful
as he said it); “the books before us may throw some light upon this
strange, and, as it seems, very roguish matter. I was told to act for
our principal, during the absence of the sleeping partner; to keep you
all in your places, and make you stick to your work; and especially to
remember that one ounce of practice is worth a pound of precept.”

“I should be most happy, sir, to obey orders,” said the little
Cambridge man, bowing; “only I hold the identical commission, ounce of
practice and all, for your benefit, my good sir, and that of all the
other juniors.”

“Now that shows a want of vareaty,” cried the tall Dunelmian, “for the
sole charge of all of ye is commeeted to _me_.”

“Itʼs me blessed self that got it last, and that manes to kape it. What
time wur you there, gintlemen, at Ory Thamis Buildings?”

It was settled that the Irishman had received his commission last, for,
some whisky having been produced, he and Hearty Wibraham had kept it up
until twelve oʼclock on the Saturday night. So, to his intense delight,
he was now appointed captain.

“An’ if I donʼt drag him from his hole, to pay him the sixty guineas I
owe him, out of your money, gintlemen, say my name isnʼt Manus OʼToole.
Now the fust arder I give, is to have in the bhoy, and wallop him.”

Easier said than done, Mr. Toole. There was no boy to be found
anywhere; and the only result of a strong demonstration in the passage
was a curt note from the landlord.

 “GENTLEMEN,—I understood as I had lett my rooms to a respectable
 party, rent payable weakly, and weak is up this day. Will take it a
 favuor to reseeve two pound ten per bearer.

  “JOHN CODGER.”

The four university men looked wondrously blank at this—“gelidusque
per ima cucurrit ossa tremor.”

“Well, I _am_ blowed!” cried the little Cantab, getting smaller, and
with the sky–blue stripes on his trousers quivering.

“Thereʼs a cousin of mine, a soleecitor,” said the young north
countryman, “would take up this case for us, if we made a joint
deposeet.”

“Have down the landlord and fight him,” proposed the Emerald Islander.

“I donʼt care a fig for the landlord,” said Cradock, who now recalled
some shavings of law from the Quarter Sessions spokeshave; “he can
do nothing at all to us, until twelve oʼclock, and then he can send
us about our business, and no more harm done. We were not parties to
the original contract, and have nothing to do with the rent. Now,
gentlemen, there is only one thing I would ask you, in return for my
lucid legal opinion.”

“What is that?” cried all the rest; “whatever it is, you shall have it.”

“That you make over to me, _vivâ voce_, your three–fourths of the
brass–plate. I have taken a strange fancy to it; the engraving is so
fine.”

“You are perfectly welcome to it,” exclaimed the other three; “but
wonʼt it belong to the landlord?”

“Not if it is merely screwed on, as probably is the case. And I have a
screw–driver in my knife, which very few screws can resist.”

“Then go and take it, by all means, before twelve oʼclock, for
afterwards we shall only be trespassers.”

Crad put his hat on and went out, but returned with the wonderful
screw–driver snapped up into his knife–handle, and the first flush of
real British anger yet seen upon his countenance. What wonderful beings
we are! He had lost nearly all his substance, and he was vexed most
about the brass–plate.

“Done at every point,” he said; “that glorious under–plate is gone, and
only the narrow bar left with the name of the thief upon it, which of
course would not suit him again.”

“Oysters all round!” cried the Cambridge man, “as the landlord cannot
distrain us. An oyster is a legal esculent; I see they teach law
at Oxford; let us at least die jolly. And I claim the privilege of
standing oysters, because I have paid the highest premium, and am the
most promising partner—at any rate, the softest fellow. Gentlemen, if
you refuse me, I claim our captainʼs decision. Captain OʼToole, how is
it?”

“Arrah, thin, and I order eysters at this gintlemanʼs expinse, London
stout for the waker stomiks, and a drop o’ poteen for digestion, to
them as are wakest of all.”

“Done,” said the little Cantab, “if only to rile the landlord, and he
may distrain the shells. Call four university men, by implication,
unrespectable parties! We must have our action against him. Gentlemen.
I am off for the grub, and see that I get in again.”

“Faix, then, my honey,” cried the Irishman, forgetting all university
language, “and, if ye donʼt, ‘twill be a quare job for the bones on the
knuckles of Manus OʼToole.”

While all four were enjoying their oysters—for Cradock, being a
good–natured fellow, did not withhold his assistance—a sharp rap–rap
announced the postman, and Mr. OʼToole returned from the door with
a large square letter, sealed with the coat of arms of the company.
“Ship–letther, and eightpence to pay, begorra. Gintlemen, will we take
it?”

“How is it addressed?” asked two or three.

“Most gintaal. ‘To the sanior clerk or junior partner of the firm of
Wibraham, Fookes, and Co., Coal Merchants,’ and thatʼs meself, if itʼs
nobody.”

“Then itʼs you to pey the eightpence,” cried the Durham man.

“Do yer think, then, itʼs me who canʼt do it?” answered Mr. OʼToole,
angrily. And then he broke open the letter and read:

  “P. & O. steamer _Will o’ the Wisp_, off the Start
  Point.—_Sunday._

 “RESPECTED AND BELOVED PARTNERS,—His Royal Highness the Pasha
 of Egypt, having resolved to light with gas the interior of the
 Pyramids, also to provide hot–water bottles for the comfort of
 his household–brigade, principally female, and to erect extensive
 gas–cooking premises, where hot crocodile may always be had, has
 entrusted me with the whole arrangements, and the entire supply of
 coal, with no restriction except that the Nile shall not be set on
 fire.

 “Interested as you are in the success of our noble firm, you will
 thank, instead of blaming me, for an apparently unceremonious
 departure. By an extraordinary coincidence, Mr. Fookes has also been
 summoned peremptorily to Constantinople, to contract with the Sultan
 for warming the sacks of the ladies who are, from time to time,
 deposited in the Bosporus.

 “Therefore, gentlemen, the entire interest of the London branch is
 left in your experienced hands. Be steady, I entreat you; be diligent,
 be methodical. Above all things, remember that rigid probity, and
 the strictest punctuality in meeting payments, are the _very soul
 of business_, and that an ounce of practice is worth a pound of
 precept. But I have the purest confidence in you. I need not appeal
 to the honour of four university men. From my childhood upward, I
 have admired those admirable institutions, and the knowledge of life
 imparted by them. ‘Quid leges sine moribus?’ Excuse me; it is all the
 Latin I know.

 “There is a raw Irishman among you, rather of the physical order; if
 he is violent, expel him. Every gentleman will be entitled to his own
 deal desk, upon discharge of the bill, which he will find made out in
 his name, in the drawer thereof. And now farewell. I have been prolix
 in the endeavour to be precise.

 “There are no funds in hand for the London branch, but our credit is
 unbounded. Push our united interests, for I trust you to the last
 farthing. I hope to find you with coffers full, and commercial honour
 untainted, on the 31st of February prox.

 “Believe me, Gentlemen, ever your affectionate partner,

  “HEARTY WIBRAHAM, D.C.L.

 “P.S.—If none of my partners know the way to enter an order, the
 office–boy will instruct the manager of the firm.—H. W.”

“Consummate scoundrel!” exclaimed the little Cantab, with the beard of
an oyster in his throat.

“Detasteable heepocrite!” cried the representative of Durham.

“Raw Irishman! Oh then the powers! And the punch of the head I never
giv’ him, a week will be next Saturday.” Mr. OʼToole danced round
the room, caught up the desks like dolls, and dashed all their noses
together. Then he summoned the landlord, and pelted him out of the room
and up the stairs with oyster–shells, the books, and the whisky–bottle,
and two pewter–pots after his legs, as he luckily got round the
landing–place. The terrified man, and his wife worse frightened,
locked themselves in, and then threw up a window and bawled out for the
police.

Cradock, feeling ashamed of the uproar, seized OʼToole by the collar;
and the Durham man, being sedate and steady, grasped him on the other
side. So they lifted him off the ground, and bore him even into Hyde
Park, and there they left him upon a bench, and each went his several
way. The police, according to precedent, were in time to be too late.




CHAPTER X.


Cradock Nowell shivered hard, partly from his cold, and partly at the
thought of the bitter life before him. He had Amyʼs five and sixpence
left, an immutable peculium. In currency his means were limited to
exactly four and ninepence. With the accuracy of an upright man (even
in the smallest matters), he had forced upon Mr. OʼToole his twopence,
the quaternary of that letter. Also he had insisted upon standing
stout, when thirst increased with oysters. Now he took the shillings
four, having lost all faith in his destiny, and put one in each of
his waistcoat pockets; for he had little horse–shoes upwards, as well
as the straight chinks below. This being done, he disposed of his
ninepence with as tight a view to security.

All that day he wandered about, and regretted Issachar Jupp. Towards
nightfall, he passed a railway terminus, miserably lighted, a disgrace
to any style of architecture, teeming with insolence, pretence, dirt,
discomfort, fuss, and confusion. Let us call it the “Grand Junction
Wasting and Screwing Line;” because among railway companies the name is
generally applicable.

In a window, never cleaned since the prorogation of Parliament, the
following “Notice” tried to appear; and, if you rubbed the glass, you
might read it.

“Wanted immediately, a smart active young man, of good education. His
duties will not be onerous. Wages one pound per week. Uniform allowed.
Apply to Mr. Killquick, next door to the booking–office.”

Cradock read this three times over, for his wits were dull now, and
then he turned round, and felt whether all his money was safe. Yes,
every blessed halfpenny, for he had eaten nothing since the oysters.

“Surely I am an active young man, of good education,” said Crad to
himself, “although not very smart, perhaps, especially as to my boots;
but a suit, all uniform, allowed, will cure my only deficiency. I could
live and keep Wena comfortably upon a pound a week. I hope, however,
that they cash up. Railway companies have no honour, I know; but I
suppose they pay when they canʼt help it.”

Having meditated with himself thus much, he went, growing excited on
the way—for now he was no philosopher—to the indicated whereabouts of
that lineʼs factotum, Mr. Killquick. Here he had to wait very nearly
an hour, Mr. Killquick being engaged, as usual, in the companyʼs most
active department, arranging very effectually for a collision down the
line. “Successfully,” I would have said; but, though the accident came
off quite according to the most sanguine, or sanguinary expectation,
the result was a slur on that companyʼs fame; only three people being
killed, and five–and–twenty wounded.

“Now, young man,” asked Mr. Killquick, when all his instructions were
on the wires, “what is your business with me?”

Cradock, having stated his purpose, name, and qualifications, the
traffic–manager looked at him with interest and reflection. Then he
said impressively, “You can jump well, I should think?”

“I have never yet been beaten,” Crad answered, “but of course there are
many who _can_ beat me.”

“And run, no doubt? And your sight is accurate, and your nerves very
good?”

“My nerves are not what they were, sir; but I can run fast and see
well.”

“Why do you shiver so? That will never do. And the muscles of his calf
are too prominent. We lost No. 6 through that.”

“It is only a little cold I have caught. It will go off in a moment
with regular work.”

“You have no relation, I suppose, in any way connected with the law? No
friends, I mean, of litigious tendencies?”

“Oh no. I have no friends whatever; none, I mean, in London, only one
family, far in the country, to care at all about me.”

“No father or mother to make a fuss, eh? No wife to prevent your
attending to business?”

“No, sir, nothing of the sort. I am quite alone in the world; and my
life is of no importance.”

“Wonderful luck,” muttered Mr. Killquick; “exactly the very thing for
us! And I have been so put out about that place, it has got such a
reputation. Poor Morshead cannot get through the work any longer by
himself. And the coroner made such nasty remarks. If we kill another
man there before Easter, the _Times_ will be sure to get hold of it.
Young man,” he continued in a louder tone, “you are in luck this time,
I believe. It is a very snug situation; only you must look sharp after
your legs, and be sure you never touch spirits. Not given to blue ruin,
I hope?”

“Oh no. I never touch it.”

“Thatʼs right. I was afraid you did, you look so down in the mouth. You
can give us a reference, I suppose?”

“Yes, to my landlady, Mrs. Ducksacre, a most respectable person, in
trade in Mortimer–street.”

“Good,” replied Mr. Killquick; “you mustnʼt be alarmed, by the way, by
any foolish rumours you may hear as to dangers purely imaginary. Your
predecessor lost his life through the very grossest carelessness. You
are as safe there as in your bed, unless your nerves happen to fail
you. And, when that is the case, I should like to know,” asked the
traffic–manager indignantly, “which of us is not in danger, even in
coming down–stairs?”

“What will my duties be, then?” asked Cradock, with some surprise.

“Why, you are not afraid, are you?” Mr. Killquick looked at him
contemptuously.

“No, I should rather hope not,” replied Cradock, meeting him eye to
eye, so that the wholesale smasher quailed at him; “there is no duty,
even in a powder–mill, which I would shrink from now.”

“Ah, terrible things, those powder–mills! A perfect disgrace to this
age and country, their wanton waste of human life. How the Legislature
lets them go on so, is more than I can conceive. Why, they think no
more of murdering and maiming a dozen people——”

“Please, sir,” cried one of the clerks, coming down from the telegraph
office, “no end of a collision on the Slayham and Bury Branch. Three
passengers killed, and twenty–five wounded, some of them exceedingly
fatally.”

“Bless my heart if I didnʼt expect it. Told Sykes it would be so. Howʼs
the engine, Jemmy?”

“Sheʼs all right, sir; jumped over three carriages, and went a header
into a sand–hill. Driver cased in glass, from vitrifaction of the sand.
Stoker took the hot water—a thing he ainʼt much accustomed to.”

“No! What a capital joke. Hell–fire–Jack (I can swear it was him),
preserved in a glass case, from the results of his own imprudence! I
shall be up with you in five minutes, James. Be quite ready to begin.”

“Now,” said Mr. Killquick, drawing out his cigar–case, “I have little
more to say to you, young man, except that you can begin at eight
oʼclock to–morrow morning. We will dispense with the references, for
I have the utmost confidence in you, and you will be searched very
carefully every time you come out of the gate—which you never will be
allowed to do, except when your spell is over, and your mate is in. You
will go at once to our outfitters, and, upon presenting this ticket,
they will fit you up, as tightly as possible, with your regimentals.
And see that you donʼt take boots, but the very best shoes for jumping
in. What they call ‘Oxford shoes’ are best, when tied tight over the
instep, and not too thick in the sole. No nails, mind, for fear of
slipping upon the flange. Good–bye, my boy; be very careful. By–the–by,
you say you donʼt value your life?”

“Very little indeed,” said Cradock, “except just for one reason.”

“Then now you must add another reason; you must value it for our sake.
The Company canʼt have another inquest for at least six months. I mean,
of course, _by the same coroner_. Confound that fellow; he will not
take a right view of things. At eight oʼclock to–morrow morning, you
will be at the gate of the Cramjam goods station. The clerk there will
have his orders about you. He will supply you with a book, and map out
for you your duties. Also Morshead, your mate, an invaluable man, will
show you the practical part of it. Now, good–bye, my lad. Remember, you
never wear any except your official dress. We allow you two suits in
the twelvemonth. Your duties will be of a refined character, and the
exercise exhilarating. I trust to receive a good report of you; and I
hope, my boy, that you are at peace, both with God and man.”

Even Mr. Killquick had been touched a little by Cradockʼs air of
uncomplaining sorrow, and the stamp of high mind and good breeding.

“Very foolish of me,” he muttered, as he lit his cigar, and went up to
telegraph to the Slayham station–master—ʼCommit yourself to nothing;
observe the strictest economy; and no bonfires of the splinter–wood, as
they had last weekʼ—“very foolish of me,” he said on the stairs, “but
it goes to my heart to kill that young fellow. How I should like to
know his history! That face does not mean nothing.”

Cradock, caring very little what his duties might be, and feeling the
night–wind go through his heart, hastened to the outfittersʼ, and
there he was received with a grin by an experienced shopman, on the
production of his note.

“Capital customers, sir,” he said; “famous customers of ours, that
Grand Junction Wasting and Screwing Line, and the best of all for the
gentlemen in your way of business, sir. Must have new clothes every
new hand, and they changes pretty often, sir. Pervides all the comforts
of a home for you, and a gentlemanly competence, before youʼve been
half a year with them.”

The man grinned still more at his own grim wit, while Cradock stared at
him in wonderment.

“Donʼt you see, sir, they canʼt pass the clothes on, after the man has
been killed, even if thereʼs a bit of them left; for they must fit you
like your skin, sir. The leastest little wrinkle, sir, or the ruffle
of a hinch, or so much as the fray of a hem, and there you are, sir;
and they have to look for another hactive young man, sir. And hactive
young men are getting shy, sir, uncommon shy of it now, except they
come from the country. Hope you insured your life, sir, before taking
the situation. Thereʼs no company will accept your life now, sir. What
a nice young man the last were,—what a nice young man, to be sure!
outrageous fond of filberts; till they cracked him, and found a shell
for him.”

“Well,” said Cradock, whom the busy tailor had been measuring all this
while, “from all that you tell me, there would be less imprudence in
ordering my coffin than to–morrowʼs dinner. What is there so very
dangerous in it?”

“Well, youʼll see, sir, youʼll see. I would not frighten you for the
world, because itʼs all up in a moment, if you lose your presence of
mind. Thank you, sir; all right now, except the legs of the tights, and
thatʼs the most particular part of it all. May I trouble you to turn
your trousers up? It will never do to measure over them. We shall put
six hands on at once at the job. The whole will be ready at eleven this
evening. You must kindly call and try everything. We are ordered to
insist upon that.”

The next morning, Crad, in a suit of peculiar, tough, and yet most
elastic cord, which fitted him as if he had been dipped in it, walked
in at the open gates of the front yard, leading to the Cramjam general
goods terminus. This was the only way in or out (except along “the
metals”), and, as it was got up with heaps of stucco, all the porters
were very proud of it, and called it a “slap–up harchway.”

“Stop, stop,” cried a sharp little fellow, gurgling up, like a
fountain, from among the sham pilasters; “whatʼs your business here,
my man, on the premises of the Grand Junction Wasting and Screwing
Company? Ah, I see by your togs. Just come this way, if you please,
then.”

Here let me call a little halt, for time enough to explain that the
more fashionable of the railway companies have lately agreed that a
station–yard is a sort of royal park, which cannot be kept too private,
which no doors may rashly open upon, a pleasant rural solitude and
weed–nursery for the neighbourhood, and wherein the senior porter
has his private mushroom–bed. They are wise in this seclusion, and
wholesome is their privacy, so long as they discard all principle—so
long as they are allowed to garotte us, while they jabber about
“public interests.” Perhaps, ere very long, we shall have a modern
Dædalus; and then the boards of directors, so ready to do collectively
things which, done individually, no gentleman would own to, may abate a
few jots of their arrogance, and have faint recollections of honour.

Cradock, not very deeply impressed by the “compo” arch (about half the
size of the stone one at Nowelhurst Hallʼs chief entrance), presented
himself to the sharp little fellow, and told him what he was come for.

“Glad to hear it,” said the gateman, “uncommonly glad to hear it.
Morshead is a wonderful fellow; there is not another man in England
could have stuck to that work as he has done. He ought to have five
pounds a week, that he ought, instead of a single sovereign. Screwing
Co.” (this was their common name) “will be sorry when they have lost
him. Now your duty is to enter, in this here book, the number of
every truck, jerry, trod, or blinkem, tarpaulin, or covering of any
sort; also the destination chalked on it, and the nature of the goods
in the truck, so far as you can ascertain them; coals, iron, chalk,
packing–cases, boxes, crates, what not, so fast as they comes into the
higher end, or so fast as they goes out of it. You return this book to
the check office every time you come off duty. You begin work at eight
in the morning, and you leave at eight in the evening. You donʼt pass
here meanwhile, and you canʼt pass up the line. Hope you have brought
some grub. Youʼll have five minutes in the afternoon, long enough
to get a snack in, after the up goods for Millstone is off. Oh, you
ought to have brought some grub; if you faint, you will never come to
again. But perhaps Morshead can spare you a bit. Heʼll be glad to see
you, thatʼs certain, for he ainʼt slept a wink for a week. And such a
considerate chap. I enter you in and out. ‘Number–taker 26.’ Thatʼs
all right from your cap, my lad. No room for it on your sleeve. Might
stick out, you know, and you must pack tighter than any of the goods
is. ‘Undertakers,’ we call you always. Good–bye, sir; Morshead will
tell you the rest, and I hope to see you all right at eight P.M. The
first day is always the worst. Go in at that door by the Pickford, and
ask the first porter you see for Morshead, and take care how you get at
him.”

Morshead was resting for a moment upon a narrow piece of planking, amid
a regular Seven Dials of sidings, points, and turn–tables. Cradock
could scarcely see him, for trucks and vans and boxes on wheels
were gliding past in every direction, thick as the carts on London
Bridge, creaking, groaning, ricketing, lurching; thumping up against
one another, and then recoiling with a heavy kick, straining upon
coupling–chains, butting against bulkheads, staggering and jerking into
grooves and out of them, crushing flints into a shower of sparks, doing
anything and everything except standing still for a moment. And among
them rushed about, like dragons—ramping, and routing, and swearing
fearfully, gargling their throats with a boiling riot, and then goring
the ground with tusks of steam, whisking and flicking their tails,
and themselves, in and out at the countless cross–webs, screaming,
and leaping, and rattling, and booming—the great ponderous giant
goods–engines. Every man was out–swearing his neighbour, every truck
browbeating its fellow, every engine out–yelling its rival. There is
nothing on earth to compare with this scene, unless it be the jostling
and churning of ice–packs in Davisʼs Straits, when the tide runs hard,
and a gale of wind is blowing, and the floes have broken up suddenly.
And even that comparison fails, because, though the monsters grind and
crash, and labour and leap with agony, they do not roar, and vomit
steam, and swear at one another.

At the risk of his life, for as yet he knew nothing of the laws that
governed their movements—a very imperfect code, by–the–by—Cradock
made his way to the narrow staging where Morshead was taking a
breathing–time. His fellow “number–taker” of course descried him
coming; for he had acquired the art of seeing all round, as a spider is
falsely supposed to do. He knew, in a moment, by Cradockʼs dress, what
business he was meant for; and he said to himself, “Thank God!” in one
breath, for the sake of his wife and family; and “Oh, poor fellow!” in
the next, as he saw how green our Cradock was. Then he held up his
hands for Cradock to stop and waved them for him to run; and so piloted
him to the narrow knife–board, “where a manʼs life was his own aʼmost.”

The highest and noblest of physical courage is that which, fully
perceiving the danger, looking into the black pit of death, and seeing
the night of horrors there (undivested of horror by true religion),
encounters them all, treads the narrow cord daily, not for the sake of
honour or fortune; not because of the dash in it, and the excitement
to a brave soul; not even to win the heartʼs maiden, that pearl of
romance and mystery: but simply to supply the home, to keep in flow the
springs of love—whence the geyser heat is gone—to sustain and comfort
(without being comforted by them) the wife, whose beauty is passed
away, and who may have taken to scold, and the children, whose chief
idea of daddy is that he has got a halfpenny.

This glorious inglorious courage, grander than any that ever won medal
or cross for destroying, had a little home—though he knew it not, and
never thought about it—in the broad, well–rounded bosom of simple
Stephen Morshead. None but himself knew his narrow escapes; an inch the
wrong way and he was a dead man, fifty times a day. And worst of all in
the night—oh, in the horrible night, and yet more in the first gleam
of morning, when the body was worn out, and dreams came over the eyes,
but were death if they passed to the brain, and the trucks went by like
nightmares—that very morning he had felt, after taking duty night
and day for more than a week, since they killed his partner, he had
felt that his Sally must be a widow, and his seven children orphans, if
another night went over him without some relief of sleep. That every
word of this is true, many a poor man would avouch (if he only had time
and the money to read it, and were not afraid); but few rich men will
care to swallow facts so indigestible.

Stephen Morshead was astonished at seeing that his mate was come. None
of the men in the goods station would have anything to do with it. It
was very well to be up in the trucks, or upon the engines, or even to
act as switchman, for you had a corner inviolable, and could only do
mischief to others. But to run in and out, and through and through,
in that perpetual motion, to be bound to jot down every truck, the
cover, and contents of it, entering or departing from that crammed
and crowded terminus, to have nobody to help you therein, and nobody
to cry “dead man” if you died, and the certainty that if you stood
a hairʼs–breadth out of the perpendicular, or a single wheel had a
bunion, you with the note–book in your hand must flood the narrow
‘tween–ways, and find your way out underneath to heaven; all this,
and the risk of the fearful jumps from one sliding train to another,
sliding oppositely, and jerking, perhaps, as you jumped; and yet if you
funked the jump you must be crushed, like a frog beneath a turf–beater:
these considerations, after many pipes were smoked over them, had
induced all the porters and stokers to dwell on the virtues of the many
men killed, and to yield to their wives’ entreaties, acquiesce in their
sixteen shillings, nor aspire to the four shillings Charon–fare.

“Now,” said Morshead, “shake hands with me,” as Cradock, breathless
with running wonder, leaped upon the nine–inch gangway. “I see you
belongs to a different horder of society; obliged to keep my eyes open,
mate; but, as long as you and I works together, I ask it as a favour of
you, to shake hands night and morning.”

“With the greatest pleasure,” said Cradock, “if you think thereʼs room
for our funny–bones.”

“Ha, ha!” laughed Morshead, “you are the right sort for it. Not a bit
afeard, I see. Now I mustnʼt stop to talk; just follow me, and do as I
do. I can put you up to it in six hours; and then if you can spare me
for the other six, ‘twill be the saving of the little ones. But tell
the truth if youʼre tired. I should scorn myself if harm came to you.”

“You are the bravest man I ever met,” said Cradock, with his heart
rising; “you cannot expect me to be like you. But you shall not find me
a coward.”

“I can see it by your eyes, lad. No sparkle, but a glowing like. I can
always tell by the eyes of a man how long he will last at this work.
Now come along o’ me, and Iʼll show you the nine worst crushing places.”

Cradock followed him through the threads—threads of Clotho and
Atropos—feeling the way with his legs, like a gnat who “overs the
posts” of a spiderʼs web. In and out, with a jump here and there, when
two side–boards threatened to shear them, they got to the gorge at the
entrance, where the main turmoil of all was. The Symplegades were a
joke to it. And all because the Screwing Company would not buy land
enough to get elbow room. There are several lines of railway which do
a much larger business; there is no other which attempts to do so much
upon less than four times the acreage.

“Iʼve tottled all them as are going out,” Mr. Morshead informed
Cradock; “now youʼll see how we enters them as they enters.”

Laughing at his own very miserable joke, he leaped on the chains of the
passing waggons, and held up his hand for Cradock not to attempt to do
the same.

“Takes a deal of practice that,” he cried, after he had crossed the
train; “it ainʼt like a passenger–train, you know; and you must larn
when they are standing. I need not to have done it now, but sometimes
I be forced. Bide where you are; no danger unless they comes with the
flaps down.”

Then he jotted down, with surprising quickness, all the necessary
particulars of the train that was coming in. It happened to be an easy
one; for there were no tarpaulins at all, and it was not travelling
faster than about four miles an hour.

“Some drivers there is,” said Morshead, as he rejoined Cradock round
the tail of the train, “who really seem to want to kill a fellow, they
come by at such a pace, without having any call for it. I believe they
think, the low fools, that we are put as spies upon them, and they
would rather kill us than not.—Hold your tongue,” to a man in a truck,
who was interrupting his lecture; “donʼt you know better than to offer
_me_ that stuff? Never touch what they offers you, sir. They means no
harm, but you had safer take poison when you be on duty. There is not
much real danger _just here_, if a fellow is careful, because the rails
run parallo; there is nothing round the curve now, I see, and only two
coming out, and both of they be scored; itʼs a rare chance to show you
the figures of eight, and slide–points where the chief danger is. Show
you where poor Charley was killed last week, and how he did it.”

“Poor fellow! Did he leave any family?”

“Twelve in all. No man comes here, unless he be tired of his life, or
be druv to it by the little ones.”

“And what did the Company do for them?”

“Oh, behaved most ‘andsome _for them_. Allowed ‘em two bob a week for a
twelvemonth to come—twopence apiece all round. But they only did it to
encourage me, for fear I should funk off. I have seen out three mates
now. Please God, I shanʼt see you out too, my lad.”

“If you do, it shanʼt be from funk, Morshead. I rather like the
danger.”

“Thatʼs the worst thing of all,” replied Stephen; “I beg of you not to
say that, sir.”

A thoroughly brave man almost always has respect for order. The bold
man—which means a coward with jumps in him—generally has none. It was
strange to see how Stephen Morshead, in all that crush, and crash, and
rattle, that swinging and creaking as of the Hellespontic boat–bridge,
mixed deference with his pity for Cradock. He saw, from his face, and
air, and manner, that he was bred a gentleman. Shall we ever come—or
rather the twentieth generation come—to the time when every man of
England (but for his own fault) shall be bred and trained a gentleman
in the true and glorious sense of it?

Cradock saw the fatal places, where the sleepers still were purple,
where danger ran in converging lines, where a man must stand sideways,
like a duellist, and with his arms in like a drill–sergeantʼs, and not
shrink an inch from the driving–wheels; where his size was measured as
for his coffin, and if he stirred he would want nothing more. Then, if
a single truck–flap were down, if an engine rollicked upon the rail,
if a broad north–country truck, overreaching, happened to be in either
train, when you were caught between the two, your only chance was to
cry, “Good God!” and lie upon your side, and straighten all your toes
out.

And yet these were the very places where, most of all, the
“number–taker” was bound to have his stand—where alone he could
contrive to check two trains at once. “Could they help starting two
trains at once?” poor Crad asked himself—for he had found no time to
ask it before—when, weary to the last fibre with the work of the day,
he fell upon his little bed, and could hardly notice Wena. Perhaps they
could not; it was more than he knew; only he knew that, if they could,
they were but wanton man–slaughterers.

After a deep sleep, all in his clothes, he awoke the next morning quite
up for his work, and Morshead, who had been on duty all night, and
whose eyes seemed cut out of card–board, only stayed for an hour with
him, and then, feeling that Crad was quite up to the day–work, ran home
and snored for ten hours, as loud as Phlegethon or Enceladus.

The most fearful thing, for a new hand, was, of course, the night–work;
and Stephen Morshead, delighted to have such a mate at last, had
begged to leave Cradock the day–spell, at least for the first three
weeks; for to Stephen the moon was as good as the sun, and sweet sleep
fell like wool when plucked at, and hushed the tramping steeds of the
day–god. Only, for the sake of Stephenʼs eyes, on whose accuracy hung
the life–poise, it was absolutely necessary not to dilate the pupils
incessantly.

But Cradock never took night–work there; and the change came about
on this wise. Wena felt that she was wronged by his going away from
her every day so early in the morning, and not coming home to her
again till ever so late at night, and then too tired to say a word, or
perhaps he didnʼt care to do it. Like all females of any value—unless
they are really grand ones, and, if such there be, please to keep them
away—Wena grew jealous desperately. She might as well be anybody
elseʼs dog; and the bakerʼs dog was with his master all day; and the
butcherʼs lady dog, a nasty ill–bred thing—the idea of calling her
a lady!—why, even she was allowed, though the selfish thing didnʼt
care for it, unless there was suet on his apron, to jump up at him and
taste him, all the time he was going for orders. And then look even at
the Ducksacre dog, a despicable creature—his father might have been
a bull–terrier, or he might have been a Pomeranian, or a quarter–bred
Skye, or the Lord knows who, very likely a turnspit, and his mother,
oh! the less we say of her the better;—why, that wretched, lop–eared,
split–tailed thing, without an eye fit to look out of, had airs of his
own; and what did it mean, she would like to know, and she who had
formed some nice acquaintances, dogs that had been presented at Court,
and got Eau–de–Cologne every morning, and not a blessed [run away] upon
them? Why, it meant simply this: that Spot, filthy plague–spot, was
allowed to go out with the baskets, and made a deal of by his owners,
and might cock his tail with the best of them, while she, black Wena,
who had been brought up so differently——

Here her feelings were too much for her, and she put down her soft
flossy ear upon the drugget–scrap, and looked at the door despairingly,
and howled until Mrs. Ducksacre was obliged to come up and comfort her.
Even then she wouldnʼt eat the dripping.

From that day she made her mind up. She would watch her opportunity.
What was the good of being endowed with such a nose as she had, unless
she could smell her master out, even through the streets of London?
What did he wear such outlandish clothes for? Very likely, on purpose
to cheat her. Very likely he was even keeping some other dog. At any
rate, she would know that, if it cost her her life to do it. What good
was her life now to her, or anybody else? Heigho!

On the following Saturday, when Cradock was gone to his fifth dayʼs
work, what does Wena do, when Mrs. Ducksacre came up on purpose to coax
and make much of her, but most ungratefully give her the slip, with a
skill worthy of a better purpose, then scuttle down the stairs, all
four legs at once, in that sort of a bone–slide which domestic dogs
acquire. Miss Ducksacre ran out of the shop at the noise—for this
process is not a silent one; but she could only cry, “Oh, Lord!” as
Wena, with the full impact of her weight multiplied into her velocity;
or, if that is wrong, with the cube of her impetus multiplied into the
forty–two stairs—bang she came anyhow, back–foremost, against the
young ladyʼs—nay, you there, I said, “lower limbs”—and deposited her
in a bushel of carrots, just come from Covent Garden.

“Stop her, Joe, for Godʼs sake, stop her!” Miss Ducksacre cried to the
shop–boy, as well as she could, for the tail of a carrot which had
gotten between her teeth.

“Blowed if I can, miss,” the boy responded, as Wena nipped his fingers
for him; the next moment she was free as the wind, and round the corner
in no time.

“Oh dear, oh dear,” cried Polly Ducksacre, a buxom young lady, with
fine black eyes, “whatever will Mr. Newman think of us? It will seem so
unkind and careless; and he does love that dog so!”

Polly was beginning to entertain a tender regard for Cradock;
especially since he had shown his proportions in “them beautiful buff
pantaloons.” What a greengrocer he would make, to be sure, so hupright
and so lordly like; and sheʼd like to see the man in the “Garden” who
would tell her she had eaten sparrow–pie, with Mr. Newman to hold the
basket for her.

By this time, Mrs. Ducksacre was come down the stairs, screaming
“Wena!” at the top of her voice the whole way; and out they ran, boy
and all, to search for her, while three or four urchins came in,
without medium of exchange, and filled cap, mouth, and pocket. One brat
was caught upon their return, and tied up for the day in an empty
potato–sack, and exposed, behind the counter, to universal execration;
in which position he took such note of manner and custom, time and
place, that it was never safe for the Ducksacre firm to dine together
afterwards.

Meanwhile, that little black Wena, responsive and responsible to none
except her master, pursued the even tenor of her way, nosing the
ground, and asking many a question of the lamp–posts, as far as the
Cramjam Terminus, at least three miles from Mortimer–street. The sharp
little gate–clerk, animated with railway love of privacy, ran out, and
clapped his hands, and shouted “hoo” at Wena; but she only buttoned her
tail down, and cut across the compound. As for the stone he threw at
her, she caught it up in her mouth as it rolled, and carried it on to
her master.

There was Cradock, in the thick of it, standing on a narrow pile of
pig–iron, one of his chief fortalices; his book was in his hand, and
he was entering, as fast as he could, all the needful particulars of a
goods train sliding past him.

Creak, and squeak, and puff, and shriek,—Oh, what a scene, thought
Wena,—and the rattle of the ghostly chains, and the rushing about, and
the roaring. She lost her presence of mind in a moment,—she always
had been such a nervous dog—she tightened her tail convulsively, and
dropped her ears, while her eyes came forth; and, glancing at the
horrors on every side, she fled for dear life from the evil to come.

The faster she fled, the more they closed round her. She had not
espied her master yet; she could not find the way back again; she was
terrified out of all memory; and a host of frightful genii, more sooty
than Cocytus, and riding hideous monsters, were yelling at her on every
side, clapping black hands, and hooting. The dog on the Derby course,
when the race rushes round the corner, was in a position of glory and
safety compared to poor Wenaʼs now. Already the tip of her tail was
crushed, already one pretty paw was broken; for she had bolted in and
out through the trains, truck bottoms, wheels, and driving–wheels. Oh,
you cowards, to yell at her! with black death grating and grinding upon
her soft silky back!

At last, she gave in altogether. They had hunted her to her grave. Who
may contend with destiny? She lay down under a moving coal–train, and
resigned herself to die. But first she must ask for sympathy, although
so unlikely to get it. She looked once more at her wounded foot, and
shivered and sobbed with the agony; and then gave vent to one long low
cry, to ask if no one loved a poor dog there.

Cradock heard it, and started so that it was nearly all up with him
too. Thoroughly he knew the cry, wherein she had wailed for Clayton.
He flung down his book, and dashed to the place, and there he saw
Wena, and she saw him. She began to try to limp to him, but he held
up his hand to stop her; disabled as she was, she was sure to be
caught by the wheel. Could she stay there, and let the train pass her?
No. At its tail was an empty horse–box, almost scraping the ground,
perfectly certain to crush her. Crying, “Down, down, my poor darling!”
he ran down the train, which was travelling seven or eight miles an
hour, seized the side of a truck, and leaped, at the risk of his life,
upon the fender in front of the horse–box. Then he got astride of the
coupling–chain, and kept his right hand low to the ground, to snatch
her up ere the crusher came. Knowing where she was, he caught her by
the neck the instant the truck disclosed her, and, with a strong swing,
heaved her up into it. But he lost his balance in doing it, and fell
sideways, with his head on the other coupling–chain. Stunned by the
blow, he lay there, only clinging by his right calf to the chain he had
sat astride upon. The first jerk of either chain, the first swing of
either carriage, and he must be ground to powder.

Luckily for him and for Amy, Morshead was not gone home yet, seeing
more to do than usual. Missing his mate from the proper place, he had
run up in terror to look for him, when a man in a truck, who had vainly
been shouting to stop the coal–trainʼs engine, pointed and screamed
to him where and what was doing. Morshead jumped on the heap of
pig–iron, and sideways thence on the board of the truck just passing,
as dangerous a leap as well could be, but luckily that truck was empty.
He jumped into the truck, a shallow one, where poor Wena lay quite
paralysed, and, stooping over the back with both arms, he got hold of
Cradockʼs collar. Then, with a mighty effort, he jerked him upon the
tail–board, and lugged him in, and bent over him.

Wounded Wena crawled up, and begged to have her poor foot looked
at, then, obtaining no notice at all, she felt that Cradock must be
killed and dead, just as Clayton had been. Upon this conclusion, she
fetched such a howl, though it shook her sore tail to do it, that the
engine–driver actually looked round, and the train was stopped.

Hereupon, let me offer a suggestion—everybody now is allowed to do
so, though nobody ever takes it. My suggestion is, that no man should
be allowed to drive an engine without having served a twelvemonthʼs
apprenticeship as an omnibus conductor. I donʼt mean to say it would
improve his morals—probably rather otherwise; but it would teach him
the habit of looking round; it would let him know that there really is
more than one quarter of the heavens. At present, all engine–drivers
seem afraid of being turned into pillars of salt. So they fix
themselves, like pillars of stone, and stare, _ἀχηνίαις ὀμμάτων_,
through their square glass spectacles.

When one of the railway bajuli—who are, on the whole, very good sort
of fellows, and deserve their Christmas–boxes—came home in the cab
with Cradock and Wena at the expense of the Company (which was boasted
of next board–day)—when one of them came home with Crad—for Morshead
had double work again—Polly Ducksacre went into strong hysterics, and
it required two married men and a boy to get her out of the potato–bin.

It was all up with our Crad that night. The overwork of brain and
muscle, the presence of mind required all the time when his mind was
especially absent, the impossibility of thinking out any of his trains
of ideas when a train of trucks was upon him, the native indignation of
a man at knowing that his blood is meant to ebb down a railway sewer,
and a new broom will sweep him clean—all these worries and wraths
together, cogging into the mill–wheel of cares already grinding, had
made such a mill–clack in his head near the left temple, where the
thump was, that he could only roll on his narrow bed at imminent risk
of a floor–bump.

Then the cold, long harbouring, struck into his heart and reins; and he
knew not that Dr. Tink came, and was learned and diagnostic upon him;
nor even that Polly Ducksacre took his feet out of bed, and rubbed them
until her wrists gave way; and then, half ashamed of her womanhood,
sneaked away, and cried over Wena.

Wenaʼs foot was put into splinters, Wenaʼs tail was stypticised; but no
skill could save her master from a furious brain–fever.




CHAPTER XI.


Leaving the son on his narrow hard pallet, to toss and toss, and turn
and turn, and probably get bed–sores, let us see how the father was
speeding.

Sir Cradock Nowell sat all alone in his little breakfast–room, soon
after the funeral of his brother, and before Eoa came to him. For the
simple, hot–hearted girl fell so ill after she heard of her loss, and
recovered from the narcotic, that Biddy OʼGaghan, who got on famously
with the people at the Crown, would not hear of her being moved yet,
and drove Dr. Hutton all down the stairs, “with a word of sinse on the
top of him,” when he claimed his right of attending upon the girl he
had known in India.

That little breakfast–room adjoined Sir Cradockʼs favourite study,
and was as pretty a little room as he could have wished to sit in.
He had made pretence of breakfasting, but perhaps he looked forward
to lunch–time, for not more than an ounce of food had he swallowed
altogether.

There he sat nervously, trying vainly to bring his mind to bear on the
newspaper. Fine gush of irony, serried antithesis, placid assumption
of the point at issue, then logic as terse and tight as the turns of
a three–inch screw–jack, withering indignation at those who wonʼt
think exactly as we do, the sunrise glow of metaphor, the moonlight
gleam of simile, the sparkling stars of wit, and the playful Aurora of
humour—alas, all these are like water on a duckʼs back when the heart
wonʼt let the brain go. If we cannot appreciate their beauty, because
our opinions are different, how can we hope to do so when we donʼt care
what any opinions are?

It is all very well, very easy, to talk about objectivity; but a really
objective man the Creator has never shown us, save once; and even He
rebuked the fig–tree, to show sympathy with our impatience.

And I doubt but it is lest we deify the grand incarnations of
intellect—the Platos and the Aristotles, the Bacons and the
Shakespeares—that it has pleased the Maker of great and small to leave
us small tales of the great ones, mean anecdotes, low traditions;
lest at any time we should be dazzled, and forget that they were but
sparkles from the dross which heaven hammers on. Oh vast and soaring
intellects, was it that your minds flew higher because they had shaken
the soul off; or was it that your souls grew sullen at the mindʼs
preponderance?

Fash we not ourselves about it, though we pay the consequences. If we
have not those great minds in the lump, we have a deal more, taking the
average, and we make it go a deal further, having learned the art of
economy and the division of labour. Nevertheless, Sir Cradock Nowell,
being not at all an objective man, lay deep in the pot of despondency;
and, even worse than that, hung, jerked thereout every now and then, by
the flesh–hook of terror and nervousness. How could he go kindly with
his writer when his breakfast would not so with him?

He was expecting Bull Garnet. Let alone all his other wearing troubles,
he never could be comfortable when he expected Bull Garnet. At every
step in the passage, every bang of a door, the proud old gentleman
trembled and flushed, and was wroth with himself for doing so.

Then Hogstaff came in, and fussed about, and Sir Cradock was fain to
find fault with him.

“How careless you are getting about the letters, Hogstaff. Later and
later every morning! What is the reason that you never now bring me the
bag at the proper time?”

It was very strange, no doubt, of Job Hogstaff, but he could not bear
to be found fault with; and now he saw his way to a little triumph, and
resolved to make the most of it.

“Yes, Sir Cradock; to be sure, Sir Cradock; how my old head is failing
me! Very neglectful of me never to have brought the bag to–day.” Then
he turned round suddenly at the door, to which he had been hobbling.
“Perhaps youʼd look at the date, Sir Cradock, of the paper in your
hand, sir.”

“Yesterdayʼs paper, of course, Hogstaff. What has that to do with it?”

“Oh, nothing, sir, nothing, of course. Only I thought it might have
comed in the letter–bag. Perhaps it never does, Sir Cradock; you knows
best, as you takes it out.” Here old Job gave a quiet chuckle, and
added, as if to himself, “No, of course, it couldnʼt have come in the
letter–bag this morning, or master would never have blowed me up for
not bringing him the bag, as nobody else got a key to it!”

“How stupid of me, to be sure, how excessively stupid!” exclaimed Sir
Cradock, with a sigh; “of course I had the bag, a full hour ago; and
there was nothing in it but this paper. Job, I beg your pardon.”

“And I hope itʼs good news youʼve got there, Sir Cradock, and no cases
of starvation; no one found dead in the streets, I hopes, or drownded
in the Serpentine. Anyhow, thereʼs a many births, I see, and a deal too
many. Children be now such a plenty nobody care about them.”

“Job, you quite forget yourself,” said his master, very grandly; but
there came a long sigh after it, and Job was not daunted easily.

“And, if I do, Sir Cradock Nowell, Iʼd sooner forget myself than my
children.”

Sir Cradock was very angry, or was trying to feel that he ought to be
so, when a heavy tread, quite unmistakable, and yet not so firm as it
used to be, shook the Minton tiles of the passage. That step used to
cry to the echoes, “Make way; a man of vigour and force is coming.” Now
all it said was, “Here I go, and am not in a mood to be meddled with.”

“Come in,” said Sir Cradock, fidgeting, and pretending to be up for
an egg, as Mr. Garnet gave two great thumps on the panel of the door.
Small as the room was, Job Hogstaff managed to be too late to let him
in.

Bull Garnet first flung his great eyes on the butler; he had no idea of
fellows skulking their duty. Old Hogstaff, who looked upon Garnet as no
more than an upper servant, gazed back with especial obtuseness, and
waved his napkin cleverly.

“Please to put that mat straight again, Mr. Garnet. You kicked it
askew, as you came in. And our master canʼt abide things set crooked.”

To Jobʼs disappointment and wonder, Bull Garnet stepped back very
quietly, stooped down, and replaced the sheepskin.

“Hogstaff, leave the room this moment,” shouted Sir Cradock,
wrathfully; and Job hobbled away to brag how he had pulled Muster
Garnet down a peg.

“Now, Garnet, take my easy–chair. Will you have a cup of coffee after
your early walk?”

“No, thank you. I have breakfasted three hours and a half ago. In our
position of life, we must be up early, Sir Cradock Nowell.”

There was something in the tone of that last remark, common–place as it
was, without the key to it, which the hearer disliked particularly.

“I have requested the favour of your attendance here, Mr. Garnet, that
I might have the benefit of your opinion upon a subject which causes me
the very deepest anxiety—at least, I mean, which interests me deeply.”

“Ah!” exclaimed Mr. Garnet: he could say “ah!” in such a manner that it
held three volumes uncut.

“Yes. I wish to ask your opinion about my poor son, Cradock.”

Bull Garnet said not a word, but conveyed to the ceiling his
astonishment that the housemaid had left such cobwebs there.

“I fear, Garnet, you cannot sympathize with me. You are so especially
fortunate in your own domestic circumstances.”

“Oh,” said Mr. Garnet, still contemplating the cornice. “_Oh
exclamantis est_,” beautifully observes the Eton grammar.

“Yes, your son is a perfect pattern. So gentle and gentlemanly; so
amiable and poetical. I had no idea he was so brave. Shall I ever see
him to thank him for saving the life of my niece?”

“He is a fine fellow, a noble fellow, Sir Cradock. The dearest and the
best boy in the whole wide world.”

The old man long had known that the flaw in Bull Garnetʼs armour was
the thought of his dear boy, Bob.

“And can you not fancy, Garnet, that my son, whatever he is, may also
be dear to me?”

“I should have said so, I must have thought so, but for the way you
have treated him.”

Bull Garnet knew well enough that he was a hot and hasty man; but he
seldom had felt that truth more sharply than now, when he saw the
result of his words. Nevertheless, he faltered not. He had made up his
mind to deliver its thoughts, and he was not the man to care for faces.

“Sir Cradock Nowell, I am a violent, hot, and passionate man. I have
done many things in my fury which I would give my life to undo; but I
would rather have them all on my soul than such cold–blooded, calm,
unnatural cruelty as you have shown to your only—I mean to your
own—son. I suppose you never cared for him; _suppose!_ I mean of
course you did not.”

He looked at Sir Cradock Nowell, with thunder and hail in his eyes. The
old man could not glance it back; neither did he seem to be greatly
indignant at it.

“Then—then—I suppose you donʼt think—you donʼt believe, I mean,
Garnet—that he did it _on purpose_?”

Mr. Garnet turned pale as a winding–sheet, and could not speak for a
moment. Then he looked away from Sir Cradockʼs eyes, and asked, “Is it
possible that _you_ have ever thought so?”

“I have tried not,” answered Sir Cradock, with his wasted bosom
heaving. “God knows that I have struggled against it. Garnet, have pity
upon me. If you have any of our blood in you, tell me the truth, what
you think.”

“I not only think, but know, that the devil only could have suggested
such an idea to you. Man, for the sake of the God that made you, and
made me as well as your brother, and every one of us brethren, rather
put a pistol to your heart than that damned idea. In cold blood! in
cold blood! And for the sake of gain! A brother to—do away with—a
brother so! Oh, what things have come upon me! Where is my God, and
where is yours?”

“I am sure I donʼt know,” replied the old man, gazing round in
wonderment, as if he expected to see Him—for the scene had quite
unnerved him—“I suppose He is—is somewhere in the usual place, Mr.
Garnet.”

“Then thatʼs not in this neighbourhood,” replied Bull Garnet, heavily;
“He is gone from me, from all of us. And His curse is on my children.
Poor innocents, poor helpless lambs! The curse of God is on them.”

He went away to the window; and, through his tears, and among the
trees, tried to find his cottage–roof.

Sir Cradock Nowell was lost to thought, and heard nothing of those
woeful words, although from the depth of that labouring chest they came
like the distant sea–roar.

Bull Garnet returned with his fierce eyes softened to a womanʼs
fondness, and saw, with pity as well as joy, that his last words had
not been heeded. “Ever hot and ever hasty, until it comes to my own
death,” he muttered, still in recklessness; “perhaps then I shall be
tardy. For my sonʼs sake, for my Bob and Pearl, I must not make such a
child of myself. Nevertheless, I cannot stay here.”

“Garnet,” said Sir Cradock Nowell, slowly recovering from his stupor,
a slight cerebral paralysis, “say nothing of what has passed between
us—nothing, I entreat you; and not another word to me now. I only
understand that you assert emphatically my son Cradockʼs innocence.”

“With every fibre of my heart. With every tissue of my brain.”

“Then I love you very much for it; although you have done it so rudely.”

“Donʼt say that. Never say it again. I canʼt bear it now, Sir Cradock.”

“Very well, then, I wonʼt, Garnet. Though I think you might be proud of
my gratitude; for I never bestow it rashly.”

“I am very thankful to you. Gratitude is an admirable and exceedingly
scarce thing. I am come to give you notice—as well as to answer your
summons—notice of my intention to quit your service shortly.”

“Nonsense!” replied Sir Cradock, gasping; “nonsense, Garnet! You never
mean that—that even you would desert me?”

Bull Garnet was touched by the old manʼs tone—the helplessness, the
misery. “Well,” he answered, “Iʼll try to bear with it for a little
longer, in spite of the daily agony. I owe you everything; all I can
do. Iʼll get things all into first–rate order, and then I hope, most
truly, your son will be back again, sir.”

“It isnʼt only the stewardship, Garnet; it isnʼt only that. You are now
as one of the family, and there are so few of us left. Your daughter
Pearl; I begin to love her as of my own flesh and blood. Who knows
but what, if my Cradock comes back, he may take a liking to her? Amy
Rosedew has not behaved well lately, any more than her father has.”

“Do you mean to say that you, Sir Cradock, with all your prejudices
of birth, legitimacy, and station, would ever sanction—supposing it
possible—any affection of a child of yours for a child of mine?”

“To be sure—if it were a true one. A short time ago I thought very
differently. But oh! what does it matter? I am not what I was, Garnet.”

“Neither am I,” thought Mr. Garnet; “but I might have been, if only I
could ever have dreamed this. God has left me, for ever left me.”

“Why donʼt you answer me, Garnet? Why do you shut your Pearl up so? Let
her come to me soon; she would do me good; and I, as you know, have a
young lady coming, who knows little of English society. Pearl would do
her a great deal of good. Pearl is a thorough specimen of a well–bred
English maiden. I think I like her better than Amy—since Amy has been
so cold to me.”

To Sir Cradockʼs intense astonishment, Bull Garnet, instead of
replying, rushed straight away out of the room, and, not content with
that, he rushed out of the house as well, and strode fiercely away to
the nearest trees, and was lost to sight among them.

“Well,” said the old man, “he always was the oddest fellow I ever did
know; and I suppose he always will be. And yet what a man for business!”

That same forenoon, Mrs. Brownʼs boy and donkey came with a very long
message from a lady who had tucked him on the head because he could not
make out her meaning. He believed her name was Mrs. Jogging, and he was
to say that Miss Oh Ah was fit to come home to–day, please, if theyʼd
please to send the shay for her. And they must please to get ready
Satanʼs room, where the daffodil curtains was, because the young woman
loved to look at the yeast, and to have a good fire burning. And please
they must send the eel–skin cloak, and the foot–tub in the shay,
because the young woman was silly.

“Chilly, you stupid,” replied Mrs. Toaster. “She shall have the
foot–warmer and the seal–skin cloak; but what Satanʼs room with the
daffodil curtains is, only the Lord in heaven knows; and how she is to
see any yeast there! Are you certain that was the message?”

“Sartin, maʼam. I said it to myself ever so many times; more often than
I stuck the Neddy.”

Sir Cradock Nowell, upon appeal, speedily decided that the satin room
was meant—the room with the rose–coloured curtains, and the windows
facing the east; but the boy stuck out for the daffodil; leastways he
was certain it was _some_ flower.

It was nearly dark when the carriage returned; and Sir Cradock came
down to the great entrance–hall to meet his brotherʼs child. He was
trembling with anxiety; for his nerves were rapidly failing him;
and, from Dr. Huttonʼs account, he feared to see in his probable
heiress—for now he had no heir—something very outlandish and savage.
Therefore he was surprised and delighted when a graceful and beautiful
girl, with high birth and elegance in every movement, flung off her
cloak, and skipped up to him with the lightness of a gazelle, and threw
her arms round his neck, and kissed him.

“Oh, uncle, I shall love you so! You are so like my darling—you have
got his nose exactly, and just the same shaped legs. Oh, to think he
should ever have left me!” And she burst into tears then and there
before half a dozen servants. “Oh, Uncle Cradock, you have got a fine
house; but I never shall get over it.”

“Hush, my dear; come with me, my child!” Sir Cradock was always wide
awake upon the subject of proprieties.

“I am not your child; and I wonʼt be your child, if you try to stop me
like that. I must cry when I want to cry, and it is so stupid to stop
me.”

“What a pretty dear you are!” said Sir Cradock, scarcely knowing what
to say, but having trust in feminine vanity.

“Am I indeed? I donʼt think so at all. I was very pretty, I know, until
I began to cry so. But now my cheeks are come out, and my eyes gone in;
but, oh dear! what does it matter, and my father never, never to take
me on his lap again? Hya! Hya! Hya!”

“Faix, thin, me darlinʼ,” cried Mrs. OʼGaghan, stroking her down in
a shampoo manner, “itʼs meself as knows how to dale with you. Lave
her to me; Sir Crayduck; sheʼs pure and parfict, every bit on her. I
knows how to bring her out, and sheʼll come to your room like a lamb,
now jist.—Git out of the way, the lot on you”—to several officious
maidens—“me honey, put your hand in my neck, your blissed leetle dove
of a hand, and fale how me heart goes pat for you. Sir Crayduck, me
duty to you, but you might ‘ave knowed how to git out of the way, and
lave the ladies to the ladies.”

Sir Cradock Nowell marched away, thinking what a blessing it was that
he had not had much to do with women. Then he reproached himself for
the thought, as he remembered his darling Violet, the mother of his
children. But, before he had brooded very long in the only room he
liked to use now, his study just off from the library, a gentle knock
came _to_ the door—as Biddy always expressed it—and Eoa, dressed in
deepest mourning (made at Lymington, from her own frock, while she lay
ill at the Crown), came up to him steadily, and kissed him, and sat on
a stool at his feet.

“Oh, uncle, I am so sorry,” she said, with her glorious hair falling
over his knees, and her deep eyes looking up at him, “I am so sorry,
Uncle Cradock, that I vexed you so, just now.”

“You did not vex me, my pretty. I was only vexed for you. Now, remember
one thing, my darling—for I shall love you as my own daughter—I have
been very harsh and stern where, perhaps, I had no right to be so: if I
am ever unkind to you, my dear, if I ever say anything hard, only say
‘Clayton Nowell’ to me, and I will forgive you directly.”

“You mean I must forgive _you_, uncle. I suppose thatʼs what you mean.
If you are unkind to me, what will you want to forgive me for? But I
couldnʼt do it. I couldnʼt say it, even if I had done any harm. Please
to remember that I either love or I hate people. I know that I shall
love you. But you must not contradict me. I never could endure it, and
I never will.”

“Well,” said Sir Cradock, laughing; “I will try to remember that, my
dear. Though, in that respect, you differ but little from our English
young ladies.”

“If you please, Uncle Cradock, I must go to–night to see where you have
put my father. There, I wonʼt cry any more, because he told me never
to vex you, and I see that my crying vexes you. Did you cry, yourself,
Uncle Cradock, when you heard of it first?”

She looked at him, as she asked this question, with such wild
intensity, as if her entire opinion of him would hang upon his reply,
that the old man felt himself almost compelled to tell “a corker.”

“Well, my dear, I am not ashamed to confess——”

“Ashamed to confess, indeed! I should rather hope not. But you ought to
be ashamed, I know, if you hadnʼt cried, Uncle Crad. But now I shall
love you very much, now I know you did cry. And how much have you got a
year, Uncle Crad?”

“How much what, my dear? What beautiful eyes you have, Eoa; finer than
any of the Nowells!”

“Yes, I know. But that wonʼt do, Uncle Crad; you donʼt want to answer
my question. What I want to know is a very simple thing. How much
money have you got a year? You must have got a good deal. I know,
because everybody says so, and because this is such a great place, as
big as the palaces in Calcutta.”

“Really, Eoa, it is not usual for young people, especially young
ladies, to ask such very point–blank questions.”

“Oh, I did not know that, and I canʼt see any harm in it. I know the
English girls at Calcutta used to think of nothing else. But I am not a
bit like them; it isnʼt that I care for the money a quarter so much as
tamarinds; but I have a particular reason; and Iʼll find out in spite
of you. Just you see if I donʼt, now.”

“A very particular reason, Eoa, for inquiring into my income! Why, what
reason can you have?”

“Is it usual for old people, especially old gentlemen, to ask such very
point–blank questions?”

Sir Cradock would have been very angry with any other person in the
world for such a piece of impertinence; but Eoa gave such a smile of
triumph at having caught him in his own net (as she thought), and
looked so exquisite in her beauty, as she rose, and the firelight
flashed on her; then she tossed her black hair over her shoulders, and
gave him such a kiss (with all the spices of India in it) that the old
man was at her mercy quite, and she could do exactly what she liked
with him.

Oh, Mrs. Nowell Corklemore—so proud of having obtained at last an
invitation to Nowelhurst, so confident that, once let in, you can wedge
out all before you, like Alexanderʼs phalanx—call a halt, and shape
your wiles, and look to belt and buckler, have every lance fresh set
and burnished, every sword like a razor; for verily the fight is hard,
when art does battle with nature.




CHAPTER XII.


Previous to the matters chronicled in the preceding chapter, Mr. Garnet
had received a note, of which the following is a copy:—

 “SIR,—My friend, Major Blazeater, late of the Hon. East India
 Companyʼs 59th Regiment of Native Infantry, has kindly consented to
 see you, on my behalf, to request a reference to any gentleman whom
 you may be pleased to name, for the purpose of concerting measures for
 affording me that satisfaction which, as a man and a gentleman, I am
 entitled to expect for your cowardly and most ruffianly violence on
 the 28th ultimo.

 “I beg you to accept my sincere apologies for the delay which
 has occurred, and my assurance that it has been the result of
 circumstances entirely beyond my own control.

  “I have the honour to be, Sir,
  “Your most obedient Servant,
  “RUFUS HUTTON.

 “Geopharmacy Lodge, Nov. 1st, 1859.”

The circumstances beyond the fiery little doctorʼs control were that he
could not find any one who would undertake to carry his message.

When Bull Garnet read this letter—handed to him, with three great
bows of the Chinese pattern, by the pompous Major Blazeater—his face
flushed to a deep amethyst tinge, which subsided to the colour of cork.
Then he rolled his great eyes, and placed one strong finger across the
deep channels of his forehead, and said, “Let me think, sir!”

“Hurrah,” said the Major to himself, “now we shall have something to
redeem the honour of the age. It is a disgrace for a fellow to live in
a country where he can never get satisfaction, although he gets plenty
of insult.”

“Major Blazeater, you will make allowances for me,” resumed Mr. Garnet;
“but I have never had much opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
laws—the code, perhaps, I should say—which govern the honourable
practice of duelling at the present day.”

“No matter, my dear sir; no matter at all, I assure you. Your second,
when I have the honour of meeting him, will settle all those little
points, which are beside the general issue; we shall settle them
together, sir, with the strictest regard to punctilio, and to your
entire satisfaction.”

“Capital fellow!” pursued the Major, in his own reflection–room;
“knew he couldnʼt be a coward: just look at his forehead. No doubt he
was perfectly justified in kicking out Rue Hutton; Rue is such an
impudent beggar. Ah! referring to his pocket–book to find his military
friendʼs address; now we shall do it in style. Glorious fellow this
Garnet—shall have the very best powder. Wish I was on his side.” And
the Major rubbed his long brown hands upon his lanky knees.

“Will it be according to rule,” asked Mr. Garnet, looking steadily
(“What an eye for a pistol!” said the Major to himself), “quite
according to rule and order, if I write down for you, Major Blazeater,
the name of the friend to whom I refer; also the time and place at
which he will be ready to discuss this little matter with you?”

“To be sure, to be sure, my dear sir; nothing could be better. Your
conduct, Mr. Garnet, does you the very highest honour.”

“Nothing, you think, can be objected to my course in this?—nothing
against the high chivalric code of modern duelling?”

“No, my dear sir, nothing at all. Please to hand me the assignation;
ha, ha, it is so pleasant—I mean the rendezvous.”

Mr. Garnet handed to him a card, whereon was written: “Town Hall,
Lymington, Wednesday, November 2nd. Before Admiral Reale, Col. Fale,
and C. Durant, Esq. Application will be made at 12 oʼclock for a
warrant against Rufus Hutton and Major Blazeater—Christian name
unknown—for conspiring together to procure one Bull Garnet to fight a
duel, against the peace of Her Majesty, and the spirit of the age.”

Major Blazeater fell back in his chair; and all his blood ran to his
head. As he told his daughter afterwards, he had never had such a
turn in his life. The fairest prospect blasted, the sunrise of murder
quenched; what good was it to live in a world where people wonʼt shoot
one another? Bull Garnet bent his large eyes upon him, and the Major
could not answer them.

“Now, Major Blazeater,” said Mr. Garnet, “I shall bind you over to keep
the peace, and your principal as well, and expose you to the ridicule
of every sensible man in England, unless I receive by to morrow
morningʼs post at 10.15 A.M. an apology for this piece of infantile
bravado. What a man does in hot passion, God knows, and God will
forgive him for, if he truly strive to amend it—at least—at least, I
hope so.”

Here Mr. Garnet turned away, and looked out of the window, and perhaps
it was the view of Bob that made his eyes so glistening.

“But, sir,” he resumed—while the Major was wondering where on earth
he should find any sureties for keeping Her Majestyʼs peace, which he
could not keep with his wife—“sir, I look at things of this sort from
a point of view diametrically opposed to yours. Perhaps you have the
breadth to admit that my view _may_ be right, and yours _may_ be wrong.”

“Nothing, nothing at all, sir, will I admit to a man who actually
appoints the magistrates the custodians of his honour.”

“Honour, sir, as we now regard it, is nothing more than foolʼs varnish.
Justice, sir, and truth are things we can feel and decide about. Honour
is the feminine of them, and, therefore, apt to confuse a man. Major
Blazeater, the only honour I have is to wish you good morning.”

“Hang it all,” said the Major to himself, as he was shown out
honourably, “I have put my foot in it this time; and wonʼt Mrs.
Blazeater give it to me! That woman finds out everything. This is now
the third time Iʼve tried to get up a snug little meeting, and the
fates are all against me. Dash it, now, if Iʼve got to pay costs, O
Boadicea Blazeater, you wonʼt mend my gloves for a fortnight.”

Major Blazeater wore very tight doeskin gloves, and was always wearing
them out. Hence, his appeal to the female Penates took this constricted
form. The household god of the Phœnicians, and the one whose image
they affixed to the bows of their galleys, hoping to steer homewards,
was (as we know from many sources) nothing but a lamb; a very rude
figure, certainly,—square, thick–set, inelegant; but I doubt not that
some grand home–truth clung to their Agna Dea. Major Blazeater was
a lamb, whose wits only went to the shearing the moment you got him
upon his own hearth, and Boadicea bleated at him. He would crumple his
neck up, and draw back his head, and look pleadingly at any one, as a
house–lamb does on Good Friday, and feel that his father had done it
before him, and he, too, must suffer for sheepishness.

Meditating sadly thus, he heard a great voice coming after him down
the gravel–walk, and, turning round, was once more under Mr. Garnetʼs
eyes. “One more word with you, if you please, sir. It will be necessary
that you two warlike gentlemen should appoint a legal second. Mine will
be Mr. Brockwood, who will be prepared to show that your principal
was grossly inquisitive and impertinent, before I removed him from my
premises.”

“Oh!” cried the Major, delighted to find any loophole for escape, “that
puts a new aspect upon the matter, if he gave you provocation, sir.”

“He gave me as strong provocation as one man can well give another,
by prying into my—domestic affairs, in the presence of my son and
daughter, and even tampering with my servants. He left me no other
course, except to remove him from my house.”

“Which you did rather summarily. My dear sir, I should have done the
same. Had I been aware of these facts, I would have declined to bear
his cartel. You shall receive my apology by to–morrow morningʼs post.
I trust this unwise proceeding—may—may not proceed any further. Your
behaviour, sir, does you credit, and requires no vindication at law.”

Thus spoke Major Blazeater, bowing and smiling elaborately under a
combination of terrors—the law, public ridicule, expenses; worst of
all, Mrs. Blazeater. The next morning, Mr. Garnet received from him
a letter, not only apologetic, but highly eulogistic, at which Bull
Garnet smiled grimly, as he tossed it into the fire. By the same post
came a letter from Rufus, to the following effect:—

 “SIR,—I regret to find that your courage consists in mere brute
 force and power. I regard you as no longer worthy of the notice of a
 gentleman. The cowardly advantage you took of your superior animal
 strength, and your still more cowardly refusal to redress the brutal
 outrage, as is the manner of gentlemen, stamp you as no more than a
 navvy, of low mechanical brutishness. Do not think that, because I
 cannot meet you physically, and you will not meet me fairly, you are
 beyond my reach. I will have you yet, Bull Garnet; and I know how to
 do it. Your last ferocious outrage has set me thinking, and I see
 things which I must have been blind not to see before. I shall see
 you, some day, in the felonʼs dock, an object of scorn to the lowest
 of the low, so sure as my name is

  “RUFUS HUTTON.

 “P.S.—I shall be at Lymington to–morrow, ready to meet you, if you
 dare initiate the inquiry.”

Mr. Garnet did not burn this letter, but twice read it through very
carefully, and then stowed it away securely. Who could tell but it
might be useful as a proof of animus? During these several operations
his eyes had not much of triumph in them.

Rufus Hutton rode to Lymington, carrying a life–preserver: he appeared
in the Town Hall, at the petty sessions; but there was no charge
made against him. Being a pugnacious little fellow, and no lover of
a peaceful issue, he had a great mind then to apply for a warrant
against Garnet for assaulting him. But he felt that he had given some
provocation, and could not at present justify it; and he had in the
background larger measures, which might be foiled by precipitancy. So
that lively broil, being unfought out and unforgiven—at least on one
side—passed into as rank a feud as ever the sun went down upon. Not
that Mr. Garnet felt much bitterness about it; only he knew that he
must guard against a powerful enemy.

Amy had told her father, long ago, what Cradock had said to her in the
churchyard, and how she had replied to him. In fact, she could not
keep it to herself until she went to bed that night; but mingled her
bright, flowing hair with his grey locks, while her heart was still
pit–a–patting, and leaned on his shoulder for comfort, and didnʼt cry
much before she got it. “My own dearest, life of my life,” cried John,
forgetting both Greek and Latin, but remembering how he loved her
mother, “my own and only child—now you do look so like your mother,
darling—may the God who has made you my blessing bless your dear heart
in this!”

The very next day John Rosedew fell into a pit of meditation. He forgot
all about Pelethronian Lapiths, the trimming of Gruterʼs lamp (which
had long engaged him; for he knew the flame of learning there unsnuffed
by any Smelfungus): even the Sabellian elements were but as _sabellicus
sus_ to him. It was one of his peculiarities, that he never became
so deeply abstracted as when he had to take in hand any practical
question. He could take in hand any glorious thesis, such as the traces
still existing of a middle voice in Latin, or the indications of very
early civilization in Eubœa, and the question whether the Ionians
came not mainly westward—any of these things he could think of, dwell
upon, and eat his dinner without knowing salt from mustard. But he
could not make a treatise of Amy, nor could he get at her etymology. He
began to think that his education had been neglected in some points.
And then he thought about Socrates, and his symposiastic drolleries,
and most philosophic reply when impeached of Xanthippic weakness.

Nevertheless, he could not make up his mind upon one point—whether or
not it was his duty to go and inform Sir Cradock Nowell of his sonʼs
attachment. If the ancient friend had been as of old, or had only
changed towards John Rosedew, continuing true all the while to the
son, the parson would have felt no doubt as to how his duty lay. And
the more straightforward and honest course was ever the first to open
upon him. But, when he remembered how sadly bitter the father already
was to the son, how he had even dared in his wrath to charge him with
wilful fratricide, how he had wandered far and wide from the sanity of
affection, and was, indeed, no longer worthy to be called a father,
John Rosedew felt himself absolved from all parental communion.

Then how was it as to expediency? Why, just at present, this knowledge
would be the very thing to set Sir Cradock yet more against the
outcast. For, in the days of old confidence and friendly interfusion,
he had often expressed to John his hope that Clayton might love Amy;
and now he would at once conclude that Cradock had been throughout the
rival of his darling, and perhaps an unsuccessful one, till the other
was got rid of. Therefore John Rosedew resolved, at last, to hold his
peace in the matter; to which conclusion Aunt Doxyʼs advice and Amyʼs
entreaties contributed. But these two ladies, although unanimous in
their rapid conclusion, based it upon premises as different as could be.

“Inform him, indeed!” cried Miss Eudoxia, swelling grandly, and
twitching her shawl upon the slope of her shoulders, of which,
by–the–by, she was very proud—she had heard it showed high
breeding—“inform him, brother John; as if his son had disgraced him
by meditating an alliance with the great–granddaughter of the Earl
of Driddledrum and Dromore! Upon such occasions, as I have always
understood, though perhaps I know nothing about it, and you understand
it better, John, it is the gentlemanʼs place to secure the acquiescence
of his family. Acquiescence, indeed! What has our family ever thought
of a baronetcy? There is better blood in Amy Rosedew, Brian OʼLynn,
and Cadwallader, than any Cradock Nowell ever had, or ever will have,
unless it is her son. Inform him, indeed! as if our Amy was nobody!”

“Pa, donʼt speak of it,” said Amy, “until dear Cradock wishes it. We
have no right to add to his dreadfully bad luck; and he is the proper
judge. He is sure to do what is right. And, after all that he has been
through, oh, donʼt treat him like a baby, father.”




CHAPTER XIII.


Mrs. Nowell Corklemore by this time was well established at the Hall,
and did not mean in her kind rich heart to quit the place prematurely.
Almost every day, however, she made some feint of departure, which
rendered every one more alive to the value of her presence.

“How could her dear Nowell exist without her? She felt quite sure he
would come that day—yes, that very day—to fetch her, in their little
simple carriage, that did shake her poor back so dreadfully”—back
thrown into prominence here, being an uncommonly pretty one—“but oh,
how thankful she ought to be for having a carriage at all, and so many
poor things—quite as good, quite as refined, and delicate—could
scarcely afford a perambulator! But she hoped for dear Sir Cradockʼs
sake, and that sweet simple–minded Eoa—who really did require some
little cultivation—that, now she understood them both, and could do
her little of ministering, Mr. Corklemore would let her stay, if it
were only two days longer. And then her Flore, her sweet little Flore!
An angel of light among them.”

Georgie had been married twice; and she was just the sort of woman
who would have been married a dozen times, if a dozen, save one, of
husbands were so unfortunate as to leave her. Her first lord, or rather
vassal, had been the Count de Vance—“a beggarly upstart Frenchman,”
in the language of his successor, who, by–the–by, had never seen, but
heard of him too often; but, according to better authority, “a man one
could truly look up to; so warm–hearted, so agreeable; and never for a
moment tired, dear, of his poor little simple wife.”

Perhaps it is needless to state that Mr. Corklemore long had been so
scientifically henpecked that he loved the operation. Only he was half
afraid to say “Haw,” when his wife was there to cry “Pshaw.”

Sir Cradock Nowell, of course, had seen a good deal of what is called
the world; but his knowledge of women was only enough to teach him the
extent of that subject. He never was surprised much at anything they
did; but he could not pretend to tell the reason of their doing it,
even when they had any, of which he did not often suspect them. He
believed that they would have their way, whenever they could, wherever,
and by whatever means; that very few of them meant what they said,
and none of them knew what they meant; that the primal elements, in
the entire body feminine, were jealousy, impulsiveness, vanity, and
contrariety.

Georgie Corklemore soon found out that he had adopted this, the popular
male opinion; and she did not once attempt to remove it, knowing, as
she did, that nothing could be more favourable to her purposes. So she
took up the part—which suited her as well as any, and enabled her to
say many things which else would have given offence—the part of the
soft, impulsive, warm–hearted, foolish woman, who is apt among men to
become a great pet, if she happens to be good–looking.

Eoa would gladly have yielded her prerogatives to Georgie, but Mrs.
Corklemore was too wide awake to accept any one of them. “No, darling,”
she replied, “for your own sake I will not. It is true that Uncle
Cradock wishes it, and so, no doubt, do you; but you are bound to
acquire all this social knowledge of which you have now so little; and
how can you do so except by instruction and practice?”

“Oh,” cried Eoa, firing up, “if Uncle Cradock wishes it, I am sure Iʼll
leave it to you, and not be laughed at any longer. Iʼll go to him at
once, and tell him so. And, as for being bound, I _wonʼt_ be bound to
learn any nonsense I donʼt like. My papa was as wise as any of you, and
a great deal better; and he never made such a fuss about rubbish as you
do here.”

“Stop, sweet child, stop a moment——”

“I am not a sweet child, and I wonʼt stop. And another thing Iʼll tell
you. I had made up my mind to it before this, mind—before you tried to
turn me out of my place—and itʼs this. You may call me what you like,
but I donʼt mean to call you ‘Cousin Georgie’ any longer. In the first
place, I donʼt like you, and never shall as long as I live; for I never
half believe you: and, in the next place, you are no cousin of mine;
and social usage (or whatever it is you are always bothering me about)
may require me to tell some stories, but not that one, I should fancy.
Or, at any rate, I wonʼt do it.”

“Very well,” replied Mrs. Corklemore, looking up from the softest of
fancy–work, with the very sweetest of smiles; “then I shall be obliged,
in self–defence, to address you as ‘Miss Nowell.’”

“To be sure. Why shouldnʼt you?”

“Well, it can be shown, perhaps, that you are entitled to the name.
Only at first it will seem absurd when applied to a baby like you.”

“A baby like me, indeed!” This was Eoaʼs sore point; and Georgie, who
delighted in making her outrageous, was always harping upon it. “Mrs.
Corklemore, how dare you call me, at my age, a baby?”

Eoa looked down at Georgie, with great eyes flashing fire, and her
clear, bright forehead wrinkling, and her light form poised like an
antelopeʼs on the edge of a cliff. Mrs. Corklemore, not thinking it
worth while to look up at her, carelessly threw back a curl, and went
on with her rug–work.

“Because you are a baby, and nothing more, Eoa.”

In a moment she was tossed through the air, and sitting on Eoaʼs head,
low satin chair and all. She had not time to shriek, so rapid was her
elation. Little Flore, running in at the moment, clapped her hands and
shouted, “Oh, ma, have a yide, a nice yide, same as me have yesterday.
Me next, me next. Oh, ah!”

Eoa, with the greatest ease, her figure as straight as a poplar–tree,
bore the curule chair and its occupant to the end of the room, and
there deposited them carefully on a semi–grand piano.

“Thatʼs how we nurse the babies in India,” she cried, with a smile of
sweet temper, “but it takes a big baby to do it, and some practice,
I can tell you. Now, Iʼll not let you down, Mrs. Corklemore,—and if
visitors come in, what will they think of our social usages? Down you
donʼt come, till you have promised solemnly never to call me a baby
again.”

“My dear,” began Georgie, trying hard not to look ridiculous—though
the position was so unfavourable—“my dear child——”

“No, not my dear child, even! _Miss Nowell_, if you please, and nothing
else.”

“Miss Nowell, if you will only lift me down—oh, it is polished so
nastily, I am slipping off already—I will promise solemnly to call you
only what you like, all the rest of my life.”

Eoa lifted her off in an instant. “But mind, I will be even with you,”
cried Georgie, through her terror, when safe on the floor once more.

“I donʼt care _that_ for you,” answered Eoa, snapping her fingers like
a copper–cap; “only I will have proper respect shown to me by people
I particularly dislike. People I love may call me what, or do with me
what, they please. My father was just the same; and I donʼt want to be
any better than he was; and I donʼt believe God wants it.”

“He must be easily contented, then.”

Georgie, with all her deliciousness, could never pass a chance of
sarcasm.

“Now Iʼll go and have it out with Uncle Cradock, about having you for
my ayah.”

Mrs. Corklemore trembled far more at those words than at finding
herself on the piano. This strange girl—whom she had so despised—was
baffling all her tactics, and with no other sword and shield but those
of truth and candour.

“Iʼve been a fool,” said Georgie to herself, for about the first time
in her life; “I have strangely underrated this girl, and shall have
hard work now to get round her. But it must be done. Come, though I
have been so rash, I have two to one in my favour, now I see the way to
handle it. But she must not tell the old noodle; that will never do.”

“I thought, Miss Nowell,” she continued aloud, “that it would not be
considered honourable, even among East Indians, to repeat to a third
person what was said familiarly and in confidence.”

“Of course not. What makes you speak of it? Do you mean to say I would
do such a thing?”

“No, I am sure you would not, knowingly. But if you think for a moment,
you will see that what I said just now, especially as to Sir Cradockʼs
opinions, was told to you in pure confidence, and meant to go no
further.”

“Oh,” answered Eoa, “then please not to tell me anything in pure
confidence again, because I canʼt keep secrets, and you have no right
to load me with them, without ever asking my leave even. But Iʼll try
not to let it out, unless you provoke me before him.”

With this half promise Georgie was obliged to be content. She knew
well enough that, if Eoa brought the question before her uncle, the
truth would come out that Sir Cradock had never dreamed for a moment
of substituting Georgie, the daughter of his cousin, for Eoa, the
only daughter of his only brother Clayton. He knew, of course, that
the Eastern maiden had no artificial polish; but he saw that she had
an inborn truth, a delicacy of feeling, and a native sympathy, which
wanted only experience to be better than any polish.

From that day forth, Mrs. Corklemore (aided perhaps by physical terror)
formed a higher estimate of Eoaʼs powers. So she changed her tactics
altogether, and employed her daughter, that sharp little Flore, to
cover the next advance. Flore was a little beauty; so far as anything
artificial can be really beautiful. Dressed, as she was, in the height
of French fashion, and herself nine–tenths of a Frenchwoman—for there
is no such thing as a French _girl_, as we Englishmen understand
girlhood—she always looked like a butterfly, just born in and just
about to pop out of a bower; for little Flore was “divinely beautiful.”

This angel was now nearly four years old, and would look at you with
the loveliest eyes that ever appealed from the cradle to heaven, and
throw her exaggerated little figure back, and tell you the biggest lie
that an angel ever wiped her mouth over. Oh, you lovely child! I would
rather have Loo Jupp, who knows a number of bad words, which you would
faint to hear of. But Loo wonʼt tell a lie. Her father beat her out of
it the very first time she tried.




CHAPTER XIV.


“Dear Uncle Cradock,” said Georgie next day, for she had obtained
permission long ago to address her fatherʼs cousin so, “what a very
sweet girl our Eoa is!”

“I am very glad that you think so, Georgie; she reminds me very often
of what my brother was at her age.”

“Oh, I do love her so. She has so much variety, and she does seem so
straightforward.”

“Not only seems but is so, Georgie; at times, indeed, a little too much
of it.”

“Well, I doubt if there can be too much of it,” cried Georgie, in the
rapture of her own heartʼs truth and simplicity, “especially among
relations, uncle. Just see now how all the misunderstandings which
arose between ourselves, for instance, might have been saved by a
little straightforward explanation. In my opinion, our Eoa would be
absolutely perfect, if we could only put a little polish, a little
finish, upon her. I suppose that was what her poor father intended, in
bringing her to England.”

“Ah, perhaps it was. I never thought of that. But I have thought, often
enough, my dear Georgie, of my own duty towards her; and I wish to
consult you about it; you are so discreet and sensible.”

“Yes,” replied Mrs. Corklemore, with a facetious curtsey, “to be sure I
am, a perfect Queen of Sheba.”

As this implied, by the manner of it, that Sir Cradock was a perfect
Solomon, he accepted the chaff very graciously, and said to himself,
“What magnificent eyes my niece Georgie has, and what a sweet
complexion, and a most exquisite figure! I wonder what Corklemore is
about, in leaving her here so long! But then he has such confidence in
her. Women of sense and liveliness, who have an answer for everybody,
are so much more trustworthy than the sly things who drop their eyes,
and think all sorts of evil.”

Meanwhile Georgie saw all this passing through his mind—more clearly,
perhaps, than she would have seen it, if it had been passing through
her own.

“To be sure. How thoughtful of you! You mean your duty, Uncle Cradock,
as to making her your heiress, now?”

Mrs. Corklemore knew well enough that he meant nothing of the sort;
but the opportunity for the suggestion was too fine to be lost.

“Oh,” said Sir Cradock, with a grim smile, “you consider that my duty,
do you? No, it was not on that subject I was anxious for your opinion,
but as to sending the child to school, or taking some other means to
finish her education.”

“She wonʼt go,” replied Mrs. Corklemore, seeing some chance of a
quarrel here; “of course it would be the best thing for her; but I am
quite certain the sweet creature never will go.”

“The sweet creature must, if I make her.”

“To be sure, Uncle Cradock; but I donʼt believe you can. Has she not
favoured you with her intentions as to settling in life, rather—well,
perhaps rather prematurely?”

“Yes,” replied the old man, laughing, “she has informed me, with all
due ceremony, of her intention to marry Bob Garnet, the moment she is
out of mourning for her dearest father.”

“Master Garnet has not asked her yet. And I have reason to believe”——
here Georgie softly hesitated.

“What?” asked Sir Cradock, anxiously, for he was very fond of Eoa; she
was such a novelty to him.

“That Master Bob Garnet, just come from school, loves Amy Rosedew above
Eoa, toffee, rock, or peppermint.”

“Amy Rosedew is a minx,” answered the old man, hotly. “I offered to
shake hands with her, when I met her on Wednesday, and was even going
to kiss her, because she is my god–daughter, and—and—an uncommonly
pretty girl, you know, and what do you think she said?”

“Oh donʼt tell me, Uncle Cradock, if it was anything impudent. You know
I could not stand it, thinking what I do of those Rosedews.”

“She threw herself back with her great eyes flashing, and the colour
in her cheeks dark crimson, and she said, ‘No, thank you. No contact
for me with unnatural injustice!’ And she drew her frock around her,
and swept away as if the road was not wide enough for both of us. Nice
behaviour, was not it? And I fear her father endorses it.”

“I know he does,” answered Georgie, whose face during that description
had been a perfect study of horror contending with humour; “I know
that Mr. Rosedew, one of the best men in the world, if, indeed, he is
sincere—which others may doubt, but not I—he, poor man, having little
perception, except of his own interest, has taken a most unfavourable
view of everything we do here. Oh, I am so sorry. It almost makes one
feel as if we must be in the wrong.” Beautiful Georgie sighed heavily,
like a fair woman at a confessional.

“His own interest, Georgie! Ourselves in the wrong! I donʼt quite
understand you.”

“As if we were harsh, you know, Uncle Cradock; when, Heaven be thanked,
we have not concluded, as too, too many—— But, not to talk of that
absurdity, and not to pain you, darling uncle, you must know what I
meant about Mr. Rosedewʼs interest.”

“No, indeed, I donʼt, Georgie. I donʼt see how John—I mean Mr.
Rosedewʼs interest is at all involved in the matter.”

“He had a daughter passing fair,” sang Mrs. Corklemore, without
thinking. “Oh, uncle, I forgot; I am so light–headed and foolish, I
forget everything now. It is Nowellʼs fault for worrying me, as he does
every week, about income.”

She passed her hand across her forehead, and swept the soft dark
hair back, as if worldly matters were too many for her poor childish
brain. Who could look at her without wishing that she really cared for
herself, just a little?

“I insist upon knowing what you mean, Georgie,” said Sir Cradock,
frowning heavily, for he was not at all sentimental; “John Rosedewʼs
daughter is Amy; and Amy, I know, is perfectly honest, though as
obstinate as the devʼ—hem, I beg your pardon; I mean that Amy is very
obstinate, as well as exceedingly bigoted, and I might almost say
insolent.”

“Oh no; I can never believe that, Uncle Cradock, even upon your
authority.” In the heat of truth, Mrs. Corklemore stood up and faced
Sir Cradock.

“But I tell you she is, Georgie. Donʼt try to defend her. No young
woman of eighteen ought to have spoken as she did to me when I met her
last Wednesday. ‘Outrageous’ is the mildest word I can use to describe
her manner.”

“Very likely you thought so, dearest Uncle Cradock; and so very likely
I might have thought, or any of the old–school people. But we must make
allowances—you know we are bound to do so—for young people brought up
to look at things from a different point of view.”

“No—by—George I wonʼt. I have heard that stuff too often. Spirit of
the age, and all that balderdash. Because a set of young jackanapes are
blessed with impudence enough to throw to the dogs all the teachings
of ages, just when it doesnʼt suit them, is it likely that we, who are
old enough to see the beauty of what they despise, are to venerate and
bow down to infantile inspiration, which itself bows down to nothing?
Georgie, you are too soft, too mild. Your forbearance quite provokes
me. Leave me, if you please, to form my own opinions, especially about
people whom I know so much better than you do.”

“I am sure, Uncle Cradock,” answered Georgie, pouting, “I never
presume in any way to interfere with your opinions. Your judgment is
proverbial; whereas I have none whatever. Only it was natural that I
should wish you to think well of one who is likely to be so nearly
related to you. What! why you look surprised, uncle? Ah, you think me
wrong in alluding to it. What a simple silly I am, to be sure! But
please not to be angry, uncle. I never dreamed that you wished it kept
secret, dear, when all the parish is talking of it.”

“Georgie Corklemore, have the goodness to tell me what you mean.”

“Oh, donʼt look at me so, uncle. I never could bear a cross look.
I mean no mystery whatever, only Amy Rosedewʼs engagement to your
unlucky—I mean your unhappy son. Of course it has your sanction.”

“Amy engaged to my—to that crafty Cradock! I cannot believe it. I will
not believe it; and at a time like this!”

“Well, I thought the time ill–chosen. But I am no judge of propriety.
And they say that the poor—poor darling who is gone, was himself
attached—let us hope that it was not so; however, I cannot believe,
Uncle Cradock, that you have not even been told of it.”

“But I tell you, Georgie, that it is so. Perhaps you disbelieve me in
your anxiety to screen them?”

“You know better than that, dear uncle. I believe _you_, before all
the world. And I will screen them no longer, for I think it bad and
ungrateful of them. And after all you have done for them! Why, surely,
you gave them the living! It makes me feel quite ill. Ingratitude
always does.” Georgie pressed her hand to her heart, and was obliged to
get up and walk about. Presently she came back again, with great tears
in her eyes, and her face full of anger and pity.

“Oh, uncle dear, I cannot tell you how grieved I am for your sake. It
does seem so hard–hearted of them. How I feel my own helplessness that
I cannot comfort you! What a passion my Nowell will be in, when I tell
him this! His nature is so warm and generous, so upright and confiding,
and he looks up to you with such devotion, and such deep respect. I
must not tell him at night, poor fellow, or he would not sleep a wink.
And the most contumelious thing of all: that pompous old maid, Miss
Eudoxia Rosedew, to be going about and boasting of it—the title and
the property—before any one had the manners even to inform so kind a
friend, and so affectionate a father! The title and the property! How I
hate such worldliness. I never could understand how people could scheme
and plot for such things. And to make so little of you, uncle, because
they relied upon the entail!”

This was quite a shot in the dark, for she knew not whether any entail
subsisted; and, as it was a most essential point to discover this,
Georgie fixed her swimming eyes—swimming with love and sympathy—full
upon poor Sir Cradockʼs. He started a little, but she scarcely knew
what to augur thence. She must have another shot at it; but not on the
present occasion.

It is scarcely needful, perhaps, to say, knowing Mrs. Corklemore and
Miss Rosedew as we do, that there was not a syllable of truth in what
the former said of the latter. Sir Cradock himself would have doubted
it, if he had been any judge of women; for Miss Eudoxia Rosedew thought
very little of baronets. How could she help it, she of the illustrious
grandmother? Oh her indignation, if she only could have dreamed of
being charged with making vaunt over such a title! Neither was it like
her, even if she had thought great things of any pledged alliance, to
go about and share her sentiments with the “common people.” The truth
of the matter was this: Georgie, with her natural craft—no, no! skill
I mean; how a clumsy pen will stumble—and ten more years of life to
drill it, had elicited Amyʼs sentiments; as one who, having stropped
a razor, carves his ladyʼs pincushion, or one who blowing on bright
gimlet tempts the spigot of bonded wine, or varlet who with a knowing
worm giveth taste of Stilton. Or even,

  “As when a man, a sluice–captain, adown from a backwater headspring,
  All through his plants and garden a waterflow is pioneering,
  Holding a shovel in hand, from the carrier casting the sods out;
  Then as it goes flowing forward, the pebbles below in a bevy
  Swirl about, and it rapidly wimpling down paterooneth,
  In a spot where a jump of the ground is, and overgets even the guideman.”

  _Il._ xxi. 257.

So sweet Amy, being under–drawn of her native crystal by many a sly
innuendo and many an Artesian auger, gushed out, like liquid diamonds,
upon the skilful Georgie, and piled upon her a flood of truth, a
Scamander upon Achilles. Oh water upon a duckʼs back, because Georgie
always swam in truth; please not to say that Castalia, _rore puro_,
wets not the kerchief of a lady thrice dipped in Styx.

And so it came to pass that young Amy let out everything, having
a natural love of candour and a natural hatred of Georgie, and
expecting to overwhelm her with the rolling seventh billow of truth.
Mrs. Corklemore, softly smiling, reared her honest head out of the
waters, sleeked her soft luxuriant locks, and the only thing likely to
overwhelm her was sympathy unfathomable. Amy did not wish for that, and
begged her, very dryly, by no means to exhaust herself; for Amy had
moral scent of a liar, even as her father had.

Now that father—the finest fellow, take him for all in all, whom one
need wish to look upon—was (according to a good manʼs luck) in fearful
tribulation. Fearful, at least, to any man except John Rosedew himself;
but John, though fully alive to the stigmotype of his position, allowed
his epidermis to quill toward the operator, and abstracted all his too
sensitive parts into a Sophistic apory.

John, sitting in his book–room, had got an apron tucked well under his
rosy chin—an apron with two pockets in it, and the strings in a bow at
the back of his neck; and he trembled for his ear–lobes, whenever he
forgot his subject. Around him, with perpetual clatter, snip and snap
and stirabout, hovered, like a Jewish maiden fingering the mill–stone,
who but his Eudoxia?

In her strong right hand was a pair of shears, keen as those of
Atropos, padded at the handles, lest to hurt the thumb, but the
blades, the trenchant edges—oh what should keep their bright love
asunder? No human ear, for a moment; nay, nor the nose of a mortal.
Neither was this risk and tug, and frequent fullersʼ–teaseling, the
whole or even the half of the agony John was undergoing. For though
he sat with a pile of books heaped in fair disorder round him—though
three were pushing about on his lap, dusting themselves on his
well–worn kersey, like sparrows on a genial highway—though one was
even perched on his right hand and another on his left, yet he had no
more fruition of them (save in the cud of memory) than had Prometheus
of his fire–glow in the frost of Strobilus, or than the son of Jove and
Pluto, whom Ulysses saw, had of his dessert.

  “Nay, then I looked at Tantalus having a rough tribulation,
  Standing fast in a lake, and it came quite home to his chin–beard;
  Nevertheless he stood thirsting, and had not to seize and to quaff it;
  For every time when the old man would stoop in his longing to quaff it,
  Then every time the water died, swallowed back, and at his ancles
  Earth shone black in a moment, because a divinity parched it.
  Trees as well, leafing loftily, over his head poured fruitage,
  Pear–trees, and pomegranates, and apple–trees glittering–fruited,
  Fig–trees of the luscious, and olive–trees of the luxuriant;
  Whereat whenever the old man shot out his hands to grasp them,
  Away the wind would toss them into the shadowy cloudland.”

  _Od._ xi. 581.

“Now, John, you are worse than ever, I do declare you are; why, you
wonʼt even hold your neck straight. I try to make you look decent: I
try so _very hard_, John; and you havenʼt even the gratitude to keep
your chin up from the apron. You had much better go to a barber, and
get half your hair pulled out by the roots, and the other half poisoned
with a leaden comb, and then youʼll appreciate _me_, perhaps.”

“We read,” said John Rosedew, complacently gazing at his white locks as
they tumbled and took little jumps on the apron, “that when the Argives
lost Thyrea, they pledged themselves to a law and a solemn imprecation,
that none of the men should encourage his hair, and none of the ladies
wear gold.”

“And pray what gold do _I_ wear? Brother John, you are so personal; you
never can let me alone. I do believe you have never forgiven me my poor
dear grandmotherʼs ring, and watch, and Aunt Dianaʼs brooch and locket;
no, nor even my own dear motherʼs diamond ring with the sapphires round
it. And perhaps you donʼt hate even my bracelet, a mere twist of gold
with catʼs eyes! Oh, John, John, how can you be my brother, and show
such a little mind, John?”

“Whence we may infer,” continued John, quite unruffled; for he knew
that it would be worse than useless to assure Miss Doxy that he was not
even aware of the existence of the things he was impeached with; “or
at least we have some grounds for supposing that the Greeks, a very
sensitive and highly perceptive race, did not like to have their hair
cut. Compare with this another statement——”

“No, indeed I wonʼt, John. I should rather hope I would not. You canʼt
hold your tongue for a moment, however solemn the occasion is. There,
thatʼs the third cut youʼve got, and I wonʼt take another snip at you.
But you have quoted less Greek than usual; thatʼs one comfort, at any
rate, and I will put you on some gold–beaterʼs skin, for being so very
good, John. Only donʼt tell Amy; she does make such a fuss about it.
But there, I need not tell you, for you wonʼt know how you got them in
half an hourʼs time. Now, donʼt make a fuss, John; one would think you
were killed”—poor John had dared to put his hand up—“as if you cared
indeed even if you had three great stripes of red all down your collar,
or even upon your white neckerchief. You wouldnʼt be at all ashamed of
yourself. Have you the face to say that you would, now?”

“Well, dear Doxy, I am not convinced that you are reasonable in
expecting me to be ashamed of bleeding when you have been cutting me.”

“Oh, of course not. I never _am_ reasonable, according to your ideas.
But one thing you may be convinced of, and that is, that I never will
toil and degrade myself by cutting your hair again, John, after this
outrageous conduct.”

John had been visited so often with this tremendous menace, that he
received it with no satisfaction. Well he knew that on that day four
weeks he must don the blue apron again, unless something happened
worse even than Aunt Doxyʼs tonsorial flourishes.

“Now, you are not done yet, John. You are in a great hurry, are you
not, to get the apron off and scatter the hair all about? Whatʼs the
good of my taking the trouble to spread Jemimaʼs shawl down? Can you
imagine you are done, when I havenʼt rubbed you up with the rosemary
even?”

“ʼCoronari marino rore!’ No wonder good Flaccus puts it after ‘multâ
cæde bidentium.’ Oh, Doxy, you are inexorable. O averse Penates! By the
way, that stanza is to my mind the most obscure (with one exception)
in all the Odes. Either Horace had too much of the ‘lene tormentumʼ
applied just then ‘ingenio non sæpe duro,’ or else——”

“Please, miss”—all the girls called her miss—“Dr. Hutton, miss!”

Bang went Miss Doxy, quicker than thought, left an exclamation,
semi–profane, far behind on the light air, slammed the door on the poor
girlʼs chilblains, bolted and locked it, and pulled out the key, and
put the scutcheon over the keyhole.

“Well, why, _διὰ τί_; _πόθεν_; unde terrarum? Women are not allowed to
say ‘mehercle,’ neither men ‘mecastor;’ ‘ædepol’ is common to both, but
only ‘inscitiâ antiquitatis;’ for the most ancient men abstained from
that even, and I dare say were none the worse for it——”

“I have no patience with you, John,” cried Miss Doxy, snatching up
brush, comb, scissors, extract of the sea–dew, the blue apron, Jemimaʼs
shawl of grey hair, and we know not how many other things, and huddling
all into a cupboard, and longing to lock herself in with them.

“Great truths come out,” answered John, quite placidly, “at periods
of mental commotion. But why, oh Doxy, and whence this inopine
hurry–scurry? There is no classic expression—except perhaps in
Aristophanes—of prosody quick enough; and, doubtless, for very good
reason, because the people were too wise to hurry so. ‘Rumpe moras,’
for instance, is rather suggestive of——”

“Oh, John! oh, John! even at such a moment, John! I believe youʼll die
in Latin or Greek—and I donʼt know which Amen is, only I donʼt believe
itʼs English—there, I am as bad as you are to discuss such a question
now. And I am quite sure Jenny canʼt tell a good story soundly. And he
has got such ferret eyes! Thank Heaven, the key was inside, John.”

Poor Miss Doxy was panting so, that her brother was quite frightened
for her; and the more so because he had no idea what there was to be
frightened at.

“Why, Doxy,” he said, “my darling, he need never see that you have cut
me.”

“As if I cared for that! Oh, John, my dearest brother, heʼll see _that
Iʼve cut your hair_!”

The idea struck John Rosedew as so gloriously novel—that man who
knew the world so!—to him it appeared such a mountain of wonder
that a sister should want to sink through the floor, for having saved
her brother from barberism, that he laughed as hard as any man of
real humour ever laughs. Miss Doxy stole on the opportunity, when he
sat down to have his laugh out, to dust all the white hair with her
handkerchief from his coat–collar.

Suddenly John Rosedew got up, and his laugh went away in gravity. He
walked to the door more heavily than was natural to him (lest he should
seem to go falsely), unlocked and unbolted it, and in his most stately
manner marched into the hall. Jenny was telling a “jolly lie”—jollity
down below, I suppose—to Mr. Rufus Hutton; she was doing it very
clumsily, not “oculo irretorto.”

“Please, sir, yes, my master is gone round the parish, sir; and the
rest, they be at the school, sir. How sorry they will be, to be sure,
to hear that you have called, sir, and all of them out of the way so!”

“No, they wonʼt,” said Mr. Rosedew, looking over her head; “the only
thing I am sorry for, Jenny, is that you can tell a falsehood so.
But the fault is not yours only. I will talk to you by–and–by. Dr.
Hutton, come in, if you please. I was having my hair cut by my sister,
Miss Rosedew. You have met her before. Eudoxia, Dr. Hutton is kind
enough to come and see us. I have told him how good and how sisterly
you have been to me, and I am sure that he must wish to have a sister
so capable—that is to say if he has not,” added John, who was very
particular about his modal and temporal prefix.

Miss Rosedew came forward, with a few white hairs still on her dark
“reps” bell–sleeve, and, being put upon her mettle, was worthy of her
brother. Oh dear, that such a grand expression should be needful,
even over the shell of the roasted egg of snobbery! Rufus Hutton, of
course, not being quite a fool, respected, and trusted, and loved them
both, more than he would have done after fifty formal dinners. And
he knew quite well that there was on his own part something akin to
intrusion; for he had called in the forenoon, when visits from none but
an intimate friend are expected; and he had pushed his advance rather
vigorously, not towards the drawing–room, but to Johnʼs favourite
book–room, where the lady Licinus plied her calling. But for this he
had good reason, as he wished to see Mr. Rosedew alone, and the cause
of his visit was urgent.

It was not long before the lady, feeling rather unhappy because she was
not arrayed much better than the lilies of the field are, withdrew in
a very noble manner, earning gratitude of Rufus. Then the doctor drew
his chair close home to the parsonʼs, looked all round the room, and
coughed to try how big the echo was. Finding no response returned by
that prolific goddess, who loves not calf or sheep–skin, and seeing
that no other lady was dangerously acoustic, Rufus inclined his
little red head towards Johnʼs great and black and slightly liparous
waistcoat, and spake these winged words:

“Ever see a thing like that, sir?”

“No, I donʼt think I ever did. Dear me, how odd it smells! Why, how
grave you are, Dr. Hutton!”

“So will you be, when I have told you what I have to tell. My discovery
is for your ears only; I have been to London about it, and there found
out its meaning. Now I will act upon your advice. Nothing in all my
experience—though I have seen a great deal of the world—nothing has
ever surprised me more than what I have told you.”

“But you forget, Dr. Hutton,” cried John, imbibing excitement, “that
as yet you have told me nothing at all, only shown me something which
I cannot in the least make out. A cylinder, hollow, and blocked at one
end; of a substance resembling book–binding, and of a most unsavoury
odour!”

“Ha!” replied Rue Hutton, “ha, my dear sir, you little guess the
importance of that thing no bigger than a good cigar. Ah, indeed! Ah,
yes!”

“Do you mean to tell me, or not, Dr. Hutton? Your behaviour is most
unusual. I am greatly surprised by your manner.”

“Ah, no doubt; no doubt of that. Very odd if you were not. I also am
astonished at your apparent indifference.”

Hereupon Rufus looked so intensely knowing, so loaded with marvel and
mystery, too big to be discharged even, that John Rosedew himself, so
calm and large, and worthy to be called a philosopher, very nearly grew
wroth with longing to know what all the matter was.

Then Dr. Hutton, having bound him by a solemn promise that he would not
for the present even hint of that matter to any one, poured out the
hissing contents of his mind under the white curls which still overhung
the elder manʼs porch of memory. And what he told him was indeed a
thing not to be forgotten.

The spectator is said to see more of the game than any of the players
see, and the reader of a story knows a great deal more than the actors
do, or the writer either, for that matter; marry, therefore, I will not
insult any candid intelligence, neither betray Rue Huttonʼs faith, for
he is an awkward enemy.

The very next day there came a letter, with coal enough on it to make
some gas, and directed in a wandering manner to “Rev. Mr. Rosedew,
Nowelhouse, somewhere in England.” Much as we abuse the Post–office
people, they generally manage to find us out more cleverly than we do
them; and so this letter had not been to more than six wrong places.
As our good journalists love to say, “it was couched in the following
terms:”—

 “HONOURED AND REVEREND SIR,—Takes the liberty of stating price of
 inland coals, as per margin, delivered free within six miles of
 Charing–cross. N.B. Weighed as the Act directs, whether required or
 otherwise, which mostly is not, and the dust come back if required.
 Excuse me the liberty of adding that a nice young gent and uncommon
 respectable, only not a good business address—no blame to him, being
 a Oxford gent—lie here very ill, and not much expect to get over
 to–morrow night. Our junior, Mr. Clinkers, with full commission to
 take all orders and sign receipts for the firm, have been up with
 him all night, and hear him talk quite agreeable about some place
 or business called Amery, supposed in the hardware line by mistake
 for emery. This young gent were called Mr. Newman, by the name of
 Charles Newman, but Mrs. Ducksacre half believe clandastical and
 temporal only, and no doubt good reason for it, because he always
 pay his lodging. Rev. sir, found your direction as per endorsement
 very simple in the inside pocket of the young gentʼs coat, and he
 only have one to look in. But for fear to be misunderstood this firm
 think none the less of him by the same reason, having been both of
 us in trouble when we was married. Also as per left–hand cover a
 foreign–looking play–book, something queer and then ‘Opera,’ which the
 undersigned understand at once, having been to that same theayter when
 our gracious Queen was married, and not yet gone into the coal–trade.
 Requests to excuse the liberty, but if endorsed correctly and
 agreeable to see the young gentʼs funeral performed most reasonably,
 at sole expense of this firm, and no claim made on any survivors
 because Robert Clinkers like him, must come by express day after
 to–morrow at latest.

 “Signed for the firm of Poker and Clinkers, West London Depôt,
 Hammersmith. Weighed as the Act directs. Per ROBERT CLINKERS, jun.

 “At Mrs. and Miss Ducksacreʼs, greengrocer and general fruiterer,
 Mortimer–street, Cavendish–square.”




CHAPTER XV.


Cradock Nowell had written from London to the Parsonage once, and once
only. He told them how he had changed his name, because his father had
cast him off; and (as he bitterly added), according to filial promise,
he felt himself bound to be Nowell no longer. But he did not say what
name he had taken, neither did he give any address; only he would write
again when he had found some good situation. Of course he longed to
hear from Amy—his own loving Amy, who begged that poor letter and bore
it in her own pure bosom long after the Queenʼs head came off—but his
young pride still lay hot upon him, and for Amyʼs sake he nursed it.

A young man is never so proud of his honour, so prompt to deny himself
anything, so strong in anotherʼs lifehold, and careless about his own
living, as when he has won a true loveʼs worth, and sees it abiding
for ever. Few are the good who have such luck—for the success is not
of merit, any more than it is in other things; more often indeed some
fish–tailed coxcomb is a womanʼs Dagon, doubly worshipped for crushing
her—but when that luck does fall to the lot of a simple and honest
young fellow, he piles his triple mountains up to the everlasting
heaven, but makes no Babel of them. A man who chatters about his love
soon exhausts himself or his subject.

John Rosedew, after receiving that letter, shut every book on his
table, chairs, and desk, and chimney–piece. He must think what to do,
and how: and he never could think hard on the flints of daily life,
while the green pastures of the dead were tempting his wayward steps
away. Of course he would go to London at once, by the very next train;
but whether or no should he tell his people the reason of his going? He
felt so strongly inclined to tell, even at risk of domestic hysterics
and parochial convulsions, that he resolved at last not to tell; for he
thought of the great philosopherʼs maxim (not perhaps irrefragable),
that when the right hangs dubious, we may safely conclude that it rides
in the scale swinging opposite to our own wishes. To most of us (not
having a quarter of John Rosedewʼs ability, and therefore likely to be
a hundred times less hesitant) it seems that the maxim holds good with
ourselves, or any other common mortal, but makes Truth actually cut
her own throat when applied to a mind like his—a mind already too
timorously and humorously self–conscious.

Let 99,000 angels get on the top of John Rosedewʼs pen—which generally
had a great hair in it—and dance a _faux pas_ over that question,
if it was laid the wrong way; for we, whose consciences must work
in corduroys and highlows, roughly conclude that right and wrong
are but as button and button–hole when it comes to a question of
hair–splitting. Blest are they whose conscience–edge, like the sword of
Thor, can halve every wisp of wool afloat upon the brook of life.

After breakfast John mounted Coræbus, leaving a short farewell, and set
off hastily with the old–fashioned valise behind the saddle, wherein
he was wont to bear wine and confections upon his parochial tours.
The high–mettled steed was again amazed at the pace that could be
pumped out of him; neither did he long continue ingloriously mute, but
woke the echoes of Ytene with many a noble roar and shriek, so that
consternation shook the heart of deer and pig and cow. But the parson
did not exult as usual in these proofs of velocity, because his soul
within him was sad; nevertheless he preserved cohesion, or at least
coincidence, in an admirable manner, with his feet thrust strenuously
into the stirrups, his bridle–hand thrown in great emergencies upon the
peak of the saddle, and whip–hand reposing on the leathern outwork,
which guarded and burnished his rear. Anchored thus by both strong
arms—for the sake of his mission and family—he felt capable of
jumping a gate, if Coræbus had equal confidence.

That evening he entered the Ducksacre shop, and found no one there but
the mistress.

“Pray excuse me, but I have been told, maʼam,” said John Rosedew,
lifting his hat—as he always did to a matron—and bowing his silvery
head, “that you have a lodger here who is very ill.”

“Yes, sir,” replied Mrs. Ducksacre, fetching her breath very quickly,
“and dead, too, for all I know. Oh Lord, I am so put upon!”

The soft–hearted parson was shocked at this apparent apathy; and
thought her no true woman. Who is not wrong sometimes? It was a very
rare thing for John Rosedew to judge man or woman harshly. But only
half an hour ago that poor woman had been up–stairs, neglecting till,
present and future, estranging some excellent customers, leaving a
wanton shop–boy to play marbles with Spanish chestnuts, while she did
her most misguided best to administer to sick Cradock soup wildly
beyond her own economy, and furiously beyond his powers of deglutition.

John Rosedew, with his stout legs shaking, and his stockings expressing
excitement, went up three pairs (ill–assorted) of stairs into Cradockʼs
sick room. Then he started back from the Aristophanic climax—even the
rags of Telephus; though after all, Polly Ducksacre had done her best
to make the room comely. Why, there were three potato–sacks on the bed,
with the names of Fulham growers done in red letters upon them, and
giving the room quite a bright appearance, as if newly–marked sheep
were in it. Nay, and I could almost swear there were two bast mats
from Covent Garden, gloriously fixed as bed curtains, mats from that
noble market where a rat prays heaven vainly to grant him the coat of a
water–rat.

There, by Cradock Nowellʼs bed, sat the faithful untiring nurse, the
woman who had absorbed such a quantity of strap, and had so kindly
assimilated it. Meek–spirited Rachel Jupp waited and watched by the
bed of him through whom she had been enfranchised. Since Issachar Jupp
became a Christian she had not tasted the buckle–end once, and scarcely
twice the tongue–end.

She had been employed some years ago as a nurse in the Middlesex
Hospital; so she knew her duties thoroughly. But here she had exceeding
small chance of practising that knowledge; because scarcely anything
which she wanted, and would have rung for, if there had been any bell,
was ever to be found in the house. Even hot water, which the doctor
had ordered, was cold again ere it came to her, and had taken an hour
before it started; for there was no fireplace in the little room, nor
even on the floor below it.

Uncle John could scarcely keep from crying, as he looked at poor Craddy
propped up in the bed there, with his lips so pale and bloodless,
cheeks sunken in and shining like dry oyster–shells, but with a round
red spot in the centre, large eyes glaringly bright and starting, and
red hot temples and shorn head swathed with dripping bandages; while
now and then he raised his weak hands towards the surging tumult, and
dropped them helpless on the sun–blind, tucked round him as part of his
counterpane.

“Ah, thatʼs the way, sir,” said Rachel, after she had risen and
curtseyed, “thatʼs the way he go on now, all the day and all the night;
and he have left off talking now altogether, only to moan and to
wamble. He used to jump up in the bed at first, and shut his left eye,
and put his arms like this, as if he was shooting at something; and it
pleased him so when I give him the hair–broom. He would put the flat
of it to his shoulder, and smile as if he see some game, and shoot at
the door fifty times a day; and then scream and fall back and cover his
eyes up. But he havenʼt done that these three days now; too weak, Iʼm
afeard, too weak for it.”

John Rosedew sighed heavily for the bright young mind, so tried
above what it was able to bear; then, as he kissed the flaming
forehead—sometimes flaming and sometimes icy—he thought that it might
be the Fatherʼs mercy to obliterate sense of the evil. For the mind of
the insane, or at least its precious part, is with Him, who showers
afar both pain and pleasure, but keeps at home the happiness.

“Can you send for the doctor at once, maʼam, or tell me where to find
him?” The parson still kept to the ancient fashion, and addressed
every woman past thirty as “maʼam,” whatever her rank or condition. As
he spoke, a heavy man entered on tiptoe, and quietly moved them aside.
A raw–boned, hulking fellow he was, with a slouch and a squint, made
more impressive by a black eye in the third and most picturesque stage,
when mauve, and lilac, and orange intone and soften sweetly off from
the purple nucleus outward; as a boyʼs taw is, or used to be, shaded,
with keen artistic feeling, in many a ring concentric, from the equator
to the poles. Mr. Juppʼs face was a villainous one; as even the softest
philanthropist would have been forced to acknowledge. The enormous
jaws, the narrow forehead, the grisly, porkish eyebrows, the high
cheek–bones, and the cunning skance gleam from the black, deep–ambushed
squinters—all these were enough to warn any man who wished to get good
out of Zakey Jupp that he must try to put it there first, and give it
time to go to the devil and back, as we say that parsley–seed does.

Mr. Jupp was a man of remarkable strength,—not active elastic
Achillean vigour, nor even stalwart Ajacian bulk, but the sort of
strength which sometimes vanquishes both of those, by outlasting,—a
slouching, slow–to–come, long–to–go heft, that had scarcely found its
proper wind when better–built men were exhausted.

Men of this stamp are usually long–armed, big in the lungs and
shoulders, small in the loins, knock–kneed, and splay–footed; in a
word, shaped like a John Dory, or a millerʼs thumb, or a banjo. They
are not very “strong on their pins,” nor active; they generally get
thrown in the first bout of wrestling before ever their muscles get
warm; they cannot even run fast, and in jumping they spring from the
heel; nevertheless, unless they are stricken quite senseless at the
outset—and their heads for the most part are a deal too thick for
that—the chances are that they make an example of the antagonist ere
he is done with. And so, in Mr. Juppʼs recent duello with an Irish
bully, who scoffed at Cradock, and said something low of his illness,
the Englishman got the worst of it in the first round, the second, the
third, and the fourth; but, just as Dan Sullivanʼs pals and backers
were wild with delight and screeching, the brave bargee settled down on
his marrow, and the real business began. After twenty–five rounds, the
Tipperary Slasher had three men to carry him home, and looked fit for
an inquest to sit upon, without making him any flatter.

Now, Issachar being a very slow man, there was no chance that he would
hurry over his present inspection of Cradock. For a very long time he
looked at him from various points of view; then, at last, he shook his
head, and poked his long black chin out.

“Now this here wunna do, ye know. Iʼll fetch the doctor to ye, master,
as ye seem to care for the pore young charp.”

And Zakey Jupp, requiring no answer, went slowly down the stairs, with
a great hand on either wall to save noise; then at a long trot, rolling
over all who came in his way, and rounding the corners, like a ship
whose rudder–bands are broken, he followed the doctor from street to
street, keeping up the same pace till he found him. Dr. Tink was coming
out of a court not far from Marylebone–lane, where the small–pox always
lay festering.

“Yeʼll just corm street ‘long wi’ me to the poor charp as saved our
Looey,” said Mr. Jupp, coolly getting into the brougham, and sitting in
the place of honour, while he dragged Dr. Tink in by the collar, and
set him upon the front seat. “Fire awa’ now for Martimer–straat,” he
yelled to the wondering coachman, “and if ye dunna laither the narg,
mind, Iʼll laither ye when we gits there.”

The nag was leathered to Mr. Juppʼs satisfaction, and far beyond his
own, and they arrived at the coal and cabbage shop before John Rosedew
had finished reading a paper which Mrs. Jupp had shown him, thinking
that it was a prescription.

“He wrote it in his sleep, sir, without knowing a thing about it; in
his sleep, or in his brain–wandering; I came in and found him at it, in
the middle of the night; and my, how cold his fingers was, and his head
so hot! We took it to three great chemists’ shops, but they could not
make it up. They hadnʼt got all the drugs, they said, and they couldnʼt
make out the quantities.”

“Neither can I,” said John; “but it rings well, considering that the
poor boy wrote it when his brain was weak with fever. The dialects are
somewhat muddled, moreover; but we must not be hypercritical.”

“No, sir, to be sure not. I am sure I meant no hypocrisy. Only you see
it ainʼt Christian writing; and Mr. Clinkers shake his head at it, and
say it come straight from the devil, and his hoof in every line of it.”

“Mrs. Jupp, the Greek characters are beautiful, though some of the
lines are not up to the mark. But, for my part, I wonder how any man
can write mixed Greek in London. Nevertheless, I shall have great
pleasure in talking it over with him, please God that he ever gets
well. To think that his poor weary brain should still be hankering
after his classics!”

It was the dirge in Cymbeline put into Greek choral metre, and John
Rosedewʼs tears flowed over the words, as Polydoreʼs had done, and
Cadwalʼs.

Unhappy Cradock! His misty brain had vapoured off in that sweet wild
dirge, which hovers above, as if the freed soul lingered, for the
clogged one to shake its wings to it.

The parson was pondering and closing his wet eyes to recover his faith
in God—whom best we see with the eyes shut, except when His stars are
shining—while Issachar Jupp came up the stairs, poking Dr. Tink before
him, because he still thought it likely that the son of medicine would
evaporate. The doctor, who knew his tricks and put up with them, lest
anything worse might come of it, solaced his sense of dignity, when he
got to the top, by a grand bow to Mr. Rosedew. John gave him the change
in a kind one; then offered his hand, as he always did, being a man of
the ancient fashion.

While they were both looking sadly at Cradock, he sat up suddenly
in the bed, and stretching forth his naked arms (wherein was little
nourishment), laughed as an aged man does, and then nodded at them
solemnly. His glazed eyes were so prominent, that their whites
reflected the tint of the rings around them.

“Ladies and gentlemen, stop him if you please, and give him a pen and
ink, and my best hat to write on. Oh, donʼt let him go by.”

“Stop whom, my dear sir?” asked the doctor, putting out his arms as if
to do it. “Now Iʼve stopped him. Whatʼs his name?”

“The golden lad. Oh, donʼt you know? You canʼt have got him, if you
donʼt. The golden lad that came from heaven to tell me I did not do it,
that I didnʼt do it, do it, sir—all a mistake altogether. It makes me
laugh, I declare it does; it makes me laugh for an hour, every time he
comes, because they were all so wise. All but my Amy, my Amy; she was
such a foolish little thing, she never would hear a word of it. And
now I call you all to witness, obtestor, antestor, one, two, three,
four, five; let him put it down on a sheet of foolscap, with room
enough for the names below it; all the ladies and gentlemen put their
names in double column, and get Mr. Clinkers, if you can, and Jenny, to
go at the bottom; only be particular about the double column, ladies
one side, gentlemen the other, like a country dance, you know, or the
‘carmen sæculare,’ and at the bottom, right across, Miss Amy Rosedewʼs
name.”

The contemplation of that last beatitude was too much for the poor
fellow; he fell back, faint on the pillow, and the shop–blind, untucked
by his blissful emotions, rattled its rings on the floor.

“Blow me if I can stand it,” cried Issachar Jupp, going down three
stairs at a step; and when he came back his face looked clearer, and
he said something about a noggin. Mrs. Ducksacre bolted after him, for
business must be attended to.

“Will he ever be right again, poor fellow? Dr. Tink, I implore you to
tell me your opinion sincerely.”

“Then I cannot say that _I think_ he will. Still, I have some hopes
of it. Much will depend upon the original strength of the cerebellum,
and the regularity of his previous habits. If he has led a wild, loose
life, he has no chance whatever of sanity.”

“No, he has led a most healthy life—temperate, gentle, and equable.
His brain has always been clear and vigorous, without being too
creative. He was one of the soundest scholars for his age I have ever
met with.”

“But he had some terrible blow, eh?”

“Oh yes, a most terrible blow.”

John thought what a terrible blow it would be to his own lifeʼs life,
if the issue went against him, and for tears he could ask no more.




CHAPTER XVI.


The good people assembled in Nowelhurst church were agreeably
surprised, on the following Sunday, by the announcement from Mr.
Pell—in that loud sonorous voice of his, which had frightened
spinsters out of their wits, lest he were forbidding, instead of asking
their banns of matrimony—that there would be no sermon that morning,
inasmuch as he, the Rev. Octavius, was forced to hurry away, at full
speed, to assuage the rampant desire of Rushford for the performance of
divine service.

Mrs. Nowell Corklemore, who had the great curtained pew of the Hall
entirely to herself and child—for Eoa never would go to church,
because they defy the devil there—Georgie, who appeased her active
mind by counting the brass–headed nails, and then multiplying them into
each other, and subtracting the ones that were broken, lifted her
indescribable eyes, and said, “Thank God,” almost audibly.

Octavius Pell, hurrying out of the porch, ascended Coræbus, as had
been arranged; but he did it so rapidly, and with such an air of
decision, that Amy, standing at the churchyard gate, full of beautiful
misgivings, could not help exclaiming,

“Oh please, Mr. Pell, whatever you do, leave your stick here till
Monday. We will take such care of it.”

“Indeed, I fear I must not, Miss Rosedew,” Octavius answered, gravely,
looking first at his stick, and then at the flanks of Ræby, who was
full of interesting tricks; “I have so far to go, you know, and I must
try to keep time with them.—Whoa, you little villain!”

“Oh dear, I am so sorry. At any rate please not to strike him, only
_stroke_ him with it. He is so _very_ high–spirited. And he has never
had a weal upon him, at least since he came to papa. And I could not
bear to see it. And I know you wonʼt, Mr. Pell.”

Octavius looked at the soft–hearted girl, blushing so in her new drawn
bonnet—mauve with black, for the sake of poor Clayton. He looked at
her out of his knowing dry eyes in that sort of response–to–the–Litany
style which a curate adopts to his rectorʼs daughter.

“Can you suppose, Miss Rosedew, that I would have the heart to beat him
now?—Ah, you will, will you then?” Ræbus thought better of it.

“No, I hope you would not,” said Amy, in pure good faith, with a
glance, however, at the thick bamboo, “because it would be _so cruel_.
It is hollow, I hope; but it has such knots, and it looks so very hard!”

“Hollow, and thin as a piece of pie–crust; and you know how this wood
splits.”

“Oh, I am so glad, because you canʼt hurt him so very much. Please
not to go, if you can hold him, more than three miles and a half an
hour. Papa says that is the pace that always suits his health best.
And please to take the saddle off, and keep it at your house, that
the Rushford boy may not ride him back. And please to choose a steady
boy from the head–class in your Sunday school, and, if possible, a
communicant. But Iʼm sadly afraid thereʼs no trusting the boys.”

“Indeed, I fear not,” said Octavius, gravely; and adding to himself,
“at any rate when you are concerned, you darling. What a love you are!
But thereʼs no chance for me, I know; and itʼs a good job for me that I
knew it. Oh you little angel, I wonder who the lucky fellow is!” Aunt
Eudoxia had dropped him a hint, quite in a casual way, when she saw
that the stout young bachelor was going in, over head and ears.

Sweet Amy watched Mr. Pell, or rather his steed, with fond interest,
until they turned the corner; and certainly the pace, so far, was
very sedate indeed. Octavius was an upright man—you could see that
by his seat in the saddle—as well as a kind and good–natured one;
and on no account would he have vexed that gentle and beautiful
girl. Nevertheless he grew impatient, as Coræbus pricked his ears
pretentiously, and snorted so as to defy the winds, and was fain to
travel sidewise, as if the distance was not enough for him; and all the
time he was swallowing the earth at the rate of no more than four miles
an hour. Then the young parson pulled out his watch, and saw that it
wanted but half an hour of the time himself had fixed for the morning
service at Rushford. And he could not bear the thought of keeping the
poor folk waiting about the cross, as they always did and would wait,
till the parson appeared among them. As Mr. Wise has well observed,
“the peasant of the New Forest is too full of veneration.”

And here let me acknowledge, as behoveth a man to do, not in a
scambling preface, which nobody ever would read, but in the body of
my work, great and loving obligation to the labours of Mr. John R.
Wise. His book is perfectly beautiful, written in admirable English,
full of observation, taste, and gentle learning; and the descriptions
of scenery are such that they make the heart yearn to verify them.
I know the New Forest pretty well, from my own perambulations and
perequitations—one barbarism is no worse than the other—but I never
should have loved it as I do but for his loving guidance.

The Rev. Mr. Pell, as some people put when they write to a
parson,—hoping still to keep faith with Amy, because her eyes were
so lovely,—pulled the snaffle, and turned Coræbus into a short cut,
through beeches and hazels. Then compromise came soon to an end, and
the big bamboo was compelled to fall upon the fat flank of Coræbus,
because he would not go without it. He showed sense of that first
attention only by a little buck–jump, and a sprightly wag of his
tail; then, hoping that the situation need not be looked in the face,
shambled along at five miles an hour, with a mild responsibility.

“Five miles more,” said Octave Pell, “and only twenty minutes to do
it in! Itʼs an unlucky thing for you, Coræbus, that your mistress is
engaged.” Whack, came the yellow bamboo again, and this time in solid
earnest; Ræbus went off as if he meant to go mad. He had never known
such a blow since the age wherein he belonged to the innkeeper. Oh,
could a horse with four feeds a day be expected to put up with tyranny?

But, to the naggyʼs great amazement, Octave Pell did not tumble off;
more than that, he seemed to stick closer, with a most unpleasant
embrace, and a pressure that told upon the wind—not of heaven but of
horse—till the following symptoms appeared:—First a wheeze, and creak
internal, a slow creak, like leather chafing, or a pair of bellows out
of order; then a louder remonstrance, like the ironwork of a roller,
or the gudgeons of a wheelbarrow; then, faster and faster, a sucking
noise, like the bucket of an old pump, when the gardener works by
the job; finally, puff, and roar, and shriek, with notes of passing
sadness, like the neap–tide wailing up a cavern, or the lament of the
Berkshire Blowing Stone.

In forest glades, where hollow hoofs fell on the sod quite mutely, that
roar was enough to try masculine courage, though never unnerved by a
heart–shock. How then could poor Pearl Garnet, sitting all alone, in a
lonely spot, wherein she had pledged herself to her dead love, sitting
there to indulge her tears, the only luxury left her—how could she
help being frightened to death as the unearthly sound approached her?

The terror was mutual. Coræbus, turning the corner sharply, stopped
short, in a mode that must have sent his true master over his withers,
to explore the nature of the evil. Then he shook all through, and would
have bolted, if the bamboo had not fallen heavily.

In the niche of a hollow oak was crouching, falling backward with
terror, and clutching at the brave old bark, yet trying to hide behind
it—only the snowy arms would come outwards—a beautiful girl, clad in
summer white on that foggy day of December. The brown cloak, which had
protected her from sylvan curiosity, lay on the ground, a few yards
away, on the spot so sad and sacred. Pearl Garnetʼs grief, if we knew
the whole of it, or perhaps because we cannot, was greater than any
girl could bear. A lovely, young, and loving maid, with stores of
imagination, yet a practical power of stowing it; of building castles,
yet keeping them all within compass of the kitchen–range; quite
different from our Amy, yet a better wife for _some_ men—according
to what the trumps are, and Amy must have hearts, or she dies;—that
very nice girl, we have let her go weep, and never once cared to follow
her. There is never any justice in this world; therefore who cares
to apologise? It would take up all our business–time, if we did it
properly.

Now, as she stretched her white arms forth, and her delicate form
shrunk back into the black embrace of the oak–tree; while her rich
hair was streaming all down her breast, and her dark eyes still full
of tear–drops; the rider no less than the horse was amazed, and seemed
to behold a vision. Then as she shrunk away into the tree–bole, with a
shriek of deadly terror—for what love casteth out fear?—and she saw
not through the ivy–screen, and Coræbus groaned sepulchrally, Pell came
down with a dash on one foot, and went, quick jump, to help her.

In a fainting fit,—for the heart so firm and defiant in days of
happiness was fluxed now and frail with misery—she was cowering away
in the dark tree–nook, like the pearls of mistletoe fallen, with her
head thrown back (such an elegant head, a womanʼs greatest beauty), and
the round arms hanging helpless.

Hereupon Mr. Pell was abroad. He had never experienced any sisters,
nor much mother consciously—being the eighth son, as of course we
know, of a jolly Yorkshire baronet; at any rate he had lost his mother
at the birth of Nonus Pell; and I am sorry there are not ninety of
them, if of equal merit.

So Octavius stood like a fish out of water, with both hands in his
pocket, as it is so generally the habit of fishes to stand.

Then, meaning no especial harm, nor perhaps great good, for that
matter, he said to himself—

“Confound it all. What the deuce am I to do?”

His sermon upon the Third Commandment, about to be preached at
Rushford, where the fishermen swore like St. Peter,—that sermon went
crack in his pocket at such a shocking ejaculation. Never heeding that,
he went on to do what a stout fellow and a gentleman must have done
in this emergency. He lifted the drooping figure forth into the open
air, touching it only with his hands, timidly and reverently, as if
every fair curve were sacred. Then he fetched water in his best Sunday
hat—the only chimney–pot he possessed—from the stream trickling
through the spire–bed; and he sprinkled it on the broad, white
forehead, as if he were christening a baby.

The moment he saw that her life was returning, and her deep grey eyes,
quiet havens of sorrow, opened and asked where their owner was, and her
breast rose like a billow in a place where two tides meet, that moment
Octave laid her back against the rugged trunk, in the thick brown cloak
which he had fetched when he went for the water; and wrapped it around
her, delicately, as if she were taking a nap there.

Oh, man of short pipes and hard, bachelor fare, for this thou deservest
as good a wife as ever basted a leg of mutton!

At last the young lady looked up at him with a deep–drawn sigh, and
said—

“I am afraid I have been very silly.”

“No, indeed, you have not. But I am very sorry for you, because I am
dreadfully clumsy.”

She glanced at his snowy choker—which he never wore but on
Sundays—and, being a very quick–witted young woman, she guessed at
once who he was.

“Oh, please to tell me—I hope the service is not over at Nowelhurst
church.”

“The service has been over for a quarter of an hour; because there was
no sermon.”

“Oh, what shall I do, then? What can I do? I had better never go home
again.”

This was said to herself in anguish, and Pell saw that he was not meant
to hear it.

“Can I go, please, to the Rectory? Mr. Rosedew is from home; but Iʼm
sure they will give me shelter until my—until I am sent for. I have
lost my way in the wood here.”

This statement was none of the truest.

“To be sure,” said the hasty parson, forgetting about the Rushford
bells, the rheumatic clerk, and the quid–chewing pilots—let them turn
their quids a bit longer—“to be sure, I will take you there at once.
Allow me to introduce myself. How very stupid of me! Octavius Pell, Mr.
Rosedewʼs curate at Rushford.”

Hereupon “Pello, pepuli, pulsum” (as his friends loved to call him
from his driving powers at cricket, and to show that they knew some
Latin) executed a noble salaam—quite of the modern school, however,
and without the old reduplication (like the load on the back of
Christian)—till the duckweed came out of his hat in a body, and fell
into the flounce tucket of the beautiful Pearlʼs white skirt.

She never looked, though she knew it was there—that girl understood
her business—but curtseyed to him prettily, having recovered strength
by this time; and there was something in his dry, manly tone, curt
modesty, and breeding, without any flourish about it, which led the
young maid to trust him, as if she had known him since tops and bottoms.

“I am Pearl Garnet,” said she, imitating his style unconsciously, “the
daughter—I mean I live at Nowelhurst Dell Cottage.”

Coræbus had cut off for stable long ago, with three long weals from
bamboo upon him, which he vowed he would show to Amy.

“Please to take my arm, Miss Garnet. You are not very strong yet. I
know your brother well; and a braver or more straightforward young
gentleman never thought small things of himself after doing great ones.”

Pearl was delighted to hear Bobʼs praises; and Mr. Pell treated that
subject so cleverly, from every possible point of view, that she was
quite astonished when she saw the Rectory side–gate, and Octavius, in
the most light–hearted manner, made a sudden and warm farewell, and
darted away for Rushford. How good it is for a sad, heavy heart to
exchange with a gay and light one!

“Hang it! after that let me have a burster!” was his clerical
ejaculation, “or else it is all up with me. I hope we havenʼt spilt the
sermon, though, or got any duckweed down it. Duckweed, indeed; what a
duck she is! And oh, what splendid eyes!”

He ran all the way to Rushford, at a pace unknown to Coræbus; and his
governor–coat flew away behind him, with the sermon banging about, and
the text peeping out under the pocket–lap. “Swear not at all,” were the
words, I believe; and a rare good sermon it must have been, if it stuck
to the text under the circumstances.

The jolly old tars, after waiting an hour, orally refreshing their
grandmothers’ epitaphs, and close–hauling on many a tight yarn, were
just setting up stunʼsails to take grog on board at the “Luggerʼs
Locker,” hard by, as the banyan time was over. Let them ship their
grog, and their old women might keep gravy hot, and be blessed to
them. They had come there for sarvice, and shiver their timbers if
theyʼd make sail till the chaplain came. Good faith, and they got
their service at last, but an uncommonly short–winded one, a sermon,
moreover, which each man felt coming admirably home—to his shipmate.

Meanwhile, Mr. Pell had left behind no small excitement at Nowelhurst.
For a rumour took wing after morning service—when the wings of fame
are briskest in all country parishes—that parson John was gone to
London to complain to the Queen that Sir Cradock Nowell never came to
church now, nor even sent his agent thither, to manage matters for
him. For Mr. Garnet still retained his stewardship among them, though
longing to be quit of it, and discharging his duties silently, and not
with his old pronouncement, because his health was weaker. The vivid
power of vital force seemed to be failing the man who had stamped his
character upon all people around him; because he never said a thing
which he did not think, and scarcely ever thought a thing with any fear
of saying it.

Hitherto we have had of Bull Garnet by far the worse side uppermost. I
will offer no excuses now for his too ready indulgence of his far too
savage temper. In sooth, we meet with scarce any case in which excuses
are undiscoverable. God and the angels find them always; our best
earthly friends can see them, when properly pointed out; our enemies,
when they want to make accusation of them.

All I will say for Bull Garnet is (to invert the historianʼs sentence)
“Hæc tanta viri vitia ingentes virtutes exæquabant”—“These blemishes,
however dark, had grand qualities to redress them.” Strong affection,
great scorn of falsehood, tenderness almost too womanly, liberality
both of mind and heart, a real depth of sympathy—would all these
co–exist with, or be lost in, one great vice? It appears to me that we
are so toothed in, spliced and mortised, dovetailed, double–budded, and
inarched, both of good and evil, that the wrong, instead of poisoning
the right, often serves as guano to it. Nevertheless we had better be
perfect—when we have found the way out.




CHAPTER XVII.


It must not be forgotten that Rufus Hutton all this time was very
hard at work, and so was Mrs. Corklemore. Between that lady and Eoa
pleasant little passes gave a zest to daily intercourse, Georgieʼs
boundless sympathies being circumscribed only by terror. Nevertheless,
although Sir Cradock laughed (when his spirits were good, and his mind
was clear) at their fundamental difference, Georgie began to gain upon
him, and Eoa to lose ground. How could it be otherwise, even if their
skill had been equal—and Eoa not only had no skill, but scorned sweet
Georgie for having any—how could Mrs. Corklemore fail of doing her
blessed duty, when she was in the house all day, and Eoa out, jumping
the river, or looking about for Bob Garnet? Whatever the weather was,
out went Eoa, peering around for the tracks of Bob, which, like those
of a mole, were self–evident; and then hiding behind a great tree when
she found him; and hoping, with flutter of heart about it, that Bob
had not happened to see her. Yet, if he happened not to see, she would
go up and be cross with him, and ask whether Amy Rosedew had turned to
the right or left there, or had stopped in a hollow tree. And did Bob
think she looked well that morning? Then he had no right to think so.
And perhaps her own new hat, with black ostrich, was a hideously ugly
thing. Oh, she only wished there were tigers!

Leave the little dear to do exactly as she likes—for nothing else
she will do; and now, in looking through the forest, grey and white
with winter, scorn we not the grand old trunk, in our gay love of the
mistletoe.

There is a very ancient tree, an oak well known and good of fame, even
at the first perambulation of our legislator king. It stands upon the
bend and brow under which two valleys meet, where a horse–shoe of the
wood has chanced, and water takes advantage. In the scoop below the
tree, two covered brooks fetch round high places into one another,
prattle satisfaction, and steal away for their honeymoon, without
a breeze upon them. This “mark–oak,” last of seven stout brothers,
dwells upon a surge of upland, and commands three valleys, two of
which unite below it, and the other leads them off, welcoming their
waters. The grand tree lifts its proven column, channeled, ramped,
and crocketed, flaked with brown on lines of grey, and bulked with
cloudlike ganglions. Then from the maintop, where is room for fifty
archers to draw the bow, limbs of rugged might arise, spread flat, or
straggle downwards. But the two great limbs of all, the power and main
glory, the arms that reared their pride to heaven, are stricken, riven,
and blasted. Gaping with great holes and rotten, heavily twisted in
and out, and ending in four long scraggy horns, ghastly white in the
winter sun; where the squirrel durst not build, nor the honey–buzzard
watch for prey; this shattered hope of a noble life records the wrath
of Heaven.

The legend is that a turf–cutter having murdered a waylost pedlar, for
the sake of his pack, buried the corpse in this hollow tree, and sat
down on the grave to count his booty. Here, while he was bending over
the gewgaws and the trinkets, which he had taken for gold upon the poor
hucksterʼs word, and which gleamed and flashed in the August twilight,
the vengeance of God fell upon him. In bodily form Godʼs lightning
crashed through the dome of oak above him, leaped on the murdererʼs
head, and drove him through the cloven earth, breast to breast on his
victimʼs corpse. You may be sure that the sons of Ytene, a timid and
superstitious race, find small attractions in that tree, when the
shades of night are around it.

John Rosedew did not return on the Monday, nor yet on the Tuesday,
&c. Not even until the last down–train roared through the Forest
on Saturday. Then, as it rushed through the dark night of winter,
throwing its white breath (more strong than our own, and very little
more fleeting) in bracelets on the brown–armed trees, and in chains on
the shoulders of heather, the parson leaned back on the filthy panels
of a second–class carriage, and thought of the scene he had left.

He had written from London to Miss Rosedew, insisting, so far as he
ever cared to insist on a little matter, that none at home should
stay up for him, that no one should come to the station to meet him,
and that Pell should be begged to hold himself ready for the Sundayʼs
duty, because Mr. Rosedew would not go home, if any change should that
day befall unlucky Cradock Nowell. Lucky Cradock, one ought to say,
inasmuch as for a fortnight now he had lost all sense of trouble.

Finding from Dr. Tink that no rapid change was impending, John Rosedew
determined to see his home, and allay his childʼs anxiety. Moreover,
he felt that his “cure of souls” must need their Sunday salting. Now
walking away from the wooded station that cloudy Christmas Eve—for
Christmas that year fell on Sunday—how grand he found the difference
from the dirty coop of London.

The new moon was set, but the clouds began to lift above the tree–tops,
and a faint Aurora flushed and flickered in the far north–west. Then
out came several stars rejoicing, singing in twinkles their Makerʼs
praise; and some of the sounds that breathe through a forest, even in
the hush of a winterʼs night, began to whisper peace and death.

John, who feared not his Masterʼs works, and was happiest often in
solitude, trudged along with the leathern valise, and three paper
parcels strapped comfortably upon his ample back. Presently he began
to think of home and his parish cares, and the breadth of God spread
around him; and then from thinking rose unawares into higher communion,
for surely it is a grander thing to feel than to think of greatness.

And in this humour quietly he plodded his proper course for the first
four miles or so, until he had passed the Dame Slough, near the
Blackwater stream, and was over against Vinney Ridge. But here he must
needs try a short cut, through the Government Woods, to Nowelhurst,
though even in the broad daylight he could scarcely have found his way
there. He thought that, in spite of his orders, Amy would be sure to
stay up for him, and so he must hurry homeward.

At a fine brisk pace, for a man of his years, he plunged into the deep
wood, and in five minutesʼ time he had very little hope of getting out
before daylight. Have you ever been lost in a great wood at night,
alone, and laden, and weary, where the frithings have not been cut for
ten years, when there is no moon or wind to guide a man, and the stars
glimpse so deceitfully? How the stubs, even if you are so quick–footed
as not to be doubled back by them, or thrown down with nostrils
patulous—how they catch you at the knee with three prongs apiece,
and make you think of white swelling! Then the slip, where the wet has
dribbled from some officious branch, or sow, or cow, summer–pasturing,
has kept her volutabre. Down you plump, and your heels alone have
chance of going to heaven, because (unless you are a wonder) you employ
such powerful language.

Rising with some difficulty, after doubting if it be worth the while,
and rubbing spitefully ever so long at “the case of the part affected,”
you have nothing for it but to start again, and fall into worse
disasters. Going very carefully then you jump from the goading repulse
of a holly into the heart of a hazel–bush—one which has numberless
clefts and tongs, and is hospitable to a bramble. Tumbling out of it,
full of thorns, recalling your Farnaby epigram, and wishing they had
pelted the hazel harder, away you go, quite desperate now, knowing well
that the wood is full of swamps, some of which will petrify you, under
sun–dew and blue campanula, when the summer comes again.

Through all these pleasing incidents and animating encounters
John Rosedew went ahead, and, too often, a “header,” until he was
desperately tired, and sat down to think about it. Then he heard two
tawny owls hooting to one another, across at least a mile of trees;
and every forest sound grew clearer in the stillness of the night; the
sharp, sad cry of the marten–cat, the bark of the fox so impatient,
the rustle of the dry leaves as a weasel or rat skirred over them,
the wing–flap of some sliding bird roused from his roost by danger,
the scratching of claws upon trunks now and then, and the rubbing of
horns against underwood: these and other stranger noises, stirring the
“down of darkness,” moving the sense of lonesome mystery and of fear
indefinite, were abroad on the air (in spite of Shakespeare) on that
Christmas Eve.

John Rosedew laid his burden by, and began to think, or wonder, what
was best to do. Long as he had lived amid the woods, he knew much
more of classic sylvulæ and poetical arundines, than of the natural
greenwood, and the tasseling of morasses.

Bob Garnet would have found his way there, or in any other English
forest, with little hesitation. From his knowledge of all the epiphytes
and their different aspects, the bent of the winter grasses, the sense
which even a bramble has of sun and wind and rain, he would soon have
established his compass, with allowance for slope and exposure.

The parson sat upon an ants’ nest, which had done its work, and feeling
discharged, collapsed with him—a big nest of the largest British ant,
which is mostly found near fir–trees. That nest alone would have told
poor Bob something of his whereabouts; for there are not many firs in
that part of the forest, and only one clump, high up on a hill, in the
wood where John Rosedew had lost himself. But the man of great learning
was none the wiser, only he felt that his smallclothes were done for,
and Mr. Channingʼs fashionable cut gone almost as prematurely as the
critic who had condemned it.

“Let me now consider,” said Mr. Rosedew to himself, for about the
fiftieth time; “it strikes me at the first sight—though I declare I
canʼt see anything—would that I could not feel! for I confess that
these legs are grievous; but putting aside that view or purview of the
question, it strikes me that, having no Antigone to lead me from this,
which certainly is the grove of the Eumenides—there is another ant
gone up my leg—ʼingentis formica laboris.’ I wish he wouldnʼt work so
hard, though, and I always have had the impression that they stayed
in–doors in the winter. Mem. To consult Theophrastus, and compare him,
as usual, with Pliny. Also look at the Geoponika, full of valuable
hints—why there he is again, biting very hard or stinging. What says
Aristophanes about the music of the gnats? Indelicate, I fear, as he
too often is. Nay, nay, good ant, if indeed thou art an ant—— Why,
what is that over yonder?”

It was a dim light in the great hollow oak, “the Murdererʼs Tree,” as
they called it, not a hundred yards from John Rosedew.

The parson approached it cautiously, for he knew that desperate men,
and criminals under a ban, still harboured sometimes in the Forest.
As he drew nearer, the feeble light, glimmering through the entrance,
showed him at once what tree it was, because the rays glanced through
two dark holes under the bulging and beetling brow, which peasants
call “the eyes of God.”

John Rosedew was as brave a man as ever wept for anotherʼs grief, or
with the word of God assuaged it. No man could have less superstition,
unless (as some would have us believe) all religion is that. Upon
this point we will not be persuaded, until we have seen them live the
better, and die the more calmly for holding it. Yet John Rosedew, so
firmly set, so full of faith in his Maker, so far above childish fears
(which spring from the absence of our Father),—he, who having injured
none had no dread of any, yet drew back and trembled greatly at the
sight before him.

A small reflector–lamp, with the wick overhung with fungus, stood upon
a knotted niche in the hollow of the tree. By it, and with his face
and eyes set towards the earth, a tall and powerful man, stripped to
the waist, was leaning, with one great arm beneath his forehead, and
bloody stripes across his back. The drooping of his figure, the woe in
every vein of it, the deep and everlasting despair in every bone—it
was an extremity of our human nature, which neither chisel nor pen may
approach, nor even the mind of man conceive, until it has been through
it.

Presently the man upraised his massive head, and scorned himself for
being so effeminate. He had nearly fainted with the pain; what right
had he to feel it? Why should his paltry body quail at a flea–bite
lash or so, when body and soul were damned for ever?

But if his form had told of sorrow, great God, what did his face tell?
He never sighed, nor groaned, nor moaned; his woe was beyond such
trumpery; he simply took the heavy scourge from the murdererʼs grave,
upon which it had dropped when the swoon came over him, and, standing
well forth in the black hollowʼs centre, to gain full swing for his
scorpion thongs, he lashed himself over back and round breast, with the
utmost strength of his mighty arms, with every corded muscle leaping,
but not a sign of pain on his face, nor a nerve of his body flinching.
Then, at last, he fell away, and allowed himself to moan a little.

John Rosedew would have leaped forward at once, in his horror at such
self–cruelty, but that he saw who it was, and knew how his meddling
would be taken. He knew that Bull Garnetʼs religious views were very
strange and peculiar, and never must be meddled with, except at his
own request, and at seasonable moments. Yet he had never dreamed that
self–chastisement was part of them.

“Garnet a wild flagellant!” said the parson to himself; “well, I knew
that he was an enthusiast, but never dreamed that he was a fanatic. And
how shockingly hard he hits himself! Strong as Dr. Mastix at Sherborne;
but the doctor took good care never to hit himself. Upon my word, I
must run away. It is too sad to laugh at. What resolution that man
must have! He scarcely feels the blows in the agony of his mind. I
must reason with him about it, if I ever can find occasion. With such
violation of His image, God cannot be well pleased.”

Meditating deeply upon this strange affair, the parson plodded
homewards, for now he knew his way, with the Murdererʼs Oak for his
landmark. At last he saw his quiet home, and gave a very gentle knock,
because it was so late.

The door was opened by Amy herself, pale, excited, and jumping.

“Oh, daddy, daddy!” Chock—chock—chock—such a lot of kisses, and both
arms round his neck.

“Corculum, voluptas, glycymelon, anima mea——”

“Oh, papa, say ‘Amy dear,’ and then I shall know it is you.”

Then she laughed, and then she cried, and presently fell to at kissing
again. I am afraid she proved herself a fool; but allowance must be
made for her, because she had never learned before how to get on
without her father.

“Oh, you beautiful love of a daddy! I was quite sure you would come,
you know; that you could not leave me any longer; so I would not listen
to a single word any one of them said. And I kept the kitchen fire up,
and a good fire in your pet room, dear; and I have got such a supper
for you! Now, off with your coat in a minute, darling. Oh, how poorly
you look, my own father! But we will soon put you to rights again. Aunt
Doxy is gone to bed, hurrah! and so are Jemima and Jenny. And she wonʼt
have the impudence to come down, with all her hair in the jelly–bags,
so I shall have you all to myself, dada; and if any one can deserve
you, I do.”

“My own pet child, my warm–hearted dear,” said John, with the
tears in his eyes; “I had not the least idea that your mind was so
ill–regulated. We must have a course of choriambics together, or
the heavy trimacrine dimeter, as I have ventured to name it, about
which——”

“About which not another short syllable, till you have had a light
tri–mackerel supper, and not a quasi–cæsura left even.”

“Why, Amy, you are getting quite witty!” And John, with one arm still
in his overcoat, looked at her bright eyes wonderingly.

“Of course I am, dad, when you come home. My learning sparkles at sight
of you. Come, quick now, for fear of my eating you before you begin
your supper. Youʼll have it in the kitchen, you know, dear, because it
will be so much nicer; and then a pipe by the book–room fire, and a
chat with your good little daughter. O father, father, mind you never
go away from me such a long, long time again.”

John thought to himself that, ere many years, he must go away from his
Amy for much more than a fortnight; but of course he would not damp her
young joy with any such troubles now.

“If you please, my meritorious father, you will come to the door, and
just smell them; and then you will have five minutes allowed you to
put on your dear old dressing–gown, and the slippers worked by the
Vestal virgins; five minutes by the kitchen clock, and not a book to
be touched, mind. Now, donʼt they smell lovely? I put them on when I
knew your knock. The first mackerel of the season, only caught this
afternoon. I sent word to Mr. Pell for them. He can do what he likes
with the fishermen. And you know as well as I do, papa, you can never
resist a mackerel.”

When John came down, half the table was covered with some of his
favourite authors—not that she meant to let him read, but only because
he would miss his books a great deal more than the salt–cellar—and
the other half she was bleaching, and smoothing, and stroking with a
snowy cloth, soft and sleek as her own bare arms, setting all things in
lovely order, and looking at her father every moment, with the skirt
of her frock pinned up, and her glossy hair dancing jigs on the velvet
slope of her shoulders. And she made him hungrier every moment by
savoury word and choice innuendo.

“Worcester sauce, pa, darling, and a little of the very best butter,
not mixed up with flour, you know, but melting on them, like their
native element. Just see how they are browning, and not a bit of the
skin come off. What is it about the rhombus, pa, and when am I to read
Juvenal?”

“Never, my child.”

“Very well, pa, dear, you know best, of course; but I thought it
was very nice about weighing Hannibal, in the Excerpta. Father, put
that book down; I canʼt allow any reading. And after supper I shall
expect you to spin me such a yarn, dear, to wind up the thread of your
adventures.”

“_Τολυπεύειν_,” said John, calmly, although he was so hungry; “the very
word poor Cradock used in his rendering of that dirge—

  “‘_Μόχθον οὕνεκα τὸν κατʼ ἦμαρ
  Ἐκτολυπέσας οἴκαδε,
  Μισθὸν φερων, ἤνυσας._’

Oh, I forgot; ah yes, to be sure. A word, I mean, which expresses in a
figurative and yet homely manner——”

“Cradock, papa! Oh, father, have you been with him in London? Oh, how
Aunt Doxy has cheated me! You know very well, my own father, that you
cannot tell me a story. Did you go to London because poor Cradock was
very, very ill?”

“Yes,” said her father, those soft bright eyes beamed into his so
appealingly; “my own child, your Cradock is very ill indeed.”

“Not dead, father? Oh, not dead?”

“No, my child; nor in any great danger, I sincerely believe, just at
present.”

“Then eat your supper, pa, while it is hot. I am so glad you have seen
him. I am quite content with that.”

She believed, or she would not have said it. And yet how far from the
truth it was!

“You shall tell me all after supper, my father. Thank God for His
mercies to me. I am never in a hurry, dear.”

Yet Amy, in dishing up the mackerel, had the greatest difficulty (for
her breath came short, and her breast heaved fast) in holding back the
tide of hysterics, which would have spoiled her fatherʼs supper.

“My amulet, I cannot eat a morsel while I see your hand shake. Darling,
I must tell you all; I cannot bear your anxiety.”

The second mackerel, a fish of no manners, instead of curling his tail
at the frying, had glued it to the pan, until a tear of Amyʼs fried,
and then he let go in a moment. John Rosedew caught his darling child,
and drew her to his knees, with the frying–pan in her hand; and then he
made her look at him, and she tried to have her eyes dry. Do what she
might she could not speak, only to let her neck rise, and her drooping
eyelids tremble.

“My own lifeʼs love, I have told you the worst. God is very good to us.
Cradock has been at the point of death, but now he is better a little.
Only his mind is in danger. And it must come home very slowly, if it
comes at all. Now, darling, you know everything.”

She took his magnificent silvery head between her little white hands,
and kissed him twice on either brow, but not a word she said.

“My own sweet child,” cried her father, slowly passing one arm around
her, and swindling his heart of a smile; “I am apt to make the worst of
things. Let us try to be braver, or at least to have more faith.”

She leaped up at that very word, with the dawn of a glorious smile in
her eyes, and she took the frying–pan once again, and eased out, with a
white–handled knife, mackerel No. 3. But, upon second thoughts, she let
him slide into the frizzle again, to keep him warm and comfortable. Her
heart was down very deep just now, but for all that, her father must
have and must enjoy his supper.

“Father, I am all right now. Only eat your supper, dear. What a selfish
thing I am!”

“Have a bit, my darling heart.”

“Yes, I will have a bit of tail, pa, just to test my cookery. Thatʼs
what I call frying! Look at the blue upon him, and the crisp brown
shooting over it! Come, daddy, no nonsense, if you please. I could have
eaten all three of them if I had only been out on the warren. And you
to come starving from London! Now No. 3, papa, if you please.” But she
kept her face away from him, and bent her neck peculiarly.

“How beautifully fresh this ale is! Oh, the stuff they sell in London!
I am almost inclined to consider the result of taking another half
glass.”

Her quick feet went pat on the cellar–steps, while her father was yet
perpending; and she came back not a whit out of breath, but sweetly
fresh and excited.

“Such a race, pa; because I know of one family of cockroaches, and half
suspect another. They are so very imprudent. Robert Garnet says that
they stay at home, and keep their Christmas domestically, and I need
not run for fear of them, at least till the end of April. And perhaps
he is right, because he knows and studies everything nasty. Only I
canʼt believe what he says about ants, because it contradicts Solomon,
who was so very much older. Now, you paternal darling, let me froth it
up for you.”

“Thank the Lord for as good a meal as ever one of His children was
blessed with.”

The parson stood up as he said these words, and put his thick but not
large hands together, among the crumbs on the tablecloth.

“Now, if you please, the leastest—double superlative, pa, you know,
like _πρώτιστος_, and something else—oh, they will pluck me at
Oxford!—the very leastest little drop of the old French cognac we
bought for parochial rheumatism, with one thin slice of lemon, an
ebullition of water, and half a knob of sugar.”

Before John could remonstrate, there it was, all winking at him, and
begging to be sniffed before sipping.

“My pet, you are so premature. How can I trust your future? You never
give me time to consider a subject, even in the first of its bearings.”

“To be sure not, father. You know quite well you would take at least
eight different views of the matter, and multiply them into eight
others of people I never heard of. Now the pipe, dear. You shall have
it here, because it is so much warmer. You know you canʼt fill it
properly.”

So the parson, happy in having a child who could fill a pipe better
than he could, leaned back in his favourite chair, which Amy had
wheeled in for him, and held his long clay in his left hand, while his
right played with her hair, as she sat at his feet, and coaxed him.

“Sermon all ready, dear?”

“Well, you know best about that, Amy; I always trust you to arrange
them.”

“Never fear, papa; leave it to me. What would you do without me? I have
put you out such a beauty, because it is Christmas Day: one that always
makes me cry, because I have heard it so often. But you must have
confidence in me.”

“Implicit confidence, my pet. Still I like to run my eyes over them,
for I cannot see as I did. My eyes are getting so old.”

“Iʼll kiss them till you canʼt see one bit, if you dare to say that
again, papa. Old, indeed! They are better than mine. And I can see
the pattern of a lady–bird, all across the room. There was a lady–bird
on the window to–day. At this time of year, only think! That was good
luck, wasnʼt it? And a dear little robin flew in, and perched upon the
hat–pegs; and then I _knew_ that you must come home.”

“Oh, you superstitious pet! I must reason with you to–morrow.”


                            END OF VOL. II.


        LONDON: PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




                         TRANSCRIBERʼS NOTES:

—Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.

—A Table of Contents was not in the original work; one has been
 produced and added by Transcriber.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 2 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 47085-0.txt or 47085-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/0/8/47085/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 3 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Cradock Nowell, Vol. 3 (of 3)
       A Tale of the New Forest.

Author: Richard Doddridge Blackmore

Release Date: October 9, 2014 [EBook #47086]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 3 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                            CRADOCK NOWELL

                       A Tale of the New Forest.

                                  BY

                    _RICHARD DODDRIDGE BLACKMORE_,

                      AUTHOR OF “CLARA VAUGHAN.”


     “You have said: whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.”

                                       AS YOU LIKE IT, Act III. Sc. 2.


                           IN THREE VOLUMES.

                               VOL. III.


              LONDON: CHAPMAN AND HALL, 193, PICCADILLY.

                                 1866.

               [_The right of Translation is reserved._]




                                LONDON:

            PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




          CONTENTS OF VOLUME III.

  CHAPTER                         PAGE

       I.                            1

      II.                           10

     III.                           21

      IV.                           49

       V.                           64

      VI.                           80

     VII.                          102

    VIII.                          122

      IX.                          142

       X.                          163

      XI.                          173

     XII.                          190

    XIII.                          202

     XIV.                          219

      XV.                          234

     XVI.                          264

    XVII.                          276

   XVIII.                          298




CRADOCK NOWELL.




CHAPTER I.


Upon the Christmas morning the parish flocked to church, and the church
was dressed so beautifully that every one was amazed. Amy and Eoa made
the wreaths, the garlands, and rosettes; there was only one cross out
of the lot, a badly–bred Maltese one; and Eoa walked over the barbarous
pewscreens (like the travisses in a stable), springing from one to
another, with a cable of flowers and evergreens, as easily and calmly
as she would come down–stairs to dinner. Of course she had never heard
of that sort of thing before, but she took to it at once, as she did to
anything pretty; and soon she was Amyʼs mistress, as indeed she must be
every oneʼs, unless she could not bear them.

The sons of the Forest looked up with amazement as they shambled in one
after other, and an old woodcutter went home for his axe, lest the ivy
should throttle the pillars. On the whole, the parish attributed this
great outburst of foliage to the indignation of the pixies at Parson
Johnʼs going to London, and staying there so long.

The prayers were read by Mr. Pell, for the rector was weary and
languid; but he would not forego his pleasant words to the well–known
flock that day. While the choir was making a stupendous din out of
something they called an “anthem,” Octave slipped off to his Rushford
duty, through the chancel–door. Then, with his silken gown on—given him
years ago by subscription, and far too grand for him to wear, except at
Christmas and Easter—John Rosedew mounted the pulpit–stairs, and showed
(as in a holy bower of good–will and of gratitude) the loving–kindness
of his face and the grandeur of his forehead. As he glanced from one to
the other with a general welcome, a genial interest in the welfare both
of soul and body, a stir and thrill ran through the church, and many
eyes were tearful. For already a rumour was abroad that “Uncle John”
must leave them, that another Christmas Day would see a stranger in his
pulpit.

After dwelling briefly on his favourite subject, Christian love, and
showing (by quotations from the noblest of heathen philosophers) how
low and false their standard was, how poor a keystone is earthly
citizenship, the patriotism of a pugnacious village, or a little
presumptuous Attica, to crown and bind together the great arch of
humanity; after showing, too, with a depth of learning wasted on
his audience, how utterly false the assertion is that the doctrines,
or rather the principles, nay, the one great principle of our New
Testament, had ever been anticipated on the banks of the Yellow
River—eloquently he turned himself to the application of his subject.

With some unconscious yearning perhaps, or perhaps some sense of
home–truth, he gazed towards the curtained pew where sat his ancient
friend, brought thither (it was too evident) by tidings of his
absence. As the eyes of the old men met, for the first time after long
estrangement—those eyes that had met so frankly and kindly for more
than fifty years, during all which time each to the other had been
a “necessarius”—and as each observed how pale and grey his veteran
comrade looked, neither heart was wholly free from self–reproach and
sorrow.

John Rosedewʼs mild eyes glistened so, and his voice so shook and
faltered, that all the parish noticed it, and wondered what harm it had
done last week. For none of them had ever known his voice shake, except
when some parishioner had done the unbecoming; and then the village
mourned it, because it vexed the parson so.

The next day, as soon as Parson John had found that all parochial
matters were in proper trim, and that he might leave home again without
neglect of duty, what did he do but order a fly, no less than a
one–horse fly, from the “Jolly Foresters;” which fly should rush to the
parsonage–door, as nearly as might be, at one oʼclock? Now why would
not Coræbus suffice to carry the rector and valise, according to the
laws of the Medes and Persians, a distance of two parasangs?

Simply because our Amy was going, and had every right to go. Beautiful
Amy was going to London, great fountain–head of all visions and
marvels, even from white long–clothes up to the era of striped
crinoline. And who shall object, except on the ground that Amy was too
good to go?

If Amy were put down now in Hyde Park, Piccadilly, or Regent–street,
at the height and cream of the season, when fop, and screw, and fogey,
Frivolus and Frivola, Diana Venatrix, Copa Syrisca, Aphrodite Misthote,
yea, and even some natural honest girls moderately ticketed, are doing
their caravaning—if Amy were put on the pathway there, in her simple
grey hat and feather, and that roundabout chenille thing which she
herself had made, and which followed the lines of her figure so, fifty
fellows, themselves of the most satisfactory figure (at Drummondʼs, or
at Couttsʼs), fifty fellows who had slipped the hook fifty times apiece
(spite of motherly bend OʼShaugnessey) must have received their stroke
of grace, and hated Cradock Nowell.

Although the South–Western Railway had been open so many years, our
forest–child had never been further from green leaf and yellow gorse
than Winchester in the eastern hemisphere, and Salisbury in the
western. And now after all to think that she was going to London,
not for joy, but sorrow. Desperate coaxing it had cost; every known
or new device—transparent every one of them, as the pleading eyes
that urged it—every bit of cozening learned from three years old and
upward, every girlish argument that never can hold water, unless it be
a tear–drop; and, better than a million pleas, every soft caress and
kiss, all loving, all imploring—there was not one of these but came to
batter Amyʼs father, or ever he surrendered. For Johnʼs ideas were very
old–fashioned as to maidenly decorum, and Aunt Eudoxiaʼs view of the
matter was even more prim and grim than his. Yet (as Amy well remarked)
if _she_ could see no harm in it, there certainly could be none; and
how could they insist so much on the _καλόν_ and the _πρέπον_, as if
they over–rode _τὸ δέον_!

It is likely enough that this last stroke won the palm of victory;
for, though Miss Amy knew little of Greek, and her father knew a great
deal, she often contrived, with true feminine skill, to take his
wicket neatly, before he had found his block–hole. And then her father
would smile and chuckle, and ask to have his bat again; which never
was allowed him. To think that any man should be the father of such
_ἐυστοχία_!

Therefore, that father was compelled to throw himself, flat as a
flounder, on Eudoxiaʼs generosity; for the leech–bottle now was dry.

“Darling Doxy, you know quite well you are such a wonderful manager;
you have got a little cash somewhere?”

He put it with a twist of interrogation, a quivering lever of doubt,
and yet a grand fulcrum of confidence, which were totally irresistible.
No wonder his daughter could coax. Oh that I were like you, John, when
I want a bit of money!

Hereupon Aunt Doxy smiled, with the perception of superior mind, and
the power of causing astonishment. Never a word she said, but went to
some unknown recesses in holy up–stair adyta: she fussed about with
many keys, over sounding boards and creaking ones, to signify her
caution; and at last came back with a leathern bag, wash–leather tied
with bobbin. Putting up her hands to keep Amy at a distance, she pursed
her lips, as if to say, “Now donʼt be disappointed; there is really
nothing in it. Nothing, at least, I mean for people of your extravagant
ideas.”

Then, one by one, before Johnʼs eyes, which enlarged with a geometric
progression of amazement, she laid a gorgeous train of gold, as if it
were but dominoes, beginning with half–sovereigns first, then breaking
into the broader gauge, until there must have been twenty pounds, and
John thought of all his poor people. Verily then she stopped awhile, to
enhance her climax; or perhaps she hesitated, as was only natural. But
now the pleasure of the thing was too much for her prudence. Looking
at John and then at Amy, and wanting to look at both at once, she drew
from a little niche in the bag, with a jerk (as if it were nothing) a
dainty marrowfat ten–pound note of the Bank of England, with a name of
substance upon the back, and an authenticity of grease grander than any
water–mark. She tried very hard to make light of it, and not wave it in
the air even; but the tide of her heart was too strong for her, and she
turned away, and cried as hard as if she had no money.

Who may pretend to taste and tell every herb in the soup of nature?
There is no sovereign moly, no paramount amellus; even basil (the herb
of kings) may be lost in garlic. Blest are they who seek not ever for
the forced–meat balls, but find some good in every brewis, homely,
burnt, or overstrained. John Rosedew, putting on his boots for the road
to London, felt himself, at every tug, quite as rich as Megacles—that
man of foremost Athenian blood, but none the more a gentleman,
who walked capaciously into, and rapaciously walked out of, the
gold–granaries of Crœsus. A delightful sense of having gotten great
money out of Eudoxia—a triumph without historic parallel—inspired him,
away with that overdone word!—aerated him with glory. Thirty pounds,
and some odd shillings, wholly at John Rosedewʼs mercy (who never gave
quarter to money, but hewed it as small as Agag when anybody asked
him),—thirty pounds, with no duty upon it, no stamp of responsibility,
and a peculiar and peppery piquancy in the spending of every halfpenny,
to wonder what sister Doxy would think if she could only know it! He
gave careful Amy the note to keep, and 15_l._ to go inside it, because
he had promised to do so, for Doxy knew his nature.

In that noble fly from the “Foresters,” which had only two springs
broken, John and his daughter went away to catch the train at
Brockenhurst. Out of the windows dangerously they pushed their
beautiful heads—the beauty of youth on one side, the beauty of age on
the other—although the coachman had specially warned them that neither
door would fasten. But what could they do, when Aunt Doxy was there by
the great rhododendron, with a kettle–holder over her mouth because it
was so cold; fat Jemima too, and Jenny, and Jem Pottles leading Coræbus
to shake off his dust at the shay–horse, and learn what he might come
to?

Some worthy people had journeyed up from the further end of the
village, to bid an eternal farewell to Amy, and to take home the
washing. They knew she would never come back again; she would never
be let go again; folks in London were so wicked, and parson was so
innocent. Evil though the omens were, as timidly blushing she went
away, tearfully leaving her fatherʼs hearth, though a daw on the left
hand forbade her to go, and a wandering chough was overheard, and a
croaking raven whirled away into the wilds of the woodland—for whom
shall I fear, I the cannie seer, while Amy smiles dexter out of the
cab, and wraps her faith around her?

Make we not half our life here, according as we receive it? Is it not
as the rain that falls, softly when softly taken, as of leaves and
grass and water; but rattling and flying in mud and foul splashes, when
met at wrong angles repulsively?

My little daughter, if you cannot see your way in that simile—a
very common–place one,—take a still more timeworn and venerable
illustration. Our life is but a thread, my child, at any moment
snappable, though never snapped unwisely; and true as it is that we
cannot spin and shape it (as does the spider) out of our own emotions,
yet we have this gift of God, that we can secrete some gold along it,
some diamonds fetching the sunlight. Knowing, then, in whose Hand we
are, and feeling how large that Hand is, let us know and feel therewith
that He will not crush us; that He loves us to rejoice therein, and
tamely to regard Him; with confidence in adoration, a smile in every
bow to Him.




CHAPTER II.


Polly Ducksacre was sitting in state behind the little counter, and
opposite the gas–jet, upon her throne—a bushel basket set upside
down on another. It was the evening of Boxing Day, and Polly was
arrayed with a splendour that challenged the strictest appraisement;
so gorgeous were her gilt earrings, cornelian necklace, sham cameo
brooch—Cupid stealing the sword of Mars—and German–silver bracelets.
The children who came in for “haʼporths of specked” forgot their errand
and hopes of prigging, and, sucking their lips with wild admiration,
cried “Lor now! Ainʼt she stunnin?” “Spexs her sweetheart in a coach
and four,” exclaimed one little girl of great penetration; “oh give us
a ride, miss, when he comes.”

That little girl was right, to a limited extent. Polly did expect
her sweetheart; not in a coach and four, however, but in a smallish
tax–cart, chestnut–coloured, picked out with white; on the panel
whereof was painted, as the Act directs, “Robert Clinkers, Junior,
Coal–merchant, Hammersmith.” Mr. Clinkers, whose first visit had
been paid simply from pity for Cradock, and to acquit himself of all
complicity in Hearty Wibrahamʼs swindle, had called again to make kind
inquiries, after finding how ill the poor fellow was, and that his
landlady sold coals. Nor was it long before he ventured to propose
an arrangement, mutually beneficial, under which the Ducksacre firm
should receive their supply from him. Two or three councils were held,
but the ladies were obliged to surrender at last, because he was so
complimentary, and had such nice white teeth, and spoke in such a
feeling manner of his dear departed angel. On the other hand, their old
wharfinger would come blustering about his sacks, loud enough to make
the potatoes jump, and he kept such impudent men, and bit his nails
without any manners, and called them both “Mrs. Acreducks.”

During this Clinkerian diplomacy, Polly showed such shrewdness, and
such a nice foot and ancle, and had such a manner of rolling her
eyes—blacker and brighter than best Wallsend—that the coals of love
were laid, the match struck, the fire kindled, and drawing well up the
hearth–place, before Robert Clinkers knew what he was at. And now he
came every evening, bringing two sacks of coal with him, and sat on a
bag of Barcelonas, and cracked, and gazed at Polly.

“Miss Ducksacre, you should sell lemonade,’” he had said only Saturday
last, which was Christmas Eve, “it is such a genteel drink, you know,
when a chap is consumed with internal fires, as the great poet says—him
as wrote the operas, or the copperas, bless me, I never know which it
is; likely you can tell, miss?”

“Lor, Mr. Clinkers, why, the proper name is hopperas; we shows the
boards, and we gets a ticket, when nobody else wonʼt go.”

“Oh now! Do you, though? Ah, I was there, afore ever I knew what life
was. A tricksome thing is life, Miss Polly, especially for a ‘andsome
female, and no young fellow to be trusted with it. Valuable cargo on
green wood. Sure to come to shipwreck.”

“Lor, Mr. Clinkers, you donʼt mean _me_! I am sure I am not at all
handsome.”

“Then there isnʼt one in London, miss. Coals is coals, and fire is
fire—oh, I should like some lemonade, with a drop of rum in it. Would
you join me in it now, if I just pop round the corner? It would make
you feel so nice now.”

“Do I ever feel anything else but nice?” Oh, Polly, what a _leading_
question!

“I wishes it was in my province now, with the deepest respect, to try!”
Here Polly flashed away, though nobody was pursuing her, got behind
some Penzance broccoli, and seized a half–pottle to defend herself. Mr.
Clinkers, knowing what he was about, appealed to a bunch of mistletoe,
under which, in distracting distraction, the young lady had taken
refuge.

“Now nobody else in all this London,” said the coal–merchant to the
berries, “in all this mighty Baal, as the poet beautifully expresses
it, especially if a young man, not over five–and–thirty, not so
very bad–looking but experienced in life, and with great veneration
for females, and a business, you may say, of three hundred a year
clear of income–tax and increasing yearly, and a contract with the
company, without no encumbrances, would ever go to think of letting
that beautiful young lady enjoy the sweets of retirement in that most
initing position, without plucking some of the pearls off, and no harm
done or taken. And nothing at all pervents me, no consideration of the
brockolo—could pay for it to–morrow morning—but my deepest respects,
not having my best togs on, through a cruel haxident. Please pigs
theyʼll come home to–morrow morning, and Iʼll do it on Monday, and lock
up yard at four oʼclock, if tailor has made a job of it. Look nice
indeed, and feel nice? I should like to know how she could help it!”

This explains why, when the wheels at the door proved to be not of
the sprightly tax–cart, but a lumbering cab, Polly was disappointed.
Neither was her displeasure removed when she saw a very pretty girl
get out, and glide into the shop, with the loveliest damask spreading
over the softest and clearest cheeks. Though Polly had made up her mind
about Cradock as now a bad speculation, it was not likely that she
should love yet any one who meant to have him.

Amy shrunk back as her nice clean skirt swept the grimy threshold.
She was not by any means fidgety, but had a nervous dislike of dirt,
as most upright natures have. Then she felt ashamed of herself, and
coloured yet more deeply to think that a place good enough for Cradock
should seem too sordid for her, indeed! And then her tears glanced in
the gas–light, that Cradock should ever have come to this, and partly,
no doubt, for her sake, though she never could tell how.

The little shop was afforested with Christmas–trees of all sorts and of
every pattern, as large as ever could be squeezed, with a knuckle of
root to keep them steady, into pots No. 32. The costermongers repudiate
larger pots, because they take too much room on a truck, and involve
the necessity of hiring a boy to push.

Aucuba, Irish yew, Portugal laurel, arbor vitæ, and bay–tree, but
most of all—and for the purpose by far the most convenient, because
of the hat–peg order—the stiff, self–confident, argumentative
spruce. All these, when they have done their spiriting, and yielded
long–remembered fun, will be fondly tended by gentle–hearted girls on
some suburban balcony; they will be watered enough to kill lignum vitæ;
patent compost will be bought at about the price of sugar; learned
consultations will be held between Sylvia and Lucilla; and then, as the
leaves grow daily more yellow, and papa is so provoking that he will
only shake his head (too sagaciously to commit himself), an earnest
appeal will be addressed to some of the gardening papers. Or perhaps
the tree will be planted, with no little ceremony, in the centre of
some grass–plot nearly as large as a counterpane; while the elder
members of the family, though bland enough to drink its health, regard
the measure as very unwise, because the house will be darkened so in a
few short years.

Meanwhile the editorʼs reply arrives—“Possibly Sylviaʼs tree has no
roots.” He is laughed to scorn for his ignorance, until little Charley
falls to work with his Ramsgate spade unbidden. _Factura nepotibus
umbram!_ It has been chopped all round the bole with a hatchet, and is
as likely to grow as a lucifer–match.

Through that Christmas Tabraca John Rosedew led his daughter, begging
her at every step to be careful of the trees, whose claims upon her
attention she postponed to those of her frock.

“Lor bless me, sir, is that you now, and your good lady along of you!
How glad I am, to be sure!”

“Miss Ducksacre, this is my daughter, Miss Amy Rosedew, of whom
you have heard me speak;” here John executed a flourish of great
complacency with his hat; “my only child, but as good to me as any
dozen could be. Will you allow her to stop here a minute, while I go
up–stairs?”

Amy was trembling now, more and more every moment, and John would not
ask how Cradock was, for fear of frightening his daughter.

“To be sure she can stay here,” said Polly, not over graciously; for if
Mr. Clinkers should come in the while, it might alter his ideal.

“Ah, so very sad; so very sad, miss, ainʼt it now?”

“Yes,” said Amy, having no desire to pursue the subject with Polly. But
Pollyʼs tongue could no more keep still than a frond of maiden–hair
fern in the draught of a river archway.

“Ah, so very sad! To think of him go, quite young as he is, to one of
them moonstruck smilems, where they makes rope–mats and tiger rugs! As
‘andsome a young man, miss, as ever I see off a hengine; and of course
he must be such, being as he is your brother.”

Before poor Amy could answer, Mrs. Ducksacre came to fetch her, and
frowned very hard at Polly, who began to look out of the window. In
spite of all her faith and hope, the child could scarcely get up the
stairs, till her father came to meet her.

“There is no one with him now, dear; Mrs. Jupp is in the sitting–room,
so very kindly lent us by the good landlady. Only two more pairs of
stairs, and there our Cradock lies, not a bit worse than he was; if
anything, a little better; and his faithful little Wena with him: she
wonʼt leave him, night or day, dear. Give me your hand, Amy. Why, I
declare, it is rather dark, when you get too far from the windows!
Madam, come in with us.”

But Eliza Ducksacre, though little versed in mintage, and taking
pig–rings for halfpence, knew when her presence had better be absence,
as well as a sleeping partner does at the associationʼs bankruptcy.
So, after showing them up to the door, she slipped away into the
side–cupboard which Mr. Rosedew had called a “sitting–room.”

Then John took Amyʼs bonnet off (after ruining the strings), and
stroked her pretty hair down, and took her young cheeks in his hands,
and begged her not to tremble so, because she would quite upset him.
Only she might cry a little, if she thought it would do her good. But
when she put her hand up, and gave a dry sob only, the father led her
very tenderly into the little chamber.

It was a wretched little room, like a casual pauperʼs home, when he
gets one, only much lower and smaller. Amy took all of it in at a
glance, for in matters of that sort a womanʼs perception is, when
compared to a manʼs, as forked lightning compared to a blunt dessert
fork.

She even knew why the bed was awry; which her father could sooner have
written ten scolia than discover. The bed was placed so because poor
Cradock, jumping up all of a sudden in an early stage of illness, and
before his head grew soft, had knocked a great piece of plaster away
from the projecting hip–beam.

Now Craddy was looking away from them, sitting up in the sack–cloth
bed, and trying with the sage gravity of fixed hallucination to read
some lines which his fancy had written on the glazed dirt that served
for a window. That window perhaps pronounced itself more by candlelight
than by daylight, and the landlord had forbidden any attempt at
cleaning it, because he knew that the frame would drop out. Two
candles, the residue of two pounds which Mr. Rosedew had paid for, only
helped to interpret the squalid room more forcibly.

While Amy stood there, shocked and frightened, and her father was
thinking what to say, the poor sick fellow turned towards them, and
his eyes met hers. She saw that the tint of her loverʼs eyes was gone
from a beautiful deep grey to the tone of a withered oak–leaf, the
pupils forthstanding haggardly, the whites dull and chased with blood
veins, the sockets marked with a cloudy blue, and channeled with storms
of sorrow; the countenance full of long suffering—gaunt, and wan, and
weary.

Amy could not weep, but gazed, never thinking anything, with all the
love and pity, devotion and faith eternal, which are sure to shine in a
womanʼs eyes when trouble strikes its light there. How different from
the shy maidʼs glance which, only a month or two ago, would have met
his youthful overtures! And how infinitely grander! Something of the
good All–Fatherʼs power and mercy in it.

She kept her eyes upon him. She had no power to move them. And they
changed exactly as his did. The pale glance wandering into her gaze,
with an appealing submissive motion, eager to settle somewhere, but
too faint to ask for sympathy, began to feel its way and fasten, began
to quiver with vibrant light and sense of resting somewhere, began to
quicken, flush, and deepen—from what fountain God only knows—then to
waver and suffuse (in feeble consciousness of grief), retire and return
again, fluttering to some remembered home, as a bird in the dark comes
to his nest; then to thrill, and beam, and sparkle with the light, the
life, the love.

So with a weak but joyful cry, like a shipwrecked man at his hearth
again, he stretched out both his wasted arms, and Amy was there without
knowing it. She laid his white cheek on her shoulder, and let her
hair flow over it; she held him up with her own pure breast, till his
worn heart beat on her warm one. Then she sobbed, and laughed, and
sobbed, and called him her world, and heart, and heaven, and kissed his
nestling forehead, and looked, and asked, oh, where the love was. All
she begged for was one word, just one little word, if you please, to
know who was to come to comfort him. Oh, he must know her—of course he
must—wouldnʼt she know him, that was all, though she hadnʼt a breath of
life left? His own, his faith, his truth, his love—his own—let him say
who, and she never would cry again. Only say it once, his own—

“Amy!”

“Yes, your Amy, Amy, Amy. Say it again, oh! say it again, my poor
everlasting love!”

Suddenly the barriers of his frozen grief were loosened. With a feeble
arm staying on her, although it could not cling to her, he burst into a
flood of tears, from the fountain of great waters whose source and home
is God.

Then John, who had stood at the door all the time, with his white head
bowed on his coat–sleeve, came forward and took a hand of each, knelt
by the bed, and gave thanks. They wanted not to talk of it, nor any
doctor to tell them. Because they had an angelʼs voice, that God would
be gracious to them.

“Darlings, didnʼt I tell you,” said Amy, looking up at them, with her
rich curls tear–bespangled, like a young grape–leaf in the vinery;
“donʼt you know that I was sure our Father would never forsake us; and
that even a simple thing like me might fetch back my own blessing? Oh,
you never would have loved me so; only God knew it was good for us.”

While she spoke, Cradock looked at her with a faint far–off
intelligence, not entering into her arguments. He only cared to hear
her voice; to see her every now and then; and touch her to make sure of
it; then to dream that it was an angel; then to wake and be very glad
that it was not, but was Amy.




CHAPTER III.


Slowly from that night, but surely, Cradockʼs mind began to return,
like a child to its mother, who is stretching forth her arms to it;
timid at first and wondering, and apt for a long time to reel and
stagger at very slight shocks or vibrations. Then as the water comes
over the ice in a gradual gentle thaw, beginning to gleam at the margin
first, where the reeds are and the willow–trees, then gliding slowly
and brightly on, following every skate–mark or line where a rope or
stick has been, till it flows into a limpid sheet; so crystal reason
dawned and wavered, felt its way and went on again, tracing many a
childish channel, many a dormant memory, across that dull lethargic
mind, until the bright surface was restored, and the lead line of
judgment could penetrate.

Mr. Rosedew quartered himself and his Amy at the Portland Hotel hard
by, and reckless of all expense moved Cradock into Mrs. Ducksacreʼs
very best room. He would have done this long ago, only the doctor would
not allow it. Then Amy, who did not like London at all, because there
were so few trees in it, hired some of the Christmas–grove from the
fair greengrocers, and decked out the little sitting–room, so that
Cradock had sweet visions of the Queenʼs bower mead. As for herself,
she would stay in the shop, perhaps half an hour together, and rejoice
in the ways of the children. All her pocket–money went into the till as
if you had taken a shovel to it. Barcelonas, Brazils, and cob–nuts she
was giving all day to the “warmints;” and golden oranges rolled before
her as from Atalantaʼs footstep.

It is a most wonderful fact, and far beyond my philosophy, that instead
of losing her roses in London, as a country girl ought to have done,
Amy bloomed with more Jacqueminot upon very bright occasions—more
Louise Odier constantly, with Goubalt in the dimples, then toning off
at any new fright to Malmaison, or Devoniensis—more of these roses now
carmined or mantled in the delicate turn of her cheeks than ever had
nestled and played there in the free air of the Forest. Good Aunt Doxy
was quite amazed on the Saturday afternoon, when meeting her brother
and niece at the station—for it made no difference in the outlay, and
the drive would do her good—she found, not a pale and withered child,
worn out with London racket, and freckled with dust and smokespots, but
the loveliest Amy she had ever yet seen—which was something indeed to
say,—with a brilliance of bloom which the good aunt at once proceeded
to test with her handkerchief.

But before the young lady left town—to wit, on the Friday evening—she
had a little talk with Rachel Jupp, or rather with strapping Issachar,
which nearly concerns our story.

“Oh, Miss Amy,” said Rachel that morning—”Miss Amy” sounded more
natural somehow than “Miss Rosedew” did—”so youʼre going away, miss,
after all, and never see my Looey; and a pretty child she is, and a
good one, and a quiet one, and father never lift hand to her now; and
the poor young gentleman saved her life, and he like her so much, and
she like him.”

“I will come and see her this evening, as you have so kindly asked me.
That is, with my papaʼs leave, and if you donʼt mind coming for me to
the inn at six oʼclock. I am afraid of walking by myself after dark in
London. My papa has found some books at the bookstalls, and he is so
delighted with them he never wants me after dinner.”

“Dear Miss Amy, would you mind, then—would you mind taking a drop of
tea with us?”

“To be sure I will. I mean, if it is quite convenient, and if you can
be spared here, and if—oh nothing else, Mrs. Jupp, only I shall be
most happy.” She was going to say, “and if you wonʼt make any great
preparations,” but she knew how sensitive poor people are at restraints
upon hospitality.

So grand preparations were made; and grander still they would have
been, and more formal and uncomfortable, if Amy had finished her
sentence. Rachel at once rushed off to her lord, whose barge–shaped
frame was moored alongside of his wharf, dreaming as stolidly as
none except a bargee can dream. He immediately shelled out seven and
sixpence from the cuddy of his inexpressibles, and left his wife to
her own devices, except in the matter of tea itself. The tea he was
resolved to fetch from a little shop in the barge–walk, where, as
Mother Hamp declared, who kept the tobacco–shop by the gate, they sold
tea as strong as brandy.

“If you please to excuse our Zakey, miss, taking no more tea,” said
Mrs. Jupp, after Issachar had laboured very hard at it, the host being
bound, in his opinion, to feast even as the guest did; “because he
belong to the antiteatotallers, as takes nothing no stronger than gin,
miss.”

“Darrnʼt take more nor one noggin of tay, miss,” cried Mr. Jupp,
touching his short front curl with a hand scrubbed in quick–lime and
copperas; “likes it, but it donʼt like me, miss. Makes me feel quite
intemperant like,—so narvous, and queer, and staggery. Looey, dear,
dadʼs mild mixture, for to speak the young ladyʼs health in. Leastways,
by your lave, miss.”

Dadʼs mild mixture soon made its appearance in a battered half–gallon
can, and Mr. Jupp was amazed and grieved that none but himself would
quaff any. The strongest and headiest stuff it was, which even the
publicans of London, alchymists of villainy, can quassify, and
cocculise, and nux–vomicise up to proof. Then, the wrath of hunger and
thirst being mollified, Issachar begged leave to smoke, if altogether
agreeable, and it would all go up the chimney; which, however, it
refrained from doing.

Now, while he is smoking, I may admit that the contents of Mr. Juppʼs
census–paper (if, indeed, he ever made legal entries, after punching
the collectorʼs head) have not been transcribed to the satisfaction
of the Registrar–General or Home–Office, or whoever or whatever he or
it is, who or which insists upon knowing nine times as much about us
as we know about ourselves. Mr. Jupp was a bargee of Catholic views;
“it warnʼt no odds to he” whether he worked upon wharf or water, sea
or river or canal, at coal, or hay, or lime, breeze, or hop–poles, or
anything else. Now and then he went down to Gravesend, or up the river
to Kingston or Staines; but his more legitimate area was navigable
by three canals, where a chap might find time to eat his dinner,
and give his wife and nag theirʼn. Issacharʼs love of nature always
culminated at one oʼclock; and then how he loved to halt his team under
a row of alders, and see the painted meadows gay, and have grub and
pipe accordinʼ. His three canals, affording these choice delights
unequally, were the Surrey, the Regentʼs, and the Basingstoke.

That last was, indeed, to his rural mind, the nearest approach to
Paradise; but as there is in all things a system of weights and
measures, Mr. Jupp got better wages upon the other two, and so could
not very often afford to indulge his love of the beautiful. Hence he
kept his household gods within reach of the yellow Tibers, and took
them only once a year for a treat upon the Anio. Then would Rachel Jupp
and Looey spend a summer month afloat, enjoying the rural glimpses
and the sliding quietude of inland navigation, and keeping the pot
a–boiling in the state–cabin of the _Enterprise_ or the _Industrious
Maiden_.

Now Amy having formed Looʼs acquaintance, and said what was right and
pretty in gratitude for their entertainment and faithful kindness to
Cradock, was just about to leave them, when Issachar Jupp delivered
this speech, very slowly, as a man who has got to the marrow and
popeʼs–eye of his pipe:—

“Now ‘scuse me for axing of you, miss, and if any ways wrong in so
doing, be onscrupulous for to say so, and no harm done or taken. But
I has my raisons for axing, from things as Iʼve a ‘earʼd him say, and
oncommon good raisons too. If you please, what be the arkerate name
and dwellinʼ–place of the young gent as saved our Loo? Mr. Clinkers
couldnʼt find out, miss, though he knowed as it warnʼt ‘Charles
Newman.’”

“Donʼt you know his story, then?” asked Amy, in some astonishment. “I
thought you knew all about it, and were so kind to him partly through
that, though you were kind enough not to talk to me about it.”

“We guesses a piece here and there, miss, since he talk so wild in his
illness. And thatʼs what made me be axing of you; for I knowed one
name right well as he out with once or twice; not at all a common name
nother. But we knows for sartin no more nor this, that he be an onlucky
young gent, and the best as ever come into these parts.”

“There can be no harm in my telling you, such faithful friends as you
are. And the sad tale is known to every one, far and wide, in our part
of Hampshire.”

“Hampshire, ah!” said Mr. Jupp, with a very mysterious look; “we knowed
Mr. Rosedew come from Hampshire, and that set us the more a–thinkinʼ
of it. Loo, child, run for dadʼs bacco–box, as were left to Mother
Richardsonʼs, and if it ainʼt there, try at Blinkin’ Davyʼs, and if he
ainʼt got it, try Mother Hamp.”

The child, sadly disappointed, for her eyes were large with hopes of
a secret about her “dear gentleman,” as she called Cradock, departed
upon her long errand. Then Amy told, as briefly as possible, all she
knew of the great mishap, and the misery which followed it. From time
to time her soft voice shook, and her tears would not be disciplined;
while Rachel Juppʼs strayed anyhow. But Issachar listened dryly and
sternly, with one great brown hand on his forehead. Not once did he
interrupt the young lady, by gesture, look, or question. But when she
had finished, he said very quietly,

“One name, miss, as have summat to do with it, Iʼve not ‘earʼd you
sinnify; and it were the sound o’ that very name as fust raised my
coorosity. ‘Scuse me, miss, but I wouldnʼt ax, only for good raison.”

“I hardly know what right I have to mention any other names,” replied
Amy, blushing and hesitating, for she did not wish to speak of Pearl
Garnet; “there is only one other name connected at all with the matter,
and that one of no importance.”

“Ah,” returned Jupp, with a glance as intense as a catʼs through a
dairy keyhole, “maybe the tow–rope ainʼt nothin’ to do with the goin’
of the barge, miss. That name didnʼt happen permiskious now to be the
name of Garnet, maʼam?”

“Yes, indeed it did. But how could you know that, Mr. Jupp?”

“Pearl Garnet were the name I ‘earʼd on, and that ainʼt a very common
name, leastways to my experience. Now, could it ‘ave ‘appened by a
haxident that her good fatherʼs name were Bull Garnet?”

Amy drew back, for Mr. Jupp, in his triumph and excitement, had laid
down his pipe, and was stretching out his unpeeled crate of a hand, as
if to take her by the shoulder, and shake the whole truth out of her.
It was his fashion with Rachel, and he quite forgot the difference.
Mrs. Jupp cried, “Zakey, Zakey!” in a tone of strong remonstrance. But
he was not abashed very seriously.

“It couldnʼt be now, could it, miss; it wornʼt in any way possible that
Pearl Garnetʼs father was ever known by the name of Bull Garnet?”

“But indeed that is his name, Mr. Jupp. Why should you be so
incredulous?”

“Oncredulous it be, miss; oncredulous, as I be a sinner. Rachey, whoʼd
ha’ thought it? How things does come about, to be sure! Now please to
tell me, miss—very careful, and not passinʼ lightly of anything; never
you mind how small it seem—every word you knows about Pearl Garnet and
that there—job there; and all you knows on her father too.”

“You must prove to me first, Mr. Jupp, that I have any right to do so.”

Issachar now was strongly excited, a condition most unusual with him,
except when his wife rebelled, and that she had, years ago, ceased to
do. He put his long black face, which was working so that the high
cheek–bones almost shut the little eyes, quite close to Amyʼs little
white ear, and whispered,

“If ye dunna tell me, yeʼll cry for it arl the life long, yeʼll never
right the innocent, and yeʼll let the guilty ride over ye. I canna
tell no more just now, but every word is gospel. I be no liar, miss,
though I be rough enough, God knows. Supposes He made me so.”

Then Amy, trembling at his words, and thinking that she had hurt his
feelings, put her soft little hand, for amends, into Zakeyʼs great
black piece of hold, which looked like the bilge of a barge; and he
wondered what to do with it, such a sort of chap as he was. He had
never heard of kissing a hand, and even if he had it would scarcely
be a timely offering, for he was having a chaw to compose himself—yet
he knew that he ought not, in good manners, to let go her hand in a
hurry; so what did he do but slip off a ring (one of those so–called
galvanic rings, in which sailors and bargemen have wonderful faith as
an antidote to rheumatics, tick dolorous, and the Caroline Morgan), and
this ring he passed down two of her fingers, for all females do love
trinkets so. Amy kept it carefully, and will put it on her chatelaine,
if ever she institutes one.

Then, being convinced by his words and manner, she told him everything
she knew about the Garnet family—their behaviour in and after the
great misfortune; the strange seclusion of Pearl, and Mr. Garnetʼs
illness. And then she recurred to some vague rumours which had preceded
their settlement in the New Forest. To all this Issachar listened,
without a word or a nod, but with his narrow forehead radiant with
concentration, his lips screwed up in a serrate ring, after the manner
of a medlar, and a series of winks so intensely sage that his barge
might have turned a corner with a team of eight blind horses, and no
nod wanted for one of them.

“Ainʼt there no more nor that, miss?” he asked, with some
disappointment, when the little tale was ended; “canʼt you racollack no
more?”

“No, indeed I cannot. And if you had not some important object, I
should be quite ashamed of telling you so much gossip. If I may ask you
a question now, what more did you expect me to tell you?”

“That they had knowʼd, miss, as Bull Garnet were Sir Cradock Nowellʼs
brother.”

“Mr. Garnet Sir Cradockʼs brother! You must be mistaken, Mr. Jupp. My
father has known Sir Cradock Nowell ever since he was ten years old;
and he could not have failed to know it, if it had been so.”

“Most like he do know it, miss. But dunna you tell him now, nor any
other charp. It be true as gospel for all that, though.”

“Then Robert and Pearl are Cradockʼs first cousins, and Mr. Garnet is
his uncle!”

“Not ezackly as you counts things,” answered the bargeman, looking at
the fire; “but in the way as we does.”

Amy felt that she must ask no more, at least upon that subject; and
that she was not likely to speak of it even to her father.

“Let him go, miss,” continued Issachar, referring now to Cradock; “let
him go for a long sea–vohoyage, same as doctor horders un. He be better
out of the way for a spell or two. The Basingstoke ainʼt fur enoo, whur
I meant to ‘ave took him. ‘A mun be quite out o’ the kintry till this
job be over like. And niver a word as to what I thinks to coom anigh
his ear, miss, if so be you vallies his raison.”

“But you forget, Mr. Jupp, that you have not told me, as yet, at all
what it is you do think. You said some things which frightened me, and
you told me one which astonished me. Beyond that I know nothing.”

“And better so, my dear young leddy, a vast deal better so. Only you
have the very best hopes, and keep your spirits roaring. Zakey Jupp
never take a thing in hand but what he go well through with it. Ask
Rachey about that. Now this were a casooal haxident, mind you, only a
casooal haxident——”

“Of course we all know that, Mr. Jupp. No one would dare to think
anything else.”

“Yes, yes; all right, miss. And weʼll find out who did the casooal
haxident—thatʼs all, miss, thatʼs all. Only you hold your tongue.”

She was obliged to be content with this, and on the whole it greatly
encouraged her. Then she returned to the Portland Hotel under convoy
of all the Jupp family, and Issachar got into two or three rows by
hustling every one out of her way. Although poor Amy was frightened
at this, no doubt it increased her faith in him through some feminine
process of dialectics unknown to the author of the Organon.

Though Amy could not bear to keep anything secret from her father,
having given her word she of course observed it, and John was greatly
surprised at the spirits in which his daughter took leave of Cradock.
But there were many points in Amyʼs character, as has been observed
before, which her father never understood; and he concluded that this
was a specimen of them, and was delighted to see her so cheerful.

Now, being returned to Nowelhurst, he held counsel with sister
Eudoxia, who thoroughly deserved to have a vote after contributing so
to the revenue. And the result of their Lateran—for they both were
bricks—council was as follows: That John was bound, howsoever much
it went against his proud stomach after his previous treatment, to
make one last appeal from the father according to the spirit to the
father according to the flesh, in favour of the unlucky son who was
now condemned to exile, so as at least to send him away in a manner
suitable to his birth. That, if this appeal were rejected, and the
appellant treated unpleasantly—which was almost sure to follow—he
could not, consistently with his honour and his clerical dignity, hold
any longer the benefices (paltry as they were), the gifts of a giver
now proved unkind. That thereupon Mr. Rosedew should first provide
for Cradockʼs voyage so far as his humble means and small influence
permitted; and after that should settle at Oxford, where he might get
parochial duty, and where his old tutorial fame and repute (now growing
European from a life of learning) would earn him plenty of pupils——

“And a professorship at least!” Miss Eudoxia broke in; for, much as she
nagged at her brother, she was proud as could be of his knowledge.

“Marry, ay, and a bishopric,” John answered, smiling pleasantly; “you
have often menaced me, Doxy dear, with Jemimaʼs apron.”

So, on a bright day in January, John Rosedew said to Jem Pottles,
“Saddle me the horse, James.” And they saddled him the “horse”—not so
called by his master through any false aggrandisement (such as maketh
us talk of “the servants,” when we have only got a maid–of–all–work),
but because the parson, in pure faith, regarded him as a horse of full
equine stature and super–equine powers.

After tightening up the girths, then—for that noble cob, at the
saddling period, blew himself out with a large sense of humour
(unappreciated by the biped who bestraddled him unwarily), an abdominal
sense of humour which, as one touch of nature makes the whole world
kin, induced the pigskin to circulate after the manner of a brass dogʼs
collar—tush, I mean a dogʼs brass collar—in order to learn what the
joke was down in those festive regions; therefore, having buckled him
up six inches, till the witty nag creaked like a tight–laced maid,
away rode the parson towards the Hall. Much liefer would he have walked
by the well–known and pleasant footpath, but he felt himself bound, as
one may say, to go in real style, sir.

The more he reflected upon the nature of his errand, the fainter grew
his hopes of success; he even feared that his ancient friendship would
not procure him a hearing, so absorbed were all the echoes of memory in
the pique of parental jealousy, and the cajoleries of a woman. And the
consequences of failure—how bitter they must be to him and his little
household! Moreover, he dearly loved his two little quiet parishes;
and, though he reaped more tithe from them in kindness than in kind or
by commutation, to his contented mind they were far sweeter than the
incumbency of Libya–cum–Gades, and both Pœni for his beadles.

He thought of Amy with a bitter pang, and of his sister with heaviness,
as he laid his hand—for he never used whip—on the fat flank of the pony
to urge him almost to a good round trot, that suspense might sooner be
done with. And when the Hall was at last before him, he rode up, not to
the little postern hard by the housekeeperʼs snuggery (which had seemed
of old to be made for him), but to the grand front entrance, where the
orange–trees in tubs were, and the myrtles, and the pilasters.

Most of the trees had been removed, with the aid of little go–carts,
before the frosts began; but they impressed John Rosedew none
the less, so far as his placid and simple mind was open to small
impressions.

Dismounting from Coræbus, whose rusty snaffle and mildewed reins would
have been a disgrace to any horse, as Amy said every day, he rang the
main entrance bell, and wondered whether they would let him in.

That journey had cost him a very severe battle, to bear himself humbly
before the wrong, and to do it in the cause of the injured. In the true
and noble sense of pride, there could not be a prouder man than the
gentle parson. But he ruled that noble human pride with its grander
element, left in it by the Son of God, His incarnationʼs legacy, the
pride which never apes, but is itself humility.

At last the door was opened, not by the spruce young footman (who
used to look so much at Amy, and speer about as to her expectations,
because she was only a parsonʼs daughter), but by that ancient and most
respectable Job Hogstaff, patriarch of butlers. Dull and dim as his
eyes were growing, Job, who now spent most of his time in looking for
those who never came, had made out Mr. Rosedewʼs approach, by virtue of
the ponyʼs most unmistakable shamble. Therefore he pulled down his best
coat from a jug–crook, twitched his white hair to due stiffness, pushed
the ostiary footman back with a scorn which rankled for many a day
under a zebra waistcoat, and hobbled off at his utmost pace to admit
the visitor now so strange, though once it was strange without him.

Mr. Rosedew walked in very slowly and stiffly, then turned aside to a
tufted mat, and began to wipe his shoes in the most elaborate manner,
though there was not a particle of dirt upon them. Old Jobʼs eyes
blinked vaguely at him: he felt there was something wrong in that.

“Donʼt ye do that, sir, now; for Godʼs sake donʼt do that. I canʼt
abear it; and thatʼs the truth.”

Full well the old man remembered how different, in the happy days, had
been John Rosedewʼs entrance; and now every scrub on the mat was a rub
on his shaky hard–worn heart.

Mr. Rosedew looked mildly surprised, for his apprehension (as we know)
was swifter on paper than pavement. But he held forth his firm strong
hand, and the old man bowed tearfully over it.

“Any news of our boy, sir? Any news of my boy as was?”

“Yes, Job; very bad news. He has been terribly ill in London, and
nobody there to care for him.”

“Then Iʼll throw up my situation, sir. Manyʼs the time I have
threatened them, but didnʼt like to be too hard like. And pretty goings
on thereʼd be, without old Job in the pantry. But I bainʼt bound
to stand everything for the saving of them as goes on so. And that
Hismallitish woman, as find fault with my buckles, and nice things
she herself wear—Iʼd a given notice a week next Monday, but that I
likes Miss Oa so, and feel myself bound, as you may say, to see out
this Sir Cradock; folk would say I were shabby to leave him now he be
gettin’ elderly. Man and boy for sixty year, and began no more than
boot–cleaning; man and boy for sixty–three year, come next Lammas–tide.
I should like it upon my tombstone, sir, with what God pleases added,
if I not make too bold, and you the master of the churchyard, if so be
you should live long enough, when my turn come, God willing.”

“It will not be in my power, Job. But if ever it is, you may trust me.”

“And I wants that in I was tellin’ my niece about, ‘Put Thy hand in the
hollow of my thigh.’ Holy Bible, you know, sir, and none canʼt object
to that.”

“Come, Job, my good friend, you must not talk so sepulchrally. Leave
His own good time to God.”

“To be sure, sir; I bainʼt in no hurry yet. Iʼve a sight of things to
see to, and my master must go first, he be so very particular. Iʼll
live to see the young master yet, as my duty is for to do. _He_ ‘ont
carry on with a Hismallitish woman; _he_ ‘ont say, ‘What, Hogstaff, are
your wits gone wool–gatherinʼ?’ and his own wits all the time, sir,
fleeced, fleeced, fleeced——”

Here John Rosedew cut short the contrast between the present and the
future master (which would soon have assumed a golden tinge as of the
Fourth Eclogue), for the parson was too much a gentleman to foster
millennial views at the expense of the head of the household.

“Job, take my card to your master; and tell him, with my compliments,
that I wish to see him alone, if he will so far oblige me. By–the–by,
I ought to have written first, to request an interview; but it never
occurred to me.”

He could scarcely help sighing as he thought of formality
re–established on the ruins of familiarity.

“Heʼll be in the little coved room, no doubt, long o’ that Hismallitish
woman. But step in here a moment, sir.”

Instead of passing the doorway, which the butler had thrown open for
him, Mr. Rosedew stood scrupulously on the mat, as if it marked his
territory, until the old man came back and showed him into the black
oak parlour.

The little coved room was calmly and sweetly equal to the emergency.
The moment Jobʼs heels were out of sight, Mrs. Corklemore, who had
been indulging in a nice little chat with Sir Cradock, “when she
ought to have been at work all the while, plain–sewing for her little
household, for who was to keep the wolf from the door, if she shrank
from a womanʼs mission—though irksome to her, she must confess, for it
did hurt her poor fingers so”—here she held up a dish–cloth rather
rougher than a coal–sack, which she had stolen cleverly from her hostʼs
own lower regions, and did not know from a glass–cloth; but it suited
her because it was brown, and set off her lily hands so;—”oh, Uncle
Cradock, in all this there is something sweetly sacred, because it
speaks of _home_!” She was darning it all the while with white silk,
and took good care to push it away when any servant came in. It had
lasted her now for a week, and had earned her a hundred guineas, having
made the most profound impression upon its legitimate owner. She would
earn another hundred before the week was out by knitting a pair of
rough worsted socks for her little Flore, “though it made her heart
bleed to think how that poor child hated the feel of them.”

Now she rose in haste from her chair, and pushed the fortunate
dish–cloth, with a very expressive air, into her pretty work–basket,
and drew the strings loudly over it.

“What are you going for, Georgie? You need not leave the room, I am
sure.”

“Yes, uncle dear, I must. You are so clear and so honest, I know; and
most likely I take it from you. But I could not have anything to do
with any secret dealings, uncle, even though you wished it, which I am
sure you never could. I never could keep a secret, uncle, because I
am so shallow. Whenever secrecy is requested, I feel as if there was
something dishonest, either done or contemplated. Very foolish of me, I
know, but my nature is so childishly open. And of course Mr. Rosedew
has a perfect right, and is indeed very wise, to conceal his scheme
with respect to his daughter.”

“Georgie, stay in this room, if you please; he is not coming here.”

“But that poor simple Amy will, if he has brought her with him. Well, I
will stay here and lecture her, uncle, about her behaviour to you.”

After all this the old man set forth, in some little irritation, to
receive his once–loved friend. He entered the black oak parlour in a
cold and stately manner, and bowed without a word to John, who had
crossed the room to meet him. The parson held out his hand, as a lover
and preacher of peace should do; but the offer, ay, and the honour too,
not being at all appreciated, he withdrew it with a crimson blush all
over his bright clear cheeks, as deep as his daughterʼs would have been.

Then Sir Cradock Nowell, trying to seem quite calm and collected,
addressed his visitor thus:

“Sir, I am indebted to you for the honour of this visit. I apologize
for receiving you in a room without a fire. Pray take a chair. I have
no doubt that your intentions are kind towards me.”

“I thank you,” replied the parson, speaking much faster than usual,
and with the frill of his shirt–front rising; “I thank you, Sir
Cradock Nowell; but I will not sit down in the house of a gentleman
who declines to take my hand. I am here much against my own wishes,
and only because I supposed that it was my duty to come. I am here
on behalf of your son, a noble but most unfortunate youth, and now in
great trouble of mind.”

If he had only said “in great bodily danger,” it might have made a
difference.

“Your interest in him is very kind; and I trust that he will be
grateful, which he never was to me. He has left his home in defiance of
me. I can do nothing for him until he comes back, and is penitent. But
surely the question concerns me rather than you, Mr. Rosedew.”

“I am sorry to find,” answered John, quite calmly, “that you think me
guilty of impertinent meddling. But even that I would bear, as becomes
my age and my profession,”—here he gave Sir Cradock a glance, which was
thoroughly understood, because they had been at school together,—”and
more than that I would do, Cradock Nowell, for a man I have loved like
you, sir.”

That “sir” came out very oddly. John poked it in, as a retractation
for having called him “Cradock Nowell,” and as a salve to his own
self–respect, lest he should have been too appealing. And to follow up
this view of the subject, he made a bow such as no man makes to one
from whom he begs anything. But Sir Cradock Nowell lost altogether the
excellence of the bow. The parson had put up his knee in a way which
took the old man back to Sherborne. His mind was there playing cob–nut
as fifty years since, with John Rosedew. Once more he saw the ruddy,
and then pugnacious, John bringing his calf up, and priming his knee,
for the cob–nut to lie upon it. This he always used to do, and not care
a flip for the whack upon it, instead of using his blue cloth cap, as
all the rest of the boys did; because his father and mother were poor,
and could only afford him one cap in a year.

And so the grand bow was wasted, as most formalities are: but if John
had only known when to stop, it might have been all right after all, in
spite of Georgie Corklemore. But urged by the last infirmity (except
gout) of noble minds, our parsons never do know the proper time to
stop. Excellent men, and admirable, they make us shrink from eternity,
by proving themselves the type of it. Mr. Rosedew spoke well and
eloquently, as he was sure to do; but it would have been better for his
cause if he had simply described the sonʼs distress, and left the rest
to the fatherʼs heart. At one time, indeed, poor old Sir Cradock, who
was obstinate and misguided, rather than cold and unloving, began to
relent, and a fatherly yearning fluttered in his grey–lashed eyes.

But at this critical moment, three little kicks at the door were heard,
and the handle rattled briskly; then a shrill little voice came through
the keyhole:

“Oh pease let Fore tum in. Pease do, pease do, pease do. Me ‘ost me
ummy top. Oh you naughty bad door!”

Then another kick was administered by small but passionate toe–toes. Of
course your mother did not send you, innocent bright–haired popples,
and with a lie so pat and glib in that pouting pearl–set mouth. Foolish
mother, if she did, though it seal Attalic bargain!

Sir Cradock went to the door, and gently ordered the child away. But
the interruption had been enough—_ibi omnis effusus labor_. When he
returned and faced John Rosedew the manner of his visage was altered.
The child had reminded him of her mother, and that graceful, gushing,
loving nature, which tried so hard not to doubt the minister. So he did
what a man in the wrong generally does instinctively; he swept back the
tide of war into his adversaryʼs country.

“You take a very strong interest, sir, in one whose nearest relations
have been compelled to abandon him.”

“I thought that your greatest grievance with him was that he had
abandoned you.”

“Excuse me; I cannot split hairs. All I mean is that something has come
to my knowledge—not through the proper channel, not from those who
ought to have told me—something which makes your advocacy seem a little
less disinterested than I might have supposed it to be.”

“Have the kindness to tell me what it is.”

“Oh, perhaps a mere nothing. But it seems a significant rumour.”

“What rumour, if you please?”

“That my—that Cradock Nowell is attached to your daughter, who behaved
so ill to me. Of course, it is not true?”

“Perfectly true, every word of it.” And John Rosedew looked at Sir
Cradock Nowell as proudly as ever a father looked. Amy, in his opinion,
was peeress for any mortal. And perhaps he was not presumptuous.

“Ah!” was the only reply he received: an “ah” drawn out into half an
ell.

“Why, I would have told you long ago, the moment that I knew it, but
for your great trouble, and your bitterness towards him. You have often
wished that a son of yours should marry my daughter Amy. Surely you
will not blame him for desiring to do as you wished?”

“No, because he is young and foolish; but I may blame you for
encouraging it, now that he is the only one.”

“Do you dare to think that I am in any way influenced by interested
motives?”

“I dare to think what I please. No bullying here, John, if you please.
We all know how combative you are. And, now you have forced me to it,
I will tell you what will be the conviction, ay, and the expression of
every one in this county, except those who are afraid of you. ‘Mr.
Rosedew has entrapped the future Sir Cradock Nowell, hushed up the
crime, and made all snug for his daughter at Nowelhurst Hall.’”

Sir Cradock did not mean half his words, any more than the rest of us
do, when hurt; and he was bitterly sorry for them the moment they were
uttered. They put an impassable barrier between him and John Rosedew,
between him and his own conscience, for many a day and night to come.

Have you ever seen a pure good man, a man of large intellect and heart,
a lover of truth and justice more than of himself, confront, without
warning, some black charge, some despicable calumny, in a word (for I
love strong English, and nothing else will tell it), some damned lie?
If not, I hope you never may, for it makes a manʼs heart burn so.

John Rosedew was not of the violent order. Indeed, as his sister
Eudoxia said, and to her own great comfort knew, his cistern of
wrathfulness was so small, and the supply–pipe so unready—as must be
where the lower passions filter through the intellect—that most people
thought it impossible “to put the parson out.” And very few of those
who knew him could have borne to make the trial.

Even now, hurt as he was to the very depth of his heart, he was
indignant more than angry.

“It would have been more manly of you, Sir Cradock Nowell, to have said
this very mean thing yourself, than to have put it into the mouths of
others. I grieve for you, and for myself, that so mean a man was ever
my friend. Perhaps you have still some relics of gentlemanly feeling
which will lead you to perform a hostʼs duty towards his visitor. Have
the kindness to order my horse.”

Then John Rosedew, so punctilious, so polite to the poorest cottager,
turned his broad back upon the baronet, and as he slowly walked to the
door, these words came over his shoulder:—

“To–day you will receive my resignation of your two benefices. If
I live a few years more, I will repay you all they have brought me
above a curateʼs stipend. My daughter is no fortune–hunter. She never
shall see your son again, unless he renounce you and yours for ever,
or you come and implore us humbly as now you have spoken arrogantly,
contemptibly, and meanly.”

Then, fearing lest he had been too grand about a little matter—not his
daughterʼs marriage, but the aspersion upon himself—he closed the door
very carefully, so as not to make any noise, and walked away towards
his home, forgetting Coræbus utterly. And, before his fine solid face
began to recover its healthy and bashful pink, he was visited by sore
misgivings as to his own behaviour; to wit, what claim had any man,
however elate with the pride of right and the scorn of wrong, to talk
about any fellow–man becoming humble to him? Nevertheless, he could not
manage to retract the wrong expression in his letter of resignation;
not from any false pride—oh no!—but for fear of being misunderstood.
But that very night he craved pardon of Him before whom alone we need
humbly bow; who alone can grant us anything.




CHAPTER IV.


What is lovelier, just when Autumn throws her lace around us, and begs
us not to begin to think of any spiteful winter, because she has not
yet unfolded half the wealth of her bosom, and will not look over her
shoulder—when we take that rich one gaily for her gifts of beauty; what
among her clustered hair, freshened with the hoar–frost in imitation of
the Spring (all fashions do recur so), tell us what can be more pretty,
pearly, light, and elegant, more memoried of maidenhood, than a jolly
spiderʼs web?

See how the diamonds quiver and sparkle in the September morning; what
jeweller could have set them so? All of graduated light and metrical
proportion, every third pre–eminent, strung on soft aerial tension,
as of woven hoar–frost, and every carrying thread encrusted with the
breath of fairies, then crossed and latticed at just angles, with
narrowing interstices, to a radiated octagon—the more we look, the
more we wonder at the perfect tracery. Then, if we gently breathe
upon it, or a leaf of the bramble shivers, how from the open centre
a whiff of waving motion flows down every vibrant radius, every weft
accepts the waft slowly and lulling vibration, every stay–rope jerks
and quivers, and all the fleeting subtilty expands, contracts, and
undulates.

Yet if an elegant spider glide out, exquisite, many–dappled, pellucid
like a Scotch pebble or a calceolaria, with a dozen dimples upon his
back, and eight fierce eyes all up for business, the moment he slips
from the blackberry–leaf all sense of beauty is lost to the gazer,
because he thinks of rapacity.

And so, I fear, John Rosedewʼs hat described in the air a flourish of
more courtesy than cordiality, when he saw Mrs. Corklemore gliding
forth from the bend of the road in front of him. Although she had left
the house after him, by the help of a short cut through the gardens,
where the rector would no longer take the liberty of trespassing, she
contrived to meet him as if herself returning from the village.

“Oh, Mr. Rosedew, I am so glad to see you,” cried Georgie, as he tried
to escape with his bow: “what a fortunate accident!”

“Indeed!” said John, not meaning to be rude, but unwittingly suggesting
a modified view of the bliss.

“Ah, I am so sorry; but you are prejudiced against me, I fear, because
my simple convictions incline me to the Low Church view.”

That hit was a very clever one. No other bolt she could have shot would
have brought the parson to bay so, upon his homeward road, with the
important news he bore.

“I assure you, Mrs. Corklemore, I beg to assure you most distinctly,
that you are quite wrong in thinking that. Most truly I hope that I
have allowed no prejudice, upon such grounds, to dwell for a moment
with me.”

“Then you are not a ritualist? And you think, so far as I understand
you, that the Low Church people are quite as good as the High Church?”

“I hope they are as good; still I doubt their being as right. But
charity is greater even than faith and hope. And, for the sake of
charity, I would wash all rubrics white. If the living are rebuked for
lagging to bury their dead, how shall they be praised for battling over
the Burial Service?”

Mrs. Corklemore, quick as she was, did not understand the allusion. Mr.
Rosedew referred to a paltry dissension over a corpse in Oxfordshire,
which had created strong disgust, far and near, among believers; while
infidels gloried in it. It cannot be too soon forgotten and forgiven.

“Oh, Mr. Rosedew, I am so glad that your sentiments are so liberal. I
had always feared that liberal sentiments proceeded from, or at least
were associated with, weak faith.”

“I hope not, madam. The most liberal One I have ever read of was God as
well as man. But I cannot speak of such matters casually, as I would
talk of the weather. If your mind is uneasy, and I can in any way help
you, it is my duty to do so.”

“Oh, thank you. No; I donʼt think I could do that. We are such
Protestants at Coo Nest. Forgive me, I see I have hurt you.”

“You misunderstand me purposely,” said John Rosedew, with that crack of
perception which comes (like a chapped lip) suddenly to folks who are
too charitable, “or else you take a strangely intensified view of the
simplest matters. All I intended was——”

“Oh yes, oh yes, I am always misunderstanding everybody. I am so
dreadfully stupid and simple. But you _will_ relieve my mind, Mr.
Rosedew?”

Here Georgie held out the most beautiful hand that ever darned a
dish–cloth, so white, and warm, and dainty, from her glove and pink
muff–lining. Mr. Rosedew, of course, was compelled to take it, and she
left it a long time with him.

“To be sure I will, if it is in my power, and you will only tell me
how.”

“It is simply this,” she answered, meekly, dropping her eyes, and
sighing; “I do so long to do good works, and never can tell how to set
about it. Unhappily, I am brought so much more into contact with the
worldly–minded, than with those who would improve me, and I feel the
lack of something, something sadly deficient in my spiritual state.
Could you assign me a district anywhere? I am sadly ignorant, but I
might do some little ministering, feeling as I do for every one. If it
were only ten cottages, with an interesting sheep–stealer! Oh, that
would be so charming. Can I have a sheep–stealer?”

“I fear I cannot accommodate you”—the parson was smiling in spite of
himself, she looked so beautifully earnest; “we have no felons here,
and scarcely even a hen–stealer. Though I must not take any credit
for that. Every house in the village is Sir Cradock Nowellʼs, and Mr.
Garnet is not long in ousting the evil–doers.”

“Oh, Sir Cradock; poor Sir Cradock!” Here she came to the real object
of her expedition. “Oh, Mr. Rosedew, tell me kindly, as a Christian
minister; I am in so difficult a position,—have you noticed in poor Sir
Cradock anything strange of late, anything odd and lamentable?”

Mr. Rosedew hated to be called a “minister,”—the Dissenters love the
word so, and even the great John had his weaknesses.

“I trust I should tell you the truth, Mrs. Corklemore, whether invoked
as a minister, or asked simply as a man.”

“No doubt you would—of course you would. I am always making such
mistakes. I am so unused to clever people. But do tell me, in any
capacity which may suit you best”—it was foolish of her not to forego
that little repartee—”whether you have observed of late anything odd
and deplorable, anything we who love him so——” Here she hesitated, and
wiped her eyes.

“Though Sir Cradock Nowell,” replied Mr. Rosedew, slowly, and buttoning
up his coat at the risk of spoiling his cockʼs–comb frill, “is no
longer my dearest friend, as he was for nearly fifty years, it does
not become me to speak about him confidentially and disparagingly
to a lady whom I have not had the honour of seeing more than four
times, including therein the celebration of Divine service, at which a
district–visitor should attend with _some_ regularity, if only for the
sake of example. Mrs. Corklemore, I have the honour of wishing you good
morning.”

Although the parson had neither desire nor power to pierce the ladyʼs
schemes, he felt, by that peculiar instinct which truly honest men have
(though they do not always use it), that the lady was dishonest, and
dishonestly seeking something. Else had he never uttered a speech so
unlike his usual courtesy. As for poor simple Georgie, she was rolled
over too completely to do anything but gasp. Then she went to the gorse
to recover herself; and presently she laughed, not spitefully, but with
real amusement at her own discomfiture.

Being quite a young woman still, and therefore not _spe longa_,
and feeling a want of sympathy in waiting for dead menʼs shoes,
Mrs. Corklemore, who had some genius—if creative power prove it;
if _gignere_, not _gigni_, be taken as the test, though perhaps it
requires both of them,—that sweet mother of a sweeter child (if so
much of the saccharine be admitted by Chancellors of the Exchequer,
themselves men of more alcohol), what did she do but devise a scheme
to wear the shoes, _ipso vivo_, and put the old gentleman into the
slippers.

How very desirable it was that Nowelhurst Hall, and those vast estates,
should be in the possession of some one who knew how to enjoy them,
and make a proper use of them! Poor Sir Cradock never could do so; it
was painfully evident that he never more could discharge his duties
to society, that he was listless, passive, somnolent,—somnambulant
perhaps she ought to say, a man walking in a dream. She had heard
of cases,—more than that, she had actually known them,—sad cases in
which that pressure on the brain, which so frequently accompanies the
slow reaction from sudden and terrible trials, had crushed the reason
altogether, especially after a “certain age.” What a pity! And it might
be twenty years yet before it pleased God to remove him. He had a tough
and wiry look about him. In common kindness and humanity, something
surely ought to be done to relieve him, to make him happier.

Nothing rough, of course; nothing harsh or coercive. No personal
restraint whatever, for the poor old dear was not dangerous; only to
make him what she believed was called a “Committee in Chancery”—there
she was wrong, for the guardian is the Committee—and then Mr.
Corklemore, of course, and Mr. Kettledrum would act for him. At least
she should think so, unless there was some obnoxious trustee, under his
marriage–settlement. That settlement must be got at; so much depended
upon it. Probably young Cradock would succeed thereunder to all the
settled estate upon his fatherʼs death. If so, there was nothing for
it, except to make him incapable, by convicting him of felony. Poor
fellow! She had no wish to hang him. She would not have done it for the
world; and she had heard he was so good–looking. But there was no fear
of his being hanged, like the son of a tradesman or peasant.

Well, when he was transported for life, with every facility for
repentance, who would be the next to come bothering? Why, that odious
Eoa. As for her, she would hang her to–morrow, if she could only get
the chance. Though she believed it would never hurt her; for the child
could stand upon nothing. Impudent wretch! Only yesterday she had
frightened Georgie out of her life again. And there was no possibility
of obtaining a proper influence over her. There was hardly any crime
which that girl would hesitate at, when excited. What a lamentable
state of morality! She might be made to choke Amy Rosedew, her rival
in Bobʼs affection. But no, that would never do. Too much crime in one
family. How would society look upon them? And it would make the house
unpleasant to live in. There was a simpler way of quenching Eoa—deny at
once her legitimacy. The chances were ten to one against her having
been born in wedlock—such a loose, wild man as her father was. And even
if she had been, why, the chances were ten to one against her being
able to prove it. Whereas it would be very easy to get a few Hindoos,
or Coolies, or whatever they were, to state their opinion about her
mother.

Well, supposing all this nicely managed, what next? Why, let poor Sir
Cradock live out his time, as he would be in her hands entirely, and
would grow more and more incapable; and when it pleased God to release
him, why then, “thou and Ziba divide the land,” and for the sake of her
dear little Flore, she would take good care that the Kettledrums did
not get too much.

This programme was a far bolder one than that with which Mrs.
Corklemore had first arrived at the Hall. But she was getting on so
well, that of course her views and desires expanded. All she meant at
first was to gain influence over her host, and irrevocably estrange
him from his surviving son, by delicate insinuations upon the subject
of fratricide; at the same time to make Eoa do something beyond
forgiveness, and then to confide the reward of virtue to obituary
gratitude.

Could anything be more innocent, perhaps we should say more laudable?
What man of us has not the privilege of knowing a dozen Christian
mothers, who would do things of nobler enterprise for the sake of their
little darlings?

But now, upon the broader gauge which the lady had selected, there were
two things to be done, ere ever the train got to the switches. One
was, to scatter right and left, behind and before, and up and down,
wonder, hesitancy, expectation, interrogation, commiseration, and every
other sort of whisper, confidential, suggestive, cumulative, as to poor
Sir Cradockʼs condition. The other thing was to find out the effect
in the main of his marriage–settlement. And this was by far the more
difficult.

Already Mrs. Corklemore had done a little business, without leaving
a tongue–print behind her, in the distributory process; and if Mr.
Rosedew could just have been brought, after that rude dismissal, to
say that he had indeed observed sad eccentricity, growing strangeness,
on the part of his ancient friend, why then he would be committed to a
line of most telling evidence, and the parish half bound to approval.

But Johnʼs high sense of honour, and low dislike of Georgie, had saved
him from the neat, and neatly–baited, trap.

That morning Mr. Rosedewʼs path was beset with beauty, though his
daughter failed to meet him; inasmuch as she very naturally awaited
him on the parish road. When he had left the chase, and was fetching
a compass by the river, along a quiet footway, elbowed like an old
oak–branch, overlapped with scraggy hawthorns, paved on either side
with good intention of primroses, there, just in a nested bend where
the bank overhangs the stream, and you would like to lie flat and flip
in a trout fly about the end of April, over the water came lightly
bounding, and on a mossy bank alighted, young Eoa Nowell.

“To and fro, thatʼs the way I go; donʼt you see, Uncle John, I must;
only the water is so narrow. It scarcely keeps me in practice.”

“Then your standard, my dear, must be very high. I should have thought
twice about that jump, in my very best days!”

“_You_ indeed!” said Eoa, with the most complacent contempt; eyeing the
parsonʼs thick–set figure and anterior development.

“Nevertheless,” replied John, with a laugh, “it is but seven and forty
years since I won first prize at Sherborne, both for the long leap
and the high leap; and proud enough I was, Eoa, of sixteen feet four
inches. But I should have had no chance, thatʼs certain, if you had
entered for the stakes.”

“But how could I be there, Uncle John, donʼt you see, thirty years
before I was born?”

“My dear, I am quite prepared to admit the validity of your excuse.
Tyrio cothurno! child, what have you got on?”

“Oh, I found them in an old cupboard, with tops, and whips, and
whistles; and I made Mother Biddy take them in at the ancle, because I
do hate needles so. And I wear them, not on account of the dirt, but
because people in this country are so nasty and particular; and now
they canʼt say a word against me. Thatʼs one comfort, at any rate.”

She wore a smart pair of poor Claytonʼs vamplets, and a dark
morning–frock drawn tightly in, with a little of the skirt tucked up,
and a black felt hat with an ostrich feather, and her masses of hair
rolled closely. As the bright colour shone in her cheeks, and the
heartlight outsparkled the sun in her eyes, John Rosedew thought that
he had never seen such a wildly beautiful, and yet perfectly innocent,
creature.

“Well, I donʼt know,” he answered, very gravely, “about your gaiters
proving a Palladium against calumny. But one thing is certain, Eoa,
your face will, to all who look at you. But why donʼt you ride, my dear
child, if you must have such rapid exercise?”

“Because they wonʼt let me get up the proper way on a horse. Me to
sit cramped up between two horns, as if a horse was a cow! Me, who
can stand on the back of a horse going at full gallop! But it doesnʼt
matter now much. Nobody seems to like me for it.”

She spoke in so wistful and sad a tone, and cast down her eyes so
bashfully, that the old man, who loved her heartily, longed to know
what the matter was.

“Nobody likes you, Eoa! Why, everybody likes you. You are stealing
everybodyʼs heart. My Amy would be quite jealous, only she likes you so
much herself.”

“I am sure, I have more cause to be jealous of her. Some people like
me, I know, very much; but not the people I want to do it.”

“Oh, then you donʼt want us to do it. What harm have we done, Eoa?”

“You donʼt understand me at all, Uncle John. And perhaps you donʼt want
to do it. And yet I did think that you ought to know, as the clergyman
of the parish. But I never seem to have right ideas of anything in this
country!”

“Tell me, my dear,” said Mr. Rosedew, taking her hand, and speaking
softly, for he saw two great tears stealing out from the dark shadow of
her lashes, and rolling down the cheeks that had been so bright but a
minute ago; “tell me, as if you were my own daughter, what vexes your
pure heart so. Very likely I can help you, and I will promise to tell
no one.”

“Oh no, Uncle John, you never can help me. Nobody in the world can help
me. But do you think that you ought to know?”

“That depends upon the subject, my dear. Not if it is a family–secret,
or otherwise out of my province. But if it is anything with which I
have to deal, or which I understand——”

“Oh yes, oh yes! Because you manage, you manage all—all the banns of
matrimony.”

This last word was whispered with such a sob of despairing
tantalization, that John, although he was very sorry, could scarcely
keep from laughing.

“You need not laugh, Uncle John. You wouldnʼt if you were in my place,
or could at all understand the facts of it. And as for its being a
family–secret, ever so many people know it, and I donʼt care two pice
who knows it now.”

“Then let me know it, my child. Perhaps an old man can advise you.”

The child of the East looked up at him, with a mist of softness moving
through the brilliance of her eyes, and spake these unromantic words:—

“It is that I do like Bob so; and he doesnʼt care one bit for me.”

She looked at the parson, as much as to say, “What do you think of
that, now? I am not at all ashamed of it.” And then she stooped for a
primrose bud, and put it into his button–hole, and then she burst out
crying.

“Upon my word,” said John, “upon my word, this is too bad of you, Eoa.”

“Oh yes, I know all that; and I say it to myself ever so many times.
But it seems to make no difference. You canʼt understand, of course,
Uncle John, any more than you could jump the river. But I do assure you
that sometimes it makes me feel quite desperate. And yet all the time
I know how excessively foolish I am. And then I try to argue, but it
seems to hurt me here. And then I try not to think of it, but it will
come back again, and I am even glad to have it. And then I begin to
pity myself, and to be angry with every one else; and after that I get
better and whistle a tune, and go jumping. Only I take care not to see
him.”

“There you are quite right, my dear: and I would strongly recommend you
not to see him for a month.”

“As if that could make any difference! And he would go and have
somebody else. And then I should kill them both.”

“Well done, Oriental! Now, will you be guided by me, my dear? I have
seen a great deal of the world.”

“Yes, no doubt you have, Uncle John. And you are welcome to say just
what you like; only donʼt advise me what I donʼt like; but tell the
truth exactly.”

“Then what I say is this, Eoa: keep away from him altogether—donʼt
allow him to see you, even when he wishes it, for a month at least.
Hold yourself far above him. He will begin to think of you more and
more. Why, you are ten times too good for him. There is not a man in
England who might not be proud of you, Eoa, when you have learned a
little dignity.”

Somehow or other none of the Rosedews appreciated the Garnets.

“Yes, I dare say; but donʼt you see, I donʼt want him to be proud of
me. I only want him to like me. And I do hate being dignified.”

“If you want him to like you, do just what I have advised.”

“So I will, Uncle John. Kiss me now, to make it up. Oh, you are such a
dear!—donʼt you think a week would do, now?”




CHAPTER V.


At high noon of a bright cold day in the early part of March, a
labourer who had been “frithing,” that is to say, cutting underwood in
one of the forest copses, came out into the green track, which could
scarce be called a “lane,” to eat his well–earned dinner.

As it happened to be a Monday, the poor man had a better dinner than
he would see or smell again until the following Sunday. For there, as
throughout rural England, a working man, receiving his wages on the
Saturday evening, lives upon a sliding scale throughout the dreary
week. He has his bit of hot on Sunday, smacking his lips at every
morsel; and who shall scold him for staying at home to see it duly
boiled, and feeling his heart move with the steaming and savoury
pot–lid more kindly than with the dry parson?

And he wants his old woman ‘long of him; he see her so little all the
week, and she be always best–tempered on Sundays. Let the young uns go
to school to get larning—though he donʼt much see the use of it, and
his father lived happy without it—‘bating that matter, which is beyond
him, let them go, and then hear parson, and bring home the news to the
old folk. Only let ‘em come home good time for dinner, or they had best
look out. “Now, Molly, lift the pot–lid again. Oh, it do smell so good!
Got ever another onion?”

Having held high feast on Sunday, and thanked the Lord, without
knowing it (by inhaling happiness, and being good to the children—our
Lordʼs especial favourites), off he sets on the Monday morning, to
earn another eighteenpence—twopence apiece for the young uns. And he
means to be jolly that day, for he has got his pinch of tobacco and
two lucifers in his waistcoat pocket, and in his frail a most glorious
dinner hanging from a hedge–stake.

All the dogs he meets jump up on his back; but he really cannot
encourage them, with his own dog so fond of bones, and having the first
right to them. Of course, his own dog is not far behind; for it is a
law of nature, admitting no exception, that the poorer a man is, the
more certain he is to have a dog, and the more certain that dog is to
admire him.

Pretermitting the dog, important as he is, let us ask of the masterʼs
dinner. He has a great hunk of cold bacon, from the cabbage–soup of
yesterday, with three short bones to keep it together, and a cross
junk from the clod of beef (out of the same great pot) which he will
put up a tree for Tuesday; because, if it had been left at home, mother
couldnʼt keep it from the children; who do scarce a stroke of work yet,
and only get strong victuals to console them for school upon Sundays.
Then upon Wednesday our noble peasant of this merry England will have
come down to the scraping of bones; on Thursday he may get bread and
dripping from some rich manʼs house; on Friday and Saturday nothing but
bread, unless there be cold potatoes. And he will not have fed in this
fat rich manner unless he be a good workman, a hater of public–houses,
and his wife a tidy body.

Now this labourer who came out of the copse, with a fine appetite for
his Mondayʼs dinner (for he had not been “spreeing” on Sunday), was no
other than Jem—not Jem Pottles, of course, but the Jem who fell from
the oak–branch, and must have been killed or terribly hurt but for
Cradock Nowellʼs quickness. Everybody called him “Jem,” except those
who called him “father;” and his patronymic, not being important, may
as well continue latent. Now why could not Jem enjoy his dinner more
thoroughly in the copse itself, where the witheys were gloved with
silver and gold, and the primroses and the violets bloomed, and the
first of the wood–anemones began to star the dead ash–leaves? In the
first place, because in the timber–track happen he might see somebody
just to give “good day” to; the chances were against it in such a
lonesome place, still it might so happen; and a man who has been six
hours at work in the deep recesses of a wood, with only birds and
rabbits moving, is liable to a gregarious weakness, especially at
feeding–time. Furthermore, this particular copse had earned a very bad
name. It was said to be the harbourage of a white and lonesome ghost, a
ghost with no consideration for embodied feelings, but apt to walk in
the afternoon, in the glimpses of wooded sunshine. Therefore Jem was
very uneasy at having to work alone there, and very angry with his mate
for having that day abandoned him. And but that his dread of Mr. Garnet
was more than supernatural, he would have wiped his billhook then and
there, and gone all the way to the public–house to fetch back that mate
for company.

Pondering thus, he followed the green track as far as the corner of
the coppice hedge, and then he sat down on a mossy log, and began to
chew more pleasantly. He had washed his hands at a little spring,
and gathered a bit of watercress, and fixed his square of cold bacon
cleverly into a mighty hunk of brown bread, like a whetstone in its
socket; and truly it would have whetted any plain manʼs appetite to see
the way he sliced it, and the intense appreciation.

With his mighty clasp–knife (straight, not curved like a gardenerʼs)
he cut little streaky slips along, and laid each on a good thickness
of crust, and patted it like a piece of butter, then fondly looked
at it for a moment, then popped it in, with the resolution that the
next should be a still better one, supposing such excellence possible.
And all the while he rolled his tongue so, and smacked his lips so
fervently, that you saw the man knew what he was about, dealt kindly
with his hunger, and felt a good dinner—when he got it.

“There, Scratch,” he cried to his dog, after giving him many a taste,
off and on, as in fairness should be mentioned; “hie in, and seek it
there, lad.”

With that he tossed well in over the hedge—for he was proud of his
dogʼs abilities—the main bone of the three (summum bonum from a canine
point of view; and, after all, perhaps they are right), and the flat
bone fell, it may be a rod or so, inside the fence of the coppice.
Scratch went through the hedge in no time, having watched the course of
the bone in air (as a cricketer does of the ball, or an astronomer of
a comet) with his sweet little tail on the quiver. But Scratch, in the
coppice, was all abroad, although he had measured the distance; and the
reason was very simple—the bone was high up in the fork of a bush, and
there it would stay till the wind blew. Now this apotheosis of the bone
to the terrier was not proven; his views were low and practical; and he
rushed (as all we earth–men do) to a lowering conclusion. The bone must
have sunk into ĕraʼs bosom, being very sharp at one end, and heavy at
the other. The only plan was to scratch for it, within a limited area;
and why was he called “Scratch,” but for scarifying genius?

Therefore that dog set to work, in a manner highly praiseworthy (save,
indeed, upon a flowerbed). First he wrought well with his fore–feet,
using them at a trot only, until he had scooped out a little hole,
about the size of a ratʼs nest. This he did in several places, and with
sound assurance, but a purely illusory bonus. Presently he began in
earnest, as if he had smelled a rat; he put out his tongue and pricked
his ears, and worked away at full gallop, all four feet at once, in a
fashion known only to terriers. Jem came through the hedge to see what
it was, for the little dog gave short barks now and then, as if he were
in a rabbit–hole, with the coney round the corner.

“Mun there, mun, lad; show whutt thee carnst do, boy.”

Thus encouraged, Scratch went on, emulative of self–burial, throwing
the soft earth high in the air, and making a sort of laughing noise in
the rapture of his glory.

After a while he sniffed hard in the hole, and then rested, and then
again at it. The master also was beginning to share the little dogʼs
excitement, for he had never seen Scratch dig so hard before, and his
mind was wavering betwixt the hope of a pot of money, and the fear of
finding the skeleton belonging to the ghost.

Scratch worked for at least a quarter of an hour, and then ran to the
ditch and lapped a little, and came back to work again, while Jem
stood by at a prudent distance, and puffed his pipe commensurately, and
wished he had somebody with him. Presently he saw something shining in
the peaty and sandy trough, about two feet from the surface, something
at which Scratch tried his teeth, but found the subject ungenial. So
Jem ran up, making sure this time that it was the pot of money. Alas,
it was nothing of the sort, nothing at all worth digging for. Jem was
so bitterly disappointed that he laid hold of Scratch, and cuffed
him well, and the little dog went away and howled, and looked at his
bleeding claws, and stood penitent, with his tail down.

Nevertheless, the thing dug up had cost some money in its time, for
gunmakers know the way to charge, if never another soul does. It was
a pair of gun–barrels, without any stock, or lock, or ramrod, heavily
battered and marked with fire, as if an attempt had been made to burn
the entire implement, and then, the wood being consumed, the iron parts
had been kicked asunder, and the hot barrels fiercely trampled on. Now
Jem knew nothing whatever of guns, except that they were apt to go
off, whether loaded or unloaded; so after much ponderous thinking and
fearing—_fiat experimentum in corpore vili_—he summoned poor Scratch,
and coaxed him, and said, “Hie, boy, vetch thic thur thinʼ!”

When he found that the little dog took the barrels in his mouth without
being hurt by them, and then dragged them along the ground, inasmuch
as he could not carry them, Jem plucked up courage and laid them by, to
take them home that evening.

After his bit of supper that night, Jem and his wife held counsel, the
result of which was that he took his prize down to Roger Sweetlandʼs
shop, at the lower end of the village. There he found the blacksmith
and one apprentice working overtime, repairing a harrow, which must be
ready for Farmer Blackers next morning. The worthy Vulcan received Jem
kindly, for his wife was Jemʼs wifeʼs second cousin; and then he blew
up a sharp yellow fire, and examined the barrels attentively.


“Niver zeed no goon the likes o’ thissom, though a ‘ave ‘eered say as
they makes ‘em now to shut out o’ tʼother end, man. Whai, her hanʼt gat
niver na brichinʼ! A must shut the man as shuts wiʼ her.”

“What wull e’ gie vor un, Roger? Her bainʼt na gude to ussen.”

“Gie thee a zhillinʼ, lad, mare nor her be worth, onʼy to bate up vor
harse–shoon.”

After vainly attempting to get eightee–pence, Jem was fain to accept
the shilling; and this piece of beautiful workmanship, and admirable
“Damascus twist,” was set in the corner behind the door, to be forged
into shoes for a cart–horse. So, as Sophocles well observes, all
things come round with the rolling years: the best gun–barrels used
to be made of the stub–nails and the horse–shoes (though the thing was
a superstition); now good horse–shoes shall be made out of the best
gun–barrels.

But, in despite of this law of nature, those gun–barrels never were
made into horse–shoes at all, and for this simple reason:—Rufus Hutton
came over from Nowelhurst to have his Polly shodden; meanwhile he
would walk up to the Hall, and see how his child Eoa was. It is a most
worshipful providence, and as clever as the works of a watch, that all
the people who have been far abroad, whether in hot or cold climates (I
mean, of course, respectively, and not that a Melville Bay harpooner
would fluke in with a Ceylon rifleman), somehow or other, when they
come home, groove into, and dovetail with, one another; and not only
feel a _pudor_ not to contradict a brother alien, but feel bound by a
_sacramentum_ to back up the lies of each other. To this rule of course
there are some exceptions (explosive accidents in the _Times_, for
instance), but almost every one will admit that it is a rule; just as
it is not to tell out of school.

As regards Rufus and Eoa, this association was limited (as all of
them are now–a–days, except in their powers of swindling), strictly
limited to a keen and spicily patriarchal turn. Eoa, somehow or other,
with that wonderful feminine instinct (which is far in advance of
the canine, but not a whit less jealous) felt that Rue Hutton had
admired her, though he was old enough to be her grandfather in those
precocious climates. And though she would not have had him, if he had
come out of Golconda mine, one stalactite of diamonds, she really never
could see that Rosa had any business with him. Therefore, on no account
would she go to Geopharmacy Lodge, and she regarded the baby, impending
there, as an outrage and an upstart.

Dr. Hutton knew more about shoeing a horse than any of the country
blacksmiths; and as Polly, in common with many fast trotters, had a
trick of throwing her hind–feet inwards, and “cutting” (as it is termed
in the art), she liked to have her hind–shoes turned up, and her hoofs
rasped in a peculiar manner, which Sweetland alone could execute to her
perfect satisfaction.

“Ha, Roger, what have you got here?” said Rufus, having returned from
the Hall, and inspected Pollyʼs new shoes, which she was very proud to
show him.

“Naethin’ at all, yer honour, but a bit o’ a old anshent goon, as
happed to coom in last avening.”

“Ancient gun, man! Why, it is a new breech–loader, only terribly
knocked about. I found it all out in London. But there are none in this
part of the country. How on earth did you come by it? And what made you
spoil it, you stupid, in your forge–fire?”

“Her hanʼt a bin in my varge–vire. If her had, herʼd nivir a coom out
alaive. Her hath bin in a wood vire by the look o’ the smo–uk.”

Then Roger Sweetland told Rufus Hutton, as briefly as it is possible
for any New Forest man to tell anything, all he knew about it; to which
the inquisitive doctor listened with the keenest interest.

“And what will you take for it, Sweetland? Of course it is utterly
ruined; but I might stick it up in my rubbish–hole.”

“Iʼll tak whutt I gie vor ‘un; no mare, nor no less. Though be warth a
dale mare by the looks ov ‘un.”

“And what did you give for it—twopence?”

“As good a croon–pace as wor iver cooined. Putt un barck in carner, if
a bainʼt worth thart.”

Dr. Hutton was glad to get it for that, but the blacksmith looked
rather blue when he saw him, carefully wielding it, turn his mareʼs
head towards the copse where poor Jem was at work. For to lose the
doctorʼs custom would make his lie at four shillings premium an
uncommonly bad investment, and Jem was almost sure to “let out” how
much he had got for the gun–barrels.

After hearing all that Jem had to say, and seeing the entire process
of discovery put dramatically, and himself searching the spot most
carefully without any further result, and (which was the main point
of all, at least in Jemʼs opinion) presenting the woodman with
half–a–crown, and bidding him hold his tongue, Rufus Hutton went home,
and very sagely preferred Harpocrates to Hymen.

The which resolution was most ungrateful, for Hymen had lately
presented him with a perfect little Cupid, according to the very best
judges, including the nurse and the mother, and the fuss that was made
at the Lodge about it (for to us men a baby is neuter, a heterogeneous
vocable, unluckily indeclinable); really the way everybody went on, and
worst of all Rufus Hutton, was enough to make a sane bachelor bless
the memory of Herod. However, of that no more at present. Some one was
quite awake to all the ridiculous parts of it, and perfectly ready to
turn it all to profitable account, as an admirable reviewer treats the
feeble birth of a novel.

Mrs. Corklemoreʼs sympathetic powers were never displayed more
brilliantly, or to better effect; and before very long she had added
one, and that the primal, step to the ascending scale of the amiable
monarch. For she could manage baby, and baby could manage Rosa, and
Rosa could manage Rufus. Only Rufus was not king of the world, except
in his own opinion.

As soon as Dr. Hutton could get away, he took the barrels to his own
little room, and examined them very carefully. Scarred as they were,
and battered, and discoloured by the fire, there could be no question
as to their having formed part of a patent breech–loading gun; even
the hinge and the bolt still remained, though the wooden continuation
of the stock was, of course, consumed; moreover, there was no loop for
ramrod, nor screw–thread to take the breeching. Then Rufus went to
a little cupboard, and took out a very small bottle of a strong and
rodent acid, and with a feather slightly touched the battered, and
crusted, and rusty “bridge,” in the place where a gunmaker puts his
name, and for the most part engraves it wretchedly. In breech–loading
guns, the bridge itself is only retained from the force of habit,
and our conservatism of folly; for as the breech–end is so much
thicker than the muzzle–end of the barrel, and the interior a perfect
cylinder, the line of sight (if meddled with) should be raised instead
of being depressed at the muzzle–end, to give us a perfect parallel.
Of course we know that shot falls in its flight, and there is no
pure point–blank; but surely the allowance for, and correction of,
these defeasances, according to distance, &c., should be left to the
marksmanʼs eye and practice, not slurred by a crossing of planes at one
particular distance.

Leaving that to wiser heads, which already are correcting it (by
omitting the bridge entirely), let us see what Dr. Hutton did. As the
acid began to work, it was very beautiful to watch the clouding and
the clearing over the noble but fiercely–abused metal. There is no
time now to describe it—for which readers will be thankful—enough that
the result revealed the makerʼs name and address, “L——, C——r–street,”
and the number of the gun. Dr. Hutton by this time had made the
acquaintance of that eminent gunmaker, who, after improving greatly
upon a French design, had introduced into this country a rapid and
striking improvement; an implement of slaughter as far in advance of
the muzzle–loader as a lucifer–match is of flint and tinder. And Rufus,
although with a set design to work out his suspicions, would have found
it a very much slower work, but for a bit of accident.

He was sauntering along one day from Charing Cross to the westward,
looking in at every window (as his manner was, for he loved all
information), when suddenly he espied the very “moral”—as the old women
say—the exact fac–simile of the thing in his waistcoat pocket.

Instantly he entered the shop, and asked a number of questions.
Though it was clear that he came to purchase nothing, he was received
most courteously, for it is one of the greatest merits of men who
take the lead with us, that they scale or skin the British dragon,
and substitute for John Bullʼs jumble of surliness and serfdom, the
courtesy of self–respect.

Then the brevity and simplicity of the new invention—for everything
is new with us during five–and–twenty years; and it took thirty years
of persistent work to make Covent Garden own rhubarb—all the great
advantages, which true Britons would “consider of,” were pointed out to
Rufus Hutton, and he saw them in a moment, though of guns he had known
but little.

And now he saw so much of import in his new discovery, that he
resolved to neglect all other business, and start for London the very
next morning, if Rosa could be persuaded to let him, without having
heard his purpose. But, in spite of all his eagerness, he did nothing
of the sort; for Rufus junior that very night was taken with some
infantile ailment of a serious kind, and for more than a month the
doctor could not leave home for a day even, without breach of duty
towards his wife, and towards the unconscious heir of his orchard–house
and pyramids.

Troubles were closing round Bull Garnet, but he knew nothing of them;
and, to tell the truth, he cared not now what the end would be, or in
what mode it would visit him. All he cared for was to defer (if it
might be so) the violence of the outburst, the ruin of the household,
until his darling son should be matured enough of judgment, and shaped
enough in character, to feel, and to make others feel, that to answer
for our own sins is quite enough for the best of us.

Yet there was one other thing which Mr. Garnet fain would see in likely
course of settlement, ere the recoil of his own crime should sweep upon
his children. It regarded only their worldly affairs; their prospects,
when he should have none. And being the mixture he happened to be—so
shrewd, and so sentimental—he saw how good it was to exert the former
attributive, when his children were concerned; and the latter, and far
larger one, upon the world at large.

He had lately made some noble purchase from the Government
Commissioners—who generally can be cheated, because what they sell
is not their own—and he felt that he was bound by the very highest
interests to be a capable grantee, till all was signed, and sealed,
and safely conveyed to uses beyond attaint of felony. Therefore he was
labouring hard to infuse some of his old energy into the breasts of
lawyers—which attempt proves the heat of his nature more than would a
world of testimony.




CHAPTER VI.


“Why should I care for life or death? The one is no good, and the
other no harm. What is existence but sense of self, severance for one
troubled moment from the eternal unity? We disquiet ourselves, we fume,
and pant—lo, our sorrows are gone, like the smoke of a train, and our
joys like the glimmer of steam. Why should I fear to be mad, any more
than fear to die? What harm if the mind outrun the body upon the road
of return to God? And yet we look upon madness as the darkest of human
evils!

“How this gliding river makes one think of life and eternity! Not
because the grand old simile lives in every language. Not because we
have read and heard it, in a hundred forms and more. A savage from the
Rocky Mountains feels the same idea—for ideas strongly stamped pierce
into the feelings.

“Why does the mind so glide away to some calm sea of melancholy, when
we stand and gaze intently upon flowing water? And the larger the
spread of the water is, and the grander the march of the current, the
deeper and more irresistible grows the sadness of the gazer.

“That naval captain, so well known as an explorer of the Amazon, who
dined with us at Nowelhurst one day last July, was a light–hearted
man by nature, and full of wit and humour. And yet, in spite of wine
and warmth, he made the summer twilight creep with the sadness of his
stories. Nevertheless, we hung upon them with a strange enchantment; we
drew more real pleasure from them than from a world of drolleries. Poor
Clayton tried to run away, for he never could bear melancholy; but all
he did was to take a chair nearer to the voyager. As for me, I cried;
in spite of myself, I cried; being carried away by the flow of his
language, so smooth, and wide, and gliding, with the mystery of waters.

“And he was not one of those shallow men who talk for effect at
dinner–parties. Nothing more than a modest sailor, leaving his mind to
its natural course. Only he had been so long upon that mighty river,
that he nevermore could cease from gliding, ever gliding, with it.

“Once or twice he begged our pardon for the sweep of hazy sadness
moving (like the night on water) through his tales and scenery. He is
gone there again of his own free choice. He must die upon that river.
He loves it more than any patriot ever loved his country. Betwixt a
man and flowing water there must be more than similitude, there must be
a sort of sympathy.”

“_Tap–Robin_, ahoy there! Ahoy, every son of a sea–cook of you. Heave
us over a rope, you lubbers. Would yer swamp us with parson aboard of
me?”

This was Mr. Jupp, of course, churning up Cradʼs weak ideas, like a
steam–paddle in a fishpond. Perhaps the reason why those ideas had been
of such sad obscurity, and so fluxed with sorry sentiment, was that the
vague concipient believed himself to be shipped off for an indefinite
term of banishment, without even a message from Amy. Whereas, in truth,
he was only going for a little voyage to Ceylon, in the clipper ship
_Taprobane_, A 1 for all time at Lloydʼs, and never allowed to carry
more than twice as much as she could.

How discontented mortals are! He ought to have been jollier than a
sandboy, for he had a cabin all to himself (quite large enough to
turn round in), and, what of all things we Britons love best, a happy
little sinecure. He was actually appointed—on the strength of his
knowledge of goods earned at the Cramjam terminus, but not through any
railway influence (being no chip of the board, neither any attorneyʼs
“love–child”—if there be such a heterogeny), only through John
Rosedewʼs skill and knowledge of the world, Cradock was actually made
“under–supercargo” of a vessel bound to the tropics.

The clipper had passed Greenhithe already, and none had hailed her or
said “Farewell.” The _Taprobane_ would have no tug. She was far too
clean in the bows for that work. Her mother and grandmother had run
unaided down the river; even back to the fourth generation of ships,
when the Dutchmen held Ceylon, and doubtless would have kept it, but
for one great law of nature: no Dutchman must be thin. But even a
Dutchman loses fat within ten degrees of the line. So Nature reclaimed
her square Dutchmen from the tropics, which turned them over. Most
likely these regions are meant, in the end, for the Yankee, who has no
fat to lose, and is harder to fry than a crocodile.

But who can stop to theorize while the _Taprobane_ is dancing along
under English colours, and swings on her keel just in time to avoid
running down Mr. Rosedew and Issachar? Mr. Jupp is combining business
with pleasure, being, as you may say, under orders to meet the _Saucy
Sally_, and steer her home from Northfleet to the Surrey Docks. So
he has taken a lift in a collier, and met Mr. Rosedew at Gravesend,
according to agreement, and then borrowed a boat to look out alike for
_Saucy Sally_ and _Taprobane_.

When words and gifts had been interchanged—what Amy sent is no matter
now; but Loo Jupp sent a penny ‘bacco–box, which beat fatherʼs out
and out (as he must be sure to tell Cradock), and had “Am I welcome?”
on it, in letters of gold at least—when “God bless you” had been said
for the twentieth time, and love tied the tongue of gratitude, the
_Taprobane_ lay–to for a moment, and the sails all shivered noisily,
and the water curled crisply, and hissed and bubbled, and the little
boats hopped merrily to the pipe of the rising wind.

Then Mr. Rosedew came down the side, lightly of foot and cleverly;
while the under–supercargo leaned upon the rail and sorrowfully watched
him. Ponderously then and slowly, with his great splay feet thrust into
the rope–ladder, even up to the heel, quite at his leisure descended
that good bargeman, Issachar Jupp. This noble bargee had never been
seen to hurry himself on his own account. He and his deeds lagged
generally on the bight of a long and slack tow–rope.

The sailors, not entering into his character, thought that he was
frightened, and condemned his apprehensive luminaries, in words of a
quarter the compass. Then Mr. Jupp let go with both hands, stood bolt
upright on the foot–rope, and shook his great fists at them. “Let him
catch them ashore at Wapping, if the devil forewent his due; let him
catch them, that was all!” Thereupon they gave him a round of cheers,
and promised to square the account, please God.

Mr. Rosedew and the bargeman looked up from the tossing wherry, and
waved their last farewell, the parson reckless of Sunday hat, and
letting his white locks glance and flutter on the cold March wind. But
Cradock made no reply.

“All right, govʼnor!” said Jupp, catching hold of the parson; “no call
for you to take on so. Iʼve a been the likes o’ that there mysel’ in
the days when I tuk’ blue ruin. The rattisination of it are to fetch it
out of him by travellinʼ. And the _Tap–Robin_ are a traveller, and no
mistake. Dʼrectly moment I comes to my fortinʼ, Iʼll improve self and
family travellinʼ.”

Zakey, to assert his independence as his nature demanded, affected a
rough familiarity with the man whom he revered. The parson allowed it
as a matter of course. His dignity was not so hollow as to be afraid
of sand–paper. The result was that Issachar Jupp, every time, felt
more and more compunction at, and less and less of comfort in, the
unresented liberties.

As he said “good–bye” at the landing–place—for he had seen the _Sally_
coming—he put out his hand, and then drew it back with a rough bow
(disinterred from long–forgotten manners), and his raspy tongue thrust
far into the coal–mine of his cheek. But John Rosedew accepted his
hand, and bowed, as he would have done to a nobleman. Even if a baby
smiled at him, John always acknowledged the compliment. For he added
Christian courtesy, and the humility of all thoughtful minds, to a
certain grand and glorious gift of radiating humanity.

Cradock Nowell was loth to be sent away, and could not see the need of
it; but doubtless the medical men were right in prescribing a southern
voyage, a total change of scene and climate, as the likeliest means
to re–establish the shattered frame and the tottering mind. And so he
sailed for the gorgeous tropics, where the sun looks not askance, where
the size of every climbing, swimming, fluttering, or crawling thing
(save man himself) is doubled; where life of all things bounds and
beats—until it is quickly beaten—as it never gets warm enough to do in
the pinching zones, tight–buckled.

Meanwhile John Rosedew went to his home—a home so loved and
fleeting—and tried to comfort himself on the road with various
Elzevirs. Finding them fail, one after another, for his mind was not in
cue for them, he pulled out his little Greek Testament, and read what a
man may read every day, and never begin to be weary; because his heart
still yearns the more towards the grand ideal, and feels a reminiscence
such as Plato the divine, alone of heathens, won.

John Rosedew read once more the Sermon on the Mount, and wondered how
his little griefs could vex him as they did. That sermon is grander in
English, far grander, than in the Greek; for the genius of our language
is large, and strong, and simple—the true spirit of the noblest words
that ever on earth were spoken. How cramped they would be in Attic
Greek (like Mount Athos chiselled); in Latin how nerveless and alien!
Ours is the language to express; and ours the race to receive them.

What man, in later life, whose reading has led him through vexed
places—whence he had wiser held aloof—does not, on some little touch,
brighten, and bedew himself with the freshness of the morning, thrill
as does the leaping earth to see the sun come back again, and, dashing
all his night away, open the power of his eyes to the kindness of his
Father?

John Rosedew felt his cares and fears vanish like the dew–cloud among
the quivering tree–tops; and bright upon him broke the noon, the heaven
wherein our God lives. Earth and its fabrics may pass away; but that
which came from heaven shall not be without a home.

Meditating, comforted, strengthened on the way, John Rosedew came to
his little hearth, and was gladdened again by little things, such as
here are given or lent us to amuse our exile life. Most of us, with
growing knowledge and keener sense of honesty, more strongly desire
from year to year that these playthings were distributed more equally
amongst us. But let us not say “equably.” For who shall impugn the
power of contrast even in heightening the zest of heaven?

Amy met him, his own sweet Amy, best and dearest of all girls, a
thoroughly English maiden, not salient like Eoa, but warmly kind, and
thoughtful, and toned with self–restraint. But even that last she
threw to the winds when she saw her father returning, and ran with her
little feet pattering, like sweet–gale leaves, over the gravel, to the
unpretentious gate.

“Darling father!” was all she said; and perhaps it was quite enough.

Of late she had dropped all her little self–will (which used to vex her
aunt so), and her character seemed to expand and ripen in the quiet
glow of her faithful love.

Thenceforth, and for nearly a fortnight, Amy Rosedew, if suddenly
wanted, was sure to be found in a garret, whose gable–window faced
directly towards the breadth of sea. When a call for her came through
the crazy door, she would slam up with wonderful speed her own little
Munich telescope, having only two slides and a cylinder, but clearer
and brighter than high–powered glasses, ten stories long perhaps, and
of London manufacture: and then she would confront the appellant,
with such a colour to be sure, and a remark upon the weather, as sage
as those of our weather–clerks, who allow the wind so much latitude
that they never contrive to hit it. But which of the maids knew
not, and loved her not the more for knowing, that she was a little
coast–guard, looking out for her _eau de vie_? Of course she saw fifty
_Taprobanes_—every one more genuine than its predecessor—and more than
fifty Cradocks, some thirty miles away, leaning over hearts of oak,
with a faint sweet smile, waving handkerchiefs as white as their own
unsullied constancy, and crying with a heavy sigh, “My native land,
good night!”

Facts, however, are stubborn things, and will not even make a bow to
the sweetest of young ladies. And the fact was that the Ceylon trader
fetched away to the southward before a jovial north–east wind, and, not
being bound to say anything to either Plymouth or Falmouth, never came
near the field of gentle Amyʼs telescope.

That doctor knew something of his subject—the triple conglomerate
called man—who prescribed for Cradock Nowell, instead of noxious
medicines—_medicina a non medendo_—the bounding ease and buoyant
freedom of a ship bound southward.

Go westward, and you meet the billows, headers all of them, staggering
faith even in the Psalmistʼs description (for he was never in the Bay
of Biscay), and a wind that stings patriotic tears with the everlasting
brine. Go eastward, and you meet the ice, or (in summer) shoals and
soundings, and a dreary stretch of sand–banks. Go northward, and the
chances are that you find no chance of return. But go full–sail to the
glorious south, and once beyond the long cross–ploughings and headland
of the Gulf Stream, you slide into a quiet breast, a confidence of
waters, over which the sun more duly does his work and knows it, and
under which the growth of beauty clothes your soul with wonder.

When shall we men leave off fighting, cease to prove the Darwinian
theory, and the legends of Kilkenny (by leaving only our tails behind
us, a legacy for new lawsuits); and in the latter days ask God the
reason we were made for? When our savage life is done with, and we
are no longer cannibals—and at present cannibals are perhaps of more
practical mind than we, for they have an object in homicide, and the
spit justifies the battle–field—when we do at last begin not to hate
one another; not to think the evil first, because in nature prior;
not to brand as maniacs, and marks for paltry satire, every man who
dares to think that he was not born a weasel, and that ferocity is
cowardice—then a man of self–respect may begin to be a patriot. At
present, as our nations are, all abusing one another, none inquiring,
none allowing, all preferring wrong to weakness, if it hit the breed
and strain; each proclaiming that it is the favoured child of God,
the only one He looks upon (merging His all–seeing eye in its squint
ambition)—at present even we must feel that “patriotism” is little more
than selfishness in a balloon.

Poor Cradock, wasted so and altered (when he left black London) that
nothing short of womanʼs true love could run him home without check,
began to feel the change of sky, and drink new health from the balmy
air, and relish the wholesome mind–bread, leavened with the yeast of
novelty. A man who can stay in the same old place, and work the blessed
old and new year at the same old work, dwell on and deal with the same
old faces, receive and be bound to reciprocate the self–same old ideas,
without crying out, “Oh bother you!” without yearning for the sea–view,
or pining for the mountain—that man has either a very great mind, or
else he has none at all. For a very great mind can create its own food,
fresh as the manna, daily, or dress in unceasing variety the fruit of
other intellects, and live thereon amid the grand and ever–shifting
scenery of a free imagination. On the other hand, a man of no mind
gets on quite contentedly, having never tasted thought–food; only wind
him up with the golden key every Saturday night, and oil him with
respectability at the Sunday service.

Now the under–supercargo of the _Taprobane_ was beginning to eat his
meals like a man, to be pleased with the smell of new tar, and the
head–over–heel of the porpoises, and to make acquaintance with sailors
of large morality. In a word, he was coming back, by spell and spate,
to Cradock Nowell, but as yet so merely skew–nailed to the pillar of
himself, that any change of weather caused a gape, a gap, a chasm.

Give him bright sun and clear sky, with a gentle breeze over the water
spreading wayward laughter, with an amaranth haze just lightly veiling
the union of heaven and ocean, and a few flying–fish, or an albatross,
for incident in the foreground—and the young man would walk to and fro
as briskly, and talk as clearly and pleasantly, as any one in the ship
could.

But let the sky gather weight and gloom, and the sullen sun hang back
in it, and the bright flaw of wind on the waters die out, and the
sultry air, in oppressive folds, lean on the slimy ocean—and Cradockʼs
mind was gone away, like a bat flown into darkness.

Sometimes it went more gradually, giving him time to be conscious that
his consciousness was departing; and that of all things was perhaps
the most woeful and distressing. It was as if the weak mind–fountain
bubbled up reproachfully, like a geyser over–gargled, and flushed the
thin membrane and cellular tissue with more thought than they could
dispose of. Then he felt the air grow chill, and saw two shapes of
everything, and fancied he was holding something when his hands were
empty. Then the mind went slowly off, retreating, ebbing, leaving
shoal–ground, into long abeyance, into faintly–known bayous, feebly
navigated by the nautilus of memory.

It is not pleasant, but is good, now and then to see afar these
pretty little drawbacks upon our self–complacency—an article imported
hourly, though in small demand for export. However, that is of little
moment, for the home consumption is infinite. How noble it is to vaunt
ourselves, how spirited to scorn as _faber_ Him who would be father;
when a floating gossamer breathed between the hemispheres of our brain
makes imperial reason but the rubbish of an imperious flood. Then
the cells and clever casemates, rammed home with explosive stuff to
blow God out of heaven, are no mortar, but a limekiln, crusted and
collapsing (after three days’ fire), a stranded cockle, dead and
stale, with the door of his shell a bubble; and so ends the philosopher.

Upon a glaring torpid sea, a degree or two south of the line, the
_Taprobane_ lay so becalmed that the toss of a quid into the water was
enough to drive her windward, or leeward, whichever you pleased to call
it. The last of the trade winds, being long dead, was buried on the
log by this time; and the sailors were whistling by day and by night,
and piping into the keys of their lockers; but no responsive dimple
appeared in the sleek cadaverous cheek of the never–changing sea.

What else could one expect? They had passed upon the windʼs–eyes so
adverse a decision—without hearing counsel on either side—that really,
to escape ophthalmia, it must close its eyelids. So everything was
heavy slumber, sleep of parboiled weariness. Where sea and sky met one
another—if they could do it without moving—the rim of dazzled vision
whitened to a talc–like glimmer. Within that circle all was tintless,
hard as steel, yet dull and oily, smitten flat with heat and haze. Not
a single place in sky and sea to which a man might point his finger,
and say to his mate, “Look there!” No skir of fish, not even a sharkʼs
fin, or a mitching dolphin, no dip of wing, no life at all, beyond
the hot rim of the ship, or rather now the “vessel,” where many a man
lay frying, with scarcely any lard left. And oh, how the tar and the
pitch did smell, running like a cankered apricot–tree, and the steam
of the bilge–water found its way up, and reeked through the yawning
deck–seams!

But if any man durst look over the side (being gifted with an Egyptian
skull, for to any thin head the sunstroke is death, when taken upon
the crown), that daring man would have seen in blue water, some twenty
fathoms below him, a world of life, and work, and taste, complex, yet
simple, more ingenious than his wisest labours. For here no rough
rivers profane the sea with a flood of turbulent passion, like a foul
oath vented upon the calm summer twilight; neither is there strong
indraught from the tossing of distant waters, nor rolling leagues of
mountain surf, as in the Indian Ocean. All is heat and sleep above,
where the sheer dint of the sun lies; but down in the depth of those
glassy halls they heed not the fervour of the noon–blaze, nor the dewy
sparkle of starlight.

“Typhoon by–and–by,” said the first mate, yawning, but too lazy to
stretch, under the awning of a sail which they wetted with a hydropult,
a most useful thing on shipboard, as well as in a garden.

“Not a bit of it,” answered the captain, looking still more lazy, but
managing to suck cold punch.

“We shall see,” was all the mate said. It was a deal too hot to argue,
and he was actually drinking ale, English bottled ale, hoisted up from
a dip in blue water, but as hot as the pipes in a pinery.

The under–supercargo heeded not these laconic interchanges. The
oppression was too great for him. Amid that universal blaze and
downright pour of stifling heat, his mind was gone woolgathering back
into the old New Forest. The pleasant stir of the stripling leaves,
the shadows weaving their morrice–dance, and trooping away on the
grass–tufts at the pensive steps of evening; the sound and scent of
the vernal wind among the blowing gorse; the milky splash of the
cuckoo–flower in swarded breaks of woodland, the bees in the belfry of
cowslips, the frill of the white wind–flower, and the fleeting scent
of violets—all these in their form and colour moved, or lay in their
beauty before him, while he was leaning against the side–rail, and it
burned his hand to touch it.

“Wants a wet swab on his nob,” said the first mate, tersely; “never
come to himself sure as my name is Cracklins.”

“Donʼt agree with you,” answered the captain, who always snubbed the
mate; “heʼs a sight better now than at Blackwall. Poor young gent, I
like him.”

“So do I,” said the mate, pouring out more boiling beer; “but that
ainʼt much to do with it. Thereʼs the wet swab anyhow.”

About an hour before sunset, when the sky was purple, and the hot
vapours piling away in slow drifts, like large haycocks walking, a
gentle breeze came up and made little finger–marks on the water. First
it awoke shy glances and glosses, light as the play upon richly–glazed
silk, or the glimpse upon mother–of–pearl. Then it breathed on the
lips of men, and they sucked at it as at spring–water. Then it came
sliding, curling, ruffling, breaking the image of sky upon sea, but
bringing earthly life and courage, hope, and the spirit of motion. Many
a rough and gruff tar shed tears, not knowing the least about them,
only from natureʼs good–will and power, as turpentine flows from the
pine–wood.

“Hearty, my lads, and bear a hand.” “Pipe my eye, and be blessed to
me!” They rasped it off with their tarry knuckles, and would knock down
any one of canine extraction, who dared to say wet was the white of
their eyes.

The gurgling of the water sounded like the sobs of a sleeping child,
as it went dapping and lipping and lapping, under the bows and along
the run of the sweetly–gliding curvature. Soon you could see the quiet
closure of the fluid behind her, the fibreing first (as of parted hair)
convergent under the counter, the dimples circling in opposite ways
on the right and left of the triangle, and then the linear ruffles
meeting, and spreading away in broad white union, after a little
jostling. You may see the same at the tail of a mill–stream, when the
water is bright in July, and the alder–shade falls across it. For the
sails were beginning to draw again now, and the sheets and tacks were
tightening, and the braces creaking merrily, and every bit of man–stuff
on board felt his heart go, and his lungs work. Therefore all were glad
and chaffing, as the manner is of Britons, when the man in the foretop
shouted down, “Land upon the port–bow.”

“I have looked for it all day,” said the captain; “I was right to half
a league, Smith.”

The skipper had run somewhat out of his course to avoid a cyclone to
the westward, but he had not allowed sufficiently for the indraught of
the Gulf of Guinea, and was twenty leagues more to the eastward than
he had any idea of being. Nevertheless, they had plenty of sea–room,
and now from the trending of the coast might prudently stand due south.
They had passed Cape Lopez three days ago, of course without having
sighted it, and had run by the log three hundred miles thence, despite
the dead calm of that day. So they knew that they could not be very far
from the mouth of the river Congo.

As they slipped along with that freshening breeze, the water lost its
brightness, and soon became of a yellowish hue, as if mixed with a
turbulent freshet. Then they lay to in fifteen fathoms, and sent off
a boat to the island, for the intense heat of the last few days had
turned their water putrid. The first and second mates were going, and
the supercargo took his gun, and declared that he would stretch his
legs and bring home some game for supper. What island it was they were
not quite sure, for there was nothing marked on the charts just there,
to agree with their reckoning and log–run. But they knew how defective
charts are.

When the water–casks were lowered, and all were ready to shove off,
and the mast of the yawl was stepped, and the sail beginning to flap
and jerk in a most impatient manner, Cracklins, who was a good–natured
fellow, hollaed out to Cradock—

“Come along of us, Newman, old fellow. You want bowsing up, I see.
Bring your little dog for a run, to rout up some rabbits or monkeys for
Tippler. And have a good run yourself, my boy.”

Without stopping to think—for his mind that day had only been a dream
to him—Cradock Nowell went down the side, with Wena on his arm, and
she took advantage of the occasion to lick his face all over. Then he
shuddered unconsciously at the gun which lay under the transoms.

“Look sharp, Cracklins,” shouted the captain from his window; “the
glass is down, I see, half an inch. I can only give you two hours.”

“All right, sir,” answered the mate; “but we canʼt fill the casks in
that time, unless we have wonderful luck.”

The land lay about a mile away, and with the sail beginning to tug,
and four oars dipping vigorously,—for the men were refreshed by the
evening breeze, and wild for a run on shore,—they reached it in about
ten minutes, and nosed her in on a silvery beach strewn with shells
innumerable. A few dwarf rocks rose here and there, and the line of the
storms was definite, but for inland view there was nothing more than
a crescent terrace of palm–trees. The air felt beautifully fresh and
pure, and entirely free from the crawling miasma of the African coast.
No mangrove swamps, no festering mud, no reedy bayou of rottenness.

But the boat–crew found no fresh water at first; and they went in
three parties to search for it. The mate with three men struck off to
the right, the boatswain with three more made away to the left, only
Cradock and the supercargo walked directly inland. Wena found several
rabbits, all of a sandy colour, and she did enjoy most wonderfully her
little chivies after them. Most of the birds were going to rest, as the
rapid twilight fell, but the trees were full of monkeys, and here and
there a squirrel shook the light tracery of the branches.

Tippler and Cradock wandered inland for half a mile or more, keeping
along a pleasant hollow which they feared to leave, lest they should
lose the way back, and as yet they had seen neither spring nor brook,
although from the growth and freshness they knew that water must be
near them. Then suddenly the supercargo fired his gun at a flying green
pigeon, whose beauty had caught his eyes.

To his great amazement Cradock fell down, utterly helpless, pale as a
corpse, not trembling, but in a syncope. His comrade tried to restore
him, but without any effect, then managed to drag him part way up the
slope, and set him with his back to an ebony–tree, while he ran to
fetch assistance. Suddenly then an ominous sound trembled through the
thick wood, a mysterious thrill of the earth and air, at the coming of
war between them. It moved the wild grapes, the flowering creepers,
the sinuous caoutchouc, the yellow nuts of the palm–oil–tree, and the
pointed leaves of the ebony.

When the supercargo ran down to the boat, the men were pushing
off hastily, the water curling and darkening, and a sullen swell
increasing. A heavy mass of cloud hung to leeward, and the tropical
night fell heavily, till the ship was swallowed up in it.

“Jump in, Tippler! Just in time,” cried the first mate, seizing the
tiller–ropes; “not a moment to lose. We must go without water; we shall
have enough out of the sky to–night. I could not tell what to do about
you, and the signalʼs ‘Return immediately.’”

“But I tell you, we canʼt go, Cracklins. Poor Newman is up there in a
fit or something. Send two men with me to fetch him.”

“How far off is he?”

“Nearly a mile.”

“Then I darenʼt do it. We are risking our lives already. The typhoon
will be on us in half an hour. Said so this morning—skipper wouldnʼt
listen. Jump in, man, jump in; or weʼre off without you. Canʼt you see
how the sea is rising? Ease off the sheet, you lubber there. We must
down with the sail in two minutes, lads, soon as ever weʼve got way
on her. Lend a grip of your black fist, Julep, instead of yawing there
like a nigger. Now will you come, or wonʼt you?”

Tippler was a brave and kind–hearted man; but he thought of his wife
and children, and leaped into the boat. Although he was not a sailor,
he saw the urgency of the moment, and confessed that nine lives must
not be sacrificed for the sake of one. The power of the wind was
growing so fast, and the lift of the waves so menacing, that the nine
men needed both skill and strength to recover their ship, ere the storm
burst.

And a terrible storm it was, of the genuine Capricorn type, sudden,
deluging, laced with blue lightning, whirling in the opposite direction
to that which our cyclones take. At midnight the _Taprobane_ was
running under bare poles, shipping great seas heavily, with an electric
coronet gleaming and bristling all around truck and dog–vane. And by
that time she was sixty miles from her under–supercargo.




CHAPTER VII.


Dr. Huttonʼs baby was getting better, and Rosa, who had been, as the
nurse said, “losing ground so sadly, poor dear,” was beginning to pick
up her crumbs again. Therefore Rufus, who (in common with Rosa and
all the rest of the household) regarded that baby as the noblest and
grandest sublimation of humanity, if not as the final cause of this
little worldʼs existence, was beginning now to make up his mind that
he really might go to London that week, without being (as his wife
declared he must be, if he even thought about it) cruel, inhuman,
unfatherly, utterly void of all sense of duty, not to say common
affection. And she knew quite well what he wanted. All he wanted was
to go and see Mr. Riversʼs peach–trees in blossom, as if that was such
a sight as her baby. Yes, _her_ baby, maʼs own darling, a dove of a
dumpling dillikins; to think that his own pa should prefer nasty little
trees without a hair on them, and that didnʼt even know what bo meant,
to the most elegant love of a goldylocks that ever was, was, was!

Master Goldylocks had received, from another quarter, a less classical,
and less pleasing, but perhaps (from an objective point of view) a more
truthful and unprismatic description of the hair it pleased God to give
him.

“Governorʼs carrots, and no mistake,” cried Mrs. OʼGaghan the
moment she saw him, which, of course, was upon his first public
appearance—catch Biddy out of the way when any baby, of any father or
mother she had ever heard of, was submitted even to the most privileged
inspection—”knew he must have ‘em, of course. You niver can conquer
that, maʼam, if your own hair was like a sloe, and you tuk me black
briony arl the time. Hould him dacent, will ye, nurse? Not slot his
head down that fashion! He donʼt want more blood in his hair, child. Oh
yes, I can see, maʼam! Niver knowed more nor two wi’ that red–hot poker
colour, colour of the red snuff they calls ‘Irish blackguard’ in the
top of a hot shovel; and one of the two were Mr. Hutton, maʼam, saving
your presence to spake of it; and the other were of Tim Brady, as were
hung at the crossroads, near Clonmel, for cutting the throat of his
grandmother.”

“Oh, Mary, take her away. What a horrid woman!”

Here Mrs. OʼGaghan was marched away, amid universal indignation, which
she could not at all understand. But she long had borne against Rufus
Hutton the bitterest of all bitter spites (such as only an Irishwoman
can bear), for the exposure of her own great mistake, and the miserable
result which (as she fully believed) had sprung from all his meddling.
And yet she was a “good–hearted” woman. But a good heart is only the
wad upon powder, when a violent will is behind it.

Not to attach undue importance to Biddyʼs prepossessions, yet to give
every facility for a verdict upon the question, I am bound to state
what an old–young lady, growing every month more satirical, because
nobody would have her, yet quite unconscious that the one drawback was
the main cause of the other (for all men hate sarcastic women),—how
tersely she expressed herself.

“Ridiculous likeness! Was he born with two cheroots in his mouth?”

But a lady, who would marry for ever because she was so soft and nice,
came to see darling baby again, the moment she was quite assured that
he was equal to the interview, having denied herself from day to
day, although it had affected her appetite, and was telling upon her
spirits. Neither would she come alone—that would be too selfish: she
must make a gala day of it, and gratify her relatives. So Mrs. Hutton
had the rapture of sitting behind her bedroom curtain, and seeing no
less than three carriages draw up in a thundering manner, while Rufus
was in the greatest fright that they would not find room to turn, but
must cut up his turf. Luckily the roller was in the way; or else those
great coachmen, who felt themselves lowered by coming to a place of
that size, would have had their revenge on the sod. The three carriages
were, of course, that of Nowelhurst Hall in the van (no pun, if you
please), with two noble footmen behind it, and Georgie in state inside.
Then the “Kettledrum rattletrap,” as the hypercritical termed it, with
Mr. Kettledrum driving, and striking statuesque attitudes for the
benefit of the horses, and Mrs. Kettledrum inside, entreating him not
to be rash. Last of all the Coo Nest equipage, a very neat affair, with
Mr. Corklemore inside, wanting to look at his wife in the distance, and
wondering what she was up to.

“Oh, such shocking taste, I know,” cried Georgie, directly the lower
order were supposed to be out of hearing, “horribly bad taste to come
in such force; but what could we do, Dr. Hutton? There was my sister,
there was my husband, there was my own silly self, all waiting, as for
a bulletin, to know when baby would receive. And so, at the very first
moment, by some strange coincidence, here we are all at once. And I do
hope darling Rosa will allow _some_ of us to come in.”

“Jonah,” shouted Rufus Hutton, going away to the door very rudely
(according to our ideas, but with Anglo–Indian instincts), “see that
all those men have beer.”

“Plaise, sir, there bainʼt none left. Brewer hainʼt a been since you
drank.” As every one in the house heard this, dear Georgie had some
revenge.

However, babe Rufus received his ovation; and the whole thing went off
well, as most things do in the counties of England, when plenty of good
wine produces itself. Lunch was ready in no time; and, as all had long
ago assented to Mrs. Corklemoreʼs most unselfish proposition that she,
as privileged of pet Rosa, should just steal up–stairs for a minute,
and then come down again—after giving notice, of course, that dear
baby should have all his lace on—the pleasant overture of the host was
accepted with little coyness—

“Let us suppose that we have dined: because the roads are so very bad.
Let us venture upon a light dessert. I have a few pears, even now in
April, which I am not altogether afraid to submit to the exquisite
taste of ladies,—‘Madame Milletʼ and ‘Josephine.’ May we think that we
have dined?”

As the company not only thought, but felt that they had made an
uncommonly good dinner, this little proposal did pleasant violence to
their sense of time. It would be so charmingly novel to think that they
had dined at three oʼclock! Oh, people of brief memory! For Kettledrum
Hall and Coo Nest loved nothing better than to dine at two; which,
perhaps, is two hours too late, according to nature _versus_ fashion.

“For such an occasion as this,” said Rufus, under all the excitement
of hospitality multiplied by paternity, “we will have a wine worth
talking of. Clicquot, of course, and Paxarette for the ladies, if
they prefer it; which perhaps they will do because it is sweeter than
port. But I do hope that some will deign to taste my 1820, Presidentʼs
unrefreshed.”

Georgieʼs pretty lip came out, like the curl of an opening convolvulus;
to think of offering her sweet wine, when choice port was forthcoming.
There are few better judges of a good glass of port than Mrs. Nowell
Corklemore.

“Port, sir, for my wife, if you please. She likes a rather dry wine,
sir, but with plenty of bouquet. There is no subject, I may say, in
which she has—ha, haw—a more profound capacity.”

“My dear Nowell, why you are perfectly calumnious. Thank you, no
champagne. It spoils the taste of—your beautiful water. How dreadfully
we were alarmed in Ringwood. We all but drove over a child. What a
providential escape! I have scarcely yet recovered it. It has made me
feel so nervous. What, Dr. Hutton, port for a lady, at this time of
day, and not ordered medically!”

Thereupon, of course Rufus prescribed it, till Georgie, being quite
overcome by the colour, as the host himself decanted it, capitulated at
last for “strictly half a glass.”

After a little, the ladies withdrew, to see double perfections in the
baby, and Mrs. Hutton, who knew quite well what they had been doing,
while she was discussing arrowroot, received them at first rather
stiffly. But she had no chance with Georgie, who entered beautifully
into the interesting room, and exclaimed with great vivacity—

“Oh, dear Mrs. Hutton, as the little boys say, ‘here we are again.’
And so glad to get away, because your husband is so hospitable, and we
thought of you all the time. I wanted so much to bring you a glass of
that very exquisite—let me see, I think it must have been port, though
I never know one wine from another—only I feared it might seem rude, if
I had ventured to propose it. Of course Dr. Hutton knew best.”

“Of course he didnʼt,” said Rosa, pettishly; “he never thought about
it. Not that I would have taken it; oh dear no! Ladies cannot have too
little wine, I think. It seems to make them so masculine.”

“Well, dear, you know best. Very likely you heard us laughing. I assure
you we were quite merry. We drank his health ‘three times threeʼ—donʼt
they call it about a baby? And I was nearly proposing _yours_; only a
gentleman ought to do that. Oh, it was so interesting, and the wine
superb—at least, so said the gentlemen; I do wish they had brought you
some, dear.”

“I am very glad they did not. It is so very lowering to a fine sense
of the ideal. I heard you laughing, or making some noise; only I was
so absorbed in these lovely poems. ‘To my Babe’ is so very beautiful,
so expressive, so elevating! I feel every single word of it. And
this sonnet about the first cropper! And the stanzas to his little
red shoes, terminating with ‘pinch his nose!’ You have had so many
husbands, dear; you must know all about it.”

“My darling child, how I feel for you! But, in all probability, he
will come up when both decanters are empty; let him find you in a good
temper, dear.”

But this (which must have grown into a row, for Georgie had even more
spirit than tact, and Rosa was equal to anything), all this evil was
averted, and harmony restored by the popping in of nurse, who had not
taken her half–crowns yet, but considered them desirable, and saw them
now endangered.

“Goldylocks, Goldylocks! Oh, bring him here, nurse. Skillikins,
dillikins! oh, such a dove! And if nobody else cares for poor mamma, he
has got so much better taste, hasnʼt he?”

Goldylocks very soon proved that he had; and Georgie, having quite
recovered her temper, admired him so ecstatically, that even his mother
thought her judgment was really worth something.

“Give him to me; I canʼt do without him. O you beautiful cherub!
Kicklewick, I am sure you never saw any one like him.”

“That indeed I never did, maʼam,” answered nurse Kicklewick, holding
her arms out, as if she must have him back again; “many a fine child I
have seen, and done for to my humble ability, maʼam, since the time I
were at Lord Eldergunʼs; and her ladyship said to me—ʼKicklewick,’ says
she——”

“Oh, his love of a nosey–posey! Oh, then his bootiful eyes, dick, dock!
And then his golden hair, you know, so lovely, chaste, and rare, you
know! Will um have a dancey–prancey?”

And Georgie, forgetting all dignity, went through a little Polish
dance, with the baby in her arms, to his very grave amazement, and the
delight of all beholders.

Although of the genuine Hutton strain, he was too young to crow yet,
nevertheless he expressed approval in the most emphatic water–colours.
Mrs. Huttonʼs heart was won for ever.

“Oh, darling, I am so obliged to you. He has positively popped two
bubbles. A thing he never did before! How can I ever repay you?”

“By letting me come over and dance him twice a week. Oh, that I only
had a boy!—because I do love boy–babies so.”

“One would think that you must have had fifty, at least, before you
were five–and–twenty! How on earth do you understand him so? I only
know half what he means, though I try for hours and hours.”

“Simply by sympathizing with him. I feel all his ideas come home to me,
and I put them into shape.”

“You are the loveliest creature I ever saw.” And, indeed, Georgie did
look very well, for it was not all mere humbug now, though perhaps
it was at first. “Oh, no wonder baby loves you. Kicklewick, isnʼt it
wonderful?”

“Indeed, then, and it would be, maʼam,” replied Mrs. Kicklewick,
rapturously—for now she had four half–crowns in her pocket—“only for
it beinʼ nature, maʼam. Nature it is as does it, as must be. Nothing
else no good again it. And how I should like to beʼlong of you, maʼam,
when your next time come, please God. Would you mind to accept of my
card, maʼam, unpretenshome but in good families,—Sarah Kicklewick, late
to Lord Eldergun, and have hopes to be again, maʼam, if any confidence
in head–footman. ‘Mrs. Kicklewick,’ he says, and me upon the bridge,
maʼam, with the wind a blowinʼ——”

“To be sure,” said Georgie, “and the water flowing; how clearly you
describe it!”

But we must cut her short, even as she cut nurse Kicklewick. Enough
that she won such influence over the kind but not too clever Rosa,
that Rufus Huttonʼs plans and acts, so far as they were known to his
wife, were known also to his wifeʼs best friend. But one thing there
was which Mrs. Corklemore could not at all understand,—why should he
be going to London so, and wanting to go again, in spite of domestic
emergencies? She very soon satisfied herself that Rosa was really
in the dark upon this point, and very indignant at being so. This
indignation must be fostered and pointed to a practical end. Mrs.
Kettledrum, of course, had been kept in the background all this time,
and scarcely allowed to dandle the baby, for fear of impairing her
sisterʼs triumph.

“How wonderfully kind and thoughtful of you!” said Rosa, as Georgie
came in again. “Have you really brought me a glass of wine? And no one
else in the house to suppose that I ought to have any nourishment! How
can I thank you, Mrs. Corklemore?”

“No more ‘Mrs. Corklemore,’ if you please. I have begun to call you
‘Rosaʼ—it is such a pretty name—and you must call me ‘Georgie,’
darling. Every one does who loves me.”

“Then I am sure all the world must. Dearest Georgie, how did you get
it? I am sure I would not touch it, only for your sake.”

“Oh, I did such a shameful thing. Such a liberty I never took before! I
actually sent the servant to say, with Mrs. Corklemoreʼs compliments,
that she felt the effect of the fright this morning, and would like
another glass of port, but would not touch it if any of the gentlemen
left the table even for a moment. And they actually sent me a
dock–glass, in pleasantry, I suppose: but I am very glad they did.”

“I will take some, if you take half, dear.”

“Not a drop. My poor weak head is upset in a moment. But you really
need it, dear; and I can so thoroughly feel for you, because the poor
Count, when my Flore was born, waited on me with such devotion, day and
night, hand and foot.”

“And I am sure Mr. Corklemore must do the same. No husband could help
adoring you.”

“Oh, he is very good, ‘according to his lights,’ as they say. But I
have known him let me cough three times without getting up for the
jujubes. And once—but perhaps I ought not to tell you: it was so very
bad.”

“Oh, you may safely tell me, dear. I will never repeat it to any one.”

“He actually allowed me to sneeze in the carriage without saying that I
must have a new fur cloak, or even asking if I had a cold.”

“Oh dear, is that all? I may sneeze six times in an hour, and my
husband take no notice, but run out and leave the front door open,
and prune his horrid little trees. And then he shouts for his patent
top–dressing. He thinks far more of dressing them than he does of
dressing me.”

“And donʼt you know the reason? Donʼt cry, sweet child; donʼt cry. I
have had so much experience. I understand men so thoroughly.”

“Oh yes, I know the reason. I am cross to him sometimes. And of course
I canʼt expect a man with a mind like his——”

“You may expect any man to be as wise as Solomon, if you only know how
to manage him. It is part of the law of nature.”

“Then I am sure I donʼt know what that means: except that people must
get married, and ought to love one another.”

“The law of nature is this. Between a wife and a husband there never
must be a secret, except when the lady keeps one. Now, your husband is,
to some extent, a rather superior man——”

“Oh yes, to the very greatest extent. No one of any perception can help
perceiving that.”

“Then he is quite sure to attempt it; to reserve himself, upon _some_
point, in an unsympathetic attitude. This is just what you must not
allow. You have no idea how it grows upon them, and how soon it
supplants affection, and makes a married man a bachelor.”

“Oh, how dreadful! But I really do think, dear, that you must be wrong
this once. My husband has never kept anything from me; anything, I
mean, which I ought to know.”

“Then he told you about that poor wild Polly? How very good and kind of
him!”

“Polly! What Polly? You donʼt mean to say——”

“No, no, dear, nothing of that sort! Only the mare running away with
him at night through the thickest part of the forest.”

“My Polly that eats from my hand! Run away with Rufus!”

“Yes, your Polly. A perfect miracle that both of them were not killed.
But, of course, he must have told you.”

Then, after sundry ejaculations, Rosa learned all about that matter,
and was shocked first, and then thankful, and then hurt.

“And now,” said Mrs. Corklemore, when the sense of wrong was paramount,
“he has some secret, I am almost sure, about our sad affair at
Nowelhurst. And I am sure, even if you were not his wife, dear, he need
not conceal any matter of that sort from the daughter of Sir Cradock
Nowellʼs old friend, Mr. Ralph Mohorn.”

“I will tell you another thing,” answered Rosa, shaking all her pillows
with the vehemence of her emotions, “whether he ought or not, he shall
not do it, Georgie, darling. As sure as I am his lawful wife I will
know every word of it before I sleep one wink. If not, he must take the
consequences upon both his wife and child.”

“Darling, I think you are quite right. Only donʼt tell me a word of it.
It is such a dreadful matter, it would make me so unhappy——”

“I will tell you every single word, just to prove to you, Georgie, that
I have found the whole of it out.”

After this laudable resolution, Rosa may be left to have it out with
Rufus. It requires greater skill than ours to interfere between man and
wife, even without the _tertium quid_ of an astounding baby.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ides of March were come and gone, the balance of day and night was
struck; and Sleep, the queen of half the world, had wheeled across the
equator her poppy–chintzed throne, or had got the stars to do it for
her, because she was too lazy. Ha, that sentence is almost worthy of a
great stump–orator. All I mean to say is, that All Foolsʼ Day was over.
Blessed are the All Fools who begin the summer (which accounts for its
being a mull with us); and blessed be the All Saints who begin the
winter, and then hand it over to Beelzebub.

“In April she tunes her bill.” Several nightingales were at it, for
the spring was early, and right early were many nests conned, planned,
and contracted for. Blessed birds, that never say, “What are your
expectations, sir?” or “How much will you give your daughter?”—but
feather their nests without waiting for an appointment in the Treasury.
Nest–eggs, too, almost as sweet as those of addled patronage, were
beginning to accumulate; and it took up half a birdʼs time to settle
seniority and precedence among them, fettle them all with their heads
the right way, and throw overboard the cracked ones. Perhaps, in this
last particular, they exercised a discretion, not only unknown to, but
undreamed of, by any British Government.

It was nearly dark by this time, and two nightingales, across the
valley, strove in Amoibæan song till the crinkles of the opening leaves
fluttered with soft melody.

  “In poplar shadows Philomel complaineth of her brood,
  Her callow nestlings plunderʼd from her by the ploughman rude:
  From lonely branch all night she pours her weeping musicʼs flow,
  Repeats her tale, and fills the world with melody and woe.”

  _Georg._ iv. 511.

Mr. Garnet heeded neither crisp young leaf nor bulbul; neither did
his horse appear to be a judge of music. Man and horse were drooping,
flagging, jaded and bespent; wanting only the two things which,
according to some philosophers, are all that men want here below—a
little food, and a deal of sleep.

Bull Garnet was on his return from Winchester, whither he now went
every week, for some reason known only to himself, or at least unknown
to his family. It is a long and hilly ride from the west of Ytene to
Winton, and to travel that distance twice in a day takes the gaiety
out of a horse, and the salience out of a man. No wonder then that Mr.
Garnet slouched his heavy shoulders, and let his great head droop; for
at five–and–forty a powerful man jades sooner than does a slight one.

Presently he began to drowse; for the stout grey gelding knew every
step of the road, and would take uncommonly good care to avoid all
circumambience: and of late the rider had never slept, only dozed, and
dreamed, and started. Then he muttered to himself, as he often did in
sleep, but never at home, until he had seen to the fastening of the
door.

“Tried it again—tried very hard and failed. Thought of Bob, at last
moment. Bob to stand, and see me hang—and hate me, and go to the devil.
No, I donʼt think he would hate me, though; he would say, ‘Father could
not help it.’ And how nice that would be for me, to see Bob take my
part. To see him with his turn–down collars standing proudly up, and
saying, ‘Father was a bad man—according to your ideas—I am not going to
dispute them—but for all that I love him, and so my children shall.’ If
I could be sure that Bob would only think so, only make his mind up,
his mind up, his mind up—for there is nothing like it—whoa, Grayling,
what be looking at?—and take poor little Pearl with him, I would go
to–morrow morning, and do it over at Lymington.”

“Best do it to–night, govʼnor. No time like the praysent, and us knows
arl about it.”

A tall man had leaped from behind a tree, and seized Bull Garnetʼs
bridle. The grey gelding reared and struck him; but he kept his hold,
till the muzzle of a large revolver felt cold against his ear. Then
Issachar Jupp fell back; he knew the man he had to deal with, how stern
in his fury, how reckless, despite the better part of him. And Issachar
was not prepared to leave his Loo an orphan.

“No man robs me,” cried Mr. Garnet, in his most tremendous voice,
“except at the cost of my life, and the risk of his. I have seven and
sixpence about me; I will give it up to no man. Neither will I shoot
any man, unless he tries to get it.”

“Nubbody wants to rob you, govʼnor, only to have a little rattysination
with you. Possible you know me now?”

Bull Garnet fell back in his saddle. He would rather have met a dozen
robbers. By the voice he recognised a man whom he had once well known,
and had good cause to know;—through his outrage upon whom, he had left
the northern counties; the man whom he had stricken headlong down a
coal–shaft, as the leader of rebellion, the night after Pearl was
christened, nigh twenty years ago.

“Yes, I know you; Jupp your name is. Small credit it is to know you.”

“And smarler still to know you, Bull Garnet. Try your pistol thing, if
you like. You must have rare stommick, I should think, to be up for
another murder.”

“Issachar, I am sorry for you. Do you call it a murder to keep such a
fellow as you off?”

“No, I dunna carl that a murder, because I be arl alive. But I do carl
a murder what you did to young Clayton Nowell.”

“Fool, what do you know of it? Let go my horse, I say. You know pretty
well what _I_ am.”

“I know you haʼnʼt much patience, govʼnor, and be arlways in a hurry.”

Jupp hesitated, but would not be beaten, whatever might be the end of
it.

“I am in no hurry now, Jupp; I will listen to all you have to say. But
not with your hand on my bridle.”

“There goeth free then. Arl knows you be no liar.”

“I am glad you remember that, Issachar. Hold the horse, while I get
off. Now throw the bridle over that branch, and I will sit down here.
Come here into the moonlight, man; and look me in the face. Here is
the pistol for you, if you bear me any revenge.”

Scarcely knowing what he did, because he had no time to think, Jupp
obeyed Bull Garnetʼs orders even to the last—for he took the pistol in
his hand, and tried to look straight at his adversary; but his eyes
would not co–operate. Then he laid the pistol on the bank; but so that
he could reach it.

“Issachar Jupp,” said Mr. Garnet, looking at him steadily, and speaking
very quietly; “have you any children?”

“Only one—a leetle gal, but an oncommon good un.”

“How old is she?”

“Five year old, plase God, come next Valentineʼs Day.”

“Now, when she grows up, and is pure and good, would you like to have
her heart broken?”

“Iʼd break any coveʼs head as doed it.”

“But supposing she were betrayed and ruined, made a plaything, and then
thrown away—what would you do then?”

“God Almighty knows, man. I canʼt abide to think of it.”

“And if the—the man who did it, was the grandson of the man who had
ruined your own mother, lied before God in the church to her, and then
left her to go to the workhouse, with you his outcast bastard—while he
rolled in gold, and laughed at her—what would you do then, Jupp?”

“By the God that made me, Iʼd have my revenge, if I went to hell for
it.”

“I have said enough. Do exactly as you please. Me you cannot help or
harm. Death is all I long for—only for my children.”

Still he looked at Issachar, but now without a thought of him; only as
a man looks out upon the sea or sky, expecting no return. And Issachar
Jupp, so dense and pig–headed—surly and burly, and weasel–eyed—in a
word, retrospectively British—gazing at Bull Garnet then, got some
inkling of an anguish such as he who lives to feel—far better were it
for that man that he had never been born.




CHAPTER VIII.


To bar the entail of crime. A bitter and abortive task; at least, in
this vindictive world, where Christians dwell more on Mount Sinai than
on the mount that did not quake and burn with fire.

And yet for this, and little else, still clung to fair fame and life
the man who rather would have lain beneath the quick–lime of Newgate.
It was not for the empty part, the reputation, the position, the
respect of those who prove the etymon of the word by truly looking
backward—not for these alone, nor mainly, did Bull Garnet bear the
anguish now from month to month more bitter, deeper, less concealable.
He strove with himself, and checked himself, and bit his tongue, and
jerked back his heart, and nursed that shattered lie, his life, if so
might be that Pearl and Bob should start anew in another land, with a
fair career before them. Not that he cared, more than he could help,
whether they might be rich or poor; only that he would like them to
have the chance of choosing.

This chance had not been fair for him, forsaken as he was, and outcast;
banned by all the laws of men, because his mother had been trustful,
and his father treacherous. Yet against all chances, he, by his own
rightful power, deeply hating and (which was worse) conscientiously
despising every social prejudice, made his way among smaller men,
taught himself by day and night, formed his own strong character,
with the hatred of tyranny for its base, and tyranny of his own for
its apex; and finally gained success in the world, and large views of
Christianity. And in all of this he was sincere!

It was a vile and bitter wrong to which he owed his birth. Sir Cradock
Nowell, the father of the present baronet, had fallen in love of some
sort with a comely Yorkshire maiden, whose motherʼs farm adjoined the
moors, whereon the shooting quarters were. Then, in that period of mean
license, when fashionable servility was wriggling, like a cellar–slug,
in the slime–track of low princes, Sir Cradock Nowell did what few of
his roystering friends would have thought of—unfashionable Tarquinian,
he committed a quiet bigamy. He had lived apart from Lady Nowell, even
before her second confinement; because he could not get on with her.
So Miss Garnet went with him to the quiet altar of a little Yorkshire
church, and fancied she was Lady Nowell; only that must be a secret,
“because they had not the kingʼs consent, for he was not in a state to
give it.”

When she learned her niddering wrong, and the despite to her unborn
child, she cast her curse upon the race, not with loud rant, but long
scorn, and went from her widowed mother, to a cold and unknown place.

So soon as Bull Garnet was old enough to know right from wrong, and
to see how much more of the latter had fallen to his share, two
courses lay before him. Two, I mean, were possible to a strong and
upright nature; to a false and weak one fifty would have offered, and
a little of each been taken. Conscious as he was of spirit, energy,
and decision, he might apply them all to very ungenial purposes, to
sarcasm, contemptuousness, and general misanthropy. Or else he might
take a larger view, pity the poor old–fashioned prigs who despise a man
for his fatherʼs fault, and generously adapt himself to the broadest
Christianity.

The latter course was the one he chose; in solid earnest, too, because
it suited his nature. And so perhaps we had better say that he chose no
course at all, but had the wiser one forced upon him. Yet the old Adam
of damnable temper too often would rush out of Paradise, and prove in
strong language that he would not be put off together with his works.
Exeter Hall would have owned him, in spite of all his backslidings, as
a very “far–advanced Christian;” because he was so “evangelical.” And
yet he never dealt in cant, nor distributed idyllic tracts, Sabbatarian
pastorals, where godly Thomas meets drunken John, and converts him to
the diluted _vappa_ of an unfermented Sunday.

And now this man, whom all who knew him either loved or hated, felt the
troubles closing around him, and saw that the end was coming. He had
kept his own sense of justice down, while it jerked (like a thistle on
springs) in his heart; he had worn himself out with thinking for ever
what would become of his children, whom he had wronged more heavily
than his own bad father had wronged him—only the difference was that
he loved them; and most of all he had let a poor fellow, whom he liked
and esteemed most truly, bear all the brunt, all the misery, all the
despair of fratricide.

Now all he asked for, all he prayed for—and, indeed, he prayed more
than ever now, and with deeper feeling; though many would have feared
to do it—now his utmost hope was to win six months of life. In that
time all might be arranged for his childrenʼs interest; his purchase of
those five hundred acres from the Crown Commissioners—all good land,
near the Romsey–road, but too full of juice—would soon be so completed
that he could sell again at treble the price he gave, so well had he
reclaimed the land, while equitably his; and then Bob should have half,
and Pearl take half (because she had been so injured), and, starting
with the proceeds of all his earthly substance before it should
escheat, be happy in America, and think fondly of dead father.

This was all he lived for now. It may seem a wild programme; but,
practical as he was in business, and not to be wronged of a halfpenny,
Bull Garnet was vague and sentimental when he “took on” about his
children. Furious if they were wronged, loving them as the cow did
(who, without a horn to her head, pounded dead the leopard), ready
to take most liberal views of everything beyond them, yet keeping
ever to his eyes that parental lens, whose focus is so very short,
and therefore, by the optic laws, its magnifying power and aberration
glorious.

Now three foes were closing round him; all of whom, by different
process, and from different premises, had arrived at the one
conclusion. The three were, as he knew too well, Rufus Hutton, Issachar
Jupp, and Mr. Chope, of Southampton. Of the first he held undue
contempt (not knowing all his evidence); the second he had for the
time disarmed, by an appeal _ad hominem_; the third was the most to be
feared, the most awful, because so crafty, keen, and deep, so utterly
impenetrable.

Mr. Chope, the partner and “brains” of Cole, the coroner, was absent
upon a lawyerʼs holiday at the time of the inquest. When he came home,
and heard all about it, and saw the place, and put questions, he
scarcely knew what to think. Only upon one point he was certain—the
verdict had been wrong. Either Cradock Nowell had shot his brother
purposely, or some one else had done so. To Chopeʼs clear intuition,
and thorough knowledge of fire–arms—for his one relaxation was
shooting—it was plain as possible that there had been no accident. To
the people who told him about the cartridge “balling,” he expressed
no opinion; but to himself he said, “Pooh! I have seen Cradock Nowell
shoot. He always knew all he was doing. He never would put a _green_
cartridge into his gun for a woodcock. And the others very seldom ball.
And even if he had a green cartridge, look at the chances against it. I
would lay my life Clayton Nowell was shot on purpose.”

Then, of course, Mr. Chope set to, not only with hope of reward, but
to gratify his own instinct, at the puzzle and wards of the question.
If he had known the neighbourhood well, and all the local politics, he
must have arrived at due conclusion long before he did. But a heavy
piece of conveyancing came into the office of Cole, Chope, and Co.,
and, being far more lucrative than amateur speculations, robbed them
of their attention. But now that stubborn piece was done with, and
Mr. Chope again at leisure to pursue his quest. Twice or thrice every
week he was seen, walking in his deliberate way, as if every step were
paid for, through the village of Nowelhurst, and among the haunts of
the woodcutters. He carried his great head downwards, as a bloodhound
on the track does, but raised it, and met with a soft sweet smile all
who cared to look at him. In his hand he bore a fishing–rod, and round
his hat some trout–flies; and often he entered the village inn, and
had bread and cheese in the taproom, though invited into the parlour.
Although his boots were soaked and soiled as if he had been wading, and
the landing–net, slung across his back, had evidently been dripping,
he opened to none his fishing creel, neither had any trout fried,
but spoke in a desponding manner of the shyness of the fish, and the
brightness of the water, and vowed every time that his patience was now
at last exhausted. As none could fish in that neighbourhood without
asking Sir Cradockʼs permission, or trespassing against him, and as
the old baronet was most duly tenacious of all his sporting rights,
everybody wondered what Mark Stote was about to allow a mere far–comer
to carry on so in Nowelhurst water. But Mark Stote knew a great deal
better what was up than they did.

Four or five times now, Bull Garnet, riding on his rounds of business,
had met Simon Chope, and bowed politely to him. On the first occasion,
Mr. Chope, knowing very little of Garnet, and failing to comprehend
him (as we fail, at first sight, with all antipodes), lost his slow
sequacious art, because he over–riddled it. All very cunning men do
this; even my Lord Bacon, but never our brother Shakespeare.

But Mr. Garnet read him truly, and his purpose also, by the aid of
his own consciousness; and a thrill of deep, cold fear went through
that hot and stormy heart. Nevertheless, he met the case in his usual
manner, and puzzled Mr. Chope on the third or fourth encounter by
inviting him to dinner. The lawyer found some ready plea for declining
this invitation; sleuth and cold–blooded as he was, he could not
accept hospitality to sift his host for murder. Of course Mr. Garnet
had foreseen the refusal of this overture; but it added to his general
alarm, even more than it contributed to his momentary relief. Clearly
enough he knew, or felt, that now he was running a race against time;
and if he could only win that race, and give the prize to his children,
how happily would he yield himself to his only comfort—death. With his
strong religious views—right or wrong, who shall dare to say? for the
matter is not of reason—he doubted Godʼs great mercy to him in another
world no more than he doubted his own great love to his own begotten.

And sad it was, enough to move the tears of any Stoic, to behold
Bull Garnet now sitting with his children. Instead of being shy and
distant (as for a while he had been, when the crime was new upon him)
he would watch them, word by word, smile by smile, or tear for tear,
as if he never could have enough of the little that was left to him.
They had begun to talk again carelessly in his presence, as the manner
of the young is. Bob had found that the vague, dark cloud, of whose
origin he knew nothing, was lifted a little, and lightened; and Pearl,
who knew all about it, was trying to slip from beneath its shadow,
with the self–preservation of youth, and into the long–obscured but
native sunlight of a daughterʼs love. And all the while their father,
the man of force and violence, would look from one to the other of
them, perceiving, with a curious smile, little traits of himself;
often amused at, and blessing them for, their very sage inexperience;
thinking to show how both were wrong, yet longing not to do it. And
then he would begin to wonder which of them he loved more deeply. Pearl
had gained upon him so, by the patience of her wrong, by coming to the
hearth for shelter from the storms of outer love.

In all races against time, luck, itself the child of time, is apt to
govern the result more than highest skill may. So far, most of the luck
had been in Mr. Garnetʼs favour; the approach of unlucky Cradock that
day, the distraction of his mind—the hurried and jostled aim which even
misled himself; the distance of John Rosedew; the blundering and timid
coroner and the soft–hearted jury; even the state of the weather; and
since that time the perversion and weakness of the fatherʼs mind: all
these had prevented that close inquiry which must have led to either
his conviction or confession. For, of course, he would have confessed
at once, come what might, if an innocent man had been apprehended for
his guilt.

Only in one important matter—so far at least as he knew yet, not having
heard of Jemʼs discovery, and Mr. Huttonʼs advance upon it—had fortune
been against him; that one was the crashing of his locked cupboard, and
the exposure of the broken gun–case to Rufus Huttonʼs eyes. And now it
was an adverse fate which brought Mr. Chope upon the stage, and yet it
was a kindly one which kept him apart from Hutton. For Simon Chope and
Rufus Hutton disliked one another heartily; as the old repulsion is
between cold blood and hot blood.

As it happened, Mr. Chope was Mrs. Corklemoreʼs pet lawyer: he had
been employed to see that she was defrauded of no adequate rights
uxorial upon her second marriage. And uncommonly good care he took to
secure the lionʼs share for her. Indeed, had it been possible for him
to fall in love at all with anything but money, that foolish lapse
would have been his, at the very first sight of Georgie. Sweetly
innocent and good, she did so sympathize with “to wit, whereas, and
notwithstanding;” she entered with such gush of heart into the bitter
necessity of making many folios, and charging for every one of them,
which the depravity of human nature has forced on a class whose native
bias rather tends to poetry; she felt so acutely (when all was made
plain to her, and Mr. Corklemore paid the bill) how very very wrong
it was not to have implicit confidence—”in being cheated,” under her
breath, and that shaft was Cupidʼs to Mr. Chope—in a word, he was so
smitten, that he doubled all his charges, and inserted an especial
power of appointment, for (Mr. Corklemore having the gout) he looked on
her as his reversion.

“Hang it,” he said, for his extreme idea of final punishment was legal;
“hang it, if I married that woman, our son would be Lord Chancellor. I
never saw such a liar.”

Now it was almost certain that, under Sir Cradock Nowellʼs settlement
upon marriage, an entail had been created. The lawyers, who do as they
like in such matters, and live in a cloud of their own breath, are sure
to provide for continuance, and the bills of their grandchildren.

“Alas, how sad!” thought Georgie, as she lay back in the Nowelhurst
carriage on her way to Cole, Chope, and Co.; “how very sad if it should
be so. Then there will be no cure for it, but to get up the evidence,
meet the dreadful publicity, and get the poor fellow convicted. And
they say he is so good–looking! Perhaps I hate ugly people so much,
because I am so pretty. Oh, how I wish Mr. Corklemore walked a little
more like a gentleman. But as a sacred duty to my innocent darling, I
must leave no stone unturned.”

Fully convinced of her pure integrity, Georgie drove up in state and
style to the office of Cole, Chope, and Co., somewhere in Southampton.
She would make no secret of it, but go in Sir Cradock Nowellʼs
carriage, and then evil–minded persons could not misinterpret her. Mr.
Chope alone could tell her, as she had said to “Uncle Cradock” (with
a faint hope that he might let slip something), what really was the
nature and effect of her own marriage–settlement. Things of that sort
were so far beyond her, so distasteful to her; sufficient for the
day was the evil thereof; she could sympathize with almost any one,
but really not with a person who looked forward to any disposal of
property, unless it became, for the sake of the little ones, a matter
of strict duty; and even then it must cause a heart–pang—oh, such a
bitter heart–pang!

“Coleʼs brains” was not the man to make himself too common. He always
required digging out, like a fossil, from three or four mural _septa_.
Being disinterred at last from the innermost room, after winks, and
nods, and quiet knocks innumerable, he came out with both hands over
his eyes, because the light was too much for him, he had been so hard
at work.

And the first thing he always expressed was surprise, even though he
had made the appointment. Mr. Simon Chope, attorney and solicitor, was
now about five–and–thirty years old, a square–built man, just growing
stout, with an enormous head, and a frizzle of hair which made it
look still larger. There was a depth of gravity in his paper–white
countenance—slightly marked with small–pox—a power of not laughing,
such as we seldom see, except in a man of great humour, who says odd
things, but rarely smiles till every one else is laughing. But if
Chope were gifted, as he may have been, with a racy vein of comedy,
nobody ever knew it. He was not accustomed to make a joke gratis,
neither to laugh upon similar terms at the jokes of other people.
Tremendous gravity, quiet movements, very clear perception, most
judicious reticence—these had been his characteristics since he started
in life as an office–boy, and these would abide with him until he got
everything he wanted; if any man ever does that.

With many a bow and smile, expressing surprise, delight, and deference,
Mr. Chope conducted to a special room that lady in whom he felt an
interest transcending contingent remainder. Mrs. Corklemore swam
to her place with that ease of movement which was one of her chief
fascinations, and fixed her large grey eyes on the lawyer with the
sweetest expression of innocence.

“I fear, Mr. Chope—oh, where is my husband? he promised to meet me
here—I fear that I must give you, oh, so much trouble again. But you
exerted yourself so very kindly on my behalf about eighteen months ago,
that I cannot bear to consult any other gentleman, even in the smallest
matter.”

“My services, such as they are, shall ever be at the entire disposal of
Madame la Comtesse.”

Mr. Chope would always address her so; “a countess once, a countess
for ever,” was his view of the subject. Moreover, it ignored Mr.
Corklemore, whom he hated as his supplanter; and, best reason of all,
the lady evidently liked it.

“You are so very kind, I felt sure that you would say so. But in this
case, the business is rather Mr. Corklemoreʼs than my own. But he
has left it entirely to me, having greater confidence, perhaps, in my
apprehension.”

She knew, of course, that so to disparage her husband, by implication,
was not in the very best taste; but she felt that Mr. Chope would be
pleased, as she quite understood his sentiments.

“And not without excellent reason,” answered the lawyer, softly; “if
any lady would be an ornament to our profession, it is Madame la
Comtesse.”

“Oh no, Mr. Chope, oh no! I am so very simple. And I never should have
the heart to do the things you are compelled to do. But to return:
this little matter, in which I hope for your assistance, is a trifling
exchange of mixed land with Sir Cradock Nowell.”

“Ah, to be sure!” said Chope, feeling slightly disappointed, for he had
some idea that the question would be more lucrative; “if you will give
me particulars, it shall have our best attention.”

“I think I have heard,” said Georgie, knowing thoroughly all about it,
“that there is some mode of proceeding, under some Act of Parliament,
which lightens, perhaps, to some extent, the legal difficulties—and, oh
yes, the expenses.”

Mrs. Corklemore knew how Mr. Chope had drawn her a very long bill—upon
his imagination.

“Oh, of course,” replied Mr. Chope, smitten yet more deeply with the
legal knowledge, and full of the future Lord Chancellor; “there is a
rough and ready way of dealing with almost anything. What they call
a statutory proceeding, shockingly careless and haphazard, and most
ungermainely thrust into an Enclosure Act. But we never permit any
clients of ours to imperil their interests so, for the sake, perhaps,
of half a sovereign. There is such a deal of quackery in all those
dabblesome interferences with ancient institutions. For security, for
comfort of mind, for scientific investigation, there is nothing like
the exhaustive process of a good common law conveyance. Look at a
proper abstract of title! A charming thing to contemplate; and still
more charming, if possible, the requisitions upon it, when prepared by
eminent counsel. But the tendency of the present age is to slur and cut
short everything. Melancholy, most melancholy!”

“Especially for the legal gentlemen, I suppose, Mr. Chope?”

“Yes. It does hurt our feelings so to see all the grand safeguards,
invented by men of consummate ability, swept away like old rubbish.
I even heard of a case last week, where a piece of land, sold for
900_l_., actually cost the purchaser only 50_l_. for conveyance!”

“Oh, how disgraceful!” cried Georgie, so nicely, that Chope detected no
irony: “and now, I presume, if we proceed in the ordinary way, we must
deliver and receive what you call ‘abstracts of title.’”

“Quite so, quite so, whichever way you proceed. It is a most
indispensable step. It will be my duty and privilege to deduce Mr.
Corklemoreʼs title; and Mr. Brockwoodʼs, I presume, to show Sir Cradock
Nowellʼs. All may be completed in six months’ time, if both sides act
with energy. If you will favour me with the description of parcels,
I will write at once to Mr. Brockwood; or, indeed, I shall see him
to–night. He will be at the Masonsʼ dinner.”

For a moment Mrs. Corklemore was taken quite aback. It is needless
to say that no interchange of land had ever been dreamed of, except
by herself, as a possible method of learning “how the land lay;” and
indeed there was no intermixed land at all, as Mr. Chope strongly
suspected. Neither was he, for the matter of that, likely to meet Mr.
Brockwood; but when it becomes a _professional_ question, a man can
mostly out–lie a woman, because he has more experience.

“Be guided by me, if you please,” said Georgie, smiling enough to
misguide any one; “we must not be premature, lest we seem too anxious
about the bargain. And, I am sure, we have done our very best to be
perfectly fair with Sir Cradock. Only we trust you, of course, to
be sure that he has reposing, composing—oh, how stupid I am! I mean
disposing power; that there is no awkward entail.”

Here she looked so preternaturally simple, which she would never have
done but for her previous flutter, that Simon Chope in a moment knew
exactly what her game was. Nevertheless, he answered nicely in that
tantalizing way which often makes a woman flash forth.

“We shall see, no doubt, ere long. Of course Sir Cradock would not
propose it, unless he had full power. Is it quite certain that poor
Clayton Nowell left no legitimate offspring?”

Oh, what a horrible suggestion! Such a thing would quite upset every
scheme. Georgie had never thought of it. And yet it might even be so.
There was something in the tone of Mr. Chopeʼs whisper, which convinced
her that he had heard something.

And only think; young men are so little looked after at Oxford, that
they can get married very easily, without anything being heard of it.
At least, so thought Mrs. Corklemore. And then oh, if poor Clayton had
left a child, how his grandfather would idolize him! Sir Cradock would
slip from her hands altogether; and scarcely any hope would remain of
diverting the succession. Even if the child was a daughter, probably
she would inherit, and could not yet have committed felony. Oh, what a
fearful blow it would be!

All this passed through that rapid mind in about half a second, during
which time, however, the thinker could not help looking nonplussed.
Mr. Chope of course perceived it, and found himself more and more
wide–awake.

“Well, what a strange idea!” she exclaimed, with unfeigned surprise.
“There has not been the slightest suggestion of anything of the kind.
And indeed I have lately heard what surprised me very much, that he had
formed an—an improper attachment in a quarter very near home.”

“Indeed! Do you know to whom?” It was Mr. Chope who was trying now to
appear indifferent.

“Yes. I was told. But it does not become me to repeat such stories.”

“It not only becomes you in this case, but it is your absolute duty,
and—and your true interest.”

“Why, you quite frighten me, Mr. Chope. Your manner is so strange.”

“It would grieve me deeply indeed to alarm Madame la Comtesse,”
answered the lawyer, trying in vain to resume his airiness; “but I
cannot do justice to any one who does not fully confide in me. In a
case like this, especially, such interests are concerned, the title
is so—so complicated, that purely as a matter of business we must be
advised about everything.”

“Well, I see no reason why I should not tell you. It cannot be of any
importance. Poor Clayton Nowell had fallen in love with a girl very far
beneath him—the daughter, I think she was, of a Mr. Garnet.”

“Oh, I think I had heard a report of that sort”—he had never heard, but
suspected it—”it can, of course, signify nothing, if the matter went no
further; nevertheless, I thank you for your gratifying confidence. I
apologize if I alarmed you; there is nothing alarming at all in it. I
was thinking of something very different.” This was utterly false; but
it diverted her from the subject.

“Oh, yes, I see. Of something, you mean, which might have caused
a disagreement between the unfortunate brothers. Now tell me your
opinion—in the strictest confidence, of course—as to that awful
occurrence. Do you think—oh, I hope not——”

“I was far away at the time, and can form no conclusion. But I know
that my partner, Mr. Cole, the coroner, was too sadly convinced,—oh, I
beg your pardon, I forgot for the moment that Madame la Comtesse——”

“Pray forget my relationship, or rather consider it as a reason; oh, I
would rather know the sad, sad truth. It is the suspense, oh the cruel
suspense. What was Mr. Coleʼs conclusion?”

“That if Cradock Nowell were put on his trial, he would not find a jury
in England but must convict him.”

“Oh, how inexpressibly shocking! Excuse me, may I ask for a glass of
water? Oh, thank you, thank you. No wine, if you please. I must hurry
away quite rudely. The fresh air will revive me. I cannot conclude my
instructions to–day. How could I think of such little matters? Please
to do nothing until you hear from me. Yes, I hear the carriage. I told
Giles to allow me ten minutes only, unless Mr. Corklemore came. You
see how thoroughly well I know the value of your time. We feel it so
acutely; but I must not presume; no further, if you please!”

Having thus appraised Mr. Chope, and apprised him of his distance, from
a social point of view, Georgie gave him a smile which disarmed him, at
least for the moment. But he was not the lawyer, or the man, to concede
her the last word.

“We lawyers never presume, madam, any more than we assume. We must have
everything proved.”

“Except your particulars of account, which you leave to prove
themselves.”

“Ha, ha! You are too clever for the whole profession. We can only prove
our inferiority.”

He stood, with his great bushy head uncovered, looking after the grand
apparatus, and three boys sitting behind it; and then he went sadly
back, and said, “Our son might have been Lord Chancellor. But I beat
her this time in lying.”




CHAPTER IX.


Two months of opening spring are past, and the forest is awaking. Up,
all we who love such things; come and see more glorious doings than of
man or angel. However hearts have been winter–bound with the nip of
avarice, and the iron frost of selfishness, however minds have checked
their sap in narrowness of ideal, let us all burst bands awhile before
the bright sun, as leaves do. Heavenʼs young breath is stirring through
crinkled bud and mossy crevice, peaceful spears of pensioned reeds,
and flags all innocent of battle. Lo, where the wind goes, while we
look, playing with and defying us, chasing the dip of a primrose–bank,
and touching sweet lips with dalliance. Lifting first the shining
tutsan, gently so, and apologizing, then after a tender whisper to the
nodding milkwort, away to where the soft blue eyes of the periwinkle
hesitate. Last, before he dies away, the sauntering ruffler looks and
steps into a quiet tufted nook, overhung with bank, and lintelled
with the twisted oak–roots. Here, as in a niche of Sabbath, dwells
the nervous soft wood–sorrel, feeding upon leaf–mould, quivering with
its long–stalked cloves, pale of hue, and shunning touch, delicate
wood–sorrel, coral–rooted, shamrock–leafed, loved and understood of
few, except good Fra Angelico.

Tut—we want stronger life than that; and here we have it overhead,
with many a galling boss and buff, yet, on the whole, worth treeʼs
exertion, and worth manʼs inspection. See the oak–leaves bursting out,
crimped and crannied at their birth, with little nicks and serrate jags
like “painted lady” chrysalids, or cowries pushing their tongues out,
throwing off the hidesome tuck, and frilled with pellucid copper. See,
as well, the fluted beech–leaves, started a full moon ago, offering
out of fawn–skin gloves, and glossed with waterproof copal. Then the
ash—but hold, I know not how the ash comes out, because it gives so
little warning; or rather, it warns a long, long time, and then does
it all of a sudden. Tush—what man cares now to glance at the yearly
manuscript of God? Let the leaves go; they are not _inscripti nomina
regum_.

Yet the brook—though time flees faster, who can grudge one glance at
brooklet? Where the mock–myrtle begins to dip, where the young agrimony
comes up, and the early forget–me–not pushes its claim upon our
remembrance, and the water–lily floats half–way up, quivering dusk in
the clearness, like a trout upon the hover. Look how the little waves
dance towards us, glancing and casting over, drawing a tongue with
limpid creases from the broad pool above, then funnelling into a narrow
neck over a shelf of gravel, and bubbling and babbling with petulant
freaks into corners of calmer reflection. There an old tree leans
solemnly over, with brows bent, and arms folded, turning the course of
the brook with his feet, and shedding a crystal darkness.

Below this, the yellow banks break away into a scoop on either side,
where a green lane of the forest comes down and wades into the water.
Here is a favourite crossing–place for the cattle of the woodland,
and a favourite bower for cows to rest in, and chew the cud of soft
contemplation. And here is a grey wooden bridge for the footpath,
adding to rather than destroying the solitude of the scene, because it
is plain that a pair of feet once in a week would astonish it. Yet in
the depth of loneliness, and the quiet repose of shadow, all is hope,
and reassurance, sense of thanks, and breath of praise. For is not
the winter gone by, and forgotten, the fury and darkness and terror,
the inclination of March to rave, and the April too given to weeping?
Surely the time of sweet flowers is come, and the glory of summer
approaching, the freedom of revelling in the sun, the vesture of the
magnificent trees, and the singing of birds among them.

Through the great Huntley Wood, and along the banks of the Millaford
brook, this fine morning of the May, wander our Rosalind and Celia,
Amy to wit, and Eoa. It is a long way from Nowelhurst, but they have
brought their lunch, and mean to make a day of it in the forest,
seeking balm for wounded hearts in good green leaf and buoyant air.
Coming to the old plank–bridge, they sit upon a bank to watch the
rising of the trout, for the stone–fly is on the water. Eoa has a
great idea that she could catch a trout with a kidney–bean stick and a
fly; but now she has not the heart for it; and Amy says it would be so
cruel, and they are so pretty.

“What a lovely place!” says Amy; “I could sit here all day long. How
that crab–apple, clothed with scarlet, seems to rouge the water!”

“It isnʼt scarlet, I tell you, Amy, any more than you are. Itʼs only a
deep, deep pink. You never can tell colours.”

“Well, never mind. It is very pretty. And so are you when you are
good and not contradictory—ʼcontradictionary,’ as James Pottles calls
Coræbus.”

“Well, it does just as well. Whatʼs the good of being so particular? I
am sure I am none the better for it; and I have not jumped the brook
ever so long, and have thrown away my gaiters just because Uncle John
said—oh, you are all alike in England.”

“What did my father say, if you please, that possessed such odious
sameness?”

“There, there, I am so glad to see you in a passion, dear; because I
thought you never could be. Uncle John only said that no doubt somebody
would like me better, if I gave up all that, and stayed in–doors all
day. And I have been trying hard to do it; but he is worse than he was
before. I sat on a bench in the chase last Monday, and he went by and
never noticed me, though I made quite a noise with my hat on the wood
until I was nearly ashamed of myself. But I need not have been alarmed,
for my lord went by without even looking.”

“And what do you mean to do about it?” Amy took the deepest interest in
Eoaʼs love–affair.

“Oh, you need not smile, Amy. It is all very well for you, I dare say;
but it makes me dreadfully angry. Just as if I were nobody! And after I
have told Uncle Cradock of my intentions to settle.”

“You premature little creature! But my father was quite right in his
advice, as he always is; and not for that reason only. You belong to
a well–known family, and, for their sake as well as your own, you are
bound to be very nice, dear, and to do only what is nice, instead of
making a tomboy of yourself.”

“Tomboy, indeed! And nice! Nice things they did, didnʼt they—shooting
one another?”

Almost before she had uttered the words, she was thoroughly ashamed
of herself, for she knew about Amy and Cradock from the maidenʼs own
confession. Amy arose without reply, and, taking her little basket,
turned into the homeward path, with a little quiet sigh. Eoa thought
for a moment, and then, having conquered herself, darted after the
outraged friend.

“I wish to have no more to do with you. That is all,” cried Amy, with
Eoaʼs strong arms round her waist.

“But, indeed, you shall. You know what a brute I am. I canʼt help it;
but I will try. I will bite my tongue off to be forgiven.”

“I simply wish, Miss Nowell, to have nothing more to do with you.”

“Then you are a great deal worse than I am; because you are
unforgiving. I thought you were so wonderfully good; and now I am sorry
for you, even more than for myself. I had better go back to the devilʼs
people, if this is the way of Christians.”

“Could you forgive any one in a moment who had wounded you most
savagely?”

“In a moment,—if they were sorry, and asked me.”

“Are you quite sure of that?”

“Sure, indeed! How could I help it?”

“Then, Eoa, you cannot help being more like a Christian than I am. I am
very persistent, and steadily bitter to any one who wrongs me. You are
far better than I am, Eoa; because you cannot hate any one.”

“I donʼt know about being better, Amy; I only know that I donʼt hate
any one—with all my heart I mean—except Mrs. Nowell Corklemore.”

Here Amy could not help laughing at Eoaʼs method of proving her rule;
and the other took advantage of it to make her sit down, and kiss her,
and beg her pardon a dozen times, because she was such a little savage;
and then to open her own lunch–basket, and spread a white cloth,
and cover it with slices of rusk and reindeerʼs tongue, and hearted
lettuce, and lemonade, and a wing of cold duck at the corner.

“I left it to Hoggy,” she cried in triumph, “and he has deserved my
confidence. Beat that if you can now, my darling.”

“Oh, I can beat that out and out,” said Amy, who still was crying,
just a drop now and then, because her emotions were “persistent:” then
she smiled, because she knew so well no old butler could touch her in
catering; but I must not tell what Amy had, for fear of making people
hungry. Only in justice it should be said that neither basket went home
full; for both the young ladies were “hearty;” and they kissed one
another in spite of the stuffing.

“Oh, Amy, I do love you so, whenever you donʼt scold me. I am sure I
was meant for a Christian. Hereʼs that nasty sneakʼs lawn handkerchief.
I picked her pocket this morning. I do twice a week for practice. But I
wonʼt wipe your pretty eyes with it, darling, because I do so loathe
her. Now, if you please, no more crying, Amy. What a queer thing you
are!”

“Most truly may I return the compliment,” answered Amy, smiling through
the sparkle of her tears. “But you donʼt mean to say that you keep what
you steal?”

“Oh no; it is not worth it. And I hate her too much to keep anything.
Last week I lit the fire in my dressing–room, on purpose to burn her
purse. You should have seen the money melting. I took good care, of
course, not to leave it in the ashes, though. I am forming quite a
collection of it; for I donʼt mind keeping it at all, when it has been
through the fire. And you canʼt think how pretty it is, all strings and
dots of white and yellow.”

“Well! I never heard such a thing. Why, you might be transported, Eoa!”

“Yes, I know, if they found me out; but they are much too stupid for
that. Besides, it is such fun; the only fun I have now, since I left
off jumping. You know the old thing is so stingy.”

“Old thing, indeed! Why, she is not five–and–twenty!”

“I donʼt care; she has got a child. She is as old as Methusalem in
her heart, though she is so deucedly sentimental”—the old Colonelʼs
daughter had not forgotten all her beloved papaʼs expressions—”I know
I shall use what you call in this country ‘physical force,’ some day,
with her. I must have done it long ago, only for picking her pocket.
She would be but a baby in my hands, and she is quite aware of it. Look
at my arm; itʼs no larger than yours, except above the elbow, and it is
nearly as soft and delicate. Yet I could take you with one hand, Amy,
and put you into the brook. If you like, Iʼll do it.”

“Much obliged, dear; but I am quite content without the crucial test. I
know your wonderful strength, which none would ever suspect, to look at
you. I suppose it came to you from your mother.”

“Yes, I believe. At any rate, I have heard my father say so; and I
could hold both his hands most easily. But oh, she is such a screw,
Amy, that sympathetic Georgie! She never gives any one sixpence; and it
is so pleasant to hear her go on about her money, and handkerchiefs,
and, most of all, her gloves. She is so proud of her nasty little
velvet paws. She wonʼt get her gloves except in Southampton, and three
toll–gates to pay, and I steal them as fast as she gets them. She
grumbles about it all dinner–time, and I offered her eighteenpence for
turnpikes—out of her own purse, of course—because she was so poor,
I said. But she flew into such a rage that I was forced to pick her
pocket again at breakfast–time next morning. And the lies she told
about the amount of money in her purse! Between eight and nine pounds,
she said the last time, and there was only two pounds twelve. Uncle
Cradock made it good to her, because he guessed that I had done it,
though he was afraid to tell me so. But, thank God, I stole it again
the next day when she went out walking; and that of course he had
nothing to say to, because it did not occur in his house. Oh what a
rage she was in! She begins to suspect me now, I think; but she never
can catch me out.”

“You consummate little thief! why, I shall be afraid to come near you.”

“Oh, I would never do it to any one but her. And I should not do it
to her so much, only she thinks me a clumsy stupid. Me who was called
‘Never–spot–the–dust!’ But I have got another thing of hers, and she
had better take care, or Iʼll open it.”

“Something else! Take care, Eoa, or I will go and tell.”

“No, you know better than that. It is nothing but a letter she wrote,
and was going to post at Burley. I knew by her tricks and suspicious
ways that there was something in it; and she would not let it go in the
post–bag. So I resolved to have it; and of course I did. And she has
been in such a fright ever since; but I have not opened it yet.”

“And I hope you never will. Either confess, or post it at once, or
never call me your friend any more.”

“Oh, you need not be hot, Amy; you donʼt understand the circumstances.
I know that she is playing a nasty game; and I need not have any
scruples with her, after what I caught her doing. Twice she has been
at my desk, my own new desk Uncle Cradock gave me, where I put all the
letters and relics that were found on my dear, dear father.” Here Eoa
burst out crying, and Amy came near again and kissed her.

“Darling, I did not mean to be cross; if the wretch would do such a
thing as that, it justifies almost anything.”

“And what do you think I did?” said Eoa, half crying, and half
laughing: “I set a fishhook with a spring to it, so that the moment she
lifted the cover, the barb would go into her hand; and the next day she
had a bad finger, and said that little Flore bit it by accident while
she was feeling her tooth, which is loose. I should like to have seen
her getting the barb out of her nasty little velvet paw.”

“I am quite surprised,” cried Amy; “and we all call you so simple—a
mere child of nature! If so, nature is up to much more than we give her
credit for. And pray, what is your next device?”

“Oh, nothing at all, till she does something. I am quits with her now;
and I cannot scheme as she does.”

Suddenly Amy put both her hands on Eoaʼs graceful shoulders, and
poured the quick vigour of English eyes into the fathomless lustre of
darkly–fringed Oriental orbs.

“You will not tell me a story, dear, if I ask you very particularly?”

“I never tell stories to any one; you might know that by this time. At
any rate, not to my friends.”

“No, I donʼt think you would. Now, do you think that Mrs. Corklemore is
at the bottom of this vile thing?”

“What vile thing? The viler it is, the more likely she is to have done
it.”

“Oh no, she cannot have done it, though she may have had something to
do with it. I mean, of course, about poor Cradock.”

“What about Cradock? I love Cousin Cradock, because he is so unlucky;
and because you like him, dear.”

“Donʼt you know it? You must have seen that I was in very poor spirits.
And this made me feel it so much the more, when you said what you did.
We have heard that an application has been made in London, at the Home
Office, or somewhere, that a warrant should be issued against Cradock
Nowell, and a reward be offered for him as——Oh, my Cradock, my Craddy!”

“Put your head in here, darling. What a brute you must have thought me!
Oh, I do so love you. Donʼt think twice about it, dear. I will take
care that it all comes right. I will go to London to–day, dearest,
and defy them to dare to do it. And Iʼll open that letter at once. It
becomes a duty now; as that nasty beast always says, when she wants to
do anything wrong.”

“No, no!” sobbed Amy, “you have no right to open her letter, and you
shall not do it, Eoa, unless my father says that it is right. Will you
promise me that, dear? Oh, do promise me that.”

“How can I promise that, when I would not have him know, for a lac of
rupees, that I had ever stolen it? He would never perceive how right
it was; and, though I donʼt know much about people, I am sure he would
never forgive me. He is such a fidget. But I will promise you one
thing, Amy—not to open it without _your_ leave.”

Amy was obliged at last to be contented with this; though she said
it was worse than nothing, for it forced the decision upon her; and,
scrupulously honest and candid as she was, she would feel it right to
settle the point against her own desires.

“Old Biddy knows I have got it,” cried Eoa, changing her humour: “and
she patted me on the back, and said, ‘Begorra, thin, you be the cliver
one; hould on to that same, me darlint, and weʼll bate every bit of
her, yit; the purtiest feet and ancles to you, and the best back legs,
more than iver she got, and now you bate her in the stalinʼ. And plase,
Miss, rade yer ould Biddy every consuminʼ word on it. Mullygaslooce,
but weʼve toorned her, this time, and thank Donats for it.’”

Eoa dramatised Biddy so cleverly, even to the form of her countenance,
and her peculiar manner of standing, that Amy, with all those griefs
upon her, could not help laughing heartily.

“Come along, I canʼt mope any longer; when I have jumped the brook nine
times, you may say something to me. What do you think of a bathe, Amy?
I am up for it, if you are—and our tablecloths for towels. Nobody comes
here once in a year; and if they did, they would run away again. What
a lovely deep pool! I can swim like a duck; and you like a stone, I
suppose.”

Amy, of course, would not hear of it, and her lively friend, having
paddled with her naked feet in the water, and found it colder—oh, ever
so much—than the tributaries of the Ganges, was not so very sorry
(self–willed though being) to keep upon the dry land, only she must
go to Queenʼs Mead, and Amy must come with her, and run the entire
distance, to get away from trouble.

Amy was light enough of foot, when her heart was light; but Eoa could
“run round her,” as the sporting phrase is, and she gave herself the
rein at will that lovely afternoon; as a high–mettled filly does, when
she gets out of Piccadilly. And she chatted as fast as she walked all
the time, hoping so to divert her friend from this new distress.

“I should not be one bit surprised, if we saw that—Bob, here somewhere.
We are getting near one of his favourite places—not that I know
anything about it; and he is always away now in Mark Ash Wood, or
Puckpits, looking out for the arrival of honey–buzzards, or for a
merlinʼs nest. Oh, of course we shall not see him.”

“Now, you know you will,” replied Amy, laughing at Eoaʼs clumsiness;
“and you have brought me all this way for that very reason. Now, if we
meet him, just leave him to me, and stay out of hearing. I will manage
him so that he shall soon think you the best and the prettiest girl in
the world.”

“Well, I wish he would,” said Eoa, blushing beautifully; “wouldnʼt I
torment him then?”

“No doubt you would, and yourself as well. Now where do you think he
will be?”

“Oh, Amy, how can I possibly guess? But if I did guess at all, I should
say there was just an atom of a chance of his being not far from the
Queenʼs Mead.”

“Suppose him to be there. What would bring him there? Not to see you, I
should hope?”

“As if he would go a yard for that! Oh no, he is come to look for—at
least, perhaps he might, just possibly, I mean——”

“Come to look for whom?” Amy was very angry, for she thought that it
was herself, under Eoaʼs strategy.

“A horrid little white mole.”

“A white mole! Why, I had no idea that there was such a thing.”

“Oh yes, there is: but it is very rare; and he has set his heart upon
catching this one.”

“That he shanʼt. Oh, I see exactly what to do. Come quickly, for fear
he should catch it before we get there. Oh, I do hate such cruelty. Ah,
there, I see him! Now, you keep out of sight.”

In a sunny break of tufted sward, embayed among long waves of wood,
young Bob Garnet sat, more happy than the king of all the world of
fairies. At his side lay several implements of his own devising, and
on his lap a favourite book with his open watch upon it. From time to
time he glanced away at a chain of little hillocks about twenty yards
in front of him, and among which he had stuck seven or eight stout
hazel rods, and brought them down as benders. He was trying not only to
catch his mole, but also to add another to his many observations as to
the periods of molar exertion. Whether nature does enforce upon those
clever miners any Three Hour Act, as the popular opinion is; or whether
they are free to work and rest, at their own sweet will, as seems a
world more natural.

Amy walked into the midst of the benders, in her self–willed,
characteristic manner, as if they were nothing at all. She made believe
to see nought of Bob, who, on the other side of the path was fluttering
and blushing, with a mixture of emotions. “Some very cruel person,”
she exclaimed, in loud self–commune, “probably a cruel boy, has been
setting mole–traps here, I see. And papa says the moles do more good
than harm, except perhaps in my flower–beds. Now Iʼll let them all off
very quietly. The boy will think he has caught a dozen; and then how
the moles will laugh at him. He will think itʼs a witch, and leave
off, very likely, for all cruel boys are ignorant. My pretty little
darlings; so glossy, and so clever!”

“Oh, please not to do that,” cried Bob, having tried in vain to contain
himself, and now leaping up in agony; “I have taken so much trouble,
and they are set so beautifully.”

“What, Master Robert Garnet! Oh, have you seen my companion, Miss
Nowell, about here?”

“Look there, you have spoiled another! And theyʼll never set so well
again. Oh, you canʼt know what they are, and the trouble I have had
with them.”

“Oh yes, Master Garnet, I know what they are; clumsy and cruel
contrivances to catch my innocent moles.”

“_Your_ moles!” cried Bob, with great wrath arising, as she coolly
destroyed two more traps; “why are they _your_ moles, I should like to
know? I donʼt believe you have ever even heard of them before.”

“Suppose I have not?” answered Amy, screwing up her lips, as she always
did when resolved to have her own way.

“Then how can they be your moles? Oh, if you havenʼt spoiled another!”

“Well, Godʼs moles, if you prefer it, Master Garnet. At any rate, you
have no right to catch them.”

“But I only want to catch one, Amy; a white one, oh, such a beauty! I
have heard of him since he was born, and had my eye on him down all
the galleries; and now he must be full–grown, for he was born quite
early in August.”

“I hope heʼll live to be a hundred. And I will thank you, Master
Garnet, to speak to _me_ with proper respect.”

Up went another riser. There was only one left now, and that a most
especial trap, which had cost a whole weekʼs cogitation.

“I declare you are a most dreadful girl. You donʼt like anything I do.
And I have thought so much of you.”

“Then, once for all, I beg you never more to do so. I have often wished
to speak with you upon that very subject.”

“What—what subject, Miss Rosedew? I have no idea what you mean.”

“That is altogether false. But I will tell you now. I mean the silly,
ungentlemanly, and very childish manner, excusable only in such a boy,
in which I have several times observed you loitering about in the
forest.”

Bob knew what she meant right well, although she would not more
plainly express it—his tracking of her footsteps. He turned as red as
meadow–sorrel, and stammered out what he could.

“I am—very—very sorry. But I did not mean it. I mean—I could not help
it.”

“You will be kind enough to help it now, for once and for all.
Otherwise, my father, who has not heard of it yet, shall speak to
yours about it. Insufferable impudence in a boy just come from school!”

Amy was obliged to turn away, for fear he should look up again, and see
the laughter in her eyes. For all her wrath was feigned, inasmuch as
to her Bob Garnet was far too silly a butterfly–boy to awake any real
anger. But of late he had been intrusive, and it seemed high time to
stop it.

“If I have done anything wrong, Miss Rosedew, anything in any way
unbecoming a gentleman——”

“Yes, try to be a good boy again,” said Amy, very graciously; at the
same time giving the stroke of grace to his masterpiece of mechanism,
designed to catch the white mole alive; “now take up your playthings
and go, if you please; for I expect a young lady here directly;
and your little tools for cockchafer–spinning would barbarize the
foreground of our sketch, besides being very ugly.”

“Oh!” cried Bob, with a sudden access of his fathers readiness—”you
spin a fellow worse than any cockchafer, and you do it in the name of
humanity!”

“Then think me no more a divinity,” answered Amy; because she must
have the last word; and even Bob, young as he was, knew better than
to paragogize the feminine termination. Utterly discomfited, as a
boy is by a woman—and Amyʼs trouble had advanced her almost to that
proud claim—Bob gathered up his traps and scuttled cleverly out of
sight. She, on the other hand (laughing all the while at herself for
her simple piece of acting, and doubting whether she had been right in
doing even a little thing so much against her nature), there she sat,
with her sketching–block ready, and hoped that Eoa would have the wit
to come and meet her beloved Bob, now labouring under his fierce rebuff.

But Eoa could not do it. She had wit enough, but too much heart. She
had heard every word of Amyʼs insolence, and was very indignant at it.
Was Bob to be talked to in that way? As if he knew nothing of science!
As if he really had an atom of any sort of cruelty in him! Was Amy so
very ignorant as not to know that all Bob did was done with the kindest
consideration, and for the interest of the species, though the pins
through the backs were unpleasant, perhaps? But that was over in a
moment, and he always carried ether; and it was nothing to the Fakirs,
or the martyrs of Christianity.

Therefore Eoa crouched away, behind a tuft of thicket, because her
maidenhood forbade her to come out and comfort him, to take advantage
of his wrong, and let him know how she felt it. Therefore, too, she
was very sharp with Amy all the homeward road; vindicating Bob, and
snapping at all proffered softness; truth being that she had suspected
his boyish whim for Amy, and now was sorry for him about it, and very
angry with both of them.

From that little touch of womanʼs nature she learned more dignity, more
pride, more reservation, and self–respect, than she could have won from
a score of governesses, or six seasons of “society.”




CHAPTER X.


“Not another minute to lose, and the sale again deferred! All the lots
marked, and the handbills out, and the particulars and conditions
ready; and then some paltry pettifogging, and another fortnight will
be required to do ‘justice to my interests.’ Justice to my interests!
How they do love round–mouthed rubbish! The only justice to me is,
from a legal point of view, to string me up, and then quick–lime me;
and the only justice to my interests is to rob my children, because I
have robbed them already. Robbed them of their birth and name, their
power to look men in the face, their chance of being allowed to do
what God seems chiefly to want us for—to marry and have children, who
may be worse than we are; though, thank Him, mine are not. Robbed them
even of their chance to be met as Christians (though I have increased
their right to it), in this wretched, money–seeking, servile, and
contemptuous age. But who am I to find fault with any, after all my
wasted life? A life which might, in its little way, have told upon
the people round me, and moved, if not improved them. Which might, at
least, have set them thinking, doubting, and believing. Oh the loss
of energy, the loss of self–reliance, and the awful load of fear and
anguish—I who might have been so different! Pearl is at the window
there. I know quite well who loves her—an honest, upright, hearty
man, with a true respect for women. But will he look at her when he
knows——Oh God, my God, forsake me, but not my children!—Bob, what are
you at with those cabbages?”

“Why, they are clubbed, donʼt you see, father, beautifully clubbed
already, and the leaves flag directly the sun shines. And I want to
know whether it is the larva of a _curculio_, or _anthomyia brassicæ_;
and I canʼt tell without pulling the plants up, and they canʼt come to
any good, you know, with all this ambury in them.”

“I know nothing of the sort, Bob. I know nothing at all about it. Go
into the house to your sister. I canʼt bear the sight of you now.”

Bob, without a single word, did as he was told. He knew that his father
loved him, though he could not guess the depth of that love, being
himself so different. And so he never took offence at his fatherʼs odd
ways to him, but thought, “Better luck next time; the governor has got
red spider this morning, and he wonʼt be right till dinner–time.”

Bull Garnet smiled at his sonʼs obedience, with a mighty fount of pride
in him; and then he sighed, because Bob was gone—and he never could
have enough of him, for the little time remaining. He loved his son
with a love surpassing that of woman, or that of man for woman. Men
would call him a fool for it. But God knows how He has made us.

Thinking none of this, but fretting over fierce heart–troubles, which
now began to be too many even for his power of life—as a hundred
wolves kill a lion—he turned again down the espalier–walk, where the
apple–trees were in blossom. Pinky shells spread to the sun, with the
little close tuft in the middle; some striped, some patched, some
pinched with white, some streaking as the fruit would be, and glancing
every gloss of blush—no two of them were quite alike, any more than two
of us are. Yet the bees knew every one among the countless multitude,
and never took the wrong one; even as the angels know which of us
belongs to them, and who wants visitation.

Bull Garnet, casting to and fro, and taking heed of nothing, not even
of the weeds which once could not have lived before his eyes, began
again in a vague loose manner (the weakness of which would have angered
him, if he had been introspective) to drone about the lawʼs delays, and
the folly of institution. He stood at last by his wicket gate, where
the hedge of Irish yew was, and there carried on his grumbling.

“Lawyers indeed! And cannot manage a simple thing of that sort! Thank
God, I know nothing of law.”

“Excuse me, Mr. Garnet. It is possible that you may want to know
something of law, shortly.”

“By what right, sir, dare you break in upon my privacy like this?”

Pale as he was, and scorning himself for the way in which his blood
shrunk back, Bull Garnet was far too strong and quick ever to be
dumb–foundered. Chope looked at him, with some admiration breaking
through the triumph of his small comprehensive eyes.

“Excuse me, Mr. Garnet. I forgot that a public man like you must have
his private moments, even at his own gate. I am sorry to see you so
hot, my dear sir; though I have heard that it is your character. That
sort of thing leads to evil results, and many deplorable consequences.
But I did not mean to be rude to you, or to disturb you so strangely.”

“You have not disturbed me at all, sir.”

“I am truly happy to hear it. All I meant, as to knowledge of law, was
to give you notice that there is some heavy trouble brewing, and that
you must be prepared to meet some horrible accusations.”

“May I trespass further upon your kindness, to ask what their subject
is?”

“Oh, nothing more than a very rash and unfounded charge of murder.”

Mr. Chope pronounced that last awful word in a deeply sepulchral
manner, and riveted his little eyes into Bull Garnetʼs great ones. Mr.
Garnet met his gaze as calmly as he would meet the sad clouded aspect
of a dead rabbit, or hare, in a shop where he asked the price of them,
and regarded their eyes as the test of their freshness. Chope could not
tell what to make of it. The thing was beyond his experience.

But all this time Bull Garnet felt that every minute was costing him a
year of his natural life, even if he ever got any chance of living it
out.

“How does this concern me? Is it any one on our estates?”

“Yes, and the heir to ‘your estates.’ Young Mr. Cradock Nowell.”

Bull Garnet sighed very heavily; then he strode away, and came back
again, with indignation swelling out the volume of his breast, and
filling the deep dark channels of brow, and the turgid veins of his
eyeballs.

“Whoever has done this thing is a fool; or a rogue—which means the
same.”

“It may be so. It may be otherwise. We always hope for the best. Very
likely he is innocent. Perhaps they are shooting at the pigeon in order
to hit the crow.”

“Perhaps you know best what their motives are. I see no use in
canvassing them. You have heard, I suppose, the rumour that Mr. Cradock
Nowell has left England?”

“I know very little about it. I have nothing to do with the case; or
it might have been managed differently. But I heard that the civil
authorities, being called upon to act, discovered, without much
trouble, that he had sailed, under a false name, in a ship called the
_Taprobane_, bound direct for Ceylon. And that, of course, told against
him rather heavily.”

“Ah, he sailed for Ceylon, did he? A wonderful place for insects. I had
an uncle who died there.”

“Yes, Ceylon, where the flying foxes are. Not so cunning, perhaps,
as our foxes of the Forest. And yet the fox is a passionate animal.
Violent, hot, and hasty. Were you aware of that fact?”

“Excuse me; my time is valuable. I will send for the gamekeeper, if you
wish to have light thrown upon that question; or my son will be only
too glad——”

“Ah, your son! Poor fellow!”

Those few short words, pronounced in a tone of real feeling, with no
attempt at inquiry, quite overcame Bull Garnet. First extrinsic proof
of that which he had so long foreseen with horror—the degradation of
his son. He dropped his eyes, which had borne, till now, and returned
the lawyerʼs gaze; and the sense of his own peril failed to keep the
tears from moving. Up to this time Mr. Chope had doubted, and was even
beginning to reject his shrewd and well–founded conclusion. Now he saw
and knew everything. And even he was overcome. Passion is infectious;
and lawyers are like the rest of us. Mr. Chope had loved his mother.

Bull Garnet gave one quick strange glance at the eyes of Simon Chope,
which now were turned away from him, and then he looked at the ground,
and said,

“Yes; I have wronged him bitterly.”

Simon Chope drew back from him mechanically, instinctively, as our
skin starts from cold iron in the arctic regions. He could not think,
much less could he speak, though his mind had been prepared for it. To
human nature it is so abhorrent to take the life of another: to usurp
the rights of God. To stand in the presence of one who has done it,
touches our pulse with death. We feel that he might have done it to us,
or that we might have done it to him; and our love of ourselves is at
once accelerated and staggered. And then we feel that “life for life”
is such low revenge; the vendetta of a drunkard. Very slowly we are
beginning to see the baseness of it.

Bull Garnet was the first to speak, and now he spoke quite calmly.

“You came with several purposes. One of them was, that I should break
to Sir Cradock Nowell these tidings of new trouble; the news of the
warrant which you and others have issued against his luckless son. I
will see to it to–day, and I will try to tell him. Good God, he does
not deserve it—I have watched him—he is no father. Oh, I wish you had
a son, Chope; then you could feel for me.”

Mr. Chope had two sons, not to be freely discoursed of; whom he meant
to take into the office, pseudonymously, some day; and he was rather
inclined to like the poor little _nullius filii_. First, because they
were his own; secondly, because they had big heads; thirdly, because
they had cheated all the other boys. Nevertheless, he was in no hurry
to be confidential about them. Yet without his knowing it, or at least
with only despising it, this little matter shaped its measure upon his
present action. The lawyer lifted his hat to Bull Garnet in a very
peculiar manner, conveying to the quick apprehension, what it would not
have been safe to pronounce—to wit, that Mr. Chope quite understood
all that had occurred; that he would not act upon his discovery until
he had well considered the matter, for, after all, he had no evidence;
lastly, that he was very sorry for Mr. Garnetʼs position, but would
rather not shake hands with him.

The steward watched him walking softly among the glad young leaves,
and down the dell where the sunlight flashed on the merry leaps of
the water. Long after the lawyer was out of sight, Bull Garnet stood
there watching, as if the forest glades would show him the approaching
destiny. Strong and firm as his nature was, he had suffered now such
wearing, wearying agonies, that he almost wished the weak manʼs wish—to
have the mastery taken from him, to have the issue settled without his
own decision.

“Poor Cradock sailed in the _Taprobane_! What an odd name,” he
continued, with that childishness to which sometimes the overtaxed
brain reverts, “tap, tap–root, tap–robin! Tush, what a fool I am! Oh
God, that I could think! Oh God, that I could only learn whether my
first duty is to you, or to my children. I will go in and pray.”

In the passage he met his son, and kissed his forehead gently, as if to
atone for the harshness with which he had sent him away.

“Father,” said Bob, “shall you want me to–day? Or may I be from home
till dark? I have so many things, most important things, to see to.”

“Birds’ nests, I suppose, and grubs, field–mice, and tadpoles. Yes, my
son, you are wise. Enjoy them while you can. And take your sister also
for a good run, if you can. You may carry your dinner with you: I shall
do well enough.”

“Oh, itʼs no use asking Pearl; she never will come with me. And I am
sure I donʼt want her. She does much more harm than good; she canʼt
kill anything properly, nor even blow an egg. But Iʼll ask her, as you
wish it, sir; because I know that she wonʼt come.”

Mr. Garnet had not the heart to laugh at his childrenʼs fine sense of
duty towards him; but he saw Bob start with all his tackle, in great
hopes, and high spirits. The father looked sadly after him, wondering
at his enjoyment, yet loving him the more, perhaps, for being so
unlike himself. And as he gazed, he could not help saying to himself,
“Very likely I shall never see him thus again—only look at him when he
will not care to look on me. Yet he must know, in the end, and she,
the poor thing, she must know how all my soul was on them. Now God in
heaven, lead me aright. Half an hour shall settle it.”




CHAPTER XI.


Meanwhile, supposing the warrant to issue, let us see what chance there
is of its ever being served. And it may be a pleasant change awhile to
flit to southern latitudes from the troubles and the drizzle, and the
weeping summer of England.

Poor Cradock, as we saw him last, backed up by the ebony–tree, and
with Wena crouching close to him, knew nothing of his lonely plight
and miserable abandonment; until the sheets of plashing rain, and
long howls of his little dog, awoke him to great wonderment. Then he
arose, and rubbed his eyes, and thought that his sight was gone, and
felt a heavy weight upon him, and a destiny to grope about, and a vain
desire to scream, such as we have in nightmare. Meanwhile, he felt
something pulling at him, always in the same direction, and he did not
like to put his hand down, for he had some idea that it was Beelzebub.
Suddenly a great flash of lightning, triple thrice repeated, lit up
the whole of the wood, like day; and he saw black Wena tugging at
him, to draw him into good shelter. He saw the shelter also, ere the
gush of light was gone, an enormous and hollow mowana–tree, a little
higher up the hill. Then all was blackest night again; and even Wena
was swallowed up in it. But with both hands stretched out, to fend the
blows of hanging branch or creeper, he committed himself to the little
dogʼs care, and she took him to the mowana–tree. Then another great
flash lit up all the hollow; and Wena was frightened and dropped her
tail, but still held on to her master.

Cradock neither knew, nor cared, what the name of the tree was, nor
whether it possessed, as some trees do, especial attractions for
lightning. “Any harbour in a storm,” was all he thought, if he thought
at all; and he lay down very snugly, and felt for Amyʼs present to him,
and then, in spite of the crashing thunder and the roaring wind, snugly
he went off to sleep; and at his feet lay Wena.

In the bright morning, the youth arose, and shook himself, and looked
round, and felt rather jolly than otherwise. Travellers say that the
baobab, or mowana–tree, is the hardest of all things to kill, and will
grow along the ground, when uprooted, and not allowed to grow upright.
Frenchmen have proved, to their own satisfaction, that some baobabs,
now living, grew under the deluge of Noah, and not improbably had the
great ark floating over their heads. Be that as it may, and though
it is a Cadmeian job to cut down the baobab, for every root thereupon
claims, and takes, a distinct existence; we can all of us tell the
travellers of a thing yet harder to kill—the hope in the heart of a
man. And, the better man he is, the more of hopeʼs spores are in him;
and the quicker they grow again, after they have all been stamped upon.
A mushroom in the egg likes well to have the ground beaten overhead
with a paviourʼs rammer, and comes up all the bigger for it, and lifts
a pave–stone of two hundred–weight. Shall then the pluck of an honest
man fail, while his true conscience stirs in him, though the result be
like a fleeting fungus, supposed to be born in an hour by those who
know nothing about it, and who make it the type of an upstart—shall
not his courage work and spread, although it be underground, as he
grows less and less defiant; and rear, perhaps in the autumn of life, a
genuine crop, and a good one?

Cradock Nowell found his island not at all a bad one. There was plenty
to eat at any rate, which is half the battle of life. Plenty to drink
is the other half, in the judgment of many philosophers. But I think
that plenty to look at it ought to be at least a third of it. The pride
of the eyes, if not exercised on that vanishing point, oneself, is a
pride legitimate, and condemned by no apostle. And here there was noble
food for it; and it is a pride which, when duly fed, slumbers off into
humility.

Oh the glory of everything, the promise, and the brightness; the large
leading views of sky and sea, and the crystal avenues onward. The
manner in which a fellow expands, when he looks at such things—if he be
capable of expanding, which surely all of us are—the way in which he
wonders, and never dreams about wondering, and the feeling of grandeur
growing within him, and how it repents him of littleness, and all his
foes are forgiven; and then he sees that he has something himself to do
with all the beauty of it—upon my word, I am a great fool, to attempt
to tell of it.

Cradock saw his lovely island, and was well content with it. It was
not more than four miles long, and perhaps three miles across; but it
was gifted with three grand things—beauty, health, and nourishment.
It might have been ages, for all he saw then, since man had sworn
or forsworn in it; perhaps none since the voyagers of Necho, whose
grand truth was so incredible. There were no high hills, and no very
deep holes; but a pleasant undulating place, ever full of leaves and
breezes. And as for wild beasts, he had no fear; he knew that they
would require more square miles than he owned. As for snakes, he was
not so sure; and indeed there were some nasty ones, as we shall see
by–and–by.

Then he went to the shore, and looked far away, even after the
_Taprobane_. The sea was yet heaving heavily, and tumbling back into
itself with a roar, and some fishing eagles were very busy, stooping
along the foam of it; but no ship was to be seen anywhere, and far away
in the south and south–east the selvage of black clouds, lopping over
the mist of the horizon, showed that still the typhoon was there, and
no one could tell how bad it was.

Cradock found a turtle, at which Wena looked first in mute wonder, with
her eyes taking jumps from their orbits, and then, like all females,
she found tongue, and ran away, and barked furiously. Presently she
came back, sniffing along, and drawing her nose on the sand, yet
determined to stick by her master, even if the turtle should eat him.
But, to her immense satisfaction, the result was quite the converse:
she and her master ate the turtle; beginning, _ab ovo_, that morning.

For, although Crad could not quite eat the eggs raw (by–the–by, they
are not so bad that way), and although he could not quite strike a
light by twirling one stick in the back of another, he had long ago
found reason _for_, and he rapidly found that excellent goddess _in_,
the roasting of eggs. And for that, he had to thank Amy. Only see how
thoughtful women are!—yes, a mark of astonishment.

But the astonishment will subside, perhaps, when we come to know all
about it; for then all the misogynes may declare that the thought was
born of vanity. Let them do so. Facts are facts, I say.

Amy had sent him a photograph of her faithful self, beautifully
done by Mr. Silvy, of Bayswater, and framed in a patent loverʼs
box, I forget the proper name for it—something French, of course—so
ingeniously contrived, that when a spring at the back was pressed,
a little wax match would present itself, from a lining of asbestos,
together with a groove to draw it in. Thus by night, as well as by day,
the smile of the loved one might illumine the lonely heart of the lover.

Now this device stood him in good stead—as doubtless it was intended to
do by the practical mind of the giver—for it served to light the fire
wherewith man roasteth roast, and is satisfied. And a fire once lit
in the hollow heart of that vast mowana–tree (where twenty men might
sit and smoke, when the rainy season came), if you only supplied some
fuel daily, and cleared away the ashes weekly, there need be no fear of
philanthropy making a trespasser of Prometheus. Cradock soon resolved
to keep his head–quarters there, for the tree stood upon a little hill,
overlooking land and sea, for many a league of solitude. And it was not
long before he found that the soft bark of the baobab might easily be
cut so as to make a winding staircase up it; and the work would be an
amusement to him, as well as a great advantage.

Master and dog having made a most admirable breakfast upon turtles’
eggs, “roasted very knowingly”—as Homer well expresses it—with a
large pineapple to follow, started, before the heat of the day,
in search of water, the indispensable. Shaddocks, and limes, and
mangosteens, bananas—with their long leaves quilling—pineapples,
mawas, and mamoshoes, cocoa–nuts, plantains, mangoes, palms, and
palmyras, custard–apples, and gourds without end—besides fifty other
ground–fruits, ay, and tree–fruits for that matter, quite unknown to
Cradock, there was no fear of dying from drought; and yet the first
thing to seek was pure water. If Cradock had thought much about the
thing, very likely it would have struck him that some of the fruits
which he saw are proof not so much of human cultivation, as of human
presence, at some time.

But he never thought about that; and indeed his mind was too full for
thinking. So he cut himself a most tremendous bludgeon of camelthorn,
as heavy and almost as hard as iron, and off he went whistling, with
Wena wondering whether the stick would beat her.

He certainly took things easily; more so than is quite in accord with
human nature and reason. But the state of his mind was to blame for it;
and the freshness of the island air, after the storm of the night.

Even a rejected lover, or a disconsolate husband, gives a jerk to his
knee–joints, and carries his elbows more briskly, when the bright
spring morning shortens his shadow at every step. Cradock, moreover,
felt quite sure that he would not be left too long there; that his
friends on board the _Taprobane_ would come aside from their track to
find him, on their return–voyage from Ceylon; and so no doubt they
would have done, if it had been in their power. But the _Taprobane_,
as we shall see, never made her escape, in spite of weatherly helm and
good seamanship, from the power of that typhoon. She was lost on the
shoals of Benguela Bay, thirty miles south of Quicombo; and not a man
ever reached the shore to tell the name of the ship. But a Portuguese
half–caste, trading there, found the name on a piece of the taffrail,
and a boat which was driven ashore.

After all, we see then that Cradock was wonderfully lucky—at least,
if it be luck to live—in having been left behind, that evening, on an
uninhabited island. “Desolate” nobody could call it, for the gifts
of life lay around in abundance, and he soon had proof that the feet
of men, ay, of white men, trod it sometimes. Following the shore, a
little further than the sailors had gone, he came on a pure narrow
thread of crystal, a current of bright water dimpling and twinkling
down the sand. Wena at once lay down and rolled, and wetted every bit
of herself; and then began to lap the water wherein her own very active
and industrious friends were drowning. That Wena was such a ladylike
dog; she washed herself before drinking, and she never would wash in
salt water. It made her hair so unbecoming.

Cradock followed up that stream, and found quite a tidy little brook,
when he got above the sand–ridge, full of fish, and fringed with trees,
and edged with many a quaint bright bird, scissor–bills and avosets,
demoiselles and flamingoes. Wena plunged in and went hunting blue–rats,
and birds, and fishes, while her master stooped down, and drank, and
thanked God for this discovery.

A little way up the brook he found a rude shanty, a sort of wigwam,
thatched with leaves and waterproof, backed by a low rock, but quite
open in front and at both ends. Under the shelter were blocks of ebony,
billets of bar–wood piled up to the roof, a dozen tusks of ivory, bales
of dried bark, and piles of rough cylinders full of caoutchouc, and
many other things which Cradock could not wait to examine. But he felt
quite certain that this must be some traderʼs depôt for shipping: the
only thing that surprised him was that the goods were left unprotected.
For he knew that the West Africans are the biggest thieves in the
world, while he did not understand the virtue of the hideous great
Fetich, hanging there.

It was made of a long dried codfish, with glass eyes, ground in the
iris, and polished again in the pupil, and a glaring stripe of red
over them, and the neck of a bottle fixed as for a tongue, and the
body skewered open and painted bright blue, ribbed with white, like a
skeleton, and the tail prolonged with two spinal columns, which rattled
as it went round. The effect of the whole was greatly increased by the
tattered cage of crinoline in which it was suspended, and which went
creaking round, now and then, in the opposite direction.

No nigger would dare to steal anything from such a noble idol. At least
so thought the Yankee trader who knew a thing or two about them. He had
left his things here in perfect faith, while he was travelling towards
the Gaboon, to complete his cargo.

Cradock was greatly astounded. He thought that it must be a white
manʼs work; and soon he became quite certain, for he saw near a cask
the clear mark of a boot, of civilized make, unquestionably. Then he
prized out the head of the cask, after a deal of trouble, and found a
store of ship–biscuit, a little the worse for weevil, but in very fair
condition. He gave Wena one, but she would not touch it, for she set
much store by her teeth, and had eaten a noble breakfast.

Having made a rough examination of the deserted shed, and found no
sort of clothing—which did not vex him much, except that he wanted
shoes—he resolved to continue the circuit of his new dominions, and
look out perhaps for another hut. He might meet a man at any time; so
he carried his big stick ready, though none but cannibals could have
any good reason to hurt him. As he went on, and struck inland to cut
off the northern promontory, the lie of the land and the look of the
woods brought to his mind more clearly and brightly his own beloved
New Forest. He saw no quadruped larger than a beautiful little deer,
lighter than a gazelle, and of a species quite unknown to him. They
stood and looked at him prettily, without either fear or defiance,
and Wena wanted to hunt them. But he did not allow her to indulge that
evil inclination. He had made up his mind to destroy nothing, even
for his own subsistence, except the cold–blooded creatures which seem
to feel less of the death–pang. But he saw a foul snake, with a flat
heavy head, which hissed at and frightened the doggie, and he felt sure
that it was venomous: monkeys also of three varieties met him in his
pilgrimage, and seemed disposed to be sociable; while birds of every
tint and plumage fluttered, and flashed, and flitted. Then Wena ran up
to him howling, and limping, and begging for help; and he found her
clutched by the seed–vessels of the terrible uncaria. He could scarcely
manage to get them off, for they seemed to be crawling upon her.

When he had made nearly half his circuit, without any other
discovery—except that the grapes were worthless—the heat of the noonday
sun grew so strong, although it was autumn there—so far as they have
any autumn—that Cradock lay down in the shade of a plantain; and, in a
few seconds afterwards, was fast asleep and dreaming. Wena sat up on
guard and snapped at the nasty poisonous flies, which came to annoy her
master.

How heavenly tropical life would be, in a beautiful country like that,
but for those infernal insects! The mosquito, for instance,—and he is
an angel, compared to some of those Beelzebubs,—must have made Adam
swear at Eve, even before the fall. And then those awful spiders,
whose hair tickles a man to madness, even if he survives the horror of
seeing such devils. And then the tampan—but let us drop the subject,
please, for fear of not sleeping to–night. Cradock awoke in furious
pain, and spasms most unphilosophical. He had dreamed that he was
playing football upon Cowley Green, and had kicked out nobly with his
right foot into a marching line of red ants. Immediately they swarmed
upon him, up him, over him, into him, biting with wild virulence, and
twisting their heads and nippers round in every wound to exasperate
it. Wena was rolling and yelling, for they attacked her too. Cradock
thought they would kill him; although he did not know that even the
python succumbs to them. He was as red all over, inside his clothes
and outside, as if you had winnowed over him a bushel of fine rouge.
Dancing, and stamping, and recalling, with heartfelt satisfaction, some
strong words learned at Oxford, he caught up Wena, and away they went,
two solid lumps of ants, headlong into the sea. Luckily he had not far
to go; he lay down and rolled himself, clothes and all, and rolled poor
Wena too in the waves, until he had the intense delight of knowing that
he had drowned a million of them. Ah! and just now he had made up his
mind to respect every form of life so.

Oh, but I defy any fellow, even the sage Archbishop who reads novels to
stop other people, to have lectured us under the circumstances, or to
have kept his oaths in, with those twenty thousand holes in him. The
salt water went into Cradockʼs holes, and made him feel like a Cayenne
peppercastor; and the little dog sat in the froth of the sea, and
thought that even dogs are allowed a hell.

After that there was nothing to do, except to go home mournfully—if a
tree may be called a home, as no doubt it deserves to be—and then to
dry the clothes, and wish that the wearer knew something of botany.
Cradock had no doubt at all that around him grew whole stacks of leaves
which would salve and soothe his desperate pain; but he had not the
least idea which were balm and which were poison. How he wished that,
instead of reading so hard for the scholarship of Dean Ireland, he
had kept his eyes open in the New Forest, and learned just Natureʼs
rudiments! Of course he would have other leaves to deal with; but
certain main laws and principles hold good all the world over. Bob
Garnet would have been quite at home, though he had never seen one of
those plants before.

We cannot follow him, day by day. It is too late in the tale for that,
even if we wished it. Enough that he found no other trace of man
upon the island, except the traderʼs hut, or store, with the hideous
scarecrow hanging, and signs of human labour, in the growth of some
few trees—about which he knew nothing—and in a rough piece of ground
near the shanty, cleared for a kitchen–garden. Cassavas, and yams, and
kiobos, and pea–nuts, and some other things, grew there; which, as he
made nothing of them, we must treat likewise. There had even been some
cotton sown, but the soil seemed not to suit it. It was meant, perhaps,
by the keen American, who thought himself lord of the island, for a
little random experiment.

When would he come back? That was the question Cradock asked, both
of himself and Wena, twenty times a day. Of course poor Cradock knew
not whether his lord of the manor were a Yankee or a Britisher, a
Portuguese or a Dutchman; “Thebis nutritus an Argis.” Only he supposed
and hoped that a white man came to that island sometimes, and brought
other white men with him.

By this time, he had cut a winding staircase up the walls of his
castle, and added a great many rough devices to his rugged interior.
Twice every day he clomb his tree, to seek all round the horizon; and
at one time he saw a sail in the distance, making perhaps for Loanda.
But that ship was even outside the expansive margin of hope. And now he
divided his time between his grand mowana citadel and the storehouse,
with whose contents he did not like to meddle much, because they were
not his property.

There he placed the shipʼs hydropult, which he had found lying on the
beach; for the mate had brought it to meet the chance of finding
shallow water, where the casks could not be stooped or the water
bailed without fouling it; and the boatʼs crew, in their rush and
flurry, had managed to leave it behind them. Cradock left it in the
storehouse, because it was useless to him where he had no water, and
it amused him sometimes to syringe Wena from the brook which flowed
hard by. Moreover, he thought that if anything happened to prevent
him from explaining things, the owner of the place, whoever he might
be, would find in that implement more than the value of the biscuits
which Cradock was eating, and getting on nicely with them, because they
corrected the richness of turtle.

Truly, his diet was glorious, both in quality and variety; and he
very soon became quite a pomarian Apicius. Of all fruits, perhaps the
mangosteen (_Garcinia mangostana_) is the most delicious, when you get
the right sort of it—which I donʼt think they have in Brazil—neither
is the lee chee a gift to be despised, nor the chirimoya, and several
others of the Annona race; some of the Granadillas, too, and the
sweet lime, and the plantains, and many another fount of beauty and
delight—all of which, by skill and care, might be raised in this
country, where we seem to rest content with our meagre hothouse
catalogue.

I do not say that all these fruits were natives of “Pomona Island,” as
Cradock, appreciating its desserts, took the liberty of naming it; but
most of them were discoverable in one part or another of it; some born
from the breast of nature, others borne by man or tide. And almost all
of them still would be greatly improved by cultivation.

So the head gardener of the island, who left the sun to garden for
him, enjoyed their exquisite coolness, and wondered how they could be
so cool in the torrid sunshine; and though he did not know the name of
one in fifty of them, he found out wonderfully soon which of them were
the nicest. And soon he discovered another means of varying his diet,
for he remembered having read that often, in such lonely waters, the
swarming fish will leap on board of a boat floating down the river.
Thereupon he made himself a broad flat tray of bark, with a shallow
ledge around it, and holding a tow–rope, made also of bark, launched
it upon the brook. Immediately a vast commotion arose among the finny
ones; they hustled, and huddled, and darted about, and then paddled
gravely and stared at it. Then, whether from confusion of mind, or the
reproaches of their comrades, or the desire of novelty, half a dozen
fine fellows made a rush, and carried the ship by boarding. Whereupon
Cradock, laughing heartily, drew his barge ashore, and soon Wena and
himself were deep in a discussion ichthyological.

As may well be supposed, the pure sea breezes and wholesome diet, the
peace and plenty, and motherly influence of nature, the due exercise
of the body, without undue stagnation of mind, the pleasure of finding
knowledge expand every day, stomachically, while body and mind were
girded alike, and the heart impressed with the diamond–studded belt of
hope—all this, we may well suppose, was beginning to try severely the
nasal joints of incessant woe.




CHAPTER XII.


But Pomona Island, now and then, had its own little cares and
anxieties. How much longer was Cradock Nowell to live upon fruit, and
fish, and turtle, with ship–biscuit for dessert? When would the trader
come for his goods, or had he quite forgotten them? What would Amy and
Uncle John think, if the _Taprobane_ went home without him? And the
snakes, the snakes, that cared not a rap for the enmity of man, since
the rainy season set in, but came almost up to be roasted! And worst of
all and most terrible thing, Crad was obliged to go about barefooted,
while the thorns were of natureʼs invention, and went every way all at
once, like a hedgehog upon a frying–pan.

For that last evil he found a cure before he had hopped many hundred
yards. He discovered a pumpkin about a foot long, pointed, and with
a horny rind, and contracted towards the middle. He sliced this
lengthwise, and took out the seeds, and planted his naked foot there.
The coolness was most delicious, and a few strips of baobab bark made a
first–rate shoe of it. He wore out one pair every day, and two when he
went exploring; but what did that matter, unless the supply failed? and
he kept some hung up for emergency.

As to the snakes, though he did not find out the snake–wood, or the
snake–stone, or the fungoid substance, like a morel, which pumices up
the venom; he invented something much better, as prevention is better
than cure. He discovered a species of aspalathus, perfectly smooth near
the root, and not very hard to pull up, yet so barbed, and toothed, and
fanged upon all except the seed–leaves, that even a python—whereof he
had none—could scarcely have got through it. Of this he strewed a ring
all round his great mowana–tree, and then a fenced path down the valley
toward his bathing–place, and then he defied the whole of that genus so
closely akin to the devil.

But Wena had saved his life ere this from one of those slimy demons. Of
course we know how hateful it is to hate anything at all, except sin
and crime in the abstract; but I do hope a fellow may be forgiven for
hating snakes and scorpions. At any rate, if he cannot be, he ought to
be able to help it. While Cradock was making his fence aspalathine,
and before he had finished the ring yet, a little snake about two feet
long, semi–transparent, and jellified, of a dirty bottle–green colour,
like the caterpillar known as the pear–leech (_Selandria Æthiops_),
only some hundreds of sizes bigger, that loathsome reptile sneaked in
through and crouched in a corner, while Cradock thought that he smelled
something very nasty, as he smoked a pipe of the traderʼs tobacco,
before turning into his locker.

He had cut himself a good broad coving from the inside of the
mowana–tree, about three feet from the ground, fitted up with a flap
and a pillow–place, and strewn with fresh plantain–leaves. Across the
niche he had fastened a new mosquito net, borrowed from his friend
the trader, whose goods he began to look upon now as placed under his
trusteeship. And in that rude couch he slept as snugly, after a hard
dayʼs work, as the pupa does of the goat moth, or of the giant sirex.
Under his feet was Wenaʼs hole, wherein she crouched like a rabbit,
and pricked her ears every now and then, and barked if ever the wind
moaned. _Fortunatos nimium_; there was nobody to rogue them.

And yet no sooner was Craddy asleep, upon the night I am telling of,
than that dirty bottle–green snake, flat–headed, and with a yearʼs
supply of venom in its tooth–bag, came wriggling on its dappled
belly around the hollow ring, while the dying embers of the fire—for
the night was rather chilly and wet, and Cradock had cooked some
fish—showed the mean sneak, poking its head up, feeling the temper of
the time, ready to wriggle to anything. Then it came to the bedposts of
Cradockʼs couch, which he had cut, in a dry sort of humour, from the
soft baobab wood. It lifted its head, and heard him snoring, and tapped
its tail, and listened again. Very likely it was warm up there, and the
snake was a little chilly, in this depth of the winter. So without any
evil forethought—for I must be just, even to a snake—though ready to
bite, at a move or a turn, of the animal known as “man,” up went that
little serpent, cleverly and elegantly, as on a Bohemian vase. Cradock
would have died in two hours after that snake had bitten him. But
before that lissom coil of death had got all its tail off the ground,
fangs as keen as its own, though not poisonous, had it by the nape of
the neck. Wena knew a snake by this time, and could treat them aright.
She gave the devilish miscreant not a chance to twist upon her, but
tore him from his belly–hold, and walked pleasantly to the fire, and
with a spit of execration threw him into it, and ran back, and then ran
to again, and barked at the noise he made in fizzing. Therewith Cradock
awoke, and got out of bed, and saw the past danger, and coaxed the
little dog, and kissed her, and talked to her about Amy, whose name she
knew quite as well as her own.

After all his works were finished, and when he hardly knew what great
public improvement he should next attempt, Cradock received visitors,
unexpected and unfashionable. In fact, they were all stark naked;
although that proves very little. Climbing his tree, one beautiful
morning, he saw four or five little marks on the sea, as of so many
housemaidsʼ thumbs, when the cheek of the grate has been polished.
Staring thereat with all his eyes—as we loosely express it—he found
that the thumb–marks got bigger and bigger, until they became long
canoes, paddling, like good ones, towards him.

This was not not by any means the sort of thing he had bargained for;
and he became, to state the matter mildly, most decidedly nervous.
He saw that there were invading him five great double canoes, each
containing ten or twelve men; and he had no gun, nor a pinch of powder.
Very likely they were cannibals, and would roast him slowly, to brown
him nicely, and then serve up Wena for garnish. He shook so up there
among the rough branches—for he did not so very much mind, being
killed, but he could not bear to be eaten—that Wena began to howl down
below, and he was obliged to come down to quiet her.

Then he tied up black Wena, and muzzled her, to her immense
indignation, with a capistrum of mowana bark, which quite foreclosed
her own, and then he crept warily through the woods to observe his
black brethrenʼs proceedings. They were very near the shore by this
time, and making straight for the traderʼs hut, of which they had
doubtless received some account. Cradock felt his courage rising,
and therewith some indignation, for he knew that the goods could not
be theirs, and by this time he considered himself in commission as
supercargo. So he resolved to save the store from pillage, if it were
possible, even at the risk of his life.

For this purpose he lay down in a hollow place by the water–side, where
he could just see over the tide–bank without much fear of discovery,
at least, till the robbers had passed the shed, which, of course,
was their principal object. It was evidently a king of men who stood
at the prow of the foremost canoe, with a javelin in his great black
hand, poised and ready for casting. His apparel consisted of two great
ear–drops, two rings upon his right wrist, and one below either knee;
also a chain of teeth was dangling down his brawny bosom. He was
painted red, and polished highly, which had to be done every morning;
and he looked as dignified and more powerful than a don or dean. One
man in each boat was painted and polished—doubtless the sign of high
rank and great birth.

When the bottom of the double canoe grated upon the beach, the negro
king flung back his strong arm, and cast at the shed his javelin. It
passed through the roof and buried itself in the body of the fetich,
which swung horribly to and fro, while the crinoline moved round
it. Hereupon a yell arose from the invading flotilla, and every man
trembled, waiting to see what would come of such an impiety. Finding
that nothing at all ensued, for Cradock had not the presence of mind
to advance at the moment, they gave another yell and landed, washing a
great deal of red from their legs. But the king was brought ashore,
dry and bright, sitting on some officers’ shoulders. Then they came up
the bank, without any order, but each with his javelin ready, and his
eyes intent on the idol. How Cradock longed for a piece of packthread,
to have set the dried codfish dancing!

At last they came quite up to the shed, and held a consultation, in
which it seemed the better counsel to allow the god, who looked ever
so much more awful now they were near him, a certain time to vindicate
himself, if he possessed the power to do so. Cradock was watching them
closely, through a tussock of long sea–grass, and, in spite of their
powerful frames and elastic carriage, he began to despise them in the
wholesale Britannic manner. They should not steal _his_ property, that
he was quite resolved upon, although there were fifty of them. They
were so near to him now that he could see their great white teeth, and
hear them snapping as they talked.

When the time allowed, which their Agamemnon was telling upon his
fingers, had quite expired, and Olympian Jove had sent as yet no
lightnings, the king, who was clearly in front of his age, cast
another javelin through the frame of crinoline, and leaped boldly,
like Patroclus, following his dart. Suddenly he fell back, howling
and yelling, cured for ever of scepticism, and with both his great
eyes quite slewed up, and all his virtue in his heels. Away went every
nigger, drowning the royal screams with their own, pell–mell down the
beach, anyhow, only caring to cut hawser. Words like these came back
to Cradock, as they rolled over one another—

“Mbongo, pongo; warakai, urelwäi;” which mean, as interpreted
afterwards by the Yankee trader,

“He is a God, a great God; he maketh rain, yea, very great rain!”

Headlong they tumbled into their boats, not stopping to carry the king
even, for which he kicked them heartily, as soon as he got on board,
and every son of a woman of them plied his knotted arms at the paddle,
as if grim Death was behind him.

Cradock laughed so heartily, that he rolled over with the hydropult
on him, and threw his heels up in the air, and if they had not yelled
so, they would have been sure to hear him. Very skilfully he had
brought the nose of that noble engine to bear full upon the royal
countenance, and the jet of water from the little stream passed through
the ribs of the fetich. That god had asserted himself to such purpose,
that henceforth you might hang him with beads, and give him a wig of
tobacco, and no black man would dare to look at them.

Cradock Nowell felt almost too proud of his mighty volunteer movement,
and began to think more than ever that the whole of the island was his.
These things show, more than anything else can, his return to human
reason; for of the rational human being—as discovered ordinarily—the
very first instinct and ambition is the ownership of a peculium. What
man cannot sympathize with that feeling who has got three fields and
six children? Therefore when a beautiful schooner, of the true American
rig, which made such lagging neddies of our yachts a few years since,
came into view one afternoon, and fetched up, with the sails all
shaking in the wind, abreast of the shed, ere sun–down, Cradock felt
like the owner of a house who sees a man at his gate. Then he came down
quietly with Wena, and sat upon a barrel, with a pipe of Cavendish in
his mouth, and Wena crouched, like a chrysalis, between his pumpkinʼd
feet.

Even the Yankee, who had not been surprised at any incident of life
since his nurse dropped him down an oil–well, when he was two years
old, even he experienced some sensation, when he saw a white man
sitting and smoking upon his barrel of knowingest notions, with a black
dog at his feet. But Recklesome Young was not the man to be long taken
aback.

“Darn me, but yoo are a cool hand. Britisher, for ten dollars. Never
see none like ‘em, I donʼt.”

“You are right,” answered Cradock, “I am an Englishman. Very much at
your service. What is your business upon my island?”

“Waal,” said the Yankee, turning round to the four men who had rowed
him ashore; “Zebedee, this is just what I likes, and no mistark about
it. One of them old islanders come to dispute possession. And perhaps
a cannon up the hill, and a company of sojers. Ainʼt it good, Zeb,
ainʼt it? Lor, how I do love them!”

“Now, donʼt be too premature,” said Cradock, “it is the fault of your
nation, as the opposite is ours.”

“Darned well said, young Britisher, give us your hand’ upon it; for,
arter all, I likes yoo.”

Cradock shook hands with him heartily, for there was something in
the manʼs face and manner, when you let his chaff drift by, which an
Englishman recognises, as kindly, strong, and sincere, although now and
then contemptuous. The contempt alone is not genuine, but assumed to
meet ours or anybodyʼs. The active, for fear of the passive voice.

“You are welcome to all the island,” said Cradock, “and all my
improvements, if you will only take me home again. The whole of it
belongs to me, no doubt; but I will make it all over to you, for a
passage to Southampton.”

“Canʼt take you that way, young Boss, and donʼt want your legal
writings. How come you here, to begin with?”

Cradock told him all his story, while the men were busy; and the keen
American saw at once that every word was true.

“Strikes me,” he said, with a serious drawl, which the fun in his eyes
contradicted, “that yoo, after the way of the British, have made a
trifle free, young man, with some of my goods and chattels he–ar; and
even yoor encro–aching country canʼt prove tittle to them.”

“Yes,” replied Cradock; “and I will pay you, if I have not done so
already. I will give you the thing which has saved the whole from
plunder, and perhaps fire afterwards.”

Then he fetched the little machine, which the Yankee recognised at once
as an American invention, and he laughed till his yellow cheeks were
reeking at the description of the “darned naygursʼ retreat.”

“Rip me up, young man,” he said, “but yooʼd be a credit to us aʼmost.
Darnʼd if I thought as any Britisher wud ever be up to so cute a dodge.
Shake hands agin, young chap, I likes yoo. And yooʼve airned your
ticket anywhor, and a hunderd dollars to back of it. Weʼll take yoo to
the centre of the univarsal world, and make yoo open your eyes a bit.
Ship aboard of us for Noo Yerk, and if that donʼt make a man of yoo,
call me small pumpkins arterwards.”

“But I want to get to England,” said Cradock, looking very black; “and
I have no money for passage from New York to Southampton.”

“Thur now, yoo be all over a Britisher agin, and reck–wirin
enlightʼment. Yoo allays spies out fifty raisons agin a thin’ smarter
than one in itʼs favior. Harken, now, Iʼll have yoo sot down in the
docks of Suthanton, free, and with fifty dollars to trade upon, sure as
my name is Recklesome Young. Thur, now! Bet, I donʼt, will yoo, and
pay me out o’ my spisshy?”

Not to dwell too long upon these little side–paths, it is enough to
record that Captain Recklesome Young, of New York, and the schooner,
_Donʼt you wish you may catch me_, made sail two days afterwards, with
half of his best cabin allotted to Cradock and to Wena. And, keen as
he was to the shave of a girlʼs lip, in striking a contract or cutting
it, upon a large scale, he came down as nobly as the angels on Jacobʼs
ladder. No English duke or prince of the blood could or would have
behaved to Cradock more grandly than Recklesome Young did, when once he
understood him. In such things the Yankees are far ahead of us. Keen as
they are, and for that same reason, they have far more trust than we
have, in large and good human nature. Of the best of them I have heard
many a true tale, such as I never could hope to hear of our noblest
London merchants. Proofs of grand faith, and Godlike confidence in a
man once approved, which enlarge the heart of him who hears them, and
makes him hate small satire.




CHAPTER XIII.


Bob Garnet, with his trowel, and box, and net, and many other
impediments, was going along very merrily, in a quiet path of the
Forest, thinking sometimes of Amy and her fundamental errors, and
sometimes of Eoa, and the way she could catch a butterfly, but for the
most part busy with the display of life around him, and the prospects
of a great boring family, which he had found in a willow–tree.
Suddenly, near the stag–headed oak, he chanced upon Miss Nowell,
tripping along the footpath lightly, smiling and blushing rosily,
and oh! so surprised to see him! She darted aside, like a trout at a
shadow, then, finding it too late for that game, she tried to pass him
rapidly, with her long eyelashes drooping.

“Oh, please to stop a minute, if you can spare the time,” said Bob;
“what have I done to offend you?”

She stopped in a moment at his voice, and lifted her radiant eyes to
him, and shyly tried to cloud away the sparkling night of hair, through
which her white and slender throat gleamed like the Milky Way. The
sprays of the wood and the winds of May had romped with her glorious
tresses; and now she had been lectured so, that she doubted her right
to exhibit her hair.

“Miss Nowell,” said Bob, as she had not answered, but only been
thinking about him, “only please to stop and tell me what I have done
to offend you; and you do love beetles so—and you never saw such
beauties—what have I done to offend you?”

An English maiden would have said, “Oh, nothing at all, Mr. Garnet;”
and then swept on, with her crinoline embracing a thousand brambles.

But Eoa stood just where she was, with her bright lips pouting
slightly, and her gaze absorbed by a tuft of moss.

“Only because you are not at all good–natured to me, Bob. But it
doesnʼt make much difference.”

Then she turned away from him, and began to sing a little song, and
then called, “Amy, Amy!”

“Donʼt call Amy. I donʼt want her.”

“Oh, I beg your pardon, Iʼm sure I rather thought you did.”

“Eoa,” said Bob; and she looked at him, and the tears were in her eyes.
And then she whispered, “Yes, Bob.”

“You have got on the very prettiest dress I ever saw in all my life.”

Here Bob was alarmed at his own audacity, and durst not watch the
effect of his speech.

“Oh, is that all?” she answered. “But I am very glad indeed that you
like—my frock, Bob.” Here she looked down at it, with much interest.

“And, to tell you the truth,” continued he, “I think, if you will
please not to be offended, that you look very well in it.”

“Oh yes, I am very well. I wish I was ill, sometimes.”

“Now, I donʼt mean that. What I mean is, very nice.”

“Well, I always try to be nice. But how can I, out butterfly–hunting?”

“Now, you wonʼt understand me. You are as bad as a weevil that wonʼt
take chloroform. What I mean is, very pretty.”

“I donʼt know anything about that,” said Eoa, drawing back; “and I
donʼt see that you have any right even to talk about it. Oh, there goes
a lovely butterfly!”

“Where, where? What eyes you have got! I do wish I was married to you.
What a collection we would have! And you would never let my traps off.
I am sure that you are a great deal better and prettier than Amy. And I
like you more than anybody I have ever seen.”

“Do you, Bob? Are you sure of that?”

She fixed her large eyes upon his; and in one moment her beauty went
to the bottom of his heart. It changed him from a boy to a man, from
play to passion, from dreams to thought. And happy for him that it was
so, with the trouble impending over him.

She saw the change; herself too young, too pure (in spite of all the
evil that ever had drifted by her) to know or ask what it meant. She
only felt that Bob liked her now better than he liked Amy. She had no
idea of the deep anticipation of her eyes.

“Eoa, wonʼt you answer me?” He had been talking some nonsense. “Why are
you crying so dreadfully? Do you hate me so much as all that?”

“Oh no, no, Bob. I am sure I donʼt hate you at all. I only wish I did.
No, I donʼt, Bob. I am so glad that I donʼt. I donʼt care a quarter so
much, Bob, for all the rest of the world put together.”

“Then only look up at me, Eoa. I canʼt tell what I am saying. Only look
up. You are so nice. And you have got such eyes.”

“Have I?” said Eoa, throwing all their splendour on him; “oh, I am so
glad you like them.”

“Do you think that you could give me just a sort of a kiss, Eoa? People
always do, you know. And, indeed, I feel that you ought.”

“I scarcely know what is right, Bob, after all the things they have
told me. But now, you know, you must guide me.”

“Then, Iʼll tell you what. Just let me give you one. The leaves are
coming out so.”

“Well, thatʼs a different thing,” said Eoa. “Amy canʼt see us, can she?”

Sir Cradock Nowell was very angry when his niece came home, and told
him, with an air of triumph, all that Bob had said to her.

“That butterfly–hunting boy, Eoa! To think of his presuming so! A mere
boy! A boy like that!”

“Thatʼs the very thing, uncle. Perhaps if he had been a girl, you
know, I should not have liked him half so much. And as for his hunting
butterflies, I like him all the better for that. And weʼll hunt them
all day long.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Uncle Cradock, smiling at the young girlʼs earnestness
in spite of all his wrath; “that is your idea of married life then, is
it? But I never will allow it, Eoa: he is not your equal.”

“Of course not, uncle. He is my superior in every possible way.”

“Scarcely so, in the matter of birth; nor yet, my child, I fear, in a
pecuniary sense.”

“For both of those I donʼt care two pice. You know it is all very nice,
Uncle Cradock, to live in large rooms, where you can put three chairs
together, and jump over them all without knocking your head, and to
have beautiful books, and prawns for breakfast, and flowers all the
year round; and to be able to scold people without their daring to
answer. But I could do without all that very well, but I never could do
without Bob.”

“I fear you must, indeed, my dear. As other people have had to do.”

“Well, I donʼt see why, unless God takes him; and then He should take
me too. And, indeed, I had better tell you once for all, Uncle Cradock,
that I do not mean to try. It would be so shabby of me, after what I
told him just now, and after his saving my life; and you yourself said
yesterday that no Nowell had ever been shabby. You have been very kind
to me and good, and I love you very much, I am sure. But in spite of
all that, I wish you clearly to understand, Uncle Cradock, that if you
try any nonsense with me, I shall get my darling fatherʼs money, and go
and live away from you.”

“My dear,” said the old man, smiling at the manner and tone of
her menace, which she delivered as if her departure must at least
annihilate him, “you are laying your plans too rapidly. You are not
seventeen until next July; and you cannot touch your poor fatherʼs
money until you are twenty–one.”

“I donʼt care,” she replied; “he is sure to have been right about it.
But I will tell you another thing. Everybody says that I could earn ten
thousand a year as an opera–dancer in London. And I should like it very
much,—that is to say, if Bob did. And I would not think of changing
my name, as I have heard that most of them do. I should be ‘Miss Eoa
Nowell, the celebrated dancer.’”

“God forbid!” said Sir Cradock. “My only brotherʼs only child! I will
not trouble you about him, dear. Only I beg you to consider.”

“To be sure I will, Uncle Cradock, I have been considering ever since
how long it must be till I marry him. Now give me a kiss, dear, and I
wonʼt dance, except for your amusement. And I donʼt think I can dance
for a long time, after what I have been told about poor Cousin Cradock.
I am sure he was very nice, uncle, from what everybody says of him, and
I am almost certain that you behaved very badly to him.”

“My dear, you are allowed to say what you like, because nobody can stop
you. But your own good feeling should make you spare me the pain of
that sad subject.”

“Not if you deserve the pain for having been hard–hearted. And much you
cared for my pain, when you spoke of Bob so. Besides, you are quite
sure to hear of it; and it had better come from me, dear uncle, who am
so considerate.”

“Something new? What is it, my child? I can bear almost anything now.”

“It is that some vile wretches are trying to get what they call a
warrant against him, and so to put him in jail.”

“Put him in jail? My unfortunate son! What more has he been doing?”

“Nothing at all. And I donʼt believe that he ever did any harm. But
what the brutes say is that he did that terrible thing on purpose. Oh,
uncle, donʼt look at me like that. How I wish I had never told you!”

Poor Sir Cradockʼs mind was not so clear and strong as it had been,
although the rumours scattered by Georgie were shameful exaggerations.
The habit of brooding over his grief, whenever he was alone—a habit
more and more indulged, as it became a morbid pleasure—the loss
moreover of his accustomed exercise, for he never would go out riding
now, having no son to ride with him; these, and the ever–present dread
of some inevitable inquiry, began to disturb, though not destroy, the
delicate fibres of reason, which had not too much room in his brain.

He fell into the depths of an easy–chair, and wondered what it was he
had heard. The lids of his mindʼs eye had taken a blink, as will happen
sometimes to old people, and to young ones too for that matter; neither
was it the first time this thing had befallen him.

Then Eoa told him again what it was, because he made her tell it; and
again it shocked him dreadfully; but that time he remembered it.

“And I have no doubt,” continued his niece, with bright tears on her
cheeks, “that Mrs. Corklemore herself is at the bottom of it.”

“Georgie! What, my niece Georgie!”

“She is not your niece, Uncle Cradock. I am your niece, and nobody
else; and you had better not think of wronging me. If you call her your
niece any more, I know I will never call you my uncle. Nasty limy slimy
thing! If you would only give me leave to choke her!”

“My darling child,” cried her uncle, who loved her the more (though
he knew it not) for siding with his son so, “you are so very hot and
hasty. I am sure Mrs. Corklemore speaks of you with the warmest pity
and affection.”

“Shall I tell you why she does, Uncle Crad? Shall I tell you in plain
English? Most likely you will be shocked, you know.”

“My dear, I am so used to you, that I am never shocked now at anything.”

“Then it is because she is _such a jolly liar_.”

“Eoa, I really must send you to a ‘nice institution for young ladies.’
You get worse and worse.”

“If you do, Iʼll jump over the wall the first night, and Bob shall come
to catch me. But now without any nonsense, uncle, for you do talk a
good deal of nonsense, will you promise me one thing?”

“A dozen, if you like, my darling. Anything in reason. You did look so
like your poor father then.”

“Oh, I am so glad of that. But it is not a thing of reason, uncle; it
is simply a thing of justice. Now will you promise solemnly to send
away Mrs. Corklemore, and never speak to her again, if she vows that
she knows nothing of this, and if I prove from her own handwriting that
it is her plot altogether, and also another plot against us, every bit
as bad, if not worse?”

“Of course, Eoa, I will promise you that, as solemnly as you please.
What a deluded child you are!”

“Am I? Now let her come in, and deny it. Thatʼs the first part of the
business.”

Without waiting for an answer, she ran to fetch Mrs. Corklemore, whom
she well knew where to find, that time of the afternoon. Dear Georgie
had just had her cup of tea with the darling Flore, in her private
audience–chamber—”oratory” she called it, though all her few prayers
were public; and now she was meditating what dress she should wear at
dinner. Those dinners were so dreadfully dull, unless she could put Eoa
into a vehement passion—which was not very hard to do—and so exhibit
her in a pleasant light before the serving–men. Yet, strange to say,
although the young lady observed little moderation, when she was baited
thus, and sunk irony in invective, the sympathies of the audience were
far more often on her side than on that of the soft tormentor.

“Come, now, Sugar–plums,” said Eoa, who often addressed her so, “we
want you down–stairs, if you please, for a minute.”

“Tum, pease, Oh Ah,” cried little Flore, running up; “pease tum, and
tell Fore a tory.”

“Canʼt now, you good little child. And your mamma tells stories so
cleverly, oh, so very cleverly, it quite takes away oneʼs breath.”

“Iʼll have my change out of you at dinner–time,” said Georgie to
herself most viciously, as she followed down the passage.

Eoa led her along at a pace which made her breath quite short, for she
was not wont to hurry so, and she dropped right gladly into the chair
which Sir Cradock politely set for her. Then, as he himself sat down,
facing her with a heavy sigh, Georgie felt rather uncomfortable. She
was not quite ready for the crisis, but feared that it was coming. And
she saw at a glimpse that her hated foe, “Never–spot–the–dust,” was
quite ready, burning indeed to begin, only wanting to make the most of
it. Thereupon Mrs. Corklemore, knowing the value of the weather–gage,
and being unable to bear a slow silence, was the first to speak.

“Something has occurred, I see, to one of you two dear ones. Oh, Uncle
Cradock, what can I do to prove the depth of my regard for you? Or——”

“To be sure, _the depth_ of your regard,” Eoa interrupted.

“Or is it for you, you poor wild thing? We all make such allowance for
you, because of your great disadvantages. If you have done anything
very wrong indeed, poor darling, anything which hard people would call
not only thoughtless but unprincipled, I can feel for you so truly,
because of your hot temperament and most unhappy circumstances.”

“You had better not go too far!” cried Eoa, grinding her little teeth.

“Thank Heaven! I see, dear, it is nothing so very disgraceful after
all, because it has nothing to do with you, or you would not smile so
prettily. You take it so lightly, it must be something about dear Uncle
Cradock. Oh, Uncle Cradock, tell me all about it; my whole heart will
be with you.”

“Black–spangled hen has broken her eggs. Nothing more,” said Eoa.
“De–ar, oh we do love you so!” She made two syllables of that word, as
Mrs. Corklemore used to do, in her many gushing moments. Georgie looked
at Eoa with wonder. She had stupidly thought her a stupid.

Then Sir Cradock Nowell rose, in a stately manner, to put an end to all
this little nonsense.

“My niece, Eoa, declares, Mrs. Corklemore, that you, in some underhand
manner, have promoted a horrible charge against my poor son Cradock, a
charge which no person in any way connected with our family should ever
dare to utter, even if he or she believed its justice, far less dare to
promulgate, and even force into the courts of law. Is this so, or is it
not?”

“Oh, Uncle Cradock, how can you speak so? What charge should I ever
dream of?”

“See how her hands are trembling, and how white her lips are; not with
telling black lies, Uncle Cradock, but with being found out.”

“Eoa, have the kindness not to interrupt again.”

“Very well, Uncle Cradock; I wonʼt, unless you make me.”

“Then, as I understand, madam, you deny entirely the truth of this
accusation?”

“Of course I do, most emphatically. What can you all be dreaming about?”

“Now, Eoa, it is your turn to establish what you have said.”

“I canʼt establish anything, though I know it, Uncle Cradock.”

“_Know_ it indeed, you poor wild nautch–girl! _Dreamed_ it you mean, I
suppose.”

“I mean,” continued Eoa, not even looking at her, but bending her
fingers in a manner which Georgie quite understood, “that I cannot
prove anything, Uncle Cradock, without your permission. But here I have
a letter, with the seal unbroken, and which I promised some one not to
open without her leave, and now she has given me leave to open it with
your consent and in the presence of the writer. Why, how pale you are,
Mrs. Corklemore!”

“My Heavens! And this is England! Stealing letters, and forging them——”

“Which of the two do you mean, madam?” asked Sir Cradock, looking
at her in his old magisterial manner, after examining the envelope;
“either involves a heavy charge against a member of my family. Is this
letter yours, or not?”

“Yes, it is,” replied Georgie, after a momentʼs debate, for if she
called it a forgery, it must of course be opened; “have the kindness
to give me my property. I thought there was among well–bred people
a delicacy as to scrutinizing even the directions of one anotherʼs
letters.”

“So there is, madam; you are quite right—except, indeed, under
circumstances altogether exceptional, and of which this is one. Now
for your own exculpation, and to prove that my niece deserves heavy
punishment (which I will take care to inflict), allow me to open this
letter. I see it is merely a business letter, or I would not ask even
that; although you have so often assured me that you have no secret in
the world from me. You can have nothing confidential to say to ‘Simon
Chope, Esq.;’ and if you had, it should remain sacred and secure with
me, unless it involved the life and honour of my son. Shall I open this
letter?”

“Certainly not, Sir Cradock Nowell. How dare you to think of such a
thing, so mean, so low, so prying?”

“After those words, madam, you cannot continue to be a guest of mine;
or be ever received in this house again, unless you prove that I have
wronged you, by allowing me to send for your husband, and to place this
letter in his hands, before you have in any way communicated with him.”

“Give me my letter, Sir Cradock Nowell, unless your niece inherits the
thieving art from you. As for you, wretched little Dacoit,” here she
bent upon Eoa flashing eyes quite pale from wrath, for sweet Georgie
had her temper, “bitterly you shall rue the day when you presumed to
match yourself with me. You would like to do a little murder, I see.
No doubt it runs in the family; and the Thugs and Dacoits are first
cousins, of course.”

Never had Eoa fought so desperate a battle with herself, as now to keep
her hands off Georgie. Without looking at her again, she very wisely
ran away, for it was the only chance of abstaining. Mrs. Corklemore
laughed aloud; then she took the letter, which the old man had placed
upon the table, and said to him, with a kind look of pity:

“What a fuss you have made about nothing! It is only a question upon
the meaning of a clause in my marriage–settlement; but I do not choose
to have my business affairs exposed, even to my husband. Now do you
believe me, Uncle Cradock?”

“No, I cannot say that I do, madam. And it does not matter whether I
do or not. You have used language about my family which I can never
forget. A carriage will be at your service at any moment you please.”

“Thanks for your hospitable hint. You will soon find your mistake, I
think, in having made me your enemy; though your rudeness is partly
excused, no doubt, by your growing hallucinations. Farewell for the
present, poor dear Uncle Cradock.”

With these words, Mrs. Corklemore made him an elegant curtsey, and
swept away from the room, without even the glisten of a tear to mar her
gallant bearing, although she had been so outraged. But when she got
little Floreʼs head on her lap, she cried over it very vehemently, and
felt the depth of her injury.

When she had closed the door behind her (not with any vulgar bang, but
firmly and significantly), the master of the house walked over to a
panelled mirror, and inspected himself uncomfortably. It was a piece of
ancient glass, purchased from an Italian chapel by some former Cradock
Nowell, and bearing a mystic name and fame among the maids who dusted
it. By them it was supposed to have a weird prophetic power, partly, no
doubt, from its deep dark lustre, and partly because it was circular,
and ever so slightly, and quite imperceptibly, concave. As upon so
broad a surface no concavity could be, in the early ages of mechanism,
made absolutely true—and for that matter it cannot be done _ad unguem_,
even now—there were, of course, many founts of error in this Italian
mirror. Nevertheless, all young ladies who ever beheld it were charmed
with it, so sweetly deeply beautiful, like Galatea watching herself and
finding Polypheme over her shoulder, in the glass of the blue Sicilian
sea.

To this glass Sir Cradock Nowell went to examine his faded eyes,
time–worn, trouble–worn, stranded by the ebbing of the brain. He knew
too well what Mrs. Corklemore meant by her last thrust; and the word
“hallucination” happened, through a great lawsuit then in progress, to
be invested with an especial prominence and significance. While he was
sadly gazing into the convergence of grey light, and feebly reassuring
himself, yet like his image wavering, a heavy step was heard behind
him, and beside his flowing silvery locks appeared the close–cropped
massive brow and the gloomy eyes of Bull Garnet.




CHAPTER XIV.


As the brothers confronted one another, the legitimate and the
base–born, the man of tact and the man of force, the luxurious and the
labourer, strangely unlike in many respects, more strangely alike in
others; each felt kindly and tenderly, yet timidly, for the other.

The old man thought of the lying wrong inflicted upon the stronger one
by their common father; the other felt the worse wrong—if possible—done
by himself to his brother. The measure of such things is not for us.
God knows, and visits, and forgives them.

Even by the failing light—for the sun was westering, and a cloud flowed
over him—each could see that the otherʼs face was not as it should be,
that the flight of weeks was drawing age on, more than the lapse of
years should.

“Garnet, you do a great deal too much. I shall recall my urgent
request, if you look so harassed and haggard. Take a holiday now for
a month, before the midsummer rents fall due. I will try to do without
you; though I may want you any day.”

“I will do nothing of the sort; work is needful for me—without it I
should die. But you also look very unwell. You must not attempt to
prescribe for me.”

“I have not been happy lately. By–and–by things will be better. What is
your impression of Mrs. Nowell Corklemore?”

“That she is an arrant hypocrite, unscrupulous, foul, and deadly.”

“Well, that is plain speaking; by no means complimentary. Poor Georgie,
I hope you misjudge her, as she says bad people do. But for the present
she is gone. There has been a great fight, all along, between her and
Eoa; they could not bear one another. And now my niece has discovered
a thing which brings me to her side in the matter, for she at least is
genuine.”

“That she is indeed, and genuinely passionate; you may trust her with
anything. She has been very rude indeed to me; and yet I like her
wonderfully. What has she discovered?”

“That Mrs. Corklemore is at the bottom of this horrible application for
a warrant against my son.”

“I can well believe it. It struck me in a moment; though I cannot see
her object. I never understand plotting.”

“Neither do I, Garnet; I only know she has made me insult the dearest
friend I had on earth.”

“Yes, Mr. Rosedew; I heard of it, and wondered at your weakness. But it
did not become me to interfere.”

“Certainly not: most certainly not. You could not expect me to bear it.
And the Rosedews never liked you.”

“That has nothing to do with it. Very probably they are right; for I do
not like myself. And you will not dislike, but hate me, when you know
what I have to say.”

Bull Garnetʼs mind was now made up. For months he had been thinking,
forecasting, doubting, wavering—a condition of mind so strange to him,
so adrift from all his landmarks, that this alone, without sense of
guilt, must have kept him in wretchedness.

Sir Cradock Nowell only said, “Keep it for another time. I cannot bear
any more excitement; I have had so much to–day.”

Bull Garnet looked at him sorrowfully. He could not bear to see his
brother beaten so by trouble, and to feel his own hard hand in it.

“Donʼt you know what they say of me? Oh, you know what they say of me;
and nothing of the kind in the family!” The old man seemed to prove
that there was, by the vague flashing of his eyes: “Garnet, you are my
brother; after all, you are my brother. And they say I am going mad;
and I know they will try to shut me up, without a horse, or a book,
or a boy to brush my trousers. Oh, Garnet, you have been bitterly
wronged, shamefully wronged, detestably; but you will not let your own
brother—brother, who has no sons now to protect him,—be shut up, and
made nothing of? Bull Garnet, promise me this, although we have so
wronged you.”

Garnet knew not what to do. Even he was taken aback, shocked by
this sudden outburst, which partly proved what it denied. And this
altogether changed the form of the confession he was come to make—and
changed it for the better.

“My brother”—it was the first time he had ever so addressed him; not
from diffidence, but from pride—”my brother, let us look at things,
if possible, as God made them. I have been injured no doubt, and so
my mother was; blasted, both of us, for life, according to the little
ideas of this creeping world. In many cases, the thief is the rogue;
in even more, the robbed one is the only villain. Now can you take the
large view of things which is forced upon us outsiders when we dare to
think at all?”

“I cannot think now of such abstract things. My mind is astray with
trouble. Did I ever tell you your motherʼs words, when she came here
ten or twelve years ago, and demanded a share of the property? Not for
her own sake, but for yours, to get you into some business.”

“No, I never heard of it. How it must have hurt her!” Bull Garnet was
astonished; because it had long been understood that his mother should
not be spoken of.

“And me as well. I gave her a cheque for a liberal sum, as I thought.
She tore it, and threw it at me. What more could I do? Did I deserve
her curse, Garnet? Is all this trouble come upon me because I did not
obey her?”

“I believe that you meant to do exactly what was right.”

“I hope—I believe, I did. And see how wrong she was in one part of
her prediction. She said that I and my father also should be punished
through you, through you, her only son. What a mistake that has proved!
You, who are my right arm and brain; my only hope and comfort!”

The old man came up, and looked with the deepest trust and admiration
at his unacknowledged brother. A few months ago, Bull Garnet would have
taken such a look as his truest and best revenge for the cruel wrong to
his mother. But now he fell away from it, and muttered something, in a
manner quite unlike his own. His mind was made up, he was come to tell
all; but how could he do it now, and wrench the old manʼs latest hope
away?

Then suddenly he remembered, or knew from his own feelings, that an
old manʼs last hope in earthly matters should rest upon no friend
or brother, not even upon a wife, but upon his own begotten, his
successors in the world. And what he had to say, while tearing all
reliance from himself, would replace it where it should be.

Meanwhile Sir Cradock Nowell, thinking that Garnet was too grateful for
a few kind words, followed him, and placed his slender tremulous and
pure–bred hand in the useful cross–bred palm which had sent Mr. Jupp
down the coal–shaft.

“Bull, you are my very best friend. After all, we are brothers. Promise
to defend me.”

But Garnet only withdrew his hand, and sighed, and could not look at
him.

“Oh, then, even you believe it; I see you do! It must be true. God have
mercy upon me!”

“Cradock, it is a cursed lie; you must not dwell upon it. Such thoughts
are spawn of madness; turn to another subject. Just tell me what is the
greatest thing one man can do to another?”

“To love him, I suppose, Garnet. But I donʼt care much for that sort of
thing, since I lost my children.”

“Yes, it is a grand thing to love; but far grander to forgive.”

“Is it? I am glad to hear it. I always could forgive.”

“Little things, you mean, no doubt. Slights and slurs—and so forth?”

“Yes, and great things also. But I am not what I was, Bull. You know
what I have been through.”

“Can you forgive as deep a wrong as one man ever did to another?”

“Yes, I dare say. I am sure I donʼt know. What makes you look at me
like that?”

“Because I shot your son Clayton; and because I did it on purpose.”

“Viley! my boy Viley! Oh, I had forgotten. What a stupid thing of me! I
thought he was dead somehow. Now, I will open the door for him, because
his hands are full. And let him put his game on the table—never mind
the papers—he always likes me to see it. Oh, Viley, how long you have
been away! What a bag you must have made! Come in, my boy; come in.”

Bull Garnetʼs heart cleaved to his side, as the old man opened the
door, and looked, with the leaping joy of a fatherʼs love, for his pet,
his beloved, his treasured one. But nothing except cold air came in.

“The passage is empty. Perhaps he is waiting, because his boots are
dirty. Tell him not to think twice about that. I am fidgety sometimes,
I know; and I scolded him last Friday. But now he may come anyhow, if
he will only come to me. I am so dull without him.”

“You will never see him more”—Bull Garnet whispered through a flood of
tears, like grass waving out of water—”until it pleases God to take you
home, where son and father go alike; sometimes one first, sometimes
other, as His holy will is. He came to an unholy end. I tell you
again—I shot him.”

“Excuse me; I donʼt quite understand. There was a grey hare, with a
nick in her ear, who came to the breakfast–room window all through the
hard weather last winter, and he promised me not to shoot her; and I am
sure that he cannot have done it, because he is so soft–hearted, and
that is why I love him so. Talk of Cradock—talk of Cradock! Perhaps he
is cleverer than Viley—though I never will believe it—but is he half so
soft and sweet? Will the pigeons sit on his shoulder so, and the dogs
nuzzle under his coat–lap? Tell me that—tell me that—Bull Garnet.”

He leaned on the strong arm of his steward, and looked eagerly for his
answer; then trembled with an exceeding great fear, to see that he was
weeping. That such a man should weep! But Garnet forced himself to
speak.

“You cannot listen to me now; I will come again, and talk to you. God
knows the agony to me; and worst of all that it is for nothing. Yet all
of it not a thousandth part of the anguish I have caused. Perhaps it is
wisest so. Perhaps it is for my childrenʼs sake that I, who have killed
your pet child, cannot make you know it. Yet it adds to my despair,
that I have killed the father too.”

Scarcely knowing voice from silence, dazed himself, and blurred, and
giddy—so strong is contagion of the mind—Bull Garnet went to the
stables, saddled a horse without calling groom, and rode off at full
gallop to Dr. Buller. By the time he got there his business habits and
wonted fashion of thought had returned, and he put what he came for in
lucid form, tersely, crisply, dryly, as if in the world there were no
such thing as ill–regulated emotion—except on the part of other people.

“Not a bit of it,” said Dr. Buller; “his mind is as sound as yours or
mine, and his constitution excellent. He has been troubled a good deal;
but bless me—I know a man who lost his three children in a month, and
could scarcely pay for their coffins, sir. And his wife only six weeks
afterwards. That is what I call trouble, sir!”

Bull Garnet knew, from his glistening eyes, and the quivering of his
grey locks, that the man he spoke of was himself. Reassured about Sir
Cradock, yet fearing to try him further at present, Mr. Garnet went
heavily homewards, after begging Dr. Buller to call, as if by chance,
at the Hall, observe, and attend to the master.

Heavily and wearily Bull Garnet went to the home which once had been
so sweet to him, and was now beloved so painfully. The storms of earth
were closing round him, only the stars of heaven were bright. Myriad as
the forest leaves, and darkly moving in like manner, fears, and doubts,
and miseries sprang and trembled through him.

No young maid at his door to meet him lovingly and gaily. None to say,
“Oh, darling father, how hungry you must be, dear!” Only Pearl, so wan
and cold, and scared of soft affection. And as she timidly approached,
then dropped her eyes before his gaze, and took his hat submissively,
as if she had no lips to kiss, no hand to lay on his shoulder, he saw
with one quick glance that still some new grief had befallen her, that
still another trouble was come to make its home with her.

“What is it, Pearl?” he asked her, sadly; “come in here and tell me.”
He never called her his Pearly now, his little native, or pretty
pet, as he used to do in the old days. They had dropped those little
endearments.

“You will be sorry to hear it—sorry, I mean, that it happened; but I
could not have done otherwise.”

“I never hear anything, now, Pearl, but what I am sorry to hear. This
will make little difference.”

“So I suppose,” she answered. “Mr. Pell has been here to–day,
and—and—oh, father, you know what.”

“Indeed I have not been informed of anything. What do I know of Mr.
Pell?”

“More than he does of you, sir. He asked me to be his wife.”

“He is a good man. But of course you said ‘No.’”

“Of course I did. Of course, of course. What else can I ever say?”

She leaned her white cheek on the high oak mantel, and a little deep
sob came from her heart.

“Would you have liked to say ‘Yes,’ Pearl?” her father asked very
softly, going to put his arm round her waist, and then afraid to do it.

“Oh no! oh no! At least, not yet, though I respect him very highly. But
I told him that I never could, and never could tell him the reason. And
oh, I was so sorry for him—he looked so hurt and disappointed.”

“You shall tell him the reason very soon, or rather the newspapers
shall.”

“Father, donʼt say that; dear father, you are bound for our sake. I
donʼt care for him one atom, father, compared with—compared with you, I
mean. Only I thought I must tell you, because—oh, you know what I mean.
And even if I did like him, what would it matter about me? Oh, father,
I often think that I have been too hard upon you, and all of it through
me, and my vile concealment!”

“My daughter, I am not worthy of you. Would God that you could forgive
me!”

“I have done it long ago, father. Do you think a child of yours could
help it, after all your sorrow?”

“My child, look kindly at me; try to look as if you loved me.”

She turned to him with such a look as a man only gets once in his life,
and then she fell upon his neck, and forgot the world and all it
held, except her own dear father. Wrong he might have done, wrong (no
doubt) he had done; but who was she, his little child, to remember it
against him? She lay for a moment in his arms, overcome with passion,
leaning back, as she had done there, when a weanling infant. For him
it was the grandest moment of his passionate life—a fatherʼs powerful
love, ennobled by the presence of his God. Such a moment teaches us
the grandeur of our race, the traces of a higher world stamped on us
indelibly. Then we feel, and try to own, that in spite of satire,
cynicism, and the exquisite refinements of the purest selfishness,
there is, in even the sharpest and the shallowest of us, something kind
and solid, some abiding element of the all–pervading goodness.

“Now I will go through with it”—Bull Garnet was recovering—”my own
child; go and fetch your brother, if it will not be too much for you.
If you think it will, only send him.”

“Father, I will fetch him. I may be able to help you both. And now I am
so much better.”

Presently she returned with Bob, who looked rather plagued and
uncomfortable, with a great slice of cork in one hand and a bottle of
gum in the other, and a regular housewife of needles in the lappet of
his coat. He was going to mount a specimen of a variety of “devilʼs
coach–horse,” which he had never seen before, and whose tail was forked
like a trident.

“Never can let me alone,” said Bob; “just ready to begin I was; and I
am sure to spoil his thorax. He is getting stiff every moment.”

Bull Garnet looked at him brightly and gladly, even at such a time.
Little as he knew or cared about the things that crawl and hop—as he
ignorantly put it—skilled no more in natural history than our early
painters were, yet from his own strong sense he perceived that his son
had a special gift; and a special gift is genius, and may (with good
luck) climb eminence. Then he thought of what he had to tell him, and
the power of his heart was gone.

It was the terror of this moment which had dwelt with him night and
day, more than the fear of public shame, of the gallows, or of hell.
To be loathed and scorned by his only son! Oh that Pearl had not been
so true; oh that Bob suspected something, or had even found it out for
himself! Then the father felt that now came part of his expiation.

Bob looked at him quite innocently with wonder and some fear. To him
“the governor” long had been the strangest of all puzzles, sometimes so
soft and loving, sometimes so hard and terrible. Perhaps poor Bob would
catch it now for his doings with Eoa.

“Sit down there, my son. Not there, but further from me. Donʼt be at
all afraid, my boy. I have no fault to find with you. I am far luckier
in my son, than you are in your father. You must try to bear terrible
news, Bob. Your sister long has borne it.”

Pearl, who was ghastly pale and trembling, stole a glance at each of
them from the dark end of the room, then came up bravely into the
lamplight, took Bobʼs hand and kissed him, and sat close by to comfort
him.

Bull Garnet sighed from the depths of his heart. His children seemed to
be driven from him, and to crouch together in fear of him.

“It serves me right. I know that, of course. That only makes it the
worse to bear.”

“Father, what is it?” cried Bob, leaping up, and dropping his
cork–slice and gum–bottle; “whatever the matter is, father, tell me,
that I may stand by you.”

“You cannot stand by me in this. When you know what it is, you will fly
from me.”

“Will I, indeed! A likely thing. Oh, father, you think I am such a
soft, because I am fond of little things.”

“Would you stand by your father, Bob, if you knew that he was a
murderer?”

“Oh come,” said Bob, “you are drawing it a little too strong, dad. You
never could be that, you know.”

“I not only can be, but am, my son.”

Father and son looked at one another. The governor standing square and
broad, with his shoulders thrown well back, and no trace of emotion in
form or face, except that his quick wide nostrils quivered, and his
lips were white. The stripling gazing up at him, seeking for some sign
of jest, seeking for a ray of laughter in his fatherʼs eyes; too young
to comprehend the power and fury of large passion.

Ere either spoke another word—for the father was hurt at the sonʼs
delay, and the son felt all abroad in his head—between them glided
Pearl, the daughter, the sister, the gentle woman—the one most wronged
of all, and yet the quickest to forgive it.

“Darling, he did it for my sake,” she whispered to her brother, though
it cut through her heart to say it. “Father, oh father, Bob is so slow;
donʼt be angry with him. Come to me a moment, father. Oh, how I love
and honour you!”

Those last few words to the passionate man were like heaven poured into
hell. That a child of his should still honour him! He kissed her with
tenfold the love young man has for maiden; then he turned away and
wept, as if the earth was water.

Very little more was said. Pearl went away to Bob, and whispered how
the fatal grief befell; and Bob wept great tears for the sake of all,
and most of all for his fatherʼs sake. Then, as the father lay cramped
up upon the little sofa, wrestling with the power of life and the
promise of death, Bob came up, and kissed him dearly on his rugged
forehead.

“Is that you, my own dear son? God is far too good to me.”




CHAPTER XV.


That night the man of violence enjoyed the first sweet dreamless sleep
that had spread its velvet shield between him and his guilt and sorrow.
Pearl, who had sat up late with Bob, comforting and crying with him,
listened at her fatherʼs door, and heard his quiet breathing. Through
many months of trouble, now, she had watched him kindly, tenderly,
fearing ever some wild outbreak upon others or himself, hiding in her
empty heart all its desolation.

The very next day, Bull Garnet resolved to have it out with his son;
not to surprise him by emotion to a hasty issue, but now to learn what
he thought and felt, after taking his time about it. All this we need
not try to tell, only so much as bears upon the staple of the story.

“Father, I know that you had—you had good reason for doing it.”

“There could be no good reason. There might be, and were, many bad
ones. Of this I will not speak to you. I did it in violence and fury,
and under a false impression. When I saw him, with his arm cast round
my pure and darling Pearl, Satanʼs rage is but a smile compared to
the fury of my heart. He had his gun, and I had mine; I had taken it
to shoot a squirrel which meddled with our firework nonsense. I tore
her from him before I could speak, thrust her aside, stepped back two
paces, gave him ‘one, two, three,’ and fired. He had time to fire in
self–defence, and his muzzle was at my head, and his finger on the
trigger; but there it crooked, and he could not pull. Want of nerve,
I suppose. I saw his finger shaking, and then I saw him fall. Now, my
son, you know everything.”

“Why, father, after all then, it was nothing worse than a duel. He had
just the same chance of killing you, and would have done it, only you
were too quick for him.”

“Even to retain your love, I will have no lie in the matter, Bob,
although a duel, in my opinion, is only murder made game of. But this
was no duel, no manslaughter even, but an act of downright murder. No
English jury could help convicting me, and I will never plead insanity.
It was the inevitable result of inborn violence and self–will, growing
and growing from year to year, and strengthened by wrongs of which
you know nothing. God knows that I have fought against it; but my
weapon was pride, not humility. Now let this miserable subject never
be recurred to by us, at least in words, till the end comes. As soon
as I hear that poor innocent Cradock is apprehended, and brought to
England, I shall surrender myself and confess. But for your sake and
poor Pearlyʼs, I should have done so at the very outset. Now it is
very likely that I may not have the option. Two persons know that I
did it, although they have no evidence, so far as I am aware; a third
person more than suspects it, and is seeking about for the evidence.
Moreover, Sir Cradock Nowell, to whom, as I told you, I owned my deed,
although he could not then understand me, may have done so since, or
may hereafter do so, at any lucid interval.”

“Oh, father, father, he never would be so mean——”

“He is bound by his duty to do it—and for his living sonʼs sake he
must. I only tell you these things, my son, to spare you a part of
the shock. One month now is all I crave, to do my best for you two
darlings. I will not ruin the chance by going again to Sir Cradock. God
saved me from my own rash words, doubtless for your pure sake. Now,
knowing all, and reflecting upon it, can you call me still your father,
Bob?”

This was one of the times that tell whether a father has through life
thought more of himself or of his children. If of himself, they fall
away, like Southern ivies in a storm, parasites which cannot cling,
but glide on the marble surface. But if he has made his future of
them, closer they cling, and clasp more firmly, like our British ivy
engrailed into the house wall.

So the Garnet family clung together, although no longer blossoming, but
flagging sorely with blight and canker, and daily fear of the woodman.
Bob, of course, avoided Eoa, to her great indignation, though he could
not quite make up his mind to tell her that all was over, without
showing reason for it. In the forcing temperature of trouble, he was
suddenly become a man, growing daily more like his father, in all
except the violence. He roamed no more through the wilds of the forest,
but let the birds nest comfortably, the butterflies hover in happiness,
and the wireworm cast his shard unchallenged. He would care for all
those things again, if he ever recovered his comfort.

Now Eoa, as everybody knew, did not by any means embody the spirit of
toleration. She would hardly allow any will but her own in anything
that concerned her. In a word, she was a child, a very warm–hearted and
lovely one, but therefore all the more requiring a strong will founded
on common sense to lead her into the life–brunt. And so, if she must
have Bob some day, she had better have him consolidated, though reduced
to three per cent.

Not discerning her own interests, she would have been wild as a hare
ought to be at the vernal equinox, but for one little fact. There was
nobody to be jealous of. Darling Amy, whom she loved as all young
ladies love one another—until they see cause to the contrary—sweet
thing, she was gone to Oxford with her dear, good father. They had
slipped off without any fuss at all (except from Biddy OʼGaghan, who
came and threw an old shoe at them), because Mr. Rosedew, in the first
place, felt that he could not bear it, and thought, in the second
place, that it would be an uncourteous act towards Sir Cradock Nowell
to allow any demonstration. And yet it was notorious that even Job
Hogstaff had arranged to totter down on Mark Stoteʼs arm, followed by
a dozen tenants (all of whom had leases), and the rank and file of
Nowelhurst, who had paid their house–rent; and then there would be a
marshalling outside the parsonage–gate; and upon the appearance of the
fly, Job with his crutch would testify, whereupon a shout would arise
pronouncing everlasting divorce between Church and State in Nowelhurst,
undying gratitude to the former, and defiance to the latter power.

Yet all this programme was nullified by the departure of John and his
household gods at five oʼclock one May morning. Already he had received
assurance from some of his ancient co–mates at Oriel (most cohesive
of colleges) that they would gladly welcome him, and find him plenty
of work to do. In less than six weeks’ time, of course, the long
vacation would begin. What of that? Let him come at once, and with his
widespread reputation he must have the pick of all the men who would
stay up to read for honours. For now the fruit of a lifetime lore was
ripening over his honoured head, not (like that of Tantalus) wafted
into the cloud–land, not even waiting to be plucked at, but falling
unawares into his broad and simple bosom, where it might lie uncared
for, except for the sake of Amy. So large a mind had long outlived
the little itch for fame, quite untruly called “the last infirmity
of noble minds.” Their first it is, beyond all doubt; and wisely
nature orders it. Their last is far more apt to be—at least in this
generation—contempt of fame, and man, and God, except for practical
purposes.

Mr. Rosedewʼs careful treatises upon the Sabellian and Sabello–Oscan
elements had stirred up pleasant controversy in the narrow world of
scholars; and now at the trito–megistic blow of the Roseo–rorine
hammer, ringing upon no less a theme than the tables of Iguvium, the
wise men who sit round the board of classical education, even Jupiter
Grabovius (the original of John Bull), had clapped their hands and
cried, “Hear, hear! He knows what he is talking of; and he is one of
us.”

That, after all, is the essence of it—to know what one is talking of.
And the grand advantage of the ancient universities is, not the tone
of manners, not the knowledge of life—rather a hat–box thing with
them—not even the high ideal, the manliness, and the chivalry, which
the better class of men win; but the curt knowledge, whether or not
they are talking of what they know. _Scire quod nescias_ is taught, if
they teach us nothing else. And though we are all still apt to talk,
especially among ladies, of things beyond our acquaintance—else haply
we talk but little—we do so with a qualm, and quasi, and fluttering
sense that effrontery is not—but leads to—”pluck.”

Nevertheless, who am I to talk, proving myself, by every word, false to
Alma Mater, having ventured all along to talk of things beyond me?

As they rose the hill towards Carfax, Amy (tired as she was) trembled
with excitement. Her father had won a cure in St. Oles—derived no
doubt from _oleo_—and all were to lodge in Pembroke Lane, pending
mature arrangements. Though they might have turned off near the jail,
and saved a little cab fare, John would go by the broader way, as his
fashion always was; except in a little posthumous matter, wherein
perhaps we have over–defined with brimstone the direction–posts.

Be that as it may,—not to press the _scire quod nescias_ (potential
in such a case, I hope, rather than conjunctive)—there they must be
left, all three, with Jenny and Jemima outside, and Jem Pottles on the
pavement, amazed at the cheek of everything. Only let one thing be
said. Though prettier girl than Amy Rosedew had never stepped on the
stones of Oxford since the time of Amy Robsart, if even then,—never
once, was she insulted.

Lowest of all low calumnies. There are blackguards among university
men, as everybody knows, and as there must be among all men. But even
those blackguards can see the difference between a lady, or rather
between a pure girl and—another. And even those blackguards have an
intensified reverence for the one;—but let the matter pass; for now we
hide in gold these subjects, and sham not to see their flaunting.

Be it, however, confessed that Amy (whose father soon had rooms in
college, not to live, but to lecture in), being a very shy young
maiden, never could be brought to come and call him to his tea,—oh
no. So many young men in gorgeous trappings, charms, and dangles, and
hooks of gold, and eye–glasses very knowing—not to mention volunteer
stuff, and knickerbockers demonstrant of calf—oddly enough they _would_
happen to feel so interested in the architecture of the porterʼs lodge
whenever Amy came by, never gazing too warmly at her, but contriving
to convey their regret at the suppression of their sentiments, and
their yearning to be the stones she trod on, and their despair at the
possibility of her not caring if they were so—really all this was so
trying, that Amy would never go into college without Aunt Doxy before
her, gazing four–gunned cupolas even at scouts and manciples. And this
was very provoking of her, not only to the hearts that beat under
waistcoats ordered for her sake, but also to the domestic kettle a–boil
in Pembroke Lane. For, over and over again, Uncle John, great as he
was in chronology and every kind of “marmora,” and able to detect a
flaw upon Potamogeitonʼs tombstone, lost all sense of time and place,
_me_ and _te_, and _hocce_ and Doxy, and calmly went home some two
hours late, and complacently received Doxology.

But alas, we must abandon Amy to the insidious designs of Hebdomadal
Board, the velvet approaches of Proctor and Pro, and the brass of the
gentlemen Bedels, while we regard more rugged scenes, from which she
was happily absent.

Rufus Hutton had found the missing link, and at the same time the
strongest staple, of the desired evidence. The battered gun–barrels
had been identified, and even the number deciphered, by the foreman
of Messrs. L—— and Co. And the entry in their books of the sale of
that very gun (number, gauge, and other particulars beyond all doubt
corresponding) was—”to Bull Garnet, &c., Nowelhurst Dell Cottage,” whom
also they could identify from his “strongly–marked physiognomy,” and
his quick, decisive manner. And the cartridge–case, which had lain so
long in Dr. Huttonʼs pocket, of course they could not depose to its
sale, together with the gun; but this they could show, that it fitted
the gauge, was not at all of a common gauge, but two sizes larger—No.
10, in fact—and must have been sold during the month in which they sold
the gun, because it was one of a sample which they had taken upon
approval, and soon discarded for a case of better manufacture.

Then as to motive, Rufus Hutton himself could depose to that, or the
probability of it, from what he had seen, but not understood, at the
fixing of the fireworks; neither had he forgotten the furious mood of
Bull Garnet, both then and in his garden.

While he was doubting how to act—for, clearly as he knew his power to
hang the man who had outraged him, the very fact of his injury made him
loth to use that power; for he was not at all a vindictive man, now
the heat of the thing was past, and he saw that the sudden attack had
been made in self–defence—while he was hesitating between his sense of
duty and pity for Cradock on one hand, and his ideas of magnanimity and
horror of hanging a man on the other, he was thrown, without any choice
or chance, across the track of Simon Chope.

Perhaps there is no more vulgar error, no stronger proof of ignorance
and slavery to catchwords, than to abuse or think ill of any particular
class of men, solely on account of their profession—although,
perhaps, we might justly throw the _onus probandi_ their merit upon
hangmen, body–snatchers, informers, and a few others—yet may I think
(deprecating most humbly the omen of this conjunction) that solicitors,
tailors, and Methodist parsons fight at some disadvantage both in fact
and in fiction? Yet can they hold their own; and sympathy, if owing,
is sure to have to pay them—notwithstanding, goose, and amen.

Away with all feeble flippancy! Heavy tidings came to Nowelhurst Hall,
Dell Cottage, and Geopharmacy Lodge, simultaneously, as might be, on
the 20th of June. The _Taprobane_ had been lost, with every soul on
board; and this is the record of it, enshrined in many journals:—

“By recent advices from Capetown, per the screw–steamer _Sutler_, we
sincerely regret to learn that the magnificent clipper–built ship
_Taprobane_, of 2200 tons (new system), A 1 at Lloydʼs for 15 years,
and bound from the Thames to Colombo, with a cargo valued by competent
judges at 120,000_l._, took the shore in Benguela Bay during a typhoon
of unprecedented destructiveness. It is our melancholy duty to add that
the entirety of the valuable cargo was entirely lost, although very
amply assured in unexceptionable quarters, and that every soul on board
was consigned to a watery grave. A Portuguese gentleman of good family
and large fortune, who happened to be in the neighbourhood, was an
eye–witness to the catastrophe, and made superhuman exertions to rescue
the unfortunate mariners, but, alas! in vain. Senhor José de Calcavello
has arrived at the conclusion that some of her copper may be saved. The
ill–fated bark broke up so rapidly, from the powerful action of the
billows, that her identity could only be established from a portion of
her sternpost, which was discovered half buried in sand three nautical
miles to the southward. We have been informed, upon good authority,
although we are not at liberty to mention our source of information,
that Her Britannic Majestyʼs steamcorvette _Mumbo Jumbo_, pierced for
twenty–eight guns, and carrying two, is under orders to depart, as soon
as ever she can be coaled, for the scene of the recent catastrophe.
Meanwhile, the tug _Growler_ has arrived with all the memorials of
the calamity, after affording the rites of sepulture to the poor
shipwrecked mariners cast up by the treacherous billows. The set of the
current being so adverse, we have reason to fear that the rest of the
bodies must have fallen a prey to the monsters of the deep. There are
said to be some hopes of recovering a portion of the specie.”

Mrs. Corklemore happened to be calling at Geopharmacy Lodge, when the
London papers arrived in the early afternoon. Rufus begged pardon, and
broke the cover, to see something in which he was interested. Presently
he cried, “Good God!” and let the paper fall; and, seasoned as he was,
and shallowed by the shifting of his life, it was not in his power to
keep two little tears from twinkling.

“Too late all my work,” he said; “Heaven has settled it without me.”

“How very sad!” cried Mrs. Corklemore, dashing aside an unbidden tear,
when she came to the end of the story; “to think of all those brave
men lost! And perhaps you knew some of them, Dr. Hutton? Oh, I am so
sorry!”

“Why, surely you know that the _Taprobane_ was the ship in which poor
Cradock Nowell sailed, under Mr. Rosedewʼs auspices.”

“Oh, I hope not. Please not to say so. It would be so very horrible!
That he should go without repenting——”

“You must have forgotten, Mrs. Corklemore; for I heard Rosa tell you
the name of the ship, and her destination.”

“Oh, very likely. Ah, now I remember. For the moment it quite escaped
me. How truly, truly grieved—it has quite overcome me. Oh, please not
to notice me—please not. I am so stupidly soft–hearted. Oh—ea, isha,
ea!”

No woman in the world could cry more beautifully than poor Georgie.
And now she cried her very best. It would have gone to the heart of
the driest and bitterest sceptic that ever doubted all men and women
because they would doubt him. But Rufus, whose form of self–assertion
was not universal negation, in what manner then do you suppose
that Rufus Hutton was liquefied? A simple sort of fellow he was
(notwithstanding all his shrewdness), although, or perhaps I should say
because, he thought himself so knowing; and his observation was more
the result of experience than the cause of it. So away he ran to fetch
Rosa, and Rosa wiped dear, sensitive Georgieʼs eyes, and coaxed her
very pleasantly, and admired her more than ever.

Bull Garnet rode home at twelve oʼclock from a long morningʼs work. He
never could eat any breakfast now, and his manner was to leave home
at six (except when he went to Winchester), gallop fiercely from work
to work, or sometimes walk his horse and think, often with glistening
eyes (when any little thing touched him), and return to his cottage and
rest there during the workmenʼs dinner–time. Then he had some sort of a
meal himself, which Pearl began to call “dinner,” and away with a fresh
horse in half an hour, spending his body if only so he might earn rest
of mind. All this was telling upon him fearfully; even his muscular
force was going, and his quickness of eye and hand failing him. He knew
it, and was glad.

Only none should ever say, though every crime was heaped upon him, that
he had neglected his masterʼs interests.

He tore the paper open in his sudden turbulent fashion, as if all paper
was rags, and no more; and with one glance at each column knew all that
was in the ‘tween–ways. Suddenly he came to a place at the corner of a
page which made him cease from eating. He glanced at Pearl, but she was
busy, peeling new potatoes for him. Bob was not come in yet.

“Darling, I must go to London. If possible I shall return to–night, if
I catch the one oʼclock up express.”

Then he opened the window, and ordered a horse, his loud voice ringing
and echoing round every corner of the cottage, and in five minutes he
was off at full gallop, for the express would not stop at Brockenhurst.

At 3.15 he was in London, and at 3.40 in the counting–house of
Messrs. Brown and Smithson, owners, or at any rate charterers, of the
_Taprobane_, Striped–ball Chambers, Fenchurch Street. There he would
learn, if he could, what their private advices were.

The clerks received him very politely, and told him that they had
little doubt of the truth of the evil tidings. Of course the fatality
might have been considerably exaggerated, &c. &c., but as to the loss
of the ship, they had taken measures to replace her. Would he mind
waiting only ten minutes, though they saw that he was in a hurry? The
Cape mail–ship had been telegraphed from Falmouth; they had sent to
the office already, and expected to get the reply within a quarter of
an hour. Every information in their power, &c.—we all know the form,
though we donʼt always get the civility.

Bull Garnet waited heavily with his great back against a stout brass
rail, having declined the chair they offered him; and in less than five
minutes he received authentic detail of everything. He listened to
nothing except one statement, “every soul on board was lost, sir.”

Then he went out, in a lumpish manner, from the noble room, and was
glad to get hold of the iron rail in the bend of the dark stone
staircase.

So now he was a double murderer. Finding it not enough to have killed
one brother in his fury, he had slain the other twin through his
cowardly concealment. Floating about in tropical slime, without a shark
to eat him, leaving behind him the fair repute of a money–grabbing
fratricide. And he, the man who had done it all, who had loved the boy
and ruined him, miserably plotting for his own far inferior children.
No, no! Not that at any rate,—good and noble children: and how they had
borne his villainy! God in mercy only make him, try to make him, over
again, and how different his life would be. All his better part brought
out; all his lower kicked away to the devil, the responsible father of
it. “Good God, how my heart goes! Death is upon me, well I know, but
let me die with my children by—unless I turn hymn–writer——”

Quick as he was in his turns of thought—all of them subjective—he
was scarcely a match for the situation, when Mr. Chope and Bailey
Kettledrum brushed by the sleeves of his light overcoat, and entered
the doors with “push—pull” on them, but, being both of the pushing
order rather than the pulling, employed indiscriminate propulsion,
and were out of sight in a moment. Still, retaining some little of
his circumspective powers, Bull Garnet knew them both from a corner
flash of his sad tear–laden eyes. There was no mistaking that great
legal head, like the breech–end of a cannon. Mr. Kettledrum might have
been overlooked, for little men of a fussy nature are common enough
in London, or for that matter everywhere else. But Garnetʼs attention
being drawn, he knew them both of course, and the errand they were
come upon, and how soon they were likely to return, and what they
would think of his being there, if they should happen to see him.
Nevertheless, he would not budge. Nothing could matter much now. He
must think out his thoughts.

When this puff of air was past which many breathe almost long enough to
learn that it was “life,” some so long as to weary of it, none so long
as to understand all its littleness and greatness—when that should be
gone from him, and absorbed into a boundless region even more unknown,
would not the wrong go with it, if unexpiated here, and abide there
evermore? And not to think of himself alone—what an example now to
leave to his innocent injured children! The fury hidden by treachery,
the cowardice sheathed in penitence! D——n it all, he would have no
more of it. His cursed mind was made up. A man can die in the flesh
but once. His spirit had been dying daily, going to the devil daily,
every day for months; and he found no place for repentance. As for
his children, they must abide it. No man of any mind would blame them
for their fatherʼs crime. If it was more than they could bear, let
them bolt to America. Anywhither, anywhere, so long as they came home
in heaven—if he could only get there—to the father who had injured,
ruined, bullied, cursed, and loved them so.

After burning out this hell of thought in his miserable brain, he
betook himself to natureʼs remedy,—instant, headlong action. He rushed
down the stairs, forgetting all about Chope and Bailey Kettledrum,
shouted to the driver of a hansom cab so that he sawed his horseʼs
mouth raw, leaped in, and gave him half a sovereign through the
pigeon–hole, to get to D——ʼs bank before the closing time. But at
Temple Bar, of course, there was a regular Chubbʼs lock, after a minor
Bramah one at the bottom of Ludgate Hill. Cabby was forced to cut it,
and slash up Chancery Lane, and across by Kingʼs College Hospital,
and back into the Strand by Wych Street. It is easy to imagine Bull
Garnetʼs state of mind; yet the imagination would be that, and nothing
more. He sat quite calmly, without a word, knowing that man and horse
were doing their utmost of skill and speed, and having dealt enough
with both to know that to worry them then is waste.

The Bank had been closed, the day–porter said, as he girded himself for
his walk to Brixton, exactly—let him see—yes, exactly one minute and
thirty–five seconds ago. Most of the gentlemen were still inside, of
course, and if the gentlemanʼs business was of a confidential——Here he
intimated, not by words, that there were considerations——

“Bow Street police–office,” Mr. Garnet cried to the driver, not even
glancing again at the disappointed doorkeeper. In five minutes he was
there. Man and horse seemed strung and nerved with his own excitement.

A stolid policeman stood at the door, as Bull Garnet leaped out
anyhow, with his high colour gone away as in death, and his wiry legs
cramped with vehemence. Then Bobby saw that he had met his master,
the perception being a mental feat far beyond the average leap of
police agility. Accordingly he touched his hat, and crinkled his eyes
in a manner discovered by policemen, in consequence of the suggestion
afforded by the pegging of their hats.

“Mr. Bennings gone?” asked Bull Garnet, pushing towards the entrance.

“His wusship is gone arf an hour, sir; or may be at most fifty minutes.
Can we do anything for you, sir? His wusship always go according to the
business as is on.”

“Thank you,” replied Mr. Garnet; “that is quite enough. What time do
they leave at Marlborough Street?”

“According to the business, sir, but gone afore us aʼmost always. We
sits as long as anybody, and gets through twice the business. But any
message you like to leave, or anything to be entered, I can take the
responsibility.”

“No. It does not matter. I will only leave my card. Mr. Bennings knows
me. Be kind enough to give him this, when he comes to–morrow morning.
Perhaps I may call to–morrow. At present I cannot say.”

The policeman lifted his hat again, like a cup taken up from a
saucer, and Bull Garnet sat heavily down in the cab, and banged the
door–shutters before him. “Strand,” he called out to the driver; “D——
and C——ʼs, the watchmakers.” There he bought a beautiful watch and
gold chain for his daughter Pearl, giving a cheque for nearly all
his balance at the bankerʼs. The cheque was so large that in common
prudence the foreman declined to cash it without some confirmation; but
Mr. Garnet gave him a reference, which in ten minutes was established,
and in ten more he was off again with his very handsome trinkets, and a
large sum in bank–notes and gold, the balance of his draft.

“Where now, sir?” shouted the driver, delighted with his fare, and
foreseeing another half–sovereign.

“I will tell you in thirty seconds.”

“Well, if he ainʼt a rum ‘un,” Cabby muttered to himself, while
amid volleys of strong language he kept his horse gyrating, like a
twin–screw ship trying circles; “but rum customers is our windfalls.
Should have thought it a reward case, only for the Bobby. Keep a
look–out, anyhow; unless he orders me back to Bedlam.”

“Not Bedlam. Waterloo Station, main line!” said Bull Garnet, standing
up in front, and looking at him over the roof. “Five minutes is all I
give you, mind.”

“What a blessed fool I am,” said the cabman below his breath, but
lashing his horse explosively—”to throw away half a sovereign sooner
than hold my tongue! He must be the devil himself to have heard me—and
as for eyes—good Lord, I shouldnʼt like to drive him much.”

“You are wrong,” replied Mr. Garnet through the pigeon–hole, handing
him twopence for the tollman; “I am not the devil, sir; as you may some
day know. Have no fear of ever driving me again. You shall have your
half–sovereign when I have got my ticket. Follow me in, and you shall
know for what place I take it.”

The cabman was too dumb–foundered to do anything but resolve that he
would go straight home when he got his money, and tell his old woman
about it. Then he applied himself to the whip in earnest, for he could
not too soon be rid of this job; and so Bull Garnet won his train, and
gave the driver the other half–sovereign, with a peculiar nod, having
noticed that he feared to approach while the ticket was applied for.

Bull Garnet took a second–class ticket. His extravagance towards the
cabman was the last he would ever exhibit. He felt a call upon him now
to save for his family every farthing. All was lost to them but money,
and alas, too much of that. Now if he cut his throat in the train,
could he be attainted of felony? And would God be any the harder on
him? No, he did not think He would. It might be some sort of atonement
even. But then the shock to Pearl and Bob, to see him brought home
with his head hanging back, and hopeless red stitches under it. It
would make the poor girl a maniac, after all the shocks and anguish
he had benumbed her with already. What a fool he had been not to buy
strychnine, prussic acid, or laudanum! And yet—and yet—and yet——He
would like to see them just once more—blessed hearts—once more.

He sat in the last compartment of the last carriage in the train, which
had been added, in a hurry, immediately behind the break van, and the
swinging and the jerking very soon became tremendous. He knew not,
neither cared to know, that Simon Chope and Bailey Kettledrum were in
a first–class carriage near the centre of the train. Presently the
violent motion began to tell upon him, and he felt a heavy dullness
creeping over his excited mind; and all the senses, which had been
during several hours of tension as prompt and acute as ever they were
in his prime of power, began to flag, and daze, and wane, and he fell
into a waking dream, a “second person” of sorrow. But first—whether for
suicide, or for self–defence, he had tried both doors and found them
locked; and he was far too large a man to force his way through the
window.

He dreamed, with a loose sense of identity, about the innocent
childhood, the boyhoodʼs aspiration, the young manʼs sense of ability
endorsing the right to aspire. Even his bodily power and vigour revived
in the dream before him, and he knitted his muscles, and clenched his
fists, and was ready to fight fools and liars. Who had fought more
hard and hotly against the hard cold ways of the age, the despite done
to the poor and lowly, the sarcasm bred by self–conscious serfdom
in clever men of the world, the preference of gold to love, and of
position to happiness? All the weak gregarious tricks, shifts of coat,
and pupa–ism, whereby we noble Christians reduce our social history
to a passage in entomology, and quench the faith of thinking men in
Him whose name we take in vain—the great Originator—all these feminine
contradictions, and fond things foully invented, fables Atellan (if
they be not actually Fescennine) had roused the combatism of young
Bull, ere he learned his own disgrace.

And when he learned it, such as it was—a proof by its false incidence
how infantile our civilization is—all his motherʼs bitter wrong, her
lifelong sense of shame and crushing (because she had trusted a liar,
and the hollow elder–stick “institution” was held up against her, and
none would take her part without money, even if she had wished it),
then he had chosen his motherʼs course, inheriting her strong nature,
let the shame lie where it fell by right and not by rule, and carried
all his energies into Neo–Christian largeness.

All that time of angry trial now had passed before him, and the five
years of his married life (which had not been very happy, for his wife
never understood him, but met his quick moodiness with soft sulks); and
then in his dream–review he smiled, as his children began to toddle
about, and sit on his knees, and look at him.

Once he awoke, and gazed about him. The train had stopped at
Winchester. He was all alone in the carriage still, and all his cash
was safe. He had stowed it away very carefully in a hidden pocket. To
his languid surprise, he fell back on the seat. How unlike himself,
to be sure; and with so much yet to do! He strove to arise and rouse
himself. He felt for the little flask of wine, which Pearl had thrust
into his pocket, but he could not pull it out and drink; such a languor
lay upon him. He had felt it before, but never before been so overcome
by it. Once or twice, an hour or so before the sun came back again,
this strange cold deadness (like a mammoth nightmare frozen) had lain
on him, in his lonely bed, and then he knew what death was, and only
came back to life again through cold sweat and long fainting.

He had never consulted any doctor about the meaning of this. With
his bold way of thinking, and judging only by his own experience and
feeling, he had long ago decided that all medical men were quacks.
What one disorder could they cure? All they had learned, and that by a
fluke, was a way to anticipate _one_: and even that way seemed worn out
now.

Now he fell away, and feared, and tried to squeeze his breast, and
tried to pray to God; but no words came, nor any thoughts, only sense
of dying, and horror at having prayed for it. A coldness fell upon his
heart, and on his brain an ignorance; he was falling into a great blank
depth, and nothing belonged to him any more—only utter, utter loss, and
not a dream of God.

Happy and religious folk, who have only died in theory, contemplating
distant death, knowing him only as opportune among kinsfolk owning
Consols, these may hope for a Prayer–book end, sacrament administered,
weeping friends, the heavenward soul glad to fly through the golden
door, _animula_, _vagula_, _blandula_, yet assured of its reception
with a heavenly smile of foretaste—this may be; no doubt it may be,
after the life of a Christian Bayard; though it need not always be,
even then. All we who from our age know death, and have taken little
trips into him, through fits, paralysis, or such–like, are quite aware
that he has at first call as much variety as life has. But the death of
the violent man is not likely to be placid, unless it come unawares, or
has been graduated through years of remorse, and weakness, weariness,
and repentance.

Then he tried to rise, and fought once more, with agony inconceivable,
against the heavy yet hollow numbness in the hold of his deep, wide
chest, against the dark, cold stealth of death, and the black, narrow
depth of the grave.

The train ran lightly and merrily into Brockenhurst Station, while the
midsummer twilight floated like universal gossamer. In the yard stood
the Kettledrum “rattletrap,” and the owner was right glad to see it. In
his eyes it was worth a dozen of the lord mayorʼs coach.

“None of the children come, dear?” asked Bailey, having kissed his
wife, as behoves a man from London.

“No, darling, not one. That——” here she used an adjective which sounded
too much like “odious” for me to trust my senses—”Georgie would not
allow them. Now, darling, did you do exactly what I told you?”

“Yes, darling Anna, I did the best I could. I had a basin of
mulligatawny at Waterloo going up, and one of mock–turtle coming back,
and at Basingstoke ham–sandwiches, a glass of cold cognac and water,
and some lemon–chips. Since that, nothing at all, because there has
been no time.”

“You are a dear,” said Mrs. Kettledrum, “to do exactly as I told you.
Now come round the corner a moment, and take two glasses of sherry; I
can see quite well to pour it out. I am so glad of her new crinoline.
She wonʼt get out. Donʼt be afraid, dear.”

Oh, Georgie, Georgie! To think that her own sister should be so low, so
unfeeling, and treacherous! Mr. Kettledrum smacked his lips, for the
sake of euphony, after the second glass of sherry; but his wife would
not give him any more, for fear of spoiling his supper. Then they came
back, and both got in, and squeezed themselves up together in the front
seat of the old carriage, for Mrs. Corklemore occupied the whole of the
seat of honour.

“You are very polite, to keep me so long. Innocent turtles; sweet
childish anxiety! The last survivor of a wrecked train! So you took
advantage, Anna dear, of my not being dressed quite so vulgarly as you
are, to discuss this little matter with him, keeping me in ignorance.”

The carriage was off by this time, and open as it was, they had no fear
of old coachey hearing, for it took a loud hail to reach him.

“Take the honour of a Kettledrum,” cried Bailey, smiting his bosom,
“that the subject has not even been broached between my wiser part
and myself. Ladies, in this pure aerial—no, I mean ethereal—air, with
the shades of night around us, and the breezes wafting, would an
exceedingly choice and delicately aromatic cigar——”

“Oh, I should so like it, Bailey; and perhaps we shall have the
nightingales.”

“I fear we must not think of it,” interposed Mrs. Corklemore, gently;
“my dress is of a fabric quite newly introduced, very beautiful, but
(like myself) too retentive of impressions. If Mr. Kettledrum smokes, I
shall have to throw it away.”

“There goes the cigar instead,” cried Bailey; “the paramount rights
of ladies ever have been, and ever shall be, sacred with Bailey
Kettledrum.”

But Mrs. Kettledrum was so vexed that she jumped up, as if to watch the
cigar spinning into the darkness, and contrived with sisterly accuracy
to throw all her weight upon a certain portion of a certain lovely
foot, whereupon there ensued the neatest little passes, into which we
need not enter. Enough that Mrs. Corklemore, having higher intellectual
gifts, “won,” in the language of the ring, “both events”—first tear,
and first hysterical symptom.

“Come,” cried Mr. Kettledrum, at the very first opportunity, to wit,
when both were crying; “we all know what sisters are: how they mingle
the—the sweetness of their affection with a certain—ah, yes—a piquancy
of expression, most pleasant, most improving, because so highly
conducive to self–examination!” Here he stood up, having made a hit,
worthy of the House of Commons. “All these little breezes, ladies, may
be called the trade–winds of affection. They blow from pole to pole.”

“The trade–winds never do that,” said Georgie.

“They pass us by as the idle wind, when the clouds are like a whale,
ladies, having overcome us for a moment, like a summer dream. Hark to
that thrush, sitting perhaps on his eggs”—”Oh, Oh!” from the gallery of
nature—”can there be, I pause for a reply, anything but harmony, where
the voices of the night pervade, and the music of the spheres?”

“You—you do speak so splendidly, dear,” sobbed Mrs. Kettledrum from the
corner; “but it is a nasty, wicked, cruel story, about dear papa saying
that of me, and he in his grave, poor dear, quite unable to vindicate
himself. I have always thought it so unchristian to malign the dead!”

“Whatʼs that?” cried Georgie, starting up, in fear and hot earnest;
“you are chattering so, you hear nothing.”

A horse dashed by them at full gallop, with his rider on his neck,
shouting and yelling, and clinging and lashing.

“Missed the wheel by an inch,” cried Kettledrum, drawing his head in
faster than he had thrust it out; “a fire, man, or a French invasion?”
But the man was out of hearing, while the Kettledrum horses, scared,
and jumping as from an equine thunderbolt, tried the strength of
leather and the courage of ladies.

Meanwhile at the station behind them there was a sad ado. A man was
lifted out of the train, being found in the last compartment by the
guard who knew his destination—a big man, and a heavy one; and they
bore him to the wretched shed which served there as a waiting–room.

“Dead, I believe,” said the guard, having sent a boy for brandy, “dead
as a door–nail, whoever he be.”

“Not thee knaw who _he_ be?” cried a forester, coming in. “Whoy, marn,
there be no mistaking _he_. He be our Muster Garnet.”

“Whew!” And the train whistled on, as it must do, whether we live or
die, or when Cyclops has made mince of us.




CHAPTER XVI.


That night there had been great excitement in the village of
Nowelhurst. A rumour had reached it that Cradock Nowell, loved in
every cottage there, partly as their own production, partly as their
future owner, partly for his own sake, and most of all for his
misfortunes, was thrown into prison to stand his trial for the murder
of his brother. Another rumour was that, to prevent any scandal to the
nobility, he had been sent to sea alone in a seventy–four gun ship,
with corks in her bottom tied with wire arranged so as to fly all at
once, same as if it was ginger–beer bottles, on the seventh day, when
the salt–water had turned the wires rusty.

It is hard to say of these two reports which roused the greater
indignation; perhaps on the whole the former did, because the latter
was supposed to be according to institution. Anyhow, all the village
was out in the street that night; and the folding of arms, and the
self–importance, the confidential winks, and the power to say more (but
for hyper–Nestorean prudence) were at their acme in a knot of gaffers
gathered around Rufus Hutton, and affording him good sport.

Nothing now could be done in Nowelhurst without Rufus Hutton. He had
that especial knack (mistaken sometimes in a statesman for really high
qualities) which becomes in a woman true capacity for gossip. By virtue
thereof Rufus Hutton was now prime–minister of Nowelhurst; and Sir
Cradock, the king, being nothing more now than the shadow of a name,
his deputyʼs power was absolute. He knew the history by this time of
every cottage, and pigsty, and tombstone in the churchyard; how much
every man got every week, and how much he gave his wife out of it, what
he had for dinner on Sundays, and how long he made his waistcoat last.
Suddenly the double–barrelled noise which foreruns a horse at full
gallop came from the bridge, and old folk hobbled, and young got ready
to run.

“Hooraw—hooraw!” cried a dozen and a half of boys, “here be Hempror o’
Roosia coming.”

Boys will believe almost anything, when they get excited (having taken
the trick from their fathers), but even the women were disappointed,
when the galloping horse stopped short in the crowd, and from his
withers shot forward, and fell with both hands full of mane, a
personage not more august than the porter at Brockenhurst Station.

“Catch the horse, you fool!” cried Rufus.

“Cuss the horse,” said the porter, trying to draw breath; “better
been under a train I had. Donʼt stand gaping, chawbacons. Is ever a
sawbones, surgeon, doctor, or what the devil you call them in these
outlandish parts, to be got for love or money?”

“I am a sawbones,” said Rufus Hutton, coming forward with his utmost
dignity; “and itʼs a mercy I donʼt saw yours, young man, if thatʼs all
you know of riding.”

The porter touched his hair instead of his hat (which was gone long
ago), while the “chawbacons” rallied, and laughed at him, and one
offered him a “zide–zaddle,” and all the women of the village felt that
Dr. Hutton had quenched the porter, and vindicated Nowelhurst.

“When you have recovered your breath, young man,” continued Rufus,
pushing, as he always did, his advantage; “and thanked God for your
escape from the first horse you ever mounted, perhaps you will tell us
your errand, and we chawbacons will consider it.”

A gruff haw–haw and some treble he–heʼs added to the porterʼs
discomfiture, for he could not come to time yet, being now in the
second tense of exhaustion, which is even worse than the first, being
rather of the heart than lungs.

“Station—Mr. Garnet—dead!” was all the man could utter, and that only
in spasms, and with great chest–heavings.

Rufus Hutton leaped on the horse in a moment, caught up old Channingʼs
stick, and was out of sight in the summer dusk ere any one else in the
crowd had done more than gape, and say, “Oh Lor!” By dint of skill he
sped the old horse nearly as quickly to the station as the fury of Jehu
had brought him thence, and landed him at the door with far less sign
of exhaustion. Then walking into the little room, in the manner of a
man who thoroughly knows his work, he saw a sight which never in this
world will leave him.

Upon a hard sofa, shored up with an ash–log where the mahogany was
sprung, and poked up into a corner as if to get a bearing there, with
blankets piled upon him heavily and tucked round the collar of his
coat, and his great head hanging over the rise where the beading of
the brass ends, lay the ill–fated Bull Garnet,—a man from birth to
death a subject for pity more than terror. Fifty years old—more than
fifty years—and scarce a twelvemonth of happiness since the shakings of
the world began, and childhoodʼs dream was over. Toiling ever for the
future, toiling for his children, ever since he had them, labouring to
make peace with God, if only he might have his own, where passion is
not, but love abides. The room smelled strongly of bad brandy, some of
which was oozing now down his broad square chin, and dripping from the
great blue jaw. Of course he could not swallow it; and now one of the
women (for three had rushed in) was performing that duty for him.

“Turn out that drunken hag!” cried Dr. Hutton, feeling he had no idea
how. “Up with the window. Bring the sofa here; and take all but one of
those blankets off.”

“But, master,” objected another woman, “heʼll take his death of cold.”

“Turn out that woman also!” He was instantly obeyed. “Now roll up one
of those blankets, and put it under his head here—this side, canʼt you
see? Good God, what a set of fellows you are to let a manʼs head hang
down like that! Hot water and a sponge this instant. Nearly boiling,
mind you. Plenty of it, and a foot–tub. Now donʼt stare at me.”

With a quick light hand he released the blue and turgid throat from the
narrow necktie, then laid his forefinger upon the heart and watched the
eyelids intently.

“Appleplexy, no doubt, master,” said the most intelligent of the men;
“I have ‘eared that if you can bleed them——”

“Hold your tongue, or Iʼll phlebotomise you.” That big word inspired
universal confidence, because no one understood it. “Now, support him
in that position, while I pull his boots off. One of you run to the
inn for a bottle of French cognac—not this filthy stuff, mind—and a
corkscrew and a teaspoon. Now the hot water here! In with his feet,
and bathe his legs, while I sponge his face and chest—as hot as you can
bear your hands in it. His heart is all but stopped, and his skin as
cold as ice. Thatʼs it; quicker yet! Donʼt be afraid of scalding him.
There, he begins to feel it.”

The dying manʼs great heavy eyelids slowly and feebly quivered, and
a long deep sigh arose, but there was not strength to fetch it. Dr.
Hutton took advantage of the faint impulse of life to give him a little
brandy, and then a little more again, and by that time he could sigh.

“Bo,” he whispered very softly, and trying to lift his hand for
something, and Rufus Hutton knew somehow (perhaps by means of his own
child) that he was trying to say, “Bob.”

“Bob will be here directly. Cheer up, cheer up, till he comes, my
friend.”

He called him his friend, and the very next day he would have denounced
him as murderer to the magistrates at Lymington. Now his only thought
was of saving the poor manʼs life.

The fatherʼs dull eyes gleamed again when he heard those words, and a
little smile came flickering over the stern lines of his face. They
gave him more brandy on the strength of it, while he kept on looking at
the door.

“Rub, rub, rub, men; very lightly, but very quickly. Keep your thumbs
up, donʼt you see? Mustnʼt get cold again for the world. There now,
heʼll keep his heart up until his dear son arrives. And then his
children shall nurse him, much better than any one else could; and
how glad they will be, John Thomas, to see him looking so well and so
strong again!”

All this time, Rue Hutton himself, with a womanʼs skill and tenderness,
was encouraging, by gentle friction over the stagnant heart, each
feeble impulse yet to live, each little bubble faintly rising from the
well of hope, every clinging of the soul to the things so hard to leave
behind. “While there is life, there is hope.” True and genial saying!
And we hope there is hope beyond it.

Poor Bull Garnet was taken home, even that very night. For Dr. Hutton
saw how much he was longing for his children, who (until he was carried
in) knew nothing of his danger. “Please God,” said Rufus to himself, as
he crouched in the fly by the narrow mattress, even foregoing his loved
cheroot, and keeping his hand on his patientʼs pulse; “please God, the
poor fellow shall breathe his last with a child at either side of him.”

Meanwhile, an urgent message from Sir Cradock Nowell was awaiting the
sick man at his cottage. Eoa herself had brought word to Pearl (of
whom she longed to make a friend) that her uncle was walking about the
house, perpetually walking, calling aloud in every room for Mr. Garnet
and John Rosedew. He had heard of no disaster, any more than she had,
for he seldom read the papers now; but Mr. Brockwood had been with him
a very long time that morning, and Dr. Buller came in accidentally;
and Eoa could almost vow that there was some infamous scheme on foot,
and she knew whose doing it was; and oh that Uncle John would come
back! But now they wanted Mr. Garnet, and he must hurry up to the Hall
the moment he came home.

Mr. Garnet, of course, they could not have: his strength was wrecked,
his heart benumbed, his mind incapable of effort, except to know his
children, if that could ever be one. And in this paralytic state, never
sleeping, never waking, never wholly conscious, he lay for weeks; and
time for him had neither night nor morning.

But Mr. Rosedew could be brought to help his ancient friend, if only it
was in his power to overlook the injury. He did not overlook it. For
that he was too great a man. He utterly forgot it. To his mind it was
thenceforth a thing that had never happened:

  “To–morrow either with black cloud
  Let the Father fill the heaven,
  Or with sun full–blazing:
  Yet shall He not erase the past,
  Nor beat abroad, and make undone,
  What once the fleeting hour hath borne.”

Truly so our Horace saith. And yet that Father gives, sometimes, to
the noblest of his children, power to revoke the evil, or at least
annul it,—grandeur to undo the wrong done by others to them. Not with
any sense of greatness, neither hope of self–reward, simply from the
loving–kindness of the deep humanity.

In truth it was a noble thing, such as not even the driest man,
sapped and carked with care and evil, worn with undeserved rebuff,
and dwelling ever underground, in the undermining of his faith, could
behold and not be glad with a joy unbidden, could turn away from
without wet eyes, and a glimpse of the God who loves us,—and yet the
simplest, mildest scene that a child could describe to its mother. So
will I tell it, if may be, casting all long words away, leaning on an
old manʼs staff, looking over the stile of the world.

It was the height of the summer–time, and the quiet mood of the setting
sun touched with calm and happy sadness all he was forsaking. Men were
going home from work; wives were looking for them; maidens by the
gate or paling longed for some protection; children must be put to
bed, and what a shame, so early! Puce and purple pillows lay, holding
golden locks of sun, piled and lifted by light breezes, the painted
eider–down of sunset. In the air a feeling was—those who breathe it
cannot tell—only this, that it does them good; God knows how, and why,
and whence—but it makes them love their brethren.

The poor old man, more tried and troubled than a lucky labourer,
wretched in his wealth, worse hampered by his rank and placement, sat
upon a high oak chair—for now he feared to lean his head back—and
prayed for some one to help him. Oh, for any one who loved him; oh,
for any sight of God, whom in his pride he had forgotten! Eoa was a
darling, his only comfort now; but what could such a girl do? Who was
she to meet the world? And the son he had used so shamefully. Good God,
his only son! And now he knew, with some strange knowledge, loose, and
wide, and wandering, that his son was innocent after all, and lost to
him for ever, through his own vile cruelty. And now they meant to prove
him mad—what use to disguise it?—him who once had the clearest head,
chairman of the Quarter Sessions——

Here he broke down, and lay back, with his white hair poured against
the carved black oak of the chair, and his wasted hands flung downward,
only praying God to help him, anyhow to help him.

Then John Rosedew came in softly, half ashamed of himself, half nervous
lest he were presuming, overdrawing the chords of youth, the bond of
the days when they went about with arm round the neck of each other. In
his heart was pity, very deep and holy; and yet, of all that filled his
eyes, the very last to show itself.

Over against the ancient friend, the loved one of his boyhood, he
stopped and sadly gazed a moment, and then drew back with a shock
and sorrow, as of death brought nearer. At the sound, Sir Cradock
Nowell lifted his weary eyes and sighed; and then he looked intently;
and then he knew the honest face, the smile, the gentle forehead.
Quietly he arose, with colour flowing over his pallid cheeks, and in
his eyes strong welcome, and ready with his lips to speak, yet in his
heart unable. Thereupon he held the chair, and bowed with the deepest
reverence, such as king or queen receives not till a life has earned
it. Even the hand which he was raising he let fall again, drawn back by
a bitter memory, and a nervous shame.

But his friend of olden time would not have him so disgraced, wanted
no repentance. With years of kindness in his eyes and the history of
friendship, he came, without a bow, and took the hand that now was shy
of him.

“Cradock, oh, I am so glad.”

“John, thank God for this, John!”

Then they turned to other subjects, with a sort of nervousness—the one
for fear of presuming on pardon, the other for fear of offering it.
Only both knew, once for all, that nothing more could come between them
till the hour of death.

The rector accepted once again his well–beloved home and cares, for the
vacancy had not been filled, only Mr. Pell had lived a short time at
the Rectory. The joy of all the parish equalled, if not transcended,
that of parson and of patron.

And, over and above the ease of conscience, and the sense of comfort,
it was a truly happy thing for poor Sir Cradock Nowell, when the loss
of the _Taprobane_ could no longer be concealed from him, that now he
had the proven friend to fall back upon once more. He had spent whole
days in writing letters—humble, loving, imploring letters to the son
in unknown latitudes—directing them as fancy took him to the Cape, to
Port Natal, Mozambique, or even Bombay (in case of stress of weather),
Point de Galle, Colombo, &c. &c., in all cases to be called for, and
invariably marked “urgent.” Then from this labour of love he awoke to a
vague form of conviction that his letters ought to have been addressed
to the bottom of the sea.




CHAPTER XVII.


Autumn in the Forest now, once again the autumn. All things turning
to their rest, bird, and beast, and vegetable. Solemn and most noble
season, speaking to the soul of man, as spring speaks to his body. The
harvest of the ample woods spreading every tint of ripeness, waiting
for the Makerʼs sickle, when His breath is frost. Trees beyond trees,
in depth and height, roundings and massive juttings, some admitting
flaws of light to enhance their mellowness, some very bright of their
own accord, when the sun thought well of them, others scarcely bronzed
with age, and meaning to abide the spring. It was the same in Epping
Forest, Richmond Park, and the woods round London, only on a smaller
scale, and with less variety. And so upon his northern road, every
coppice, near or far, even “Knockholt Beeches” (which reminded him of
the “beechen hats”), every little winding wood of Sussex or of Surrey
brought before Cradock Nowellʼs eyes the prospect of his boyhood. He
had begged to be put ashore at Newhaven, from the American trader,
which had rescued him from Pomona Island, and his lonely but healthful
sojourn, and then borne him to New York. Now, with his little store of
dollars, earned from the noble Yankee skipper by the service he had
rendered him, freely given and freely taken, as behoves two gentlemen,
and with his great store of health recovered, and recovered mind, he
must walk all the way to London, forty miles or more; so great a desire
entered into him of his native land, that stable versatility, those
free and ever–changing skies, which all her sons abuse and love.

Cradock looked, I do assure you, as well, and strong, and stout, and
lusty, as may consist with elegance at the age of two–and–twenty. And
his dress, though smacking of Broadway, “could not conceal,” as our
best writers say, “his symmetrical proportions.” His pantaloons were
of a fine bright tan colour, with pockets fit for a thousand dollars,
and his boots full of eyelets, like big lampreys, and his coat was a
thing to be proud of, and a pleasing surprise for Regent–street. His
hat, moreover, was umbratile, as of the Pilgrim Fathers, with a measure
of liquid capacity (betwixt the cone and the turned–up rim) superior
to that of the ordinary cisterns of the London water–companies.
Nevertheless he had not acquired the delightful hydropultic art,
distinctive of the mighty nation which had been so kind to him. And,
in spite of little external stuff (only worthy of two glances—one to
note, and the other to smile at it), the youth was improved in every
point worth a manʼs observation. Three months in New York had done him
an enormous deal of good; not that the place is by any means heavenly
(perhaps there are few more hellish), only that he fell in with men of
extraordinary energy and of marvellous decision, the very two hinges of
life whereupon he (being rather too “philosophical”) had several screws
loose, and some rust in the joints.

As for Wena, she (the beauty) had cocked her tail with great arrogance
at smelling English ground again. To her straight came several dogs,
who had never travelled far (except when they were tail–piped), and one
and all cried, “Hail, my dear! Have you seen any dogs to compare with
us? Set of mongrel parley–woos, canʼt bark or bite like a Christian.
Just look round the corner, pretty, while we kill that poodle.”

To whom Wena—_leniter atterens caudam_—”Cordially I thank you. So much
now I have seen of the world that my faith is gone in tail–wags. If
you wish to benefit by my society, bring me a bit from the hock of
bacon, or a very young marrowbone. Then will I tell you something.”
They could not comply with her requisitions, because they had eaten all
that themselves. And so she trotted along the beach, like the dog of
Polyphemus, or the terrier of Hercules, who tinged his nose with murex.

‘Tis a very easy thing to talk of walking fifty miles, but quite
another pair of shoes to do it; especially with pack on back, and feet
that have lost habitual sense of Macadamʼs tender mercies. Moreover,
the day had been very warm for the beginning of October—the dying
glance of Summer, in the year 1860, at her hitherto foregone and
forgotten England. The highest temperature of the year had been 72° (in
the month of May); in June and July, 66° and 68° were the maxima, and
in August things were no better. Persistent rain, perpetual chill, and
ever–present sense of icebergs, and longing for logs of dry wood. But
towards the end of September some glorious weather set in; and people
left off fires at the time when they generally begin them. Therefore,
Cradock Nowell was hot, footsore, and slightly jaded, as he came to the
foot of Sydenham Hill, on the second day of his journey. The Crystal
Palace, which long had been his landmark through country crossroads,
shone with blue and airy light, as the sun was sinking. Cradock admired
more and more, as the shadows sloped along it, the fleeting gleams, the
pellucid depth, the brightness of reflection framed by the softness of
refraction.

He had always loved that building, and now, at the top of the hill,
he resolved (weary as he was) to enter and take his food there.
Accordingly Wena was left to sup and rest at the stables; he paid
the shilling that turns the wheel, and went first to the refreshment
court. After doing his duty there, he felt a great deal better; then
buttoned his coat like a Briton, and sauntered into the transept. It
had been a high and mighty day, for the Ancient Order of Mountaineers
(who had never seen a mountain) were come to look for one at Penge,
with sweethearts, wives, contingencies, and continuations. It boots
not now to tell their games; enough that they had been very happy, and
were gathering back in nave and transept for a last parade. To Cradock,
so long accustomed to sadness, solitude, and bad luck, the scene,
instead of being ludicrous (as a youth of fashion would have found
it), was interesting and impressive, and even took a solemn aspect as
the red rays of the sun retired, and the mellow shades were deepening.
He leaned against the iron rail in front of the grand orchestra, and
seeing many pretty faces, thought about his Amy, and wondered what she
now was like, and whether she were true to him. From Pomona Island he
could not write; from New York he had never written; not knowing the
loss of the _Taprobane_, and fearing lest he should seem once more to
be trying the depth of John Rosedewʼs purse. But now he was come to
England, with letters from Captain Recklesome Young, to his London
correspondents, which ensured him a good situation, and the power to
earn his own bread, and perhaps in a little while Amyʼs.

As he leaned and watched the crowd go by, like a dream of faces, the
events of the bygone year passed also in dark parade before him. Sad,
mysterious, undeserved—at least so far as he knew—how had they told
upon him? Had they left him in better, or had they left him in bitter,
case with his God and his fellow–man? That question might be solved at
once, to any but himself, by the glistening of his eyes, the gentleness
of his gaze around, the smile with which he drew back his foot when a
knickerbocked child trod on it. He loved his fellow–creatures still;
and love is law and gospel.

While he thought these heavy things, feeling weary of the road, of
his life half weary, shrinking from the bustling world again to be
encountered, suddenly a grand vibration thrilled his heart, and mind,
and soul. From the great concave above him, melody was spreading
wide, with shadowy resistless power, like the wings of angels. The
noble organ was pealing forth, rolling to every nook of the building,
sweeping over the heads of the people and into their hearts (with one
soft passport), “Home, sweet home!” The men who had come because tired
of home, the wives to give them a change of it, the maidens perhaps to
get homes of their own, the children to cry to go home again;—all with
one accord stood still, all listened very quietly, and said nothing
at all about it. Only they were the better for it, with many a kind
old memory rising, at least among the elder ones, and many a large
unselfish hope making the young people look, with trust, at one another.

And what did Cradock Nowell feel? His home was not a sweet one; bitter
things had been done against him; bitter things he himself had done.
None the less, he turned away and wept beneath a music–stand, as if his
heart would never give remission to his eyes. None could see him in the
dark there, only the God whose will it was, and whose will it often is,
that tears should bring us home to Him.

“I will arise, and go home to my father. I will cry, ‘Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee.’”

And so he had. Not heavily, not wilfully, not wittingly, not a
hundredth part so badly as that father had sinned against him. Yet it
was wrong in him not to allow the old man to recover himself, but,
forgetting a sonʼs love–duty, so to leave him—hotly, hastily, with a
proud defiance. Till now he had never felt, or at least confessed to
himself, that wrong. Now, as generous natures do, he summed up sternly
against himself, leniently against others. And then he asked, with
yearning and bitter self–reproach, “Is the old man yet alive?”

       *       *       *       *       *

The woods were still as rich and sweet, and the grass as soft as
in May month; the windings of the pleasant dells were looped with
shining waters; but she who used to love them so and brighten at their
freshness, to follow the steps of each wandering breeze, and call to
the sun as a flower does—now she came through her favourite places,
and hardly cared to look at them. Only three short months ago she had
returned to her woodland home, and the folk that knew and loved her,
in the highest and brightest spirits of youth, conscious beauty, and
hopefulness. All her old friends were rejoicing in her, and she in
their joy delighted, when her father thought it his sorrowful duty, in
this world of sorrow, to tell her the bad news about her ever unlucky
Cradock. At first she received it with scorn—as the high manner of her
mind was—utter unbelief, because God could not have done it. Being
simple, and very young, she had half as much faith in her heavenly
Father as she had in the earthly and fallible parent; neither was she
quite aware that we do not buy, but accept from God.

But, as week upon back of week, and month after tardy month, went
by, Amyʼs faith began to wane, and herself to languish. She watched
the arrival of every mail from the Cape, from India, from anywhere;
her heart leaped up as each steamer came in, and sank at each empty
letterbag. Meanwhile her father was growing very unhappy about her,
and so was good Aunt Doxy. At first John had said, when she took it so
calmly, “Thank God! How glad I am! But her mother cared for me more
than that.” Like many another loving father, he had studied, but never
learned his child.

Now it was the fifth day of October, the weather bright and beautiful,
the English earth and trees and herbage trying back for the summer of
which they had been so cheated. Poor pale Amy asked leave to go out.
She had long been under Rue Huttonʼs care, not professionally, but
paternally (for Rufus would have his own way when he was truly fond
of any one), and she asked so quietly, so submissively, without a bit
of joke about it, that when she was gone her father set to and shook
his head, till a heavy tear came and blotted out a reference which had
taken all the morning. As for Aunt Doxy, she turned aside, and took off
her spectacles quickly, because the optician had told her to keep them
perfectly dry.

Where the footpath wanders to and fro, preferring pleasure to duty,
and meeting all remonstrance by quoting the course of the brook, Amy
Rosedew slowly walked, or heavily stopped every now and then, caring
for nothing around her. She had made up her mind to cry no more, only
to long for the time and place when and where no crying is. Perhaps
in a year or so, if she lived, she might be able to see things again,
and attend to her work as usual. Till then she would try to please her
father, and keep up her spirits for his sake. Every one had been so
kind to her, especially dear Eoa, who had really cried quite steadily;
and the least thing that girl Amy could do was to try and deserve
it. Thinking thus, and doing her best to feel as well as think it,
yet growing tired already, she sat down in a chair as soft as weary
mortal may rest in. A noble beech, with a head of glory overlooking
the forest, had not neglected to slipper his feet with the richest
of natureʼs velvet. From the dove–coloured columnʼs base, two yards
above the ground–spread, drifts of darker bulk began, gnarled crooks
of grapple, clutching wide at mother earth, deeply fanged into her
breast, sureties against every wind. Ridged and ramped with many a
hummock, rift, and twisted sinew, forth these mighty tendons stretched,
some fathoms from the bole itself. Betwixt them nestled, all in moss,
corniced with the golden, and cushioned with the greenest, nooks of
cool, delicious rest, wherein to forget the world, and dream upon the
breezes. “As You Like It,” in your lap, Theocritus tossed over the
elbow, because he is too foreign,—what sweet depth of enjoyment for a
hard–working man who has earned it!

But, in spite of all this voluptuousness, the “moss more soft than
slumber,” and the rippling leafy murmur, there is little doubt that
Miss Amy Rosedew managed to have another cry ere ever she fell asleep.
To cry among those arms of moss, fleecing, tufting, pillowing, an
absorbent even for Niobe! Can the worn–out human nature find no comfort
in the vegetable, though it does in the mineral, kingdom?

Back, and back, and further back into the old relapse of sleep, the
falling thither whence we came, the interest on the debt of death. Yet
as the old Stagyrite hints, some of dayʼs emotions filter through the
strain of sleep; it is not true that good and bad are, for half of
life, the same. Alike their wits go roving haply after the true Owner,
but some may find Him, others fail—Father, who shall limit thus Thine
infinite amnesty?

It would not be an easy thing to find a fairer sight. Her white arms
on the twisted plumage of the deep green moss, the snowy arch of her
neck revealed as the clustering hair fell from it, and the frank and
playful forehead resting on the soft grey bark. She smiled in her sleep
every now and then, for her pleasant young humour must have its own way
when the schoolmaster, sorrow, was dozing; and then the sad dreaming of
trouble returned, and the hands were put up to pray, and the red lips
opened, whispering, “Come home! Only come to Amy!”

And then, in her dream, he was come—raining tears upon her cheek,
holding her from all the world, fearing to thank God yet. She was
smiling up at him; oh, it was so delicious! Suddenly she opened her
eyes. What made her face so wet? Why, Wena!

Wena, as sure as dogs are dogs; mounted on the mossy arm,
lick–lick–licking, mewing like a cat almost, even offering taste of her
tongue, while every bit of the Wena dog shook with ecstatic rapture.

“Oh, Wena, Wena! what are you come to tell me, Wena? Oh that you could
speak!”

Wena immediately proved that she could. She galloped round Amy, barking
and yelling, until the great wood echoed again; the rabbits, a mile
away, pricked their ears, and the yaffingales stopped from tapping.
Then off set the little dog down the footpath. Oh, could it be to fetch
somebody?

The mere idea of such a thing made Amy shake so, and feel so odd, she
was forced to put one hand against the tree, and the other upon her
heart. She could not look, she was in such a state; she could not look
down the footpath. It seemed, at least, a century, and it may have been
half a minute, before she heard through the bushes a voice—tush, she
means _the_ voice.

“Wena, you bad dog, come in to heel. Is this all you have learned by
travelling?”

But Wena broke fence and everything, set off full gallop again to Amy,
tugged at her dress, and retrieved her.

What happened after that Amy knows not, neither knows Cradock Nowell.
So anything I could tell would be a fond thing vainly invented. All
they remember is—looking back upon it, as both of them may, to the
zenith of their lives—that neither of them could say a word except
“darling, darling, darling!” all pronounced as superlatives, with “my
own,” once or twice between, and an exclusive sense of ownership,
illiberal and unphilosophical. What business have we with such minor
details? Who has sworn us accountants of kisses? All we have any right
to say is, that after a long spell of inarticulate tautology, Amy
looked up when Cradock proposed to add another cipher; very gravely,
indeed, she looked up; except in the deepest depth of her eyes.

“Oh no, Cradock. You must not think of it. Seriously now, you must
_not_, love.”

“Why? I should like to know, indeed! After all the time I have been
away!”

“I have so little presence of mind. I forgot to tell you in time, dear.
Why, because Wena _has licked my face all over_, darling. Darling, yes,
she _has_, I say. You are too bad not to care about it. Now come to my
own best father, dear. Offer your arm like a gentleman.”

So they—as Milton concisely says. Homer would have written “they two.”
How sadly our language wants a dual! We, the domestic race, have we
rejected it because the use would have seemed a truism?

       *       *       *       *       *

That same afternoon Bull Garnet lay dying, calmly and peacefully
going off, taking his accounts to a larger world. He knew that there
were some heavy items underscored against him; but he also knew that
the mercy of God can even outdo the hope He gives us for token and
for keepsake. A greater and a grander end, after a life of mark and
power, might, to his early aspirations and self–conscious strength,
have seemed the bourne intended. If it had befallen him—as but for
himself it would have done—to appear where men are moved by passion,
vigour, and bold decision, his name would have been historical, and
better known to the devil. As it was, he lay there dying, and was well
content. The turbulence of life was past, the torrent and the eddy,
the attempt at fore–reaching upon his age, and sense of impossibility,
the strain of his mental muscles to stir the great dead trunks of
“orthodoxy,” and then the self–doubt, the chill, the depression, which
follow such attempts, as surely as ague tracks the pioneer.

Thank God, all this was over now, and the violence gone, and the dark
despair. Of all the good and evil things which so had branded him
distinct, two yet dwelled in his feeble heart, only two still showed
their presence in his dying eyes. Each of those two was good, if two
indeed they were—faith in the heavenly Father, and love of the earthly
children.

Pearl was sitting on a white chair at the side of the bed away from the
window, with one hand in his failing palm, and the other trying now and
then to enable her eyes to see things. She was thinking, poor little
thing, of what she should do without him, and how he had been a good
father to her, though she never could understand him. That was her own
fault, no doubt. She had always fancied that he loved her as a bit of
his property, as a thing to be managed; now she knew that it was not
so; and he was going away for ever, and who would love or manage her?
And the fault of all this was her own.

Rufus Hutton had been there lately, trying still to keep up some little
show of comfort, and a large one of encouragement; for he was not the
man to say die till a patient came to the preterite. Throughout the
whole, and knowing all, he had behaved in the noblest manner, partly
from his own quick kindness, partly from that protective and fiduciary
feeling which springs self–sown in the hearts of women when showers of
sorrow descend, and crops up in the manly bosom at the fee of golden
sunshine. Not that he took any fees; but that his professional habits
revived, with a generosity added, because he knew that he would take
nothing, though all were in his power.

Suddenly Mr. Pell came in, our old friend Octavius, sent for in an
urgent manner, and looking as a man looks who feels but cannot open on
the hinge of his existence. Like a thorough gentleman, he had been shy
of the cottage, although aware of their distress; eager at once and
reluctant, partly because it stood not in his but his rectorʼs parish,
partly for deeper reasons.

Though Pell came in so quietly, Bull Garnet rose at his entry, or tried
to rise on the pillow, swept his daughter back by a little motion
of his thumb, which she quite understood, and cast his eyes on the
parsonʼs with a languid yet strong intelligence. He had made up his
mind that the man was good, and yet he could not help probing him.

The last characteristic act of poor Bull Garnetʼs life, a life which
had been all character, all difference, from other people.

“Will you take my daughterʼs hand, Pell?”

“Only too gladly,” answered Pell; but she shrank away, and sobbed at
him.

“Pearl, come forward this moment. It is no time for shilly–shallying.”

The poor thing timidly gave her hand, standing a long way back from
Pell, and with her large eyes streaming, yet fixed upon her father, and
no chance at all of wiping them.

“Now, Pell, do you love my daughter? I am dying, and I ask you.”

“That I do, with all my heart,” said Pell, like a downright Englishman.
“I shall never love any other.”

“Now, Pearl, do you love Mr. Pell?” Her fatherʼs eyes were upon her in
a way that commanded truth. She remembered how she had told a lie, at
the age of seven or eight, and that gaze had forced it out of her, and
she had never dared to tell one since, until no lie dared come near her.

“Father, I like him very much. Very soon I should love him, if—if he
loved me.”

“Now, Pell, you hear that!”

“Beyond all doubt I do,” said Octave, whose dryness never deserted him
in the heaviest rain of tears; “and it is the very best thing for me I
have heard in all my life.”

Bull Garnet looked from one to the other, with the rally of his life
come hot, and a depth of joyful sadness. Yet must he go a little
further, because he had always been a tyrant till people understood him.

“Do you want to know how much money, sir, I intend to leave her, when I
die to–night or to–morrow morning?”

Cut–and–dry Pell was taken aback. A thoroughly upright and noble
fellow, but of wholly different and less rugged road of thought.
Meanwhile Pearl had slipped away; it was more than she could bear, and
she was so sorry for Octavius. Then Pell up and spake bravely:

“Sir, I would be loth to think of you, my dear oneʼs father, as
anything but a gentleman; a strange one, perhaps, but a true one. And
so I trust you have only put such a question to me in irony.”

“Pell, there is good stuff in you. I know a man by this time. What
would you think of finding your dear oneʼs father a murderer?”

Octavius Pell was not altogether used to this sort of thing. He turned
away with some doubt whether Pearl would be a desirable mother of
children (for he, after all, was a practical man), and hereditary
insanity—— Then he turned back, remembering that all mankind are mad.
Meanwhile Bull Garnet watched him, with extraordinary wrinkles, and a
savage sort of pleasure. He felt himself outside the world, and looking
at the stitches of it. But he would not say a word. He had always been
a bully, and he meant to keep it up.

“Sir,” said Octave Pell, at last, “you are the very oddest man I ever
saw in all my life.”

“Ah, you think so, do you, Pell? Possibly you are right; possibly you
are right, Pell. I have no time to think about it. It never struck me
in that light. If I am so very odd, perhaps you would rather not have
my daughter?”

“If you intend to refuse her to me, you had better say so at once, sir.
I donʼt understand all this.”

“I wish you to understand nothing at all beyond the simple fact. I shot
Clayton Nowell, and did it on purpose, because I found him insulting
her.”

“Good God! You donʼt mean to say it?”

“I never yet said a thing, Pell, which I did not mean to say.”

“You did it in haste? You have repented? For Godʼs sake, tell me that.”

“Treat this as a question of business. Look at the deed and nothing
else. Do you still wish to marry my daughter?”

Pell turned away from the great wild eyes now solemnly fixed upon him.
His manly heart was full of wonder, anguish, and giddy turbulence. The
promptest of us cannot always “come to time,” like a prizefighter.

Pearl came in, with her chest well forward, and then drew back very
suddenly. She thought her fate must be settled now, and would like to
know how they had settled it. Then, like a genuine English lady, she
gave a short sigh and went away. Pride makes the difference between us
and all other nations.

But the dignified glance she had cast on Pell settled his fate and hers
for life. He saw her noble self–respect, her stately reservation, her
deep sense of her own pure value (which never would assert itself), and
her passing contempt of his hesitation.

“At all risks I will have her,” he said to himself, for his manly
strength gloried in her strong womanhood; “if she can be won I will
have her. Oh, how I am degrading her! What a fool–bound fellow I am!”

Then he spoke to her father, who had fallen back, and was faintly
gazing, wondering what the stoppage was.

“Sir, I am not worthy of her. God knows how I love her. She is too good
for me.”

Bull Garnet gathered his fleeting life, and looked at Pell with a love
so deep that it banished admiration. Then his failing heart supplied,
for the last, last time of all, the woe–worn fountain of his eyes.
Strong and violent as he was, a little thing had often touched him to
the turn of tears. What impulse is there but has this end? Even comic
laughter.

Pell lifted from the counterpane the broad but shrunken hand, which was
on the way to be offered to him, until sad memory stopped it. Then he
looked down at the poor grey face, where the forehead, from the fall
of the rest, appeared almost a monstrosity, and the waning of strong
emotions left a quivering of hollowness. The young parson looked down
with noble pity. Much he knew of his father–in–law! Bull Garnet would
never be pitied. He drew his hand back with a little jerk, and placed
it against his broad, square chin.

“I canʼt bear to die like this, Pell. _I wish to God you could shave
me._”

Pell went suddenly down on his knees, put his strong brown hands up,
and said nothing except the Lordʼs Prayer. Bull Garnet tried to raise
his palms, but the power of his wrists was gone, and so he let them
fall together. Then at every grand petition he nodded at the ceiling,
as if he saw it going upward, and thought of the lath and plaster.

He had said he should die at four oʼclock, for the paroxysms of
heart–complaint returned at measured intervals, and he felt that he
could not outlast another. So with his usual mastery and economy of
labour, he had sent a man to get the keys and begin to toll the great
church bell, as soon as ever the clock struck four. “Not too long
apart,” he said, “steadily, and be done with it.” When the boom of the
sluggish bell came in at the open window, Bull Garnet smiled, because
the man was doing it as he had ordered him.

“Right,” he whispered, “yes, quite right. I have always been before my
time. Just let me see my children.” And then he had no more pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Amy came in very softly, to know if he was dead. They had told her
she ought to leave it alone, but she could not see it so. Knowing all
and feeling all, she felt beyond her knowledge. If it would—oh, if it
would help him with a spark of hope in his parting, help him in the
judgment–day, to have the glad forgiveness of the brother with the
deeper wrong—there it was, and he was welcome.

A little whispering went on, pale lips into trembling ears, and then
Cradock, with his shoes off, was brought to the side of the bed.

“He wonʼt know you,” Pearl sobbed softly; “but how kind of you to
come!” She was surprised at nothing now.

Her father raised his languid eyes, until they met Cradockʼs eager
ones; there they dwelt with doubt, and wonder, and a slow rejoicing,
and a last attempt at expression.

John Rosedew took the wan stiffening hand, lying on the sheet like a
cast–off glove, and placed it in Cradockʼs sunburnt palm.

“He knows all,” the parson whispered; “he has read the letter you left
for him; and, knowing all, he forgives you.”

“That I do, with all my heart,” Cradock answered firmly. “May God
forgive me as I do you. Wholly, purely, for once and for all!”

“Kind—noble—Godlike——” the dying man said very slowly, but with his old
decision.

Bull Garnet could not speak again. The great expansion of heart had
been too much for its weakness. Only now and then he looked at Cradock
with his Amy, and every look was a prayer for them, and perhaps a
recorded blessing.

Then they slipped away, in tears, and left him, as he ought to be, with
his children only. And the telegraph of death was that God would never
part them.

Now, think you not this man was dying a great deal better than he
deserved? No doubt he was. And, for that matter, so perhaps do most of
us. But does our Father think so?




CHAPTER XVIII.


Softly and quietly fell the mould on the coffin of Bull Garnet. A great
tree overhung his sleep, without fear of the woodman. Clayton Nowellʼs
simple grave, turfed and very tidy, was only a few yards away. That
ancient tree spread forth its arms on this one and the other, as a
grandsire lays his hands peacefully and placidly on children who have
quarrelled.

A lovely spot, as one might see, for violence to rest in, for long
remorse to lose the track, and deep repentance hopefully abide the time
of God. To feel the soft mantle of winter return, and the promising
gladness of spring, the massive depths of the summer–tide, and the
bright disarray of autumn. And to be, no more the while, oppressed, or
grieved, or overworked.

There shall forest–children come, joining hands in pleasant fear, and,
sitting upon grassy mounds, wonder who inhabits them, wonder who and
what it is that cannot wonder any more. And haply they shall tell this
tale—become a legend then—when he who writes, and ye who read, are dust.

Ay, and tell it better far, more simply, and more sweetly, never having
gone astray from the inborn sympathy. For every grown–up man is apt to
mar the uses of his pen with bitter words, and small, and twaddling;
conceiting himself to be keen in the first, just in the second, and
sage in the third. For all of these let him crave forgiveness of God,
his fellow–creatures, and himself, respectively.

Sir Cradock Nowell, still alive to the normal sense of duty, tottered
away on John Rosedewʼs arm, from the grave of his half–brother. He had
never learned whose hand it was that dug the grave near by, and no
one ever forced that unhappy knowledge on him. This last blow, which
seemed to strike his chiefest prop from under him, had left its weal on
his failing mind in great marks of astonishment. That such a strong,
great man should drop, and he, the elder and the weaker, be left to do
without him! He was going to the Rectory now, to have a glass of wine,
after fatigue of the funeral, a vintage very choice and rare, according
to Mr. Rosedew, and newly imported from Oxford. And truly that was its
origin. It might have claimed “founderʼs kin fellowship,” like most of
the Oxford wine–skins.

“Wonderful, wonderful man!” said poor Sir Cradock, doing his best to
keep his back very upright, from a sudden suffusion of memory,—”to
think that he should go first, John! Oh, if I had a son left, he should
take that man for his model.”

“Scarcely that,” John Rosedew thought, knowing all the circumstances;
“but of the dead I will say no harm.”

“So quick, so ready, so up for anything! Ah, I remember he knocked a
man down just at the corner by this gate here, where the dandelion–seed
is. And afterwards he proved how richly he deserved it. That is the way
to do things, John.”

“I am not quite sure of that,” said the conscientious parson; “it might
be wiser to prove that first; and then to abstain from doing it. I
remember an instance in point——”

“Of course you do. You always do, John, and I wish you wouldnʼt. But
that has nothing to do with it. You are always cutting me short, John;
and worse than ever since you came back, and they talked of you so at
Oxford. I hope they have not changed you, John.”

He looked at the white–haired rector, with an old manʼs jealousy. Who
else had any right to him?

“My dear old friend,” replied John Rosedew, with kind sorrow in his
eyes, “I never meant to cut you short. I will try not to do it again.
But I know I am rude sometimes, and I am always sorry afterwards.”

“Nonsense, John; donʼt talk of it. I understand you by this time; and
we allow for one another. But now about my son, my poor unlucky boy.”

“To be sure, yes,” said the other old man, not wishing to hurry
matters. And so they stopped and probed the hedge instead of one
another.

“I donʼt know how it is,” at last Sir Cradock Nowell said, being rather
aggrieved with John Rosedew for not breaking ground upon him—”but how
hard those stubs of ash are! Look at that splinter, almost severed by a
man who does not know how to splash; Jem, his name is, poor Garnet told
me, Jem—something or other—and yet all I can do with my stick wonʼt
fetch it away from the stock.”

“Like a child who will not quit his father, however his father has
treated him.”

“What do you mean by that, John? Are you driving at me again? I thought
you had given it over.”

“I never give over anything,” John answered, in a manner for him quite
melodramatic, and beyond his usual key.

“No. We always knew how stubborn you were. And now you are worse than
ever.”

“No fool like an old fool,” John Rosedew answered, smiling sweetly,
yet with some regret. “Cradock, I am such a fool I shall let out
everything.”

“What do you mean?” asked Sir Cradock Nowell, leaning heavily on his
staff, and setting his white face rigidly, yet with every line of it
ready to melt; “John, I have heard strange rumours, or I have dreamed
strange dreams. In the name of God, what is it, John? My son!—my only
son——”

He could say no more, but turned away, and bowed his head, and trembled.

“Your only son, your innocent son, has been at my house these three
days; and when you like, you can see him.”

“When I like—ah, to be sure! I donʼt like many people. I am getting
very old, John. And no one to come after me. It seems a pity, donʼt you
think, and every one against me so?”

“You can take your own part still, my friend. And you have to take your
sonʼs part.”

“Yes, to be sure, my sonʼs part. Perhaps he will come back some day.
And I know he did not do it, now; and I was very hard to him—donʼt you
think I was, John?—very hard to my poor Craddy, and he was so like his
mother!”

“But you will be very kind to him now; and he will be such a comfort to
you, now he is come back again, and going away no more.”

“I declare you make me shake, John. You do talk such nonsense. One
would think you knew all about him,—more than his own father does. What
have I done, to be kept like this in the dark, all in the dark? And you
seem to think that I was hard to him.”

“Cradock, all you have to do is just to say the word; just to say that
you wish to see him, and your son will come and talk to you.”

“Talk to me! Oh yes, I should like to talk to him—very much—I mean, of
course, if he is at leisure.”

He leaned on his stick, and tried to think, while John Rosedew hurried
off; and of all his thoughts the foremost were, “What will Cradock my
boy be like; and what shall I give him for dinner?”

Cradock came up shyly, gently, looking at his father first, then
waiting to be looked at. The old man fixed his eyes upon him, at first
with some astonishment—for his taste in dress was somewhat outraged
by the Broadway style—then, in spite of all the change, remembrance
of his son returned, and love, and sense of ownership. Last of all,
auctorial pride in the young manʼs width of shoulder, blended with soft
recollections of the time he dandled him.

“Why, Cradock! It is my poor son Cradock! What a size you are grown, my
boy, my boy!”

“Oh, father, I am sure you want me. Only try me once again. I am not at
all a radical.”

“Crad, you never could be. I knew you must come round at last to my way
of thinking. When you had seen the world, Crad; when you had seen the
world a bit, as your father did before you.”

And so they made the matter up, in politics, and dress, and little
touches of religion, and in the depth of kindred love which underlies
the latter; and never after was there word, except of migrant
petulance, between the crotchety old man, and the son who held his
heartʼs key.

All this while we have been loth to turn to Mrs. Corklemore, and
contemplate her discomfiture, although in strict sequence of events
we ought to have done so long ago. But it is so very painful—and
now–a–days all writers agree with Epicurus, in regarding pain as the
worst of evils—so bitter is the task to describe a lovely mother
failing, in spite of all exertion, to do her duty by her child, in
robbing other people, that really—ah well–a–day, physic must be taken.

At the time of her dismissal from the halls of Nowelhurst, Mr.
Corklemore had been so glad to see his pretty wife again, and that
queer little Flore, who amused him so by pinching his stiff leg, and
crying “haw,” and he had found the house so desolate, and the absence
of plague so unwholesome, and the responsibility of having a will of
his own so horrible, that he scarcely cared to ask the reason why they
were come home. And Georgie—who was not thoroughly heartless, else how
could she have got on so?—thought Coo Nest very snug and nice, with
none to contradict her. So she found relief awhile, in banishing her
worse, while she indulged her better half.

Let me do the same by suppressing here that evil tendency to moralise.
In Georgieʼs case, as well as mine, the indulgence possessed at any
rate the attractions of change and variety. But, knowing how strictly
we are bound by the canons of philosophy to suspect and put the curb
on every natural bias, that good young woman soon refrained from
over–active encouragement of her inclination to goodness. Rallying
her sense of right, she vanquished very nobly all the seductions of
honesty, and, by a virtuous effort, marched from the Capua of virtue.

She stood upon the wood–crowned heights which look upon Coo Nest, and
as the smoke came curling up, the house seemed very small to her. What
a thing to call a garden! And the pigeon–house at Nowelhurst was nearly
as large as our stable! And oh that little vinery, where one knew every
single bunch, and came every day to watch its ripening, and the little
fuss of its colouring, like an ogre watching a pet babe roasting.
Surely nature never meant her to live upon so small a scale; or why had
she been gifted with such large activities?

She turned her back upon Coo Nest, and her face to Nowelhurst Hall, and
in her mindʼs eye saw a place ever so much larger.

Then a pleasant sound came up the hollow, a nice ring of revolving
wheels coquetting with the best C springs and all the new improvements.
Well–mettled horses, too, were there, stepping together sonipedally,
and a footman could be seen, whose legs must stand him in 60_l._ a year.

“That odious old Sir Julius Wallop and his wizen–faced wife come
to patronize us again and say, ‘Ha, Corklemore, snug little place,
charming situation; but I think I should pull it down and rebuild;
no room for Chang to stand in it. And how is my old friend, Sir
Cradock, your forty–fifth cousin, I believe? Ah, he _has_ a nice
place.’ I havenʼt the heart to meet them now, and their patronizing
disparagement. Heigho! It is a nice turn–out. And yet they have at
Nowelhurst three more handsome carriages. And it does look so much
better to have two footmen there behind; and I do like watered linings
so. How nice Flo did look by my side in that new barouche! Oh, my
darling child, I must not give way to selfish feelings. I must do my
duty towards you.”

Therefore she proceeded, against her better nature, in the face of
prudence, with her attempt to set aside poor Sir Cradock Nowell, and
obtain fiduciary possession of his property. Cradock was lost in the
_Taprobane_,—of that there could be no doubt; and so she was saved all
further trouble of laying before the civil authorities the stronger
evidence they required before issuing a warrant. But all was going very
nicely towards the commencement of an inquiry as to the old manʼs state
of mind. Then suddenly she was checkmated, and never moved a pawn again.

One afternoon, Mrs. Corklemore was sitting in her drawing–room,
expecting certain visitors, and quite ready to be bored with them,
because they were leading gossips—ladies who gave the first complexion
to any nascent narrative. And Georgie knew how to handle them. In the
county talk which must ensue, only let them take her side, and all the
world would feel for her in her very painful position.

After a rumble of rapid wheels, and a violent pull at the bell, which
made the lady of the house to jump, because they had just had the
bell–hanger, into her sanctuary came with a cooler than curcumine
temperature, not indeed Lady Alberta Smith and her daughter Victorina
Beatrice, but Eoa Nowell and her cousin Cradock.

For once in her life Mrs. Corklemore was deprived of all presence of
mind, ghostly horror being added to bodily fear of Eoa. She fain would
have fled, but her limbs gave way, and she fell back into a soft French
chair, and covered her face with both hands. Then Eoa, looking tall and
delicate in her simple mourning dress, walked up to her very quietly,
leading Cradock as if she were proud of him.

“I have taken the liberty, Mrs. Corklemore, of bringing my cousin
Cradock to see you, because it may save trouble.”

“I trust you will forgive,” said Cradock, “our very sudden invasion. We
are come upon a matter of business, to save unpleasant exposures and
disgrace to our distant relatives.”

“Oh,” gasped poor Mrs. Corklemore, “you are alive, then, after all? It
was proved that you had lost your life upon the coast of Africa.”

“Yes, but it has proved otherwise,” Cradock answered, bowing neatly.

“And it would have been so much better, under the sad, sad
circumstances, for all people of good feeling, and all interested in
the family.”

“For the latter, perhaps it would, madam; but not so clearly for the
former. I am here to protect my father from all machinations.”

“Leave her to me,” cried Eoa, slipping prettily in front of him, “I
understand her best, because—because of my former vocation. And I think
she knows what I am.”

“That I do,” answered Georgie, cleverly interposing first a small
enamelled table; “not only an insolent, but an utterly reckless
creature.”

“You may think so,” Eoa replied, with calm superiority; “but that only
shows your piteous ignorance of the effects of discipline. I am now so
sedate and tranquil a woman, that I do not hate, but scorn you.”

Cradock could not help smiling at this, knowing what Eoa was.

“We want no strong expressions, my dear, on one side or the other,” for
he saw that a word would have overthrown Eoaʼs new–born discipline;
“Mrs. Corklemore is far too clever not to perceive her mistake. She
knows quite well that any inquiry as to my dear fatherʼs state of
mind can now be of no use to her. And if she thinks of any further
proceedings against myself, perhaps she had better first look at just
this—just this document.”

He laid before her a certificate, granted by three magistrates, that
indisputable evidence had been brought before them as to the cause and
manner of Clayton Nowellʼs death, and that Cradock Nowell had no share
in it, wittingly or unwittingly. That was the upshot of it; but of
course it extended to about fifty–fold the length.

Mrs. Corklemore bent over her, in her most bewitching manner, and
perused it very leisurely, as if she were examining Floreʼs attempts at
pothooks. Meanwhile, with a side–glint of her eyes, she was watching
both of them; and it did not escape her notice that Eoa was very pale.

“To be sure,” she said at last, looking full at the Eastern maid, “I
see exactly how it was. I have thought so all along. A female Thug must
be charmed, of course, by the only son of a murderer. My dear, I do so
congratulate you.”

“Thank you,” answered Eoa, and the deep gaze of her lustrous eyes made
the clever woman feel a world unopened to her; “I thank you, Georgie
Corklemore, because you know no better. My only wish for you is, that
you may never know unhappiness, because you could not bear it.”

Saying so, she turned away, and, with her light, quick step, was gone,
before her enemy could see a symptom of the welling tears which then
burst all control. But Cradock, who had dwelt in sorrow, compared
to which hers was a joke, stayed to say a few soft words, and made a
friend for evermore of the woman who had plotted so against his life
and all his love.

Madame la Comtesse since that time has seen much tribulation, and is
all the better for it. Mr. Corklemore died of the gout, and the angel
Flore of the measles; and she herself, having nursed them both, and
lost some selfishness in their graves, is now (as her destiny seemed
to be) the wife of Mr. Chope. Of course she is compelled to merge her
strong will in a stronger one, and, according to natureʼs Salique law,
is the happier for doing so. Whether this union will produce a subject
for biography to some unborn Lord Campbell, time alone can show.

From the above it will be clear that poor Eoa Nowell was now acquainted
with the secret of the Garnet family. Bob himself had told her all,
about a month after his fatherʼs death, renouncing at the same time all
his claims upon her. Of that Eoa would not hear; only at his urgency
she promised to consult her friends, and take a week to think of it.
And this was the way she kept her promise.

First she ran up to Cradock Nowell, with the bright tears still upon
her cheeks, and asked him whether he had truly and purely forgiven his
injurer. He took her hand, and answered her with his eyes, in which
the deepened springs of long affliction glistened, fixed steadily upon
hers.

“As truly and purely as I hope to be forgiven at the judgment–day.”

“Then that settles that matter. Now order the dog–cart, Crady dear, and
drive me to Dr. Huttonʼs.”

Of course he obeyed her immediately, and in an hour they entered the
gate of Geopharmacy Lodge. Rosa was amazed at her beauty, and thought
very little, after that, of Mrs. Corklemoreʼs appearance.

“For my part,” said Rufus Hutton, when Eoa had laid the case before
him in a privy council, “although it is very good of you, and very
flattering to me, that you look upon me still as your guardian, I think
you are bound first of all to consult Sir Cradock Nowell.”

“How very odd! Now that is exactly what I do not mean to do. He never
can understand, poor dear, and I hope he never will, the truth about
poor Claytonʼs death. His present conviction is, like that of all the
neighbourhood, that Black Will the poacher did it, the man who has
since been killed in a fight with Sir Julius Wallopʼs gamekeepers. And
it would shock poor uncle so; I am sure he would never get over it if
the truth were forced upon him. And if it were, I am sure he would
never allow me to have my way, which, of course, I should do in spite
of him. And I am not his heiress now, since Cradock came to life again.
But I have plenty of money of my own; and I have quite settled what to
give him the day that I am married, and you too, my dear guardy, if
you behave well about this. Look here!”

She drew forth a purse quite full of gold, and tossed it in her old
Indian style, so that Rufus could not help laughing.

“Well, my dear,” he answered kindly, “who could resist such bribery?
Besides, I see that your mind is made up, and we all know what the
result of that is. And after all, the chief question is, what effect
will your knowledge of this have on your love for your husband?”

“It will only make me love him more, ever so much more, because of his
misfortune.”

“And will you never allude to it, never let him see that you think of
it, so as to spoil his happiness?”

“Is it likely I should think of it? Why, my father must have killed
fifty men. He was desperate in a battle. And Bob has never brought that
up against me.”

“Well, if you take it in that light—decidedly not an English light——”

“And perhaps you never heard that Bobʼs father, by his quickness and
boldness, saved the lives of fifteen men in a colliery explosion before
he ever came to Nowelhurst, and therefore he had a perfect right
to—to——”

“Take the lives of fifteen others. Fourteen to his credit still. Well,
Eoa, you can argue, if any female in the world can. Only in one thing,
my dear child, be advised by me. If you must marry Robert Garnet,
leave this country for a while, and take his sister Pearl with you.”

“Of course I must marry Bob,” said Eoa; “and of course I should go away
with him. But as to taking Pearl with us, why, thatʼs a thing to be
thought about.”

However, they got over that, as well as all other difficulties; Sir
Cradock Nowell was at the wedding, Mr. Rosedew performed the ceremony,
and Rufus Hutton gave away as lovely a bride as ever was seen. Bob
Garnet spied a purple emperor, who had lost his way, knocking his head
in true imperial fashion against the chancel–window, and he glanced at
Eoa about it, between the two “I wills,” and she lifted her beautiful
eyebrows, and he saw that she meant to catch him. So, after signing the
register, they contrived to haul him down, without letting John Rosedew
know it; then at the chancel–porch they let him go free of the Forest,
with his glorious wings unsoiled. Not even an insect should have cause
to repent their wedding–day.

And now they live in as fair a place as any the world can show, not
far from Pezo da Ragoa, in the Alto Douro district. There Eoaʼs
children toddle by the brilliant riverʼs brink, and form their limbs to
strength and beauty up the vine–clad mountainʼs side. Bob has invested
his share of proceeds in a vineyard of young Bastardo, and Muscat de
Jesu; moreover, he holds a good appointment under the Royal Oporto
Company, agricultural of the vine. Many a time Eoa sits watching with
her deep bright eyes the purple flow of the luscious juice from the
white marble “lagar,” wherein the hardy peasants, with their drawers
tied at the knee, tramp to the time of the violin to and fro, without
turning round, among the pulpy flood. Then Bob, who has discovered a
perfect cure for oidium, and knows how to deal with every grub that
bores into or nips the vine, to his wife and bairns he comes in haste,
having been too long away, bringing a bunch of the “ladiesʼ fingers,”
or the Barrete de Clerigo, or it may be some magnificent insect new to
his entomology; or, still more interesting prize, a letter from Pearl
or Amy, wherein Mrs. Pell, or Nowell, gossips of the increasing cares
which increase her happiness. Yet even among those lovely scenes, and
under that delicious sky, frequent and fond are the glances cast by
hope, as well as memory, at the bowered calm of the Forest brooks, and
the brown glamour of the beechwood.

And when they return to dwell in the Forest, and to end their days
there, even Bob will scarcely know the favourite haunts of his
boyhood—to such an extent has Cradock Nowell planted and improved,
clothing barren slopes with verdure, adding to the wealth of woods many
a new tint and tone, by the aid of foreign trees unknown to his father.
In doing so, his real object is not so much to improve the estate, or
gratify his own good taste, or even that of Amy; but to find labour
for the hands, and food for the mouths, of industrious people. Sir
Cradock grumbles just a little every now and then, because, like all
of us Englishmen, he must have his grievance. But, on the whole, he is
very proud of what his son is doing, and thoroughly enjoys his power of
urging or repressing it.

And if on theoretic matters any question chances to arise between them,
when one says “no” to the otherʼs “yes”—as all true Britons are bound
to do upon politics, port wine, and parsons,—then a gentle spirit comes
and turns it all to laughter, with the soft and pleasant wit of a
well–bred womanʼs ignorance. For Amy still must have her say, and still
asserts her privilege to flavour every dull discussion with lively
words, and livelier glances, and a smile for both the disputants. Then
Cradock looks at his dear young wife with notes of admiration, and bids
her keep such piquant wisdom for the councils of the nursery. Upon
which pleasant reminder, the old man chuckles, as if some very good
thing had been said; then craftily walks with a spotted toy, capable of
barking and exactly representing Caldo or Wena, whichever you please,
to the foot of certain black oak–stairs, where he fully expects to hear
the prattle of small Clayton.

To wit, it has been long resolved, and managed with prospective wisdom
down the path of years, that the county annals shall not be baulked of
a grand Sir Clayton Nowell. And a very grand fellow indeed he is, this
two–year–old Clayton Nowell—grand in the stolid sageness of his broad
and steadfast gaze, grand in the manner of his legs and his Holbein
attitude, grander still in stamping when his meat and ale are late, but
grandest of all, immeasurably grand, in the eyes of his grandfather.

Hogstaff, whose memory is quite gone, and his hearing too of every
sound except the voice of this boy, identifies him beyond all cavil
with the Clayton of our story. Many a time the bowed retainer chides
his little master for not remembering the things he taught him only
yesterday. Then Cradock smiles at his sonʼs oblivion of the arts his
uncle learned, but never reminds old Hoggy that the yesterday was
rather more than five–and–twenty years ago.

Is it true or is it false, according to the rules of art, that the
winding–up of a long, long story, handled with more care than skill,
should have some resemblance to the will of a kindly–natured man? In
whose final dispositions, no dependent, however humble, none who have
helped him in the many pages of his life, far less any intimate friend,
seeks in vain a grateful mention or a token of regard.

Be that as it may, any writer who loves his work (although a fool for
doing so) feels the end and finish of it like the signature of his
will. And doubly saddened must he be, if the scenes which charmed him
most, and cast upon him such a spell that he could not call spectators
in,—if these, for want of skill, have wearied eyes and hearts he might
have pleased.

For surely none would turn away, whose nature is uncancelled, if once
he could be gently led into that world of beauty. To rest in the
majesty of shade, forgetting weary headache; to let the little carking
cares, avarice and jealousy, self–conceit and thirst of fame, fly away
on the wild wood, like the piping of a bird; to hear the rustle of
young leaves, when their edges come together, and dreamily to wonder at
the size of things above us.

Shall ever any man enclasp the good that grows above him, or even offer
to receive the spread of Heavenʼs greatness? Yet every man may lift
himself above the highest tree–tops, even to the throne of God, by
loving and forgiving.

And verily, some friends of ours, who could not once forego a grudge,
are being taught, by tare and trett, how much they owe their Maker, and
how little to themselves. First of these is Rufus Hutton, quite a jolly
mortal, getting fat, and riding Polly for the sake of his liver and
renes. And all he has to say is this: first, that he will match trees
and babies with those of any nurseryman; next, that as I have a knack
of puffing good people and good things, he begs for reciprocity on the
part of superior readers. And if this should chance to meet the eye of
any one who knows where to find a really first–rate Manilla, conducted
on free–trade principles, such knowing person, by addressing,
confidentially under seal, “R. H., Post–office, Ringwood,” may hear of
something very greatly to his own advantage.

Now do we, without appeal to the blue smoke of enthusiasm, know of
anything to the advantage of anybody whatever? Yes, I think we do. We
may highly commend the recent career of the Ducksacre firm, and Mr.
Clinkers, and Issachar Jupp the bargee. Robert Clinkers and Polly his
wife are driving a first–rate business in coal and coke and riddlings,
not highly aristocratic perhaps, but free from all bad debts. You may
see the name on a great brass–plate near the Broadway, Hammersmith,
on the left hand, where the busses stop. But Mr. Jupp flies at higher
game. He has turned his length of wind, that once secured the palm
of victory in physical encounters, to a higher and nobler use. In a
word, Mr. Jupp is a Primitive Christian upon and beside the waters of
Avon. There you may hear him preaching and singing through his nose
alternately—ah, me, that is not what I mean—for either proceeding is
nasal—every Sunday and Wednesday evening, when the leaks in the punt
allow him. He gets five–and–thirty shillings a–week, as Sir Cradockʼs
water–bailiff, and he has not stolen twig or catkin of all the trees he
convoys down Avon. In seven or eight more summers, little Loo Jupp will
probably be the prettiest girl in the Forest. May we be there to see
her!

The best and kindest man of all who have said their say in my story,
and not thrust their merits forward, John Rosedew, still leads his
quiet life, nearer and nearer to wisdomʼs threshold, nearer and nearer
to the door of God. His temper is as soft and sweet, his memory as
bright and ready, and his humour as playful, as when he was only thirty
years old, and walked every day to Kidlington. As for his shyness, that
we must never ask him to discard; because he likes to know us first,
and then he likes to love us.

But of all the people in the world, next to his own child Amy, most he
loves and most he honours his son–in–law, Cradock Nowell—

Cradock Nowell, so enlarged and purified by affliction, so able now
to understand and feel for every poor man. He, when placed in large
possessions and broad English influence, never will forget the time
of darkness, grief, and penury, never will look upon his brethren, as
under another God than his.

It is true that we must have hill and valley, towering oak and ragged
robin, zenith cloud overlooking the sun, and mist crouching down in the
hollows. And true as well that we cannot see all the causes and needs
of the difference. But is it not still more true and sure, that the
whole is of one universal kingdom (bound together by one great love),
the high and low, the rich and poor, the powerful and the helpless? And
in the spreading of that realm, beyond the shores of time and space,
when at last it is understood what the true aim of this life has been,
not greatness, honour, wealth, or science, no, nor even wisdom—as we
unwisely take it—but happiness here and hereafter, a flowing tide
whose fountain is our love of one another, then shall we truly learn
by feeling (whereby alone we can learn) that all the cleaving of
our sorrow, and cuts into the heart of us, were nothing worse than
preparation for the grafts of God.


                               THE END.


                                LONDON:

            PRINTED BY C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND.




                         TRANSCRIBERʼS NOTES:

—Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.

—A Table of Contents was not in the original work; one has been
 produced and added by Transcriber





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cradock Nowell, Vol. 3 (of 3), by 
Richard Doddridge Blackmore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRADOCK NOWELL, VOL. 3 (OF 3) ***

***** This file should be named 47086-0.txt or 47086-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/0/8/47086/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Shaun Pinder and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

