Dante's Treatise 'De Vulgari Eloquentia' (1303-1305)
Author: Alighieri, Dante; Howell, A. G. Ferrers.
Publication info: Dante's Treatise “De Vulgari Eloquentiâ” [Translated Into English; With Explanatory Notes; By A. G. Ferrers Howell ... ] . vii, 131 p. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co, 1890.

Dante's Treatise “De Vulgari Eloquentiâ” [Translated Into English; with Explanatory Notes; By A. G. Ferrers Howell ... ]
[Page 1]
BOOK FIRST. CHAPTER I.
WHAT THE VULGAR TONGUE IS, AND WHEREIN IT DIFFERS FROM GRAMMAR.
Since we do not find that any one before us has treated of the science of the Vulgar Tongue, while, in fact, we see that this tongue is highly necessary for all, inasmuch as not only men, but even women and children, strive, in so far as Nature allows them, to acquire it; and since it is our wish to enlighten to some little extent the discernment of those who walk through the streets like blind men, generally fancying that those things which are [really] in front of them are behind them; we will endeavour, by the aid of the Wisdom which breathes from Heaven, to be of service to the speech of the common people, not only by drawing the water for such a draught from our own
[Page 2]
understanding, but by taking or compiling from others, mixing the most useful information from each [with our own], so that we may then be able to give draughts of the sweetest hydromel. But as the business of every science is not to prove but to explain its subject, in order that men may know what that is with which the science is concerned, we say at once that we call the Vulgar Tongue that to which children are accustomed by those who are about them when they first begin to distinguish sounds; or, to put it more shortly, we say that the Vulgar Tongue is that which we acquire without any rule, by imitating our nurses. We afterwards have another secondary speech, which the Romans called Grammar. And this secondary speech the Greeks also have, as well as others, but not all. Few, however, acquire the use of this secondary speech, because we can only be guided and instructed in it by the expenditure of much time, and by assiduous study. Of these two kinds of speech also, the Vulgar Tongue is the nobler, as well because it was the first employed by the human race, as because the whole world makes use of it, though it has been divided into different forms of utterance and words. It is also the nobler as being natural to us, whereas the other is rather of an artificial kind; and it is of this nobler form of speech that we intend to treat.
[Page 3]
CHAPTER II.
THAT MAN ALONE HAS INTERCOURSE BY SPEECH
Such [then] is our true first speech. I do not, however, say “ours” as implying that any other kind of speech exists besides man's; for to man alone of all created beings was speech given, because for him alone was it necessary. It was not necessary for the angels or for the lower animals, but would have been given to them in vain, which Nature, as we know, shrinks from doing. For if we clearly consider what our intention is when we speak, we shall find that it is nothing else but to unfold to other the thoughts of our own mind. Since, then, the angels have, for the purpose of manifesting their glorious thoughts, a most ready and indeed ineffable power of intellect, by which one of them is known in all respects to another, either of himself, or, at least, by means of that most brilliant mirror in which all of them are represented in the fulness of their beauty, and into which they all most eagerly gaze: they seem to have required no sign of speech. And if an objection be raised concerning the spirits who fell, it may be answered in two ways. First, inasmuch as we are treating of those things which
[Page 4]
are necessary for well-being, we ought to pass over the fallen angels, because they perversely refused to wait for the Divine care. Secondly (and better), because the devils themselves only need, in order to disclose their perfidy to one another, to know, each of another, that he exists, and what is his rank: which they certainly do know, because they had knowledge of one another before their fall. The lower animals also did not require to be provided with the power of speech, because they are guided by natural instinct alone: for all those of the same species have the same actions and passions; and so they are enabled by their own actions and passions to know those of others. But among those of different species not only was speech unnecessary, but it would have been altogether harmful; since there would have been no friendly intercourse between them. And if it be objected concerning the serpent speaking to the first woman, or concerning Balaam's ass, that they spoke, we reply that the angel in the latter, and the devil in the former, wrought in such a manner that the animals themselves set their organs in motion, and thus the voice thence sounded clear like genuine speech; not that the sound made by the ass was anything but braying, or that made by the serpent anything but hissing. But if any one should argue in opposition, from what Ovid says in the fifth book
[Page 5]
of the Metamorphoses about magpies speaking, we reply that he says this figuratively, meaning something else. And if any one should rejoin that even up to the present time magpies and other birds speak, we say that it is false, because such action is not speaking, but a kind of imitation of the sound of our voice, or, in other words, because they try to imitate us so far as sound is concerned, but not as regards speech. Wherefore, if a magpie were to repeat after any one what he had expressly said, this would be but a representation, or imitation of the sound made by him who had spoken first. And so it is evident that the power of speech has been given to man alone. But why this was necessary for him, we will briefly endeavour to explain.
CHAPTER III.
THAT INTERCOURSE BY SPEECH WAS NECESSARY FOR MAN.
Since , then, man is not moved by natural instinct, but by rason; and reason itself appears in different aspects in individuals in respect of discernment, judgment, or choice, so that almost every one appears to rejoice in his own species: we are of opinion that no one has knowledge of another by
[Page 6]
means of his own actions or passions as a brute beast; nor does it happen that one man can enter into the mind of another by spiritual insight, like an angel, because the human spirit is hindered by the grossness and opacity of its mortal body. It was therefore necessary that the human race should have some rational and sensible sign for the inter-communication of its thoughts: because the sign, having to receive something from the reason of one and to convery it to the reason of another had to be rational ; and since nothing can be conveyed from one reason to another except through a medium of sense, it had to be sensible : for, were it only rational , it could not pass [from the reason of one to that of another]; and were it only sensible , it would neither have been able to take from the reason of one nor to convey it to that of another. Now, this sign is that noble subject itself of which we are speaking; being, as to sound, sensible by nature, but rational in so far as it carries some meaning according to the pleasure of the speaker .
[Page 7]
CHAPTER IV.
TO WHAT MAN SPEECH WAS FIRST GIVEN: WHAT HE SAID FIRST, AND IN WHAT LANGUAGE HE SAID IT.
Speech was given to man alone, as is plain from what has been said above. And now I think we ought to investigate, to whom of mankind speech was first given, and what was the first thing he said, and to whom, when, and where he said it; and also in what language his speech first came forth. Now, according to what we read in the beginning of Genesis, where the most sacred Scripture is treating of the origin of the world, we find that a woman spoke before all others,—I mean that most presumptuous Eve, when, in answer to the inquiry of the devil, she said, “We eat of the fruit of the trees which are in Paradise, but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of Paradise, God has commanded us not to eat of it, nor to touch it, lest peradventure we die.” But though we find it written that a woman spoke first, it is, however, reasonable to suppose that a man spoke first; nor does it appear unsuitable that so excellent an act of the human race should have proceeded earlier from a man than from a woman. We therefore reasonably believe that speech was given first to
[Page 8]
Adam himself by God immediately after He had formed him. As to the first word uttered by the voice of him who spoke first, I feel no doubt that it is plain to a man of sound mind that this first word was the equivalent of “God,” namely “El” in the way of a question or answer. It seems absurd and repugnant to reason that anything should have been named by man before God, since man had been made by Him and through Him. For since after the transgression of the human race every commencement of its speech begins with “Alas,” it is reasonable to suppose that every such commencement before the fall began with joy; and because there is no joy without God, but all joy is in God, and God Himslef is all joy, it follows that he who spoke first, said first and before anything else, “God.” And here arises this difficulty, that having said before that man spoke first by way of answer, if it was an answer it must have been an answer to God; and if so, it would seem that God had spoken first, which appears contrary to what has been said above. To which we reply that he might well have made answer when God questioned him; nor does it follow from this that God spoke in that form of speech which we are discussing. For who doubts that whatever is can be bent according to the will of God? For by Him all things were made, by Him they are preserved, and by Him also they are governed. Therefore, since
[Page 9]
the air is made to undergo such great changes, by the ordinance of that lower Nature which is the minister and workmanship of God, that it causes the thunder to resound, the fire to flash forth, the water to rage, and scatters the snow and hurls down the hail; shall it not be moved to utter certain words rendered distinct by Him who has distinguished greater things? Why not? Wherefore we consider that these observations are a sufficient answer to this difficulty, and to some others.
CHAPTER V.
WHERE AND TO WHOM MAN SPOKE FIRST.
Thinking then (not without reason drawn as well from higher as from lower things) that the first man directed his speech first of all to God Himself, we may reasonably say that this first speaker spoke at once, without delay, after having been inspired by the vivifying power; for in man we believe it to be more characteristic of humanity to be heard than to hear, provided he be heard and hear as a man. If therefore that Workman and Origin and Lover of perfection by His inspiration made the first man complete in all perfection it appears to us reasonable to believe that this most noble of animals did not begin to hear before he began
[Page 10]
to be heard. But if any one raises the objection that there was no need for Adam to speak, as he was, so far, the only human being; whilst God distinguishes all our secret thoughts without any words of ours, and even distinguishes them before we do ourselves; I say, with that reverence which ought to be used in judging anything respecting the Eternal Will, that, though God knew, nay even foreknew (which is the same thing in respect of God) the thought of the first man who spoke, without any words being said, still He wished that the man should speak, in order that, in the unfolding of so great a gift, He Himself who had freely bestowed it might be glorified. And therefore it is to be believed that the joy we feel in the orderly exercise of our faculties proceeds from God. Hence also we can accurately select the place where our first speech was uttered; for if man was inspired with life outside Paradise, he first spoke outside; but if within, we have proved that the place of his first speech was within.
[Page 11]
CHAPTER VI.
IN WHAT LANGUAGE MAN FIRST SPOKE; AND WHAT WAS THE NATIVE COUNTRY OF THE AUTHOR OF THIS WORK.
Since human affairs are carried on in very many and different languages, so that many men are not understood by many with words any better than without words, it will be well for us to make investigation concerning that language which that man who had no mother, who was never suckled, who never saw either adolescence or youth, is believed to have spoken. In this matter, as in many others [we may quote the saying that] Pietramala is a most populous city, and the native place of the majority of the children of Adam. For whoever is so offensively unreasonable as to suppose that the place of his birth is the most delightful under the sun—such a one, I say, may be allowed, into the bargain, to place his own vernacular (that is, his mother-tongue) before all others, and consequently to believe that it actually was that of Adam. But we, to whom the world is our native country, just as the sea is to the fish, though we drank of Arno before our teeth appeared, and though we love Florence so dearly that for the love we bore her we are wrongfully
[Page 12]
suffering exile—we rest the shoulders of our judgment on reason rather than on feeling. And although, as regards our own pleasure or sensuous comfort, there exists no more agreeable place in the world than Florence, still, when we turn over the volumes both of poets and other writers by whom the world is generally and particularly described, and when we reflect in ourselves on the various situations of the places of the world and their arrangement with respect to the poles and to the equator, our deliberate and firm opinion is that there are many countries and cities both nobler and more delightful than Tuscany and Florence, of which I am a native and a citizen; and also that a great many nations and races use a speech both more agreeable and more serviceable than the Italians do. Returning, therefore, to our subject, we assert that a certain form of speech was created by God, together with the first soul. And I say, “a form,” both in respect of the names of things and of the grammatical construction of these names, and of the utterance of this grammatical construction: and this from every tongue of speaking men would use, if it had not been dissipated by the fault of man's presumption, as shall be shown further on.
In this form of speech Adam spoke, and in this form also all his descendants spoke until the building of the tower of Babel, which is by interpretation the tower of confusion; and this
[Page 13]
form of speech was inherited by the sons of Heber, who, after him, were called Hebrews. This language remained with them alone after the Confusion, in order that our Redeemer (who was, as to His humanity, to spring from them) might use, not the language of confusion, but of grace. Therefore Hebrew was the language which the lips of the first speaker formed.
CHAPTER VII.
ON THE DIVISION OF SPEECH INTO VARIOUS LANGUAGES.
It is, alas! with feelings of shame that I now recall the ignominy of the human race. But since it is impossible to avoid passing through it in our course, though the blush of shame rises to our cheeks and our soul revolts from it, we will pass over it quickly. O thou, our human nature, ever prone to sin! O thou, full of iniquity from the first, and ever afterwards without cessation! did it suffice for thy correction that through thy first transgression thou wast removed and banished from thy delightful native land? Did it suffice that through the universal lust and cruelty of thy family, one house alone excepted, whatever was subject to thee perished in the flood,
[Page 14]
and that the animals of earth and air were punished for the evil deeds which thou hadst committed? Certainly this should have been enough; but, as men are wont to say in proverbs, “Thou shalt not ride on horseback before the third time,” thou, wretched one, didst choose rather to come to a wretched steed. See, reader, how man, either forgetting or despising his former discipline, and turning aside his eyes from the marks of the stripes which remained, for the third time provoked the lash by his stupid and presumptuous pride! For incorrigible man, persuaded by the giant, presumed by his own art to surpass not only Nature, but the very Cause of Nature, which is God. And he began to build a tower in Sennar, which was afterwards called Babel, that is, Confusion, by which he hoped to ascend to heaven; meaning, in his ignorance, not to equal, but to surpass his Maker. O boundless clemency of the Heavenly Power! What father would bear so many insults from a son? But, rising up, not with the scourge of an enemy, but of a father, and [with a scourge] accustomed at other times to give stripes, He chastised His rebellious son with correction at once pitiful and memorable. For almost the whole human race had come together to the work of wickedness: some were giving orders; some were acting as architects; some were building the walls; some were adjusting the tiling
[Page 15]
with levels; some were laying on the mortar with trowels; some were quarrying stone; some were engaged in bringing it by sea, some by land; and different companies were engaged in different other occupations, when they were struck by such confusion from heaven, that all those who were attending to the work, using one and the same language, left off the work on being estranged by many different languages, and never again came together in the same intercourse. For the same language remained to those alone who were engaged together in the same kind of work: for instance, one [language remained to] all the architects; another to those rolling down blocks of stone, another to those preparing the stone; and so it happened to each group of workers. And the human race was accordingly divided into as many different languages as there were different branches of the work; and the higher the branch of work the men were engaged in, the ruder and more barbarous was the language they afterwards spoke. But those to whom the holy language remained were neither present, nor countenanced the work; but, utterly hating it, they mocked the folly of those engaged in it. But these formed the smallest part as to numbers, and were, as I conjecture, of the seed of Shem, who was the third son of Noah; and from them sprang the people of Israel, who made use of the most ancient language until their dispersion.
[Page 16]
CHAPTER VIII.
THE SUBDIVISION OF SPEECH THROUGHOUT THE WORLD, AND ESPECIALLY IN EUROPE.
On account of the confusion of tongues related above, we have no slight reason for thinking that men were at that time first scattered through all the climes of the world, and the habitable regions and remote corners of those climes. And as the root of the human race was originally planted in the regions of the East, and our race also spread out from there on both sides by a manifold diffusion of shoots, it finally reached the boundaries of the West, whence rational throats first drank of the rivers of the whole of Europe, or, at least, of some of them. But whether these men then first arrived as strangers, or whether they came back to Europe as natives, they brought a three- fold language with them; and of those who brought it, some allotted to themselves the southern, others the northern part of Europe, while the third body, whom we now call the Greeks, seized on part of Europe and part of Asia. Afterwards, from one and the same idiom, derived from the foul Confusion, various vulgar tongues drew their origin, as we shall show further on. For one idiom prevailed in all the country extending
[Page 17]
from the mouths of the Danube, or the lake of Maeotis, to its western confines, which end in the frontiers of England, Italy, and France, and in the Ocean; though afterwards, through the Slavonians, Hungarians, Teutons, Saxons, English, and many other nations, it was drawn off into various vulgar tongues: this alone remaining to almost all of them as a sign of their common origin, that almost all the above-named answer in affirmation, jo . Proceeding eastwards from this idiom, namely, from the eastern boundary of the Hungarians, another language prevailed over the whole of that part of Europe, and even extended beyond. But a third idiom prevailed in that part of Europe which remains from the other two, though it now appears in a threefold form. For of those who speak it, some say in affirmation oc , others oil , and others sì , namely, the Spaniards, French, and Italians. Now the proof that the vulgar tongues of these three nations proceed from one and the same idiom is obvious, because they call many things by the same names, as Deum, coelum, terram , and vivit, moritur, amat , and almost all other things. Those of them who say oc inhabit the western part of the south of Europe, beginning from the frontier of the Genoese. Those who say sì inhabit the country east of the said frontier, namely [that which extends] as far as that promontory of Italy where the gulf of the Adriatic
[Page 18]
Sea begins; and Sicily. But those who say oil lie in a northerly direction in reference to the others; for they have the Germans on their east and north, are bounded on the west by the English Sea, and, bounded [on the south] by the mountains of Arragon, are also shut in on the south by the inhabitants of Provence and the curve of the Apennines.
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE THREEFOLD VARIETY OF SPEECH, AND HOW THE SAME LANGUAGE UNDERGOES CHANGE IN PROCESS OF TIME: AND OF THE INVENTION OF GRAMMAR.
We must now make proof of the reason we possess, since it is our purpose to investigate matters in which we are supported by the authority of none—namely, the change which has passed over a language which was in its origin of one and the same form. And because it is safer, as well as quicker, to travel by known paths, let us follow up the language which belongs to us alone, neglecting the others. For that which [as giving the explanation of this change] is reasonable in one appears to be the cause [of a similar change] in the others also. The language,
[Page 19]
then, which we are proceeding to treat of is three- fold, as has been mentioned above; for some of those who speak it say oc , others sì , and others oil . And that this language was uniform at first after the beginning of the Confusion (which must first be proved) appears from the fact that we agree in many words, as eloquent writers ( 2 a ) show. And this agreement is repugnant to that confusion which was the consequence of the crime committed in the building of Babel. The writers of all three forms of the language agree, then, in many words, especially in the word Amor . Gerard of Borneil, says—
“ Si m sentis fizels amics
Per ver encusar Amor .”
The king of Navarre—
“ De fin amor si vient sen et bonté .”
Messer Guido Guinicelli—
“ Nè fe amor, prima che gentil core,
Nè cor gentil, prima ch' amor, natura .”
Let us now inquire why it is that this language has varied into three chief forms, and why each of these three variations varies in itself; why, for instance, the speech of the right side of Italy differs from that of the left (for the Paduans speak in one way and the Pisans in another); and also why those who live nearer together differ in their speech, as the Milanese and Veronese, the Romans
[Page 20]
and the Florentines, and even those who agree in the name of their race being the same, as the Neapolitans and the people of Gaeta, those of Ravenna and Faenza, and, what is stranger still, the inhabitants of the same city, like the Bolognese of the Borgo di S. Felice and the Bolognese of the Strada Maggiore. All these differences and varieties of speech which occur will be made clear by one and the same reason. We say, then, that no effect as such goes beyond its cause, because nothing can bring about that which itself is not. Since therefore every language of ours, except that created by God with the first man, has been restored at our pleasure after the Confusion, which was nothing else but forgetfulness of the former language; and since man is a most unstable and changeable animal, no human language can be lasting and continuous, but must needs change like other properties of ours, as, for instance, our manners and our dress, according to differences of time and place. And so far are we from thinking that there is room for doubt as to the truth of our remark, that speech varies by reason of difference of time, that we are of opinion that this is rather to be held as certain. For if we consider all our other actions, we shall find that we differ much more from our fellow-countrymen in very distant times than from our contemporaries very remote in place. Wherefore, we boldly affirm, that if the
[Page 21]
ancient Pavians were to rise from the dead they would talk in a different language from that spoken by the modern Pavians. Nor should what we are saying appear more wonderful than the sight of a young man grown up whom we did not see grwing up. For the motion of those things which move gradually is not considered by us; and the longer the time required for perceiving the variation of a thing, the firmer we suppose that thing to be. We are not, therefore, surprised if the opinions of men who are but little removed from the brutes suppose that the same town has always produced citizens with an unchanging speech; because the change in the speech of the same town comes about gradually, and not without a very long succession of time, whilst the life of man is in its nature extremely short. If, therefore, the speech of the same people varies (as has been said) successively in course of time, and cannot in any wise stand still, it must necessarily happen that the speech of people living apart and removed from one another will vary in different ways; just as manners and dress vary in different ways, since they are not rendered stable either by nature or by intercourse, but arise according to men's inclinations and local fitness. Hence were set in motion the inventors of the art of grammar, which is nothing else but a kind of unchangeable identity of speech in different
[Page 22]
times and places. This having been settled by the common consent of many peoples seems exposed to the arbitrary will of none in particular, and consequently cannot be variable. They therefore invented grammar in order that we might not, en account of the variation of speech fluctuating at the will of individuals, either fail altogether in attaining, or at least attain but a partial knolwedge of the opinions and exploits of the ancients, or of those divided from us by difference of place.
CHAPTER X.
ON THE VARIATION OF LANGUAGE IN ITALY ON THE RIGHT AND ON THE LEFT OF THE APENNINES.
Bearing in mind that our language is now spoken under three forms (as has been said above), we feel, when comparing it with itself according to the threefold character of the sounds composing it, great hesitation and timidity in placing [its different forms] in the balances; because we dare not, in our comparison, give the preference to any one of them, except on account of our finding that the founders of grammar have taken sic as the adverb of affirmation, which seems to confer a kind of precedence on the Italians, who say sì . For each of the three
[Page 23]
divisions of our language defends its pretensions by copious evidence. That of oil alleges on its behalf that, because of its being an easier and pleasanter vulgar tongue, whatever has been translated or composed in vernacular prose belongs to it; namely, the books containing the exploits of the Trojans and Romans, the exquisite legends of King Arthur, and very many other works of history and learning. Another, namely that of oc , claims that speakers of the Vulgar Tongue first employed it for poetry, as being a more finished and sweeter language: for instance, Peter of Auvergne and other ancient writers. The third, which is the language of the Italians, bases its preeminence on the possession of two privileges: first, that the sweetest and most refined poets who have written in the Vulgar Tongue are its intimate friends and belong to its household, like Cino of Pistoia and his friend; second, that it seems to lean more on grammar, which is common [to all]: and this appears a very weighty argument to those who examine the matter in a rational way.
We, however, decline to give judgment in this case, and, confining our treatise to the Vulgar Italian, let us endeavour to enumerate the variations it has undergone in itself, and also to compare these with one another. In the first place, then, we say that Italy has a twofold division into Right and Left. And if any should ask what is the
[Page 24]
dividing line, we answer that it is the ridge of the Apennines, which, like the top of a water-pipe, discharges its droppings in different directions on either side; and the streams flow down to either shore alternately, through long sloping channels, as Lucan describes in his second book. The right side, also, has the Mediterranean Sea as its basin; while the waters on the left fall into the Adriatic. The districts on the right are Apulia (but not the whole of it), Rome the Duchy [of Spoleto], Tuscany and the March of Genoa; those on the left are, part of Apulia, the March of Ancona, Romagna, Lombardy, the March of Treviso with Venetia. Friuli and Istria cannot but belong to the left of Italy; and the Islands of the Mediterranean, namely Sicily and Sardinia, must belong to, or be associated with, the right of Italy. Now, in each of these two sides, and those districts which follow them the language of the inhabitants varies; as, for instance, the language of Sicily as compared with that of Apulia, of Apulia with that of Rome, of Rome with that of Spoleto, of Spoleto with that of Tuscany, of Tuscany with that of Genoa, of Genoa with that of Sardinia; also of Calabria with that of Ancona, of Ancona with that of Romagna, of Romagna with that of Lombardy, of Lombardy with that of Treviso and Venice, of these last with that of Aquileia, and of Aquileia with that of Istria; and we do not think that any
[Page 25]
Italian will disagree with us in this statement. Whence it appears that Italy alone is diversified by not less than fourteen dialects, all of which again vary in themselves; as, for instance, in Tuscany the Sienese differ in speech from the Aretines; in Lombardy, the Ferrarese from the Placentines; and even in the same city we observe some variation of speech, as we remarked above in the last chapter. Wherefore, if we would calculate the primary, secondary, and subordinate variations of the Vulgar Tongue of Italy, we should find in this tiny corner of the world that the varieties of speech not only come up to a thousand, but even to many more.
CHAPTER XI.
IT IS SHOWN THAT SOME IN ITALY HAVE AN UGLY AND AWKWARD DIALECT.
As the Vulgar Italian has so many discordant varieties, let us hunt after a more fitting and an Illustrious Italian language; and, in order that we may be able to have a practicable path for our chase, let us first cast the tangled bushes and brambles out of the wood. Since, then, the Romans think that they ought to have precedence over all the rest, let us in this process of uprooting or
[Page 26]
clearing away give them (not undeservedly) precedence, declaring that we will have nothing to do with them in any scheme of a vernacular language. We say, then, that the Vulgar Tongue of the Romans, or, rather, their hideous jargon, is the ugliest of all the Italian dialects;—nor is this surprising, since they appear in their morals also, and in the depravity of their customs, to stink worse than all the rest;—for they say, “ Me sure quinte dici ”. After them, let us get rid of the inhabitants of the March of Ancona, who say, “ Chignamente sciate state ”, with whom we reject the Spoletans also. Nor must we forget that a great many Canzoni have been written in contempt of these three peoples, among which we have noticed one correctly and perfectly composed by a certain Florentine named Castra, and beginning—
“ Una ferina va scopai da Cascoli,
Cita çita sen gì a grande aina ”.
And, after these, let us weed out the people of Milan and Bergamo with their neighbours, in reproach of whom also we recollect that some one has sung—
“ In te l' ora del vesper,
Ziò fu del mes d' ochiover ”.
After them, let us sift out the Aquileians and Istrians, who belch forth with cruelly harsh accents, “ Çes fastù ”. And with these let us cast out all the mountainous and rural dialects, as those of Casentino
[Page 27]
and Prato, all of which, by the extravagance of their accent, seem discordant to the common people of the towns. Let us also cast out the Sardinians, who are not Italians, but are to be associated with them; because they alone seem to be without any vernacular language of their own, imitating Latin, like apes do men, for they say, “ Domus nova et dominus meus ”.
CHAPTER XII.
OF THE DIALECT OF SICILY AND APULIA.
Having sifted, so to speak, the Italian dialects, let us, comparing together those left in our sieve, briefly choose out the more honourable and respectable of them. And first let us examine the genius of the Sicilian dialect, for it appears to arrogate to itself a greater renown than the others: both because all the poems written by Italians are called Sicilian, and because we find that very many Sicilian writers have written important poems, as in the canzoni, “Ancor che l'acqua per lo fuoco lassi,” and “Amor che lungamente m' hai menato .” But this fame of the land of Sicily appears, if we rightly examine the mark to which it tends, only to have continued by way of a reproach to the princes of Italy, who
[Page 28]
follow after magnificence, not in an heroic, but in a plebeian way. But those illustrious heroes. Frederick Caesar and his highly favoured son Manfred, displaying the nobility and righteousness of their souls as long as fortune was favourable, followed what is human, disdaining what is bestial: wherefore those who were of noble heart and endowed with graces strove to attach themselves to the majesty of such great princes; so that in their time whatever the best Italians produced, first appeared at the court of these mighty sovereigns. And from the fact that the royal throne was in Sicily, it has come to pass that whatever our predecessors wrote in the Vulgar Tongue is called Sicilian; and this name we also retain, nor will our successors be able to change it. Racha, Racha. What is the sound now uttered by the trumpet of the latest Frederick ? What is that uttered by the bell of Charles II.? What is that uttered by the horns of the powerful Marquises John and Azzo? What is that uttered by the flutes of the other magnates? What but “Come, ye murderers; come, ye traitors; come, ye followers after avarice.” But it is better to return to our subject than to speak in vain; so we declare that if we accept the Sicilian dialect, that, namely, spoken by the common people, from whose speech it appears our judgment should be drawn, we shall
[Page 29]
find that it is in nowise worthy of preference because it is not uttered [in poetry] except on some particular occasion, as, for instance, in the poem, “ Traggemi d' este focora se t' este a bolontate ”.
If, however, we decline to accept this dialect, but choose in preference that spoken by the highest Scilians, as it may be examined in the canzoni quoted before, [we shall find] that it differs in nothing from that language which is the most worthy of praise, as we shall show further on.
Then the Apulians, because of their own harshness of speech, or else because of their nearness to their neighbours the Romans and people of the Marches, make use of shameful barbarisms, for they say, “ Volzera che chiangesse lo quatraro ”. But although the natives of Apulia commonly speak in a hideous manner, some of them have been distinguished for their polished language, inserting more curial words into their canzoni , as clearly appears from an examination of their works; for instance—
“ Madonna, dir vi voglio ,”
and
“ Per fino amore vo' si lietamente ”.
Wherefore it should become clear to those who mark what has been said above, that neither the Sicilian nor the Apulian dialect is that Vulgar
[Page 30]
Tongue which is the most beautiful in Italy; for we have shown that eloquent natives of those parts have diverged from their own dialect.
CHAPTER XIII.
THE TUSCAN AND GENOESE DIALECTS.
Next let us come to the Tuscans, who, in their frenzied infatuation, seem to arrogate to themselves the title of the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue; and in this matter we find not only that the minds of the common people are crazed, but that many distinguished men have embraced the delusion; for instance, Guittone of Arezzo, who never adopted the Curial Vulgar Tongue, Bonagiunta of Lucca, Gallo of Pisa, Mino Mocato of Siena, and Brunetto of Florence, whose works, if there be leisure to examine them, will be found to be not Curial , but merely written in the local dialect. And because the Tuscans exceed the rest in this frenzied intoxication of theirs, it seems right and profitable to deal with the dialects of the Tuscan towns one by one, and to take off somewhat of their vain-glory. The Florentines open their mouths and say, “ Manuchiamo introcque, non facciamo altro ;” the Pisans, “ Bene andonno li Fanti di Fioranza per Pisa ;” the people of Lucca,
[Page 31]
“ Fo voto a Dio che in gassara eie lo comuno di Luca ”; the Sienese, “ Onche rinegata avesse io Siena ”; the Aretines, “ Vo' tu venire ovelle ” . We do not intend to deal with Perugia, Orvieto, Viterbo and Città Castellana, because of their close connection with the Romans and Spoletans. But, obtuse as almost all the Tuscans are in [keeping to] their degraded dialect, we have noticed that some have recognized the excellence of the [Italian] Vulgar Tongue ( 7a ), namely, Guido , Lapo, and another, all Florentines, and Cino of Pistoja, whom we now undeservedly put last, though not undeservedly driven to do so. Therefore, if we examine the Tuscan dialects, reflecting how the writers commended above have deviated from their own dialect, it does not remain doubtful that the Vulgar Tongue we are in search of is different from that which the people of Tuscany use.
But if any one thinks that what we say of the Tuscans may not also be said of the Genoese, let him but bear this in mind, that if the Genoese were, through forgetfulness, to lose the letter Z, they would have either to be dumb altogether or to discover some new kind of speech, for Z forms the greatest part of their dialect, and this letter cannot be uttered without great harshness.
[Page 32]
CHAPTER XIV.
ON THE DIALECT OF ROMAGNA, AND SOME OF THE DIALECTS BEYOND THE PO, ESPECIALLY THE VENETIAN.
Let us now cross the leaf-clad shoulders of the Apennines, and hunt over the whole of the left side of Italy, beginning, as usual, from the East. Entering Romagna, then, we remark that we have found two principal alternate dialects in Italy, with certain opposite characteristics. One of these, on account of the softness of its words and pronunciation, seems so feminine that it causes a man, even when speaking like a man, to be believed to be a woman. All the people of Romagna have this dialect, especially those of Forli, whose city though the most modern, seems to be the middle point of all the province. These people say “ Deusci ”, and use “ oclo meo ” and “ corada mea ” as terms of endearment. We have heard that some of them have diverged in poetry from their own dialect, namely, the Faentines Thomas, and Ugolino Bucciola. There is also, as we have observed, another dialect, so bristling and shaggy in its words and accents that, owing to its rough harshness, it not only distorts a woman's speech, but makes one doubt whether
[Page 33]
she is not a man. All those who say magara have this dialect, namely, the Brescians, Veronese, and Vicentines, as well as the Paduans, with their ugly syncopations of all the [Latin] participles in tus and substantives in tas , as mercò and bonté . With these we also class the Trevisans, who, like the Brescians and their neighbours, substitute the consonant f for v , cutting off the final syllable of the word, as nof for nove, vif for vivo ; which we disapprove as a gross barbarism.
Nor do the Venetians deem themselves worthy of the honour of possessing that Vulgar Tongue which we have been searching for; and if any of them, driven by error, should cherish any delusion on this point, let him remember whether he has ever said, “ Per le plage de Dio tu non veras ”. Among the Venetians we have noticed one writer striving to depart from his mother-tongue, and to apply himself to the Curial vernacular language, namely, Hildebrand of Padua.
Wherefore, on all the dialects mentioned in the present chapter coming up for judgment, our decision is that neither that of Romagna nor its opposite (as we have mentioned), nor that of Venice, is that Illustrious Vulgar Tongue which we are seeking.
[Page 34]
CHAPTER XV.
THE AUTHOR DISCUSSES AT LENGTH THE DIALECT OF BOLOGNA.
Let us now, in order that we may clear the way, track out what remains of the Italian wood. We say, then, that perhaps those are not far wrong who assert that the people of Bologna use a more beautiful speech [than the others], because they receive into their own dialect something borrowed from their neighbours of Imola, Ferrara, and Modena, just as we have pointed out that all [writers in the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue] borrow from their neighbours, as [the instance of] Sordello shows with respect to his native Mantua, to which Cremona, Brescia, and Verona are adjacent; and he, who was so distinguished by his eloquence, not only in poetry but in every other form of utterance, forsook his native dialect. The abovementioned citizens of Bologna, also, get from those of Imola their smoothness and softness [of speech], and from those of Ferrara and Modena a spice of sharpness characteristic of the Lombards. This we believe has remained with the inhabitants of that district as a relic of the admixture of the foreign Longobards with them: and this is the reason why we find that there has been no poet among the people of Ferrara, Modena, or Reggio.
[Page 35]
For, from being accustomed to their own sharpness, they cannot adopt the Courtly Vulgar Tongue without [betraying] a kind of roughness, which we must consider as much more apparent in the case of the people of Parma, who say monto instead of molto . If, therefore, the people of Bologna borrow from both these kinds of dialect, it seems reasonable that their speech should, by the mixture of opposites above referred to, remain tempered to a praiseworthy sweetness; and this we without hesitation judge to be the case. So that if those who place the people of Bologna first in the matter of the Vulgar Tongue merely have regard in their comparison to the dialects of the different Italian towns, we gladly agree with them: but if they consider that the dialect of Bologna is, taken absolutely, worthy of preference, we altogether disagree with them, because this dialect is not that language which we term Courtly and Illustrious: for, if it were, the greatest Guido Guinicelli, Guido Ghislieri, Fabrizio and Onesto, and other poets of Bologna would never have departed from it; and these were distinguished writers, well versed in the various differences of dialect. The greatest Guido wrote—
“ Madonna il fermo cuore ;”
Fabrizio—
“ Lo mio lontano gire ;”
Onesto—
“ Più non attendo il tuo soccorso, Amore .”
[Page 36]
And these words are altogether different from the common dialect of Bologna. And since we consider that no one can feel any doubt as to the inhabitants of the towns at the extremities of Italy, and if any one does, we do not deem him worthy of any answer from us, little remains to be mentioned in our discussion. Therefore, being eager to put down our sieve so that we may quickly see what is left in it, we say that Trent and Turin as well as Alessandria are towns situated so near the frontiers of Italy that they cannot possess a pure language, so that even if their dialects were as lovely as they are hideous, we should still say that they were not truly Italian, because of their foreign ingredients. Wherefore, if we are hunting for an Illustrious Italian language, we shall not find what we are hunting for in them.
CHAPTER XVI.
OF THE EXCELLENCE OF THE HIGHEST FORM OF THE VULGAR TONGUE: AND HOW IT IS COMMON TO ALL ITALIANS.
After having scoured the heights and pastures of Italy without having found that panther which we are in pursuit of, let us now track her out in a more rational manner, in order that we may with
[Page 37]
skilful efforts completely enclose within our toils her who is everywhere felt but nowhere seen. Resuming, then, our hunting-spears, we say that in every genus of things there must be some standard by which all the things of that genus may be compared and weighed, so that from it we may obtain the measure of all the rest: just as in numbers all are measured by unity, and are said to be more or fewer according as they are distant from or near to unity: so also in colours all are measured by white, for they are said to be more or less visible according as they approach or recede from it. And what we say of those things which display quantity and quality, we think may also be said of all the categories and of substance : namely, that everything in a genus is measurable by that which is simplest in the same genus. Wherefore in our actions, however many may be the species into which they are divided, we have to discover this standard by which they may be measured: thus, in what concerns our actions as human beings simply, we have Virtue, in order that we may have insight into the nature of our actions generally, for according to it we judge a man to be good or bad: in what concerns our actions as citizens, we have the Law, according to which a citizen is said to be good or bad: in what concerns our actions as Italians, we have certain very simple standards of manners, customs, and language, by
[Page 38]
which our actions as Italians are weighed and measured. Now the noblest of those actions which belong to us as Italians are peculiar to no one town in Italy but are common to all: and among these we can now distinguish that Vulgar Tongue which we were pursuing above, and which is perceptible in every town, but abiding in none. It may, however, be more perceptible in one than in another, just like the simplest of substances, which is God, who is more perceptible in a man than in a brute, in an animal than in a plant, in a plant than in a mineral; in heaven than in the elements, in fire than in earth. And the simplest quantity, which is unity, is more perceptible in an odd than in an even number; and the simplest colour, which is white, is more perceptible in orange than in green. Having, then, found what we were looking for, we declare that the Illustrious, Cardinal, Courtly, and Curial Vulgar Tongue in Italy is that which belongs to all the towns in Italy, but does not appear to belong to any one of them; and is that by which all the local dialects of the Italians are measured, weighed, and compared.
[Page 39]
CHAPTER XVII.
WHY THIS LANGUAGE IS CALLED ILLUSTRIOUS.
We must now set forth in order why it is that we call this language we have found by the epithets Illustrious, Cardinal, Courtly and Curial; and by doing this we shall more clearly explain the nature of the language itself. First, then, let us lay bare what we mean by the epithet Illustrious, and why we call the language Illustrious. Now, whatever we call Illustrious we understand to be something which shines forth illuminating and illuminated: and in this way we call men illustrious, either because, being illuminated by authority, they illuminate others by [the display of] Justice and Charity; or else because, having been excellently trained, they in turn give excellent training, like Seneca and Numa Pompilius. And the Vulgar Tongue of which we are speaking has both been exalted by training and authority, and also exalts its followers by honour and glory. Now, it appears to have been exalted by training, inasmuch as we see it [purified] from so many rude Italian words, involved constructions, faulty expressions, and rustic accents, and brought to such a degree of excellence, clearness, completeness, and polish, as is displayed by Cino of Pistoja and his friend in
[Page 40]
their Canzoni . And that it has been exalted by authority is plain; for what is of greater authority than that which can sway the hearts of men, so as to make an unwilling man willing, and a willing man unwilling, just as this language has done and is doing? Now, that it exalts its followers by honour is evident. Do not they surpass in renown kings, marquises, counts, and all other magnates? This has no need at all of proof. But we ourselves know how glorious it makes its friends, for the sweetness of this glory makes us cast even our exile behind our back. Wherefore we ought deservedly to proclaim this language as Illustrious.
CHAPTER XVIII.
WHY THIS LANGUAGE IS CALLED CARDINAL, COURTLY, AND CURIAL.
It is not without reason that we adorn this Illustrious Vulgar Tongue with a second epithet; that is, that we call it Cardinal: because, as the whole door follows its hinge, and whither the hinge turns the door also turns, whether it be moved inwards or outwards; so the whole herd of local dialects turns and returns, moves and pauses, according as this [Illustrious language does], which really seems to be the father of a family. Does it not daily
[Page 41]
root out the thorny bushes from the Italian wood? Does it not daily insert cuttings or plant young trees? What else have its foresters to do but to bring in and take away as has been said? Wherefore it surely deserves to be adorned with so great a name as this.
Now, the reason we call it Courtly is as follows: if we Italians had a Court it would be an Imperial one; and if a Court is a common home of all the realm, and an august ruler of all parts of the realm, it would be fitting that whatever is of such a character as to be common to all [parts] without being peculiar to any should frequent this Court and dwell there: nor is there any other abode worthy of so great an inmate. Such, in fact, seems to be that Vulgar Tongue of which we are speaking; and hence it is that those who frequent all the royal palaces always speak the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue. Hence, also, it happens that our Illustrious Language wanders about like a wayfarer, and is welcomed in humble shelters, seeing we have no Court.
This language is also deservedly to be styled Curial because Curiality is nothing else but the justly balanced rule of things which have to be done; and, because the scales required for this kind of balancing are only wont to be found in the most excellent Courts of Justice, it follows that whatever is well balanced in our
[Page 42]
actions is called Curial. Wherefore, since this Illustrious language has been weighed in the balances of the most excellent Court of Justice of the Italians, it deserves to be called Curial. But it seems mere trifling to say that it has been weighed in the balances of the most excellent Court of Justice of the Italians, because we have no [Imperial] Court of Justice. To this the answer is easy. For, though we have no Court of Justice in Italy in the sense of the one [Supreme] Court of the King of Germany, still the members of such a Court are not wanting. And just as the members of the German Court are united under one Prince, so the members of ours have been united by the gracious light of Reason. Wherefore, it would be false to assert that the Italians have no such Court of Justice, though we have no Prince, because we have a Court, though, as a body, it is scattered.
CHAPTER XIX.
THAT THE LOCAL ITALIAN DIALECTS ARE REDUCIBLE TO ONE WHICH IS CALLED ITALIAN.
Now we declare that this Vulgar Tongue, which we have shown to be Illustrious, Cardinal, Courtly, and Curial, is that which is called the Vulgar Italian. For just as a Vulgar Tongue is to be
[Page 43]
found belonging to Cremona, so can one be found belonging to Lombardy; and just as one can be found belonging to Lombardy, so one can be found belonging to the whole of the left side of Italy. And just as all these can be found, so also can that which belongs to the whole of Italy. And just as the first is called Cremonese, the second Lombard, and the third Semi-Italian, so that which belongs to the whole of Italy is called the Italian Vulgar Tongue. For this has been used by the illustrious writers who have written poetry in the vernacular throughout Italy; as Sicilians, Apulians, Tuscans, natives of Romagna, Lombardy, and both the Marches. And because our intention is, as we promised in the beginning of this work, to give instruction concerning the Vulgar Tongue, we will begin with this Illustrious Italian as being the most excellent; and treat, in the following books, of those whom we think worthy to use it; and for what, and how, and also where, when, and to whom, it ought to be used. And after making all this clear, we will make it our business to throw light on the lower forms of the Vulgar Tongue, gradually coming down to that which belongs to a single family.
[Page 44]
BOOK SECOND. CHAPTER I.
FOR WHOM THE USE OF THE POLISHED AND ORNATE VULGAR TONGUE IS FITTING, AND FOR WHOM IT IS NOT FITTING.
Promising once more to display the activity of our mental power, and taking up again the pen of useful work, we declare in the first place that the Illustrious Italian Vulgar Tongue is equally fit for use in prose and in verse. But because prosewriters get this language especially from poets, and because poetry remains a fixed pattern to prosewriters, and not the contrary, inasmuch as certain [definite] things appear to confer a supermacy on verse: therefore, according as this language is [primarily] metrical, let us carefully disentangle it, treating of it in the order we set forth at the end of the first book. Let us,then, first inquire whether those who write verse in the Vulgar Tongue should use this Illustrious language; and, so far as a superficial consideration of the matter goes, it would seem that they should, because every one who writes verse ought to adorn his verse as far as he is able. Wherefore, as nothing affords so
[Page 45]
great an adornment as the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue does, it would seem that every writer of verse ought to employ it. Besides, if that which is best in its kind be mixed with things inferior to itself, it not only appears not to detract anything from them, but even to improve them. Wherefore, if any writer of verse, even though his verse be poor in thought, mixes the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue with his poverty of thought, not only will he improve his poverty of thought, but he actually appears to be obliged to take this course. Things of small power require much more assistance than things of great power; and thus it appears that all writers of verse are at liberty to use this Illustrious language. But this is quite false, because not even poets of the highest order ought always to assume it, as will appear from a consideration of what is discussed farther on. This Illustrious language, then, just like our behaviour in other matters and our dress, demands men of like quality to its own; for great magnificence demands men of power, and the purple, men of noble character: and, in the same way, this Illustrious language seeks for men who excel in genius and knowledge, and despises others, as will appear from what is said below. For everything which is suited to us is so either in respect of the Genus, or of the Species, or of the Individual, as Sensation, Laughter, War: but this Illustrious language is not suited to us in
[Page 46]
respect of our Genus, for then it would also be suited to the brutes; nor in respect of our Species, for then it would be suited to all men,—and as to this there is no question, for no one will say that this language is suited to dwellers in the mountains; because the best thoughts cannot exist except where knowledge and genius are found: therefore the best language is suitable in respect of the Individual. But nothing is suited to an Individual except on account of his particular merit, as, for instance, Commerce, War, and Government. Wherefore, if things are suitable according to merit, that is, according to individual worth (and some men are worthy, others worthier, and others worthiest), it is plain that good things are suited to the worthy, better things to the worthier, and the best things to the worthiest. And as language is the instrument of our thought, just as a horse is the instrument of a soldier, and as the best horses are suited to the best soldiers, so the best language will, as has been said, be suited to the best thoughts. But the best thoughts cannot exist except where knowledge and genius are found; therefore the best language is only suitable in those in whom knowledge and genius are found: and so the best language is not suited to all who write verse, since a great many write without knowledge and genius: and consequently neither is the best Vulgar Tongue [suited to all who write verse]
[Page 47]
Wherefore, if it is not suited to all, all ought not to use it, because no one ought to act in an unsuitable manner. And as to our statement that every one ought to adorn his verse as far as he can, we declare that it is true: but we should not describe an ox with a saddle or a swine with a belt as adorned, nay, rather we should laugh at them as disfigured; for adornment is the addition of some suitable thing. As to our statement that superior things mixed with inferior produce a perfect thing, we say that it is true if the blending is complete, as when we mix gold and silver together; but if it is not, the inferior things appear worse, as when beautiful women are mixed with ugly ones. Wherefore, since the theme of those who write verse always persists as an ingredient separate from the words; it will not, unless of the highest quality, appear better when associated with the best Vulgar Tongue, but worse; like an ugly woman if dressed out in gold or silk.
[Page 48]
CHAPTER II.
FOR WHAT SUBJECTS THE ORNATE VULGAR TONGUE OUGHT TO BE USED.
After having proved that not all those who write verse, but only those of the highest excellence ought to use the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue, we must in the next place establish whether every subject ought to be handled in it, or not; and if not, we must show separately what subjects are worthy of it. And, in reference to this, we must first find out what we understand by that which we call worthy. Worthy is that which has worthiness , just as noble is that which has nobility ; and as, when the qualifying term is known, the qualified term is [also] known in so far as it is qualified by the other, if we know what worthiness is, we shall know also what worthy is. Now, worthiness is an effect or end of deserts: so that when any one has deserved well, we say that he has arrived at worthiness of good; but when he has deserved ill, at worthiness of evil. Thus we say that a soldier who has fought well has arrived at worthiness of victory; one who has ruled well, at worthiness of a kingdom; also, that a liar has arrived at worthiness of shame, and a robber at worthiness of death. But inasmuch as [further] comparisons
[Page 49]
are made among those who deserve well, as also among those who deserve ill, so that some deserve well, some better, and some best, some badly, some worse, and some worst; while such comparisons are only made with respect to the end of deserts, which (as has been mentioned before) we call worthiness , it is plain that worthinesses are compared together according as they are greater or less, so that some are great, some greater, and some greatest; and, consequently, it is obvious that one thing is worthy, another worthier, and another worthiest. And because there can be no such comparison of worthinesses with regard to the same object [of desert], but [only] with regard to different objects, so that we call worthier that which is worthy of greater objects, and worthiest that which is worthy of the greatest, because no thing can be more worthy than another of the same object: it is evident that the best things are worthy of the best [objects of desert], according to the requirement of the things. Whence it follows that, since the language we call Illustrious is the best of all the other forms of the Vulgar Tongue, the best subjects alone are worthy of being handled in it, and these we call the worthiest of those subjects which can be handled: and now let us hunt out what they are. And, in order to make this clear, it must be observed that, as man has been endowed with a threefold life, namely,
[Page 50]
Vegetable, Animal, and Rational, he journeys along a threefold road: for in so far as he is Vegetable, he seeks for what is useful in that which he has in common with plants; in so far as he is Animal (4), he seeks for what is pleasurable in that which he has in common with the brutes; in so far as he is Rational (4), he seeks for what is right,—and in this he stands alone, or is a partaker of the nature of the Angels. It is by these three kinds of life that we appear to carry out whatever we do: and because in each one of them some things are greater, some greatest, it follows that those which are greatest appear the ones which ought most to be treated of, and, consequently, in the greatest Vulgar Tongue. But we must discuss what things are greatest; and first in respect of what is useful. Now, in this matter, if we carefully consider the object of all those who are in search of what is useful, we shall find that it is nothing else but Safety. Secondly, in respect of what is pleasurable: and here we say that that is most pleasurable which gives pleasure by the most exquisite object of appetite, and this is Love. Thirdly, in respect of what is right: and here no one doubts that Virtue has the first place. Wherefore these three things, Safety, Love, and Virtue, appear to be those capital matters which ought most to be treated of,—I mean the things which are most closely connected with them,
[Page 51]
as prowess in Arms, the fire of Love, and the right direction of the Will. And, if we duly consider, we shall find that the illustrious writers have written poetry in the Vulgar Tongue on these subjects exclusively, namely, Bertram of Born on Arms; Arnauld Daniel on Love ; Gerard of Borneil on Righteousness; Cino of Pistoja on Love; his friend on Righteousness. For Bertram says—
“Non puesc mudar q' un chantar non esparja ;”
Arnauld—
“ L' aura amara fa'ls broils blancutz clarzir ;”
Gerard—
“ Per solatz revelhar
Que s'es trop endormitz ;”
Cino—
“ Degno son io, che mora ;”
His friend—
“ Doglia mi reca nello cuore ardire ”.
I do not find, however, that any Italian has as yet written poetry on the subject of Arms.
Having then arrived at this point, we know what are the proper subjects to be sung in the highest Vulgar Language.
[Page 52]
CHAPTER III.
THE AUTHOR DISTINGUISHES THE FORMS IN WHICH POETS WRITE IN THE VULGAR TONGUE.
Let us now endeavour carefully to examine how those matters which are worthy of so excellent a Vulgar Tongue are to be restricted. As we wish, then, to set forth the form by which these worthy matters are to be bound, we say, in the first place, that it must be borne in mind that those who have written poetry in the Vulgar Tongue have uttered their poems in many different forms; some in that of Canzoni , some in that of Ballate , some in that of Sonnets, some in other illegitimate and irregular forms, as will be shown further on. Now, we consider that of these forms that of Canzoni is the most excellent, and therefore, if the most excellent things are worthy of the most excellent, as has been proved above, those subjects which are worthy of the most excellent Vulgar Tongue are worthy of the most excellent form, and consequently ought to be handled in Canzoni . Now, we may discover by several reasons that the form of Canzoni is such as has been described. The first reason, is that though whatever we write in verse is a Canzone , the
[Page 53]
Canzoni [technically so-called] have alone acquired this name; and this has never happened without [the sanction of] some ancient provision. Moreover, whatever produces by its own power the effect for which it was made, appears nobler than that which requires external assistance; but Canzoni produce by their own power the whole effect they ought to produce, which Ballate do not, for they require the assistance of the performers for whom they are written; it therefore follows that Canzoni are to be deemed nobler than Ballate , and therefore that their form is the noblest of any, for no one doubts that Ballate excel Sonnets in nobility of form. Besides, those things appear to be nobler which bring more honour to their author: but Canzoni bring more honour to their authors than Ballate ; therefore they are nobler than these, and consequently their form is the noblest of any. Furthermore, the noblest things are the most fondly preserved: but among poems Canzoni are the most fondly preserved, as is evident to those who look into our books; therefore Canzoni are the noblest [poems], and consequently their form is the noblest. Also, in works of art, that is noblest which embraces the whole art; since, therefore, poems are works of art, and the whole of the art is embraced in Canzoni alone, Canzoni are the noblest poems, and so their form is the noblest of any. Now, that the whole of the art of poetic
[Page 54]
song is embraced in Canzoni appears from the fact that whatever is found in the art is found in them; but the converse is not true. But the proof of what we are saying is at once apparent; for all the utterances of the highest mental powers of illustrious poets are found in Canzoni alone. Wherefore, in reference to the subject now before us, it is clear that the matters which are worthy of the highest Vulgar Tongue ought to be handled in Canzoni.
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE VARIETY OF STYLE OF THOSE WHO WRITE POETRY.
Having , then, proved by a process of disentangling what persons and things are worthy of the Courtly Vulgar Tongue, as well as the form of verse which we deem worthy of such honour as alone is fitted for the highest Vulgar Tongue, before going off to other topics, let us explain the form of the Canzone , which many appear to adopt rather by chance than by design; and let us display that, of which a knowledge has been hitherto casually assumed, I mean the teaching of [the practice of] this art; omitting the form of Ballate and Sonnets, because we intend to explain this in the fourth book of
[Page 55]
this work, when we treat of the Intermediate Vulgar Tongue. Reviewing, therefore, what has been said, we remember that we have for the most part given the name of poets to those who write verse in the Vulgar Tongue; and this we have doubtless ventured to say with good reason, because they are in fact poets, if we take a right view of poetry, which is nothing else but a rhetorical composition set to music . But these poets differ from the great poets—that is, the Regular ones,—for these last have written poetry with stately language and regular art, whereas the others, as has been said, write by chance. It therefore happens that the nearer we approach to the great poets, the more correct is the poetry we write; whence it behoves us, by devoting somewhat of our work to teaching [the rules of the art], to emulate their poetic teaching.
In the first place, then, we say that each one ought to take up a subject of such weight as to be a fair burden for his own shoulders, so that their strength may not be too heavily taxed and he be forced to tumble into the mud. This is the advice our master Horace gives us when he says, in the beginning of his “Art of Poetry”, “Ye who write, take up a subject suited to your strength.”
Next, we ought to possess a sound judgment as to those things which suggest themselves to us as
[Page 56]
fit to be uttered, so as to decide whether they ought to be sung in the way of Tragedy, Comedy, or Elegy. By Tragedy we understand the Higher style, by Comedy, the Intermediate style, by Elegy we understand the Lower style. If our subject appears fit to be sung in the Tragic style we must then assume the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue, and consequently we must write a properly constructed Canzone . If it appears fit to be sung in the Comic style, sometimes the Illustrious and sometimes the Lower Vulgar Tongue should be used, and the judgment to be exercised in this case we reserve for treatment in the Fourth Book. If our subject appears fit to be sung in the Elegiac style we must adopt the Lower Vulgar Tongue alone.
But let us omit the other styles, and now, as is fitting, let us treat of the Tragic style. We are said, then, to make use of the Tragic style when the Stateliness of the Lines as well as the Loftiness of the Construction and the Excellence of the Words agree with the Weight of the Subject. But, because, if we remember rightly, it has already been proved that the highest things are worthy of the highest, and because the style which we call Tragic appears to be the highest style, those things which we have distinguished as being worthy of the highest song are to be sung in that style alone, namely, Safety, Love, and Virtue, and those other things, our conceptions
[Page 57]
of which arise from these: provided that they be not degraded by any accident. Let every one, therefore, beware, and discern what we say; and, when he purpose to sing of these three subjects simply, or of those things which directly and simply follow after them, let him first drink of Helicon, and then, after adjusting the strings, boldly take up his plectrum and begin in the proper manner. But it is just here, in the due composition of the Canzone and in the exercise of this judgment that the real difficulty lies; for the proper result can never be attained without strenuous efforts of genius, constant practice in the art, and fully available knowledge. And it is those [so equipped] whom the Poet in the Sixth Book of the Aeneid describes as Beloved of God, raised by glowing virtue to the sky, and Sons of the Gods, though he is speaking figuratively. And here let the folly of those stand confessed who, innocent of art and knowledge, and trusting to genius alone, rush forward to sing of the highest subjects in the highest style. Let them cease from such presumption, and if, in their natural sluggishness they are but geese, let them abstain from imitating the eagle soaring to the stars.
[Page 58]
CHAPTER V.
OF THE STRUCTURE OF THE LINES, AND THEIR VARIATION BY MEANS OF SYLLABLES.
We seem to have said enough, or at least as much as our work requires, about the weight of the subjects to be treated in Canzoni . Wherefore let us hasten on to the Stateliness of the Lines, in respect of which it is to be observed that our predecessors have made us of different lines in their Canzoni , as the moderns also do; but we do not find that any one has hitherto used a line of more than eleven or less than three syllables. And though the Italian poets have used the lines of three and of eleven syllables and all the intermediate ones, those of five, seven, and eleven syllables are more frequently used [than the others]; and next to them, that of three syllables in preference to the others: but of all these, the line of eleven syllables seems the stateliest, as well by reason of the length of time it occupies as of the extent of subject, construction, and language of which it is capable: and the beauty of all these things is more multiplied in this line [than in the others], as is plainly apparent, for, wherever individual items of weight are multiplied, the weight of the whole is multiplied also. And all poets [in the Vulgar Tongue]
[Page 59]
seem to have considered this [to be true], as they begin their Illustrious Canzoni with the line of eleven syllables, as Gerard of Borneil—
“ Ara auzirets encabalitz chantars .”
And though this line appears to be of ten syllables, it is in reality of eleven, for the last two consonants do not belong to the preceding syllable. And though they have no vowel belonging to them, still they do not lose the force of a syllable: and the proof of this is, that the rhyme is in this instance completed by one vowel, which could not be the case except by virtue of another understood in this line.
The King of Navarre writes—
“ De fin Amor si vient sen et bonté ;”
where, if the accented syllable and the pause on it be considered, the line will be found to have eleven syllables. Guido Guincelli writes—
“ Al cuor gentil ripara sempre Amore ;”
Guido Giudice dalle Colonne of Messina—
“ Amor che longamente m' hai menato ;”
Rinaldo d'Aquino—
“ Per fino Amore vo si lietamente ;”
Cino, of Pistoia—
“ Non spero che giammai per mia salute ;”
his friend—
“ Amor che muovi tua virtù dal cielo ”.
[Page 60]
And though this line of eleven syllables appears, as has been said, the most celebrated of all, yet, if it be associated in some slight degree with the line of seven syllables (provided only it retain its supremacy), it seems to rise yet more illustriously and loftily in its stateliness; but this must be left for further explanation. We say also that the line of seven syllables follows next after that which is greatest in celebrity. After this we place the line of five and then that of three syllables. But the line of nine syllables, which appeared to consist of the line of three taken three times was either never held in honour or fell into disuse because it was disliked. As for the lines of an even number of syllables, we use them but rarely, because of their rudeness; for they retain the nature of their numbers , which are subject to the odd numbers as matter to form. And so, summing up what has been said, the line of eleven syllables appears the stateliest line, and this is what we were in search of. It now remains for us to investigate concerning exalted constructions and pre-eminent words; and, at length, after having got ready our sticks and ropes, we will teach how we ought to bind together the promised faggot—that is, the Canzone.
[Page 61]
CHAPTER VI.
OF THE VARIOUS CONSTRUCTIONS TO BE USED IN “CANZONI.”
Inasmuch as our intention has reference to the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue, which is the noblest of all, and we have distinguished the things which are worthy of being sung in it, which are the three noblest subjects, as has been established above, and have chosen the form of Canzoni for them, as being the highest form; and have also (in order that we may more perfectly give thorough instruction in this form) settled certain preliminaries, namely the Style and the Line: let us now deal with the Construction. Now, it must be observed that we call Construction a regular arrangement of words, as “ Aristoteles philosophatus est tempore Alexandri ”, for here we find five words regularly arranged, and they form one construction. Now, in reference to this we must first bear in mind that one construction is congruous while another is incongruous; and inasmuch as, if we recollect the beginning of our distinction, we are only pursuing the highest things, the incongruous construction finds no place in our pursuit, because it has proved deserving of a lower degree of goodness. Let, therefore, illiterate persons be ashamed—I say, let them be ashamed of
[Page 62]
being henceforth so bold as to burst forth into Canzoni , for we laugh at them just as we laugh at a blind man distinguishing between colours. It is, then, the congruous construction after which we are following. But here we come to a distinction of not less difficulty [than the former] before we can reach what we are in search of—I mean, that construction which is most full of refinement: for there are a great many degrees of constructions; namely [first] the tasteless, which is that of common people; as, “Peter is very fond of Mistress Bertha.” [Then] there is the simply savoury, which is that of rigid scholars or masters; as, “I am sorry for the wretched, but I have greater sorrow for those who, languishing in exile, only revisit their native land in their dreams”. There is also the savoury and graceful, which belongs to some who make a superficial use of rhetoric; as, “The praiseworthy discernment of the Marquis of Este and his magnificence prepared for all makes him beloved” . Then there is the savoury and graceful and also exalted, which is that of the Illustrious writers; as, “Totila, having cast the greatest part of the flowers out of thy bosom, O Florence, went late and fruitlessly into Sicily”. This degree of construction we call the most excellent, and this is the one we are seeking for, since, as has been said, we are in pursuit of the highest things. And the Illustrious Canzoni are found to be made
[Page 63]
up of this alone, as [that by] Gerard [of Borneil, beginning]—
“ Si per mon Sobre-Totz no fos ;”
[that by] the King of Navarre, [beginning] —
“ Dreit Amor qu'en mon cor repaire ;”
[that by] Folchetto of Marseilles, [beginning]—
“ Tam m'abelhis Pamoros pensamens ;”
[that by] Arnauld Daniel, [beginning]—
“ Sols sui qui sai lo sobrafan que m sortz ;”
[that by] Aimery de Belinoi, [beginning]—
“ Nuls hom non pot complir adreitamen ;”
[that by] Aimery de Péguilain, [beginning]—
“ Si com Parbres que per sobrecarcar ;”
[that by] Guido Guinicelli, [beginning]—
“ Tengo di folle impresa allo ver dire ;”
[that by] Guido Cavalcanti, [beginning]—
“ Poi che di doglia cuor convien ch' io porti ;”
[that by] Cino of Pistoia,, [beginning]—
“ Avenga ch' io non aggia più per tempo ;”
[that by] his friend, [beginning]—
“ Amor che nella mente mi ragiona ;”.
And, Reader, you must not be surprised at our calling to memory so many authors; for we cannot point out that construction which we call the highest except by examples of this kind. And it
[Page 64]
would possibly be very useful, in order to the full acquirement of this construction, if we had surveyed the Regular poets—I mean Virgil, Ovid in his “Metamorphoses,” Staius, and Lucan as well as other writers who have employed the most lofty prose, as Cicero, Livy, Pliny, Frontinus , Paulus Orosius , and many others whom friendly solitude invites us to consult. Let, then, those followers of ignorance hold their peace who praise up Guido of Arezzo and some others who have never got out of the habit of being plebeian in words and in construction.
CHAPTER VII.
WHAT WORDS ARE TO BE PUT [INTO “CANZONI”] AND WHAT WORDS ARE INADMISSIBLE IN VERNACULAR METRE.
The next division of our progress demands that an explanation be given as to those words which are of such grandeur as to be worthy of being admitted into that style to which we have awarded the first place. We declare, therefore, to begin with, that the due selection of words involves not the smallest labour of our reason, because we see that a great many sorts of them can be found. For some words are childish , some feminine ,
[Page 65]
some manly : and of these last some are sylvan , others urban ; and of those we call urban we feel that some are combed-out and glossy , some shaggy and rumpled . Now, among these urban words, the combed-out and the shaggy are those we call grand : whilst we call the glossy and the rumpled those whose sound is superfluous, just as among great works some are works of magnanimity, others of smoke; and as to these last, although when superficially looked at there may be thought to be a kind of ascent, still, [when they are viewed] by sound reason no ascent will be found, but rather a headlong fall down giddy precipices, because the marked-out path of virtue is departed from. Consider then, Reader, how much it behoves thee to use the sieve in selecting noble words: for if thou hast regard to the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue, which (as has been said above) poets ought to use when writing in the Tragic style in the vernacular (and these are the persons to whom we intend to give information), thou wilt take care that the noblest words alone are left in thy sieve. And among these thou wilt not be able in anywise to place childish words, because of their simplicity, as mamma and babbo, mate and pate ; nor feminine words because of their softness, as dolciada and placevole ; nor sylvan words, because of their roughness, as greggia and the rest; nor the glossy nor rumpled urban words as femina and corpo . Therefore
[Page 66]
thou wilt see that only the combed-out and the shaggy urban words will be left to thee, which are the noblest, and members of the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue. Now, we call those words combedout which have three, or as nearly as possible three syllables, without aspirate, without acute or circumflex accent, without the double consonants z or x , without double liquids or liquids placed immediately after a doubled mute; and which, so to say, leave the speaker with a certain sweetness, like amore, donna, disio, virtute, donare, litiria, salute, securitate, difesa . We call shaggy all words beside these which appear either necessary or ornamental to the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue. We call necessary those which we cannot change, as certain monosyllables like sì, vo, me, te, se, a, e, i, o, u, the interjections, and many more. We describe as ornamental all polysyllables which, when mixed with combed-out words produce a fair harmony of structure though they may have the roughness of aspirate, accent, double [ s or z ], [double] liquids and length as terrà, honore, spezza , gravitate, alleviato, impossibilitate, benavventuratissimo, avventuratissimamente, disavventuratissimamente, sovramagnificantissimamente , which last has eleven syllables. A name or word might yet be found with more syllables still; but as it would exceed the capacity of all our lines it does not appear to fall into the present discussion; such a
[Page 67]
word is onorificabilitudinitate , which runs in Italian to twelve syllables, and in Latin to thirteen, in two of the oblique cases. In what way shaggy words of this kind are to be harmonized in metres with the combed-out words we leave to be taught further on. And what has been said here on the preeminent nature of the words to be used may suffice for every one of inborn discernment.
CHAPTER VIII.
WHAT A “CANZONE” IS, AND HOW IT ADMITS OF SEVERAL VARIED FORMS.
Having prepared the sticks and cords for our faggot, the time is now come to bind it up: but inasmuch as knowledge of every work should precede performance, just as there must be a mark to aim at, before we let fly an arrow or javelin, let us first, and principally, see what that faggot is which we intend to bind up. That faggot then (if we bear well in mind all that has been said before) is the Canzone . Wherefore let us see what a Canzone is, and what we mean when we speak of a Canzone . Now, a Canzone , according to the true meaning of the name, is the action or passion itself of singing, just as a composition read is the action or passion of reading. But let us examine
[Page 68]
what has been said, namely whether a Canzone is so called as being an action or passion. In reference to this we must consider that a Canzone may be taken in two ways: in one way as having been composed by its author, and so as an action; and it is in this way that Virgil says, in the first book of the Aeneid , “I sing of arms and the man:” in another way, when, after having been composed it is uttered either by the author or by someone else, whether with or without modulation of sound, and thus it is a passion. For in the first case it is acted upon, but in the second it appears to act on some one else; and so, in the first case, it appears as the action of some one, and in the second it also appears as the passion of some one. And because it is acted on before it acts, it appears more [properly] to get its name from its being acted on and being the act of some one than from its acting on others. Now, the proof of this is, that we never say “This is Peter's Canzone ” meaning that he utters it, but meaning that he has composed it.
We must next discuss the question whether we call a Canzone the composition of the words which are set to music, or the music itself: and with regard to this, we say that no music [alone] is ever called a Canzone , but a Sound, or Tone, or Note, or Melody. For no trumpet-player or organist or lute-player calls his melody a
[Page 69]
Canzone except in so far as it has been wedded to some Canzone : but those who write words suitable for music call their works Canzoni . And such words, even when written down on paper without any one to utter them, we call Canzoni : and therefore a Canzone appears to be nothing else but the completed action of one writing words [to be] set to music. Wherefore we call Canzoni , not only Canzoni [in the strict sense, of] which we are now treating, but also Ballate and Sonnets and all words of whatever kind written for music, both in the Vulgar Tongue and in Latin. But inasmuch as we are only discussing works in the Vulgar Tongue, setting aside those in Latin, we say that of poems in the Vulgar Tongue there is one supreme which we call Canzone in a super-excellent sense: and the supremacy of the Canzone has been proved in the third chapter of this book. And since the term which has been defined appears to be common to many things, let us take up again the common term which has been defined, and distinguish by means of certain differences that thing which alone we are in search of. We declare therefore that the Canzone which we are in search of as being so called in a super-excellent sense, is a composition in the Tragic style of equal stanzas, without choral interludes, with reference to one subject, as we have shown in our composition “ Donne che avete intelletto d' Amore ”. Therefore also it
[Page 70]
appears sufficiently plain what we mean when we speak of a Canzone , and consequently what that faggot is which we are endeavouring to bind up. Now, the reason why we call it a composition in the Tragic style, is because, when such a composition is made in the Comic style, we call it, by way of diminution, Cantilena , of which we intend to treat in the fourth book of this work.
CHAPTER IX.
WHAT ARE THE PRINCIPAL PARTS IN A “CANZONE,” AND HOW THE STANZA IS THE MORE PRINCIPAL PART.
Inasmuch as a Canzone is a composition of stanzas, as has been said, we must necessarily be ignorant of the Canzone if we do not know what a Stanza is: for knowledge of the thing defined results from knowledge of the things defining; and it therefore follows that we must treat of the Stanza, in order, that is, that we may discover what it is and what we wish to understand by it. And in reference to this matter we must observe that this word has been invented solely with respect to the art [of the Canzone ]: namely, in order that that in which the whole art of the Canzone is contained should be called Stanza , that is, a
[Page 71]
room able to hold, or a receptacle for the whole art. For just as the Canzone embosoms the whole theme, so the Stanza embosoms the whole art: nor is it lawful to claim anything of art for the subsequent [stanzas]; but they may only be clothed with the art of the first stanza: from which it is plain that the stanza of which we are speaking is the limit or binding together of all those things which the Canzone derives from the art: and if we explain them, the description we are in search of will become clear. The whole art, then, of the Canzone appears to depend on three things: first, on the division of the musical setting; second, on the arrangement of the parts; third, on the number of the lines and syllables: but we make no mention of Rhyme, because it does not concern the peculiar art of the Canzone , for it is allowable in any stanza to introduce new rhymes and to repeat the same at pleasure, but this would by no means be allowed if Rhyme belonged to the peculiar art of the Canzone . But if it concerns us to retain anything relating to Rhyme as belonging to this art, it will be comprised in the passage where we shall speak of the arrangement of the parts. Wherefore we may here collect the defining terms from what has been said, and declare that a stanza is a structure of lines and syllables limited with reference to a certain musical setting and to the arrangements of its parts.
[Page 72]
CHAPTER X.
WHAT THE MUSICAL SETTING OF THE STANZA IS: AND HOW THE STANZA IS VARIED IN SEVERAL WAYS IN THE “CANZONE.”
Knowing that man is a rational animal, and that an animal consists of a sensible soul and a body, if we are ignorant either of what this soul is, or of what the body itself is, we cannot have a perfect knowledge of man, because the perfection of knowledge of every single thing is determined by its ultimate elements, as the Master of the Wise testifies in the beginning of his Physics. Therefore, in order to obtain that knowledge of the Canzone which we are panting for, let us now briefly examine the parts of the definition given of the Canzone , and first let us inquire concerning the Musical Setting, next concerning the Arrangement of the parts, and afterwards concerning the Lines and Syllables.
We say, then, that every stanza is set for the reception of a certain Ode; but this appears to be done in different ways, for some proceed throughtout to one continuous ode—that is, without the repetition of any musical phrase, and without any Dieresis (4): and we understand by
[Page 73]
Dieresis, a transition from one ode to another: this, when speaking to the common people, we call Volta . And this kind of stanza was used by Arnauld Daniel, in almost all his Canzoni , and we have followed him in ours beginning—
“ Al poco giorno ed al gran cerchio d' ombra ”.
But there are some stanzas which admit of a Dieresis, and there can be no Dieresis (in our sense of the word) unless a repetition of one ode be made either before the Dieresis, or after, or both. If the repetition takes place before the Dieresis, we say that the stanza has Feet: and it ought to have two, though sometimes (but very rarely) we find three. If the repetition takes place after the Dieresis, then we say that the stanza has Verses. If there is no repetition before [the Dieresis], we say that the stanza has a Fronte ; if there is none after, we say that it has a Syrma or Coda . See, therefore, Reader, how much licence is given to those who write Canzoni , and consider on what account custom has claimed so large a choice: and if Reason shall have guided thee by a straight path, thou wilt see that this licence of which we are speaking has been granted only by the deservedly pre-eminent authority of the Canzone .
From what has been said here, it will become plain how the art of the Canzone depends on the
[Page 74]
division of the Musical Setting: and therefore let us go on to the Arrangement [of the parts].
CHAPTER XI.
OF THE ARRANGEMENT [OF THE PARTS] OF THE STANZA, THE NUMBER OF FEET AND SYLLABLES, AND THE DISTINCTION OF THE LINES TO BE PLACED IN THE COMPOSITION.
It appears to us that what we call the Arrangement [of the parts of the stanza] is the most important section of what belongs to the art [of the Canzone ]: for this depends on the division of the Musical Setting, the putting together of the lines, and the relation of the rhymes: wherefore it seems to require to be most diligently treated of. We will therefore begin by saying that the Fronte taken with the Verses, and the Feet with the Syrma or Coda, and also the Feet taken with the Verses, may be differently arranged in the stanza: for sometimes the Fronte exceeds or may exceed the Verses in syllables, but not in lines; and we say “may exceed” because we have never yet met with this arrangement. Sometimes [the Fronte ] may exceed the Verses in lines, and be exceeded by them in syllables; as, if the Fronte had five lines and each Verse had two lines, while the lines of the
[Page 75]
Fronte were of seven syllables, and those of the Verses of eleven syllables. Sometimes the Verses exceed the Fronte in syllables and in lines; as in our Canzone “Traggemi della mente Amor la stiva ” . Here the Fronte was composed of four lines, three of eleven syllables and one of seven syllables: for it could not be divided into Feet, since an equality of lines and syllables is required in the Feet with respect to one another, and also in the Verses with respect to one another. And just as we say that the Verses may exceed the Fronte in lines and syllables, so it may be said that the Fronte , in these two particulars, may exceed the Verses: as, if each Verse had two lines of seven syllables, and the Fronte were made up of five lines, two of eleven syllables and three of seven syllables. And sometimes the Feet exceed the Coda in lines and syllables; as in our Canzone “Amor che muovi tua virtù dal cielo ”. Sometimes the Feet are exceeded by the Syrma, both in lines and syllables; as in our Canzone, “Donna pietosa e di novella etate ” . And just as we have said that the Fronte may exceed [the Verses] in lines and be exceeded by them in syllables, and the contrary , so we say of the Syrma. The Feet likewise may exceed the Verses in number, and be exceeded by them: for there may be in a stanza three Feet and two Verses, or three Verses and two Feet; nor are we limited by that number, so as not to be
[Page 76]
able to combine more Feet as well as Verses at the same time. And just as we have spoken of the victory of lines and syllables in comparing the other parts of the stanza together, we now also say the same as regards the Feet and Verses [compared together], for these can conquer and be conquered in the same way. Nor must we omit to mention that we take Feet in the contrary sense to that of the Regular poets, because they said that the line consisted of Feet, but we say that a Foot consists of lines, as appears plainly enough. Nor must we omit to state again that the Feet necessarily receive from one another an equality of lines and syllables, and their arrangement, for otherwise the repetition of the melodic section could not take place. And we declare that the same rule is to be observed in the Verses.
CHAPTER XII.
OF WHAT LINES STANZAS ARE MADE, AND OF THE NUMBER OF SYLLABLES IN THE LINES.
There is also, as we have said before, a certain arrangement which we ought to consider in putting the lines together; and therefore let us deal with this, repeating what we have said above respecting the lines. In our practice three lines especially appear
[Page 77]
to have the prerogative of frequent use, namely the line of eleven syllables, that of seven syllables, and that of five syllables, which we have shown are to be used in preference to the others. Of these, when we are attempting poetry in the Tragic style, the line of eleven syllables deserves, on account of a certain excellence, the privilege of conquest in the structure [of the stanza]. For there is a certain stanza which rejoices in being made up of lines of eleven syllables alone, as this one of Guido of Florence —
“ Donna mi prega perch 'io voglia dire .”
And we, also, have said—
“ Donne che avete intelletto d'Amore ”.
The Spaniards have also used this line, and I mean by Spaniards those who have written poetry in the vernacular of oc . Aimery of Belinoi [has written]— “ Nuls hom non pot complir adreitamen .” There is a certain stanza where only one line of seven syllables is woven in, and this cannot be except where there is a Fronte or a Coda, because (as has been said) in the Feet and Verses an equality of lines and syllables is required. Wherefore, also, neither can there be an odd number of lines where there is no Fronte or no Coda, but where we have a Fronte or a Coda we may freely use an even or an odd number of lines. And just
[Page 78]
as there is a certain stanza formed containing one line of seven syllables, so it appears that a stanza may be woven together with two, three, four or five such lines, provided only that in the Tragic style the lines of eleven syllables predominate in number, and one such line begin. We do, indeed, find that some writers in the Tragic style have begun with a line of seven syllables, namely Guido dei Ghisilieri and Fabrizio, both of Bologna , as thus—
“ Di fermo sofferire; ”
and—
“ Donna, lo fermo cuore; ”
and—
“ Lo mio lontano gire .”
But if we go carefully into the sense of these [ Canzoni ], their Tragedy will not appear to proceed without a certain faint shadow of Elegy . With regard to the line of five syllables we are not so liberal in our concessions; in a great work it is sufficient for one line of five syllables to be inserted in the whole Stanza, or two at most in the Feet: and I say “in the Feet” because of the requirements of the Musical Setting in the Feet and Verses. It does not appear that the line of three syllables, when taken by itself, should be adopted in the Tragic style: and I say “when taken by itself” because it often appears to be adopted by way of certain echoing of the rhymes,
[Page 79]
as may be discovered in this Canzone of Guido of Florence—
“ Donna mi prega perch 'io voglia dire ;”
and in the following of ours—
“ Poscia che Amor del tutto m' ha lasciato ”
And in this Canzone the line of three syllables does not appear at all by itself, but only as a part of a line of eleven syllables answering like an echo to the rhyme of the line before. And hence, Reader, you may be sufficiently able to choose in what way to arrange your stanza: for the arrangement appears to require to be considered with reference to the lines. And this further point must be specially attended to with regard to the arrangement of the lines, [namely] that if a line of seven syllables be inserted in the first Foot it must take up the same position in the second that it receives in the first; for instance, if a Foot of three lines has the first and last of eleven syllables, and the middle one—that is, the second—of seven syllables, so the second Foot must have the first and last of eleven syllables and the middle one of seven syllables: otherwise the repetition of the melodic section, with reference to which the Feet are constructed, as has been said, could not take place; and consequently there could be no Feet. And what we have said of the Feet [may be said] of the Verses also: for we see that the Feet and
[Page 80]
Verses differ in nothing but position, the former term being used before the Dieresis of the Stanza and the latter after it. And we declare also that what has been said of the Foot of three lines is to be observed in all other Feet. And what we have said of one line of seven syllables we also say of two or more than two lines of seven syllables, and of the line of five syllables, and of every other line.
CHAPTER XIII.
OF THE RELATION OF THE RHYMES, AND IN WHAT ORDER THEY ARE TO BE PLACED IN THE STANZA.
Let us also apply ourselves to the relation of the rhymes, not however dealing with them now in themselves , for we put off the special treatment of them till afterwards, when we shall deal with poems in the Intermediate [Vulgar Tongue]. In the beginning of this chapter it seems advisable to explain certain things: one is, the unrhymed stanza in which there is no question of arrangement of rhymes; and Arnauld Daniel very often made use of this kind of stanza, as here— “ Si m fos Amors de joi donar tan larga ;” and we have said—
“ Al poco giorno ed al gran cerchio d' ombra .”
[Page 81]
Another thing is, the stanza all of whose lines give the same rhyme: and here it is plainly unnecessary to seek for any arrangement [of rhymes]; and so it remains for us only to dwell upon the mixed rhymes. And, first, it must be remarked that in this matter almost all writers take the fullest licence; and it is from this that the sweetness of the whole harmony chiefly results. There are, then, some poets who sometimes do not make all the endings of the lines rhyme in the same stanza, but repeat the same endings, or else make the rhymes to them in the other stanzas: as Gotto of Mantua has done, and he has sung many good Canzoni of his own to us. He always wove into his stanza one line unaccompanied [by a rhyme], which he called the key. And as one such line is allowable, so also are two, and perhaps more. There are some other poets, and almost all the authors of Canzoni , who never leave any line unaccompanied in the stanza without answering it by the consonance of one or more rhymes. Some poets also make the rhymes of the lines following the Dieresis different from the rhymes of the lines preceding it; whilst some do not do this, but bring back the endings of the former part of the stanza, and weave them into the lines of the latter part. But this occurs oftenest in the ending of the first line of the latter part [of the stanza], which very many poets make to rhyme with the ending of the
[Page 82]
last line of the former part ; and this appears to be nothing else but a kind of beautiful linking together of the whole stanza. Also with regard to the arrangement of the rhymes according as they are in the Fronte or Coda, every suitable licence should, it seems, be conceded; but still the endings of the last lines will be most beautiful if they fall with a rhyme into silence . But in the Feet we must be careful, and here we find that a particular arrangement has been observed: and, making a distinction, we say that a Foot is completed with either an even or an odd number of lines, and in both cases there may be rhymed and unrhymed endings; in the Foot of an even number of lines no one feels any doubt [as to this], but in the other, if any one is doubtful, let him remember what was said in the preceding chapter about the line of three syllables when, as forming part of a line of eleven syllables, it answers like an echo . And if there happens to be an unrhymed ending in one of the Feet, it must by all means be answered by a rhyme in the other; but if all the endings in one of the Feet are rhymed, it is allowable in the other either to repeat the endings, or to put new ones, either wholly, or in part, at pleasure, provided, however, that the order of the preceding endings be observed in its entirety: for instance, if in the first Foot of three lines the extreme endings, that is, the first and last, rhyme
[Page 83]
together, so the extreme endings of the second Foot must rhyme together; and, according as the middle line in the first Foot sees itself accompanied or unaccompanied [by a rhyme], so let it rise up again in the second: and the same rule is to be observed with regard to the other kinds of Feet. In the Verses, also, we almost always obey this law: and we say “almost” because, on account of the above—mentioned linking together [of the two parts of the stanza], and combination of the final endings , it sometimes happens that the order now stated is reversed.
Moreover, it seems suitable for us to add to this chapter what things are to be avoided with regard to the rhymes, because we do not intend to deal any further in this book with the learning relating to Rhyme. There are, then, three things with reference to the position of the rhymes, the appearance of which is unbecoming to a Courtly poet; namely, [first], excessive repetition of the same rhyme, unless, perchance, this expedient claim for itself the merit of being something new and before unattempted in the art [of the Canzone ], just like the general of a newly raised army, who is displeased to let a day's service pass without some martial exploit : and this we appear to have achieved in the Canzone beginning—
“ Amor, tu vedi ben che questa donna ” .
The second of the things to be avoided is that useless
[Page 84]
ambiguity which always seems to detract somewhat from the subject [of the Canzone ]: and the third is roughness of rhymes, unless it be mingled with smoothness; for the Tragedy itself gains brilliancy from the mixture of smooth and rough rhymes. And let this suffice concerning the art [of the Canzone ], so far as it relates to the arrangement [of the parts of the stanza].
CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE NUMBER OF LINES AND SYLLABLES IN THE STANZA.
Having sufficiently treated of those things which belong to the art in the Canzone , it now appears that we ought to treat of the third matter , namely, the number of the lines and syllables. And, in the first place, with regard to the stanza as a whole, it is necessary to observe something and to distinguish something which we shall afterwards observe in relation to its parts . It concerns us, therefore, first to make a distinction between those matters which fall to be sung of, because some of them seem to desire a long drawnout stanza, and others do not; since we sing of all the matters we are speaking of either with reference to the right or to the left , just as it happens
[Page 85]
that we sing sometimes persuasively, sometimes dissuasively, sometimes in congratulation, sometimes in irony, sometimes in praise, sometimes in contempt. And those words which refer to the unfavourable should always hasten to the end, while the others should advance to the end with a suitable prolixity.
[Page ]
[Page ]
NOTES. BOOK FIRST. CHAPTER I. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 CHAPTER II. 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 CHAPTER III. 17 18 CHAPTER IV. 19 20 21 22 CHAPTER V. 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 CHAPTER VI. 31 32 33 34 35 CHAPTER VII. 36 37 38
[Page 94]
39 40 41 42 43 44 45 CHAPTER VIII. 46 47 CHAPTER IX. 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57
[Page 98]
CHAPTER X. 58 59 60 61 62 63 64
[Page 99]
CHAPTER XI. 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 CHAPTER XII. 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89
[Page 103]
90 91 92 93 94 95 CHAPTER XIII. 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 CHAPTER XIV 107
[Page 106]
108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 CHAPTER XV 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124
[Page 109]
CHAPTER XVI. 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132
[Page 111]
CHAPTER XVIII. 133 134
[Page 112]
BOOK SECOND. CHAPTER I. 135 136 137 138 139 140 CHAPTER II. 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 CHAPTER III. 151 152 153
[Page 115]
154 CHAPTER IV. 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 CHAPTER V. 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 CHAPTER VI. 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185
[Page 119]
186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 CHAPTER VII. 197 198
[Page 121]
199 200 201 202 203 204 205 CHAPTER VIII. 206 207 208 209 210 CHAPTER IX. 211
[Page 122]
CHAPTER X. 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 CHAPTER XI. 221 222 223 224 225 226 227
[Page 124]
CHAPTER XII. 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 CHAPTER XIII. 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 CHAPTER XIV. 246 247 248
[Page ]
APPENDIX I.
Canzone referred to above, II. x., note 6:—
I.
Al poco giorno, ed al gran cerchio d' ombra
Son giunto, lasso! ed al bianchir de' colli,
Quando si perde lo color nell' erba,
E 'l mio desio però non cangia il verde,
Sì è barbato nella dura pietra,
Che parla e sente come fosse donna.
II.
Similemente questa nuova donna
Sì sta gelata come neve all' ombra,
Che non la muove se non come pietra
II dolce tempo che riscalda i colli
E che li fa tornar di bianco in verde
Perchè gli copre di fioretti e d' erba.
III.
Quand 'ella ha in testa una ghirlanda d' erba
Trae dalla mente nostra ogni altra donna
Perchè si mischia il crespo giallo e 'l verde
Sì bel, ch' Amor vi viene a stare all' ombra,
Che m'ha serrato tra piccoli colli
Più forte assai che la calcina pietra.
IV.
Le sue bellezze han più virtù che pietra,
E 'l colpo suo non puol sanar per erba;
Ch' io son fuggito per piani e per colli,
[Page 127]
Per potere scampar da cotal donna;
Ed al suo viso non mi può far ombra
Poggio, nè muro mai, nè fronda verde.
V.
Io l' ho veduta già vestita a verde
Sì fatta, ch' ella avrebbe messo in pietra
L' Amor ch' io porto pure alla sua ombra,
Ond' io l' ho chiesta, in un bel prato d' erba,
Innamorata, com' anco fu donna,
E chiuso intorno d' altissimi colli.
VI.
Ma ben ritorneranno i fiumi a' colli
Prima che questo legno molle e verde
S' infiammi (come suol far bella donna)
Di me, che mi torrei dormir su pietra
Tutto il mio tempo, e gir pascendo l' erba,
Sol per veder de' suoi panni l'ombra.
Quandunque i colli fanno più nera ombra,
Sotto il bel verde la giovine donna
Gli fa sparir, come pietra sott' erba.
The three lines following the sixth stanza were called the Commiato . It is very surprising that Dante does not explain how they were musically dealt with.
APPENDIX II.
The following stanzas are referred to above, II. xi., note 4; and xiii., note 4.
I. First Foot.
Amor che muovi tua virtù dal cielo
Come 'l sol lo splendore
Chè là s'apprende più lo suo valore
Dove più nobiltà suo raggio trova;
[Page 128]
Second Foot.
E come 'l fuga oscuritate e gelo,
Così, alto signore,
Tu cacci la viltate altrui del core,
Nè ira contra te fa lunga prova;
Dieresis. Syrma, Or Coda.
Da te convien che ciascun ben si muova
Per lo qual si travaglia il mondo tutto:
Senza te è distrutto
Quanto avemo in potenza di ben fare;
Come pintura in tenebrosa parte
Che non si può mostrate,
Nè dar diletto di color, nè d'arte.
II. First Foot.
Donna pietosa e di novella etate,
Adorna assai di gentilezze umane,
Era là ov' io chiamava spesso morte.
Second Foot.
Veggendo gli occhi miei pien di pietate
Ed ascoltando le parole vane,
Si mosse con paura a pianger forte.
Dieresis. Syrma, Or Coda.
Ed altre donne che si furo accorte
Di me per quella che meco piangea
Fecer lei partir via,
Ed appressârsi per farmi sentire.
[Page 129]
Qual dicea, “Non dormire,”
E qual dicea, “Perchè sì ti sconforte?”
Allor lasciai la nova fantasia
Chiamando il nome della donna mia.
APPENDIX III.
Stanza referred to above, II. xii., note 4:—
First Foot.
Amor, che nella mente mi ragiona
Della mia donna disiosamente,
Move cose di lei meco sovente
Che l' intelletto sovr' esse disvia.
Second Foot.
Lo suo parlar sì dolcemente sona
Che l' anima ch' ascolta e che lo sente
Dice, “O me lassa! ch' io non son possente
Di dir quel ch' odo della donna mia.”
Dieresis. Syrma, Or Coda.
E certo e' mi convien lasciare in pria
S' io vo' trattar di quel ch' odo di lei
Ciò che lo mio intelletto non comprende,
E di quel che s' intende
Gran parte, perchè dirlo non saprei.
Però se le mie rime avran difetto,
Ch' entreran nella lode di costei,
Di ciò si biasmi il debole intelletto,
E 'l parlar nostro che non ha valore
Di ritrar ciò che dice Amore.
[Page 130]
APPENDIX III.
Stanza referred to above, II. xii., note 8:—
First Foot.
Poscia ch' Amor del tutto m' ha lasciato
Non per mio grato
Chè stato—non avea tanto gioioso,
Ma perocchè pietoso
Fu tanto del mio core
Che non sofferse d' ascoltar suo pianto;
Second Foot.
lo canterò così disamorato
Contr' al peccato
Ch' è nato—in noi di chiammare a ritroso
Tal, ch' è vile e noioso,
Per nome di valore,
Cioè di leggiadria, ch' è bella tanto,
Dieresis . Syrma, Or Coda.
Che fa degno di manto
Imperial colui dov' ella regna.
Ella è verace insegna
La qual dimostra u' la virtù dimora:
Per che son certo, sebben la difendo
Nel dir, com' io la 'ntendo
Ch' Amor di sè mi farà grazia ancora.
[Page 131]
APPENDIX V.
Referred to above, II. xiii., note 6:—
First Foot.
Doglia mi reca nello core ardire
A voler, ch' è di veritate amico;
Però, donne, s' io dico
Parole quasi contr' a tutta gente
Non ven maravigliate.
Second Foot.
Ma conoscete il vil vostro desire;
Chè la beltà, ch Amore in voi consente,
A virtù solamente
Formata fu dal suo decreto antico
Contro lo qual fallate.
Dieresis. Syrma, Or Coda.
Io dico a voi che siete inammorate,
Che, se beltate a voi
Fu data, e virtù a noi,
Ed a costui di due poter un fare,
Voi non dovreste amare,
Ma coprir quanto di beltà v' è dato
Poichè non è virtù ch' era suo segno.
Lasso! a che dicer vegno?
Dico, che bel disdegno
Sarebbe in donna di ragion lodato
Partir da sè beltà per suo commiato.
NOTES
1 [1] 04801001By grammar Dante means a literary language based on certain grammatical rules, and free from the mutability inherent in vernacular tongues (see below, I. ix.). This literary language, as regards Italy in Dante's time, was, of course, Latin. In Convito, I. xi., he talks of “la grammatica greca,”meaning the literary language of Greece, and contrasts it with Latin, the vernacular of Italy in the time of Cicero, to which he is referring. Balbo (Vita di Dante, p. 57) remarks, “La grammatica non toccava alle lingue moderne o volgari abbandonate all' uso, e tenute in quel conto che si fa ora de' dialetti.”
2 [2] 04801002Discretionem. Cf. Conv., I. xi., where Dante, after stating the use of the bodily eyes, says “così la parte razionale ha suo occhio col quale apprende la differenza delle cose in quanto sono ad alcuno fine ordinate, e quest' è la discrezione.”
3 [3] 04801003Cf. Par., viii. 94, where Charles Martel (son of Charles II. of Anjou, king of Naples) says, “S' io posso Mostrarti un vero a quel che tu dimandi Terrai il viso come tieni il dosso:” and again ib., line 136, after the explanation has been given, “or quel che t' era dietro t' è davanti.”
4 [4] 04801004Verbo aspirante de coelis. It is better to take Verbo, not as meaning the Word as in St. John's Gospel, ch. i., (though Dante uses it in this sense, Par., vii. 30; xxiii. 73), but as equivalent to the Wisdom of God, as in Par., xix. 44. Cf. Conv., II. vi., “La somma sapienza del Figluolo,” and III. xiv., xv., where the two ideas are blended. For the expression “aspirante,” cf. Par., i. 19, ii. 8, where “spirare” is used of Apollo and Minerva respectively, and vii. 142, xv. 2, where it is used of the Divine Love.
5 [5] 04801005Dulcissimum hydromellum. Giuliani considers the honey to be the material drawn from others, and the water, Dante's own.
6 [6] 04801006Sed quia unamquamque doctrinam oportet non probare sed suum aperire subjectum. Cf. Conv., II. xiv., where Dante, comparing the different sciences to the heavens, says, “Ciascuno Cielo mobile si volge intorno al suo centro il quale, per quanto sia quello movimento, non sì muove: e così ciascuna scienza si muove intorno al suo soggetto, lo quale essa non muove, perocchè nulla scienza dimostra lo proprio suggetto ma presuppone quello.
7 [7] 04801007If we compare Conv., I. v., with this passage we shall find that Dante considered Latin to be superior to the Vulgar Tongue (a) because of its being fixed and incorruptible; (b) because of its greater efficiency as a vehicle of thought; (c) because of the greater beauty due to its artificial character: but also that Dante considered the Vulgar Tongue superior to Latin (a) because of its greater antiquity; (b) because of the greater number of people who used it; (c) because it is natural rather than artifical, and therefore (see below, ch. iv. of this book) the direct gift of God.
8 [1] 04801008Compare the following passages: Quaestio de Aqua et Terra, § 18: “We must know that universal nature is not baulked of its end; whence, though natuere in particular cases may sometimes be baulked of its intended end on account of the disobedience of matter, still, universal nature can in nowise fail of its intention, since the actuality and potentiality of things which are capable of being and not being, are equally subject to universal nature.” Inf., xi. 99. “Natura lo suo corso prende Dal divino intelletto e da sua arte.” In De Monarchia, I. iv., Dante speaks of God “having produced the human race in being by His art, which is Nature:”and immediately after, he says, “God and nature makes” (note the singular verb) “nothing in vain: but whatever they produce” (again, in the original, the verb is in the singular) “in being is [designed] for some operation.” In Par., viii. 113, he says: “Impossibil veggio Che la natura in quel ch' é uopo stanchi;” and the same words occur in Latin, Mon., i. 12.
9 [2] 04801009Cf. Conv., I. v. “Lo sermone ... ordinato a manifestare lo concetto umano.”
10 [3] 04801010God is the mirror in which all things are reflected; and the angels and blessed spirits of Paradise, ever gazing into this mirror, see, and therefore know, all things. This idea runs through the Paradiso, e.g. xi. 19–21; xv. 61–63; xxi. 49, 50; xxvi. 106, 107.
11 [4] 04801011Cf. Par., xix. 46. “Il primo superbo Che fu la somma d' ogni creatura Per non aspettar lume cadde acerbo.”
12 [5] 04801012Quod ipsi daemones ad manifestandam inter se perfidiam suam non indigent nisi ut sciant quilibet de quolibet quia est et quantus est: quod quidem sciunt, cognoverunt enim se invicem ante ruinam suam. See S. Thomas, Summa Theol., pt. i., qu. 56, art. 2, where the question as to whether one angel can know another is discussed and resolved in the affirmative. S. Thomas held that the angels were distinguished from one another by the different degrees of their perfection, and that this difference was the cause of their being able to know one another. He held also that this difference in the degrees of their perfection persisted in the angels who fell (see Summa, pt. i., qu. 109, art. 1), and Dante's expression “quantus est” (“what is his rank”) refers to this.
13 [6] 04801013See Summa, pt. i., qu. 107, art. 3, where S. Thomas declares that, “as regards things pertaining to natural knowledge (naturalis cognitio) there is no need for the manifestation of the truth either in angels or devils; because ... from the very beginning of their condition they know all things pertaining to natural knowledge.” It appears, however, that in relation to matters outside “natural knowledge” the angels both good and bad have a faculty of manifesting their thoughts to one another by “internal speech” (ib., art. 1); which, of course, does not conflict with what Dante says in this chapter, for he is here only referring to external speech by words. The whole subject of the speech of the angels is minutely discussed by S. Thomas in Summa, pt. i., qu. 107, and see also qu. 109, art. 3.
14 [7] 04801014“Actions and passions.” See below, bk. 1. ch. xvi., note 5, and bk. II. ch. viii., where these terms are exemplified.
15 [8] 04801015Lines 295–299.
16 [9] 04801016Cf. Convito, III. vii., where Dante raises and disposes of the same objection.
17 [1] 04801017That is, perceptible by sense.
18 [2] 04801018Cf. Par., xxvi. 130. “Opera naturale è ch' uom favella; Ma, così o così, natura lascia Poi fare a voi secondo che v' abbella.”
19 [1] 04801019Eve was not altogether a favourite with Dante. There is curious passage (Purg., xxix. 23–30) where he speaks of her with a feeling of personal resentment for having kept him so long out of the earthly paradise. See, also, Purg., xxx. 52, and Par., xiii. 38. But he gives her a very exalted place among the blessed spirits (Par., xxxii. 6).
20 [2] 04801020Giuliani's emendation, “a Deo statim ac ipsum plasmaverat,” is here followed, instead of “ab eo qui statim ipsum plasmaverat.” So also Trissino.
21 [3] 04801021El. There is a difficulty, similar to that in Par., xxvi. 134, as to whether El, Eli or I, be the right reading here. I have followed Giuliani in preferring El. Further on, in ch. vi. of this book, Dante concludes that Hebrew was the language spoken by Adam. Now, it is generally admitted that Dante did not himself know Herbrew, and it is therefore highly probable (as Giuliani observes) that in this matter he was following the guidance of S. Isidore, who, in the seventh book of his “Etymologies,” ch. i., in giving ten names by which God was known to the Hebrews, states that the first of these was El (the others being Eloim, Eloe, Sabaoth, Elion, Eieie, Adonai, Ia, Ia ia, and Saddai). It is perfectly true that in Par., xxvi. 126., Dante asserts that the language originally spoken by Adam was extinct long before the building of Babel, which is in irreconcilable contradiction with what he says in this work; but by reading El we at least prevent him from contradicting himself in the same book.
22 [4] 04801022Nam sicut post praevaricationem humani generis quidlibet exordium suae locutionis incipit ab heu, rationabile est, quod ante, quidlibet inciperet a gaudio. This is Giuliani's emendation. If the reading generally adopted of qui fuit in place of the second quidlibet be retained, there is no antecedent to which qui can refer.
23 [1] 04801023 The “higher and lower things” are explained by Giuliani to be the Divine authority (as expressed in the inspired narrative of Genesis), and human reason (cf. Par., xxvi. 25, 26, 46, 47; Mon., II. i.); but it must be confessed. that Dante relies much less on the former than on the latter, since, with regard to the first question discussed in this chapter, he only uses the narrative of Genesis to explain it away, and with regard to the second, he employs merely à priori reasoning, the sacred text being silent on the question. It seems, therefore, that Dante must rather mean reason drawn from consideration of the Nature of God, and of the Nature of man.
24 [2] 04801024Speech, that is to say, is a more brilliant and characteristic use of that gift of reason which distinguishes man from the brutes, than merely hearing what is uttered by another.
25 [3] 04801025That is, as a man guided by Reason and not as a beast (see Conv., II. viii., IV. vii.).
26 [4] 04801026See Par., vii. 26, where Adam is called “quell' uom che non nacque,” Par., xiii. 37–45, and xxvi. 91.
27 [5] 04801027See Par., xvii. 37–42, where the foreknowledge of God is illustrated by a singularly apt simile.
28 [6] 04801028Cf. Purg., xxxi. 37–42, and Par., xxiv. 40–45.
29 [7] 04801029Because we are thus obeying the will of Him who is the Source of order. Par., i. 103–135, furnishes an instructive comment on this passage.
30 [8] 04801030Convicimus. Giuliani suggests conjicimus, “we conclude,” and it certainly gives a better sense. S. Thomas (Summa Theol., pt. i., qu. cii., art. 3) decides that Adam was created outside Paradise. Dante here leaves the question open.
31 [1] 04801031See note 4 to preceding chapter.
32 [2] 04801032This is, of course, ironical, Pietramala being an insignificant place in Tuscan Romagna. Fraticelli quotes a similar saying of the present time, “Costui ha viaggiato molto: ha visto anche Peretola.”
33 [3] 04801033Tam obscenae rationis. Giuliani proposes obscaecatae (blinded) for obscenae; Trissino translates, Di cosi disonesta ragione.
34 [4] 04801034Cf. Aen., vii. 715: “Qui Thybrim Fabarimque bibunt.” A similar expression is found below, in ch. vii. of this book, and in Conv., IV. xiv.
35 [5] 04801035This statement conflicts with Par., xxvi. 124–126, where Adam is made to say, “La lingua che parlai fu tutta spenta Innanzi assai ch' all' ovra inconsumabile Fosse la gente di Nembrot attenta,” etc. Giuliani attempts to reconcile the two passages by arguing that all that Dante meant by “tutta spenta” was, that extensive changes had in the course of years passed over the language, such as he mentions in Convito, I. v., and below, in this work, I. ix., whilst the language remained radically the same. Scartazzini, in his note to Par., xxvi. 124, replies (with perhaps excessive warmth), “Bassi e vili sotterfugi,” and asserts that the contradiction is irreconcilable. It is, in fact, more natural to suppose that by the time Dante was working at the Paradiso his views on this point had undergone a change, (even if we do not accept Scartazzini's statement that the passage in the Paradiso was inserted expressly to correct this one), than with Giuliani to explain away the very strong expression “tutta spenta.”
36 [1] 04801036Renovare. Cf. Inf., xxxiii. 4, “Tu vuoi ch' io rinnovelli Disperato dolor che il cor mi preme,” and Virg. Aen., ii. 3, “Infandum, regina, jubes renovare dolorem.”
37 [2] 04801037Refugiat. Cf. Inf., i. 25, “L'anima mia che ancor fuggiva.”
38 [3] 04801038Correctionem. The common reading (which was also that followed by Trissino) is correptionem; but, as Giuliani says, the whole context evidently requires that the word should be correctionem, for Dante is enumerating three several chastisements inflicted on man by God with a view to the amendment of his corrupt nature. Giuliani's emendation is therefore followed here.
39 [4] 04801039Sed sicut proverbialiter dici solet, non ante tertium equitabis, misera miserum venire maluisti ad equum. This is a difficult passage. Witte proposed to change tertium, the common reading, into tertiam, understanding horam; in which case the passage would run thus: “Thou shalt not ride on horseback before the third hour.” This seems, also, to have been the reading followed by Trissino, who translates, “Non andrai a cavello anzi terza,” that is, three hours after sunrise (cf. Inf., xxxiv. 96; Conv., III. vi.; IV. xxiii). But even thus the meaning is not much clearer than before; for (1) riding is a mode of recreation, and it is clear from what follows that Dante is referring to some punishment against which human nature is meant to be warned by this proverbial saying; and (2) there seems to be no reason in the nature of things against taking a ride earlier than three hours after sunrise. I have, therefore, no doubt that Giuliani is on the right track, when he sees in the words equitabis and venire ad equum an allusion to the phrase “dar un cavallo,” to give one a whipping—a process explained by Alberti in his dictionary (sub. voc. cavallo), as follows: “‘Dare un cavallo’ = gastigare, perchè i fanciulli si gastigan colle sferzate, facendoli alzare a cavalluccio da un altro.” Giuliani says that there is in fact a proverb still current, “Alle tre (that is, at the third fault) si da il cavallo, o si bastona.” Or there may perhaps be an allusion to the old punishment of the wooden horse described by Littré (sub. voc. cheval) as a “pièce de bois, qui taillé en arrête et mise sur des tréteaux, servait à une punition de soldat. Le soldat, ayant fait une faute fut mis pendant deux heures sur le cheval de bois.” This punishment was not, however, confined to soldiers, for we read that Pope Urban VI. inflicted it on one of his cardinals (Lenfant, Hist. du Concile de Pise, liv. I., c. xxxiii.). Cf. also Du Cange, sub. voc. equuleus, which he describes as a sort of gibbet to which bodies of decapitated martyrs were fastened. The meaning of the words in question, then, will be, “Thou shalt not have the punishment of the horse before thy third fault.” The only objection to this is, that whereas these words should point to a more severe punishment than the two preceding, the confusion at Babel, to which Dante is referring, was certainly a less severe punishment than either the expulsion from Paradise or the Flood.
40 [5] 04801040Nimrod. Cf. Inf., xxxi. 77, 78, “Questi è Nembrotto, per lo cui mal coto Pure un linguaggio nel mondo non s' usa,” and Purg., xii. 34–36, “Vedea Nembrot appiè del gran lavoro Quasi smarrito, e riguardar le genti Che in Sennaar con lui superbi foro.
41 [6] 04801041See, for Dante's idea of Nature, Mon., II. ii.; also Conv., IV. ix., where he says, “Di costei (natura) è limitator Colui che da nulla è limitato, cioè la prima Bontè ch' è Iddio, che solo colla infinita capacità l' Infinito comprende;” and Inf., xi. 99, 100, “Come natura lo suo corso prende Dal divino intelletto e da sua arte.”
42 [7] 04801042Alias, that is, on the two occasions before referred to, viz. the expulsion from Eden and the Flood. Cf. Purg., xiv. 151, “Onde vi batte chi tutto discerne.” Giuliani proposes to read aliis, and the meaning would then be, “a scourge accustomed to give stripes of a different nature,” i.e. not for the correction of the offender, but for his damnation, with an allusion to the punishment of the fallen angles. But this seems far-fetched.
43 [8] 04801043Pia correctione. Cf. Par., xviii. 129, “Il pio Parde;” and Conv., II. xi.
44 [9] 04801044Pars amussibus tegulabant, pars trullis linebant. This is Witte's emendation of the common reading. “Pars amysimus tegulabant, pars tuillis liniebant.”
45 [10] 04801045See note 5 to the preceding chapter.
46 [1] 04801046Cf. Purg., xxviii. 142, “Qui fu innocente Pumana radice.”
47 [2] 04801047It is not very easy to see why Dante describes those who used the vernacular of oc as Spaniards. Fraticelli thinks he refers to the inhabitants of Catalonia, implying that they used the same language as the Provencals. Giuliani, referring to the passage below, in bk. II., ch. xii., thinks that Dante is, here as well as there, referring to Spaniards who wrote poetry in the vernacular of oc, and so increased its influence. But this is unlikely, as Dante is here speaking not, as there, of a literary, but of a popular language.
48 [1] 04801048Securius. So Giuliani and Trissino, as appears from his translation. The common reading is salubrius, more wholesome.
49 [2] 04801049Nam quod in uno est rationale videtur in aliis esse causa. This is the common reading. Giuliani proposes to make causa ablative, and to insert eâdem before it, when the sentence would run, “For what is reasonable in one appears to be so for the same cause in the others also.” 2a. Doctores, that is, persons whose writings have given them the authority of teachers.
50 [3] 04801050Therefore, at the Confusion there were not three forms of the language, but one. The manuscripts read, “Quae quidem convenientia ipsi confusioni quae fuit delictus in aedificatione Babel.” Witte proposed delictum, and Giuliani the insertion of propter before it, both which emendations are necessary to make sense of the passage, and are therefore here followed.
51 [4] 04801051One of the most eminent of the troubadours. He flourished about A. D. 1200, and was a native of the territory of the viscounts of Limoges, whence he is referred to in Purg., xxvi. 120, as “quel di Lemosì.” He is quoted again below, bk. II. chs. ii., v., vi.
52 [5] 04801248This was Thibaut VI., Count of Champagne and Brie, posthumous son of Thibaut V. and Blanche, daughter of Sancho the Wise, king of Navarre. He was born 1201, became king of Navarre 1244, and died 1253. His fame rests on his amatory poems, said to have been inspired by Blanche of Castile, mother of Saint Louis, though this appears to be at least doubtful. He is quoted below, bk. II. chs. v., vi.
53 [6] 04801052Guido Guinizelli, or Guinicelli, a native of Bologna (see below, ch. xv.), where he exercised the office of a judge. He died in 1276. He is quoted again below, bk. II. chs. v., vi.; and Conv., IV. xx., where he is styled “quel nobile Guido Guinicelli.” Dante had the highest opinion of his poetic powers, calling him, in Purg., xxvi. 97–99, “Il padre Mio e degli altri miei miglior, che mai Rime d'amore usâr dolci e leggiadri.”
54 [7] 04801053See Par., xxvi. 127–138, where Dante uses the same argument to prove the extinction of the language originally spoken by Adam long before the Confusion, which is contrrary to what he says above (see note 5 to ch. vi).
55 [8] 04801054Cf. Conv., I. v., “Sich' to credo che se coloro che partiro di questa vita già sono mille anni tornassero alle loro cittadi, crederebbono la loro cittade essere occupata da gente strana, per la lingua dalla loro discordante. Di questo si parlerà altrove più compiutamente in un libro ch' io intendo di fare, Dio concedente, di Volgare Eloquenza.”
56 [9] 04801055Civicasse. Giuliani says, “Rispetto al vocabolo civicasse che importerebbe aver conversato o aver avuto com. mercio, non se ne riscontra altro esempio, nè saprei onde il nostro Maestro il dervasse.” Du Cange, however, (sub. voc. civica), cites two instances of the verb civicare, and explains it as = civem facere. Giuliani proceeds, “Vero è che nel codice Vaticano vi fu sostituito specificasse che pur in qualche modo si potrebbe adattare all' espresso concetto, giacchè specificare prende talora, anche presso il Volgo di Toscana la significazione di proferir parole o di parlare.”
57 [10] 04801056Cf. above, note 1 to ch. i.
58 [1] 04801057These legends are alluded to in Inf., v. 67, 128; xxxii. 61, 62; Par., xvi. 14.
59 [2] 04801058Peter of Auvergne was a troubadour who flourished at the beginning of the thirteenth century. In one of his poems he satirized his contemporary poets with great bitterness. He ended his life in the cloister.
60 [3] 04801059Cino, or in full, Guittoncino of Pistoja, of the family of the Sinibuldi, was one of the chief jurists and poets of his time. He was born in 1270, studied at Bologna, was banished from his native town in 1307; studied at Paris; held office at Rome under Louis of Savoy, sent thither by Henry of Luxemburg; in 1314 produced his Commentary on the Code of Justinian, which gained him his doctor's degree at Bologna; subsequently was professor of Civil Law at Treviso, Perugia, and Florence. Towards the end of his life he returned to Pistoja, where he died in 1336, and was buried in the Cathedral. His love for Selvaggia, daughter of Filippo Vergiolesi, whom he lost in her early youth, inspired his amatory poems. He had the remarkable honour of being commemorated both by Dante (here and below, ch. xiii., and bk. II., ch. ii.; and see the sonnet, “Io mi credea del tutto esser partito,” No. XL. in Fraticell's edition of the Canzoniere), and by Petrarch, who mourned him in the sonnet beginning— “Piangete, donne, e con voi pianga Amore, Piangete, amanti per ciascun paese.” His most considerable poem is entitled, “Sulla Natura d' Amore.”
61 [4] 04801060Here and elsewhere in this work Dante calls himself by this name. It is very remarkable that Cino is not mentioned in the Divina Commedia.
62 [5] 04801061The “gran giogo” of Purg., v. 116, and the “dosso d' Italia” of Purg., xxx. 86.
63 [6] 04801062Pharsalia, bk. II. 391–438.
64 [7] 04801063Sequuntur, for which Giuliani proposes Sociantur.
65 [1] 04801064The same word (habitus) is used here as that translated dress in ch. ix. above. Abito is similarly used in the Divina Commedia. Compare Inf., xvi. 8, and Purg., xxix. 134, with Purg., xxx. 116, and Par., xiii. 78.
66 [2] 04801065This term of reproach is used elsewhere by Dante (Par., xvi. 55; xx. 125; xxvii. 26).
67 [3] 04801066Sorella mia, chente (che cosa) dici.
68 [4] 04801067Chignamente is explained by Fraticelli and Giuliani following Corbinelli, as meaning qualmente. The sense of the other two words is uncertain. Fraticelli reads sciate siate.
69 [5] 04801068The meaning of these words, also, is very uncertain. Giuliani in his note on the passage gives an account of the various emendations which have been proposed, adding, “Neppur dopo tutto ciò si riesce a ripigliare il bandolo dell' arruffata matassa.”
70 [6] 04801069“Nell' ora del vespero, ciò fu del mese d'ottobre.”
71 [7] 04801070“Che fai tu.”
72 [8] 04801071It is a little surprising to find the town of Prato given as an instance of a mountainous and rural district, but probably its dialect was not very unlike that spoken among the neighbouring Apennines.
73 [9] 04801072Mediastinis civibus. Giuliani is no doubt right in saying that the persons here alluded to are the same as the “terriginis mediocribus” (translated in the same way) in the next following chapter. There, however, it is clear that the common people are referred to, and contrasted with the highest classes who did not use the local dialect which Dante is there, as here, considering; whence it follows that the same class of persons are intended here. The same remark applies to the similar expression ‘mediastinis Bononiae,’ in ch. xv. below. Giuliani, however, with Trissino, takes the expression mediastinis civibus as meaning, “Quei cittadini che stanno in mezzo le città,” which evidently makes the word mediastinis redundant. So, in his rather obscure note on terrigenis mediocribus in the next chapter, he seems to treat both phrases as simply equivalent to terrigenae or indigenae, “native inhabitants.” But Dante never uses a superfluous word.
74 [10] 04801073Giuliani thinks that nova should be altered to novas, because the word nova would not distinguish the Sardinian from the other Italian dialects. He remarks that there is still a place called Domus Novas in the province of Cagliari.
75 [1] 04801074The same metaphor occurs again below, II. vii.; and in Par., xxvi. 22: “Certo a più angusto vaglo Ti conviene schiarar.”
76 [2] 0480175Giuliani is certainly right here in reading acqua, and not the Sicilian from aigua, which is the common reading, for it is clear from the end of this chapter that Dante is speaking in this place of the highest form of the Vulgar Tongue, as described below, chs. xvi.—xviii., and not of the colloquial Sicilian dialect. The line is said to be by Guido il Guidce delle Colonne, of Messina, who flourished about the year 1250, and to whom the line next quoted is ascribed below, II. v. Some have thought there is a reference to him in Purg., xi. 97.
77 [3] 04801076The “mark to which it tends” is the inciting of the other Italian princes to emulate Frederick II. and Manfred in their fostering of this literary vernacular.
78 [4] 04801077Superbiam. This word occurs again, in a good sense, in II. iv. In the “Divine Comedy” it is always used in a bad sense.
79 [5] 04801078Frederick II., son of the Emperor Henry VI., by Constance, daughter and heiress of Roger, the Norman king of Sicily, was born at Iesi in 1194, crowned as emperor by Honorius III. in 1220, and died in 1250. It is remarkable to find that in spite of the high praise bestowed on him in this passage, he is placed by Dante as an Epicurean among the heretics in Inf., x. 119. His definition of nobility is quoted and criticized in Conv., IV. iii., x.
80 [6] 04801079Bene genitus, which here answers to the ben nato of Purg., v. 60, and Par., v. 115. Or Perhaps the expression may allude to Manfred's personal beauty (Purg. iii. 107), just as the corresponding mal nati seems in Conv. III. iv., to mean ill-favoured.
81 [7] 04801080Illegitimate son of Frederick II. by Bianca, daughter of Count Boniface Lancia. He was born in 1221, governed the kingdom of Naples for Conrad, son of Frederick II., after that emperor's death, and subsequently for Conrad's infant son Conradin. After a long struggle with the Popes Innocent IV. and Alexander IV., he was defeated by Charles of Anjou (whom Urban IV. had hired against him) at the battle of Benevento in 1265, where he was slain. See Dante's exquisite tribute to his memory in Purg., iii. 112–145.
82 [8] 04801081Nobilitatem ac rectitudinem suae formae pandentes. Forma is here used in its scholastic sense of the soul or vital principle of the body. See note 10 on bk. II., ch. v., below.
83 [9] 04801082Cf. Inf., xxiv. 124, “Vita bestial mi piacque e non umana;” Inf., xxvi. 118, “Considerate la vostra semenza; Fatti non foste a viver come bruti Ma per seguir virtute e conoscenza;” and Purg., xxvi. 83, “Non servammo umana legge Seguendo come bestie l' appetito.” See also Conv. II. viii.
84 [10] 04801083See Milman, “Latin Christianity,” vi. 96–100; ix. 200; Foscolo, Discorso sul testo della Divina Commedia, § cxxv.
85 [11] 04801084This expression of contempt is taken from S. Matthew v. 22.
86 [12] 04801085Frederick, son of Peter III. of Arragon, by Constance, daughter of Manfred. He was born in 1272, elected king of Sicily in 1296, and died in 1337. He is mentioned by Dante with disapproval in Purg., vii. 119; Par., xix. 130; and xx. 63. The motives for this disapproval would seem to have been (1) the terms of the treaty of Caltabellotta, concluded in 1302 between Frederick and Charles II. of Arragon (see next following note) and Charles of Valois, by which Frederick was to marry the daughter of Charles II. and give up his claims to the kingdom of Naples, that of Sicily being secured to him for life; (2) Frederick's conduct in forsaking the Ghibelline cause and retiring to Sicily after the death of the Emperor Henry VII., in 1313. See Scartazzini's notes to the above passages in his edition of the Divina Commedia, and Amari's “La Guerra del Vespro Siciliano,” ii. 463 and 475, note 1.
87 [13] 04801086Son of Charles of Anjou, the conqueror of Manfred. He was born in 1243, and at his father's death (1285) was a prisoner in Sicily, but was set free through the intervention of Edward I. of England in 1288. He was crowned king of Naples in 1289 by Pope Nicolas IV., and died in 1309. Dante mentions him with disapproval in Purg., vii. 119; xx. 79–81; Par., vi. 106; and xix. 127–130, where, in allusion to some deformity by which he was disfigured, and to the title of King of Jerusalem which the kings of Naples bore, he is called, “Il Ciotto di Gerusalemme.” These two sovereigns, Frederick III. of Sicily and Charles II. of Naples, are again addressed together in terms of warning in Conv., IV. vi.
88 [14] 04801087This was John I., surnamed the Just, Marquis of Montferrat, who succeeded his father, William Vi., in 1292, married in 1296 a daughter of Amadeus V., count of Savoy, and died in 1305 (according to Benvenuto da S. Giorgio in Muratori, R. I. Script., xxiii. 409), or in 1306 (according to Giuliani and Fraticelli). The reason why Dante here blames this prince is uncertain. At the time of his succession to the Marquisate he was frequenting the court of Charles II. of Naples, which may perhaps in part account for it.
89 [15] 04801088Azzo VII., marquis of Este, who succeeded his father, Obizzo II., in 1293, and died in 1308. In 1300, or, as others say, in 1305, he married Beatrice, daughter of Charles II. of Naples, as his second wife, a transaction denounced by Dante, in Purg., xx. 80.
90 [16] 04801089Terrigenis mediocribus. See note 9 to the next preceding chapter.
91 [17] 04801090Focora=fuochi: bolontate=volonta. This is the third line of an ancient Serventese, attributed to Ciullo d' Alcamo, and probably belonging to the first half of the thirteenth century, which has given rise to much discussion in Italy of late years.
92 [18] 04801091This is that vernacular language which is described below, in chapters xvi.–xviii. of this book.
93 [19] 04801092Vorrei che piangesse il figluolo, or, as others say, il fanciullo (Fraticelli).
94 [20] 04801093For Dante's explanation of this, one of the characteristic epithets of the highest form of the Vulgar Tongue, see below, ch. xviii.
95 [21] 04801094These lines are from Jacopo of Lentino, known as il Notajo, who flourished in the middle of the thirteenth century. See note (1) to the next following chapter.
96 [1] 04801095 Guittone of Arezzo was of noble birth, and flourished at the end of the thirteenth century. He belonged to that “Ordo Militiae Beatae Mariae,” instituted by Pope Urban IV., whose members, owing to their luxurious life, came to be known as “Frati godenti” (see Inf., xxiii. 103). Guittone, however, seems to have formed a creditable exception. After having been unjustly deprived of his estate by the Government of Arezzo, who had previously employed him as ambassador to Florence, he withdrew to that city, where he died in 1294, after founding a monastery there the year before. In a striking passage of the Purgatorio (xxiv. 49–63) Dante cites Guittone of Arezzo with Jacopo of Lentino, and Bonagiunta of Lucca as representatives of the ancient artificial style of poetry, and contrasts them with himself as the founder of the new style of natural inspiration, saying, “Io mi son un che, quando Amor mi spira, noto, ed a quel modo Che detta dentro, vo significando.” See also Purg., xxvi. 121–126, and below, II. 6, where Guittone's reputation is again attacked.
97 [2] 04801096Bonagiunta belonged to the family of the Urbiciani, and was a contemporary of Guittone of Arezzo. He died about the year 1296. Of Mino Mocato of Siena and Gallo of Pisa nothing seems to be known.
98 [3] 04801097That is, Brunetto Latini. He was born about the year 1220, and came of an illustrious Florentine family. He was conspicuous alike in literature and public life. In 1260 he was sent as ambassador to Alphonso, king of Castile; but during his absence on this mission the battle of Montaperti and the consequent downfall of the Guelphs (Brunetto's party) occurred, and he accordingly retired to France. About ten years later he returned to Florence, where, after filling the office of secretary (or, as it was then called, of dictator) to the Republic, he died in 1294. His principal work, to which he gave the title of the “Treasure,” was written in French, and was a kind of compendium of the philosophy of that age. His chief Italian book was the allegoric poem called Il Tesoretto, and he also translated several works from the Latin. Dante and Guido Cavalcanti were his pupils. See the touching episode in the Inferno (xv. 22–124), in which Dante acknowledges his obligations to Brunetto.
99 [4] 04801098Giuliani, following Böhmer, reads, Se ne.
100 [5] 04801099This is explained by Fraticelli as being equivalent to, “Grazie a Dio, il Comune di Lucca è in allegria, in festa.”
101 [6] 04801100Onche = unque.
102 [7] 04801101There is some difficulty about the word ovelle. According to Corbinelli it is a compound of ovec = Fr. avec and elle (lei). Böhmer sees in it a compound of ove (where) and elle; and Giuliani adopts this view, suggesting, however, that the word might be wrongly written for avale, which he says is still used by the common people of Arezzo for ora, adesso. 7a. Vulgaris excellentiam. Giuliani understands these words as mening “the excellence of their own Vulgar dialect,” i.e. its capacity for being improved into an Illustrious Vulgar Tongue, and he uses this passage in support of his view that the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue which Dante subsequently treats of was substantially identical with the Florentine dialect when purified from its baser elements (see Introduction, and Giuliani's note to this passage).
103 [8] 04801102Guido Cavalcanti: the date of his birth is uncertain. In 1266 he married the daughter of the great Ghibelline leader, Farinata degli Uberti. He was an intimate friend of Dante (see Vita Nuova, § iii.); was banished with the chiefs of the two rival factions of Bianchi and Neri, by the Priors of Florence (of whom Dante was one), in the summer of 1300. The place of his exile was Serezzana, the climate of which brought on an illness of which he died early in 1301 (see Inf., x. 111), having previously returned to Florence. He is quoted again below, II. vi., xii.
104 [9] 04801103Lapo Gianni was one of Dante's friends, and is mentioned with Guido Cavalcanti in Dante's second sonnet (Canzoniere, p. 74, ed. Fraticelli). He was a notary by profession, and is judged by Fraticelli (Vita di Dante, p. 68) to have been “per quei tempi poeta non ispregevole.”
105 [10] 04801104Dante himself.
106 [11] 04801105Because of the inferiority of Pistoja, not of Cino. Dante's hatred of Pistoja (see Inf., xxiv. 126; xxv. 10–12) was no doubt due to the fact of its having been the place where the feud of the Bianchi and Neri began, which was the source of Dante's troubles (see Fraticelli, Vita di Dante, 120, 121).
107 [1] 04801106Cf. Inf., i. 13, 16, “Ma poi ch' io fui al piè d' un colle giunto ... Guardai in alto e vidi le sue spalle vestite gia de' raggi del pianeta,” etc.
108 [2] 04801107“Italy” of course here means the left side of Italy, as before described.
109 [3] 04801108Deusci is from Deus scit, “God knows.”
110 [4] 04801109Oclo meo = occhio mio; corada mea = cor mio.
111 [5] 04801110Ugolino, surnamed Bucciola, belonged to the family of the Manfredi of Faenza, being a son of that Alberigo Manfredi whose treacherous murder of his kinsman is alluded to in Inf., xxxiii. 118–120. Two sonnets attributed to him, but judged by Giuliani to be of very inferior quality, have come down to us. Of Thomas of Faenza nothing personally is known, and but little of his poetry has survived. See Giuliani's note on this passage.
112 [6] 04801111Hispidum. The same epithet occurs again below, II. vii.
113 [7] 04801112Magara. So Giuliani and Fraticelli, following Corbinelli, instead of Manara, the reading of the manuscripts. Fraticelli says, Magara = “Dio lo volesse.” Giuliani says that Magari Dio is still used.
114 [8] 04801113“Per le piaghe di Dio tu non verrai.”
115 [9] 04801114Little is known of this poet, who is said to have been a notary. Two sonnets alone of his have come down to us.
116 [1] 04801115The metaphor introduced at the beginning of ch. xi. is still kept up.
117 [2] 04801116Sicut facere quoslibet a finitimis suis convicimus. The addition of the words I have inserted in the translation seems necessary to complete the sense. Unless quoslibet be restricted in this way, the characteristic of borrowing from other dialects, which Dante assigns as the cause of the superiority of the Bologna dialect, evidently ceases to be a distinguishing feature of it. Giuliani, following Böhmer, proposes to change convicimus into conjicimus (“we conclude”), but this does not throw much light on the passage, and the common reading is quite intelligible if it be referred to the passages occurring in the three preceding chapters, in which Dante notes how poets, writing in the Illustrious vernacular, have diverged from their own dialect; and to the words occurring a few lines further on in this chapter, in which he notes the same fact with regard to Sordello. The ground for preferring the Bologna dialect will therefore be, that it, by borrowing from extraneous sources, presents some analogy to the Illustrious form of the language, which, as Dante says in the next chapter, is perceptible in every town in Italy, but abiding in none.
118 [3] 04801117There is much uncertainty about the facts of Sordello's life. What is known of him is exhaustively stated by Scartazzini, in his note at the end of Purg., vi. It appears that he was born at Goito early in the thirteenth century, and from the first displayed great poetic ability. He wrote with equal facility in French, Italian, and Provencal, and became one of the most famous troubadours of the age. After having been welcomed at the court of Richard, count of S. Bonifacio, he eloped with the count's wife, Cunizza (see Par., ix. 32), sister of the notorious Ezzelino da Romano (see Inf., xii. 110), and went to live with her as his mistress at Ezzelino's court. This, as might have been expected, was a little too much for Ezzelino, and he sent Sordello about his business. After various adventures and visits to other courts of North Italy, we find him about the year 1245 at the court of the Countess Beatrice, daughter (see Par., vi. 133) of Raymond Berengar, count of Provence, and wife of Charles of Anjou, and she became the object of Sordello's poetic devotion. Whether he took part in the first crusade of S. Louis in 1248–1251, at which Charles of Anjou was present, is uncertain; but he did accompany Charles's army on its march against Manfred, in 1265, though he got no further than Novara, where he was kept by illness till 1266. After this, nothing certain is known of him; but from the fact that Dante places him in the ante-Purgatory, among those who had come to a sudden and violent end before having repented of their sins, it has been conjectured that Sordello met his death in this way.
119 [4] 04801118Garrulitas. It is not easy to discover the exact force of this word here. A few lines further on, Dante uses the term acerbitas (roughness or harshness), to describe a result of the quality in question, citing as an extreme instance the substitution of n for l by the people of Parma. The verb garrire, to utter a shrill sharp cry, occurs in Par., xix. 147, “Nicosia e Famagosta Per la lor bestia si lamenti e garra,” and this is probably the kind of sound Dante refers to in this place. Such is also Giuliani's opinion. He understands by garrulitas, “Asprezza significativa di quel non so che di stridulo o di fortemente acuto che pur tuttavia si fa sentire nelle pronunzie dei popoli testè ricordati.”
120 [5] 04801119Aulica. This term is explained below, in ch. xviii.
121 [6] 04801120Of these poets not much is known, but from their all being here spoken of as writers who had passed away, they must have flourished, at latest, at the close of the thirteenth century. Fabrizio, or Fabruzzo, belonged to the well-known family of the Lambertazzi; nothing of his poetry has survived. Onesto appears to have carried on an interchange of poems with Cino of Pistoja, and is commemorated by Petrarch with “i due Guidi” (i.e. Cavalcanti and Guinicelli) among the “gente che d' amor givan ragionando,” in the Trionfo d' Amore, c. iv.
122 [7] 04801121Quae quidem verba prorsus a mediastinis Bononiae sunt diversa. (See above, xi., note 9.)
123 [8] 04801122Cumque ... pendamus. Giuliani, after noting that the Grenoble MS. reads pensamus, proposes to read putamus (“we think”).
124 [9] 04801123Fraticelli's reading, residibus, is here followed instead of the common reading residinis. The Grenoble MS. has, according to Giuliani, residuis.
125 [1] 04801124Cf. Inf., xvi. 106–108, “Io avea una corda intorno cinta e con essa pensai alcuna volta Prender la lonza alla pelle dipinta.”
126 [2] 04801125The text is corrupt here. Witte's reading, “redolentem ubique nec usquam apparentem,” is followed in the translation. Fraticelli, and also Trissino (as appears from his version), read, redolentem ubique et ubique apparentem” (“everywhere perceptible and everywhere apparent”), which does not harmonize with the statements further on in the chapter. (See Giuliani's note on this passage.)
127 [3] 04801126Giuliani's emendation, ut illinc, is here adopted instead of the common reading, et illinc.
128 [4] 04801127Cf. Par., xv. 55, “Tu credi che a me tuo pensier mei Da quel ch' è primo così, come raja Dall 'un, se si conosce, il cinque e il sei.” Compare also below, bk. II., ch. v. Benvenuto of Imola remarks, commenting on the words, “tre e quattro volte,” in Purg., vii. 2: “Here note that the poet includes both numbers, i.e. the even and the odd, and he puts the odd first as the more perfect; whence among arithmeticians an odd number is called masculine, but an even number feminine, on account of its imperfection.”
129 [5] 04801128The Aristotelic Categories which are here referred to were the classes into which Being, as such, could be divided. They were ten in number, namely, Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Place, Time, Position, Possession, Action, Passion.
130 [6] 04801129Substance, a technical term of the Aristotelic philosophy, as expounded by S. Thomas, of which Dante was a faithful follower, had two meanings: (a) As the first of the Categories, or modes of Being generally (see previous note), it meant individual existence in the abstract. (b) It meant some individual thing having independent existence, “quaedam per se subsistens,” as S. Thomas calls it (Comment. on Aristotle's Metaphysics, bk. III., lect vii.). Substances in this sense were divided into Simple and Compound. In S. Thomas's treatise, De Ente et Essentia, ch. ii., he says, ‘Of substances, some are Simple and some Compound [that is, made up of matter and form. See below, bk. II., ch. v., note 10]; and in both is Essence, but in the Simple substances it is found in a truer and nobler way. And according as these have a nobler Being, they are also the cause of those which are Compound, at least the First and Simple Substance, which is God.” By Essence he means, that which causes a thing to be what it is, and this is also expressed by the term Quiddity. See also Summa Theol., pt. i., qu. iii., art. 5, and Hauréau's Historire de la Philosophie Scolastique, pt. i., pp. 70–83, where a very clear explanation of the ambiguous term Substance will be found.
131 [7] 04801130See previous note.
132 [8] 04801131The common reading is, “Simplicissima substantiarum quae Deus est ... in homine magis redolet quam in bruto: in animali quam in planta: in hac quam in minera: in hac quam in coelo: in igne quam in terra.” This is evidently wrong, for, as Fraticelli remarks, quoting Torri, “Come potrebbe dirsi che Dio risplende più nelle miniere che nel cielo?” Fraticelli accordingly substitutes igne from the next clause for coelo, as proposed by Torri: so that the statement would be that “God is more perceptible in a mineral than in fire, in fire than in earth.” Fraticelli admits that this does not make the gradation satisfactory. There is little doubt that Giuliani is right in proposing the reading, “in coelo quam in elementis,” which I have followed in the translation. Giuliani supports his emendation by a very apposite quotation from Dante's “Letter to Can Grande,” § 23, where he says, “We see one thing in a more excellent rank, but another in an inferior rank, as is clear in the case of heaven, and the elements of which that is incorruptible, but these corruptible.” Giuliani also refers to the passage in Convito, III. vii. beginning, “Così la bontà di Dio è ricevuta altrimenti,” etc.
133 [1] 04801132Curiis. Dante is, no doubt, referring to those assemblies held by sovereign princes (with special reference, of course, to the Emperor) at the chief festivals, which were attended by the nobles and prelates of the realm, and in which national affairs of the greatest importance were transacted, and disputes between the magnates of the realm determined. (See Du Cange, sub voc. Curia, 8.)
134 [2] 04801133This fixes the date of the first book to a period earlier than November 1308, when Henry of Luxemburg was elected Emperor as Henry VII. (cf. Introduction). It is to be noticed that Dante considered the Empire as vacant between the death of Frederick II., in 1250, and the election of Henry VII., in consequence of the dereliction of Italy by the intervening monarchs. In Conv., IV. ii., he says, “E da sapere che Federigo di Soave, ultimo Imperadore e Re de' Romani ultimo dico per rispetto al tempo presente non ostante che Ridolfo e Adolfo e Alberto poi eletti sieno appresso la sua morte e de' suoi discendenti.” See also Purg., vi., 89; xxxiii. 37 (with Scartazzini's note), and Par., iii. 120.
135 [1] 04801134There is a good deal of difficulty as to the true reading here. I have followed that of Fraticelli. See the question discussed in Giuliani's note to this passage. There is, however, no doubt as to the meaning.
136 [2] 04801135Quare, si quis versificator quamquam rude versificetur, ipsum suae ruditati admisceat, etc. This is rendered by Trissino: “E però se alcun versificatore ancora che faccia rozzamente versi lo mescolerd con la sua rozzezza.” But it is clear from what Dante says at the end of this chapter, where he is showing the fallacy of this reasoning, that the phrase rude versificetur refers to poverty of matter, rather than to rudeness of style.
137 [3] 04801136Cf. Conv. IV. xxix.
138 [4] 04801137Laughter is again mentioned by Dante as a distinctive quality of man, in Vita Nuova, § 25, and in the “Letter to Can Grande,” § 26.
139 [5] 04801138The text here is in a very corrupt state. I have followed the somewhat drastic emendations of Giuliani. See his note on the passage.
140 [6] 04801139Cf. above, I. ii.; and Convito, I. v., where the same remark occurs.
141 [1] 04801140Et sicut, cognito habituante, habituatum cognoscitur, in quantum hujus. In explanation of the terms habituante and habituatum, Giuliani says, “A parlar colle scuole, l' abituante denotando ciò che qualifica l'abituato, nel caso suddetto è la dignità (worthiness) che ci fa conoscere chi la possiede, l' Uomo propriamente degno, vale a dire, abituato di dignità, in quanto ha, più o meno della dignità stessa.” Habituare is, literally, to clothe (see Du Cange, sub voc.). Dante uses abituare in this sense in Purg., xxix. 145. “E questi sette col primaio stuolo erano abituati.”
142 [2] 04801141That is, according to the greater or less worthiness of the nature of the things (Giuliani).
143 [3] 04801142It is most important to notice that Dante, following the Aristotelic system of S. Thomas, maintained the unity of the individual vital principle or soul (by which terms the whole of the immaterial part of man is meant), endowed with the three kinds of life here mentioned, rejecting alike the doctrine of Averrhoes of one universal soul, of which all individuals are partakers, and that of those teachers who held that the vital principle consisted of so many distinct essences, to each of which the name of soul might be applied in the way of analogy (see Purg., iv. 1–6). The process of the infusion of the soul is fully described in Purg., xxv. 37–75; see also Convito, III. iii., and IV. vii.
144 [4] 04801143Giuliani's reading (from the Vatican MS.), Vegetabilis ... Animalis ... Rationalis, instead of Vegetabile ... Animale ... Rationale, is here followed.
145 [5] 04801144That is, conformable to the will of God. “Come del suo voler gli angli tuoi Fan sacrificio a te, contando osanna, Così facciano gli uomini de' suoi” (Purg. xi., 10–12). This explains what Dante means by saying that in this respect man is a partaker of the angels' nature. Cf. Conv., IV., 19.
146 [6] 04801145Salus. Giuliani thinks that Happiness in the highest sense, “l' ultimo Fine al quale l' uomo è ordinato in quanto egli è uomo” (Conv., IV. vi.) is what Dante here means by Salus, and he refers to Purg., xvii. 106; Par., viii. 102; xxii. 124; xxviii. 61, probably a misprint for 67: where it may be said in passing that salute hardly bears this meaning. But surely, if Dante had meant Happiness in the highest sense by salus, he would not have associated it with the lowest form of life (the vegetable), and with exploits in arms, placing it below carnal love, and virtue!
147 [7] 04801146Hoc est ea quae maxime sunt ad ista. So Giuliani, with the Vatican MS.; a reading also approved by Fraticelli, though he prints the common reading, maxima.
148 [8] 04801147Bertram of Born was viscount of Hautefort in Périgord, and, as such, a subject of Henry II. of England. He was distinguished both as a warrior and as a poet. He abetted Prince Henry, son of Henry II., in his rebellion against his father. Bertram's stronghold of Hautefort was besieged and taken by Henry II. in 1183, but on account of Bertram's friendship with Prince Henry, who had died in the same year, the king forgave him, and restored him his castle and estates. He was afterwards implicated in an insurrection of the subjects of Alphonso II. of Arragon, and in the attacks made by Philip II. of France on the continental dominions of Richard I. of England. He ended his career as a Cistercian monk. Dante mentions him again in Inf., xxviii. 134, and xxix. 29, and Conv., IV. xi.
149 [9] 04801148Arnauld Daniel was also a native of Péridgord, and flourished in the last quarter of the twelfth century. But little is known of his life, and only seventeen Canzoni of his have come down to us, though he appears to have written various works of a romantic character. He is quoted again below, ch. vi and xiii.; see also Purg., xxvi. 115–148.
150 [10] 04801149This Canzone will be found as No. xviii. in Part II. of the Canzoniere, in Fraticelli's edition, which is that referred to throughout.
151 [1] 04801150 The Ballate, as their name implies, were intended to be sung by dancers.
152 [2] 04801151Literally, those things which have been sung. See Dante's definition of poetry in the next following chapter.
153 [3] 04801152For then, all poems would be Canzoni.
154 [4] 04801153Quicquid de cacuminibus illustrium capitum poetantium profluxit ad labia. I believe the rendering I have given expresses the meaning of this somewhat singular expression. Trissino translates literally: “Tutto quello che dalla cima delle teste degli illustri poeti è disceso alle loro labbra.”
155 [1] 04801154Illius artis magisterium. So Giuliani and Trissino, who translates “Il magisterio di quell' arte.” The common reading is Ergasterium, which is explained by Du Cange as meaning a workshop; here it would have to be rendered “workmanship.”
156 [2] 04801155Cf. Conv., I. vii. (near the end).
157 [3] 04801156Line 38.
158 [4] 04801157Giuliani's reading of this sentence is here followed. So also Trissino. See Giuliani's note.
159 [5] 04801158Illustre. I here follow Giuliani's very happy emendation. The common reading is mediocre. There is little doubt that Giuliani's is right, because, in fact, the Intermediate style (as its name implies) is made up of the two others. We must also bear in mind that in the “Divine Comedy” itself we find words of the Illustrious Vulgar Tongue mixed with others of more colloquial character.
160 [6] 04801159Superbia. See above, I. xii., note 4.
161 [7] 04801160Accident, a technical term in the philosophy of S. Thomas, meant that which had no independent existence, but rested its being on some Substance (in the second sense of the word, as explained above, I. xvi., note 6). The destruction of the Accident would not affect the existence of the Substance. “Sustanzia ed accidente e lor costume” was one of the mysteries which Dante saw revealed in his final vision of the Deity (Par., xxxiii. 88).
162 [8] 04801161A mountain in Bœtia, and a favourite resort of the Muses. Here, as in Purg., xxix. 40, the mountain is put instead of the springs of Aganippe or Hippocrene, which flowed from it.
163 [9] 04801162A small stick or quill for striking the strings of the lyre.
164 [10] 04801163Lines 129–131.
165 [11] 04801164Confiteatur eorum stultitia. The verb appears here to be used in a passive sense. Giuliani, following the Trivulzian MS., reads confiteamur (let us confess), and changes stultitia into stultitiam; adding, “Del resto, a me basta d'investigare le proprie intenzioni di Dante senza nè punto darmi briga di correggerne la Grammatica, nè tampoco di stabilirne regole al modo suo.”
166 [12] 04801165Cf. Inf., iv. 94–96. “Così vidi adunar la bella scuola Di quei signor dell' altissimo canto che sovra gli altri com' aquila vola.”
167 [1] 04801166This subject is dealt with in the next following chapter.
168 [2] 04801167See above, I. ix., note 4.
169 [3] 04801168See above, I. ix., note 5.
170 [4] 04801169The common reading is accentus et eius causa (the accent and its cause) which is unintelligible. Giuliani's emendation of pausa for causa is accordingly followed. He says: “Sicuramente, che ove in questo verso, ‘De fin amor si vient sen et bonté’ si consideri l' accento principale e dove posa cioè da ultimo, si conoscerà che la sillaba tè o tà di bontà, per esser comprensiva di due sillabe, basta a compiere la quantità conveniente al verso suindicato.”
171 [5] 04801170See above, I. ix., note 6.
172 [6] 04801171See above, I. xii., note 2.
173 [7] 04801172See above, I. x., note 3.
174 [8] 04801173Canzoniere, p. 171.
175 [9] 04801174See above, I. xvi., note 4.
176 [10] 04801175Dante uses the word Form in two senses— (a) As meaning the external appearance of things (as in Purg., xvii. 19; xxv. 99; Par., xxx. 61). (b) In the sense, as here, of that which causes a thing to be what it is (cf. above, I. xvi., note 6). Hence, as above, I. x., it is used as synonymous with the Vital Principle, or Soul. So also, Inf., xxv. 101; Par., i. 127–129; xxiv. 128. The passage from S. Thomas's treatise, De ente et essentia, of which the following is Hauréau's translation (Hist. de la Philosophie Scolastique, vol. ii., pt. i., p. 365) shows the relationship between the terms Form and Essence. “L'essence d'une substance composée et d'une substance simple diffère en ce que l'essence d'une substance composée est non pas seulement la forme ou la matière mais tout ensemble la matière et la forme, tandis que l'essence d'une substance simple est la forme seulement ... L'essence d'une substance composée peut signifier soit le tout, soit une partie de tout, ce qui vient, comme nous l'avons dit, de la détermination de la matière; aussi l'essence d'une chose composée ne se dit-elle pas de cette chose même de quelque facon que ce soit, car on ne peut dire qu'un homme soit sa propre quiddité, tandis que l'essence d'une substance simple, qui en est la forme, ne peut signifier que le tout, puis qu'il n'y a là qu'une forme, qui est en quelque sorte le récipient de la forme.”
177 [1] 04801176That is, “Aristotle professed philosophy in the time of Alexander.”
178 [2] 04801177The reference is to ch. ii. of this book.
179 [3] 04801178Giuliani's reading of miserorum instead of cunctis is here followed.
180 [4] 04801179This touching allusion to the author's own exile is very similar to a phrase occurring in the letter addressed, in the name of Count Alexander of Romena, to the Cardinal of Ostia by the Florentine exiles in 1304, and believed to be by the hand of Dante (see Fraticelli's remarks on the letter, pp. 411–413 of the third volume of his edition of the minor works of Dante.) The letter is in Latin, and the phrase is thus rendered by Fraticelli, “Imperocchè quella solute della patria, la quale, quasi per desiderio sognando, ardentemente bramavamo, il processo delle vostre lettere sotto paterna ammonizione più volte a noi la promette.”
181 [5] 04801180It has been shown in the Introduction that the Marquis of Este here referred to is the same who is mentioned by name above, I. 12. This being so, it follows that, having regard to the strong terms of disapproval in which he is there spoken of, the present sentence must be ironical, which is perhaps what is intended by the somewhat peculiar expression “of some who make a superficial use of rhetoric” (quorundam superficie tenus rhetoricam haurientium) which immediately precedes.
182 [6] 04801181Totila, no doubt, here means Charles of Valois (born 1270, died 1324, brother of Philip the Fair of France), and the allusion is to his mission from Boniface VIII., in 1301, to pacify Florence, which had been procured by the party hostile to Dante and was the cause of his exile (see Balbo, Vita di Dante, 149–183; Fraticelli, Vita di Dante, 121–135). For Charles' ignominious expedition into Sicily, see Amari, Vespro Siciliano, ii. 451–476, 9th ed.; also Purg., xx. 70–78, where Charles is compared to Judas Iscariot. The reason why he is here called Totila is that in Dante's time Totila was believed to have destroyed Florence, and G. Villani gives an account of the supposed occurrence in bk. II., ch. i., of his chronicle. In Inf., xiii. 149, Dante refers to Attila as the destroyer of Florence, but this also is a fiction.
183 [7] 04801182See above, I. 9, notes 4, 5. The canzone by Gerard of Borneil, of which the first line is here quoted, is printed by Raynouard in the first volume of his Lexique Romane, p. 379.
184 [8] 04801183This author wrote poetry between 1180 and 1195; he afterwards became a monk, was bishop of Toulouse in 1205, took part in the persecution of the Albigensian heretics, and died in 1231. Dante places him in Paradise (Par., ix. 67–142).
185 [9] 04801184See above, II. ii., note 9.
186 [10] 04801185Aimery de Belinoi (Belenvei, Belvezen, or Beauvoir) was a troubadour who flourished in the middle of the thirteenth century, and adorned the court of Raymond Berengar V., count of Provence. He afterwards went to Spain, and is said to have died there. Dante speaks of him as a Spaniard below, ch. xii.
187 [11] 04801186Aimery de Péguilain was son of a merchant of Toulouse, and became one of the most celebrated troubadours of the thirteenth century. He frequented the court of Alphonso IX., king of Castile, and afterwards those of Boniface III. of Montferrat, and Azzo VI. of Este. The whole of the latter part of his life (1201–1250, about) was spent in Italy in honourable intercourse with the most eminent personages of the day, and in poetic composition. About fifty of his pieces have come down to us.
188 [12] 04801187See above, I. ix., note 6.
189 [13] 04801188See above, I. xiii., note 8.
190 [14] 04801189See above, bk. I.
191 [15] 04801190This Canzone is expounded in the third treatise of the Convito, and is alluded to in Purg., ii. 112, where Casella is represented as singing it, “Sì dolcemente che la dolcezza ancora dentro mi suona.”
192 [16] 04801191Publius Papinius Statius, one of the most conspicuous figures in the Divina Commedia, was a Neapolitan by birth. He flourished in the reign of Domitian (81–96, A.D.), to whom his father had been preceptor. His most considerable poem is the Thebaïd, an epic in twelve books, whose subject is the expedition of the Seven against Thebes. Another epic, the Achilleïd, was left unfinished. A collection of poems on various occasions, entitled Silvae, and considered by some to be his best work, was unknown in Dante's time. The high opinion of Statius as a poet, held by his contemporaries and in the Middle Ages, is no longer generally endorsed. In Purg., xxii. 127–129, he is placed on a level with Virgil.
193 [17] 04810192Marcus Annaeus Lucanus was born at Cordova in A.D. 39, and was a nephew of Lucius Annaeus Seneca, the philosopher. He was brought up at Rome, and became involved in a plot against the Emperor Nero. Tacitus (Ann. xv. 49) says that his motive was resentment at the jealousy of Nero, who refused to allow Lucan's poems to be published lest they should be compared with his own. The plot was abortive, and the execution of Lucan having been ordered, he bled himself to death, A.D. 65. His chief work is an epic, called Pharsalia, describing the struggle between Caesar and Pompey. It will be remembered that Dante refers to it above, I. 10.
194 [18] 04801193Sextus Julius Frontinus was governor of Britain, A.D. 75–78, and appointed Curator Aquarum (superintendent of the Aqueducts) in A.D. 97. He died in 106. Two treatises by him are extant; one on the Art of War, the other on the Roman Aqueducts.
195 [19] 04801194Many authorities, Scartazzini among them, consider that this writer is alluded to in Par., x. 118–120. He flourished in the fifth century A.D., and his principal work was called Historiarum libri VII. adversus Paganos. It is a little surprising to find writers of the calibre of Orosius and Frontinus in such good company. One is reminded of Macaulay's words (“Essay on Dryden”), “Every reader of the ‘Divine Comedy’ must be struck by the veneration which Dante expresses for writers far inferior to himself. He will not lift up his eyes from the ground in the presence of Brunetto, all whose works are not worth the worst of his own hundred cantos. He does not venture to walk in the same line with the bombastic Statius. His admiration of Virgil is absolute idolatry.”
196 [20] 04801195Cf. above, I. 13.
197 [1] 04801196Giuliani's reading, “grandiosa,” is here adopted instead of grandioso.
198 [2] 04801197Species. So Giuliani instead of materies. Trissino translates by maniere.
199 [3] 04801198Magnis. Giuliani proposes to change this to humanis; but by taking great as meaning “apparently great,” the common reading may well stand.
200 [4] 04801199Cf. Inf., xxiv. 47–51. Psalms xxxvii. 20; lxviii. 2.
201 [5] 04801200Cf. above, bk. I., ch. xii.
202 [6] 04801201It must be remembered that by the Latins (whom Dante would follow) l and r were alone regarded as liquids, as appears from the Etymologies of S. Isidore (i. 4, 9), where he mentions that the Greeks counted m and n also as liquids.
203 [7] 04801202For instance, in such words as obbligo, labbra.
204 [8] 04801203The text of this sentence is very corrupt. I have followed Giuliani. See his note (pp. 177, 178).
205 [9] 04801204So Giuliani instead of terra, onore, speranza, in order to make the examples agree with the rules given in the context.
206 [1] 04801205A very favourite simile with Dante; e.g. Inf., viii. 13; xxix. 43; Purg., ii. 55; Par., v. 91; xvii. 27; xxix. 24.
207 [2] 04801206Here, of course, and until Dante restricts the meaning in the latter part of this chapter to Canzone in its technical sense, the word is equivalent to Song in its most general acceptation; but as the word Song cannot be used as an equivalent of Canzone in its technical sense, I have thought it best to keep to the Italian term throughout.
208 [3] 04801207Fabricata. So Giuliani, instead of fabricatur.
209 [4] 04801208That is, a musical setting.
210 [5] 04801209Canzoniere, p. 90.
211 [1] 04801210Below, ch. xiii.
212 [1] 04801211It is hardly necessary to say that the word “soul” is here taken in the sense of the whole of the immaterial part of man, and that it is called sensible in so far as it is put into connection with external things by means of the senses.
213 [2] 04801212That is, Aristotle, “Il maestro di color che sanno” (Inf., iv. 131).
214 [3] 04801213Literally, “The things which give the definition of that which defines it (i.e. the Canzone);” with an allusion to the first sentence of ch. ix. of this book.
215 [4] 04801214See the last note to this chapter.
216 [5] 04801215See above, II. ii., note 9.
217 [6] 04801216This Canzone will be found in Appendix I.
218 [7] 04801217Syrma is the Greek σύρμα.. It means, anything trailed after one.
219 [8] 04801218Literally, “by worthiness of authority.”
220 [9] 04801219Dante's rules for the structure of the Stanza given in this chapter may be summarized as follows: The different kinds of stanza made use of in the Canzone depended upon the Musical Setting for which they were designed. I. The Musical Setting might consist of one continuous melody without any repetitions or division. II. The Musical Setting might be divided into two different Melodic Sections, which Dante calls Odes, the repetition of one of which was compulsory, and might be made either— (a) Before the transition to the second Ode (which transition Dante calls Dieresis). Here the first part of the stanza was divided into parts called Feet (two in number, or, very rarely, three), each, of course, sung to the same Ode. If the Ode used in the second part of the stanza was not to be repeated, the second part of the stanza was called the Syrma, or Coda. (b) After the Dieresis, or transition. Here the first Ode was not to be repeated, and the first part of the stanza, which was consequently undivided, was called the Fronte, while the divisions of the second part of the stanza (each sung to the second Ode) were called Verses. (c) Lastly, both Odes might be repeated, and in this case both parts of the stanza were divided; the divisions of the first part being called Feet, and those of the second Verses. The rules given in this chapter must be carefully borne in mind, or the further rules in the following chapters will be quite unintelligible.
221 [1] 04801220Böhmer's emendation is here followed, instead of the common reading, “sometimes the Fronte exceeds the Verses in syllables and in lines.” If the common reading be adhered to, the case of the Fronte exceeding the Verses in syllables and lines is stated twice over, once here, and again a little further down. It also follows from the common reading that the words “and the contrary,” further on in this chapter, are incorrect, there being no statement corresponding with them. Böhmer's reading removes both these difficulties.
222 [2] 04801221This Canzone is lost.
223 [3] 04801222See note 1 to this chapter.
224 [4] 04801223The first stanzas of these Canzoni are given below in Appendix II. as an illustration of Dante's rules. The poems in their entirety will be found in the Canzoniere, pp. 171, 104.
225 [5] 04801224See note 1 to this chapter.
226 [6] 04801225The meaning simply is that the Feet must exactly correspond in the number of their lines and the number of syllables. Thus, if the first foot has five lines, the second must also have five, and if the first line of the first foot has eleven syllables, the first line of the second foot must also have eleven, and so on.
227 [7] 04801226Cantus. This is the same as the “Ode” of the preceding chapter. See note 9 to that chapter.
228 [1] 04801227That is, Guido Cavalcanti. See above, I. xiii., note 8.
229 [2] 04801228Canzoniere, p. 90.
230 [3] 04801229See above, II. vi., note 10.
231 [4] 04801230The Canzone “Amor che nella mente mi ragiona” exemplifies the stanza here spoken of. Its first stanza is given in Appendix III. It will be found at length in Canzoniere, p. 182.
232 [5] 04801231Above, I. xv., note 6.
233 [6] 04801232See above, II. iv., where we find that Elegy is to be treated in the lowest kind of Vulgar Tongue.
234 [7] 04801233That is, a Canzone.
235 [8] 04801234Canzoniere, p. 193. The first stanza is given in Appendix IV.
236 [1] 04801235See above, II. ix.
237 [2] 04801236Stantia sine rithimis. So Böhmer. The common reading, stantia sive rithimus, which Fraticelli prints, makes no sense. Trissino escapes the difficulty by a paraphrase.
238 [3] 04801237That is, the arrangement of mixed rhymes.
239 [4] 04801238This is exemplified in the Canzone, “Donna pietosa e di novella etate,” of which the first stanza is given in Appendix II.
240 [5] 04801239That is, the last line in Fronte or Coda should rhyme with some preceding line.
241 [6] 04801240It will be remembered that in the passage to which Dante here refers he had said that the line of three syllables was only admissible in the Tragic Style, as forming part of a line of eleven syllables, and rhyming with the ending of the line before. In the present passage his meaning is that, in the case of a Foot with an uneven number of lines, there might be room for doubt whether all the endings of the lines should not be unrhymed; but this, he says, is not so: only, if some of them be rhymed and others unrhymed, those that are unrhymed must be answered by rhymes in the other Foot, just as, when the three-syllabled line is used, it must be made to rhyme with the ending of the line before. The rule here stated is exemplified in the Canzone, “Doglia mi reca nello core ardire,” of which the first stanza is given in Appendix V., which, as will there be seen, is divided into two Feet and a Coda. The first Foot has five lines, of which three, viz. the 1st, 4th, and 5th, are unrhymed, and two, viz. the 2nd and 3rd, are rhymed: but it will be seen that the 1st rhymes with the 1st line in the second Foot, the 4th with the 2nd in the second Foot, and the 5th with the 5th in the second Foot.
242 [7] 04801241That is, the endings of the last line of the first part, and of the first line of the second part of the stanza.
243 [8] 04801242See, as to this phrase, above, I. xviii.
244 [9] 0480243Ut nascentis militiae dux qui cum nulla praerogativa suam indignatur praeterire dietam. So Giuliani. The common reading is dies instead of dux, and Trissino (apparently unconscious of any absurdity) translates, “come il giorno della nascente milizia, il quale si sdegna passare la sua giornata senza alcuna prerogativa.”
245 [10] 04801244Canzoniere, p. 164.
246 [1] 04801245See above, II. ix.
247 [2] 04801246I have followed Giuliani in this very corrupt place.
248 [3] 04801247That is, the favourable or unfavourable side.
$$$
