'V 



i 







- *j 






>C*x 



1*'-V\ 



DESMOND. 



VOL. 1. 



DESMOND. 




N 



O 



E L, 



IN TWO VOLUMES. 



B Y 



CHARLOTTE SMITH. 



VOLUME I. 



DUBLIN: 

PRINTED FOR P. WOGAN, P. BYRNF, J. MOORE, W. 

M'kENZIE, H. COLBERT, A. GRUEBER, B. DORNIN, 

J. JONES, J. RICE, W. JONES, J. MEHAIN, 

G. DRAPER, R M'aLLISTER 

G. F0LINGS8Y. 



M.DCC.XCII. 



Digitized by tine Internet Arcliive 
in 2010 with funding from 
Duke University Libraries 



Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/desmondnbvelintw01smit 



v./ 



PREFACE. 



I N fending Into the world a work fo 
unlike thofe ot n:iy former writings, which 
have been honored by its approbation, I 
feel fome degree of that apprehenfion 
which an Author is fenfible ot on a firfl. 
publication. 

This arifes partly from my doubts of 
fucceeding fo well in letters as in narra- 
tive ; and partly from a fuppofuion, that 
there are Readers, to whom the fiditious 
occurrences, and others to whom the po- 
litical remarks in thele volumes may be 
difpleafing. 

a 3 To> 



ii PREFACE.^ 

To the firft I beg leave to fuggefl, that 
in reprefenting a young man, nourifh- 
ing an ardent but concealed paflion for 
a married woman ; I certainly do not 
mean to encourage or juftify fuch at- 
tachments ; but no delineation of cha- 
radler appears to me more interefting, 
than that of a man capable of fuch a 
paflion fo generous and difinterefted as 
to feek only the good of its objedl ; 
nor any ftory more moral, than one that 
reprefents the exiflence of an a£Fed;ion fo 
regulated. 



As to the political paflages difperfed 
through the work, they are for the moft 
part, drawn from converfations to which 
I have been a witnefs, in England and 
France, during the laft twelve months* 
In carrying on my ftory in thofe coun- 
tries, and at a period when their political 
fituation (but particularly that of the lat- 
ter) is the general topic of difcourfe in 
both J I have given to my imaginary cha- 
jra(flers the arguments I have heard on 
both fides i and if thofe in favor of one 
party have evidently the advantage, it is 
not owing to my partial reprcfentation, 
bat to the predominant power of truth 

and 



^ P R E F A C E. iii 

and reafon, which can neither be altered 
nor concealed'. 



But women it is faid have no bufinefs 
with politics — Why not ? — Have they no 
intereft in the fcenes that are ading 
around them, in which they have fathers, 
brothers, hufbands, Tons, or friends en- 
gaged ? — Even in the commonefl: courfe 
of female education, they are expe£led 
to acquire fome knowledge of hiftory ; 
and yet, if they arc to have no opinion of 
what is paflmg, it avails little that they 
fhould be informed of what has pajftd, in 
a world where they are fubje(5l to fuch 
mental degradation ; where they are cen- 
fured as affecting mafculine knowledge if 
they happen to have any underflanding ; 
or defpifed as infignificant triflers if they 
have none. 



Knowledge, which qualifies women to 
fpeak or to write on any other than the 
mofl common and trivial fubjefls, is 
fuppofed to be of fo difficult attainment, 
that it cannot be acquired but by the fa- 
crifice of domeftic virtues, or the negle(5t 
of doaieftic duties. — — / however n\\j 
fafely fay, that it was in the obfervance, 
not in the breach of duty, / became an 

Author i 



iv PREFACE. 

Author ; and it has happened, that the 
circumftances which have compelled me 
to write, have introduced me to thofe 
fcenes of life, and thofe varieties ol" cha- 
rader which I fhould otherwife never 
have feen : Tho' alas! it is from thence, 
that I am too well enabled to defcribc 
from immediate obfervation, 



" The proud man's contumely, th' oppreflbrs- 

vrong ; 
The laws delay, the infolence of office." 



Bur, while in confequence of the af- 
fairs of my family, being moft unhap- 
pily in the power of men who feem to 
exercife all thefe with impunity , I am be- 
come an Author by proft'Jfwfi, and feel 
every year more acutely, " thai hope 
delayed maketh the heart Jick'^ I am 
fenfible alfo (to ufe another quotation) 
that 

-'* Adverfity — 



Tho' iike a toad ugly and venomous, 
Wears yet a precious jewel in its head." 



For it is to my involuntary appearance 
in that charader, that I am indebted, 
for all that makes my continuance in the' 

world 



PREFACE. w 

world defirablc ; all that foftens the rigor 
of my dcftiny and enables me to fuftain 
it : I mean friends among thofe, who, 
while their talents are the boaft of their 
country, are yet more refpedable for the 
goodnefs and integrity of their hearts. 



Among thefe I include a female friend, 
to whom I owe the beautiful little Ode 
in the laft volume-, who having written 
it for this work, allows me thus publicly 
to boafl of a friendfhip, which is the 
pride and plcafure of my life. 



If I may be indulged a moment longer 
in my egotifm, it fhall be only while I 
apologize for the typographical errors of 
the work, which may have been in fome 
meafure occafioned by the detached and 
hurried way, in which the (heets were 
fometimcs fent to the prefs when I was at 
a diftance from it ; and when my atten- 
tion was din:ra(5ted by the troubles, 
which it feems to be the peculiar delight 
of the perfons who are concerned in 
the management of my children's affairs, 
to inflid upon me. With all this the 
Public have nothing to do : but were it 

proper 



Ti PREFACE. 

proper to relate all the difadvantages 
from anxiety of mind and local circum- 
flances, under which tbefc volumes have 
been compofed, fuch a detail might be 
admitted as an excufe for more material 
errors. 



For that afperity of remark, which 
will arife on the part of thofe whofe 
political tenets I may offend, I am pre- 
pared ; thofe who objed to the matter, 
will probably arraign the manner, and 
exclaim againft the impropriety of 
making a book of entertainment the 
vehicle of political difcuffion. I am how- 
ever confcious that in making thefe flight 
/ketches, of manners and opinions, as 
they fluduated around me ; I have not 
facrificed truth to any party — Nothing 
appears to me more refpettable than 
national pride ; nothing fo abfurd as 
national prejudice — And in the faithful 
reprefenration of the manners of other 
countries, fureiy Engliflimen may find 
abundant reafon to indulge the one, 
while they conquer the other. To thofe 
ho\yever who (till cherifli the idea of our 
having a natural enemy in the French 
nation ; and that they are ftill more na- 
turally our foes, becaufe they have dared 

to. 



PREFACE. 



vu 



to be freemen, I can only fay, that again ft 
the phalanx of prejudice kept in conftant 
pay, and under (tri<5t difcipline by intereft, 
the flight Ikirmifliing of a novel writer 
can have no effedt : we fee it remains 
hitherto unbroken againft the powerful 
efforts of learning and genius — though 
united in that caufe which mujl finally 
triumph — the caufe of truth, reafon, and 
humanity. 



CHARLOTTE SMITH. 



London> 
June 20, 1792. 



DESMOND. 



LETTER I. 
TO MR. BETHEL. 

June 9, 1790. 

YOUR arguments, my friend, were decifive; 
and fince I am now on my way— I hardly know 
whither, you will be convinced that I attended 
to them; and have determined to relinquifh the 
dangerous indulgence, of contemplating the 
perfections of anobjedt, that can never be mine. 
Yes ! — I have torn tnyfelf from her ; and, with- 
out betraying any part of the anguifli and regret 
1 felt, I calmly took my leave ! — It was five days 
Ego, the morning after fhe had undergone the 
fatiguing ceremony of appearing, for the firft 
time fince her marriage, at court on the birth- 
night. — 

I had heard how univerfally fhe had been ad- 
mired, but {he feemed to have received no plea- 
fure from that admiriition— and I felt involun- 
tarily pleafed that (he had not. — Her hufband — 
I hate the name — Verney ; had already efcaped. 
from the confinement, which this ceremony of 
their appearances had for a day or two impofed 
upon him : and was gone to I know not what 
races ; Ihc named the place faintly and reluc- 
tantly when I afked after him ; and I did not 
repeat thequeftion ; there was however another 
queftion which I could not help alking myfelf ; 

Vol. I. B docs 



2 DESMOND. 

does this man deferve the lovely Geraldine ? — • 
Alas! — I know he does not ; cannot: the fport 
o( every wild propenfity or rather of every pre- 
vailing fafhion, (for it is to thit he facrifices ra- 
ther than to his own inclinations) I have too 
much reafon to bt;lieve he will diiTipate his for- 
tune, and render his wife miferable. — But is it 
poiTible flie can love him? — Oh, no ! — it is furely 
not pofljble — when through the mild grace and 
fometimes tendernefs of her manner, 1 remark 
the flrcngth and clearnefs of her underftanding ; 
when- I obferve, how immediately fhc fees the 
ridiculous, and how quickly her ingenuous and 
liberal mind itrinks from vice and folly -I be- 
lieve it impoffible that the hour can be far dif- 
tant, if indeed it is not already arrived ; when 
the flowers, with which the mercenary hands 
of her family^ drefTed the chains they impofed 
upon her, will be totally faded ; and when, what 
ever affedlion fhe now feels for him, if any does 
exift, will be dtftroyed by the conviction of 
Verney's unworthinefs — Ah ! where will then 
an heart, like hers, find refuge againft the hor- 
rors of fuch a dtdiny — would to heaven I had 
become acquainted with her before that defliny 
was irrevocable — or that i had never known her 
at all. 

When I was admitted to her drefling-rooin 
the lall time 1 faw her — -fhe was reading; and 
, laid down her book on my entrance — I was ill, 
or had appeared fo to her; when 1 had i'ttn her 
a few days before — flie fcemed now to recolle<5l 
it with tmder interefl: — and when, in anfwering 
her enquiries, I told her I intended going abro^id 
for fome months > I fhculd have thought — had 
I dared to indulge the flattery of fancy — that fhe 
heard it v;ith. concern, " we ihall not tbeo fee 

you 



DESMOND. 3 

you this year in Kent," faid fhe, " I am very 
forry for it,"—- fhe piufcd a moment, and addedj 
with one of thofe fmiles which give fuch pecu- 
liar charms to her countenance, " but I hope 
you will regain your health and fpirits — and I 
think we (hall certainly have you among us again 
in the (hooting feafon." — I know not what was 
the matter with me, but 1 could not anfwer her^ 
and the converfation for fome moments dropped. 

She refumed it after another fliort filence, and 
afked me when I had feen her brother? — He 
talks, " faid (he," of going to the Continent 
alfo this fummer, and I wifh you may meet him 
there — your acquaintance could not fail of be- 
ing advantageous in any country, but particu- 
larly a foreign country, to a young man fo new 
to the world as he is ; and one, fo unfettled ia 
all his plans, from temper and habit, that I am 
ever in pain left he (hould fall into thofe errors, 
which I every day fee fo fatal to thofe who enter 
into the world unexperienced like him — without 
a guide. — Should you happen to meet with him 
abroad, I am fure you have friendlhip enough 
for us all, to diredt him," — 

1 feized v/ith avidity an opportunity of being 
ferviceable to any one who belongs to her — I had 
not feci\ Wavcrly for fome time, and imagined 
he was gone back to Oxford ; but I aiTured her, 
that if Mr. Waverly could make it convenient 
to go when I d^d to Paris, 1 fhould be extremely 
glad to be ufcful to him, and happy in his com- 
pany. 

Pleafed with the earneft manner in which I 
fpoke, ihe became more un-referved on this fub- 
jedt. " You know a little of my brother," faid 
fhe, ** but it is impoffible, on (b flight an ac- 
quaintance, to be aware of the peculiarities of his 
B 2 temper 



^ DESMOND. 

temper — peculiarities that give me fo many fears 
on his account. It is not his youth, or the ex- 
penfive ftyle in which he lets out, that difquieC 
me fo much as that uncommon indecifion of 
mind, which never allows him to know what he 
will do a moment before he a6ls ; and fome how 
or other he always continue^, after long debates 
and repeated changes, to adopt the very worft 
fcheme of thofe he has examined. I may fay to 
you that this defedt originated in the extreme 
indulgence of his parents-.— a very confiderable 
part of my father's eftate would have gone into 
another branch of the family, had he not had a 
fon — and it happened his fix eldeft children 
were daughters, fo that when this long- wifhed- 
for and only fon was born, he became of more 
confequence to my father and mother than the 
reft of their family: and we, his th/ee fifJers, 
who furvived, have through our lives hitherto 
uniformly feen our intereft yield to his. — But, 
believe me, we (hould never have murmured, 
(at leaft 1 can aniwtr for myl'elf) — at whatever 
facrificcs have been made, had they contributed 
to render him really and permanently happier, 
but the continual enquiries that were made of 
■what he would do, and what he would like, while 
nothin T was ever offered to him but variety of 
gratification, have, I think, coincided with his 
natural temper to produce that coniinual inabi- 
lity, to puriue any fiudy or even any plealure 
fleadily. — My father's death, and his being of 
a^e, have rendered him mafter of himfelf and his 
fo) tune ; but he cannot refolve what to do with 
either of them, and my apprehenfions are, that 
he will fall into the hands of thofe who will de- 
termine for him, anddifpnfe of both, rather for 
their own advantage than for his. I have there- 
fore 



DESMOND. 5 

fore encouraged, as much as poilible, hishalf- 
formed'inclination to go abroad — but he tallcs 
fo vaguely about it, and varies (o much in his 
projedts, that I doubt whether he will ever exe- 
cute any of them. — If you really would allow 
him to accompany you — yet I know not hov/ to 
alTcit, yourfociety would perhaps determine him 
to the journey, and prevent his meeting any of. 
thofe inconveniencies to which young travellers 
are expofed." 

I believe my lovely friend mi (look the expref» 
fion which my eager acquiefcence threw into my. 
countenance, for what might be produced by the 
embarraflmentj of wilhing to efcape with civi* 
lity from an unwelcome propofal — for (he hcfi- 
tated — yet, without giving me time to reply, 
fald, " but perhaps I am taking a very improper 
liberty with you — I ought to have recollected, 
that in this expedition you have probably a party, 
to which any addition maybe unwelcome; and 
that you have fo flight an acquaintance with my 
brother" — " v^ 

I interrupted her. — '* It is enough for me, 
that he is your brother — that alone would make 
me wifh to render him every fervice in my power 
— even if I had never feen him." — 1 had faid 
more than I ought; more than I intended to fay. 
— 1 felt inftantly conicious of it, and I now con- 
fufedly hurried intoprofeffionsof perfonal regard 
for Waverly, far enough from being fmcere; 
and affurances, that, as 1 went for change of air 
and fcene, which my health and fpirits required, 
1 fhould make no party, iinhfs it was with one 
friend, to whom my fociety might be ufeful — 
" and when that friend," adJed J, '* is your 
brother." — 1 was relapfing faft into the fully, of 
which, but a moment before, I repented. — i faw 

her 



dj D E S M O N B. 

h^r change coTour, and for the firft time fince 
the rile of this attachment — which v/ill end only 
with my life — I had faid, what to a vain woman 
might have betrayed it. 

Geraldinefeemed now felicitous to change the 
converfation, but this I would not do, till 1 had 
made her promife to write to her brother, as 
foon as (he could learn where he was; and men- 
tion to hi:Ti my intended journey, and my rea- 
dinefs to begin it with him immediately. 

1 afiured her, that if I met Waverly before 
I left London, 1 would endeavour to fix his de- 
parture with me, and giving her my addrefs, that 
he might write to me at Margate, reludantly, 
and with pangs, fuch as are felt only when 
" foul and body part" — I bade her adieu ! 

She looked concerned, and gave me her lovely 
hand, which I dared not prefs to my lips — but, 
as trembling, I held it in mine, fhc wifhed me 
health and happinefs, a pleafant journey, and a 
profperous reiurn, in that foul-foothing voice 
which I always hear with undefcribable emo- 
tions. — More tremuloufly fweet than ufual, it 
flill vibrates in my ears, and 1 ftili repeat to 
myfelf her la(l words—" Farewell, Mr. DcC- 
mond, may all i'elicity attend you." 

Now, you will call this wrong, ridiculous, 
and romantic. — But fpare your remonitrances, 
dear Bethel, fince i obey you in elTcntials, and 
am going from England, rather becaufe you de- 
fire It, than bc'caufe I am convinced that fuch an 
afFe£tion as 1 feel ought to be eradicated. — Do 
you know againft how many vices, and how 
many follies, a paffion, fo pure and ardent as 
mine, fortifies the heart ? — Are you fure that 
tlie tviis you reprefent as attending it, are not 
purely imaginary, while the good is real ? — { 

expe6lj 



D t: S M O N D. 7 

expe<51, however, a heavy le£ture for all this, 
and ii were better not to add another word on 
the fubjecl. 

Your's ever, with true regard, 

LIONEL DESMOND, 



I forgot to add,, that though my journey is 
certainly decided upon, becaufc I hope to find, 
in the prefent political tumult in France, what, 
may intcreft and divert my attention; yet, 
I will not fail to deliver to your relations the 

letter you endoled in your lafl and to avail 

myfelf of it as an introduflion to Mrs. Fairfax, 
and her family, as foon as I arrive at iMargate. 
—You imngine, that the charm^ of one or other 
of your fair coufins will have pov.'er enough to 
drive, from my heart, an inclination which you 
fo entirely difapprove — though I am too well 
convinced of the inefHcacy of the recipe, I try 
it you fee — in deference to your opinion — jiiftas 
a patient, who knows his difeafe to be incurable, 
fubmits to the prefcription of a phyfician he 
efteems, — As foon as I have delivered my cre- 
dentials you ihall hwr from me again. 



L E T- 



O & E S M O N Dr 

LETTER II. 

TO MR. DESMOND, 

Hartfield, June ij, 1790- 

YES .' — you have really given an inftance of 
extreme prudence — and, in confequcnce of it, 
you will, I think, haveoccafion to exert another 
virtue, which is by no means the moft ennlnent 
among thofe you pofFefs ; the virtue of patience, 
■ — So ! — you have really undertaken the delight- 
ful office of bear-leader — becaufe the brother of 
your Geraldine cannot take care of himfelf — 
and this you call fetting about your cure, while 
you continue to difpute, whether it be wife 

to be cured or no^ and, while you argue 

that a pailion for another man's wife may 
fave you from abundance of vice and folly, 
you flrengthen your argument to be fure won- 
derfully, by commitiing one of the greatcftads 
of folly in your power. — And as to vice, 1 hold 
it, my good friend, to be a great advance towards 
it, when you betray fyrnptoms (which no wo- 
man can fail to underhand) of this wild and 
romantic pafiion of yours, or, as you fenumen- 
tallytermit, this ardent and pure attachment — 
an attachment and an arrangement 1 ihmk are 
the terms now in ufe, I beg pardon if I do not 
always put them in the right place. 

But ierioufly — do you know what you have 
undertaken in thus engaging yourfclf with Wa- 
vcrly ? — and can you bear to be made uneafy by 
the caprices of a man who is of twenty minds 
in a momenr, without ever being in his right 
mind.— Ycur only chance of efcaping, as you 

have 



DESMOND. 9 

have now managed the matter is, that he will 
never determine whether he fhall go with you or 
no. — Some fcampering party will be propofed 
to a cricket match in HampQiire, or a race in 
Yorkfhire ; one friend will invite him to a ball 
in the Weft of England, and another to fee a 
boxing match in the neighbourhood of London : 
and while he is debating whether he fliall make 
any of thefe engagements, or which, or go to 
France with you, you wiil have a very fair op- 
portunity of leaving him — unlefs (which from 
the ftyle of your laft letter I do not expc£l) you 
fhould yourfelf change your refolution on the 
beft grounds; and find your romantic and your 
patriotic motive for a journey to France, con- 
quered at once by the more powerful enchant- 
ments of one of my fair coufins. 

While, from your fortune being entrufted to 
my management by your grandfather till you 
were five-and- twenty, 1 confidered myfelf as 
your guardian, I forbore to recommend to either 
of thefe young women, becaufe they were my 
relations — But now as you are mafter alike of 
yourfelf and of your eftate, yet are ftill willing 
to attend (at leaft you fay you are) to the opinion 
of a friend who has lived fourteen years longer 
in the world than you have. 1 am defirous that 
you fhould become acquainted with them, and 
that you fhould judge fairly, fmce that muft lie 
to judge favourably, of women who are fo uni- 
verfally and juftly admired; who certainly are 
moft highly accompliftied : and have fortunes to 
ailift whoever they marry, in fuppoi ting them in 
that rank of life to which they will do fo mucii 
honour — this you call an extraordinary ftyle of 
advice, from a man who, in the noon of l.fe, 
has renounced that world, whofe attradions he 
B 5 lecom- 



•1© DESMOND. 

recommends to you ; but that, at hardly hine- 
and-thirty, I have no longer any reli(h for it, 
arifes, not from general mifanthropy, but from 
particular misfortune, and againft thofe calami- 
tics of domeftic life that have embittered my days, 
I vi'ifli to guard yours — by giving you fome of 
my dearly-bought experience. 

You have talent?, youth, health, perfon and 
fortune — a good heart and an ardent imagination 
— thefe, my dear Defmond, are advantages v^xy 
rarely united, and when they do meet, all the 
firft are too often loft by the fatal and irregular 
indulgence of the laft. This is what I fear for 
you — but my lecture muft: terminate with my 
paper — my good wifhes ever follow you ; let me 
bear from you foon — and believe me e\er 

Yours, 

E. BETHEL, 



L E i- 



D r 3- K' OK D. II 

LETTER IJI. 
TO MR. BETHEL. 

Margate, June 16, lygo. 
MY vifit to your friends is paid, and 1 mef 
fuch a reception as I might expe6l from your re- 
commendation — would I could tvll you, that it 
has anfwered all the friendly expeclation*:, or 
rather hopes, you formed of it : but you expe^ 
an ingenuous account of my ffntiments in re- 
g-ird to thefe ladies ; and you fhall hive them. 

Mrs, Fairfax has been certain'y a very fine 
woman, and even now has perfon-J advantages 
enough to authorife her retaining thofe prettn- 
fions, which it is eafy to fee fbe v/ould, with 
extreme reludtance, entirely refign,— It is hovi'- 
ever but jiiftice to add, tlia: her unwillingnefs 
to fade, does not influence her to keep back the 
period when it is fit her daughters fhould bloom 
' — fhe rather runs into the contrary extreme; 
and with folicitudc, which her maternal affec- 
tion renders rather an amiable weaknefs, fiie is 
always buftling about, to ftiew them to the beft 
advant-^jjip -, and, as (he is perfectly convinced 
that they are the moft accomplifhed young wo- 
men of the age, fo fhe is very deiirous of im- 
prefling that conviction on all her acquaintance 
« — for the reft I believe fhe may b^ a very good 
woman ; and I have only to object to a little too 
much parade about it ; and th;.t flie talks rather 
too loud — and rather too lon^;. 

My firft introduiTtion to her was not at h?r 
own houfe, for entering one of the libraries 
about two o'clock on Thurfday noon, i ob- 
B 6 fervedy. 



12 DESMOND. 

ferved, that the attention of the few people who 
fo early in the feafon affembled there, was en- 
grofled by a lady who was relating a very long 
ftory about herfelf, in a tone of voice, againft 
which, whatever had been the fubjecl, no de- 
gree of attention to any other could have been 
a defence. I was compelled therefore, inftead 
of reading the paper where I was anxious to fee 
French news, to join the audience who were 
hearing — how her leafe was out, of an houfe (he 
had in Harley-ftrcet, and all the converfation 
lield between herfelf, her landlord, and her at- 
torney about its renewal. But how at laft they 
could not agree ; an.i fo {lie had taken another in 
Manchefter Square, which {lie defcribed at full 

length " The Ducheff," continued (he, 

*' and lady Lindwes, and lady Sarah, were ali 
fo delighted when they found 1 had determined 
upon it — and lady Sufan affurcd me it would 
delay at leaft her winter's journey to Bath — 
Oh! my dear Mrs. Fairfax, faic lady Sufan, you 
have no notion now, how exceflively happy we 
{hall all be, to have you fo near us — and your 
fvveet girls ! — their fociety is a delightful acqui- 

fition Mifs Fairfax's finging is charming, 

and I fo doat upon Anaftatia's manner of read- 
ing poetry, that I hope we (hall fee a great deiil 
of both of them." — 

Though I at once knew that this was the lady 
to whom i VI as fortunate enough to have a letter 
of recommendation in my pocket, it was not 
eafy with all that mauvais konte with which you 
fo frequently accufe me, to find a favourable 
moment to make my buw and my fpeech, be- 
tween the end of one narrative and the beginning 
of another, with fuch amazing rapidity did 
they follow each other : and I fiiould have re- 
tired 



DESMOND. 13 

tired without having been able to feizeany fuch 
lucky interval, if this inexhauftible ftream of 
eloquence had not been interrupted by the fud- 
den entrance of a young man who feemed to be 
one of Mrs. Fairfax's intimate acquaintance, 
and who faid he came to tell her, that a raffle, 
in which flie was engaged at another (hop, was 
full, and that her daughters had fent him to de- 
fire fhe would come. '* There is nobody now, 
madam, to throw," faid this gentleman, " but 
you and I ; and Mifs Anaftatia being the higheft 
number, thinks fhe {hall win the jars — but as 
for me, I cannot go back this morsiing, for I 
am engaged to ride" — " Oh, but I defire you 
will," replied Mrs. Fairfax, " it wont take 
you up a minute, and I will have it decided — 
for I hate fufpencc." — *' Yes, madam," faid 
another gentleman who had been among the 
lifteners, " you may hate it — but there is no- 
thing that VVaverly loves fo much, if one may 
judge by the difficulty he always makes about 
deciding upon every thing — and if the determi- 
nation of the raffle depends upon him, yoa will 
hardly know who the jars are to belong to this 

feafon." " I protefl:, Jack Lewis," cried 

Waverly, whom I now immediately knew, 
though his cropped hair and other fingulafities 
of drefs had at firft prevented my recolle£ling 
him — ** I proteft you do me injuftice — I am 
the (leadieil creature in life — and I would go 
now willingly — but upon my foul I'm paft my 
appointment." 

" And what fignifies your appointment r" 
replied the other. — " What fignifies whether 
you keep it or no?" — Why, that's true," an- 
fwered my futur- fellow-traveller, " to be fure 
it is of no great confequence, neither — ^o if you 

.defire 



14 D E S M O N I>. 

defire it, I'll go with you, Ma'am, though really 
I hardly know." — He was beginning to hefitate 
again, but iMrs. Fairfax took him at his word^ 
and they went out together ; however, before 
they had reached the place where the pofTeflion 
of the China jars wa^ to be decided, I faw Wa- 
verly leave the lady, and go I fuppofe to keep 
the engagement, which he allowed a moment 
before was of no conlequence. As for myfelf, 
as foon as I recovered from the effecfts of the 
firft impieflion made by Mrs. Fairfax's oratory, 
which perhaps; the weaknefs or irritab lity of 
my nerves rendered more forcible than it ought 
to be, I colledled courage enough to follow her; 
atrd in a momentary paufe that fuccecded her 
lofing her raffle, which would now have been, 
finally fettled (he faid, had Waverly been pre- 
fent, I advanced and delivered your letter. 

She received it moft gracioufly ; and even re- 
tired from the groups (he was engaged in, to 
read it. I took that opportunity of addrefling 
mylelf to Mifs Fairfax, who is certainly a very 
pretty woman ; fhe feemed however cold and 
referved ; and, I thought, put on that fort of 
air whch fays — ♦' i don't kndw. Sir, whether 
you are in ilyle of life to claim my notice." — 
Thefe little doubts, however, which I readily 
forgave^ were immediately diffipated, when htr 
mother appeared with your letter in her hand — 
and faid, '* Margarette, my dear, this is Mr. 
Defmond — the friend and ward of Mr. Bethel, 
I am fure you will be as rejoiced as I am in this 
opportunity of being honoured with his acquain- 
tance." — ^1 faw inftantly, that the young lady re- 
colleded, in the friend and ward of Mr. Bethel, 

a man of large, independent foriune. The 

moft amiable exprciiion of complacency was 

immediately. 



DESMOND. 15 

Immediately conveyed into her countenance ; 
and, as 1 attended her and lier mother home, 
I perceived that two or three gentlemen, who 
came with her alfo, and towards whom fhe had 
before been lavifh of hei finiles, were now al- 
moft negledted, while Iht; w as io good as to at- 
tend only to me. — At the door of their lodgings 
I took my leave of them, after receiving the 
very obliging invitation to dine with them the 
nextday. Analtatia was not with them. Mifs 
Fairfax told me, that, as foon as fhe had thrown 
for the jars, (he went home, '* for Anaftatia, 
faid (he, is exct /lively fond of reading and re- 
citing—and, her reading maftcr, a celebrated 
a£tor at one of the theatres, happening to be 
here by accident, fhe would not lofe the oppor- 
tunity of receiving a lefTon. " She dees excel, 
afiuredly, faid the elder lady, in thofe accom- 
plilhmentf, as Mr. ]3efmond, I think will fay, 
when he hears her." — lexprfffed my fati;fa£tion 
at the profpe6t of being fo gratified, and then 
took my leave. 

Yeiterday morning I favv Waveily, who 
feemed to embrace, with avidity, the projedt of 
going with me to Paris — I reprcfented to him 
the necefhty of his knowing, piecifely, his own 
mind, as i cannot remain here more than four 
or five days. — He allures me, that nothing can 
prevent his going, and that he will infiantly fet 
about making preparations. — Indetd, my good 
friend, you were too k\erc upon him. — He is 
young, and quite without experience, but he feeirvS 
to have a good difpoiition, and an underftanding 
capable of improvement. — There is too, a family 
reiemblance to his ftfter, which, though flight, and 
rather a flying than a fixed likenefsj intertits me 
for him; and in diort, lam more defircus ofcur- 
•ing than of reckoning: his fault?. He 



l6 D E S M O N I>. 

He dined with Mrs. Fairfax yeftertlay, where 
I was alfo invited, and where a party of nine or 
ten were afTembled. The captivating fifters dif- 
playt-d all their talents, and 1 own they excel in 
almofl every accomplifliment. — I have feldom 
feen a finer figure taken altogether, than the 
younger fifter, and indeed, your defcription of 
the perfonal beauty of both, was not exaggera- 
tion. — To their acquirements, I have already 
donejuftice: yet, I am convinced, that, with 
all thefe advantages, my heart, were it totally 
free fiom every other impreflion, would never 
become devoted to either. 

It Vi'ould be nonfenfe to pretend to give rea- 
fons for this. —With thefe caprices of the ima- 
gination, and of the heart, you have allowed 
that Reafon has very little to do. 

One objection however, to my pretending to 
either of thefe ladies, would be, that every de- 
gree cf excellence on which you feeni to dwell. 
— Always furrounded by admiring multitudes ; 
or, prailifing thofe acccmpliiliments by which 
that admiration is acquired, they feem to be in 
danger of forgetting they have hearts — appearing 
to feel no preference for any perfon, but thofe who 
have the fandion of faftion, or the recommen- 
dation of great property ; and, affluent as they 
are themfclves, to confider only among the men 
that furround them, who arc the likelieft to 
jaife them to higher aiSuence or fupcrior rank. 

Of this 1 had a fpecimen yefterday — ^Waverly 
fetms to have an inclination for Mifs Fairfax, 
and as he and I were the two young men in the 
party of yefterday, who feemed the moft worthy 
the notice of the two young ladies, I was (o 
fortunate as to be ailowed to entertain Mifs 
Anafiatia, while WaverJy was engaged in ear- 

neft 



DESMOND. 17 

neft difcourfe by Mifs Fairfax, who put on all 
thofe fafcinating airs which ftie fo well knows 
how to affume. — I faw that poor Waverly was 
confidering whether he {hould not be violently 
in love with her, or adhere to the more humble 
beauty, for whom he had been relating h\^ pen- 
chant to mc a few hours before, when the door 
fuddenly opened, and a tall young fellow, very 
d'rty, and apparently very drunk, was (hewn 
into the room. — The looks of all the ladies tef- 
tified their fatisfadtion : and they all eagerly 
exclaimed, " Oh ! my lord, when did you ar- 
rive, who expe£led you ? — how did you come ?" 
— Without, however, attending immediately to 
thefe queftions, he fhook the two young ladies* 
hands, called them familiary by their Chriftian 
names : and then throwing himfelf at his length 
on a fopha, he thus anfwered— *' Came ! — why, 
curfe me if 1 hardly know how 1 came here — 
for 1 have not been in bed thefe three nights- 
Why, J came with Davers, and Lenham, and 

a parcel of us, We were going to fettle a 

wager at Tom Felton's — But, rat me, if I 
know why the plague we came through this 
damned place, twenty miles at Icaft out of our 
way. — How in the devil's name do ye contrive 
to live here, why, here is not a foul to be feen?" 
— Then, without waiting for an anfwer to this 
elegant exordium, he fuddenly fnatched the hand 
of the eldelt Alifs Fairfax, who fat near him, 
and cried, " hut, by the Lord, my fweet Peggy, 
you look confoundedly handfome — curfe me if 
you don't. — By Jove, I believe I fhall be in 
lovt witn you myielf. — What ! — fo you have 
got out of your megrims and ficknefs, eh ! — 
aiid are quite well, you dear little toad you, 
?hP" — The Ibfl and fmiling anfwer which the 

lady 



is DESMOND. 

lady gave to an acldrefs fo impertinently familiar,, 
convinced nne (he was not difpleafed with it : the 
mother feemed equally fatisfied ; and I hw^ that 
even the fentimenta! Anaftatia forgot the critique 
on the laft fafiiionable novel, with which flie 
had a moment before been obliging me ; and 
caft a look of folicitude towards that part of the 
room, where this newly-arrived vifitor, whom 
they called Lord Newminfter, was talking to 
her fifter in the ilyle of which I have given you 
an example — while poor Waverly, who had at 
cnce loft all his confequence, fat filentand mor- 
tified, or if he dsfUdently attempted to join in 
the converfation, obtained no notice from the 
lady, and only a dare of contemptuous enquiry 
from the lord, — As, notwithftanding the favor 
1 had found a few hours before, I now feemed 
to be finking faft into the fame infignificance, I 
thought it better to avoid a continuance of fuch 
mortitication, by taking my leave; Waverlv, as 
he accompanied me home, cnald hardly conceal 
his vexation — yet was unwilling to fliew it : 
Vvhile I doubt net but Mrs. Fairfax and the 
young ladies we happily entertained the reft of 
the evtning by the delcdtable converfation of 
Lord I\'ewminfter. 

I ftiajl probably write once more from hence.. 

Your's, ever and truly, 

L. D. 



L E T= 



D E S M O K D. ig 

LETTER IV. 

TO MR. DESMOND. 

Hartfitid, June to, 1790. 

I AM forry my prefcription is not likely to 
fucceed; 1 had perCuadedmyfelf that the youngeft 
of my fair coufins was the likeliefl: of any wo- 
man of my acquaintance, to become the objefl 
of a reafonable attachment. — Surely Defmond 
you are faftidious — you expert what you will 
never find, the cultivated mind and polilhed 
manners of refined fociety, with the fimplicity 
and unpretending modefty of retired life — they 
are incompatible — they cannot be united ; and 
this model of pcrfe6tion, which you have ima- 
gined, and can never obtain, will be a fuurce of 
unhappinefs to you through life. 

I told you in 2 former letter, that I would 
endeavour to give you a little of my dearly- 
bought experience. You know that I have 

been unhappy ; but you are probably quite unac- 
quainted with the fources from whence that un- 
happinefs originates — in relating them to you I 
may perhaps ccnvnce you, that ignorance and 
fimplicity are no fecuritiesagainft theevils which 
you fecm to apprehend in domeftic life ; and 
that the woman, who is fuddenly raifed from 
humble mediocrity to the gay fcenes of faihiona- 
ble fplendor, is much more likely to be giddily 
intoxicated than one who has from her infancy 
been accuftomed to them. 

At one and twenty, and at the clofe of a long 
minority, which had been palled under the care 
of very CACelient guardians, 1 became mailer of 

a very 



aO 1> E S M O Pi I>. 

a very large fum of ready money, and an eftate 
the largeft and beft conditioned that any gentle- 
man pofTefl'ed in the country where it lay. — I 
was at that time very- unlike the fober fellow I 
now appear — and the moment I was free from 
the reftraint of thoi'e friends, to whofe guardian- 
Tnip my father had left me, I rufhed into all the 
diffipation that was going forward, and became 
one of the gayeft men at that time about town. 

With fuch a fortune it was not difficult to 
be introduced into " the very firft world." — 
The llluilrious adventurers and titled gamblers,, 
of whom that world is compofed, found me an 
admirable rubje6l for them j while the women, 
who were then either the mod celebrated orna- 
ments of the circle where 1 moved, or were en- 
deavouring to become fo, were equally felicitous, 
to obtain my notice — and the unmarried part of 
them feemed generoufly willing to forget my 
want of title in favour of my twelve or thirteen, 
thoufand a year. — I had, however, at a very early 
period of my career, conceived an affe<Sl;ion, or 
according to your phrafe, an ardent attachment 
to a married woman of high rank, — but 1 had at, 
the fame time feen enough of them all, to de- 
termine never to marry any of them myfelf. 

Two years experience confirmed me in this- 
refolution, but by the end of that time I was re- 
lieved from the embarraiiinents of a large pro- 
perty. — In the courfe of the firfl-, the tun and 
the hazard table had dlfburthened m.e of all my 
ready money ; and, at the conclulion of the i"e- 
cond, m.y eltate was reduced to fomething leis 
than one half. — I then found that I was not, by, 
above one half, fo great an obje£t to my kmd 
friends as I bad been — and, when foon after- 
wards 1 was compelled to pay five, thoufand. 

pounds 



DESMOND. 21 

pounds for my fentimental attachment — when 
the obliging world reprefented mv affiirs infi- 
nitely worfe than they were, and I became afraid 
of looking into them myfelf, I found the period 
rapidly approaching when to this circle I fliould 
become no obje£t at all. 

My pride now effected that, which common 
fenfe had attempted in vain ; and I determined 
to quit a fociety into which I {hould never have 
entered. ■ I went down to my houfe in the 
county where almoft all my eftate lay ; fent for 
the attorney who had the care of my property, 
and with a fort of defperate refolution refolvcd 
to know the worft. 

This lawyer, whofe father had been fteward 
to mine, and to whom at his death the fteward- 
fliip had been given by my guardians, was a 
clearheaded, aftive and intelligent man: and 
when he law himfelf entrufted with fuller pow- 
ers to a6t in my bufinefs than he had till then 
pofleflVd, hefet about it fo carneftly and aflidu- 
oufly, that he very foon got fuccefsfully through 
two law fuits of great importance : raifed my 
rents without oppreffing my tenants — difpofed 
of fuch timber as could be fold without preju- 
dice to the principal eftate — fold ofFpart of what 
was mortgaged to redeem and clear the reft ; 
and fo regulated my affair?, that in a few 
months, from the time of his entlrelv undertak- 
ing them, I found myfelf relieved from every 
embarraftment, and ftill poflefled of an eftate of 
more than five thoufand pounds a year. The 
feven that 1 had thrown away gave me however 
fome of the fevere pangs that are inflicted by 

mortified pride. Nabobs and rich citizens 

became the oflentatious pofleffojs of manors 
and royalties in the fame county, which were 

once 



22 DESMOND. 

once mine ; and fomeof my eflates— dilates that 
had been in my family fince the conqueft, now 
lent their names to barons by recent purchafe, 
and dignified mulhroom nobility, 

I fled therefore from public meetings, where 
I only found objeils of felf-roproach, and made 
acquaintance with another fet of people, among 
whom I was ftill confidered as a man of great 
fortune ; and where I found more attention, 
and, as I believed, more friendfhip than I had 
ever experienced in fuperior focieties. 

More general information and more under- 
{landing I certainly found; and none of my new 
friends pofiefTed a greater fliare of both than my 
folicitor, Mr. Stam.ford — he had defervedly ob- 
tained my confidence, and I was now often at 
his houfe, which his family feemed to vie in try- 
ing, to render agreeable to me. 

His wife was pleafing and good humoured, 
and he had feveral filters, fome married, and two 
fmgle, who occafionajly vifitad at his houfe ; and 
it was not difficult to fee, that in the eyes of the 
latter, Mr. Bethel, with his reduced fortune, 
was a man of greater confequence than he had 
ever appeared to the high born damfeis among 
whom he had lived in the meridian of his prol- 
perity. 

I was not however flattered by their attention 
or attracted by their coquetry — they were pretty 
-enough, and not without (enfey but they had 
both been very much in London ; and I thought 
too deeply initiated, if not into very fafliionable 
focieties, yet into the ftyle of thofe which catch. 
With imitative emulation, the manners and ideas 
thofe focieties give. — Mr. Stamford feemed de- 
firous of giving both thcfe ladies a chance of 
fuccefs wjth me, for they were alternately 

brought 



DESMOND. 2J 

brouo-ht forward for about twelve months 

at the end of which time they were both per- 
haps convinced that they had neither of them 
any great profpcil of it, for then the family 
of a widow fiftcr was invited, none of whom 
I had ever feen, or hardly heard mentioned be- 
fore. 

The father of this family, a lieutenant in the 
army, had married the eldeft of Siamford's fif- 
ters, when he was recruiting in the town where 
(he then lived — by which he fo greatly difobliged 
the friends on whom he depended, that though 
he had a very large family, they never afforded 
him afterwards the leaft ailiftance ; and about two 
years before the period I now fpeak of, he had 
died at Jamaica, leaving his widow and {even 
children, with very little more than the penfioii 
allowed by Government to fubfift upon. — Of 
thefe children the two eldefl: were dauahters ; 
who, from the obfcure village their mother was 
compelK'd to inhabit in VV^les, were now come 
to pafs the winter at the houfe of their uncle in 

a large provincial town. On entering one 

morning Stamford's parlour, in my ufual fami- 
liar way, 1 was ftruclc with the fight of two 
very young women who were at work there ; 
the elder of whom was, I ihoughr, the moit 
peifect beauty I had ever feen. — When I met 
Stamford, I exprefled my admiration of the 
young perfon 1 had jufl parted from, and en- 
quired who {be was — he told me fhe was his 
n;ece, and briefly related the hiftory of his fifter's 
family. 

At dinner, as Stamford invited me to flay, I 
could not keep my eyes from the contemplation 
of Louifa's beauty, which the longer I beheld 
it, became more and more fafcinating j the un- 

iiiFccled 



24 DESMOND. 

,affe£ied innocence and timidity of her manners, 
rendered her vet more intereftino; — fhe Icnew 
merely how to read and write : and had, till now, 
never been out of the village, whither her mo- 
ther had retired when fhe was only fix or feyen 
years old — and her total unconfcioufnefs of the 
beauty fhe fo eminently poirefTed, rivetted the 
fetters which that beauty, even at the firft inter- 
view, impofed. 

Her uncle was not, however, fo blind to the 
impreifion I had received ; yet he managed fo 
vvell, that, without any appearance of artifice 
on his part, I was every day at the houfe ; and, 
in a week, I was gone an whole age in love. I 
foon made propofals, which were accepted with 
tranfport. I married the beautiful Louifa — and 
was for fome time happy. 

Mr. Stamford had immediately the whole 
management of my fortune, in the improvement 
of which, he had now fo much interrft; and 
in his hands it recovered itfelf fo faft, that, tho' 
I made a very good figure in the country, I did 
not ejcpend more than half my income — The 
money thus faved, Stamford put out to the bed 
advantage — and 1 faw myfeif likely to regain 
the loft confequence I fo much regretted : a 
fooliih vanity, to which I facrificed my real feli- 
city. 

Stamford, who had all the latent ambition 
that attends confcious abilities, a^ a man of bu- 
finefs, had, till now, felt that ambition repreffed 
by the little probability there was of his ever 
reaching a more elevated fituaiion. — But he faw 
and irritated the mortified pride which I very ill 
concealed — and, by degrees, he communicated 
to me, and taught me to adopt thofe projeds, 
by whicn he told me I iliould not only be 

relieved 



DESMOND. 25 

relieved from this uneasy fcnfation, but rifs 
to greater confequcuce than 1 had ever pof- 
fcffed.— 

" YouhavetalentSjfaidhe, and ought toexert 
them. — In thefe times, any thing may be done 
by a man of abilities, who has a feat in Parlia- 
ment. Take a feat in the Houfe of Commons, 
and a feilion or two will open to you profpedts 
greater than thofe you facrificed in the early 
part of your life." — I took his advice, and the 
i'oilowing year, inftead of felling, at a general 
election, the two feats far a borough v^hich be- 
longed to me, I filled qne myfelf, and gave the 
other to Stamford, who, confcious as he wasof 
poileflxng thofe powers, which, in a corrupt go- 
vernmenr, are always ea;j;erly bought, had long 
been folicitous to quit tiie narrow walk of a 
country attorney, and mount aHage where thofe 
abilities would have fcope. 

In confequence of this arrangement, I took 
3 large houfe in town ; where Stamford and his 
family had apartments for tbe iirft four or five 
months. — At the end of that time, he bad ma- 
naged fo well, that he hired one for himfelf. — 
Artful, aiSlive, and indefatigable, with a tongue 
very pljPufible, and aconfcience very pliant, he 
Toon became a very ufeful man to the party who 
had purchafed him. Preferments and fortune 
crowded rapidly upon him, and Stamford, the 
country attorney, v/as foon forgotten, in Stam- 
ford the confident of minifters, and the compa- 
nion of peers. 

I was not, however, entirely without acqui- 
ring fome of the advantages he had taught me 
to expect — I obtained, by v/hat 1 now blufh to 
think of, (giving my voice in diredu oppofition 
to my opinion and my principles,) a place of 

Vol. I. C fix 



26 DESMOND. 

fix hundred pounds a year: which, though it 
did little more than pay the rent of my houfe in 
town, was, as Mr. btamford affuied me, the 
foretafte of fuperior advantages. — But, long be- 
fore the clofe of this feffion of Parliament, I 
difcovered, that far from being likely to recover 
the fortune I had diflipated, I wa^, in faiSt, a 
confiderable h)fer in pecuniary matters. — Alas! 
I was yet endeavouring to Ihut my eyes againft 
the fad conviction, that I had fullained, a yet 
heavier and more irreparable lofs ; domeftic hap- 
pinefs, and the afFe<Slion of my wife. 

Dazzled and intoxicated by fcenes of which 
(he had till then had no idea, Louifa, on our 
firft coming to town entered, with extreme avi- 
dity into the diffipation of London — and I in- 
dulged her in ir, from the filly pride of fhewing 
to the women among whom I had formerly lived, 
beauty which eclipfed them all. — They afFefled 
todifdain the little rultic, whom they malicioufly 
reprefented as being taken from among the 
loweft of the people. — The admiration however 
with which fhe was univerfally received by the 
men, amply revenged their malignity, but, while 
it mortihed them, it ruined me. 

Louifa lived now in a conftant fuccefiion of 
flattery, by which perhaps a ftronger mind might 
have become giddy. — Shehadprincesat her toilet 
and noblemen at her feet every day, and from 
them {he foon learned to imagine, that had fhe 
been feen before (he threw herfelf away on me, 
there was no rank of life, however exalted, to 
which fuch charms might not have given her pre- 
tenfions. — That love, which till this fatal period 
{he feemed to have for me — that gratitude of 
which her heart had appeared fo full (for I had 
provided for a'l her family) even her affection 

for 



DESMOND. 27 

for her children, was drowned in the Intoxicat- 
ing draughts of flattery, which were every day 
adminiilered to her — and when the time came 
for our returning into the country, (he returned 
indeed with me, but I carried not back the in- 
genuous, unafFeifled, Louifa; whofe fimplicity, 
rather than her beauty, had won my heart. - 
Ah ! no 1 — I faw only a fine lady eager for admi- 
ration ; willing to purchafe it on any terms, and 
fullen and difcontented when fhe had not thofe 
about herfrom whom (he had beenfo accuftomed 
to receive it, — That happinefs was loft to me for 
ever. I had long been confcious, but I flill 
hoped to preferve my honor — and that 1 might 
detach my wife from thofe by whofe afliduity it 
feemed to be the moft endangered, I determined to 
make a journey into Italy. — She neither pro- 
moted or objected to the fcheme, but a few days 
before that, which I had fixed on to begin our 
journey, (he left thehoufe, and put herfelf un- 
der the prote(5lion of a man who difgraces the 
name he bears. 

I purfued the ufual courfe in thcfe cafes; I 
challenged and fought with him — 1 was (lightly, 
and he was dangeroully wounded ; and by way 
of further fatisfadtion I heard, that my wife at- 
tended him in his iJlnefs, and as foon as he was 
able to travel, accompanied him to the South of 
France. 

I then thought of purfuing that method of 
vengeance, which had fome years before been 
fuccefsfully employed againft myfelf, and had 
begun the preliminary fteps towards if, when 
Stamford, the now profperous uncle of my wife, 
undertook to difTuade me — he reprefented to me 
that any money I could obtain, would only be 
confidered as the price of my diflionour — and 
C 2 that 



28 DESMOND. 

that fuch a publication of mifcondu(5l in the 
mother of my children would be very injurious 

to them, particularly to my little girl that 

therefore it would, upon every account, be bet- 
ter tofufFcr him to negociatean accommodation 
with — I Hopped him fliort, without hearing to 
its clofe, this infamous and infuking propofal — 
and defired him to leave my houfe ; no longer 
doubting, from comparing this with other in- 
ftances that now occurred to me, that he had 
fold the perfon of his niece to her feducer, with 
as mnch fang froid zs he had before fold his own 
confcience to the minifter. 

ImprefTed by this opinion, and being too 
well convinced of the futility of thofe chimerical 
plans with which he had lured me from inde- 
pendence and felicity, I determined never more 
to hold converfe with him : and to divert myfelf, 
as foon and as completely as poffible of all regret, 
for a worthlefs and ungrateful woman. — I there- 
fore tonic all my affairs into my own hands, acr 
cepted the chiltern hundreds, and felling my f?4t 
for the remairider of the feven years, i r^figrted 
at once my place at court, and my place in par- 
liament; for by the latter I now felt, that I had 
unworthily obtained the former. — Then, letting 
the family houfe wherel had refided in the neigh- 
bourhood of Stamford, I fettled myfelf at this 
fmaller place ; the only property 1 poiTefs at a 
diftance from my native county. 

Here 1 have now lived nearly eight years, and 
between the education of my children, and the 
amufement afforded me by my farm, I hope I 
fhall end thofe years at leaffc not fo unhappily as 
they began. — Of the woman once fo beloved, I 
can now think with forrow and pity rather than 
refentment, for flie is dead— —and 1 wi(h her 

errors 



DESMOND. 29 

errors to be forgotten and forgiven by the world, 
as 1 have forgiven, though 1 cannot forget them. 
■ — Though releafcd by her death from any matri- 
monial engagement, 1 have no intention again 
to hazard my happinefs, but apply all my time 
in improving the remains of my eftate for my 
fon; to render him worthy to enjoy it — and to 
educate my daughter in fuch a manner, that 
although fhe promifes to pollefs her mother's 
beauty, fhe may not be its vidiim. — For this 
purpofe it will foon become neceflary for me to 
quit occafionally the folitude where 1 have re- 
gained my peace, and return to thofe fcenes 
among which I loft it; for I am determined my 
little Louifa fhall fee the world before (he is fet- 
tled in it; that (he may learn to enjoy it with 
moderation, or refign it with dignity. 

In looking forward, my dear friend, to this 
period, now not very remote, I have thought 
that a wife of yours would be the perfon to 
whom I fliould beft like to entruft fo precious 
acharge as my charminggirl on her firft entrance 
into life. — Thus you fee that I had, in recom- 
mending a wife to you, no very juft claim to the 
difintereftednefs of which 1 have foniCtimes 
boafted — but fo goes the world. I have tired 
myfelf, and exhaufted my fpirits, by this detail 
of what I always avoid recalling, when it can 
ferve no purpofe but to renew fruitlefs regret — 
May, however, the narrative which has coft 
me fome pam, ferve to convince you, that fuch 
women as the two Fairfaxes, are much lefs 
likely to facrifice their honour on the altar of 
vanity, than the rural damfel from the Welch 
mountains or northern fells. I hope to hear 
from you, as you promife, once more before 

you depart It is impoffible to help again 

C 3 offering 



30 D Er s u o n j>. 

offering my congratulation on your fortunate 
choice of Waverly for a travelling companion 
— nor can I avoid admiring the efFeft of family 
I tie fiefs. 

Adieu ! your's ever, 

E. BETHEL, 



LET- 



D E S M 6 N D. 31 

LETTER V. 
TO MR. BETHEL. 

June 25, 1790. 

YOU are very good to have taken fo much 
trouble, and to have entered on a detail fo pain- 
ful to yourfelf for my advantage — be aflured, 
my good frienJ, 1 feel all my obligations to you 
on this, and on innumerable occafions j and that 
I fhould pay to your opinion the utmofl defe- 
rence were not my marrying novi^, perhaps my 
ever marrying at all, quite out of the queftion 
—for I believe I (hall never have an heart to 
beftow, and. without it I can never folicit that 
love, which, fo circumftanced, I can neither, 
deferve nor repay. 

You tell me, Bethel, that I vainly expe<n to 
meet the cultivated mind and poliQied manners 
of refined ibciety, united with the fimple and 
unpretending modcfty of retired life, while the 
idea 1 have thus drelTed up as a model of perfec- 
tion, will embitter ail my day« — It will indeed! 
—but it is not the fearch that will occupy, or 
the idea that will perfecute me — it is the reality, 
the living original of this fair idea^ which 1 
have found — and found in pofleflion of another 
— yes my friend — Geraldine unites thefe per- 
fections — and adds to them fo many others, both 
of heart and underftanding, that were her per- 
fon only an ordinary one, I could not have 
known without adoring her. I will not, how- 
ever, dwell upon this topic — for it is one on 
which you do not hear me with pleafure, and it is 
C 4. not 



32 DESMOND. 

not fit that / indulge myfelf in what I feel while 
I write about her — though I can only do fa 
while I write to you, for no other perfon on 
earth fufpeiSts this attachment, nor do I ever 
breathe her name to any ear but yours. 
■ 1 force myfelf from this fubjtdl then ; though 
there is not in the world another that really fixes 
my attention an inftant; not one that has any 
momentary attraction, unlefs it be the tran fac- 
tions in France. — I am waiting here for Wa- 
verly, who is gone to Bath, to take leave of his 
mother; a rarafure which, on her writing to 
him to defire it, he adopted with only two de- 
bates— whether he Ihould go round by London, 
to bid adieu to his dear Nancy, a nymph who 
lives at his expence ; or proceed dire<5i!y to 
Bath.— As I fortfaw that his dear Nancy might 
chufe to vifit the Continent too ; or might ap- 
prehend hisefcape from her chains, and there- 
fore prevent his going himfelf, I moft ftrongly 
enforced the necelTity of his obeying his mo- 
ther's fummons in the quickeft way poflible ; 
declaring to him, that, if he detained me above 
a week, I muft abfolutely go without him. — 
This, as he is now very eager for the journey, 
and fpeaks no French, fo that he would be 
fuhjedt to many difficulties in travelling alone, 
at length determined him to go ftraight to Bath 
and return immediately ; on which conditions 
1 agreed to wait a week where I am, though, 
fince I niuft go, 1 am extremely impatient to 
be at Paris — and would have made this facrifice 
of time to nothing but the fervice of Geraldine 
in ferving her brother. 

Since i wrote to you lad, I have pafTed part 
o"S feveral days with Mr. Fairfax's family, 
without feeing caufe to change my opinion of any 

part 



DESMOND. 33 

part of it. — But all my obfervations tend rather 
to confirm that which 1 formed on my firft in- 
trodudtion. — The foolifli vanity, whence origi- 
nates fo many ftratagems to heighten their ccn- 
fequence, that afFediation which carries them 
into the fnperior ranks of life, to applaud and 
flatter there, that they may acquire, in their 
turn, greater fuperiority over that clafs where 
fortune has placed them, and be looked up to 
as the ftandards of elegance and fafliion, becaufe 
they life fo much with the nobility, and the fa- 
crifices they are ever ready to make of their own 
dignity, in order to obtain this; fuch condud}, 
I fay, has fomething in it fo weak and fo mean, 
that no accomplifhments, beauty or fortune 
could tempt me to connedl myfelf with a wo- 
man who had been educated in fuch a courfe of 
unworthy prejudice.-— Surely, my friend, if you 
have ever remarked this mal de families you, 
who have not much reafon to venerate the in- 
fluence of ariftocracy in fociety, would not have 
fuppofed that either of thefe ladies, even if they 
would deign to accept my fortune in apology for 
my being only Mr. D^fmond, (with hardly a 
remote alliance to nobility) could have given 
me in marriage that felicity, which I am fure 

you wilh I may find. You have probably, 

therefore, fufFered this trait of charactt-r, thouf^h 
it ftrongly pervades the whole family to efcape 
you. 

Yefterday morning Mifs Fairfax was fo ob- 
liging as to invite me to be of a party (he had 
made to ride out : or rather allowed me to at- 
tend her, together with Waverly and another 
gentleman, who neither of them came — I how- 
ever waited on her by her own appointment at 
the hour of breakfaft, and found her fitting at 
C 5 the 



34 DESMOND. 

the tea-table with her mother, her fifter, and 
the Lord Newminllerj who, notwithftanding 
his complaints of the dulnefs of the place, had 
returned hither after having fettled his wager. — 
He was ftretched upon a fopha — with boots on 
— a terrier lay on one fide of him, and he occa- 
fionally embraced a large hound, which licked 
his face and hands, while he thus addreffed it. 
— " Oh ! thou dear bitchy — thou beautiful 
bitchy — damme, if I don't love thee better than 
my mother or my fifters." — Then, by a happy 
tranfition, addrefTing himfelf to the youngelt 
Miis Fairfax, he added, *' Statia, my dear, tell 
me if this is not a divinity of a dog — do you 
know that I would not part with her for a thou- 
fand guineas." " Here Tom," fpeaking to 
the fcrvant who waited, '* give me that choco- 
late and that bread and butter" — the man obey- 
ed, and the noble gentleman poured the choco- 
late over the plate, and gave it altogether to the 
divinity of a dog — " was it hungry ?" cried 
he — *' was it hungry, a lovely dear ? — I vi'ould 
rather all the old women in the country fhould 
faft for a month, than thou (houldeft not have 
thy belly- full." — The ladies, far from appear- 
ing to think this fpeech unfeeling or ridiculou?, 
were lavifh in their praifes of the animal ; and 
Mifs Fairfax, who feems more dtfirous than 
her filler to attract the attention of its v.-orthy 
- owner, faid, " my Lord, do you think fne has 
had enough .'' — (hall I give her fome more cho- 
colate ? or fend for a plate of cold meat ?" 

She then carelltd the favourite, and fed it from 
her fair hands ; while I, who had been afilent 
and unnoticed fpedator ftnce my hrft entrance, 
contemplated with more pity than wonder, this 
fapient member of our legiflature : who having, 

at 



DESMOND. 35 

at length, fatlsfied the importunity of one of the 
objedts of his folitude, turned to the o:her, and 
hugging it with more afFedtion than he would 
probubly have (hewed to the heir of his titles, 
he cried, *' my poor dear Venom when will you 
pup ? — i^^ggy ! — will you have one of her pup- 
pies ? — they are the very bell breed in England. 
— Damme now, do you know, my curfed fellow 
of a groom loft me the brother to this here bitch 
a weeic or two ago — and be curfed to his ftupid 
Ibul — and now I have got none but Venom left 
of that there breed." At this period his la- 
mentation was fuddenly fufpended by the doors 
being opened ; and the entrance of a figure who 
gave me the idea of a garden roller fet on its 
end, and fupported by two legs : I found it, 
however, on a fecond view, a peribn I had often 
feen ; and immediately recognized to be Gene- 
ral Wallingford ; who, as foon as he could re- 
cover his breath, which feemed to have been 
lod for a moment by exertion and agitation,, 
thus began : 

'* So Madam ! — fo ! — this is aflonilhing — 
this laft news from Fran.e. — 7 his decree fills 
up the meafure of that madnefs and folly which 
has always marked thecondudlof that beggarly 
fet who call themfeves the National AfTembly! 
— The evil is however now fo great, that it 
muft, it muft abfolutrly cure itfclf 5 this decree 
is decifive — they have crulhed themfelves." — 
Mrs. Fairfax now enquired what it was ?. 
*« Why — i have letters,. Madam," replied the 
General, " from my friend Langdale, who was 
palTing through Paris on his way to Italy, (for 
as to making any ftay there now, it is impoHible 
for a man of fafhion fo far to commit himftlf as 
to. ftay. in fuch a fcene of vulgar triumph and 

popular 



36 DESMOND. 

popular anarchy) Langdale, faw too much of it 
in three days ; and his laft letters dates, that by 
a decree pafled the nineteenth of June, thefe 
low wretches, this coUedion of dirty fellows, 
have abolifhed all titles, and abolilhed the very 
name of nobility." — " The devil they have ?" 
cried Lord Newminfter, raifing himfelf upon 
his elbow, and interrupting a tune he had been 
humming, amezzavce; '' th^ devil they have? 
— then 1 vvifh the King and the Lords may 
fmafli them all — and be curfed to them — I wifh 
they may all be fent to hell — now damme — do 
you know if I was King of France for three 
days, 1 would drive them all to the devil in a 
jiffy." 

The more fagacious General caft a rueful 
look at the wife and gallant projector of an im- 
pofiible exploit : and then, without attempting 
to demonftrate its impradlicability, he began 
very gravely to defcant on the (hocking confe- 
quences of this decree. Sentiments in which 
Mrs. Fairfax very heartily joined. — ^' !t will 
be impolfible, I fear," faid the General, " at 
leali, for fome time, for any man of fafhion tore- 
fide plcafantly at Paris, which I am extremely 
forry for, for it is a place I always ufed to love 
very much ; and I had great inclination to pafs 
the autumn there. — -For my part, I've never ob-- 
ferved, but that the people had liberty enough— 
' Quite as m.uch, 1 am convinced, as thofe wrong- 
headed, ignorant wretches, that form thecanaillc 
ought to have, in any country; 'tis a very ter- 
rible thing when that corrupt mafs gets the 
upper hand, in any country; but, in the pre- 
fent inftance, the mifery is, that certain perfon* 
among even /es gens comme il faut^ fhould be 
abiurd and fenfelefs enough to encourage tfae 

brutes. 



DESMOND. 3:7 

brutes, by afFei^ing a ridiculous patriotifm, and 
calling themfelves the friends of the people." 

** Rot the people," — cried the noble Peer: 
*' I wifli they were all hanged out of the way, 
both in France and here too. — What bufinefs 
have a fet of blackguards to have an opinion 
about liberty, and be curfed to them ? Now 
General I'll tell you what, if 1 was a French 
nobleman now, and had to do with them, damme 
if I did not fhew the impudent rafcals the dif- 
ference. By Jove, Sir, I'd fet fire to their 

aflembly, and mind no more (hooting them all, 
than if they were fo many mad dogs." 

Though it was ufcd on behalf of his own 
fyftem of politics, the extreme ignorance and 
abfurdity which this language betrayed, made 
the General decline anfvvering or approving it; 
but he was infinitely attentive to the mere pa- 
thetic lamentations of Mrs. Fairfax, which were 
thus exprciled. — " Well ! I re.lly think, my 
dear General, that in my whole life, 1 never 
■was (o (hocked at any thing, as at what you 
tell me : Heavens ' how my fympaihifing heart 
bleeds, when I reflecfl on the numbers of amiable 
people of rank, compelled thus to the cruel ne- 
ce/Tity of refigning thofe ancient and honorable" 
names which diltinguifhed them from the vulgar 
herd ! and who are no longer marked by their 
titles from that canaille with which it is fo odious 
to be levelled. — 7 hy might, in my mind, as 
well have robbed them of their property, and 
have turned them out to perilh in the ftreets, if 
indeed that is not done already." 

" No j" replied the General " that has not 
.lappcned yet, but doubtlefs it will , and, in- 
deed, they might as well have done it at once, 
for they have mads Paris fo infupportuble to 

people 



38 DESMOND'. 

people of fafhion, that itmuft, of courfe, be- 
come a mere defert. — Nobody of any elegance 
of manners can exift, where tradefmen, attor- 
nies, and mechanics have the pas. — The fplen- 
dour of that beautiful capital is gone : the glory 
of the noblejje is vanillied for ever. 

*' Come, come, my dear General," anfwered 
the lady, *' let us hope not ; a counter-revolu- 
tion may fet all to rights again, and we may 
live to fee thefe vulgar people punifhed for their 
ridiculous ambition, as they deferve. My heart, 
however bleeds to a degree for the noblejje., par- 
ticularly for two moft intimate friends of mine, 
women of the higheft rank, who are, without 
doubt, included in this univerfal btjule'verfement. 
— It was only this laft winter, when one of them, 
la Duchefie de Miremont, who was then in 
England, you know, faid to me — Ah! ma ires 
chere i^ ires aimable madame Fairfax., je vous en 
reponds que — 

The Lady, had in an inftant, forgotten the 
calamities of her foreign friends in her eager- 
jiefs to difplay her own confequence; but I 
found it impoliible to attend, with patience, to 
the reft of the dialogue between her and the 
General, and was meditating how, with the 
leaft appearance of rudenefs, 1 could make my 
efcape, when Mifs Fairfax's horfes were brought 
to the door, and my fervant immediately after- 
wards arrived with mine- — She rofe to go ; and 
turning towards Lord Newminller faid, v./ith 
extreme foftnels— " Does not your Lordfhip 
ride this morning ?" >' No, my dear Pegg," 
anfwered he, yawning in her face as he fpoke ; 
*' I cannot undertake the fatigue, for I was up 
at eight o'clock to lee a iet too between the 
Ruffian and Big Ben., who are to fight next 

week 



DESMOND. 39 

week for a thoufand. — I fparred a little myfelf, 
and now I'm damned tired, and fit for nothing 
but a lounge; perhaps I may meet you in my 
phaeton an hour hence or fo, that's juft as the 
whim takes me." — The Lady then, in the fame 
gentle tone cried — " Oh creature ! equally idle 
and ferocious !" — while he folded his arms, and 
re-fettling himfvlf, with his two dogs upon the 
fopha, declared, that he felt himfelf difpofed to 
take a nap. 

The old General, more gallant and more 
ad^ive, notwithftanding his gout and his fize, 
jiow led Mifs Fairfax to her horfe ; and, as he 
affifted her to mount it, he feemed to whifper 
lome very tender fentence in her ear ; if I could 
guefs by the peculiar cxprefiion of his features, 
while 1 had nothing to do but to wait while all 
this paffed, and when the ceremony was finiflied, 

to ride filentiy awiiy by her fide. We had 

hardly, however, quitted the town, when the 
young Lady thus began : — ** This is really very 
frightful news, Mr. Defmond, that General 
Wallingford has brought us to-day. — Do you 
not tliink it extremely lliocking ?" '* No, Ma- 
dam, not at all j 1 own myfelf by no means 
maflerof the fubjed)^, but from all I do kncw\ I 
feel myfelf much more difpofed to rejoice at, 
than to lament it." 

" ImpofTible, Mr. Defmond ! — Surely I mif- 
underftand you ! — What ! are you difpoled to 
rejoice that nobility and fafliion are quite de- 
ftroyed ?" 

*' I am glad that oppreffion is deftroyed j 
that the power of injuring the many is taken 
from the few. — Dear Madam, are you aware of 
the evils which, in confequence of the feudal 
fyftem, exifttd in France? A fyftcm formed in 

the 



4© DESMOND. 

the blindefl: periods of ignorance and prejudice; 
which gave to the noblejfe^ not only an exemp- 
tion from thofe taxes which crufhed the people 
by their weight, but gave to the pofl'eflbrs of 
le$ terres titrh, every power to impoverifh and 
deprefs the pealant and the farmer; on whom, 
after all, the pro perity of a nation depends.— 
That thefe powers are annihilated, no generous 
mind can furely lament." 

" 1 hope," replied Mifs Fairfax, with more 
afperity than I thought my humility deferved — 
*' I hope, Sir, I am not ungenerous, nor quite 
ignorant, neither, of the hiftory of France — 
But I really muft own, that I cannot fee the 
matter in the light vou do. — Indeed, lean fee 
nothing but the moft horrid cruelty and injuf- 
tice."— 

*' In calling a man by one name, rather than 
by another !-^My dear Mifs Fairfax, the cruelty 

and injuftice muft furely be imaginary." • 

*' Not at all, in my opinion ^ Sir," retorted my 
fair antagonift. — " A title is as much a perfon's 
property as his eftate ; and, in my mind, one 
might as well be taken away as another — And 
to lofe one's very birth-right, by a mob too, of 
vulgar creatures. — Good Heaven ! I declare the 
very idea is exceflively terrific ; only fuppofe the 
Englifo mob weie toget fucha notion, and in fome 
.odiousriot, begin the fame fort of thing here !" 

" Perhaps," replied I (ftill, I afl'ure you, 
fpeaking with the utmoft humility) " perhaps 
there never may exifl here the fame caufe ; and, 
therefore, the e^e<^ will not follow.— Our no- 
bility are lefs numerous ; and, till within a kw 
years, that titles have became fo very common, 
they were all of that defcription which could be 
ranked only with the haut noblejje of France ; 

they 



DESMOND. 41 

they are armed with no powers toopprefs, indi- 
vidually, the infcnor onitT of men ; they have 
no vaflals but ihofe whofe fervice is voluntary; and, 
upon the whole, are fo different a b(jdy of men 
from that which was once the nobility of France, 
£S to admit no very juft comparifon, and no 
great probability of the fame fteps ever being 
taken, to annihilate their titles; though they 
pofiefs, in their right of hereditary legiflacion, 
a ftrong, and to many, an obnoxious feature 
which the higher ranks in France never pof- 
fefled. — However, we will, if you pleafe, and 
merely for the fake of converfation,fuppofe that 
the people^ or, if you pleafe, the vulgar^ took 
it into their heads to level all thofe diftindlions 
that depend upon names — I own I fee nothing 
in it fo very dreadful, it might be endured." 

" Yes, by favages and brutes, perhaps," 
replied the Lady, with anger flafliing from her 
eyes, and lending new eloquence to her tongue, 
** but I muft fay, that I never expedled to hear 
from a man of fafliion, a defence of an a6l fo 
(hamefully tyrannous and unjuft, exercifed over 
their betters by the fcum of the people ; an zSt 
that muft deftroy all the elegance of manners, 
all the high polifh that ufed to rendet people, 
in a certain ftyle, fo delighful in France. By 
degrees, i fuppofe, thofe who can endure to flay 
in a country under fuch a dercftable fort of go- 
vernment, will become as rude and difgufling 
as our common country 'Squires." 

I faw by the look with which this fpeech was 
delivered, that /was decidedly a corainon coun- 
try 'Squire. — '* Unhappily," replied 1, '•*■ my 
dear Mifs Fairfax, the race of men whom you 
call common country 'Squires, are alinoft, if 
not entirely annihilated in i-ngland j though na 
3 decree 



42 DESMOND". 

decree has pafTed againft them — A total change 
of manners has effected this." I was going on, 
but with great vivacity fhe interrupted me. — 

*' So much the better, Sir, they will never 
be regretted." — 

" Perhaps not, Madam, and as we are merely 
arguing for the fake of converfation, let me juft 
fuppofe that the fame thing might happen, if all 
thofe who are now raifcd above us by their 
names, were to have no other diftin£iion than 
their merits. — Let me afk you, would the really 
great, the truly noble among them (and that 
there are many fuch nobody is more ready to al- 
low) be lefs beloved and revered i/ they were 
known only by their family names? On the 
other hand, would the celebrity of the men of 
ton be much reduced ? For example, the noble- 
man I had the honour of meeting at your houfe 
to-day. — He is now, I think, called Lord HeW' 
minfter. Would he be lefs agreeable in his 
manners, lefs refined in his convtrfation, lefs 
learned, lefs worthy, lefs refpf£table, were he un- 
happillycompelled to be called, as his father was 
before he bought his title, Mr. Grantham?" 

I know not whether it was the matter or the 
manner that ofFended my beautiful anftocrate, 
but fhe took this fpeech molt cruelly amifs, and 
mofl inhumanely determining to avenge herfelf 
upon me ; (he replied with fymptoms of great 
indignation in her countenance, " That fhe 
was iT\x\y forry to fee the race of mere country 
'Squires did flill exif)-, and that, among thofe 
where, from fortune and pretenfions, fhe fhould 

leaft have imagined they would be found. 

(This was me. ) That as to Lord Newminfler, 
by whatever name he might at any time be 
called, fhe fhould, for her part, always fay and 

think, 



DESMOND. 43 

think, that there were few who fo completely 
filled the part of a man of real fafliion among 
the nobility ; and not one, in any rank of life, 
who, in her mind, pofTefled a twentieth part of 
his good qualities. 

The manner in which this was uttered, was 
undoubtedly meant to crufh at once, and for 
ever, all the afpiring thoughts, that I, prefum- 
ing on the ftrength of my fortune, might per- 
adventure have dared to entertain. — Over- 
whelmed by the pretty indignation, as much as 
by the unanfwerable arguments of my angry 
goddefs, I began to confider how I might turn 
or drop difcourfe where I was fo likely to fufFer 
for my temerity, when I was relieved by the ap- 
pearance of a carriage, at a diftance, which, {he 
faid, {he knew to be Lord Newminfter's phae- 
ton ; and, without any further ceremony than 
{lightly wi{hing me good-morrow, (he centered 
away to meet it — leaving me, as flowly I trotted 
another way, to congratulate my country en the 
pure notions of patriotic virtue with which even 
its women are imprefi'edj and, on fuch able 
fupporters of its freedom, as Lord Newminfter 
in the upper, and General Wallingford in the 
lower Houfe. — Alas ! my oppofite principles, 
however modeftly and diffidently urged, have 
loft me, as i have fince found, for ever, that 
favour, which without being a man of fafhion, 
I was once fo happy as to enjoy from your fair 
relations : for whenever, in the courfe of the 
next two or three days, I happened to meet 
them, I was {lightly noticed, that 1 apprehend 
our acquaintance will end here. — Condole with 
me, dear Bethel j and, to make fome amends, 
let me foon hear from you. 

I have 



44 DESMOND. 

I have had, very unexpe£^edly, a letter firem 
Mr. Dangby, my mother's fole furviving bro- 
ther ; who, abforbed in his own fmgular no- 
tions and amufements, has hardly feemed to re- 
colle(5t me for many years. — He has heard, I 
know not how (for I have long had i>o other 
communication with him, thsi. writing him an 
annual letter, with an annual prefent of game 
and venifon fmce J became of age) that I am 
going to France ; and he ftrongly remonftrates 
upon the danger I fhall incur if I do, both to my 
perfon and my principles. — He entreats me not 
to try fuch a hazardous journey ; and hints, that 
his fortune is too large to be defpifed — i don't 
know what this fuddcn fit of folicitude means, 
for though I am the only relation he has, 1 never 
had any reafon to think I fhould benefit by his 
fortune ; and your care, my dear Bethel, has 
prechided the neceffi*y of my defiring it. I fhall 
anfwer him with great civility, however, but 
certainly make no alteration in my plan* 

Adieu! my friend — fail not to write if you 
bear any thing of the family of Verney. 

Your's ever, 

LIONEL DESMOND, 



LET- 



DESMOND. 45 

LETTER VI. 
TO MR. BETHEL. 

' Calais, July 4, 1790. 

I HAD waited for Waverly the week I had 
promifed to wait — the laft day of that week was 
come : and I was going to enquire for a paflage 
to Calais or Dunkirk, when I met Anthony, 
his fervant, in the ftreet. The poor fellow was 
covered with duft, and feemed half dead with 
fatigue; '*WeH Anthony where is your mafteri"' 
** Qh ! lord fir," anfwered he, " my mafter 
has changed his mind about going to France, 
and fent me poft from Stamford in Lincoln* 
fhire, Sir, where he is gone with fome other 
gentlemen to an houfe, one Sir James Dey- 
bourne has juft by there; — Sir, I have hardly 
been off the faddle for above iix-and- thirty 
hours ; and we had no fooner got dov/n there, 
than mafler fent me off poft to )our honor ; to 
let you know. Sir, that he could not, no how 
in the world, go to Paris with you at this 
time." — 

*' But did he not write ;" " why, no Sir, he 
was going to write I believe, but fomehow his 
friends they perfuaded him there was no need of 
it; fo, Sir, he called me, and bid me, that I 
fhould deliver the meflage to you, about his not 
coming, the fooneft 1 pofllbly could : and fo, 
Sir, I fet off diredly, and he told me to fay that 
he (hould write in a very little time ; and he 
hoped he faid, that I would make hafte, to pre- 
vent your honor's waiting for him." 

1 had at this moment occafion to recolleif^, 
how neatly Waverly was related to Geraldine ; 
to prevent my feeling fome degree of anger and 

refent- 



46 DESMOND. 

T«fentment towards him. — I fent, however, his 
poor haraffed fervant to my lodgings, where I 
ordered him to refrefh himfelf by eating and 
fleeping ; and then went to fee about my paf- 
fage to France. 

I afterwards fauntered into one of the libra- 
ries, and took up a book ; but my attention 
was foon diverted, by a very plump, fleck, fhort, 
and, altogether, a moft orthodox figure ; whofe 
enormous white wig, deeply contrafted by his 
peony-coloured face, and confequential air, de- 
clared him to be a dignitary, very high, atleaft 
in his own efteem. — On his entrance he was 
very refpedlfully faluted by a little thin man ia 
black ; whofe fnug well-powdered curls, hum- 
ble demeanor, and cringing addrefs, made me 
fuppofe him either a dependent on the plump 
doiSlor, or one who thought he might benefit by 
his influence — for he not only refigned the newf- 
paper he was reading, but buftled about to pro- 
cure others ; — while his fuperior, noticing him 
but little, fettled himfelf in his feat, with a ma- 
gifterial air — put on his fpedacles, and took 
out his fnuff-box ; and having made thefe ar- 
rangements, he began to look over the paper of 
the day; but feeing it full of intelligence from 
Prance, he laid it down, and, 

" As who fliould fay I am Sir Oracle," 

he began an harangue, fpeaking flowly and 
through his nofe. 

" *Tis an uneafy thing," faid he, " a very 
uneafy thing, for a man of probity and princi- 
ples to look in thefe days into a newfpaper. — 
Greatly muft every fuch man be troubled to 
read of the proceedings that are going forward 

ia 



DESMOND. 47 

in France. — Proceeding?, which muft awaken 
the wrath of heaven ; and bring down upon 
that perfidious and irreverent people its utmoft 
indignation." 

I'he little man took the opportunity the fo- 
lemn clofe of this pompous oration gave him, to 
cry — '* very true, Dodtor, your obfervation is 
perfedly juft ; things to be fure have juft now 
a very threatening appearance." '* bir," re- 
fumed the grave perfonage, " it is no appear- 
ance^ but a very (hocking redlity. They have 
done the moft unjuft and wicked of all adlions 
in depriving the church of its revenues.— 
'Twere as reafonable. Sir, for them to take my 
birth-right or your's." 

" I thought, Dodor," faid a plain looking 
man, who had attended very earneftly to the 
beginning of this dialogue — *' I thought, that 
the revenues and lands of the church, being the 
property of the ftatc, they might be diredled by 
it into any channel more conducive, in the opi- 
nion of that ftate, to its general good ; and 
that it appearing to the National AiFembly of 
France, that this their property was unequally 
divided; and that their bifhops lived like 
princes, while their curates * had hardly the 
means of living like men, — I imagined " 

" You imagined, Sir ? — And give me leave 
to alk what right you have to imagine ? — or 
what you know of the fubjcdt ! — The church 
lands and revenues the property of the itate ! — 
No, Sir — I affirm that they are not — That they 
are the property of the pofleflbrs, as much. Sir, 
as your land and houfes, if you happen to have 
any, are your's." 

** Not quite (o^ furely, my good Dodor," 
replied the gentleman mildly — " My houfes 

* Curees-retSors. 

and 



48 DESMOND. 

and lands — ifj as you obferve, I happej> to 
have any, were- piababiy either acquired by 
my own iiidiiftry, or were my birth-right. — 
Now Sir" — He would have proceeded, but 
the Divine^ in an angry and fupercilious 
•manner interrupted him — *' Sir, I wont ar- 
gue, I wont commit myfelf, nor endeavour to 
convince a perfon whofe principles are, 1 fee, 
fundamentally wrong. — But no man of fenfc 
will deny, that when the prefent body of French 
clergy took upon them their holy funiiions — 
that then they became, as it were, born again 
' — and— and — and by their vows — " 

*' But, my worthy Sir, ihofe vows were 
vows of poverty. — They were vows, by which, 
far from acquiring temporal goods; the means 
of worldly indulgencies, they exprefsly re- 
i\ounced all terreftrial delights, and gave them- 
felves to a life of mortification and humility.— 
Now, it is very certain, that many of them not 
only polTeiTed immenfe revenues, wrung from 
the hard hands of the peafant and the artificer, 
but ailually expended thofe revenues. — Not in 
relieving; the indigent, or encouraginj the in- 
duftrious j but in gratifications more worthy 
the diflblute followers of the meretricious fcarlet- 
clad lady of Babylon, than the mortified difci- 
ples of a fimple and pure religion." Then, as 
if difdaining to carry farther an argument in 
which he had fo evidently the advantage againft 
the proud petulance of his adverfary, the gentle- 
man walked calmly away, while the Doi^tor, 
fwelling with rage, cried, " I don't know who 
that perfon is, but he is very ignorant, and very 
ill-bred." — " 'Tis but little worth your while, 
Dodlor," cried the acquiefcent young man, ** to 
eater into controverfial difcourfe with perfons 

fo 



DESMOND. 49 

fo unworthy of the knowledge and literature 
which you ever throw into your convcifation." 

*' It is not, Sir," anfwercd the Doctor ; '* it 
were indeed a woeful warte of the talent with 
which it has pleafed heaven to entrufl: me, to 
contend with the utheiftica! pietendcrs to phiio- 
fophy, that obtrude themftrlves but too much 
into fociety. — However, Sir, a little time will 
fhew that 1 am right, in aflerting, thit a nation 
that pays no more regard to the facied order, 
can never profper : — but, tliat fuch hnnible fa* 
crilciious robberv, as that wretched anarchy, 
for I cannot call it government, has bien guilty 
of, will draw down calamities upon the mifera- 
ble people ; and that the evil fpirit, which is let 
Joofe among them, will prompt them to deluge 
their country with blood, by deftroying each 
other." 

" So much the better, Dodor," cried a fat, 
bloated figure, in a brown ridin'y wi», a red 
waii^coit, and boots — " fo much the better— I 
heartily, for my parr, wifh they may." This 
philanthropic perfonage, who had till now been 
talking with an old lady about the price of foals 
and mackarel that morning at market, now 
quitted his feat, and fquatting himfelf down 
near the two reverend genileu.en, proceeded 
bnfkly in his difcourfe, as if perfcvSlly confcious 
of its weight and energy. — " Yts Doctor, I 
vote for their cutting one anothcrs throats, and fo 
faving us the trouble — The fooncr they fee 
ab'jut it, the better I /hall be pleaftd, for, as for 
my parr, I deteft a Frenchman, and always did.^ 
— You muft know, that hft funiiier, I went 
down to Brighton, for I always go every fum- 
mer to fome of thefv? kind of waterin^^ plar^s.— 
So, as I wasobferving, I went down to Bri;ih- 

VoL. I. D ton 



50 TJ E S M O N D. 

'ton in the month of Auguft, which is the beft 
part of the feafon, becaufe of the wheat-ears 
being plenty ; but, I dont know how it happen- 
ed, I had an ugly feci in my ftomach : what was 
the meaning of it I could not tell: but, I quite 
loft n:\y relifh for iny dinner, and fo I thought it 
proper to confult a phyfician or two on the cafe ; 
and they advif-d me to try if a little bit of a fail 
would not fet things to rights ; and told me, 
that very likely, if I went over the water, I 
Ihould fuid my app' tite. — So, Sir, I determined 
to go, for riding did me no goo'l at all ; and fo 
of courfel was a liltie uneafy. — So, Sir, I even 
went over the herring pond. — I was as fick as a 
hctrfe, to be fuie, all night ; but however, the 
next morning, when we landed on 1 rench 
ground, there was I tolerably chirruping, and 
pretty wtll dilpofed for my breakfaft.— Oh, ho! 
tninks I, this will liufwcr, I believe. — However, 
Ithougiit I would lay by for dinner, for the 
Monfieur at the inn told us he could let u^ have 
game and fiCii. — But lord, Sir, mod of their 
provifions are nothing to be compired fo ours; 
and what is good they ruin by th>?!r vile manner 
of dielfing ii. — Why, Sir, we h id for dinner 
foiiie fouls- the fiiieft I evtr faw, but they were 
fried in bad lard ; and then, Sir, for the par- 
tridges, there was neither game gravy, nor 
poivrrade, nor even bread faucc. — Faith, I had 
enoiJtih of them and their cookery^ in one day j 
fd. Sir, the next morning I embarked again for 
Old England. However, upon the whole, the 
tiling itfelf anfvered well enough, for m) ap- 
petite was almoll at a par, as 1 may fay, when 
I came home. But for }Our French, 1 never 
defire to fet eytis on any of them again — and 
indeed, fof mv part, I am free to fay, that if the 

whole 



e 



DESMOND. 51 

whole race was extirpated, and we were in pof- 
fcflion of their country, as in jiiftice it is certain 
we ought to be, why, it would be fo much the 
better — VVefhould maice a better hand of it in 
fuch a country as that a great deal. — I under- 
hand, that one of the things thcfe fellows have 
done fince they have got the notion of liberty 
into their head«, has been, to let loole all the 
taylors and tinkers and frifleurs in their coun- 
try, to dcftroy as much game as they pleafe. 
Now, Sir, what a pity it is, th^t a country 
where there is fo much, is not ours, and our 
game-laws in force there. — And then their 
wne ; I can't fay I ever faw a vineyard, be- 
caufe, as I obferved, I did not go far enough up 
the country : but, no doubt, we fhould manage 
that matter much better; and, upon the whole, 
confidering we always were their ma(hr«, my 
opinion is, that it would be right and proper for 
our minirtry to take this opportunity of falling 
upon them, while they are weakening each 
other ; and, if they will have liberty, give theni 
a little tafte of the liberty of us Englillimen ; 
for, of themfelve?, they can have no right no- 
tion of what it is — and, take my word for it, its 
the meereft folly in the world for them to think 
about it. — No, no ; none but tnglirnmen, free- 
born Britons, either underftand it or defcrve 
it." 

Such was the volubility and vehemence with 
which this fpeech was made, that the Doctor 
could not find any opportunity to interrupt it.— 
Whatever were his opinion of the politics of the 
orator, he feemed heartily to coii cide with him 
in the notions he entertained on the important 
fcience of eating. He therefore (though with 
an air of reflraint, and as if he would cautioufly 
D 2 guard 



54 DESMOND. 

guard his dignity from the too great familiarity 
with whcii the other Teemed to approach him) 
e-ntered into another diO'crtatioii on the French 
revolution, anathematifing all its pr(Je6t"rs and 
upholders, with a zeal which fcrnulphus might 
envy ; and, in (carce lefs charitable terms, 
branding thtni v/ith the imputation of every 
hit'eous vice he could co!le6t, and ending a 
very long oration with a pious and chriitian 
denu^nciati^ n of battle And murder, pcftiknce 
and famine here, and ctermd torments here.tfter, 
for all who imagined^ aided, or commended 
fuch an abomination. 

I'he gentleman who had vifited France for' 
the reftoration of his appetite (and who had 
formerly, as I learned afterwards, kept a ta- 
vern in London, and was now retired upon a 
fortuf.e) feemed unable oi* unwilling to diftin* 
S,ui(h declamation rrom argument, or prejudice 
from reafon — He appeared to be dtlighttd by 
the furious eloquence of the churchtnat), whcm 
he Ihook heartily by the hand. — '* Doctor,'* 
cried he, " I am always rejoictd to meet with 
gentlemen of your talents and capacity ; you 
are an honour to our e(li.bliftimeni ; what )ou 
have faid is quite convincing indeed j ftrong, 
unanfwerable argument : I hear.iiy wifli fome 
of my acquaintance, who pretend to He advo- 
cates for French liberty, were to hear \ ou — I 
believe they'd foon be pur to anon-plus — You'd 
be quite too much for them, I'm furc. Pray, 
!>■ cVor, "ive me leave to aft, what liay do you 
tnean to make In this place ? 1 fh.dl be proud to 
cultivate the honour of your acquaintance ; if 
}'ou are here next we-k, will \ou do me the fa- 
vour to dine with me on Wednefday — I've a 
chicken- turtle, which promifes Vi-ell — the firft 

I've 



P E S M O N D. 53 

I've rpceiv'L'u this feafon, from what I call my 
XVcft-Indian f.irm } a little patch of properly X 
puichaied, a few years fince, in Jamaica. — A» 
to the dielling of turtles, I always fte to that 
myftlf, for I am extremely particular; though, 
i muft fay, my negro fellow is a very excelieiil 
hand at it — 1 have lent him more than once to 
perform for fome great people at t'other end of 
the town. — if you'll do m;; the pleafure, Doc- 
tor, to take a dinner with me 1 (hall be glad ; 
and, indeed, befides the favour ot your company, 
I would fain have the four or five fnends that 
I've invited for that day, to hear a little of your 
opinion upon thefe faid French matters." 

Though the Dodtor had, till now, hefitated 
and leemed to doubt whether he did not de- 
fcend too much from his elevated fuperioiity> 
in encouraging the forwaidnefs of his new ac- 
quaintance ; this propofal, flattering at once 
his pride and his appetite, was irrcfiflible. — 
He, therefore, relaxing from the air of arrogant 
dignity he ufually woic, accepted very graci- 
ouily of the invitation t.) afUil in devoui ing the 
chicken-tuitle, and then thcf? two worthy 
champions of British f.ii;h and BritiHi liberty, 
entered into converfation on matters, which, 
feem as it fhould, were neither laft nor leaft in 
their efteem. This was an enquiry into the 
good thi.igs for the table, that weie to be found 
in the neighbourhood ; in praife of many of 
whch, tiiey were extremely eloquent. — ihe 
J3oitor complained of the fcarcuy of venifon, 
but added, that he expc6ted an excellent haunch 
in a few days, horn a nobleman, his friend 4nd 
patron ; ot which, Mr. "Sldebottom (for fuch 
was the n-ime ot this newly acquired friend) 
was rtqueded to partake. — This requell: was, 

of 



54 DESMOND. 

ofcourfe, readily afiented to, and they, at length 
left the Shop together, having fettled to ride to a 
neighbouring farm houfe, v/here Mr. Sidebot- 
tom aHined the Doftor, that he hd difcovered 
fome delicate fat ducks and pigeons, of peculiar 
fize and flavour. — " 1 even queftion," faid he, 
•' whether there will not be, in about a week's 
time, fome nice turkey pov/ts. — The good wo- 
man is very clever about her poultry, and if file 
has had tolerisbie luck fmce I faw her, they 
muft now he nearly fit for thf difh." — In this 
pleafing hope, the two genclcmen departed to- 
gether ; I fallowed them at a little diftance, and 
faw them accoflcd by a thin, pale figure of a 
woman, with one infant in her arms and ano- 
ther following her ; her drefs was not that of a 
beggar, yi::t it befpoke extreme indigence ; I 
fanctfd ihe was a fo eigner, and my idea was 
confiimed when I heard her fpeak ; fhe fiepped 
flowlj, and, asitfeemed, iri'ioluttly, towards 
the two profperous men, who were going in 
fearch of fat ducks and early turkeys j and, in 
impeifedt Knglifh, began to relate, that fhe 
was a widow, and in great diftrefs, ** A wi- 
" dow," cried Mr. Sidebottom, " why you 
are a Frenchwoman 5 what have you to do 
here ? and why do you not go back to your 
€>wn country ? This is the time there for beg- 
- gars — they have got the upper hand. Go, go, 
miftrefs ; get back to your own country." — 
The poor woman anivvered, that fhe had tra- 
velled towards Dover with her two children, in 
hopes of getting a paffage to France ; but that 
they having been ill on the road, her little ftock 
of money was exhaufted ; *' and therefore," 
faid fhe, " I was advifed to come hither, Sir, 
in hopes of procuring, by the generofity of 

the 



D £ S M O N D. 55 

the company who frequent this place, where- 
withal to pay my pafl'age to France; for unlefs 
1 can produce enough for that purpofe, no com- 
mander of a veflel will take me." 

" And let me tell you, they very properly 
refufe," faid Mr. Sidebottom, " you had no 
bufinefs that 1 know of in England, but to take 
the bread out of the mouth of our own people ; 
and now I fuppofe you are going to join the fifK 
women, and i'uch like, who are pulling down 
the king's palaces." — Ihe unhappy woman caft 
a look of anguifh on her children, and was 
quietly relinquifhing this hopelefs application, 
when the Dodtor, more alive to the tender foli- 
citations of p'ty than Mr. Sidebottom, put his 
hand into his pocket, and then in a nafal voice 
and in a magifterial manner, thus fpoke : 
** Woman! though I have no doubt but that 
thou art a creature of an abandoned condufl, 
and that thefe children are bafe born j yet, be- 
ing a flranger and a foreigner, I have fo much 
univerfal charity, that, unworthy as I believe 
thee, 1 will not fhut my heart againft thy peti- 
tion. If thou art an impoRor, and wickedly 
impofeft upon that charity, fo much the worfe 
for thee J 1 do my duty in beftowing it, and the 
wrong refts with thee! Here! Here is — lix- 
pence ! which I give thee towards thy paillige! 
Go, therefore, depart in peace ; and let me not 
have occafion to reprove thee to morrow for 
lingering about the ftreets of this place : where, 
as people of fortune and confideration come for 
their health, they ought not to be diflurbed and 
difgufted by the fight of objedls of mifery. I 
don't love to fee beggars in thefe places ; their 
importunity is injurious to the nerves. — Let me 
hear of you no more — Our laws oblige us to pro- 
vide for no poor but our own." The 



^,6 D B S M O N D. 

The IDoft.^.r leaving thus fulfilled two great 
ciuties of his proftffior, thofe of giving advice, 
2ncl pivirijT alni<, ftruttedaw:^y with the worthy 
Mr Sidebottom; who wifely confidered that 
the liiiiipikc through which he muft pafs in his 
lour after good di(ht-s, W(uld demand thf' Imall 
money he haii about him, he therefore (orebore 
lo add to the bounty of the Dodtor towards the 
unfortunate pttitioner, who, feeling fome de- 
gree of alarm from the remonliranceflit imper- 
feilly underlh)od, reiiiained for a momentgazing 
■on the fix- pence, which fhe yet held in her 
hand. She then riafped the youngeft of her 
children to her bread, took the hand of the other 
2S he clung to her gov/n, and burft into t-ars. 
In a moment, however, {he dried her eyes, and, 
leaning againtl the rails of the parade, file caft 
a defpairing Ir.ok towards the gay gro'-ps who 
were pailing, yet feemed exanuning to which 
of thf-ni Oie might apply with mofl hope of 
f'jccefs. f\t this moment I approached nearer 
to ht r i but (he did not fee me till i fpcke to her 
in French, and inquired, how 1 could afTift her. 
The voice of kindnefs, in her ov/n language, 
was fo fooihing, and 1 fear fo new, that Ihe 
was for lome motDents unable to anfwer me j 
the fimpl.citv of the narrative w tfi which fhe 
at length fdtisned my inquiry, convinced me of 
the truth of all ibe related. 

She told me, that her hufoand, the fon of a 
reputable trad- fman at Amiens, had married 
her, thedaugh^ccr of a very inferior one, againll 
his father's poll five injUn<£l:ions, who had there- 
upon difmified him ftom t!vc huflneCs to which 
he had been brought up, and left him to the 
world. I'hat thus deflitute, with a wile, and 
foon afterwards a child to fupport, he had ac- 
cepted 



D £ S M O .V t). 57 

cepted the offer of an Engllfti gentleman fo ac- 
company him to England, " where he behavfd 
ff) well," continued ihe, ** that his mafler, who 
was a good man, became much his friend, and 
hearing he had in France a wife and child, whom 
he loved, he not only gave leave, but money to 
have us fetched over. Some months ■^hcv, Sir, 
the gentleman married a very rich lady from the 
city, who wifhed him to part with his French 
fervant ; but though he prevailed upon her lo 
let him keep a perfon who h^d been very faith- 
ful to him, the lady never liked him. In lefs 
than a twelvemonth after his marriage, my liuf- 
band's mafler was taken ill of a fever and died. 
My hufband fat up with him many night«, and 
by the time his mafter was carried to the grave, 
he fell ill himfelf of the fame diftemper; and 
his lady being afraid of the infection, hurried 
him out of the houfe to the lodging where X 
and my children lived. There he lay dreadfully 
ill for three weeks, during which time the lady 
fent a phyiician to him once or twice, but after- 
wards went into the country, and thought no 
more about him ; fo that we had nothinf: toftip- 
port this cruel illnefs, but what my hufoand 
!iad faved in his fervice ; which, with a wife 
and two children to keep out of his wages, to 
be fure, could not be much. He "ot throu^^h 
the fever, Sir, but it had fo ruined his blood, 
that he went almoft immediately into a decrne j 
and it is now three weeks fince he died, leaving 
me quite deftitute with thL^fe two children. I 
applied for help, in this my iiunoft diftrefs, to 
the widow of his late mafter, in whofe fervice 
he certainly loft his life. After waiting a great 
while for an anfwer, fhe fent a gentleman lo me 
with a guinea, which vva>-, fhe (aid, i.il fhe 
D 5 fhoaUl 



58 DESMOND. 

fhould ever do for me ; and fhe advifed me to 
get back to France. This, by the afliftance of 
the gentleman that brought me this money, who 
touched with pity for my fituaticn, raifed for 
me, among his friends, above a guinea more, 
1 attempted to do ; but on the road my children 
tell fick, and my money was all expended in 
procuring them afliftance : fo that now I have 
no means of reaching France, where, if 1 could 
once get, I hope my parents, poor as they are, 
would receive me, and that I fhould be able 
fome way or other to earn my bread and my 
children's." 

I hope it is unneceflary to fay, that I imme- 
diately fet the widow's heart at eafe on this 
fcore ; and undertook to pay for her's and her 
children's conveyance. 

Yefterday evening then I embarked. The 
,wind was againft us, and the fea ran extremely 
high; but 1 was impatient to be gonej and 
though the mafter doubted whether he could 
crofs to Dunkirk, I was impatient, and preflVd 
him to gee under iveigh, which he did, nctwith- 
fUnding the unprumiiuig appearance of the wea- 
ther. 

I fat upon deck, looking towards the fhore, 
when I faw, though we were by this tinit at a 
coi\fiderable di (lance fiom it, a gioup of people 
, who feemed to be making fignals to the men in 
the veflel. I bade the mailer obferve them, and 
he diiiinguiflied, by hisgLl's, a boat attempting to 
put oil, in which he told me he imagined fome 
other pafTcngers, who had arrived alter we had 
come on board, might be. He requeued, there- 
fore, that! would give him leave to lay to and 
wait for it, which 1 readily granted ; and as the 
waves were new extremely high, we continued, 

with 



DESMOND. 59 

with fome apprehenfions, to watch the boat, 
which was a very fmall one, and which often en- 
tirely difappeared. 

At length by the great exertion of the fiflier- 
men who were in it, the boat came along fide, 
and one of the men hailing the mafter, told hina 
he had brought a gentleman and his twofervants, 
who wer» but juft arrived from London in great 
hafte, for a pafTage to France. 

Three rueful figures did indeed appear in the 
boat ; and in the firft of them that was helped 
up the fide of the veffel, I recognifed Waverly ! 

Sick to death, wet to the fkin, and 1 believe, 
not a little frightened by the tofling of the boat, 
he tould not immediately anfwer the queftions 1 
put to him. At length he told me, that the day 
after he had fent off Anthony he altered his 
mind, and fet out poft to overtake me before I 
failed. " But now, faid he, I wifh fomehow 
1 had not come till next v/eek ; for fetting off 
in fuch a hurry, I have not brought my horf«s 
and carriages as I intended ; and have only that 
portmanteau of cloaths with me." I was almoft 
tempted to tell him he had then better return 
on fliore, and wait for the accommodation he 
thus regretted ; but I thought of Geraldine, 
and detefting myfelf for my petulence, began 
to condole with, inftead of blaming the half- 
drowned Waverly, whom I immediately advifed 
to change his cloaths and go to bed, for he fuf- 
fcred extremely from the motion of the vcffel, 
and again wifhed himfelf on fhore. On the 
facre, however, to which, in Icfs turbulent 
weather, a little encouragement might have fent 
him, he had now no inclination to venture, but 
took my advice and retired to the cabin; from 
whence Anthony came up in a few moments 
with a letter in his hand, which he laid his maf- 

ter 



60 DESMOND. 

ter had forgot to giv^e me. I looked at the di- 
rection — ic was the writing, the elegant VvTitins, 
cfGeraldine. I opened it with trembling hands, 
and a palpitating heart. Heavens! does fhe 
write to me ? Dare 1 hope fiie remembers me? 
— I have employed every moment fmce in read- 
ing and in copying it, that you may fee how 
elegantly fhe writes, though I cannot part with 
the original. With what delight I retrace every 
word file has written j with what tranfport kifs 
the fpaces between the lines, where her fingers 
have pafTed. But you have no notion of all this, 
and will fmile contemptuoufly at it, as boyifii 

and romantic folly. My dear liethel, why 

fii'iuld we call folly that which hallows fuch 
happincfs, fincc, after all our wifdom, our feli- 
city depends merely on the imagination? I feel 
lighter and gayer hnce I have been in pofTeflion 
of this dear letter, the firft 1 ever received from 
her I Waverly's little foibles difappear before its 
powerful infiutnce. It ads like a tali man, and 
liides his faults, half of which I am ready to 
think virturs, fince without his indccifion I 
ihoulu never have received it. Oh ! with what 
zeal w:ll ' endeavour to execute the ch.^rge my 
any-tlic friend irlvee rne to w.itch over the con- 
duct of her brother. He is really not a bad 
young man i and i particularly rejoice at his 
— i)eing here, as 1 have learned from him, this 
nioinine-, that the people vviih whom he went 
from Bath inco LincolnfViire arc ganibleis, 
who have won a conildeuble fum of money of 
b.m. From fuch adve.'Uurcs, 1 hope to fave 
h!rr; in future , and admitting it poflible that his 
ujifeitled temper may fomeiimes occafion me 
1. me trouble, I fhall rem.ember that he is the 
Iroiher of iiiV adorable GeraldiiiC, and the tafic 

will 



DESMOND. 6 1 

will become a plcafure. — Farewell, my frienr!, 
you know my addrefs at Paris, i (hall go on this 
evening to Amiens, where I fliall, perhaps, be 
detained a day by the affairs of mv poor protegee 
and her children, who mud be put into Tome way 
of fubfiftence before 1 leave them. 

1 am, ever, my dear Beihel, 

Faithfully your'?, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



L E T- 



62 O £ S M O K D. 



LETTER VII. 



Paris, Jul/ 19, 1790. 

I H AV F^ now, my dear Bethel, been fome 
days in this capita!, without having had time to 
write to you ; (o deeply has the animating fpec- 
tacle of the J4.th, and the converfation in which I 
have been fince engaged, occupied my atten- 
tion. — 1 can now, however, aflure you — and 
with the mort: heart-felt fatisfa6lion, that nothing 
is more unlike the real flate of this country, 
than the accounts which have been given of it 
in En<i;land : and that the fan2;uinarv and fero- 
cious democracy, the fcenes of anarchy and 
confufion, which we have bad fo pathetically 
defcribed and lamented, have no exiftence but 
in the malignant fabrications of thofe who have 
been paid for their miireprefentations. 

That it has been an cbjeit with our govern- 
ment to employ fucn men ; men, whofe bulinpfs 
U is to ftifle truths, which though unable to 
deny, tht-y are unwilling to admit ; is a proof, 
that they bdieve the delufion of the people ne- 
celTary to their own views ; and have recourfe 
to thefe miferab'e expedients, to impede a little 
the progrefs of that light which they fee rifing 
upon the world. You know I was always in- 
terefted in this revolutionj (you fometimes 
thought too warmly) and I ovvoj that till I came 

hither, 



DESMOND. 63 

hither, I was not fufficiently mafter of the fub- 
je6t, to be able to anfwer thole doubts which 
you often raifed, as to the permanency of the 
new fyftem in France — But 1 think, that can- 
did and hberai as you are ; and with fuch prin- 
ciples of univerfal philanthropy as you pofiefs, 
I (hall now have no difficulty in making you as 
warmly anxious, as I am, ior the fuccefs of a 
caufe which, in its confcquence, involves the 
freedom, and, of courfe, the happinefs, not 
merely of this great people, but of the univerfe. 
I had letters of introdu6iion to feveial gentle- 
men here ; among others, to the ci- Levant Mar- 
quis de Montfleuri — A man, m whom the Hre 
of that ardent imagination, fo common among 
his countrymen, is tempered by found reafon; 
and a habit of reflection, very unufual at his 
time of life, to a native of any country, but 
particularly to one of this, wh-.re corruption 
has long been a fyrtem, from the iufluei.ce of 
which, it was hardly poffible for young men of 
property and title to efcape. — Montflturi, how- 
ever, though born a courtier, is one of the 
fteadieft friends to the people — and it is from 
him that 1 have heard a detail of the proi^refs of 
this great event, on which, 1 believe you may 
depend j and I will, in my two or thue next 
letters, relate it in his own woids. 

In the mean-time, my friend, I have infinite 
pleafure in dcfcnbing to you the real Jtate of 
Paris, and its neighbc urhood — Where there is 
not only an excellent police, but where the na- 
tural gaiety of the pe< pie now appears without 
any reitraint, and yer, certainly, without any 
diforder. — Where the utmoft care is taken o'f 
the lues of the commonalty, of whom a great 
number pel ifb-d yearly in Pans, by the furious 
manner jn which the carriages of the ncblejfe 

were 



6^ DESMOND. 

were driven through the ftreets, where there are 
no accommodations for the foot paflenger — ?.nd 
where the proud and unfeeling pcffefibrs of thofe 
fplendid equipages (the difappearance of which 
has been fo much lamented in England) have 
been known to feel their rapid wheels crufhing 
a fellow creature, v/itb emotions fo far from 
thofe of humanity, as to have faid, " tant mieux^ 
il y a toujour s ojfez de ces giuux* ^ Is it not na- 
tural for a people, who have been thus treated, 
to retaliate with even more ferocity than has 
been imputed to them ? — and can it appear fur- 
prizine, tiiat when the remark has been made, 
that there are now fewer magnificent carriages 
in the ftreets of Paris than there were formcily, 
ihey have anfwtrid, ** mails il y en a encore 
trcpY' 

One of the greatcft complaints which the dif- 
contented here have made — One, on which the 
eloquent dfclaimcis among us have the moft 
loudly infifted, is the levelling principle which 
the revclutiuniiiS have purfutd. — Certainly, it 
is a great misfortune to the nobility to be de- 
prived of the invaluable privilege of believing 



* *' So much the better, there are always enough of thofe 
fhabby ra!cal> " 

! know nrt \«.heiher, in the nurneroas aneccictet of this kind, 
th.ii have been colleiie.', it has ever btcn rtlated, thai a very 
-few years fince, a ynunfr Frt nchn^an of fufhion — one of " the 
very Tirfl world," was driving through the llreet= of ParK, with 
an Lrg'.fhman, hit acouainiante, in a tahric.'et, in the rue S\ 
Honor), which is always extremi ly crowdeci, hi^ horfe thievs 
do.vn a poor nan. and the wheeU gi'ing ove: his n ck, k Ued 
him on the fpot — The Englifluraa, with all the emoti>»ft5 «)f 
terror. nitU'-d on fuch an inc oe.'.i, ciied out — Good Gcd, you 
have killed ihe man !— The chorictcer drove tn ; faying, with 
all poflible l"ng fniJ — *' Eh bieti, lant fis four /«<" — Well 
ther.j fo muth the v.'orle for him. 

-f " B^t ihett ifc iii'l too rri^ny." 

themfelvcs 



DESMOND, 65 

thcnifclves of a fuperior fpecies, and to be com- 
pellfd to learn that they art men. 

1 was afTurerl, in London, that I (hould find 
Paris a ('efirt-.— How true fuci'j an afleition i!=) 
]tt the public walk^, and public ipcctacles vvit- 
nefs J places, where luch numbers affl-mble, as 
are hardl)' ever feen colleded in London, ^unlefs 
on very extraordinary occa(ionsj) yet, where 
et'cn in the pi efcnt hour, wh' n the ferment of the 
public mind cannot h.vt lubfided, there is na 
diforder, no tumult, nor even that degree of 
difturbance, which the moft trifling popular 
whim txciies among us. 

It is, howevei, at thefe places, the peopje 
are to be fcen, and not their opprtfTors. — And 
if it is ujily ihe/e latter that conft tutes an in- 
habited cc'Untry, Paris will remain, perhaps, 
(leferted, in the eyes of thofr- who are ^'efcriced 
by LJeneral Wallirigford and Mrs. Fairfax — as 
'■'- people of fafhion" — les gens ccmme il faut — 
While the philofopher, the philaiuhropili, the 
citizen of the world; whole comprciienfive mind 
takes a more fubiiii^e view of human natyre than 
he can obtain from the heiphts of Verfaiiles or 
St, James's, rejoices at the fpedtacle which 
every where prefents itielf of newiy-difFuled 
happinefs, and hails his feliow man, dilcncum- 
bered of tiioff paltry diftindions that dtbaled 
and difguifed him. 

Such a man — with heart-felt fatisfadicn re- 
peals that energetic, and in let^ard to this 
country, prophetic fentence of our immortal 
poet. 

" Methinks I fee in my mind a noble and 
puifiant nation, touring herfelf like the ftrcng 
man after fleep j and fhaking her invincible 
locks . — Methinks I fee her, an eagle mewing 

her 



66- DESMOND. 

her mighty youth, and kindling her undazzled 
eyes at the t'ull mid day be-^m ; purging and un- 
fcaling her long abuied tight at thefoun z'la t'.f. If 
of heavenly radiance, while the whole flock of 
timorous tsnd nnify birds, w'vh thofe that love 
the tw;light, fluiter about, amazed at what Ihe 
means arid in iheir envious gabble, would 
prognofticite a year of fedt* and Ichiims*."— 
Afti r this, my friend, 1 w 11 n( w add a word of 
my own.— M V next letter w '1 ^ive \ ou fome of 
the converfation of ^yIonlfleurl. When (hall I 
hear from you. - And when will you indulge me 
With fome account of your neighb mrs. — Pray 
forget not what, even in this fcene, is ftill neareft 
the heart 

Of your's, 

L. DESMOND, 



* MiltoD OD the liberty of unlicenfed printing. 



LET- 



DESMOND. 67 



LETTER Vm. 



TO MR. BETHEL. 



Paris, July io, 1790. 

MONTFLEURT, with whom I have 
pafied many pleafant and inHrud^ive hours fince 
I have been here, has defired me to go with him 
to his eftate on the banks of the Loire, about 
fifteen miles from Lyons, where bufinefs will 
foon call him. From thence, he propofes taking 
me to the chateau of his unclf. the ci-devant 
Count d'Hautevillc in Auvergne, where i am 
to witnels the pangs of aiiftocracy, reludtantly 
and proudly yielding to a necelfity which it exe- 
crates ; and my friend, afterwards, accompa- 
nies me to Marfeilles, where, I believe, I fhall 
embark foi Italy, or, pt^ihaps, for the Archi- 
pelago — 1 know n.)t which — It depends on I 
know not what. (There is a fentence a little 
in the Waverly ftyle) — 1 was, however, going 
to fay, that it depends on the Itate of my mind, 
whether my abfcnce from England (hall be 

longer or fhorter ; If 1 could return to fee 

Geraldine 



69 DESMOND. 

Geraldine happy, and not to regret that ftie is 
happy with Vtiney. — If I could fi°tl, when 1 
behold her, all thdt difmtcrened afTectiun, which 
the purity of her ch^radtcr oii^ht to inf^. le, 
without forming wi/hes ami hopes that ferve only 
to torment me, 1 would return thiough Ii. ly in 
a few months to Lngjand. — V ou tell me abitnce 
will effect all this, and reftore me lo reafon. — 
I rather hope it than believe it; and even, 
amidft this intert-fting fccne, 1 catch my l'=^lf con- 
tinually c.irryin.j my thoughts to hn^idnd ; and 
imagining where Cjerald;ne I'^—and enquiring 
whether Ihe has not new fources of uneafinefs 
in tliC encrealing diffipation of her hufband. 

W hat attradlions for me has her very name. — 
It is with difficulty i recall my pen, and my 
wandering ipirits, to tndeavour to ficoiledt, 
whether I told you how much difturbed poor 
Waverl) was at the French poft-hor(es and car- 
riages, wifh which we travelled from Dunkirk j 
and how often he curled his improvident hafte, 
which had madt him (et out without his own 
horfes and carriage**. — At Abbeville, he feemed 
ftrongly difpofed to have i'ent Anthony back to 
have fetched them; and, at Amiens, Ibll more 
inclined to return and bring them himlelt ; nor 
had he quite fettled the debate when I came 
back from an abfence, that was occafioned by 
the fettlement of mj poor protegee and her chil- 
dren, which i managed with Itfs difficulty than 
I expected. — All this trifling 1 could bear from 

Wavcrly, and forgive it as'boyifh folly. 

But it provokes tny ipleen to fee a fellow have 
no more idea of the impt-rtaiice of the prtfent 
period in France — if ever he can be brought to 
think about it at all, it is only to raife a debate, 
whether be fiiould have refigned his title calmly, 

had 



•DESMOND. 69 

had he been a French nobleman ? — which ufually 
terminates in the wife clecLration, that he (hould 
have thought it a litde hard. 

Now will you pique yurfelf upon your faga- 
city in forefceinj that I (hould be fometimes 
peevilh at the foibles of my fellow-traveller j it 
is, however, merely a tranfitory difpleafure, and 
one th'iug' t of Geraldine diflipates it at once. — 
Since We ha^e been at Paris, there is fo much 
to enia»e him that he has been verv little wiih 
me ; and here are feveral Englimmen of his 
acquamtancp, who have taken the trouble of 
de-iding for him, off my hands; all my care 
being to help to keep him, as much as poflible, 
from ihe gaming houies, in obedience to his 
fifter's wifhes, which are my laws. 

While he faunters away his time in a morning 
in the Palais Royal^ and in the evening at the 
theatre*;, and in fuppers with the adtrefles, I 
am deeply, and more deeply interefled by the 

politics of the country. Montfleuri pafles 

much of his time with me; and, therefore, I 
will give you a fkctch of his character and his 
hiftory. 

He is now about five-and-thirty, a fine manly 
figure, with a countenance ini^enuous and com- 
manding. — He has been a fop, and ftill retains 
a fomethuig of it in his drefs and manner, but 
it is veiy little v'fi 'le, and not at all difgufting i 
perhaps, lefs fo than that negligence which 
many of his countrymen have lately affc£ted, as 
if determined, in trifles, as well as in matters 
of more confequence, to chai^ge characters 
with us. 1 he father of Monrfleuri died 
in America, and as an only Ion, he was the 
darling of his mother; who, being anxious 
that her daughters, of whom Ihe had four, mii^ht 

not 



JO DESMOND. 

not be an incumbrance on an eftate which his 
father had left a good d^aJ embarrafled, compel led 
the f.'cond and the younijeft of them to become 
nuns; and married the eldeft and the third, who 
were remarkably beautiful, to the jfirft men who 
offered —Montfleuri had no fooner the power by 
the new rt-gulations, than he took his young- 
eft fifter, who is not yet eighteen, from the con- 
vent, where {he was on the point of taking the 
vows j and, to the fecond, who has taken them, 
he offers an eftablifhment in his own houfe, if 
file will leave her monaftery, which is near his 
eftate in the Lvonois. — To conquer her fcruples 
and to prevail upon her to return to his houfe, 
is part of his immediate bufincfs in that coun- 
try — His mother, whole miitaken zeal he re- 
veres, and for vvhofe fondnefs, however unjuO, 
he is grateful, has been dead a few months, and 
left him at liberty to follow the generous dictates 
of his heart. 

It is not fo eafy for him to break the cruel 
bonds which that fatal partiality put on his other 
fifter ; 1 mean the third, for the tldeft i": a wi- 
dow, — I'his [bird filler, who is called Madame 
de iJoifbelle, Iha.e feen j and, in finding her 
a very lovely and intertfting woman, have, with 
extreme concern, tieard that her hufband is one 
of the nioft worthUfs charadtcrs in France ; 
where, howev- r, he is not at prefent, being a 
fier arijhcrute^ and havmg quitted his country 
lathtr ihan behold it fr;'e. 

Mau.:me de Boifbcile, is now, therefore, at 
the hotel cf her brotncr, with IVIademoilelle 
Montfleuri, his younger lifter ; and ihey <.ie togo 
with us to Monifl.uri in a few days. 

I was jefterday with Monifieu!i at a vifit he 
n)ade to a family of lalhion, where, in the even- 



DESMOND. 71 

ing, people of all parties aflcmble ; and where 
the^lal^y of the houfe piques herfelf upon being 
a bel efprity and giving to her guefts the utmoll 
freedom of converfaiion. When we went in, 
a young abbe.^ who feemed to have an excellent 
opin on of his own abilities, was defcanting on 
the injuftice of what had been done in regard 
to the clergv. — The fneering tone in which 
he defcribed the National Affembly, by the 
name of " ces Mcffieurs qui ont pris la peine 
de nous reformer,^'* and the turn of his dif- 
courle, made it evident, that under a conrtrained 
or, at leaft, an afFeilrd moderation and cano'our, 
he concealed principles the moft inimical and 
malignant to the revolution. — His difcourie was 
to this efFe6l. 

*' In every civilized country, there is no 
doubt of the fupremacy of the church;, more 
efpecially in this, where, ever fince the baptifm 
of Clovis, it has made one of the great princi- 
ples of the ftate. — .All ecclefiaftical property, 
therefore, ought undoubt dly to be facred j 
and, to invade it, is to commit facrilege. 
I will nor go into fcriptiiral proofs of this axiom, 
I will only fpealc of the immorality and injuftice 
of thofe meafures which have been taken aaainfl 
It. It is well known, that much of the reve- 
nues of the church ?.riie from gifts ; from lega- 
, cies given by Clovis and his pious fucceffbrs ; 
or, by other htgh and iHuftrious perfons, to 
raife houfes of p:e;y, where the reclufe and 
religious might pray for the repofe of the fouls 
of thele (.minent perfoii*. — lo fulfil thefe pur- 
porfes, a certain number of men, renouncing 
the honours and cmoJuments of the world, have 

* Thofe gentlemen v.- ho have taken the trouble to reform us. 

given 



^2 DESMOND. 

given their lives to this holy occupation ; and 
is it not juft theyihould enjoy the lot they have 
thus chcfen in peace? Is it not juft that, if they 
have reOgned the pleafures of this world, they 
fbould be allowed its necefTarieSj while they are 
fmoothing the paiTage to, or fecuring the happi- 
nefs of the other, for thofe, who truft to their 
fandity and their prayers ? — Befides, permit nae 
to remark, that many of the monaftic eftates 
have been wafte lands, which have been culti- 
vated and reclaimed by their former poflefTors ; 
that, among the various focieties of religious 
men, many have well earned their fupport, by 
undertdking the education of youth, while others 
have been employed in the charitable office of 
redeeming flaves from captivity. — Perhaps there 
mijiht be fome little difproportion between the 
emoluments poflVfied by the fuperior and inferior 
cler""y ; but it was always poflihle for thefe lat- 
ter to rife by their zeal and good conduci:; and, 
I muft be permitted to think, that rr.rjjleitrs nos 
reformateurs^ have not enough confidcred wh.it 
thev were doing j when inliead of re(ftif\ine, 
with a tender hand, any little errors in the eccle- 
fiaftic^il order, they have deftroyed it ; inftead 
of pruning the tree, they have torn it up fc^rci- 
bly by the roots. -^If the nation wz.^- dijirelfed 
in its'revenues, by — by — by 1 knov? not what 
caufe, the clergy offered four hundred millions 
of livres* towards its afnftancc — a generous and 
noble olfer, which ought to have been accept- 
ed." — The abbe ce Jed fpeaking with the air of 
a man, who thought he had not only produced 
arguments, but fuch as it would be impolMble 

* Making upwards of fixteen and an half millions fteiling. 

to 



to controvert.— —•Montfleuri, however, who 
fccmcd of another opinion, thus anfwered him. 

** You have afTerted, Sir, that in all civi- 
lized countries, the church forms a fupreme 
branch of the legiflature. — This is furely not the 
fad: I will not, however, enter into a difcuf- 
fion of how far it is fo in other countries, or 
hswfar it ought to be fo in any, but reply to the 
arguments which you have deduced from its 
power in our own. — You muft allow me to re- 
mark, that the antiquity of an abufe is no rea- 
fon for its continuance — And if the enormous 
wealth of the clergy be one, it ought not to be 
perpetuated, unlefs better reafons can bebrought 
in its favour, than that it com nenced at the con- 
verfion and baptifm of Clovis ; who, guilty of 
horrible enormities, and ftainej with blood, was 
taught to hope, that, by eretSting churches, and 
endowing tflonafteries, the pardon of heaven 
might be obtained for his crimes: and, in doing 
fo, he certainly did not make a bad bargain for 
himfelf ; for it coft hlra only that of which he 
robbed his fubjedh. It was with their toil and 
mifery he thus purchafed the abfolution which 
the monks gave him for murder and oppreffion 
— It was their tears, and their blood, that ce- 
mented the edifices he raifed*. 

I believe the fame may be faid of the foun- 
dations made by thofc mon.irchs, whom you call 
his pious fucceflbrs. The weak bigot Louis 
the Seventh — the ferocious fanguinary monfter 
Louis the Eleventh, are, I fuppofe, among the 
moft eminent of the lift. — —Of what efficacy 
thofe prayers might be, that were thus obtainedj, 

* Some fentences here arc drawn from a little Prepch pa«' 
phlet, entitled *■' Ltttrr «mx Arijirtbtotrate Fran^itiP 

Vol, L E I fliaiv 



74 : DESMOND. 

I ihall fay nothing, fince that is matter of opi- 
nion. — It is plain, however, that the nation 
does not now believe them ufeful to its welfare, 
and therefore, with great propriety, turns into 
another channel, that wealth, which it no longer 
deems beneficial in this. I think you will not 
deny that the moft ufeful of the clergy are the 
cures^ who live on their cures; whofe time 
fhould be given up to the really chriftian and 
pious purpofes of inftrudling the poor, vifiting 
the fick, and relieving the temporal neceflities 
of their parifhioners, by fuch means as they 
poflefs ; though it too often happened that they 
had hardly wherewithal to fupply themfelves 
with the necefTarics their humble manner of life 
required. — An error, in the diftribution of mo- 
ney appropriated to the church, which in the 
prefent fyftem, will, I apprehend, be remedied. 
I cannot agree with you, that the tree is torn 
up by the roots: I fhould rather fay, that its 
too luxuriant branches, which prevented the 
production of wholefome fruit, are reformed ; 
and the whole reduced nearer to the proportion, 
which may fecure it from, being deflroyed by 
the ftorms that pafs by, through the difpropor- 
tion of its head. — You have, Sir, declined en- 
tering into thofc fcriptural proofs of their facred 
naturej which you intimated were to be brought 
in fupport of the ancient eftablifhments; a for- 
^tunate circumflance for me, as on that ground 
I muft have felt my inferiority. — But, from what 
I know of the fubjcdt, 1 have always fuppofed, 
that whatever fpiritual refemblance there might 
be between the primitive fathers of the church 
and their prefent fuccefTors, there was certainly 
very little in their temporal conditions. It docs 
not appear ever to have been the expcdlation of 

the 



DESMOND. 7^; 

the faints and martyrs, that thofe who followed 
them in their holy calling, fhould become tem- 
poral princes, or poflefs fuch immenfe revenue* 
as the higher clergy enjoyed in this country, of 
whom, you know. Sir, that there were fome 
whofe yearly incomes amounted to eighty, an 
hundred, two, three, four hundred thoufand 
livres a year. 

As to that ranlc of them who lived in coji- 
vents, I will not enquire whether piety or idle- 
ncfs decided their vocation — I will believe that 
it may, in numerous initances, have been the 
former motive — and that in others, the unhappy, 
or the guilty, might feek, in thefe retreats, (bel- 
ter from the mil'eries of life, or leifure to make 
their peace with heaven. — But men, carried into 
religious retirements by fuch motives, would 
probably be content with mere iiecefl'aries of. 
life, which are not taken from thenij it is not 
therefore thefe men who complain.— To the 
monks, I am difpofed to al'ow all you can urge 
in their favour, as to thee diication of youth, and 
the redemption of prifon r«, though thefe me- 
rits, and particularly theljtter, have been much 
difputed (probably from the mifreprefentation that 
have been made of the manner of executing thefe 
charges) — I will go farther, and enumerate one 
obligation the world owes them, which you have 
over-looked, or do not think it of confequence 
enough to mention. — I mean, that to them wc 
are indebted for the prefervation of thofe pre- 
cious relicts of antiquity, which, but for the 
fecurity which fuperltition enabled them to give, 
would have perifhed in the ferocious rurbultnce 
of the dark ages. Bat, Sir, with all the difpo- 
fition imaginable^ to allow the monaflic infti- 
tuiion all the honour they can aflume, I ftiU 
E a tanno» 



76 X> B S M O N D. 

cannot be of opinion that the good works they ' 
have given birth to, even in their utmoft ex- 
tent, balance the various evils which ihefe com- 
munities occaHon to the nation that fupports 
them. As to the mendicant orders, furely the 
fuppreflion of them cannot be complained of.— 
The vow of poverty taken by capucins^ recollets, 
&c. &c. may now be executed in humble pri- 
vacy, for which the ftate will provide during 
the lives of thofe have taken thefe vows, and 
they will no longer be in a degraded condition 
of life, which muft be a continual tax to the 
pious, while it gave to the light-minded a fub- 
jc<Sl of ridicule, and to the indifferent, of dif*- 
guft. I need hardly infifl on the miferies to 
which monadic vows, made at a time of life 
when no civil contrail would be binding, have 
condemned individuals of both fexes. — Wretch- 
es, who having thus thrown themfelves, yet 
living, into the tomb, have afterwards exifted 
only to curfe their being. — I will not retouch 
the difgufting pidturcs that have been fo fre- 
quently exhibited, of the wretchednefs, or the 
vices that have prophaned thefe dark recefles, 
built for far other purpofes ; nor enlarge upon 
the deluges of blood, the variety of tortures by 
which the monks have eftablifhed their power 
over the ignorance and apprehenfions of man- 
kind. — What then (hould prevent a nation from 
re-afTuming grants ; which, admitting they were 
originally given to good purpofes, have long 
fince been perverted ? Certainly, Sir, you can- 
not aflert, that le haut clergiy the higher rank of 
ecclefiaftics in our day, whofe declined authority 
and leflened revenues you regret, refemble, in 
any inllance, thofe apoftles who profefied po- 
verty and humility, and went about doing 

good ? 



» « S M O N D. 77 

good ?— Thoirgh I am, on the other hand, ready 
to admit of their refemblance to their more im- 
mediate, though ftill remote predeceflbrs, the 
bi(hops who lived as long ago as the reign ot 
Louis le Debonnair. One of our hiftorians* 
fpeaks of them as being, at that period, *' men 
who were, for the moft part, become great lords, 
poflefling vail domains and many vairalsj and, 
while they governed the minds of the people, 
entirely devoted to a court. — Men, whofe am- 
ple revenues enabled them to gratify every 
wordiy inclination, and to enjoy luxuries 
whch foon made them lofe fight of their fpiri- 
t\in\ duties, and negled their original vocati- 
on. — 

A young man, whom I had not till now no- 
ticed, took advantage of a paufe to interrupt 

Montfleuri " Well," faid he, in Englifh, 

•* and what then? it proves that thofe worthies 
knew how to live ; and, 1 am forty with all my 
foul, that their lucceflbrs, the old bucks of our 
own times, are thrown out as they are. — When 
I was at Paris laft, 1 was always fure of a convert 
at the table of an archbifhop, and an excellent 
table it was ; then, at that time, there were 
many of the haut clerge who gave comfortable, 
and even elegant cftabliihments to two or three 
pretty women, to whofe parties one was always 
welcome. — Now there is an end of all that— 
the poor bifhops are gone upon their travels, and 
their chere amies upon the town ; which, in re- 
gard to its fociety, I am fure is very far from 
being improved j for, inllead of the agreeable 



♦ MUlot. 

fort 



78 DESMOND. 

fort of people one ufed to converfe with, one- 
now only meets queer fellows; who bore one to 
death with long preachments about their free- 
dom, their eonftitution, and the rights of the 
people ; and, after all, I don't fee that any of 
thefe things are much changed for the better.— 
As to people, that is, the canaille^ of whofe hap - 
pinefs there is fomuch talk, I don't think, my- 
felf, that they are fo much happier than they 
were before ; indeed, 1 have heard it aiErmed 
by thofe who are much more interefted in the 
matter, and more acquainted with it than I am, 
that ihey are nor at all happier fince this boafted 
revolution, nor at all better off."— 

Montfleuri, who had, I faw, conceived a 
very mean opinion of ihis individual, of a na- 
tion be loves and efteems, anfwered very calmly 
— ** The objection you have made, Sir, to the 
redutfl;ion of the higherclergy; the evils you have 
deduced from it are certainly moft convincing. 
— In regard, however, to the opinions which 
have, you fay, been delivered by good judges of 
the fubje£t on the happinefs of the people; per- 
haps, the beft way of afcertaining the juftice of 
thofe remarks, would be to refer you to the peo- 
ple themfelves, as being alone competent to de- 
cide. 

** Enquire of them, whether they are not 
better for bemg relieved from the taille, from 
the gahe/ley from the impofts levied at the gates 
of every town, on every neceflary of life; for 
the relief they have obtained from thofe bur- 
thens that were inipofed upon them, becaufe 
they were poofi while their illuftnous compa- 
triots 



D f S M O N o. 79 

friots were exempt, becaufe they were noble.* 
A(k the aged pcafant, who is no longer able to 
labour for his own fubfiftence ; afk the mother of 
a group of helplefs children, if they are not the 
happier for being afi'ured, that the Ton, the huf- 
band, on whom their exiftence depends, cannot 
now be torn from the paternal cottage; and, to 
execute fome ambitious fcheme of a weak king 
or a wicked minirter, be enrolled againft their 
inclination in a mercenary army ? — Let the fol- 
d;er, who is now armed for the defence of his 
country, a country fenfible of the value of the 
blood he is ready to ihed for its freedom, tell 
you whether he is not happier for the confciouf- 
nefs that he cannot be compelled to carry de- 
vaftation into another land as a Have, but fhall 
hereafter guard his own as a fieem:i:>i a!k the 
hufbandman, whofe labours were coldly and 
relu^antly performed before, when ihtfermiers- 
gtneral^ and the intcndants of the provinces, 
devoured two-thirds of their labour, if they do 
not proceed more willingly znd more profpe- 
roufly to cultivate a foil from whence xhoiz lo- 
cufts are driven by the breadth of liberty ? En- 
quire of the citizen, the mechanic-, if he repofes 
not more quietly in his houfe from ihe certainty 
that it is not now liable to be entered by the 
marechaujfies^ and that it is no longer poffible 
for hi.T» to be forcibly taken out of it by zlettre 
de cachet., in the power of a minifter, or his fe- 
cretary, his fecretary's clerk, or his miftrefs ? 
Let the voice of common fenfe anfwer, whether 
the whole nation has gained nothing in its dig- 

• Ce gouvernement ferait digne des Hottentot?, /^y/ Vol- 
taire, daos lequel il leiolt pcniis a un ctriain nombre d'hom* 
rnes de dire, c'eft a ceux qui trav'aillent a payer— Nous ne de» 
voirsrien payer, parceque nous fommes oiiits. 

nity^ 



So DESMOND. 

nity, by obtaining the right of trial by jury, by 
the reform in the courts of judicature; where, 
it is well known, that formerly, every thing 
was given to money or to favour, and to equity 
and juftice, nothing ?— As to the prejudice that 
allthefe alterations have been to the manners of 
fociety, to that, indeed, I have nothing to fay. 
I muft lament that, in fhaking off the yoke, wc 
have been fo long reproached for wearing, we 
have not taken care to preferve, unfaded, all 
thofe elegant flowers with which it was deco* 
rated. The complaint, perhaps, is well found- 
ed, for I have heard it before ; and, particularly 
from the ladies of your country, Sir ; to whom, 
1 am afraid, the name of a Frenchuian will 
hereafter give no other idea than that cf a fa- 
vage; a misfortune which, as I greatly admire 
the Englifh ladies, nobody can niore truly regret 
than 1 fhall.— But I fhall tire you, Sir, by ihus 
dwelling on a fubjedt which you have jufloblerved 
is very ennuyanl ; and, therefore, wjU leave you 
to Monfieur I'Abbe de Bremont, whcfe ideas, 
on public matters, feem more happily to meet 
your own." 

Montfietiri tlien v/alfred away, and, with me, 
joined the paity ui tlie lady of the houle, who 
was at play in another room.— Ihe converfa- 
tion, round the table, took another turn, and we 
foon afterwards went away ; and, as the evening 
was warm, ftrolled into the Luxembourg Gar- 
dens, where my friend continued, as 1 will relate 
in a future letter, to fpeak on the predifpofing 
caufes of the revolution — and on its eiFedls. 

I am fo late now, as to the poft, that I have 
only time to entreat you to write to me imme- 
diately, that I may receive your letter before I 

leave 



DESMOND. 8l 

leave Paris, which will be within thefe fif- 
teen days. — The ten laft have pafTed without 
my receiving a fingle line from you, — Adieu ! 
dear Bethel, 

Your*s truly, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



L jE X. 



82 DESMOND. 



LETTER IX. 



TO MR. BETHEL, 



Paris, Auguft 4, 1 790, 

I T is very uneafy to me, my dear Bethel, to 
be fo long without hearing from you. — 1 am 
willing to believe, that you are abfent from 
Hartfield, and wandering with my little friends, 
Harry and Louifa, on one of your ufual fum- 
iner tours ; and that, therefore, you have not 
received my letters, and know not whither to 
direct. — I would, indeed, rather believe any 
thing than that you have forgotten me, unlefs 
it be, that illncfs has prevented your writing, 
Waverly has had only two letters from his 
youngeft After fince he left England j and they 
hardly mention the Verney family, as Fanny 
Waverly is with her mother at Bath, where 
they ufually refide. 

Were my heart lefs deeply interefted for my 
friends in England, I fhould be quite abforbed 
in French politics ; £nd, could thofe friends be 
even for a little while fupplied by foreign con- 
nections, 



DESMOND. 83 

ne£lions, the family of Moiitfleuri would be 
that where I fliould chufe to feek. them. — But 
the tender iotereft 1 feel for fome individuals in 
England, no time, no change of fcene can wea- 
ken j my heart 

•* Siill to my country turns with cejfelels pain, 
And drags at each remove a lengihening chain. '"• 

I will not indulge this train of thought; it 
will be better to continue to relate the converfa- 
tion I had with Montfleuri in the latter part of 
that evening, of which I defcribed the beginning 
in my laft letter. 

As we walked together towards the Luxem- 
bourg Gardens, he afked me if I knew the 
young Englifhman, whofe argument, in defence 
of the enormous revenues of ihe bifhops, was 
fo very convincing. — " Not even by name," 
anfwered I ; " and fo far I am from wifhing to 
enquire, that I would 1 could forget having 
heard fuch frivolous folly in my native lan- 
guage." — Montfleuri fmiled at the warmth with 
which I fpoke. '* I. can forgive," faid he, 
*' the {hort view of an unexperienced boy juft 
come from his college, or the trifling inconfe- 
quence of a mere petit maitre^ who knowing 
nothing beyond what the faunterers in a coffee- 
houfe, or the matrons of a card-table have taught 
him to repeat by rote ; talks merely as a child 
recites his lelFon, without being capable of af- 
fixing one idea to the fentences he utters. — Such 
people are perfedtiy harmlefs, or rather bring 
into ridicule the caufe they attempt to defend j 
but, .when 1 meet, as loy often i have done. 



» Coldf-uUh. 

En !ifl.- 



©4 D E S M O N D. 

Engli(hmen of mature judgment and folid abi- 
lities, fo loft to all right principles as to depre- 
ciate, mifreprefent, and condemn thofe exerti- 
ons by which we have obtained that liberty they 
afFedl fo feduloufly to defend for themfelves ; 
when they declaim in favour of an hierarchy fo 
fubverfive of all true freedom, either of thought 
or adlion, and fo inimical to the welfare of the 
people, and pretend to blame us for throwing 
off thofe yokes, which would be intolerable to 
themfelves, and which they have been accuf- 
tomed to ridicule us for enduring : I ever hear 
them with a mixture of contempt and indigna- 
tion, and reflect with concern on the power of 
national prejudice and national jealoufy, to 
darken and pervert the underftanding. 

" All, however, that I have ever heard from 
fuch men, has ferved only to prove to me, either 
that they fear for their own nation the too great 
political confequence of ours, when our conftii- 
tution fhall be eftablifhed ; or know and dread, 
that the light of reafonthus rapidly advancing, 
which has fiiewn us how to overturn the mafly 
and cumbrous edifice of defpotifm, will make, 
too evident, the faults of their own fyftem of 
government, which it is their particular intcreft 
to fkreen from refearch and reformation. — Bat 
how feeble are all the endeavours of this polrti- 
cai jealoufy on one hand, and the yet obftinate 
piejudices of papal fuperftition on the other, to 
obfcure this light in its irrefiftible and certain 
progrefs ; more rapid and more brilliant from 
the vain attempt to intercept and impede it. — ■ 
** Nefentezvouspas" fays Voltaire very juftly 
i — ** Ne fentez vous pas^ que ce qui eji jujle^ clair^ 
ivHent^ eji naturdUmsni t tfpi£ii de tout le rnonde^ 

^ que 



D E S M O N D* 85 

fcf que des chimeres ne peuventpas tojoun s'attlrer 
la.meTtu veneratian?*** 

The fudden change that has taken place in 
this country, from the moft indolent fubmiffion 
to a defpotic government, to the adoption of 
principles of more enlarged liberty than your 
nation has ever avowed, appeared (o aftonifh- 
Ing, and fo unaccountable, to thofe who beheld 
the event at a diflance, that they believed it 
could not be permanent. Our national charac- 
ter, a chara^er given us by Caefar, and which 

we are laid ftill to retain That vehement, 

fierce, and almoft irrefif^ible, in the beginning 
of an aftion, we are foon repulfed and difmayed 
—Encouraged the perfuafion, that the revolu- 
tion would prove only a violent popular com- 
motion j and that when our firft ardour was 
abated, the fpirit of our ancient government, 
taking advantage of this well-known difpofition 
of the French people, would gradually refume 
its influence ; and perhaps, by a few conceffions 
of little confequence, induce us to fubmit again 
to that fyftem, which a momentary frenzy had 
fufpended. But I, who, though as diffipated 
as moft men, was neither an unobferving or 
difmterefted fpecSator of what was paffing, have 
for fome years feen, that our government was 
approaching rapidly to its diflolution, and, that 
many caufes unknown, and unfufpecSled, were 
filently uniting to accelerate its ruin, 

*' The advocates for defpoiifm confider the 
reigns of Henry the Fourth, and Louis the 
Fourteenth, as evidences in favor of their fyf- 

* Are you not fenfible, that what is juft, clear, and evident, 
muft be natuially attended to — Aud tlwt chimeras caanot »1- 
Ya^s be held in reneraiion ? 

tem : 



J^6 O E S M O K D. 

tem ; but allowing, that the former was an ex- 
cellent man, and worthy to be entrufted with 
the power of governing a great people (which 
can hardly be allowed to Louis the Fourteenth), 
what a black and hideous lift of regal monfters 
may be brought to contrail the molt favourable 
pidtures tnat can be drawn of thefe monarchs. 
The various murders and aflaffinations which 
{lain the annals of the lad princes of the Houfe 
of Valoisj and, above all, the maflacre of St. 
Bartholemew, rcfledt difgrace on a nation, 
which, even at that dark period, could tolerate 
and obey fuch forocious tyrants, andftill more, 
on the fanguinary fuperftition whicn gave them 
a pretence to commit thefe enormities. The 
fame bigotry, however, delivered his infuJted 
country from the laft of this odious race*; but 
it oppofed, in his fucccflbr, a man who fcemed 
born for the political falvation of his people, 
and who became afterwards the beft king that 

France ever boafted. Brought up like the 

mountaineers, over whom only it was once 
likely he fliould reign, his heart had never been 
hardened, nor his frame enervated by the flat- 
teries or luxuries of a court. — He had not been 
taught, that to be born a king is to be born 
fomething more than man. 

*' The admirable difpofitions he had received 
from nature, were fo much improved in the 
rigid fchool of adverfity, in which fo many 
years of his life were palled, that his charader 
was fixed, and profperity and power could not 
deftroy thofe fentiments of humanity and good- 
nefs which made him, throughout his whole 
leign (even amidll the too libtral indulgence of 

« Henry the Third. 

fomc 



DESMOND. 87 

fome weaknefTes and errors) confider the happi> 
nefs of his people as the firft objedl of his go- 
vernment. But his life was embittered, and his 
endeavours for the good of his fubjedts conti- 
nually oppofed, by the reftlefs fufpicion, and 
encroaching ambition of the priefts of that reli- 
gion, to which, to fave the efFufion of his peo- 
ple's blood, he was a reluctant, and perhaps, 
not a very fincere convert. Till at length the 
fame execrable fanaticifm raifed againft him the 
murderous hand of Ravaillac, and with him 
periflied the hopes of France j a nation that, 
had he lived, would probably have pofTefled 
profperity and happinefs, with a confiderablc 
portion of political liberty. 

*' The treafurc that the wife oeconomy of the 
Due de Sully had amafTed for him, to carry on 
his projects, which would have fecured a long 
and univerfal peace, were inftantly, on his death, 
diflipated among the hungry and (elfifli nobility 
that furrounded his widow*. 

" The early part of the reign of the weak 
and peevifh bigot his fon, Louis the Thirteenth, 
was marked by a faint attempt to rcftore fome- 
thing like a voice to the people, by a convoca- 
tion of les etais generauxf. 

*' But this was rather an effort of the nobi- 
lity againft the hated power of the Italian favou- 
rites, the Conchinis, than meant to reftore to 
the people any part of their loft rights. 

" The whole of this reign was rendered odious 
by the continual wars on the fubjedl of religion^ 

* Mary of Medicis. 

+ The laft «flemlly of that defcriptioo ihat was calied.in 
France. , 
• ■' . V/hich 



which deluged the country with blood; by the 
fa£lions, which exifted even in the family of the 
prince upon the throne; where the mother was 
armed againft her fon, the fon againft his mo- 
ther ; and the brothers againft each other. — All 
pradifing, in turn, every artifice that perfidy 
and malignity could imagine; and facrificing 

every thing to their own worthlefs views. 

When to thefe ruinous circumftances was added 
an ambitious ariftocracy, ready on every occa- 
iion to take advantage of the weaknefs of the 
monarch, and the difcord in his councils, it is 
eafily feen that nothing but the refolute courage, 
and ftrong talents of Richelieu could have pre- 
vented the total dcftruiSlionof France as a mo- 
narchy; it would, but for him, have been bro- 
Jcen into fmail republics, and fmall principali- 
ties; the firft would have been pofleffed by the 
Huguenots, and the latter by the principal no- 
bility; who, whenever they oppoied the court, 
and flew into rebellion, revolted not againft mea- 
fures, but men. — It was the favourites of Louis 
the Thirteenth that provoked them, and not the 
cncreafing oppreffion of the people. — The un- 
happy and plundered people, who equally the 
victims of the monarch, the nobles, and the 
priefts, were pillaged and deft toyed by them all. 
But the thick cloud of ignorance which co- 
vered Europe, was yet but flowly and partially 
rolling away: it was during this period that 
Galileo was imprifoned in Italy* for his difco- 
veries in aftronomy ; and that the Defcartes 
was accufed of impiety and atheifoi. 

* '• There I vifited," fays Milton, '* the ceiebrited Gali- 
leo, then poor and old, and a long tirDe a prifoner in the dwa- 
geon of the Inquil'tion, for daring to think otherwife in aftro- 
nomy than hi* FrAOcilcan and DomicicaQ licenlers thought." 

« The 



DESMOND* 89 

" The reign of Louis the Fourteenth was 
more propitious to knowledge. — His encourage- 
ment of fcience and literature has, in the im- 
mortality it has conferred upon him, led many 
writers to forget the oftentatious defpot, in the 
munificent patron. — Fafcinated by his manners, 
dazzled by the magnificence of his public works, 
and elated by his victories, his people felt for 
him the moft enthufiaftic attachment, and loved 
even his vices; vices which the fervile crowd 
of nobles around him, found it their iniereft to 
imitate and applaud ; while the priefts alfo made 
their advantage of thefe errors, obtaining by 
them the means of diilating to a man who waft 
at once a libertine and a cievoti.-~-'ThQ revoca- 
tion of the editSt of Nantz ; the cruel and ab- 
furd perfecution of the Proteftants, were among 
the follies that they led him to commit j and 
depopulaUtd and impoverished his country, 
which, at his death, fnon after tlic clofe tjf an 
unfucccfsful war, was in a ftate of almolt total 
bankruptcy ; yet, fo bigotted were we then to 
the fyftem of paiTive obtdience, fo attached ta 
unlimited monarchy, that throughout the long 
reign of his" great-grandfon,* the murmurs of 
the people were feeble and difregarded ; though 
their burthens were intolerable, though they 
were impofed by a prince who, without any of 
the virtues of his predecefibr, had more than his 
vices; and, though the fums thus extorted from 
the hard hands of patient induUry, were either 
expended in difgraceful and ill- managed wars, 
or hviflied in the debaucheries of the molt prof- 
ligate courtf that modern isurope hag beheld. 



♦ Louis the Fifteenth. 

f See U Vie privee dc Louis XV. 



From 



^0 DESMOND. 

,^From the infamous means that to fupport all 
this, were then pra6lifed to raife money ; from 
the heavy impofts that were then laid on the 
country, France has never recovered j but per- 
haps, in the difcontents which thefe opprefTions 
created, filent and unmarked as they were, the 
foundation was laid for the univerfal fpirit of 
revolt, to which flie is now indebted for her 
freedom. 

*' In the mean-time, the progrefs of letters, 
which Louis the Fourteenth h;id encouraged, 
was infenfibly difpelling that ignorance that 
aJone could fecuie this blind obedience. — The 
prefident, Montefquieu had done as much as a 
writer, under a defpot, dared to do, towards de- 
veloping the fpirit of the law;-, and the true prin- 
ciph;S of govcinfoenti ari'i, though the multi- 
tud, heeded not, or underftood not his abftradT; 
reafaning, he taught thofe to think, who gra- 
dually difleminated his opinions, Voltaire at- 
tacked defpotifm in all its holds, with the powers 
of refiftlefs wit. — Roufleau with matchlefs elo- 
quence :— and, as thefe were authors who, to 
the force of reafon, added the charms of fancy, 
they were univerfally read, and their fentiments 
were adopted by all clafles of men. 

^' The political maxims and oeconomical 
fyftems of Turgot, and the application of thef3 
principles by Mirabeau, excited a fpirit of en- 
quiry, the refult of which could not fail of being 
favourable to the liberties of mankind; and 
fuch was the difpofition of the people of France, 
when the ambitious policy of our miniftry fent 
our foldiers into America to fupport the En- 
glifh colonifts in their refiftance to the parent 
ftatc." 

I here 



DESMOND. 91 

1 here interrupted my friend, by remarking, 
that (o deep is the refentment which the Engli/h 
ftill entertain againft his nation for this inter- 
ference, that I had heard many rejoicing over 
the moft unpromifing picture they could draw 
of the prefent ftate of France} and, when they 
have imagined the country deluged with blood, 
and perifliing by famine, have faid — '* Oh ! the 
French defcrve it all for what they did againft 
us in America." — 

" And yet, my dear Sir,'* anfwered Mont" 
fieuri, *' thefe good countrymen of your's are 
a little inconfiderate and inconfiftent: inconfi- 
deratc in not reflecting, that the interference 
which feems fo unparclonahle, was the ^^t of the 
cabinet, not of the penple, who had no choice, 
hut went to be fi^ot ac for the liberties of Ame- 
I'ica, without having any liberty of their own i 
and, inconfirtcnt inafniuch, as they row ex- 
claim againft the refolution we have mace to <^e-» 
prive our monarchs of the power of mf.king 
war; a power which they thus complain has 
been fo unwarrantably exerted-— Thefe are fome 
of the many abfurdities into which a refolution 
to defend a pernicious fyftem, betrays its ableft 
advocates. However, our court has found its 
punifbment ; blinded by that reftlefs defire of 
conqueit, and their jealoufy of the hnglifh, 
which has ever marked its politics, our govern- 
ment did not reflect that they were thus tacitly 
encouraging a fpirit fubvtrfive of all their 
views ; nor foreiee, that the men who were fent 
out to aflifl in the prefervation of American 
freedom, would foon learn that they wtre de- 
graded by being themfelves flaves ; and would 
return to their native country to feel and to aflerC 
their right to be themfelves free. 

« I was 



'* I was then a very young man ; but my 
father, who was a colonel in the regiment of 
Naflau, and who died in America, took me 
with him in defpite of the tears and entreaties 
of my mother — 1 faw there fuch fcenes as have 
kft an indelible impreiTion on my mind, and 
an utter abhorrence for all who, to gratify their 
own wild ambition, or from even worfe mo- 
tives, can deliberately animate the human race 
to become butchers of each other.-— Above all, 
it has given me a deteftation of civil war, for 
the fierceft animofity with which the French 
and Englifh armies have met in the field, was 
mildnefs and friendfhip in comparifon of the 
ferocity felt by the Englifh and Americans, 
men fpeaking the fame language, and originally 
of the fame country, in their encounters with 
each other. I faw, amidft the almoft undifci- 
plined Americans, many inftances of that en- 
ll.ul'iaftic courage which animates men who 
contend for ail that is dear to them, againft the 
iron hand of injuftice i and, 1 faw thefe exer- 
tions made too often vain, againft the difci- 
plincd mercenaries of defpotifm j who, in learn- 
ing to call them rebels, feemed too often to 
have forgotten that they were men. How little 
did I then imagine, that a country which feem- 
ed to be devoted to deftrudtion, could ever be 
in fuchaftate as that in which I have fince be- 
held it, — Yes, my friend, I revifited this coun- 
try two years fmce, in which fourteen years 
before 1 had ferved as an enfign, when it was 
the feat of war. — 1 fee ic now recovered of thofe 
wounds, which its unnatural parent hoped were 
mortal, and in the moit.flounihing ftate of:po- 
llticai heakh^ 

" What 



D t IT M d R O. 91 

** What then^ecomes of the polittcat credtt 
of thofe who prognofticated, that her produc- 
tions would be unequal to her wants ; her le- 
giilatures to her government.— I know not how 
far the mother-country is the worfe for this dif- - 
union with her colonies — but, I am fure, they 
are the better ; and nothing is more falfc than 
that idea of the veteran ftatefman, that a coun- 
try under a new form of government, is deftr- 
tute of thofe who have ability to dire6l it.— 
That they may be unlearned in the deteflable 
chicane of politics, is certain j but they are 
alfo uncorrupted by the odious and pernicious 
maxims of the unfeeling tools of defpotifm ; 
honeft minifters then, and able negociators 
will arife with the occafion.— They have ap- 
peared in America; they are rifing in France 
— they have, indeed, arifen ; and, when it is 
feen that talents and application, and not the 
fmile of a miftrefs, or a connexion with a pa- 
raiite, give claims to the offices of public truft j 
men of talents and application will never b» 
wanting to fill mem." 

Montfleuri here paufed z moment; and a 
fentence of Milton's, of whom you know I 
am an inceflant reader, immediately occurred 
to me as extremely applicable to what he had 
been faying ; I repeated it to him in Englifh, 
which he underftands perfe€^}y well. 

" For, when God (hakes a kingdom, with 
{Irong and healthful commotions, to a general 
reforming, it is not untrue that many fedlaries 
and falfe teachers are then bufieft in feducing: 
but yet more true it is, that God then raifes, 
to his own work, men of rare abilities and 
more than common indufkry ; not only to look 
back and revife what hath been taught hereto- 
fore. 



9+ 



D B S M O N 0. 



fore, but to gain further, and go on feme 
new and enlightened fteps in the difcovery of 
truth."* 

Here our conference was ended for this time, 
at lead, on politics. We took a few turns 
among the happy groups who were either 
walking, or fitting, to enjoy the moft beau- 
tiful moon-light evening I ever remember to 
have feen j and I then returned to my hotel, and 
went to my repofe, determined to indulge the 
pleafing hope of having letters from England 
on the morrow, as it was poft day j but, I am 
again moft feverely difappointed. — Waverly, 
however, has letters from his fifters — they lay 
on the table in the room where we ufually fit, 
for he is gone with, I know not what party, to 
Chantilly. — I fee that one of them is directed 
by the hand of Geraldine.— — I have taken it 
up an hundred times, and laid it down again— 
It is fealed with an impreifion of the Verney 
arms — it is heavy, and feems to contain more 
than one or two fheets of paper j perhaps there 
is a letter in it for me. — Yet, why fhould I , 
flatter myfelf ? — The other letter is from Fanny 
Waverly — I recolledl her hand, for it a little re- 
fembles her fifter's. — Would to heaven Waverly 
was come back — He went on a fudden, and named 
no time for his return ; and my time, ihefe laft 
two days, has been waflcd in the moft uneafy 
expectation ; for 1 can think of nothing but the 
purport of thefe letters. — If they aflure me of 
the health and content of Mrs. Verney, for I 
will try to break myfelf of calling her Geral- 
dine (becaufe I always^ long to add my to that 
beloved name) — I will endeavour to account, 

* Miltoaontbe Liberty of unliccnfed Priating. 

deaf 



D E S M O K D. 9^ 

dear Bethel, for your filence, by believing that 
you are travelling with your children; and kt 
out as cheerfully as I can, with Montfleuri and 
his fifters, on Monday, which is the day fixed 
for our departure. — I hoped, a few days ago, 
that I had determined Waverly to go with us, 
but he has fince made fome new acquaintance, 
and has probably fome new fchemes. 

Adieu ! You know me to be ever 

moft faithfully your's, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



L E T. 



^S B t S M O M D. 



LETTER X. 



Montfleuri, Augufl 29, 1 790. 

AFTER being once more compelled to 
change my plan on account of the indecifion of 
Waverly, who did not return to Paris till fome 
days after he had written to me to fay he fhould 
be there j he arrived, and I faw thefe letters, 
which alone would have induced me to wait. — 
But I was extremely mortified to find, that in- 
ilead of an account of Geraldine herfelf, it was 
only a long letter about health and prudence, 
which Mrs. Waverly, who has the gout herfelf, 
has employed her daughter to write for her to 
her fon. In a poflfcript, however, (he adds 
fome trifling commiffions on her own account, 
which, as Waverly fet out the next day for 
Rheims, with the fame fcampering party with 
whom he was juit returned from Chantilly, he 
left for me to execute : judge whether I did not 
undertake them with pleafure, with delight, and 
whether I regretted the two days longer that 
were thus pafied in her fervice at Paris. — This 
circumftance gave me an opportunity of writing 
to her. — And fo, my dear Bethel, I (hall have 
a letter from her befoie I quit this place, whi- 
ther 1 have entreated her to dire<^. Do not 
now give me one of your grave, cold ]c<5lures — 
1 and 



DESMOND. 97 

and blame me for the inconfiftency of flying 
from my country to conquer a paflion which | 

ftill take every opporluiiity of cherirtiing. 

Without this afi^'eclion, 1 feel that my life would 
fjnlc into taftelefs apathy; and 1 cannot, my 
rigid Mentor, difcover the immorality of it, in 
its prefent form. Oit the contrary, I am con- 
vinced, that my apprehenfioris of rendering 
myfelf unworthy of the efteem, which, I now 
believe, Geraldine feels for me, aiSrs upon me 
as a fort of fecond confcience. — What ought 
iiot that man to attempt, who dares hope ever 
to become worthy of her heart?— But I dare 
not; nor do I ever truft myfelf with fo pre- 
fumptuous a thought. — Her friendfhip, her ef- 
teem, may be mine — But I am getting into re- 
gions, where your cold and calm philofophy 
cannot, or will not follow me. 

I return, therefore, to mere matter of fadl ; 
and to thank you for your long-expedted and 
long wiihed-for letter. — It is tolerably inter- 
fperfed with ledures, my goad friend — but I 
thank you for them, becaufe I know they are 
the eftiifions of anxious friendfhip — and liiil 
more, [ thank you for the account you give me 
of yourfelf, your children, and all other friends, 
for whom you think i am interefted, except the 
V^erneys, whpm you cruelly leave out of the 
lirt — and relative to them, therefore, I form 
many uneafy conjettures, fo that, inftead of 
faving me from pain, you have inflidled it ; my 
appiehenfjons, probably, go beyond the truth; 
but Geraldine is unhappy, I know {he is. — in 
-every Knglifti newfpaper that I have feen fince 
1 left London, there is fome account of Ver- 
ney's exploits upon the turf — and of his win- 
nings or his lolings. — Some of Waverly's ac- 

•VoL. I, F quaintance, 



^8 S £ S M O N 0. 

qualntance, whom I accidentaHy ceriverftjd 
with at Paris, fpoke of him in terms of high 
approbation, as to ufe their own cant, ** a de- 
vilifli dafhing fellow — a good fellow"' — and fuch 
epithets as convinced me he is facrificing the 
happinefs of that lovely woman to the glory of 
being talked of— —The only fpecies of fame 
which feems to give him any pleafure. 

I am now at Montfleuri, in the Lyonois.— 
Had I not felt, as I travelled hither, a ftrange, 
uneafy fenfation, which I acknowledged to be 
a weaknefs, in refle(Sting on the encreafing dif- 
tance between me and Geraldine; and had I 
not very uneafy apprehenfions about her brother, 
who is gone with a fet of very diflipated boys, 
they hardly know whither themfelves, my jour- 
ney to this place would have been one of the 
moft agreeable I ever made. 

1 have twice before trav^elled the direct road 
from Paris to Lyons. — Montfleuri, who is the 
moft cheerful companion in the world, has him- 
felf a great tafte for rural beauty, and there- 
fore, though every part of this country is, of 
courfe, well known to him, he had particular 
pleafure in turning out of the road to (hew me 
any view, or building, which he thought worth 
my obfervation. Our journey, by this means, 
was of eight days continuance' — and eight days 
have been feldom more pleafantly pafled. 

I have faid very little hitherto of Montfleuri's 
two fifters, who are with us j and who are by 
no means objedls to be pafled in frlence, in ihie 
account you wi(h to have of my wanderings. — 
Though I, you know, " bear a charmed heart," 
and therefore cannot, like our friend Melthrope, 
ertliven my narrative with details of my own 
paffions for a fprightly French woman, or ah 

eleeant 



DESMOND. Q9 

elegant Italian. I am perfuaded, that were I 
to be (hewn, in fucceflion, the moft celebrated 
beauties of all the kingdoms through which I 
(hall pafs, I thus fliould ftill apoftrophife Ge- 
raldine : 

•' I fcorn the beauties common eyet adore. 

The more I view them— feel thy charm* the more.** 

But I am talking of her inftead of Madame de 
Boifbelie, who is very beautiful and very un- 
happy, two circumftances that cannot fail to 
make her extremely interefting ; perhaps fhe is 
rendered yet more fo by the unfailing variety of 
her manner. — There are times when her natu- 
rally gay fpirits fink under the preflure of mis- 
fortune ; fometimcs her ill-afix)rted marriage, 
which has put her into the power of a man 
altogether unworthy of her ; the embarraflment 
of his affairs, and the uncertainty of her fate» 
recur to her in all their force; and (he efcapes 
from company, if it be poiTibl^, to hide the 
languor and depreiRon fhe cannot conquer. — 
During our journey, however, this was not 
eafily done, and 1 often remarked with pain, 
thefe cruel refletStions fill her fine eyes with 
tears, and force deep fighs from her bofom. — ■ 
But this difpofition was as a palling cloud obfcur- 
ing the brilliancy of the fummer fun. — The mo- 
ment her attention is diverted from this mourn- 
ful and ufelcfs contemplation, by fome naw oh- 
je£l, or yields to the tender raillery of her bro- 
ther, who is extremely fond of her, the gayeft 
fmiles return again to her exprefiive counte- 
nance ; her eyes regain their luftre, and Gm 
pafles almoil inftantaneoufly from languid de- 
jeition, to moft brilliant vivacity. — Without 
F 2 having 



lOO DESMOND, 

having ever had what we call a good education, 
Jofephine (for I have learned from her brother, 
and at her own defire, to drop the former appel- 
lation of Madame de Boifbelle) Jofephine has 
much of that fort of knowledge which makes 
her a pleafant companion ; and a fund of native 
wit, which, though it is rather fparkling than 
impreflive, renders her converfation very de- 
lightful. — She has a pretty voice, and plays well 
on the harp. —Yet all the does has fo much of 
national characfler in it, that it would become 
only a French woman, and 1 think I fhould not 
admire one of my own countrywomen, who 
poflTcfTLd exadly the perfon, talents and manners 
of my friend's hder. — I do not know whether 
you perfeclly underfland me, but i underftand 
myfelf; though, perhaps, I do not explain my- 
felf clearly. 

The little mild Julie is yet too young to have 
any very decided chara(3:er. — The religious 
prejudices which Ihe received in her early in- 
fancy (for at nine years old her mother, deter- 
mined to make her a nun) have funk fo deeply 
in her mind, that I much doubt whether they 
will ever be erafed. Ihis has given to her dif- 
pofition a melancholy cafl, which, though it 
renders her, perhaps, interefting to ftrangers, 
her brother fees with concern.— I perceive that 
there is, at time-, a very painful flruggle in her 
mind, between her wifh to obey and gratify 
him in entr.'-ing iut® the world, and her fears of 
ofFending Heaven by having failed to renounce 
it; and, i am afraid, there are moments which 
an/ abfurd bigot might take advantage of, to 
perfuade her, that fne fliouid yet return to that 
ftate whither Heaven has fummoned her, 

Julie,. 



DESMOND. 101 

- Julie, however, is extremely pretty, though 
quite in another ftyle of beauty from her fiHcr. 
• — VVaverly admired her, on firft feeing her, as 
much as it is in his nature to admire any wo- 
man ; and, for three days, I fancied it poffible 
that the fair and pcnfive nun might tix this 
vagrant fpiiit. I even began to confider, how 
(if the affair fhould become more ferious) Ge- 
raldine, as much as fhe wifhes her brother mar- 
ried, would approve of his chufing a woman 
of another country, and another religion from 
his own ; and, I had fettled it with myfelf, to 
give no encouragement to the progrels of his 

attachment, till 1 knew her fentiments. 

I might, however, have faved myfelf all my 
wife refolutions, for Waverly immediately af- 
terwards making fome fortunate additions to his 
number of Lngliih acq'jsirjtance (Mr. Chet- 
wood, the able advocate for cpiicopalian luxury 
is one) has fince pailed all his time among 
them ; and feems to have loft, in their company, 
every impreffion that the gentle Julie, and hef 
fafcinating, though very impertct^n. Engliih, had 
made. — He has promifed, either to come hither 
within ten days, or to meet me at Lyons in 
the courfe -of a fortnight ; but I do. not expedl 
that he will do either the one or the other, 

I do not know whether you love ttie dtfcrip- 
tion of places, or whetlier I am very well qua- 
lified to undertake it, it you do. — However, I 
will endeavour to give you an idea of the habi- 
tation of Montflcuri, and of the country round 
it, where his liberal and enlightened fpirit has, 
ever fince he became his own mafler, been oc- 
cupied in foftening the har{h features of that 
fyjUm of government^ to ivhich only the poverty and 

mifery 



J02 D B S M O N D. 

mifery of fuck a country as this could^ at any ttme^ 
he owing. 

The chateau of Montfieuri is an old building, 

but it is neither large nor magnificent for 

having no predilection for the gothic gloom in 
which his anceftors concealed their greatnefs, 
he has pulled down every part of the original 
i^rudlurc, but what was a<£tually ufeful to him- 
felf; and brought the houfe, as nearly as he 
couldj into the form of ot^.e of thofe houfe?, 
which men of a thoufand or twelve hundred a 
year inhabit in England. 

its lituation is the \x\oi\ delicious that luxuri- 
ant fi;ncy could imagine. — It ftands on a gentle 
rife, tiie river there, rather broad than deep, 
makes almofl a circuit round it at the difiance 
of near half a mile. — The oppofite banks rife 
Trrimcd-atc;y on the fouth fje into ftcep hills o( 
fantaHic forms, clothed with vines. — They 
arc naturally indeed, little more than rocks ; but 
wherever the foil was deficient, theinduftryof 
ihe labourers, who are in that diftridt the tenants 
of Montfieuri, has fupphed it; and the wins 
produced in this little mountainous traft is par- 
ticularlydelicious. Thefe pointed hills fuddenly 
finlc into a valley, or rather a narrow pafs, 
which thro* tufts of Cyprus that grow among the 
rocks, gives a very fingular view into the coun- 
try beyond them. — Another chain of hills then 
Tife i and thefe laft were the property of a con- 
vent of monks, whofe monaftery is not more 
than a mile from the houfe of my friend. — In 
the culture of thefe two adjoining ridges of 
vineyards, may be ken the efi^e(Sls of the ma- 
nagement of the different mafters to whom they 
belong. — The peafantsoa the domain of Mont- 
fieuri are happy and profperous, while in the 

line 



O B S M O N p. 103 

line of country immediately adjoining to his, 
though the good fathers have taken tolerable 
care of their vineyards, has every where el(e 
the appearance of being under a languid and 
relu(5tant cultivation. — On the top of one of 
the higheft of thefe hills is the ruin of a large 
ancient building, of which the country people 
tell wonderful legends. 1 have never yet ex- 
plored it, but it is a fine obje£l from the win- 
dows of this houfe ; and I rejoice, that Mont- 
fleuri, who has purchafed the eflate of the con- 
vent, will now be able to preferve it in its pre- 
fent romantic form, from the farther depreda- 
tions of the neighbouring hinds, who, when- 
ever their fears yielded to their convenience, 
were in habits of carrying away the materials 
for their own purpofes; and have, by thofe 
ttieans, done more than time towards d.-flroying 
this monument of aniiquity. — I, who love, )<iu 
knoW) every thing ancient, unlefs it be ancient 
prejudices, have entreated my friend tc preferve 
this ftru£lure in its prefent ibte — than which, 
nothing can be more pifturefque : when of a 
fine glowing evening, the aimoft perpendicular 
hill on which it ftands is refle«5i:ed in the unruf- 
fled bofom of the broiid river, crowned with 
thefe venerable remains half mantled in ivy, and 
other parafytical plants, and a few cyprefTes, 
which grow here as in Italy, mingling their 
fpiral forms among the mafles of ruin. 

The whole of me ground between the houfe 
and the river, is the paternal eftate of Mont- 
fleuri.— It is now divided, the lower grounds 
into meadows, and the higher into corn inclo- 
fures, nearly as we feparate our fields in En- 
gland. — The part mofl immediately adjoining to 
the houfe he has thrown into a paddock, and 
QUt thgfe Jong avenues, which in aimoft every 

dirt<Stion 



I04 I) £ S M O N D. 

«iirci^inn pointed towards the hcufe into groups 
of trees : breaking as much as poiiible the lines 
they would yet defcribe, by youn^ plantations 
of i'uch trees as are ihe moli: likely, by their 
quick growth, to overtake them in a few years. 
— B<it, i am not quite Cure, that I do not wifh 
be had icft one vifta of the beautiful and grace- 
'flil Spanifh cheftnut remninini;. — I know this 
ben3)S a very gnthic ar.d exploded tafte, but 
fuch is the force of t-arly irnprefTions, that I 
have ftill an aftViSiion for *' the bowed roof— 
the cathtdral-hke folemniiy of long lines of tall 
trees, whofe topmod hougns are interlaced with 
each other. — i do not, however, defend the pu- 
rity of my f-i ft*? in this in (lance; for nature cer- 
tainly ntvf r planted trees in direcl lines. — But 
I accv"unt for my prcudeciion, by the kind of 
per.five and 'nuhincholy pleaiure i \iftd to feel, 
when in my childhood and early youth, J walked 
aloile^ in a long avenu? of srbeai, which led 
frncn a very wild and woody part of the weald 
of K!^•nt, to an old houfe my father, at that 
period of my life, inhabited. I remember the 
cry of the wood pecker*, or yaffils, as we call 
tlicrn in that country, going to rooft in a pale 
autumnal evening, anfwered by the owls, which 
in great numbers inhabit the deep forert-like 

giejis that hiy behind the avenue. 1 fee the 

moon riimgflnwly over the dark mafs of wood, 
-and the oppofitc hills, tinged vvith purple from 
llie lad refleclicn of the fun, which was funk 
b.^'iiiid ihem.-*— — 1 recail the fenfations I felr, 
w hfii, as the (ilver leaves of the afpin' tiem.bied 
in th-' lowed breeze, or flowly feJ! to the ground 
before aie, i became half fnghter.ed at the en- 
creafing obfcurity of the •objeifis around me, 
.ind have dUnoO. perfuadcd mvielf that the grey 

trunks 



DESMOND. 105 

trunks of thefe old tree?, and the low murmur 
of the wind among thtir branches, were the dim 
forms, and hollow fighs of fome fupcrnatural 
brings; and at length, afraid of looking behind 
me, I have hurried breathlefs into the houfe. 

No fuch forabie tints as thefe, however, 
fhade the environs of A'lontfleuri's habitation. 
Ever fince he became mafter of this place, 
which, till then had been very mijch negledted, 
he has been endeavouring to bring it as near as 
polTible to ihofe plans of comfort and conve- 
nience which he faw were followed in England, 
and of which, it muft be acknrwledged, the 
French, in general, have not hitherto had much 
idea. In this purfuit, he has fucceeded much 
better than I ever faw it done in France before ; 
and were it not for a few obftinate and promi- 
nent features that belong; to PVench buildings, 
which it is almoft impoflible for him to remove, 
it would be eafy for me. to imagine myfelf ia 
fome of the moft beautiful parts of England. — 
A little fancy would convert the vineyard? into 
hop- gardens (if hops could be fuppofed to grow 
on fuch eminences) ; nor would they be much 
injured by the comparifun ; for, when the vine 
of either is in leaf, the hop, fcen at a diftance, 
has the moft agreeable appearance. — At other 
times, neither the one cr the other are, as lar 
as the beauty of. the landfcap-e is confidered, 
very defirable objecls. 

At this feafon, however, when the peafantry 
around the chateau of Montfleuri are prepar- 
ing for the vintage — when the people, h^ppy 
from their nacural difpofition, the eSeCt of loil 
and climate — happy in a generous and confide- 
rate mafter ; (and now more rationallv'happy, 
from the certainty they enjoy, that nochingcs 
F 5' can 



I©6 DESMOND. 

can put them, as once it might have done, into 
the power of one who may not inherit his vir- 
tues) when they are making ready to avail 
themfelves of this joyous feafon. The expref- 
fion of exaltation and content on their animated 
faces, is one of my moft delicious fpeculati- 
ons. 

Montfleuri, whofe morality borders, perhapff^ 
a little on epicurifm, imagines, that in this 
world of ours, where phyfical and unavoidable 
evil is very thickly fown, there is nothing fo 
good in itfelf, or fo pleafing to this Creator of 
the world, as to enjoy and difFufe happinefs.' — 
He has therefore, whether he has refided here 
or no, made it the buGnefs of his life to make 
his vafTals and dependents content, by giving 
them all the advantages their condition will al- 
low. — The effect of this is, that inftead of 
fqualid figures inhabiting cabins built of mud, 
without windows or floors, which are feen in 
too many parts of Frante (and which muft con- 
tinue to be feen, till the benign influence of 
liberty is generally felt). The peafantry in this 
domain refemble both in their own appearance,- 
and in the comfortable look of their habitations, 
thofe who.'e lot has fallen in thcfe villages of 
England*, where, the advantages of a good 

landlord, 

** The Englifh have a cuftom of arrogantly bo ifting of the 
f rtunate fituation ot ihe common people of England.— But ie» 
(S'ofe, who, ■with an onpottnnity of oblervation, have evei had 
sB^nquiriog eye anri a feeling heart on this iubje£\, lay whe- 
ther this pride is v»eli f-oundtd. At the pieftoi pricer of the 
retjuifites of mere exHlence, a labouier, with a wife ami four 
or five chiidi'en, wh;) has only liis l.ibour to Jepcnil upon, can 
tiiJte nbihhig lutbiead, and na always a fufficicncy of -that. 

Too certain it is, li.at (to Jay nothing of the mileries 

cf the Loi)do;i pcop, too eviiknt to every one who palTet' 
Ifroojj'fc tht llfCetsj ti.e.e ti« ivaoy, vtty ir.any parts of the 

couniry, 



DESMOND. IC7 

landlord, a favourable fjtuation for employment, 
or an extenfive adjoining common, enable the 
Jabourers to pofiefs fonicthing more than the 
mere necejfaries of life, and happily counteracSt 
the cfFe6ts of thofe heavy taxes with which all 
thofe neceflaries of life are loaded. 

Oh ! my friend ! let thofe of our foidifant 
great men who love power, and who are, with 
whatever reludlance, compelled at length to fee, 
and the hour is very rapidly approaching, when 
ufurped power will be tolerated no longer: — 
Let them, if nothing but the delight of govern- 
ing will facisfy tliem, have recourfe to the me- 
thod Montfleuri has purfued ; and then, the 
beft and fincereft of all homage, the homage of 
grateful hearts may be theirs. — I am convinced, 
that not even the family pride which, in feudal 
times, actuated the Iri£h and Scottidi clans, could 
produce, in the caufe of their chieftains, a zeal fo 
ardent and fo fteady, as that with which the de- 
pendents of MontHeuii would defend him at 
home, or follow him into the field, were there 
occafion for either. 

It is, indeed, a fmgular fight, to obferve the 
mutual attachments that exili between this gay 
and voldtile man, and his neighbours, whom 
he will not allow to be called dependents, fince 
no beings, he fays, capable of procuring their 
own fubfiftence are dependent. He enters, 



country, where the Isbourer has not a fubfiflerce even Avheri 
in con'lant work, and-where, in tale.-! of ^:l..kre^^, ili^ coiuiiiion 
is deploralile iniied — realizi d in ihe mtlaneboi) , but joll pic- 
ture, (ii»wn in Knox's KfTay, Nj. 150, etitil-^ii, " A Remedy 
for Dil'conieni." — Yet we are always affecting to talk of ihe 
mifery af'd beggary of the Fitiich— And nuw jinpuie ih^t 
mdery, though v/e welisjiow it txiftvd befoie, to ihe revolu- 

tiuR, To the vtiy ,aufe that ',\ili in a very few yeais re- 

ruove it. 

however, 



1C8 DESMOND. 

hciwevcr, wiih rational but warm folicitude into 
the intertils ot the humblefl of them, and fi-iould 
not, hefiiys.be happy if there was among them 
nn aching heart which he had negltdted to put 
at eafe, whenever it depended on him. 

'Jhe neighbourhood, however, of the feigt?cry 
which belongs to the monks, was, til! now, a 
great impediment to all the plans which his be- 
nevuKnce fuggefled to him. — Thcfe reverend 
fathers encouraged in idlenef?, thofe whom 
Monifleuri was endeavouring to lender induf- 
Irious ; and, the alms givcii aw:iy at the gates 
of the convent, without affording a fuiiicient 
or permanent fupport to the poorer clafs of his 
people, was yet enough to give theni an excufe 
for indolence, and a habit of negle6iing to (' ck 
their ov.n fubfiftrnce ; in many other inftances 
too, the influence of the monks has counteradU 
ed th;it of Montficuri. — It is not quite three 
years fmce he h^fr near a thrd of the adults, and 
a fourth of tiie ch'ldrtn of his villages, by a 
Uial.gnant fmall-pox that broke out i^mong 
them J for the monks had taught the people to 
htlieve, that inoculation, which he had long 
earntllly wiHied to introduce, was an impious 
prefumption offenfive to heaven. 

I ht:f{' men, however, are now difperied j 
thofir who adhere to the monaflic vows, aie gone 
inro other ccramuniries ; others have taken ad- 
vantage of the late change to return to that 
world which they had reluiili-ntly rencunctd j 
" and one only, among two-and- twenty, accept- 
ed the ofler which iVIontfleuri nvade lo thofe 
whom he thought the mofl: rclpciiable atiTong 
theiT^ ; and whom he, therefore, vv;(hcd to fave 
from .'iny inconvcnimcies that might attend an 
• )moJuntary removal — 1 his propo/a! was to fit 

lip 



DESMOND. 



IC9 



up one of tbe wings of tl^e houfe (which he 
had dclUiied for other purpofcs) for the rc-ception 
of thofe whochofeto ftay ; and of fupplyingto 
them, at his own expence, every gratification 
to which tiicy had been accuftomed, that their 
reduced income did noten.ible th^m to enjoy. — 
Moft of thofe to whom thi'^ generous offer was 
m.ide, treated it either with refcntment or icorn : 
father Cypriano, a Portuguei'e, who has loft ;>.ll 
attachment to his own country, or for fome 
reafoii or other does not willi to return to it, 
accipied the propofed accommc'dation, with 
fome httle changes, according to a plan of his 
own. — He tuld Montfleuri, that though he had 
no great attachment to any of the members of 
tbe (bciety, yet that there would be fomething 
particularly comfortlefs in refiding alone, where 
he had been accuftomed to fre (o many of his 
brethren around him ; and that, though he in 
real ty courted folilude in prcre;ence to fociety, 
it was not exactly there he wifhci to enjoy it ; 
but, that if Monifieurl would allow the work- 
men employed about the houl'e to raife for him, 
in a lequeflered fpot which he pointed out, a 
fort of hermitage after a plan of his own, he 
would be happy to avail himielf of his bounty, 
and to end his days on his eftate. — 1 nei.d hardly 
fay, that my friend moil readily acceded to his 
vyiihes; and, during his late abfence, father 
Cypriano has, on the rocky holders of the river, 
wnichare there concealed bv fome of • he thickcft 
woods i have fLcn in France, built an he; mitage 
oxadily correfponding to the ideas I had firmed 
of thofe fort of habitations from Don Qii'Xi;te 
or Gil Bias. — It IS partly an excavation in the 
hard land rock that rifes above the river 5 if is 
lituaied about two hundred yards from it, and is 

partly 



no D E 5 M O hf D. 

partly compofed of hard wood, which fupports 
the roof, and enlarges the fcite of the building 
(if building it may be called.) The outward 
room is paved with flat ftones, and the inner is 
boarded j there, is his little bed, his crucifix, 
and two chairs. — The other apartment contains 
only a table j the feats of turf and mofs, that 
furround it, and a fort of recefs where he puts 
his provifions, which are furniflied him daily 
from Montfleuri, with an attentive liberality, 
of which the good anchoret even complains, 
though he never refufes it.— Montfleuri tells me 
that ihere is fomething Angular in the hiftory of 
this venerable man, with which he is not ac- 
quainted ; but that, as he feems very commu- 
nicative, he will endeavour, fome day when we 
are together, to engage him in an account of 
his life. 

This anchoret, as a being to which we are 
never accuftomed (unlefs it be to a hired or to a 
wax hermit in fome of our gardens) has led me 
away ftrangely from what 1 was going to tell 
you of the ufe to which Montfleuri has deftined 
the diflblved monafl:ery. 

He has fitted it up as an houfe of induftry ; 
not to confine the poor to work, for he abhors 
the idea of compulfion, but to furnifh with eafy 
and ufeful employment, fuch as by age, or in- 
firmity, or infancy, are unfitted for the labour 
of the fields. — And h:re he a]fo means that the 
"robuft peafant may, when the rigour of the fea- 
fon, or any other circumftance deprives him of 
occupation abroad, find fomething to do within; 
nothing, however, in the way of manufadlures 
is ti> be atiempted, farther than ftrong coarfe 
articles, ufeful to themfelves, or in the cultue 
of the efiate. — 1 think the ficetch Montfleuri 

has 



DESMOND. Ill 

has given me of his plan an admirable one; it 
is yet only in its firft infancy; but, if it fuc- 
ceeds, as I am furc it muft, 1 will eftablifti fuch 
an houfe on my own eftate, whenever I fettle 
there. 

Whenever I fettle there! — Ah ! Bethel, that 
expreflion recalls a thoufand painful ideas from 
which I have been vainly trying to efcape.-— 
Alas ; I fhall never fettle there ! or, if ever I 
do, it will be as a folitary and infulated being, 
whofe pleafures will foon become merely animal 
and felfifh, becaufe there will be none to (hare 
them.— A being who, though weary of the 
world, will find no happinefs in quitting it. — 
Methinks I fee myfelf rambling at four or five- 
and-fifty, over grounds which I fhall have none 
to inherit; and furveying, with the dull eye of 
torpid apathy, improvements which, when I 
am gone, there will be none to admire j and 
which will then, perhaps, 

" Pafs to a fcrivener, or a city knight." 

Yes, I (hall be, I doubt not, that forlorn 
and felfifli being, an old batchelor ; one, who 
having no dearer ties to fweeten his weary ex- 
iftence, is furrounded by hungry para/itical re- 
lations, or is governed in his fecond childhood 
by his houfe- keeper. 

You will fmile, I fuppofe, at this apoftrophe, 
and would even laugh, when you know the 
moment at which it occur? — when the lovely, 
the bewitching Jofephine herfelf, is waiting for 
me to walk with her; and, ** in ihtle ip(>iu\e 
plains, under this genial fun, where, at this 
inllant, all flefh is running our, piping;, fi 'oling, 
and dancing to the vintage, and every flep ihat s 

taicen, 



112 DESMOND. 

taken, the judgment is furprifed by the imagi- 
nation."* — How fiial) I refill her? — The firft 
grapes are to ^e gathered in a {ew days on the 
oppofite hills; the peafants Tinging the liveliefl 
airs, have been this evenmg carrying up their 
implements for this delightful operation ; — Julie 
and nei brother are gone already to fee them; and 
Jofephine fent me,-a few moments fmce, a note, 
in which fhe gaily reproaches me for want of 
gallantry in thus making her wait this lovely 
evening. Oh ! were it but Geraldine who ex- 
pected me ! — were it Geraldine who waited for 
me, to lend her my arm in this little expedition. 
—I have once or twice, as Madame de i>oifbclle 
ha* been walking with me, tried to fancy her 
Geraldine, and particularly when flie has been 
in her plaintive moods. I have caught founds 
that have, for a moment, aided my defire to be 
deceived — IJut, as the lady herfelf could not 
guefs what made me io filcnt and inattentive, 
fome fudden etciittierie not at all in harmony 
with my tetlings; fome trait, in the charatfter 
of her country has fuddenly difTol/ed the charm, 
and awakened me to a full fenie of the lolly i 
was guilty of. 

. Bj! i ice, at this mom.ent, Jqfephine her/elf, 
who conJ-lccnds to beckon to me, and to tx- 
prefs her impatience at my delay. — Farewell, 
my friend, I Ihall hardly write ..gain from hence. 

Ever your's n^ofl faithfully, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 

* Sterne. 



LET- 



DESMOND. 113 



LETTER Xr. 



TO MR. DESMOND. 



Hartfjeld, September 20, 

** I N thofe fpcriive plains, and under this 
genial fun, where, at this iniiant, all flefh is 
Turning out piping, fiddling, ind dancing to 
the vintage j and every ftep that is taken, the 
judgment is furprifed by the imagination." — 
With the lovely Jofephine beckoning to you as 
you fit at your window ! — and reproaching you 
for want of gallantry ! — 

Bravo, my friend ! — This will do — I fee, 
that though my firft advice did not fucceed, my 
fecond infallibly will. — " Go, fcaich in Eng- 
land for fome object worthy of thofe affections 
which, placed as they are now, can only rferve 
to render you miferable — Or \i that dots not do 
— if you ;ire become, through the influence of this 
romantic attachment, too faftidious for reafon- 
able happinefs — go abroad, dilltpate vour ideas, 
inllead of fuffering them to dwell .continually 
en a hopcltfb purfuit ; and you will find chanse 

of 



1)4 DES^MONP. 

of place and variety of fcenes are the befl re- 
medies for every difeafe of the mind." — Thus 
I preached ; and I now value niyfelf on the 
fuccefs of my prefcription, though I did not 
forefee this kind Jofephine, who will undoubt- 
edly perfedl the cure. — At your age, my good 
friend, a lovely and unfortunate woman — who 
probably tells you all her diftrefles — who leans 
on your arm, and whole voice you endeavour 
to fancy the tender accents of Geraldine — will, 
I will venture to prophecy, foon ceafe topleafe 
you, notwithlianding you " bear a charmed 
heart," only in the femblance of another. — And 
as to any engagements, you know, fuch as her 
having a hufband, and fo forth, thofe little im- 
pediments '* make not the heart fore" in P^rance. 
In ikort, 1 look upon your cure as nearly per- 
fected, and by the time this letter reaches, you, 
I doubt not, but that you wiii have begun to 
woiider how you could cvtr take up fuch a no- 
tion, as of an (Unchangeable and immortal paf- 
lion, which is a thing never heard or thought 
of, but by the tender novel writer, and their 
gerule readers.— Madame de Boifbellefeems the 
Woman in the world beft calculated to win 
you from the abfurd fyftem you had built ; and 
had you been a defcendant of Lord Chefter- 
field's, and his fpirit prefided over your delHny, 
he could hardly have led you to a fcene fo fa- 
vourable to diflultory gallantry, and fo fatal to 
the immortality of your attachment, as the houfe 
of Montfteuri. 

Thus, believing your cure certain, I venture 
to tell you what 1 know of Verney. — You will 
ftill, perhaps, receive it with concern; but it 
will no longer awaken your quixotifm. — You 
wili nat, I think, iiovy offer yeniey half your 

eftate 



DESMOND. 115 

eftate to fave his wife from an uneafy moment 
or ftrip yourfelf of nine or ten thoufand pounds 
to fupply his deficiencies at Newmarket, where 
the next meeting would probably create the 
lame deficiency, and, of courfe, the fame ne- 
ccflity. 

Verney, then, I am forry to fay, has at length 
parted with his eftate in this country: I am 
more forry to fay, that he has parted with it to 
Stamford, to whom, as 1 have been lately in- 
furmed, it has been long mortgaged. 

The frnal fettlenient of this matter, which 
has, I find, been fometime in agitation, has 
happened only within this month j and in con* 
fequcnceof it, Mr. Stamford, or, 1 fliould ra- 
ther fay, Sir Robert Stamford, for he is almoft 
as lately raifed to the dignity of a Baronet, took 
poftelfion, about ten days iince, of the houfe, 
wliich he bought ready furni{}K<l, and he is, for 
the prcfent, living there with bis family, i am 
not, as you will eiifily believe, much delighted 
with this, either on his own account, or be- 
caufe of the ftyle of living which he will intro- 
duce into the country. A very frnall part of his 
grounds adjoins to my wood-lands. — He is faid 
to be a very great favage, in regard to game ; 
and though I care very little myfelf about that 
perpetual fubje^t of country contention, it will 
be very difagreeable to me to have my tenant 
fubjedt to the vexations of this petty tyrant. — 
1 do not know whether i have told you of the 
places he now enjoys, nor how they have en- 
abled him to encreafe the fplcndor of his ap- 
pearace, or the luxury of his table, by which 
he llrengthens his intereft. In the latter, he is 
faid to excel, from talents and tafte ; and that 
more good dinuers have of late been eaten at 

his 



Jl6 DESMOND. 

his houfe for the benefit of the Engli/h govern- 
ment, by ihofe who are intrufted to carry it on, 
than have tver before been prepared tor the like 
purpofes,- — He is luppofed to be one of thofe 
fortunate perfon«, who being deep in the fecrct, 
are enabled to take advantage of every fludiua- 
tion, to which the proceedings of miniftry give 
rife, in the value of the public funds; and by 
this means principally, to have fecured beyond 
the reach of fortune, that weahh which he has 
fo rapidly, anti, in the apprehenfion of many 
people, fo wonderfully accumulated. — He has 
already, fince his immediate neighbourhood 
gives him aconfiderable degree of intereft with 

the tradefmen of W , bee© courting their 

favor, with a meannefs, equal to that arrogance 
with which he treats all who are, or may be, his 
equals; and from whom he expe<Sls rotning 
equal to the cringing fervility with which he 
fawns upon bis titled friends, and thofe who 
have helped to raife him to his prefent feat; or 
the junto, by whofe united Itrcngth he means 
to keep it.— 

I have forgot poor Verney's afFairs in my ac- 
count of this great man: but i own the inci- 
dent of bis coming into this neighbourhood 
has vexed me, more, perhaps^ than it ought 
to do. — 1 ftiall not feel it very pleafant to ablent 
myfelf from thofe public meetings, which, as 
a mdgiftratc, I have thought it my duty to at- 
tend, becaufe Sir Robert will now rske the chair 
on account of his new rank. — Ytt, certainly, 
I (hall as little like to meet a man, by whom i 
know I have been grofsly and irreparably in- 
jured ; and whofe private and public character 
are equally hateful i?o me.— -To him, I may well 
addrels the lines of Shakefpeare, 

. '« Vour 



ESMOND. 117 

" Your heart 



*' Is cranmed wiih arrogancy, Ipleen, and pride; 
" You have by fortune, and your friends high favor, 
" Gone lightlv o'er low fleps — and now are mounted 
" Where po'.vers are your retainers." 

I believe, my friend, it is a weaknefs to be 
difturbed at fucli a man. — I will name him theiv 
no more ; but proceed to tell yoa all I know far- 
ther of Verney, which is merely, that the money 
he received from Sir Robert, more than what 
his eftale was already mort2;ased for (which did 
not amount to above fix thoufand pounds) was 
Immediately paid away to fatisfy debts of honor; 
and that he is now raifing money on his northern 
e.ftates, in which he finds fome difiiculties on 
account of his wife's fettlements. This I hear 
from fuch authority, that I cannot doubt the 
truth of it. — I enquired of my informer, why, 
if Verney had difchargedy«f/; confiderable debts 
of honor by this laft tranlaclion, he had imme- 
diate occafion to encumber his Yo|-kniire c{-' 
tates ? — My acquaintance laughed at my calling- 
fix thoufand pounds a confiderable debt, andA 
told me, that if that fum had paid all the de-. 
mands that were the moft immediately prefllng 
on his friend Verney, which he knew they did 
not, that he would have occafion for at k^aft as 
much again for the October meeting; and there- 
fore, was trying to raife all he wanted at one?. — 
This was faid by no means in the way of a fe-' 
cret, or, as of a defign of which Verney had' 
any notion of being afhamed ; and the young 
man who related it to me, and who is one of 
the fet to which he belongs, fpoke of it rather 
as complaining, tiiai it w^f, a confounded fliame, 
that as Verney had married a girl of no fott'jne, 
or next to none, he Ihould have been drav.?n in 

to 



Il8 D £ S KI O N D. 

to make fuch an unreafonable fettlement upon 
her, as prevented his raifing money upon his 
eftates. I am very forry for Mrs. Verney, but 
I have long forefeen this. — She will, undoubt- 
edly, have too much firmnefs of mind, and at- 
tention to the intereft of her children, to give 
up her fettlement j and it will always afford the 
family a certain degree of affluence. — You may 
alTure yourfelf, that were the whole treafuresof 
the Eaft to find their way into the pocket of 
her hufband, he would finally poflefs no more, 
for there is nothing but the impoflibility of part- 
ing with it, that can ever keep any property 
whatever in his pofleffion. 

So much, dear Defmond, for private news 
from England ; as for public news, you proba- 
bly receive it from thofe who are better qualified 
than I am to fpeak upon it. — -You know I am 
not by any means partial to your prefent ar- 
rangements ; yet, as I do not yet fee the fuccefs of 
the new modes of government that have been 
taken up in France, I am not fanguinely look- 
ing out for changes, as you feem to be.— Per- 
haps this coldnefs is owing to the obfervations I 
made in my (hort and unfortunate political ca- 
reer. — I faw then fuch decided felfiflinefs in all 
parties, fo little fincerity, fo little real concern 
for the general good in any, that it impreft me 
with an univerfal miftruft of ail who profefs the 
fcience of politics. — Your friend, Montfleuri, 
however, ieems to be fincere. — But for many 
of thofe whom the abbe termed mejjieurs les re- 
formateurs, they appear to me to be wavering 
and divided in their councils, and breaking into 
parties, which occasions me again to entertain 
iome doubts of the permanency of the revolu- 
tion. — '1 am Geruinly a warm friend to its prm- 

ciplest 



D E « M O N D« 119 

crples. — I only hefitate to believe, that there is 
fteadinefs and virtue enough exifting among the 
leaders, to apply thofe principles to pradlice.— 
I conclude, therefore, as I began, with a quo- 
tation from Sterne — and I fay with uncle Toby 
— " I wifli itmay anfwer." 

I have no expectation of hearing from you 
very foon again, as from your laft letter, this 
feems likely to be long in reaching you. — But 
I am perfuaded, that the intereft you take in 
French politics on one hand j and, on the other, 
the intereft the fair Jofephine takes in your's, 
will reftore to you your gay fpirits — and to me 
my rational friend. 

You know I remain, ever, 

Moft faithfully your's, 

£. BETHEL. 



LET- 



J 20 D E S M O N D. 



LETTER XII.* 



TO MR. BETHEL. 



Hautevllle, in Auvergne, 
Sept, 14, 1790. 

RELUCTANT LY— Oh ! how reluc- 
tantly, I quitted, three days fince, the cheerful 
abode of Montfleuri, where every countenance 
beamed with pleafure and content, for this 
mournful refidence. — A refidence, where mor- 
tified and dircomfited tyranny feems to have 
taken up its fullen ftation; and with impotent 
indignation to colour with its own gloomy hand 
every furrounding object. — — The Comte 
d'Hauteville is the brother of Monifleuri's mo- 
ther: and though they are as cppofite in their 
principles, and in their temperi, as light and 
darkncfs, Montfleuri has io much refpett for 
his uncle, and io much goodnefs of heart, as to 
fulfil a promife he required of him, when the 
latter left Paris, that he would come to him for 

* "Written before the receipt of ihe foregoing. 

ten 



DESMOND. 121 

ten days. — Unable to endure a country, where 
his power, and as he believes, his confequence 
isdiminifhed, Monfieurd'Hauteville is preparing 
to quit France. — His nephew thinks he can 
difluade him from this refolution, and reconcile 
him to the terrible misfortune of being free 
among freemen, inftead of being a petty tyrant 
among flaves — While the Comte himfelf enter- 
tained hopes that he could convert his nephew, 
or, at leaft, leflen his extravagant zeal for that 
odious democratic fyftem he has embraced.— 
That both will fail in thefe their expectations, 
is already very evident. — 1 mufl: give you, how- 
ever, a fketch of our journey, and of our re- 
ception, to enable you to form fome idea of this 
place, and of its pofl'eiTor. 

We fet out in my chaifc — neither of us in 
very gay fpirits, though thofe of Montfleuri 
are not very eafily deprefled. But our taking 
leave of Jofephine and Julie, who faw their 
brother depart with tears, though he is fo fooii 

to return ; the melancholy which he knew 

hung over this houfe, and perhaps the heavy 
atmofphere, which juft then prevailed, contri- 
buted to make him penfive, and from the fame 
caufes that render a Frenchman, of his difpofition 
grave, an Englifiiman naturally feels difpofed 
to hang himfelf. I had, befides the additional 
vexation of leaving the houfe of Montfleuri, 
without having received, as I expected, a letter 
from Mrs. Verney during my ftay there. 

The beginning of our journey, therefore, 

was difmal enough. Towards evening, we 

flopped at the convent where Montfleuri's other 
fitter is a profefTed nun. I was not permitted 
to fee her ; but he returned in worfe fpirits than 
he fet out, exclaiming againft the odious fuper- 

Voi,. I. G ftition. 



121 DESMOND. 

fiition, that had condemned fo amiable a young 
woman, to fo many years of rigid confinement, 
(forfhe is a Carmelite) and has given, he fays, 
to her mind, a tindure of fadnefs, which he 
fears it will always retain. When he comes 
back, it is to be decided, whether or no, fhe 
quits her convent. — He has a fmal! property 
near the little town of Aique-mont, where, as 
he had fome bufinefs to fettle, we remained all 
night; and where, I have occafion again tore- 
mark, the afFe6lion which all who are connedt- 
ed with him feel for Montfleuri. — We did not 
quit Aiquemont till late the following day. — 
The weather was fo unuCually warm, that we 
travelled flowly, and it was the evening ofyelter- 
day before we approached the end of our journey. 

The country through which we travelled, 
v/as, in many parts, beautifully romantic ; but, 
within about three leagues of the chateau 
d'Hauteviile, it opens into one of thofe exten- 
five plains that are very frequent in Normandy, 

though not fo ufual in this part of France. ■ 

Over thefe dead flats, a ftraight road ufually 
runs for many miles, and the dull unitorrnity of 
the profpc£l is broken only by the rows of pear 
or apple trees, which are planted upon it in va- 
rious directions. 

A few plantations of vines had here an even 
lefs pleafnig effect. — In fome of them, however, 
people were at work ; but we no longer heard 
the cheerful fongs, or faw the gay faces that we 
had been accuftomed to hear and fee in the 
Lyonois. — At length, Montfleuri pointed out 
to me, at the extremity of this extenfive plain, 
the woods, which he faid furrounded the habi- 
tation of his uncle. — The look of even ill ma- 
naged cultivation foon after ceafed j and over a 

piece 



DESMOND. 123 

piece of ground, which wasgrafs, where it was 
not mole-hills, and from whence ail traces of 
a road were obliterated, we approached to the 
end of an avenue of beech trees ; they were 
rather the ruins of trees ; for they had loft the 
beautiful and graceful forms nature originally 
gave them, by the frequent application of the 
ax J and were, many of them, little better than 
ragged pollards. 

A few draggling trees of other kinds, that 
had been planted and neglected, were mingled 
among the rows of beech on either fide; but 
were, for want of proteftion, " withering in 
leaflefs platoons." — Not a cottage arofe to break 
the monotony of this long line of disfigured ve- 
getation. — Nothing like a lodge, animated by 
the cheerful refidence of a pcafant's family, 
marked its termination ; but the paling, which 
had once divided it from the plain, had either 
fallen down for want of repairing, or had been 
carried away by the country people for fuel, in 
a country where it feemed to be particularly 
icarce. 

Slowly, and through a miferable road, we 
traverfed this melancholy avenue, without fee- 
ing, for fome time, a human crgature. It 

feemed to lengthen as we went, and had already 
lafted above a mile and a quarter, when we cb- 
ferved a figure quickly walking towards us, 
with a gun on his fhoulder, whom I, at firft, 
fuppofed to be the Count himfelf. The man 
feemed, by his ftep and manner, to be in eager 
purfuitof fomething ; but I could perceive, by 
his a£tion, that, on obferving an Englifh chaife, 
he changed the objedl of his attention, and ad- 
vanced towards us in a fort of trot, which, from 
G 2 his 



124 DESMOND. 

his lank figure and grotefque habit, had a very 
ridiculous efFedl:. 

Under a full drefs coat, of a reddifli brown, 
and had once been lined with fattin, appeared a 
waiftcoat of gold-floweied brocade, the flaps 
reaching to his knees, and made, I am perfuad- 
ed, in the reign of Louis ci devant le Grand. — 
What appeared of his breeches, under this mag- 
nificent jujie au-corps^ was of red velveret, 
forming a happy contrafl to a pair of black 
worfled {lockings. — The little hair which grew 
on each fide of his temples had been compelled, 
jn defpite of its reluctance and incapability, to 
afTume the form of curls, but they feemd to 
have fled, d^un rnanihe la plus cpiniatre dri monde 
from his ears ; a little hat, like what I recollect 
having feen in caracature prints, under the name 
oi .Chapeau a le Nevernois, covered the rell: of 
his head ; but this, as he approached us, was 
depofited under his arm, notwithftanding the 
incumbrarce of his gun. 

" This is a curious fellow," faid Montfleuii 
to me, as I approached him, *' he is my uncle's 
confidential fervant, and more fingularly origi- 
nal than his mafter — A tremendous ariftocrate, 
and miferable at the lofs of dignity which he 

believes he has fuftained." 1 hen adJreffing 

himfelf to the man, who was by this time very 
near us, " Aha 1 my old friend. La Maire," 
cried he, *' how are you? — How is Monfieur 
d'Hauteville ?" — The old man, not at all fatis- 
fied with the manner of this addrefs-, ftepped 
back, laid his hand on his breaft, and, with a 
cold and formal bow, replied, ** that he had 
the honour to afl^ure Monfieur le Marquis de 
Montfieuri, that Monfeigneur le Comte 
d'Hauteville was as well as, under the prefent 
3 melancholy 



DESMOND. 125 

melancholy circumftanccs of the kingdom, any 
true Frenchman could be." — There was (ome- 
thing (o very ludicrous in the method and mat- 
ter of this anfwer, that Montfieuri did not at- 
ttrnpt t'lrefift his violent inclination to laugh — 
an impolitenefs in which I could as little forbear 
to join. — " Well, well, Monfieur le Maire," 
cried Montfleuri, " I am glad to hear my uncle 
is only indifpofed from his national concerns — 
So open the chaife door, my old friend, and I 
will walk up to the houfe with this Englifh 
gentleman, who has been fo good as to accom- 
parw me." 

Le Maire turned his little fierce black eyes 
upon me, as Montfleuri announced me to be an 
Hnglifhman, and, with a look which 1 could 
not mifmrerpret, muttered fomething as with a 
jerk he (hut the chaife door — '* Ah cxirfe thofe 
Englifh, no good ever comes where they are." 

*' Well, but Le Maire," faid Montfleuri, 
what are you fhooting at this time in the even- 
ing ? what were you To eagerly purfuing when 
we firft faw you?" — ** Partridges, Monfieur 
le Marquis, partridges j I faw a great number 
of them fetding round the houfe juffc now, 
young ones, h.trdly able to fly, and 1 was re- 
folviid not one of them (hould efcape." 

*' Mais a quoi boncela?" enquired Mont- 
fleuri, "• of what ufe will that be, fince if they 
are fo young they are unfit to eat ?" 

'■^ A qjoi bon Monfieur le Marquis?" re- 
plied the old dumeftic, very indignantly; 
* '*■ Alais c'eft que je ne veux pas, qu'iJ y refte, 

dans 

* Why is it, becaule I would not have remain on the whole 
eftatr, one fingle partridge for thole beggarly rogues oF the 
*ilh|^e, who have the inf.imou» li'jert> of killing the birds on 

my 



126 DESMOND. 

dans ie domaine un feul perdrix pour ces gueux 
du village ; qui ont la liberie infdme de chaffer 
fur les terresde Monleigneur ie Comted'Haute- 
ville — Ah ! je les epargnerai bitn, ces marauds, 
3a, la peine de prendre legibier, & fije les recon- 
terai, je lerai bien leur affaire." 

" Mais comment leur affaire ?" faid Mont- 
fleuri. — " Eh ! Monfieurle Marquis," anfwer- 
fd Le Maire, '* c'cff que je pourrais bien, don- 
ner quelque coups de fuiil a ces coquins." 

** Tu as done une vocation decide pour la 

lanterne?" *' Soit, Monfieur le Marquis, 

j'aimerai mieux etre pendu par ces gens detef- 
tables, moi, que de vivre ou ils font mes egaux, 
Sc ou ils vont a la chaffe." ** You fee, now," 
faid Montfleuri, turning to me, " the ftyle 
which even the domeftics of the n o b/ej/e zti'um^d 
towards the peafantry and common people.— 
'Ihis fellow has imbibed all the infolent confe- 
quence of thofe among whom he has lived j and, 
though roturier himfelf conceives, that he de- 
rives from the honor of being the idle valet to a 
nobleman, a right to defpife and trample on 
ths honert man who drav/s his fubfiftence from 
the ground by independent induftry." By this 
time we were arrived at the gateof the courdhon- 
nfur, which is furroundedon three fides by the 
chateau. — There bad once been a ftraight walk, 
leading from the termination of the avenue to the 

my lord's grounds. I'll I'pare them ihe trouble, rafcals at they 
are, of taking game ; and, if 1 met the.i. — I (hould do their 
bufineis." 

' " But how do their buCnels?" " Why, Monfieur le Mar- 
quis, peihaps I might fiie a tew fii it among thofe fcouBdrels." 
— "■' You have, then, a decided call ior exhibtng on the Ian- 
thorn poll ?" — " Beit lb: 1 had rather be hanged than live 
where thole fellows aie my equalt, and kave the hberty ot 
hunting." 

fteps 



D li S M O N D. 127 

fteps of the houfe, but it was now covered with 
thirties and nettles; the fleps were overgrown 
with green mofs, and when the great door 
opened to let us in, it Teemed an operation to 
which it was entirely unaccuftomcd. 

Le Maire, however, extremely folici^tous for 
the dignity of his mafter, had hurried in before 
us, and fent one fervant to wait at this door, 
and a fecond to fhew us the way to the apart- 
ment where Monfeigneur was to receive us. — 
This was in i. falle a cornpognie^ on the firft floor, 
where, after pafling through three other cold 
and half furniflied rooms, we, at length, ar- 
rived. — The Count, who is a handfome man, 
above fixty, received me with cold politenefs ; 
his nephew with a fort of fullen kindnefs : it 
feemed as if he at once embraced him as a rela- 
tion, and repulfed him as an enemy. — About 
half an hour after our arrival, I heard that the 
Count was to fend, the next day, a courier to 
Clermont, by whom I might difpatch letters to 
England. — I had this and two or three others to 
write ; and, I thought that it was better to let 
the Count and his nephew begin their political 
controverfy without the prefenceof a third per- 
son ; for thefe reafons, as foon as fupper was 
over, which was very ill drefied, and ferved ir» 
very dirty plate, 1 defired to be conducted to 
tny apartment. Having mounted a very broad 
fbirc.ifeof brick and wood, and pafled through 
a long corridor, which feemed to lead to a part 
of the houfe very remote from that I had left, 
I was fhewn into a fort of ftate bed-chamber ; 
one of thofe v.'here comfort had formerly been 
facrificed to fplendour, but which now poflciled 
neither the one nor tlie other : and, on opening 
the door, 1 was fenfible of that damp, mufly 

fmcll, 



128 DESMOND. 

fniiel], which is ufuaHy perceived in rooms that 
have been 1-ng unfrequented. 

The wainfcoting was of cedar, or fome other 
brown wood, finely carved ; the hangings of a 
dull and d.irk blue Lyon's damafk; a high ca- 
nopy bed of the fame, ftood at one end of the 
room, and, at the other, was a very large glafs 
reaching from the ceiling to the floor; but 
M'hich, by the Tingle candle I had, ferved only 
to reflect the deep gloom that every obje£t offer- 
ed. — A great projedting chimney of blood co- 
loured marble, over which another mirror fup- 
ported a large carved trophy, reprefcnting the 
aims of the family; a red marble table, and 
(our or five high-backed, fluffed chairs, covered 
with blue velvet, completed the furniture of the 
room; which, floored as it was with hexagon 
bricks, compofed, altogether, oneof themoft 
funeral apartments i ever remember to have 
been in. 

i fat down, however, and wrote my letters j 
but having done them, 1 felt no inclination to 
ileep, and therefore, opening the croife'e, 1 leaned 
upon the railing, which, in houfes built as this 
is, forms a clumfy fort of balcony to every win- 
dov*'. — The day had been unufually clofe and 
fultry, and with the night, the thunder ftorm, 
produced by the heated atmofphere, approached. 
— I now heard it mutter at a diftance, and foon 
after faw, from the fouth-weft, the moft vivid 
lightening I ever remarked, breaking from thofe 
niajeftic and deeply-loaden clouds, which the 
-brightnefs of the moon above them made very 
viiible. — In a country fo level as that is, for 
many miles round the chateau d'iiauteville, the 
horizon is, of courfe, great and uninterrupted, 
and I faw to advantage the progrefs of the 

ftorm i 



DESMOND. 129 

ftorm ; a fpeflacle I have always had great plea- 
fure in contemplating. 

When the imagination foars into thofc re- 
gions, where the planets puifue each its deftined 
courfe, in the immenfity of fpace — every planer, 
probably, containing creatures adapted oy the 
Almightv, to the refidencc he has placed them 
in ; and when we refledl, that the fmalleft of 
thefe is of as much confequence in the univerfe, 
as this world of cur's j how puerile and ridicu- 
lous do thofe purfuits appear in which we are fo 
anxioufly bufied ; and how infignificant the 
trifles we toil to obtain, or fear to lofp. None 
of all the little cares and troubles of our Ihort 
and fragile exiftence, feem worthy of g;ving us 
any real concern — and^ perhaps, we never truly 
poflefs the reafon we fo arrogantly boaft, till we 
can thus appreciate the real value of the objects 
around us. 

Heaven knows, my dear Bethel, that I am 
far enough from enjoying this philofophic tran- 
quility. — 1 have entiufted you with my waking 
refledlions — D.ire 1 afk your indulgence for the 
wild wanderings of my mind, when reafon re- 
figned her feat entirely to " thick-coming fan- 
cies." 

The hurricane had entirely fubfided, and the 
rain-drops fell flowly from the roof, I rtill con- 
tinued at the window, for my thoughts were 
fled to LngKmd, and I had only a confufed re- 
colle6lion of where I was j till I found myfelf 
extremely cold, and turning, faw my candle ex- 
piring in the focket. I then recolleded, that 
it was time to go to my bed, and to feek in 
fleep, relief againft the uneafy thoughts thathad 
dwelt upon my mind about Geraldinc. On 
looking, however, towards it, it again feemed 
G5 fo 



230 DESMOND. 

fo comfortlefs and gloomy, that I fancied it 
damp ; and though no man poflelTes a conftitu- 
tion more fortified againft fuch accidents, or 
cares lefs about them, 1 had no inclindtion to 
undrefs myfelf, or, though I was weary, to 
llcep ; I v/ifhed for a book, but I happened, 
contrary to my ufual cuftom, not to have one 
in the i'mall portmanteau 1 had brought from 
Montfleuri ; and having nothing to divert my 
attention from the cold gloom that furrounded 
me, I became tired of hearing the dull murmurs 
of the finking wind howl along the corridor— 
and I, at length, determined to try to fleep. 

Still, however, the notion of the dampnefs 
of the bed detering me from entering it, I took 
only my coat ofF, and wrapping myfelf in a 
flannel powdering gown, 1 threw myfelf on the 
embroidered counterpane, and foon after funk 
into forgetfulnefs. 1 know you tvill fay I am 
as weakly fuperftitious as a boarding- fchool 
mifs, or as ** the wifeft aunt telling the fiddeft 
tale" to a circle of tired and impatient auditors. 
■■ — I am confcious of all this, yet I cannot help 
relating the ftrange phantoms that haunted my 
imagination. 

1 believed myfelf at the fame window as 
where 1 ftood to obferve the ftorm; and, that 
in the Count's garden, immediately beneath it, 
I faw Geraldine expofed to all its fury. — Her 
hufband feemed at firft to be with her, but he 
difiippeared, 1 know not how, and fiie was left 
expofed to the fury of the contending elements, 
which feemed to terrify her lefs on her own ac- 
count, than on that of three children, whom {he 
clafpcd to her bofom, in all the agonies of ma- 
ternal apprehenfion, and endeavoured to fhelter 
from the encreafing fury of the tempeft. — I 

haftened. 



DESMOND. 131 

haftened, I flew, with that velocity we poflefs 
only in dreams, to her afiiftance : I preffed her 
eagerly in my arms — I wrapt them round her 
children — — 1 thought flie faintly ihanlced me; 
told me, that for herfelf my care wa- ultlefs, 
but that it might protect rht-m.- She was as 
cold as marble, and I rtcolledt having remark- 
ed, that (lie refembied a beautiful Itatue of 
Niobe, done by an Italian fculptor, which I 
had admired at Lyons. 

While 1 was entreating her to accept of my 
protedion, and to go mto the houfe, I fuddenly, 
by one of thofe incongruities fu ulual in fleep, 
fancied I faw her extended, pale, and apparently 
dymg on the bed, which i had objected to go 
into, wiih the leaft of her chMdren, a very 
young infant dead in her arms. — Diftracted at 
luth a figlu, I feized her hand — I implored her 

to Ipealt to me She opened languidly thofe 

lovely eyes, which 1 have (o ofien gazed on 
with tranfpor-. — they were glazed and neavy— 
yet, 1 thought, they exprtiied tendernel- and 
pity for me — while, in a low, tremulous voice 
— Ihe bade me adieu ?— adieu, for ever! 

1 now fhrieked in frantic terror — I tried to 
recall her to life by my wild exclamations — I 
would have warmed, in my bofom, the cold 
hand I neld, when (he gently drew it from me, 
and pointing to her two children, whom I now 
faw itanding by the fide of the bed, clinging to 
a young woman, who was, 1 fancied, Fanny 
Waverly, Ihe faid, in a yet lower and moie 
mournful tone — *•• Defmond ! — if you ever truly 
loved me, it is there you mult fhew your affec- 
tion." — I then faw the lalt breath tremble on 
thofe lovely lips — it was gone — Geraldine was 
loft for ever !— And, jn an agony of defpair, 

fuc 



132 DESMOND. 

fuch as, thank Heaven, I never was confcious 
of vi'aking; I threw myfelf on the ground. — 
The Violence of this ideal emotion reftored me 
to myfelf. — I awoke — my face bathed in tears, 
and in fuch confufion of fplrits, that it was long 
before 1 could recall myfelf to reafon, and to a 
clear conviction, that all this was only a dream. 
So ftrong was the impreflion, that 1 dared not 
hazard feeling it again by fleeping. — I theiefore 
put on my great coat, and as the moon now 
fhone in unclouded radiance, 1 went down into 
the garden, and wandered among the bofquets 
and treiUage that make its formal ornaments. — 
Still the figure of Geraldine purfued me, fuch 
as I had feen her in this diftrcfling vifion — Still 
I heard her voice bidding me an eternal adieu ! 
— I would have given the world to have had 
fome human being to have fpoken to, that thefe 
imaginary founds of plaintive forrow might 
have vibrated in my ears no longer, but 1 was 
afhamed of awakening Montfleuri, had 1 known 
where to have found him — And my fervant 
Warley, I bad left at Montfleuri, to bring my 
letters after me. 

1 continued, therefore, to traverfe this me- 
lancholy garden — Sometimes refolving to con- 
quer my weaknefs, and return to my bed, and 
thfn (hrinking for the apprehenfions of being 
again liable to the terror I had juft experienced. 
At length, I heard the clock of the church 
ftrike three — I followed the found for two or 
three hundred paces, through a cut walk that 
led from the garden towards it, and entering 
"^the church-yard, which is the cimet'iere of a 
large village, I was again (truck with a circum- 
ftance that had before appeared particulaily dif- 

maK 



DESMOND. 133 

mal. I mean, that there are in France no 
marks of graves, as in England, 

*' Where heaves the tuif in many a mouldering heap," 

Here all is level — and forgetfulnefs Teems to have 
laid her cold oblivious hand on all who reft within 
thefe enclofures. 

No object appears in the mou'-nful fpotl was 
now contemplating, but a crofs, on which a 
dead Chrift painted, and reprefenting life, as 
clofely as poflible, was fufpended ; the moon- 
beams falling directly on this, added to the 
dreary horrors of the fcenc. — I ftood a few mo- 
ments looking on it, and tht^n was roufed from 
my mournful reverie by the found of human 
voices, and of horfcs feet. — Iliftened, and found 
thefe (bunds came from the farm-yard, which 
was only two or three hundred paces before me. 
— Hither i gladly found my way, and faw the 
vine-dreflers,and people employed in the making 
•wine, preparing for their work, and going to 
gather the grapes while the dew was yet on 
them. Rejoiced to find fomebody to fpeak to, 
1 entered into converfation with them, and for 
a moment dilfipated my ideas — I followed them 
to the vine-yard, affilted in their labours, and 
was equally allonilhed and pleafed to hear, how 
rationally thefe unenlightened men conffdered 
the blefiing of their new-born liberty, and with 
what manly fiimnefs determined to preferve it. 

There was among them a Breton, who ap- 
peared to have more acutenefs and knowledge 
than the reft ; with him, 1 fliall take an oppor- 
tunity of having farther difcourie. 

It is now one o'clock at noon. — I have had 
an hour's converfation with Montfleuri — I have 

paid 



IJ4- » E S M O N Er. 

paid my morning compliments to the Count-— 
I have bten amuled with the ridiculous anger of 
I^e Maire, whom M .'ntfleuri has been pro- 
voking to diiplay it, on the fubject of the abo- 
lifhed titles — Y^t, even after all this, the im- 
preffion 1 received in my fleep is not diiTipated 
—Yet, I am certainly not fuperftitiou-. — [ 
have, afTuredly, no faith in dreams, which are> 
I know, but 

*' The children "f an idle brain, 

*' Begot of D' thing but vain phanfafy, 

♦' And more intonllant than the vagrant wind«."* 

I fhal! hear from Kngland, perhaps, to-mor- 
row, or Friday, and then be able to laugh at my 
wealcnefs, as mucn as vou h ive probably done 
in reading this. I hear the Count's courier is 
ready to fet out for Clermont. 1 muft, there- 
fore, haltily bid you, dear Bethel, adieu! 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



♦ Shakefpeare. 



LET- 



DESMOND, 135 



♦LETTER XIL 



TO MR. BETHEL. 



Hauieville in Auvergne, Sept. 30, 1790. 

MONTFLEURI came into my room yef- 
tefterday moring with letters in nis hand, whict 
he had juft received from his own houie — x 
afked eagerly for mine, but there were none, 
and my ft-rvant yet remains waiting for them.— 
I exprefled, perhaps too forcibly, what 1 felt — 
impatience and difappointment; when Mont- 
fleuri, as foon as thefe emotions had a little 
fubfided, afked me gaily, " whether 1 had 
many near and dear relations in England, for 
whofe health I was fo extremely folicitous as to 
injure my own by my anxiety ?" — I replied, 
*' that though 1 had very few relations, and 
with thofe few feldom correfponded, yet, that 
1 had friends to whom 1 was warmly attached." 
— " And fome lovely and fond woman alfo, I 
fancy," intenufued he^ *' for, my dear Def- 

•Wiit'.en before the receipt of Bethel's laft letter. 

mond 



136 DESMOND. 

mond, thefriendfhip, however greaf, that fub- 
fifts between perfons of the fame fcx, creates 
not thefe violent anxieties. — Ah ! my good 
friend, I fancy you are a very fortunate fellow^ 
— As to my tv/o fifters, they feem, by their let- 
ters, to be quite enchanted with you ; and Jo- 
fephine (whofe tears, indeed, at our parting, I 
did not before attribute all to my own account) 
declares in this let'er, that if I do rot foon re- 
turn with my Englifh friend, fhe and Julie muft 
rejoin us here, notwirhftanding their diflike to 
this melancholy place ; for, that fince we have 
left Montfleuri, it is become fo extremely /r/^,?, 
that they are half dead with lalfitude znA ennui. 
You remember, I dare fay, hearing fine fenti- 
mental fpeeches from Jofephine about the 
charms of folitude and the beauties of nature. — 
Now nature was never more beautiful than it is 
at this moment in the I yonois, yet is my gentle 
Tofephine moft marvelloufly difcontent. I^Gi- 
mond, do tell me how you manage to bewitch the 
women in this manner?" 

I was neither gay enough to enjoy this rail- 
lery, or coxcomb enough to believe that Ma- 
dame de Boifbelle regrettt-d meat Montfleuri.-— 
Indeed, I raihtr felt hurt at her brother's fpeak- 
ing of her thus lightly; but with him this vi- 
vacity is conltituiional. — He has befides, from 
education, habit, and principles, much freer 
notions than 1 have about w^omen. — He again 
enquired of me of what nature was my Englifh 
attachment — a queftion I declined anfwering; 
for the name of Geraldme is not to be prophan- 
ed by his fufpicions, or even his conjectures. — 
Were I to fav that my paffion for her is as pure 
and holy as that of a fond brother for a lovely 
and amiable filler, which I am almoji fure it is, 

he 



©ESMOND. 137 

he would turn my Platonifm into ridicule; or, 
if he could be perluaded to believe that (uch a 
paflion exifts, he would think that fhe Vi'as a 
prude, and that I am an idcot ; and to thi?, 
though I can forgive it, becaufe he does not 
know Geraldine, I will not expofe myfelf. 

1 heartily with the time fixed for our (lay here 
was expired — 1 am wcaiy of the place — The 
frigid magnificence in which we live is very 
dull, and the perpetual arguments between the 
Count and his Nephew, are fometimes, at 
leaft, diftreffing. — The former, with that 
haughty obftinacy that endeavours to fet itfelf 
abuve the reafon it cannot combat, defends, 
with afperity and anger, thofe prejudices, in 
obedience to which he is about to quit his coun- 
try— Though could he determine to throw them 
off, he might undoubtedly continue at home, 
as much refpedted, and more beloved than ever 
he was in the meridian of his power. 

1 he dialouges, which he is fond of holding 
with Montfleuri, have not unfrequently been 
carried on with fo much warmth on his fide, as 
to alarm me, left they fhould produce an open 
rupture ; for what the old Count wants in found- 
nefs of argument, he makes up in heat and de- 
clamation. — His nephew, however, has fo 
much good temper, and fuch an habitual ref- 
pe£t for him, that he never fuffers himfelf to be 
too much rufiied ; and d'Hauteville, after the 
moft violent of thefe contentions, is under the 
neceffity of recollecting, that it is on his ne- 
phew he muft depend for the care of his pecu- 
niary concerns (a matter to which he is by no 
means indifferent) when he goes into the volun- 
tary exile to which he chufes to condemn him- 
felf. He alfo recollects, that he owes to Mont- 
fleuri 



138 DESMOND. 

fleuri a confiderable fum of money, part of his 
mother's fortune j. which, together with the ar- 
rcar of intereft he has always evaded paying by 
the chicanery of the old laws ; and, he now 
fears, that when equal jaftice is eftabliflied, this 
claim may be revived and enforced by Mont- 
fleuri. — Thus it is rather intereft than affinity 
that prevents his breaking with his nephew; 
and that compels him, with averted and reluc- 
tant ears, to hear thofe truths which Mont- 
fieuri fpeaks to him, with the fame coolnefs, 
and as much diverted of confiderations of per- 
fonal intereft, as his nephew would fpeak be- 
fore a Conclave of cardinals, or, if it could be 
colledled, of emperors. 

To-day, after dinner, Montfleuri happened 
to be abfent, and the Count taking advantage of 
it, began to talk to me, whom he wifhes to 
win over to his party, on the fubject nearell his 
heart — the abolition of all titular diftin£tions in 
France — He went back to the earlieft records 
of the kingdom to prove what I never doubted 
—the antiquity of tides, as if that were an ir- 
refragable proof of their utility. — " My God, 
Sir !" cried he, "is it poffible — that you — that 
you — who are, without doubr, yourlelf of no- 
ble blood"—" Pardon me. Sir, faid I, for in- 
terrupting you, but if that be of any weight in 
the argument you are going to ufe, it is necef- 
fary to tell you, your fuppoution is erroneous 
— I am not noble. — My anceltors, fo far as I 
ever traced them, which is indeed a very little 
way, were never above the rank of plain coun- 
try gentlemen j and, I am afraid, towards the 
middle of the laft century, iofe even that dig- 
nity in a miller and a farmer." — " Well, Sit," 
continued the Count, in whofe elteem i had 

gained 



D E S M O N D. 139 

gained nothing by this humble ciifclofure of 
my origin. — '* Well, Sir, however that may 
have been — you are now, I underftand, from 
the Marquis, my nephew, a man of large for- 
tune and liberal education — and therefore, in 
your own country, where nohlejfe is not To much 
infifled upon, you have, undoubtedly, mixed 
much with men of high birth, and eminent 
confidcration." — '* Really, Sir, you do me ar^ 
honor in that fuppofition, to which 1 am not 
very well entitled. With u«, it is true, that a 
conl^derable fortune is a paiTport to futh fociety; 
and had I found any fatisfaiticn in enlifting my- 
felf under the banners of either of thofe parties, 
who are always contending for the good of old 
Kngland, I might have been admitted among 
the old and middle aged, who are bufied in ar- 
ranging the affairs of the public ; or among the 
young, who are yet more bufy in difarranging 
their own. But having no tafte for the fociety 
of either the one or the other, I can boafl of 
only one titled friend in my own country; and 
he Is a man whom 1 love and honor for the vir- 
tues of his heart, not for the fplendor of his fi- 
tuation— Poflciling an illuftrious name and a 
noble fortune, he has a dignity of mind, and a 
fenlibility of heart, which thofe advantages not 
unfrequently deftroy. Could we, among our 
numerous nobility, boafl of many fuch men, 
their conduit wou d be a ftronger argument in 
favor of tlie advantages of a powerful arifto- 
cracy, than the moit dazzling Ihew of a birth- 
day exhibition, or the moll plauhbie vindi- 
cation of titu'ar diftindtions that we have ever 
yet heard. — There may, for ought 1 know, 
be others equallv refptctable for their private 
virtues, but they have not fallen within my obfer- 
vation; and judging, therefore, of the greater 

part 



140 DESMOND. 

part of them through the medium of public re- 
port, I have felt no with to approach them 
nearer." ** However you may think of indi- 
viduals, Sir," faid the Count, " you furely are 
not fo blinded, fo infatuated, by the dod^rines 
that have obtained moft unhappily for this 
country, as not to feel the necelTiiy that this or- 
der of men fiiould exilK — You muft know, that 
the wifdom of our ancient kings created this 
drftindtion, that is to fay, they thought it expe- 
dient to raife the brave and valiant above the 
common level of mankind, by giving them 
badges and titles of honor, in order to mark and 
perpetuate their glorious deeds, and ftimulate, 
to emulation, their illuftrious pofterity — now 
— if thefe well-earned rev/ards are taken from 
their defcendants — if thefe facred diftmdiions be 
annihilated, and the names of heroes paft, be 
erafed from the records of mankind — I aflert, 
that there is an end, not only of juftice, but of 
emulation, fubordination — all that gives fafety 
to property, or grace to fociety — and the world 
will become a chaos of confufion and outrage. 
—What ! — (hall a man of trade, a ncgociant, 
an upilart dealer in wine, or wood, or fugar, 
or cloth, approach one in whofe veins, perhaps, 
the blood of our Lufignans and lancreds cir- 
culares. — The fame blood which, in the de- 
fence of our holy religion, was fhed in Palef- 
tine. — I fay, {hall a mufhroom, a fungus, ap- 
proach thefe illuftrious defcendants of honored 
anceftors, and fay, " Behold, Oh ! man of 
-high defcent, 1 am thy equal, my country de- 
clares it !" 

Indignation here artefted the eloquence it had 
produced, and gave me an opportunity of fay- 
ing, " My dear Sir, the united voices of com- 
mon 



DESMOND. 141 

mon fenfc, nature, and reafon, declared all 
this long ago, though it is only now you are 
compelled to hear them. As to the degradation 
of Mejftfurs^ the prefent defcendants of your 
Lufignans and Tancreds, if it be a degradation 
to be accounted only men, I really am much 
concerned for them ; but for the ill efFeits it 
otherwife produces, inafmuch as fuch motives 
fail as might excite them to equal thefe their 
great progenitors, I cannot underftand that 
there is in that refpt(5l much to regret. — The 
days of chivalry will never, I apprehend, re- 
turn i the ravings of a fanatic monk will never 
again prevail on the French to make a crufade. 
. — Nay, added I, fmiling, there feems but little 
probability that they will foon be called upon to 
take arms, in a caufe which has in later times 
appeared of greater moment — 1 mean, refcuing 
what one of your writers calls U'vain honneur du 
pavilion*^ from the arrogant fuperiority of us 
prefumptuous iflanders. The real value of 
both thefe objects, for which fo much blood 
has been wafted, feems to be better underftood, 
the real inteieft of humanity to appear in its 
proper light. Since, therefore, we no longer 
have occafion to follow the example of thofe he- 
roes who have bled for either— Why contem- 
plate them with fuch blind reverence? i fup- 
pofe, Sir, youwiUnot fay, that the frantic ex- 
peditions to the Holy Land, preached by Peter 
the Hermit, anfwered any other purpofe than 
to depopulate and impoverifli your country and 
mine. Nor will you maintain, that either 
France or England have gained any thing but 

* The vain honor of the flag, which, till within a few years, 
•the Englifh have always infjlled on having ftruck to them in 
ithe Narrow Seas. 

taxes 



142 DESMOND. 

taxes and poverty by the continual wars with 
which we have been harafling each other, 
through a fucceffirn of ages. Surely then it is 
time to recall our imaginations from thefe wild 
dreams of fanaticifm and heroifm — Time to 
remove the gorgeous trappings, with which we 
have dreft up folly, that we might fancy it 
glory. — The tinfel ornaments we have borrow- 
ed as the livery of this phantom, are become 
tarnifhed and contemptible — Let not regret 
then, that the hand of fober reafon tears off 
thefe poor remaining (Tireds, with which virtue 
difdains to attempt encreafing its genuine luf- 
tre ; with which felfiihners and foi'Iy mujl fail 
lo hide their real deformity. — Have patience 
with me yet a moment — while I afk — v/hether 
you really think, that a dealer in wine, or in 
wood, in fugar, or cloth, is not endued with 
the fame facukiesand feelings as the defcendant 
of Charlemagne; and whether the accidental 
advantages of being able to produce a long pe- 
digree (which, notwithftanding the infinite vir- 
tue afcribed to matrons of antiquity, is, I fear, 
often very doubtful) ought to give to the noble 
who pofleires it, a right to confider every lower 
rank of men as being of an inferior and fubor- 
dinante fpecies" — 

** So, Sir" — angrily burfl forth the Count 
— " So, Sir ! — I muft, from all this, conclude, 
that you confider your footman upon an equa- 
lity with yourfelf. — Why then is he your foot- 
man * ?'; 

" Becaufe — though my footman is certainly 
fo far upon an equality with me, as he is a man, 
and a free-man; there muft be a diftindlion in 

* This argument has been called unanfwerable. 

local 



DESMOND. 143 

local circumftances ; though they neither ren- 
der me noble, or him bate — I ttappen to be 
born heir toconfiderable eftates ; it is his chance 
to be the Ion of a labtmrer, living on thofe ef- 
tates. — I have occafion for his fervicts, he has 
occafion for the money by which I purchafe 
them : in this compadt we are equal fo far as 
we are free. — I, with my property, which is 
money, buy his property, which is time, fo 
long as he is willing to fell it. — 1 hope and be- 
lieve my footman feels himfelf to be my fellow- 
man ; but I have rot, therefore, any apprehen- 
fion that inftead of waiting behind my chair, he 
will fit down in the next. — He was born poor — 
but he is not angry that I am rich — fo long as 
my licbes are a benefit and not an oppreffion to 
him. — He knows that he never can be in myfi- 
tuation, but he knows alfo that I can amend 
his. — If, however, inftead of paying him for 
his fervices, 1 were able to fay to him, as has 
been done by the higher clafies throughout Eu- 
rope, and is (till in too many parts of it — " you 
arc my vafial — vou were born upon my effate — 
you are my property — and you muft come to 
work, fight, die for me, on whatever condi- 
tions I pleafe to impofe; — my fervant, who 
would very naturally perceive no appeal againft 
fuch tyrannical injuftice, but to bodily prov.^efs 
would, as he is probably the moflr athletic of 
the two, difcoyer that fo far from being com-^ 
pelled to ftand on fuch terms behind my chair, 
he was well able either to place himfelf in the 
next, or to turn me out of mine, — * * Ceux qui 

difent 

•*' Thbfe who fay that all men are equal, fay tliat which is 
ptrfeftly true; if they mean that all men have an equal right 
to perfonal and mental Jibetty ; to their refjieilive pioperties; 

and 



144 D E S M O N D» 

difent que tous les hommes font egaux,' fays 
Voltaire — ''Ceux qui difent que tous les hom- 
mes font egaux, difent la plus grande verite, 
s'ils entendent que tous les hommes ont un droit 
egala la liberte, a la propriete de leurs biens, 
& a la protection des loix. — lis fe tromperaienr 
beaucoup, s'ils croyaient que les hommes, 
doivent etre €gaux par les emplois, puifqu'ils 
ne le font pas par leurs talens." 

" Voltaire !" impatiently exdaimed the 
Count, " why always Voltaire ? — one is per- 
fectly ftunned with the falfe wit and infiduous 
mifreprefentations of that atheiftical fcribbler." 

Againft the defender of the family of Calas ; 
the protedlor of the Sirvens ; the bcnefadtor of 
all mankind, whom he pitied, feived, and 
laughed at ; the Count now moft furioufly de- 
claimed, in along and angry fpeech, which, as 
it pofTelled neither truth or argument, 1 have 
forgot.— Towards the clofe of it, however, he 
had worked himltlf into fuch a ftate of irrita- 
tion, that he feemed on the point of forgetting 
that on which he fo highly values hitnfclf — 
Les manihes de la vieille cour. 

The entrance of a man of the church, whofe 
diminiftied revenues had yet had no effedt, 
either in reducing his figure, or fubduing his 
arrogance, made a momentary diverfion in my 
favour. 

But the Count was now heated by his fub- 
je6l : and, being reinforced with fo able an aux- 
iliary, he returned to the charge. — He related 
the fubjcCt of our controverfy to his friend, 

and to the prote<f\inn of the laws: but they would be ss cer- 
tainly wrong in believing that men ought to be equal in trullf, 
in employments, fince niiture has not made them equal in ihtir 
tilentj." 

who. 



U E S M O N D» 145 

who, whik he fpolce, furveyed me with fuch 
looks, as one of the holy lirotheihood of the In- 
quifition may be fLppoled to throw on the un- 
happy culprit whom he is aboiit to condemn to 
the flames on the next autodefe. — in a n^anner 
psculiar, I truft, to la v'lelle cour ecclcfiajltque^ 
he gave me to unuei (bnd, that he confidertd 
me as an ignorant atheidical boy ; and, that 
his abhorrence of my principles was equalleij 
only by his contempt for my country and my- 
felf.— *' Voltaire," faid he,' '^ Voltaire^ Mun- 
iieur L'Anglois' is a wretch with whofe natiie 
I fully not my mind ; a monfter whofe pernici- 
ous writings have overturned the religion and 
the government of his country." The manner 
in which this was faid, brought to my mind aa 
exprellion which Voltaire puts himfelf into the 
mouth of fuch a character. — " Ah 1 nous feri- 
ous les maitres du mcnde, fans ces coquins de 
gens d'efprit." * I continued to liilen to the 
difcourfe which the Count now refumed j the 
pujpot of which was to convince me, that the 
decree of the nineteenth of May, was fubver- 
five of all order, and ruinous alike to the dig- 
nity and happinefs of a Hate. — At length he 
rtopped CO recover his breath, and gave me an 
opportunity of faying, " if, Sir, I might be 
once more permitted to qu;;te fo obnoxious an 
author f as him of whom we have juft been 
fpeaking, I ihouid fay, that *' Lc nom eft in- 
different ; il n'y a que le pouvoir qui ne le foit 
pa&.:J:" — If the nav\e of vobUJfe was fo connedled 

* " Ah ! we Il>ou!d be maftrr* of the world, were it not for 
thofe ralcal!) wits." 

"f- Voltaire. 

X The name u immateriii ; it ii tho power only that is of 
tonfequence. 

Vol. I. H wi^.h 



14-6 DESMOND. 

^ith the poiuer of oppreflion, that they could 
not be divid d, the nation had a right to take 
away both ; if "otherwire) it might, perhaps, 
have been politic to have divided them, and 
have left to the French patricians, thefe founds 
on which they feem to feel that their confe- 
qucncc depends ; together with the invaluable 
privileges of having certais^n fymbols painted on 
their coaches, or woven on (heir furniture; 
and of dreffins; their domeflics in one way rather 
than in another. —A great people who had every 
thing on which its freedom and its profperity 
depended to confider, mul^ furely have fcen 
fuch obje£ls as thefe with fo much indifference, 
that had they not been evidently obnoxious to 
the fpirit of reform, they would have left thenli 
to the perfons who fo highly value them ; per-* 
fons who refolve to quit their country becaufe 
fhey are no longer to be enjoyed in it.-^The 
framers of the nev/ conftitution, had they not 
been well convinced of the inefficacy of mere 
palliation^ would nor, certainly, by deflroying 
thefe diftincStions (matters in themfdves quite 
inconfequential) have raifed againft the fabrick 
Cliey were planning, the unextinguifliable rage 
and hatred of a great body of men ; but would 
have left them in quiet pofl'effion of thefe bau- 
bles fo ncceHary to their happinefs." 

*' Hold, Sir," cried the Count, whofe im* 
patience-tould no longer be reftrained^" Hold, 
Sir, and do not fpeak ihus contcmptuoufly I en- 
treat you, of an advan-r£g« which it is very truly 
faid, no man undervalues who is pofTelled of it. 
-—You, Sir, have owned that your family is 
roturier — How then, and at your time of life, 
when the real value of fbjedts cannot have been 
liaught you by exptricjice ; bow then can you 

pretend 



D E S M O K D. 147 

pretend to judge of that which is appreciated by 
the wifdom of age?, and has been held up as 
the reward of heroic virtues. — Baubles ! — Is it 
thus you term the name a man derives from his 
ilhiftrious anceftors — Bauble ! — are the ho ors 
handed down to me, from the firft d'HauteVille, 
who lived under Louis le Grosy the fixth in de- 
fcent from Charlemagne, to be thus contuma- 
cioufly defcribed by the upftart politics of mo- 
dern reformers." 

I was really concerned to fee the poor man 
fo violently agitated, and replied, " My dear 
Sir — I allow much to the pride derived from an = 
ceftry — Where the dignity of an houfe has been 
fupported, as I doubt not, but that you have 
fupported yours ; but let me on the other fide 
fay, that there are but too many who certainly 
inherit nor, with their names, the vi tues of 
their progenitors. You recollecl a maxim of 
Rochefaucauh's on this fubjeit, which, as I 
remember to have heard, that he is a favourite 
author of your's, you will allow me to bring 
forward in fupport of my argument — '* Les 
grands noms abaiflcnt au lieu d'e.ever, ceux qui 
ne favent pas les foutenir*." Befides, how 
nuny are there, both in your country and mine, 
who are called noble, who cannot, in facfl, re- 
fer to the examples of a long line of anceftry, 
to animate th m, by example, to dignified con- 
duct.— How ve^v nianv, who owe to money, 
a, id not hereditary merit, the right they afl'ume 
^to louk dOA-n on the reft of the world. It ii 
tfU', tnai for the moft part,, that world repays 
their contempt ; and it is from the vulgar only, 

* "■ Great namt-s degrade, inlead of ri'fin^, tbofe who 
knr w mt how to lonport chein;" — Max tns 94, dc Ro;hc- 

fdUCdtllt. 

H 2 who 



I^B. D £ S M O K D. 

who venerate a new coronet, which is generally 
*' twice as big as an old on/' — that they receive 
even the '* knee homage, this valued appendage 
gives them. " Les Rois font des homnics 
-comme des pieces de monnoie; ils les font va- 
loir ce qu'ils veulent, h Ton eft force de les re- 
cevoir, felon leurs cours, & non pas felon leur 
veritable prix *." 

^' Let fuch men, then," faid Monfieur 
d'Hauteville, " let fiich be erafed, with all my 
heart, from the catalogue of noble names. — In- 
deed, it i« well known, that ic^ never confidered 
fuch as belonging to our order. — I argue not 
.about them — but for thofe, whofe blood gives 
them pretenfions to different treatment. — Ah ! 
Monfieur Defmond, >f it were poflible — but it 
is not — for you to underftand my feelings, you 
would comprehend, how utteily impoflible it is 
for me, at my time of life, to continue in this 
loft and debafed country, to drag on an ex- 
jftence, from which every thing valuable is 
gone, and which is confequently expofed to in- 
dignity and fcorn — Would they not erafe my 
iirms ? change my defcription ? tear down the 
trophies of my houfe?" — Thefe ideas feemed 
fo deeply to affedl the Count, that his refpirgti- 
on again became affetSted ; his eyes appeared^to 
be ftarting from his head j and he aflumed f© 
much the look of a man on the point of be- 
coming infane, that 1 thought it more than time 
to conclude a converfation, that I ftiould not 
have continued fo long, had he not feemed t« 
dcfire it. 

* Kings pive value to men as ihey Ho to coin; they mark 
iht-m with what ftamp they pleafe ; and ihe world leceives 
itieni accoriiing lo inib imagimry ert'mate, and not accorilinjj 
It) Lheir ical silu*. — Ro.hcfaucauli, Msxii.e 10. 

With 



DESMOND. 149 

With inveterate prejudice, thus fondl]^ 
nurfed from early youth, it werehopelefsto con- 
tend — In the mind of Monfieur d'Hautevillc, 
this notion of family confequence is fo interwo- 
ven, fo aflbciated with all his id&as,. that, as 
the ivy coeval with the tree, at lengthy deliroys 
its vital principle, this fentiment now predo- 
minates to the cxtindlion of reafon itfelf — 
" Thefe prejudices," fays an eminent living, 
writer*, ** arife from what are commonly called 
falfe views of things, or improper airociatlons- 
of ideas, which, in the extreme, become deli- 
rium, or madnefs j and is confpicuous to every 
pcrfon, except to him, who actually labours- 
under this diforder of mind." 

I withdrew, therefore, as foon as I could, 
iag Monfieur d'Hautevillc with his friciid ; 
who, 1 am fu;e, had his looics pofilfil-d thj 
power imputed to thnfc of the Balilifk, would 
tiien have concluded my adventures. — As I 
pafied through the 1-ifk ami room, and turned 
my eyes on the drawing of a great gemalogica'. 
tree,, vi/hich covers one fide of it, 1 could i.ot 
help philofophizmg on the infinite variety of the 
mi'des ot ihinking among mankind — The dif- 
feren<e briween my consideration of fuch an 
object, tnd that bcflowed on it by Monfieur 
d'l::auceville, Uruck me forcibly. Had 1 fuch 
a yellow fcroU, though it defcribed my delcent 
from Adam or Noah, from a knight of the 
fla.iung lab'-e, or a king of the Weft Saxons 
— I fliould probably, on the firft occaf;on 
that fuch a material was wanted, cut it 
into angular flips, and write directions on 
the back of thefe parchment flireds, for the 
phcafants and hares that I fend to my friends — 

• I*ri^e/'» Lewers to a Philofophicil Unbelitver. 

WWle 



15® D E S Al O N D. 

While Monfeigneur le Comte d'Hauteville is 
going to leave his native country, becaufe the 
vifionary honor he derives from this record, are 
not oflenfibly allowed him in it — Exclaimino-, 
poor man ! to the National Aflembly, " Oh ! 
ye have — 

*' From my own windows torn my houfliold coat ; 
" Raz'iloiit my imprt^fs; leaving me no figrj 
" To ihew the worlJ I an« a gentleman !* 

I here conclude this long letter, though I 
fliall not feai it to night, becaufe I have here 
much time on my hands, and cannot employ it 
belter than in writing to you ; and becaufe, I 
hope to difpach by the fame conveyance that 
takes this, an anfwer to thofe which I hope to 
have fr"m you — for furely, my fervant will be 
here to-morrow or Tuefday, with the letters 
that I have fo long expe<?ied to be directed to the 
chateau de Montfleuri, from England : and 
wiiich 1 now await, with hourly and increafing 
impatience. 

Vale — Vale et me ama^ 

L. DESMOND. 



• Shakefpeare's Richard the Second. 



LET. 



D £ S M O N Q. 151 



LETTER XIV,* 



TO MR. BETHEL, 



Haufeville, in Auvergnc, 
Oa. z, 1790. 

D I D I not name to you a Breton, who had 
fomething in his air and manner unlike others 
of the peafantry ? — Whenever I have obferved 
him, he Teemed to be the amufemcnt of his fel- 
low labourers ; there was an odd quaint kind of 
pleafantry about him i. and I wiflied to enter 
into- converfation with him^ which I had yef- 
terday evening an opportunity of doing. ■ • 
" You are not of this part of France, my 
friend ?" faid I — " No, Monfieur — I am a Bre- 
ton — And now, would return into my own 
country again, but that, in a fit of impatience, 
at the exceffive impofitions I laboured under, 
I fold my little property about four years ago, 
and now muft continue to '* courir !e monde, 
& de vivre comme il plaroit a Dieu" — Sterne 
has, 1 think, tranflated that to be upon nothing. 

• Written before the receipt of Btthers hftktter. 

My 



152 DESMOND. 

My acquaintance did not appear to be fond of 
fuch meagre diet. '* But, pray," faid I, " ex- 
plain to me, what particular oppreiEons you 
had to complain of, that drove you to fo def- 
perate, and as it has happened, fo ill-timed a 
refolution." 

"I believe, "replied he, "that I am naturally of 
a temper a little impatient; and it was not much 
qualified by making a campaign or two againft the 
Englifh ; the firft was in a fliip of war, fitted out 
at St. Male's — or, in other words, Monfieur, a 
privateer; for thou?h I was bred a fail or, and 
loved fighting well enough, I was refiifed even 
as Enfigne de vaijjeau*^ on board a king's fhip, 
hccnnje I was not a gentkrnan — My father, how- 
ever, had a pretty Jitilc eftate, which he inhe- 
rited from his great, great grandfather — But he 
h -d an elder Ton, ;ir.d I was to fcramble through 
the world as we'l as I couid — They wanted, 
indf ec), to make me a monk ; but I had a mortal 
aveifion x.o that metierf, and thought it better 
to run the rifque of getting my head taken off 
by a cannon bail, than to fhave it — My firft 
.debu;t was not very fortunate — We fell in with 
an tinglifh frigate, with whom, though it was 
hopelefs enough to contend, we exchanged a 
few (hot, for the honor of our country; and 
one of thofe we were favored with in return, 
tore off the flefh from my right leg, vMthout 

breaking the bone The wound was bad 

enough, but the Englilh furgeon fewed it up, 
and before we landed, I was (o well as to be 
fent with the reft of our crew to the prifcwi at 
Winchefter— I had heard a great deal of the 

* Anfwering, I lielierc, to our «iW(hIpi3ien. 
■f Trade — profeffioB. 

humanity 



D E S W O N D. J 53 

humanity of the Englifti to their prifoners, and 
fiipnofed I might bear my fate without much 
murniuring ; but we were not treated the better 
for belonging to a privateer. — 1 he prifon was 
over-crowded, and very unheahhy — The provi- 
fions, I believe, might be liberally allowed by your 
government, but they were to pafs throuj^li the 
hands of fo many people, every one of which had 
their advantage out of them, that, before they^ 
were dirt ributed in the prifon, there was but little^ 
reafon to boaftof the generofity of your count- y- 
mer^. To be fure, the wifdom ar^d humanity 
of war is very remarkable in a fcene like this, 
where one nation fhuts up five or fix thoufand 
of the fubjei51s of another, to be fed by contract 
while they live; and when thev die, which two- 
thirds of the number fcldom fail to do — to be 
buried by contract-- — Yes' — out of nine-md- 
twenty of us poor devils, u ho were taken in our 
little privateer, fourteen died within three weeks i 
among whom, was a relation of mine,' a gallant 
fellow, who had been in the former wars with 
the Knglifh, and ftood the hazards of many a 
bloody day — He was an old man, but had a 
conftitution fo enured to hardships, and the 
changes of climate, that he feemed likely to fee 
many more — A vile fever that lurked in the 
prifon feized him— My hammock (for we were 
flung in hammocks, one above another, in thofe 
great, miferable rooms, which compofe, what 
they fay is, an unfininifhed palace) was hung 
above his, and when he fomid himiVU" dyincr, 
he called to me to come to him — " 'Fis all over 
with me, my friend," faid he — " N'impyrte one 
muft die at feme time or other, but i fliould ' 
have liked it better by a cannon ball — Nothings 
however, vexes me more in this bufinefs, than 
ti 5 that 



154 DESMOND. 

that I have been the means of bringing you 
hither to die in this hole — (for, in fad, it was 
by his advice, I had entered on board the pri- 
vateer) However, it may be, you will out-live 
this confounded place, and have another touch 
at thefe damned Englifli." National hatred, 
that flrange and ridiculous prejudice in which 
my poor old friend had livei', was the laft fen- 
fation he felt in death — He died quietly enough, 
in a few moments afterwards, and the next day 
I faw him tied up between two boards, by way 
of the coffin, which was to be provided by con- 
tract; and depofited in \.\\t fojfe that furrounded 
ourpiifon, in a grave, dug by contrail, and of 
courfe very fhallovi', in which he was covered 
wiih about an inch of mold, which was by con- 
tradt alio, put over him, and {<i\tv\. other pri- 
foners, who died at the fame time ! — My youth, 
and a great flow of animal fpirits, carried me 
through ihis wretched fcene — And a youn^ of- 
ficer, who was a native of the fame part of 
Britan^', and who was a prifoner on parole, at 
a neighbouring town, procured leave to vifit the 
priffin at Winchefter, and enquired me out— 
lie -gave me, though he could command very 
iittle mf ney himfelf, all he had about him, to 
afliif me in procuring food, and promifed to try 
if he could obtain for me my parole, as he knew 
my parents, and was concerned for my fituaticn 
— But his intenticns, in my favor, were Toon 
fruilrated, for, on the appearance of the com- 
bined fleets in the Channel, the Fjench officer>-, 
who were tliought too near the coaif, were or- 
dered away to Northampton, while, very foon 
ar:crwarc!s, a number of Spaniards, who had 
a.tiong them a fever of a moft malignant fort, 
Vere lent to the prifon ahcady ovcr-crcwded, 

and 



DESMOND. 155 

and death began to make redoubled havock 
among its wretched inhabitants— Of fo dire a 
nature was thedifeafe thus imported, that while 
the bodies that were thrown over-board from 
the Spanifti fleet, and driven down by the tide 
on the coafts of Cornwall and Devonfhire, car- 
ried its fatal influence into thofe countries, the 
prifoners, who were fent up from Plymouth, 
difTeminated deftrudion in their route, and 
among all who approached them ; thus becom- 
ing the inftruments of greater mifchief, than the 
fword and the bayonet could have executed — 
Not only the miferable prifoneis of war, who 
were now a mixture of French, Spanifli, and 
Dutch perifhed by dozens everv day ; but the 
foldiers who guarded them, the attendants of the 
prifon, the phyfical men who were fent to 
adminifter medicines, and foon afterwards, the 
inhabitants of the town, and even thofe of the 
neighbouring country began to fufFer — Then it 
was that your government perceing this blejjitig 
of ivar likely to extend itfclf rather too far, 
thought proper to give that attention to it, 
which the calamities of the prifoners would 
never have excited. A phyfician was fent down 
by Parliament, to examine into the caufes of 
this fcourge ; and in confequence of the im- 
poiubilitv of flopping it while fuch numbers 
were crowded together, the greater part of the 
French, whom hcknefs had fpared, were dif- 
mifTed, and I, among others, returned to my 
ovvn country. I, foon after, not difcouraged by 
what had befallen me, ente;ed on board another 
privateer, which had the good fortune to captuie 
two Welt-India fliips richly laden, and to br-ng 
them fafely into I'Urient, where we difpcfed of 
their cargoes ; and my ftiare was h confidera- 

ble, 



156 D E S r%I O N D. 

ble, that I determined to quit the Tea, and re- 
turn to my friend? — When, in purfuance of 
this rcfolution, I arrived at home, I found my 
father and elder brother had died during my ab- 
fence; and 1 took pofTeffion of the little eftate 
to which 1 thus became heir, and began to think 
rnyfelf a perfon of Tome confequence. In com- 
mencing country gentleman, 1 fat rnyfelf down 
to reckon all the advantages of my fituation 
— An extenfive tradl of warte land lay oti one 
f.de of my little domain — On the other, a forefl- 
—My fields abounded with game — a river mn 
thrcugh them, on which I depended for a fupply 
of fifh ; and 1 determined to make a little war^ 
ren, and to build a dove cote. I had Under- 
gone hardfliips enough to give me a perfe(St; re- 
Jiih for the good things now within my reach *, 
and I refolved mcft pioufly to enjoy them — But 
I was foon diftuibed in this agreeable reverie-*— 
1 took the liberty of firing one morning at a 
covey of partridges, that were feeding in my 
corn J and having the fame day caught a brace 
of trout, 1 was fitting down to regale rnyfelf on 
th«fe dainties, when I received the following 
notice from the neighbouring feigneur, with 
whom 1 was not at all aware that I had any 
thing to do. 

*' The mcft high and mofl powerful y^/^«^«r, 
Monfergneur Raoul-Phillippe-Jofeph-Alexan- 
dre-Caefar Erifpoe, Baron de Kermanfroi, fig- 
nifies to Louis- John de Merville, that he the 
{z\d fergnrar is in quality of Lord Paramount, 
is to all intents and purpofes invcfted with the 
tok right and property of the river running 
through his frcf, together with all the fifh 
therein ; the rpfties, reeds, and willows that 
grow iti or r.9ar the fiiid river; 2II trees and 

plants 



D E S M O N D. 157 

plants that the fiid river waters; and all the 
iflands and aits within it — Of all and every one 
of which the high and mighty lord, Raoul-Phil- 
lippe-Jof- ph-Alexander-Ccefar Erifpoe, Baron 
de Kermanfroi, is abfolute and only proprietor 
— Alfo, of all the birds of whaifoever nature 
or fpecies, that have, fhall, or may, at anytime 
fly on, or acrofs, or upon, the faid fieforfeignemy. 
—And all the hearts of chafe, of whatfoever 
defcription, that have, (hall, or may be found 
upon it."«— In fhort. Sir, it concluded with in-^ 
forming me, the faid Louis- Jean, that if I, at 
any time, dared to fifh in the river, or to fhoet 
a bird upon the faidyf^/", of which it feems my 
little farm unluckily made part, I fhould be de- 
livered into the hands of juftice, and dealt with 
according to the utmoft rigor of the offended 
laws. To be fure, 1 could not help enquiring 
within myfelf how it happened, that I had no 
right to the game thus fed in my fields, nor 
the fi{h that fwam in the river ? and how it was, 
that heaven, in creating thefe animals, had 
been at work only for the grczt feigneurs / ——' 
What! is there nothing, faid I, but infeds and 
reptiles, over which man, not born noble, may 

exercife dominion? From the wren to the 

eagle J from the rabbit to the wild-boar; from 
the gudgeon to the pike — all, all, it feems, are 
the property of the great. 'Twas hard to ima- 
gine where the power originated, that thus de- 
prived all other men of their rights, to give to 
thofe nobles the empire of the elements, and the 
dominion over animated n-^ture ! — However, I 
refledted, but I did not refift; and fincc I could 
no longer bring myfelf home a dinner with my 
gun, I thought to confole myfelf as well as I 
could, with the produce of my farm -yard ; and 

1 con- 



158 DESMOND. 

I conftrufled a fmall enclofed pigeon-houfc, 
from whence, without any offence to my noble 
neighbour, 1 hoped to derive feme fupply for 
my taole — But, alas! the comfortable and re- 
tired ftate of my pigeons attra<Sted the ariftocra- 
tic envy of thufe of the fame fpecies, who inha- 
bited the fpacious manorial dove-cote of Mon- 
feigneur; and they were fo very unreafonable 
as to cover, in immenfe flocks, not only my 
fields of corn, where they committed infinite 
depredations, but to furround my farm-yard, 
and monopolize the food with which 1 fupplied 
my own little colledlion, in their inclofures. 
As if they were inftindtively allured of the pro- 
tediion they enjoyed as belonging to the feigneur 
Raoul-Phillippe- J<'feph-Alexander-Ca;lar liri- 
fpce. Baron de Kermanfroi ; my menaces, and 
the {houts of my fervants, were totally difre- 
garded ; till, at length, I yielded too haflily to 
my indignation, and threw a ftone at a flight of 
them, with fo much effect, that I broke the leg 
of one of thcfe pigeons ; the confcquence of 
which was, that m half an hour, four of the 
gardes de chajje* of Monfeigneur appeared, and 
funinioned me to declare, if I was not aware, 
that the wounded bird which they produced in 
evidence againft me, was the property of the 
fz\d Jeignair ; and without giving me time either 
to acknowledge m.y crime, or apologize for if, 
th y ftiot, by way of retaliation, the tame 
pigf^ons in my enclofurgs, and carried me away 
to the chateau of the moft high and puiffant 
feigneur Raoul - Phiilippe -Jofeph - Alexander- 
C'selar hrifpc e. Baron de Kermanfroi, to anfwer 
for the aflauli I had thus committed on the per- 

♦ Game keep r?, 

fon 



D E s M O N D. 159 

fon of one of his pigeons — There I was interro- 
gated by the Fi(c;il, who was making out a prO' 
ces verbal', and reproved fevercly for not know- 
ing or attending to the fad^, fo univerfally ac- 
knowledged by the laws of Britany, that pigeons 
and rabbits were creatures peculiarly dedicated 
to the fervice of the nobles ; and that for a vaf- 
fal, as I was, to injure one of them, was an 
unpardonable offence againft the rights of my 
lord, who might inflicSt any punifliment he 
pleafed for my tranfgrelFion — That indeed, the 
laws of Beauvoifis pronounced, that fuch an 
ofFence was to be punifhed with death ; but 
that the milder laws of Britany condemned the 
offender only to corporal punifhment, at the 
mercy of the lord — Jn (hort, Sir, I got off this 
time by paying a heavy Hne to Monfeigneur 
Raoul - Phillippe - Jofeph - Alexander - Caefar, 
Erifpoe, Baron de Kermanfroi, who was ex- 
treiviely neceflitous, in the midft of his great- 
nefs. — Soon afterwards, Monfeigneur difcovered 
that there was a cttain fpot upon my eftate, 
where a pond might be made, for which he 
found that he had great occafion j and he very 
modeftly fignified to me, that he ftiould caufe 
this piece of ground to be laid underwater, and 
that he would either give me a piece of ground 
of the fixme value, or pay me for it according 
to the eftimation of two perfons whom he would 
appoint J but, that in caie 1 refufed this juft and 
liberal offer, he (hould, as Lord Paramount, 
and of his own right and authority, make his 
pond by flooding my ground according to law. 
** 1 felt this propofal to be inconfiltent with 
every principle of juftice — In this fpot was an 
old oak, planted by the firft de Merville, who 
had bought the eftate — It was under its fhade 
2 that 



l6o DESMOND. 

that the happieft hours of my life hzi paflVcf, 
while I was yet a child, and it had been held in 
veneration by all my family — 1 determined then 
to defend this favourite fpot ; and I haftened to 
a neighbouring magiftrate, learned in the law 
— He confidered my cafe, and then informed 
me, that, in this inftance, the laws of Briiany 
were filent, and that therefore, their deficiency 
muft be fupplied by the cuftpms and laws of the 
neighbouring provinces — The lawr. of Maine 
and Anjou, faid he, decide, that the feigneur of 
the Jief^ may take the grounds of his vaflal to 
make ponds, or any thing elfe, orrly giving him 
another piece of ground, or paying what is 
equivalent in meney — As precedent^ therefore,, 
decides, that the fame thing may be done in 
Britany, I advife you, Louis-Jean de Merville,. 
to fubmit to the laws, and on receiving payment, 
to give up your land to Monfeigneur Raoul- 
Phillippe - Jofeph- Alexander- Gsefar Erifpoe-, 
Baron de Kermanfroi. 

"It was in vain I reprefented that I had a- 
particular tafte, or a fond attachment to this 
ipot. My man of law told me that a vaflal had 
no right to any tafte or attachment, contrary to 
the fentiments of his lord — And, alas! — in a 
few hours, I heard the hatchet laid to my bet* 
loved oak — My fine meadow was covered with 
water, and became the receptacle for the carp, 
tench, and eels of Monfeigneur — And remon - 
ftrances and complaints were in vain ! — Thefe^ 
were only part of the grievances I endured from 
my unfortunate neighbourhood to this powerful 
Baron, to whom, in his miferable and half fur- 
nifhed chateau.^ 1 was regularly fummoned todo - 
homage ** upon faith and oath" — Till my op- 
prefiions becoming more vexatious and infupport- 

able, 



DESMOND. l6t 

able, I took the defperate rcfolution of felling 
my eftate, and throwing myfelf again upon the 
wide world — Paris, whither I repaired with the 
money for which I fold it, was a theatre fo new, 
and fo agreeable to me, that I could not deter- 
mine to leave it till I had no longer the means 
left of playing there a very brilliant part ; when 
that unlucky hour arrived, I wandered into this 
country, and took up my abbde with a relation^ 
a farmer, who rents feme land of Monfeigneur 
the. Count d'Hautcville, and here I have lemain- 
cd, at times, working, but oftener philofophizing, 
and not unfreqiiently regretting my (!ear oak, 
ati'I tho finft agreeable vifions that I indulged on 
t^.king pcOeflion of my little farm, before I was 
aware of the confcqutnce^ of being a vafTal of 
Monfeigneur Raoul-PhillipjK- Jofeph-Ak-xan- 
dcr-Cxfar Krirp(.ie, Baron de Kt.TmiUifroi, and 
indeed fometinits repentirfg that I did not wait 
a little longer, u'hen thtr revolution wouiil h.ive 
protedttd me againft the tyranny oi my very 
illuftrirus neighbour." 

De Jvlerville here ended his narrative, every 
wordof Vv'hich 1 found to be true ; and i could not 
but marvel at the ignorance or effrontery of thofe 
who afiert thjt the noblejp of France either pof- 
(t-^fci^ no powf rs inimical to the general rights of 
mankind, or poflrlling fuch, forbore to exert 
them. The former part- of his life beats tefti- 
mony to the extreme benefits accruing from wary 
end cannot but roife a wijh^ that the power of doing 
fuch extenfivc gocd to mankind, arid renewing fcenes 
fo very much to the honor of reofonable beings^ rr.ay 
never be taken from the princes and potentates of the 
earth. I thus endeavour, dear Bethel, by en- 
tering into the interefts of thofe I am with, to 
call off my thoughts from my own, or I fhould 

find 



j62 D E S M O M 0. 

find this very long f,)acc of time, in which i 
have failed to receive letters from England, al- 
moft infuppoi table. 

At the very moment I complain, I fee my 
fervant Warham approaching the houfe — I fly, 
impatiently, to receive news of Geraldine, of 
you, of all I love} a ^ hope to have a long, a 
very long letter to write, in anfwer, to morroWj 
to thofe I expedt froin you — We go baclc to 
Montfleuri the nex* day, this will therefore be 
the lail pacquet you will receive from hence. 



LIONEL DESMOND. 



JJote. The latter part of this narrative Is a fort of (rcz 
tranfl-.tion of parts of a little pamphlet, entitled, '' Hiftoire 
d'un malheureux VafTal df Bretagne, ecrite par lui-ineme," 
in which the excfflVve tbufes to which the feudal fyftem ^avc 
birth, are detailed. 



LET- 



D B S M O M D. 163 



LETTER XV.* 



TO MR. BETHEL. 



Montfleuri, 0(5lober 10, 1790. 

WHAT did I fay to you, dear Bethel, tn 
my letter of the 29th of Auguft, that has given 
you occafion to rally me fo unmercifully about 
Madame de Boifbeile j and to predidl my cure^ 
as you call it — 1 cannot now recoUtdl the con- 
tents of that letter, but of this I am fare, that 
I never was more fondly attached to the lovely 
woman, from whom my deltiny has divided me, 
than at this moment; or ever faw the perfec- 
tions of other women with more indifference— 
Were it poflible for you, my friend, to compre- 
hend the anguirti of heart which I have felt ever 
fince your laft letieis gave me fuch an account 
of the fituation of Verney's afF.iirs — You might 
be convinced, that time, abfence, and diftance, 
have had no fuch effedt in altering my fenti- 



• Anfwer to letter XI. 

ments ; 



164 DESMOND. 

ments; and that the fifter of my friend Montfitun, 
were fhe even as partial to me, as fome trifling 
occurrences I have related, may have led you to 
imagine, can never be to me more than an 
agreeable acquaintance — far from being able to 
detach my mind from the idea of Geraldine's 
fituation — I have undergone continual raillery 
from Montfleuri, for my extreme dejeilion, 
ever fince I heard it — If thefe diilrefling fcenes 
fhould become yet more alarming, 1 fhall return 
to hngland — There I ihall, at lead, learn the 
progrefs of that ruin, which, though I cannot 
wholly prevent, I may, perhap;^, fof'ten to her, 
for whofe fake alone, I dep'cate its arrival — 
Reitkfe and wretched, I left Hautevilic, hardly 
confcious of the progrefs of my journey j and 
fmce i came hither, have h;id a return of that 
lurking fever which made my htaUh one pre- 
tence for my quitting LngUnd. 

Montfleuri is not here, but was detained by 
Ivufinefs at Aiguemont — [ expe<3 him to-mor- 
row ; and (hull then determine whether to b- nd 
my courfe fouthward with him, or northv^ard, 
on my return to England. 1 cannot cefcnbe 
to you htivv wretched I am — Surtl)-, you never 
loved, or you would not ridicule fcelmgs fo 
acute as nnne- — Nor would you fuppofe that I 
ihould ihink, about my fortune, if the facrifice 
of any part of it could fccure the peace and 
competence of a being for whom i could lay 
down my life. I intended to have continued a 
little narrative of all that happens to me — of the 
perfons I meet — and of the converfatii^n I hear 
—but your raillery has changed my purpofc. 
Of whom can I fpeak here, but of Jofephine 
and Julie; and if I tell you that they wept with 
picture pn my arrival, and have fince exerted 

them- 



B E. S M O K D. 165 

themfelves, with unccafing folicitlicle, to divert 
the melancholy they cannot but perceive — You 
would again renew that ftrain of ridicule about 
the former, which 1 To little like to hear — This 
prevents my telling you of a walk which Jo- 
iephine engaged me to take with her laft night 
to the ruin on the hill, of which, 1 believe, I 
gave a flight defcription in fome former letter — 
nor will I, for the fame reafon, relate the con- 
verfation that pafled there — When (eating her- 
felf on a piece of a fallen column, fhe began, 
after a deep figh, and with eyes fwimming in 
tears, to relate to me the occurrences of her 
unfortunate life. 

Could I help liftening to fuch a woman?— 
Could I help fympathizingin forrows which (he 
fo well knows how to defcribe? — Alas ! when 
{he complains that her mother betrayed her into 
marriage with a man, for whom it was impof- 
fible (he ever could either feel love or eftecm — 
"When (he dwells on all the miferies of fuch a 
conneftion, on the bitternefs with which her 
life is irrecoverably dafhed — The fnniliarity of 
her fate to that of Geraldine, awakens in my 
mind a thoufand fubjedls of painful recoUedtion, 
and fruitlefs regret — My tears flow with hers; 
and {he believes thofe emotions arife from ex- 
treme fenfibility^ which are rather excited by 
the fituation of my own heart. 

This kind of converfation fo entirely en- 
groffed us laft night, that I heeded not the pro- 
grefs of time; and the fun had been for fome 
time funk behind thofe diftant mountains that 
bound the extenfive profpe6t from the emi- 
nence we were upon, before I recol!e<Sled that 
we had a river to crofs, and a very long walk 
home. 

When 



l66 DESMOND. 

When thefe circumftances occurred to me, 
I fuddenly propofed to Madame de Boifbelleto 
return— She had then been Ihedding tears in 
fileiice, ( >T fome mortients, and ftarting from 
the melancholy altitude in which fhe fat, (he 
tonic my ha id, and gently preffing it, faid, as I 
led her among the mafleso'" he fallen buildings 
that impe.ed our path — " To the unhappy, fym- 
pathy and tendernefs, like your's, is fo fe- 
ducii;g, that 1 have even trefpafled on the in- 
dulgence your pity (eems willing to grant me — 
I, perhaps, have too tedioufly dwelt on incurable 
clamiiies, and called off your thoughts too 
loa-i from pleafantcr fubje£ls and happier wo- 
men!"- 1 anfwcred — (not, I own, without 

more emotion than 1 wiflied to have Ihewn) that 
I had indeed liflened .... 

Dear Bethel, I here broke off, on receiving 
intelligence that a meflenger from Marfeilles 
had a pacquet to deliver to me. I hurried to 
meet him, and received from a man fent ex- 
prt^fs, the leiier I enclofe, from Anthony, Wa- 
verly's old fervant. 

As I am not fure that my prefencc in En- 
gland can be ufcful to Gerald ine, and have fome 
hoaes that at Marfeilles, it may yet fave her 
brother, I lliall therefore haften thither ; but, 
at the earneft entreaty of the ladies of this fa- 
mily, I (hall wait till noon to morrow, by 
which time Montfleuri will certainly be return- 
ed. I have therefore difpatched my fervant to 
the next port houfe to order four horfes hither 
to-nio>row— I have no hope that Waverly will 
yield to reafon, but his fluttuating charadler, 
which is uluaily fo much againfl: him, is here 
my only relianve — Diredt your letters, till you 
hear from me again, to the care of iVlelfieurs 

Duhamel 



DESMOND. 167 

Duhamel Mnd Bergot, at Marfeilles ; and do 
not, I befeech you, my dear friend, trifle with 
my unllappinef^, but g ve me as exadl an account 
a6 you can coiled of V erney's affairs. As loon 
as polhble 1 hope to hear from you. 

Your's afFe<Slionalely, ever, 

LIONtL DESMOND. 



LET. 



J 68 D E S M O K D. 



LETTER XVI/ 



TO LIONEL DESMOND, ESQUIRE. 
SiR. 

Marfiiles, Oiflr. 7ih, 1790. 

HOPING you will excufc this freedom — 
this is to let you know, that Mafter changed 
his mind as to joining your honors party at my 
lord the Count of Hottevills as he promifed 
faithfully, and inftead thereof, fet out with the 
gentlemen as he was with for this place ; where 
they have introduced him to a family as is come 
to fettle near here fince the troubles in the capi- 
tol ; which is, a mother, a fon and two daugh- 
ters. And mafter have lived with this family 
all's one as if it were his home — 1 know no 
harm of the females — they are handfome young 
women — that is the two daughters : but the fon, 
tho he appears fo grand and fafliinabJe, is as I 
hear a fort of fiiarping chap— or what we call 

• Indoffd in the foregoieg. 

- i4 
I 



DESMOND. 169 

in England a black legs — He has won a good 
deal of money of mafter, as 1 have leafon to 
think; but that does not altogether fignify fo 
much as the intention they have perfuadcd him 
into amongft them, to marry one of the mam- 
felles ; which if fomething does not happen to 
make him change his mind he will certainly do 
out of hand — 1 can afTure you honour'd Sir, I 
never knew mafter fo long in the fame mind 
ever fince I have been in liis fervice as upon 
this occacion — And I thought proj-er to let yoti 
know, hecaufe I am certain that my old ladj', 
nor no part of his relation? could like of this 
thing, and particularly his Jtfter Mrs. Verney, 
who faid fo much to him in my hearing about 
being drawn in to marry, and advifed him by 
all means to confult you, before ever he refolved 
upon any fcheme whatever — I vva> fo bold as to 
tell this to my mafter, who was not angry in- 
deed with me, as he is a very good natured gen- 
tleman : but he afk'd if fo be 1 thought that he 
was to be always a child iji leading ftrings. 

I thought it beft, feeing this affair is ftill 
going on to advertife your honor of it; and if 
you think it proper to put an end thereto by 
your hinterference I think there is no time to 
be loft. 

From Sir . , 

Your dutiful humble fervant 

to command 

ANTHONY BOOKER, 

Vol. I. I LET- 



170 DESMOND. 



LETTER XVII. 



TO MISS WAVERLY AT BATH, 



Upper Seymour Street, Nov. 10, 1790. 

WHY did I flatter myfdf, deareft Fanny, 
that the numberlefs diftrefles which have lately 
furrounded me, would either bring with them 
that calm refignatioa which fhould teach me to 
bear, or that total debility of mind that fliould 
make me forget to feel all their poignancy. — Is 
it, that I fat out in life with too great a (hare of 
fenfibility ? or is my lot to be particularly 
wretched ? — Every means 1 take to fave myfelf 
from pain — to fave thofe I love — on whom, in- 
deed, my happinefs depends, lerves only to ren- 
der me moie mifcrable. — How ill I have fuc- 
ceeded in regard to my brother, the enclofcd 
-letter wi!l too well explain ! 

Why did I ever involve DcfaionJ in the 
hnpelcfs t ,fk of checking his coiiducL — I am 
(o didreiTed, fo hurt, that it is with the utmolb 
diiiic'jlty i v/rite. — .iowever, as the generous 

• exertions 



DESMOND. 171 

exertions of this excellrnt ycunp; man have, for 
the prtfcnt, rtfcued my broihcr from the atSlual 
commiflian of the folly he metiitated, though 
perhaps at the expcnce of a mofl valuable life, 
you will communicate to my mother this very 
unfortunate altair, and dchre her diredlions iti 
regard to recalling her fon. 

Perhaps 1 ought to fay all this to her myftlf; 
but I am really fo ihiikcn by this inte!Iigcnre, 
that it is not without great difficulty I can wri c 
to you. — My fortitude, which you have of late 
been accuftomed to compliment, has, I know 
not why, quite forfaken me now; and, me- 
thinks, 1 could bear any thing better, than that 
fuch a man as Defmond (heuld be fo great a 
fufFerer from his generous attention to a part of 
my family. 

1 have been very ill ever fincc the receipt of 
this melancholy letter; and, it is only to-dav, 
though I received it on Thurfday, that I hav^ 
had ilrcngth enough to forwnrn it to vcu. — [ 
am now fo near being confined, that the people 
\>ho are coUecSlcd about me, weary me with 
their troublcfome care, and will not Jet me have 
a moment to myfelf. 

It would have been a comfort to me, ry 
Fanny, toha\c had vour company at this time; 
but I know that this incident will add to the rp- 
luSVance \\ith which my mother would have be- 
fore borne your abfence from her ; and, thfr^- 
fore, 1 will not again name it, nor fuffer myfelf 
to make tliofe complaints, in which ivg ( I meaa 
the unhappy) too frequently indulge ourfelves, 
without conlidering that this querulous weak- 
nefs i"? pcinful to othrrs ; and, to ourfelvec, un, 
availing : — for, alas! it cures not the evils it 
dffcribfc:-. 

! 2 As 



174 DESMOND. 

As to Mr. Verney, he has never been at 
harrie fince the October meeting, nor have I 

ever heard from him. His friend, Colonel 

Scarfdale, called at niy door on Tuefday, and 
was, by accident, admitted. — He made a long 
vifit, and talked, as ufiial, in a ftyle which i 
fuppofe 1 might admire (hnce all the world al- 
lows him to be very charming) if I could but 
underftand what he means. However, though I 
am fo taftelefs as not to difcover the perfections 
of this wonderful being, I endured his conver- 
fation from three o'clock till half paft five; in 
hopes, that as he is fo much conne£lcd with 
Mr. Verney, I might learn from him where 
my hufband is. — But he laughed ofF all my en- 
quiries unfeelingly enough j and, all I could 
collctSl was, that Mr. Verney is now, or at leaft 
was a icw days fmce, at the houfe of one of 
their mutual friends in Yorkfhire. — I anticipate 
the remark you will make upon this — You who 
are fo little inclined to fpare his follies, or, in- 
deed, thofe of any of your acquaintance ; and, 
it is too true, that when he is at home, it makes 
no other difference to me than that of deftroy- 
ing my peace without promoting my happinefs. 
— i check my pen, however — and when I jook 
at my two lovely children, I blame myfelf for 
being thus betrayed into complaints agamll their 
father. — Ajas ! v.'hy are our pleafures, our tafles, 
our views of life fo difFerent? — But 1 will ftifle 
thefe murmurs; aiid, indeed, I would molt wil- 
lingly dr(>p this hopelefs fubjett for ever. Let 
me return to one that gives, at leaft, more fa- 
vourable iceds oi human nature, though it can 
only be productive of pain to me — I mean — to 
poor Drfm(;nd. — Oh ! Fa/iny, what a heart is 
his! — How noble is that diJdain of p-^rfonal 

d.inger. 



D E S M O N D. 173 

danger, when mlngleil with fuch manly tender- 
iiefs — luch generous fenfibility for the feelings 
of others ! — When we faw fo much of him in 
Kent thefirfl year of my marriage, we ufed, I 
remember, to have little difputes about him — 
but they were chilJifll. Do you not recollect 
that when I contended for Lavatcr's fyllem, I 
introduced him in lupport of my argument? — 
His was the moft open, in2;enuous countenance 
I had ever fcen ; and his manners, as. well as all I 
could then know of his heart and his temper, 
were exz£i\y fuch as that countenance indicated. 
You then, in the mere fpirit of contradidlion, 
ufed to fay, that this ingenuous expreflion was 
often loft in clouds for whole hours together ; 
and that you believed this paragon was a fullcy 
fort of an animal. — Did you ever believe that 
fuch a ftrikine: inflance of difinterefted kindnefs 
towards your own family wouid fo connrm my 
-opinion? — Yet while I write he fuffers — per- 
haps dies ! the vidlim of tliat generous and 
exalted fpirit which led him to hazard his life, 
that he might fulfil a promife I, who have fo 
little a right to his friendfhip, drew from him— 
A promife that he would be attentive to the 
conduct of my brother ! 

Indeed, Fanny, when my imagination fets- 
him before me woundtd, in pain, perhaps in 
danger (and it is an image 1 have hardly loft for 
a moment fince the receipt of vhis cruel intelli- 
gence) I am io very milerable, that all other 
anxieties of my life, multiplied as they have 

lately been, are unheeded and unfair. But 

why ftiould I write thus- why hazard com- 
municating to you, my dear iirter, a portion 
of that pain from which 1 cannot myfelf et- 
cape ? 

I will 



1^4 DESMOND. 

I will bid you good night, my Fanny. It is 
now fix-and-thiriy hours fmce 1 have clofed my 
eyes— I will try to fleep, a.nd to forget how very 
very long it will be before i can hear again from 
Marfeilles. 

Write to rnc I conjure you — tell me what 
are my mother's inttntions as to fending for my 
brother home. And be allured of the tender 
afFedion cf your 

GERALDINE VERNEY. 



P. S. Did you ever hear cf this M*dsmc 
de Buifbtllc ? and do you know whcthti ilic is 
a uiduw or married?— Young, middle aged ur 
Old ? — She is fiHer to Mr. Defmond's favourite 
I'rench fiiend, Montfieuri ; and, if fhe has any 
heart, muft hi.ve exquifite pleafure in foftening, 
to fuch a man as Defmond, the long hours of 
pain and confinement. — I fuppofe he has for- 
gotten that I read French tolerably j however, 
perhaps, it was better to let the furgeon write. 
—How miferable is the fufpence I muft endure 
till the arrival of the next letters. 



LET- 



» t" S M N' D. 1-5 



LETTER XVUL* 



TO MRS. VKRNEY. 



MA D A M, 

IT is at the rcqueff of Mr. Dcfrr.r-nd, that 
I takcthelibertyof addrcfiing you. f^i'>- anxiety, 
on your account, has never torfaken him in the 
midft of what have been certainly very acute 
fufterings ; not unattended with danger. 

Jt may be necefTary to enter into a detail of 
the caufes that prevent his writing himfelf, on 
a fubjedt, which nothing but the impraifticabi- 
lity of his doing, would, 1 am fure, induce him 
to entrufl to a flranger. 

It is now four days fince I received a fum- 
mons to attend, at the diftance of three miles 

♦ Enclofcd in ihe foregoing to Mifs Waverly. 

from 



Ijb ©ESMOND. 

from the cit)*, an Englifli gentleman, who hail, 
on that morning, been engaged in an affair of 
honor. I had not till then the honor of know- 
ing Mr. Defrnond — whom I found very terribly 

wounded by a piltol fhot in the right arm. > 

I'hc ball eutering a little below the elbow, had 
run only broken, but fo (battered tlie bone, that 
i am afraid the greatell (kill cannot anfwer the 
ct-nfequences. — Befidcs this, there was a bullet, 
•from the nrft brace of piftols which were fired, 
lodged in the right flioulder, which, though it 
was fo ficuated as to be extraiSted without much 
cliiEculty, greatly encreiifes the inflammation, 
and of courfe, the hazard of the other wound, 
■where the finews are fo torn, and the bone in 
iuch a flate, that the ball could not be taken 
out without great pain. I did all that could be 
done, and iVlr. Defrnond bore the operation 
vviih the calmefl fortitude. 1 left him at noon, 
in what 1 thought as favourable a way, as was 
pi^ifible, under Iuch circumfVances ; yet 1 found, 
on my return in the evening, that he had a 
great deal of fever ; and I am concerned to fay, 
ibis fymptom has ever fince been encreafing. — 
1 hough much is certainly to be hoped for, 
irom the youth, conftitution, and patience of 
the fufi'erer — I can by no means fay I am cer- 
tain of a fortunate event. 

The difpute, in confcquence of which this 
difagreeable accident happened, originated, I 
'find, about y^^ur brother, Mr. Wavcrly ; who, 
entangled.by the artifices of a family well known 
IH this country, had engaged to marry one of 
the -young ladies — a ftep which was thought, by 
^ir. Defrnond, as indeed it was uaiverfaJly^ 

very indifcreet. T he interference of Mr. 

De(aiond 



DESMOND, 177 

Dcfm^nd to prevent k, brought upon hrm the 
refentment of t!>e ladles brotlier, the young 
Chevalier »de -Stt. Eloy ; and the duel enfued. 

I found, very early in the courfe of my at- 
tendance, that the mind of my patient was as 
much aftedted as his body ; and that thegreateft 
pain he felt, was from being rendered incapable 
of writing to you, madam. — He at length aflced 
if I would be fo -good as to write what he 
would dictate, as it was the only way by 
which he <:-ould communicate his fituation to 
you. His advice is, that the relations of Mr. 
Waverly recall him immediately to England. 
He is now at Avignon, but notwithftanding 
what has happened, Mr. Defmond fecnis lo 
think him by no means fecure from the artifices 
of a family that has gained fuch an afcendancy 
over him. — I made notes with my pencil, as i 
fat by his bedfide, and indeed promifed to ad- 
here to the words he dictated ; but I think it 
my duty, midam, in this cafe,, to tell you my 
real fentiment?, and not to palliate or difguife 
my apprehenfions. — As foon as the affair hap^ 
pened, I fenr, by Mr. Defmond's defire, an 
account of it to his friend, whofe houfe, in 
the Lyonois, he had, I found, lecently left \ 
and to day this friend, Monfieur de Moniflcuri, 
arrived here exprefs, with his fifter, Madame 
de Boifbelle. — They both feem extremely inte- 
refted for the health of my patient, and have 
attencfed him,, ever f;nce their arrival, with un- 
ceafing aiTiduity. — He appears pleafed and re- 
lieved by their prefence; and indeed I imagined 
that he would rather have employed one of them 
to have the honor of writing to you ; but he 
faid Monfieur de Montfleuri could write but 
little Englilh, and his fifter none. 

I 5 I believe, 



176 D E S M O It O. 

I believe, madam, tha^t to receive the honor 
of your commands, vi^ould be particularly gra- 
tifying to my patient, of whom I moft fincerely 
wifh that I may be enabled, in a fev^ days, to 
fend you a better account. 

I am, madam. 

Your moft obedient, 

and moft humble fervant, 

WILLIAM CARMICHAEL.. 



L K T- 



I 



■t 



O £ S M 9 N D. 179' 



LETTER XIX. 



TO MR. D E S M G N D. 



Baih, Nov. 15, 1790. 

I NEVER was fo diftrefled in my life, liiy 
dear Defmond, as I was at the account of your 
accident ; which I received yefterday from Mifs 
Waverly. — I came hither about ten days ago by 
the advice of my friend Banks, who thinks the 
waters will decide, whether the fomething I 
have about me is gout or no ; and thought of 
nothing lefs than of receiving intelligence here, 
that you lie dangeroufly wounded at or near 
Marfeilles, in a quarrel about Waverly. — This 
is no time to prcaclt to you. — But 1 beg, that 
immediately upon the receipt of this letter, you 
vy^ill let me know if I can be of any ufe to you ; 
and, if 1 can, bc'afTured that nothing ftiiri 

. . preveiit 



prevent my coming to you inftantly. I hope 
you know, that I am not one of thofe who can. 
With great compofure, talk over and lament 
their friends misfortunes, without ftirring a 
finger to help them. — My life, which has long 
afrorded me no enjoyment worth the trouble of 
living for, is only of value to me, as it may be 
ufetul to ray children, and the very few friends 
I love. — You oncf, I remember, on an occa- 
ficn of much lefs importance, fcrupled to fend 
for me bccaufe you faid you knew it was in the 
midft of harveft ; — it is now in the midft of 
the wheat feafon ; yet, you fee, I am at Bath ; 
and, if a trifling, half-formed complaint, which 
is not ferious enough to have a name, could 
bring me thus far from home, furely the fervice 
of my friend Dcfmond would carry me much — 
much farther. 

1 fhall be extremely uneafy till I hear from 
you, and would, indeed, fee out diredily, if I 
could imagine you are as ill as Mifs VVaverly 
repjefents you. — But ibefides that, her account 
is inconfiRent and incoherent. I know all 

-^ifils love a duel, and to lament over the dear 
jjgallant creature who fuffers ijj it. — This little 
jwild girl fee.ms half frantic, aiid ,does nothing 

'•4>ut talk to every .body ahu.ut yoju, in which (he 
JSiCws more gratitude than difc.reitiori. — Your 
-unr.le, Danby, who is here on his ufual au- 
,tua nal vifit, has heard of your fame j and came 
buftling up toraein the cotFec-Boufe this morn- 
ing, ti) tell me, that alJ he bad forefeen as the 
cofjfequence of your imprudejit jouxney to 
France, was come to pafs j that you were af- 
faffini.ted by a party v^hom your politics h.ad 
offended ; and would probably loie your Jife in 
confequeiacc pf yojar.fjpoliih i^gc for a fooliih 

revolu- 



DESMOND. jSi 

revolution. — I endeavoured, in vain, to con- 
vince him that the afFair happened in a mere 
jjrivate quarrel — a quarrel with an avanturUr^ 
in which you had engaged to fave a particular 
friend from an improper niarriage. — The old 
Major would not hear me. — He at length grant- 
ed, that infteadof being afraflin:ited, yon might 
have fought, but that IHH it muft have been 
about politics ; and, to do him juttice, he judges 
of others by himfelf, which is the only way a man 
can judge. — Very certain it is, nav, he openly 
protcfies it, that he never loved any body well 
enough in his life, to give himfelf, on their ac- 
count, one quarter of an hour's pain. — The 
public intererts him as little — he declares, that 
he is perfectly at eafe, and therefore, cares not 
who is otherwife j and as to all revolutions, 
or even alteration?, he has a mortal averfion 
to them. — Mifs Waverly tells me (he has writ- 
ten to you, by defire of her mother, to thank 
you for your very friendly interpofition, and 
has given you an account of all your connexions 
in England. — This I am very ferry for, becaufe 
I am afraid fhe can give you no account of the 
Verney family that will not add to the prefent 
deprefiion of your fpirits ; indeed (he cannot, 
with truth, fpeak. of their fituation favourably j 
and, if truth could fay any thing good of Ver- 
ney, Mifs Waverly feems little difpofed to 
repeat it. — She is naturally fatirical, and hates 
Verney, to whom (he thinks her fifter has 
been facrificed j fo, that when«ver they meet, 
it is with difpieafnre on her fide, and with con- 
temptuous indifFerence on his : — but Fanny, 
whenever fhe has an oppoitunity of fpeaking of 
him, takes care that the dark (hades ot his 
chara<iter (hall have all their foree. — Allow, my 

2 ^21 



l82 D E S M O t^ D. 

dear Defmond, fomething for this in the ac- 
count you may, perhaps, hear. — Let me have 
early intelligence of you I conjure you ; and I 
again beg you to remember, that you may com- 
mand the prefence, as in any other way, the 
bcft ferviccs of ^ 

Your's moft faithfully, 

E. BETHEL. 



LET-- 



DESMOND. 183 



LETTER XX. 



TO MR. BETHEL. 



Marfellles, 29th Not. 1790. 

I U S £ another hand, my dear friend, to 
thank you for your letter of the fourteenth, 
which reached me yefterday. — Your attentive 
kindnefs in offering to come to me, I (hall ne- 
ver forget : though I do not avail myfelf of it, 
becaufe I know fuch a journey can be neither 
convenient or agreeable to you ; and becaufe it 
is in your power, and in yours only, to a6t for 
me in England, in an affair on which the tran- 
quility of my mind depends. Tranquillity— 
without which, the progrefs of my cuie will 
be flow ; and that fingle reafon will, I am per- 
fuaded, be enough to reconcile you in the tafk 
1 now folicit you to engage in. 

A letter from Mifs Waverly, which I re- 
ceived by the feme pofl that brought yours, 
1 has 



184 DESMOND. 

has rendered me more than ever wretched. 

Good heavens 4 in what a fituation is the wo- 
man, fo juftly adored by your unhappy friend, 
at a moment when he cannot fly to her aflif- 
tance ! — She had Jain-in only ten days, when 
her fitter wrote to me. — There are two execu- 
tions in the houfe, one for fixteen hundred, the 
other for two thoufand three hundred pounds. 
Verney is gone, nobody knows whither. And 
Geraldine, in fuch a fituation, has no father, 
brother, or friend to fupport her. — Yet the na- 
tural dignity of her mind has, it fbould feem, 
never forfak.en her. 

A h'ttle before her confinement fhe wrote to 
thank me for my fiiendfhip for her brother, and 
to deplore its confequcnces — (Oh, Bethel ! for 
how much more fuffering would not her tender 
gratitude overpay rre) but of herfelf, oi her 
own uneafinefs, fhe faid nothing j nor fhould 
I have Jcnown it but fc>f^ Fanny Waverly ; 
whom her mother has, at length, fent to the 
fuffering angel, aud who has given me a dread- 
ful detail of the fuppofed fituation of Verney 's 
^a^.iirs— I fay fuppofed, becaufe there is nor 
thing certainJy known from himifelf^ acd thefe 
debts weje only difcovered by the entrance of 
the fheriiF's ofijctr?'. I cannot reft, my dear 
Bethel, whilfl Geraldine is thus diftreffed. My 
iboiights are conflantly employed upon the 
means of relievin,g her; but a cripple as 1 am, 
and fo far from England, 1 miift depend on ycu 
to aflift me. Since then you were fo good as to 
ofFtr to come nirher, I hope and believe you 
wiU not hefitiite to take a fliorter journey, much 
more conducive to my repcfe, even than the 
fatisfatf ion o. feeing you. — Go, I befeech you, 
to London — enquire into the nature of thefe 

debts i 



DESMOND. 185 

debts; and, at all events, difcharge them ; but 
concealing carefully at whofe entreaty you take 
this trouble; even concealing yourfelf, if it be 
pofliblc — I fend you an order, on my banker, 
for five thoufand pounds, and if twice the fum 
be wanted to reftore to Geraldine her houfe, 
and a little, even tranfient rcpofe, I fljould 
think it a cheap purchafe. 

Do not argue with me, dear Bethel, about 
this— but hear me, when I moft folemnly af- 
fure you, that far from meaning to avail myfelf 
of any advantage which grateful fenfibility 
might give me over fuch a mind as her's, it is 
not my intention flie fhall ever know of the 
tranlaition ; and I entreat you to manage it for 
nie accordingly. While 1 find her rife every 
moment in my e/ieem, I knoiv that I am becom- 
ing — alas? am already become unworthy hers. 
— Do not alk me an explanation ; I have faid 

more than I intended— but let it go. 7^he 

grcatefi: favor you can do me, Bethel, is to 
execute this commiflion for me as expeditioufly 
as poffible, and it will give you pleafure to hear, 
that i am fo much better than my furgeon ex- 
pe£ted, from the early appearances of my wound, 
that it is probable I fhall be able to thank you 
with my own hand, for the friendly commiflion 
I now entreat you to undertake. I am already 
able to move my fingers, though not to guide a 
pen. iVly arm however, is yet in fuch a ftatt^ 
as renders it very imprudent, if not impoflible 
for me, to leave the fkilful man, who has, con- 
trary to all probability and expectation, faved 
jt from amputation; which, at firft, feemed 
almoft unavoidable. Montfleuri wifhes that 
I may remove to his houfe, in the Lyonois, as 
a jort of firil ftage towards England i but I 

have 



l86 t) E S M O N L». 

have been already too much obliged to him, 
and his filler, Madame de Boi(belle. He at- 
tended me himfelf day and night, while there 
was fo much danger, as Mr. Carniichael ap- 
prehended, for many days after the accident; 
and fince he has been abfent, his fifter, has 
with too much goodnefs given me her conftant 
attention. — Montfleuri has been to Paris, and 
returned only yefterday. He fees my uneafinefs 

fjnce the receipt of Mifs Waverly's letter 

Madame de Boifbelle too fees it, and what is 
worfe, my medical friends perceive it, from 
the ftate of my wound ; fo that as it is imp-nffi- 
bli fur me, my dear friend, either to conceal or 
conquer it, my fjle dependence for cither peace 
of nvnd, or bodily health, is on your friendly 
eftdeavours to remove it. 

How long, how very long, will the hours 
feem that mu[l intervene before I can hear that 
this is done ; and what fhall I do to beguile 
them? Montfleuri tali-is to me of politics, and 
exults in the hope that all will be fettk'd advan- 
tageoufly for his country, and without blood- 
flied ; I rejoice, moft fmcerely rejoice, in this 
profpeft, (o favourable to the belt interefts of 
humanity ; but I can no longer enter with 
cagernefs into the detail of thofe mezfures by 
which it is to be realized. — One predominant 
fenfation, excludes for the prefent, all the lively 
JBtereft I felt in more general concerns, and 
while Mrs. Verney is ' but it is not 

necefiary, furely to add more on this topic — 
No, my dear Bethel, you will, on fuch an oc- 
cafion, enter into my feelings from the genero- 
ilty of your own heart, and what ever that 
little touch of mifanthropy, which you have 
acquired, my lead you to think of human na- 
ture^ 



DESMOND. 187 

ture in general — you will after my afleverations on 
this fubjeiSl, and I hope, after what you know 
of me, do juftice as well to the difintercfted 
nature of my love, as to the finccrity of that 
friendfhip, with which, 

I ever remain, 

moil affedlionately yours, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



LET, 



D E 3 M O N G. 



LETTER XXT. 



TO MR. DESMOND, 



London, Dec. 17, 1790. 

THE moment I received your letter, I 
haftenod from Bath, where I then wa«, to 
London; determined to execute your comnnf- 
fion to the beft of my p©wer, though 1 neither 
approved it, or knew very well how to fet about 

it. Do not imagine, however, my dear 

Defmond, that I have a nund (o narrowed by 
a long converfe with the world, or an heart (o 
hardened by too much knowledge of its inhabi- 
tants, as to blame the liberality of your fenti- 
ments, or be infenhble to the pleafure of indul- 
ging them.. But here there is a fatal and 

jnfeparable bar to the fuccefs of every attempt 
you can make to befriend Mrs. Verney and her 
children; and the facility with which Verney 
finds himfelf delivered from one difficulty, only 
ferves to encourage him to plunge into others, 
liH total and irretrievable ruin iliall overtake 
hira» 

I was 



DESMOND. 189 

I was aware of all the difficulties of the taflc 
vou fet me ; for it was by no means proper that 
the fmalleft fufpicionfliould arife as to the quar- 
ter from whence the money came that paid ofF 
thofe demands, which muft otherwife have 
brought all the effedls Verney had at his town- 
hnufe to fale within a very (hort time. — I have a 
friend in the law who, to great acutenefs, adds 
that moft rare quality, in an attorney, of ftri<Sl 
integrity — To him I confided the bufinefs, and 
he has managed it fo well, that Mrs. Verney is 
again in an uninterrupted pofTeiTion of her 
houfe ; and believes, as does Verney himfelf, 
that Mrs. Waverly advanced the moneys but 
keeps it concealed left it fliould fubjfft her to 
future demands. Of the means by whicn all 
this was done, I need not enter into a detail — 
You will be fatisfied to know it is done, and 
that the pride and delicacy of Geraldine have 
not fufi-ered. — You will be better pleafed, per- 
haps, to hear fomething of herfelf. — 1 thought 
1 might call there as an acquaintance j and 
though I received intelligence at the door, that 
Mrs. Verney was not well, and faw no company 
but her own family, I fent up my name, and 
was immediately admitted. 

1 found her in her dreiling-room, fo pale, ft 
languid, fo changed from the lovely .blooming 
Geraldine of four years fince, that I behe)d her 
with extreme concern. — Yet however unwilling 
I am, my friend, to encourage in you the growth 
of a paffion productive on all fides of mifery, l 
1 am compelled to own, that this charming wo- 
man, in the pride of early beauty, never ap- 
peared to me fo interefting, fo truly lovely, as 
at the moment I faw her. — In her lap lay fleep- 
ing the litt4e infant of a month old — The boy of 

which 



190 



DESMOND. 



which I have heard you fpeak with Co much 
fotidnefs, fat on the carpet at her feet, and the 
girl on the lopha by her. — In anfwer to my 
compliments, fhe faid with a fweet, yet melan- 
choly fmile — " This is very good indeed, Mr. 
Bethel, and like an old friend.-— How are your 
two fweet children — are they in town with 
you ? — [t would give me great pleafure to fee 
them." — I anfwered her enquiries about Harry 
and Louifa in the ufual way; and Cas then, 
with a fort of anxiety ia her manner, for which 
I could eafily account, talked for a moment on 
the common topics of the day j which almoft 
unavoidably led me to fpeak of France. — She 
fighed when I firft named it ; and, with a faint 
blufh, exclaimed — " Ah ! Mr. Bethel ! how 
can I think of France without feeling the acu- 
teft pain, when it inftanily brings to my mind 
what has fo lately happened there to our excel- 
lent friend, Mr. Defmond ?" — A deeper colour 
wavered for a moment on her cheek ; her voice 
t'^'embliid ; but (he feemed, by an effort, to re- 
prefs her emotion, and continued — " Were 
you not a moft candid and generous minded 
man, Mr. Bethel, I fhould fear that you would 
almofl hold me in averfion, for having been, 
however unintentionally, the caufe of your 
friend's very dreadful accident : believe me, 
nothing In my whole life, (and it has not cer- 
ta nly been a fortunate life,j has ever given me 
fo muci concern as this event. All who love 
Mr. DeTmond (and there are few young men fo 
univerfally and defervedly belov(d) muft deteli 
the very name of thofe who were the means of 
hazardinj; a life fo valuable, and of expofing 
him (o lulfer fuch pain and conhnemcnt ; pf^r- 
hips fuch lafting inconvenience — for I fear'* — 

ai>d 



DESMOND. 191 

and her voice faultered (o as to become almoft 
inarticulate — ** I fear it is far from being cer- 
tain that he will ever be reflored to the ufe of 
his hand." 

That idea feemed fo diftreffing to her, that 

(he looked as if flie was ready to faint. 1 

haftened, you may be aflured, to relieve her 
apprehenfions > and aflured h-er, that not only 
your hand would be well, but that you thought 
yourfelf infinitely overpayed for the inconveni- 
ence you had fuftained in your rencounter with 
the Chevalier de St. Eloy, fince you had been 
the means of faving her brother from a mar- 
riage fo extremely improper : then, to detach 
her thoughts from what I fawthey moft pain- 
fully dwelt upon, your hazard and fufFerings, I 
gave her an account I had learned from Mr. 
Carmichael* of the family of St. Eloy; and, as 
1 found this ftill affected her too much, becaufe 
it excited her gratitude anew, towards you, by 
whofc interference Waverly had cfcaped from a 
connexion with it, I made a tranfition to the 
affairs of France : and knowing how well fhe 
could talk on every fubje<^, had a wifh to draw 
her out on this. 

The little I could obtain from her would 
have convinced me, had I needed fuch convic- 
tion, of the ftrcngth of her underftandingi, and 
that rcdtitude of heart, which is fo admirable 
ind fo rare. Yet, with ali this, there is no 
prelumption ; none of that anxiety to be heard, 
or that diclatorial tone of converfation that has 
fo often difgufted and repulfed me, in women 
who either have, or affetSl to have, a fuperiority 
of underlhnding. — Geraldine aft'ecls nothing ; 

* In a leuer that doci net «ppear, 

and, 



tgi DESMOND. 

and, far from appearing folicitous to be confidered 
as an oracle, (he faid, with an enchanting fmile, 
towards the clofe of our converfation — " I 
know not how I have ventured, Mr. Bethel, to 
(peak fo much on a fubjeit, which I am very 
willing to acknowledge, I have had no oppor- 
tunity of knowing well. — Mr. Vcrney, you 
know, is no politician, or if he were, he would 
hardly deign to convcrfe on that topic with a 
woman — for of the underftandings of all wo- 
men he has the moft contemptible opinion j and 
fays, ' that we are good for nothing but to 
make a (hew while v/e are young, and to be- 
come nurfes when we are old.' — 1 know that 
more than half the men in the world are of his 
opinion ; and that by them, what fome cele- 
brated author has faid, is generally allowed to 
be true — that a woman even of talents is only 
confidered by man with that fort of pleafure 
■with which they contemplate a bird who fpeaks 
a few words plainly — I believe it is not exactly 
the expreflion, but, however, it is the fenfe of 
it i and, I am afraid, is the general fenfe of the 
world." 

I could not forbear interrupting here, to afTure 
her that if fuch an opinion was genera), mine 
was an exception ; for that 1 was convinced, 
ignorance and vanity were mvjch more fatal to 
that happinefs which every man feeks, or ought 
to feek, when he marries, than that knowledge 
which has been infidioufly called unbecoming 
in women. — I was going on, fori found myfelf 
abfolutely unable to quit her, when her hufband 
and the Lord Newminfter, whom you defcribed 
to me at Margate fome months fince, entered 
the room together. 

Verneyj 



n E 3 M o N n» i<5j 

Vcrncy, who ha? naturdlly a wild, unfcttled 

look, really (hocked inc. To an emaciated 

figure and unheahhy coudtenance, were 
added the difgufting appearance of a dtbauch 
of liquor not flept off; and clothes not fwice 
changed. — The other tnan was in even a worfe 
ft ate ; but as he was not married to Gcraldine, 
I looked at him only with' pity and difgiiftj 
while, towards Verney, I felt fomething like 
horror and deteftation. 

Geraldine turned pale when he was an- 
nounced ; and faid, in a low voice, as he came 
into the room—*' This is very unexprded, I 
have feen Mr. Verney only once for thefe laft 

five weeks" 1 would have retired, but fhe 

added, with an half-ftifledfigh-" Oh! no! do 
not go, you hear he has his friend Newminfler 
with him, and probably will not ftay five mi- 
nutes. — But if be [hould," added flie, as if 
fearing fhe had fpoken too much in a tone of 
regret and complaint — ** if he {hould, he will, 
1 am fure, be happy to fee his old friend Mr, 
Bethel." 

At this inftani Lord Newminffer, followed 
by Verney, entered. — The ("ormsr appeared llu- 
pid fi;om the efFe6ls of his hi\ night, or rathsi;^ 
morning's caroufal; but Verney, who had ju^ 
heard that the credit. irs, who had the executi- 
on'-, in his houfe, wcreptiH, and the bailiffs witii- 
drawn, was not in a hiiinour to be reftrved, or 

even confiderato. Without Tpeaking to bis 

wife, he Clicok hands v/itb ine, and cried—- 
" Damme, Bethel, how long is it tince 1 favv 
you \di\ ? 1 thought you tvert- ^one to kingdom 
come.— Here's Newmmiier and I, we came 
only lafl night fron» hi? hcafe in Norfolk.— 
Damme, we came to raije r^< kvhv' t--.>.^s ther ; 
Vol, I. }•: foi 



194 DESMOND. 

■for I have had the Philiftines in my houfe, and 
be curfed co them, who had laid violent hands 
on all my goods and chatties, except my wife 
and her brats; but fome worthy foul, I know 
not who, has fent them off. — I wifh 1 could 
find out who is (o damned generous, I'd try to 
touch them a little for the ready I want now." 
Oh ! could you have feen the countenance 
of Geraldine, while this fpeech was uttering! 
— fhe was paler than ever; and was, I faw, 

quite unable to continue in the room (he 

therefore rofe, and faying her little boy was 
awake, who had continued to fleep in her lap 
during our converfation, fhe walked apparently 
with very feeble fteps out of the room ; the two 
other children following her — " away with ye 
all," cried the worthlefs brute their father, 
*' there, get ye along to the nurfery, that's the 
proper place for women and children." — The 
jook that Geraldine gave him, as {he pafled to 
the door, which 1 held open for her, is not to 
be defciibed — it was contempt, ftifled by con- 
cern — it was indignatioi fubdued by fhame and 
forrovv. — *' Good morning to you, Mr. Be- 
thel," lai-ifhe, as Ihe went by me — *' I know not 
how to thank you enough for this friendly vifir, 
or can 1 fay hov/ much my obligation will be in- 
creafed, if you will have thegoodnefs to repeat 
it ; pray let me fee you again before you leave 
London." — I afTured her I would wait on her 
with pleafure ; and I felt extremely unhappy 
as the door clofed after her, and 1 faw her no 
more. — 

" Well, now Bethel," faid the hufband, 
*' let me talk to you a little ; tell me — are not 
your horfes at Hall's, at Hyde Park Corner?" 
I anfwercd, " yes ;" — " aye? then you're the 

man 



DESMOND. 195 

fiian I want ; — you've got a hellifb clever trot- 
ting mare, one of the niceft things I've feen a 
long time; — have you a mind to fell her ?" 
. *' Certainly no." 

s: ** I am forry for it, for I want juft fuch a 
thing. Don't you remember a famous trotting 
galloway I had, two years ago, that 1 bought 
at Tatterfal's, that would go fifteen miles within 
the hour — ^^I've loft: him by a curfed accident, 
and 1 want one as fpeedy — damme. Bethel, I'll 
give you a hundred for your little mare, and 
I'll be curs'<l if that is not fifty more than (he's 
worth." 

" I ihall not fell the mare, Mr. Verney," 
smfwered L, very coldly, fo let us talk of fome- 
thing elfe. — Pray tell me, what is this fl:ory 
which you touched upon, a little unfeelingly I 
thought, before your wife, of an execution in 
your houfe." 

*' An execution — by heaven I'd two, and that 
old tv/addler, mother Waverly, for the firft time 
in her life, has done a civil thing, for (he paid 
them off the other day — If my wife had nat 
lain- in though I fuppofe, and been fo much 
alarmed as they told me flie was, fo that the 
good old gofllp, was afraid of the confequenqes, 
I believe fhe'd have feen me at the devil before 
{he'd have drawn her purfe-ftrings; fo'twas well 
timed, and now I only wifh (he'd keep the child, 
for I'd encumbrances enough of fmall children 
before." 

" Good God,'^ Swj faid I, " is it poflible 
that having married fuch a woman as Mrs. 
Verney, and having fuch lovely and promifing 
children, you can negle£l the one, and call the 
other encumbrances." 



196 DESMOND. 

** Poh," replied he carelefsfy, '* I don't neg- 
Ie£l her — but children — when one has a houfe 
full of them, as I think 1 am likely to have, 
pull confounded hard; and as to their pro- 
niifmg, I know nothing that they proTriife, but 
to grow up, to pull harder ftill, and find otit 
that I am in their way before I have any mind 
to relinquifh the enjoyments of this life." 

'* Why then, ft nee you muft have been 
aware of all thefe contingencies, did you mar- 

" Why wh;.t a fenftlefs quc{li«n ! becaufe 
I was a green-horn, drawn in by a pretty face, 
and a iine figure. '1 heold woman, her mother, 
had the art of Jezebel, and I was a raw boy 
from College, and fancied it very knowing to 
marry a girl that all the young fellows of my 
acquaintance reckoned fo confounded hand- 
fome; befidcs, a man muft marry at fome time 
or other." 

*' That," faid the Peer, who feemed fud- 
denly awaked from his flupor, by a pofition fo 
contrary to his fentiments — *' that I deny — 'tis 
a damned folly, and nobody in his fenfes will 
commit it."" He then talked in a manner too 
grofs, and too ofFcnfive, for me to repeat upon 
paper; and concluded with exprefling his pity 
for poor Verney ; and proteftmg, that for his 
own part, though he (aw half the f fhionable 
girls in town angling f(^r him, he fbuuld keep 
nis neck out of (uch a diimncd yoke. 

I reprefled the contempt and indignation 
which It was impoflibic to help feelings and ad- 
rfrefling the illuftrious orator-r-"^ It is unfortu- 
nate, my Lord, faid 1, that thefe are your fert- 
timents, fince by them, the world is likely to 
be deprived of the worth you might tranfniif 

for 



©ESMOND. JC)7 

for its general benefit, and your country, \n 
particular, of talents, which might adorn its 

legiflature. Your Lord(hip's cotemporaries 

niuft, I am fure, refledl with concern on the 
'little profpeft there thus remains, that your vir- 
tues and abilities will not defcend to dignify the 
future annals of the Britifh fenate." 

" Oh I the devil may take the Britifh fcnatc 
for me," anfwered hz, *' I never put my head 
Into it, but when I am fent fjr on feme paints 
thattheieare doubts about; and then, indeed, 
1 go, if miniftry defire it: but otherwife, I 
don't care a curie for their drained politics . — * 
As long as I keep the reverfion ot the hnecures 
my father got for me, and two or three little 
fnug additions I've had given me fince for the 
borough intercft I'm able to carry them ; not 
one fingle guinea do 1 care fur thtir panics or 
their projedts." — Then fuddenly difmifTing the 
fubject, this hereditary patriot turned to his 
friend Verney, and faid — " Well, but Dickjf 
boy, what's the hour — as you'ye paid your 
humble duty to Madam, {hould we not be off? 
— .I've ordered my horfes to be at my own do<St 
at fix, and I have promifed Cavcrsfield to be 
with him by half paft feven to dinner — We 
muft not bilk him, as h? has made the party on 
purpofc for us." " J am ready, replied Verney, 
for X fhall not drefs at home." He then aroie, 
as if he was going, but Mifs Waverly, who 
had been out the former part oi the morning, 
now entered, and while I fpoke to her, Mr. 
Verney called to his (ervant to give him lome 
diredions about his clothes, and Lord Newmin- 
ftcr ftretchcd himfelf on the fopha and went 
ver/ comj>ofi:dl]r to fleep. 

To 



tgS DESMOND. 

'I^o any young woman, however flight may 
,be her pretennons, the marked ncgle£l of a 
man of Lord Newminfter's age is ufually fuffi- 
eiently mortifying: but to Fanny V/averiy, 
who has been accullomed to exceflive flattery 
and adulation ever fince flie left the nurfery, 
this rude inattention mufl: have appeared infup- 
portably infulting, and I forgave the little afpe- 
ritytlierc i^as in her manner, when (he faid to 
me witli a fmile of indignant contempt, and 
pointing to Newminfter, who was, I really be- 
lieve, in a found fleep — " An admirable fpe- 
cimen of the manners of a modern man of fa- 
fhion/' 

Verney, who had been giving dire^ions to 
bis fervant at the door of the room, now return- 
ed to it — *' Aha ! little Fanny," faid he, " are 
you there? — How doft do, child? — Plchoop» 
hohoop, Newminfter, it is time to go, my lad 
— ^come, let us be off." 

*• Have you feen your wife, Sir ?" faid Mifs 
Waverly very gravely — '* Yes, my dear Mi fa 
Frances," replied he in a drawling tone of 
?pimickry, ** / bave feen my wife, looking for 
all the world like Charity and herthree children 
•over the door of an hofpitaL — " 

*' She fliould not only /ooi Charity," retorted 
Fanny fmartly, " but feei it, or fhe would 
^ever be able to endure your monftrous btha- 
.viour." 

" Pretty pettifh little dear," cried he " how 
this indignation animates your features — Anger, 
Mifs Fanny, renders you abfolutely piquant — 
My wife now — my grave, folemn, fage Ipoufe, 
is not half fo aga^ant with her chari'y and all 
her virtues." ■ .■j\,-. , : . / 

" That 



DESMOND. 199 

*' That (he poflefTcs all virtue?, Sir, muft be 
her merit folely, for never woman had fo poor 
encouragement to cherifh any — \V hen one ccn- 
fiders that (he fnfftrs youf her charity cannot be 
doubted : her faithy in relying upon you, is 
alfo exemplary ; and one laments that (o con- 
neiSted, (he can have nothing to do with 
Hope—" 

Fanny Waverly then left the room,' and as 
I was going before (he came in, I now bowed 
(lightly to the two friends and went out at the 
fam»^ time. — When we came into the next room 
fhe (lopped, and would have fpoke, but her 
heart was full — flie fat down, took out her 
handkerchief, and burft into tears. 

'* 1 beg your pardon, Mr. Bethel," faid fhe, 
fobbing, " but I cannot command myfelf, 
when 1 refledl on the fituation cf my poor fifter 
and her children} when 1 meet that unfeeling 
man, and know, too well, what niulv be the 
confequence of his condud." 
• She was prevented by her emotion from pro- 
ceeding, and I took that opportunity of faying, 
** There is nothing new I hope, my dear Mifs 
Waverly ? nothing, jufr at this moment, to give 
you deeper concern, or more uneafy apprehen- 
Jions for Mrs. Verney ?" 

*' Oh ! no," replied (lie, *' nothing very 
new — fince the two executions w hich have been 
liere this fortnight, cannot be called very recent 
circumllances j they were paid off by I know 
not what means j and the officers who were in 
polTeffion of tlie efFe^fls, difmilfed only yellerJay, 
yet to-day this unhappy man returns ; and re- 
turns with an avowed intention, as his conhd-^n- 
tial fervant has been faying below, toraife mort: 
money. Oh ! Mr, Bethel, could you imar;ine 

^ all 



3tOO D E s M O N E>. 

all my filler has endured in this frightful period, 
during which fhe has only once feen her huf- 
band — could you imagine what foe has endured, 
and have witnefTcd the fortitude, the patience, 
the courage fhe has Ihewn, while fuffering not 
only pain and weaknefs, but all the horrors of 
dreading the approach of ruin for her children! 
you would have faid, that the remembrance of 
that perfonal beauty, forivhich (he has bieen fo 
celebrated, was loft and eclipfed in the admira- 
tion raifed by her underftanding." 

** In my fhort conference with her," anfwer- 
ed I, ** all this was indeed vifible, and could 
not efcape the obfervation of one already im- 
preffed with the hightft opinion of your ufle'r 
from the report of Mr. Defmond." 

At the jiame of Defmond, a deep blufli over- 
fpread the face of the fair Fanny. Not fuch 
as thdt which wavered for a moment oil 
the faded cheek of her lovely fifter, when 
the blood, for a moment, forfaking the heart, 
was recalled thither by a confcioufnefs that it 
fliould not exprefs too warmly the fentiments 
that fent it forrh — Fanny's blufo fpoke a diffe- 
rent, chough not Icfs expreflive language, and 
tlie tears tbat wtre trembling in her eyes, were 
a moment checked whilt iTie clafped her hands 
togi^thrr, and cried eagcily — ^^ Defmond! — 
Oh ! how i adore the very name of Defmond ! 
— To him — ^lo your noble friend it is owing, 
Mr. Bethel, that while i lament the fate of a 
fifter, 1 do not weep over the equally miferable 
deftiny of a brother." 

1 have feen Fanny Waverly in the ball-rooms 
at Bath admired by the men, and envied by the 
women J and, with all the triumphant con- 
fcioufnefs of beauty, enjoying the voluntary and 

invalun- 



DESMOND. 201 

invo1«ntary tribute thus paid to her ; but I never 
till now thoi'tjht her fo handfonie, for I never 
till now thought her interefting — So much more 
attraction does unafFc<5ted ft-nfibility lend to per- 
fonal perfection, than it acquires from the giddy 
flattering airs, infpired by frjfifh vanity — Yes, 
indeed, my friend, Fanny Waverly is a very 
charming young woman, and I was fo much 
pleafed with every thing (he faid of you, and 
of her own family during the reft of our fiiort 
converfation, that I have fince indulged myfelf 
in fancying that k is not at all impolfible for 
you to transfer to her the afFedion, which while 
you feel it for her fifter, cannot fail to render 
you unhappy, and which, pcihaps,. may be at- 
tended with fatal confequences to the object of 
your love. — If your attachment to Geraldine is 
really as pure and difinterefted as you have often 
called it, it might equally exift were you the 
hufband of her fifter, and fuch an alliance 
would put it much more in your power than it 
can ever be otherwife, to befriend and afllft her 
and her children — But I know this is an afi'air 
in which you will tell me the heart is not to be 
commanded, and therefore 1 wiM no longer dwell 
upon it, th<jn to repeat, that were you to fee 
Fanny Waverly now, you would ."link hez not 
inferior t© I.er h-fterin perfonal beauty, ^though 
1 own it is of a difFereiu charailcr,) and you 
v^ould be convinced that ihe i* not as )ou once 
behcved, deftiiute of that feminine tendcrnefs, 
without which I a'rte with )Ou, that mere 
beauty is p')werleis. 

And now, my dear Defmond, let me fpeak 

of the *' thick-coming fancies," with wh-.ch 

you fo ftrangcly t-ormented yourfelf at Hjute- 

ville — 1 have been fo much aLrmcd by vour 

K 5 ace; J eat 



202 ^ DESMOND. 

accident fince, and have had fo mai)y fubjcfls 
on which to think and write, that 1 have not 
touched upon your dream, which you furely 
are not fuperftitious enough to dwell upon— 
You, who are lb little fubjeclto the indulgence 
of prejudice, and who are not unfrequtntly 
ridiculing others for being too deeply imprefl'ed 

*' With all the curfe an;) all the pried has taught." 

But why is it that the ftrongeft minds — thofe 
who dare examine whatever is offered to them 
with acute reafon, and who reject all, however 
it may be fanclioned by cullom, or rendered 
venerable by time, that reafon refufcs to accede 
to, fhall yet fink under the influence of images 
impreflcd on the brain by a difturbed digellion,. 
or a quickened circulation? Alas! my friend,, 
there appears to be a ftrange propenfity in hu- 
man nature to torment itfelf, and as if the phy- 
iical inconveniencies with which we are fur- 
rounded in this world of ours were not enough, 
we go forth conftantly in fearch of mental and 
imaginary evils — This is no v/here fo remarka- 
ble as among thofe who are In vvliat we call af- 
fluence and profperity — Kow many of my ac- 
quaintance who have no wifh, which it is not 
immediately in their power to gratify, fuffer 
their imaginations to " play fuch tricks with 
them, (I ufe an expreflibn of Dr. Johnfon's, 
whofe imagination was furely not exempt from 
the charge) that they are really more unhappy 
and more truly objects of companion than the 
labourer, who lives only to work, and wor'cs 

only to live? 1 do not however, my dear 

friend, mean to fay, that you are one of thefe— 
\ouf adiive fpirit and feeling heart, fecures 

vou 



DESMOND. 2C3 

you for ever againft thispalfy of the mind — but 
perhaps, from the charge of indulj^ing other 
extravagancies, you are not wholl)' exempt — 
'Jhis attachment to Mrs. Vcrney, which has 
given a peculiar colour to your life for three 
years, and which you flill chcrifli as if your 
exiflcnce were to become infipid without it, is 
furely a wealcnefs and an impropriety, wh ch 
fuch an underftanding as yours ought to fiial;e 
off. — But I wil! fay no more on a topic that is, 
I know, irkfome to you, and indeed, 1 am too 
apt to offer advice to thofe I eftcem, without 
fufficiently confidering, that we none of us love 
to take what we are all fo eager to give — ! can- 
rot however, drop the fubjec^ without remark- 
ing, that when in the fame letter you cicfcribe 
your rtfledtions on the puerility and ijiconfe- 
quence of the objects that mankind are fo 
anxioufly occupied in obtaining, and in the next 
page relate the terrors occafioned by a dream, 
the fainted fhadow of thofe fleeting fhadcs, 
which it feems i'o abfurd to be moved by ; J can 
only repeat, as one is continually compelled to 
do — Alas ! poor human nature ! 

You have obliged me very much by the 
Sketches you have fent me of the people you 
have converfed with, and the fcenes to which 
you have been witnefs. — In anfwer to your re- 
marks and narratives, I obferve, that it is an 
incontrovertible truth allowed even by thole 
who have written proteffedly againft it, that a 
revolution in the government of France was 
abfolutely neceffary ; and, that it has been ac- 
complifhed at lefs expence of blood, than any 
other event, I will not fay of equal magnitude, 
(for I know of none fuch in the annals of man-' 
kind) but of fuch a nature, evcrcoft before, is 

alfa 



204 DESMOND. 

a\fo a pefition that the hardeft prejudice muft> 
in delpjte of mifrepre fen tat ions, allow; but 
while 1 contempl.ue, with infinite fatisfaftion, 
this great and noble effort for the univerfal 
fights of the human race, I behold, with ap- 
prehenfion and difquiet, (uch an hoft of foes 
arife to render it abortive, that I hardly dare 
indulge thofe hopes in which you are fo fan- 
guine, that uncemented by blood, the noble 
and fimply fnajeftic temple of liberty will arife 
on the fcite of the barbarous ftrudure of gothic 
tlefpotifm. 

To fay nothing of thofe doubts which have 
arifen from the want of unanimity and fteadi- 
nefs among thofe who are immediately entruftcd 
with its conftruilion, 1 rtfie<^ with fear on the 
force that i3 united to impede its completion, 
or deftroy it when complete. Not only al! the 
defpots ot Europe, from thofe dealers in human 
blood, the petty princes of Germany, to the 
Sanguinary witch of all the K ufTias, but the go» 
vernmcnis, which are yii called Umitted menar- 
itiesy and even thofe vhich ft ill pafs as repub- 
lics — in every one of thefe the governments, 
Wijl we know, pay the venal pen, and the mer- 
cenary fwordag.Jnft it— fome openly j the others 
3K far as they dare, without roufing, too dan- 
gerpvflyj the indignation of thtii own fubje£ls 
— In all ihefe ftates, there are great bodies of 
people, whofe intcrell, which is what wholly 
Jtcides their opit.ion, is diametrically oppofite 
to all rtform, and, of courfe, to the reception 
of thofe truths which may promote it — Thefe 
bodies are formed of the ariftocracies, their re- 
lations, dependtnis, and parafittrs, a nulmerous 

and formiiiablf phalanx Hierarchies, whofe 

Uurnin^ and eloquence are n.Uurklly exerted in a 

caufe 



D B S M O N O. 205 

caufe which involves their very cxiftence. An 
immenfe number of placemen and penfioners^ 
who fee that thedifcuffion of political queflions, 
leads inevitably to fhew the people the folly and 
injuilicc of their paying by heavy taxes for 
imaginary and non-exifting fervices — Crowds 
of lawyers, who, wereequal juftice once cflab- 
li(hed, could not be enriched and ennobled by 
explaining what they have themfelves continued 
to render inexplicable — And laft, not Iea(V, % 
very numerous defcription of people, who, be- 
ing from their participation of thefe en^oluments, 
from family poffeffions, or from fticcefsful com- 
merce, at eaie themfelves, indolently acquiefce 
in evils which do not affedt them, and who, 
when mifery is defcribed, or oppreffion com- 
plained of, fay, " What is all this to us, we 
fufFer tKither ? and why (hould we be difturbed 
for thnfe who do?"—" Chi ben fta, non fi 
mouve*,*' fays the Italian proverb.— -In ihort, 
my friend, I do not, as feme politicians have 
affe^led to do, doubt the virtue of the French 
nation, and fay ibty are too corrupt to be rege- 
nerated — I doubt rather that huropean ftates in 
general, will not lufFer them to throw off the 
corruption, but unite to perpetuate to them 
what tiKy either do fubmit to, or are willing to 
fuhmil to themfelves — I rather fear, that liberty 
having been driven away to the new world, will 
eftablUh there her glorious empire — and to Eu- 
rope, funk in luxury and efferriinacy — ener- 
vated and degenerate Europe will return no 
more. 

Let me, dear Defmond, hear foon from your 
•wn hand, that )ou are content with the fuc- 

• Thofe who are well fituaud d«fire not to move. 

Cffs 



206 DESMOND. 

cefs of my negotiation, and with this long ac- 
count of thofe for whom you are interefted. — 
Let me learn alfo your future defigns, as to re- 
turning to England, or ftaying on the Conti- 
nent, and above all, that you continue to be- 
lieve me, with fmcere attachment, 

Your's, afFc£tionately, 

E. BETHEL. 

Continue, I beg of you, to write by another 
hand till you can ufe your own, and let me have 
the fl'ietches of fuch converfation as you may 
have during your convalefcencc — I mean thofe 
on political or general topics, and not, of courfe, 
the more refined ^1)6 fentlmental d'\z\og\\zs which 
you may hold with Madame de Boijbelle — hy the 
way, 1 do not quite underftand what you mean 
by faying in your laft: letter, that you become 
every day more unworthy thceflreem of Geral- 
dine — You jurely think very humbly of yourfelf.^ 



LET- 



y 

» E s M O N D. 207 



LETTER XXII. 



Marfeilles, 8tli Jan. ijgt. 

THE firft letter I was able to write, was 

toGeraldine — This, my dear Bethel, is thefe- 
cond ; and it is with extieme pleafure I thank 
you for your immediate attention to my requell, 
and the propriety with which you feeni to have 
conducted fo troublefome a commiflion — I thank 
you too for your long letter, and the account, 
painful as it is, of the fcene you faw at Verney's 
— Gracious heaven ! why is it, that fuch a 
cruel facrifice was ever made ? But I dare not 
t.'uft myfelf on this fubjevfi, and have made an 
hundred refolutions never to mention it more; 
yet, how avoid writing on what conflanily oc- 
cupies niy mind? — how difmifs from thence, 
even for a moment, what weighs fo heavy on 
my heart ? Let me, liowever, allure you Bethel, 
that though I have no hope, I had almoft faid 
no wifn, ever to be more to this lovely, injured 
woman, than a fond, afFeilionaie b'ot ler — 
yet, that I will never niuiry fanny Wavcrly. 

I believe 



208 DESMOND. 

I believe that the advantageous pi<3urc you have 
drawn of her is not a flattering one — 1 admire 
her perfon, and think well of her underftanding 
— The>fymptcms of fcnfibiJity and of attach- 
ment to her lifter whi h you difcovered in her, 
certainly add thofe attra<3ions to her character, 
in which, I know not why it appeared to me to 
be dcfe(fiive — -—If I had a brother whom 1 
loved, and whom I wifhed to fee happ ly mar- 
ried, it would be to Fanny Waverly I fhould 

wifti to direct his choice But for myfelf — = 

No, Bethel, it is now out of the queftion ; we 
will fpeak of it then no more j but I will haften 
to thank you for thofe parts of your long and 
welcome letter that were meant lo detach my 
thoughts from thofe fources of painful and 
fruitlefs regret, which 1 am, perhaps, too fond 
of cherifhing— Fain, very fain would 1 ihake 
them ofF, my friend, but i cannot— «nay, I am 
denied the confolation of talking to you on pa- 
per of all I feel— 1 have often been very un- 
happy, but 1 never was qute fo wretched as I 
am at this moment. My anxiety for the fate of 
Geraldine tears me to pieces, and I cannot re- 
turn to England immediately, where 1 fhould, 
at leaft, be relieved from the long and infiip- 
portable hours of fufpence which the diftanec 
now obliges me to undergo — If 1 could not 
fee her, at leaft I could hear once or twice a 
week of her fituation, and might, perhaps, be 
fo fortunate as to ward off fome of thole mif- 
fortunes to which from her hulband's conduiSl 
fhe is hourly expofed. Do nor, however, be 
alarmed on account of my healtn ; 1 believe I 
could now travel without anyhazar ', but there 
are circumftances which render it difficult for 
me to quit this part ot France immediately. — 
My friend Montlleuri prefl'es me extremely to 

return 



return for fome time to his houfe, and I once 
propofed doing fo, but now I cannot do that, 
but ftiall, 1 believe, as foon as I am quite well 
enough to be difmifl'ed from the care of Mr. 
Carmichael, go by flow journies towards Swit- 
zerland, and from thence to Italy — This, how- 
ever, depends upon events j and you will fee by 
the manner in which this is written, that I do 
not at prefent boaft of fo perfect a reftoration 
to health as to make any immediate determina- 
tion necefTary. 

I perfedlly agree with you in the flatement you 
have made of thofe caufes which has made many 
of the Englifli behold the French revolution with 

relu£tance, and even abhorrence, To thoie 

caufes you might have added themifreprefentati- 
ons that have been fo induftrioufly propagated; 
all the tranfient mifchicf has been exaggerated ) 
and we hive in the overcharged picflure loft fight 
of the great and permanent evils that have been 
removed — All the good has been concealed or 
denied, and the former government, which we 
ufed to hold in abhorrence, has been fpoken of 
with prsifc and regret — This is by no means 
wonderful, when we confider how m.iny among 
ourfelves are afraid of enquiry, and tremble at 

the idea of inno\ation How many of the 

French, with whom we converfe in England, 
Are avanturiersj who feize this op^ ortunity to 
avail thcmfelves of imaginary con1equ<-nce, and 
defcribe ihemfelves as men fufFeiing for their 
loyal adherence to their king ; and ..s having 
loft their all in the caufe of injured loyalty— 
We believe and pity them, taking ail their la- 
mentable ftoiies for granted — whereas the truth 
is, that no property has been forcibly taken 
ffom its poileft'Qrs — none is intended to be taken 

—and 



2l6 DESMOND. 

— and thefe men who defcribe themfelves as 
robbed, had, many of them, nothing to lofe — 
Half the Knglifh, however, who hear of thofe 
fiditious diftrelTes, are intereiied in having them 
credited, and cry, " Thefe are the blefled ef- 
fe£ls of a revolution .' — Thefe private injuries 
arife from the raihnefs and folly of touching 
the fettled conftitution of a country !" — While 
others, too indolent toafkeven the fimple quef- 
tion — ^' Is this true? — are the individuals thus 
injured r" fhrink mto themfelves, and fay, 
*' Well ! 1 am fure we have reafon to be thanii.- 
ful that there is no fuch thing among us." 

But though I have long been thoroughly 
aware, both of the interefted prejudice, and 
indolent apathy, which exifts in England, i 
own I never expecled to have feen an elaborate 
treatife in favor of defpotifm written by an £n- 
glifhmanj v/ho has always been called one of 
the moft fleady, as he undoubtedly is one of 
the moft able of thofe who are efteemed the 
friends of the people — Ynu will eafily compre- 
hend that I allude to the book lately publiihed 
by Mr. Burke, which I received three days 
fmce from England, and have read once. 

I will not enter into a difcuffion of it, though 
the virulence as well as the mifreprcfentation 
with which it abound^, lays it alike open to 
ridicule and contradi6lion— Abufive declmna- 
tion can influence only fuperficial or prepollelled 

underftanding Thofe who cannot, or who 

will not fee, that fine founding periods are not 
arguments — that poetical imagery is not matter 
of fail. I forefee that a tbcufaad pens lui/l leap 
frotn ths'ir JiandiJ}:)es (to parody a fublimc {t\\- 
tence of his own) to ar.fwer fuch a book — I 
forefee that ic wiH cal! fo;th all the talents that 

are 



DESMOND. 211 

are yet unbought (and which, I trulV, are un- 
purchafeablt) in t ngland, and therefore 1 re- 
juice that it has btcn written, fiiicc, far from 
iinallv injuring the caufc of truth and rea!on 
againft which Mr. Burke is fo inveterate, it 
will awaken every advocate in tbt-.r defence. 

One of the moft ftriking of Uioie well-drcflld 
abfurdities with which lie infults the under- 
ftanding of his country, is chat which forcibly 
reminds me of the arguments in favor of abfo- 
lute power, brought by bir Robert Fihrier in 
that treatife, of which Locke deigned to tntcr 
into a refutation — This advocate of unlimited 
government derives the origin of monarchies 
from Adam, and aflerts, that *' Man, not be- 
ing born free, could never have the liberty to 
chufe either governors or formsof government." 
He carric:, however, his notion of this inca- 
pacity farther than Mr. Burke; according to 
him, man, in general, having been born in a 
ftate ct fervitude fince Adam, can never in any 
cafe have had a right to chufe in what way he 
would be governed — Mr. Burke feems to air 
low that iume fuch right might ha\e exifted 
among Engiifhmen, previous to the year 1688, 
but that then they gave it up for themielves and 
their poftenty for ever. 

It was miglitily the fafhion when I left Eng- 
land, ;or the enemies of the revolution in 
France, to treat all that was advanced in its 
favor, as novelties — as the flimfy fpeculations 
of unpra6lifed politicians — or the artful mifrer 
prefentations of men of defperate fortunes and 

^vild ambition. Precedent, however, which 

kems" gaining ground, and ufurping the place 
of common fenfe in our ccurts, may here be 
united with found rcafon — if reafun be allowed t^ 

thofe 



212 DESMOND. 

thofe great men towards whom we have hoca 
taught to look with acquiefcence and venera- 
tion. 

** When fafhion,'* fays Locke, " has once 
Ain<5lioned what folly or craft began, cuftom 
makes it facred, and it will be thought impu- 
dence or madncfs to contradict or queftion it." 
This impudence and madnefs feems by the ve- 
nal crew, whofc intereft it is that no quejiions 
fhould arife, to be imputed to sW who venture 
to defend the condud of the patriots flrugglmg 
for the liberties of France ; Mr. Burke now 
loads them with the imputation, not only of 
impudence and madncfs, but with every other 
crime be cai> imagine, and involves in the (ame 
venture, thofe of his own countrymen, v-ho 
have d.ired to rejoice in liie fr.'dom of France, 
and to fupport the caufe of political and civil 
liberty throughout the world. Now, without 
committing myfelf to enter into any thing like 
an argument with fo redoubtable an adverfary j 
and with a view foleiy to cfcape the cenfure of 
broaching novelties.^ let me quote a fentence in 
Locke on Civil Government, which among 
the few books I have accefs to, I happen to 
have procured, in fpeaking of conquefV, he 
fays, 

*•• This concerns not their children, (the 
children of the conquered) for lince a fdther 
hath not in himfelf a power over the life and 
liberty of his child, no aGl of his own can pof- 
ilbly forfeit it; fo that the children^ whatever 
may have happened to the fatners, are free 
raen ; and the abfoiute power of the conquered 
reaches no farther than the perfons of Che men' 
who were fubdued by him, and dies with them, 
uid ihould be govern tiiem as ilavcs, fubjeded 

to 



DESMOND. tlj 

to his abfohite power, he has no fuch right of 
dominion over their children — he can have no 
power over them but by their own tonfent ; and 
lie has no lawful authority while force, not 
choice, compels them to fubmiflion." 

If conqueftdoes not bind pofterity, fo neither, 
can compact bind it. Mr. Burke does not di- 
rectly aff^rt whatever difpofition he fhews to do 
io^ that nothing can be changed or amended in' 
the conftitution of England, becaufe the fa- 
mily who now are on the throne derive their 
facred right (through a bloody and broken fuc- 
ceflion) from William the baftarei of Norman- 
dy ; but he maintains, that every future altera- 
tion, however necelFary, is become impoffiblc, 
fince the compact made for all future genera- 
tions, between the Prince of Orange, and the 
felf-ele£le^l Parliament who gave him the crown 
in 1688 — So, that if at any remote period it 
(hould happen, what cannot indeed be imme- 
diately apprehended, that the crown fhould de- 
fcend to a prince more profl gate than Charles 
the Second, without his wit; and morecarelefs 
of the welfare and profperity of his people 
than James the Second, without his piety; the 
Englifb muft fubmit to whatever burthens his 
vices (hall impofe — to whatever yoke the ty- 
ranny of his favourites fhallinfli(f^j becaufex\iey 
arc bound by the compadt of 1688, to alter 
nothing that the conftitution then framed, bids 
thf m ^nd their children fubmit to ad infinitum.. 

1 have been two days writing this letter, ^tfktk 
a weak and trembling hand, 1 now, therefore, 
dear Bethel, bid you adieu ! 1 entreat you to 
write to me as often as poflible, for if 1 quit 
this place, your letters will follow me. — 1 re- 
commcnd 10 you, as the moft cffential kindhef^ 

jou 



'214 DESMOND. 

you can do me, to attend to that intered, which 
is infinitely dearer to me than my own, and 
with repeated acknowledgments of all your 
kindnefs on a thoufand other occafions, but 
above all on the laft. I entreat you ever to be- 
lieve me 

Your's moft gratefully and 

affectionately, 

LIONEL DESMOND, 



f^ 



L £ T- 



DESMOND. 215 



LETTER XXIIL 



TO MRS. V E R N E Y. 



Bath, luh Feb. 1791. 

I WA S uiieafy, my dear Sifter, at your not 
writing, and fince you have written, I am more 
uneafy flill. The account you give me of 
yourfelf and the baby frighten me — Dreary as 
the feafon i?, 1 now join with you in wifhing 
you in the country — I beg your pardon if my 
frankncfs ofFends you; but I cannot help fay- 
ing, you know too well, that your hufband 
really cares not where you are, and will not op- 
pofe your going if you defire it, but will, pro- 
bably, be glad to have ycu out of the way — 
My dear Geraldine, it gives me the fevered 
pain to be compelled to write thus, and to break 
the injunction you have fo often laid on me, 
not to fpeak my thoughts fo freely of Verney — 
Your health is at ftake, and I forget every thing 
elfe. After all, what do 1 fay, that you have 
not yourfelf faid internally a thoufand tirries, 
though your delicate fenfeof duty (duty tofuch 

a manl} 



2l6 DESMOND, 

a man !) makes you acquiefcein patleirt filenre, 
under injuries that would have made nineteen 
women in twenty fly out of his houfe, and plav 
the deuce in abfolute defperation ? — How is it 
pofltble that you can help being confcious of 
your perfcdtions, and of his deferving them fo 
little? — Can you fail to feel, and to compare? 
•—It is impofRble but that you muft at 

That fate repine. 



" Which threw • pciirl before a fwine." 

There is a quotation from me, which you will 
allow to be, at leaft, a novelty. It will hardly, 
however, procure my pardon for its pertncfs, 
and therefore, I pray you, my dear Geraldine, 
to forgive me ; or, if you are a little hungry, 
I will learn to bear it, if you will but exert 
yourfelf (if exertion be neceflary) to go into the 
country and be well. 

Ton io not fay a word of Mr. Defmond, and 
/can think and talk of nobody elfe — In hopes 
of hearing fomething of him, I have endu-ed 
the mifery of long converfation with that odd 
©Id animal his uncle Major Danby — The for- 
mal twaddler loves to tell long ftories', and can 
feldom get any body to hear them, unlefs he 
can feize upon fome ftranger who does not 
know him, iind thefe becoming every day more 
Scarce, be has taken quite a fancy to me, be- 
caufe he finds I liften to him with uncommon 
patience, and do not yawn above once in ten 
ininutes. The goflipping people here (of which 
heaven knows there arc plenty) have already 
obfervfd our tite-a tite^ and begin to whifper 
to each other that iVIifs Waverly has hook'd the 
rich old M;jyr — 1 like of alU*things liiat they 
jftjouid bclit'-e it, and am ia hopes of being in 

the 



DESMOND. 217 

the Loftdon papers very foon, among the trea- 
ties of marriage. — What do you think DcC- 
mond would fay to it ? — Do you think he would 
like fuch a fmart young aunt i* — Poor fellow! — • 
I have not been able to get at much intelligence 
about him, and what I have heard is very pain- 
ful — His uncle has only heard lately, that his 
health is much impaired by long confinement, 
and that he is yet unable to travel towards Eng- 
land ; but 1 hope the old croker made the worft 
of it to me — He perfills in Aiying, that his ne- 
phew could not have met with fuch an accident 
in England, as if people here did not flioot 
one another every day, for reafons of much Icfs 
moment, or for no reafon at all — But though I 
have attempted, whenever he would hear me, 
to rep.efent this, ai.d to explain and dwell upon 
the generofity of Dcfmond's conduv?^, 1 have 
not yet fucceedsd in convincing him, that it 
was friendfh'p to my brother, and not any po- 
litical matter that inv...lv(.'d his nephew in this 
difp\Jte — The gnoJ Major, indeed, cannot com- 
prehend how friendfhip ihould lead another to 
incur danger, for he hjd never in his life that 
fort of feeiing, which tliould make him gc half 
a n)!le out of his way to ferve any body. Ti:is 
I hav^ frequently heard from thofe who knev/ 
him as a young irtanj and I believe fenfibility 
a-nd philanthropy arf qualities that do not en- 
creafe with year*; — He retaiiis now nothing of 
the ingenuous freedom of the foldier, but all 
th^ hiiTdnefs which a military life fometinics 
giver, and in quitring it, he k. eps only the 
worit part of a profoflion, that is laid to make 
b^d men worfe-^l don't know why 1 have faid 
io much about him, unlcfs it is becaufe I have 
noihiuo to fay of Defmond, and vet cannot 
Vol. I. L cnurely 



2l8 DESMOND. 

entirely quit the fubjeiSl — He provoked me this 
morning in the pump-room, by {landing up, and 
in his fharp, loud voice, giving an account, to 
two or three people that were Grangers to him, 
of the accident that had happened to his ne- 
phew in France. An old, upright woman, 
who was, I immediately faw, a titled goflip, 
liflened for fome time very attentively, and 
then enquired, in a canting fort of whine, if 
the affair had not been owing to the troubles? — 
The Major, delighted to have a Lady Bab 
Frightful intereft herfelf in his ftory, began it 
again, and I ran out of the place, half deter- 
mined, that not even the wifh 1 cannot help 
feeling to hear now and then of Defmond from 
him, (hoLild tempt me again to enter into con- 
verfation with this ftory-telling old bore. 

My mother, who generally agrees totheopi-. 
rion of her acquaintance, if they happen to be 
rich, and who is not unwilling to have the obli- 
gation DefT!ond has laid us all under, lightened 
by fuppofing fonie part of the quarrel with the 
Chevalier de St. tloy, to have originated in a 
difference of political opinion, really encourages 
the Major in his notion, and when they get to- 
gether, I lofe my patience entirely. To your 
enquiry, how my mother is in health, I can 
afTure you, i have not feen her fo well thefe laft 
eighteen months, and fhe is now fo often in 
company, is at fa many card parties abroad, 
and has fo many pariii s at home, that, without 
having been much mifl'ed, 1 mignt have ftaid 
with you much longer ; however, I did what 
appeared to us to be my duty in returning, and 
1 muft not regret it, though very certain it is, 
that all the maternal atfedtions of my mother 
are more than ever engrofled by her fon — She is 

ncMT 



DESMOND. 2.9 

now impatiently expeiSing his arrival, and quef- 
tioning every body (he fees, about the probable 

length of his voyage from Leghorn It is 

amazing to me, that with all this tendernefs 
and anxiety for him, (lie feels no gratitude, or 
fo little, towards the man, without whofe inter- 
pofition, he would never have returned at all 
—I alfo wonder it does not occur to her, that 
it is far from being ccrfain he did embark at 
Leghorn the time he propofed to do fo — P'or 
myfelf, I {hould not be at all furprized to hear 
from him at Rome, nor intleed, to learn that 
he was again the captive of Mademoifelle de 
St. Eioy — Let me not, however, my fivter, 
add anticpitated to the real evils with vvhicli 
you feem deftined lo contend— All will yet be 
well — Defmond will return in perfefl health, 
and brighter days await us. Let me hear frogi 
you at Icaft twice a week, and believe me ever, 
with true afFc^ion, your 

FANNY. 



LETTER XXIV. 
TO MISS WAVERLY. 

Sheen, near RiclimonJ, Feb, 19, 1791. 

I H A V E delayed anfwering your letter 
my Fanny, till to-day, though I have been in 
pofieflion of it above a week, languor alone 
would not have caused this omiflion, but I have 
been bulled in my little removal to a lodginc^ I 
have taken here, as Dr. Warren declared'' it *to 
be neceflary, both on my own account, and on 
that of the mfant I fuckle, that I ihonld remove 
from London. Mr. Verncy, I know not why, 
refolutely oppofed my going into Yorkfhire, 
L 2 nor 



2^0- DESMOND. 

nor could my entreaties, or the opinion. of the 
phyfician, obtain any other anfwer than that 
my going thither would be inconvenient to him 
■ — I have, alas ! no longer the houfe in Kent to 
which 1 was (o attached, and therefore, rather 
becaufe it is my duty to try to live than becaufe 
I wi(b- to live — rather for the fake of my poor 
children than my own — I employed a friend in 
this neighbourhood to look out for apartments 
for me, v/here I could have accommodations 
for my three children, three fervants, and my- 
felt — fuch he fortunately found in a tolerably 
plcafant fituation, and at a reafonable price, a 
conrideration lo which I muff no longer be in- 
difFtrent. 

Small, however, as the difference is, be- 
tween my living here or in Seymour- flreer, and- 
careiefs of my being cither at one place or ano- 
ther, as you too j iftly obferve Mr. Verney to 
he; 1 own I remarked, and remarked with re- 
doubled an^uifli of heait, that this additionil 
expence, thou'^h pro;iounced to l>e abfolutely 
neceiTary to my exiftence, and that of his child, 
is fubmittcd to with rtludlance by Mr. Verney 
• — I check myfelf, Fanny — I will not murmur 
— and I will even reprove you, my fii^er, for 
encouraging me in thofe repi-nings, which, 
though 1 cannot always reprefs, I know it is 
vvio.ng to indulgr — Do not, my love, te^ch me 
to yield too eafily to a feiifibility of evils, 
w.J;iicb, fince they are without remedy, it is bet- 
ter to bear wiih equality of mind, and with re- 
Tignation of tieari — A'as ! mine is. but too apt 
to feel aH the miferifs of its ^ciiiny— but my 
children and m.y.duty.m.uft and fVall teach ma- 
ta fub,m,it unreplningly to fulfil the latter, for 
the fake of the former— ? IVheii innocent imiies 
repay ms^.for many hours of anxiety,, and while 
I they 



DESMOND. 2H 

they are well around me, I believe I can bear 
any ihino. 

YoLi conrl.>'<o y<^u, Iciter cr.eeitul!y, my 
I'anny, as if you would diflipate the concern 
which the former part of it mufi: give me on ac- 
count ci Mr. Defmond — Alas ! the former part 
is all real, and the latter only the proplietic 
hope of a fanguine imagination — " Defmond 
will return in perfeft health, and brighter days 
await us." — If he {bould riot return, or not re- 
turn in perfect health ' — Amiable as Mr. iJel- 
mond is, and interefting as he muft be to every 
one of his a<:quaintance, i certainly ihould not 
feel fo extremely anxious about hini, (as my 
folicitude for my ch;idien, is as much as I sai 
well sble tobfiir) were it not far the unhappy 
circumfhince ih. t continually haunts me — I 
mean, that I involved him in this f;\ta] affair, 
and that whatever ill cor.fequei.ces finally at- 
tend it, win be imputable fuiely to me — li is 
this, and this only, that renders me more un- 
happy about him than you or any of his otiier 
friinds have reafon to be, however great your 
regard (or him, and it is this, that, if the 
event fliould in any v.'ay be injurious to him. 
Will ovcrcaft my days With regret and anguifh 
that mult be all my own, for rione CTtn Ihare, 
becaufe none can f<?el i; as I fh;ili — Mow hght- 
ly you can talk, my dear girl, of his unile, 
even a moment after naming the intelligence 
you have coile£ted from him about i^ein.ond, 
but ^at/^ have no reafon to reproach your(elf tor 
/j/V misfortune — your heart is noi weighed down 
by any of your own — You cannot, and indeed 
ought not to look forward as I do, to fceiies of 
future forrow — long, vejy long, may it be, be- 
fore you may be compelisd to do it — or rather, 

may 



222 DESMOND. 

may nothing but rich and luxuri&'it profpects 
ever offer th -rcfelves to the eyes of my Fanny. 

But I beleech you lu chccU yaup vivacity 
v/hen you mett Mr. Danby, and be content to 
liften to his iirefome ftories a little longer, if 
liftetiing to them is the tax you noufi pay for 
hearing of hisnephev,, / could atten'i to the 
mofl: tedious legend with which felf-confe- 
quence ever perftcuted patience, were I but fure 
thai fome authentic infofmation, as to the real 
ilate of DciiriOini's ht-alth, would clofe the nar- 
rative ; fuch information, without any tax be- 
ing demanded for it, I ufed to obtain from his 
friend Mr. Bethel, but I have now no means of 
feeing him, as he is g<.>ne bacic to his houfe in 
Kent, that houfe fo ncir the place which I can- 
not help regreiting — Had it not been fold, I 
tould have gone ihitiier now, 1 might have 
f.cn Mr. Bethel continually, he is an excellent 
nian, and is fo much attached to Defmond, 
lilat it is plcafant to hciir him fpeak of him, in- 
deed he is the only perfon vvho does juftice to 
thufe noble qualities of heart and underllanding 
that Defmond fo eminently pc^fleiles, but of 
which three parts of the v/orld know not the 
value. 

Yet I know not whether it was only my be- 
ing myielf in dreadfully low fpirits, when I laft 
faw Air. Bethel, or whether he was himfelf in 
a dirtrcded (iate of mind, but methought he 
fpoke in a very reluctant and defponding way 
about Defmond, thoijgh he afTured me that he 
was entirely out of danger of any kind from the 
wound, and that the lofs of the ufe of his hand 
was nu longer apprehended — But i found Mr. 
Bethel knows nothing certainly of Defmond's 
iuiure intentions; and if he did not deceive me 
aboui his health, there is alTuredly Ibuie other 
. " circum- 



DESMOND. 223 

circumftance relating to him that makes Bethel 
uaealy — He Ciid much of^ tlie friciidlliip Mon- 
iieur de Montfleuri had fhewn to Dcfmond in 
attending him, and of his fiftcr too ; that Ma- 
dame de'Boifbeile, who has, it is faid, been his 
nurCc the whole time. I fuppofcd, when I firft 
heard of her attendance on Mr. Defrnond, that 
file had been a widow, as it Teemed unlikely fhe 
could otherwife have been fufTicieuily at liberty 
for fuch an exertion of friendihip, but Mr. Be- 
thel informed me (lie is n;i>rried, but very un- 
happily, and that her hufbaiid, a bankrupt both 
in fame and fortune, is an emigrant, and is 
either in Germany or England — Mr. Bethel 
fays the lady, who is extremely beautiful, is 
now entirely dependant on tiie Marquis de 
Montfleuri her brother, whom llie cannot 
oblige more than by the attention ihi: has fhevi^ 
to his friend — Ho-ff fortunate ihe is in having 
fuch a brother, how doubiy for:ana;e in being 
allowed to (hew her gratitude to him, by giv- 
ing h^T /j/iir'y attendance to fuch a man as DqC- 
mond — Beautiful and accompliined as Mr. Be- 
thel defcribes htr to be, metis ii>ks I envy her 
nothing but the opportunity Ihe has had to 
foothe tiis hours of pain and confinement. 1 
ufed to think once, that Dcftnond had a very 
friendly regard for me, but now, in how diffe- 
rent a light he mull conhder us — / have been 
the caufe of his fufferings — it has been the en- 
viable lot of Madame de Boifbcjle to foften and 
alleviate them — Mr. Bethel fays he caljs her 
Jofephine — If her good fortune Ihould ftiil pre- 
vail, and her hufband fnould not return from 
the hazarCous exploits in which, it is laid, his 
political principles are likely to engage him, (he 
will, perhaps, become /j/i J ofephint, for 1 have 
perfuadcd myfclf that his long ftay in Fiance is 

n«w 



224 n E S M G N D. 

now more owing to the tender gratitude he muft 
feel for this l.idy, than to any necefiity ht is in, 
on account of indifpofiUun, to remain there. 

And now my Funny, indeed, I cannot con- 
clude without availing my.rjfof my elder/hip 
once more, to entreat that yuu would confider 
whether it would not be better to check that 
flippancy with which you are too apt to accuf- 
tom yourfelf to fpeak of our mother. Admit- 
ting that fhe has the fo'bles you reprefent, of 
courting the rich — of being too partial to her 
fon, it is not her children v/ho {hould point 
them out to the obfeivation and ridicule of 
others—Believe me, my fifter, there is nothing 
lb injurious to that dfJicate fennbility which 
you realty pofTefs, as indulging this petulance 
— By degrees, it will become habitual, and the 
iittlc afp^'fitie^', which you h'ow g've vvay toon- 
Jv, -'erhrips,. a\ '.Vi-i;;.+g or in fpuaklng to nic, 
Will fcon be lb (nuch matter of courfc ihat ynu 
will forget their tendency, and , be inrerkfibifi of 
their impropriety — It is true, that I have not 
l:ved fo much longer in the v/orld as to be able 
to fpeak much froin experience; but, from the 
J'lttle 1 have feen of that world more than y-'i< 
bave, I think I may venture to aflert, that 
where families are divided among themfelves — ■ 
I mean, where the father or mother difagree with 
th€ children, or the brothers and fifters with each 
other, ther€ is fomething very wrong among 
them all, and I proteft to you, that were I a 
man, not beauty, wir, and fortune united, 
{hould eno;ape mc; to marry a woman who {liew- 
ed a want of duty and gratitude towards either 
of her parent^, but particularly towards her 
mother — Were I madly in love, 1 am con- 
vaicedy that any thing like tb« ridicule of a 

daughter 



D E S M C N D. 225 

daughter fc» direfled, vvuuld produce a radical 
and immediate cure. 

Here let me drop the fubjeil, I hope fof ever, 
and to begin one that, I trult, will make 
amends for any little pain this may ha e in- 
flicted ; let me tc'l you, that fince I have been 
he:e, I have found my health and that of my 
babv, fenubly anend, and that I now hop? I 
Ciali not be compelled to wean him, though I 
am not happy, though 1 know 1 never can be 
fo, I have, at le-ift, obtained a trartiient calm. 
The agitation occafioned by tlve late painful 
events, is gradually, though llovvly fubfiding; 
I can now return to my books with attention 
lefs difUaci-ed, and have been reading a defcrip- 
tion of fome of the fouthern parts of Kurope, 
particularly of the Lyonois, &c. — -I Ihould like 
extremely to fee thofe accounts wnich I find 
Mr. Defmond fends to his fiiend Bethel, be- 
caufe he has fo much talle, and is fo intelligent 
a traveller — ["here was no poflibility you know 
of afking in plain terms for this indulgence, I 
hinted it as much a? I dared, though Bethel 
did not, or perhips would not undcriiand me — 
But to return to myfvlt, and what you would 
think melancholy, thougn it is not to are an un- 
pleafai^ way of paliiag my time — Dreary as the 
ieafon \et i_s 1 hjve b-i'tik-n myf.lf to my foii- 
tary walks in the filds that furround this houfe, 
which, for a fituation fo near Lon.Jon, is ex- 
tremely pleafant, and quiie retired- — I find the 
perfect fecJulion, the uninterrupted tranqiiil- 
lity i enjoy now, fo(ii.hiiig to myfpirits, and of 
courfe, bsnefijial to my health, if 1 do but hear 
favourable accounts from the contin-'nt, and 
nothing iitw haoiJens embarra{/i»jg in tlie peca- 
niary affairs oT Mr. Verney, I lliall oc f>>on re- 
ftored 10 as cheeffal a {bte as i atn now iik ly 
L 5 ever 



^26 DESMOND. 

ever to enjoy — Alfift the progrefs of my refto- 
r^tion, my deareft Fanny,- by frequent letters, 
iince I cannot have the delight of your company, 
and cheer with your vivacity, which I love 
(even in reproving its wildeft Tallies. ) 
Your affectionate 

GERALDINE. 
I had but jufl fealed my letter, when a pac- 
qu.t was brought me from Defmond himfeJf — 
Ye?, my Fanny, a letter written with his own 
hand, and not with fo much apparent wealc- 
neis as one would imagine — I hope there is no- 
thing improper in the exce/Iive pleafure this let- 
ter gives me — Gratitude can furely never be 
wrong, or if it can be carried to excefs, its excefs 
is here pardonable — 1 know not what 1 would 
fay, my fpiriis are fo fluttered— This welcome 
letter has been very long incoming, 1 will fend 
you a copy of it in a poll or two — Hcavcu biefs 
i'.iij my Fanny. 



LETTER XXV. 

TO MP. DESMOND. 

HartfielJ, March i8th, 1791. 
J VV A S in hopes, my dear Defmond, that 
long before this, i fnould have fpoken to you 
once more in England, inftead of diredting to 
you in Switzerland. Your letter of the 30th 
J-:.r:.ary *, bade me fanguincly hope this, I 
therefore forbore to write ; but inftead of feeing 
)ou reftored to health, to tranquillity, and 
your country, 1 receive a melancholy letter 
hifCii the pays de l^aucl — Ytt you aflure me that 

* Which dcct act appea/. 

your 



DESMOND. 227 

your arm no longer reoiincls you of your acci- 
dent, and I truft to your afTurances, as well as 
to the evidence of your handwiiting — You tell 
me alfo, that your health is much amended, 
why then, my friend, this extraordinary de- 
preflion of fpiHts ? — I own I am made uneafy, 
extremely uneafy, in obferving it, and cannot 
help lamenting that your time, your talent?, 
and your temper, are thus wafted and deftroyed 
—Is it, that this fatal paffion ftill obfcures your 
days ? or is there, as indeed I ftrongly fufpe6l, 
is there fome other fource of unealinefs more 
recent, to which I am a ftranger ? It has been 
a rule with me, even while you were, in fome 
meafure, under my guardianfhip, never, dear 
Defmond, to intrude upon you with officious 
enquiries, nor to afk more of your confidence 
than you chofe to give me — Friendfhip, like 
the fcrvice of heaven, fhouid be perfc6l free- 
dom ; yet forgive me, if for once I intrude 
upon your referve with curioiity that arifes folcly 
from my regard for you — Is. there in this any 
circumftance, the pain of which 1 can remove ? 
if there is, I will be fatisfied with fuch a partial 
communication as may enable me to be of ufe 
to you, without enquirin_f into particulars you 
may wifh to conceal. 

I fend you, with other books, one that now 
engroiles ail the converfation of this country, 
which, from its boldnels and fingularity alone, 
and, written as it is, by an obfcure individual*, 
calling himfelf the fubjecl of another govern- 
ment, could never have attradled fo much at- 
tention, or have occafioned to the party whofe 
principles it decidedly attacks, fuch general 
alarm, if there had not been much found fenfe 
ia it, however bluntly delivered —As I had ra- 
* P«iae, 

ther 



228 n E S M O K B. 

ther hear your opinion of it, than give you my 
own, 1 will leave the difcufiion of politics, to 
tell you of what pafTes among your acquaint- 
ance — This neighbourhood is almoft vvhollv 
occupied by the improvements which Sir Robert 
Stamford is makiog at Linwell, the place fo 
regretted by Mrs. Verney — The beautiful little 
wood which overfliidovved the clear and rapid 
rivulet, as it haftens through thefe grounds to 
join the Medway, has been cut down, or at 
leaft a part of it only has been fuffered to remain, 
as what he calls a collateral fecurity againft the 
iiorth-eaft wind, to an immenfe range ef forc- 
ing and fucceilion houfes, where not only 
pines are produced, but where different build- 
ings, and different degrees of heat, are adapted 
to the ripening cherries in March, and peaches 
•in April, wil;h almoft every other fruit out af 
its natural courfe — Ihe hamadryades, to whom 
I remember, on your firft acquaintance with 
the Verney family, you addrefs lome charming 
lines of poetry, becaufe it was under their pro- 
tection you firil beheld Geraldine j the hama- 
dryades are driven from the place which is nov^r 
occupied by culinary deities — The water now 
ferves only to fupply the gardeneis, or to ftag- 
nate in ltev^5 for the fattening of carp and 
tench ; heaps of manure pollute the turf, and 
rows of reed fences divide and disfigure thcfe 
beautiful grounds, th tt were once lavvns and 
•coppices — Every thing is iacrificed to ihe lux- 
uries of the table; and the country neighbours, 
•though niany of them polilii'ed ihe ulual ele- 
gancies ani fupe;fluities of modern life btfcre, 
aie compelled to hide their diminiflicd head-s, 
when Sir Rob.Mt Stanford gives an eiiteriain- 
ment — Riches, however, unworthily acquiie ', 
a;ed fure pai]^>ort to the '* mouth h^unjr," not 

only 



D E ^ M O N D. 229 

only of the conrKnon herd of thofe who are call- 
ed *' gentlemen and ladies," but to the titled 
and the high born, who, while they court new- 
rifen opulence, envy, and yet defpife the up- 
ftart who has obtained it — 1 never meet this 
great man myTelf, as our former conne£tions, 
and our pr^fent edrangement, are fo generally 
known, that we are never invited together, but 
he is almoft always the fubjedt of difcourfe, at 
parties where I do go^ and always fpoken of 
with wonder ; for hardly a week paiTes in which 
fome new improvement in luxury does not ex- 
cite admiration at his boundlefs expence, 
which, from fuch a man, is /uppofed to be fup- 
ported by a great fortune, for, as he has raifed 
himfelf, itfeems ui>likely that he fhouldfo little 
underftand the value of money, as to iquander it 
thus profufely, if he had r^ot a great deal of rt. 
To thofe, who are more in the fecret, all this 
ought not perhaps to be wonderful ; yer, though 
I know the very extent of Stafmord's abilities, 
and know that he has nothing like eminent ta- 
lents, though perhaps an acute and active mind 4 
] have, I own,- now and then been tempted to 
wonder av his extraordinary and rapid ri<e, and 
have joined the old ladies, who talk him over, 
in pronouncing him a wondtrfully lucky man — • 
When 1 hear of the ofteniation with winch he 
difplays thofe acquifitions, which are beyond 
the reach of others — When I am told, tha-t men 
of the firlt rank come to eat his good things, 
and praife his {kill in colle^itlng them — When 
1 learn that the M'nilier f^nds for him exprels, 
and that no rcfolution of importance is adopted 
without conlulting him — And recollect how 
very few years are pafled Hnce be vvas'a country 
Airorney, 2nd rode more miles for half-a- 

crown 



230 DESMOND. 

crown than a poftillion— I cannot always re- 
prefs a degree of aftoniftiment, and fay. 

*' We kn ,w the thing is neither new nor rarcj 
*' But wonder how the devil it got there !*" 

It s pleafant enough to hear the converfation 
that fometimes pais about this man at the din- 
ner and tea tables — The awe that the fuperi- 
ority of riches creates, reprefl'es the malignity 
that envy engenders, though with fo much dif- 
ficulty reprefles it, that it is every moment ob- 
liquely appearing — For my own part, I regard 
this man with fo much contempt, that the only 
pain I now feel from his refiding in my imme- 
diate neighbourhood, arifes from my regret for 
the lofs of Mrs. Vern.'y, whole fociety inc'ecd, 
1 had not learned to reliih when 1 was deprived 
of it. This confeflion is imprudent, perhaps, 
my friend, and encouraging that unhappy pre- 
pofleflion which I have always blamed, but 
truth extorts it from me, and the more 1 fee of 
the ufual dull round ol country vilits and coun- 
try converlation, the more I regret the time, 
when 1 was fure to find at Linwell, a woman, 
who, to the foftnefs of manners of her own 
fex, unites a Itrength of undertianding, whieh 
we believe peculiar to ours, and wh':>, with fo 
capabi'-. a head, has a heart fo admirably tender 
— You will be alarmed, perhaps, Defmond, at 
th« warmth of my panegyric, and fancy, that 
in endeavouring to cure you, 1 have myfelf 
caught the iut.:ction— But be at peace, my 
friend, on that fcore — though Geraldine, 
in the two lafi: converfations 1 had with her, 
has made me a fincere convert to an alilrtion of 
your's, which 1 ufcd to deny, that he, who 
has once feen ai\d loved her, could never divert 
himielf of his atuchment, yet. I am no longer 
* Pope. 

liabk 



DESMOND. 231 

liable to feel this fatal infatuation in the excefs 
you do, and am only fenfible of fuch regard for 
her, as a father or brother might feel — I own, 
that even thj depreflion of fpirit which her un- 
happy marriage occahons, is not without its 
charms — but when 1 fee her llruggling to pal- 
liate what he will not allow her to conceal, the 
wild abfurdities and ruinous follies of her huf- 
band — when I fee her mild endurance of inju- 
ries, and that her patience and fweetnefs are 
vainly endeavouring 

To fpread 



" A guardian glory rouad her ideoi's head *." 

1 feel refpeit bordering on adoration, and fet 
her above Oclavia, or any of the fair examples 
in ancient ftory — Yes ! my dear Defmond, I 
not only acquit you of folly, but have more than 
once caught myfelf build mg for your delightful 
chateaux en Ejpagne^ which, however, i will 
not feed your iick fancy by Iketching, for Ver- 
ney's lite, nbtwithftanding his irregularities, is 
a very good one, and it were therefore much 
wifer in me to direct yuur thoughts to the for- 
mer and more rational advice I gave you, when 
-I exprelled my hopes, that you might in time 
carry your affedlions to the very lovely and ani- 
mated Fanny VVaverly, who, if I am any judge 
of the female heart, from the countenance, and 
the manner, would not let you defpair, and 
who, as (he is very far from fufpetiting your 
partiality to her filter, perhaps, puts down to 
her own account the extraordinary exertions of 
friendfhip which you have made for her family, 
in becoming the travelling friend of her brother. 
I do not hear that Waverly has yet made his 
appearance in tngland, though i have enquired 
«1 feveral of my acquaintance, who are lately 
* Hay ley. 

come 



221 DESMOND. 

come from Bath, and who tell me that his mo- 
ther, Mrs. Waverly, is diftreffed by his long 
delay, and the uncertciinty of what is become of 
him J that (he is compelled to have a party 
with her all day, who engage her at cards, in 
order to detach her mind from this infupportable 
anxiety — Fortunate refource ! — How thefe 
good folks are to be envied, who can, in tran- 
quillity folace, in afflidion, confole themfelves 
with a rubber! *' A blefling on him," quoth 
Sancho, *•* who fitft invented the thing called 
fleep, it covers a man over like a cloak" — A 
bleffing, fay 1, on hitn who hrft invented thofe 
two and-fifty fquares of panned paper — 1 hey 
blunt the arrows of afflidiion, ^■^ and reconcile 
man io his lot*." 

While the elder lady of the Waverly family 
is thus diverting the pangs of maternal dif- 
quietude, and the younger trying to think lefs 
of a certain fentimental v^anderer, by fluting, 
to ufe her own phrafe, with all tt\e fmartefl men 
at Bath, who affiduoufly furround her — Geral- 
dine remains in perfeft retirement at a lodging 
near Richmond, with her children, and only 
two fervants — ftie has no carriage with her, and 
never goes out butt © walk with her little ones; 
and having, wifely, declined all vifitors, (he 
has not, 1 hope, yet learned that all Verney's 
tewn-carriages and horfes, cxctrpt only a polt- 
chaife, which fo.'nchody re-pufcbafed for him, 
are lately fold — Ae is himfelf gone into York- 
fhire, whither heabfolutely rcfufed to fufter her 
to go, when country ar was prefcribed for her 
health, and it is reported, and I feur with 
truth, that he has eftabliihed an hunt there, of 
which he bears the great ft {hare of theeKpvnce, 
though it is faid to be at the joint charge of 

himfelf. 



DESMOND. 233 

himfclf, Lprd Newminfter, and Sir James 
Dcybournc. The arrar.'^jement at Moorefly 
Park, is r:,id (Apd ftill 1 believe with too much 
foundation) to confift of three of the 
molt ^ celebrated courtezans, who are at this 
tiii-.c the moft fafliionable, and of courfe, the 
mofl: expcnfive — Every one of thefe illuftriouc 
perfonagcs appropriating one of thefe ladies 
for the t;mc of thtir refidencc. This has been 
going on ever fince the month of January, and 
is to £n*l only v>'ith the hunting feafon — You 
will wonder, perhaps, how I got at all this iil- 
telligcncf, but my folichude for Geraldine 
conquers the diCike I have to enter into that 
fort of (t;nvcrfaiion whith is called goflippingj 
and I happen to have an nc'cjujiintance at W— , 
a fpinftrr, fomewhat pafl'eci the bloom of life^ 
and who, very much ag^ainO her inclination^, 
h?.s hitherto remained uniapped by carelTcs, 
un-b-vkr-t iii' .yfion by ttuder falutaiions *, 
hut, though without fortune, ihe is of a goo4 
fr'.rni'y, ar.i.] being illii-d to f^.>roe gre<!t people, 
and aaving coiuriytd to cmke hert'eif uf.fui to 
ctherr, jQie is received alternately at feveral 
fiiHiionible houfes. v^'liere (he flutters the lords 
and ladies ; fits with the young niiHes while 
their makers are with them ; and reads aloud 
to the blind or Tick, dowager, who loves a newf. 
paper or a novel; but though {he is thus three 
parts of the year among her iiluftrious friends, 
(he chufes always to referve a home, which 

happens to be a fmall, neat lodging at W , 

where ihe has been many years an occaflonal 
inhabitant. 

Now it chanced, that when firft Geraldine 
was married, and came a lovely, blooming 
creature of ei^htee^i into this neighbourhood, 

* Sterne. 

this 



234 DESMOND. 

this Mif, Elford, was among her carlieft vifi- 
tors. — It is faid, that a young and handfome 
married woman is generally an objed of diflike 
to ladies who are 

*' Wiiheiingon the virgin thorn, 
'* In fir.gie bletrtdnels.*" 

but Mifs Elford, as if to contradi£l Co invidious 
an alTertion, was feen to take a peculiar and 
lively intereft in the welfare of her dear friend 
Mrs. Verney (for a dear friend fhe foon be- 
came), and her good humour, which had be- 
fore been but little remarked, became now very 
eminent — the change was accounted tor partly 
by the acquifition (he had made of fo pleafant an 
acquaintance as Mrs. Verney, whofe houfe 
within a mile of the town, was extremely con- 
venient to her, and whofe coach and fervants 
were rJways at her command, and partly by the 
fuppofed attention of a very handfon\e clergy- 
man, who having two years befoie given up a 
feliowfhip at Oxlord to marry a very pretty wo- 
man, whom he paffionately loved, had, within 
twelve months \oH her, and now had accepted 
a curacy at a diftance from the fcene of his pad 
hanpinefs and misiortune, and in atten-.ptiiig to 
dinipate his grief, had mixed much in the fo- 
ciety of the neighbourhood, and had appeared 
particularly ple?.K-d in that of Mils Klford, who 
paffcd for ''a mo it fenfible woman." — When 
Verney fettled at Linwell, this gentleman, Mr. 
Mulgrave, was continually at the houfe where 
Mifs Elford ficquently refided alfo, and where 
(efpecially after Verney gave him a living, 
whicti happened to fall at that time) it was fup- 
poftd iheir intended uniun was rapidly advanc- 
ine to its conclufion j when fuddenly, Mr» 
Mulgrave grew cold and referved, and the mor- 
* Sbr»kefpeare. 

tified 



DESMOND. 235 

tified Mifs El ford loft once more the profpe6l of 
an immediate and fortunate eftablifhment. 

Though, till then, Mrs. Verney had been, 
in her cftimation, the beft, fweeteft, dearelt 
Ero»t..r. :., »i,„ ,.,,.ij, .u^ ia,/r-^<Tive fondntfs of 
Mils Klford declined from this moment ; and aS 
fhe could not fuffer herfelf to think that (he had 
been premature in reckoning on the imprellion 
file had made on Mr. Mulgrave, or that fhe 
wanted the captivating talents neceirary to fix 
that impreffion when it tvas made-, ihe took it 
into her head that Mr. Mulgrave had conceived 
an improper aftedlion for Mrs. Verney, and 
though there was probably not the leaft grounds 
for this idea, fhe has cherilhed it ever fince, 
and confequencly hates Geraldine, with an in- 
veterate malignity, which no other caufe could 
raife, or could fuftain — Still, however, ihe con- 
ceals this hateful fentiment under the fembiance 
of friend(hip— She laments, moft pathetically, 
the hard fate of " that fwect woman" — Sheds 
crocodile tears over the ruinous extravagancies 
of Verney (of which, however, (he has always 
the earlieft intelligence), and tells every body 
iiow long fhe fore fa w thde fatal propenfitics in 
the hufband of her charming friend before they 
broke out — talks of the vanity of all fublunary 
plans of happincfs, and thanks her good God I 
—for having placed her lot, where (he is not ex- 
pofed to theic heart-rending viciffitudes. — This 
good little gentlewomen, then, great part of 
whofe life, 1 really believe, pafles in colleding 
and difperfuig accounts of the failures, failings, 
faults, and follies of her acquaintance, has been 
of late more than ufually active ; and as fhe 
finds i liften to her with a greater degree of at- 
tention than 1 ufed to afford her, and is i\pt 
awaie of the motive I have for doing fOf 1 fee 

Ihe 



236 DESMOND. 

(he entertains a tboufand wandering fancies re- 
lative to my afliduity, and eagerly exerts herfelf 

to obtain its continuance 1 am a widower, 

about her own age — I have children who may 
want the care of fuch a difcreet Derron— I m^y 
^,:£jr j^r.L^ a liiiionai companion — Of alithele 
confiderations, it is really wonderful to remark 
the eifecft:, and to obferve he. .v amiable, difcreet, 

and realbnable my prude affects to be 1 am 

forry to encourage hopes, vvhicii I am afraid I 
cannot even for your fervice, my dear Defmond, 
realize, but as I have no other means of obtain- 
ing fuch intelligence as you war:*:, and fuch as 
indeed itppears to me abfalutely necelfary to 
enable eithes- of us to nillft in difpcriui^^ rhofe 
heavy clouds of calamity that ,are continuaily 
han^itig over her, for whom we ?re both fo 
atixious—l hope I am jul^ili'd in availing my- 
(cif of the infuriiiation ('■/ readily given me by 
my neighbour—I wifli I co'.ild add th-it ti^e pic- 
ture I have 6rA\va of Verney's ccnducl, owes 
its darkeft touches to the fnarp hands of malig- 
nant envy, through which it has paiT^d — But 
on enquiring of other people, who are quite 
difmterefted, and who really admire and regret 
the lovely victim of his follies, the circumftances 
and proceedings of Vcrney are reprefented in 
the fame way. 

, I have had within this laft week fome fymp- 
toms that threaten a return of the gout (if gout 
it be) that has fo long hung about me, and as 
my friend Banks, on whofefkill 1 have a great 
reliance, perfxfts in faying, that my future en- 
joyment of life depends on my having a regular 
£t, i (hall, if thefe flying complaints are not 
foon dilfipated, go again to Bath, as foon as my 
lent corn is in th^ ground, which three weeks 
will complete— We have hitherto had a re- 
markable 



DESMOND. 237 

markable fine feafon, and my farming is likely 
to go on molt piofperoufly — Harry is doing well 
at Winchci*!, and the maftcrs r.Ture me he will 
be a very citvt;r fellow — I (hall take Louifa with 
me, and put her to fchool at Bath for the time 
1 continue there, which will probably be three 
months — Long, long before that time, my dear 
Defmond, 1 hope to hail your return to Eng- 
land, and to tell you perfonally, how truly I am 

Your attached and faithful, 

ERASMUS BETHEL. 



LETTER XX VL 

TO MR. BETHEL. 

Laufanne, April lo'h, ^ypr. 
YOUR letter, with a packet 'of banks, 
reached me here, my friend, by fhe hands ef 
our old acquaintance Aflibv, who t:ok th*cm up 
on his way, and delivered them f^.fely to me 
three days ago — How fliall I, how nu^ht I to 
reply to fuch friendly enquiries, fuch generous 
offers as your's ? — I can find no words that an- 
fwer my idea of all 1 ought to fay to, thank, 
you— none that feem adequate to excufe that 
w.int of confidence, perhaps you will think of 
gratitude, which I muft feem to fhew, when 
I fay, tiiat though I am very certainly noft un- 
happy, it is impoiTible fir me to avail myfelf of 
your friend (hip towards the alhviition of my 
u.ihappjnef?, impoirible for me even to commur 
picate Its iburce — Notice not, therefore, my 
defpondence, my dear Bethel, its caufe cannot 



238 DESMOND. 

be removed, and whatever may be its confe- 
quences, be aflured that I deferve them all — 
Every word I write on this fubjedt gives me in- 
exprejf!ible pain, and therefore, I know you will 
pardon my befeeching you not to renew the to- 
pic, aflu ring you rfelf, that if at Any future time, I 
can properly take advantage of your counfel, and 
your friendfhip, there is not on earth the man 
to whom I would fo readily apply. 

I will not, hovvever, in any inftance deceive 
you. My late accident, my prefent ftatc of 
health, are neither of them thecaufeof my re- 
maining abroad — The uneafinefs 1 fufFer is not 
folely on account of Gerald ine, though your 
laft letter has encreafed and rendered almoft in- 
fupportable the folicitude I feel for her — yet 
amidft all the anguiiTi with which my mind 
dwells on the calamities that furround her, it is 
moft foothing and confolatory to hear from 
vourfelf that flie has found a friend in you j 
and that, being a convert to the united power 
of goodnefs, underftanding, and beauty, you 
have been taught by their invincible attraction^ 
to pity, and even to approve the attachment 
you were To lately difpofcd to condemn and ridi- 
cule, and which you fo lately and undefervcdly 
gave me credit for having conquered. 

In lodgings at Sheen, with only her children 
with her ! — one of the houfes, that in which 
fhe ufed to delight, fold — the other, the ancient 
houfe of her hufband's family, inhabited by his 
courtezans, and his diflblute companions ! 

Yet amid all this, inftead of returning evil 
for evil, what is her conduct ? — (he goes to a 
cheap retirement ; ihe is occupied only in the 
care of her children ; inftead of the retaliation 
which wc fee fo ufually adopted by young and 

beautiful 



DESMOND, 239 

beautiful women, whofe hufbands negleiSl and 
ill treat them, it feems as if her patient fvveet- 
nefs encreafed in proportion to the provocation 
ftie receives. Accurfed be he, who (hall at- 
tempt to degrade a charadler fo noble, to fully 
a mind fo angelic — Never will I be that man- 
But if I continue in this ftrain, I (hall get into 
thofe regions of heroics, that are, you hy^ be- 
yond the reach of your reafonable and calm 
comprehenfion ; fo we will talk of fomething 
elfej and m order to convince you that I can 
occafionally play the Mentor, inftead of being 
always your Telemachus, I am going to give 
you fomething very like a lecture — My dear 
Bethel, vk'hy do you fuffet thar Sir Robert 
Stamford to occupy and inflame to refentment 
a mind like your's — When you regret, that the 
place where I fiilt faw Geraldine, and where I 
have fo often repeated 

" Benedetto fia 'Igiorna, e'l mefe, e Tanno 
E la flagion e'l tetnpo, e I'ora e'l punto, 
E'l bel paele, e'l loco ov'io fui giunto 
Da duo begli occhi, che legato m'hanno.*''' 

I underftand all your friendly emotions, and 
rejoice that you enter with fuch enthufiafm into 
thofe feelings which, till you were more ac- 
quainted with Geraldine, you treated as roman- 
tic puerilities — but when the fungus growth of 
this arrogant upftart has fo much fhare in your 
indignation, 1 am hurt, that the elevated fpirit 
of my friend can be ruffled by a bein^ fo utterly 
contemptible. 

** Small thiagt make mean men proud. "f" 

* Petrarch. 
"f ^hakelpeanlb 

Caa 



240 O E S M O N D. . 

Can you then wonder, that to fuch a man, his 
fudden, and, as he well knows, his undeferved 
exaltation is matter of oftentaiious triumph r 
but does it make him refpedtable in the world f 
and does not even the bafeft part of that world, 
while it courts, defpife him ?— Leave him then, 
my friend, to ^wdjS.^ in fwinifti excefs, fums, 
which he has earned by doing dirty work, at 
the expence of thofe who are now called the 
'' fwinifh multitude,*" hundreds of whom 
m^'ht be fed by the fuperfluities of his luxurious 
tab!': — l^eave him to the wretched adulation of 
the favviiing parafue, who can ftoop to admipc"^ 
his Rne places, and be repaid by the delicacies 
of h'ls table, i^eave him to be an example of 
hbvi? liitle merit is required in oar country to 
reach the higheft poftS of proht and confidence 
— an example ofa placeman filling uCelefs places 
- — of a penhoner paid for the mifchief he has 
airift.ed ia doing to the nation, whole govi^rnors 
have thus rewarded him— But let \\o\ your mind, 
polTeifinj:, as it doe?, all the upright principles, 
the generous independence, that once ch'araiSte- 
rifed the Englilh genlkman, be difturbed by 
the difguftrng infolence of fuch a being, while 
y6u feel, that the humblelt labourer who culti- 
vates your ground, is a more honeft and a more 
refpcctable man. 

Ih reading the book you fent me, which 1 
have yet had only time to do fuperficially, I am 
fdr.cibly (Iruck with truth<!, thai either were not ' 
fee-n before, or were (by men, who did not wifh 
to acknowledge them) carefully reprelled ; they 
are bluntly, fometimes coarfely delivered, but 
it is oiien impoflible to refufe immediate LuTent 

■\ Vide Mr. Burke's dclcription of ibe people. 

to 



DESMOND. 241 

to thofe which appear the boldeft ; im|ioiTib!c to 
deny, that many others have been accedi-d to, 
when they were Ipoken by men, to whofe au- 
thority we have paid a kind of prefcHptive obe- 
dience, though they now liave called forth fuch 
clamour and abufe againft the author of " the 
Rights of Man." — My other letters from Eng- 
land are filled with accounts of the rage and 
indignation which this publication has excited 
— I pique myfelf, however, on having, in my 
former letter, cited againft Burke a fentence of 
Locke, which contradi6is as forcibly as Paine 
has contradicted one of his moft abfurd pofitions 
— I know, that where found argum nt fail'^, 
abxifivc declamatio 1 is always fubftiiuted, and 
that it often filences wh-^re it ' annot convince — 
I know too, that where the politics are ob- 
noxious, rccourle is always had topcrfonal de- 
traction ; 1 therefore wonder not,, that on your 
fide the wa^er, thofe whoareavcrfe to the politics 
of Paine, will declaim inftead of arguing; and 
thofe who feel the force of his abilities, will 
villify his private life, as if that was any thing 
to the purpofe; i do, however, wonder, that 
thefe angry 2nt;igon:fts do not recolle6l, that 
the clamour they raife, ferves only to prove 
their fears ; and that 'i the writings of this man 
are, as they would reprefent, deftitute of truth 
and found argnmeiu, they mnii be quickly 
configiicd TO contempt and oblivion, and could 
neither be th; mfelves t^^e fubjedl: of alarm, or 
render their author art object of invcfli(y;irioa 
and abhorrence ; but the truth is that, whatever 
may be his private life, [with which I cannot 
iiHtierftaiul, that the public ha\e any conceiw) 
he comes as a {jolltical wricer, under the dcfcrip- 
♦.if-n given of a controvertill bv the acute author, 
Vol. I. M ' to 



242 DESMOND. 

to whom Monfieur d'Hauteviile has fo terrible 
an averfion. 

*' A t'on jamais vu un plus abominable 
homme ? il expofe les chofes avec un fidelity 
fi odieufe ; il met fous les yeux le pour & le 
■centre avec un imparlialite fi lache ; il eft d'un 
clairte fi intolerable, qu'il met les gens qui 
n'ont que le fens commun, en etat de douter, & 
niemc de juger.*" 

I frequent no fociety here willingly, as I find 
my mind by no means in a ftate to attend to 
the common occurrences of life without fatigue ; 
and that both my fpirits and health fufFer, by 
the exertion which a man is obliged to make in 
company for which he does not care a ftraw. 
However, as Afhby had been very obliging to 
me in bringiixg my pacquets from Marfcilles, 
and depended on me for introdutSlion here, I 
went with him yefterday to the houfe of a man 
of fome confideration, where there is generally 
the beft company of the place afiembled, and 
where there then happened to be, among many 
others, French and Swifs, two Englifhmen, 
one, a Mr. Cranbourne, who has accompanied, 
in their travels, feveral men of rank, and now 
is returning to England with a Lord Fording- 
bridge, whofe minority is juft ended, and who 
is returning to hiiJ-land to take his feat in the 
houfe of peers. 

Mr. Cranbourne, who waf, I find, bred to 
the law, has all that fupercilious and dogmatical 
manner, which an education for the bar very 

* V/as there ever iuch an abominable ferow? he expofesthe 
trmh fo (dioufly; he les before our eyes the arguments oa 
both fides with Itch honible imp;irtialiiy ; he is Co intolerably 
clear and I'lain, that he enables people •uibi have enly commcn 
Jeaje, ts di.i/t, ar.d iv.-ti ti !u./^v.— Voltaire, 

frequently 



D E S M O N" O. 243 

frequently gives — He afTcrts with violence, ami 
maintains witti obftinacy; and though the wnrld 
doubted either of the pnjfundity of his jucij- 
mcnt, or the power of his eloquence, fo t'ut 
he was unfeed and unretaincd during the couiic 
of thofe years that he called himfclf a couiilel- 
lor, he is fo perfe(5tly convinced of his emintncc 
in both, that he is on all occ^fions, not a pleader, 
but a decider, and fits felf-ele£led on the judg- 
rnent feat, on every occafion of controverfy— 
His travels, without diverting him of the que- 
rulous afperity of the bar, have made him a 
folemn coxcomb in every other fcience ; and he 
prides himfelf on having formed his prefent 
pupil on his own model, and declares, that he 
will make a fuperior figure as an orator in the 
Britifli fenate. 

The boy, who has thus been taught to con- 
fider himlelf as a miracle of elegance and eru- 
dition, unites the flippant airs of a young man 
*< of a certain rank"— —with the fenfntious 
pertnefs of an attorney's clerk juft out of his 
time — I found him, on our entrance, Handing 
in the midft of a circle, declaiming againft- the 
French government; and pouring fortn a warm 
eulcgium on Mr. Burke — The lordling aiFe(£ls 
an Italian accent, and to have forgotten the harlh 
tones of his native laniuage, when he dt ians 
to fpeak it — '* Pray*" f^^'d he, *' tell me you, 
who know, what is this other book—This an- 
fwer to Hurke, that I have been bored with— 
fomebody wanted me td sead it, but I had neither 
patience nor inclination — 1\ (;;ems from the ac- 
count other people have given .Tie, to be very 
feditiou"-; I wonder they don't purufh the au- 
thor, who, they fay, is quite a low fo.t of fel- 
low What does he mean by his Rights oi 

M 2 Man, 



244 B E S M N *. 

jVIan, and his equality? — What wretched and 
dangerous doifirine to diffeminate among the 
.lazzaroni* of England, where they are always 
ready enough to ip.urmur againft their betters? 
I hope our government will take care to fdence 
-fuch a demagogue, before he puts It into the 
iieads of les gens fans culotes-^ in England, to do 
as they have done m France, and even before be 
gets feme of the ragged rogues hanged — They 
rights ! poor devils, who have neither fhiris 
nor breeches '" 

You have accufed me of laying by in com- 
pany, even where the converfation has turned 
'«n topics that intereft me moft.. I own i had 
.done lb now, partly from depreflion of fpirits, 
.and partly from the reluctance I felt to engage 
in " wordy war" againft prejudice and ablur- 
-dity. — 1 now, however, venturrd to enquire of 
Lord Fordingbi idgc, whether thefe men whom 
he called Inzzaroni, might not be urged to re- 
volt by thole very miferies which expofed them 
to his contempt? and whether fuch extreme 
^Xiverty and wretchednefs did not fhew the ne- 
cefTity of foaie alteration in the government 
where -vhey exiHed ? — If government be allowed 
K» be for ib.e benefit of the governed, not the 
governor?, fiirely thtfe complaints fhould be 
beard. '"• Whv, what would you have govern- 
ment do ?" aniwcrcd he — " Hovvc-n it prevent 

fuch fort of things ?■ Ou/'s, for example, 

againft which th^fc ftijpidj'iogs are complaining 
in libellous p.imphLf> and pipers, by what 
mean? can it <ihv .i<'- thefe difcon tents ? — 'Would 
you have thu >.liniiltr keep a fitap-Iliop, to fup- 



* i-*23aronl, a v.-orii rlef^riptiie of people reduced to the 
•!Jtm-)!.t f.oveil" ai'd wicltiiccitK is. 

ply 



DESMOND. 24.5 

ply the fans cuktes with thofe nccefiaries gratis F 
—This convincing argum?iit, which tiie whole 
company apfilauded with a loud laugh, gave my 
right honourable adverfary luch confidence in 
his own powers, that, without perniittmg me 
to reply, he proceeded. — " I inlift upon it, that 
there is no caule of complaint in England ; no- 
body is poor, unlefs itbe by their own fault; anil 
nobody is opprefTed j as to the common people, 
the mub, or whatever you pleaje to call them; 
what were they born lor but to work ? And 
here comes a fellow and tells them about tiieir 
rights — They have no rights — they can have 
none, but to labour for their fuperiors, and if 
they are idle, 'tis their own faults, and not the 
fault o( the conftilution, in which there are no 
imperfe£lions, and which cannot by any con- 
trivance be made better." 

'* Your lorufhip," anfwered 1, " whofe com- 
prehenfive mind prob*bly looks forward to th^ 
time when you will yourfelf make one of that 
illuftricus body that Mr. Burke defcribes as the 
Corinthian pillar of poliflied focieiy, has, 1 dare 
fay, in travelling through other countries, made 
the government of your own your peculiar ftudy, 
and by contrafting it with thoie you have (een^ 
you have learned to appreciate iis value — That 
it is fuperior to moll, perhaps, to all of them, 
1 am willing to allow, yet i cannot pronounce 
it to be without imperfections, where i obferve 
fuch dreadful contrails in the condition of the 
people under it — Who can walk: through the 
ftreets of London without being (hocked with 
them ? — Here., a man,, who polltires an im- 
menfe income which has been g vtn him tor his 
fervile attendance, or his venal voice, an in- 
come, which is paid/rom the b.urthenfome im- 

pofts 



240 !» 'E S .VI O N D. 

poils laid on the people, is feen driving along 
in a fplendid equipage ; his very fervants cloath- 
ed in purple and fine linen, and teftifying, bj 
their looks, that they * fare fumptuoufly every 
day' — 1 here, extended on the pavement, lies 
one of thofe very people whofe labour has pro- 
bably contributed to the fupport of this luxury, 
begging vil>efewithal to continue his degraded 
exiftence, of the difgufted pairenger, who turns 
from the fpe£lacle of his fqualid wretchednefs 
— In our daily prints, this fhocking inequality 
is not lefs ftriking — In one paragraph, we are re- 
galed with an eulogium on the innumerable 
bleiiings, the abundant profperity of our coun- 
try J in the next, we read the melancholy and 
rrrrt^ryirg Wi} of m!mbcr]i.r« unhappy debtors, 
who, in vain, folicit, from time to time, the 
mercy of the legifiature, and who are left by the 
powers who tan relieve them, to linger out tt-.eir 
unprofitable lives, and to perifh, through penury 
and difealie, in the moft loathfome continementsj 
condemned to feel 

* The horrors of a gloomy paol. 



llBpiiiid and unheard, where niilery moans ; 
Whtie fjcknefs pine^^ where third and hunger burn, 
And poo! misfortune, feels the lafti of guilt.*' 

To-day, we fee difplayed in tinfel panegyric, 
thie fuperb trappings, the gorgeous ornanients, 
the iewels of immeofe value, with which the 
illiifli SOU"; perfonagc5 of our land amaze and ue- 
light ui — T"o- morrow, we read d a poor man, 
an ancient woman, a (ieferted child, who were 
found dead in luch or fuch alleys or flrcet, 
* Juppofcd lo have pcrifhed through want, and 

* Thomfoin. 

the 



D H S M O N D. 2:\.J- 

the inclemency of the weather ;' and is it pof*-> 
fible to help exclaiming. 



-' lake phyfic pomp— 



Expofe thyiielf to feel what wretches fee I ; 
S« (halt thou ni;\ke ihe I'uptrflux to ihein. 
And (hew the heavens more jurt.*" 

The young peer, who had (hesvn more pa.- 
tience than I expe(5led, now interrupted me — 
" All this is very fine, Sir," faid he, '* but give 
me leave to fay, that it is all common place de- 
clamation, (that was true enough) and does not 
go to prove, that the form of our government 
is defective — mifery exilts every where, and i<i 
intended toexiil; even according to your own 
qiiotadon, it is allowed — 

* And 0>«w the htavens mor* juft.' 

It is heaven fo decides then, and by no means 
the fault of government — It is the lot of hu- 
manity, and cannot be changed." ** liius it 
is," anfwered 1, *' that we dare to arraign our 

God for the crime? and follies of man that. 

God, who certainly made none of his creatures- 
to be miferable, nor called any into exiftence 
only to live painfully, anJ pcriPa vvietchedly ; 
but when the blind fcinlhnefs of man dif- 
tf ibutes what Providence has given ; when ava- 
rice accumulates, and power u Turps, fome have 
fuperfluities, which contribute nothing to their 
happinefs, others hardly enough to give them 
the means of a tolerable exiftence — Were, there, 
indeed, a fure appeal to the mercies of the rich, 
the calamities of the poor might be Icfs inio- 

* Shakeri>cace. 

Icrable j 



248 D li S M O N D. 

Icrable j but it is too cerfain, that higli aiSucncc 

•^and pro.'perity have a dirtit tendency to harden 

the tcinptr. How few do we meet with who 

can feci lor miCeiics ihey Cejmut imagine, and 

are Ture they can nevti cxper ence ? How 

many, who ha\e heans fo indurated by tlicir 
town fviccefs or fortune, that diey are infenfible 
to geuerohly, and even tojiiftice? — f-low many 
nK)re, who wotild, perhaps, be in fc^me degree 
alive to the fcnf.ttiot.s of ln-'maiiity, if their bvi- 
fuief;;, or iheir plciifuies billowed them time to 
thmic, but who are (o occupied by either the 
«rne or the othtr, and fo litile ii. the habit of 
attendir.g to difagrceiibie fi;bjc<ib, that they 
flirink Ironi the det^ul (.f poverty and lorrow, 
and- would be dIfguHed with thofe who fiiuuld 
attempt to intrude with fuch images 

' On ffirn j.'.)lit<. ?' 

" Well, Sir," ciied my lord, in whore hands 
the reft of the corripany continued to Jcave an 
argument in which they thought he had greati.y 
the advantage — ••* Well, Sir! and what then ? 
—Have we not laws, by which our poor are 
amply, magnihcently provided for ?" 

" That they were intended to be fc, I be- 
lieve," anfwertd 1, " but how thofe laws are 
perverted, let the frequent, the meritorious, 
but unfuccefsful attempts to amend them, bear 

witncfs- Their abufe ; the heavint-fs with 

^^■hich they prefs on one pidt of the comoiunitv, 
without relieving the other, is ojie of the greateit 
evils we corap'a.in of; but here, as in twenty 
other inftance^-, every attempt at redrefs h 
filenced by the ncli me tangcre^ which our con- 
fiitution has been made to fay, and which has 

been 



B F S M O N Dj 249 

been echoed, without enquiry, by all who have 
either intereft in prcftrving the inviolability 
even of its acknowlcd<:,ed defedts, or who have 
been brought up in prejudices, that make them 
believe that our anceftors were Co much wifer 
than we are ; that it is a fort of facrilege to 
doubt the perfe(5tion of the ftrutlurc they raifed, 
and to imagine an edifice of greater ftrength and 
fimplicity — If thefe prejudices are enforced and 
continued — if every attempt to repair what time 
has injured, or amend what is acknowledged to 
be defe(fl:ive, is oppofed as dangerous, and exe- 
crated as impious ; let us go on till the building 
falls upon our heads, and let thofe who efcape 
the ruins, continue to meditate on the prodi- 
gious advantage of this holy reverence, and 
to bo.jft of the happinefs of being Englilh- 
men!" 

'* I fhould be glad, Sir, fince ycu, at leaft, 
feem to have none of this refjie.ft," faid the 
young lawyer, and who now thought he had 
been filent long enough— '•' I fhould be glad if 
your fagacity would point out fome of thofe 
mher defeds in the ftrudure of the Englifh con- 
rticution, which, doubtlefs, you have difcover- 
ed." 

« That is not very difficult,'* I replied, " and 
I (hould begin by faying, that its very founda- 
tion is defective, from the inequality of repre- 
fentation ; (were that aiTertion not atlov/ed by 
every one as an incontrovertible truth j and had 
not there been fuch repeated mockeries, fuch 
frequently renewed forces aifled, to amufe us 
with pretended efforts at a reform, which never 
were intended, nor can ever be carried ino ef- 
fect, but by the unanimous and determined per- 
feverance of the people) — To drop the meta- 
M 5 phor, 



•250 D E S M O N D. 

phor, let mc turn to another very common fub- 
jedt of acknowledged complaint — I mean the 
penal laws — laws, by which the property and 
the life of the individual is put on an equal 
footing, and by which murder, or a robbery to 
the amount of forty (hillings, are offences 
equally punifhed witn death — Is it poinble to 
itRe^ without horro-, on the numbers that are 
every year executed, while every year's expe- 
rierjce evinces, that this prodigality of life ren- 
ders tlie punifliment familiar, and prevents not 
crimes? — Is there a feflion at the Old Bailey, 
where boys, from fifteen to twenty are not con- 
demned ? — boys, who, deferted from their in- 
fancy, have been driven, by ignorance and want, 
to violate the laws of that fociety, which 

* SSakes her encumbered lap, and throw* them out.'* 

Why do we boafl; of the mildnefs and huma- 
nity of laws, whicii provides punifhment inftead 
of prevention ? And can we avoid feeing, that 
v;hile they give up yearly to the hands of the 
txecutianer greater numbers than die the vidlims 
of public juftice in all the other European coun- 
tries reckoned together; we mufl, in fpite of 
our national vanity, acknowledge, either, that 
the Engliilh are the worft, and moft unprinci- 
pled race of men in Europe, or, that their pe- 
nal laws are the moll fanguinary of thofe of 

any nation under heaven. Attempts have 

been made to remedy this enormity, which I 
cannot help calKng a national difgrace ; but, 
like every other endeavour at partial corre(5tion 
of abufts, thefe humane eflforts have been baf- 

* C«wper, 

fled 



DESMOND. 251 

fled on the ufual principle, that nothing muft 
be touched, nothing muft be changed"— —- 
" Really, Sir," faid Mr. Cranbourne, '* you 
are a molt able advocate for beggars and . 
thieves." 

" At leaft, Sir, I am a difinterefted one, for 
I plead for thofe who cannot fee me — but it is 
not for beggars and thieves, as you are pleafed 
to fay, that 1 plead — it is for the honor of my 
country — for the reform of the laws, which oc- 
cafion beggars and thieves to exili in fuch num- 
bers ; while we oftentatioufly boaft, that thofe- 
laws are the beft in the world. Nor is it only, 
the penal laws that feem to want alteration; 
allow me to obferve, that from the continual 
complaints of the defedts of our law, as it re- 
lates to the protedion of property, it does not 
feem to deferve the praile of fuperiority which 
we arrogantly claim — We hear every, day of 
fuits in which even fuccefs is ruin ; and we 
know, that far from being able to obtain in our 
courts, that fpeedy, clear, decifive, and im- 
partial juftice, which, from their inftitution 
they are defigned to give, a vidtory (obtained, . 
after being fent through them all) is often 
much worfe than a retreat — ihe remedy more fa- 
tal than the difeafe — So confcious are even the ^ 
lawyers themfelves of this, that if one of them 
(as may happen) has a perfonal regard for his 
client, and is willing to wave pecuniary advan^ 
tage in his favor, fuch a lawyer will fa) — '-' Do 
any thing — fubmit to any compromife — put up 
with any lofs, rather than go to lav,?" — One of. 
our courts is called that of Equity, where the 
widow, the orphan, the deferred and unhappy 
of every defcription, (who have money) are to 
find protedion and redrefsj yet it is too cer- 
tain, 



5^ DESMOND. 

tain, that fuch are the delay?, fuch the expences 
in this court, that the ruinous tedioufnefs of a 
Chancery fuit is become proverbial-^the op- 
preileJ may perifh, before they r-an obtain the 
remedy they feek ; and where, under the direc- 
tion of this court, litigated property is to be 
divided, it continually happen?, that, by the 
time a decifion is obtained, there is nothing to 
divide — The poet I juft now quoted, fays, 

■— ^— r— * ln,tlii« rank sge. 



Mjch is the patriot'*s weeding hand required*.' 

But alas ! — efpecial care is taken, that neither 
reafon nor patriotifm Ihall touch too rudely 

* The tails ci^ law, where da' k, infidious mee, 
Hne cumbious added to perpkx the truth, 
And lejag'hen fi . pie jufticc into trade. f 

And yet 

* How ghricus 'Wire the dny that faiu thefe hnkty 
And every man Kuilh'tn tht reach of right \'' 

*■*■ As to your poets," cried Mr. Cranbourne 
fi/percilioufly — " There is no bringing argu- 
ment againfl their flowery declamation ; fine 
fooiiding words about rights and liberties, are 
impoAng to fuperficial underftandings, but can- 
not convince others — fine flourifhing words are 
not arguments." 

" Nor does there," faid I, " need arguments, 
jsn what I have aflerted — they are matters of 
iu^^b, and not of fpeculation or opinion— truths, 
which cannot be denied, and which it would 
require fonie fkill to palliate." 

* Thorn f'jj). 

X i^id. 

« As 



DESMOND. 253 

" As to truth. Sir, it is not always proper 
to fpeak it, nay, it is not always fafe to the 
well-beinjj; of a ftatC'-^The queftion, I think i?, 
not whether a thina; be exadly conformable to 
vour Utopian anJ impra<f^icable fchemee, but 
whether it be expedient— -We know that truth 
is not expedient^ and that it is the buftnefs of 
government to enforce obedience, without which 
it would not go on ; not to liften to the reafon- 
ing of every wild dogmatift, who fancies him- 
felf a philofopher, and able to mend what is 
already good — all fuch fhould be prevented 
from difleminating their pernicious doctrines, 
which ferve only to make men difcontent with 
their fituation, to raife murmurs, and to clog the 
wheels of government." 

This fentence, which was moft confequen- 
tially delivered, was applauded by all the party, 
as I had nothing to offer againft it, but that 
truth which had juftbecn pronounced to be in- 
expedient, I declined the conteft, faying only, 
•* If truth is not to be fpoken, Sir, in a go- 
vernment, calling itfelf free, left it fhould be 
underftood by the people, who are governed ; 
and prevent their freely fupplying the oil, that 
facilitates the movement of the cumbrous ma- 
chine — If fa£ls, which cannot be denied, be 
repreffed j and reafon, which cannot be con- 
troverted, be ftifled ; the time is not far diftant, 
when fuch a country may fay, adieu liberty !— 
Let them, therefore, if they are content to do 
(o^ begin with expelling thofe who dare fpeak 
truth, and are fo impudent as to reafon — ' Tous 
ces gens qui raifonent font la pefte d'un etat.*' 

• Voltaire — * All thefe reafoning people are the very curfes 
of a gavcinment.' 

I then 



2 si DESMOND. 

I then left my adverfary to enjoy the triumph of 
his imaginary fupcriority, and wandered away 
alone, indulging contemplations, mournful con- 
templations, on far other fubje£tf. — The mo- 
ment 1 am in folitude, the image of Gcraldine 
in diftrefs, Geraidme contending with irreme- 
diable misfortunes, recurs to me j and other 
fubje£ls of regret, add bitlernefs to my reflec- 
tions ; perhaps, therefore, I fiiould do wifely, 
to mix more in fociety, where 1 muft, of courfe 

' Difguife the thing I im, 
By fteining oiherwife.' 

But 1 am fo poor at diflimulation, that the pain 
of attempting it, is more haraffing than the 
thoughts I would fly from. 

Write to me very frequently, my friend ; and 
remember as he wiihes to be remembered, 

Year's ever, moft afFedlionately, 

LIONEL DESMOND. 



LET- 



S £ S M O N ». 255 



LETTER XXVII. 



TO MRS. VERNE Y. 



Bath, April 20, lygr. 

I A M not furprifed, my dear ftfter, but I 
am very forry you have had a vifit from your 
hufband, and his foreign and Englifh compa- 
nions — I forefee no poflible good that can arife 
from it, though I will not aiFe£l fo much prc- 
fcience as to point out exadly the evils I appre- 
hend ; one of which, however, you muft your- 
fclf iee, I mean the expences that Verney will 
be drawn into to give himfelf confequencc 
among thefe, his new friends ; but, perhaps, he 
may be content to exhibit his Yorkfliire-houfe, 
with feme of the inhabitants he had lately there, 
to do its honors, and may fpare you, notwiih- 
ftanding what he faid about your going down 
thither — Believe me, I would not have named 
this circumftance, as you have fo often reproved 
me for fpeaking with afperity of Verney, could 
1 have fuppofed it poiTible that you can be igno- 
rant of the party who were fo lateJy colledted 

there. 



256 ■ DESMOND. 

there, or of the real reafon which made hitn 
oppofe your going thither with your children, 
when the country was pronounced abfolutely 
nccefiary for you by your ph\ ficians ; forgive 
me, pray, if I thus renew difagreeable recol- 
ledtions, but I do not love you fhouid now go 
where fuch people held fo lately their profligate 

focieties 1 do not love that my Geraldine 

Ibould appear a neglected and unhappy wife, 
prefiding in the fame fcenes that fo recently 
witnefled the orgies of Verney, S<:arfdale, Dey- 
bourne, and Newminfter, with abandoned prof- 
titutes — Shall I go farther, and add, that I do 
not love my Geraldine fliould be where Scarf- 
dale is at all — you have often yourfelf obferved 
his behaviour; and, as he knows you cannot 
fail to underftand it, furely it is inconfiftent with 
your character to allow him an opportunity of 
repeating it; do not go to Moorily Park, my 
filler, if you can avoid it ; and if it cannot other- 
Wife be evaded, without a violation of what you 
think your duty — obedience ! — unqualified obe- 
dience ! — I will contrive, that my mother (hall 
make a point of your coming hither ; a requeft 
which Verney will not refu(e, fince he believes 
that he owes to her the difcharge of thofe two 
moft troublcfome debts; (though it certainly 
was not by her they were difcharged) nor, were 
fome little ^atitude oUtof the qucftion, (which, 
perhaps, with him it might be,) would lie, how- 
ever politic he is, hazard offending my mother, 
while he feels the daily probability of his being 
under the neceflity of a/king other pecuniary 
favors. 

Let me hear, by an early pofl, that you de- 
termine on this, or fome other equally proper 
fcheme — Again Jet me afk your forgivencfs, if 

I have 



DESMOND, 2r57 

( have faid too much, and I entreat you to im- 
pute it to the tender <ift't6tion 1 bear you, which 
is, jou know, inheienr, and has grown up with 
me from my iiri\ conrcioufncls of exidencc — 
Alas ! if i did not love you, what elfe fhould 
I have to love in the world ? My other fifter is 
lo much old<r, that 1 have alwa)S had my aftoc- 
tion for htr, " chaftifed by fei;r," and (lie i$ 
now afar ofF, and time and diflance are cruel 
encmiej>, eveii to the ties of blood — iVIy brother ! 
— alas ! does he care for any of us, and is it pof- 
libie to wafle one's affection on apathy and inde- 
cilion? — My mother ! 1 truft, i venerate and 
legard her, as my only parent j I think myfelf 
inaebted to her for the trouble fhe has taken 
during my infancy and my childhood, and for 
that portion of regard which flie is able to fpare 
me (hnce I believe the affedtions are involun- 
tary^ from her fon j but I have felt too much 
awe, to be fenfible towards her, of that fympa- 
thetic and gentle affe<Stion which unites me ta 
you— to you, my Geraldine, whofe foft temper 
is ever ready, even amidft your friendly chidings, 
to plead for your flippant Fanny, while ^^r heart 
finds refpondent fentiments only in your's — 
Ah ! would to heaven I dared entruft you with 

one, which is but no: you have too many 

troubles of your own — Never, never, may yoyr 
tirnuernefs for me add to their number. 

Your uncafinefs about my brother is now^ I 
hope, relieved, at kail fo far as depends on 
knowing where he is — My mother, however, is 
fo far /rom feeling herfeif contented at the ac- 
cotiiHs he has fent her of his journey to the 
Archipelago, and his Grecian importations, 
that (he IS, if poUlble, more unealy and more 
reltjcfs than ilie has been fince his abfence; for 

my 



45^ 13 £ S M O N D. 

my part, I think he is quite as well at Venrcf, 
witli his Cypriot, as he would be at Paris, or 
itj LoiiJoi), with any connection of the fame 
fort, liut he might form at either of thofe 
places ; and certainly we have much lefs reafon 
to be difTatisfied, than if he had added to our 
family alliances, by a union with that of the 
illuftrious houfe of St. Eloy. 

That name brinj,s to my mind, or rather 
to the end of my pen, another name, I mean, 
that of Defmond. His uncle, who is ftill here, 
is grown quite coy upon that fubje£l, though 
willing enough to talk to me upon any other ; 
or if 1 continue, at any time, to oblige him to 
fpeak upen it, his anfwers are peevifii, (hort, 
and unfatisfadory— ! proteft I am half inclined 
to believe the venerable veteran h in love with 
me himfelf, and is jealous of ray grateful recol- 
)c«Slion of his nephew — Oh ! how I fhould be 
delighted to have the power of teizing this old 
petrifaction. But, alas! my dear fifter, is all 
exerted in vain, the heart of the Major is com- 
pofed of fuch impenetrable ftuff, that, 1 believe, 
there is no plaguing him any way. 

Now do 1 long to tell you a little of what 
is paffing here ; but, I know, the goffip of this 
place is rather irkfome than plealing to you j 
and I am often rather reproved than thanked, for 
endeavouring to amufe you with the events, 
real or imaginary, which occupy us here, and 
gives us the requifite fupplies of converfation for 
the tea and card parties; but indeed, my Ge- 
raldine, if you deprive me, by your rigid avtrfion 
to what you call detraction, of fuch a refource 1 
know not what there will remain for me to write 
about, and to fill ihofe long letters which alone 
faligfy you y I mult not fay much of any of our 

own 



DESMOND. Z5^ 

own family, becaufe you fay it is pert, and un- 
duiiful, and 1 know not what ; if I could rc- 
rcpeat only good ot the people I am among, you 
would let me fill quires of paper about them ; but, 
as it if, if I report only what 1 hear, you accule 
me of being as fpitefully fcandalous as the 
dowagers, who fit in tremendous coinmittces on 
the reputations of the week— You know, I ne- 
ver am allowed to converfe with any of the lite- 
raty people 1 meet, as my mother has a terrible 
averfion to every thing that looks like a deiirc 
to acquire knowledge ; and for tlie fame reafon, 
fhe profcribes every fpecies of reading, and mur- 
murs, when flie cannot abfolutely prohibit the 
fafhionable, infipid novel. 

The'e is fo much enquiry of the f.ige, ma- 
tronly gentlewomen of her acquaiiuancc, who 
are, as (he believes, deep in the fecret, as to 
what books are proper, who are the authors, 
and whether there be *' any offence in them j" 
that, by the time thefe voices are co.lecled, I 
find, more than half 1 propofe reading, abfo- 
lutely forbidden — Novels, it is decided, con- 
vey the poifon of bad example in the foft fem- 
blance of refined fentiment — One contains an 
oblique apology for fuicide ; a fecond, a lurking 
palliation of conjugal infidelity ; a third, a 
fneer againft parental authority j and a fourth, 
againft religion ; tome are difliked for doctrines, 
which, probably, malice only, afiuming the 
gaib of wifdom, can difcover in them; and 
others, becaufe their writers have either, in 
their private, or political life, given offence to 
the prudery, or (he party of fome of thefe wor- 
thy perfonages, whom ray mother, relying on 
their reputation for fandlity and iagacity, chufes 
to cofalt J and thus I am reduced to pradife the 

Jineje 



J^C'O DESMOND. 

yf^^^of aboafding-fchool mifs,and to hide thefc 
obje£tionabie pages, from an inquifition not lefs 
fevere than that which the lovely Serena* fuf- 
tained, or I mult confine myfelf to fuch maw- 
kifii reading as is produced, " in a rivulet of 
text I uiining through a meadow of margin," in 
the fott lemblance of letters, " from Miiskve- 
rilsJa Evelyn, to Mifs Viclorina Villars'" — 
How then, my fifier, am 1 to find any thing to 
fay but of living characters ? or how can I help 
being facirical againfi: thofe vvho will not let me 
be fentimental ?— 1 might, indeed, read hiftory ; 
but whenever I attempt to do fo, I am, to tell 
you the truth, driven from it by difguft — What 
IS it, but a miferably mortifying detail of crimes 
and follies ? — of the guilt of a few, and the 
fufterings of many, while almoft every page 
offers an argument in favor of what I never will 
believe — that Heaven created the human race 
only to deftroy itfelf ; and that in placing the 
various fpecies of it, in various climates, 
whence they acquired various complexions, ha- 
bits, and languages; their Creator meant thefe 
men fhould become the natural enemies of each 
other, and apply the various portions of reafon 
he has allotted them, only in itudying how to 
annoy and murder each other. 

But I am wajidering, in my wild way, from 
the point ; and, in my complaints, that the 
pretty, foothing tales of imagination are pro- 
hibited, while the hideous realities ot human 
life affright me, 1 had nearly forgctten what I 
v/as going to fay, wiiich is not at all fcandalous 
— Oh no! — it is, on the contrary, an event at 
which you will rejo;ce— Your old f;iend, Mifs 



* Triomrfesj^f ten-.per. 

Elford, 



D E S M O N li. ' 261 

El ford, has, at laft, met with a lover, who 
really purpofesto becofne hei hufband — He is a 
phyftcian ; very well looking, and twelve OT 
fourteen >ears younger than herlclf — She is irt 
love!— Oh! undefcribably in love — And the 
Do£lor forefecs, in her extenfive connexions, 
advantages likely to arife to him in his profef- 
fton, thjt will, he thinks, more than counter- 
balance the trifling wants of fortune, beauty, 
and youth— I dare not paint to you -the ridicu*- 
lous love fcenes that this tender pair exhibit-— 
You have feen Mifs Elford in love once before*, 
and can, perhaps, imagine how {he exprcfles 
now a ftill more ardent paflion ; and with what 
airs of antiquated coquetry fhe recalls th? Doc- 
tor to his allegiance, if, peradventure, (be de- 
teds his eyes wandering towards any of the 
younger and handfomer part of the company—* 
The idea here is, that they are to be married very 
foon, and I really wifti they may, if it bs only 
in the hope, that Mifs Elford, rn having a huf- 
band of her own, will be fa engaged by her own 
un''xpe6tedgood fortune, a^ to let the reft of the 
world remain for feme time unmolefted. I 
cannot help it, my dear filler if, rn deCpite of 
your gentle admonitions, I do hdte this little, 
flirivelled, fatirical Sybil — It was from her 1 
find, that the hiftory ©f my brother's adventure? 
with the St. Lloy family got abroad here, with 
numberlefs additional circumilances that never 
happened ; and it is of her, thr.: my mother 
learned what I w.fhed toconceai from her, the 
parties that Verney lately had ii, Yorkfliir^.— 
Oh I if you could have heard how (be canted 
about " her dear, her amiable JMrs. Verney ;*' 
while fhe could not difguife th? pleaiore Ihe took 
in defcptbing your hufband's fo;blei.>— -you would 

have 



■26«2 D E S M O K D. 

liave been convinced of what I always told you ; 
that under uncommon hypocrify, fhe conceals 
uncommon malignity — Astomyfelf, I find fhe 
goes about talking of me in fuch terms as thefe : 
** Did you fee dear Mifs Waverly at the ball 
laft night? — Was (he not charming? — I think 
fhe never looked fo well ; and really I begin to 
be a convert to the opinion of thofe, who faid, 
lail year, when fhe firft came out, that fhe was 
quite as handfome as her fecond fifter Mrs. Ver- 
ney, the celebrated beauty — Mrs. Verney, poor, 
dear creature ! — (I have an amazing regard for 
her, and have loved her from our childhood.^ 
though (he is two or three years younger than I 
am!) Mrs. Verney is a little altered, though 
ftill fo very young — Poor thing ! — -troubles, like 
her's, are great enemies to beauty, which is but 
as the flower of the morning ; but however fhe 
may be changed in appearance, fhe is flill moll 
amiable — indeed, more fo, as to gentlenefs of 
temper, than Mifs Waverly, though Jhe is a 
fweet girl, and has no fault, except, perhaps, a 
Jittle, a very little too much vivacity, which, it 
is the great object of my worthy friend, hei 
mother, to check ; judging, indeed, very truly, 
that a young perfon, fo much followed and ad- 
mired, cannot be too referved and cautious." 
— Yes ! and, in confequence of this imperti- 
nent opinion, this odious tabby (who fays fhe 
is only a year or two younger than you, though 
fhe will never fee forty again) has made my 
mother fo full of fears and precautions, tha'. i 
am neither to read any books but thofe that are 
ordered by the Divan, of which fhe is deputy 
chair-woman, or to fpeal^ to any men but old 
fograms, fuch as Major Diuby ; or men of hrge 
fortune — My mother need not be fo apprehen- 

five; 



DESMOND. id^J 

five; firft, becaufe I have not the leaft inclina- 
tion to fet out for Scotland with any of the in- 
fignificant butterflies, whom I like well enough 
to have flutter about me in public j and fecond- 
ly, becaufe, if I had fuch a fancy, there is not 
on« of them who has the leaft notion of marry- 
ing a young woman without a fortune, or with 
a very fmall one — Even the fortunate beings 
who are not profcribed, men who can make a 
fettlement, have, for the moft part, but Jittle 
inclination to encumber themfelves with z 
|)ortionlefs wife ; and among them all, 1 know 
none who anfwer my ideas of what a man ought 
to be — Alas ! there is but one in the world whom 
I fhould felecSl as the hero of my Romance, if I 
were in hafte to make one. 

But you muft give me leave to deteft Mifs El- 
ford a little j though, indeed, I have not in my 
heart room for many other fentiments than thofc 
of anxiety and tendernefs for you, my dear Ge- 
raldine. Write foon, and explicitly, of your 
intentions, to 

Your affe6lionate and faithful. 



JANNV WAVERLY 



LET- 



2^ B E S M O N ». 



LETTER XXVIII. 



SeynsootStreet, 27th April, 1791. 

YES! my fifter, I knew of the way in 
which Mr. Verney lived when he was laft in 
Yorklhire, though I never mentioned it, and 
had fome hope it might have efcaped my mo- 
ther's knowledge and your's— Alas ! Fanny ! 
I cannot be ignorant, however I defire to apprar 
fo, of the extreme bitternefs of the lot to which 
I .am condemned ; but while you love rr,e— 
while my charming children are weW — whiJemy 
mother thinks of me with fome intereft — and 
let me a=dd, while 1 have a few friends, whofe 
regard is fo well worth poflefiing, I will not fmk 
under it; but will fupport myfelf by there- 
flexion, that I do tr.y duty, and, at leaft, de- 
fcrve a better fate — I now haften to the other 
parts of your letter — You will fee, by the date 
of this, that 1 am returmd to London— and you 
well knovv" how much againft my inclination — 
However, it was thought better than going into 
Yorkfhirc ; and fortunately for me, the Due de 
Komaguecourt, who is become Mr. Verney's 
moft mtimate friend, difcovered, thac he had 
no inclination to go at this feafon into fo remote 
apart of England — However, Mr. Verney de- 
termines 
I 



DESMOND. 265 

tcrmines to entertain him here in a ftyie which 
may do honor to his hofpitality ; and as frequent 
dinners are to be given, and the Duke profeflcs 
himfelf diffatisfied, even with the moft luxu- 
rious table, where ladies do not prefide, I have 
been compelled to quit my quiet lodging, and 

am to remain here till indeed, I know not . 

till when, for Mr. Verney is as unfettled* in- 
his plans, even as my poor brother himfelf, and 
without the docility which Waverly has, who 
will generally allow fome other perfon to decide 
for him, and then believes, for a few hoursy 
that he has followed his own inclination. 

All you fay about Col. Scarfdale is very true 
— It is impoflible not to fee, however I have 
endeavoured to mifunderftand him ; that his 
pretended friend/hip for Verney, does not pre- 
vent his forming defigns, which you may affure 
yourfelf, excite only my contempt, and add 
abhorrence of his principles to perfonal aver- 
fion — I now fee a great deal more of him than 
I do of Mr. Verney ; for though we have ap- 
parently inhabited the fame houfe thefe three 
days, we have met only once, even at table, 
and th?t was yeflerday, when a magnificent 
dinner was given to his friends — Col. Scarfdale, 
however, is very obligingly willing not to eon- 
iign me to folitude ; but, nnce he is always ad- 
mitted by Mr. Verney's dire6l:ion, and knows I 
am never out, he takes the opportunity of faun- 
tering up to my dreffing^room, where he plays 
with the children, picks up my thread-paper, 
infifts upon bringing me new mufic, and on 
reading to me fome novel or poem, with which 
he is generally furnifhed— If coldnefs, and ap- 
parent difguft, could have put an end to attend- 
ance fo improper, and fo uneafy to me, it cer- 
VoL. I. N tainly 



266 D £ S M O N D» 

tainly would not have continued beyond the 
fecond morning, but to-day is the third, on 
which, in dfepitc of myfelf, I (hall probably be 
condemned to endure it — He afFe<5ls extreme 
uneafinefs at the ftate of Verney's affairs, 
(though, till lately, he has endeavoured to 
laugh ofF my folicitude about them, whenever 
I ventured to exprefs it) and has given feveral 
intimations, that his friend has formed an at- 
tachment to fome expenfive woman — hints, 
that I determine never to underfland — But, 
when I thus evade the fubjedtl wifli not to hear 
of, he fighs, walks about the room, and, as 
if unable to exprefs his emotions, cries, " I love 
Verney from my foul ; but, in this inftance, I 
cannot excufe him, though I pity him, for be- 
ing fo infenfible of his own happinefs ! — I be- 
lieve he is the only man in England who has fo 
little tafte." 

. This, they fay, is fuch a common y{»<;^, and 
has been ufed fo often, that I rather wonder the 
Colonel, who piques himfelf on his peculiar 
talents in gallantry, has not recourfe to fomc 
lefs hackneyed expedient — I muft put an end to 
fuch fort of converfation, however, though I do 
not know how to do it j as my fpeaking to 
Verney, (if he did not laugh at it, as he pro- 
bably would) might be attended with unpleafant 
confequences. To-morrow the whole party 
dine here again j and 1 have promifed Mr. Ver- 
ney to go to Ranelagh with them, and Mifs 
Ayton, who is fo good as to come to me when- 
ever thefe engagements are made, that I may 
not be the only woman — Oh ! my Fanny, would 
you were with me — Nothing could fo foothc 
my fufFerings, as having you, to whom I might 
weep at night, when 1 have been compelled to 

conceal 



B £ S M O N D. 267 

conceal all day under afFe£led tranquillity, the 
anguifli of a breaking heart — I {hall own to you, 
my dear filler, that notwithftanding the refolu- 
tions 1 made at the beginning of my letter, to be 
patient and tranquil, there are moments, when 
1 moft fmccrely vvifli that 1 and my babies were 
ali dead together — What will become of us ? 
If, as J greatly fear, there will foon be nothing 
left but my fettlement, between their father 
and utter ruin— If it ever does come to that, of 
which, from the hints dropped by Scarfdale, I 
expert every day to hear, I fhall, if I have any 
fuch power, give it up to him, for I cannot 
bear his diftrefs, while I have the means of re- 
lieving it — However, perhaps, it may not be fo 
bad as Scarfdale, with fome very unworthy view 
of his own, feems inclined toreprcfent it — But, 
from him, I have heard of fuch lofles at play, 
upon the turf, and in bets of other fort?, that if 
only half of what he fays be true, it is impoflible 
this poor infatuated man can go on long — I 
need not fay how greatly his expences are en- 
creafed by the prefent fet of acquaintance he 
has got into — I have fpolcen of it to him at the 
only moment 1 had an opportunity, and his an- 
fwer was — " Pooh ! don't give yourfelf any 
concern about that — I know what 1 am about, 
and fhall take care to be no lofcr, but very much 
oiherwife." — This, I fuppofe, meant, that he 
doubted not his fuccefs at play againft the 
French noblemen, two of whom are men of 
very large fortune — But how degrading is fuch 
a fcheme ! — how unworthy of a man profefling 
any honor or piinciple ! — Enough, my Fanny, 
peih.ips too much on this cruel topic — I will 
try to talk of other things. 

N 2 I cannot 



a68 B E S M O N D. 

I cannot help fmiling at your account of my 
old acquaintane Mjfs Elford, whom I have 
heartily forgiven, not only for the {lories (he 
once fent forth about Mr. Mulgrave, which I 
never knew fne had done till lately j but for the 
little air of triumph (he aflumes in relating, that 
*' poor, dear Mrs. Verneyis already altered in 
her appearance, though fo young!" — Ah! it 
is very true, indeed, my love — I not only for- 
give her, but am really very glad fhe is at length 
likely to enter happily into that ftate which has 
always been the great obje(5^ of her laudable am- 
bition — She will now, 1 truft, bear lefs enmity 
towards her young married friends, (how fel- . 
dom, alas! the objedts of well-founded envy) 
or towards thofe whofe youth and charms feem- 
ed to give them a chance which fhe herfelf def- 
paired of — I wifti, however, ftie would not be- 
iet my mother with ftories of Mr. Verney^ 
which ferve only to make her uneafy, without 
producing any benefit to us. 

You fay, that my mother certainly did not 
pay off thofe two debts that fo fad ly diftrefled 
us five months ago — AVho then could it be ? — 
Since I have been convinced it was none of my 
own family, I have been, I own, very folici- 
teus to di/cover to whom fuch an obligation is 
owing ; and in the indifcretion of my curiofity, I 
have applied to Colonel Scarfdale, who, with- 
out dire6lly afierting it, has given fuch anfwers, 
as would (if I did not believe him incapable of 
fuch an action, even from interefud motives) 
have led me to imagine it might be himfelf— — 
Surely this cannot be? — I wifn it were poflible 
to know. 

You afk me, my Fanny, after Mr. Def- 
mond — Alas ! I know nothing fatisfadory of 

him i 



DESMOND. 269 

him ; and have fometimes been fo anxious to 
hear of him, as to think of writing to Mr. 
Bethel — Yet a fear of its having a fingular and 
improper appearance, has always deterred me. 
What is your fecret, my clear fifter, which ycu 
will not communicate, left it fliould add to my 
troubles ? — Does it, as I guefs, relate to Def- 
mond ? — Oh ! how happy, how enviable, would 
the lot of that woman be, who, infpiring fuch 
a man with efteem and afFeftion, fhould be at 
liberty to return it — Need 1 fay, that it is the 
wifliof my heart, my Fanny, might be that for- 
tunate creature ; yet, let me not aflift in cherifli- 
ing an hope that may ferve only to embitter her 
lite — I have heard it hinted, (but it is long 
fince, and, perhap«, came from no very good 
authority) that he is already attached, with the 
moft ardent afFeftion, to that Madame de Boif- 
belle, who fo afliduoufly attended him in his 
illnefs ; and that his continuing fo long abroad, 
is owing to his unwillingnefs to leave her — I 
have colleiSted this intelligence partly from 
Colonel Scarfdale, who has fome correfpondence 
abroad, and partly from my fcrvant Manwar- 
ing, whofe hufband is an old friend of War- 
ham's, Mr. Defmond's fervant, and now and 
then has a letter from him — Upon putting all 
the circumftances together, I am compelled to 
give that credit to their united evidence, which 
1 fliould not have given to the Colonel alone, 
who feemed to triumph mightily in being able 
to relate, that my excellent and virtuous fncnd, 
as he fneeringly calls Oefmond, is entangled in 
an adventure with a married woman — Perhaps, 
however, this is all the invention of malice, or 
the painting of ignorance — Malice, that will 
not allow it ■prcbabU mere friendship fliould exift 
N 3 between 



270 DESMOND. 

between two perfons of difFerent fexes ; and 
grofs ignorance, that connot imagine it poffiblc 
— May heaven blefs Defmond, whatever are his 
prolpedls and connexions ! and may he be as 
happy as he deferves to be ! — I feel, too fenfibly, 
the weight of our obligation to him whenever 
his name is mentioned, whenever 1 think of 
him — Perhaps, I fee! it the more, becaufe (you 
only excepted) none of my family feem to feel 
it at all — My brother, I fear, never writes to 
him ; and has probably committed follies as 
great, though not fo irretrievable, as thofe 

from which Defmond delivered him. Mr. 

Verney is continually making Defmond's quix- 
otifm the fubjeit of his ridicule; (a talent 
which he manages generally (o as to attract ridi- 
cule himfelf) and my mother J?ems rather forry 
that Defmond is wifer than her fon, than obli- 
ged to him for having exerted that wlfdom in 
his behalf. How long, my dear Fanny, has 
your reading been under profcription ? — We 
ufed to read what we would, when we were 
girls together, and I never found it was preju- 
dicial to either of us ; but my mother feems to 
have been liftening (notwithftanding her diflike 
of women's knowledge) to fome of thofe good 
ladies, who, by dint of a tolerable memory, and 
being accuftomed to aflbciate with men of let- 
terii, have colledted fome phrafes and remarks, 
which they retail in lefs enlightened focicties, 
and immediately obtain credit for an uncommon 
{hare of penetration and fcience — But if every 
work of fancy is to be prohibited in which a tale 
is told, or an example brought forward, by 
which fome of thefe ladies fuppofe, that the er* 
rors of youth may be palliated, or the imagina- 
tion awakened — 1 know no book of amufement 

that 



rr E s M o M D. 271 

that can efcape their cenfure; and the whole 
phalanx of novels, from the two firft of our 
claffics, in that linp of writing, Richardfon 
and Fielding, to the lefs exceptionable, though 
certainly lefs attractive inventors of the prefent 
day, muft be condemned with lefs mercy, than 
the curate and the barber fnewed to the collec- 
tion of the Knight of the forrowful Counte- 
nance ; and ten, I really know not what young 
people (I mean young women) will read at all 
— But let me afk thefe fevere female cenfors, 
whether, in every well-written novel, vice^ and. 
even weaknejps, that deferve not quite fo harfli 
aname, ^re not exhibited, as fubjedtingthofe who 
are examples of them, to remorfe, regret, and 
punifliment — And fmce circumftances, more 
inimical to innocence, are every day related, 
without any difguife, or with very little, in the 
public prints ; fince, in reading the world, a 
girl muft fee a thoufand very uglv blots, which 
frequently pafs without any cenfure at all — I 
own, I cannot imagine, that novel reading, 
can, as has been alledged,. corrupt fhe imagin- 
ation, or enervate the heart ; at leaft, fuch a 
defcription of novels, as thofe which reprefent 
human life nearly as it is ; for, as to others, 
thofe wild and abfurd writings, that defcribe in 
inflated language, beings, that never were, nor 
ever will be, they can (if any young woman 
has fo little patience and tafte as to read them) 
no more contribute to form the charadler of 
her mind, than the grotefque figures of fhep- 
herdeffes, on French fans and B^rgamot boxes, 
can form her tafte in dref-^ — Who could, for 
a moment, feel any imprefllon from the peru- 
fal of fuch ftuff as this, though every diurnal 
print puffed its excellence, and every />^/// maitrt 

3 fwore 



272 DESMOND. 

fwore it was quite the thing — exquifite — -pathe- 
tic — ^^interefting. 

" The beautiful, the foft, the tender Iphi- 
gcnia, cloied not, xluring the tedious hours, 
her beauteous eyes while the glorious flambeau 
offilver-flippered day funk beneath the cncrim- 
foned couch of coral-crowned Thetis, giving 
up the dormant world to the raven-embrace of 
all over-clouding night- — When, however, the 
matin loving lark, or rufTet pinions, floating 
amid the tiffany clouds, that variegated, in fleecy 
undulation, the grcy-invefted heavens, hailed 
with his foul reviving note, the radiant coun- 
tenance oi returning morn; the fweet, the 
mild, the elegantly unhappy maid, turned to- 
wards the rofeate-ltreaming Eaft, thofe fapphire 
mefl'engers, that exprefTed, in language of fuch 
exquifite fenfibility, every emotion of her deli- 
cate foul ; and, with a palpi tatina: flgh, arofe 
— She clad her graceful form in a clofe jac- 
ket of Nakara fatin, trimmed with filvcr, and 
the bloiroms of the fweet- fcented pea, intermix- 
ed ; her petticoat was of white fattin, with a 
border of the fame; and on her head, half hid- 
ing, and half difcovering her hyacinthine locks, 
fhe carclefsly bound a glowing wreath of Afri- 
can marygold?, and purple v^^hina-after, fur- 
mounting the whole with a light kerchief of 
piivk Italian gauze, embroidered by herfelf in 
lilies of the valley — She then appoached the 
window, and in a voice, whofe dulcet gurglings 
emulated :he cooings of the enamoured pigeon 
of the woods, fliefighed forth the following ex- 
quifitively expreilive ode." 

Now do you think, my dear Fanny, that ei- 
ther good or harm can be derived from fuch a 
book as this r — Lofs of time may be, with juf- 

tice, 



DESMOND. 273 

tice, objci^eJ to it, but no other evil — A fen- 
fible girl would certainly throw it away iii Jii- 
guft ; a weak one (who would probably not un- 
derftand half of it, could it be underftood at all) 
cries, " Dear ! — how fweet ! — charming crea- 
ture ! — A light kerchief of pink italim gauze, 
embroidered with lilies of the valley ! — Her 
voice, the dulcit gurglings of the enamoured 
pigeon of the woods !" — And then, meaning 
only to enquire, whether this amiable Iphlge- 
nia was happy or no ? — She fits down to have 
her hair curkd— reads as faft, as the rofeate 
rays, and azure adventures, will let her, to the 
end, and forgetting them all — dreflVs herfelf and 
goes to Ranelagh, or the opera, where (he tells 
fome little cream-coloured beau what a dear, 
divine novel fhe has been reading ; but of which, 
in fadt, fhe has forgotten every word. 

1 own it has often ftruck me as a fmgular in- 
confiftency, that, while novels have been con- 
demned as being injurious to the intereft of vir- 
tue, the play-houfe has been called the fchool 
of morality — -The comedies of the lait century 
are alanoil, w thout exception, fo grofs, that, 
with all the alterations they have received, they 
are very unfit for that part of the audience to 
whom novel reading is deemed pernicious, nor 
is the example to be derived from them very 
conducive to the intererts of morality ; for, not 
only the rake and the coquette of the piece are 
generally made happy, but thofe duties of life, 
to which novel-reading is believed to be prejudi- 
cial, are almoft always violated with impunity, 
or rendered ridiculous by *•• the trick of the 
fcene" — Age which ought to be refpeded, is 
invariably exhibited, as hateful and contemp- 
tible — To cheat an old father, or laugh at a 

fat 



274 DESMOND. 

fat aunt, are the fupreme merits of the heroes 
and [i.roines ; and though nothing is more out 
of nature than the old man of the ft age — 1 can- 
not be of opinion, that the fcene is a fchool of 
morality for youth, which teaches them, that 
age and infirmity, are fubjesfts of laughter and 
ridicule — Such, however, is the tafte of the 
t.nglifn in their thentrical amufcment? — And 
n^nv, when the very ofFenfive jeft is no longer 
admitted, ponraits of foliy, exaggerated till 
they lofc all refemblance, harlequin tricks, and 
pantomimical efcapes, are fubftitued to keep the 
audience awak?, and are accepted in place of 
genuine wit, of which it muft be owned, there 
is " a plentiful lack" (with fome ftrong excep- 
tions, however) m our modern comedy — All 
this is very well, if we take it as mere amufc- 
ment; but, what 1 quarrel with, is the canting 
fallacy of calling the fbage the fchool of morali- 
ty — Roufleau fays, very juftly, " II n'y a que 
la raifon qui ne foit bonne a rien fur la fcene*" 
— A reafonable man would be a character in- 
fupportably flat and infipid even on the French 
ftage, and on the Englifh, would not be endur- 
ed to the end of the firft fcene — Even thofe 
charming pieces, which are called drames, fuch 
as le Pere de famille, I'lndigent, le Philofophe 
fans le fcavoir, would, howevr^r well they might 
be tranflated, adapted to our manners, and re- 
prefented, lull an Englifh audience to fleep, 
though they- exhibit donieftic fcenes, by which 
morality and virtue are moft forcibly inculcated ; 
and fuch, as by coming " home to the bufinefs 
and bofoms" of the younger part of the audience, 

* It is reafon only that is worih noihing on the ftage. 

might 



DESMOND. 275 

might be, indeed, leflbns in that fchool, which 
our theatre certainly does not form; though the 
careful mothers, wh odread the evil influtnce cf 
novels, carry their daughthers to its moft ex- 
ceptionable reprefentations. 

In regard to novels, I cannot help remarking 
another ilrange inconfiftency, which is, that the 
great name of Richardfon, (and great it certainly 
deferves to be) makes, by a kind of hereditary 
prefcriptive deference, thofe fcenes, thofe de- 
i'criptions pafs uncen fared in Pamela and Cla- 
rifla, which are infinitely more improper for 
the perufal of young wometi, than any that can 
be found in the novels of the prefent day j of 
which, indeed, it may be faid, that, if they do 
no good, they do no harm ; and (hat there is a 
chance, that thofe who will read nothing, if 
the do not read novels, may colIe(£t from them 
fome few ideas, that are not either fallacious, or 
abfurd, to add to the very fcanty ftock which 
their ufual infipidity of life has afforded them 
■ — As to niyielf, 1 read, you know, all forts of 
books, and have done fo ever fmce I was out of 
the nurfery, for my mother had then no notion 
of reftraining me — Novels, ofcourfe, and thofe 
very indifferent novels, were the firft that I 
could obtain ; and I ran through them with 
extreme avidity, often forgetting to pradlife my 
leflbn on the harpfichord, or to learn my French 
tafk, while I got up into my own room, and 
devoured with an eager appetite, the mawkiih 
pages that told of a damfel, moil exquifitely 
beautiful, confined by a cruel father, and e(- 
caping to an heroic lover, while a wicked Lord 
laid in wait to tear her from him, and carried 
her to fome remote caftle — Thofe delighted me 
moft that ended miferably ; and having tortured 

mc 



276 DESMOND. 

me through the lad volume with impoflible di- 
ftrefs, ended in the funeral of the heroine- 
Had the imagination of a young perfon been li- 
able to be much afFedled by thefe fort of hifto- 
ries, mine would, probably, have taken a ro- 
mantic turn, and at eighteen, when I was mari- 
cd, I Ihould havehefitated whether I fliould obey 
my friends dirediions, or have waited till the 
hero appeared, who would have been imprinted 
on my mind, from fome of the charming fabu- 
lous creatures, of whom I had read in novels 
— But, far from doing fo, I was, you fee, 
" obedient — very obedient ;" and, fn the four 
years that have fmce paft, I have thought only 
of being a quiet wife, and a good nurfe, and 
of fulfilling, as well as I can, the part which 
has been chofen for me — I know not how I have 
Aid into all this egotifm, from a defence of 
novel-reading — It has, however, ferved to de- 
tach my thoughts from fubje<Sts of* fad import j" 
and I have written myfelf into fome degree of 
cheerfulnefs ; before 1 relapfe, therefore, I will 
bid you, my beloved Fanny, adieu I 

GERALDINE VERNEY. 



End of Vol, I. 



