Dissertation I. On the Idea of Universal Poetry
Author: Hurd, Richard.
Publication info: The Works Of Richard Hurd . 8 v. London: Printed for T. Cadell and W. Davies, 1811.

Dissertation I. On the Idea of Universal Poetry [in, The works of Richard Hurd. In eight volumes]
[Page 2]
A DISSERTATION ON THE IDEA OF UNIVERSAL POETRY.
[Page 3]
WHEN we speak of poetry, as an art , we mean such a way or method of treating a subject, as is found most pleasing and delightful to us . In all other kinds of literary composition, pleasure is subordinate to USE : in poetry only, PLEASURE is the end, to which use itself (however it be, for certain reasons, always pretended) must submit.
This idea of the end of poetry is no novel one, but indeed the very same which our great philosopher entertained of it; who gives it as the essential note of this part of learning— THAT IT SUBMITS THE SHEWS OF THINGS TO THE DESIRES OF THE MIND: WHEREAS REASON DOTH BUCKLE AND BOW THE MIND UNTO THE NATURE OF THINGS . For to gratify the desires of the mind , is to PLEASE : Pleasure then, in the
[Page 4]
idea of Lord Bacon, is the ultimate and appropriate end of poetry; for the sake of which it accommodates itself to the desires of the mind , and doth not (as other kinds of writing, which are under the controul of reason) buckle and bow the mind to the nature of things .
But they, who like a principle the better for seeing it in Greek, may take it in the words of an old philosopher, Eratosthenes , who affirmed— ροιητὴν ράντσ ςοχαζΕσθαι ψυχαγωγίας, οὐ διδασκαλίς —of which words, the definition given above, is the translation.
This notion of the end of poetry, if kept steadily in view, will unfold to us all the mysteries of the poetic art. There needs but to evolve the philosopher's idea, and to apply it, as occasion serves. The art of poetry will be, universally, THE ART OF PLEASING ; and all its rules , but so many MEANS , which experience finds most conducive to that end;
Sic ANIMIS natum inventumque poema JUVANDIS .
Aristotle has delivered and explained these rules, so far as they respect one species of poetry, the dramatic , or, more properly speaking, the tragic: And when such a writer,
[Page 5]
as he, shall do as much by the other species, then, and not till then, a complete ART OF POETRY will be formed.
I have not the presumption to think myself, in any degree, equal to this arduous task: But from the idea of this art, as given above, an ordinary writer may undertake to deduce some general conclusions, concerning Universal Poetry , which seem preparatory to those nicer disquisitions, concerning its several sorts or species .
I. It follows from that IDEA , that it should neglect no advantage, that fairly offers itself, of appearing in such a dress or mode of language, as is most taking and agreeable to us. We may expect then, in the language or style of poetry, a choice of such words as are most sonorous and expressive, and such an arrangement of them as throws the discourse out of the ordinary and common phrase of conversation. Novelty and variety are certain sources of pleasure: a construction of words, which is not vulgar, is therefore more suited to the ends of poetry, than one which we are every day accustomed to in familiar discourse. Some manners of placing them are, also, more agreeable to the ear, than others: Poetry, then, is
[Page 6]
studious of these, as it would by all means, not manifestly absurd, give pleasure: And hence a certain musical cadence, or what we call Rhythm , will be affected by the poet.
But, of all the means of adorning and enlivening a discourse by words, which are infinite, and perpetually grow upon us, as our knowledge of the tongue, in which we write, and our skill in adapting it to the ends of poetry, increases, there is none that pleases more, than figurative expression .
By figurative expression , I would be understood to mean, here, that which respects the pictures or images of things . And this sort of figurative expression is universally pleasing to us, because it tends to impress on the mind the most distinct and vivid conceptions; and truth of representation being of less account in this way of composition, than the liveliness of it, poetry, as such, will delight in tropes and figures, and those the most strongly and forceably expressed. And though the application of figures will admit of great variety, according to the nature of the subject, and the management of them must be suited to the taste and apprehension of the people, to whom they are addressed, yet, in some way
[Page 7]
or other, they will find a place in all works of poetry; and they who object to the use of them, only shew that they are not capable of being pleased by this sort of composition, or do, in effect, interdict the thing itself.
The ancients looked for so much of this force and spirit of expression in whatever they dignified with the name of poem , that Horace tells us it was made a question by some, whether comedy were rightly referred to this class, because it differed only, in point of measure, from mere prose.
Idcirco quidam, comoedia necne poema
Esset, quaesivere: quod acer spiritus, ac vis,
Nec verbis , nec rebus inest: nisi quod pede certo
Differt sermoni, sermo merus— Sat. 1. I. iv.
But they might have spared their doubt, or at least have resolved it, if they had considered that comedy adopts as much of this force and spirit of words , as is consistent with the nature and degree of that pleasure, which it pretends to give. For the name of poem will belong to every composition, whose primary end is to please , provided it be so constructed as to afford all the pleasure, which its kind or sort will permit.
[Page 8]
II. From the idea of the end of poetry, it follows, that not only figurative and tropical terms will be employed in it, as these , by the images they convey, and by the air of novelty which such indirect ways of speaking carry with them, are found most delightful to us, but also that Fiction , in the largest sense of the word, is essential to poetry. For its purpose is, not to delineate truth simply, but to present it in the most taking forms; not to reflect the real face of things, but to illustrate and adorn it; not to represent the fairest objects only, but to represent them in the fairest lights, and to heighten all their beauties up to the possibility of their natures; nay, to outstrip nature, and to address itself to our wildest fancy, rather than to our judgment and cooler sense.
Οὔτ' ἐριδΕρκτὰ τάδ' ἀνδράσιν, οὔτ' ἐρακουςὰ
ΟὔτΕ νόω ι ρΕρίληρτα
As sings one of the profession 1 who seems to have understood his privileges very well.
For there is something in the mind of man, sublime and elevated, which prompts it to overlook all obvious and familiar appearances,
[Page 9]
and to feign to itself other and more extraordinary; such as correspond to the extent of its own powers, and fill out all the faculties and capacities of our souls. This restless and aspiring disposition, poetry, first and principally, would indulge and flatter; and thence takes its name of divine , as if some power, above human , conspired to lift the mind to these exalted conceptions.
Hence it comes to pass, that it deals in apostrophes and invocations; that it impersonates the virtues and vices; peoples all creation with new and living forms; calls up infernal spectres to terrify, or brings down celestial natures to astonish, the imagination; assembles, combines, or connects its ideas, at pleasure; in short, prefers not only the agreeable, and the graceful, but, as occasion calls upon her, the vast, the incredible, I had almost said, the impossible, to the obvious truth and nature of things. For all this is but a feeble expression of that magic virtue of poetry, which our Shakespear has so forcibly described in those well-known lines—
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rowling,
Doth glance from heav'n to earth, from earth to heav'n;
[Page 10]
And, as Imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shape, and gives to aery nothing
A local habitation and a name.
When the received system of manners or religion in any country, happens to be so constituted as to suit itself in some degree to this extravagant turn of the human mind, we may expect that poetry will seize it with avidity, will dilate upon it with pleasure, and take a pride to erect its specious wonders on so proper and convenient a ground. Whence it cannot seem strange that, of all the forms in which poetry has appeared, that of pagan fable , and gothic romance , should, in their turns, be found the most alluring to the true poet. For, in defect of these advantages, he will ever adventure, in some sort, to supply their place with others of his own invention; that is, he will mould every system, and convert every subject, into the most amazing and miraculous form.
And this is that I would say, at present, of these two requisites of universal poetry, namely, that licence of expression , which we call the style of poetry, and that licence of representation ,
[Page 11]
which we call fiction . The style is, as it were, the body of poetry; fiction , is its soul. Having, thus, taken the privilege of a poet to create a Muse, we have only now to give her a voice, or more properly to tune it, and then she will be in a condition, as one of her favourites speaks, TO RAVISH ALL THE GODS . For
III. It follows from the same idea of the end, which poetry would accomplish, that not only Rhythm, but NUMBERS , properly so called, is essential to it. For this Art undertaking to gratify all those desires and expectations of pleasure, that can be reasonably entertained by us, and there being a capacity in language, the instrument it works by, of pleasing us very highly, not only by the sense and imagery it conveys, but by the structure of words, and still more by the harmonious arrangement of them in metrical sounds or numbers, and lastly there being no reason in the nature of the thing itself why these pleasures should not be united, it follows that poetry will not be that which it professes to be, that is, will not accomplish its own purpose, unless it delight the ear with numbers, or, in other words, unless it be cloathed in Verse .
[Page 12]
The reader, I dare say, has hitherto gone along with me, in this deduction; but here, I suspect, we shall separate. Yet he will startle the less at this conclusion, if he reflect on the origin and first application of poetry among all nations.
It is every where of the most early growth, preceding every other sort of composition; and being destined for the ear , that is, to be either sung, or at least recited, it adapts itself, even in its first rude essays, to that sense of measure and proportion in sounds, which is so natural to us. The hearer's attention is the sooner gained by this means, his entertainment quickened, and his admiration of the performer's art excited. Men are ambitious of pleasing, and ingenious in refining upon what they observe will please. So that musical cadences and harmonious sounds, which nature dictated, are farther softened and improved by art, till poetry become as ravishing to the ear, as the images, it presents, are to the imagination. In process of time, what was at first the extemporaneous production of genius or passion, under the conduct of a natural ear , becomes the labour of the closet, and is conducted by artificial rules; yet still, with a secret reference to the sense of hearing,
[Page 13]
and to that acceptation which melodious sounds meet with in the recital of expressive words.
Even the prose-writer (when the art is enough advanced to produce prose) having been accustomed to have his ear consulted and gratified by the poet, catches insensibly the same harmonious affection, tunes his sentences and periods to some agreement with song, and transfers into his coolest narrative, or gravest instruction, something of that music, with which his ear vibrates from poetic impressions.
In short, he leaves measured and determinate numbers, that is, Metre , to the poet, who is to please up to the height of his faculties, and the nature of his work; and only reserves to himself, whose purpose of giving pleasure is subordinate to another end, the looser musical measure, or what we call Rhythmical Prose .
The reason appears, from this deduction, why all poetry aspires to please by melodious numbers. To some species, it is thought more essential, than to others, because those species continue to be sung , that is, are more
[Page 14]
immediately addressed to the ear; and because they continue to be sung in concert with musical instruments , by which the ear is still more indulged. It happened in antient Greece, that even tragedy retained this accompaniment of musical instruments, through all its stages, and even in its most improved state. Whence Aristotle includes Music , properly so called, as well as Rhythm and Metre , in his idea of the tragic poem. He did this, because he found the drama of his country, OMNIBUS NUMERIS ABSOLUTUM , I mean in possession of all the advantages which could result from the union of rhythmical, metrical , and musical sounds. Modern tragedy has relinquished part of these: yet still, if it be true that this poem be more pleasing by the addition of the musical art, and there be nothing in the nature of the composition which forbids the use of it, I know not why Aristotle's idea should not be adopted, and his precept become a standing law of the tragic stage. For this, as every other poem, being calculated and designed properly and ultimately to please , whatever contributes to produce that end most perfectly, all circumstances taken into the account, must be thought of the nature or essence of the kind.
[Page 15]
But without carrying matters so far, let us confine our attention to metre, or what we call verse . This must be essential to every work bearing the name of poem , not, because we are only accustomed to call works written in verse, poems , but because a work, which professes to please us by every possible and proper method, and yet does not give us this pleasure, which it is in its power, and is no way improper for it, to give, must so far fall short of fulfilling its own engagements to us; that is, it has not all those qualities which we have a right to expect in a work of literary art, of which pleasure is the ultimate end .
To explain myself by an obvious instance. History undertakes to INSTRUCT us in the transactions of past times. If it answer this purpose, it does all that is of its nature ; and, if it find means to please us, besides, by the harmony of its style, and vivacity of its narration, all this is to be accounted as pure gain: if it instructed ONLY , by the truth of its reports, and the perspicuity of its method, it would fully attain its end . Poetry, on the other hand, undertakes to PLEASE . If it employ all its powers to this purpose, it effects all that is of its nature: if it serve, besides, to inform or instruct us, by the truths it conveys,
[Page 16]
and by the precepts or examples it inculcates, this service may rather be accepted, than required by us: if it pleased ONLY , by its ingenious fictions, and harmonious structure, it would discharge its office, and answer its end .
In this sense, the famous saying of Eratosthenes, quoted above— that the poet's aim is to please, not to instruct —is to be understood: nor does it appear, what reason Strabo could have to take offence at it; however it might be misapplied, as he tells us it was, by that writer. For, though the poets, no doubt (and especially THE POET , whose honour the great Geographer would assert, in his criticism on Eratosthenes) frequently instruct us by a true and faithful representation of things; yet even this instructive air is only assumed for the sake of pleasing ; which, as the human mind is constituted, they could not so well do, if they did not instruct at all, that is, if truth were wholly neglected by them. So that pleasure is still the ultimate end and scope of the poet's art; and instruction itself is, in his hands, only one of the means , by which he would effect it 2
[Page 17]
I am the larger on this head to shew that it is not a mere verbal dispute, as it is commonly thought, whether poems should be written in verse, or no. Men may include, or not include, the idea of metre in their complex idea of what they call a Poem . What I contend for, is, that metre , as an instrument of pleasing , is essential to every work of poetic art, and would therefore enter into such idea, if men judged of poetry according to its confessed nature and end .
Whence it may seem a little strange, that my Lord Bacon should speak of poesy as a part of learning in measure of words FOR THE MOST PART restrained ; when his own notion, as we have seen above, was, that the essence of poetry consisted in submitting the shews of things to the desires of the mind . For these shews of things could only be exhibited to the mind through the medium of words: and it is just as natural for the mind to desire that these words should be harmonious , as that the images, conveyed in them, should be illustrious ; there being a capacity in the mind of being delighted through its organ, the ear , as well as through its power, or faculty of imagination . And the wonder is the greater, because the great philosopher himself was aware
[Page 18]
of the agreement and consort which poetry hath with music , as well as with man's nature and pleasure , that is, with the pleasure which naturally results from gratifying the imagination. So that, to be consistent with himself, he should, methinks, have said— that poesy was a part of learning in measure of words ALWAYS restrained ; such poesy , as, through the idleness or negligence of writers, is not so restrained, not agreeing to his own idea of this part of learning . 3
These reflexions will afford a proper solution of that question, which has been agitated by the critics, “Whether a work of fiction and imagination (such as that of the arch- bishop of Cambray, for instance) conducted, in other respects, according to the rules of the epic poem, but written in prose, may deserve the name of Poem , or not.” For, though it be frivolous indeed to dispute about names, yet from what has been said it appears, that if metre be not incongruous to the nature of an epic composition, and it afford a pleasure which is not to be found in mere prose, metre is, for that reason, essential to this mode of
[Page 19]
writing; which is only saying in other words, that an epic composition, to give all the pleasure which it is capable of giving, must be written in verse .
But, secondly, this conclusion, I think, extends farther than to such works as aspire to the name of epic . For instance, what are we to think of those novels or romances , as they are called, that is, fables constructed on some private and familiar subject, which have been so current, of late, through all Europe? As they propose pleasure for their end, and prosecute it, besides, in the way of fiction , though without metrical numbers, and generally, indeed, in harsh and rugged prose, one easily sees what their pretensions are, and under what idea they are ambitious to be received. Yet, as they are wholly destitute of measured sounds (to say nothing of their other numberless defects) they can, at most, be considered but as hasty, imperfect, and abortive poems; whether spawned from the dramatic, or narrative species, it may be hard to say—
Unfinish'd things, one knows not what to call,
Their generation's so equivocal.
[Page 20]
However, such as they are, these novelties have been generally well received: Some , for the real merit of their execution; Others , for their amusing subjects; All of them, for the gratification they afford, or promise at least, to a vitiated, palled, and sickly imagination—that last disease of learned minds, and sure prognostic of expiring Letters. But whatever may be the temporary success of these things (for they vanish as fast as they are produced, and are produced as soon as they are conceived) good sense will acknowledge no work of art but such as is composed according to the laws of its kind . These KINDS , as arbitrary things as we account them (for I neither forget nor dispute what our best philosophy teaches concerning kinds and sorts ), have yet so far their foundation in nature and the reason of things, that it will not be allowed us to multiply, or vary them, at pleasure. We may, indeed, mix and confound them, if we will (for there is a sort of literary luxury, which would engross all pleasures at once, even such as are contradictory to each other), or, in our rage for incessant gratification, we may take up with half-formed pleasures, such as come first to hand, and may be administered by any body: But true taste requires chaste, severe,
[Page 21]
and simple pleasures; and true genius will only be concerned in administering such.
Lastly, on the same principle on which we have decided on these questions concerning the absolute merits of poems in prose, in all languages, we may, also, determine another, which has been put concerning the comparative merits of RHYMED , and what is called BLANK verse, in our own, and the other modern languages.
Critics and antiquaries have been sollicitous to find out who were the inventors of rhyme, which some fetch from the Monks, some from the Goths, and others from the Arabians: whereas, the truth seems to be, that rhyme , or the consonance of final syllables, occurring at stated intervals, is the dictate of nature, or, as we may say, an appeal to the ear, in all languages, and in some degree pleasing in all. The difference is, that, in some languages, these consonances are apt of themselves to occur so often that they rather nauseate, than please, and so, instead of being affected, are studiously avoided by good writers; while in others, as in all the modern ones, where these consonances are less frequent, and where the quantity of syllables
[Page 22]
is not so distinctly marked as, of itself, to afford an harmonious measure and musical variety, there it is of necessity that poets have had recourse to Rhyme ; or to some other expedient of the like nature, such as the Alliteration , for instance; which is only another way of delighting the ear by iterated sound, and may be defined, the consonance of initial letters , as rhyme is, the consonance of final syllables . All this, I say, is of necessity, because what we call verses in such languages will be otherwise untuneful, and will not strike the ear with that vivacity, which is requisite to put a sensible difference between poetic numbers and measured prose.
In short, no method of gratifying the ear by measured sound , which experience has found pleasing, is to be neglected by the poet: and although, from the different structure and genius of languages, these methods will be different, the studious application of such methods, as each particular language allows, becomes a necessary part of his office. He will only cultivate those methods most, which tend to produce, in a given language, the most harmonious structure or measure, of which it is capable.
[Page 23]
Hence it comes to pass, that the poetry of some modern languages cannot so much as subsist, without rhyme: In others, it is only embellished by it. Of the former sort is the French, which therefore adopts, and with good reason, rhymed verse, not in tragedy only, but in comedy: And though foreigners, who have a language differently constructed, are apt to treat this observance of rhyme as an idle affectation, yet it is but just to allow that the French themselves are the most competent judges of the natural defect of their own tongue, and the likeliest to perceive by what management such defect is best remedied or concealed.
In the latter class of languages, whose poetry is only embellished by the use of rhyme, we may reckon the Italian and the English: which being naturally more tuneful and harmonious than the French, may afford all the melody of sound which is expected in some sorts of poetry, by its varied pause , and quantity only; while in other sorts, which are more sollicitous to please the ear, and where such sollicitude, if taken notice of by the reader or hearer, is not resented, it may be proper, or rather it becomes a law of the English and Italian poetry, to adopt rhyme . Thus,
[Page 24]
our tragedies are usually composed in blank verse: but our epic and Lyric compositions are found most pleasing, when cloathed in rhyme. Milton, I know, it will be said, is an exception: But, if we set aside some learned persons, who have suffered themselves to be too easily prejudiced by their admiration of the Greek and Latin languages, and still more, perhaps, by the prevailing notion of the monkish or gothic original of rhymed verse, all other readers, if left to themselves, would, I dare say, be more delighted with this poet, if, besides his various pause, and measured quantity, he had enriched his numbers, with rhyme . So that his love of liberty, the ruling passion of his heart, perhaps transported him too far, when he chose to follow the example set him by one or two writers of prime note (to use his own eulogium), rather than comply with the regular and prevailing practice of his favoured Italy, which first and principally, as our best rhymist sings,
With pauses, cadence, and well-vowell'd words,
And all the graces a good ear affords,
Made rhyme an art —
Our comedy, indeed, is generally written in prose ; but through the idleness, or ill taste,
[Page 25]
of our writers, rather than from any other just cause. For, though rhyme be not necessary, or rather would be improper, in the comedy of our language, which can support itself in poetic numbers, without the diligence of rhyme; yet some sort of metre is requisite in this humbler species of poem; otherwise, it will not contribute all that is within its power and province, to please . And the particular metre, proper for this species, is not far to seek. For it can plainly be no other than a careless and looser Iambic, such as our language naturally runs into, even in conversation, and of which we are not without examples, in our old and best writers for the comic stage. But it is not wonderful that those critics, who take offence at English epic poems in rhyme , because the Greek and Latin only observed quantity , should require English comedies to be written in prose, though the Greek and Latin comedies were composed in verse. For the ill application of examples, and the neglect of them, may be well enough expected from the same men, since it does not appear that their judgment was employed, or the reason of the thing attended to, in either instance.
And THUS much for the idea of Universal Poetry . It is the art of treating any subject
[Page 26]
in such a way as is found most delightful to us; that is, IN AN ORNAMENTED AND NUMEROUS STYLE — IN THE WAY OF FICTION — AND IN VERSE . Whatever deserves the name of POEM must unite these three properties; only in different degrees of each, according to its nature. For the art of every kind of poetry is only this general art so modified as the nature of each, that is, its more immediate and subordinate end, may respectively require.
We are now, then, at the well-head of the poetic art; and they who drink deeply of this spring, will be best qualified to perform the rest. But all heads are not equal to these copious draughts; and, besides, I hear the sober reader admonishing me long since——
                                         Lusisti satis atque BIBISTI ;
Tempus abire tibi est, ne POTUM LARGIUS AEQUO
Rideat, et pulset lasciva decentius AETAS .
Thurcaston, MDCCLXV.
NOTES
1 Empedocles. See Plutarch, vol. I. p. 15. Par. 1624.
2 See Strabo, I. i. p. 15. Par. 1620.
3 Adv. OF Learning, vol. i. p. 50. Dr. Birch's Ed. 1765.
$$$
