Dissertation the Tenth
Author: Campbell, George.
Publication info: The Four Gospels . xiv, 700 p. London: Printed for A. Strahan; and T. Cadell, 1789.

Dissertation The Tenth [in, The Four Gospels, Translated From The Greek, With Preliminary Dissertations, And Notes Critical and Explanatory. By George Campbell ... In Two Volumes. Vol. I]
[Page 445]
DISSERTATION THE TENTH.
The chief Things to be attended to in translating.— A comparative View of the opposite Methods taken by Translators of Holy Writ.
PART I. The Things to be attended to in translating. To translate has been thought, by some, a very easy matter to one who understands tolerably the language from which, and has made some proficiency in the language into which, the translation is to be made. To translate well is, however, in my opinion, a task of more difficulty than is commonly imagined. That we may be the better able to judge in this question, let us consider what a translator, who would do justice to his author, and his subject, has to perform. The first thing, without doubt, which claims his attention, is to give a just representation of the sense of the original. This, it must be acknowledged, is the most essential of all. The second thing is, to convey into his version, as much as possible, in a consistency with the genius of the language which he writes, the author's spirit and manner, and, if I may so express myself, the very
[Page 446]
character of his style. The third and last thing is, to take care, that the version have, at least, so far the quality of an original performance, as to appear natural and easy, such as shall give no handle to the critic to charge the translator with applying words improperly, or in a meaning not warranted by use, or combining them in a way which renders the sense obscure, and the construction ungrammatical, or even harsh.
§ 2. Now , to adjust matters so as, in a considerable degree, to attain all these objects, will be found, upon enquiry, not a little arduous, even to men who are well acquainted with the two languages, and have great command of words. In pursuit of one of the ends above mentioned, we are often in danger of losing sight totally of another: nay, on some occasions, it will appear impossible to attain one, without sacrificing both the others. It may happen, that I cannot do justice to the sense, without frequent recourse to circumlocutions; for the words of no language whatever will, at all times, exactly correspond with those of another. Yet, by this method, a writer whose manner is concise, simple, and energetic, is exhibited, in the translation, as employing a style which is at once diffuse, complex, and languid. Again, in endeavouring to exhibit the author's manner, and to confine myself, as nearly as possible, to the same number of words, and the like turn of expression, I may very imperfectly render his sense, relating obscurely, ambiguously, and even improperly, what is expressed with great propriety and perspicuity in the original. And, in regard to the third object mentioned, it is evident, that when the two languages differ very much in their genius and structure, it must be exceedingly difficult for a translator to render this end perfectly compatible with the other two. It will perhaps be said, that this is of less importance, as it seems solely to regard the quality of the work, as a performance in the
[Page 447]
translator's language, whereas the other two regard the work only as an exhibition of the original. I admit that this is an object inferior to the other two; I meant it should be understood so, by mentioning it last. Yet even this is by no means so unimportant as some would imagine. That a writing be perspicuous in any language, much depends on the observance of propriety; and the beauty of the work (at least as far as purity is concerned) contributes not a little to its utility. What is well written, or well said, is always more attended to, better understood, and longer remembered, than what is improperly, weakly, or awkwardly, expressed.
§ 3. Now , if translation is in general attended with so much difficulty, what must we think of the chance of success which a translator has, when the subject is of so great importance, that an uncommon degree of attention to all the above-mentioned objects, will be exacted of him; and when the difference, in point of idiom, of the language from which, and of that into which the version is made, is as great, perhaps, as we have any example of. For, in translating the New Testament into English, it is not to the Greek idiom, nor to the Oriental, that we are required to adapt our own, but to a certain combination of both; often, rather, to the Hebrew and Chaldaic idioms, involved in Greek words and syntax. The analogy and prevailing usage in Greek, will, if we be not on our guard, sometimes mislead us. On the contrary, these are sometimes safe and proper guides. But, without a considerable acquaintance with both, it will be impossible to determine, when we ought to be directed by the one, and when by the other.
§ 4. There are two extremes in translating, which are commonly taken notice of by those who examine this subject critically; from one extreme, we derive what is called a close and literal, from
[Page 448]
the other, a loose and free translation. Each has its advocates. But though the latter kind is most patronised, when the subject is a performance merely human, the general sentiments, as far as I am able to collect them, seem rather to favour the former, when the subject is any part of holy writ. And this difference appears to proceed from a very laudable principle, that we are not entitled to use so much freedom with the dictates of inspiration, as with the works of a fellow-creature. It often happens, however, on such general topics, when no particular version is referred to as an example of excess on one side, or on the other, that people agree in words, when their opinions differ, and differ in words, when their opinions agree. For, I may consider a translation as close, which another would denominate free, or as free, which another would denominate close. Indeed I imagine that, in the best sense of the words, a good translation ought to have both these qualities. To avoid all ambiguity, therefore, we shall call one extreme literal , as manifesting a greater attention to the letter than to the meaning; the other loose , as implying under it, not liberty, but licentiousness. In regard even to literal translations, there may be so many differences in degree, that, without specifying, it is in vain to argue, or to hope to lay down any principles that will prove entirely satisfactory.
PART II. Strictures on Arias Montanus. Among the Latin translations of Scripture, therefore, for I shall confine myself to these in this Dissertation, let us select Arias Montanus for an example of the literal. His version of both Testaments
[Page 449]
is very generally known, and commonly printed along with the original, not in separate columns, but, for the greater benefit of the learner, interlined. This work of Arias, of all that I know, goes the farthest in this way, being precisely on the model of the Jewish translations, not so much of the Septuagint, though the Septuagint certainly exceeds in this respect, as on the model of Aquila, which, from the fragments that still remain of that version, appears to have been servilely literal. Arias, therefore, is a fit example of what may be expected in this mode of translating.
§ 2. Now , that we may proceed more methodically in our examination, let us inquire how far every one of the three ends in translating, above mentioned, is answered by this version, or can be answered by a version constructed on the same plan. The first and principal end is to give a just representation of the sense of the original. But how, it may be asked, can a translator fail of attaining this end, who never wanders from the path marked out to him; who does not, like others, turn aside for a moment, to pluck flowers by the way, wherewith to garnish his performance; who is, on the contrary, always found in his author's track; in short, who has it as his sole object, to give you, in the words of another language, exactly what his author says, and in the order and manner wherein he says it, and, I had almost added (for this, too, is his aim, though not always attainable), not one word more or less than he says? However he might fail in respect of the other ends mentioned, one would be apt to think he must certainly succeed in conveying the sentiments of his author. Yet, upon trial, we find that, in no point whatever, does the literal translator fail more remarkably, than in this, of exhibiting the sense. Nor will this be found so unaccountable, upon reflection, as, on a superficial view, it may appear. Were the words of the one language exactly correspondent to those of the other,
[Page 450]
in meaning and extent; were the modes of combining the words in both entirely similar, and the grammatical or customary arrangement the same, and were the idioms and phrases resulting thence perfectly equivalent, such a conclusion might reasonably be deduced: but, when all the material circumstances are nearly the reverse, as is certainly the case of Hebrew, compared with Latin; when the greater part of the words of one, are far from corresponding accurately, either in meaning or in extent, to those of the other; when the construction is dissimilar, and the idioms, resulting from the like combinations of corresponding words, by no means equivalent, there is the greatest probability that an interpreter, of this stamp, will often exhibit to his readers what has no meaning at all, and sometimes a meaning very different from, or perhaps opposite to, that of his author.
§ 3. I shall briefly illustrate, from the aforesaid translation, what I have advanced, and that, first, in words, next, in phrases or idioms. I had occasion, in a former Dissertation 1 , to take notice of a pretty numerous class of words which, in no two languages whatever, are found perfectly to correspond, though, in those tongues wherein there is a greater affinity, they come nearer to suit each other, than in those tongues wherein the affinity is less. In regard to such, I observed, that the translator's only possible method of rendering them justly, is by attending to the scope of the author, as discovered by the context, and choosing such a term in the language which he writes, as suits best the original term, in the particular situation in which he finds it.
§ 4. But this is far from being the method of the literal translator. The defenders of this manner would, if possible, have nothing subjected
[Page 451]
to the judgment of the interpreter, but have every thing determined by general and mechanical rules. Hence, they insist, above all things, on preserving uniformity, and rendering the same word in the original, wherever it occurs, or however it is connected, by the same word in the version. And as the much greater part of the words, not of one tongue only, but of every tongue, are equivocal, and have more significations than one, they have adopted these two rules for determining their choice, among the different meanings of which the term is susceptible. The first is, to adopt the meaning, wherever it is discoverable, to which etymology points, though in defiance of the meaning suggested, both by the context and by general use. When this rule does not answer, as when the derivation is uncertain, the second is, to adopt that which of all the senses of the word appears to the translator the most common, and adhere to it inflexibly, in every case, whatever absurdity or nonsense it may involve him in. Perhaps, not even the most literal interpreters observe inviolably these rules. But one thing is certain, that in those cases wherein they assume the privilege of dispensing with them, this measure is, in no respect, more necessary than in many of the cases wherein they rigidly observe them. I may add another thing, as equally certain, that whenever they think proper to supersede those rules, they betray a consciousness of the insufficiency of the fundamental principles of their method, as well as of the necessity there is, that the translator use his best discernment and skill for directing him, first, in the discovery of the meaning of his author, and, secondly, in the proper choice of words for expressing it in his version.
§ 5. I shall exemplify the observance of the two rules above mentioned, in the version I proposed to consider. And, first, for
[Page 452]
that of etymology; the passage in Genesis 2 , which is properly rendered in the common translation, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature : Arias renders, Reptificent aquæ reptile . It is true, that the word which he barbarously translates reptificent (for there is no such Latin word), is in the Hebrew conjugation called hiphil , of a verb which in kal , that is, in the simple and radical form, signifies repere, to creep . Analogically, therefore, the verb in hiphil should import, to cause to creep . It had been accordingly rendered by Pagninus, a critic of the same stamp, but not such an adept as Arias, repere faciant . But in Hebrew, as in all other languages, use, both in altering and in adding, exercises an uncontroulable dominion over all the parts of speech. We have just the same evidence that the original verb in hiphil , commonly signifies to produce in abundance, like fishes and reptiles, as we have that in kal , it signifies to creep . Now, passing the barbarism reptificent , the sense which this version conveys, if it convey any sense, is totally different from the manifest sense of the author. It is the creation, or first production of things, which Moses is relating. Arias, in this instance, (as well as Pagnin), seems to exhibit things as already produced, and to relate only how they were set in motion. What other meaning can we give to words importing: “Let the waters cause the “creeping thing to creep?” or, if, by a similar barbarism in English, we may be allowed to give a more exact representation of the barbarous Latin of Arias: “Let the waters creepify the creeper?”
Another example of etymological version, in defiance of use and of common sense, we have, in the beginning of the song of Moses 3 . The words rendered in the English translation, My doctrine shall drop as the rain , Arias translates, “Stillabit ut pluvia assumptio mea.” The word here rendered assumptio has, for its etymon, a verb which
[Page 453]
commonly signifies sumo, capio . That sage interpreter, it seems, thought it of more importance to acquaint his reader with this circumstance, than with the obvious meaning of the word itself. And thus, a passage which, in the original, is neither ambiguous nor obscure, is rendered in such a manner as would defy Oedipus to unriddle.
§ 6. As to the second rule mentioned, of adopting that which of all the significations of the word, appears to the translator the most common, and to adhere to it inflexibly in every case, however unsuitable it may be to the context, and however much it may mar the sense of the discourse, there is hardly a page, nay, a paragraph, nay, a line in Arias, which does not furnish us with an example. Nor does it take place in one only, but in all the parts of speech. First, in nouns 4 , Et hoc verbum quo circumcidit . The Hebrew word rendered verbum , answers both to verbum , and to res ; but as the more common meaning is verbum , it must, by this rule, be made always so, in spite of the connection. In this manner he corrects Pagnin, who had rendered the expression, justly and intelligibly, Hæc est causa quare circumcidit . In that expression 5 , Filius fructescens Joseph super fontem , we have both his rules exemplified, the first in the barbarous participle fructescens , which has a derivation similar to the Hebrew word; the second in the substantive filius , which is no doubt the most common signification of the Hebrew Enlarge this image.
ben , and in the preposition super . In this manner he corrects Pagnin, who had said, not badly, Ramus crescens Joseph juxta fontem.
§ 7. And , to shew that he made as little account of the reproach of solecism as of that of barbarism, he says, as absurdly as unmeaningly, Pater fuit sedentis tentorium 6 , giving a regimen to a neuter
[Page 454]
verb. Pagnin had said, inhabitantis . That this is conformable to the signification of the Hebrew word in this passage, which the other is not, there can be no question; but it might fairly bear a question, whether sedeo or inhabito be the more common meaning of the Hebrew word. The same strange rule he follows in the indeclinable parts of speech, the perpositions in particular, which being few in Hebrew, and consequently of more extensive signification, he has chosen always to render the same way, thereby darkening the clearest passages, and expressing, in the most absurd manner, the most elegant.
As I would avoid being tedious, I shall produce but two other examples of this, having given one already from Jacob's benediction to his sons, though the whole work abounds with examples. The expression used by Pagnin, in the account of the creation, Dividat aquas ab aquis 7 , he has thus reformed, Sit dividens inter aquas ad aquas . The other is in the account of the murder of Abel 8 , Surrexit Cain ad Hebel , where Pagnin had used the preposition contra . As a specimen of the servile manner in which he traces the arrangement and construction of the original, to the total subversion of all rule and order in the language which he writes, I shall give the following passage in the New Testament, not selected as peculiar, for such are to be found in every page: De quidem enim ministerio in sanctos, ex abundanti mihi est scribere vobis 9 .
§ 8. To proceed now, as I proposed, to phrases or combinations of words: I shall, first, produce some examples which convey a mere jargon of words, combined ungrammatically, and, therefore, to those who do not understand the language out of which the translation is made, unintelligibly. Such are the following: Istæ generationes cæli et terræ, in creari ea, in die facere Deus terram et
[Page 455]
cælum 10 .— Emisit eum Dominus ad colendam terram quod sumptus est inde 11 .— Major iniquitas mea quam parcere 12 . But as, in certain cases, this manner of copying a foreign idiom, makes downright nonsense, in other cases, the like combinations of corresponding words, in different languages, though not unmeaning, do not convey the same meaning, nay, sometimes convey meanings the very reverse of one another. Thus, two negatives in Greek and French deny strongly, in Latin and English they affirm. #1488;ל לכ col la , in Hebrew is none: non omnis , in Latin, which is a literal version, and not all , in English, denote some . In like manner, ουκ , construed with ουδΕις , in Greek, is still nobody; non nemo , in Latin, which is a literal version, is somebody . The words και οugr; μΕλΕι σοι ρΕρι ουδΕνος 13 , rendered properly in the common version, and carest for no man , are translated by Arias, Et non cura est tibi de nullo ; the very opposite of the author's sentiment, which would have been more justly rendered, Et cura est tibi de nullo ; or, as it is in the Vulgate, Non curas quenquam . In this, however, hardly any of the literal interpreters have judged proper to observe a strict uniformity; though I will venture to say, it would be impossible to assign a good reason why, in some instances, they depart from that method, whilst in others they tenaciously adhere to it.
§ 9. It ought, withal, to be observed, that several interpreters who, in translating single words, have not confined themselves to the absurd method above mentioned, could not be persuaded to take the same liberty with idioms and phrases. Thus Arias has but copied the Vulgate in translating, ‘ Ὁτι ουκ αδυνατησΕι ραρα τω ΘΕω ραν ρημα 14 ’, Quia non crit impossible apud Deum omne verbum . In this short sentence there are no fewer than three improprieties, one arising
[Page 456]
from the mis-translation of a noun, and the other two from mis-translated idioms. Ρημα , in Hellenistic usage, is equivalent to the Hebrew ℸℶℸ daber , which, as has been observed, signifies not only verbum , a word, but res , or negotium , a thing; which last is the manifest sense of it in the passage quoted: the second is the rendering of ου ραν, , non omne , and not, as it ought to have been, nullum : the third arises from using the future in Latin, in the enunciation of an universal truth. It ought to have been remembered, that the Hebrew has no present tense, and is consequently obliged often to use the other tenses, and especially the future, in enunciating general truths, for which, in all modern languages, as well as in Greek and Latin, we employ the present. In consequence of these blunders, the version, as it lies, is perfectly unmeaning; whereas, no person, that is even but a smatterer in Hebrew, will hesitate to declare, that the sense is completely expressed in English, in these words: For nothing is impossible with God.
§ 10. There are few of the old versions which have kept entirely clear of this fault. In the ancient Latin translation called the Italic, whereof we have not now a complete copy remaining, there were many more barbarisms than in the present Vulgate. And even Jerom himself acquaints us that, when he set about making a new version, he left several things which he knew to be not properly expressed, for fear of giving offence to the weak, by his numerous and bold alterations. This idiom of non omne , for nihil or nullum , seems to have been one which, in many places, though not in all, he has corrected. Thus, what in the old Italic, after the Septuagint, was Non est omne recens sub sole 15 , he has rendered perspicuously and properly, Nihil sub sole novum . A slavish attachment to the letter, in translating, without any regard to the meaning, is originally
[Page 457]
the offspring of the superstition, not of the church, but of the synagogue, where it would have been more suitable in Christian interpreters, the ministers, not of the letter, but of the spirit, to have allowed it to remain.
§ 11. That this is not the way to answer the first and principal end of translating, has, I think, been sufficiently demonstrated. Instead of the sense of the original, it sometimes gives us downright nonsense; frequently a meaning quite different, and not seldom it makes the author say in another language, the reverse of what he said in his own. Can it then be doubted, that this is not the way to attain the second end in translating? Is this a method whereby a translator can convey into his version, as much as possible, in a consistency with the genius of a different language, the author's spirit and manner, and (so to speak) the very character of his style? It is evident, that the first end may be attained, where this is not attained. An author's meaning may be given, but in a different manner; a concise writer may be made to express himself diffusely, or a diffuse writer concisely; the sense of an elegant work may be justly given, though in a homely dress. But it does not hold conversely, that the second end may be attained without the first; for when an author's sense is not given, he is not fairly represented. Can we do justice to his manner, if, when he reasons consequentially, he be exhibited as talking incoherently; if what he writes perspicuously, be rendered ambiguously or obscurely; if what flows from his pen naturally and easily, in the true idiom and construction of his language, be rendered ruggedly and unnaturally, by the violence perpetually done to the construction of the language, into which it is transmuted, rather than translated? The manner of a tall man, who walks with dignity, would be wretchedly represented by a dwarf who had no other mode of imitation, but to number and
[Page 458]
trace his footsteps. The immoderate strides and distortions which this ridiculous attempt would oblige the imitator to employ, could never convey to the spectators an idea of easy and graceful motion.
§ 12. The third end of translating, that of preserving purity and perspicuity in the language into which the version is made, is not so much as aimed at, by any of the literal tribe. Upon the whole, I cannot express my sentiments more justly both of Arias and of Pagnin, than in the words of Houbigant, who 16 , in assigning his reasons for not adopting the version of either, says, “Non facerem meam illam versionem Ariæ Montani horridam, inficetam, obscuram, talem denique qualem composuisset, si quis homines deterrere ab sacris codicibus legendis voluisset. Non illam Pagnini, quam Arias, jam malam, fecit imitando ac interpolando pejorem.” In this last remark, which may in part be justified by some of the foregoing examples, he perfectly agrees with Father Simon, who says of Arias's amendments on Pagnin's translation, Quot correctiones, tot corruptiones . For there is hardly any thing altered that is not for the worse. Such Latin versions would be quite unintelligible, if it were not for the knowledge we have of the original, and of the common English version, which is as literal as any version ought to be, and sometimes more so. The coincidence of two or three words recalls the whole passage to our memory; but we may venture to pronounce that, to an ancient Roman, who knew nothing of the learning or opinions of the East, the whole of Arias's Bible would appear no better than a jumble of words without meaning.
§ 13. To all the other evil consequences resulting from such versions, we ought to add that they necessarily lead the unlearned reader
[Page 459]
into an opinion that the original, which is susceptible of them, must be totally indefinite, equivocal, and obscure. Few, without making the experiment, can allow themselves to think that it is equally possible by this mode of translation, completely to disfigure and render unintelligible what is written with plainness and simplicity, and without any ambiguity, in their mother-tongue. Yet nothing is more certain than that the most perspicuous writing, in any language, may be totally disguised by this treatment 17 . Were the ancient Greek or
[Page 460]
Latin classics, in prose or verse, to be thus rendered into any modern tongue, nobody could bear to read them. Strange indeed, that a treatment should ever have been accounted respectful to the sacred penmen, which, if given to any other writer, would be universally condemned, as no better than dressing him in a fool's coat.
I am not at all surprised that certain great men of the church of Rome, like Cardinal Cajetan, who (though, with foreign assistance, he translated the Psalms) did not understand a word of Hebrew, show themselves great admirers of this method. The more unintelligible the Scriptures are made, the greater is the need of an infallible interpreter, an article of which they never lose sight. But that others, who have not the same motive, and possess a degree of understanding superior to that of a Jewish cabalist, should recommend an expedient, which serves only for debasing and discrediting the dictates of the divine spirit, appears perfectly unaccountable. I shall only add, that versions of this kind are very improperly called translations. The French have a convenient word, travesty , by which they denote the metamorphosis of a serious work into mere burlesque by dressing it in such language as renders it ridiculous, makes the noblest thoughts appear contemptible, the richest images beggarly, and the most judicious
[Page 461]
observations absurd. I would not say, therefore, the Bible translated , but the Bible travestied , by Arias Montanus. For that can never deserve the name of a translation, which gives you neither the matter nor the manner of the author, but, on the contrary, often exhibits both as the reverse of what they are. Malvenda, a Dominican, is another interpreter of the same tribe with his brother Pagnin, and with Arias, whom he is said greatly to have exceeded in darkness, barbarism, and nonsense. I never saw his version, but have reason to believe, from the accounts given of it, by good judges, that it can answer no valuable purpose.
PART III. Strictures on the Vulgate. I proceed now to consider a little the merit of some other Latin translations of holy writ. The first, doubtless, that deserves our attention, in respect both of antiquity, and I may say, of universality in the Western churches, is the Vulgate . The version which is known by this name, at least the greater part of it, is justly ascribed to Jerom, and must therefore be dated from the end of the fourth, or the beginning of the fifth century. As its reception in the church was gradual, voluntary, and not in consequence of the command of a superior, and as, for some ages, the old Latin version, called the Italic , continued, partly from the influence of custom, partly from respect to antiquity, to be regarded and used by many, there is reason to believe that a part of that version still remains in the Vulgate,
[Page 462]
and is, in a manner, blended with it. One thing at least is certain, that in several places of the Vulgate we find those expressions and ways of rendering which that learned father in his works strongly condemned, at the same time that, in other parts, we see his emendations regularly followed. Besides, as I hinted before, there were several corrections, which, though his judgment approved them, he did not think it prudent to adopt, for fear of shocking the sentiments of the people. From this it may naturally be inferred, that the manner and style of the Vulgate will not be found equal and uniform. And I believe no person who has examined it with a critical eye, will deny that this is the case.
§ 2. From what remains of the old Italic, it appears to have been much in the taste of almost all the Jewish translations, extremely literal, and consequently, in a great degree, obscure, ambiguous, and barbarous. To give a Latin translation of the Scriptures, which might at once be more perspicuous, and more just to the original, was the great and laudable design of that eminent light of the Western churches above mentioned. The Old Testament part of the Italic version had been made entirely from the Septuagint (for the Hebrew Scriptures were for some ages of no estimation in the church); but Jerom, being well skilled in Hebrew, undertook to translate from the original. This itself has made, in some passages, a considerable difference on the sense. And, as the version of the Seventy has generally the mark of a servile attachment to the letter, there can be no doubt that there must have been considerable differences of reading, in the Hebrew manuscripts extant at the times when the several parts of that version were made, from those in common use at present. And though I think, upon the whole, that the Hebrew Scriptures are much preferable, an acquaintance with the Septuagint is of great importance for several reasons, and particularly for this, that it
[Page 463]
often assists in suggesting the true reading in cases where the present Hebrew copies are obscure, or appear to have been vitiated. Jerom judiciously recurred to that translation in such cases, and often borrowed light from it, when it was more perspicuous than the Hebrew, and when the meaning which it contained seemed better adapted to the context. Perhaps he would have done still better to have recurred oftner. For, however learned those Jews were, to whose assistance he owed the acquisition of the language, they were strongly tinctured with the cabalistical prejudices which prevailed, more or less, in all the literati of that nation. Hence they were sometimes led, on very fanciful grounds, to assign to words and phrases, meanings not supported by the obvious sense of the context, nor even by the most ancient versions and paraphrases. In this case, there can be no doubt that these were more to be confided in than his Jewish instructors.
§ 3. No intelligent person will question the fitness of that judicious and learned writer, for the task of translating the Bible into his native language. But that we may not be led too far in transferring to the work, the personal merit of the author, we ought to remember two things, first, that the Vulgate, as we have it at present, is not entirely the work of Jerom; and, secondly, that even in what Jerom translated, he left many things, as he himself acknowledges, which needed correction, but which he did not chuse to alter, lest the liberties taken with the old translation should scandalize the vulgar. It is no wonder, then, that great inequalities should be observable in the execution. In many places it is excellent. The sense of the original is conveyed justly and perspicuously; no affectation in the style; on the contrary, the greatest simplicity combined with purity. But this cannot be said with truth of every part of that work.
[Page 464]
§ 4. In the preceding part of this Dissertation 18 , I took notice of one passage rendered exactly in the manner of Arias, who found nothing to alter in it, in order to bring it down to his level. Indeed there are many such instances. Thus ουκ αν Εσωθη ρασα σαρξ is rendered, Non fieret salva omnis caro 19 . In some places we find barbarisms and solecisms, to which it would be difficult to discover a temptation, the just expression being both as literal and as obvious as the improper one that has been preferred to it. Of this sort, we may call, Neque nubent, neque nubentur 20 . Nonne vos magis plures estis illis 21 ? Non capit prophetam perire extra Jerusalem 22 , and Filius hominis non venit ministrari sed ministrare 23 . Yet, as to the last example, the same words in another Gospel are rendered without the solecism, Filius hominis non venit ut ministraretur ei, sed ut ministraret 24 . Very often we meet with instances of the same original word rendered by the same Latin word, when the sense is manifestly different, and the idiom of the tongue does not admit it. This absurdity extends even to conjunctions. The Greek ὁτι answers frequently to the Latin quia, because , and not seldom, to quod, that . Here, however, it is almost uniformly rendered quia or quoniam , in defiance of grammar and common sense. Thus, Tunc confitebor illis quia nunquam novi vos 25 , and Magister scimus quia verax es 26 . These expressions are no better Latin, than these which follow are English. Then will I confess to them, because I never knew you , and, Master we know because thou art true : words which, if they suggest any meaning, it is evidently not the meaning of the author; nor is it a meaning which the original would have ever suggested to one who understands the language.
[Page 465]
Nay, sometimes even the favourite rule of uniformity is violated, but not for the sake of keeping to the sense, the sense being rather hurt by the violation. Thus λαος , answering to populus , and commonly so rendered, is sometimes improperly translated plebs . ΕροιησΕ λυτρωσιν τω λαω ἁυτου 27 , is rendered Fecit redemptionem plebis suæ . Sometimes the most unmeaning barbarisms are adopted merely to represent the etymology of the original term. Τον αρτον ἡμων τον Εριουσιον δος ἡμιν σημΕρον, , is rendered Panem nostrum supersubstantialem da nobishodie 28 . Panis supersubstantialis is just as barbarous Latin as supersubstantial bread would be English, and equally unintelligible. There is an additional evil resulting from this manner of treating holy writ, that the solecisms, barbarisms, and nonsensical expressions which it gives rise to, prove a fund of materials to the visionary, out of which his imagination frames a thousand mysteries.
§ 5. I would not, however, be understood by these remarks, as passing a general censure on this version, which, though not to be followed implicitly, may, I am convinced, be of great service to the critic. It ought to weigh with us, that even the latest part of this translation was made about fourteen hundred years ago, and is consequently many centuries prior to all the Latin translations now current, none of which can claim an earlier date than the revival of letters in the West. I do not use this argument from an immoderate regard to antiquity, or from the notion that age can give a sanction to error. But there are two things in this circumstance which ought to recommend the work in question, to the attentive examination of the critic. First that, having been made from manuscripts older than most, perhaps than any, now extant, it serves, in some degree, to supply the place of those manuscripts, and furnish us with the
[Page 466]
probable means of discovering what the readings were, which Jerom found in the copies he so carefully collated. Another reason is, that being finished long before those controversies arose, which are the foundation of the sects now subsisting, we may rest assured that, in regard to these, there will be no bias from party zeal to either side of the question. We cannot say so much for the translations which have been made since the rise of Protestantism, either by Protestants or by Papists. And these are, in my opinion, two not inconsiderable advantages.
§ 6. I take notice of the last the rather, because many Protestants, on account of the declaration of its authenticity, solemnly pronounced by the council of Trent, cannot avoid considering it as a Popish Bible, calculated for supporting the Roman Catholic cause. Now this is an illiberal conclusion, the offspring of ignorance, which I think it of some consequence to refute. It is no further back than the sixteenth century, since that judgment was given in approbation of this version, the first authoritative declaration made in its favour. Yet the estimation in which it was universally held throughout the Western churches, was, to say the least, not inferior before that period to what it is at present. And, we may say with truth, that though no judicious Protestant will think more favourably of this translation, on account of their verdict; neither will he, on this account, think less favourably of it. It was not because this version was peculiarly adapted to the Romish system, that it received the sanction of that synod; but because it was the only Bible with which the far greater part of the members had from their infancy had the least acquaintance. There were but few in that assembly who understood either Greek or Hebrew. They had heard that the Protestants, the new heretics, as they called them, had frequent recourse to the original, and were beginning to make versions from it; a
[Page 467]
practice of which their own ignorance of the original made them the more jealous. Their fears being thus alarmed, they were exceedingly anxious to interpose their authority, by the declaration above mentioned, for preventing new translations being obtruded on the people. They knew what the Vulgate contained; and had been early accustomed to explain it in their own way. But they did not know what might be produced from new translations. Therefore, to preoccupy men's minds, and prevent every true son of the church from reading other, especially modern, translations, and from paying any regard to what might be urged from the original, the very indefinite sentence was pronounced in favour of the Vulgate, vetus et vulgata editio , that in all disputes it should be held for authentic, ut pro authentica habeatur.
§ 7. Now if, instead of this measure, that council had ordered a translation to be made by men nominated by them, in opposition to those published by Protestants, the case would have been very different: for we may justly say that, amidst such a ferment as was then excited, there should have appeared, in a version so prepared, any thing like impartiality, candour, or discernment, would have been morally impossible. Yet even such a production would have been entitled to a fair examination from the critic, who ought never to disdain to receive information from an adversary, and to judge impartially of what he offers. As that, however, was not the case, we ought not to consider the version in question as either the better or the worse for their verdict. It is but doing justice to say, that it is noway calculated to support Romish errors and corruptions. It had been in current use in the church, for ages before the much greater part of those errors and corruptions was introduced. No doubt the schoolmen had acquired the knack of explaining it in such a way as favoured their own prejudices. But is this any more than what we
[Page 468]
find the most discordant sects acquire with regard to the original, or even to a translation which they use in common? For my own part, though it were my sole purpose, in recurring to a version, to refute the absurdities and corruptions of Popery, I should not desire other or better arguments than those I am supplied with by that very version, which one of their own councils has declared authentical.
§ 8. I am not ignorant that a few passages have been produced, wherein the Vulgate and the original convey different meanings, and wherein the meaning of the Vulgate appears to favour the abuses established in that church. Some of these, but neither many, nor of great moment, are no doubt corruptions in the text, probably not intentional, but accidental, to which the originals in Hebrew and Greek have been in like manner liable, and from which no ancient book extant can be affirmed to be totally exempted. With respect to others of them, they will be found, upon a nearer inspection, as little favourable to Romish superstition, as the common reading in the Hebrew or the Greek. What is justly rendered, in our version, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel 29 , is in such a manner translated in the Vulgate, as to afford some colour for the extraordinary honours paid the virgin mother of our Lord. Inimicitias ponam inter te et mulierem, et semen tuum et semen illius. Ipsa conteret caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis calcaneo ejus . “She shall bruise thy head.” In this way it has been understood by some of their capital painters, who, in their pictures of the Virgin, have represented her treading on a serpent. It is, however, certain, that their best critics admit this to be an error, and recur
[Page 469]
to some ancient manuscripts of the Vulgate, which read ipsum , not ipsa.
A still grosser blunder, which seems to give countenance to the worship of relics, is in the passage thus rendered by our interpreters: By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff 30 : in the Vulgate thus: Fide Jacob moriens singulos filiorum Joseph benedixit, et adoravit fastigium virgæ ejus ; “adored the top of his rod;” as the version made from the Vulgate by English Romanists, and published at Rheims, expresses it. But the best judges among Roman Catholics admit, that the Latin text is not entire in this place, and that there has been an accidental omission of the preposition, through the carelessness of transcribers. For they have not now a writer of any name who infers, from the declaration of authenticity, either the infallibility of the translator, or the exactness of the copiers. Houbigant, a priest of the Oratory, has not been restrained, by that sentence, from making a new translation of the Old Testament from the Hebrew into Latin, wherein he uses as much freedom with the Vulgate, in correcting what appeared to him faulty in it, as any reasonable Protestant, in this country, would do with the common English translation. Nay, which is more extraordinary, in the execution of this work, he had the countenance of the then reigning pontiff. In his version he has corrected the passage quoted from Genesis, and said, “ Illud ” (not illa ) “conteret caput tuum.” I make no doubt that he would have corrected the other passage also, if he had made a version of the New Testament.
§ 9. I know it has also been urged, that there are some things in the Vulgate, which favour the style and doctrine of Rome, particularly in what regards the sacraments; and that such things are to
[Page 470]
be found in places where there is no ground to suspect a various reading, nor that the text of the Vulgate has undergone any alteration, either intentional or accidental. Could this point be evinced in a satisfactory manner, it would allow more to Popery, on the score of antiquity, than, in my opinion, she is entitled to. It is true, that marriage appears, in one passage, to be called a sacrament. Paul, after recommending the duties of husbands and wives, and enforcing his recommendations by the resemblance which marriage bears to the relation subsisting between Christ and his church, having quoted these words from Moses, For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh ; adds, as it is expressed in the Vulgate, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, ego autem dico in Christo et in ecclesia 31 ; as expressed in the English translation, This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the church ; which is in effect, as I had occasion to observe in the preceding Dissertation, to which I refer the reader 32 . ‘This is capable of an important and figurative interpretation, I mean, as it relates to Christ and the church.’ Under the Mosaic economy, the relation wherein God stood to Israel, is often represented under the figure of marriage; and it is common, with the penmen of the New Testament, to transfer those images, whereby the union between God and his people is illustrated in the Old, to that which subsists between Christ and his church. It is evident that, by the Latin word sacramentum , the Greek μυστηριον is frequently rendered in the New Testament; and it is no less evident, not only from the application of the word in that version, but from the general use of it, in ecclesiastical writers, in the primitive ages, that it often denoted no more than an allegorical or figurative meaning, which may be assigned to any narrative or injunction; a meaning more sublime
[Page 471]
than that which is at first suggested by the words. Thus, the moral conveyed under an apologue or parable was with them the sacrament , that is, the hidden meaning of the apologue or parable. Thus, in ego dicam tibi sacramentum mulieris et bestiæ quæ portat eam 33 , I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast which carrieth her; it is indubitable, that μυστηριον , or sacramentum , means the hidden meaning of that vision. It is very plain that, in their use, the sense of the word sacramentum was totally different from that which it has at present, either among Protestants or among Papists 34 . At the same time, there can be no question, that the misunderstanding of the passage quoted above, from the Epistle to the Ephesians, has given rise to the exaltation of matrimony into a sacrament. Such are the effects of the perversion of words, through the gradual change of customs; a perversion incident to every language, but which no translator can foresee.
No more is their doctrine of merit supported by the following expression: Talibus hostiis promeretur Deus 35 ; which, though faulty in point of purity, means no more than is expressed in the English translation, in these words: With such sacrifices God is well pleased . It is, by common use, and not by scholastic quibbles, that the language of the sacred writers ought to be interpreted. Again, the command which so often occurs in the Gospels, pænitentiam agite , seems at first to favour the Popish doctrine of penance . In conformity to this idea, the Rhemish translators render it do penance . But nothing is more evident, than that this is a perversion of the phrase from its ancient meaning, occasioned by the corruptions which have insensibly crept into the church. That the words, as used by the Latin translator, meant originally as much, at least, as the English word repent , cannot admit a question; and thus much
[Page 472]
is allowed by the critics of that communion. In this manner Maldonat, a learned Jesuit, in his Commentary 36 , explains pænitentiam agite , as of the same import with parate vias Domini, rectas facite semitas ejus ; and both as signifying Relinquite errores et sequimini veritatem; discedite a malo, et facite bonum . He understood no otherwise the agite pænitentiam of the Latin translator, than we understand the μΕτανοΕιτΕ of the Evangelist. Accordingly, the same Greek word is in one place of that version rendered pænitemini 37 . But the introduction of the doctrine of auricular confession, of the necessity for obtaining absolution, of submitting to the punishment prescribed by the priest for the sins confessed, which they have come to denominate pænitentia , and their styling the whole of this institution of theirs the sacrament of penance , which is of a much later date than that version, has diverted men's minds from attending to the primitive and only proper import of the phrase. Agite pænitentiam was not, therefore, originally a mis-translation of the Greek μΕτανοΕιτΕ , though not sufficiently expressive; but the abuse which has gradually taken place in the Latin church, and the misapplication of the term which it has occasioned, have in a manner justled out the original meaning, and rendered the words, in their present acceptation, totally improper 38 .
§ 10. Several other words and expressions give scope for the like observations. But, after what has been said, it is not necessary to enter further into particulars. The Vulgate may reasonably be pronounced, upon the whole, a good and faithful version. That it is unequal in the style, in respect both of purity and of perspicuity, is very evident; nay, to such a degree, as plainly to evince that it has not all issued from the same pen. Considered in gross, we have
[Page 473]
reason to think it greatly inferior to Jerom's translation, as finished by himself. I may add, we have reason also to consider the version which Jerom actually made, as greatly inferior to what he could have made, and would have made, if he had thought himself at liberty to follow entirely his own judgment, and had not been much restrained by the prejudices of the people. I have already observed the advantages redounding to the critic from the use of this version, which are in some degree peculiar. I shall only add, that its language, barbarous as it often is, has its use in assisting us to understand more perfectly the Latin ecclesiastical writers of the early ages.
PART IV. Strictures on Castalio. Having shown, that it is impossible to do justice to an author, or to his subject, by attempting to track him, and always to be found in his footsteps, I shall now animadvert a little on those translators who are in the opposite extreme; whose manner is so loose, rambling, and desultory that, though they move nearly in the same direction with their author, pointing to the same object, they keep scarcely within sight of his path. Of the former excess, Arias Montanus is a perfect model: the Vulgate is often too much so. Of the latter, the most remarkable example we have in Latin, is Castalio. Yet Castalio's work is no paraphrase, such as we have sometimes seen under the name of liberal translations : for in these, there are always interwoven with the thoughts of the author, those of his interpreter,
[Page 474]
under the notion of their importance, either for illustrating, or for enforcing, the sentiments of the original. The paraphrast does not confine himself to the humble task of the translator, who proposes to exhibit, pure and unmixed, the sentiments of another, clothed, indeed, in a different dress, namely, such as the country, into which he introduces them, can supply him with. The paraphrast, on the contrary, claims to share with the author in the merit of the work, not in respect of the language merely, for to this every interpreter has a claim, but in respect of what is much more important, the sense: nay, further, if the sentiments of these two happen to jar, no uncommon case, it is easy to conjecture whose will predominate in the paraphrase. But it is not with paraphrasts that I have here to do. A loose manner of translating is sometimes adopted, not for the sake of insinuating, artfully, the translator's opinions, by blending them with the sentiments of the author, but merely for the sake of expressing with elegance, and in an oratorical manner, the sense of the original.
§ 2. This was acknowledged to be in a high degree Castalio's object in translating. He had observed, with grief, that great numbers were withheld from reading the Scriptures, that is, the Vulgate, the only version of any account then extant, by the rudeness, as well as the obscurity, of the style. To give the public a Bible more elegantly and perspicuously written, he considered as at least an innocent, if not a laudable artifice, for inducing students, especially those of the younger sort, to read the Scriptures with attention, and to throw aside books full of indecencies then much in vogue, because recommended by the beauty and ornaments of language. “Cupiebam,” says he 39 , “extare Latiniorem aliquam, necnon fideliorem, et magis perspicuam sacrarum literarum translationem, ex qua
[Page 475]
posset eâdem operâ pietas cum Latino sermone disci, ut hac ratione et tempori consuleretur, et homines ad legenda sacra pellicerentur.” The motive was surely commendable; and the reason whereon it was founded, a general disuse of the Scriptures, on account of the badness of their language, is but too notorious. Cardinal Bembo, a man of some note and literature under the pontificate of Leo X. in whose time the Reformation commenced, is said to have expressed himself strongly on this subject, that he durst not read the Bible, for fear of corrupting his style; an expression which had a very unfavourable aspect, especially in a churchman. Nevertheless, when we consider, that by the Bible he meant the Vulgate, and by his style, his Latinity, this declaration will not be found to merit all the censure which Brown 40 , and others, have bestowed upon it. For surely no one who understands Latin, will say, that he wishes to form his style in that language on the Vulgate. Nor does any reflection on the language of that translation affect, in the smallest degree, the sacred writers. The character of Moses' style, in particular, is simplicity, seriousness, perspicuity, and purity. The first and second of these qualities are, in general, well exhibited in the Vulgate; the third is sometimes violated, and the fourth often.
§ 3. But , to return to Castalio: he was not entirely disappointed in his principal aim. Many Romanists, as well as Protestants, who could not endure the foreign idioms and obscurity of the Vulgate, attracted by the fluency, the perspicuity, and partly, no doubt, by the novelty of Castalio's diction, as employed for conveying the mind of the Spirit , were delighted with the performance; whilst the same quality of novelty, along with what looked like affectation in the change, exceedingly disgusted others. One thing is very evident, in regard to this translator, that when his work first made its
[Page 476]
appearance, nobody seemed to judge of it with coolness and moderation. Almost every person either admired or abhorred it. At this distant period, there is a greater probability of judging equitably, than there was when it was first published, and men's passions, from the circumstances of the times, were so liable to be inflamed, on every new topic of discussion, wherein religion was concerned.
§ 4 If we examine this work by the three great ends of translating, above observed, we shall be qualified to form some judgment of his merit in this department. As to the first and principal end, conveying the true sense of his author, I think he has succeeded, at least, as well as most other translators into Latin, and better than some of those who, with much virulence, traduced his character and decried his work. He had, indeed, one great advantage, in being an excellent linguist, and knowing more of the three languages, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, than most of the critics of his time. But that his immoderate passion for classical elocution, did sometimes lead him to adopt expressions which were feeble, obscure, and improper, is very certain. And it must be owned, notwithstanding his plausible defence, that Beza had reason to affirm, that the words ὁτι ΕρΕσκΕψατο και ΕροιησΕ λυτρωσιν τω λαω ἁυτου 41 , are but ambiguously and frigidly rendered, qui populi sui liberationem procuret . The difference is immense, between the notions of Pagans concerning the agency of their gods in human affairs, and the ideas which Scripture gives us of the divine efficiency; and, therefore, even Cicero, in a case of this kind, is no authority. The following instance, cited by Houbigant, is an example of obscurity arising from the same cause 42 : Tu isti populo terræ hæreditatem hercisceris 43 . Hercisco is merely a juridical term which, though it might have been proper,
[Page 477]
in a treatise on the civil law, or in pleading in a court of judicature, no Roman author, of any name, would have used, in a work intended for the people. But, to no sort of style are technical terms more unsuitable than to that of holy writ. It was the more inexcusable, in this place, where the simple and natural expression was so obvious. Tu terram—dabis isti populo possidendam . Whereas, the phrase which Castalio has adopted, would have probably been unintelligible to the much greater part of the people, even in Rome, at the time when Latin was their mother-tongue.
§ 5. As to the second object of translating, the conveyance of the spirit and manner of the author, in a just exhibition of the character of his style; I hinted before that, in this particular, he failed entirely , and I may even add intentionally . The first characteristical quality of the historic style of holy writ, simplicity , he has totally renounced. The simple style is opposed both to the complex, and to the highly ornamented. The complex is, when the diction abounds in periods, or in sentences consisting of several members artfully combined. This is much the manner of Castalio, but far from that of the sacred historians. In a former Differtation 44 , I gave a specimen of this difference, in his manner of rendering the first five verses of Genesis. Now, for the transformation he has made them undergo, he has no excuse, from either necessity or perspicuity. The simple style will suit any tongue (though the complex will not always), and is remarkably perspicuous. His affecting so often, without any necessity, to give, in the way of narrative, what, in the original, is in the way of dialogue, is another flagrant violation of ancient simplicity.
Nor is simplicity alone hurt by this change. How cold and inanimate, as well as indefinite, is the oblique but classical turn, which
[Page 478]
Castalio has endeavoured to give to Laban's salutation of Abraham's servant: Eumque a Jova salvere jussum, hortatur, ne foris maneat : compared with the direct and vivid address in the Vulgate, literally from the Hebrew: Dixitque, Ingredere, benedicte Domini: cur foris stas ? Or, as it is in the English translation, Come in, thou blessed of the Lord: wherefore standest thou without 45 ? That he transgresses, in this respect also, by a profusion of ornament, is undeniable. By his accumulated diminutives, both in names and epithets, in the manner of Catullus, intended surely to be ornamental, he has injured the dignity, as well as the simplicity and seriousness, of Solomon's Song.
Another ornament, in the same taste, by which the simplicity of the sacred writers has been greatly hurt in his translation, is the attempt, when the same ideas recur, of expressing them almost always in different words and varied phrases. It is not only essential to the simplicity, but it adds to the majesty, of the inspired penmen, that there never appears, in them, any solicitude about their words. No pursuit of variety, or, indeed, of any thing in point of diction, out of the common road. Very different is the manner of this interpreter. I had occasion to remark before 46 , that there were no fewer than seven or eight phrases, employed by Castalio, in different places of the New Testament, for expressing the import of the single verb μΕτανοΕω, , though used always in the same acceptation. And, as another specimen of this inordinate passion, I shall add, that, to express διωγμος , he uses, beside the word persequutio , the far too general terms, vexatio, afflictio, insectatio, adversa, res adversæ . Nay, in some instances, his love of variety has carried him so far as to sacrifice, not barely the style of his author, but his sense. What can be a stronger example of it, than his denominating God, Deus
[Page 479]
obtrectator 47 , rather than recur, with his author, to any term he had employed before. For the Hebrew אנק kone , rendered jealous in the English translation, he had used, in one place, æmulus , in another, socii impatiens , and in a third, rivalis impatiens . Though some exception might be made to the two last, the first was as good as the language afforded. Another translator would not have thought there was any occasion for a fourth; but so differently thought our classical interpreter, in matters of this kind, that he preferred a most improper word, which might contribute to give his style the graces of novelty and variety, to an apposite, but more common term, which he had employed before. The word obtrectator is never used, as far as I remember, but in a bad sense. It is acknowledged, that when jealousy is ascribed to God, the expression is not strictly proper. He is spoken of after the manner of men. But then the term, by itself, does not imply any thing vicious. We may say of a man properly, in certain cases, that he had reason to be jealous ; but with no propriety can we say, in any case, that a man had reason to be envious , that he had reason to be calumnious . These epithets are better suited to the diabolical nature, than to the divine. Yet both are included in the word obtrectator.
In short, his affectation of the manner of some of the poets and orators, has metamorphosed the authors he interpreted, and stript them of the venerable signatures of antiquity, which so admirably befit them; and which, serving as intrinsic evidence of their authenticity, recommend their writings to the serious and judicious. Whereas, when accoutred in this new fashion, nobody would imagine them to have been Hebrews; and yet (as some critics have justly remarked), it has not been within the compass of Castalio's art, to make them look like Romans.
[Page 480]
§ 6. I am far from thinking that Castalio merited, on this account, the bitter invectives vented against him by Beza, and others, as a wilful corrupter of the word of God. His intention was good; it was to entice all ranks, as much as possible, to the study of the divine oracles. The expedient he used appeared, at least, harmless. It was, in his judgment, at the worst, but like that which Horace observes, was often practised by good-natured teachers:
   Ut pueris olim dant crustula blandi
Doctores, elementa velint ut discere prima.
He regarded the thoughts solely as the result of inspiration, the words and idiom as merely circumstantial. “Erant Apostoli,” says he 48 , “natu Hebræi: et peregrina, hoc est Græca lingua scribentes hebraizabant; non quod id juberet spiritus: neque enim pluris facit spiritus Hebraismos quam Græcismos.” Indeed, if the liberty Castalio has taken with the diction, had extended no further than to reject those Hebraisms which, how perspicuous soever they are in the original, occasion either obscurity or ambiguity, when verbally translated, and to supply their place, by simple expressions, in the Latin idiom, clearly conveying the same sense, no person who is not tinctured with the cabalistical superstition of the Jews, could have censured his conduct.
Very often, the freedoms he used with the style of the sacred penmen, aimed no higher. Thus, the expression of the Prophet, which is, literally, in English, My beloved had a vineyard in a born of the son of oil ; and which is rendered in the Vulgate, Vinea facta est dilecto meo in cornu filio olei ; Castalio has translated much better, because intelligibly, Habebat amicus meus vineam in quodam pingui dorso . Had he used the more familiar term, collis , instead of dorsum ,
[Page 481]
it would have been still better. The English translation expresses the sense very properly, My well beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill 49 . But, as I have shown, the freedoms taken by Castalio went sometimes a great deal further than this, and tended to lessen the respect due to the sacred oracles, by putting them too much on a footing with compositions merely human, and by changing their serious manner for one comparatively light and trifling, nay, even playful and childish.
§ 7. As to the other two qualities of the historical style of Scripture, perspicuity and purity, he seems in general to have been observant of them. To the latter he is censured chiefly for having sacrificed too much. Yet his attention to this quality has proved a principal means of securing his perspicuity; as it is certain that the excessive attempts of others to preserve in their version the Oriental idiom, have both rendered the plainest passages unintelligible, and given bad Latin for what was good Hebrew or Chaldee. The example last quoted is an evidence of this; and surely none can doubt that it has more perspicuity, as well as propriety, to say in Latin, ut nemo usque evaderet with Castalio, than to say, ut non fieret salva omnis caro with the Vulgate: and, Nulla res est quam Deus facere non possit with the former, than non erit impossibile apud Deum omne verbum with the latter. Nevertheless, in a few instances, an immoderate passion for classical phraseology has, as we have seen, betrayed him into obscurities, and even blunders, of which inferior interpreters were in no danger.
§ 8. To illustrate the different effects on the appearance of the sacred penmen, produced by the opposite modes of translating, which
[Page 482]
Arias and Castalio have adopted, I shall employ a similitude of which Castalio himself has given me the hint. In his epistle dedicatory to king Edward, he has these words: Quod ad latinitatem attinet, est oratio nihil aliud quam rei quædam quasi vestis, et nos sartores sumus . In conformity to this idea, I should say that those venerable writers the Apostles and Evangelists, appear, in their own country, in a garb plain indeed, and even homely, but grave withal, decent, and well fitted to the wearers. Arias, intending to introduce them to the Latins, has, to make them look as little as possible like other men, and, one would think, to frighten every body from desiring their acquaintance, clothed them in filthy rags, which are indeed of Roman manufacture, but have no other relation to any thing worn in the country, being alike unfit for every purpose of decency and use. For surely that style is most aptly compared to tattered garments, in which the words can, by no rule of syntax in the language, be rendered coherent, or expressive of any sense. Castalio, on the contrary, not satisfied that when abroad, they should be gravely and properly habited, as they were at home, will have them tricked up in finery and lace, that they may appear like men of fashion, and even make some figure in, what the world calls, good company. But, though I consider both these interpreters as in extremes, I am far from thinking their performances are to be deemed, in any respect, equivalent. It is not in my power to discover a good use that can be made of Arias' version, unless to give some assistance to a school-boy in acquiring the elements of the language. Castalio's, with one great fault, has many excellent qualities.
§ 9. In regard to the third object of translating, which is to write so far properly and agreeably in the language into which the translation is made, as may, independently of its exactness, serve to recommend it as a valuable work in that tongue; if Castalio failed here,
[Page 483]
he has been particularly unlucky, since the latinity and elegance of the work must, by his own acknowledgment, have been more an object to him than to other translators, this being the great means by which he wanted to draw the attention of the youth of that age to the study of the holy Scriptures. But however much his taste may, in this respect, have been adapted to the times wherein he lived, we cannot consider it as perfectly chaste and faultless. Sufficient grounds for this censure may be collected from the remarks already made. The superficial and the shining qualities of style seem often to have had more attractions with him than the solid and the useful.
§ 10. In other respects he appears to have been well qualified for the task of translating. Conversant in the learned languages, possessed of a good understanding and no inconsiderable share of critical acuteness, candid in his disposition, and not over-confident of his own abilities, or excessively tenacious of his own opinion, he was ever ready to hearken, and, when convinced, to submit to reason, whether presented by a friend or by a foe, whether in terms of amity and love, or of reproach and hatred. Of this he gave very ample evidence in the corrections which he made on some of the later editions of his Bible.
He was far from pretending, like some interpreters and commentators, to understand every thing. When he was uncertain about the sense, he could do no other than follow the words in translating. This expression of the Apostle Peter 50 , Εις τουτο γαρ και νΕκροις ΕυηγγΕλισθη, ἱνα κριθωσι μΕν κατα ανθρωρους σαρκι, ζωσι δΕ κατα ΘΕον ρνΕυματι, , he translates in this manner, Nam ideo mortuis quoque nunciatus est, ut et secundum homines carne judicentur, et secundum Deum spiritu vivant ; adding this note on the margin: Hunc locum
[Page 484]
non intelligo, ideoque ad verbum transtuli . There are several other such instances. In one place he has on the margin: Hos duos versus non intelligo, ideoque de mea translatione dubito 51 . It is worth while to take notice of the manner in which he himself speaks of such passages: “Quod autem alicubi scribo, me aliquem locum non intelligere: id non ita accipi volo, quasi cætera plane intelligam: sed ut sciatur, me in aliis aliquid saltem obscuræ lucis habere, in illis nihil: tum autem ut meæ translationi in quibusdam hujusmodi locis non nimium considatur. Neque tamen ubique quid non intelligam oftendo: effet enim hoc infinitum 52 .”
§ 11. In regard to the changes he made in adopting classical terms instead of certain words and phrases, which had been long in use amongst ecclesiastic writers, and were supposed to be universally understood, I cannot agree entirely with, either his sentiments, or those of his adversaries. In the first place, I do not think, as he seems once to have thought (though in this respect he afterwards altered his conduct, and consequently, we may suppose, his opinion), that no word deserved admission into his version, which had not the sanction of some Pagan classic. For this reason, the words baptisma, angelus, ecclesia, proselytus, synagoga, propbeta, patriarcha, mediator, dœmoniacus, hypocrita, benedictus , and the words fides and fidelis , when used in the theological sense, he set aside for lotio, genius, respublica, adventitius, collegium, vates, summus pater, sequester, furiosus, simulator, collaudandus, fiducia, fidens . Some of the more usual terms, as angelus, baptisma, ecclesia, synagoga , were, in later editions, restored. In regard to some others, considering the plan he had adopted, his choice cannot be much blamed, as they were sufficiently expressive of the sense of the original. A few, indeed, were not so.
[Page 485]
Genius is not a version of αγγΕλος, nor furiosus of δαιμονιζομΕνος. . The notions entertained by the heathen of their genii , no more corresponded to the ideas of the Hebrews, in regard to angels , than the fancies which our ancestors entertained of elves and fairies, corresponded to the Christian doctrine concerning the heavenly inhabitants. ΑγγΕλος was a literal version made by the Seventy into Greek, of the Hebrew ךאלמ malach , a name of office which, if Castalio after them had literally rendered into Latin, calling it nuntius , it would have been as little liable to exception, as his rendering the words ΒασιλΕυς and ὑρηρΕτης, rex and minister. Furiosus is not a just translation of δαιμονιζομΕνος. The import of the original name, which only suggests the cause, is confined, by the translator's opinion, to the nature of the disorder: furiosus means no more than mad , whereas δαιμονιζομΕνος. is, repeatedly in Scripture, given as equivalent to δαιμονιον Εχων. Nor does the disease of those unhappy persons appear to have been always madness . And if, in this, we regard etymology alone, the traditionary fables, about the three infernal goddesses, called furies , are noway suited to the ancient popular faith, of either Jews or Pagans, concerning demons. And, even though adventitius corresponds exactly in etymology with ρροσηλυτος, the Latin word does not convey the idea which, in the Hellenistic idiom, is conveyed by the Greek. Simulator can hardly be objected to, as a version of ὑροκριτης. In some instances, it answers better than hypocrita . This name is, in Latin, confined, by use, to those who lead a life of dissimulation in what regards religion; whereas the Greek term is sometimes employed in the New Testament, in all the latitude in which we commonly use the word dissembler , for one who is insincere in a particular instance. But the classical word collaudandus does not suit the Greek Ευλογητος as used in holy writ, near so well as does the ecclesiastical epithet benedictus . And summus pater is too indefinite a version of ρατριαρχης.
[Page 486]
It is a good rule, in every language, to take the necessary terms in every branch of knowledge or business, from those best acquainted with that branch: because, among them, the extent of the terms, and their respective differences, will be most accurately distinguished. In what, therefore, peculiarly concerned the undisputed tenets, or rites, either of Judaism or of Christianity, it was much more reasonable to adopt the style used by Latin Jews or Christians, in those early ages, before they were corrupted with philosophy, than, with the assistance of but a remote analogy, to transfer terms used by Pagan writers, to the doctrines and ceremonies of a religion with which they were totally unacquainted. I must, therefore, consider the rejection of several terms established by ecclesiastic use, and conveying precisely the idea intended by the sacred penmen, as an indication of an excessive squeamishness in point of Latinity. Such terms, in my judgment, are, in matters of revelation, entitled even to be preferred to classical words. For, though the latter may nearly suit the idea, they cannot have, to the same degree as the former, the sanction of use in that application.
§ 12. But , let it be observed, on the other hand, that the preference above mentioned, is limited by this express condition, that the ecclesiastic term, in its common acceptation, plainly convey to the reader the same idea which the original word, used by the sacred penmen, was intended to convey to the readers for whom they wrote. To plead, on the contrary, with Father Simon and others, for the preferable adoption of certain theologic words and phrases consecrated by long use, as they are pleased to term it, though admitted to be obscure, ambiguous, or even improper, is to me the greatest absurdity. It is really to make the sacred authors give place to their ancient interpreters: it is to throw away the sense of the former in compliment to the words of the latter. We must surely consider inspiration
[Page 487]
as a thing of very little consequence, when we sacrifice it knowingly to human errors. This would, in effect, condemn all new translations, whatever occasion there might be for them, for correcting the faults of former versions. But into the truth of this sentiment I shall have occasion to inquire more fully afterwards. Only let it be remembered, that the limitation now mentioned affects two classes of words, first, those by which the original terms were early mis-translated; secondly, those which, though at first they exhibited the true sense of the original, have come gradually to convey a different meaning. For these, in consequence of a change insensibly introduced in the application, are become now, whatever they were formerly, either improper or ambiguous.
There are some terms in the Vulgate which, in my judgment, were never perfectly adapted to those in the original, in whose place they were substituted. Whether sacramentum for μυστηριον were originally of this number or not, it is certain that the theological meaning, now constantly affixed to that word, does not suit the sense of the sacred authors, which is fully and intelligibly expressed in Latin, as Castalio and Houbigant have commonly done, by the word arcanum . The Vulgate sometimes renders it mysterium , which is not much better than sacramentum . For mysterium , not being Latin, and being variously used as a technical term by theologians, must be vague and obscure. Many other latinized Greek words (as scandalizo, blasphemia, heresis, schisma ) are in some measure liable to the same objection. The original terms are none of those, which were observed formerly 53 , not to be susceptible of a translation into another language. And in that case to transfer the words, leaving them untranslated, rarely fails either to keep the reader in ignorance, or to lead him into error. For this reason I am far from condemning with Boys, Simon, and some others, the modern translators, particularly
[Page 488]
Castalio, for rendering them into proper Latin. I intend, in another Differtation, to evince that they would not have executed faithfully the office they had undertaken, if they had not done it. The words with which Castalio has commonly supplied us, instead of those above mentioned ( officio, maledictum, or impia dicta, secta, dissidium, or factio ), are in general as apposite for expressing the sense of the original, as any other words of the same class. And even the Vulgate is not uniform in regard to those words. ἉιρΕσις is, in several places of that version, rendered secta , and σχισμα scissura and dissensio . But of this I have treated already in the preceding Differtation.
§ 13. After all the zeal Castalio has shown, and the stretches he has made for preserving classical purity, could it have been imagined that he would have admitted into his version manifest barbarisms, both words and idioms of no authority whatever? Yet that he has afforded a few instances of this strange inconsistency, is unquestionable. It would not be easy to assign a satisfactory reason for his rejecting the term idolum idol, a classical word, and used by Pagans in the same meaning in which it is used by us. If it be said, that in their use, it was not accompanied with the same kind of sentiment as when used by us; as much may be affirmed with truth of Deus, Numen , and every word that relates to religion, which could not fail to affect differently the mind of a heathen, from the way in which it affects the mind of a Jew or a Christian. Ought we to have different names for the Pagan deities, Jupiter, Juno, &c. because the mention of them was attended with reverence in Pagans, and with contempt in Christians?
But what shall we say of his supplying idolum by a barbarism of his own, deaster , a word of no authority, sacred or profane? It suited the fundamental principles of his undertaking to reject idololatra idolater, because, though analogically formed from a good word, it
[Page 489]
could plead only ecclesiastic use. But by what principle he has introduced such a monster as deastricola , that was never heard of before, it would be impossible to say. He could be at no loss for a proper expression. Idolorum or simulacrorum cultor would have served. He has given but too good reason, by such uncouth sounds as deaster, deastricola , and infidens infidel, to say that his objections lay only against the liberties in language which had been taken by others. Castalio argues against barbarisms as being obscure; surely this argument strikes more against those of his own coining, than against those (if they can be called barbarisms) which are recommended by so long continued, and so extensive, an use. For, though he should not allow the use of theologians to be perfectly good, it is surely, on those subjects, sufficient for removing the objection of obscurity. I do not see any thing in his work which has so much the appearance of self-conceit as this. In other respects, I find him modest and unassuming. It has been also observed, that his idioms are not always pure. Dominus, ad cujus normam , is not in the Latin idiom. Norma legis is proper, not norma Dei , or norma hominis . But this I consider as an oversight, the other as affectation.
§ 14. I shall add a few words on the subject of Hebraisms, which Castalio is accused of rejecting altogether. This charge he is so far from denying, that he endeavours to justify his conduct in this particular. Herein, I think, if his adversaries went too far on one side, in preferring the mere form of the expression, to the perspicuous enunciation of the sense; this interpreter went too far on the opposite side, as he made no account of giving to his version the strong signatures which the original bears of the antiquity, the manners, and the character, of the age and nation of the writers. Yet both the credibility of the narrative, and the impression which the sentiments are adapted to make on the readers, are not a little affected by that circumstance.
[Page 490]
That those are in the worse extreme of the two, who would sacrifice perspicuity and propriety (in other words, the sense itself) to that circumstance, is not indeed to be doubted. The patrons of the literal method do not advert that, by carrying the point too far, the very exhibition of the style and manner of the author, is, with both the other ends of translating, totally annihilated. “Quo pertinent,” says Houbigant 54 , “istiusmodi interpretationes, quæ nihil quidquam resonant, nisi adhibes interpretis alterum interpretem?” Again, “Num proprietas hæc censenda est, quaæ mihi exprimat obscure ac inhumane, id quod sacri scriptores, dilucide ac liberaliter expresserunt?” The sentiments of this author, in regard to the proper mean between both extremes, as they seem entirely reasonable, and equally applicable to any language (though expressed in reference to Latin versions only), I shall subjoin to the foregoing observations on Castalio: “Utroque in genere tam metrico quam soluto, retinendas esse veteres loquendi formas, nec abista linea unquam discedendum, nisi gravibus de causis, quæ quidem nobis esse tres videntur: primo, si Hebraismi veteres, cum retinentur, fiunt Latino in sermone, vel obscuri vel ambigui; secundo, si eorum significantia minuitur, nisi circuitione quadam uteris; tertio, si vergant ad aliam, quam Hebraica verba, sententiam 55 .”
§ 15. I shall finish my critique on this translator, with some remarks on a charge brought against him by Beausobre and Lenfant, who affirm 56 that, abstracting from the false elegance of his style, he takes greater liberty (they must certainly mean with the sense) than a faithful interpreter ought to take. Of this his version of the following passage 57 is given as an example. Του ΕριστρΕψαι αρο σκοτους ;
[Page 491]
Εις φως, και της Εξουσιας του Σατανα Ερι τον ΘΕον, του λαβΕιν αυτους αφΕσιν ἁμαρτιων, και κληρον Εν τοις ἡγιασμΕνοις, ριστΕι τη Εις ΕμΕ ; which is thus rendered by Castalio: “Ut ex tenebris in lucem, et ex Satanæ potestate ad Deum se convertant, et ita peccatorum veniam, et eandem cum iis sortem consequantur, qui side mihi habenda sancti facti fuerint:” and by Beza, whom they here oppose to him: “Et convertas eos a tenebris ad lucem, et a potestate Satanæ ad Deum, ut remissionem peccatorum et fortem inter sanctificatos accipiant per fidem quæ est in me.” In my opinion there is a real ambiguity in the original, which if Castalio be blameable for fixing, in one way, Beza is not less blameable for fixing it, in another. The words ριστΕι τη Εις ΕμΕ, may be construed with the verb λαβΕιν at some distance, or with the participle ἡγιασμΕνοις immediately preceding. In the common way of reckoning, if one of these methods were to be styled a stretch, or a liberty, it would be Beza's, and not Castalio's, both because the latter keeps closer to the arrangement of the original, and because the Apostle, not having used the adjective ἁγιοις, but the participle ἡγιασμΕνοις gives some ground to regard the following words as its regimen. Accordingly, Beza has considered the version of Erasmus, which is to the same purpose with Castalio's, and with which the Tigurine version also agrees; “ut accipiant remissionem peccatorum, et sortem inter eos qui sanctisicati sunt, per fidem quæ est erga me;” as exhibiting a sense quite different from his own; at the same time, he freely acknowledges, that the original is susceptible of either meaning. “ Τη ριστΕι. Potest quidem hoc referri ad participium ἡγιασμΕνοις, quemadmodum retulit Erasmus.” In this instance Beza, though not remarkable for moderation, has judged more equitably than the French translators above mentioned, who had no reason to affirm, dogmatically, that the words ought to be joined in the one way, and not in the other; or to conclude, that Castalio affected to give the words this turn,
[Page 492]
in order to exclude the idea of absolute election . Did the English translators, for this purpose, render the passage after Erasmus and Castalio, not after Beza, That they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me ? Nobody, I dare say, will suspect it.
I cannot help thinking those critics unlucky in their choice of an example: for had there been more to say, in opposition to this version of the passage, than has yet been urged, it would still have been hard to treat that as a liberty peculiar to Castalio, in which he was evidently not the first, and in which he has had the concurrence of more translators than can be produced on the other side. For my part, as I acknowledge that such transpositions are not unfrequent in holy writ, my opinion is, that the connection and scope of the place ought chiefly to determine us in doubtful cases. In the present case, it appears to me to yield the clearest sense, and to be every way the most eligible, to join the words ριστΕι τη Εις ΕμΕ, neither to ἡγιασμΕνοις, nor to λαβΕιν, but to the foregoing verb ΕριστρΕψαι; for when the regimen is thrown to the end of the sentence, it is better to join it to the first verb, with which it can be suitably construed, than to an intermediate verb, explicative of the former. Nothing can give a more plain, or a more apposite, meaning than the words under examination, thus construed; To bring them by the faith that is in me (that is, by my doctrine, the faith, ἡ ριστις being often used by the sacred writers for the object of faith, or thing believed), from darkness to light , &c.
§ 16. Thus , I have endeavoured to examine, with impartiality, Castalio's character as a translator, without assuming the province of either the accuser or the apologist. I have neither exaggerated, nor extenuated, either his faults or his virtues, and can pronounce truly, upon the whole, that though there are none (Arias and Pagnin excepted),
[Page 493]
whose general manner of translating is more to be disapproved; I know not any by which a student may be more assisted in attaining the true sense of many places, very obscure in most translations, than by Castalio's.
PART V. Strictures on Beza. Beza , the celebrated Geneva translator of the New Testament, cannot be accused of having gone to either of the extremes in which we find Arias and Castalio. In general, he is neither servilely literal, barbarous, and unintelligible, with the former; nor does he appear ashamed of the unadorned simplicity of the original, with the latter. It was, therefore, at first, my intention not to criticise his version, no more than to inquire into the manner of all the Latin translators of sacred writ, but barely to point out the most egregious faults in the plan of translating sometimes adopted, specifying, in the way of example and illustration, those versions only, wherein such faults were most conspicuous. On more mature reflection, I have judged it proper to bestow a few thoughts on Beza, as his translation has, in a great measure, been made the standard of most of the translations of the reformed churches (I do not include the Lutheran) into modern tongues. He has, perhaps, had less influence on the English translators, than on those of other countries; but he has not been entirely without influence, even on them. And though he writes with a good deal of purity and clearness,
[Page 494]
without florid and ostentatious ornaments; there are some faults, which it is of great moment to avoid, and with which he is, upon the whole, more chargeable, than any other translator of the New Testament I know.
§ 2. His version of the New Testament is nearly in the same taste with that of the Old, by Junius and Tremellius, but better executed. These two translations are commonly bound together, to complete the version of holy writ. Junius and Tremellius have been accused of obtruding upon the sacred text, a number of pronouns, ille, hic , and iste , for which the original gives no warrant. Their excuse was, that the Latin has not articles, as the Hebrew, and that there is no other way of supplying the articles, but by pronouns. But it may with reason be questioned, whether it were not better, except in a few cases, to leave them unsupplied, than to substitute what may darken the expression, and even render it more indefinite, nay, what may sometimes alter the sense. At the same time, I acknowledge that there are cases in which this method is entirely proper. In the addition of an emphatic epithet, the article is fitly supplied by the pronoun. Thus the words, ΕρΕσΕ Βαβυλων ἡ ρολις ἡ μΕγαλη 58 , are justly translated by Beza, Cecidit Babylon urbs illa magna : and the expression used by Nathan to David, Thou art the man 59 , is properly rendered by Junius, Tu vir ille es . The necessity of recurring to the pronoun, in these instances, has been perceived also by the old translator and Castalio.
Nor are these the only cases wherein the Greek or Hebrew article may, not only in Latin, but even in English, which has articles, be rendered properly by the pronoun. For example, a particular species is distinguished from others of the same genus, by some attributive conjoined with it; but when the occasion of mentioning that species
[Page 495]
soon recurs, the attributive is sufficiently supplied by the article; and, in such instances, it often happens, that the article is best supplied, in another language, by the pronoun. In the question put to our Lord, Τι αγαθον ροιησω, ἱνα Εχω ζωην αιωνιον , 60 , a species of life to which the question relates, is distinguished from all others, by the epithet αιωνιον . The article would contribute nothing here to the distinction. But when, in the answer 61 , the same subject is referred to, the epithet is dropped, and the article is prefixed to ζωην , which ascertains the meaning with equal perspicuity. Ει δΕ θΕλΕις ΕισΕλθΕιν Εις την ζωην . I have seen no Latin translation, no not Beza's, which renders it, Si vis in vitam illam ingredi ; and yet it is evident, that such is, in this passage, the force of the article. The English idiom rarely permits us to give articles to abstract nouns. For this reason, it would not be a just expression of the sense to say, If thou wouldst enter into the life , to wit, eternal life , the life enquired about. Our only way of marking the reference to the question, is by saying, If thou wouldst enter into that life . As, in French, the article is, on the contrary, added to all abstract nouns, the pronoun is equally necessary with them as with us, for making the distinction. There is, besides, something like an impropriety in saying to the living, If thou wouldst enter into life.
But there are, unquestionably, cases in which the Genevese interpreters employ the pronoun unnecessarily, awkwardly, and even improperly. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book 62 , say the English translators. Audient die illa surdi isti verba literarum , say Junius and his associate. Any person who understands Latin, on hearing the verse read by itself, will suppose that there must have been mention of some deaf persons in the foregoing verses, to which the pronoun isti , in this verse, has a reference. But, on inquiry, he will find there is no such thing; and that it is deaf persons in general
[Page 496]
of whom the Prophet speaks. The introduction of the pronoun, therefore, serves only to mislead. Matthœus ille publicanus 63 , in Beza's version, evidently suggests, that Matthew was a man famous as a publican, before he became an Apostle. In some places, it not only appears awkward, but injures the simplicity of the style. Junius says, in his account of the creation, Dixit Deus, Esto lux, et fuit lux; viditque Deus lucem hanc esse bonam: et distinctionem fecit Deus inter hanc lucem et tenebras 64 . Here, I think, the pronoun is not only unnecessary and affected, but suggests something ridiculous, as if that light only had been distinguished from darkness. However, as lux is first mentioned, without an attendant, the pronoun which attends it, when mentioned afterwards, does not make the expression so indefinite and obscure as in the former example. But, when Beza makes the Evangelist say 65 , Jonas genuit Jechoniam in transportatione illâ Babylonicâ; post autem transportationem illam Babylonicam, Jechonias genuit Salathielem ; what more is expressed, in relation to the period, than if he had said simply, in transportatione Babylonica, et post transportationem Babylonicam ? The addition of this epithet makes the noun sufficiently definite, without any pronoun. Nay, does not the pronoun, thus superadded, suggest one of two things; either that the transportation, here referred to, had been mentioned in the preceding words, or that the historian meant to distinguish, out of several transportations, one more noted than the rest? Now, neither of these was the case: no mention had been made before of the Babylonian transportation; and there were not more Babylonian transportations, or more transportations any whither, than one which the Jewish nation had undergone. With this fault Erasmus also is chargeable, but much seldomer. Greek, as well as Hebrew, has an article, and so have modern languages. But, in translating out of these into Latin, nobody, I believe, has
[Page 497]
ever, either before or since, thought of making the pronoun supply the article, except in a few special instances, such as those above excepted. In such instances, I acknowledge, there is an evident propriety.
§ 3. Beza , with natural talents considerably above the middle rate, had a good deal of learning, and understood well both Greek and Latin; but he neither knew Hebrew (though he had the assistance of some who knew it), nor does he seem to have been much conversant in the translation of the Seventy. Hence it has happened, that his critical acuteness is not always so well directed as it might have been. The significations of words and idioms are often determined by him from classical authority, which might, with greater ease and more precision, have been ascertained by the usage of the sacred writers, and their ancient interpreters. As to words which do not occur in other Greek writers, or but rarely, or in a sense manifestly different from what they bear in Scripture, Beza's chief aid was etymology. This has occasioned his frequent recourse, without necessity, to circumlocution, to the prejudice always of the diction, and sometimes of the sense. Examples of this we have in his manner of rendering σρλαγχνιζομαι 66 , κληρονομΕω 67 , ρληροφορΕω 68 , συκοφαντΕω 69 , χΕιροτονΕω 70 , and several others. On the last of these, I shall soon have occasion to make some remarks. For the other four, I shall only refer to my notes on those passages in the Gospels, where they occur as marked in the margin. It is, no doubt, to this attempt at tracing the origin of the words in his version, that he alludes in that expression, Verborum proprietatem studiose sum sectatus 71 . This, however, has been shown not to be always the surest method of attaining the signification wanted. 72 .
[Page 498]
§ 4 But of all the faults with which Beza is chargeable as a translator, the greatest is, undoubtedly, that he was too violent a party-man to possess that impartiality, without which it is impossible to succeed as an interpreter of holy writ. It requires but a very little of a critical eye to discern in him a constant effort to accommodate the style of the sacred writers to that of his fect. Nay, what he has done in this way, is done so openly, I might have said avowedly, that it is astonishing it has not more discredited his work.
In this particular, as in the application of the pronouns above mentioned, Junius and Tremellius have also justly fallen under the animadversion of all impartial judges. What is thus well expressed in the English translation, They gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading 73 , is rendered, by these interpreters, Exponendo sensum dabant intelligentiam PER SCRIPTURAM IPSAM . The three last words are an evident interpolation. There is no ellipsis in the sentence: they are noway necessary; for the sense is complete without them. But with them it is most unwarrantably limited to express the private opinion of the translators. I am as zealously attached as any man, to the doctrine that Scripture will ever be found its own best interpreter; an opinion which I have considered in a former Dissertation 74 , and which is sufficiently supported by the principles of found criticism and common sense. But no person can detest more strongly a method of defending even a true opinion, so unjustifiable as that of foisting it into the sacred Scriptures. If any thing can serve to render a just sentiment questionable, it is the detection of such gross unfairness, in the expedients employed for promoting it. Yet this ha been copied into the Geneva French version, after it had received the corrections of Bertram, by whom it has been made to say, Ils en donnoient l'intelligence, la faisant entendre
[Page 499]
par l'ecriture même . It is but just to observe, that neither Olivetan the translator, nor Calvin, who afterwards revised his work, had discovered any warrant for the last clause in the original, or had admitted it into the version.
The insertion of this comment has here this additional bad consequence, that it misleads the reader in regard to the exposition meant by the sacred penman. Who would not conclude, from the version of Junius, that Ezra, or some of the Levites who attended, after reading a portion of Scripture, pronounced an explanatory discourse (such as in some Christian societies is called a lecture) on that passage. Whereas the whole import appears to be that, as the people, after the captivity, did not perfectly understand the ancient Hebrew, in which the law was written, this judicious teacher found it expedient, by himself or others, to interpret what was read, one paragraph after another, into that dialect of Chaldee which was current among them; a practice long after continued in the synagogue, and not improbably, as learned men have thought, that which gave rise to the targums or paraphrases in that tongue extant to this day.
I do not remember a passage wherein Beza has gone quite so far, as Junius and Tremellius have presumed to do in this instance; but that he has shown throughout the whole work, a manifest partiality to the theology then prevalent in Geneva, is beyond a doubt. I shall select a few examples out of a much greater number, which might be brought.
§ 5. The first shall be from that celebrated discourse of our Lord's, commonly called his sermon on the mount, wherein these words, ηκουσατΕ ὁτι ΕρρΕθη τοις αρχαιοις 75 , are always rendered, Audistis dictum fuisse a veteribus ; in contradiction to all the versions which had preceded,
[Page 500]
Oriental and Occidental, and in opposition to the uniform idiom of the sacred writers. [See the note on the passage in this version.] Beza does not hesitate in his annotations to assign his reason, which is drawn not from any principle of criticism, not from a different reading in any ancient manuscripts, of which he had several, but professedly from the fitness of this version for supporting his own doctrine. “Præstat τοις αρχαιοις explicare quasi scriptum sit ὑρο των αρχαιων ( ut sic notentur synagogœ doctores , jampridem sic docentes, qui solebant patrum et majorum nomina suis falsis interpretationibus prœtexere) quam ad auditores referre.” But this correction of the ancient version was every way unsuitable, and the expedient weak. It was essential to the Pharisaical notion of traditions, to consider them as precepts which God himself had given to their fathers verbally, and which were therefore called the oral law, in contradistinction to the written law, or the Scriptures. Consequently Beza's representation of their presumption is far short of the truth. He ought to have said, Qui solebant (not patrum et majorum nomina , but) Dei nomen (for the fact is indubitable) suis falsis interpretationibus pratexere . And let it be observed, that our Lord does not here give any sanction to their distinction of the law into oral and written . He does not once say, It was said to the ancients , but uniformly, Ye have heard that it was said . He speaks not of what God did, but of what they pretended that he did.
His words, therefore, and the doctrine of the Pharisees, are alike misrepresented by this bold interpreter; and that for the sake of an advantage merely imaginary against an adverse sect. The one interpretation is not more favourable to the Socinians than the other. But if it had been otherwise, no person will consider that as a good reason for misrepresenting, unless he is more solicitous of accommodating Scripture to his sentiments, than of accommodating his sentiments to Scripture. The former has indeed been but too common
[Page 501]
with interpreters, though with few so much, and so barefacedly, as with Beza. I am sorry to add that, in the instance we have been considering, Beza has been followed by most of the Protestant translators of his day, Italian, French, and English.
§ 6. The following is another example of the strong inclination which this translator had, even in the smallest matters, to make his version conformable to his own prepossessions. He renders these words, συν γυναιξι 76 , though, without either article or pronoun, cum uxoribus , as though the expression had been συν ταις γυναιξιν αυτων . In this manner he excuses himself in the notes: “Conveniebat apostolorum etiam uxores confirmari, quas vel peregrinationis illorum comites esse opportebat, vel eorum absentiam domi patienter expectare.” Very well: and because Theodore Beza judges it to have been convenient that the Apostles wives, for their own confirmation, should be there, he takes the liberty to make the sacred historian say that they were there, when, in fact, he does not so much as insinuate that there were any wives among them. The use of the Greek word γυνη is entirely similar to that of the French word femme . Nobody that understands French would translate avec les femmes with the wives, but with the women, whereas the proper translation of avec leurs femmes is, with their wives.
It is impossible for one who knows the state of things at the time when that version was made, not to perceive the design of this mis-interpretation. The Protestant ministers, amongst whom marriage was common, were exposed to much obloquy among the Romanists, through the absurd prejudices of the latter, in favour of celibacy. It was, therefore, deemed of great consequence to the party, to represent the Apostles as married men. But could one imagine that this consideration would have weight enough to lead a man of Beza's
[Page 502]
abilities and character, into such a flagrant, though not very material, mis-translation? A translator ought surely to express the full meaning of his author, as far as the language which he writes is capable of expressing it. But here there is an evident restriction of his author's meaning.
The remark of the canon of Ely is unanswerable: “Qui mulieres dicit, uxores etiam sub eadem appellatione comprehendere potest. At qui uxores nominat, solas illas nominat.—Igitur quo generalior eo tutior erit, et Græcis convenientior interpretatio.” Besides, there may have been, for aught we know, no wives in the company, in which case Beza's words include a direct falsehood. And this falsehood he boldly puts into the mouth of the sacred penman. We know that Peter had once a wife, as we learn from the Gospel, that his wife's mother was cured by Jesus of a fever 77 . But whether she was living at the time referred to in the Acts, or whether any more of the Apostles were married, or whether their wives were disciples, we know not. Now this falsification, though in a little matter, is strongly characteristical of that interpreter. I am glad to add, that in this he has been deserted by all the Protestant translators I know.
A similar instance the very next chapter presents us with 78 . The words, ουκ ΕγκαταλΕιψΕις την ψυχην μου Εις ἁδου , he translates, Non derelinques cadaver meum in sepulcro , not only rendering ἁδης sepulcrum , according to an opinion which, though shown above 79 , to be ill-founded, is pretty common; but ψυχη cadaver , carcase, wherein, I believe, he is singular. His motive is still of the same kind. The common version, though unexceptionable, might be thought to support the Popish limbo. “Quod autem annotavi ex vetere versione animam meam natum esse errorem, ac propterea me maluisse aliud nomen usurpare, non temerè feci, cùm hunc præcipue locum a
[Page 503]
Papistis torqueri ad suum limbum constituendum videamus, et veteres etiam inde descensum illum animæ Christi ad inferos excogitarint 80 .”
This specimen from Beza, it may be thought, should have been overlooked, because, though inserted in the first, it was corrected in the subsequent, editions of his version. This, I confess, was my own opinion, till I observed, that in the annotations of those very editions, he vindicates his first translation of the words, and acknowledges that he had altered it, not from the conviction of an error, but to gratify those who, without reason, were, through ignorance of the Latin idiom, dissatisfied with the manner in which he had first rendered it. “In priore nostrâ editione,” says he 81 , “recte interpretatus eram, NON DERELINQUES CADAVER, &c. quod tamen nunc mutavi, ut iis obsequar, qui conquesti sunt me a Græcis verbis discessisse, et nomine cadaveris (inscitia certè potius Latini sermonis quam recto ullo judicio) offenduntur.”
To Beza's reason for rejecting the common version, Castalio retorts, very justly, that if the possibility of wresting a passage in support of error, were held a good reason for translating it otherwise, Beza's own version of the passage in question, would be more exceptionable than what he had pretended to correct. “Deinde non minus ex ejus translatione possit error nasci, et quidem longe perniciosior. Cum enim animam Christi vertat in cadaver, periculum est ne quis animam Christi putet nihil fuisse nisi cadaver 82 .” And even this opinion, which denies that Jesus Christ had a human soul, has not been unexampled. It was maintained by Beryllus, bishop of Bostra in Arabia, in the third century. But, on this strange principle of Beza's, where is the version of any part of Scripture in which we could safely acquiesce?
[Page 504]
§ 7. A third example of the same undue bias (for I reckon not the last, because corrected, whatever was the motive) we have in his version of these words, ΞΕιροτονησαντΕς δΕ αυτοις ρρΕσβυτΕρους 83 , which he renders Quumque ipsi per suffragia creassent presbyteros . The word χΕιροτονησαντΕς , he translates from etymology, a manner which, as was observed before, he sometimes uses. χΕιροτονΕιν literally signifies, to stretch out the hand . From the use of this manner, in popular elections, it came to denote to elect , and thence, again, to nominate , or appoint any how. Now Beza, that his intention might not escape us, tells us in the note, “Est notanda vis hujus verbi, ut “Paulum ac Barnabam sciamus nil privato arbitrio gessisse, nec ullam in ecclesia exercuisse tyrannidem: nil denique tale fecisse quale hodie Romanus papa et ipsius affeclæ, quos ordinarios vocant.” Now, though no man is more an enemy to ecclesiastic tyranny than I am, I would not employ against it weapons borrowed from falsehood and sophistry. I cannot help, therefore, declaring, that the version which the Vulgate has given of that passage, Et quum constituissent illis presbyteros , fully expresses the sense of the Greek, and consequently that the words per suffragia , are a mere interpolation, for the sake of answering a particular purpose. It was observed before 84 , that use, where it can be discovered, must determine the signification in preference to etymology. And here we are at no loss to affirm that χΕιροτονΕω , whatever were its origin, is not confined to electing or constituting by a plurality of voices.
But whatever be in this, in the instance before us, the χΕιροτονησοντΕς , or electors, were no more than Paul and Barnabas; and it could not, with any propriety, be said of two, that they elected by a majority of votes; since there can be no doubt that they must have both agreed in the appointment: and if it had been the disciples, and not the two Apostles, who had given their suffrages, it would
[Page 505]
have been of the disciples, and of them only, not of the Apostles, that the term χΕιροτοηνσαντΕς could have been used, which the construction of the sentence manifestly shows that here it is not. The sense of the word here given by Beza, is therefore totally unexampled; for, according to him, it must signify not to elect , but to constitute those whom others have elected . For if this be not what he means by per suffragia creassent , applied to no more than two, it will not be easy to divine his meaning, or to discover in what manner it answered the purpose expressed in his note. And if this be what he means, he has given a sense to the word, for which I have not seen an authority from any author, sacred or profane. The common import of the word is no more than to constitute, ordain, or appoint any how, by election, or otherwise, by one, two, or more. When it is by election, it is solely from the scope of the passage that we must collect it. In the only other place 85 where it occurs in the New Testament, it no doubt relates to a proper election. But it is from the words immediately connected, χΕιροτονηθΕις ὑρο των Εκκλησιων , we learn that this is the sense there; as it is from the words immediately connected that we learn, with equal certainty, that it relates here to an appointment made by two persons only.
The word occurs once in composition with the preposition ρρο. Αλλα μαρτυσι τοις ρροκΕχΕιροτονημΕνοις ὑρο του ΘΕου 86 , rendered by Beza himself, sed testibus quos ipse prius designaverat . Here there can be no question that it refers to a destination, of which God alone is the author, and in which, therefore, there could be no suffrages. For even Beza will not be hardy enough to pretend, that such is the force of this verb, as to show, that God did nothing but by common consent, and only destined those whom others had elected.
[Page 506]
That the word χΕιροτονΕω was commonly used in all the latitude here assigned to it, Dr. Hammond has, from Philo, Josephus, and Pagan writers of undoubted authority, given the amplest evidence in his Commentary.
But, so great was the authority of Beza with the Protestant translators, who favoured the model of Geneva, that his exposition of this passage, however singular, was generally adopted. Diodati says, still more explicitly, E dopo ch' ebbero loro ordinati PER VOTI COMMUNI , degli antiani . The French, Et apres que PAR L'AVIS DES ASSEMBLEES , ils eurent etabli des anciens . The English Geneva Bible, And when they had ordained them elders BY ELECTION . The words in these versions, distinguished by the character, are those which, after Beza's example, are interpolated. In the English translation, these words are discarded. Our translators did not concur in sentiments with the Genevese, at least in this article.
§ 8. Again , that he might avoid every expression which appeared to favour the doctrine of universal redemption, the words of the Apostle, concerning God, ‘ Ὁς ραντας ανθρωρους θΕλΕι σωθηναι 87 , literally rendered in the Vulgate, Qui omnes homines vult salvos fieri , he translates, Qui quosvis homines vult servari 88 . A little after, in the same Epistle, Ὁς Εστι σωτηρ ραντων ανθρωρων, μαλιστα ριστων 89 , in the
[Page 507]
Vulgate, Qui est salvator omnium hominum, maxime fidelium ; Beza renders, Qui est conservator omnium hominum, maxime vero fidelium . Let it be observed, that this is the only place, in his version, where σωτηρ is rendered conservator , preserver: in every other passage but one, where he uses a periphrasis, the word is servator , answering to salvator , in the Vulgate, saviour . If it had not been for the annexed clause, μαλιστα ριστων , Beza, I suppose, would have retained the word servator , and had recourse to the expedient he had used so lately for eluding the difficulty, by saying, Servator quorumvis hominum . But he perceived, that ραντων ανθρωρων must be here taken in the most comprehensive sense, being contradistinguished to ριστων . I do not mean, by these remarks, to affirm, whether or not the word conservator be equivalent to the import of the original term, as used in this place. It is enough for my purpose that, as this difference of meaning does not necessarily result, either from the words in immediate connection, or from the purport of the Epistle, no person is entitled to alter the expression, in order to accommodate it to his own opinions.
An exact counterpart to this is the manner in which an anonymous English translator has rendered these words of our Lord, Το ρΕρι ρολλων ΕκχυνομΕνον Εις αφΕσιν ἁμαρτιων 90 , which is shed for mankind, for the remission of sins ; defending himself in a note, by observing, that “ ρολλοι is frequently used for ALL .” Admit it were. The common acceptation of the word is doubtless many , and not all . And if no good reason for departing from the common meaning can be alleged, either from the words in construction, or from the scope of the passage, it ought to remain unchanged: otherwise, all dependence on translations, except for the theological system of the translator, is destroyed. Of the conduct of both translators, in these instances, though acting in support of opposite opinions, the
[Page 508]
error is the same. And the plea which vindicates this writer, will equally vindicate Beza, and the plea which vindicates Beza, will equally vindicate this writer. The analogy of the faith, that is, the conformity to his particular system, is the genuine plea of each.
The safest and the fairest way for a translator is, in every disputable point, to make no distinction, where the divine Spirit has not distinguished. To apply to this the words used by Boys, in a similar case, “Cur enim cautiores simus, magisque religiosi quam Spiritus Sanctus? Si Spiritus Sanctus non dubitavit dicere ραντας et σωτηρ , cur nos vereamur dicere omnes et servator ?” In the same manner would I expostulate with certain divines amongst ourselves, who, I have observed, in quoting the preceding passages of Scripture, never say, would have all men to be saved , and, the Saviour of all men , but invariably, all sorts of men ; charitably intending, by this prudent correction, to secure the unwary from being seduced by the latitudinarian expressions of the Apostle. If this be not being wise above what is written , I know not what is. In the first of the two passages quoted, I know no translator who has chosen to imitate Beza; in the second, he is followed by the Geneva French only, who says, Le conservateur de tous hommes . But it is proper to add, that it was not so in that version, till it had undergone a second or third revisal: for the corrections have not been all for the better.
§ 9. Further , the words χαρακτηρ της ὑροστασΕως αυτου 91 , rendered, in the Vulgate, figura substantiœ ejus , he has translated, character personœ illius . My only objection here is, to his rendering ὑροστασις persona . However much this may suit the scholastic style, which began to be introduced into theology in the fourth century,
[Page 509]
it by no means suits the idiom of a period so early as that in which the books of the New Testament were written. It is of real consequence to scriptural criticism, not to confound the language of the sacred penmen with that of the writers of the fourth, or any subsequent, century. The change in style was gradual, but in process of time became very considerable. There was scarcely a new controversy started, which did not prove the source of new terms and phrases, as well as of new or unusual applications of the old. The word ὑροστασις occurs four times in the New Testament, but in no other place is it rendered person . It occurs often in the Septuagint, but it is never the version of a Hebrew word which can be rendered person . Jerom, though he lived when the Sabellian and Arian controversies were fresh in the minds of men, did not discover any reason to induce him to change the word substantia , which he found in the former version, called the Italic. I take notice of this, principally (for I acknowledge that the expression is obscure, either way rendered) on account of the manner wherein Beza defends his version. “Quominus substantiam interpretarer, eo sum adductus, quod videam plerosque ὑροστασιν hoc loco pro ουσια esse interpretatos, perinde ac si inter essentiam et substantiam nihil interesset—Deinde hoc etiam commodi habet ista interpretatio quod hypostases adversus Sabellium aperte distinguit et ὁμοουσιον confirmat adversus Arianos.” Here we have a man who, in effect, acknowledges that he would not have translated some things in the way he has done, if it were not that he could thereby strike a severer blow against some adverse sect, or ward off a blow, which an adversary might aim against him. Of these great objects he never loses sight. Accordingly, the controvertist predominates throughout his whole version, as well as commentary; the translator is, in him, but a subordinate character; insomuch that he may justly be called what Jerom calls Aquila, contentiosus interpres.
[Page 510]
I own, indeed, that my ideas on this subject are so much the reverse of Beza's, that I think a translator is bound to abstract from, and, as far as possible, forget, all sects and systems, together with all the polemic jargon which they have been the occasion of introducing. His aim ought to be invariably to give the untainted sentiments of the author, and to express himself in such a manner as men would do, or (which is the same thing) as those men actually did, amongst whom such disputes had never been agitated. In this last example, Beza is followed by the French and the English translators, but not by the Italian.
§ 10. Again , in the same Epistle it is said, Ὁ δΕ δικαιος Εκ ριστΕως ζησΕται· και Εαν ὑροστΕιληται, ουκ ΕυδοκΕι ἡ ψυχη μου Εν αυτω 92 . In the Vulgate, rightly, Justus autem meus ex fide vivet: quod si subtraxerit se, non placebit animœ meœ . In Beza's version, Justus autem ex fide vivet; at si QUIS se subduxerit, non est gratum animo meo . Here we have two errors. First, the word quis is, to the manifest injury of the meaning, foisted into the text. Yet there can be no pretence of necessity, as there is no ellypsis in the sentence. By the syntactic order, ὁ δικαιος is understood as the nominative to ὑροστΕιληται ; the power of the personal pronoun being, in Greek and Latin, sufficiently expressed by the inflexion of the verb. Secondly, the consequent displeasure of God is transferred from the person to the action; non est gratum ; as though Εν αυτω could be explained otherwise than as referring to δικαιος . This perversion of the sense is, in my judgment, so gross, as fully to vindicate from undue severity, the censure pronounced by bishop Pearson 93 . Illa verba a Theodoro Beza haud bonâ fide sunt translata . But this is one of the many passages in which this interpreter has judged that the sacred penmen,
[Page 511]
having expressed themselves incautiously, and given a handle to the patrons of erroneous tenets, stood in need of him more as a corrector than as a translator. In this manner Beza supports the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints, having been followed, in the first of these errors, by the French and English translators, but not in the second; and not by the Italian translator in either, though as much a Calvinist as any of them. In the old English Bibles, the expression was, If he withdraw himself.
§ 11. IN order to evade, as much as possible, the appearance of regard, in the dispensation of grace, to the disposition of the receiver, the words of the Apostle, Τον ρροτΕρον οντα βλασφημον και διωκτην, και ὑβριστην· αλλ' ηλΕηθην, ὁτι αγνοων Εροιησα Εν αριστια 94 , he renders, Qui prius eram blasphemus et persecutor, et injuriis alios afficiens: sed misericordia sum donatus. Nam ignorans id faciebam: nempe fidei expers . Here I observe, first, that he divides the sentence into two, making a full stop at ηλΕηθην , and thus disjoins a clause which, in Greek, is intimately connected, and had always been so understood, as appears from all the ancient versions and commentaries: and, secondly, that he introduces this sentence with nam , as if, in Greek, it had been γαρ , instead of quia , the proper version of ὁτι . Both are causal conjunctions; but as the former is generally employed in uniting different sentences, and the latter in uniting the different members of the same sentence, the union occasioned by the former is looser and more indefinite than that produced by the latter. The one expresses a connection with the general scope of what was said, the other with the particular clause immediately preceding. This second sentence, as Beza exhibits it, may be explained as an extenuation suggested by the Apostle, after confessing so black a crime. As if he had said:
[Page 512]
“For I would not have acted thus, but I knew not what I was doing, as I was then an unbeliever.” It is evident that the words of the original are not susceptible of this interpretation. Beza has not been followed in this, either by Diodati, or by the English translators. The Geneva French, and the Geneva English, have both imitated his manner.
§ 12. I shall produce but one other instance. The words of the beloved disciple, Ρας ὁ γΕγΕννημΕνος Εκ του ΘΕου, ἁμαρτιαν ου ροιΕι 95 ; rendered in the Vulgate, Omnis qui natus est ex Deo, peccatum non facit , Beza translates, Quisquis natus est ex Deo, peccato non dat operam ; by this last phrase, endeavouring to elude the support which the original appears to give to the doctrine of the sinless perfection of the saints in the present life. That this was his view, is evident from what he had urged in defence of the phrase, in his annotations on the fourth verse, to which he has subjoined these words: “Itaque non homines sed monstra hominum (such was his polemic style) sunt Pelagiani, Cathari, Cœlestiani, Donatistæ, Anabaptistæ, Libertini, qui ex hoc loco perfectionem illam somniant, a qua absunt ipsi omnium hominum longissime.” His only argument, worthy of notice, is the seeming inconsistency of this verse, with what the Apostle had advanced a little before, Εαν ΕιρωμΕν ὁτι ἁμαρτιαν ουκ ΕχομΕν, ἑαυτους ρλανωμΕν 96 , If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves . But he has not considered, that if one of those human monsters (as he meekly calls them) should render this verse, If we say that we have never sinned (which is not a greater stretch than he has made in rendering the other), the reconciliation of the two passages is equally well effected as by his method. But as, in fact, neither of these expedients can be vindicated, the only fair way is, to exhibit both verses in as general terms as the inspired
[Page 513]
penman has left them in; and thus to put, as nearly as possible, the readers of the translation on the same footing on which the sacred writers have put the readers of the original.
There is still another reason which seems to have influenced Beza in rendering ἁμαρτιαν ροιΕι peccato dat operam , which is kindly to favour sinners, not exorbitantly profligate, so far as to dispel all fear about their admission into the kingdom of heaven. This construction may be thought uncharitable. I own I should have thought so myself, if he had not explicitly shown his principles, on this subject, in other places. That expression, in the sermon on the mount, ΑροχωρΕιτΕ αρ' Εμου ὁι ΕργαζομΕνοι την ανομιαν 97 , he renders, Abscedite a me qui operam datis iniquitati . And though he is singular in using this phrase, I should not, even from it, have concluded so harshly of his motive, if his explanation in the note had not put it beyond doubt. ‘ Ὁι ΕργαζομΕνοι την ανομιαν , “id[illeg.]est, OMNIBUS sceleribus et flagitiis addicti homines—qui velut artem peccandi exercent, sicut Latini medicinam, argentariam facere dicunt.” Thus, if he wound the sense in the version, he kills it outright in the commentary. In another edition, wherein he renders the text simply facitis iniquitatem , he says, still more expressly, “Dicuntur ergo facere iniquitatem , et a Christo rejiciuntur hoc in loco, non qui uno et altero scelere sunt contaminati, sed qui hanc velut artem faciunt, ut sceleste agendo vitam tolerent, et Dei nomine abutantur ad quæstum, quo cupiditatibus suis satisfaciant.” Castalio, after quoting these words, says 98 , very justly, and even moderately, “Hæc sunt ejus [Bezæ] verba, quibus mihi videtur (si modo de habitu loquitur, sicut antithesis ostendere videtur) nimis latam salutis viam facere: quasi Christus non rejiciat sceleratos, sed duntaxat sceleratissimos. Enimvero longè aliter loquuntur sacræ literæ.”
[Page 514]
Not only Scripture in general, he might have said, but that discourse in particular, on which Beza was then commenting, speaks a very different language: Except your righteousness , says Jesus 99 , shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven . It would have better suited Beza's system of Christian morality, to have said, Except your unrighteousness shall exceed the unrighteousness of publicans and harlots, ye shall in no case be excluded from the kingdom of heaven . But as our Lord's declaration was the reverse, it is worth while to observe in what manner this champion of Geneva eludes its force, and reconciles it to his own licentious maxims. Hear his note upon the place: “Justitiæ nomine intellige sinceram tum doctrinam tum vitam, cum verbo Dei videlicet, quod est justitiæ vera norma, congruentem. Sed, de doctrina potissimum hic agi liquet ex sequenti reprehensione falsarum legis interpretationum.” And on the last clause of the sentence, nequaquam ingressuros in regnum cœlorum , he says, “Id est, indignos fore qui in ecclesia doceatis. Nec enim de quorumvis piorum officio, sed de solis doctoribus agit: et nomine regni cœlorum, ut alibi sæpe, non triumphantem (ut vulgo loquuntur), sed adhuc militantem, et ministerio pastorum egentem ecclesiam intelligit.”
According to this learned commentator, then, your righteousness here means, chiefly or solely, your orthodoxy ; I say chiefly or solely : for, observe his artful climax, in speaking of teachers and teaching. When first he obtrudes the word doctrine , in explanation of the word righteousness , he puts it only on the level with a good life; it is “tum doctrinam tum vitam.” When mentioned the second time, a good life is dropt, because, as he affirms, “de doctrina potissimum hic agi liquet.” When the subject is again resumed, in explaining the latter part of the sentence, every thing
[Page 515]
which relates to life and practice is excluded from a share in what is said; for after this gradual preparation of his readers, they are plainly told, “de solis doctoribus hic agit.” Now, every body knows, that Beza meant, by orthodoxy, or found doctrine, an exact conformity to the Genevese standard. The import of our Lord's declaration, then, according to this bold expositor, amounts to no more than this, ‘If ye be not completely orthodox, ye shall ‘not be teachers in the church.’ In this way of expounding Scripture, what purposes may it not be made to serve? For my part, I have seen nothing, in any commentator or casuist, which bears a stronger resemblance to that mode of subverting, under pretence of explaining, the divine law, which was adopted by the Scribes, and so severely reprehended by our Lord. In the passage taken from John's Epistle, I do not find that Beza has had any imitators. In the version of the like phrase in the Gospel, he has been followed by the Geneva French, which says, Vous qui faites le mêtier d'iniquité.
§ 13. I Might collect many more passages, but I suppose that those which have been given, will sufficiently verify what has been advanced of this translator's partiality. Any one who critically examines his translation, will see how much he strains in every page, especially in Paul's Epistles, to find a place for the favourite terms and phrases of his party. A French projector, Monsieur Le Cene (whose project for a new translation was, in what regards one article, considered already), seems, though of a party in many things opposite to Beza's, to have entertained certain loose notions of translating, which in general coincide with his; but by reason of their different parties, would have produced, in the application, contrary effects. As a contrast to Beza's corrections of the unguarded style (as he certainly thought it) of the sacred penmen, I
[Page 516]
shall give a few of Le Cene's corrections, which he proposed, with the same pious purpose of securing the unlearned reader against seduction 100 . The words of the Apostle, rendered by Beza, Qui credit in eum qui justificat impium 101 , Le Cene thus translates into French: Qui croit en celui qui justifie CELUI QUI AVOIT ETE un impie . The expression rendered by Beza, Quem autem vult indurat 102 , Le Cene thinks ought to be corrected; and though he does not, in so many words, say how; it is plain, from the tenor of his remark, that he would have it permittit ut seipsum induret . He adds, “It behoveth also to reform (I use his own style, Il faudroit aussi reformer ) what the Vulgate and Genevese versions (he might have added, Moses and Paul) represent God as saying to Pharaoh, “ In hoc ipsum excitavi te, ut ostendam in te virtutem meam 103 ;” but does not mention the reformation necessary.
I cannot help observing here, by the way, that though Castalio was, in regard to the subject of the chapter from which some of the foregoing quotations are taken, of sentiments, as appears from his notes, opposite to Beza's, and coincident with Le Cene's, he has translated the whole with the utmost fairness. Nor has he employed any of those glossing arts recommended by Le Cene, and so much practised by Beza, when encountering a passage that appeared favourable to an adversary. Merely from his translation, we should not discover that his opinions of the divine decrees, and the freedom of human actions, differed from Beza's. If both interpreters, however, have sometimes failed in their representations of the sacred authors, the difference between them lies in this: the liberties which Castalio has taken, are almost solely in what regards their style and manner; the freedoms used by Beza affect their sentiments and doctrine.
[Page 517]
But to return to Le Cene, of whom I shall give but one other specimen; the words rendered by Beza, Quia iterum dixit Esaias, Excœcavit oculos eorum et obduravit cor eorum; ne videant oculis, et sint intelligentes corde, et sese convertant et sanem eos 104 ; he proposes in this manner to express in French: Ce qui avoit fait dire a Isaie; ils ont aveuglés leurs yeux et endurci leur cœur, pour ne pas voir de leurs yeux, et pour n'entendre point du cœur, et de peur de se convertir, et d'être gueris . “They have blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart,” &c. instead of, “He hath blinded, &c.” Surely, the difference between these interpretations, regards more the sense than the expression. In the latter instances, we have the Arminian using the same weapons against the Calvinist, which, in the former, we saw the Calvinist employ against the Arminian; a conduct alike unjustifiable in both.
§ 14. These examples may suffice to show that, if translators shall think themselves entitled, with Beza and Le Cene, and the anonymous English translator above quoted, to use such liberties with the original, in order to make it speak their own sentiments, or the sentiments of the party to which they have attached themselves, we shall soon have as many Bibles as we have sects, each adapted to support a different system of doctrine and morality; a Calvinistic Bible, and an Arminian, an Antinomian Bible, a Pelagian, and I know not how many more. Hitherto, notwithstanding our disputes, we have recurred to a common standard; and this circumstance, however lightly it may be thought of, has not been without its utility, especially in countries where the Christian principle of toleration is understood and practised. It has abated the violence of all sides, inspiring men with candour and moderation in judging of one another, and of the importance of the tenets which discriminate them.
[Page 518]
The reverse would take place, if every faction had a standard of its own, so prepared, as to be clearly decisive in supporting all its favourite dogmas, and in condemning those of every other faction. It may be said, that the original would still be a sort of common standard, whose authority would be acknowledged by them all. It no doubt would: but when we consider how small a proportion of the people, of any party, are qualified to read the original, and how much it would be the business of the leading partizans, in every sect, to preoccupy the minds of the people, in regard to the fidelity of their own version, and the partiality of every other, we cannot imagine that the possession of a standard, to which hardly one in a thousand could have recourse, would have a sensible effect upon the party. Of so much consequence it is, in a translator, to banish all party-considerations, to forget, as far as possible, that he is connected with any party; and to be ever on his guard, left the spirit of the sect absorb the spirit of the Christian, and he appear to be more the follower of some human teacher, a Calvin, an Arminius, a Socinus, a Pelagius, an Arius, or an Athanasius, than of our only divine and rightful teacher, Christ.
§ 15. Some allowance is no doubt to be made for the influence of polemic theology, the epidemic disease of those times wherein most of the versions, which I have been examining, were composed. The imaginations of men were heated, and their spirits embittered with continual wranglings, not easily avoidable in their circumstances: and those who were daily accustomed to strain every expression of the sacred writers, in their debates one with another, were surely not the fittest for examining them with that temper and coolness, which are necessary in persons who would approve themselves unbiassed translators. Besides, criticism, especially sacred criticism, was then but in its infancy. Many improvements, through the united labours of the
[Page 519]
learned in different parts of Europe, have since accrued to that science. Much of our scholastic controversy on abstruse and underterminable questions, well characterised by the Apostle, strifes of words, which minister not to godly edifying 105 , are now happily laid aside. It may be hoped, that some of the blunders into which the rage of disputation has formerly betrayed interpreters, may, with proper care, be avoided; and that the dotage about questions, which gender contention (questions than which nothing can be more hollow or unsound 106 ), being over, some will dare to speak, and others bear to hear, the things which become sound doctrine, the doctrine according to godliness.
NOTES
1 [1] Diss. II. § 4.
2 [2] Gen. i. 20.
3 [3] Deut. xxxii. 2.
4 [4] Joshua, v. 4.
5 [5] Gen. xlix. 22.
6 [6] Gen. iv. 20.
7 [7] Gen. i. 6.
8 [8] Gen. iv. 8.
9 [9] 2 Cor. ix. 1.
10 [10] Gen. ii. 4.
11 [11] Gen. iii. 23.
12 [12] Gen. iv. 13.
13 [13] Mark, xii. 14.
14 [14] Luke, i. 37.
15 [15] Eccl. i. 9.
16 [16] Proleg. p. 178.
17 [17] As it is impossible, without an example, to conceive how monstrous the transformation is, which it occasions, I shall here subjoin a specimen of a few English sentences translated into Latin, in the taste and manner of Arias. “Ego inveni aliquod pecus in meo frumento, et posui illa in meam libram. Ego rogavi unum qui stabat per, si ille novit cujus illa erant. Sed ille vertit unam viam a me, et fecit non ita multum ut vindicare salvum ad redire mihi ullam responsionem. Super hoc ego rogavi unum alium qui dixit unam magnam tabulam abiegnam in replicatione quam ego feci non substare. Quam unquam ego volui non habere posita illa sursum, habui ego notum ad quem illa pertinebant; nam ego didici post custodias quod ille fuit unus ego fui multum aspectus ad.” Were these few lines put into the hands of a learned foreigner, who does not understand English, he might sooner learn to read Chinese, than to divine their meaning. Yet a little attention would bring an Englishman who knows Latin, soon to discover that they were intended as a version, if we may call it so, of the following words, which, in the manner of Arias, I give with the version interlined. Ego inveni aliquod pecus in meo frumento, et I found some cattle in my corn, and posui illa in meam libram. Ego rogavi unum put them into my pound. I asked one qui stabat per si ille novit cujus illa erant. Sed who stood by if he knew whose they were. But ille vertit unam viam a me, et fecit non he turned a way from me, and did not ita multum ut vindicare salvum ad redire mihi so much as vouch safe to return me ullam responsionem. Super hoc ego rogavi any answer. Upon this I asked unum alium qui dixit unam magnam tabu- another who said a great lam abiegnam in replicatione quam ego feci non deal in reply which I did not substare. Quam unquam ego volui non habere understand. How ever I would not have posita illa sursum, habui ego notum ad quem put them up, had I known to whom illa pertinebant, nam ego didici post custodias they belonged, for I learned afterwards quod ille fuit unus ego fui multum aspectus ad. that he was one I was much beholden to. Should one object that the Latin words here employed do not suit the sense of the corresponding words in the passage translated, it is admitted that they do not; but they are selected in exact conformity to the fundamental rules followed by Arias. Thus una via away, vindicare salvum vouchsafe, quam unquam however, tabula abiegna deal, substare understand, post custodias afterwards, aspectus beholden, are all agreeable to the primary rule of etymology, and, in no respect, worse than reptifico, where both sense and use required produco; or assumptio for doctrina, to the utter destruction of all meaning, or non omnis for nullus, which gives a meaning quite different. But by what rule, it may be asked, is pound rendered libra, in a case wherein it manifestly means septum? By the same rule, it is answered, whereby iashab is rendered sedere, in a case wherein both the sense and the construction required inhabitare, and daber is rendered verbum where it manifestly means res, the golden rule of uniformity, by which every term ought always to be rendered the same way, and agreeably to its most common signification, without minding whether it make sense or nonsense so rendered. [The literal translator follows implicitly the sage direction given by Cajetan, “Non sit” vobis curæ, si sensus non apparet, quia non est vestri officii exponere, sed interpretari: interpretamini sicut jacet, et relinquatis expositoribus curam intelligendi.” Præf. Comment. in Psalm.] Now it is certain that pound occurs oftner in the sense of libra than in that of septum. But how do you admit such gross solecisms as redire responsionem? I answer, Is this more so than sedere tentorium? or do the prepositions as used here in stabat per and aspectus ad, make the construction more monstrous, than inter ad in that sentence sit dividens inter aquas ad aquas? Besides, there is not a word in the above specimen, which, taken severally, is not Latin: so much cannot be said for Arias, whose work is over-run with barbarisms as well as solecisms. Witness his fructescens and reptificent, in the few examples above produced. And in regard to the total incoherence and want of construction, can any thing in this way exceed in creari ea, or in die facere Deus, or ad terram quod sumptus est inde, or major iniquitas quam parcere?
18 [18] § 9.
19 [19] Matth. xxiv. 22.
20 [20] Matth. xxii. 30. Mark, xii. 25.
21 [21] Matth. vi. 26.
22 [22] Luke, xiii. 33.
23 [23] Matth. xx. 28.
24 [24] Mark, x. 45.
25 [25] Matth. vii. 23.
26 [26] Matth. xxii. 16.
27 [27] Luke, i. 68.
28 [28] Matth. vi. 11.
29 [29] Gen. iii. 15.
30 [30] Heb. xi. 21.
31 [31] Eph. v. 32.
32 [32] Diff. IX. Part I. § 7, 8.
33 [33] Rev. xvii. 7.
34 [34] Diss. IX. Part I.
35 [35] Heb. xiii. 16.
36 [36] On Matth. vii. 15.
37 [37] Mark, i. 15.
38 [38] For further illustration on this article see Diff. XI. Part II. § 4.
39 [39] Cast. Defens. Translat. &c.
40 [40] Essays on the Characteristics.
41 [41] Luke, i. 68.
42 [42] Proleg.
43 [43] Josh. i. 6.
44 [44] Diss. III. § 4.
45 [45] Gen. xxiv. 31.
46 [46] Diss. VI. Part III. § II.
47 [47] Josh. xxiv. 19.
48 [48] Defens.
49 [49] Isaiah, v. I.
50 [50] I Pet. iv. 6.
51 [52] Isaiah, xxvii. 6, 7.
52 [53] Ad lectores admonitio
53 [54] Diss. II. Part I. § 5.
54 [55] Proleg.
55 [56] Ibidem.
56 [57] Preface Generale, P. II. des Versions du N. T.
57 [58] Acts, xxvi. 18.
58 [59] Rev. xiv. 8.
59 [60] 2 Sam. xii. 7.
60 [61] Matth. xix. 16.
61 [62] 17.
62 [63] Isaiah, xxix. 18.
63 [64] Matth. x. 3.
64 [65] Gen. i. 3, 4.
65 [66] Matth. i. II, 12.
66 [67] Matth. ix. 36.
67 [68] Matth. v. 5.
68 [69] Luke, i. I.
69 [70] Luke, xix. 8.
70 [71] Acts, xiv. 23.
71 [72] Epist. ad Elis. Reg. Angl.
72 [73] Diff. IV. § 15, &c.
73 [74] Neh. viii. 8.
74 [75] Diss. II. Part II.
75 [76] Matth. v. 21. 27. 33.
76 [77] Acts, i. 14.
77 [78] Matth. viii. 14, 15.
78 [79] Acts, ii. 27.
79 [80] Diss. VI. Part II. § 4, &c.
80 [81] Bezæ Resp. ad Cast.
81 [82] Bezæ Annotationes, ed. 1598.
82 [83] Cast. Defen. adversarii Errores.
83 [84] Acts, xiv.23.
84 [85] Diss. IV. § 15, &c.
85 [86] 2 Cor. viii. 19.
86 [87] Acts, x. 41.
87 [88] 1 Tim. ii. 4.
88 [89] In the same manner he renders these words [Tit. ii. 11.], ΕρΕφανη γαρ ἡ χαρις του ΘΕου ἡ σωτηριος ρασιν ανθρωροις, “Illuxit enim gratia illa Dei salutifera quibusvis [not omnibus] hominibus.” No modern translation that I am acquainted with follows Beza in his interpretation of this verse. The Geneva French says, Car la grace de Dieu salutaire à tous hommes, est clairement apparue. The Geneva English, For that grace of God that bringeth salvation unto all men, hath appeared. The translators of the version in common use, have considered ρασιν ανθρωροις, as governed by ΕρΕφανη, and not by σωτηριος, rendering it, For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men. Of this version the original is evidently capable. Diodati has done still better in retaining the ambiguity. Percioche è apparita la gratia di Dio salutare a tutti gli huomini.
89 [90] 1 Tim. iv. 10.
90 [91] Matth. xxvi. 28.
91 [92] Heb. i. 3.
92 [93] Heb. x. 38.
93 [94] See his Præfatio Parænetica, prefixed to Grabe's Septuagint.
94 [95] 1 Tim. i. 13.
95 [96] I John, iii. 9.
96 [97] I John, i. 8.
97 [98] Matth. vii. 23.
98 [99] Cas. Defens. Adversarii Errores.
99 [100] Matth. v. 20.
100 [101] Proj. &c. ch. xiv.
101 [102] Rom. iv. 5.
102 [103] Rom. ix. 18.
103 [104] Rom. ix. 17. Exod. ix. 16.
104 [105] John, xii. 39, 40.
105 [106] 1 Tim. vi. 3, &c.
106 [107] See an excellent sermon on this subject, by my learned colleague, Dr. Gerard, vol. II. p. 129.
$$$
