Essays on the Nature and Principles ... (1790)
Author: Alison, Archibald.
Publication info: Essays On the Nature and Principles Of Taste. By the Revd. Archibald Alison . xiii, 415 p. Edinburgh: Bell and Bradfute, 1790.
TO
WILLIAM PULTENEY, Esq ;
THESE ESSAYS
ARE INSCRIBED;
IN TESTIMONY
OF THE RESPECT AND GRATITUDE
OF THE AUTHOR.
Edinburgh, Nov. 22. 1789.
[Page ]
INTRODUCTION. Taste , is that Faculty of the human Mind, by which we perceive and enjoy, whatever is Beautiful , or Sublime in the works of Nature or Art.
The perception of these Qualities is attended with an Emotion of Pleasure, very distinguishable from every other pleasure of our Nature, and which is accordingly distinguished by the name of the Emotion of Taste . The distinction of the objects of Taste into the Sublime and the Beautiful, has produced a similar division of this Emotion, into the Emotion of Sublimity , and the Emotion of Beauty.
The Qualities that produce these Emotions, are to be found in almost every class of the objects of human knowledge, and the Emotions themselves afford one of the most extensive sources of human delight. They occur to us, amid every variety of External Scenery, and among many diversities of disposition and affection in the Mind of Man. The most pleasing Arts of human invention are altogether directed to their pursuit: and even the necessary Arts are
[Page ]
exalted into dignity, by the Genius that can unite Beauty with Use. From the earliest period of Society, to its last stage of improvement, they afford an innocent and elegant amusement to private life, at the same time that they increase the Splendour of National Character; and in the progress of Nations, as well as of Individuals, while they attract attention from the pleasures they bestow, they serve to exalt the human Mind, from corporeal to intellectual pursuits.
These Qualities, however, though so important to human happiness, are not the objects of immediate observation; and in the attempt to investigate them, various circumstances unite to perplex our research. They are often obscured under the number of qualities with which they are accidentally combined: They result often from peculiar combinations of the qualities of objects, or the relation of certain parts of objects to each other: They are still oftener, perhaps, dependent upon the state of our own minds, and vary in their effects with the dispositions in which they happen to be observed. In all cases, while we feel the Emotions they excite, we are ignorant of the causes by which they are produced; and when we seek to discover them, we have no other method of discovery, than that varied and patient Experiment , by which, amid these complicated circumstances, we may gradually ascertain the peculiar qualities which, by the Constitution of our Nature ,
[Page ]
are permanently connected with the Emotions we feel.
In the employment of this mode of Investigation, there are two great objects of attention and inquiry, which seem to include all that is either necessary, or perhaps possible, for us to discover on the subject of Taste.
These objects are,
I. To investigate the Nature of those Qualities that produce the Emotions of Taste : And,
II. To investigate the Nature of that Faculty , by which these Emotions are received.
These investigations, however, are not to be considered only as objects of philosophical curiosity. They have an immediate relation to all the Arts that are directed to the production either of the Beautiful or the Sublime ; and they afford the only means by which the principles of these various Arts can be ascertained. Without a just and accurate conception of the Nature of these Qualities, the Artist must be unable to determine, whether the Beauty he creates is temporary or permanent, whether adapted to the accidental prejudices of his Age, or to the uniform constitution of the human Mind; and whatever the Science of Criticism
[Page ]
can afford for the improvement or correction of Taste, must altogether depend upon the previous knowledge of the Nature and Laws of this Faculty.
To both these Inquiries, however, there is a preliminary investigation, which seems absolutely necessary, and without which every conclusion we form, must be either imperfect or vague. In the investigation of Causes , the first and most important step, is the accurate examination of the Effect to be explained. In the Science of Mind, however, as well as in that of Body, there are few effects altogether simple, or in which accidental circumstances are not combined with the proper effect. Unless, therefore, by means of repeated Experiments, such accidental circumstances are accurately distinguished from the phenomena that permanently characterise the effect, we are under the necessity of including in the Cause, the causes also of all the accidental circumstances with which the effect is accompanied.
With the Emotions of Taste , in almost every instance, many other accidental Emotions of Pleasure are united; the various simple pleasures that arise from other qualities of the object; the pleasure of agreeable Sensation, in the case of Material objects; and in all, that pleasure which by the Constitution of our Nature is annexed to the Exercise of our Faculties. Unless therefore we have previously acquired a distinct and accurate conception of that peculiar effect which
[Page ]
is produced on our Minds, when the Emotions of Taste are felt, and can precisely distinguish it from the effects that are produced by these accidental Qualities, we must necessarily include in the Causes of such Emotions, those Qualities also, which are the causes of the accidental pleasures with which this Emotion is accompanied. The variety of Systems that Philosophers have adopted upon this subject, and the various Emotions into which they have resolved the Emotion of Taste, while they afford a sufficient evidence of the numerous accidental pleasures that accompany these Emotions. afford also a strong illustration of the necessity of previously ascertaining the Nature of this Effect, before we attempt to investigate its Cause. With regard, therefore, to both these Inquiries, the first and most important step is accurately to examine the Nature of this Emotion itself, and its distinction from every other Emotion of Pleasure; and our capacity of discovering either the Nature of the Qualities that produce the Emotions of Taste, or the Nature of the Faculty by which they are received, will be exactly proportioned to our accuracy in ascertaining the Nature of the Emotion itself.
In this view of the subject, a work intended as an Inquiry into the Nature and Principles of Taste , may naturally be supposed to consist of the following Parts , and to be conducted in the following Manner :
[Page ]
I. The first Part would contain an Analysis or Examination of that Effect which is produced on the Mind , when these Emotions are felt; and of their Distinction from the Simple Emotions of Pleasure.
II. The second Part would contain an Investigation of the Nature of the Qualities that are fitted by the Constitution of our Nature to produce these Emotions ; and of their Distinction from the Qualities that are productive only of the Simple Emotions of Pleasure.
In this part of the subject, there are two subordinate Inquiries, that would naturally demand attention.
1. The Qualities of Sublimity and Beauty, are discovered not only in pleasing or agreeable objects, but frequently also in objects that in themselves are productive of Pain ; and some of the greatest Compositions of the Fine Arts are founded upon subjects of Terror or Distress . It would form, therefore, an obvious and important Inquiry, to ascertain by what Means this singular Effect is produced in real Nature , and by what Means it may be produced in the Compositions of Art.
2. There is a Distinction in the Effects produced on our Minds by objects of Taste; and this distinction both in the Emotions and in their Causes has been expressed by
[Page ]
the terms of Sublimity and Beauty . It would form, therefore, a second object of Inquiry , to ascertain the Nature of this Distinction , both with regard to these Emotions , and the Qualities that produce them.
III. The third Part of such a work would contain an Investigation of the Nature of that Faculty by which these Emotions are received: And the pursuit of it would naturally lead to the important Inquiry, Whether there is any Standard by which the Perfection and Imperfection of this Faculty may be determined? and to the illustration of the Means by which it may be either corrected or improved.
Such are the objects which it seems to me most important to ascertain in the Philosophy of Taste ; and such is the method in which these Essays towards this Inquiry have been conducted. But when I consider both the extent and the difficulty of such an Investigation, and recollect the Errors into which many great Men have fallen upon these subjects, I can only find resolution to present the First Part of my Inquiries to the Public.
[Page 1]
ESSAY I. Of the Nature of the Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty. CHAPTER I. Of the Effect produced upon the Imagination, by Objects of Sublimity and Beauty. SECTION I. The emotions of sublimity and beauty are uniformly ascribed, both in popular and in philosophical language, to the imagination. The fine arts are considered as that arts which are addressed to the imagination, and the pleasures they afford, are described, by way of distinction, as the Pleasures of the Imagination. The nature of any person's taste, is, in common life, generally determined from the nature or character of his imagination, and the
[Page 2]
expression of any deficiency in this power of mind, is considered as synonymous with the expression of a similar deficiency in point of taste.
Although, however, this connection is so generally acknowledged, it is not perhaps as generally understood in what it consists, or what is the nature of that effect which is produced upon the imagination, by objects of sublimity and beauty. I shall endeavour, therefore, in the first place, to state, what seems to me the nature of this effect, or, in what that exercise of imagination consists, which is so generally supposed to take place, when these emotions are felt.
When any object, either of sublimity or beauty, is presented to the mind, I believe every man is conscious of a train of thought being immediately awakened in his imagination, analogous to the character or expression of the original object. The simple perception of the object, we frequently find, is insufficient to excite these emotions, unless it is accompanied with this operation of mind, unless, according to common expression, our imagination is seized, and our fancy busied in the pursuit of all those trains of thought, which are allied to this character or expression.
Thus, when we feel either the beauty or sublimity of natural soenery, the gay lustre of a morning in spring, or
[Page 3]
the mild radiance of a summer evening, the savage majesty of a wintry storm, or the wild magnificence of a tempestuous ocean, we are conscious of a variety of images in our minds, very different from those which the objects themselves can present to the eye. Trains of pleasing or of solemn thought arise spontaneously within our minds, our hearts swell with emotions, of which the objects before us seem to afford no adequate cause; and we are never so much satiated with delight, as when, in recalling our attention, we are unable to trace either the progress or the connection of those thoughts, which have passed with so much rapidity through our imagination.
The effect of the different arts of taste is similar. The landscapes of Claude Lorrain, the music of Handel, the poetry of Milton, excite feeble emotions in our minds, when our attention is confined to the qualities they present to our senses, or when it is to such qualities of their composition that we turn our regard. It is then, only, we feel the sublimity or beauty of their productions, when our imaginations are kindled by their power, when we lose ourselves amid the number of images that pass before our minds, and when we waken at last from this play of fancy, as from the charm of a romantic dream. The beautiful apostrophe of the Abbé de Lille, upon the subject of gardening,
[Page 4]
N'avez vous pas souvent, au lieux infrequentés,
Rencontré tout-à-coup, ces aspects enchantés,
Qui suspendent vos pas, dont L'image chérie
Vous jette en une douce et longue réverie?
is equally applicable to every other composition of taste; and in the production of such trains of thought, seems to consist the effect which objects of sublimity and beauty have upon the imagination.
For the truth of this observation itself, I must finally appeal to the consciousness of the reader; but there are some very familiar considerations, which it may be useful to suggest, that seem very strongly to shew the connection between this exercise of imagination, and the existence of the emotions of sublimity or beauty.
[Page 5]
SECTION II. That unless this exercise of imagination is excited, the emotions of beauty or sublimity are unfelt, seems capable of illustration, from many instances of a very familiar kind.
I. If the mind is in such a state, as to prevent this freedom of imagination, the emotion, whether of sublimity or beauty, is unperceived. In so far as the beauties of art or nature affect the external senses, their effect is the same upon every man who is in possession of these senses. But to a man in pain or in grief, whose mind, by these means, is attentive only to one object or consideration, the same scene, or the same form, will produce no feeling of admiration, which, at other times, when his imagination was at liberty, would have produced it, in its fullest perfection. Whatever is great or beautiful in the scenery of external nature, is almost constantly before us; and not a day passes, without presenting us with appearances, fitted both to charm and to elevate our minds; yet it is in general with a heedless eye that we regard them, and only in particular moments that we are sensible of their power. There
[Page 6]
is no man, for instance, who has not felt the beauty of sunset; yet every one can remember many instances, when this most striking scene had no effect at all upon his imagination; and when he has beheld all the magnificence with which nature generally distinguishes the close of day, without one sentiment of admiration or delight. There are times, in the same manner, when we can read the Georgics, or the Seasons, with perfect indifference, and with no more emotion, than what we feel from the most uninteresting composition in prose; while in other moments, the first lines we meet with, take possession of our imagination, and awaken in it such innumerable trains of imagery, as almost leave behind the fancy of the poet. In these, and similar cases of difference in our feelings, from the same objects, it will always be found, that the difference arises from the state of our imaginations; from our disposition to follow out the train of thought, which such objects naturally produce, or our incapacity to do it, from some other idea, which has at that time taken possession of our minds, and renders us unable to attend to any thing else. That state of mind, every man must have felt, is most favourable to the emotions of taste, in which the imagination is free and unembarrassed, or in which the attention is so little occupied by any private or particular object of thought, as to leave us open to all the impressions, which the objects that are before us, can create. It is upon the vacant and the unemployed, accordingly, that the objects
[Page 7]
of taste make the strongest impression. It is in such hours alone, that we turn to the compositions of music, or of poetry, for amusement. The seasons of care, of grief, or of business, have other occupations, and destroy, for the time at least, our sensibility to the beautiful or the sublime, in the same proportion, that they produce a state of mind unfavourable to the indulgence of imagination.
II. The same thing is observable in criticism. When we sit down to appreciate the value of a poem, or of a painting, and attend minutely to the language or composition of the one, or to the colouring or design of the other, we feel no longer the delight which they at first produce. Our imagination in this employment is restrained, and instead of yielding to its suggestions, we studiously endeavour to resist them, by fixing our attention upon minute and partial circumstances of the composition. How much this operation of mind tends to diminish our sense of its beauty, every one will feel, who attends to his own thoughts on such an occasion, or who will recollect how different was his state of mind, when he first felt the beauty either of the painting or the poem. It is this, chiefly, which makes it so difficult for young people, possessed of imagination, to judge of the merits of any poem or fable, and which induces them so often to give their approbation to
[Page 8]
compositions of little value. It is not, that they are incapable of learning in what the merits of such compositions consist, for these principles of judgment are neither numerous nor abstruse. It is not, that greater experience produces greater sensibility, for this every thing contradicts; but it is, because every thing, in that period of life, is able to excite their imaginations, and to move their hearts, because they judge of the composition, not by its merits, when compared with other works, or by its approach to any abstract or ideal standard, but by its effect in agitating their imaginations, and leading them into that fairy land, in which the fancy of youth has so much delight to wander. It is their own imagination, which has the charm, which they attribute to the work, that excites it; and the simplest tale, or the poorest novel, is, at that time, as capable of awakening it, as afterwards the eloquence of Virgil or Rousseau. All this, however, all this flow of imagination, in which youth, and men of sensibility, are so apt to indulge, and which so often brings them pleasure at the expence of their taste, the labour of criticism destroys. The mind, in such an employment, instead of being at liberty to follow whatever trains of imagery the composition before it can excite, is either fettered to the consideration of some of its minute and solitary parts; or pauses amid the rapidity of its conceptions, to make them the objects of its attention and review. In these operations, accordingly, the emotion, whether of beauty, or sublimity, is lost, and
[Page 9]
if it is wished to be recalled, it can only be done by relaxing this vigour of attention, and resigning ourselves again, to the natural stream of our thoughts. The mathematician who investigates the demonstrations of the Newtonian philosophy, the painter who studies the design of Raphael, the poet who reasons upon the measure of Milton, all, in such occupations, lose the delight which these several productions can give; and when they are willing to recover their emotion, must withdraw their attention from those minute considerations, and leave their fancy to expatiate at will, amid all the great or pleasing conceptions, which such productions of genius can raise.
III. The effect which is thus produced upon the mind, by temporary exertions of attention, is also more permanently produced by the difference of original character; and the degree in which the emotions of sublimity or beauty are felt, is, in general, proportioned to the prevalence of those relations of thought in the mind, upon which this exercise of imagination depends. The principal relation, which seems to take place in those trains of thought, that are produced by objects of taste, is that of resemblance; the relation, of all others, the most loose and general, and which affords the greatest range of thought, for our imagination to pursue. Wherever, accordingly, these emotions are felt,
[Page 10]
it will be found, not only that this is the relation which principally prevails among our ideas, but that the emotion itself is proportioned to the degree in which it prevails.
In the effect which is produced upon our minds, by the different appearances of Natural scenery, it is easy to trace this progress of resembling thought, and to observe, how faithfully the conceptions which arise in our imaginations, correspond to the impressions which the characters of these seasons produce. What, for instance, is the impression we feel from the scenery of spring? The soft and gentle green with which the earth is spread, the feeble texture of the plants and flowers, the young of animals just entering into life, and the remains of winter yet lingering among the woods and hills, all conspire to infuse into our minds somewhat of that fearful tenderness with which infancy is usually beheld. With such a sentiment, how innumerable are the ideas which present themselves to our imagination! Ideas, it is apparent, by no means confined to the scene before our eyes, or to the possible desolation which may yet await its infant beauty, but which almost involuntarily extend themselves to analogies with the life of man, and bring before us all those images of hope or fear, which, according to our peculiar situations, have the dominion of our hearts!—The beauty of autumn is accompanied with a similar exercise of thought. The leaves begin then to drop from the trees, the flowers and shrubs, with which the
[Page 11]
fields were adorned in the summer months, decay, the woods and groves are silent, the sun himself seems gradually to withdraw his light, or to become enfeebled in his power. Who is there, who, at this season, does not feel his mind impressed with a sentiment of melancholy? or who is able to resist that current of thought, which, from such appearances of decay, so naturally leads him to the solemn imagination of that inevitable fate, which is to bring on alike the decay of life, of empire, and of nature itself? In such cases of emotion, every man must have felt, that the character of the scene is no sooner impressed upon his mind, than various trains of correspondent imagery rise before his imagination; that whatever may be the nature of the impression, the general tone of his thoughts partakes of this nature or character; and that his delight is proportioned to the degree in which this uniformity of character prevails.
The same effect, however, is not produced upon all men. There are many, whom the prospect of such appearances in nature, excites to no exercise of fancy whatever; who, by their original constitution, are more disposed to the employment of attention, than of imagination, and who, in the objects that are presented to them, are more apt to observe their individual and distinguishing qualities, than those by which they are related to other objects of their knowledge. Upon the minds of such men, the relation of
[Page 12]
resemblance has little power; the efforts of their imagination, accordingly, are either feeble or slow, and the general character of their understandings, is that of steady and precise, rather than that of enlarged and extensive thought. It is, I believe, consistent with general experience, that men of this description are little sensible to the emotions of sublimity or beauty; and they who have attended to the language of such men, when objects of this kind have been presented to them, must have perceived, that the emotion they felt, was no greater than what they themselves have experienced in those cases, where they have exerted a similar degree of attention, or when any other cause has restrained the usual exercise of their imagination. To the qualities which are productive of simple emotion, to the useful, the agreeable, the fitting, or the convenient in objects, they have the same sensibility with other men; but of the superior and more complex emotion of beauty, they seem to be either altogether unconscious, or to share in it, only in proportion to the degree in which they can relax this severity of attention, and yield to the relation of resembling thought.
It is in the same manner, that the progress of life generally takes from men their sensibility to the objects of taste. The season in which these are felt in their fullest degree is in youth, when, according to common expression, the imagination is warm, or, in other words, when it is easily excited
[Page 13]
to that exertion upon which so much of the emotion of beauty depends. The business of life, in the greatest part of mankind, and the habits of more accurate thought, which are acquired by the few who reason and reflect, tend equally to produce in both, a stricter relation in the train of their thoughts, and greater attention to the objects of their consideration, than can either be expected, or can happen in youth. They become, by these means, not only less easily led to any exercise of imagination, but their associations become at the same time less consistent with the employment of it. The man of business, who has passed his life in studying the means of accumulating wealth, and the philosopher, whose years have been employed in the investigation of causes, have both not only acquired a constitution of mind very little fitted for the indulgence of imagination, but have acquired also associations of a very different kind from those which take place, when imagination is employed. In the first of these characters, the prospect of any beautiful scene in nature, would induce no other idea than that of its value. In the other, it would lead only to speculations upon the causes of the beauty that was ascribed to it. In both, it would thus excite ideas, which could be the foundation of no exercise of imagination, because they required thought and attention. To a young mind, on the contrary, possessed of any sensibility, how many pleasing ideas would not such a prospect afford? ideas of peace and innocence, and rural joy, and all the unblemished delights of solitude
[Page 14]
and contemplation. In such trains of imagery, no labour of thought, or habits of attention, are required; they rise spontaneously in the mind, upon the prospect of any object, to which they bear the slightest resemblance, and they lead it almost insensibly along, in a kind of bewitching reverie, through all its store of pleasing or interesting conceptions. To the philosopher, or the man of business, the emotion of beauty, from such a scene, would be but feebly known; but by the young mind, which had such sensibility, it would be felt in all its warmth, and would produce an emotion of delight, which not only would be little comprehended by men of a severer or more thoughtful character, but which seems also to be very little dependent upon the object which excites it, and to be derived, in a great measure, from this exercise of mind itself.
In these familiar instances, it is obvious, how much the emotions of taste are connected with this state or character of imagination, and how much those habits or employments of mind, which demand attention, or which limit it to the consideration of single objects, tend to diminish the sensibility of mankind, to the emotions of sublimity or beauty.
[Page 15]
SECTION III. There are many other instances equally familiar, which are sufficient to shew, that whatever increases this exercise or employment of Imagination, increases also the emotion of beauty or sublimity.
I. This is very obviously the effect of all Associations. There is no man, who has not some interesting associations with particular scenes, or airs, or books, and who does not feel their beauty or sublimity enhanced to him, by such connections. The view of the house where one was born, of the school where one was educated, and where the gay years of infancy were passed, is indifferent to no man. They recal so many images of past happiness, and past affections, they are connected with so many strong or valued emotions, and lead altogether to so long a train of feelings and recollections, that there is hardly any scene which one ever beholds with so much rapture. There are songs also, that we have heard in our infancy, which, when brought to our remembrance in after years, raise emotions, for which we cannot well account; and which,
[Page 16]
though perhaps very indifferent in themselves, still continue from this association, and from the variety of conceptions which they kindle in our minds, to be our favourites through life. The scenes which have been distinguished by the residence of any person, whose memory we admire, produce a similar effect. “Movemur enim, nescio quo pacto, locis ipsis, in quibus eorum, quos diligimus, aut admiramur adsunt vestigia.” The scenes themselves may be little beautiful; but the delight with which we recollect the traces of their lives, blends itself insensibly with the emotions which the scenery itself, excites; and the admiration which these recollections afford, seems to give a kind of sanctity to the place where they dwelt, and converts every thing into beauty which appears to have been connected with them. There are scenes, undoubtedly, more beautiful than Runnymede, yet to those who recollect the great event which passed there, there is no scene, perhaps, which so strongly seizes upon the imagination; and although the emotions this recollection produces, are of a very different kind from those which the mere natural scenery can excite, yet they unite themselves so well with these inferior emotions, and spread so venerable a charm over the whole, that one can hardly persuade one's self, that the scene itself is not entitled to this admiration. The valley of Vaucluse is celebrated for its beauty, yet how much of it has been owing, to its being the residence of Petrarch!
[Page 17]
Mais ces eaux, ce beau ciel, ce vallon enchanteur,
Moins que Pétrarque et Laure interessoient mon cœur.
La voila donc disois-je, oui, voila cette rive
Que Pétrarque charmoit de sa lyre plaintive;
Ici Pétrarque à Laure exprimant son amour,
Voyoit naître trop tard, mourir trop tot, le jour.
Retrouverai-je encore, sur ces rocs solitaires,
De leurs chiffres unis les tendres characteres?
Une grotte écartée avoit frappé mes yeux,
Grotte sombre, dis-moi si tu les vis heureux,
M'écriois-je! un vieux tronc bordoit-il le rivage?
Laure avoit reposé sous son antique ombrage;
Je redemandois Laure à l'echo du vallon,
Et l'echo n'avoit point oublié ce doux nom.
Partout mes yeux cherchoient, voyoient, Pétrarque et Laure,
Et par eux, ces beaux lieux s'émbellissoient encore.
Les Jardins, Chant 3me.
The Sublime is increased, in the same manner, by whatever tends to increase this exercise of imagination. The field of any celebrated battle becomes sublime from this association. No man, acquainted with English history, can behold the field of Agincourt, without some emotion of this kind. The additional conceptions which this association produces, and which fill the mind of the spectator on the prospect of that memorable field, diffuse themselves in some measure over the scene, and give it a sublimity which
[Page 18]
does not naturally belong to it. The majesty of the Alps themselves is increased by the remembrance of Hannibal's march over them; and who is there, that could stand on the banks of the Rubicon, without feeling his imagination kindle, and his heart beat high?
“Middleton Dale,” says Mr Whately, “is a cleft between rocks, ascending gradually from a romantic village, till it emerges, at about two miles distance, on the vast moorlands of the Peak. It is a dismal entrance to a desart; the hills above it are bare, the rocks are of a grey colour, their surfaces are rugged, and their shapes savage, frequently terminating in craggy points, sometimes resembling vast unwieldy bulwarks, or rising in heavy battresses one above another, and here and there a mishapen mass bulging out, hangs lowering over its base. No traces of men are to be seen, except in a road which has no effect on such a scene of desolation, and in the limekilns constantly smoking on the side. The soil is disfigured with all the tinges of brown and red, which denote barrenness; in some places it has crumbled away, and strata of loose dark stones only appear; and in others, long lines of dross shovelled out of the mines, have fallen down the steeps. In these mines, the veins of lead on one side of the Dale, are observed always to have corresponding veins, in the same direction, on the other; and the rocks, though differing widely in different places,
[Page 19]
yet always continue in one style for some way together, and seem to have a relation to each other. Both these appearances make it probable that Middleton Dale is a chasm rent in the mountains by some convulsion of nature beyond the memory of man, or perhaps before the island was peopled. The scene, though it does not prove the fact, yet justifies the supposition, and it gives credit to the tales of the country people, who, to aggravate its horrors, always point to a precipice, down which they say a young woman of the village threw herself headlong, in despair at the neglect of a man whom she loved; and shew a cavern, where a skeleton once was discovered, but of what wretch is unknown; his bones were the only memorial left of him.”
Observations upon Modern Gardening, p. 93.
It is surely unnecessary to remark, how much the sublimity of this extraordinary scene, is increased, by the circumstances of horror, which are so finely connected with it.
One of the sublimest objects in natural scenery, is an old and deep wood covering the side of a mountain, when seen from below; yet how much greater sublimity is given to it, by Dr Akenside, by the addition of the solemn images which in the following lines are associated with it?
[Page 20]
                                         ---Mark the sable woods
That shade sublime yon mountain's nodding brow.
With what religious awe, the solemn scene
Commands your steps! as if the reverend form
Of Minos or of Numa, should forsake
Th' Elysian seats, and down the embowering glade
Move to your pausing eye.—
Pleasures of Imagination, Book 3.
There is a passage in one of the Odes of the same poet, in which a scene, which is in general only beautiful, is rendered strikingly sublime, from the imagery with which it is associated.
'Tis thus to work her baneful power,
Suspicion waits the sullen hour
   Of fretfulness and strife,
When care the infirmer bosom wrings,
Or Eurus waves his murky wings,
   To damp the seats of life.
But come, forsake the scene unbless'd
Which first beheld your faithful breast
   To groundless fears a prey,
Come, where with my prevailing lyre
The skies, the streams, the groves conspire
   To charm your doubts away.
[Page 21]
Thron'd in the sun's descending car
What Power unseen diffuseth far
   This tenderness of mind?
What Genius smiles on yonder flood!
What God in whispers from the wood
   Bids every thought be kind?
Ode to Suspicion.
I know not, however, any instance, where the effect of association, is so remarkable in bestowing sublimity on objects, to which it does not naturally belong, as in the following inimitable poem of Buchanan's, on the month of May. This season is, in general, fitted to excite emotions very different from sublimity, and the numerous poems which have been written in celebration of it, dwell uniformly, on its circumstances of “vernal joy.” In this ode, however, the circumstances which the poet has selected, are of a kind, which, to me, appear inexpressibly sublime, and distinguish the poem itself by a degree and character of grandeur, which I have seldom found equalled in any other composition. The idea of it was probably taken from these fine lines of Virgil in the second Georgic, in describing the effects of spring.
                                         Non alios, prima crescentis origine mundi
Illuxisse dies, aliumve habuisse tenorem
Crediderim: ver illud erat, ver magnus agebat
[Page 22]
Orbis, et hybernis parcebant flatibus Euri:
Cum primum lucem pecudes hausere, virûmque,
Ferrea progenies duris caput extulit arvis,
Immissæque feræ sylvis, et sidera cœlo.
I believe, however, no one will doubt, how much Buchanan has improved, upon this beautiful idea.
Calendæ Maiæ.
Salvete sacris deliciis facræ
Maiæ calendæ, lætitiæ et mero
   Ludisque dicatæ jocisque
   Et teneris charitum choreis.
Salve voluptas et nitidum decus
Anni recurrens perpetua vice,
   Et flos renascentis juventæ
   In senium properantis Ævi.
Cum blanda veris temperies novo
Illuxit orbi, primaque secula
   Fulsere flaventi metallo,
   Sponte sua, sine lege, justa,
Talis per omnes continuus tenor
Annos tepenti rura Favonio
   Mulcebat, et nullis feraces
   Seminibus recreabat agros.
[Page 23]
Talis beatis incubat insulis
Felicis auræ perpetuus tepor,
   Et nesciis campis senectæ
   Difficilis, querulique morbi.
Talis silentum per tacitum nemus
Levi susurrat murmure spiritus,
   Lethenque juxta obliviosam
   Funereas agitat cupressos.
   Forsan supremis cum Deus ignibus
Piabit orbem, lætaque secula
   Mundo reducet, talis aura
   Æthereos animos fovebit.
Salve fugacis gloria seculi,
Salve secunda digna dies nota,
   Salve vetustæ vitæ imago,
   Et specimen venientis Ævi.
National associations, have a similar effect in increasing the emotions of sublimity and beauty, as they very obviously increase the number of images, presented to the mind. The fine lines which Virgil has dedicated in his Georgics, to the praises of his native country, however beautiful to us, were yet undoubtedly read with a far superior emotion, by an ancient Roman. The prodigies which the same poet has described, as preceding the death of Cæsar, and the still more minute description which Lucan, in the first book of his Pharsalia, has given of such events, on the approach
[Page 24]
of the civil war, must probably have given to a Roman, who was under the dominion of such national superstitions, the strongest emotions of sublimity and terror. But we read them now without any other emotion, than what arises from the beauty of the composition.
The influence of such associations, in increasing either the beauty or sublimity of Musical composition, can hardly have escaped any person's observation. The tune called Bellisle March, is said, by a very eminent writer, to have owed its popularity among the people of England, to the supposition, that it was the tune which was played, when the English army marched into Bellisle, and to its consequent association with images of fame, and conquest, and military glory. There are other tunes of the same character, which, without any peculiar merit, yet always serve to please the people, whenever they are performed. The natives of any country, which possesses a national or characteristic music, need not be reminded, how strongly the performance of such airs brings back to them the imagery of their native land; and must often have had occasion to remark how inferior an emotion they excite in those who are strangers to such associations. The effect of the celebrated national song, which is said to overpower the Swiss soldier in a foreign land, with melancholy and despair, and which it is therefore found necessary to forbid in the armies in which they serve, cannot surely be attributed to
[Page 25]
its composition alone, but to the recollections that it brings, and to those images that it kindles in his mind of peace, and freedom, and domestic pleasure, from which he is torn, and to which he may never return. Whatever may be the sublimity of Handel's music, the singular effect of it on some late occasions, is, doubtless, not to be ascribed to that sublimity alone, but in a peculiar manner to the place where it was performed; not only from the sacredness of that place, which is, of itself, so well fitted to excite many awful emotions; but in a considerable degree also, from its being the repository of so many “illustrious dead,” and the scene, perhaps of all others, most sacred to those who have any sensibility to the glories of their country.
There are associations, also, which arise from particular professions, or habits of thought, which serve very well to illustrate the same observation. No man, in general, is sensible to beauty, in those subjects with regard to which he has not previous ideas. The beauty of a theory, or of a relic of antiquity, is unintelligible to a peasant. The charms of the country are altogether lost upon a citizen, who has passed his life in town. In the same manner, the more that our ideas are increased, or our conceptions extended upon any subject, the greater the number of associations we connect with it, the stronger is the emotion of sublimity or beauty we receive from it.
[Page 26]
The pleasure, for instance, which the generality of mankind receive from any celebrated painting, is trifling when compared to that which a painter feels, if he is a man of any common degree of candour. What is, to them, only an accurate representation of nature, is, to him, a beautiful exertion of genius, and a perfect display of art. The difficulties which occur to his mind in the design and execution of such a performance, and the testimonies of skill, of taste, and of invention, which the accomplishment of it exhibit, excite a variety of emotions in his breast, of which the common spectator is altogether unsusceptible; and the admiration with which he thus contemplates the genius and art of the painter, blends itself with the peculiar emotions which the picture itself can produce, and enhances to him every beauty that it may possess.
The beauty of any scene in nature is seldom so striking to others, as it is to a landscape painter, or to those who profess the beautiful art of laying out grounds. The difficulties both of invention and execution which from their professions are familiar to them, render the profusion with which nature often scatters the most picturesque beauties, little less than miraculous. Every little circumstance of form and perspective, and light and shade, which are unnoticed by a common eye, are important in theirs, and mingling in their minds the ideas of difficulty, and facility in overcoming it, produce altogether an emotion of delight,
[Page 27]
incomparably more animated than any that the generality of mankind usually derive from it.
The delight which most men of education receive from the consideration of antiquity, and the beauty that they discover in every object which is connected with ancient times, is in a great measure to be ascribed to the same cause. The antiquarian, in his cabinet, surrounded by the relics of former ages, seems to himself to be removed to periods that are long since past, and indulges in the imagination of living in a world, which, by a very natural kind of prejudice, we are always willing to believe was both wiser and better than the present. All that is venerable or laudable in the history of these times present themselves to his memory. The gallantry, the heroism, the patriotism of antiquity rise again before his view, softened by the obscurity in which they are involved, and rendered more seducing to the imagination by that obscurity itself, which, while it mingles a sentiment of regret amid his pursuits, serves at the same time to stimulate his fancy to fill up by its own creation those long intervals of time of which history has preserved no record. The relics he contemplates seem to approach him still nearer to the ages of his regard. The dress, the furniture, the arms of the times, are so many assistances to his imagination, in guiding or directing its exercise, and offering him a thousand sources of imagery, provide him with an almost inexhaustible field in which his memory and
[Page 28]
his fancy may expatiate. There are few men who have not felt somewhat, at least, of the delight of such an employment. There is no man in the least acquainted with the history of antiquity, who does not love to let his imagination loose on the prospect of its remains, and to whom they are not in some measure sacred, from the innumerable images which they bring. Even the peasant, whose knowledge of former times extends but to a few generations, has yet in his village some monument of the deeds or virtues of his forefathers; and cherishes with a fond veneration the memorial of those good old times to which his imagination returns with delight, and of which he loves to recount the simple tales that tradition has brought him.
And what is it that constitutes that emotion of sublime delight, which every man of common sensibility feels upon the first prospect of Rome ? It is not the scene of destruction which is before him. It is not the Tyber diminished in his imagination to a paultry stream, flowing amid the ruins of that magnificence which it once adorned. It is not the triumph of superstition over the wreck of human greatness, and its monuments erected upon the very spot where the first honours of humanity have been gained. It is ancient Rome which fills his imagination. It is the country of Cæsar, and Cicero, and Virgil, which is before him. It is the mistress of the world which he sees, and who seems to him to rise again from her tomb, to give laws to the universe.
[Page 29]
All that the labours of his youth, or the studies of his maturer age have acquired with regard to the history of this great people, open at once before his imagination, and present him with a field of high and solemn imagery which can never be exhausted. Take from him these associations, conceal from him that it is Rome that he sees, and how different would be his emotion!
II. The effect which is thus produced, by Associations, in increasing the emotions of sublimity or beauty, is produced also, either in nature, or in description, by what are generally termed Picturesque Objects. Instances of such objects are familiar to every one's observation. An old tower in the middle of a deep wood, a bridge flung across a chasm between rocks, a cottage on a precipice, are common examples. If I am not mistaken, the effect which such objects have on every one's mind, is to suggest an additional train of conceptions, beside what the scene or description itself would have suggested; for it is very obvious, that no objects are remarked as picturesque, which do not strike the imagination by themselves. They are, in general, such circumstances, as coincide, but are not necessarily connected, with the character of the scene or description, and which at first affecting the mind with an emotion of surprise, produce
[Page 30]
afterwards an increased or additional train of imagery. The effect of such objects, in increasing the emotions either of beauty or sublimity, will probably be obvious from the following instances.
The beauty of sunset, in a fine autumnal evening, seems almost incapable of addition from any circumstance. The various and radiant colouring of the clouds, the soft light of the sun, that gives so rich a glow to every object which it falls, the dark shades with which it is contrasted, and the calm and deep repose that seems to steal over universal nature, form altogether a scene, which serves perhaps better than any other in the world, to satiate the imagination with delight: Yet there is no man who does not know how great an addition this fine scene is capable of receiving from the circumstance of the evening bell. In what, however, does the effect of this most picturesque circumstance consist? Is it not in the additional images which are thus suggested to the imagination? images indeed of melancholy and sadness, but which still are pleasing, and which serve most wonderfully to accord with that solemn and pensive state of mind, which is almost irresistibly produced by this charming scene.
Nothing can be more beautiful than Dr Goldsmith's description of evening, in the Deserted Village.
[Page 31]
   Sweet was the sound, when oft at evening's close
Up yonder hill the village murmur rose.
There as I pass'd with careless steps and slow,
The mingling notes came soften'd from below:
The swain responsive as the milk-maid sung,
The sober herd that low'd to meet their young,
The noisy geese that gabbl'd o'er the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school,
The watch dog's voice that bay'd the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh, that spoke the vacant mind:
Yet how much is the beauty of this description increased, by the fine circumstance with which it is closed?
These all in soft confusion sought the shade,
And fill'd each pause the nightingale had made.
There is a beauty of the same kind produced in the “Seasons,” by the addition of one of the most picturesque circumstances that was ever imagined by a poet.
---Lead me to the mountain brow,
Where sits the shepherd on the grassy turf,
Inhaling, healthful, the descending sun.
Around him feeds his many bleating flock
Of various cadence, and his sportive lambs
Their frolics play; and now the sprightly race
[Page 32]
Invites them forth, when swift the signal given
They start away, and sweep the mossy mound
That runs around the hill, the rampart once
Of iron war, in ancient barbarous times.
Spring.
The scene is undoubtedly beautiful of itself, without the addition of the last circumstance; yet how much more beautiful does it become by the new order of thought which this circumstance awakens in the mind, and which contrasting the remembrance of ancient warfare and turbulent times, with the serenity and repose of the modern scene, agitate the imagination with a variety of indistinct conceptions, which otherwise could never have arisen in it?
The physical arguments of Buchanan, in his poem “de Sphæra,” against the doctrine of the motion of the earth, are probably read with little emotion; but it is impossible to read the following lines of it without delight, from the very picturesque imagery which they contain.
Ergo tam celeri tellus si concita motu
Iret in Occasum, rursusque rediret in Ortum,
Cuncta simul quateret secum, vastoque fragore,
Templa, ædes, miserisque etiam cum civibus, urbes
Opprimerit subitæ strages inopina ruinæ.
Ipsæ etiam volucres tranantes aera leni
[Page 33]
Remigio alarum, celeri vertigine terræ
Abreptas gemerent sylvas, nidosque tenella
Cum sobole et chara forsan cum conjuge: nec se
Auderet zephyro solus committere turtur,
Ne procul ablatos, terra fugiente, Hymenæos
Et viduum longo luctu defleret amorem.
Lib . 1.
There is a very striking beauty of the same kind in a little poem of Dr Beattie's, entitled, “Retirement.”
Thy shades, thy silence now be mine,
   Thy charms my only theme:
My haunt, the hollow cliff, whose pine
   Waves o'er the gloomy stream,
Where the scar'd owl on pinions grey
   Breaks from the rustling boughs,
And down the lone vale sails away
   To more profound repose.
“All,” says Mr Whately, in describing the Tinian Lawn at Hagley, “all here is of an even temper, all mild, placid and serene, in the gayest season of the day, not more than cheerful, in the stillest watch of night, not gloomy. The scene is indeed peculiarly adapted to the tranquillity of the latter, when the moon seems to repose her light on the thick foliage of the grove, and steadily marks the
[Page 34]
shade of every bough. It is delightful then to saunter here, and see the grass and the gossamer which entwines it glistening with dew, to listen and hear nothing stir, except perhaps a withered leaf, dropping gently through a tree, and sheltered from the chill, to catch the freshness of the evening air.” It is difficult to conceive any thing more beautiful than this description, yet how much is its beauty increased by the concluding circumstance? “A solitary urn, chosen by Mr Pope for the spot, and now inscribed to his memory, when seen by a gleam of moonlight through the trees, fixes that thoughtfulness and composure, to which the mind is insensibly led by the rest of this elegant scene.”
Observations on Gardening, p . 201.
I shall conclude these instances of the effect of picturesque objects, in increasing the emotion of Beauty, with a passage from the Iliad, which contains one of the most striking images that I know of in poetry, and which I am the more willing to quote, as it has not been so much taken notice of as it deserves. It is the appearance of Achilles, when Phœnix and Ulysses are sent from the Grecian camp, to appease his wrath,
Τὼ δὲ βάτην ραρὰ θινα ρολυφλοίσβοιο θαλασσης,
Ρολλὰ μάλ' Εὐχομένω γαιηόχω Ἐννοσιγαίω,
Ῥηϊδίως ρΕριθω̂ν μΕγάλας φρένας Αἰακίδαο
[Page 35]
Μυρμιδόνων δ' ἐρί τΕ κλισίας καὶ νη̂ας ἱκέσθην
Τὸν δ' Εὗρον φρένα τΕρρόμΕνον φόρμιγγι λιγΕίη
Καλη̂ δαιδαλέη, ἐρὶ δ' ἀργύρΕον ζυγὸς ἦΕν.
Τὴν ἄρΕτ' ἐξ ἐνάρων, ρτόλιν ἨΕτίωνος ὀλέσσας
Τη̂ ὅγΕ θυμὸν ἔτΕρρΕν, ἄΕιδΕ δ' ἄρα κλέα ἀνδρω̂ν.
Iliad, Lib . ix. v . 182.
Thro' the still night they march, and hear the roar
Of murmuring billows, on the sounding shore,
And now arriv'd, where on the sandy bay,
The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay,
Amus'd, at ease, the godlike man they found
Pleas'd with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
With this he sooths his angry soul, and sings
Th'immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
Book ix. v . 236.
It was impossible for the poet, to have imagined any other occupation so well fitted to the mighty mind of Achilles, or so effectual in interesting the reader in the fate of Him whom Dr Beattie calls, with truth, the most terrific human personage that poetical imagination has feigned.
The Sublime is increased in the same manner, by the addition of picturesque objects. The striking image with which Virgil concludes the description of the prodigies which attended the death of Cæsar, is well known.
[Page 36]
Scilicet et tempus veniet cum finibus illis
Agricola, incurvo terram molitus aratro,
Exesa inveniet scabrâ rubigine pila:
Aut gravibus rastris, galeas pulsabit inanes,
Grandiaque effosis mirabitur ossa sepulchris.
There are few passages more sublime in the Pharsalia of Lucan, than the description in the third Book, of one of Pompey's armies, blocked up by Cæsar in a part of the country where there was no water, and where the soldiers were perishing with thirst. After describing very minutely, the fruitless attempts of the army to obtain relief, and the miserable expedients with which they endeavoured to supply their wants, he proceeds in the following nervous and beautiful lines, of which, I am persuaded, the last circumstance is too striking to require any comment.
O fortunati, fugiens quos barbarus hostis,
Fontibus immistos stravit per rura veneno.
Hos licet in fluvios saniem, tabemque ferarum
Pallida, Dictæis, Cæsar, nascentia saxis
Infundas aconita palam, Romana juventus
Non decepta bibet.—torrentur viscera flamma
Oraque sicca rigent squamosis aspera linguis;
Jam marcent venæ, nulloque humore rigatus
Aëris alternos angustat Pulmo meatus,
Rescissoque nocent suspiria dura palato.
[Page 37]
Pandant ora siti, nocturnumque aëra captant.
Expectant imbres, quorum modo cuncta natabant
Impulsu, et siccis vultus in nubibus hærent.
Quoque magis miserus undæ jejunia solvant
Non, super arentem Meroen, Cancrique sub axe
Qua nudi Garamantes arant, sedere, sed inter
Stagnantem Sicorim et rapidum, deprensus Iberum
Spectat vicinos, sitiens exercitus, amnes.
Lib . 3. ad med.
The fine description in the Gierusalemme Liberata, of a similar distress in the army of Godfrey, before the walls of Jerusalem, has probably been borrowed from this passage of Lucan; and it is pleasing to observe, with what address Tasso has imitated, though not copied, the picturesque circumstance with which the description of the Roman poet is closed. Instead of aggravating the distress of the soldier, by the prospect of waters, which he could not approach, he recals to his remembrance, the cool shades, and still fountains of his native land: a circumstance, not only singularly pathetic, but more fertile also of imagery, than perhaps any other that the poet could have imagined.
S'alcun giamai tra frondeggiente rive
Puro vide stagnar liquido argento,
O giù precipitose vi acque vive
Per Alpe, o'n piaggia érboso à passo lento:
[Page 38]
Quello al vago desio forma, e descrive,
E ministra materia al suo tormento.
In Thomson's description of Winter in the northern regions, though the description itself is sublime, yet one additional circumstance adds powerfully to its sublimity.
Thence winding eastward to the Tartar coast,
She sweeps the howling margin of the main,
Where undissolving from the first of time
Snows swell on snows, amazing to the sky,
And icy mountains, high on mountains pil'd,
Seem to the shivering sailor, from afar
Shapeless and white, an atmosphere of clouds.
Ocean itself no longer can resist
The binding fury: but in all its rage
Of tempest taken by the boundless frost
Is many a fathom, to the bottom chain'd,
And bid to roar no more—a bleak expanse
Shagg'd o'er with wavy rocks, cheerless and void
Of every life, that from the dreary months
Flies conscious, southward. Miserable they!
Who here entangled in the gathering ice
Take their last look of the descending sun,
While full of death, and fierce with tenfold frost
The long long night, incumbent o'er their heads
Falls horrible.—
[Page 39]
In the following masterly description of a very sublime scene in nature, by Mr Whately, I doubt not but that it will be acknowledged, how much the sublimity of it is increased, by the very picturesque imagery which the occupations of the inhabitants afford. “A scene at the New Weir, on the river Wye, which in itself is truly great and awful, so far from being disturbed, becomes more interesting and important, by the business to which it is destined. It is a chasm between two ranges of hills, which rise almost perpendicularly from the water; the rocks on the sides are mostly heavy masses, and their colour is generally brown; but here and there a pale craggy cliff starts up to a vast height above the rest, unconnected, broken and bare: large trees frequently force out their way amongst them, and many of them stand far back in the covert, where their natural dusky hue is deepened by the shadow which overhangs them. The river too, as it retires, loses itself amid the woods, which close immediately above, then rise thick and high, and darken the water. In the midst of all this gloom, is an iron forge, covered with a black cloud of smoke, and surrounded with half burned ore, with coal, and with cinders. The fuel for it is brought down a path, worn into steps, narrow, and steep, and winding among the precipices; and near it is an open space of barren muir, about which are scattered the huts of the workmen. It
[Page 40]
stands close to the cascade of the Weir, where the agitation of the current is increased by large fragments of rocks which have been swept down by floods from the banks, or shivered by tempests from the brow; and at stated intervals, the sullen sound, from the strokes of the great hammers in the forge, deadens the roar of the waterfall.”
Page 109.
There is a similar beauty, if I am not mistaken, in the concluding stroke of the following passage from Mons. Diderot.
“Qu'est ce qu'il faut au poëte? Est-ce une nature brute ou cultivée? paisible ou troublée? Préféra-t-il la beauté d'un jour pur et serein, à l'horreur d'une nuit obscure, où le siflement interrompu des vents se mêle par intervalles au murmure sourd et continu d'un tonnerre éloigné, et où il voit l'éclair allumer le ciel sur sa tête? Préférat-il le spectacle d'une mer tranquille, à celui des flots agitées? le muet et froid aspect d'un palais, à la proménade parmi des ruines? un édifice construit, un éspece planté de la main des hommes, au touffu d'une antique forêt, au creux ignoré d'une roche deserte? des nappes d'eau, des bassins, des cascades, à la vûe d'une cataracte qui se brise en tombant à travers des rochers, et dont le bruit se
[Page 41]
fait entendre au loin du berger, qui à conduit son troupeau dans la montagne, et qui l'écoute avec éffroi?”
Epitre à Mons. Grimm. sur la Poësie Dramatique.
I shall conclude these illustrations with a very sublime one from the Paradise Regained of Milton, in which I believe the force of the concluding stroke will not be denied.
   —Either tropic now
'Gan thunder, and both ends of heaven; the clouds
From many a horrid rift abortive, pour'd
Fierce rain, with lightening mixed: nor slept the winds
Within their stony caves, but rush'd abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vext wilderness, whose tallest pines
Tho'rooted deep as high, and sturdiest oaks
Bow'd their stiff necks, loaden with stormy blasts
Or torn up sheer—Ill wast Thou shrouded then
O patient Son of God!
Book 4.
In these and a thousand other instances that might be produced, I believe every man of sensibility will be conscious of a variety of great or pleasing images passing with rapidity in his imagination, beyond what the scene or description immediately before him can of themselves excite. They
[Page 42]
seem often, indeed, to have but a very distant relation to the object that at first excited them; and the object itself, appears only to serve as a hint, to awaken the imagination, and to lead it through every analogous idea that has place in the memory. It is then, indeed, in this powerless state of reverie, when we are carried on by our conceptions, not guiding them, that the deepest emotions of beauty or sublimity are felt, that our hearts swell with feelings which language is too weak to express, and that in the depth of silence and astonishment we pay to the charm that enthrals us, the most flattering mark of our applause.
“The power of such characters in Nature,” says Mr Whately (from whom I am happy to borrow the following observations, not only from the beauty of their expression, but from their singular coincidence in the illustration of the fact I have been endeavouring to establish) “the power of such characters is not confined to the ideas which the objects themselves immediately suggest; for these are connected with others, which insensibly lead to subjects far distant perhaps from the original thought, and related to it only by similitude in the sensations they excite. In a prospect enriched and enlivened with inhabitants and cultivation, the attention is caught first by the circumstances which are gayest in the season, the bloom of an orchard, the festivity of a hay field, and the carols of a harvest home; but the cheerfulness which these infuse into the
[Page 43]
mind, expands afterwards to other objects than those immediately presented to the eye, and we are thereby disposed to receive, and delighted to pursue, a variety of pleasing ideas, and every benevolent feeling. At the sight of a ruin, reflections on the change, the decay, and the desolation before us naturally occur; and they introduce a long succession of others, all tinctured with that melancholy which these have inspired: or if the monument revive the memory of former times, we do not stop at the simple fact which it records, but recollect many more coeval circumstances, which we see, not perhaps as they were, but as they are come down to us, venerable with age, and magnified by fame. Even without the assistance of buildings, or other adventitious circumstances, nature alone furnishes materials for scenes which may be adapted to almost every kind of expression. Their operation is general, and their consequences infinite: the mind is elevated, depressed, or composed, as gaiety, gloom, or tranquillity prevail in the scene, and we soon lose sight of the means by which the character is formed. We forget the particular objects it presents, and giving way to their effects, without recurring to the cause, we follow the track they have begun, to any extent, which the dispositions they accord with, will allow. It suffices that the scenes of nature have power to affect our imagination and our sensibility: for such is the constitution of the human mind, that if once it is agitated, the emotion
[Page 44]
often spreads beyond the occasion: when the passions are roused, their course is unrestrained, when the fancy is on the wing, its flight is unbounded, and quitting the inanimate objects which first gave them their spring, we may be led by thought above thought, widely differing in degree, but still corresponding in character, till we rise from familiar subjects up to the sublimest conceptions, and are rapt in the contemplation of whatever is great or beautiful, which we see in nature, feel in man, or attribute to the Divinity.”
Page 154.
III. The influence of such additional trains of imagery, in increasing the emotions of sublimity or beauty, might be illustrated from many other circumstances, equally familiar. I am induced to mention only the following, because it is one of the most striking that I know, and because it is probable that most men of education have at least in some degree been conscious of it: The influence I mean, of an acquaintance with Poetry in our earlier years, in increasing our sensibility to the beauties of nature.
The generality of mankind live in the world, without receiving any kind of delight, from the various scenes of beauty which its order displays. The rising and setting of the
[Page 45]
sun, the varying aspect of the moon, the vicissitude of seasons, the revolution of the planets, and all the stupendous scenery that they produce, are to them only common occurrences, like the ordinary events of every day. They have been so long familiar, that they cease to strike them with any appearance either of magnificence or beauty, and are regarded by them, with no other sentiments than as being useful for the purposes of human life. We may all remember a period in our lives, when this was the state of our own minds: and it is probable most men will recollect, that the time when nature began to appear to them in another view, was, when they were engaged in the study of classical literature. In most men, at least, the first appearance of poetical imagination is at school, when their imaginations begin to be warmed by the descriptions of ancient poetry, and when they have acquired a new sense as it were, with which they can behold the face of nature.
How different, from this period, become the sentiments with which the scenery of nature is contemplated, by those who have any imagination! The beautiful forms of ancient mythology, with which the fancy of poets peopled every element, are now ready to appear to their minds, upon the prospect of every scene. The descriptions of ancient authors, so long admired, and so deserving of admiration, occur to them at every moment, and with them, all those enthusiastic ideas of ancient genius and glory, which the
[Page 46]
study of so many years of youth, so naturally leads them to form. Or, if the study of modern poetry has succeeded to that of the ancient, a thousand other beautiful associations are acquired, which instead of destroying, serve easily to unite with the former, and to afford a new source of delight. The awful forms of Gothic superstition, the wild and romantic imagery, which the turbulence of the middle ages, the Crusades, and the institution of chivalry have spread over every country of Europe, arise to the imagination in every scene; accompanied with all those pleasing recollections of prowess, and adventure, and courteous manners, which distinguished those memorable times. With such images in their minds, it is not common nature that appears to surround them. It is nature embellished and made sacred by the memory of Theocritus and Virgil, and Milton and Tasso; their genius seems still to linger among the scenes which inspired it, and to irradiate every object where it dwells; and the creation of their fancy, seem the fit inhabitants of that nature, which their descriptions have clothed with beauty.
Nor is it only in providing so many sources of association, that the influence of an acquaintance with poetry consists. It is yet still more powerful in giving character to the different appearances of nature, in connecting them with various emotions and affections of our hearts, and in thus providing an almost inexhaustible source either of solemn or of cheerful
[Page 47]
meditation. What to ordinary men is but common occurrence, or common scenery, to those who have such associations, is full of beauty. The seasons of the year, which are marked only by the generality of mankind, by the different occupations or amusements they bring, have each of them, to such men, peculiar expressions, and awaken them to an exercise either of pleasing or of awful thought. The seasons of the day, which are regarded only by the common spectator, as the call to labour, or to rest, are to them characteristic either of cheerfulness or solemnity, and connected with all the various emotions which these characters excite. Even the familiar circumstances of general nature, which pass unheeded by a common eye, the cottage, the sheep-fold, the curfew, all have expressions to them, because, in the compositions to which they have been accustomed, these all are associated with peculiar characters, or rendered expressive of them, and leading them to the remembrance of such associations, enable them to behold with corresponding dispositions, the scenes which are before them, and to feel from their prospect, the same powerful influence, which the eloquence of poetry has ascribed to them.
Associations of this kind, when acquired in early life, are seldom altogether lost; and whatever inconveniencies they may sometimes have with regard to the general character, or however much they may be ridiculed by those who do
[Page 48]
not experience them, they are yet productive to those who possess them, of a perpetual and innocent delight. Nature herself is their friend; in her most dreadful, as well as her most lovely scenes, they can discover something either to elevate their imaginations, or to move their hearts; and amid every change of scenery, or of climate, can still find themselves, among the early objects of their admiration, or their love.
[Page 49]
CHAPTER II. Analysis of this Exercise of Imagination. SECTION I. The illustrations in the preceding chapter, seem to shew, that whenever the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty are felt, that exercise of Imagination is produced, which consists in the indulgence of a train of thought; that when this exercise is prevented, these emotions are unfelt or unperceived; and that whatever tends to increase this exercise of mind, tends in the same proportion to increase these emotions. If these illustrations are just, it seems reasonable to conclude, that the effect produced upon the mind, by objects of Sublimity and Beauty, consists in the production of this exercise of Imagination.
Although, however, this conclusion seems to me both just and consonant to experience, yet it is in itself too general, to be considered as a sufficient account of the nature of that operation of mind which takes place in the case of such Emotions. There are many trains of ideas of which we are conscious, which are unattended with any kind of pleasure.
[Page 50]
There are other operations of mind, in which such trains of thought are necessarily produced, without exciting any similar emotion. Even in the common hours of life, every man is conscious of a continued succession of thoughts passing through his mind, suggested either by the presence of external objects, or arising from the established laws of association: such trains of thought, however, are seldom attended with pleasure, and still seldomer with an emotion, corresponding in any degree, to the emotions of sublimity or beauty.
There are, in like manner, many cases where objects excite a train of thought in the mind, without exciting any emotion of pleasure or delight. The prospect of the house, for instance, where one has formerly lived, excites very naturally a train of conceptions in the mind; yet it is by no means true that such an exercise of imagination is necessarily accompanied with pleasure, for these conceptions not only may be, but very often are of a kind extremely indifferent, and sometimes also simply painful. The mention of an event in history, or of a fact in science, naturally leads us to the conception of a number of related events, or similar facts; yet it is obvious, that in such a case the exercise of mind which is produced, if it is accompanied with any pleasure at all, is in most cases accompanied with a pleasure very different from that which attends the emotions of sublimity or beauty.
[Page 51]
If therefore some train of thought, or some exercise of Imagination is necessary for the production of the emotions of Taste, it is obvious, that this is not every train of thought of which we are capable. To ascertain therefore with any precision, either the nature or the causes of these emotions, it is previously necessary to investigate the nature of those trains of thought that are produced by objects of sublimity and beauty, and their difference from those ordinary trains, which are unaccompanied with such pleasure.
As far as I am able to judge, this difference consists in two things. 1 st , In the Nature of the ideas or conceptions which compose such trains: and, 2 dly , In the Nature or Law of their succession.
I. In our ordinary trains of thought, every man must be conscious that the ideas which compose them, are very frequently of a kind which excite no emotions either of pleasure or pain. There is an infinite variety of our ideas, as well as of our sensations, that may be termed indifferent, which are perceived without any sentiment either of pain or pleasure, and which pass as it were before the mind, without making any farther impression than simply exciting the consciousness of their existence. That such ideas
[Page 52]
compose a great part, and perhaps the greatest part of our ordinary trains of thought, is apparent from the single consideration, that such trains are seldom attended with emotion of any kind.
The trains of thought which are suggested by external objects, are very frequently of a similar kind. The greater part of such objects are simply indifferent, or at least are regarded as indifferent in our common hours either of occupation or amusement: the conceptions which they produce, by the laws of association partake of the nature or character of the object which originally excited them, and the whole train passes through our mind without leaving any farther emotion, than perhaps that general emotion of pleasure which accompanies the exercise of our faculties. It is scarcely possible for us to pass an hour of our lives without experiencing some train of thought of this kind, suggested by some of the external objects which happen to surround us. The indifference with which such trains are either pursued or deserted, is a sufficient evidence, that the ideas of which they are composed, are in general of a kind unfitted to produce any emotion either of pleasure or pain.
In the case of those trains of thought, on the contrary, which are suggested by objects either of Sublimity or Beauty, I apprehend it will be found, that they are in all cases composed of ideas capable of exciting some affection or emotion;
[Page 53]
and that not only the whole succession is accompanied with that peculiar emotion, which we call the Emotion of Beauty or Sublimity, but that every individual idea of such a succession is in itself productive of some simple Emotion or other. Thus the ideas suggested by the scenery of Spring, are ideas productive of emotions of Cheerfulness, of Gladness, and of Tenderness. The images suggested by the prospect of ruins, are images belonging to Pity, to Melancholy, and to Admiration. The ideas in the same manner awakened by the view of the ocean in a storm, are ideas of Power, of Majesty, and of Terror. In every case where the emotions of Taste are felt, I conceive it will be found, that the train of thought which is excited, is distinguished by some character of emotion, and that it is by this means distinguished from our common or ordinary successions of thought. To prevent a very tedious and unnecessary circumlocution, such ideas may perhaps, without any impropriety, be termed Ideas of Emotion; and I shall beg leave therefore to use the expression in this sense.
The first circumstance, then, which seems to distinguish those trains of thought which are produced by objects either of Sublimity or Beauty, is, that the ideas or conceptions of which they are composed, are ideas of Emotion.
[Page 54]
II. In our ordinary trains of thought, there seldom appears any general principle of connection among the ideas which compose them. Each idea, indeed, is related by an established law of our nature, to that which immediately preceded and that which immediately follows it, but in the whole series there is no predominant relation or bond of connection. This want of general connection is so strong, that even that most general of all relations, the relation either of pleasure or pain, is frequently violated. Images both of the one kind and the other, succeed each other in the course of the train; and when we put an end to it, we are often at a loss to say, whether the whole series was pleasant or painful. Of this irregularity, I think every man will be convinced who chuses to attend to it.
In those trains, on the contrary, which are suggested by objects of Sublimity or Beauty, however slight the connection between individual thoughts may be, I believe it will be found, that there is always some general principle of connection which pervades the whole, and gives them some certain and definite character. They are either gay, or pathetic, or melancholy, or solemn, or awful, or elevating, &c . according to the nature of the emotion which is first
[Page 55]
excited. Thus the prospect of a serene evening in summer, produces first an emotion of peacefulness and tranquillity, and then suggests a variety of images corresponding to this primary impression. The sight of a torrent, or of a storm, in the same manner, impresses us first with sentiments of awe, or solemnity, or terror, and then awakens in our minds a series of conceptions allied to this peculiar emotion. Whatever may be the character of the original emotion, the images which succeed seem all to have a relation to this character; and if we trace them back, we shall discover not only a connection between the individual thoughts of the train, but also a general relation among the whole, and a conformity to that peculiar emotion which first excited them.
The train of thought, therefore, which takes place in the mind, upon the prospect of objects of sublimity and beauty, may be considered as consisting in a regular or consistent train of ideas of emotion, and as distinguished from our ordinary trains of thought. 1 st , In respect of the Nature of the ideas of which it is composed, by their being ideas productive of Emotion; and, 2 dly , In respect of their Succession, by their being distinguished by some general principle of connection, which subsists through the whole extent of the train.
[Page 56]
The truth of the account which I have now given of the nature of that train of thought which attends the emotions of sublimity and beauty, must undoubtedly at last be determined by its conformity to general experience and observation. There are some considerations however, of a very obvious and familiar kind, which it may be useful to suggest to the reader, for the purpose of affording him a method of investigating with accuracy the truth of this account.
If it is true that the ideas which compose that train of thought, which attends the emotions of Taste, are uniformly ideas of Emotion, then it ought in fact to be found, that no objects or qualities are experienced to be beautiful or sublime, but such as are productive of some simple Emotion.
If it is true that such trains of thought are uniformly distinguished by some general principle of connection, then it ought also to be found, that no Composition of objects or qualities produces such emotions, in which this Unity of character or of emotion is not preserved.
I shall endeavour, at some length, to illustrate the truth of both these propositions.
[Page 57]
SECTION II. That no objects, or qualities in objects, are, in fact, felt either as beautiful or sublime, but such as are productive of some Simple Emotion, seems evident from the following familiar considerations.
I. Wherever the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty are felt, I believe it will be found, that some affection is uniformly excited, by the presence of the object, before the more complex Emotion of Beauty is felt; and that if no such affection is excited, no Emotion of Beauty or Sublimity is produced. The truth of this observation may be illustrated, both from common language, and common experience.
1. If any man were to assert, that some object, though positively indifferent or uninteresting, was yet beautiful or sublime, every one would consider it as asserting an absurdity. If, on the other hand, he were to assert, that the object had neither beauty nor sublimity to him, because there was no quality in it which could give him any emotion, I apprehend we should not only clearly understand his meaning,
[Page 58]
but very readily allow his reason; and if the object were such as appeared to us in the light either of Sublimity or Beauty, and we wished to make him sensible of it, the way that we should naturally take, would be to point out to him some affecting or interesting quality, which we imagined he had overlooked, and which we felt was the foundation of our own emotion.
There is undoubtedly a very great difference between the Emotion of Taste, and any Simple Emotion, as of Cheerfulness, Tenderness, Melancholy, Solemnity, Elevation, Terror, &c . as such emotions are frequently felt, without any sentiment of Beauty or Sublimity; but there is no case, I believe, where the Emotions of Taste are felt, without the previous production of some such Simple Emotion. It is often indeed difficult to say, what is the quality in the object which produces the Emotion of Beauty; and it is sometimes difficult, in the case of complex objects, when different qualities unite in the production of Emotion, to define the exact nature of that Emotion which we feel; but whether the general impression we receive, is that of Gaiety, or Tenderness, or Melancholy, or Solemnity, or Elevation, or Terror, &c . we have never any difficulty of determining: and so strong is our conviction of the dependence of the Emotions of Taste upon some such previous simple emotion, that whenever we endeavour to explain the Beauty or Sublimity of any object, we uniformly proceed by pointing
[Page 59]
out the interesting or affecting quality in it, which is fitted to produce this previous emotion. It is not only impossible for us to imagine an object of Taste, that is not an object of Emotion; but it is impossible to describe any such object, without resting the description upon that quality, or those qualities in it, which are productive of Simple Emotion.
2. Every man has had reason to observe a difference in his sentiments, with regard to the beauty of particular objects from those of other people, either in his considering certain objects as beautiful, which did not appear so to them, or in their considering certain objects as beautiful, which did not appear so to him. There is no instance of this more common than in the case of airs in music. In the first case of such a difference of opinion, we generally endeavour to recollect, whether there is not some accidental association of pleasure which we have with such objects, and which affords us that delight which other people do not share; and it not unfrequently happens, that we assign such associations as the cause of our pleasure, and as our apology for differing from their opinion. In the other case, we generally take it for granted, that they who feel a beauty where we do not, have some pleasing association with the object in question, of which we are unconscious, and which is accordingly productive to them of that delight in which we are unable to share. In both cases, altho' we may not discover what the particular association is, we do not fail to suppose that some such
[Page 60]
association exists which is the foundation of the sentiment of beauty, and to consider this difference of opinion as sufficiently accounted for on such a supposition. This very natural kind of reasoning could not, I think, take place, if we did not find from experience, that those objects only, are productive of the Sentiment of Beauty, which are capable of exciting Emotion.
3. The different habits and occupations of life produce a similar effect on the sentiments of mankind with regard to the objects of Taste, by their tendency to confine their sensibility to a certain class of objects, and to render all others indifferent to them. In our progress from infancy to manhood, how much do our sentiments of beauty change with our years! how often, in the course of this progress, do we look back with contempt, or at least with wonder, upon the tastes of our earlier days, and the objects that gratified them! and how uniformly in all this progress do our opinions of Beauty coincide with the prevalent Emotions of our hearts, and with that change of sensibility which the progress of life occasions! As soon as any class of objects loses its importance in our esteem, as soon as their presence ceases to bring us pleasure, or their absence to give us pain, the beauty in which our infant imagination arrayed them disappears, and begins to irradiate another class of objects, which we are willing to flatter ourselves are more deserving of such sentiments, but which have often no other
[Page 61]
value, than in their coincidence with those new emotions that begin to swell in our breasts. The little circle of infant beauty, contains no other objects than those that can excite the affections of the child. The wider range which youth discovers, is still limited by the same boundaries which nature has prescribed to the affections of youth. It is only when we arrive at manhood, and still more, when either the liberality of our education, or the original capacity of our minds, have led us to experience or to participate in all the affections of our nature, that we acquire that comprehensive taste, which can enable us to discover, and to relish, every species of Sublimity and Beauty.
It is easily observable, also, that besides the natural progress of life, the habits of thought, which men acquire from the diversity of their occupations, tend, in the same proportion to limit their sense of Beauty or Sublimity, as they limit their emotions to a particular character or kind. The lover reads or hears with indifference, of all that is most sublime in the history of ambition, and wonders only at the folly of mankind, who can sacrifice their case, their comforts, and all the best pleasures of life, to the unsubstantial pursuit of power. The man, whose life has been passed in the pursuits of commerce, and who has learned to estimate every thing by its value in money, laughs at the labours of the Philosopher or the Poet, and beholds, with
[Page 62]
indifference, the most splendid pursuits of life, if they are not repaid by wealth. The anecdote of a late celebrated Mathematician, is well known, who read the Paradise Lost, without being able to discover in it, any thing that was sublime, but who said that he could never read the queries at the end of Newton's Optics, without feeling his hair stand on end, and his blood run cold. There are thousands who have read the old ballad of Chevy Chase, without having their imaginations inflamed with the ideas of military glory. It is the Brave only, who, in the perusal of it, like the gallant Sir Philip Sydney, feel “their hearts moved, as by the found of a trumpet.”
The effect of such habits of mind upon the sense of Beauty, may, in some degree, be observed in all the different classes of mankind; and there are probably few men, who have not had occasion to remark how much the diversity of tastes corresponds to the diversity of occupations, and, even in the most trifling things, how strongly the sentiments of Beauty, in different men, are expressive of their prevailing habits, or turn of mind. It is only in the higher stations accordingly, or in the liberal professions of life, that we expect to find men either of a delicate or comprehensive taste. The inferior situations of life, by contracting the knowledge and the affections of men, within very narrow limits, produce insensibly a similar contraction in their notions of the beautiful or the sublime. The finest natural
[Page 63]
taste, is seldom found able to withstand that narrowness and insensibility of mind, which is perhaps necessarily acquired by the minute and uninteresting details of the mechanical arts; and they who have been doomed, by their professions, to pass their earlier years in populous and commercial cities, and in the narrow and selfish pursuits which prevail there, soon lose that sensibility which is the most natural of all,—the sensibility to the beauties of the country; because they lose all those sentiments of tenderness and innocence, which are the foundation of much the greater part of the associations we connect with the scenery of Nature.
4. The difference of original character, or the natural tendency of our minds to particular kinds of Emotion, produces a similar difference in our sentiments of Beauty, and serves, in a very obvious manner, to limit our taste to a certain class or character of objects. There are men, for instance, who, in all the varieties of external nature, find nothing beautiful but as it tends to awaken in them a sentiment of sadness, who meet the return of Spring with minds only prophetic of its decay, and who follow the decline of Autumn with no other remembrance than that the beauties of the year are gone. There are men, on the contrary, to whom every appearance of Nature is beautiful as awakening a sentiment of gaiety;—to whom Spring and Autumn alike are welcome, because they bring to them only different images of joy;—and who, even in the most desolate and wintery scenes, are
[Page 64]
yet able to discover something in which their hearts may rejoice. It is not, surely, that Nature herself is different, that so different effects are produced upon the imaginations of these men; but it is because the original constitution of their minds has led them to different habits of Emotion,—because their imaginations seize only those expressions in nature, which are allied to their prevailing dispositions,—and because every other appearance is indifferent to them, but those which fall in with the peculiar sensibility of their hearts. The gaiety of Nature alone, is beautiful to the chearful man; its melancholy, to the man of sadness; because these alone are the qualities which accord with the Emotions they are accustomed to cherish, and in which their imaginations delight to indulge.
The same observation is equally applicable to the different tastes of men in Poetry, and the rest of the fine arts; and the productions that all men peculiarly admire, are those which suit that peculiar strain of Emotion, to which, from their original constitution, they are most strongly disposed. The ardent and gallant mind sickens at the insipidity of pastoral, and the languor of elegiac poetry, and delights only in the great interests of the Tragic and the Epic Muse. The tender and romantic peruse, with indifference, the Iliad and the Paradise Lost, and return with gladness, to those favourite compositions, which are descriptive of the joys or sorrows of Love. The gay and the frivolous, on the contrary,
[Page 65]
alike insensible to the sentiments either of Tenderness or Magnanimity, find their delight in that cold but lively style of poetry, which has been produced by the gallantry of modern times, and which, in its principal features, is so strongly characteristic of the passion itself. In general, those kinds of poetry only are delightful or awaken us to any very sensible Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, which fall in with our peculiar habits of sentiment or feeling; and if it rarely happens, that one species of poetry is relished to the exclusion of every other, it arises only from this, that it is equally rare, that one species of Emotion should have so completely the dominion of the heart, as to exclude all Emotions of any other kind. In proportion, however, as our sensibility is weak, with regard to any class of objects, it is observable, that our sense of Sublimity or Beauty in such objects, is weak in the same proportion; and wherever it happens, (for it sometimes does happen), that men, from their original constitution, are incapable of any one species of Emotion, I believe it will also be found, that they are equally insensible to all the Sublimity or Beauty which the rest of the world find in the objects of such Emotion.
5. Besides the influence of permanent habits of thought, or of the diversities of original disposition upon our sentiments of Beauty, every man must have had opportunity to observe, that the perception of Beauty depends also on the temporary
[Page 66]
sensibility of his mind; and that even objects of the most experienced Beauty, fail in exciting their usual delight, when they occur to him in moments, when he is under the dominion of different emotions from those with which he usually regards them. In our seasons of gaiety, we behold with indifference, the same objects which delight our imaginations, when we are under the impressions of tenderness or melancholy. In our seasons of despondence, we turn with some kind of aversion, from the objects or the reflections that enchant us in our hours of gaiety. In the common hours of life, in the same manner, when we are either busy, or unoccupied, and when our minds are free from every kind of sensibility, the objects of Taste make but a feeble impression upon us; and are either altogether neglected, or tacitly reserved to another time, when we may be more in the temper to enjoy them. The husbandman who goes out to observe the state of his grounds, the man of business who walks forth to ruminate about his affairs, or the philosopher, to reason or reflect, whatever their natural sensibilities may be, are at such times insensible to every beauty that the scenery of nature may exhibit; nor do they begin to feel them, until they withdraw their attention from the particular objects of their thought, and abandon themselves to the emotions which such scenes may happen to inspire.
[Page 67]
There are even moments of listlessness and languor, in which no objects of Taste whatever, can excite their usual delight, in which our favourite books, our favourite landscapes, our favourite airs, cease altogether to affect us; and when sometimes we almost wonder what is the secret spell that hangs over our minds, and prevents us from enjoying the pleasures that are within our reach. It is not that the objects of such pleasures are changed; it is not even that we have not the wish to enjoy them, for this we frequently attempt, and attempt in vain; but it is because we come to them either with minds fatigued, and with spirits below their usual tone, or under the influence of other feelings than are necessary for their enjoyment. Whenever we return to that state of mind which is favourable to such emotions, our delight returns with it, and the objects of such pleasures become as favourite as before.
[Page 68]
II. It is further observable, that our sense of the Beauty or Sublimity of every object, depends upon that quality, or those qualities of it which we consider; and that objects of the most acknowledged beauty, cease to affect us with such emotions, when we make any of their indifferent or uninteresting qualities the object of our consideration. There is no production of Taste whatever, which has not many qualities of a very indifferent kind; and there can be no doubt, both that we have it in our power to make any of these qualities the object of our attention, and that we very often do so, without regarding any of those qualities of emotion, upon which its Beauty or its Sublimity is founded. In such cases, I believe every one has felt, that the effect upon his mind corresponds to the quality he considers.
1. It is difficult, for instance, to enumerate the various qualities which may produce the Emotion of Beauty, in the statues of the Venus de Medicis, or the Apollo Belvidere; yet it is undoubtedly possible for any man to see these masterpieces of statuary, and yet feel no Emotion of Beauty. The delicacy, the modesty, the timidity of the one, the grace, the dignity, the majesty of the other, and in both, the inimitable art with which these characters are expressed, are, in general, the qualities which first impress themselves upon
[Page 69]
the imagination of the spectator; yet the man of the best taste may afterwards see them, without thinking of any such expressions. He may observe their dimensions, he may study their proportions, he may attend to the particular state of their preservation, the history of their discovery, or even the nature of the marble of which they are made. All these are as truly qualities of these statues, as their majesty or their grace, and may certainly, at particular times, happen to engage the attention of the man of the most refined taste. That in such cases, no Emotion of Beauty would be felt, and that before it could be felt, it would be necessary for the spectator to withdraw his mind from the consideration of such unaffecting qualities, is too obvious to require any illustration.
The same observation is applicable to every other production of Taste. There is no poem, no painting, no musical composition, however beautiful or sublime, that has not many qualities or attributes, that are altogether uninteresting, and which may not be made the object of attention at particular times, although in general they are left out of consideration. The Inversions of Milton, the compound Epithets of Thomson, are as really qualities of their compositions, as the sublimity of the one, or the tenderness of the other. The person who should make such qualities alone the object of his attention, in the perusal of the Seasons, or the Paradise Lost, though he might certainly receive
[Page 70]
some instruction, would doubtless receive little delight; and if he were really capable of feeling the Sublimity or Beauty which distinguish these compositions, it must be to other and more affecting qualities of them, that he must turn his regard. While these minute and unaffecting circumstances were the objects of his attention, he could be conscious of no greater emotion than what he might receive from the perusal of the most unanimated prose. It is in consequence of this, that the exercise of Criticism never fails to destroy, for the time, our sensibility to the beauty of every composition, and that habits of this kind so generally end in destroying the sensibility of Taste. They accustom us to consider every composition in relation only to rules; they turn our attention from those qualities upon which their effect is founded as objects of Taste, to the consideration of the principles by which this effect is attained, and instead of that deep and enthusiastic delight which the perception of Beauty or Sublimity bestows, they afford us at last no higher enjoyment, than what arises from the observation of the dexterity of Art.
2. The effect of Familiarity, which has so often been observed, in diminishing our sensibility to the objects of Taste, may serve also as an illustration of the same principle. This effect indeed is generally resolved into the influence of habit, which in this, as in every other case, is supposed to diminish the strength of our emotions; yet that it is not solely
[Page 71]
to be ascribed to habit, seems evident from the following consideration, that such indifference is never permanent, and that there are times when the most familiar objects awaken us to the fullest sense of their beauty. The necessity which we are under of considering all such objects when familiar, in very different aspects from those in which they appear to us as objects of Beauty, and of attending only to their unaffecting qualities, may perhaps better account both for this gradual decay of our sensibility, and for its temporary returns.
When a man of any taste, for instance, first settles in a romantic country, he is willing to flatter himself that he can never be satiated with its beauties, and that in their contemplation he shall continue to receive the same exquisite delight. The aspect in which he now sees them, is solely that in which they are calculated to produce Emotion. The streams are known to him only by their gentleness or their majesty, the woods by their solemnity, the rocks by their awfulness or terror. In a very short time, however, he is forced to consider them in very different lights. They are useful to him for some purposes, either of occupation or amusement. They serve as distinctions of different properties, or of different divisions of the country. They become boundaries or land-marks, by which his knowledge of the neighbourhood is ascertained. It is with these qualities that he hears them usually spoken of by all who surround
[Page 72]
him. It is in this light that he must often speak and think of them himself. It is with these qualities accordingly, that he comes at last insensibly to consider them, in the common hours of his life. Even a circumstance so trifling as the assignation of particular names, contributes in a great degree to produce this effect; because the use of such names, in marking the particular situation or place of such objects, naturally leads him to consider the objects themselves in no other light than that of their place or situation. It is with very different feelings that he must now regard the objects that were once so full of beauty. They now occur to his mind, only as topographical distinctions, and are beheld with the indifference such qualities naturally produce. Their majesty, their solemnity, their terror, &c . are gradually obscured, under the mass of unaffecting qualities with which he is obliged to consider them; and excepting at those times when either their appearances or their expressions are new, or when some other incident has awakened that tone or temper of thought with which their expressions agree, and when of consequence he is disposed to consider them in the light of this expression alone, he must be content at last to pass his life without any perception of their beauty.
It is on the same account that the great and the opulent, become gradually so indifferent to those articles of elegance or magnificence with which they are surrounded, and
[Page 73]
which are so effectual in exciting the admiration of other men. The man of inferior rank, whose situation prevents him from all familiarity with such objects, sees them in the light of their magnificence and elegance alone; he sees them too, as signs of that happiness and refined pleasure, which men in his condition so usually and so falsely attribute to those of elevated rank; and he feels accordingly all that unmingled emotion of admiration which such expressions are fitted to produce. But the possessor must often see them in different lights. Whatever may be their elegance or their beauty, they still serve some end, or answer some purpose of his establishment. They are destined to some particular use, or are ornaments of some particular place: They are articles in the furniture of such a room, or ingredients in the composition of such a scene: They were designed by such an artist, executed after such a model, or cost such a sum of money. In such, or in some other equally uninteresting light, he must frequently be obliged both to speak and to think of them. In proportion as the habit of considering them in such a light increases, his disposition, or his opportunity to consider them as objects of Taste diminishes. Their elegance or their magnificence gradually disappears, until at last he comes to regard them (excepting at particular times) with no farther emotion, than what he receives from the common furniture of his house. The application of the same observation to many more important sources of our happiness, is too obvious to require any illustration.
[Page 74]
There is no man, in like manner, acquainted with the history or the literature of antiquity, who has not felt his imagination inflamed by the most trifling circumstances connected with such periods. The names of the Ilyssus, the Tiber, the Forum, the Capitol, &c . have a kind of established grandeur in our apprehensions, because the only light in which we regard them, is that of their relation to those past scenes of greatness. No man, however, is weak enough to believe, that to the citizen of Athens, or of Rome, such names were productive of similar emotions. To him they undoubtedly conveyed no other ideas, than those of the particular divisions of the city in which he dwelt, and were heard of consequence, with the same indifference that the citizen of London now hears of the Strand, or the Tower.
3. The influence of Fashion, in producing so frequent revolutions in the sentiments of men, with regard to the beauty of those objects to which it extends, and in disposing us to neglect or to despise at one time, the objects which We considered as beautiful before, may perhaps be explained upon the same principle. Fashion may be considered in general as the custom of the great. It is the dress, the furniture, the language, the manners of the great world, which constitute what is called the Fashion in each of these articles, and which the rest of mankind are in such haste to adopt, after their example. Whatever the real beauty or
[Page 75]
propriety of these articles may be, it is not in this light that we consider them. They are the signs of that elegance and taste, and splendour, which is so liberally attributed to elevated rank; they are associated with the consequence which such situations bestow; and they establish a kind of external distinction between this envied station, and those humble and mortifying conditions of life, to which no man is willing to belong. It is in the light therefore of this connection only, that we are disposed to consider them; and they accordingly affect us with the same emotion of delight, which we receive from the consideration of taste or elegance, in more permanent instances. As soon, however, as this association is destroyed, as soon as the caprice or the inconstancy of the great have introduced other usages in their place, our opinion of their beauty is immediately destroyed. The quality which was formerly so pleasing or so interesting in them, the quality which alone we considered, is now appropriated to other objects, and our admiration readily transfers itself to those newer forms, which have risen into distinction from the same cause. The forsaken Fashion, whatever may be its real or intrinsic beauty, falls for the present at least, into neglect or contempt; because, either our admiration of it was founded only upon that quality which it has lost, or because it has now descended to the inferior ranks, and is of consequence associated with ideas of meanness and vulgarity. A few years bring round again the same Fashion. The same association attends it,
[Page 76]
and our admiration is renewed as before. It is on the same account, that they who are most liable to the seduction of Fashion, are people on whose minds the slighter associations have a strong effect. A plain man is incapable of such associations: a man of sense is above them; but the young and the frivolous, whose principles of Taste are either unformed, or whose minds are unable to maintain any settled opinions, are apt to lose sight of every other quality in such objects, but their relation to the practice of the great, and of course, to suffer their sentiments of beauty to vary with the caprice of this practice. It is the same cause which attaches the old to the fashions of their youth. They are associated with the memory of their better days, with a thousand recollections of happiness and gaiety, and heartfelt pleasures, which they now no longer feel. The Fashions of modern times have no such pleasing associations to them. They are connected to them, only with ideas of thoughtless gaiety, or childish caprice. It is the Fashions of their youth alone, therefore, that they consider as beautiful.
[Page 77]
III. It may farther be observed, that the dependence of Taste upon Sensibility, or the necessity of some simple Emotion being excited, before the Beauty or Sublimity of any object is perceived, is so far from being remote from general observation, that it is the foundation of some of the most common judgments we form with regard to the characters of men.
1. When we are but slightly acquainted with any person, and have had no opportunities of knowing the particular nature of his sentiments or turn of mind, we never venture to pronounce, or even to guess with regard to his Taste; and if, in such a stage of our acquaintance, we find that his opinions of Beauty are very different from our own, we are so far from being surprised at it, that we set ourselves very deliberately to account for it, either by recalling to mind those habits or occupations of his life which may have led him to different kinds of emotion, or by supposing that his natural sensibility is very different from our own. On the other hand, when we are well acquainted with any person, and know intimately the particular turn or sensibility of his mind, although we should never have happened to know his sentiments of Sublimity or Beauty, we yet venture very boldly to pronounce, whether any particular class of objects
[Page 78]
will affect him with such sentiments or not. The foundation of our judgment, in such cases, is the agreement or disagreement of such objects, with the particular turn or character of his affections; and if we are well acquainted with the person, our judgment is seldom wrong. In the same manner, although we are altogether unacquainted with any person, yet if we are informed of his particular Taste, or of his favourite objects of Beauty or Sublimity, we not only feel ourselves disposed to conclude from thence, with regard to his particular turn or character of mind; but if the instances are sufficiently numerous, we in general conclude right. It is scarcely possible for any man to read the works of a Poet, without forming some judgment of his character and affections as a man, or without concluding, that the magnanimity, the tenderness, the gaiety, or the melancholy, distinguished him in private life, which characterise the scenes or descriptions of his works. I am far from contending, that such judgments, in general, are just; not only from the rashness with which they so commonly are formed, but still more, in those cases where we reason from any person's Taste, from the impossibility of knowing whether this Taste is genuine, or whether it is founded upon some accidental associations. All that I mean to conclude is, that such judgments are a proof of the connection between Taste and Sensibility; and that they could not be formed, unless we found from experience, that no qualities affect us with the
[Page 79]
Pleasures of Taste, but such as are productive of some simple Emotion.
2. It is farther to be observed, that the sense of the dependence of the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, upon the accidental or temporary disposition of the mind, is also very strongly expressed, both in common conduct and in common conversation. To a man under some present impression of joy, we should not venture to appeal with regard to the beauty of any melancholy or pathetic composition. To a man under the dominion of sorrow, we should much less presume to present even the most beautiful composition, which contained only images of joy. In both cases, we should feel, that the compositions in question demanded different emotions from those that the persons had in their power to bestow; that while their present dispositions continued, there was no chance of the composition's being interesting to them; and if we really wished to know their opinions, we would naturally wait till we found them in such a disposition as was favourable to the emotions to which either of the compositions was addressed.
When any poem, or painting, or scene in nature peculiarly affects us, we are generally in haste to shew it to some friend, whose taste we know is similar to our own; and our minds are not fully satiated with its beauties, until we are able to unite with our own peculiar emotion, that pleasing surprise which
[Page 80]
we participate with one, to whom it is new, and that sentiment of gladness, which it is so natural to feel, when we find that we have been able to communicate delight. It sometimes happens, however, that the person to whom we shew it, does not feel the pleasure we expected. In such a case, though we are a little surprised, we are not much disappointed. We tell him, that he happens not to be in the humour to be pleased; that at another time we are sure he will feel its beauty; and though we should not happen to know what is the peculiar cause of his indifference, we yet satisfy ourselves, that there is some cause which prevents him from the indulgence of the particular emotion which the scene or the composition demands, and which we know he is in general disposed to indulge. It happens, accordingly, if we are really well acquainted with the person, and if this beauty is not founded upon some particular association of our own, that our expectation is gratified, and that when he returns to his ordinary temper of mind, he becomes sensible to all the beauty or sublimity which we had found in it. Many other instances of the same kind might be produced. In all cases, I think, where we discover in other people a weaker sense with regard to the beauty of particular objects than in ourselves, and when we can recollect no accidental association which may account for the superiority of our own emotion, We are naturally inclined to attribute it either to some temporary occupation or embarrassment of their minds when such objects were
[Page 81]
presented to them, or if we find that this was not the case, to some original deficiency in the sensibility of their hearts. To say that a man has no feelings of tenderness or magnanimity, accounts to us at once for his want of sensibility to the beauty of any actions or species of composition, which are founded on such emotions. In the same manner, to say that at any particular time he was under the dominion of opposite feelings, as fully accounts to us for his insensibility at such a time to the beauty of such actions or compositions. I apprehend, that these very natural and very common judgments could not be formed, unless we found from experience, that those qualities only are felt as beautiful or sublime, which are found to produce emotion.
IV. The proposition which I have now endeavoured to illustrate, might be illustrated from a variety of other considerations, and particularly from the nature of the Fine Arts. The object of these Arts is to produce the Emotions of Taste; and it might easily be shown,
1. That the only subjects that are in themselves proper for the imitation of these Arts, are such as are productive of some species of Simple Emotion:
[Page 82]
2. That when these subjects are of a contrary kind, the method by which alone they can be rendered either beautiful or sublime, is by the addition of some interesting or affecting quality:
3. That the extent, as well as the power of the different fine arts, in producing such emotions, is in proportion to the capacity which they afford the artist of making such additions; and that in this respect, Poetry, by employing the instrument of language, by means of which it can express every quality of mind as well as of body, has a decided superiority over the rest of these arts, which are limited to the expression of the qualities of body alone.
These considerations, however, besides their being familiar to those who have reflected upon these subjects, would necessarily lead to discussions far beyond the limits of these Essays. The reader, who would wish to see some of these principles illustrated, will find it very fully and very beautifully done in Dr Beattie's Essays upon Poetry and Music.
If the preceding illustrations are just: if it is found, that no qualities are felt, either as beautiful or sublime, but such as accord with the habitual or temporary sensibility of our minds; that objects of the most acknowledged beauty fail to excite their usual emotions, when we regard them in the
[Page 83]
light of any of their uninteresting or unaffecting qualities; and that our common judgments of the characters of men are founded upon this experience, it seems, that there can be no doubt of the truth of the proposition itself.
[Page 84]
SECTION III. If it is true, that those trains of thought which attend the Emotions of Taste, are uniformly distinguished by some general principle of connection, it ought to be found, that no Composition of objects or qualities, in fact, produces such emotions, in which this Unity of character or of emotion is not preserved. This proposition also may be illustrated from the most superficial review of the Principles of Composition, in the different Arts of Taste.
I. There is no man of common Taste, who has not often lamented that confusion of expression which so frequently takes place, even in the most beautiful scenes of real Nature, and which prevents him from indulging to the full, the peculiar emotion which the scene itself is fitted to inspire. The cheerfulness of the morning is often disturbed by circumstances of minute or laborious occupation,—the solemnity of noon by noise and bustling industry,—the tranquillity and melancholy of evening by vivacity and vulgar gaiety. It is seldom even that any unity of character is preserved among the inanimate objects of such scenery.
[Page 85]
The sublimest situations are often disfigured, by objects that we feel unworthy of them,—by the traces of cultivation, or attempts towards improvement,—by the poverty of their woods, or of their streams, or some other of their great constituent features,—by appearances of uniformity or regularity, that almost induce the idea of art. The loveliest scenes, in the same manner, are frequently disturbed by unaccording circumstances, by the signs of cultivation,—the regularity of inclosures,—the traces of manufactures, and what is worse than all, by the presumptuous embellishments of fantastic Taste. Amid this confusion of incidents, the general character of the scene is altogether lost: we scarcely know to what class of objects to give our attention; and having viewed it with astonishment, rather than with delight, we at last busy ourselves in imaginary improvements, and in conceiving what its beauty might be, if every feature were removed which now serves to interrupt its expression, and to diminish its effect.
What we thus attempt in imagination, it is the business of the art of Gardening to execute; and the great source of the superiority of its productions to the original scenes in nature, consists in the purity and harmony of its composition, in the power which the artist enjoys, to remove from his landscape whatever is hostile to its effect, or unsuited to its character, and by selecting only such circumstances as accord with the general expression of the scene, to awaken an
[Page 86]
emotion more full, more simple, and more harmonious than any we can receive from the scenes of Nature itself.
It is by this rule accordingly, that the excellence of all such compositions is determined. In real Nature, we often forgive, or are willing to forget slight inaccuracies or trifling inconsistencies; but in such productions of design, we expect and require more perfect correspondence. Every object that is not suited to the character of the scene, or that has not an effect in strengthening the expression by which it is distinguished, we condemn as an intrusion, and consider as a reproach upon the taste of the artist. When this expectation, on the contrary, is fully gratified, when the circumstances of the scenery are all such as accord with the peculiar emotion which the scene is fitted to inspire, when the hand of the artist disappears, and the embellishments of his fancy press themselves upon our belief, as the voluntary profusion of Nature, we immediately pronounce that the composition is perfect, we acknowledge that he has attained the end of his art; and in yielding ourselves up to the emotion which his composition demands, we afford him the most convincing mark of our applause. In the power which the art of gardening thus possesses, in common with the other fine arts, of withdrawing from its imitations whatever is inconsistent with their expression, and of adding whatever, may contribute to strengthen, or to extend their
[Page 87]
effect, consists the great superiority which it possesses over the originals from which they are copied.
II. The art of Landscape painting is yet superior in its effect, from the capacity which the artist enjoys, of giving both greater extent and greater unity to his composition. In the art of gardening, the great materials of the scene are provided by Nature, and the artist must satisfy himself with that degree of expression which she has bestowed. In a landscape, on the contrary, the painter has the choice of the circumstances he is to represent, and can give whatever force or extent he pleases to the expression he wishes to convey. In gardening, the materials of the scene are few, and those few unwieldy; and the artist must often content himself with the reflection, that he has given the best disposition in his power to the scanty and intractable materials of Nature. In a landscape, on the contrary, the whole range of scenery is before the eye of the painter. He may select from a thousand scenes, the circumstances which are to characterise a single composition, and may unite into one expression, the scattered features with which Nature has feebly marked a thousand situations. The momentary effects of light or shade, the fortunate incidents which chance sometimes throws in, to improve the expression of real
[Page 88]
scenery, and which can never again be recalled, he has it in his power to perpetuate upon his canvas: Above all, the occupations of men, so important in determining, or in heightening the characters of Nature, and which are seldom compatible with the scenes of gardening, fall easily within the reach of his imitation, and afford him the means of producing both greater strength and greater unity of expression, than is to be found either in the rude, or in the embellished state of real scenery.
While it is by the invention of such circumstances that we estimate the genius of the artist, it is by their composition that his Taste is uniformly determined. The mere assemblage of picturesque incidents, the most unimproved Taste will condemn. Some general principle is universally demanded, some decided expression, to which the meaning of the several parts may be referred, and which by affording us, as it were, the key of the scene, may lead us to feel from the whole of the composition, that full and undisturbed emotion which we are prepared to indulge. It is this purity and simplicity of composition, accordingly, which has uniformly distinguished the great masters of the art, from the mere copiers of Nature. It is by their adherence to it, that their fame has been attained; and the names of Salvator, and Claude Lorrain, can scarcely be mentioned, without bringing to mind the peculiar character of their
[Page 89]
compositions, and the different emotions which their representations of Nature are destined to produce.
It is not, however, on our first acquaintance with this art, that we either discover its capacity, or feel its effects; and perhaps the progress of Taste, in this respect, may afford a further illustration of the great and fundamental Principle of Composition. What we first understand of painting is, that it is a simple art of imitation, and what we expect to find in it, is the representation of the common scenes of nature that surround us. It is with some degree of surprise, accordingly, that we at first observe the different scenery with which the Painter presents us, and with an emotion rather of wonder, than of delight, that we gaze at a style of landscape, which has so little resemblance to the ordinary views to which we are accustomed. In the copy of a real scene, we can discover and admire the skill of the artist; but in the representation of desart or of desolate prospects, in appearances of Solitude or Tempest, we perceive no traces of imitation, and wonder only at the perversity of Taste, which could have led to the choice of so disagreeable subjects.
As soon, however, as from the progress of our own sensibility, or from our acquaintance with poetical composition, we begin to connect expression with such views of Nature, we begin also to understand and to feel the beauties of landscape
[Page 90]
painting. It is with a different view that we now consider it. It is not for imitation we look, but for character. It is not the art, but the genius of the Painter, which now gives value to his compositions; and the language he employs is found not only to speak to the eye, but to affect the imagination and the heart. It is not now a simple copy which we see, nor is our Emotion limited to the cold pleasure which arises from the perception of accurate Imitation. It is a creation of Fancy with which the artist presents us, in which only the greater expressions of Nature are retained, and where more interesting emotions are awakened, than those which we experience from the usual tameness of common scenery. In the same proportion in which we thus discover the expression of landscape, we begin to collect the principles of its composition. The crowd of incidents which used to dazzle our earlier Taste, as expressive both of the skill and of the invention of the artist, begin to appear to us, as inconsistence or confusion. When our hearts are affected, we seek only for objects congenial to our emotion; and the Simplicity, which we used to call the Poverty of landscape, begins now to be welcome to us, as permitting us to indulge, without interruption, those interesting trains of thought which the character of the scene is fitted to inspire. As our knowledge of the expressions of Nature increases, our sensibility to the beauty or to the defects of composition becomes more keen, until at last our admiration attaches itself only to those greater productions of the art, in
[Page 91]
which one pure and unmingled character is preserved, and in which no feature is admitted, which may prevent it from falling upon the heart, with one full and harmonious effect.
In this manner, the object of painting is no sooner discovered, than the unity of expression is felt to be the great secret of its power; the superiority which it at last assumes over the scenery of Nature, is found to arise in one important respect, from the greater purity and simplicity which its composition can attain; and perhaps this simple rule comprehends all that Criticism can prescribe for the regulation of this delightful art.
III. But whatever may be the superiority of painting to the originals from which it is copied, it is still limited, in comparison of that which Poetry enjoys. The Painter addresses himself to the Eye. The Poet speaks to the Imagination. The Painter can represent no other qualities of Nature, but those which we discern by the sense of sight. The Poet can blend with those, all the qualities which we perceive by means of our other senses. The Painter can seize only one moment of existence, and can represent no other qualities of objects than what this single moment
[Page 92]
affords. The whole history of Nature is within the reach of the Poet, the varying appearances which its different productions assume in the progress of their growth and decay, and the powerful effects which are produced by the contrast of these different aspects or expressions. The Painter can give to the objects of his scenery, only the visible and material qualities which are discerned by the eye, and must leave the interpretation of their expression to the imagination of the spectator; but the Poet can give animation to whatever he describes. All the sublimity and beauty of the moral and intellectual world are at his disposal; and by bestowing on the inanimate objects of his scenery the characters and affections of mind, he can produce at once an expression which every capacity may understand, and every heart may feel. Whatever may be the advantage which painting enjoys, from the greater clearness and precision of its images, it is much more than balanced by the unbounded powers which the instrument of language affords to the Poet, both in the selection of the objects of his description, and in the decision of their expression.
It is, accordingly, by the preservation of Unity of character or expression, that the excellence of poetical description is determined; and perhaps the superior advantages which the Poet enjoys in the choice of his materials, renders our demand for its observance more rigid, than in any of the other arts of Taste. In real Nature, we willingly
[Page 93]
accommodate ourselves to the ordinary defects of scenery, and accept with gratitude, those singular aspects in which some predominant character is tolerably preserved. In the compositions of Gardening, we make allowance for the narrow limits within which the invention of the artist is confined, and are dissatisfied only when great inconsistencies are retained. Even in painting, we are still mindful that it is the objects only of one sense that the artist can represent; and rather lament his restraints, than condemn his Taste, if our minds are not fully impressed with the emotions he studies to raise, or if the different incidents of his composition do not fully accord in the degree, as well as in the nature of their expression. But the descriptions of the Poet can claim no such indulgence. With the capacity of blending in his composition the objects of every sense; with the past and the future, as well as the present, in his power; above all, with the mighty spell of mind at his command, with which he can raise every object that he touches, into life and sentiment, we feel that he is unworthy of his art, if our imaginations are not satiated with his composition, and if in the chastity, as well as the power of his expression, he has not gratified the demand of our hearts.
It would be an unpleasing, and indeed an unnecessary task, to illustrate this observation, by the defects or absurdities of Poets of inferior genius, or imperfect taste. It will perhaps be more useful, to produce a few instances
[Page 94]
of description from some of the greatest Poets, in which very trifling circumstances serve to destroy, or at least to diminish their effect, when they do not fully coincide with the nature of the emotion which the descriptions are intended to raise.
In that fine passage in the second book of the Georgics, in which Virgil celebrates the praises of his native country, after these fine lines,
Hic ver assiduum atque alienis mensibus æstas.
Bis gravidæ pecudes, bis pomis utilis arbos:
At rabidæ tigres absunt, et sæva leonum
Semina, nec miseros fallunt aconita legentes,
Nec rapit immensos orbes per humum, neque tanto
Squameus in spiram tractu se colligit anguis.
There is no reader whose enthusiasm is not checked by the cold and prosaic line which follows:
Adde tot egregias urbes, operumque laborem.
The tameness and vulgarity of the transition dissipates at once the emotion we had shared with the Poet, and reduces him in our opinion to the level of a mere describer.
[Page 95]
The effect of the following nervous and beautiful lines in the conclusion of the same book, is nearly destroyed by a similar defect. After these lines,
   Hanc olim veteres vitam coluere Sabini,
Hanc Remus et frater; sic fortis Etruria crevit,
Scilicet et rerum facta est pulcherrima Roma.
We little expect the following spiritless conclusion:
Septemque una sibi muro circumdedit arces.
There is a still more surprising instance of this fault in one of the most pathetic passages of the whole poem, in the description of the disease among the cattle, which concludes the third Georgic. The passage is as follows:
Ecce autem duro fumans sub vomere taurus
Concidit: et mixtum spumis vomit ore cruorem .
Extremosque ciet gemitus: it tristis arator
Mœrentem abjungens fraterna morte juvencum,
Atque opere in medio defixa relinquit aratra.
The unhappy image in the second line is less calculated to excite compassion than disgust, and is singularly ill suited to that tone of tenderness and delicacy which the Poet has
[Page 96]
every where else so successfully maintained, in describing the progress of this loathsome disease.
In the speech of Agamemnon to Idomeneus, in the fourth book of the Iliad, a circumstance is introduced altogether inconsistent both with the dignity of the speech, and the majesty of Epic Poetry.
Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe
To worth like thine, what praise shall we bestow!
To Thee the foremost honours are decreed
First in the fight, and every graceful deed.
For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls
Restore our blood, and raise the warriors souls,
Tho' all the rest, with stated rules be bound
Unmix'd, unmeasur'd are thy goblets crown'd.
Instances of the same defect may be found in the comparison of the sudden cure of Mars's wound to the coagulation of curds,—in that of Ajax retreating before the Trojans to an ass driven by boys from a field of corn,—in the comparison of an obstinate combat between the Greeks and the Trojans, to the stubborn struggle between two peasants, about the limits of their respective grounds,—in that of Ajax flying from ship to ship, to encounter the Trojans, to
[Page 97]
a horseman riding several horses at once, and showing his dexterity, by vaulting from one to another.
There is a similar fault in the two following passages from Milton, where the introduction of trifling and ludicrous circumstances, diminishes the Beauty of the one, and the Sublimity of the other.
Now Morn her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sow'd the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam wak'd: so custom'd, for his sleep
Was airy light from pure digestion bred
And temp'rate vapours bland , which th' only sound
Of leaves, and fuming rills, Aurora's fan
Lightly dispers'd, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough. Book v.
   They ended parle, and both address'd for fight
Unspeakable: for who, though with the tongue
Of angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such height
Of godlike power? for likest gods they seem'd,
Stood they or mov'd, in stature, motion, arms,
Fit to decide the empire of great Heav'n.
Now wav'd their fiery swords, and in the air
Made horrid circles: two broad suns their shields
[Page 98]
Blaz'd opposite, while Expectation stood
In horror; from each hand with speed retired
Where erst was thickest fight, th' angelic throng ,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion . Book vi.
In the following passage from the sixth book of Lucan's Pharsalia, where he describes the incantations of the witch Eryctho, and of whose voice he had before said with great sublimity,
Omne nefas superi, prima jam voce precanti
Concedunt, carmenque timent audire secundum.
in labouring to increase the terror of the reader, he has rendered his description almost ludicrous, by accumulating images which serve only to confuse, and which in themselves have scarcely any other relation than that of mere noise.
Tum vox Lethæos cunctis pollentior herbis
Excantare Deos, confundit murmura primum
Dissona, et humanæ multum discordia linguæ.
Latratus habet illa canum, gemitusque luporum
Quod trepidus bubo, quod strix nocturna queruntur,
Quod strident, ululantque feræ, quod sibilat anguis,
Exprimit, et planctus illisæ cautibus undæ
[Page 99]
Silvarumque sonum, fractæque tonitrua nubis;
Tot rerum vox una fuit.—
Such a collection of unaccording images is scarcely less absurd than the following description of the Nightingale, by Marini:
Una voce pennuta, un suon' volante
E vestito di penne, un vivo fiato,
Una piuma canora, un canto alato,
Un spirituel che d' harmonia composto
Vive in anguste viscere nascosto.
Even less obvious inconsistencies are sufficient to diminish the effect of poetical description, when they do not perfectly coincide with the general emotion.
There is a circumstance introduced in the following passage from Horace, which is liable to this censure:
Solvitur acris Hyems, grata vice veris et Favoni,
   Trahuntque siccas machinæ carinas,
Ac neque jam stabulis gaudet pecus, aut arator igni,
   Nec prata canis albicant pruinis.
Jam Cytherea choros ducit Venus, imminente luna,
   Junctæque Nymphis Gratiæ decentes
Alterno terram quatiunt pede.—
[Page 100]
The image contained in the second line is obviously improper. It suggests ideas of labour, and difficulty, and art, and has no correspondence with that emotion of gladness with which we behold the return of the Spring, and which is so successfully maintained by the gay and pleasing imagery in the rest of the passage.
In a description of the morning, in the charming poem of the Minstrel, there is a circumstance to which the severity of Criticism might object upon the same principle.
The cottage curs at early pilgrim bark,
Crown'd with her pail, the tripping milkmaid sings,
The whistling plowman stalks a-field, and hark!
Down the rough slope the ponderous waggon rings.
The image in the last line, though undoubtedly a striking one in itself, and very beautifully described, is yet improper, as it is inconsistent both with the period of society, and the scenery of the country to which the Minstrel refers.
There is a similar error in the following fine description from Shakespeare.
   The current, that with gentle murmur glides
Thou know'st, being stopp'd, impatiently doth rage,
[Page 101]
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with th' enamel'd stones,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage :
And so by many winding nooks he strays
With willing sport to the wild ocean.
The pleasing personification which we attribute to a brook, is founded upon the faint belief of voluntary motion, and is immediately checked, when the Poet descends to any minute or particular resemblance.
Even in that inimitable description which Virgil has given of a storm, in the first book of the Georgics, a very accurate Taste may perhaps discover some slight deficiencies.
Sæpe etiam immensum cœlo venit agmen aquarum,
Et fœdam glomerant tempestatem imbribus atris
Collectæ ex alto nubes. Ruit arduus æther
Et pluvia ingenti sata læta, boumque labores ,
Diluit. Implentur fossæ , et cava flumina crescunt
Cum sonitu, fervetque fretis spirantibus æquor.
Ipse pater, media nimborum in nocte, corusca
Fulmina molitur dextra, quo maxuma motu
Terra tremit: fugere feræ, et mortalia corda
Per gentes humiles stravit pavor. Ille flagranti
[Page 102]
Aut Atho, aut Rhodopen, aut alta Ceraunia telo
Dejicit: ingeminant Austri, et densissimus imber.
If there was any passage to which I would object in these wonderful lines, it would be to those that are marked in Italics. I acknowledge indeed, that the “pluvia ingenti sata læta boumque labores diluit,” is defensible from the connection of the imagery with the subject of the poem; but the “implentur fossæ” is both an unnecessary and a degrading circumstance, when compared with the magnificent effects that are described in the rest of the passage.
I shall conclude these illustrations, with two passages, descriptive of the same scene, from different Poets, in which the effects of imperfect and of harmonious composition are strikingly exemplified.
In the “Argonautica” of Apollonius Rhodius, when Medea is described in a state of deep agitation between her unwillingness to betray her father, and her desire to save her lover Jason, the anxiety of her mind is expressed by the following contrast, of which I give a literal translation:
“The night now covered the earth with her shade; and in the open sea, the pilots, upon their decks, observed the star of Orion. The travellers and the watchmen slumbered. Even the grief of mothers who has lost their children,
[Page 103]
was suspended by sleep. In the cities there was neither heard the cry of dogs, nor the noise nor murmur of men. Silence reigned in the midst of darkness. Medea alone knew not the charms of this peaceful night, so deeply was her soul impressed with fears for Jason.”
Virgil describes a similar situation as follows:
   Nox erat, et placidum carpebant fessa soporem
Corpora per terras, sylvæque et sæva quierant
Æquora: quum medio volvuntur sidera lapsu
Quum tacet omnis ager: pecudes, pictæque volucres,
Quæque lacus late liquidos, quæque aspera dumis
Rura tenent, somno positæ sub nocte silenti
Lenibant curas, et corda oblita laborum:
At non infelix animi Phænissa.
“On voit ici, (says M. Marmontel, with his usual taste and discernment), non seulement la superiorité du talent, la vie, et l'ame repandues dans une poësie harmonieuse, et du coloris le plus pur, mais singulierement encor la superiorité du gout. Dans la peinture du poëte Grec, il y a des details inutiles, il y en a de contraires à l'effet du tableau. Les observations des pilotes, dans le silence de la nuit, portent euxmêmes le caractére de la vigilance et de l'inquietude, et ne contrastent point avec le trouble de Medée. L'image d'une mere qui a perdu ses enfants est faite pour distraire de celle
[Page 104]
d'une amante; elle en affoiblit l'interét, et le poëte en la lui opposant, est allé contre son dessein; au lieu que, dans le tableau de Virgile, tout est réduit à l'unité. C'est la nature entiere, dans le calme et dans le sommeil, tandis que la malheureuse Didon veille seule, et se livre en proie à tous les tourments de l'amour. Enfin, dans le poëte Grec, le cri des chiens, le sommeil des portiers, sont des details minutieux et indignes de l'epopée, au lieu que dans Virgile tout est noble et peint à grands traits: huit vers embrassent la nature.” Encyclopedie, voc. Imitation.
In these illustrations of the necessity of unity of expression, for the production of the Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty, I have chiefly confined myself to such instances in poetry, as are descriptive of natural scenery, because they are most within the observation of that class of readers, to whom any illustrations of this point are necessary. The same principle extends with equal force, to every other branch of poetical imitation, to the description of the characters, the sentiments and the passions of men: And one great source of the superiority which such imitations have over the originals from which they are copied, consists in these cases, as well as the former, in the power which the artist enjoys, of giving an unity of character to his descriptions, which is not to be found in real Nature. The illustration of this point, however, as well as of the general
[Page 105]
fact, that all such descriptions are defective, in which this unity is not preserved, I must leave to the reader's own observation. In the same view, I leave the consideration of the effect of Contrast; a principle which may at first seem adverse to these conclusions, but which in fact is one of the strongest confirmations of them. The reader who is accustomed to such speculations, need not be reminded that the real end of Contrast is to strengthen the effect of the general Emotion,—that its propriety is determined by the nature of that Emotion,—that it is justly applied only in those cases where the Emotion is violent and demands relief, or faint and requires support, or long continued and needs repose, —and that in all cases where it exceeds these limits, or where it does not serve to invigorate the character of the Composition, it serves only to obstruct or to diminish its effect; and the reader to whom these principles are new, may find amusement in verifying them.
IV. The Unity of character which is thus demanded in poetical description, for the production of the Emotions of Taste, is demanded also in every species of poetical Composition, whatever may be its extent.
[Page 106]
In describing the events of life, it is the business of the historian to represent them as they really happened; to investigate their causes, however minute; and to report the motives of the actors, however base or mean. In a poetical representation of such events, no such confusion is permitted to appear. A representation destined by its nature to affect, must not only be founded upon some great or interesting subject, but in the management of this subject, such means only must be employed as are fitted to preserve, and to promote the interest and the sympathy of the reader. The Historian who should relate the voyage of Æneas, and the foundation of Rome, must of necessity relate many trifling and uninteresting events, which could be valuable only from their being true. The Poet who should attempt this subject, must introduce only pathetic or sublime events,—must unfold their connection with greater clearness,—must point out their consequences as of greater moment,—and must spread over all that tone and character of dignity which we both expect and demand in a composition, destined to excite the sensibility, and to awaken the admiration of mankind. Even that species of poem which has been called by the Critics the Historical Epic, and which is only a poetical narration of real events, is yet in some measure subjected to the same rule; and though we do not expect from it, the sublime machinery or the artful conduct of the real Epic, we yet demand a more uniform tone of elevation, and a purer and more dignified selection of incidents,
[Page 107]
than from the strict narrative of real history. In both, the Poet assumes the character of a person deeply impressed with the magnitude or the interest of the story he relates. To impress his reader with similar sentiments, is the end and object of his work; and he can no otherwise do this, than by presenting to his mind only such incidents as accord with these great emotions, by leaving out whatever in the real history of the event may be mean or unininteresting, and by the invention of every circumstance that, while it is consistent with probability, may raise the subject of his work, into greater importance in his esteem. That it is by this rule accordingly the conduct of the Epic Poem is determined, is too obvious to require any illustration.
The same Unity of emotion is demanded in Dramatic Poetry, at least in the highest and noblest species of it, Tragedy; and in the conduct of the Drama, this unity of character is fully as essential as any of those three unities, of which every book of Criticism is so full. If it is painful to us, when we are deeply engaged in some great interest, to turn our minds to the consideration of some other event, it is fully as painful to us, in the midst of our admiration or our sympathy, and while our hearts are swelling with tender or with elevated emotions, to descend to the consideration of minute, or mean, or unimportant incidents, however naturally they may be connected with the story, or however
[Page 108]
much we may be convinced, that they actually took place. The envy which Elizabeth entertained of the beauty of Mary of Scotland, was certainly one cause, and probably a great cause of the distresses of that most unfortunate Queen; but if a Poet, in a tragedy founded upon her pathetic story, should introduce the scene which Melville describes in his Memoirs, and in which the weakness of Elizabeth is so apparent, we should consider it both as degrading to the dignity of Tragedy, and unsuited to the nature of the emotion which the story is fitted to raise. It is hence that Tragicomedy is utterly indefensible, after all that has been said in its defence. If it is painful to us in such cases to descend to the consideration of indifferent incidents, it is a thousand times more painful to be forced to attend to those that are ludicrous; and there is no man of the most common sensibility, who does not feel his mind revolt and his indignation kindle at the absurdity of the Poet, who can thus break in upon the sacred retirement of his sorrow, with the intolerable noise of vulgar mirth. Had the taste of Shakespeare been equal to his genius, or had his knowledge of the laws of the Drama corresponded to his knowledge of the human heart, the effect of his compositions would not only have been greater than it now is, but greater perhaps than we can well imagine; and had he attempted to produce through a whole composition, that powerful and uniform interest which he can raise in a single scene, nothing of that perfection
[Page 109]
would have been wanting, of which we may conceive this sublime art to be capable.
Of the necessity of this Unity of Emotion, Corneille is the first Tragedian of modern Europe who seems to have been sensible; and I know not whether the faults of this Poet have not been exaggerated by English Critics, from their inattention to the end which he seems to have prescribed to himself in his works. To present a faithful picture of human life, or of human passions, seems not to have been his conception of the intention of Tragedy. His object, on the contrary, seems to have been, to exalt and to elevate the imagination; to awaken only the greatest and noblest passions of the human mind; and by presenting such scenes and such events alone, as could most powerfully promote this end, to render the Theatre a school of sublime instruction, rather than an imitation of common life. To effect this purpose, he was early led to see the necessity, or disposed by the greatness of his own mind to the observation, of an uniform character of dignity; to disregard whatever of common, of trivial, or even of pathetic in the originals from which he copied, might serve to interrupt this peculiar flow of Emotion; and instead of giving a simple copy of Nature, to adorn the events he represented, with all that eloquence and poetry could afford. He maintains, accordingly, in all his best plays, amid much exaggeration and much of the false eloquence of his time, a tone
[Page 110]
of commanding and even of fascinating dignity, which disposes us almost to believe, that we are conversing with Beings of an higher order than our own; and which blinds us, at least for a time, to all the faults and all the imperfections of his composition. I am far from being disposed to defend his opinions of Tragedy, and still less to excuse his extravagance and bombast; but I conceive, that no person can feel his beauties, or do justice to his merits, who does not regard his tragedies in this view; and I think that some allowance ought to be made for the faults of a Poet, who first shewed to his country the example of regular Tragedy, and whose works the great Prince of Condé called “The Breviary of Kings.”
In the former section, I have endeavoured to show, that no objects are in themselves fitted to produce the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, which are not productive of some simple emotion. In this, I have attempted to show, that no Composition of objects or qualities is in fact productive of such emotions, in which an Unity of Character is not preserved. The slight illustrations which I have now offered, are probably sufficient to point out the truth of the general principle; but the application of it to the different Arts of Taste, and the explanation of the great rules of Composition from this constitution of our nature, are objects far beyond the limits of these Essays. I must satisfy myself, therefore, with observing in general, that in all the Fine
[Page 111]
Arts, that Composition is most excellent, in which the different parts most fully unite in the production of one unmingled Emotion, and that Taste the most perfect, where the perception of this relation of objects, in point of Expression, is most delicate and precise.
[Page 112]
CONCLUSION. I. The illustrations in the first chapter of this Essay are intended to show, that whenever the Emotions of Beauty or Sublimity are felt, that exercise of Imagination is produced which consists in the prosecution of a train of thought.
The illustrations in the second chapter are intended to point out the distinction between such trains, and our ordinary trains of thought, and to show, that this difference consists, 1 st , In the ideas which compose them being in all cases Ideas of Emotion; and, 2 dly , In their possessing an uniform principle of connection through the whole of the train. The effect, therefore, which is produced upon the mind, by objects of Taste, may be considered as consisting in the production of a regular or consistent train of Ideas of Emotion.
[Page 113]
II. The account which I have now given of this effect, may perhaps serve to point out an important distinction between the Emotions of Taste, and all our different Emotions of Simple Pleasure. In the case of these last emotions, no additional train of thought is necessary. The pleasurable feeling follows immediately the presence of the object or quality, and has no dependence upon any thing for its perfection, but the sound state of the sense by which it is received. The Emotions of Joy, Pity, Benevolence, Gratitude, Utility, Propriety, Novelty, &c . might undoubtedly be felt, although we had no such power of mind as that by which we follow out a train of ideas, and certainly are felt in a thousand cases, when this faculty is unemployed.
In the case of the Emotions of Taste, on the other hand, it seems evident, that this exercise of mind is necessary, and that unless this train of thought is produced, these emotions are unfelt. Whatever may be the nature of that simple emotion which any object is fitted to excite, whether that of Gaiety, Tranquillity, Melancholy, &c . if it produce not a train of thought in our minds, we are conscious only of that simple Emotion. Whenever, on the contrary, this train of thought, or this exercise of imagination is produced, we are conscious of an emotion of a higher and more
[Page 114]
pleasing kind; and which, though it is impossible to describe in language, we yet distinguish by the name of the Emotion of Taste. If accordingly the Author of our nature had denied us this faculty of imagination, it should seem that these emotions could not have been felt, and that all our emotions would have been limited to those of simple pleasure.
The Emotions of Taste may therefore be considered as distinguished from the Emotions of Simple Pleasure, by their being dependent upon the exercise of our imagination; and though founded in all cases upon some simple Emotion, as yet further requiring the employment of this faculty for their existence.
III. As in every operation of Taste there are thus two different faculties employed, viz . some affection or emotion raised, and the imagination excited to a train of thought corresponding to this emotion, the peculiar pleasure which attends, and which constitutes the Emotions of Taste, may naturally be considered as composed of the pleasures which separately attend the exercise of these faculties, or in other words, as produced by the union of pleasing emotion, with the pleasure which by the constitution of our nature is annexed to the exercise of imagination. That both these pleasures
[Page 115]
are felt in every operation of Taste, seems to me very agreeable to common experience and observation.
1. That in every case of the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, that simple Emotion of Pleasure is felt, which arises from the peculiar nature of the object perceived, every man, I conceive, may very easily satisfy himself. In any beautiful object, whose character is Cheerfulness, we are conscious of a feeling of Cheerfulness,—in objects of Melancholy, of a feeling of Sadness,—in objects of Utility, of a feeling of Satisfaction and Complacence, similar to what we feel from objects of the same kind when the Emotion of Beauty is not excited. In sublime objects, in the same manner, whatever their character may be, whether that of Greatness, Terror, Power, &c . we are conscious of the feelings of Admiration, of Awe, of Humility, &c . and of the same pleasures from the exercise of them, which we feel in those cases where the Emotion of Sublimity is not produced. In the trains of thought which are excited by objects either of Sublimity or Beauty, every man knows, that the character of those trains is determined by the peculiar nature of the object; and instead of the Emotions of Taste being attended with one uniform species of pleasure, every man must have felt, that the sum of his pleasure is in a great degree composed of the peculiar pleasure which the exercise of different affections brings.
[Page 116]
2. That there is a pleasure also annexed by the constitution of our nature, to the exercise of imagination, is a proposition which seems to require very little illustration. In common opinion, the employment of imagination is always supposed to communicate delight; when we yield to its power, we are considered as indulging in a secret pleasure, and every superiority in the strength or sensibility of this faculty is believed to be attended with a similar increase in the happiness of human life. Nor is this persuasion of the connection of pleasure with the exercise of imagination, confined to those cases where the mind is employed in contemplating only images of joy: for even in those men whose constitution disposes them to gloomy or melancholy thought, we have still a belief that there is some secret and fascinating charm in the disposition which they indulge, and that in this operation of mind itself, they find a pleasure which more than compensates for all the pain which the character of their thoughts may bring. There is a state of mind also, which every man must have felt, when, without any particular object of meditation, the imagination seems to retire from the realities of life, and to wander amid a creation of its own; when the most varied and discordant scenes rise as by enchantment before the mind; and when all the other faculties of our nature seem gradually to be obscured, to give to this creation of Fancy a more radiant glow. With what delight such employments of imagination are attended, the young and the romantic can tell, to whom they are often
[Page 117]
more dear than all the real enjoyments of life; and who, from the noise and tumult of vulgar joy, often hasten to retire to solitude and silence, where they may yield with security to these illusions of Imagination, and indulge again their visionary bliss.
On a subject of this kind, however, when illustration is perhaps less important than description, I am happy to be able to transcribe a passage, which will render unnecessary every illustration that I can give. It is a passage from a posthumous work of M. Rousseau, in which he describes his mode of life, during a summer which he passed in the islands of St Pierre, in the middle of the little lake of Bienne.
“Quand le beau tems m'invitoit, j'allois me jetter seul dans un bateau que je conduisois au milieu du lac, quand l'eau étoit calme, et là, m'étendant tout de mon long dans le bateau, les yeux tournés vers le ciel, je me laissois aller et dériver lentement au gré de l'eau, quelquefois pendant plusieurs heures, plongê dans mille rêveries confuses, mais délicieuses, et qui sans avoir aucun objet bien déterminé ni constant, ne laissoient pas d'etre à mon gré cent fois préférables à tout ce que j'avois trouvé de plus doux dans ce qu'on appelle les plaisirs de la vie.—
“—Quand le soir approchoit, je descendois des cimes de l'isle, et j'allois volontiers m'asseoir au bord du lac, sur
[Page 118]
la gréve dans quelque asyle caché la le bruit des vagues, et l'agitation de l'eau fixant mes sens, et chassant de mon ame toute autre agitation, la plongeoient dans une rêverie délicieuse, où la nuit me surprenoit souvent sans que je m'en fusse apperçu. Le flux et reflux de cette eau, son bruit continu, mais renflé par intervalles, frappant sans relâche mon oreille et mes yeux, suppléoient aux mouvemens internes que la rêverie éteignoit en moi, et suffisoient pour me faire sentir avec plaisir mon éxistence, sans prendre la peine de penser.—
“—Tel est l'état où je me suis trouvé souvent à l'isle de St Pierre dans mes rêveries solitaires, soit couché dans mon bateau que je laissois dériver au grè de l'eau, soit assis sur les rives du lac agité, soit ailleurs au bord d'une belle riviere, où d'un ruisseau murmurant sur le gravier. Telle est la manière dont j'ai passé mon tems, durant le séjour que j'y ai fait. Qu'on me dise à present ce qu'il y a là d'assez attrayant pour exciter dans mon cœur des regrèts si vifs, si tendres, et si durables, qu'au bout de quinze ans il m'est impossible de songer à cette habitation cherie sans m'y sentir à chaque fois transporter encore par les élans du desir.—
“—J'ai pensé quelquefois assez profondement, mais rarement avec plaisir, presque toujours contre mon grè, et comme par force; la rêverie me délasse et m'amuse, la
[Page 119]
reflexion me fatigue et m'attriste. Quelquefois mes rêveries finissent par meditation, mais plus souvent mes meditations finissent par la rêverie; et durant ces égaremens mon ame erre et plâne dans l'univers sur les aîles de l'imagination, dans des éxtases qui passent toute autre jouissance.
“Tant que je goutai celle-la dans toute sa pureté, toute autre occupation me fut toujours insipide. Mais quand une fois, jetté dans la carriere literaire, par des impulsions étrangers, je sentis la fatigue du travail d'esprit, et l'importunité d'une célebrité malheureuse, je sentis en même tems languir et s'attieder mes douces rêveries, et bientot forcé de m'occuper malgrè moi de ma triste situation, je ne pus plus retrouver, que bien rarement, ces cheres éxtases, qui durant cinquante ans m'avoient tenu lieu de fortune et de gloire; et sans autre dépense que celle du tems, m'avoient rendu dans l'oisivité le plus heureux des mortels.”
Les Rêveries, Promenade 5. et 7.
If it is allowed, then, that there is a pleasure annexed by the constitution of our nature, to the Exercise of Imagination; and if the illustrations in the first chapter are just, which are intended to show, that when this exercise of mind is not produced, the Emotions of Taste are unfelt, and that when it is increased, these Emotions are increased
[Page 120]
with it, we seem to possess a sufficient evidence to conclude, that this Pleasure exists, and forms a part of that peculiar pleasure which we receive from objects of Sublimity and Beauty.
The pleasure, therefore, which accompanies the Emotions of Taste, may be considered not as a simple, but as a complex pleasure; and as arising not from any separate and peculiar Sense, but from the union of the pleasure of Simple Emotion , with that which is annexed, by the constitution of the human mind, to the Exercise of Imagination.
IV. The distinction which thus appears to subsist between the Emotions of Simple Pleasure, and that complex pleasure which accompanies the Emotions of Taste, seems to require a similar distinction in philosophical language. I believe, indeed, that the distinction is actually to be found in the common language of conversation; and I apprehend that the term delight is very generally used to express the peculiar pleasure which attends the Emotions of Taste, in contradistinction to the general term Pleasure, which is appropriated to Simple Emotion. We are pleased , we say, with the gratification of any appetite or affection,—with food when hungry, and with rest when tired,—with the
[Page 121]
gratification of Curiosity, of Benevolence, or of Resentment. But we say, we are delighted with the prospect of a beautiful landscape, with the sight of a fine statue, with hearing a pathetic piece of music, with the perusal of a celebrated poem. In these cases the term Delight is used to denote that pleasure which arises from Sublimity and Beauty, and to distinguish it from those simpler pleasures which arise from objects that are only agreeable. I acknowledge, indeed, that this distinction is not very accurately adhered to in common language, because in most cases, either of the terms equally expresses our meaning; but I apprehend, that the observation of it is sufficiently general, to shew some consciousness in mankind of a difference between these pleasures, and to justify such a distinction in philosophical language as may express it.
If it were permitted me therefore, I should wish to appropriate the term Delight, to signify the peculiar pleasure which attends the Emotions of Taste , or which is felt, when the Imagination is employed in the prosecution of a regular train of Ideas of Emotion.
[Page ]
ESSAY II. Of the Sublimity and Beauty of the Material World. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. If the illustrations in the preceding Essay are just, if that exercise of mind which takes place when the Emotions of Beauty or Sublimity are felt consists in the prosecution of a regular train of Ideas of Emotion, and if no other objects are in fact productive of the Emotions of Taste, but such as are fitted to produce some simple Emotion, there arises a question of some difficulty, and of very considerable importance, viz . What is the source of the Sublimity and Beauty of the Material World ?
It cannot be doubted, that many objects of the Material World are productive of the Emotions of Sublimity and
[Page 126]
Beauty: some of the fine arts are altogether employed about material objects; and far the greater part of the instances of Beauty or Sublimity which occur in every man's experience, are found in matter, or in some of its qualities.
On the other hand, I think it must be allowed, that Matter in itself is unfitted to produce any kind of emotion. The various qualities of matter are known to us only by means of our external senses; but all that such powers of our nature convey, is Sensation and Perception; and whoever will take the trouble of attending to the effect which such qualities, when simple and unassociated, produce upon his mind, will be satisfied, that in no case do they produce Emotion, or the exercise of any of his affections. The common language of mankind upon this subject, perfectly coincides with this observation. Such qualities, when simple, are always spoken of as producing sensation, but in no case as producing emotion; and although perhaps the general word Feeling, (as applied both to our external and internal senses), may sometimes be used ambiguously, yet if we attend to it, we shall find, that with regard to material qualities, it is uniformly used to express Sensation, and that if we substitute Emotion for it, every man will perceive the mistake. The smell of a rose, the colour of scarlet, the taste of a pine apple, when spoken of merely as qualities, and abstracted from the objects in which they are found, are said to produce agreeable Sensations,
[Page 127]
but not agreeable Emotions. In the same manner, the smell of assafœtida, or the taste of aloes, when spoken of as abstract qualities, are uniformly said to produce unpleasing Sensations, but not unpleasing Emotions. If we could conceive ourselves possessed only of those powers which we have by means of our external senses, I apprehend there can be no doubt, that in such a case, the qualities of matter would produce only sensation and perception; that such sensations might be either pleasing or painful, but that in no case could they be attended with any emotion.
But although the qualities of matter are in themselves incapable of producing emotion, or the exercise of any affection, yet it is obvious that they may produce this effect, from their association with other qualities; and as being either the signs or expressions of such qualities as are fitted by the constitution of our nature to produce Emotion. Thus, in the human body, particular forms or colours are the signs of particular passions or affections. In works of art, particular forms are the signs of Dexterity, of Taste, of Convenience, of Utility. In the works of nature, particular sounds and colours, &c . are the signs of Peace, or Danger, or Plenty, or Desolation, &c . In such cases, the constant connection we discover between the sign and the thing signified, between the material quality and the quality productive of Emotion, renders at last the one expressive
[Page 128]
to us of the other, and very often disposes us to attribute to the sign, that effect which is produced only by the quality signified.
That such associations are formed with material qualities, every man has sufficient evidence in his own experience; and there are many causes which may be assigned, both of the extent and of the universality of such associations. I shall remark a few of these, without pretending to an accurate enumeration.
1. All those external objects, which, from their nature or constitution, are productive to us, either of use, of convenience, or of pleasure, or which in any other way are fitted to produce Emotion, are known and distinguished by their qualities of form and colour. Such qualities, therefore, are naturally, and even necessarily expressive to us of those uses, or conveniencies, or pleasures. It is by them that we become acquainted with the subjects from which such utilities arise: it is by them that we learn to distinguish such subjects from one another; and as they are the permanent signs of these several utilities, they affect us with the same emotion which the utilities signified by them are fitted to produce. The material qualities, for instance, which distinguish a ship, a plough, a printing-press, or a musical instrument, do not solely afford us the perception of certain colours or forms, but along with this perception,
[Page 129]
bring with it the conception of the different uses or pleasures which such compositions of material qualities produce, and excite in us the same Emotion, with the uses or pleasures thus signified. As, in this manner, the utilities or pleasures of all external objects are expressed to us by their material signs of Colour and of Form, such signs are naturally productive of the Emotions which properly arise from the qualities signified.
2. The qualities of Design, of Wisdom, of Skill, are uniformly expressed to us by certain qualities of Form, and certain compositions of Forms, Colours and Sounds. Such qualities, therefore, or compositions of qualities, become the signs of Design, or Wisdom, or Skill, and like all other signs, affect us with the same Emotion we receive from the qualities signified.
3. All our knowledge of the minds of other men, and of their various qualities, is gained by means of material signs. Power, Strength, Wisdom, Fortitude, Justice, Benevolence, Magnanimity, Gentleness, Tenderness, Love, &c . are all known to us by means of the external signs of them in the Countenance, Gesture, or Voice. Such material signs are therefore very early associated in our minds with the qualities they signify; and as they are constant and invariable, become soon productive to us of the same Emotions with the qualities themselves.
[Page 130]
In the same manner, the Characters, the Dispositions, the Instincts of all the various tribes of animals, are known to us by certain signs in their frame, or voice, or gesture. Such signs become therefore expressive to us of these Characters, or Instincts, or Dispositions, and affect us with all the Emotions which such qualities are fitted to produce.
4. Besides these immediate expressions of qualities of Mind by material signs, there are others which arise from Resemblance, in which the qualities of Matter become significant to us, of some affecting or interesting quality of Mind. We learn from experience, that certain qualities of Mind are signified by certain qualities of Body. When we find similar qualities of body in inanimate Matter, we are apt to attribute to them the same expression, and to conceive them as signifying the same qualities in this case, as in those cases where they derive their expression immediately from Mind. Thus, Strength and Delicacy, Boldness and Modesty, Old Age and Youth, &c . are all expressed by particular material signs in the human form, and in many cases by similar signs in the forms of animals. When we find similar appearances in the forms of inanimate Matter, we are disposed to consider them as expressive of the same qualities, and to regard them with similar Emotions. The universality of such associations is evident from the structure of the rudest languages. The strength of the Oak, the delicacy of the Myrtle, the boldness of a Rock, the modesty of the Violet, &c . are expressions common in all languages, and so
[Page 131]
common, that they are scarcely in any, considered as figurative; yet every man knows, that Strength and Weakness, Boldness and Modesty, are qualities, not of Matter, but of Mind, and that without our knowledge of Mind, it is impossible that we should ever have had any conception of them. How much the effect of descriptions of natural scenery arises from that personification, which is founded upon such associations, I believe there is no man of common taste who must not often have been sensible.
5. We are led by the constitution of our nature, also, to perceive resemblances between our Sensations and Emotions, and of consequence between the objects that produce them. Thus, there is some analogy between the Sensation of gradual Ascent, and the Emotion of Ambition,—between the Sensation of gradual Descent, and the Emotion of Decay,—between the lively Sensation of Sunshine, and the cheerful Emotion of Joy,—between the painful Sensation of Darkness, and the dispiriting Emotion of Sorrow. In the same manner, there are analogies between Silence and Tranquillity,—between the lustre of Morning, and the gaiety of Hope,—between softness of Colouring, and gentleness of Character,—between slenderness of Form, and delicacy of Mind, &c . The objects, therefore, which produce such Sensations, though in themselves not the immediate signs of such interesting or affecting qualities, yet in consequence of this Resemblance, become gradually expressive of them, and
[Page 132]
if not always, yet at those times at least, when we are under the dominion of any Emotion, serve to bring to our minds the images of all those affecting or interesting qualities, which, we have been accustomed to suppose they resemble. How extensive this source of Association is, may easily be observed, in the extent of such kinds of figurative expression in every language.
6. Besides these, Language itself is another very important cause of the extent of such Associations. The analogies between the qualities of Matter, and the qualities of Mind, which any individual might discover or observe, might perhaps be few, and must of course be limited by his situation and circumstances; but the use of Language gives to every individual who employs it, the possession of all the analogies which so many ages have observed, between material Qualities, and Qualities capable of producing Emotion. Of how much consequence this is, may be discovered in the different impressions which are made by the same objects on the common people whose vocabulary is limited by their wants, and on those who have had the advantage of a liberal Education.
7. To all these sources of Association is to be added, that which is peculiar to every individual. There is no man almost, who has not, from accident, from the events of his life, or from the nature of his studies, connected agreeable
[Page 133]
or interesting Recollections, with particular Colours, or Sounds, or Forms, and to whom such sounds or colours, &c . are not pleasing from such an Association. They affect us, in some measure, as the signs of these interesting qualities, and, as in other cases, produce in us the same Emotion with the qualities they signify.
These observations are probably sufficient to show the numerous and extensive associations we have with Matter, and its various qualities, as well as to illustrate some of the means by which it becomes significant or expressive to us of very different, and far more interesting qualities than those it possesses in itself. By means of the Connection, or Resemblance, which subsists between the qualities of Matter, and qualities capable of producing Emotion, the perception of the one immediately, and very often irresistibly suggests the idea of the other; and so early are these Associations formed, that it requires afterwards some pains to separate this connection, and to prevent us from attributing to the Sign, that effect which is produced alone by the Quality signified.
Whatever may be the truth of these observations, it cannot at least be doubted, that the qualities of Matter are often associated with others, and that they affect us in such cases, like all other signs, by leading our imaginations to
[Page 134]
the qualities they signify. It seems to be equally obvious, that in all cases where Matter, or any of its qualities, produces the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, this effect must arise either from these Material Qualities themselves, from their being fitted by the constitution of our nature, to produce such Emotions; or from some other qualities with which they are associated, and of which they operate, as the Signs or Expressions.
It should seem, therefore, that a very simple and a very obvious principle is sufficient to guide our investigation into the source of the sublimity and beauty of the qualities of Matter. If these qualities are in themselves fitted to produce the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, (or in other words, are in themselves beautiful or sublime), I think it is obvious that they must produce these Emotions, independently of any association. If, on the contrary, it is found, that these qualities only produce such Emotions when they are associated with interesting or affecting qualities, and that when such Associations are destroyed, they no longer produce the same Emotions, I think it must also be allowed, that their Beauty or Sublimity is to be ascribed, not to the material, but to the associated qualities.
That this is in reality the case, I shall endeavour to show by a great variety of illustrations. It is necessary, however,
[Page 135]
for me to premise, that I am very far from considering the Inquiries which follow, as a complete examination of the subject. They are indeed only detached observations on the Sublimity and Beauty of some of the most important classes of material qualities, but which, however imperfect they may severally be, yet seem to possess considerable weight from their collected evidence.
[Page 136]
CHAPTER II. Of the Sublimity and Beauty of Sound. The Senses by which we chiefly discover Beauty or Sublimity in material objects, are those of Hearing and Seeing.
The objects of the first, are Sounds , whether Simple or Composed.
The objects of the second, are Colours , Forms , and Motion.
[Page 137]
SECTION I. Of Simple Sounds. I shall begin with considering some of those instances, where Simple Sounds are productive of the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty. Such sounds are capable of many divisions. It may be sufficient at present, to consider them in the following order:
1. Sounds that occur in inanimate Nature.
2. The Notes of Animals. And,
3. The Tones of the Human Voice.
PART I. Of Miscellaneous Sounds. Of the first class, or of those Miscellaneous Sounds that occur in inanimate Nature, there are many which produce Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty.
[Page 138]
I. 1. All sounds in general are Sublime , which are associated with Ideas of Danger; the howling of a Storm,—the murmuring of an Earthquake,—the Report of Artillery,—the Explosion of Thunder, &c .
2. All sounds are in general Sublime, which are associated with Ideas of great Power or Might; the Noise of a Torrent,—the fall of a Cataract,—the uproar of a Tempest,—the Explosion of Gun-powder,—the dashing of the Waves, &c .
3. All sounds, in the same manner, are Sublime, which are associated with Ideas of Majesty or Solemnity, or deep Melancholy, or any other strong Emotion; the Sound of the Trumpet, and all other warlike Instruments,—the Note of the Organ,—the Sound of the Curfew,—the tolling of the passing Bell, &c .
That the Sublimity of such sounds arises from the Ideas of Danger or Power, or Majesty, &c . which are associated with them, and not from the Sounds themselves, or from any original fitness in such sounds, to produce this Emotion, seems to be obvious from the following considerations:
[Page 139]
1. Such sounds, instead of having any permanent or definite Character of Sublimity, vary in their effect, with the qualities they happen to express, and assume different characters, according to the nature of these qualities.
If sounds in themselves were Sublime, it might reasonably be expected in this, as in every other case of Sense, that their difference of effect would be strictly proportioned to their difference of character, and that Sounds of the same kind or character would invariably produce the same Emotion. The following instances, however, seem to show, that no specific character of Sublimity belongs to mere Sound, and that the same Sounds may produce very different kinds of Emotion, according to the qualities with which we associate them.
The Sound of Thunder is perhaps of all others in Nature, the most Sublime. In the generality of mankind this Sublimity is founded on Awe, and some degree of Terror; yet how different is the Emotion which it gives to the peasant who sees at last, after a long drought, the consent of Heaven to his prayers for rain,—to the philosopher, who from the height of the Alps, hears it roll beneath his feet,—to the soldier, who, under the impression of ancient superstition, welcomes it, upon the moment of engagement, as the omen of victory! In all these cases, the Sound itself is the
[Page 140]
same; but how different the nature of the Sublimity it produces! The report of artillery is Sublime, from the images both of Power and of Danger we associate with it. The noise of an engagement heard from a distance, is dreadfully Sublime. The firing of a Review is scarcely more than magnificent. The sound of a real skirmish between a few hundred men, would be more sublime than all the noise of a feigned engagement between a hundred thousand men. The straggling fire of a company of soldiers upon a field-day, is contemptible, and always excites laughter. The straggling fire of the same number of men, in a riot, would be extremely sublime, and perhaps more terrible than an uniform report.
The howling of a Tempest is powerfully Sublime from many associations; yet how different to the inhabitant of the land, and the sailor, who is far from refuge,—to the inhabitant of the sheltered plain, and the traveller bewildered in the mountains,—to the poor man who has nothing to lose, and the wealthy, whose fortunes are at the mercy of the storm! In all these cases, the Sound itself is the same, but the nature of the Sublimity it produces is altogether different, and corresponds, not to the effect upon the organ of Hearing, but to the character or situations of the men by whom it is heard, and the different qualities of which it is expressive to them.
[Page 141]
The Sound of a Cascade is almost always Sublime; yet no man ever felt in it the same species of Sublimity, in a fruitful Plain, and in a wild and romantic Country,—in the Pride of Summer, and in the Desolation of Winter,—in the hours of Gaiety, or Tranquillity, or Elevation,—and in seasons of Melancholy, or Anxiety, or Despair. The Sound of a Trumpet is often Sublime; but how different the Sublimity in the day of Battle,—in the March of an Army in Peace,—or amid the splendours of a Procession. There are few simple sounds more sublime than the report of a Cannon; yet every one must have felt the different Emotions of Sublimity with which the same sound affects him, and at the same intervals, in moments of public Sorrow, or public Rejoicing.
In these and many other instances that might be mentioned, the nature of the Emotion we experience, corresponds, not to the nature of the Sound itself, but to the nature of the Association we connect with it; and is in fact altogether the same with the Emotion which the same quality produces, when unaccompanied with Sound. If Sounds in themselves were fitted by the constitution of our nature to produce these Emotions, it would seem, that greater uniformity would be found in their effects; that the difference of their effects would be proportioned to the difference of their nature as Sounds; and that the same Sounds would permanently produce the same Emotion.
[Page 142]
2. If any particular sounds are fitted by our constitution to produce the Emotion of Sublimity, it seems impossible that sounds of a contrary kind should produce the same Emotion. If, on the contrary, the Sublimity of Sounds arises from the qualities we associate with them, it may reasonably be expected, that sounds of all kinds will produce this Emotion, when they are expressive of such qualities as are in themselves Sublime. Many very familiar observations seem to illustrate this point.
The most general character, perhaps, of Sublimity in Sounds, is that of Loudness, and there are doubtless many instances where such sounds are very constantly sublime; yet there are many instances also, where the contrary quality of sounds is also sublime; and when this happens, it will universally be found, that such sounds are associated with Ideas of Power or Danger, or some other quality capable of exciting strong Emotion. The loud and tumultuous sound of a Storm is undoubtedly Sublime; but there is a low and feeble Sound which frequently precedes it, more sublime in reality than all the uproar of the storm itself, and which has accordingly been frequently made use of by Poets, in heightening their descriptions of such scenes.
Along the woods, along the moorish fens
Sighs the sad Genius of the coming storm,
And up among the loose disjointed cliffs
[Page 143]
And fractur'd mountains wild, the brawling brook
And cave presageful send a hollow moan
Resounding long in Fancy's listening ear.
Then comes the Father of the Tempest forth, &c . Thomson's Winter.
“Did you never observe (says Mr Gray in a letter to a friend) while rocking winds are piping loud , that pause, as the gust is recollecting itself, and rising upon the ear in a shrill and plaintive note, like the swell of an Æolian harp. I do assure you there is nothing in the world so like the voice of a spirit.” Such a sound in itself is inconsiderable, and resembles many others which are very far from being sublime; but as the forerunner of the storm, and the sign of all the imagery we connect with it, it is sublime in a very great degree. There is in the same manner said to be a low rumbling noise preceding an earthquake, in itself very inconsiderable, and generally likened to some very contemptible sounds; yet in such a situation, and with all the images of danger and horror to which it leads, I question whether there is another sound so dreadfully Sublime. The soft and placid tone of the human voice is surely not sublime; yet in the following passage, which of the great images that precede it, is so powerfully so? It is a passage from the first book of Kings, in which the Deity is described as appearing to the Prophet Elijah. “And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the
[Page 144]
Lord. And behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice . And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle.”—
Another great division of Sounds is into Grave and Acute. If either of these classes of sound is sublime in itself, it should follow, according to the general laws of Sensation, that the other should not be so. In fact, however, the Sublime is found in both, and perhaps it may be difficult to say to which of them it most permanently belongs. Instances of this kind are within the reach of every person's observation.
In the same manner, it may be observed, that the most common, and, in general, the most insignificant Sounds become Sublime, whenever they are associated with images belonging to Power, or Danger, or Melancholy, or any other strong Emotion, although in other cases they affect us with no Emotion whatever. There is scarcely in nature a more trifling Sound than the buzz of Flies, yet I believe there is no man of common Taste, who, in the deep silence of a summer's noon, has not found something strikingly sublime in this
[Page 145]
inconsiderable sound. The falling of a drop of water, produces in general a very insignificant and unexpressive sound; yet sometimes in vaults, and in large Cathedrals, a single drop is heard to fall at intervals, from the roof, than which, I know not if there is a single sound more strikingly Sublime. One can scarcely mention a sound less productive of the Sublime, than the sound of a Hammer. How powerfully, however, in the following description has Shakespeare made this vulgar Sound Sublime!
   From camp to camp, thro' the foul womb of night
The hum of either army, stilly sounds,
That the fix'd sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other's watch.
Fire answers fire, and thro' their paly flames
Each battle sees the other's umber'd face;
Steed answers steed in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the earth's dull ear, and from the tents
The armourers accomplishing the knights
With busy hammers, closing rivets up
Give dreadful note of preparation. Henry V. act 3. Chorus.
The sound of oars in water is surely very far from being Sublime, yet in a Tragedy of Thomson's, this sound is made strikingly Sublime, when (in the person of a man who had been left by the treachery of his companions upon a desart
[Page 146]
island), he describes the horrors he felt, when he first found his being deserted: And adds,
         I never heard
A sound so dismal as their parting oars.—
Instances of the same kind are so numerous, that it is unnecessary to insist upon them. If Sounds are Sublime in themselves, independently of all Association, it seems difficult to account for contrary sounds producing the same effect, and for the same sounds producing different effects, according to the Associations with which they are connected.
3. When such Associations are dissolved, the sounds themselves cease to be Sublime. There are many cases, undoubtedly in which this experiment cannot be made, because in many cases the connection between such Sounds, and the Qualities they indicate, is constant and invariable. The connection between the sound of Thunder, of a Whirlwind, of a Torrent, of an Earthquake, and the qualities of Power, or Danger, or Awfulness, which they signify, and which the objects themselves permanently involve, is established not by Man, but by Nature. It has no dependence upon his Will, and cannot be affected by any discipline of his Imagination. It is no wonder, therefore, while such connections are so permanent, that the Sublimity which belongs to the qualities of the objects themselves, should be attributed to their external signs, and that such signs should
[Page 147]
be considered in themselves as fitted to produce this Emotion. The only case in which these associations are positively dissolved, is when, by some error of judgment, we either mistake some different sound, for the Sound of any of these objects, or are imposed upon by some imitation of these Sounds. In such cases, I think it will not be denied, that when we discover our mistake, the Sounds are no longer Sublime.
There is nothing more common than for people who are afraid of Thunder, to mistake some very common and indifferent sound for it; as the rumbling of a Cart, or the rattling of a Carriage. While their mistake continues, they feel the Sound as sublime: the moment they are undeceived, they are the first to laugh at their error, and to ridicule the Sound which occasioned it. Children at first are as much alarmed at the Thunder of the Stage, as at real Thunder. Whenever they find that it is only a deception, they amuse themselves with mimicking it. It may be observed also, that very young children show no symptoms of Fear or Admiration at Thunder, unless perhaps when it is painfully loud, or when they see other people alarmed about them; obviously from their not having yet associated with it the Idea of Danger: and perhaps also from this cause, that our imagination assists the report, and makes it appear much louder than it really is; a circumstance which seems to be confirmed by the common mistake we make of very inconsiderable
[Page 148]
noises for it. Mistakes in the same manner are often made in those countries where earthquakes are common, between very inconsiderable sounds, and that low rumbling sound which is said to precede such an event. There cannot be a doubt, that the moment the mistake is discovered, the noise ceases to be sublime. In all other cases of the same kind, where mistakes of this nature happen, or where we are deceived by imitation, I believe it is agreeable to every person's experience, that while the mistake continues, the sounds affect us as sublime; but that as soon as we are undeceived, and that the sign is found not to be accompanied with the qualities usually signified, it ceases immediately to affect us with any Emotion. If any sounds were in themselves Sublime, or fitted by the constitution of our nature to produce this Emotion, independently of all Association, it would seem that there could be no change of our Emotion, and that these Sounds would as permanently produce their correspondent Emotion, as the objects of every other Sense produce their correspondent ideas.
In all cases, however, where these associations are either accidental or temporary, and not as in the former case, permanent in their nature, it will be found, that sounds are sublime only, when they are expressive of qualities capable of producing some powerful Emotion, and that in all other cases the same sounds are simply indifferent. In some of
[Page 149]
the instances formerly mentioned, where common or vulgar sounds are rendered sublime by association, it is obvious that the same sounds in general, when they have no such expression to us, are very different from Sublimity. The buzz of flies, the dropping of water, the sound of a hammer, the dashing of an oar, and many others which might easily be mentioned, are in general, Sounds absolutely indifferent, and so far from possessing any Sublimity in themselves, that it might be difficult at first to persuade any man that they could be made so. Their Sublimity therefore can only be attributed to the qualities which they signify.
There are few sounds, in the same manner, much more sublime, than the striking of a clock at midnight. In other situations the very same sound is altogether different in its expression. In the morning it is cheerful,—at noon indifferent, or at least unnoticed. In the evening plaintive,—at night only sublime. In the tolling of a bell, the sound is uniformly the same; yet such a sound has very different expressions, from the peculiar purposes to which it is applied. The passing bell, and the funeral bell, alone are sublime. The whistling of the wind in an autumnal, or in a wintry night, is often felt as sublime, and has accordingly been frequently introduced into poetical descriptions of a similar character. The nicest ear, however, is unable to distinguish any difference betwixt this sound, in the seasons before mentioned, and in spring or summer, when, if it has any character at all, it has
[Page 150]
a character very different from Sublimity. The Trumpet is very generally employed in scenes of Magnificence or Solemnity. The sound of the trumpet in such situations is accordingly very sublime, and seems to us to be expressive of that solemnity or magnificence. This instrument, however, as every one knows, is very often degraded to very mean offices. In such cases, the sound is altogether indifferent, if not contemptible. The Bagpipe has, to a Scotch Highlander, no inconsiderable degree of sublimity, from its being the martial instrument of the country, and of consequence associated with many spirited and many magnificent images. To the rest of the world, the sound of this instrument is at best but barely tolerable. They who are acquainted with the history of superstition, will recollect many instances where Sounds have become sublime from this Association, which to the rest of mankind were very insignificant, and which have become also insignificant both to Individuals and to Nations, when the superstitions upon which their expression was founded, had ceased.
There are several other considerations, from which the principle I here endeavour to illustrate might be confirmed, —the uniform connection between Sublime Sounds, and some quality capable of producing Emotion, and the impossibility of finding an instance where Sound is Sublime, independently of all Association,—the great difference in the number of sounds that are sublime to the common
[Page 151]
people, and men of cultivated or poetical imagination,—and the difference which every man feels in the effect of such sounds in producing this Emotion, according to the particular state of his own mind, or according to the particular strength or weakness of his sensibility to the qualities which such sounds express. But I am unwilling to anticipate the reader in speculations which he can so easily prosecute for himself. If the illustrations I have already offered are just; if Sounds of all kinds are sublime, when they are expressive of any qualities capable of producing strong Emotions; and if no Sounds continue to be sublime, when they cease to be expressive of such qualities, it is, I think reasonable to conclude, that the Sublimity of such Sounds is to be ascribed, not to the mere quality of Sound, but to those associated qualities of which it is significant.
II.
There is a great variety of sounds also, that occur in the scenes of Nature, which are productive of the Emotion of Beauty ; the sound of a Waterfall, the murmuring of a Rivulet, the whispering of the Wind, the Sheepfold Bell, the sound of the Curfew, &c .
That such sounds are associated in our minds, with various qualities capable of producing Emotion, I think every
[Page 152]
man may be satisfied from his own experience. When such sounds occur, they are expressive to us of some particular character: they suit one species of Emotion, and not others; and if this were not obvious in itself, it might be made sufficiently obvious, from the use of such sounds in poetical Composition. Every man, there, judges of the propriety of their introduction, and determines with regard to the taste and judgment of the Poet, by their suitableness to the nature of the Emotion he has it in his view to excite. Every man, therefore, has some peculiar Emotion associated with such sounds, or some quality, of which they are considered as the signs or expressions.
That the Beauty of such sounds arises from the qualities of which they are expressive, and not from any original fitness in them to produce this Emotion, may perhaps be evident from the following considerations:
1. To those who have no such associations, or who consider them simply as Sounds, they have no beauty. It is long before children show any degree of sensibility to the beauty of such sounds. To the greater number of them, in the same manner, the common people are altogether indifferent. To the peasant, the Curfew is only the mark of the hour of the evening,—the Sheep-bell, the sign of the neighbourhood of the flock,—the sound of a Cascade, the sign of the falling of water, &c . Give them the associations
[Page 153]
which men of cultivated imagination have with such sounds, and they will infallibly feel their beauty.
In the same manner, men of the best natural taste, who have not formed such associations, are equally insensible to the beauty of such Sounds. The inhabitant of a country where there are no waterfalls, is stunned at first with the noise of a cascade, but is not delighted with it. They who are not accustomed to the Curfew, and who are ignorant of its being the evening bell, and as such, associated with all those images of tranquillity and peace, which render that season of the day so charming, feel nothing more from its sound than from the sound of a bell at any other hour of the day. The sound of the Sheepfold bell is but an insignificant noise to those who have never lived in a pastoral country, and who do not consider it as expressive of those images of simple and romantic pleasure, which are so naturally connected with such scenes. Every man acquainted with the poetry of distant nations, knows, in the same manner, how much the beauty of many allusions to peculiar sounds of these countries is lost to those, who are strangers to them, and who, of consequence, have none of those associations which render them so expressive to the natives.
2. It is further observable, that such Sounds are beautiful only in particular tempers of mind, or when we are under the influence of such Emotions as accord with the expressions
[Page 154]
which they possess. If, on the contrary, such sounds were beautiful in themselves, although in different states of mind, we might afford them different degrees of attention; yet in all situations they would be beautiful, in the same manner as in every state of mind the objects of all other senses uniformly produce their correspondent ideas. The sound of the Curfew, for instance, so beautiful in moments of melancholy, or tranquillity, in a joyful or even in a cheerful hour, would be directly the reverse. The sound of a Waterfall, so valued amid the luxuriant scenery of summer, is scarcely observed, or if observed, simply disagreeable amid the rigors of winter. The sound of the hunting Horn, so extremely picturesque in seasons of gaiety, would be insupportable in hours of melancholy.
It is at particular seasons only, in truth, that we are sensible to the beauty of any of the Sounds before mentioned. For once that they affect us, they occur to us ten times without effect. The real and the most important business of life could not be carried on, if we were to indulge at all times our Sensibility either to Sublimity or Beauty. It is only at those seasons, that such sounds affect us with any Emotions of Beauty, when we happen to be in that temper of mind, which suits with the qualities of which they are expressive. In our common hours, when we are either thoughtless or busy, we suffer them to pass without notice.
[Page 155]
If such sounds were beautiful in themselves, such variations in their effects could not possibly happen.
3. When such associations are dissolved, the sounds themselves cease to be beautiful. If a man of the most common taste were carried into any striking scene of an ornamented garden, and placed within the hearing of a Cascade, and were told, in the midst of his enthusiasm, that what he takes for a Cascade is only a Deception, the sound continues the same, but the beauty of it would be irrecoverably gone. The tinkling of the Sheepfold bell may be imitated by many very common sounds; but who is there who could for a moment listen to any imitation of this romantic Sound? There are a great number of sounds which exactly resemble the sound of the hunting Horn, and which are frequently heard also in the same scenes: when known, however, some of them are ridiculous, none beautiful. The same bell which is so strikingly beautiful in the evening, is altogether unnoticed at noon. “The flute of a Shepherd (says Dr Beattie, with his usual beauty of expression) heard at a distance, in a fine summer's day, amidst a romantic scene of groves, hills, and waters, will give rapture to the ear of the wanderer; though the tune, the instrument, and the musician be such as he could not endure in any other place.” Instances of a similar kind are so numerous, that I forbear to detail them. Upon the supposition of any original and independent beauty in Sounds, such variations are altogether unaccountable.
[Page 156]
I shall only farther observe upon this subject, that when it is considered, how few Sounds are beautiful amid the infinite number which occur in the scenes of Nature, and that wherever they do occur, there is always some pleasing or interesting quality of which they are expressive, there arises a very strong presumption, independently of all other considerations, that the Beauty of such particular Sounds is derived from the qualities which they express, and not the effect of the mere sounds themselves.
PART II. Of the Notes of Animals. There are instances, I believe, both of Sublimity and Beauty, in the Notes of Animals. That such Sounds are associated with the qualities of the Animals to which they belong, and become expressive of these qualities, cannot, I think, be denied. There are besides other associations we have with them, from their Manner of Life, the Scenes which they usually inhabit, and the Countries from which they come.
[Page 157]
I. That the Notes or Cries of some animals are Sublime , every one knows: the Roar of the Lion, the Growling of Bears, the Howling of Wolves, the Scream of the Eagle, &c . In all those cases, these are the notes of animals remarkable for their strength, and formidable from their ferocity. It would seem very natural, therefore, that the Sublimity of such Sounds should arise from the qualities of which they are expressive; and which are of a nature fitted to excite very powerful Emotions in our minds.
That this is in reality the case, and that it is not the Sounds themselves which have this effect, appears to be obvious from the two following considerations:
1. When we have no associations of this kind, such Sounds are productive of no such Emotion. There is not one of these Sounds which may not be imitated in some manner or other; and which, while we are ignorant of the deception, does not produce the same Emotion with the real Sound: when we are undeceived, however, we are conscious of no other Emotion, but that perhaps of simple pain from its loudness. The howl of the Wolf is little distinguished from the howl of the Dog, either in its tone or in its strength, but there is no comparison between their Sublimity. There
[Page 158]
are few, if any of these Sounds so loud as the most common of all Sounds, the lowing of a Cow; yet this is the very reverse of Sublimity. Imagine this Sound, on the contrary, expressive of Fierceness or Strength, and there can be no doubt that it would become Sublime. The hooting of the Owl at midnight, or amid ruins, is strikingly Sublime. The same Sound at noon, or during the day, is very far from being so. The scream of the Eagle is simply disagreeable, when the bird is either tamed or confined: it is Sublime only, when it is heard amid Rocks and Desarts, and when it is expressive to us of Liberty, and Independence, and savage Majesty. The neighing of a War-horse in the field of battle, or of a young and untamed Horse when at large among mountains, is powerfully Sublime. The same sound in a Cart-horse, or a Horse in the stable, is simply indifferent, if not disagreeable. No Sound is more absolutely mean, than the grunting of Swine. The same Sound in the wild Boar, an animal remarkable both for fierceness and strength, is Sublime. The memory of the reader will supply many other instances.
2. The Sublimity of such sounds corresponds not to their Nature, as Sounds, but to the Nature of the Qualities they signify. Sounds of all kinds are Sublime, in proportion as they are expressive of Power, or Fierceness, or Strength, or any other quality capable of producing strong Emotions in the animals which they distinguish. There are many instances
[Page 159]
undoubtedly where loud Cries are Sublime, but there are many also, where such Notes are very far from being so. The lowing of Cows, the braying of the Ass, the scream of the Peacock, and many other inoffensive birds, are only mean or disagreeable.
Low or feeble Sounds, in the same manner, are generally considered as the contrary of Sublime; yet there are also many instances where such Sounds are strongly Sublime, when they distinguish the notes of fierce, or dangerous, or powerful animals. There is not a Sound so generally contemptible as that which we distinguish by the name of Hissing, yet this is the Sound appropriated to Serpents, and the greater part of poisonous reptiles; and, as such, is extremely Sublime. The noise of the Rattlesnake (that most dangerous animal of all his tribe) is very little different from the noise of a child's play-thing, yet who will deny its Sublimity! The growl of the Tyger resembles the purring of a Cat: the one is Sublime, the other insignificant. Nothing can be more trifling than the Sound produced by that little animal, which among the common people is called the Death-watch; yet many a bold heart hath felt its power. The inhabitants of modern Europe would smile, if they were asked, if there were any Sublimity in the Notes of Chickens, or Swallows, or Magpies; yet under the influence of ancient superstition, when such animals were considered as ominous, the bravest among the
[Page 160]
people have trembled at their Sound. The superstitions of other countries afford innumerable instances of the same kind.
If these illustrations are just, it should seem, that the Sublimity of the Notes of Animals is to be ascribed to the Associations we connect with them, and not to any original fitness in the mere Sounds themselves, to produce this Emotion.
II. That the Beauty of the Notes or Cries of Animals arises from the same cause, or from the qualities of which they are expressive to us, may perhaps be obvious from considerations equally familiar.
It seems at least very difficult to account for the instances of such Sounds which are universally reckoned beautiful, if we consider the Sounds themselves as the causes of this Emotion. The number of notes is as various as the different species of animals, and amid these there are a thousand instances, where similar Sounds are by no means productive of similar effects; and where, although the difference to the Ear is extremely small, there is yet a great difference in their capacity of producing such Emotions. If,
[Page 161]
on the contrary, we consider the source of their beauty, as consisting in the pleasing or affecting qualities with which such sounds are associated, we have an easy solution of the difficulty, and which will be found at the same time perfectly to agree with the facts.
It would lead to a very long, and very unnecessary enquiry, if I were to attempt to enumerate the various Notes of this kind that are beautiful, and the different associations we have with them. That with many such sounds we have in fact such associations, is a matter, I apprehend, so conformable to every man's experience, that it would be superfluous to attempt to prove it.
There is indeed one class of animals, of which the notes are in a singular degree objects of Beauty: I mean Birds; and for this we may assign very sufficient reasons. 1 st , Such notes approach much nearer than any other, to the tones of the human voice, and are therefore much more strongly expressive to us of such qualities as we are affected by. 2 dly , These animals are much more than any other the objects of our interest and regard; not only from our greater acquaintance with them, and from the minuteness and delicacy of their forms, which renders them in some measure the objects of Tenderness; but chiefly from their modes of life, and from the little domestic arrangements and attachments which we observe among them so much more strongly than
[Page 162]
among any other animals, and which indicate more affecting and endearing qualities in the animals themselves, than in any others we know. That we have such associations with Birds, is very obvious, from the use which is made of their instincts and manner of life, in the poetical compositions of all nations.
That it is from such associations the beauty of the notes of animals arises, may appear from the following considerations:
1. They who have no such associations, feel no Emotion of Beauty from them. A peasant would laugh, if he were asked, if the call of a Goat, or the bleat of a Sheep, or the lowing of a Cow were beautiful; yet in certain situations, all of these are undoubtedly so. A child shows no symptom of admiration at those Sounds which are most affecting in natural scenery, to other people. Every one will recollect, in what total indifference his early years were passed, to that multitude of beautiful Sounds which occur in the country; and I believe, if we attend to it sufficiently, it will be found, that the period when we became sensible to their beauty, was when we first began to feel them as expressive, either from our own observation of Nature, or from the perusal of books of poetry. In the same manner, they who travel into very distant countries, are at first insensible to the beauty which the natives of these countries ascribe to
[Page 163]
the notes of the animals belonging to them, obviously from their not having yet acquired the associations which is the foundation of their beauty. The notes which are sacred from any kind of superstition, are beautiful only to those who are under the dominion of that superstition. A foreigner does not distinguish any beauty in the note of the Stork. To the Hollander, however, to whom that bird is the object of a very popular and very pleasing superstition, this note is singularly beautiful.
2. Such Sounds as are either from experience, or from imagination, associated with certain qualities capable of producing Emotion, are beautiful only when they are perceived in those tempers of mind which are favourable to these Emotions. Instances of this are very numerous. The bleating of a Lamb is beautiful in a fine day in spring: in the depth of winter it is very far from being so. The lowing of a Cow at a distance, amid the scenery of a pastoral landscape in summer, is extremely beautiful: in a farm-yard it is absolutely disagreeable. The hum of the Beetle is beautiful in a fine summer evening, as appearing to suit the stillness and repose of that pleasing season: in the noon of day it is perfectly indifferent. The twitter of the Swallow is beautiful in the morning, and seems to be expressive of the cheerfulness of that time: at any other hour it is quite insignificant. Even the song of the Nightingale, so wonderfully charming in the twilight, or at night, is altogether
[Page 164]
disregarded during the day; in so much so, that it has given rise to the common mistake, that this bird does not sing but at night. If such notes were beautiful in themselves, independently of all association, they would, necessarily, at all times be beautiful.
3. In this, as in other cases before mentioned, when such associations are destroyed, the Beauty of the Sounds ceases to be felt. The call of a Goat, for instance, among rocks, is strikingly beautiful, as expressing wildness and independence. In a farm-yard, or in a common inclosure, it is very far from being so. The plaintive and interesting bleat of the Lamb ceases to be beautiful whenever it ceases to be the sign of infancy, and the call for that tenderness which the infancy of all animals so naturally demands. There is a bird that imitates the notes of all other birds with great accuracy. Such imitations, however, are not in the least beautiful in it. There are people, in the same manner, who imitate the song of birds with surprising dexterity. It is the imitation, however, in such a case, that alone pleases us, and not the notes themselves. It is possible (according to the curious experiments of Mr Barrington) to teach a bird of any species the notes of any other species. It may however, I think very justly be doubted, whether the acquired notes would be equally beautiful. The connection we observe between particular birds, and the peculiar scenes in Nature which they inhabit, and the different seasons at
[Page 165]
which they appear; and the great difference in their instincts and manner of life, render their notes expressive to us of very dissimilar characters; and we accordingly distinguish them by epithets expressive of this variety. The wildness of the Linnet, the tenderness of the Redbreast, the pertness of the Sparrow, the cheerfulness of the Lark, the softness of the Bulfinch, the plaintiveness of the Nightingale, the melancholy of the Owl, are expressions in general use, and the Associations we thus connect with them, very obviously determine the character or expression of their Notes. By the artificial education above mentioned, all these Associations would be destroyed; and as far as I am able to judge, all, or at least a great part of the Beauty we feel from their songs. It is in the same manner, that we are generally unhappy, instead of being delighted with the song of a bird in the cage. It is somewhat like the smile of Grief, which is much more dreadful than tears, or like the playfulness of an infant, amid scenes of Sorrow. It is difficult therefore to say, whether in this cruel practice there is a greater want of Taste or of Humanity; and there could be in fact no excuse for it, if there were not a kind of tenderness excited towards them, from the reflection that they are altogether dependent upon our benevolence, and a very natural gratitude awakened, by the exertions they make for our pleasure.
[Page 166]
I forbear to produce any farther illustrations on this subject. From those that have been produced, it seems to me that we have sufficient ground for concluding, that, of those Sounds which have been considered, the Sounds that occur in the scenes of Nature, and the Sounds produced by animals, the Sublimity or Beauty arises from the qualities of which they are considered as the Signs or Expressions, and not from any original fitness in the Sounds themselves to produce such Emotions.
I have only further to add, that upon the principle of the absolute and independent Sublimity or Beauty of Sounds, it is very difficult to account for the different Sounds which have been mentioned as productive of these Emotions. There is certainly no resemblance as sounds, between the noise of Thunder, and the hissing of a Serpent,—between the growling of a Tyger, and the explosion of Gunpowder,—between the scream of an Eagle, and the shouting of a multitude; yet all of these are Sublime. In the same manner, there is as little resemblance, between the tinkling of the Sheepfold bell, and the murmuring of the Breeze,—between the hum of the Beetle, and the song of the Lark,—between the twitter of the Swallow, and the sound of the Curfew; yet all of these are beautiful. Upon the principle which I endeavour to illustrate, they are all perfectly accountable.
[Page 167]
PART III. Of the Tones of the Human Voice. There is a similar Sublimity or Beauty felt in particular Notes or Tones of the human Voice.
That such Sounds are associated in our Imaginations, with the qualities of mind of which they are in general expressive, and that they naturally produce in us the conception of these qualities, is a fact so obvious, that there is no man who must not have observed it. There are some Philosophers who consider these as the natural signs of Passion or Affection, and who believe that it is not from Experience, but by means of an original Faculty, that we interpret them; and this opinion is supported by great authorities. Whether this is so, or not, in the present enquiry, is of no very great importance; since, although it should be denied that we understand such signs instinctively, it cannot be denied, that very early in infancy this Association is formed, and that our opinions and conduct are regulated by it.
That the Beauty or Sublimity of such Tones, arises from the nature of the qualities they express, and not from the
[Page 168]
nature of the Sounds themselves, may perhaps appear from the following observations.
1. Such sounds are beautiful or sublime, only, as they express Passions or Affections which excite our sympathy. There are a great variety of tones in the human voice, yet all these tones are not beautiful. If we enquire what are the particular Tones which are so, it will universally be found, that they are such as are expressive of pleasing or interesting affections. The tones peculiar to Anger, Peevishness, Malice, Envy, Misanthropy, Deceit, &c . are neither agreeable nor beautiful. The tone of Good Nature, though very agreeable, is not beautiful but at particular seasons, because the quality itself is in general rather the source of complacence than pleasure: we regret the want of it, but we do not much enjoy its presence. On the contrary, the tones peculiar to Hope, Joy, Humility, Gentleness, Modesty, Melancholy, &c . though all extremely different, are all beautiful; because the qualities they express are all the objects of Interest and Approbation. In the same manner, the tones peculiar to Magnanimity, Fortitude, Self-denial, Patience, Resignation, &c . are all sublime; and for a similar reason. This coincidence of the Beauty and Sublimity of the Tones of the human Voice, with those qualities of mind that are interesting or affecting to us, if it is not a formal proof, is yet a strong presumption that it is from the expression
[Page 169]
of such qualities that these sounds derive their Sublimity or Beauty.
2. The effect of such sounds in producing these Emotions, instead of being permanent, is limited by the particular temper of mind we happen to be in, or by the coincidence between that temper, and the peculiar qualities of which such sounds are expressive. To most men, for instance, the tone of Hope is beautiful. To a man in Despair, I presume it would be far from being so. To a man in Grief, the tone of Cheerfulness is simply painful. The tone of Indignation, though in particular situations strongly sublime, to a man of a quiet and placid temper, is unpleasant. To men of an ardent and sanguine character, the tone of Patience is contemptible. To peevish and irritable spirits, the voice of Humility, so peculiarly beautiful, is provoking. Such observations may be extended to many diversities of passion: and it may still farther be remarked, that those Sounds in the human Voice, which are most beautiful or most sublime to us, are always those that are expressive of the qualities of mind, which, from our particular constitutions or habits, we are most disposed to be affected by. If the Beauty or Sublimity of such tones were independent of the qualities of mind we thus associate with them, such diversities could not happen, and the same Sounds would produce uniformly the same Emotions, as the same Colours or Smells produce uniformly the same Sensations.
[Page 170]
3. Similar Tones, in this case, do not produce similar Emotions, as should seem to happen if these effects were produced by the mere Sounds themselves. There is little affinity for instance, between the low and depressed tone of Grief, and the shrill and piercing note of Joy; yet both are beautiful. There is little resemblance between the loud found of Rage, and the low placid tone of Patience; yet both are, in many cases, sublime. The tone of Peevishness, is not very different from the tone of Melancholy; yet the one is beautiful, the other positively disagreeable. The tone of Pusillanimity is little distinguishable from the tone of Patience; but how different in the effects they produce upon our minds! Observations of this kind, it is in the power of every one to extend.
4. Whenever these Tones are counterfeited, or whenever they cease to be the Signs of those qualities of mind of which we have generally found them significant, they immediately cease either to be sublime or beautiful. Every one must have observed, that this is the effect of Mimicry. Wherever, in the same manner, any species of deceit is used; or where we know that these tones are employed, without the existence of the correspondent passions, we no longer feel them as beautiful or sublime. If the Sounds themselves were the causes of these Emotions, whatever we might think of the person, the Sounds themselves would continue to produce the Emotions either of Sublimity or Beauty, in the
[Page 171]
same manner as the most absurd misapplication of Colours, never disturbs our perception of them as colours.
5. There is yet a further consideration, which may perhaps more clearly illustrate this opinion, viz . That the Beauty or Sublimity of such Sounds in the human Voice, altogether depends on our opinion of the propriety or impropriety of the affections which they express. We know either from Nature, or from Experience, that particular Sounds or Tones are the expression of particular Passions and Affections; and the perception of such sounds is immediately accompanied with the conception of such affections in the person from whom they proceed. But it is only from actual observation or enquiry, that we can know what is the cause of these affections. Our sympathy, our interest, it is plain, depends on the nature of this connection, on our opinion of the propriety or impropriety of such affections in such circumstances. All this, however, does not in any degree affect the nature of the Sound, which is still the same, whether the affection be proper or improper. It is very obvious, however, that our sense of the Beauty or Sublimity of such Sounds, depends on our opinion of this Propriety. No tone of Passion or Affection is beautiful, with which we do not sympathise. The tone of Joy, for instance, is beautiful in most cases where it is heard. Suppose we find that such a Sound proceeds from some very trifling or ridiculous cause, our sense of its Beauty is instantly destroyed
[Page 172]
with our opinion of its Propriety. The tone of Melancholy, or moderated Grief, is affecting and beautiful beyond most others. Assign some frivolous reason for it, and instantly it becomes contemptible. The tone of Patience is sublime in a great degree. Tell us that it is Pusillanimity, and its effect is instantly gone. The high imperious note of Rage is often sublime. A trifling cause renders it simply painful. The same observation may be extended to the tones of all our passions. It is, I conceive, extremely difficult, if not impossible, to account for this change of Emotion, on the principle of the original and independent Beauty of such Sounds.
With regard to the human Voice, however, it is to be observed, that besides all this, there is also a Beauty in particular degrees of the same Tones. Although the expression of the different passions is the same in all men, yet it necessarily happens, that there is a sensible difference in the degree or character of these similar Sounds. There is no man of any delicacy of organs, who must not often have been sensible of such differences. These also are expressive to us of several qualities. They are, in the first place, expressive of the perfection or imperfection of the organs of speech, and of the health or indisposition of the person; circumstances which often determines in a great degree, when either of these expressions are strong, the pleasure or pain we have in their conversation. 2 dly , They are expressive also of the temper or character
[Page 173]
of mind. As we are naturally led to judge of the character of the person, from the peculiar tones of his voice, and to believe that such passions have the principal dominion of his mind, which have the most prevalent expression in his speech, so we are led in the same way to judge of the degree or force of these passions, by the degree or strength of such tones in his voice. This kind of inference is so natural, that there is perhaps no person who has not made it. That the Beauty of such degrees of Sound arises from such associations is apparent, as it is expressive to us of moderation and self-command,—as it expresses habit, more than immediate impulse,—as it is peculiar to such tones only as are expressive of affecting passions or dispositions of mind,— as it is felt alone by those who are affected by such dispositions, —and as it is beautiful only in those cases where this temperance of Emotion, of which it is the sign, is considered as proper. I forbear therefore any further illustration of it.
[Page 174]
The observations which I have offered on the subject of Simple Sounds, are perhaps sufficient to show, that the Sublimity and Beauty of these Sounds arises in all cases, from the qualities with which we have observed them connected, and of which they appear to us as the Signs or Expressions; and that no Sounds in themselves are fitted by the constitution of our nature to produce these Emotions.
It is natural, however, to suppose, that in this, as in every other case, our experience should gradually lead to the formation of some general rules with regard to this expression; and that different sounds should appear to us to have a difference of character, according to the nature of the qualities with which we most frequently find them conjoined. This supposition will appear more probable, when we consider, not only that the diversities of sounds are few, and consequently that rules of this kind can be more easily formed; but particularly, that these diversities of sounds are the immediate expressions of different qualities of mind in the human Voice, and consequently, that their character becomes more certain and definite.
I believe in fact, that something of this kind takes place early in life, and that long before we are able to attend to their formation, we have formed certain general
[Page 175]
associations, with all the great diversities of sound, and that in after life, they continue to be generally expressive of these characters.
To enumerate these general expressions, is a very delicate, as well as a very difficult task. I hazard therefore, the following observations, only as hints for the prosecution of the subject; and as I am sensible of their imperfection, I am willing to rest no conclusion upon them.
The great divisions of Sound are into Loud and Low, Grave and Acute, Long and Short, Increasing and Diminishing. The two first divisions are expressive in themselves: the two last only in conjunction with others.
1. Loud Sound is connected with ideas of Power and Danger. Many objects in nature which have such qualities, are distinguished by such sounds, and this association is farther confirmed from the human Voice, in which all violent and impetuous passions are expressed in loud tones.
2. Low Sound has a contrary expression, and is connected with ideas of Weakness, Gentleness and Delicacy. This association takes it rise not only from the observation of inanimate nature, or of animals, where in a great number of cases, such sounds distinguish objects with such qualities, but particularly from the human Voice, where all gentle,
[Page 176]
or delicate, or sorrowful affections are expressed by such tones.
3. Grave Sound is connected with ideas of Moderation, Dignity, Solemnity, &c . principally, I believe, from all moderate, or restrained, or chastened affections being distinguished by such tones in the human Voice.
4. Acute Sound is expressive of Pain, or Fear, or Surprise, &c . and generally operates by producing some degree of astonishment. This association also, seems principally to arise from our experience of such connections in the human Voice.
5. Long or lengthened Sound, seems to me to have no expression in itself, but only to signify the continuance of that quality which is signified by other qualities of Sound. A loud, or a low, a grave, or an acute Sound prolonged, expresses to us no more than the continuance of the quality which is generally signified by such Sounds.
6. Short or abrupt Sound has a contrary expression, and signifies the cessation of the quality thus expressed.
7. Increasing Sound signifies, in the same manner, the increase of the quality expressed; as
[Page 177]
8. Decreasing Sound signifies the gradual diminution of such qualities.
I shall leave to the reader to attend to the diversity of expression which arises from the different combination of these diversities of Sound.
The most Sublime of these Sounds appears to me to be a loud, grave, lengthened and increasing Sound.
The least Sublime, a low, acute, abrupt, or decreasing Sound.
The most beautiful, a low, grave and decreasing Sound.
The least beautiful, a loud, acute, lengthened and increasing Sound.
Such are the few general principles that, as far as I can judge, take place, with regard to the Sublimity or Beauty of Sounds. The innumerable exceptions that there are to every one of these rules, afford a sufficient proof, that this Sublimity or Beauty does not arise from the Sounds themselves. Wherever, however, any new sound occurs, it is, I think, by its approach to one or other of these classes that we determine its Sublimity or Beauty.
[Page 178]
SECTION II. Of Composed Sounds, or Music. I. In the preceding illustrations, I have considered only Simple Sounds as producing the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty.
Sounds, however, are capable of being united by certain laws, and of forming a whole. To such a composition of Sounds we give the name of Music ; an Art, confessedly, of great power, in producing Emotions both of Sublimity and Beauty, and the source of one of the first and purest pleasures of which our nature is susceptible.
Upon this subject, I shall beg leave to offer a few observations, although it is with great diffidence that I speak upon an art of which I have no theoretical knowledge, and of which I can judge only from the effect that it produces on myself.
[Page 179]
The essence of Music consists in continued Sounds. The same sound, however, when continued, has no beauty, farther than as a simple sound, and when long continued, becomes positively disagreeable: Music therefore must necessarily consist in the composition of different sounds.
The Succession or Composition of all different Sounds is not equally pleasing. By a peculiar law of our nature, there are certain sounds of which the union is agreeable, and others of which the union is disagreeable. There is therefore a relation between sounds, established by nature, which cannot be violated without pain. Music therefore as an art intended to produce pleasure, must consist in the composition of related Sounds.
These observations are sufficiently obvious. There are, however, two other circumstances in the Succession of Sounds, necessary to constitute Music.
1. The mere Succession of related Sounds is not in itself pleasing. Although the Succession of any two related Sounds is agreeable, yet a whole series of such Sounds, in which no other relation was observed but the relation between individual Sounds, would be absolutely disagreeable. To render such a series pleasing, it is necessary that it should possess Unity, or that we should discern a relation not only between the individual Sounds, but also among the whole number of Sounds that constitute the series. Although every
[Page 180]
word in language is significant, and there is a necessary relation among words, established by the rules of grammar; yet it is obviously possible to arrange words according to grammatical rules, which yet shall possess no meaning. In the same manner, a series of Sounds may be composed, according to their individual relations, which yet may possess no general relation, and from which, as we can discover no end, we can derive no pleasure. What Thought is to the arrangement of words, the Key, or the fundamental Tone, is to the arrangement of Sounds; and as the one constitutes a whole in language, by establishing a certain and definite idea, to which all the words in a sentence bear a relation, so the other constitutes a whole in Music, by establishing a definite and leading Sound, to which all the other Sounds in the series bear a similar relation. The first circumstance, therefore, that distinguishes musical Succession, is the preservation of this relation among all the individual Sounds, to one key or fundamental tone, which is the foundation and end of the composition.
2. The second circumstance which distinguishes Musical Succession, is the Regularity or Uniformity of that Succession. In natural events, Succession without Regularity is confusion; and wherever Art or Design is supposed, is positively disagreeable. In Music therefore, as an Art designed to please, Regularity or Uniformity is absolutely necessary. The most pleasing succession of Sounds, without the
[Page 181]
preservation of this Regularity, or what is commonly called Time, every one knows, is positively displeasing. For this purpose, every succession of Sounds is supposed to be divided into certain equal intervals, which whether they comprehend more or fewer Notes, occupy the same space of Time in the succession of these Notes. To preserve this Uniformity, if there are few Sounds in this Interval, these Sounds must be prolonged to occupy the whole space of Time. If there are many, they must be sounded quickly for the same reason. The one constitutes what is called Slow, the other what is called quick Time in common language. In both cases, however, the space or portion of time allotted to each Interval is uniformly the same, and constitutes the only Regularity of which Sounds in succession are capable. A regular or uniform succession of Sounds, therefore, related to one Key or fundamental Note, may be considered as constituting Musical succession, and as distinguishing it from all other successions of Sound. The accurate perception both of this Regularity, and of this Relation, constitutes that Faculty which is generally called a good or a Musical Ear.
II. If therefore, we consider Music, as such a succession of Sounds as I have now described, the two circumstances which distinguish, or determine the nature or character of
[Page 182]
every Composition, are, the Nature of the Key, and the Nature of the Progress; the Nature of the Fundamental and governing Sound, and the Nature (or as it is commonly called) the Time, of the Succession.
With both of these characteristics of Musical composition, I apprehend, that we have many Associations.
The Key or Fundamental Tone of every Composition, from its relation to the Tones of the human Voice, is naturally expressive to us of those qualities or affections of mind which are signified by such Sounds. It is perhaps unnecessary to offer any illustration of this, because it is so obvious to every man's observation. The relation of such Tones in Music, to the expression of the qualities of mind is indeed so strong, that all Musicians understand what Keys or what Tones are fitted for the expression of those affections, which it is within the reach of Music to express. It is also observable, that they who are most unacquainted with Music, are yet able immediately to say, what is the affection which any particular Key is fitted to express. Whether any piece of Music is beautiful, or not, may be a subject of dispute, and very often is so; but whether the Sounds of which it is composed are gay or solemn, cheerful or melancholy, elevating or depressing, there is seldom any dispute.
[Page 183]
That the Time of musical Composition is also expressive to us of various affecting or interesting qualities, can scarcely be disputed. In all ages, quick time, or a rapid succession of Sounds has been appropriated to the expression of Mirth and Gaiety: Slow time, or a slow succession of Sounds, to the expression of Melancholy or Sadness. All the passions or affections therefore, which partake of either of these ingredients, may be generally expressed by such circumstances in the Composition, and the different degrees of such Movements, may, in the same manner, express such affections as partake of any intermediate nature between these extremes. In what manner, the conception of such affections is associated with such circumstances in the progress of Sound, it is not my business to explain. It is sufficient that the fact itself is acknowledged. I cannot avoid, however, observing, that there is a very strong analogy, not only between the progress of Musical Sounds, and the progress of Sounds in the human Voice, in the case of particular passions; but that there is also a similar analogy between such progress in Sounds, and the progress of Thought in the case of such Passions. Under the influence of pleasing or agreeable passions the articulation is quick; in the case of contrary passions it is slow; and so strong is this expression, that we are disposed to judge of the passion any person is affected with, although we do not hear the words he utters, merely from the slowness or rapidity of his articulation. It is observable in the same manner, that different passions have
[Page 184]
an influence upon the progress of our thoughts, and that they operate very sensibly either in accelerating or retarding this progress. All the passions which belong to Pleasure, are attended with a rapid succession of Thoughts, and seem to give an unusual degree of vigour to our Imagination. The passions, on the contrary, which belong to Pain, produce, in general, a slow and languid succession of Thought, and seem to depress our Imagination below its usual Tone. This is so obvious, that every person must have observed it even in conversation.
The Progress of musical Sounds, therefore, may very naturally express to us the nature or character of particular passions, not only from the analogy between such progress of Sounds, and the progress of Thought; but still more from its being in a great measure the Sign of such affections of mind, by making use of the same Sounds or Tones, and the same varieties in the progress of these Sounds, which are in real life the Signs of such affections in the human Voice. Whether these observations account for the associations we have with musical Time, or not, is at present a matter of no consequence, as the fact itself is sufficiently certain. The appropriation of particular Time, to particular Emotions, has taken place in every age and country, is understood by every man, and is not the less certain, though no account can be given of the reason of it.
[Page 185]
It is in thus being able to express both the Tone of Passion or Affection, and that progress of Thought or Sentiment which belongs to such Affections, that, in as far as I am able to judge, the real foundation of musical Expression consists. It is far beyond the bounds which I prescribe myself in these observations, to enter into any minute investigation of the different expressions which such Sounds, and such Compositions of Sounds in general possess. But if the reader will recollect, what are the distinct associations which it has formerly been observed we have with Sounds or Tones, as loud or soft, grave or acute, and the particular associations which it has now been observed we have with the different progressions of Sound, as quick, or moderate, or slow; and will further attend to the possible number of ways in which these different characteristics of Music may be combined, he will be fully sensible both of the different Emotions which it is in the power of Music to express, and of the great variety which it affords in the expression of these Emotions.
If I am not mistaken, the real extent of Musical Expression, coincides in a great degree with this account of it. These Signs in the human Voice are general Signs. They express particular classes of passion or emotion, but they do not express any particular passion. If we had no other means of intercourse or of information, we might from such Signs infer, that the person was elevated or depressed, gay
[Page 186]
or solemn, cheerful or plaintive, joyous or sad; but we could not, I think, infer, what was the particular passion which produced these expressions. Music which can avail itself of these Signs only, can express nothing more particular than the Signs themselves. It will be found accordingly, that it is within this limit that musical Expression is really confined; that such classes of Emotion it can perfectly express; but that when it goes beyond this limit, it ceases to be either expressive or beautiful. The general Emotions of Gaiety, Elevation, Solemnity, Melancholy or Sadness, it is every day found to express; and with regard to such general expressions there is never any mistake; but when it attempts to go further, when it attempts to express particular passions, Ambition, Fortitude, Pity, Love, Gratitude, &c . it either fails altogether in its effect, or is obliged to have recourse to the assistance of words to render it intelligible. “It is in general true (says Dr Beattie) that Poetry is the most immediate and the most accurate interpreter of Music. Without this auxiliary, a piece of the best music, heard for the first time, might be said to mean something, but we should not be able to say what. It might incline the heart to sensibility, but poetry or language would be necessary to improve that sensibility into a real Emotion, by fixing the fancy upon some definite and affecting ideas. A fine instrumental symphony well performed, is like an oration delivered with propriety, but in an unknown tongue; it may affect us a little, but conveys no determinate
[Page 187]
feeling. We are alarmed, perhaps, or melted or soothed; but it is very imperfectly, because we know not why. The singer, by taking up the same air, and applying words to it, immediately translates the oration into our own language. Then all uncertainty vanishes, the fancy is filled with determinate ideas, and determinate Emotions take possession of the heart.”
Essay upon Poetry and Music, part 1. chap. vi.
Nor is this confining the Expression of which Music is capable, within narrower limits than is consistent with our experience of its effects. Although its real power consists in its imitation of those Signs of Emotion or Passion which take place in the human Voice, yet from its nature, it possesses advantages which these Signs have not, and which render it, within those limits, one of the most powerful means which can be made use of, in exciting Emotion. As far as I am able to judge, these advantages principally consist in the two following circumstances:
1. In that variety of sounds which it admits of, in conformity to the Key, or fundamental Tone. In the real Expression of Passion in the human Voice, the Sound is nearly uniform, or at least admits of very small variation. In so far, therefore, as mere Sound is concerned, the tone of any passion would in a short time become unpleasing from its uniformity; and if this effect were not forgot, in our attention
[Page 188]
to the language and sentiments of the person who addresses us, would be perceived by every ear. In Music, on the contrary, the variety of related Sounds which may be introduced, not only prevents this unpleasing effect of uniformity, and preserves the Emotion which the prevailing tone is of itself able to excite, but by varying the expression of it, keeps both our attention and our imagination continually awake. The one resembles what we should feel from the passion of any person, who uniformly made use of the same words, to express to us what he felt. The other, what we feel from that eloquence of passion, where new images are continually presenting themselves to the mind of the speaker, and a new source of delight is afforded to our imagination, in the perception of the agreement of those images with the Emotions from which they arise. The effect of musical Composition, in this light, resembles, in some measure, the progress of an oration, in which our interest is continually kept alive; and if it were possible for us, for a moment, to forget that the performer is only repeating a lesson, were it possible for us to imagine, that the sounds we hear were the immediate expressions of his own Emotions, the effect of Music might be conceived in some measure to approach to the effect of Eloquence. To those who have felt this influence, in the degree in which, in some seasons of sensibility, it may be felt, there is no improbability in the accounts of the effects of Music in early times, when the professions of Poetry and Music were not separated:
[Page 189]
when the Bard, under the influence of some strong and present impression, accommodated his melody to the language of his own passion; and when the hearers under the influence of the same impression, were prepared to go along with him, in every variety of that Emotion which he felt and expressed himself.
2. But, besides this, there is another circumstance in which the Expression of Music differs materially from the Expression of natural Signs, and which serves to add considerably to the strength of its effect. Such natural Sounds express to us immediately, if they express at all, the Emotion of the person from whom they proceed, and therefore immediately excite our own Emotion. As these Sounds, however, have little or no variety, and excite immediately their correspondent Emotion, it necessarily happens, that they become weaker as they proceed, until at last they become positively disagreeable. In musical Composition, on the contrary, as such Sounds constitute a whole, and have all a relation to the Key, or fundamental Note in which they close, they not only afford us a satisfaction as parts of a regular whole, but what is of much more consequence, they keep our attention continually awake, and our expectation excited, until we arrive at that fundamental Tone, which is both the close of the Composition, and the end of our expectation. Instead, therefore, (as in the former case) of our Emotion becoming more languid as the Sounds proceed,
[Page 190]
it becomes, in the case of musical Composition, on the contrary, more strong. The peculiar affection we feel is kept continually increasing, by means of the expectation which is excited for the perfection of this whole, and the one and the other are only gratified when we arrive at this desired and expected end.
In this respect, indeed, musical Expression is in itself superior even to the Expression of Language: and were the Passions or Affections which it can express, as definite or particular, as those which can be communicated by Words, it may well be doubted, whether there is any Composition of Words which could so powerfully affect us, as such a Composition of Sounds. In Language, every person under the influence of Passion or Emotion, naturally begins with expressing the cause of his Emotion; an observation, which every one must have made in real life, and which might easily be confirmed by instances from Dramatic Poetry. In this case, our Emotion is immediately at its height, and as it has no longer any assistance from Curiosity, naturally cools as the Speaker goes on. In Music on the contrary, the manner of this communication resembles the artful, but interesting conduct of the Epic or Dramatic Poem, where we find ourselves at once involved in the progress of some great Interest, where our Curiosity is wound up to its utmost to discover the event, and where at every step this Interest increases, from bringing us nearer to the expected
[Page 191]
end. That the effect of musical Composition is similar, that while it excites Emotion from the nature of the Sounds, it excites also an increasing expectation and interest from the conduct of these Sounds, and from their continued dependence upon the close, has, I am persuaded, been felt in the strongest manner by every person of common sensibility, and indeed is in itself extremely obvious from the effect which is universally produced by any pathetic composition upon the Audience. The increasing silence,—the impatience of interruption, which are so evident as the composition goes on,—the arts by which the performer is almost instinctively led, to enhance the merit of the close, by seeming to depart from it,—the suppression of every sign of emotion till the whole is completed, and the violence either of sensibility or applause, that are immediately displayed, whenever a full and harmonious close is produced; all testify in the strongest manner the increasing nature of the Emotion, and the singular advantage which Music thus possesses, in keeping the attention and the sensibility so powerfully awake.
Such seems to me, the natural effect of Music on the human Mind: in expressing to us those Affections or Emotions, which are signified by the tones of the Voice, and the progress of articulate Sounds; limited indeed in the reach of its imitation or expression, and far inferior to language, in being confined to the expression only of general Emotions; but powerful within those limits, beyond any
[Page 192]
other means we know, both by the variety which it can afford, and the continued and increasing interest which it can raise.
It is obvious, that the observations which I have now offered, relate principally to vocal Music, and to that simple species of Composition which is commonly called Song or Air. I believe it will be found that this is in reality, not only the most expressive species of Composition, but the only one which affects the minds of uninstructed Men. It is the only Music of early Ages, the only Music of the common People, the only Music which pleases us in Infancy and early Youth. It is a considerable time before we discern the beauties of more artificial Composition, or indeed before we understand it. In such kinds of composition, a young person, whatever may be his natural taste, seldom discovers any continued relation. He is disposed to divide it in his own mind into different parts; to consider it as a collection of distinct airs; and he is apt to judge of it, not as a whole, but as the separate parts of it are expressive to him or not. There is nothing accordingly more common, than to find young people, expressing their admiration of a particular strain or division of the Composition, and such strains are always the most simple, and those which approach most to the nature of Airs; but it is seldom, I believe, that they are able to follow the whole of a Concerto,
[Page 193]
or that they are found to express their admiration of it as a whole.
With such a species of Composition, however, they who are instructed in Music have many and very interesting associations. A Song or an Air leads us always to think of the Sentiment, and seldom disposes us to think of any thing else. An Overture or a Concerto, disposes us to think of the Composer. It is a work in which much invention, much judgment, and much taste may be displayed; and it may have therefore to those who are capable of judging of it, all that pleasing effect upon the mind which the composition of an excellent Poem or Oration has upon the minds of those who are judges of such works. The qualities of Skill, of Novelty, of Learning, of Invention, of Taste, may, in this manner, be expressed by such Compositions; qualities, it is obvious, which are the foundation both of Sublimity and Beauty in other cases, and which may undoubtedly be the foundation of such characters in musical Composition, even although it should have no other or more affecting expression to recommend it. Nor is this all; such compositions are not read in private, but are publicly recited. There is therefore the additional circumstance of the performance to be attended to; a circumstance of no mean consequence, and of which every man will acknowledge the importance, who recollects the different effects the same composition has produced on him, when performed by
[Page 194]
different people. There is therefore, the Judgment, the Taste, the expression of the Performer, in addition to all those different qualities of excellence which may distinguish the Composition; and the whole effect is similar to that which every one has felt from any celebrated piece of Poetry, when recited by an able and harmonious Declaimer. Even to the very worst music, this gives an effect, and the effect may easily be conceived when the Music also is good.
III. While Music has this power in expressing some of the most interesting and affecting passions of the human Mind; and is, in its more artificial state, significant to us of so many pleasing and delightful qualities, it will not, I hope, be considered as rash, if I presume to think that it is from these associations that it derives all its power in producing the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty, and that wherever it does produce either of these effects, it is by being expressive to us either of some interesting passion, or of some valuable and pleasing quality in the Composition, or the Performance.
When any musical Composition affects us with the Emotions either of Sublimity or Beauty, it should seem, that this effect must arise from one or other of the following
[Page 195]
causes: 1 st , From the nature of the single or individual Sounds which enter into the Composition. 2 dly , From the nature of the Composition itself, or from those laws, which, as has before been observed, are necessary to render a succession of Sounds agreeable, or to constitute Music; or, 3 dly , From the associations we connect with it, or the qualities of which it is expressive to us. That the Beauty or Sublimity of single sounds, is not a quality of the Sounds themselves, but arises from their expression, I have already endeavoured to illustrate. That the Beauty of musical Composition does not arise from the second of those causes, or from the circumstances of the Composition itself, and that it is altogether to be ascribed to the qualities of which it is expressive to us, I am disposed to conclude from the following considerations:
1. If the Beauty of Music arose from the regular Composition of Sounds, according to those laws, which are necessary to constitute Music or an agreeable succession of Sounds, it would necessarily follow, that every composition where these laws were observed would be beautiful. Every man, however, knows, that there is a very wide distinction between Music and beautiful Music. If a Composition is expressive of no sentiment, a common hearer feels no Beauty from it: If it is quite common, and has neither novelty nor skill in it, a Connoisseur in Music feels as little. If it has neither one nor other, all the world pronounce it bad
[Page 196]
Music. Yet such a Composition may be perfectly regular, may be in obedience to the strictest laws of Composition; and will give to every one that inferior pleasure, which arises from a regular succession of Sounds. As there is therefore a very evident distinction between that mechanical pleasure which we receive from mere Music, and that delight which we feel from Music when Beautiful or Sublime, it is obvious, that the mere regular Composition of related Sounds, is not the cause of the Emotions either of Sublimity or Beauty.
2. If the beauty of Music arose from any of those qualities, either of Sound, or of the Composition of Sounds, which are immediately perceivable by the Ear, it is obvious, that this would be expressed in Language, and that the terms by which such Music was characterised, would be significant of some quality or qualities discernible by the Ear: If, on the contrary, this Beauty arises from the interesting or affecting qualities of which it is expressive to us, such qualities, in the same manner, ought, in common language, to be assigned as the causes of this Emotion: and the terms by which such Music is characterised ought to be significant of such qualities. That the last is the case, I think there can be no dispute. The terms Plaintive, Tender, Cheerful, Gay, Elevating, Solemn, &c . are not only constantly applied to every kind of Music, that is either Sublime or Beautiful; but it is in fact by such terms only that men ever
[Page 197]
characterise the Compositions from which they receive such Emotions. If any man were asked what was it that rendered such an Air so beautiful; he would immediately answer, because it was Plaintive, Solemn, Cheerful, &c . but he never would think of describing its peculiar nature as a Composition of Sounds. In the same manner, if he were accounting to any person for the Beauty or Sublimity of any Composition, if he were to describe it in the most accurate way possible, as having particular characters of Composition, he might indeed make him wonder at his learning, but he would leave him as ignorant as before, with regard to the source of its Beauty. Were he to tell him on the other hand, that it was expressive of Melancholy, Gaiety or Tenderness, he would make him understand at once the reason of his Emotion. If the Beauty or Sublimity of Music arose from the laws of its Composition, the very reverse of all this would obviously be the case.
It is observable, in the same manner, that even they who are best acquainted with the principles of Composition, and who are most disposed to forget the end, in attention to the rules of the science, yet never think of expressing the Beauty or Sublimity of any piece of Music, by terms significant of its nature as a Composition, but by such as are significant of some pleasing or interesting Association. If they forget the Expression of Music, they never forget the merits of the Composer. When they speak therefore of the Sublimity or
[Page 198]
Beauty of any such Composition, if they are farther questioned upon the subject, it will always be found, that it is either the Learning, the Invention, or the Taste which it displays, that they assign as the foundation of their admiration, or some other quality either in the composition or performance, perfectly distinct from the mere qualities either of Sound or Composition. This universal language of mankind, is not only a proof of the connection between the Beauty and Sublimity of Music, and the Expressions which it conveys; but it is impossible that this language should ever have been either employed, or understood, if the Sublimity or Beauty of Music were independent of such Expressions.
3. If the Beauty or Sublimity of Music depended solely upon the nature of its composition, and was independent of the qualities of which it is expressive, it would necessarily happen, that the same compositions must always be beautiful or sublime, which once were so; and that in every situation they must produce the same Emotion, in the same manner as every other object of Sense uniformly produces its correspondent sensation. The truth is, however, that no such thing takes place, and that, on the contrary, Music is then only beautiful or sublime, when it is accommodated to the Emotion which it is intended to express. If the Passion of Revenge, for instance, were expressed by the most beautiful composition of Sounds conceivable, which either naturally, or from habit,
[Page 199]
were considered as expressive of Tenderness, every man, instead of being affected with its beauty, would laugh at its absurdity. In the same manner, if Love or Tenderness were expressed by any Sounds, or composition of Sounds, generally appropriated to the expression of Rage, or Revenge, however sublime they might be according to their own expression, they would undoubtedly cease to be so by such an appropriation. Instances of the same kind might easily be multiplied. If we could suppose, that by a miracle, the present system of Sounds in the human Voice were altogether changed; that the Tones which now express Mirth, should then express Melancholy, the Sounds which now express Rage, should then express Tenderness, &c . and that a similar revolution should at the same time take place in the Expression of the progress of Sounds, I think every man will allow, that the whole system of Music must of necessity be changed; that a new Music must arise accommodated to this change, in the system of expressive Sounds, and that if it were not changed, instead of affording us any Emotions of Beauty or Sublimity, it would either be unintelligible, or absolutely absurd; yet in such a case, all that arises from the mere mechanical structure of Sounds would remain, all that is immediately perceived by the Ear, either in Sound itself, or in the composition of Sound, would have undergone no revolution. There cannot well be a stronger proof, that the Beauty or Sublimity of Music arises from the qualities
[Page 200]
which it expresses, and not from the means by which they are expressed.
4. It is observable, that the Beauty or Sublimity of Music is felt by those who have no perception of the relation of Sounds, either in point of Tune or Time and who consequently must be unconscious of any pleasure that arises from the mere composition of Sounds. Every one who will take the trouble of enquiring, will find many people who have (as it is generally called) no musical ear, who are unable to learn the simplest tune, and who can scarcely distinguish one tune from another, who are yet sensible to the Beauty or Sublimity of Music, and who feel delight from different kinds of Composition. The want of a musical ear is not uncommon; but I believe there is no instance of any person who is insensible either to the Expression of different Tones in the human Voice, or who is not differently affected by the different progress of Sounds. In such cases, although Music has not the same extent of Expression to them, that it has to those who are born with a good ear, yet still it has some Expression; and the proof of it is, that although they cannot tell whether any note is just or not, or whether the time of any composition is perfectly preserved, they can still tell whether a song is gay or plaintive, whether fitted to inspire mirth or melancholy. They have therefore that degree of delight from it, which the scenes of Nature usually inspire, where a general but indistinct
[Page 201]
relation is observed to some interesting or affecting qualities, and where, in consequence of this relation, such scenes naturally tend to excite or to encourage a correspondent Emotion; but they are insensible to that greater delight, which, as has already been shown, every man of a good Ear, feels both from the variety of this Expression, and from the continued and increasing interest which it awakens. If the Sublimity or Beauty of Music arose from the discernment of such relations as constitute the laws of composition, it is obvious that they who are incapable of discerning such relations, would be incapable at the same time, of discovering either its Sublimity or Beauty.
In the preceding observations, I have considered only the permanent Associations we have with Musical Composition, or the Expressions which are every where felt both in the Tone and the Time of such successions of Sound, from their analogy to the character and progress of Sound in the human Voice. With Music, however, we have often many accidental Associations, both individual and national; and the influence of such Associations upon our opinions of the Beauty or Sublimity of Music might be shown from many considerations. On the one hand, from the dependence of the Beauty of Music, upon the temporary or habitual dispositions of our minds,—from the different effect which is
[Page 202]
produced by the same Composition, according to the Associations we happen to connect with it,—and from the tendency which all national Music has to render those who are accustomed to it, insensible to the beauty of any foreign Music, from their association of particular sentiments, with peculiar characters or modes of Composition: And on the other hand, from the influence of individual or national Associations, in increasing the Sublimity or Beauty of Music, both by increasing its natural Expressions, and by rendering these Expressions more definite and precise. I am unwilling, however, to swell these very imperfect remarks, by illustrations which every one can so easily prosecute for himself.
From the whole, I am induced to conclude, that Music is productive to us of two distinct and separate Pleasures:
1. Of that mechanical Pleasure, which by the constitution of our nature accompanies the perception of a regular succession of related Sounds.
2. Of that Pleasure which such Compositions of Sound may produce, either by the Expression of some pathetic or interesting Affection, or by being the Sign of some pleasing or valuable Quality, either in the Composition or the Performance.
[Page 203]
That it is to this last Source, the Beauty or Sublimity of Music is to be ascribed, or that it is Beautiful or Sublime only, when it is expressive of some pleasing or interesting Quality, I hope is evident from the preceding observations.
[Page 204]
CHAPTER III. Of the Objects of Sight. The greatest part of the external objects, in which we discover Sublimity or Beauty, are such as are perceived by the Sense of Sight. It has even been imagined by some Philosophers, that it is to such objects only that the name of Beauty is properly applied, and that it is only from analogy that the same term is applied to the objects of our other Senses. This opinion, however, seems at first sight ill founded. The terms Beauty and Sublimity are applied by all men to Sounds, and even sometimes to Smells. In our own experience, we very often find, that the same Emotion is produced by Sounds, which is produced by Forms or Colours; and the nature of language sufficiently shows, that this is conformable also to general experience. There seems no reason therefore for limiting the objects of Sublimity or Beauty to the sole class of visible objects.
It must, however, be acknowledged, that by far the greatest number of these objects are such as we discover by means of this Sense; nor does it seem difficult to assign the reason
[Page 205]
of this superiority. By the rest of our senses, we discover only single qualities of objects; but by the Sense of Seeing, we discover all that assemblage of qualities which constitute, in our imaginations, the peculiar nature of such objects. By our other senses, we discover, in general, such qualities, only when the bodies are in contact with us; but the Sense of Sight affords us a very wide field of observation, and enables us to make them the objects of attention, when they are at very considerable distances from ourselves. It is natural, therefore, that the greater power of this Sense should dispose us to greater confidence in it, and that the qualities of bodies which we discover by means of it, should more powerfully impress themselves upon our imagination and memory, than those single qualities which we discover by the means of our other Senses. The visible qualities of objects, accordingly, become to us not only the distinguishing characteristics of external bodies, but they become also in a great measure the Signs of all their other qualities; and by recalling to our minds the qualities signified, affect us in some degree with the same Emotion which the objects themselves can excite. Not only the smell of the Rose, or the Violet, is expressed to us by their Colours and Forms; but the utility of a Machine, the elegance of a Design, the proportion of a Column, the speed of the Horse, the ferocity of the Lion, even all the qualities of the human mind are naturally expressed to us by certain visible appearances; because our experience has taught us, that such qualities
[Page 206]
are connected with such appearances, and the presence of the one immediately suggests to us the idea of the other. Such visible qualities, therefore, are gradually considered as the Signs of other qualities, and are productive to us of the same Emotions with the qualities they signify.
But, besides this, it is also to be observed, that by this sense, we not only discover the nature of individual objects, and therefore naturally associate their qualities with their visible appearance; but that by it also we discover the relation of objects to each other; and that hence a great variety of objects in nature become expressive of qualities which do not immediately belong to themselves, but to the objects with which we have found them connected. Thus, for instance, it is by this sense we discover that the Eagle inhabits among Rocks and Mountains; that the Red-breast leaves the Woods in Winter, to seek shelter and food among the dwellings of Men; that the song of the Nightingale is peculiar to the Evening and the Night, &c . In consequence of this permanent connection, these animals acquire a character from the scenes they inhabit, or the seasons in which they appear, and are expressive to us in some measure of the character of these seasons and scenes. It is hence that so many objects become expressive, which perhaps in themselves would never have been so; that the Curfew is so solemn from accompanying the close of day, the twitter of the Swallow so cheerful, from its being heard in the Morning,
[Page 207]
the bleating of Sheep, the call of the Goat, the lowing of Kine, so beautiful from their occurring in pastoral or romantic Situations; in short, that the greatest number of natural objects acquire their expression from their connection with particular or affecting scenes.
As, in this way, the visible qualities of objects become expressive to us of all the qualities which they possess; and besides, in so many cases receive expression from their connection with other objects, it is extremely natural, that such qualities should form the greatest and most numerous class of the objects of Material Beauty.
I proceed to a more particular investigation of the Sublimity and Beauty of some of the most remarkable Classes of these Qualities.
[Page 208]
SECTION I. Of the Beauty of Colours. The greatest part of Colours are connected with a kind of established Imagery in our Minds, and are considered as expressive of many very pleasing and affecting Qualities.
These Associations may perhaps be included in the following Enumeration: 1 st , Such as arise from the nature of the objects thus permanently coloured. 2 dly , Such as arise from some analogy between certain Colours, and certain Dispositions of Mind; and, 3 dly , Such as arise from accidental connections, whether national or particular.
1. When we have been accustomed to see any object capable of exciting Emotion, distinguished by some fixed or permanent Colour, we are apt to extend to the Colour the Qualities of the object thus coloured; and to feel from it, when separated, some degree of the same Emotion which is properly excited by the object itself. Instances of this kind are within every person's observation. White, as it is the colour
[Page 209]
of Day, is expressive to us of the Cheerfulness or Gaiety which the return of Day brings. Black, as the colour of Darkness, is expressive of Gloom and Melancholy. The Colour of the Heavens, in serene Weather, is Blue: Blue therefore is expressive to us of somewhat of the same pleasing and temperate character. Green is the colour of the Earth in Spring: It is consequently expressive to us of some of those delightful Images which we associate with that Season. The colours of Vegetables and Minerals acquire, in the same manner, a kind of character from the character of the species which they distinguish. The expression of those colours, which are the signs of particular passions in the human Countenance, and which, from this connection, derive their effect, every one is acquainted with.
2. There are many Colours which derive expression from some analogy we discover between them and certain affections of the human Mind. Soft or Strong, Mild or Bold, Gay or Gloomy, Cheerful or Solemn, &c . are terms in all Languages applied to Colours; terms obviously metaphorical, and the use of which indicates their connection with particular qualities of Mind. In the same manner, different degrees or shades of the same Colour have similar characers, as Strong, or Temperate, or Gentle, &c . In consequence of this Association, which is in truth so strong that it is to be found among all Mankind, such Colours derive a character from this resemblance, and produce in our Minds
[Page 210]
some faint degree of the same Emotion, which the qualities they express are fitted to produce.
3. Many Colours acquire character from accidental Association. Purple, for instance, has acquired a character of Dignity, from its accidental connection with the dress of Kings. The colours of Ermine have a similar character from the same cause. The colours in every country which distinguish the dress of Magistrates, Judges, &c . acquire dignity in the same manner. Scarlet, in this country, as the Colour which distinguishes the dress of the Army, has, in some measure, a character correspondent to its employment; and it was perhaps this Association, (though unknown to himself,) that induced the blind man, mentioned by Mr Locke, to liken his notion of Scarlet to the Sound of a Trumpet. Every person will, in the same manner, probably recollect particular Colours which are pleasing to him, from their having been worn by People whom we loved, or from some other accidental Association.
In these several ways, Colours become significant to us of many interesting or affecting Qualities, and excite in us some degree of the Emotions which such qualities in themselves are fitted to produce. Whether some Colours may not of themselves produce agreeable Sensations, and others disagreeable Sensations, I am not anxious to dispute: but wherever Colours are felt as producing the Emotion of Beauty,
[Page 211]
that it is by means of their Expression, and not from any original fitness in the Colours themselves to produce this effect, may perhaps be obvious from the following considerations:
1. The different sentiments of Mankind, with regard to the Beauty of Colours, are inconsistent with the opinion that such qualities are beautiful in themselves. It is impossible to infer, because any particular Colour is beautiful in one country, that it will also be beautiful in another: and there are in fact many instances where the same Colour produces very different opinions of Beauty in different races of Men. Black, to us is in general, an unpleasant Colour. In Spain and in Venice, it is otherwise. Yellow, is to us, at least in dress, a disagreeable Colour. In China, it is the favourite Colour. White, is to us extremely Beautiful. In China, on the contrary, it is extremely disagreeable. Instances of the same kind must have occurred to every person.
If we enquire, on the other hand, what is the reason of this difference of opinion, we shall uniformly find, that it arises from the different Associations which these different people have with such Colours; and that their opinion of their Beauty is permanently regulated by the nature of the Qualities of which they are expressive. Black is to us, an unpleasant Colour, because it is the Colour appropriated to Mourning. In Venice and Spain, it is the Colour which
[Page 212]
distinguishes the dress of the Great. Yellow, is in China, the imperial Colour, and sacred to the Emperor and his property: it is therefore associated with ideas of Magnificence and Royalty. Among us it has no distinct Association, and is therefore beautiful or otherwise, only according to its degree or shade. White is beautiful to us in a supreme degree, as emblematical both of Innocence and Cheerfulness. In China, on the other hand, it is the Colour appropriated to Mourning, and consequently, very far from being generally beautiful. In the same manner, wherever any peculiar Colours are permanently favourite, there will always be found some pleasing Association which the People have with that Colour, and of which they, in some measure, consider it as significant.
2. It is farther observable, that no Colours, in fact, are beautiful, but such as are expressive to us of pleasing or interesting Qualities. All Colours obviously, are not beautiful: the same Colours are beautiful only when they are expressive of such qualities; and, in general, I believe it will be found, that among all the variety of Colours we are acquainted with, those only are beautiful which have similar expressions.
The common Colours, for instance, of many indifferent things which surround us, of the Earth, of Stone, of Wood,
[Page 213]
&c . have no kind of Beauty, and are never mentioned as such. The things themselves are so indifferent to us, that they excite no kind of Emotion, and of consequence, their Colours produce no greater Emotion, as the signs of such qualities, than the qualities themselves. The Colours, in the same manner, which distinguish the ordinary dress of the common People, are never considered as Beautiful. It is the Colours only of the Dress of the Great, of the Opulent, or of distinguished professions, which are ever considered in this light. The Colours of common furniture in the same way, are never beautiful: it is the Colours only of fashionable, or costly, or magnificent Furniture, which are ever considered as such.
It is observable, farther, that even the most beautiful Colours, (or those which are expressive to us of the most pleasing Associations,) cease to appear beautiful whenever they are familiar, or when the objects which they distinguish have ceased to produce their usual Emotions. The Blush of the Rose, the Blue of a serene Sky, the Green of the Spring, are Beautiful only when they are new, or unfamiliar. In a short time we observe them with the same indifference, that we do the most common and unnoticed Colours. That, in the same manner, our perception of their Beauty, depends on the state of our own Minds, and that it is only in seasons of sensibility that we are conscious
[Page 214]
of it, is a fact which every Man knows so well from his own experience, that it would be needless to illustrate it.
It may be observed also, that no new colour is ever beautiful, until we have acquired some pleasing association with it. This is peculiarly observable in the Article of Dress; and indeed it is the best instance of it, because in such cases, no other circumstance intervenes by which the experiment can be influenced. Every man must have observed, that in the great variety of new colours which the caprice of Fashion is perpetually introducing, no new colour appears at first as beautiful. We feel, on the contrary, a kind of disappointment, when we see such a colour in the dress of those who regulate the Fashions, instead of that which used to distinguish them; and even although the colour should be such, as in other subjects we consider as beautiful, our disappointment still overbalances the pleasure it might give. A few weeks, even a few days alter our opinion; as soon as it is generally adopted by those who lead the public Taste, and has become of consequence the mark of Rank and Elegance, it immediately becomes beautiful. This, it is observable, is not peculiar to colours that in themselves may be agreeable; for it often happens, that the caprice of Fashion leads us to admire colours that are disagreeable, and that not only in themselves, but also from the Associations with which they are connected. A plain man would scarcely believe, that the Colours of a glass
[Page 215]
Bottle, of a dead Leaf, of Clay, &c . could ever be beautiful; yet within these few years, not only these, but some much more unpleasant colours that might be mentioned, have been fashionable and admired. As soon, however, as the Fashion changes, as soon as they whose Rank or Accomplishments give this fictitious value to the Colours they wear think proper to desert them, so soon the Beauty of the Colour is at an end. A new Colour succeeds; a new disappointment attends its first appearance; its beauty is gradually acknowledged; and the Colour which was formerly the favourite, sinks into neglect and contempt. If the faculty by which the Beauty of Colours is perceived, had any analogy to a Sense, it is obvious that such variations in our opinion of their Beauty could not take place.
3. When the particular Associations we have with such Colours are destroyed, their Beauty is destroyed at the same time.
The different machines, instruments, &c . which minister to the convenience of Life, have in general, from the materials of which they are composed, or from the uses to which they are applied, a fixed and determinate Colour. This Colour becomes accordingly in some degree beautiful, from its being the Sign of such qualities; and although this effect is, in a great measure, lost from the frequency of observation, it is still observable upon many occasions. Change the
[Page 216]
accustomed Colour of such objects, and every man feels a kind of disappointment. This is so strong, that even if a Colour more generally beautiful is substituted, yet still our dissatisfaction is the same, and the new colour, instead of being beautiful, becomes the reverse. Rose-colour, for instance, is a more beautiful Colour than that of Mahogany; yet if any man were to paint his doors and windows with Rose-colour, he would certainly not add to their Beauty. The Colour of a polished steel grate is agreeable, but is not in itself very beautiful. Suppose it painted green, or violet, or crimson, all of them colours much more beautiful, and the beauty of it is altogether destroyed. The Colours of Cedar, of Mahogany, of Sattin-wood, are not nearly so beautiful as many other Colours that may be mentioned. There is no Colour, however, with which such woods can be painted, that would be so beautiful as the Colours of the woods themselves; because they are very valuable, and the Colours are in some measure significant to us of this value. Instances of this kind are innumerable.
There are different professions in every country, which are distinguished by different coloured dresses. Whatever may have led to this Appropriation, and however fanciful and extravagant it may sometimes be, after it is established, there is felt a kind of propriety in the dress; and it is strongly associated in our minds with the qualities which such professions seem to indicate. We are in some measure
[Page 217]
disappointed, therefore, when we see a professional man not in the dress of his profession; and when he is in this dress, we conceive that there is a propriety and beauty in such a Colour. Change the Colours of these several dresses, and all this species of Beauty is destroyed. We should not only laugh at the supposition of the Army and Navy being dressed in black, and the Church and the Bar in scarlet; but we should feel also a discontent, as if these Colours had in themselves a separate Expression, and were in these cases misapplied. Even in reversing the dress of individuals of these different professions, the whole Beauty of their dress is destroyed; and we are conscious of a feeling of impropriety, as if the qualities which are peculiar to such professions were necessarily connected with the dress they wear. So strong is this association even in trifles, and so naturally do Colours become expressive to us of the qualities with which we have found them generally connected.
In natural objects the same circumstance is very apparent. There are Colours perhaps more generally beautiful than those which distinguish Trees, or Rocks, or Waters, or Cottages, or Ruins, or any of the ordinary ingredients of rural scenery; yet no Colours, but the natural, could possibly be beautiful, in the imitation of such scenes; because no other Colours could be expressive to us of those qualities which are the sources of our Emotion from such objects in Nature. That all the Beauty, in the same manner, of Plants of Animals,
[Page 218]
would be destroyed, if any new Colours, however generally beautiful, were substituted in the place of those by which Nature has distinguished their different classes, and which are of consequence associated in our minds with all the qualities which they possess, is so obvious, that it is altogether unnecessary to attempt the illustration of it. That this principle applies also to the Colours of Dress, and that the same Colour is beautiful or not, as the Expression which it has, is suited to the character or situation of the person who wears it, every person may satisfy himself by a little attention. As thus there is no Colour whatever, which in all situations is beautiful, and as, on the contrary, the Beauty of every Colour is destroyed, whenever the associations we have with it are dissolved, it seems reasonable to conclude, that the beauty of such qualities arises from their Expression, and not from any original fitness in them to produce this Emotion.
4. If the Beauty of Colours arose from any original fitness in them to produce this Emotion, it is apparent, that they who are incapable of such Perceptions, must be incapable of such Emotion. That the blind, however, may receive the same delight, from the ideas which they associate with Colours, that they do who see, is a fact which I think every one will be convinced of, who reads the poems of Dr Blacklock. No man who is not acquainted with the history of their ingenious Author, could perceive that he had the
[Page 219]
misfortune to lose his sight in early infancy. That from conversation, and from the perusal of books of poetry, it was possible for him to learn the distinguishing colours of certain objects, and to apply them with sufficient propriety in his own verses, I do not deny; but the circumstance of importance at present is this, that his poetry is full of the same sentiments, and expresses the same admiration with regard to the different visible qualities of matter, with that of Poets who have had no such defect; and that the same power is ascribed to them in producing the Emotions of Beauty, and with as great accuracy with regard to particular instances, as in the compositions of those who have had the Sense of Sight in its fullest perfection. If our perception of the Beauty of Colours arose from some original fitness in such qualities to produce this Emotion, it is obvious, that the blind must be as incapable of perceiving this beauty, as of perceiving the Colours themselves; but if the Beauty of Colours arises from the associations we connect with them, this fact, in the case of Dr Blacklock, admits of a very simple solution. From reading, and from conversation, he has acquired the same associations with the Words that express such Colours, as we have with the Colours themselves; that the word White, for instance, signifies a quality in objects expressive of Cheerfulness and Innocence,—the word Purple, the quality of Majesty,—the word Black, the quality of Gloom and Melancholy, &c . In this case, it is obvious, that he may feel the same Emotions from the use of these words, that
[Page 220]
we do from the Colours which they express; and that from the permanence of these associations in a great variety of cases, he may apply the terms with sufficient propriety, either in sublime or beautiful description. As this is in reality the case, it seems to be a very strong confirmation of the opinion, that the Beauty of such qualities arises from the associations we connect with them, and not from any original or independent Beauty in the Colours themselves.
[Page 221]
CHAPTER IV. Of Forms. Of all material Qualities, that which is most generally, and most naturally productive of the Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty, is Form. Other qualities may be separated from most objects, without destroying their nature; but the Form of every material object, in a great measure, constitutes its nature and essence, and cannot be destroyed, without destroying the individual subject to which it belongs. From whatever cause, therefore, the Beauty of any material object proceeds, it is natural to ascribe it to the Form, or to that quality which most intimately belongs to the object, and constitutes its essence to our senses. The common opinion, therefore, undoubtedly is, that Forms in themselves, are beautiful; that there is an original and essential Beauty in some particular Forms; and that this quality is as immediately discernible in them, as the Forms themselves.
Philosophers, however, have not been satisfied with this common opinion. The supposition of such an original and independent Beauty in Forms, has been found inconsistent
[Page 222]
with many phenomena, and some more general principle was wanted, under which the different facts upon this subject might be tolerably arranged. Many Theories accordingly have been formed to account for this species of Beauty. Some have resolved it into a sense of Proportion, and endeavoured to establish, by analogy from our other senses, certain proportions which are immediately and permanently beautiful. Others have accounted for this Beauty from the union of Uniformity and Variety. Some have supposed it to arise from the consideration of Utility. Others have asserted, that the Beauty of Forms arises from their Commonness, and that the beautiful Form is that which is most generally met with in objects of the same kind. Mr Hogarth, in opposition to all, considers the beautiful Form, as being described by lines of a particular kind, and has produced a great variety of instances in support of his opinion.
It is not my design at present, to enter into any examination of these several opinions. In all of them, I believe, there is something true to a certain extent, though I believe also, that they have arisen from a partial view of the subject, and are inadequate to account for the greater number of the phenomena.
I may be allowed, however, to observe, that of the two, the common opinion is by much the most defensible. To reduce the great variety of instances of Beauty in Forms to any
[Page 223]
single principle, seems at first sight altogether impossible; not only from this variety, but also, in innumerable cases, from the contrary nature of the Forms, which, in fact, are Beautiful. As no Theory besides, can possibly be maintained without some foundation in Nature, the number of Theories which have been produced upon this subject, are, in themselves an evidence, that this Beauty arises from more causes than any one of these Theories comprehends.
The principle which I have endeavoured to illustrate, with regard to the Beauty and Sublimity of Sounds and Colours, will, perhaps, be found to be equally applicable to the Beauty or Sublimity of Forms: and as far as I can judge, is free from the objections which may be stated both to the common and the philosophical opinions. In the observations which follow, I shall therefore endeavour to shew, That the Sublimity or Beauty of Forms arises altogether from the Associations we connect with them, or the Qualities of which they are expressive to us; and I shall endeavour to explain, with as much accuracy as I am able, the different Expressions of which Forms are susceptible, and which are the Foundation of that Sublimity and Beauty which we ascribe to them. The importance of the subject, will, I hope, be my excuse for the length, and perhaps for the tediousness of some of these illustrations.
[Page 224]
Forms are naturally divisible into two kinds, into animated and inanimate Forms. It is the latter of these only which I propose at present to consider; as it is obviously necessary first to consider the source of the Beauty of which Form itself is capable, before we can properly ascertain that superior Beauty which arises from Animation.
With regard to inanimate Forms, the principal expressions which they have to us, seem to me to be, 1 st , The expressions of such qualities as arise from the nature of the bodies distinguished by such Forms; and, 2 dly , The expressions of such qualities as arise from their being the subject or production of Art. The first of these constitutes what may be called their Natural Beauty; the second, what may be called their Relative Beauty. There is also another source of expression in such qualities from accidental Association, and which perhaps may be termed their Accidental Beauty.
Upon each of these sources of the Beauty of Forms, I shall offer some observations.
[Page 225]
SECTION I. Of the Natural Sublimity and Beauty of Forms. PART I. Of the Sublimity of Forms. The Sublimity of inanimate Forms seems to arise chiefly from two sources; 1 st , From the nature of the objects distinguished by that Form; and, 2 dly , From the quantity or magnitude of the Form itself. There are other circumstances in the nature of Forms, which may extend or increase this character; but I apprehend, that the two now mentioned, are the only ones which of themselves constitute Sublimity. Both of them, I believe, are productive of this effect, by being expressive to us of qualities capable of exciting very strong Emotions.
[Page 226]
I. 1. The Forms which distinguish bodies that are connected in our minds with ideas of Danger or Power, are in general Sublime. There is scarcely any thing in inanimate Nature more remarkably so, than all those Forms which are appropriated to the instruments of War. The Forms of Cannon, Mortars, &c . have all a character of this kind. Military Ensigns, although approaching to very common and neglected Forms, partake of the same character: there are few things more Sublime than the Forms of Armour, particularly the steel Armour which was in use in the middle ages. Even the familiarity of common use does not altogether destroy this effect: the Sword, the Spear, the Javelin, the Dagger, are still sublime Forms, and enter with propriety into the sublimest descriptions either of Poetry or Painting.
2. The Forms that in general distinguish bodies of great duration, and which of consequence express to us great Power or Strength, are in most cases Sublime. In the Vegetable Kingdom, the Forms of Trees are Sublime, principally in proportion to their expression of this quality. Nothing is more Sublime than the Form of Rocks, which seem to be coeval with Creation, and which all the convulsions of Nature have not been able to destroy. The Sublimest of
[Page 227]
all the Mechanical Arts is Architecture, principally from the durableness of its productions; and these productions are in themselves Sublime, in proportion to their Antiquity, or the extent of their Duration. The Gothic Castle is still more sublime than all, because, besides the desolation of Time, it seems also to have withstood the assaults of War.
3. The Forms which distinguish bodies that are connected in our Minds with ideas of Splendor or Magnificence, are in general sublime. The Forms of the Throne, the Sceptre, and the Diadem, approach, in fact, to very common and very neglected Forms, yet they are all sublime, from being the signs of the Splendor and Magnificence of Royalty. The triumphal Car, and the triumphal Arch, are sublime Forms from similar Associations.
4. The Forms, in the same manner, which distinguish bodies connected in our Minds with ideas of Awe or Solemnity, are in general sublime. The Forms of Temples, although very different as Forms, have in all ages been accounted as sublime. Even the most common Forms employed in religious service, derive a character of this kind from the qualities with which they are connected. The Thunderbolt of Jupiter, the Trident of Neptune, &c . seem to have been considered by the Ancients as sublime Forms, although in themselves they are insignificant. The Forms of all those things, in the same manner, which are employed
[Page 228]
in the burial of the Dead, are strikingly sublime. The Pall, the Hearse, the Robes of Mourners, &c . even the Plumes, which in general are so beautiful, and the Colour of which is in most cases so cheerful, are, in this situation, above all other things, powerfully Sublime.
That these, and probably other Associations of a similar kind, have an effect in bestowing Sublimity upon the Forms which generally distinguish such bodies, every person, I think, will be satisfied, both from his own experience, and from conversation. That the Sublimity of such Forms arises from the qualities which they express, and not from an original fitness in any peculiar Forms to produce this Emotion, is so apparent from the single consideration of the great variety of Forms that are sublime, that I will not fatigue the reader by any farther illustration of it.
II. The Sublimity of Forms, in many cases also, arises from their Magnitude; and this Quality alone is often sufficient to bestow Sublimity. With Magnitude accordingly, we have many distinct and powerful Associations.
[Page 229]
In animal Forms, Magnitude is strongly associated in our Minds with the ideas of proportionable Power or Strength, and is chiefly sublime from its expression of this Quality. Animals of great size, but feeble or harmless, are so far from being sublime, that they are in general contemptible; a fact which may easily be observed even in the opinions of Children.
In inanimate Forms, Magnitude seems to have different expressions to us, according to its different appearance or description.
Magnitude in Height, is expressive to us of Elevation, and Magnanimity. The source of this Association is so obvious, and the Association itself so natural, that such qualities of Mind have, in all ages, been expressed by these Images, and such Magnitudes described by terms drawn from these qualities of Mind.
Magnitude in Depth, is expressive to us of Danger or Terror, and from our constant experience, of images of Horror. In all countries, the popular Hell is considered as an unfathomable abyss, into which the souls of the wicked are plunged.
Magnitude in Length, is expressive to us of Vastness, and when apparently unbounded, of Infinity; that being naturally
[Page 230]
imagined to be without end, to which we can discern none. It is impossible to see a vast plain, and above all, the ocean, without this impression. In spite of the knowledge we have of the immense space between us and the fixed stars, and of the comparatively trifling distance between any two points in this globe, yet the former is not nearly so sublime as the view of the ocean without shore, or even of a great plain without bounds.
Magnitude in Breadth, is expressive to us of Stability, of Duration, of Superiority to Destruction. Towers, Forts, Castles, &c . are sublime in consequence of this association, though very often they have no other considerable magnitude. The pyramids of Egypt are strikingly sublime in point of form, from this Expression, as well as from the real knowledge we have of their duration. We are so accustomed to judge of the stability of every thing by the proportion of its base, that terms borrowed from this material quality, are in every language appropriated to the expression of some of the sublimest conceptions we can form; to the stability of Nations, of Empires, of the Laws of Nature, of the future hopes of good men.
For the reality of these Associations, I might appeal to every man's own experience, as well as to the common language of mankind. That it is from such Expressions, or from being the sign of such qualities that Magnitude is sublime,
[Page 231]
and not from any original fitness in the quality itself to produce this Emotion, seems to be obvious from the following considerations: 1 st , That there is no determinate Magnitude, which is solely or peculiarly sublime, as would necessarily be the case, were Magnitude itself the cause of this Emotion. 2 dly , That the same visible Magnitude which is sublime in one subject, is often very far from being sublime in another, and vice versa ; and, 3 dly , That Magnitude, according to its different appearances, has different characters of Sublimity corresponding to the different Expressions which such appearances have; whereas if it were in itself sublime, independently of all Expression, it would in all cases have the same degree, and the same character of Sublimity.
[Page 232]
PART II. Of the Natural Beauty of Forms. The most obvious definition of Form , is that of Matter, bounded or circumscribed by Lines. As no straight line, however, can include Matter, it follows, that the only Lines which can constitute Form, must be either, 1 st , Angular Lines, or, 2 dly , Curved or winding Lines. Every Form whatever must be composed either by one or other of these Lines, or by the Union of them.
When Forms are composed by one of these lines solely, they may be termed Simple Forms. When they are composed by the Union of them, they may be termed Complex Forms.
For the sake of perspicuity, I shall first consider what it is that constitutes the Beauty of Simple Forms, and then, what constitutes the Beauty of Complex Forms.
Simple Forms then may be considered as described either by angular, or by winding Lines. These different Forms
[Page 233]
seem to me to be connected in our minds with very different Associations, or to be expressive to us of very different Qualities. I shall beg leave to mention some of these, without pretending to a complete enumeration.
1. The greater part of those bodies in Nature, which possess Hardness, Strength, or Durability, are distinguished by angular Forms. The greater part of those bodies, on the contrary, which possess Weakness, Fragility or Delicacy, are distinguished by winding or curvilinear Forms. In the Mineral Kingdom, all Rocks, Stones, and Metals, the hardest and most durable bodies we know, assume universally angular Forms. In the Vegetable Kingdom, all strong and durable Plants, are in general distinguished by similar Forms. The feebler and more delicate race of Vegetables, on the contrary, are mostly distinguished by winding Forms. In the Animal Kingdom, in the same manner, strong and powerful Animals, are generally characterised by Angular Forms: feeble and delicate Animals by Forms of the contrary kind. In consequence of this very general connection in Nature, these different Forms become expressive to us of the different qualities of Strength and Delicacy.
2. In all those bodies which have a progress, or which grow and decay within our own observation, the same character of Form is observable. In the Vegetable Kingdom, the infancy or youth of plants is, in general, distinguished
[Page 234]
by winding Forms. The infancy and youth of animals is, in the same manner, distinguished by winding or serpentine Forms. Their mature and perfect age, by Forms more direct and angular. In consequence of this connection, Forms of the first kind become in such cases expressive to us of Infancy, and Tenderness, and Delicacy, and those of the second kind of Maturity, and Strength and Vigour.
3. Beside these very obvious Associations, it is also to be observed, that from the Sense of Touch, angular Forms are expressive to us of Roughness, Sharpness, Harshness; winding Forms, on the contrary, of Softness, Smoothness, Delicacy, and Fineness, and this connection is so permanent, that we immediately infer the existence of these qualities, when the bodies are only perceived by the Eye. There is a very strong analogy between such qualities as perceived by the Sense of Touch, and certain qualities of mind; as in all languages such qualities are expressed by terms drawn from the perceptions of the external sense. Such Forms, therefore, when presented to the Eye, not only lead us to infer those material qualities which are perceived by the Sense of Touch, but along with these, to infer also those qualities of mind, which from analogy are signified by such qualities of matter, and to feel from them some degree of that Emotion which these dispositions of mind themselves are fitted to produce. The epithets Bold, Harsh, Gentle, Delicate, are universally applied to Forms. In all languages figurative
[Page 235]
expressions of a similar kind will be found; and whoever attends either to his own feelings, or to the meaning which men in general annex to such words in applying them to Forms will, I believe, be convinced, that the Emotion which they signify, and are intended to signify, is founded upon the associated qualities, and very different from the mere agreeable or disagreeable sensation which the material qualities alone convey.
4. The observations which I have now made, relate principally to simple curves, or to Forms in which a single curvature takes place; as the curve of the Weeping Willow, of the young shoots of Trees, of the stem of the Tulip, and the Lily of the Valley. There is another species of Form, commonly distinguished by the name of the winding or serpentine Form, in which different Curves take place, or in which a continued Line winds into several Curvatures. With this Form, I apprehend we have another, and a very important Association, I mean that of Ease. From what cause this Association arises, I will not now stop to enquire; but I conceive every one must have observed, that wherever we find Vegetables, or any other delicate or attenuated body assume such Forms, we are impressed with the conviction of its being easy, agreeable to their nature, and free from force or constraint. On the contrary, when such bodies, in the line of their progress, assume angular Forms, we have a strong impression of the operation of force, of
[Page 236]
something that either prevents them from their natural direction, or that constrains them to assume an unnatural one. That winding Forms are thus expressive to us of Volition and Ease, and angular Forms of the operation of Force or Constraint, appears from a singular circumstance in Language, viz . That, in general, all the former directions are expressed by verbs in the active voice; a River winds, a Vine wreathes itself about the Elm, a Flower bends, &c . while, on the other hand, all directions of the latter kind are expressed in general by the passive voice of verbs. I believe also, I may appeal to the observation of the reader, whether from the winding of a River, of the Ivy, or of the tendrils of the Vine, he has not an impression of Ease, of Freedom, of something agreeable to the object: and whether, in the contrary Forms in such cases, he has not an impression of uneasiness, from the conviction of Force having been applied, or some obstacle having occurred, to constrain them to assume a direction unnatural to them. In general, therefore, I apprehend, that winding or serpentine Forms are expressive to us of Ease, and angular Forms of Force or Constraint. Such seem to me the principal Associations we have with the great division of Simple Forms. Winding Forms being expressive to us of Fineness, Delicacy, Ease; and angular Forms of Strength, Roughness, and in some cases of the operation of Force or Constraint.
[Page 237]
All Forms as perceived by the Eye, are constituted by Lines; and their Beauty is dependent upon the nature of these constituent parts. It is natural, therefore, to enquire, whether from such Associations, any general principles can be formed, which may direct the Artist in the invention of beautiful Forms, by determining the character and expression of Lines.
Lines differ either in regard to their Nature, or their Direction.
1. Lines differ in regard to their nature according to the different degrees of their Consistence or Strength. Strong and vigorous lines are expressive to us of Strength and Stability when perpendicular; and of some degree of harshness or roughness when horizontal, or in an oblique direction. Fine and faint Lines are expressive to us of Smoothness, Fineness, Delicacy. In any given number of straight Lines, that is always most beautiful which is finest, or which while it preserves its continuity, has the appearance of the smallest quantity of matter employed in the formation of it. Hence, in every subject either of Art or Nature, one of the principal causes of the Beauty of delicate outline.
2. Lines differ in their direction in two ways. They are either Even or Uneven, that is, Straight or Irregular. Irregular
[Page 238]
Lines differ again, they are either in Angles or Curves.
1. Even Lines are expressive to us of Softness and Smoothness.
2. Uneven Lines are either Angular or Winding.
Angular Lines are expressive of Harshness, Roughness, &c .
Winding Lines of Pliancy, Delicacy, Ease, &c .
The real and actual Beauty of Lines will be found to correspond to these Associations; and these are in fact the most beautiful which have the most pleasing or affecting Expression.
1. Strong and Even Lines express Strength and Smoothness. They have therefore a degree of Beauty. Fine and Even Lines express Delicacy and Smoothness. They are accordingly more beautiful than the former.
2. Strong and Angular Lines express Strength and Harshness. They are therefore very seldom beautiful. Fine and Angular Lines express Delicacy together with Roughness. They are beautiful therefore only, when the expression of Delicacy prevails over the other.
[Page 239]
3. Strong and Winding Lines express Strength and Gentleness or Delicacy. Their effect is mutually destroyed, and they are accordingly indifferent, if not unpleasing. Fine and Winding Lines express Delicacy and Ease. They are accordingly peculiarly beautiful.
4. The least beautiful Lines are Strong and Angular Lines. The most Beautiful, Fine and Winding Lines.
Considering therefore Lines in this abstracted view, and independent of the nature of the bodies which they distinguish, it seems very natural to conclude, That these Forms will be the most beautiful which are described by the most beautiful Lines, and that of consequence, the Serpentine or winding Form must necessarily be the most beautiful. It was this view of the subject which seems to have influenced Mr Hogarth , in the opinions which he published in his Analysis of Beauty . He saw clearly, and his art afforded him continual proofs of it, that the Winding Line was of all others the most beautiful. He conceived therefore, that all Forms must be beautiful in proportion to the predominance of this Line in their Composition; and his opinion falls in so much with the general observation of Mankind, that it has been very universally adopted.
If, however, the observations which I have made upon the different expressions of Forms are just; if the Winding or
[Page 240]
Serpentine Form is beautiful, not of itself, and originally, but in consequence of the Associations we connect with it, it ought to follow, that whenever this Association is destroyed, the Form should be no longer beautiful, and that wherever the same Associations are connected with the contrary Form, that Form should then be felt as Beautiful.
That this is actually the case, I shall now endeavour to shew from several very familiar Illustrations.
1. If such Forms were in themselves Beautiful, it is reasonable to think that this should be expressed in Language, and that the circumstance of the Form should be assigned as the cause of our Emotion. If, on the contrary, such Forms are beautiful from their being expressive of particular Qualities, it is equally reasonable to think, that, in common language, this expression should be assigned as the cause of the Emotion. That the latter is the case, cannot, I think, well be disputed. No Man, when he is speaking of the Beauty of any Form, unless he has some Theory in his Mind, thinks of ascribing it to the peculiar nature of the Form, or of describing its Beauty to other People, as consisting in this Form. The terms, on the contrary, which are generally used upon these occasions, are such as signify some quality of which the Form is expressive; and the epithets by which the Beauty of the Form is marked, are such as are significant of these Qualities. Among these Qualities,
[Page 241]
those of Gentleness, Fineness or Delicacy, as far as I can judge, are the most remarkable, and the most generally expressed in common Language. In describing the beautiful Forms of Ground, we speak of gentle Declivities, and gentle Swells. In describing the beautiful Forms of Water, we speak of a mild Current, gentle Falls, soft Windings, a tranquil Stream. In describing the beautiful Forms of the Vegetable Kingdom, we use a similar Language. The delicacy of Flowers, of Foliage, of the young Shoots of Trees and Shrubs, are expressions every where to be heard, and which every where convey the belief of Beauty in these Forms. In the same manner, in those ornamental Forms, which are the production of Art, we employ the same Language to express our opinion of their Beauty. The delicacy of a Wreath, of a Festoon, of Drapery, of a Column, or of a Vase, are terms universally employed, and employed to signify the reason of our admiration of their Forms.
It may be observed also, that in comparing similar Forms, and determining with regard to their Beauty, we employ the same language; and that the reason we assign for our preference of one Form to another, is, in general, from its superior expression of Fineness or Delicacy. In comparing two Vases, or two Wreaths, or two Festoons, or any other ornamental Forms, a Person unacquainted with the Theories of Philosophers, when he is asked the reason of his preference, very readily answers, because it is more delicate; but never thinks
[Page 242]
of assigning any circumstance of the Form itself, as the foundation of his admiration. The least attention to the common language of Mankind on such subjects, will sufficiently shew how much the expression of delicacy determines the Beauty of all ornamental Forms. In describing any beautiful Form, in the same manner, to other people, we usually employ the same language, and this language is not only perfectly understood, but immediately also conveys to others the conception of the Beauty of this Form. If we were to describe the most beautiful Vase in technical terms, and according to the distinguishing characteristics of its Form, no one but an Artist would have any tolerable conception of its Beauty; but if we were simply to describe it, as peculiarly delicate in all its parts, I believe it would leave with every one the impression of the Beauty of its Form. If however, there were any original and independent Beauty in particular Forms, the description of this Form would be alone sufficient to convey the idea of its Beauty, and the circumstance of its Delicacy or Fineness would be as little able to convey this idea, as that of its Colour.
I shall only farther observe upon this subject, that the language and opinions of Children, and of common People, are inconsistent with the notion of any original or absolute Beauty in any particular Forms. Every Form is beautiful to Children that distinguishes objects, which they love or
[Page 243]
take pleasure in; and so far are they, or the common People from having any conception of the abstract Beauty of any peculiar Forms, that it is very seldom they distinguish between the Form and the subject formed, or feel any other Emotion from it, than as it is expressive to them of the qualities of the object distinguished by that Form. If, on the contrary, there were any original and independent Beauty in any peculiar Form, the preference of this Form would be early and decidedly marked both in the language of Children, and in the opinions of Mankind.
As there appears therefore, to be no Form which is peculiarly or solely beautiful, and as in winding or curvilinear Forms, the general nature of Language seems to ascribe this Beauty to their expression of Delicacy, and not to the mere circumstance of Form itself, it appears probable, that the Beauty of such Forms arises from this expression, and not from any original fitness in such Forms to excite this Emotion.
2. When this Association is destroyed, or when winding or curvilinear Forms cease to be expressive of Tenderness or Delicacy, I believe it will be found, that they cease also to be felt as beautiful. The origin of our Association of Delicacy with such Forms, arises, as I have before observed, from our general experience that bodies of such a kind are
[Page 244]
distinguished by such Forms. This Association therefore will be destroyed, when such Forms are given to, or assumed by bodies of a contrary kind.
The greater part of beautiful Forms in Nature, are to be found in the Vegetable Kingdom, in the Forms of Flowers, of Foliage, of Shrubs, and in those assumed by the young Shoots of Trees. It is from them accordingly, that almost all those Forms have been imitated, which have been employed by Artists for the purposes of Ornament and Elegance: and whoever will take the trouble of reviewing these different ornamental Forms, will find that they are almost invariably the Forms of such Vegetables, or of such parts of Vegetables, as are distinguished by the Delicacy and Tenderness of their Texture.
There are many parts however, of the Vegetable Kingdom, which are not distinguished by this character of Delicacy. The stem of some species of Flowers, and of almost all Shrubs, the trunk and branches of Trees, are distinguished by opposite characters, and would indeed be unfit for the purposes of Vegetation if they were not. In these subjects accordingly, the winding or serpentine Form is very far from being beautiful, as it has no longer its usual expression of Fineness or Delicacy.
[Page 245]
In the smaller and feebler tribe of flowers, for instance, as in the Violet, the Daisy, or the Lily of the Valley, the bending of the stem constitutes a very beautiful Form, because we immediately perceive that it is the consequence of the weakness and delicacy of the flower. In the Rose, on the contrary, and the white Lily, and in the tribe of flowering shrubs, a class of vegetables of greater strength, the same Form assumed by the stem is felt as a defect, and instead of impressing us with the idea of Delicacy, leads us to believe the operation of some force to twist it into this direction. In the young and feeble branches of such plants, however, this Form is again beautiful, when we perceive that it is the consequence of the delicacy of their texture, and of their being overpowered by the weight of the flower. In the Vine or Ivy, in the same manner, the winding of the young shoots and feebler branches, constitutes very beautiful Forms. In the direction of the stem, on the other hand, such Forms are felt as a defect as no longer expressive of Delicacy, but of Force. In the growth of the stronger vegetables, as of Trees, where we know and expect great strength, nothing can be so far from being beautiful, as any winding or serpentine Form assumed by the trunk. The beautiful Form of such objects is of so very different a kind, that it is in the opposite Form only that we perceive it. In the direction of the branches, the same character is expected, and a similar defect would be felt in their assuming any regularly winding or curvilinear Form. It is only when
[Page 246]
we arrive at the young shoots, and that only in their infant season, in spring, that we discover again the serpentine Form to be beautiful, because it is then only that we perceive it to be really expressive of Tenderness or Delicacy. Observations of this kind are within every person's reach, and I believe it will be found, that in the Vegetable Kingdom, the winding or serpentine Form is no longer beautiful than while it is expressive of some degree of Delicacy or Fineness, and that it ceases to be beautiful, whenever it is assumed by bodies of a different kind.
All the different bodies which constitute the Mineral Kingdom, are distinguished by a greater degree of Hardness and Solidity, than is to be found in any other of the production of Nature. Such bodies, however, by different exertions of Art, may be moulded into any form we please; but the beauty of the serpentine Form, in such cases, is lost, from our consciousness of the absence of that Delicacy which in general accompanies such Forms. It is possible, for instance, to imitate the winding of the Ivy, the tendrils of the Vine, or the beautiful curves of the Rose Tree, in Iron, or in any other metal. It is possible also, to colour such imitations in so perfect a manner, as at first to deceive the spectator. If I am not mistaken, however, the moment we are undeceived, the moment we know that the subject is so different from that which characterises such Forms in real Nature, the Beauty of the Forms is destroyed, and instead
[Page 247]
of that pleasing sentiment of Tenderness which the delicacy of the vegetables excites, a sentiment of disappointment and uneasiness succeeds: of disappointment, from the absence of that delicacy which we generally infer from the appearance of such Forms; and of uneasiness, from the conviction of Force having been applied to twist the subject into so unnatural directions. If the same observation is further pursued, I think, it will be found in general, that wherever the delicate Forms of the vegetable world, are imitated in metal, or any other hard and durable substance, the character of the Form is lost, and that instead of that lively Emotion of Beauty, which we receive from the original Forms, we are conscious of a feeling of discontent, from the seeming impropriety of giving to such durable substances a character which does not belong to them.
There are, however, undoubtedly, cases in which curvilinear Forms in such subjects are beautiful. I apprehend, however, that this takes place only when a kind of adventitious delicacy is given to such substances, and of consequence the same character is retained by the Form which we have generally associated with it in real Nature. This effect is in general produced by the following causes: 1 st , When the quantity of matter is so small, as to overcome our sense of its strength or durability; and, 2 dly , When the workmanship is so excellent, as to produce an opinion of fineness or delicacy, independent of the nature of the subject
[Page 248]
upon which it is employed. In either of these cases, such Forms may be beautiful, though assumed by the hardest or most durable substances.
A Bar of Iron, for instance, or of any other metal, may be twisted by force into the most perfect spiral Form; but in such a case, the conviction of force and labour destroys altogether the beauty of the general Form. Suppose this bar lengthened, until it becomes as slender as the wires which are made use of in musical instruments, and as delicate as such wires are, and the Form becomes immediately beautiful. The same bar may be bent by force into the Form of any given curve. In such a case the curve is not beautiful. Make the same experiment with a chain of iron, or of any other metal, which in some respects is yielding and pliant, and where we know that no force is requisite to make it assume such Forms, and the curves which it produces will be found very different in point of Beauty. The imitation of any vegetable Form, in the same manner, as the Vine, or the Rose, in any kind of metal, and as large as it is found in nature, would be very far from being beautiful. The imitation of such Forms in Miniature, and in Relief, when the character of the substance is in some measure forgot in the diminution of its quantity, may be, and very often is, extremely beautiful. The embellishments of a Vase, or of an Urn, which in general consist in the imitation of vegetable Forms, are beautiful both from the diminution
[Page 249]
of their size, and from the delicacy of their workmanship. If either of these circumstances were wanting, if they were massy in their substance, or imperfect in their execution, I apprehend, a proportionable degree of their Beauty would be lost. In the same manner, although none of the Forms of the greater vegetables are beautiful, when imitated in their full size, many of the smaller and more delicate plants may be imitated with propriety, because such imitations suppose not only small quantities of matter, but great accuracy and perfection of art.
The same observation may be extended to the ornaments of Architecture. These ornaments being executed in a very hard and durable substance, are in fact only beautiful when they appear but as minute parts of the whole. The great constituent parts of every building require direct and angular lines, because in such parts we require the Expression of Stability and Strength. It is only in the minute and delicate parts of the work, that any kind of ornament is attempted with propriety; and whenever such ornaments exceed in size, in their quantity of matter, or in the prominence of their Relief, that proportion which in point of lightness or delicacy we expect them to hold with respect to the whole of the building, the imitation of the most beautiful vegetable Forms, does not preserve them from the censure of Clumsiness and Deformity. A ballustrade might with equal propriety be finished in waving lines, but certainly
[Page 250]
would not be beautiful. A twisted column, though affording very pleasing curves to the Eye, is acknowledged to be less beautiful than the common and regular one. In short, if the serpentine Form were the only Form of Beauty, it might with sufficient propriety be introduced into a great number of the ornamental parts of Architecture. The fact of which every person may assure himself, that such Forms are beautiful only in those parts where the quantity of matter is minute, the Relief small, and the workmanship more exquisite, affords a strong presumption, that such Forms cease to be beautiful, when the general Association we have with them is destroyed.
It is the same limit which seems to determine the Beauty of those Forms which are executed either in wood or plaster, for the ornament of our houses. Every person must have observed in old houses, the absolute deformity of those figures with which the roofs were decorated, and in comparing them with those of modern times, will perceive, that the great superiority of the latter consists in the greater delicacy of the Forms, as well as in the greater perfection of the execution. In both, flowers and foliage are imitated; but in the one in full Relief, and upon a scale sometimes greater than that of Nature. In the other, with the simplest Relief, and the finest lines, that are consistent with the preparation of the subject. The terms, accordingly, by which we express our contempt or our admiration of them, are those of Heaviness
[Page 251]
or Lightness, terms which in this subject are synonymous with Massiness or Delicacy. The subjects, however, are the same, and no other circumstances intervene, but the superior delicacy of the Forms, and the greater accuracy of the workmanship.
It would lead me into too long a digression, if I were to enter into any detail on these subjects. The hints which I have offered, may perhaps lead the reader to satisfy himself by his own observation; that the winding or curvilinear Form is beautiful only in those subjects which are distinguished by softness or delicacy of texture: that in substances of a hard and durable nature, it in general ceases to be beautiful; and that in those cases where it is found to be beautiful, it arises from that adventitious delicacy (if I may so call it) which is produced, either when the quantity of matter employed is so small as to overcome our opinion of its strength or durability, or when the workmanship is so excellent, as to bestow on the subject a character of Delicacy which does not properly belong to it. If in this manner it is found, that when the Association is destroyed, the curvilinear Form ceases to be beautiful, it is obvious, that this Beauty is to be ascribed, not to the Form itself, but to the quality of which it is expressive.
3. As the Beauty of the winding or curvilinear Form is thus destroyed, when those Associations of Tenderness, and
[Page 252]
of Delicacy, which we in general connect with it, are dissolved, so, in the same manner, it may be observed, that all other Forms, when they have this character or expression, are considered and felt as beautiful. If there is any Form, or species of Forms, which is fitted by the constitution of our nature immediately to excite the Emotion of Beauty, and independent of all Association, it is obvious, that there never could have been a doubt upon the subject, and that in every class of objects, we should have been as able to point out the beautiful Form, as to point out its Colour or Smell. The fact is, however, that in no class of objects is there any such permanent Form of Beauty; and besides, the disagreement of different ages and nations in the Beauty of Forms, every man must have perceived in the course of his experience, that every general rule on this subject is liable to innumerable exceptions, and that there is no one Form, or species of Form, which, to the exclusion of all others, demands and obtains his admiration.
That angular Forms, accordingly, are also beautiful, when they are expressive of Fineness, of Tenderness, of Delicacy, or such affecting qualities, may perhaps appear from the consideration of the following instances.
In the Vegetable World, although it is generally true, that winding Forms are those that are assumed by young, or feeble, or delicate plants, yet this rule is far from being
[Page 253]
uniform, and there are many instances of similar productions being distinguished by Forms of an angular kind. There are accordingly many cases, where this Form is considered as beautiful, because it is then expressive of the same qualities which are generally expressed by Forms of the other kind. The Myrtle, for instance, is generally reckoned a beautiful Form, yet the growth of its stem is perpendicular, the junction of its branches form regular and similar angles, and their direction is in straight or angular Lines. The known delicacy however, and tenderness of the Vegetable, at least in this climate, prevails over the general expression of the Form, and gives it the same Beauty which we generally find in Forms of a contrary kind. How much more beautiful is the Rose Tree when its buds begin to blow, than afterwards when its flowers are full and in their greatest perfection: yet in this first situation, its Form has much less winding surface, and is much more composed of straight lines and of angles, than afterwards, when the weight of the flower weighs down the feeble branches, and describes the easiest and most varied curves. The circumstance of its youth, a circumstance in all cases so affecting; the delicacy of its blossom, so well expressed by the care which nature has taken in surrounding the opening bud with leaves, prevail so much upon our Imagination, that we behold the Form itself with more delight in this situation, than afterwards, when it assumes the more general Form of delicacy. It is on a similar account that the leaves of Vegetables
[Page 254]
form a very common, and a very beautiful Decoration, though they are less distinguished by winding Lines, than almost any other part of the plants. There are an infinite number of the feebler Vegetables, and many of the common grasses, the Forms of which are altogether distinguished by Angles and straight Lines, and where there is not a single Curvature through the whole, yet all of which are beautiful, and of which also some are imitated in different ornamental Forms with excellent effect, merely from the Fineness and Delicacy of their Texture, which is so very striking that they never fail when we attend to them, to afford us that sentiment of interest and tenderness, which in general we receive from the opposite Form. There are few things in the Vegetable World more beautiful than the knotted and angular stem of the Balsam; merely from its singular transparency, which it is impossible to look at, without a strong impression of the Fineness and Delicacy of the Vegetable. Such observations with regard to Flowers or Plants, every person has it in his power to pursue. There is not, perhaps, any individual of this Kingdom, which if it is remarkable for its Delicacy or Tenderness, is not also considered as beautiful in its Form, whether that Form be winding or angular.
It deserves also to be remarked, that the Form of the great constituent parts of all Vegetables, whether strong or delicate, is nearly the same; the growth of the stem and the
[Page 255]
direction of the branches being in both alike, and in both also, either in straight or in angular Lines. It is principally in the more delicate parts of the first, in the young Shoots, and in the Foliage, that they deviate from this Form, and assume winding or curvilinear directions. It is in these parts only, as I have before observed, that we discover beautiful Forms. In the class of feeble or delicate Plants, on the contrary, the Forms which we neglect in the first, are regarded as beautiful, because they have that expression which is found only in the opposite Forms of the other. The same Form has thus a different effect from the difference of its expression; and the straight Lines and angular Junctions, which are merely indifferent in the Elm and the Oak, are beheld with delight in the Plant or the Flower, when we are convinced that they are accompanied with Tenderness and Delicacy.
In many of those Arts, where the Beauty of Form is chiefly consulted, the same circumstance is observable. In all of them, the Beauty of Form is principally determined by its expression of Delicacy; but as in many of them the curvilinear Form is necessarily less expressive of this quality than the angular one, it is accordingly less beautiful.
In the manufacture of Glass, for instance, the great Beauty of the Form is in proportion to this Expression. Nothing
[Page 256]
is less beautiful than thick and massy Glass, which, from its quantity, seems intended to compensate for its Fragility. Nothing, on the contrary, is more generally beautiful, than thin and transparent Glass, which, from experience, we know to be the most decisive sign of its Delicacy and Weakness. In such a manufacture, winding Lines cannot be observed without necessarily increasing the quantity and thickness of the material, and of consequence diminishing its Fineness and Transparency. Such Forms accordingly are less beautiful than those composed of more direct and angular Lines, which, while they admit of greater transparency, express also greater delicacy and fineness. To take a very common instance, the stalk of a wine Glass might with equal ease be fashioned into serpentine or winding Forms, as into the angular copartments in which we generally find it, yet I am much deceived if it would be nearly as beautiful, because these Lines could not admit of that apparent fineness of surface, or transparency of matter, which is obtained by its angular Divisions. In a Lustre, in the same manner, one of the most beautiful productions of this manufacture, all is angular. The Form of the Prism, one of the most regular and angular of all Forms, obtains every where, the Festoons even are angular, and instead of any winding or waving Line, the whole surface is broken into a thousand little Triangles; yet I conceive no person will deny its Beauty. A Lustre, on the other hand, composed of the most beautiful Curves, and studiously varied into the most waving surface,
[Page 257]
would not be nearly so beautiful; because the necessary thickness which it would give to the Glass, would, in this case, be expressive of Strength and of Solidity, instead of Delicacy, and would diminish altogether that fine Transparency, which in this manufacture, is immediately the sign of Tenderness and Fragility.
The same observation will apply to the manufacture of Steel, or any other of the Metals. The greatest expression of Delicacy which a hard substance like Steel can receive, is from the Fineness and Brilliancy of its surface. It demands, of consequence, angular Forms, which, by admitting greater perfection of polish, or, at least, by displaying it better, are more beautiful than Curves, which require both greater solidity, and have less brilliancy. A sword Hilt, or a watch Chain, are infinitely finer and more beautiful, when they are composed of angular Forms, than when they are composed of Curves. In the Forms which are given to Jewels, the same rule universally obtains. The delicacy of such subjects is in their Brilliancy. The only Form therefore that is beautiful in them, is that which displays it.
There is no subject of this kind, in which Beauty of Form is more generally consulted, or indeed more generally found, than in the different articles of household Furniture. Such objects, by being composed of the uniform material of Wood, and that a hard and durable one, admit of little difference
[Page 258]
in point of Delicacy, but in the Quantity, or in the Form which is given to this Material. With regard to the first, all Furniture, I apprehend, is Beautiful in proportion to the smallness of its quantity of Matter, or the Fineness or Delicacy of the parts of it. Strong and Massy Furniture, is every where vulgar and unpleasing, and though in point of utility, we pardon it in general use, yet wherever we expect Elegance or Beauty, we naturally look for Fineness and Delicacy in it. The actual Progress of Taste in this Article is from Strength to Delicacy. The first articles of Furniture in every country are strong and substantial. As Taste improves, and as it is found that Beauty, as well as Utility, may be consulted in such subjects, their strength and solidity are gradually diminished, until at last by successive improvement, the progress terminates in that last degree of Delicacy and even of Fragility, which is consistent either with the nature of the Workmanship, or the preservation of the Subject.
In this Progress, it is discovered, that where the material which is employed is hard and durable, the greatest Delicacy which can be given to the Form, is rather in the use of direct and angular Lines, than in winding and serpentine ones; and chiefly from the reason I have before mentioned, that Curves cannot be employed without a proportionable and very obvious increase of Solidity, and by these means, destroying in a great measure the expression of Delicacy.
[Page 259]
Whoever will look into any of those books, which have made us acquainted with the Forms of Grecian or Roman Furniture, in their periods of cultivated Taste, will perceive accordingly, that in scarcely any of them, is the winding or serpentine Form observed; and that on the contrary, the lightest and most beautiful of them, are almost universally distinguished by straight or angular Lines, and by the utmost possible diminution of Solidity, that is consistent either with convenience or use. What is there, for instance, more beautiful in this kind, than the Form of the ancient Tripod, in the best periods of Roman Taste? The feet gradually lessening to the end, and converging as they approach it; the plane of the table placed with little ornament, nearly at right angles to the feet; and the whole appearing to form an imperfect triangle, whose base is above. There is scarcely in such a subject, a possibility of contriving a more angular Form, yet there can be none more completely Beautiful: because this Form itself is more immediately expressive of Delicacy, than almost any other which could have been imagined: the slightness of the whole fabric, the decreasing proportion of the feet as they descend to the ground, the convergence of the feet themselves, and the narrowness of the base for the superstructure, expressing not only the utmost degree of Delicacy that is consistent with use, but impressing us also with the further conviction of the necessity of approaching or handling it with tenderness, for fear of destroying its slight Stability. From this elegant Model accordingly,
[Page 260]
or from others, in which the same principle obtains, the greater part of the most beautiful articles of Modern Furniture are imitated. It is the Form which prevails in the construction of Chairs, Tables, Sophas, Beds, &c . and it is the Delicacy which it so well expresses, that bestows upon them the greater part of their Beauty. The application of winding or serpentine Lines, or of the more general Form of Beauty, would tend only to diminish their effect, by bestowing upon them the appearance of a greater degree of Solidity, and thus lessening, instead of increasing the expression which is the cause of this effect.
In the course of these observations, the Reader will observe, that I have all along gone upon the supposition, that there is in reality only one species of winding or curvilinear Form; and that I have confined my observations upon their expression to this general character of Form. Every one knows, however, that such Forms admit of great variety, and that the number of different curvatures that may be produced are almost infinite. Whoever then will take the trouble of pursuing this investigation, may, I think, easily satisfy himself; that among these, there is none uniformly and permanently beautiful; that the same Curve which is beautiful in one case, is very often not beautiful in others; and that in all cases that curvature is the most beautiful, which is most fully expressive of Delicacy or Ease in the subject which it distinguishes. As Forms of this kind differ
[Page 261]
also in the number, as well as in the nature of their curvatures, he will perceive also, that the same dependence upon their expressions continues; that the same number of curvatures or windings which are beautiful in one subject, are not beautiful in others; and that whenever in any subject the number of windings exceeds our opinion of Ease or Facility, it from that period becomes unpleasing, and expressive only of Force or Constraint. The limits which I must prescribe to myself in these observations, oblige me, in this, as in every other part of them, to refer much of the illustration which might be produced, to the Reader's own Reflection and Investigation.
If the observations which I have now offered on the Natural Beauty of Forms, or that Beauty which arises from the consideration of Form itself, be just, we may perhaps, without much impropriety, rest in the following conclusions on the subject.
1. That the Beauty of such Forms arises from the qualities of Fineness, Delicacy, or Ease, of which they are expressive.
2. That in every subject, that Form (whether angular or curvilinear) which is most expressive of these qualities, is the most beautiful Form. And,
[Page 262]
3. That, in general, the curvilinear or winding Form, as most frequently expressive of these qualities, is the most beautiful.
With regard also to those Arts which are employed in the imitation or invention of ornamental Forms, the following observations may not be without their use:
1. That wherever Natural Forms are imitated, these will be the most beautiful, which are most expressive of Delicacy and Ease.
2. That wherever new or arbitrary Forms are invented, that Form will be the most beautiful, which is composed by the most beautiful Lines, or, in other words, by Lines which have the most pleasing Expression. And,
3. That wherever the subject of the Form is of a hard or durable nature, that Form will be the most beautiful, in which the smallest quantity of Matter is employed, and the greatest delicacy of execution exerted.
The truth of these remarks I leave altogether to be determined by the observation of the reader. I shall only observe, that in the prosecution of this Inquiry, it is necessary to leave out of consideration every circumstance, of Design, of Fitness, or of Utility, and to consider
[Page 263]
Forms in the light only of their appearance to the Eye, without any relation either to an author or an end. These relations (as will be shown afterwards) are the foundation of a distinct species of Beauty, to which the principles of their natural Beauty do not apply.
Although, however, I have thus been led to conclusions different from those of Mr Hogarth, yet it is but justice to a performance of uncommon ingenuity, to acknowledge, that the principle which he has endeavoured to establish in his Analysis of Beauty, is perhaps of all others the justest and best founded principle which has as yet been maintained, in the investigation of the Natural Beauty of Forms. The instances which I have produced, and many others of the same kind, that will probably occur to every man of reflection, seem to me very strongly to show, that the principle of the absolute Beauty of Serpentine Forms is to be considered only as a general principle, subject to many exceptions; and that not only this Form is beautiful, from being the Sign of particular interesting and affecting qualities, but that in fact also, Forms of the contrary kind are likewise beautiful, when they are expressive of the same qualities.
[Page 264]
PART III. Of theComposition of Forms. I. The preceding observations relate altogether to Simple Forms, or to such Forms as are described by a single Line.
It is obvious, however, that there are very few Forms of such a kind. In the greater part of beautiful Forms, whether in Nature or in Art, Lines of different descriptions unite, and there is a Beauty felt in certain combinations of these Lines, or in the production of a complex Form. The principles, therefore, which account for the Beauty of Simple Forms, cannot be supposed to account also for that peculiar Beauty which arises from the union of such Forms in Composition.
Simple Forms are distinguished to the Eye, by the uniformity or similarity of the Line by which they are described. Complex Forms are distinguished by the mixture of
[Page 265]
similarity and dissimilarity in these Lines, or, in other words, by their Uniformity and Variety. The same principle which leads us to ascribe the Beauty of Simple Forms, to some original Beauty in these Forms themselves, leads us also to ascribe the Beauty of complex Forms, to some original fitness in the Composition of Uniformity and Variety, to produce this Emotion.
That the Composition of Uniformity and Variety in Forms is agreeable, or is fitted by the constitution of our nature to excite an agreeable sensation in the Sense of Sight, I am not disposed to dispute. That these qualities are also capable of conveying to us very pleasing and very interesting expressions, and that in this manner they are felt as beautiful, I shall endeavour to show in the next chapter; but that the union of such material qualities as perceived by the Eye, and without reference to any Expression, is not in itself, and essentially beautiful, is obvious from the following considerations, of which I shall devolve the illustration upon the reader himself.
1. If the Composition of Uniformity and Variety in Forms, were in itself beautiful, it would necessarily follow, that in every case where this Composition was found, the Form would be beautiful. The greater part of Forms, both in Art and Nature, are possessed of this union. The greater part of these Forms, however, are not beautiful.
[Page 266]
2. If it is said, that it is not the mere union of Uniformity and Variety, but a certain union of them, which is beautiful, then this peculiar union must in all cases be necessarily beautiful. The only difference between Forms in this respect, must be either in the number or in the degree of their uniform, or of their varied parts. Let any particular or certain Composition of these parts be fixed upon; it will be found, that so far is this union of uniformity and variety from being in itself beautiful, that it cannot be extended to objects of any different kind, without altogether destroying their Beauty.
3. If it is farther said, that it is not any certain, but a proper Composition of Uniformity and Variety which is beautiful, then it is obvious, that this propriety is not the object of our external Senses, and that whatever Beauty arises from the Composition of these qualities, is to be ascribed to some other principle than to the mere material qualities alone.
II. If, on the other hand, the account which has been given of the Natural Beauty of Forms, as expressive of certain affecting or interesting qualities, be just, it seems natural to suppose, that in the Composition of Forms, some propriety should arise from the Composition of Expression ; that as
[Page 267]
Lines are distinguished by different characters, the mixture of different Lines should produce confusion, instead of Beauty; and that the Composition of Form should then only be beautiful, when the same relation is preserved amid variety, which is demanded in all other cases of Composition 1
That this is really the case, will, I trust, appear probable, from the following considerations:
1. I conceive it will be found, that the union of such qualities is felt as beautiful, only in those cases where the object itself has some determinate Expression; and that in objects where no such general Expression is found, no Beauty is expected in their Composition.
In the present case, Uniformity and Variety, mean Similarity and Dissimilarity of Form. Every one knows, however, that the mere union of Similarity and Dissimilarity does not constitute a beautiful Form. In the Forms of Ground, of Water, of Vegetables, of Ornaments, &c. it is difficult to find any instance of a perfectly Simple Form, or in which Lines of different descriptions do not unite. It is obvious, however, that such objects are not beautiful in so great a proportion, and that, on the contrary, in all of them there are cases where this mixture is mere confusion, and in no respect considered as beautiful. If we enquire farther,
[Page 268]
what is the circumstance which distinguishes beautiful objects of these kinds, it will be found, I believe, that it is some determinate character or Expression which they have to us; and that when this Expression is once perceived, we immediately look for and expect, some relation among the different parts to this general character.
It is almost impossible, for instance, to find any Form of Ground which is not complex, or in which different forms do not unite. Amid a great extent of landscape, however, there are few spots in which we are sensible of any beauty in their original formation; and wherever such spots occur, they are always distinguished by some prominent character; the character of Greatness, Wildness, Gaiety, Tranquillity, or Melancholy. As soon as this impression is made, as soon as we feel the expression of the scene, we immediately become sensible, that the different Forms which compose it are suited to this character; we perceive, and very often we imagine a correspondence among these parts, and we say accordingly, that there is a relation, an harmony among them, and that Nature has been kind, in combining different circumstances with so much propriety, for the production of one effect. We amuse ourselves also, in imagining improvements to the scene, either in throwing out some circumstances which do not correspond, or in introducing new ones, by which the general character may be more effectually supported. All this Beauty of Composition, however,
[Page 269]
would have been unheeded, if the scene itself had not some determinate character; and all that we intend, by these imaginary improvements, either in the preservation of greater Uniformity, or in the introduction of greater Variety, is to establish a more perfect relation among the different parts to this peculiar character.
In the laying out of grounds, in the same manner, every man knows, that the mere Composition of similar and dissimilar Forms does not constitute Beauty; that some character is necessary, to which we may refer the relation of the different parts; and that where no such character can be created, the Composition itself is only confusion. It is upon these principles, accordingly, that we uniformly judge of the Beauty of such scenes. If there is no character discernible, no general Expression, which may afford our imaginations the key of the scene, although we may be pleased with its neatness, or its cultivation, we feel no Beauty whatever in its composition; and we leave it with no other impression than that of regret, that so much labour and expence should be thrown away upon so confused and ungrateful a subject. If, on the other hand, the scene is expressive, if the general Form is such as to inspire some peculiar Emotion, and the different circumstances such as to correspond to this effect, or to increase it, we immediately conclude, that the Composition is good, and yield ourselves willingly to its influence. If, lastly, amid such a scene,
[Page 270]
we find circumstances introduced, which have no relation to the general Expression; if Forms of Gaiety and Gloom, Greatness and Ornament, Rudeness and Tranquillity, &c. are mingled together without any attention to one determinate effect, we turn with indignation from the confusion, and conclude, that the Composition is defective in its first principles. In all cases of this kind, we become sensible of the Beauty of Composition, only when the scene has some general character, to which the different Forms in Composition can refer; and determine its Beauty by the effect of this union in maintaining or promoting this general Expression. The same observation may be extended to the Forms of Wood and Water; but I willingly refer the reader to Mr Whately's excellent “Observations upon Modern Gardening,” for the full illustration of this remark, with regard to the different objects of natural scenery.
In the Vegetable World, also, if the mere composition of Uniformity and Variety were sufficient to constitute Beauty, it would almost be impossible to find any instance where Vegetable Forms should not be beautiful. That this is not the case every one knows; and the least attention to the language of Mankind will shew, that wherever such Forms are beautiful, they are felt as characteristic or expressive; and that the Beauty of the Composition is determined by the same principle, which regulates our opinion with regard to the Composition of the Forms of Ground. The
[Page 271]
beautiful Forms which we ourselves remark in this kingdom; the Forms which have been selected by Sculptors for embellishment or ornament, by Painters for the effect of landscape, by Poets for description or allusion, are all such as have some determinate Expression or Association; their Beauty is generally expressed by epithets significant of this Character; and if we are asked the reason of our admiration, we immediately assign this Expression as a reason satisfactory to ourselves for the Beauty we discover in them. As soon also as we feel this Expression in any Vegetable Form, we perceive, or demand a relation among the different parts to this peculiar Character. If this relation is maintained, we feel immediately that the Composition of the Form is good. We shew it as a beautiful instance of the operation of Nature, and we speak of it, as a Form in which the utmost harmony and felicity of Composition is displayed. If, on the contrary, the different parts do not seem adjusted to the general character, if instead of an agreement among these parts in the maintaining or promoting this Expression, there appears only a mixture of similar and dissimilar parts, without any correspondence or alliance, we reject it as a confused and insignificant Form, without meaning or beauty. If, in the same manner, the general Form has no Expression, we pass it by without attention, and with a conviction, that where there is no Character to which the relation of the different parts may be referred, there can be no propriety or beauty in its Composition.
[Page 272]
In the different species of Vegetables which possess Expression, and which consequently admit of Beauty in Composition, it is observable also, that every individual does not possess this Beauty; and it is the same principle which determines our opinion of the Beauty of Individuals, that determines our opinion of the Beauty of different species. The Oak, the Myrtle, the weeping Willow, the Vine, the Ivy, the Rose, &c. are beautiful classes of Plants: but every Oak and Myrtle, &c. does not constitute a beautiful Form. The many physical causes which affect their growth, affect also their Expression; and it is only when they possess in purity the peculiar Character of the class, that the individuals are felt as beautiful. In the judgment accordingly that we form of this Beauty, we are uniformly guided by the circumstance of their Expression. When, in any of these instances, we find an accumulation of Forms, different from what we generally meet with, we feel a kind of disappointment; and however much the Composition may exhibit of mere uniform and varied parts, we pass it by with some degree of indignation. When the discordant parts are few, we lament that accident should have introduced a variety which is so prejudicial, and we amuse ourselves with fancying how beautiful the Form would be, if these parts were omitted. It is only when we discover a general correspondence among the different parts to the whole of the character; and perceive the uniformity of this character maintained amid all their varieties, that we are fully satisfied with the
[Page 273]
Beauty of the Form. The superiority of the productions of Sculpture and Painting to their originals in Nature, altogether consists in the power which the Artists have to correct these accidental defects, in keeping out every circumstance which can interrupt the general Expression of the subject or the Form, and in presenting, pure and unmixed, the character which we have associated with the objects in real Nature.
The same observation extends to every species of artificial Form; but the pursuit of it would necessarily lead to a very long, and I believe, a very unnecessary discussion. With regard to this subject, I shall leave the Reader to his own observation, and shall only beg of him to reflect, whether, if the Composition of uniformity and variety was necessarily beautiful, every species almost of artificial Form would not be found to be beautiful; whether, on the contrary, the Beauty of Composition is not perceived in those subjects only where the Form itself has some Character or Expression, or where it affords him some distinct principle, to which the relation of the different parts may be referred; and whether he does not determine the Beauty of the Composition, by the effect of this union of different parts in exciting one definite Emotion. It is perhaps unnecessary to remark, that in pursuing such observations, it is proper to leave out every consideration of design or of utility, and that the fittest subjects for such experiments are ornamental Forms, or those
[Page 274]
Forms in which no other object is sought, than the mere production of Beauty.
I shall content myself with observing upon this subject, that whatever is the source of the Beauty of complex Forms, it is natural to suppose, it should be expressed in language; and that if uniformity and variety were beautiful in themselves, and by the constitution of our Nature, it is reasonable to think, that in describing beautiful Forms, such qualities should be assigned as the foundation of their Beauty. If I am not deceived, however, this is very far from being the case. In describing such objects, we never satisfy ourselves with distinguishing them by such characters, and if any person were in such terms to describe any Form to ourselves, we should be at as great a loss as ever, with regard to its Beauty. I apprehend, on the contrary, that the natural and uniform method we take for this purpose, is first to convey to our hearers the idea of its Character or Expression, and after having given them this general conception of it, we enter into the detail of its Composition, and endeavour to explain to them, with how great propriety the different parts are accommodated, to preserve and to promote this characteristic Expression; and if we succeed in this description, we never fail not only to be understood, but to convey also to those who hear us, a perfect belief of the Excellence and Beauty of the Composition. If the mere mixture of uniformity and variety were beautiful, independent
[Page 275]
of any relation to Expression, all this natural process could never take place, and if it did, could never convey any opinion of Beauty.
2. I believe it will be found, that different proportions of Uniformity and Variety, are required in Forms of different characters; and that the principle from which we determine the Beauty of such proportion, is from its correspondence to the nature of the peculiar Emotion which the Form itself is fitted to excite. Every one knows, that some Emotions require a greater degree of uniformity, and others a greater degree of variety in their objects; and perhaps, in general, all strong or powerful Emotions, and all Emotions which border upon pain, demand uniformity or sameness, and all weak Emotions, and all Emotions which belong to positive pleasure, demand variety or novelty, in the objects of them. Upon this constitution of our Nature, the Beauty of Composition seems chiefly to depend; and the judgment we form of this Beauty, appears in all cases, to be determined by the correspondence of the different parts of the Composition in preserving or promoting the peculiar Expression by which the object itself is distinguished.
In the Forms of Ground, for instance, there is very obviously, no certain proportion of uniformity and variety,
[Page 276]
which is permanently beautiful. The same degree of uniformity which is pleasing in a scene of Greatness or Melancholy, would be disagreeable or dull in a scene of Gaiety or Splendor. The same degree of variety which would be beautiful in these, would be distressing in the others. By what rule, however, do we determine the different Beauty of these proportions? Not surely by the Composition itself, else one determinate Composition would be permanently beautiful: but by the relation of this Composition to the Expression or Character of the scene; by its according with the demand and expectation of our Minds; and by its being suited to that particular state of attention or of fancy, which is produced by the Emotion that the scene inspires. When this effect is accordingly produced, when the proportion either of uniformity or variety corresponds to the nature of this Emotion, we conclude, that the Composition is good. When this proportion is violated, when there is more uniformity of Expression, than we chuse to dwell upon, or more variety than we can follow without distraction, we conclude that the Composition is defective, and speak of it either as dull or confused. Whatever may be the number of distinct Characters, which the Forms of Ground possess, there is an equal number of different proportions required in the Composition of them: and so strong is this natural determination of the Beauty of Composition, that after admiring the Composition of one scene, we very often, in a few minutes afterwards, find equal
[Page 277]
Beauty in a Composition of a totally different kind, when it distinguishes a scene of an opposite character.
“The style of every part (says Mr Whately, in the conclusion of his Observations upon Ground) must be accommodated to the character of the whole; for every piece of ground is distinguished by certain properties: it is either time or bold, gentle or rude, continued or broken; and if any variety inconsistent with these properties be obtruded, it has no other effect than to weaken one idea, without raising another. The insipidity of a flat; is not taken away by a few scattered hillocks; a continuation of uneven ground can alone give the idea of inequality. A large, deep, abrupt break, among easy swells and falls, seems at best but a piece left unfinished, and which ought to have been softened: it is not more natural, because it is more rude. On the other hand, a small fine polished Form, in the midst of rough mishapen ground, though more elegant than all about it, is generally no better than a patch, itself disgraced, and disfiguring the scene. A thousand instances might be added, to show, that the prevailing idea ought to pervade every part, so far at least indispensably, as to exclude whatever distracts it; and as much further as possible to accommodate the character of the ground to that of the scene it belongs to.”
[Page 278]
After observing that the same principle extends to the proportion, and to the number of the parts, he observes, “That ground is seldom beautiful or natural without variety, or even without contrast; and the precautions which have been given, extend no farther, than to prevent variety from degenerating into inconsistency, and contrast into contradiction. Within the extremes Nature supplies an inexhaustible fund; and variety thus limited, so far from destroying, improves the general effect. Each distinguished part makes a separate impression; and all bearing the same stamp, all concurring to the same end, every one is an additional support to the prevailing idea.—An accurate observer will see in every Form several circumstances, by which it is distinguished from every other. If the scene be mild and quiet, he will place together those which do not differ widely, and he will gradually depart from the similitude. In ruder scenes, the succession will be less regular, and the transitions more sudden. The character of the place must determine the degree of difference between contiguous Forms.—An assemblage of the most elegant Forms in the happiest situations is to a degree indiscriminate, if they have not been selected and arranged with a design to produce certain Expressions: an air of magnificence or of simplicity, of cheerfulness, tranquillity, or some other general character, ought to pervade the whole; and objects pleasing in themselves, if they contradict that character, should therefore
[Page 279]
be excluded; those which are only indifferent must sometimes make room for such as are more significant; many will often be introduced for no other merit than their Expression; and some which are in general rather disagreeable, may occasionally be recommended by it. Barrenness itself may be an acceptable circumstance in a spot dedicated to Solitude and Melancholy.” As the great secret of gardening, seems thus to consist in the accurate preservation of the character of every scene, whether original or created; so it is the same principle that determines the opinion of men with regard to its Beauty; and whoever will read Mr Whately's excellent book with attention, will perceive, that all his rules with regard to the Forms of Ground, of Water, of Wood, of Rocks, and of Buildings, may be referred to this leading principle; and that they are nothing more than investigations of the character of these different Forms, and directions how to apply them in scenes of different Expression.
Our opinion of the Beauty of vegetable forms seems directed by the same principle. Many of the classes of trees have distinct characters. There are therefore different compositions which are beautiful in their forms; and in all of them, that Composition only is beautiful which corresponds to the nature of the Expression they have, or of the Emotion which they excite. The character, for instance, of the weeping willow, is melancholy, of the birch and of the aspin,
[Page 280]
gaiety: the character of the horse-chesnut, is solemnity, of the oak, majesty, of the yew, sadness. In each of these cases, the general Form or Composition of the parts is altogether different; all of them, however, are beautiful; and were this proportion in point of Composition changed, were the weeping willow to assume an equal degree of variety with the oak, or the oak to shew an equal degree of uniformity with the weeping willow, we should undoubtedly feel it as a defect, and conclude that in this change of Form, the Beauty of the character and of the Composition was lost.
It is in this manner, accordingly, that we judge of the Beauty of individuals, in these different classes. All these individuals are not beautiful; and wherever they appear as beautiful, it is when their Form adheres perfectly to their character; when no greater degree either of uniformity or variety is assumed, than suits that peculiar Emotion which their expression excites in our minds. An oak, which wreathes not into vigorous or fantastic branches, a yew, which grows into thin and varied forms, a plane-tree, or a horse-chesnut, which assumes not a deep, and almost solid mass of foliage, &c. appear to us as imperfect and deformed productions. They seem to aim at an expression which they do not reach, and we speak of them accordingly as wanting the Beauty, because they want the character of their class.
[Page 281]
In the formation of beautiful groups, the same adherence to Expression is necessary: and whatever may be the character of the group, the real limit to variety, is correspondence in this Expression. The permanent character of trees arises from their Form or their Colour. In so far as Form is concerned, Forms of different character are never found to unite, or to constitute a beautiful composition. A mixture, for instance, of the light and upright branches of the almond, with the falling branches of the willow, the heavy branches of the horse-chesnut, and the wild arms of the oak, would be absolute confusion, and would be intolerable in any scene where design or intention could be supposed. The mixture of trees, on the other hand, that correspond in their Forms, and that unite in the production of one character, are found to constitute beautiful groups. We speak of them accordingly as beautiful from this cause: When we meet with them in natural scenery, we are pleased with the fortunate, though accidental connection, and we say, that they could not have been better united by the hand of Art: When we meet with them in cultivated scenes, we praise the taste of the artist, and say, that the Composition is pure and harmonious. “Trees (says Mr Whately) which differ but in one of these circumstances, whether of shape, of green, or of growth, though they agree in every other, are sufficiently distinguished for the purpose of Variety; if they differ in two or three, they become contrasts: if in all, they are opposites and seldom group well together. Those, on the contrary,
[Page 282]
which are of one character, and are distinguished only as the characteristic mark, is strongly or faintly impressed upon them, as a young beech, and a birch, an acacia and a larch, all pendant, though in different degrees, form a beautiful mass, in which unity is preserved without sameness.” How far the same principle extends to landscape painting, they who are acquainted with the art will be at no loss to determine.
In all the different kinds of ornamental Forms, in the same manner, instead of there being any one determinate proportion of Uniformity and Variety beautiful, there are, in fact, as many varieties of beautiful Composition, as there are varieties of Character; and the rule by which we judge of this Beauty, in every particular case, is by the correspondence of the Composition, to the character which the Form is intended to express. To give the same proportion of uniform or of varied parts to every species of ornamental Form, to Forms of Splendour, of Magnificence, of Gaiety, of Delicacy, or of Melancholy, would be to sin against the very first principle of Composition, and would immediately be detected even by those who never heard of the principles of Composition. The beautiful Form of the Vase, for instance, is employed in many different kinds of ornament, and may either be Magnificent, Elegant, Simple, Gay, or Melancholy. In all these cases, however, the Composition is different. A greater proportion of Uniformity distinguishes
[Page 283]
it when destined to the Expression of Simplicity, Magnificence or Melancholy, and a greater proportion of Variety, when destined to the Expression of Elegance or Gaiety. We immediately perceive also that there is propriety and Beauty in this difference of Composition; and if we are asked, why it is so, we readily answer, because it accords with the peculiar character which the Form is there intended to have. If, on the other hand, this proportion is inverted, if the Vase upon a tomb has all the varieties of a Goblet, or the latter all the uniformity of the funereal Urn, we immediately perceive an impropriety and deformity, and as readily explain it, by saying that the Composition is unfitted to the Expression which the object is intended to have.
The Orders of Architecture have different characters from several causes, and chiefly, I believe, from the different quantities of matter in their Entablatures. The Tuscan is distinguished by its Severity; the Doric by its Simplicity; the Ionic by its Elegance; the Corinthian and Composite by their Lightness and Gaiety. To these characters, their several ornaments are suited with consummate Taste. Change these ornaments, give to the Tuscan the Corinthian Capital, or to the Corinthian the Tuscan, and every person would feel not only a disappointment from this unexpected Composition, but a sentiment also of impropriety from the appropriation of a grave or sober ornament to a subject of
[Page 284]
Splendor, and of a rich or gaudy ornament to a subject of Severity. Even in the commonest of all Forms, the Forms of Furniture, the same principle is obvious. Chairs, Tables, Mirrors, Candlesticks, &c . may have very different characters; they may be either Simple, Elegant, Rich or Magnificent. Whatever this character may be, we demand a correspondence in the Composition. The same number of uniform parts, which is beautiful in any simple Form, is insipid in an elegant, and mean in a rich or magnificent one. The same variety of parts which is beautiful in a Form of splendor or magnificence, is confused in an elegant, and taudry in a simple Form.
In these, and a thousand other cases of the same kind, it will be found, that no certain proportion of Uniformity and Variety is permanently felt as beautiful; that, on the contrary, wherever the Form, either in itself, or from its situation, has any determinate Expression, the Beauty of Composition arises from its correspondence to that Expression; and that wherever Forms differ in character, a different Composition is approved, and is said to be approved, upon this account. I shall only add to these hints upon the subject, that the natural language of men is uniformly guided by this principle; and that whenever they attempt to describe the excellence of any Composition, it is not by explaining the peculiar proportions of Uniformity and Variety which may obtain in it, but by showing how well this
[Page 285]
proportion accords with the Expression by which the object itself is distinguished.
If the illustrations which I have now offered are just, we shall have reason to conclude, that the mere Composition of Uniformity and Variety is not beautiful in itself, or from the original constitution of our nature; that it is felt as beautiful only in those cases, where the Form is distinguished by some character or Expression; and, that the Beauty of the Composition arises, in every case, from its correspondence to the nature of that Emotion which this Expression is fitted to excite.
These conclusions seem to lead to a very different rule for the Composition of beautiful Forms, from that which Mr Hogarth has laid down in his Analysis of Beauty. “The way (says he) of composing pleasing Forms, is to be accomplished by making choice of variety of lines, as to their shapes and dimensions; and then again by varying their situations with each other, by all the different ways that can be conceived, and at the same time (if a solid Figure be the subject of the Composition) the contents or space that is to be inclosed within those lines, must be duly considered and varied too, as much as possible with propriety.” Although it is with much diffidence that I differ from Mr Hogarth, yet I cannot help being of opinion, (in so far at least as the natural Beauty of Forms is concerned),
[Page 286]
that this rule might be followed in a thousand cases, without the production of any degree of Beauty; that if the distinguishing Form is inexpressive or indifferent, all this Variety would only create confusion; and that in its application to Forms of different characters or Expression, it would excite a sentiment of impropriety, instead of pleasure.
On the other hand, the view which I have now given of the subject, would seem to lead to the following rules for beautiful Composition:
1. That wherever beautiful Form is intended, some characteristic or expressive Form should be selected, as the ground or subject of the Composition. And,
2. That the Variety (whether in the form, the number, or the proportion of the parts) should be adapted to the peculiar nature of this Expression, or of that Emotion which this Expression is fitted to excite in the mind of the spectator. 3. Forms of this kind are either single or dependent. In single or independent Forms, their character is at the pleasure of the Artist; and that will be always most beautiful, in which the character is best preserved.
[Page 287]
4. In dependent Forms, on the contrary, or those which are designed for particular scenes or situations, their character must be determined by that of the scene or situation; and that also will be the most beautiful Form, in the composition of which, the alliance to the general character is most precise and delicate.
III. The same principle seems to extend to the Composition of Colours . The mere mixture of Colours is not beautiful. In the different Colours, that are mingled upon a Painter's pallet, or in a book of patterns, we say there is no Beauty, because there is no Relation. What then is the relation which is necessary to constitute beautiful Composition? It is not the mere relation of Colours, because Colours of very different kinds are found to produce beautiful Compositions. It is not any established relation between particular Colours which is beautiful from our original constitution, because, in different subjects, different Compositions are necessary. I humbly apprehend, That it is the Relation of Expression.
In Natural Scenery, for instance, the Colours of the great ingredients, Ground, Water, Wood, Rocks and Buildings are very different, and are susceptible of great varieties. In every scene, however, which is expressive, we look for and
[Page 288]
demand an unity in the Expression of these different Colours. We often find fault accordingly with the Colour of particular objects in such scenes, and say that they are too Rich, too Solemn, or too Cheerful, for the rest of the scene. The vivid Green, for instance, which is so pleasing in a cheerful landscape, would ill suit a scene of Melancholy or Desolation. The brown heath which so singularly accords with scenes of Gloom or Barrenness, would be intolerable in a landscape of Gaiety. The grey rock which throws so venerable an air over grave or solemn scenes, would have but a feeble effect in scenes of horror. The blue and peaceful stream which gives such loveliness to the solitary valley, would appear altogether misplaced amid scenes of rude and savage Majesty. The white foam and discoloured waters of the torrent, alone suit the wildness of their Expression.
The great difference in the Colours of Trees, requires attention in their Composition into Groups. If the Oak, the Yew, the Birch, the Fir, the Aspin, the Willow, &c . were mixed together indiscriminately, every one would exclaim at the impropriety of the Composition, and say that there was no relation, and no character preserved. Unite, however, only such Trees, as are distinguished by Colours of a similar character, the Composition will be beautiful, and the variety will only serve to enhance and strengthen the Expression. If any other rule but their Expression were followed would the effect be the same?
[Page 289]
Different Compositions of Colours also are necessary in the different appearances of Trees, whether as a Clump, a Thicket, a Grove, or a Wood. The same degree of uniformity in colouring which is beautiful in a Wood, is displeasing in a Thicket or open Grove; the same degree of variety which is beautiful in these, is unpleasing in the other. To what principle shall these differences be referred, but to the difference of Character; to the Airiness and Gaiety of the one, to the Majesty and Solemnity of the other?
The scenes of Nature often derive their Character even from the season of the day in which they are viewed, and aspect which they regard. How much the Beauty of the Composition of Colours in such scenes, arises from the Composition of their Expression, is beautifully illustrated in the following observations of Mr Whately.
Some species and situations of objects are in themselves adapted to receive or to make the impressions which characterize the principal parts of the day: their splendor, their sobriety, and other peculiarities recommend or prohibit them upon different occasions: the same considerations direct the choice also of their appendages: and in consequence of a judicious assemblage and arrangement of such as are proper for the purpose, the Spirit of the Morning, the Excess of Noon, or the Temperance of Evening,
[Page 290]
may be improved or corrected by the application of the scene to the season.
“In the Morning , the freshness of the air allays the force of the sun beams, and their brightness is free from glare; the most splendid objects do not offend the eye, nor suggest the idea of heat in the extreme; but they correspond with the glitter of the dew which bespangles all the produce of the earth, and with the cheerfulness diffused over the whole face of creation. A variety of buildings may therefore be introduced to enliven the view, their colour may be the purest white without danger of excess though they face the eastern sun; and those which are in other aspects should be so contrived, that their turrets, their pinnacles, or other points, may catch glances of the rays, and contribute to illuminate the scene. The trees in general, ought to be of the lightest greens, and so situated as not to darken much of the landscape by the length of their shadows. Vivacity in the streams, and transparency in a lake, are more important at this than at any other hour of the day; and an open exposure is commonly the most delightful, both for the effect of particular objects, and the general character of the scene.
“At Noon , every expedient should be used to correct the excess of the season; the shades are shortened, they must therefore be thick, but open plantations are generally preferable
[Page 291]
to a close covert: they afford a passage, or at least, admittance to the air, which tempered by the coolness of the place, soft to the touch, and refreshing at once to all the senses, renders the shade a delightful climate, not a mere refuge from heat. Groves even at a distance, suggest the ideas which they realize upon the spot, and by multiplying the appearances, improve the sensations of relief from the extremity of the weather; Grottos, Caves and Cells are on the same account agreeable circumstances in a sequestered recess: and though the chill within be hardly ever tolerable, the eye catches only an idea of coolness from the sight of them. Other buildings ought in general to be cast into shade, that the glare of reflection from them may be obscured. The large expanse of a lake is also too dazzling: but a broad river moving gently, and partially darkened with shadow, is very refreshing, more so perhaps than a little rill, for the vivacity of the latter rather disturbs the repose which generally prevails at mid-day: every breeze then is still; the reflection of an aspin leaf scarcely trembles on the water; the animals remit their search of food, and man ceases from his labour; the steam of heat seems to oppress all the faculties of the mind, and all the active powers of the body; and any very lively motion discomposes the languor in which we then delight to indulge.
[Page 292]
“In the Evening all splendor fades; no buildings glare, no water dazzles, the calmness of a lake suits the quiet of the time, the light hovers there, and prolongs the duration of day. An open reach of a river has a similar though a fainter effect, and a continued stream all exposed, preserves the last rays of the sun along the whole length of its course, to beautify the landscape. But a brisk current is not so consistent as a lake, with the tranquillity of Evening, and other objects should in general conform to the temper of the time: buildings of a dusky hue are most agreeable to it. No contrast of light and shade can then be produced; but if the plantations, which by their situation are the first to be obscured, be of the darkest greens, if the buildings which have a western aspect be of a light colour, and if the management of the lawns and the water be adapted to the same purpose, a diversity of tints will be preserved long after the greater effects are faded.”
There are few subjects where the Beauty or Deformity of the Composition of Colours is more observable, or at least more commonly observed, than in the article of Dress . The following hints may perhaps lead the Reader to perceive, that this Beauty is also dependent upon Expression.
1. It may be observed, that no Dress is beautiful, in which there is not some leading or predominant Colour displayed,
[Page 293]
or in which, if I may use the expression, there is not some unity of colouring. A dress, in which different colours were employed in equal quantities, in which one half of the body was distinguished by one Colour, and the other by another, or in which each particular limb was differently coloured, would be ridiculous instead of being beautiful. It is in this way accordingly, that Mountebanks are dressed, and it never fails to produce the effect that is intended by it, to excite the mirth and the ridicule of the common people.
2. No dress is ever remarked as beautiful, in which the prevailing Colour has not some pleasing or affecting Expression. There are a variety of colours which are chosen for common apparel, which have no Character or Expression in themselves, and which are chosen for no other reason, but because they are convenient for the peculiar occupations or amusements in which we are engaged. Such dress accordingly has no Beauty. When we say, that it is a useful or a convenient Colour, we give it all the approbation that it is entitled to. There are, on the contrary, a variety of colours which are expressive from peculiar Associations, which are either gay, or delicate, or rich, or grave, or melancholy. It is always such Colours that are chosen for what is properly called Dress, or for that species of Apparel, in which something more than mere convenience is intended. When we speak of such Dress accordingly, we generally
[Page 294]
rally describe its Beauty by its Character, by its being delicate or rich, or gay or magnificent, or in other words, by its being distinguished by some pleasing or affecting Expression. We should feel an equal impropriety in any person's chusing the Colour of ornamental Dress, on account of its convenience, as in his chusing the Colour of his common apparel, because it was gay, or delicate, or splendid.
This difference of Expression, constitutes the only distinction that seems to subsist between the Colours that are fit for common, and those that are fit for ornamental apparel. But besides this, there is another constituent of the Beauty of the prevailing Colour: its relation to the character or situation of the Person who wears it. The same Colour which would be beautiful in the dress of a Prince, would be ridiculous in the dress of a Peasant. We expect gay Colours in the dress of youth, and sober, and temperate colours in the dress of age. We feel a propriety in the cheerful Colours of a Marriage, and in the melancholy colouring of Mourning. There is a propriety of relation also between the colours that distinguish the Dress of certain situations, and these situations themselves, which we never see violated without some degree of pain. Besides all this, there is a relation of a still more delicate kind; between the Colours of Dress, and the Character that distinguishes the countenance of the Person who wears it; which however little attended to, is one of the most important articles
[Page 295]
in the Composition of Dress, and which is never observed or violated without either increasing or diminishing the Beauty of the Person it distinguishes. As the general Beauty of Dress depends upon the predominant Colour being distinguished by some pleasing or interesting Expression; so the Beauty of Dress in any particular situation or character, depends upon this Expression being suited to that character or situation.
3. No Dress is ever considered as beautiful, in which the Composition of the inferior Colours is not adapted to the peculiar Expression of the prevailing Colour. The mere accumulation of different Colours, without any regard to the general Colour of the Dress, every one knows to be proverbially expressive of ignorance and vulgarity. To suit these Colours, on the other hand, to the prevailing Colour, is considered as the great criterion of Taste in this kind of Composition. If you enquire, accordingly, why in any particular case, such Colours are not suited to the Dress, you will be told, that they are either too glaring, too solemn, too gay, or too delicate, for the predominant Colour; in other words, that they do not accord with the Expression of the Dress, and that on this account the Composition is not beautiful. Wherever in this article, it is said, that Colours either suit, or do not suit, what is meant or felt, I believe, is, that their Expressions either agree, or do not agree.
[Page 296]
It is upon the same account, that different Colours in Dress, admit of very different degrees of variety, in the Composition of the subordinate Colours. Rich Colours admit of little variety. Grave or melancholy Colours of less. Delicate Colours admit more of contrast than of variety. Gay or cheerful Colours demand a great proportion of variety. It all these cases, the proportion which is beautiful is that which accords with the peculiar nature of the Emotion, that the predominant Colour excites. Strong Emotions and Emotions which border upon pain, require uniformity in their objects. Rich, or magnificent, or mournful Dresses, require therefore a great proportion of uniformity in the Composition of the colouring. Weak Emotions require to be supported and enlivened. Dresses of a gentle or delicate character are therefore best illustrated by contrast. Emotions which belong to pleasure, demand Variety in their objects. Dresses of a gay character, admit therefore of a greater proportion of Variety in their colouring, than any of the others.
These slight hints (and the subject deserves no more) may perhaps lead the Reader to conclude, that the Beauty of Dress (in so far as it relates to the Composition of Colours) depends upon the Unity of Expression: and that Taste, in this respect, consists in the accurate perception of the Expressions of Colours, and of their relation both to each
[Page 297]
other, and to the character or situation of the person for whom they are destined.
There is one subject, in which some attention to these principles might perhaps be productive of no unimportant effect: I mean, in Dramatic Representation. Every one has perceived the impropriety of the greater part of the Dresses which are seen upon the Stage. The confusion of rich and taudry, gay and grave Drapery, in the same performance; the neglect of every kind of correspondence between the Dress, and the Character it distinguishes; Comedy and Tragedy clothed in the same Colours; and instead of any relation among the different Dresses of the same performance, or any correspondence to the Character of that performance, each particular Dress at variance with another, and all of them left to be determined by the caprice or vanity of the Actor. If instead of this, we were to find in each distinguishing Character, some agreement between the Expression of the Dress and the nature of that Character; if different Ages, and Professions, and Situations, were attired with the same regard to propriety that we expect in real life; if the whole of the Dresses in every particular performance had some relation to the Character of that performance, and to the Emotion it is destined to excite in our minds; if no greater degree of Variety was admitted in this respect, than was consistent with this unity of Expression; and if the whole were so imagined, as to
[Page 298]
compose a beautiful mass or group of colouring, in those scenes where any number of personages were assembled together; some addition, I conceive, would be given to the effect of an Art, which has the capacity, at least, of becoming one of the most powerful means we know, both of strengthening Virtue, and of communicating Knowledge.
Whether the principle which I have now explained, may not extend to what is called the Harmony of Colouring in Historical Painting; whether the Beauty of the prevailing Colour is not dependent upon the agreement of its Expression, with that peculiar Expression or Character which distinguishes the scene; and whether the Beauty of the Composition of the subordinate Colours is not determined by its effect in preserving this unity of Expression, I shall leave to be determined by those who are more learned in the Art, and better acquainted with Instances by which the truth of the observation may be tried.
[Page 299]
SECTION II. Of the Relative Beauty of Forms. Besides those qualities of which Forms in themselves are expressive to us, and which constitute what I have called their Natural Beauty, there are other qualities of which they are the Signs, from their being the subjects of Art, or produced by Wisdom or Design, for some end. Whatever is the effect of Art, naturally leads us to the consideration of that Art which is its cause, and of that end or purpose for which it was produced. When we discover skill or wisdom in the one, or usefulness or propriety in the other, we are conscious of a very pleasing Emotion; and the Forms which we have found by experience to be associated with such qualities, become naturally and necessarily expressive of them, and affect us with the Emotions which properly belong to the qualities they signify. There is therefore an additional source of Beauty in Forms, from the Expression of such qualities; which, for the sake of perspicuity, I shall beg leave to call their Relative Beauty.
[Page 300]
Every work of Design may be considered in one or other of the following lights: Either in relation to the Art or Design which produced it,—to the nature of its construction, for the purpose or end intended,—or to the nature of the end which it is thus destined to serve; and its Beauty accordingly depends, either upon the excellence or wisdom of this Design, upon the Fitness or propriety of this construction, or upon the Utility of this end. The considerations of Design, of Fitness, and of Utility, therefore, may be considered as the three great sources of the Relative Beauty of Forms. In many cases, this Beauty arises from all these Expressions together; but it may be useful to consider them separately, and to remark the peculiar influence of each, upon the Beauty of Forms.
[Page 301]
PART I. Of the Influence of Design upon the Beauty of Forms. I. That the quality of Design is in many cases productive of the Emotion of Beauty, seems to me too obvious to require any illustration. The Beauty of Design in a Poem, in a Painting, in a musical Composition, or in a Machine, are Expressions which perpetually occur both in books, and in conversation, and which sufficiently indicate the cause or source of the Emotion.
Wherever we discover Fitness or Utility, we infer the existence of Design. In those Forms, accordingly, which are distinguished by such qualities, the discovery of an end immediately suggests to us the belief of Intention or Design; and the same material qualities of Form, which signify to us this Fitness or Usefulness, are the Signs to us also of the Design or Thought which produced them.
[Page 302]
It is obvious, however, that we often perceive the Expression of Design in Forms, both in Art and Nature, in which we discover neither Fitness nor Utility. By what means then do we infer the existence of Design in such cases; and are there any qualities of Form, which are in themselves expressive to us of Design and Intention? I apprehend that there are; that there are certain qualities of Form which are immediately and permanently expressive to us of these qualities of Mind, and which derive their Beauty from this Expression.
1. In this view, it will easily be observed, that the material quality which is most naturally and most powerfully expressive to us of Design, is Uniformity or Regularity . Wherever, in any Form, we observe this quality, we immediately infer Design. In every Form, on the contrary, where we discover a total want of this quality, we are disposed to consider it as the production of Chance, or of some Power, which has operated without Thought or Intention. “In all cases (says Dr Reid) Regularity expresses Design and Art; for nothing regular was ever the work or Chance.” In what manner this connection is formed, whether it is derived from experience, or to be considered as an original principle of our nature, I do not enquire. It is, however, very obvious in children, at a very early age; and it may be observed, that the popular superstitions of all nations are in a great measure founded upon it; and that all
[Page 303]
uniform or regular appearances in Nature are referred by them, to some intelligent mind.
The terms Regularity and Uniformity are used so synonymously, that it is difficult to explain their difference. As far as I am able to judge, the following account of this difference is not very distant from the truth.
With regard to both terms, when applied to Forms, two things are observable. 1 st , That they are only applied to such objects as compose a whole; and that they express a relation either between the parts of it considered separately, or among the parts considered as constituting the whole. The relations between different wholes, or the parts of different wholes, are expressed by other terms. 2 dly , That they express always similarity or resemblance of parts. With regard to Uniformity, the term itself is an evidence of it; Uniformity being nothing but similarity of Form. With regard to Regularity, it is not less evident. A regular Form, is a Form where all the parts are similar: an irregular Form, is a Form where all the parts are dissimilar. A Form, partly regular and partly irregular, is a Form where some parts are similar, and others dissimilar. This is, I conceive, the literal meaning of Regularity, as applied to Forms, and what we always mean by it, when applied to natural objects. There is, however, another meaning of the term, when applied to works of Art, viz . the Imitation of a Model.
[Page 304]
Thus, we say, that a Pillar is regular, that a Poem is regular, that any Composition is regular, when they have the same proportions, and the same parts, which are found in the model, or prescribed by the rule. In this case, it is still the similarity of parts which constitutes Regularity; the similarity between all the parts in the Copy, and those in the original from which it is borrowed.
Considering then Regularity and Uniformity as both expressing similarity of parts in a whole, it is plain, that we may consider every Form composed of parts, either in relation to the similarity of individual parts, or in relation to the similarity of the whole parts. In the first case, the resemblance of any two or more parts constitutes its Uniformity. In the second, the resemblance or similarity of all the parts constitutes its regularity. Thus, we say that any two sides of a Prism are uniform, but that the Prism itself is a regular Figure; that the sides of a Cube are uniform, but the Cube itself is regular; that the sides of many of the different Crystals are uniform, but that the Crystals themselves are regular Solids.
In this view, both Uniformity and Regularity are constituted by similarity of parts; and the difference between them is, That Uniformity expresses the similarity of parts considered separately, and Regularity the similarity of parts as constituting the whole. There may therefore be Uniformity
[Page 305]
without Regularity, because there may be a similarity between any two or more parts of a Form, without a general similarity among the whole; but there cannot be Regularity without Uniformity, or without this general resemblance of the whole parts to each other.
Whatever may be the truth of this explanation, it seems sufficiently obvious, that both these qualities are naturally expressive to us of Design, and that from the appearance of the one, we are disposed to infer the exertion of the other.
I believe also it will be found, that the Beauty of such qualities in Forms, arises from this Expression of design, and that they are not beautiful in themselves, independent of this Expression.
1. Whenever we know that such appearances in Nature are the effect of chance, or seem to have been produced without any design, they are not beautiful. Of this every one must have had many instances in his own experience. We often meet with Vegetable productions, which assume perfectly regular Forms, and which approach to a resemblance to Animals. However exact such a resemblance may be, or however regular the Form, we never consider such productions as beautiful. We say only that they are curious: we run to see them as Novelties, but we never speak of their Beauty, or feel from them that Emotion of delight
[Page 306]
which Beauty excites. In many Stones, in the same manner, we often find resemblances to Vegetables, to Animals, and to the human Countenance. We never say, however, that such instances are beautiful; but that they are curious. The appearance of Regularity or Uniformity in Rocks or Mountains, or in any of the ingredients of Natural Scenery, is every where considered as a defect, instead of a Beauty, and is beheld with no other Emotion than that of surprise. If Uniformity or Regularity were beautiful in themselves, it is obvious, that such productions of chance would be equally beautiful with those that are produced by design.
2. It is obvious, that Uniformity is not in every case equally beautiful, and that this Beauty is in all cases proportioned to the difficulty of its attainment, or to the more forcible Expression of Design or Skill. In simple Forms, or such as are constituted by Lines of one kind, Uniformity is beautiful but in a very small degree. Increase the number of Parts, and its Beauty increases in proportion to their Number. We are not much struck with the Uniformity of two Leaves of a Tree. The Uniformity of the whole number of Leaves is a very beautiful consideration. The Uniformity of these minute parts in every individual of the class, in every Tree of the same kind in Nature, is a consideration of still greater effect, and can scarcely be presented to the Mind, without awakening a very powerful conviction of Wisdom and Design. It is upon this principle,
[Page 307]
chiefly, I apprehend, that we determine the Beauty of Mathematical Figures, when we consider them simply as Figures, without relation either to their connection with Science, or with any of the productions of Art. An Equilateral Triangle is more beautiful than a Scalene or an Isosceles, a Square than a Rhombus, an Hexagon than a Square, an Ellipse than a Parabola, a Circle than an Ellipse; because the number of their uniform parts are greater, and their Expression of Design more complete. In general, in this subject, Regular Figures are more beautiful than Irregular, and Regular Figures of a greater number of parts more beautiful than the same figures of a smaller number of parts; they cease only to be beautiful when the number of their parts is so great as to produce confusion, and of consequence to obscure the Expression of Design. It is the same principle which seems to produce the Beauty of Intricacy . Nothing is more delightful, than in any subject where we at first perceived only confusion, to find regularity gradually emerging, and to discover amid the apparent chaos, some uniform principle which reconciles the whole. To reduce a number of apparently dissimilar particulars, under one general law of resemblance, as it is one of the strongest evidences of the exertion of Wisdom and Design, so it is also productive of one of the strongest Emotions of Beauty, which Design can excite.
[Page 308]
II. The view which I have now given of the Beauty of Regularity and Uniformity, as arising from the Expression of Design, seems also very sufficiently to account for a fact, which every one that is conversant in the history of the fine Arts must have observed: I mean the universal prevalence of Uniformity in the earlier periods of these Arts: and perhaps a general view of the progress of Taste in this respect, is the best method by which I can explain the influence of Design upon the Beauty of Forms.
1. In the infancy of Society, when Art was first cultivated, and the attention of Men first directed to Works of Design, it is natural to imagine, that such Forms would be employed in those Arts which were intended to please, as were most strongly expressive of Design or Skill. This would take place from two causes, 1 st , From their ignorance of those more interesting qualities which such productions might express, and which the gradual advancement of the Arts alone could unfold; and, 2 dly , From the peculiar value which Design or Art itself, in such periods, possessed, and the consequent admiration which it raised. When any Art was discovered among a rude People, the circumstance that would most strongly affect them, would be the Art itself, and the Design or Skill which it exhibited: the real
[Page 309]
capacities or consequences of the Art, they must altogether be ignorant of. What the Artist would value himself upon, would be the production of a Work of Skill. What the Spectator would admire, would be the Invention or Ingenuity of the Workman who was capable of imagining and executing such a Work. What the Workman, therefore, would study, would be to give his Work as full and complete an Expression of this Skill or Design as he could. He would naturally, therefore, give it the appearance of perfect Uniformity. In proportion as it had this appearance, it would more or less testify the exertion of this Skill, and of consequence more or less excite the admiration of the Spectator. The circumstance of Art itself, would thus naturally prevail over every other Expression of Form; and the value as well as the uncommoness of such talents would give to Uniformity a degree of Beauty, which it is perhaps difficult for those to imagine, who are accustomed to the advancement of the Arts in a polished Age. How naturally all this would take place, may still, however, be seen in the Tastes and opinions of Children. What they perpetually admire is Uniformity and Regularity. The first little essays they make in Art, are all distinguished by this Character; the opinion they form of the Value or Beauty of any object that is shewn to them, is from the prevalence of Uniformity in its Composition; and the triumph which they display, when they are able to produce any kind of Regularity in their little productions, very sufficiently indicates the
[Page 310]
connection that subsists in their Minds, between such Qualities and the Expression of Design.
In the earlier periods of Society, therefore, it seems reasonable to imagine, that all those Arts which were directed only to Ornament, or to the production of Beauty, should employ, in preference to all others, the admired Form; and that the Artist should attempt to give to every thing that constituted the fine Arts of such an Age, that Uniformity, which was expressive of the Quality most valued, and most admired among them. It is found accordingly, that this is the fact, and that the Form, which, in such periods, universally characterizes the productions of Taste is Uniformity or Regularity.
The first appearance of the Arts of Sculpture and Painting, has, in every country, been distinguished by this character. The earliest attempts to imitate the human Form, could have little merit as an Imitation, and could be valued only for the Skill and Dexterity they appeared, at such a period, to exhibit. What the Spectator admired, was not so much the Resemblance to Man, as the Invention and Art which produced this Resemblance; what the Artist therefore would study, would be to make his work as expressive of this skill as possible. He could, however, do this in no way so surely, as by the production of Uniformity, by making choice of an attitude in which both sides of the body
[Page 311]
were perfectly similar, and every article of drapery, &c . upon the one side, having a correspondent article of the same kind upon the other. Such a work, carried with it immediately the conviction of design, and would of course excite the admiration of an Age to which Design was not familiar. The figures of the Gods, and of the Heroes, of rude Nations, are accordingly represented by every Traveller, as fashioned in this manner; and whoever will take the trouble of reading the Abbé Winkelman's laborious History of Ancient Sculpture, will find that the earliest period even of Grecian Art, was distinguished by the same Character.
As the favourite Form of such an Age, would be Regularity, the first step of the progress of the Art would naturally consist in the greater perfection of this Form, in the higher finishing of the Parts, and in the increase of their Number. It is at this period that the Egyptian Sculpture seems to have stopped; the accuracy and the delicacy of its workmanship appear not to have been exceeded by any other People; but the possibility of adding Variety to Uniformity, or of copying the more graceful attitudes of the human Form, seems either to have been unknown or unattempted among them. From what cause this peculiarity arose, it is now difficult to explain; if it may not be conceived to have been the effect of a law of Religion, by which the Artists were forbidden to give any other appearance or attitude to the objects of their worship, than those
[Page 312]
which were to be found in their ancient Sculptures. Every History of Painting sufficiently shews, that the first periods of this Art have been uniformly distinguished by the same Character.
The Art of Gardening seems to have been governed, and long governed by the same Principle. When Men first began to consider a Garden as a subject capable of Beauty, or of bestowing any distinction upon its possessor, it was natural that they should endeavour to render its Form as different as possible from that of the country around it; and to mark to the Spectator, as strongly as they could, both the design and the labour which they had bestowed upon it. Irregular Forms, however convenient or agreeable, might still be the production of Nature; but Forms perfectly regular, and Divisions completely uniform, immediately excited the belief of Design, and with this belief, all the admiration which follows the employment of Skill, or even of Expence. That this Principle would naturally lead the first Artists in Gardening to the production of Uniformity, may easily be conceived, as even at present, when so different a system of Gardening prevails, the common People universally follow the first System; and even the Men of the best Taste, in the cultivation of waste or neglected lands, still inclose them by uniform Lines, and in regular Divisions, as more immediately signifying what they wish should
[Page 313]
be signified, their Industry or Spirit in their improvement.
As gardens, however, are both a costly and permanent subject, and are of consequence less liable to the influence of Fashion, this Taste would not easily be altered; and the principal improvements which they would receive, would consist rather in the greater employment of uniformity and expence, than in the introduction of any new Design. The whole History of Antiquity, accordingly, contains not, I believe, a single instance where this character was deviated from, in a spot considered solely as a garden; and till within this century, and in this country, it seems not any where to have been imagined, that a garden was capable of any other Beauty, than what might arise from Utility, and from the display of Art and Design. It deserves also further to be remarked, that the additional ornaments of gardening, have in every country partaken of the same character, and have been directed to the purpose of increasing the appearance and the Beauty of Design. Hence Jet d'Eaus, artificial Fountains, regular Cascades, Trees in the form of Animals, &c . have in all countries been the principal ornaments of gardening. The violation of the usual appearances of Nature in such objects, strongly exhibited the employment of Art. They accorded perfectly, therefore, with the character which the scene was intended to have; and they increased
[Page 314]
its Beauty, as they increased the effect of that quality upon which this Beauty was founded.
The same principle which has thus influenced the Taste of men in the earlier periods of Society, with regard to Sculpture and Gardening, appears to have extended to every other Art which was employed in the Beauty of Form. The Art of Dancing, one of the Fine Arts of a rude people, and which is capable indeed of being one of the Fine Arts of the most improved people, is distinguished in its first periods by the same character, and from the same cause. The common or general motions of the human body are acquired in so early infancy, and are performed with so little reflection, that they appear to be more the exertion of a natural power, than an acquisition of labour or art. When men then first began to take pleasure in the exertion of their agility, and to expect praise or admiration for their skill, it is obvious, that the motions and gestures which they would adopt, would be such as were farthest removed from the natural or easy motions of the body, and which from this difference were most strongly expressive of the address or agility of the Dancer. Hence naturally arose the invention of all those uniform attitudes, in which the two sides of the body were rendered perfectly correspondent; those artificial gestures, in which the same motion of the limbs is repeated, without any change of place: and as the art advanced, those regular figures in which the same Form is perpetually
[Page 315]
described; and those more complicated dances, in which a number of performers are engaged in repeating some intricate figure within a definite interval. Such gestures and figures as essentially different from the usual gestures of the body, were immediately expressive both of Design and of Skill. The performer would study to excel in them. The spectator would admire him in proportion as he did excel; and hence the Art would almost necessarily assume the same character of Regularity or Uniformity that distinguished the other Arts which were destined to please.
It would be very easy to illustrate the same observation, from a variety of other particulars in the ornamental Forms of rude nations, if it did not lead to a very minute, and I believe a very unnecessary investigation. The Reader will perhaps forgive me, if I avail myself of this opportunity to hazard a conjecture, whether the same principle is not the cause of the invention of Rhyme and Measure in Poetry, and whether it may not serve to account for a very remarkable fact that every one is acquainted with, viz . The Precedence of Poetical, to Prosaic Composition.
The use of language is acquired so early in life, and is practised upon common occasions with so little study or thought, that it appears to a rude people, as it does to the common people of every country, rather as an inherent power of our nature, than as an acquisition of labour or
[Page 316]
study; and upon such occasions, is considered as no more expressive of Design or Skill, than the notes of birds, or the cries of animals. When therefore men first began to think of Composition, and to expect admiration from their skill in it, they would very naturally endeavour to make it as expressive as they could of this Skill, by distinguishing it as much as possible from common language. There was no way so obvious for this, as by the production of some kind of Regularity or Uniformity; by the production either of Regularity in the succession of these Sounds, or of Uniformity or Resemblance in the Sounds themselves. Such qualities in Composition would immediately suggest the belief of Skill and Design, and would of consequence excite all that admiration which, in the commencement of every Art, such qualities so strongly and so justly raise. The same cause, therefore, which induced the Sculptor to give to his performances that Form, which was most strongly expressive of his skill, would induce the Poet to employ that Regularity or Uniformity of Sounds, which was most immediately expressive also of his Skill, and which was most likely to excite the admiration of his people. Rhyme or Measure then (according to the nature of the language, and the superior difficulty of either) would naturally come to be the constituent mark of Poetry, or of that species of Composition which was destined to affect or to please. It would be the simplest resource which the Poet could fall upon, to distinguish his productions from common language; and it would accordingly
[Page 317]
please, just in proportion to the perfection of its Regularity, or to the degree in which it was expressive of his labour and skill. The greater and more important characteristics of the Art, a rude people must necessarily be unacquainted with; and what would naturally constitute the distinction to them between Poetry and common language, would be the appearance of Uniformity or Regularity in the one, and the want of them in the other.
As thus, the first instances of Composition would be distinguished by some species of Uniformity, every kind of Composition would gradually borrow, or come to be distinguished by the same character. If it was necessary for the Poet to study Rhyme or Measure, to distinguish his verses from common language, it would be equally necessary for the Lawgiver to study the same in the Composition of his Laws, and the Sage in the Composition of his Aphorisms. Without this character, they had no distinction from usual or familiar Expression; they had no mark by which they might be known to be the fruit of Thought or Reflection, instead of the immediate effusion of Fancy. Before the invention of writing, the only expedient by which it seems possible that Composition could be distinguished from common language, must have been some species of Uniformity or Regularity, which might immediately convey the belief of Art or Design, and thus separate it from that vulgar language, which appeared to imply neither. It
[Page 318]
is hence, that in every country, proverbs, or the ancient maxims of wisdom, are distinguished by Alliteration, or Measure, or some other artifice of a like nature; that in many countries the earliest laws have been written in verse; and, in general, that the artificial Composition which is now appropriated to Poetry alone, and distinguished by the name of Poetical Composition, was naturally the prevailing character of Composition, and applied to every subject which was the fruit of labour or meditation; as the mark, and indeed the only mark that then could be given, of the employment of this labour and meditation.
The invention of writing occasioned a very great revolution in Composition. What was written, was of itself expressive of Design. Prose therefore, when written, was equally expressive of Design with Verse or Rhyme; and the restraints which these imposed, led men naturally to forsake that artificial Composition, which now no longer had the value it bore, before this invention. The discovery of writing, seems therefore naturally to have led to Composition in Prose. It might be expected also, that the same cause should have freed Poetry from the restraints with which the ignorance or the necessities of a rude Age had thus shackled it; and that the great distinctions of Imagery, of Enthusiasim, of being directed to the Imagination, instead of the Understanding, &c . should have been sufficient distinctions of it from prosaic Composition, without preserving those rude
[Page 319]
inventions, which were founded solely upon the Expression of Art. There are, however, two causes which serve to prevent this natural effect, and which it is probable will every where continue to appropriate Rhyme or Measure to poetical Composition. 1 st , The permanence of poetical Models, and the irresistible prejudice we have in their favour, even from no other cause than their antiquity: and, 2 dly , The real difficulty of the Art itself, which in opposition to the general history of Art, remains still as difficult, and perhaps more so, than in the first periods of its cultivation; and which of consequence renders it still as much the object of admiration, as when it first began to be cultivated. The generality of men judge of Poetry by the perfection or imperfection of its Rhymes; and the art or skill of the Poet in the management of them, constitutes a very great share of the pleasure they have in the perusal of it.
Whatever truth there may be in this conjecture, with regard to the Origin of Rhyme and Measure, it is a fact sufficiently certain, that the first periods of the history of the Fine Arts, are distinguished by Uniformity and Regularity; and perhaps the observations which I have offered may lead the Reader to believe, that this arises from the early, and perhaps instinctive association we have of such qualities in Form, with Design and Skill, and the great and peculiar value they necessarily have in such a period of society.
[Page 320]
2. When, however, the Fine Arts have made this progress, circumstances arise which alter in a great measure the Taste of mankind, and introduce a different opinion with regard to the Beauty of Design. Two causes more especially conspire to this. 1 st , The discovery that is gradually made, that other and more affecting qualities are capable of being expressed by Forms, than that of mere Design: and, 2 dly , The progress of the Arts themselves, which naturally renders easy what at first was difficult, and of consequence, renders the production of Regularity or Uniformity less forcibly the Sign of Skill than at first. Both tend immediately to the introduction of Variety.
When the Painter and Sculptor, for instance, had advanced so far in their Art, as to be able to imitate exactly the Form of the human Body, it could not well be long before they applied themselves to particular imitations of it. Some Forms are beautiful, others not. They would study therefore to imitate the former; and perhaps endeavour to investigate what circumstances constituted the difference between such cases. The imitation of the beautiful, from the imitation of mere Form, was itself a great step in the Art, but was of still greater consequence in leading to another. Beautiful Forms were more beautiful in one attitude than in another, under the influence of some passions or affections, than under the influence of others. To imitate such objects, therefore, it was necessary to study, not only the
[Page 321]
general Beauty of Form, but such Attitudes and Expressions, as were the signs of such Passions or Affections. The most beautiful Forms in real Life, were still in some respects deficient, and it was difficult to find instances, where such Forms might display the most beautiful Attitudes or Expressions. The imagination of the Painter or the Sculptor, could alone supply this want: he would endeavour by degrees, therefore, to unite the Beauty of Form, with the Beauty of Expression; and would thus gradually ascend to the conception of Ideal Beauty, and to the production of Form and of Attitude, more beautiful than any that were to be found in Nature itself. In these various steps, the Uniformity of the earlier Ages would insensibly be deserted. Beautiful Attitudes have little Uniformity, and in the Expression of Passion or Affection, every Variety of Form must be introduced which takes place in real Life. The Artist, therefore, would not only be under the necessity of introducing Variety, but the admiration of the Spectator would necessarily keep pace with its Introduction; both because the expression which his Forms now assumed, was of itself much more pleasing and interesting, than the mere expression of Design, and because this Variety was in fact now significant of greater Skill and Dexterity in the Artist, than the mere Uniformity of the former Age. In those Arts, therefore, Variety of Form, would not only be considered as expressive of Design; but as what distinguished the Old and the Modern School, was the Uniformity of the
[Page 322]
one, and the Variety of the other, it would be considered as the peculiar sign of elegant or of improved Design.
In all the other Arts, which were either directed to the production of Beauty of Form, or which were susceptible of it, the same causes would produce the same effect. In all of them, in proportion as the Art was cultivated, the difficulty of it would decrease; the same Form which was beautiful and solely beautiful, when the circumstance of Art or Skill only was considered, would every day become less beautiful as that Skill became more common:—the natural rivalship of Artists would lead them to deviate from this principle of Uniformity, and by the introduction of some degree of Variety, to give greater proofs of their Art and Dexterity:—it would not fail to be observed, that in such inventions some were more beautiful or more pleasing than others: some farther qualities, therefore, would be sought for in Forms, than that which was merely expressive of Design: the Forms which were beautiful in Nature, would be imitated in the productions of Art; succeeding Ages would gradually refine upon these beginnings of Improvement; until, at last, the most common Forms would receive all that degree of Beauty, which was consistent with their usefulness or ends.
The Forms, however, that are beautiful in Nature, are, in general, such as are distinguished by Variety. In the
[Page 323]
imitation of them, Variety would necessarily be introduced. The imitation of such Forms, the application of them to common objects, was, in itself, more laborious, more difficult, and demanded more skill in the Artist, than the production of mere Uniformity. The Variety, therefore, which took place in this period of the Arts, would naturally become the sign of improved or of elegant Design, as Uniformity had formerly been the sign of Design itself; and as the one distinguished the rude period of these Arts, and the other the improved and elegant one, Uniformity in this, as in the former case, would come to be considered as the sign of rude or imperfect Design, and Variety, of that which was refined and cultivated. The application of these principles to the different Arts, which are conversant in the Beauty of Form, is far beyond the limit of these observations.
By such means as these, by the imitation of Nature, by the invention which rivalship would naturally excite, and by the natural progress of Art itself, Variety would gradually be introduced; in different degrees indeed in different Arts, according to their nature, and the costliness and permanence of the subjects upon which they were employed, but still in all in some degree, and according to the measure in which they admitted of it. As it thus also became the principal visible distinction between the rude and the improved state of these Arts, it would become the sign of this
[Page 324]
improvement and refinement; the excellence of the Artist, would, in a great degree, be measured by the proportion of it which he was capable of giving to his works; and as the love of Uniformity had distinguished the earlier periods of Society, the love of Variety would from the same cause, distinguish the periods of cultivation and refinement. It is found accordingly, that this is the great characteristic of the taste of polished Ages: and so strong is this principle, that wherever, in the Arts of any country, Variety is found to predominate, it may be safely inferred, that they have long been cultivated in that country; as, on the other hand, wherever the love of Uniformity prevails, it may with equal safety be inferred, that they are in that country but in the first stage of their improvement.
There is one Art, however, in which the same effect seems to have arisen from very different causes. The Variety which distinguishes the Modern Art of Gardening in this Island, beautiful as it undoubtedly is, appears not however, to be equally natural to this Art, as it has been shown to be to others. It is, at least, of a very late origin: it is to be found in no other country: and those nations of antiquity, who had carried the Arts of Taste to the greatest perfection which they have ever yet attained, while they had arrived at Beauty in every other species of Form, seem never to have imagined, that the principle of Variety was
[Page 325]
applicable to Gardening, or to have deviated in any respect from the Regularity or Uniformity of their ancestors.
Nor does it indeed seem to be either a very natural or a very obvious invention. A Garden is a spot surrounding or contiguous to a house, and cultivated for the convenience or pleasure of the family. When Men began first to ornament such a spot, it was natural that they should do with it, as they did with the house to which it was subordinate, viz . by giving it every possible appearance of Uniformity, to shew that they had bestowed labour and expence upon the improvement of it. In the countries that were most proper for Gardening, in those distinguished by a fine climate and a beautiful scenery, this labour and expence could in fact in no other way be expressed than by the production of such Uniformity. To imitate the Beauty of Nature in the small scale of a Garden, would have been ridiculous in a country, where this Beauty was to be found upon the great scale of Nature; and for what purpose should they bestow labour or expence, for which every Man expects credit, in erecting a scene, which as it could be little superior to the general scenery around them, could of consequence but little communicate to the Spectator the belief of this labour or this expence having been bestowed? The Beauty of Landscape, Nature had sufficiently provided. The Beauty, therefore, that was left for Man to create, was the Beauty of Convenience or Magnificence; both of them dependent
[Page 326]
upon the employment of Art and Expence, and both of them best expressed by such Forms, as immediately signified the employment of such means. In such a situation, therefore, it does not seem natural, that Men should think of proceeding in this Art beyond the first and earliest Forms, which it had acquired; or that any further improvement should be attempted in it, than merely in the extension of the scale of this Design.
In this view, I cannot help thinking, that the Modern Taste in Gardening, (or what Mr Walpole very justly, and very emphatically calls the Art of creating Landscape,) owes its origin to two circumstances, which may at first appear paradoxical, viz . To the accidental circumstance of our taste in Natural Beauty being founded upon foreign models; and to the difference or inferiority of the scenery of our own country, to that which we were accustomed peculiarly to admire.
The influence of these circumstances will be perhaps sufficiently obvious to those who recollect, that the Compositions which serve most early, and indeed most universally, to fix our Taste in this respect, are those which have been produced in Italy and Greece; in countries much superior to our own, in the articles of climate and of natural Beauty; which are almost sacred in our imaginations, from the events by which they have been distinguished, and which,
[Page 327]
besides all this, have an additional, charm to us, from the very Compositions in which they are celebrated. The poems of Homer and Theocritus, of Virgil and Horace, have been now for a considerable length of time, the first poetical Compositions to which the youth of modern Europe are accustomed; and they have influenced accordingly, in a very sensible degree, the Taste of all those who have been so early engaged in the study of them. Besides this, the effect of Painting, and particularly of Landscape Painting, has been very great, both in awakening our Taste to natural Beauty, and in determining it. The great masters in this Art have been principally Italians: men who were born amid scenes of distinguished Beauty, who passed their lives in copying those features either of real or of adventitious Expression with which Italy presented them; and whose works have disseminated in every country where they found their way, the admiration of the scenes which they copied. From both these causes, and from the strong prejudice, which, since the revival of letters, we so early and so deeply feel, in favour of every thing that relates to Grecian or to Roman Antiquity, the Imagery of Italian Scenery had got strongly the possession of our imagination. Our first impressions of the Beauty of Nature had been gained from the Compositions which delineated such scenery; and we were gradually accustomed to consider them as the standard of Natural Beauty.
[Page 328]
With these impressions, it was very natural for the inhabitants of a country, of which the scenery, however beautiful in itself, was yet in many respects very different from that which they were accustomed to consider as solely or supremely beautiful, to attempt to imitate what they did not possess; to import, as it were, the beauties which were not of their own growth; and in fact to create, according to Mr Walpole's vigorous expression, that scenery which Nature and Fortune had denied them.
Such improvements, however, as extremely expensive, could not be at first upon a very large scale. They could, for various reasons, occupy only that spot of ground which surrounded the house; and as they thus supplanted what had formerly been the garden, they came very naturally to be considered only as another species of gardening. A scene of so peculiar a kind, could not well unite with the country around. It would gradually therefore extend, so as to embrace all the ground that was within view, or in the possession of the improver. From the garden, therefore, it naturally extended to the park, which became therefore also the subject of this new, but very fortunate mode of improvement: And thus, from the nature of modern education, and the habit we are in of receiving our first rudiments of Taste from foreign models, together with the admiration which so many causes have conspired to excite in our minds with regard to antiquity, seems very probably to
[Page 329]
have arisen that modern Taste in Gardening, which is so different from every other that men have followed, and which has tended so much to the ornament of this country.
It is to be observed also, in confirmation of what I have said, that the first attempts of this kind in England, were very far from being an imitation of the general scenery of Nature. It was solely the imitation of Italian scenery; and it is not improbable, that they who first practised the Art, were themselves ignorant of the possible Beauties which it at length might acquire. Statues, Temples, Urns, Ruins, Colonades, &c . were the first ornaments of all such scenes. Whatever distinguished the real scenes of Nature in Italy, was here employed in artificial scenery, with the most thoughtless profusion; and the object of the Art in general, was the creation not of Natural, but of Italian Landscape. The fine Satire of Mr Pope upon this subject, is a sufficient proof of the degree to which this Fashion was carried; and it deserves to be remarked, to the honour of his Taste, that he so soon saw the possible Beauties of this infant Art, and was so superior to the universal prejudices upon the subject.
It was but a short step, however, from this state of the Art, to the pursuit of general Beauty. The great step had already been made, in the destruction of the regular Forms which constituted the former system of Gardening, and in
[Page 330]
the imitation of Nature, which, although foreign, and very different from the appearances or the character of Nature in our own country, was yet still the imitation of Nature. The profusion with which Temples, Ruins, Statues, and all the other adventitious articles of Italian scenery was lavished, became soon ridiculous. The destruction of these, it was found, did not destroy the Beauty of Landscape. The power of simple Nature was felt and acknowledged, and the removal of the articles of acquired Expression, led men only more strongly to attend to the natural Expression of scenery, and to study the means by which it might be maintained or improved. The publication also, at this time, of the Seasons of Thomson, in the opinion of a very competent judge 2 , contributed in no small degree, both to influence and to direct the Taste of men in this Art. The peculiar merit of the work itself, the singular felicity of its descriptions, and above all, the fine Enthusiasm which it displays, and which it is so fitted to excite, with regard to the works of Nature, were most singularly adapted to promote the growth of an infant Art, which had for its object the production of natural Beauty; and by diffusing every where both the admiration of Nature, and the knowledge of its Expression, prepared in a peculiar degree, the minds of men in general, both to feel the effects, and to judge of the fidelity, of those scenes in which it was imitated. By these means, and by the singular genius of some late masters, the Art of Gardening has gradually ascended from
[Page 331]
the pursuit of particular, to the pursuit of general Beauty; to realize whatever the fancy of the Painter has imagined, and to create a scenery, more pure, more harmonious, and more expressive, than any that is to be found in Nature itself.
From the slight view which I have now given of the progress of those Arts, which respect the Beauty of Form, the Reader may perhaps be satisfied, that this progress itself produces a difference in the sentiments of men, with regard to the Beauty of Design, and to those material qualities in Forms, which are expressive of it; that the same degree of Art or Skill which is the object of admiration in an early age, ceases to be so, in an age of greater improvement; and that hence as Uniformity is the distinguishing Form of Beauty in the first periods of these Arts, Variety is from the same cause, in the latter.
These qualities, however, though in a great measure characteristic of the rude and the improved periods of the Arts, are neither opposite nor irreconcileable. In every perfect Form of Beauty they must be united, and the same quality of Design or Skill which is the foundation of their Beauty, affords also the law of their union.
Every work of Art supposes Unity of Design, or some one end which the Artist had in view in its structure or composition. In Forms, however, considered simply as expressive
[Page 332]
of Design, and without any other relation, the only possible Sign of unity of Design, is Uniformity or Regularity. It is this which alone distinguishes the productions of Chance, from those of Design; and without the appearance of this, Variety is confessedly only Confusion.
In every beautiful work of Art, something more than mere Design is demanded, viz . Elegant or embellished Design. The only material Sign of this is Variety. It is this which distinguishes, in general, beautiful from plain Forms; and without this, in some degree, Uniformity is only dulness and insipidity. Beautiful Forms, therefore, must necessarily be composed both of Uniformity and Variety; and this union will be perfect, when the proportion of Uniformity does not encroach upon the Beauty of Embellishment, and the proportion of Variety does not encroach upon the Beauty of Unity.
Considering, therefore, Forms in this light, as beautiful merely from their Expression of Design, the observation of Dr Hutcheson may perhaps be considered as an Axiom with regard to their Beauty, viz . That where the Uniformity is equal, the Beauty of Forms is in proportion to their Variety; and when their Variety is equal, their Beauty is in proportion to their Uniformity; that is according to the view which I have now presented to the Reader, When the Unity of Design is equal, the Beauty of Forms will be in proportion
[Page 333]
to their Embellishment; and when the Embellishment of Forms is equal, their Beauty will be in proportion to the Unity of their Design.
III. In the view which I have now presented to the Reader, the qualities of Uniformity and Variety are considered as beautiful from their Expression of Design. In the preceding section, on the other hand, these qualities are considered as beautiful, from the effect of their Composition, in maintaining and promoting the Emotion which the subject itself is capable of exciting. That these qualities are in fact beautiful from both these causes; that their Composition is in some cases beautiful from being expressive of the Skill and Taste of the Artist; and in others, from being correspondent to the Character or Expression of the subject, are propositions so obvious, that I will not detain the Reader by any illustration of them. The confounding of these distinct Expressions, has also, I believe, been the cause of the greater part of mistakes which have been made in the investigation of the Beauty of these qualities.
The Beauty of these Expressions, however, is very different; and as it is in the power of the Artist, either to sacrifice the Beauty of Design to that of Character or Expression,
[Page 334]
or to sacrifice the Beauty of Character to that of Design, there is not perhaps any circumstance of more importance to him, or to the Arts of Taste in general, than a proper comprehension of the difference of this Beauty, and of the great superiority which the one has over the other. The superiority of the Beauty of Expression or Character, seems to consist in three things. 1 st , In the greater and more affecting Emotion, which is produced by it, than what is produced by the mere expression of Design. 2 dly , In this Beauty being more universally felt, as being dependent only upon Sensibility, while the Beauty of Design is felt only fully by those who are proficients in the Art, and who are able accordingly to judge of the Skill or Taste which is displayed; and, 3 dly , In the permanence of this Beauty, as arising from certain invariable principles of our Nature, while the Beauty of Design is dependent upon the period of the Art, in which it is displayed, and ceases to be beautiful, when the Art has made a farther progress either in improvement or decline. In all those Arts therefore, that have for their object, the production of beautiful Forms, it may be considered as a first and fundamental principle, That the Expression of Design should be subject to the Expression of Character; and, that in every Form, the proportion of Uniformity and Variety, which the Artist should study, ought to be that which is accommodated to the nature of this Character, and not to the Expression of his own Dexterity or Skill. As in the Mechanical Arts, whose object is
[Page 335]
utility, and in which the ability of the Artist is most surely displayed by the production of useful Form, it would be absurd in him to sacrifice this utility, to the display of his own dexterity or address: so in the Arts of Taste, whose object is Beauty, and in which the Taste or Genius of the Artist is in like manner most surely displayed by the production of beautiful Form, it is equally absurd to sacrifice the superior Beauty of Character or Expression, to that meaner and less permanent Beauty, which may arise from the display of his own ability or art.
However obvious or important the principle, which I have now stated may be, the fine Arts have been unfortunately governed by a very different principle; and the undue preference which Artists are naturally disposed to give to the display of Design, has been one of the most powerful causes of that decline and degeneracy which has uniformly marked the history of the fine Arts, after they have arrived at a certain period of perfection. To a common Spectator, the great test of excellence in beautiful Forms is Character or Expression, or, in other words, the appearance of some interesting or affecting quality in the Form itself. To the Artist, on the other hand, the great test of excellence is Skill; the production of something new in point of Design, or difficult in point of Execution. It is by the Expression of Character, therefore, that the generality of Men determine the Beauty of Forms. It is by the Expression of
[Page 336]
Design, that the Artist determines it. When therefore, the Arts which are conversant in the Beauty of Form, have attained to that fortunate stage of their progress, when this Expression of Character is itself the great Expression of Design, the Invention and Taste of the Artist, take, almost necessarily, a different direction. When his excellence can no longer be distinguished by the production of merely beautiful or expressive Form, he is naturally led to distinguish it by the production of what is uncommon or difficult; to signalize his works by the fertility of his invention, or the dexterity of his execution; and thus gradually to forget the end of his art, in his attention to display his superiority in the Art itself. While the Artist thus insensibly deviates from the true principles of Composition, other causes unfortunately tend to mislead also the Taste of the Public. In the Mechanical Arts, whose object is Utility, this Utility is itself the principle by which we determine the perfection of every production: Utility, however, is a permanent principle, and necessarily renders our opinion of this perfection as permanent. In the Fine Arts, whose object is Beauty, it is by its effect upon our imagination alone, that we determine the excellence of any production. There is no quality, however, which has a more powerful effect upon our imagination than Novelty. The Taste of the generality of mankind, therefore, very naturally falls in with the invention of the Artist, and is gratified by that continued production of Novelty which the Art affords
[Page 337]
to it. In the Mechanical Arts, which are directed to general utility, all men are in some measure judges of the excellence of their productions, because they are in some measure judges of this Utility. But in the Fine Arts, which seem to require peculiar talents, and which require at least talents that are not generally exerted, all men neither are, nor conceive themselves to be judges. They willingly therefore submit their opinions to the guidance of those, who, by their practice in these arts, appear very naturally the most competent to judge with regard to their Beauty; and while the Arts amuse them with perpetual novelty, very readily take for granted, that what is new is also beautiful. By these means; by the preference which Artists are so naturally disposed to give to the Expression of Design, above the Expression of Character; by the nature of these Arts themselves, which afford no permanent principle of judging; and by the disposition of men in general to submit their opinions to the opinions of those who have the strongest propensity, and the greatest interest in their corruption, have the Arts of Taste, in every country, after a certain period of perfection, degenerated into the mere Expressions of the Skill and Execution of the Artist, and gradually sunk into a state of barbarity, almost as great as that from which they at first arose. “Alit æmulatio ingenia, (says Velleius Paterculus, in speaking or the same subject), et nunc invidia, nunc admiratio incitationem accendit; naturaque quod summo studio petitum est, adscendit in summum,
[Page 338]
difficilisque in perfecto mora eft: naturaliterque quod procedere non potest, recedit; et ut primo, ad consequendos quos priores ducimus, accendimur, ita, ubi aut præteriri aut æquari eos posse desperavimus, studium cum spe senescit, et quod assequi non potest, sequi desinit; et velut occupatam relinquens materiam, quærit novam; præteritoque eo, in quo eminere non possumus, aliquid in quo nitamur conquirimus.”
Vell. Patercul. L . I. ad fin.
Nor is this melancholy progress peculiar to those Arts which respect the Beauty of Form. The same causes extend to every other of those Arts which are employed in the production of Beauty; and they who are acquainted with the History of the Fine Arts of Antiquity, will recollect, that the History of Statuary, of Painting, of Music, of Poetry, and of Prose Composition, have been alike distinguished in their later periods, by the same gradual desertion of the End of the Art, for the display of the Art itself; and by the same prevalence of the Expression of Design, over the Expression of the Composition in which it was employed. It has been seldom found in the history of any of these Arts, that the Artist, like the great Master of Painting in this country, has united the Philosophy with the practice of his Art, and regulated his own sublime inventions, by the chaste principles of Truth and Science.
[Page 339]
For an error, which so immediately arises from the nature, and from the practice of these Arts themselves, it is difficult, perhaps impossible, to find a remedy. Whether (as I am willing to believe) there may not be circumstances in the modern state of Europe, which may serve to check at least, this unfortunate progression; whether the beautiful Models of Antiquity in every Art, may not serve to fix in some degree the Standard of Taste in these Arts; whether the progress of Philosophy and Criticism may not tend to introduce greater stability, as well as greater delicacy of Taste; and whether the general diffusion of Science, by increasing in so great a proportion the number of judges, may not rescue these Arts from the sole dominion of the Artists, and thus establish more just and philosophical principles of decision, it is far beyond the limits of these Essays to enquire. But I humbly conceive, that there is no rule of Criticism more important in itself, or more fitted to preserve the Taste of the Individual, or of the Public, than to consider every Composition as faulty and defective, in which the Expression of the Art is more striking than the Expression of the Subject, or in which the Beauty of Design prevails over the Beauty of Character or Expression.
[Page 340]
PART II. Of the Influence of Fitness upon the Beauty of Forms. I. The second source of the relative Beauty of Forms is Fitness , or the proper Adaption of Means to an End.
That this Quality in Forms is productive of the Emotion of Beauty, every one must probably have perceived. In the Forms of Furniture, of Machines, and of Instruments in the different Arts, the greater part of their Beauty arises from this consideration; nor is there any Form which does not become beautiful, where it is found to be perfectly adapted to its End. “A ship which is well built, and which promises to sail well, says Mr Hogarth, is called by sailors a Beauty.” In every other profession in like manner, all Machines or Instruments are called beautiful by the Artists, which are well adapted to the end of their Arts. Even the most common and disregarded articles of convenience, are
[Page 341]
felt as beautiful, when we forget their familiarity, and consider them only in relation to the purposes they serve.
That Fitness is not the only source of Beauty in Forms, is sufficiently obvious. But I apprehend the elegant and ingenious Author of the Essay upon the Sublime and Beautiful , has yielded too much to the love of System, when he will not allow it to be any source of Beauty at all. The common experience and common language of mankind are at variance with this opinion, nor does it seem to be sufficiently supported by any of the instances he brings. “On this principle (says he) the wedge-like snout of the Swine, the little sunk eyes, and the whole make of the head, so well adapted to its offices of digging and rooting, would be extremely beautiful. The great bag hanging to the bill of the Pelican, a thing likewise highly useful to this animal, would be likewise as beautiful in our eyes. The Hedge-hog, so well secured against all assaults by his prickly hide, and the Porcupine, with his missile quills, would be then considered as creatures of no small elegance. There are few animals whose parts are better contrived than those of the Monkey. He has the hands of a man, joined to the springy limbs of a beast: he is admirably calculated for running, leaping, grappling and climbing: and yet there are few animals which seem to have less Beauty in the eyes of all mankind,” &c . In these instances, and in all the others he mentions, it is
[Page 342]
clear, that the animals are not, in general, considered as beautiful: but if I am not deceived, the reason of this is, not that the Fitness of their construction is not a consideration capable of producing the Emotion of Beauty, but that in general we never consider the animals in the light of this Fitness of their construction. Such Forms are not naturally beautiful, or have none of those ingredients which were before mentioned as constituting the natural Beauty of Forms. It is the natural Beauty of Forms, however, which first strikes us, because it demands neither any previous knowledge, nor any fixed attention. Such animals, besides, have many unpleasing qualities from their instincts, their characters, and their modes of life. It is in the light of these qualities, however, that we generally consider them; because painful or disagreeable qualities much more suddenly, as well as more powerfully affect us, than qualities of an opposite kind. Whenever, however, we can prevail upon ourselves to disregard these unpleasing considerations, and to consider the animals in the light of the Fitness of their construction, I believe it is agreeable to every man's experience, that their Forms become then, in some degree, objects of Beauty. To say at first, that the head of the Swine was a beautiful Form, might perhaps expose the person who asserted it to ridicule; but if the admirable Fitness of its construction, for the necessities of the animal, are explained, there is no person who will not feel from this view of it, an Emotion of Beauty. There is nothing more common,
[Page 343]
accordingly, in books of Anatomy, or Natural History, than the term of Beauty applied to many common, and many disagreeable parts of the animal Frame; nor is there any Reader, who considers the subjects in the light of their Fitness alone, who does not feel the same Emotion with the Writers. A Physician talks even of a beautiful Theory of Dropsies or Fevers, a Surgeon of a beautiful Instrument for operations, an Anatomist of a beautiful Subject or Preparation. The rest of the world, indeed, hear this language with some degree of astonishment. It is in the light only of Horror or Disgust that such objects appear to them; but to the Artists these qualities have long disappeared, and the only light in which they regard them, is their Fitness for the purposes of their Arts. These instances are perhaps sufficient to show, that even the objects which are most destitute of Natural Beauty, become beautiful, when they are regarded only in the light of their Fitness; and that the reason why they do not always appear beautiful to us, is, that we in general leave this quality out of our consideration. That pleasing or agreeable Forms receive Beauty from their Fitness; and that the most perfect Form of Natural Beauty may receive additional Beauty from its being wisely adapted to some End, are facts too obvious to require any illustration. It is only to be observed, that this quality, in its effect of producing the Emotion of Beauty, is subject to the same limitations with every other quality of Emotion. Such qualities, when either familiar or minute,
[Page 344]
fail in producing an Emotion sufficiently strong to be the foundation of Beauty; and as the Emotion which we receive from Fitness, is in itself greatly inferior to many other Emotions of Pleasure, there are perhaps more instances, where this quality is observed, without the sentiment of Beauty, than in most other qualities of a similar kind with which we are acquainted. Unless when it is either great or new, the generality of men feel little Beauty in any Expression of Fitness.
[Page 345]
II.
Of the Beauty of Proportion. I apprehend also, that the Beauty of Proportion in Forms is to be ascribed to this cause; and that certain Proportions affect us with the Emotion of Beauty, not from any original capacity in such qualities to excite this Emotion, but from their being expressive to us of the Fitness of the parts to the End designed. It is impossible for me, within the bounds which I prescribe myself, to enter fully into the investigation of the nature of Proportion. All I intend is to produce some of the considerations which induce me to join with Mr Hogarth in this conclusion.
1. I conceive, that the Emotion of pleasure which Proportion affords, has no resemblance to any pleasure of sensation, but that it resembles that feeling of satisfaction which we have in other cases, where Means are properly adapted to their End. When a Chair or a Table, or any other common object is well proportioned, as far as I can judge, what we feel, is not a mere sensation of pleasure, from a certain arrangement of parts, but an agreeable Emotion, from the perception of the proper disposition of these parts,
[Page 346]
for the End designed. In the same manner, the effect of disproportion seems to me to bear no resemblance to that immediate painful sensation which we feel from any disagreeable sound or smell, but to resemble that kind of dissatisfaction which we feel, when Means are unfitted to their End. Thus, the disproportion in the legs of a Chair or Table, does not affect us with a simple sensation of pain, but with a very observable Emotion of dissatisfaction or discontent, from the unsuitableness of this construction for the purposes which the objects are intended to serve. Of the truth of this, every man must judge from his own experience.
The habit, indeed, which we have in a great many familiar cases, of immediately conceiving this Fitness from the mere appearance of the Form, leads us to imagine, as it is expressed in common language, that we determine Proportion by the eye; and this quality of Fitness is so immediately expressed to us by the material Form, that we are sensible of little difference between such judgments and a mere determination of sense; yet every man must have observed, that in those cases, when either the object is not familiar to us, or the construction intricate, our judgment is by no means so speedy; and that we never discover the Proportion, until we previously discover the principle of the Machine, or the Means by which the End is produced.
[Page 347]
2. The nature of language seems also very strongly to show the dependence of Proportion upon Fitness, and that it produces the Emotion of Beauty, by being considered as the Sign of this quality. If a common person were asked, why the Proportion of some particular building, or machine, or instrument pleased him, he would naturally answer, because it rendered the object fit or proper for its end. If we were describing a machine or instrument, to any person who was unacquainted with the meaning of the term Proportion, and wished to inform him of the Beauty of this Proportion, we could do it perfectly well by substituting the term Fitness instead of it, and explaining to him the singular accuracy with which the several parts were adapted to the general end of the machine; and if we succeeded in this description, he would have the same Emotion from the consideration of this Fitness, that we ourselves have from the consideration of, what we call, its Proportion. It very often happens, in the same manner, that we read or hear accounts of Forms which we have never seen, and of consequence, of the Proportions of which (if Proportion is a real and original quality in objects) it is impossible for us to judge; yet I think, if we are convinced that the Form is well contrived, and that its several parts are properly adjusted to their End, we immediately satisfy ourselves that it is well proportioned; and if we perfectly understand its nature or mechanism, we never hesitate to speak of its Proportion, though we never have seen it.
[Page 348]
If Proportion, on the contrary, consisted in certain determinate relations, discoverable only by a peculiar sense, all this could not possibly happen. The consideration of Fitness could no more influence our opinion of Proportion, than any other consideration; and we could as little collect the belief of Proportion in any Form from the consideration of its Fitness, as from that of its Sound or Colour.
In a great variety of cases, the terms Fitness and Proportion are perfectly synonymous. There is, however, a distinction between them, which it may be necessary to explain, as it will afford a more accurate conception of the nature of Proportion, and of the foundation of its Beauty.
Every Form which is susceptible of Proportion, may be considered in either one or other of the following lights. 1 st , In the light of its whole or general relation to the End designed, or when it is considered as a whole, without any distinction of parts; or, 2 dly , In the light of the relation of its several parts to this End. Thus, in the case of a machine, we may sometimes consider it in the light of its general utility for the End it is destined to serve, and sometimes in the light of the propriety of the different parts, for the attainment of this End. When we consider it in the first light, it is its Fitness which we properly consider. When we consider it in the second light, it is its Proportion we consider.
[Page 349]
Fitness may therefore be supposed to express the general relation of propriety between Means and an End, and Proportion a peculiar or subordinate relation of this kind, viz . the proper relation of parts to an End. Both agree in expressing the relation of propriety between Means and their Ends. Fitness expresses the proper relation of the whole of the Means to the End. Proportion the proper relation of a part, or of parts, to their End.
In common language, accordingly, wherever we speak of this relation in a subject which has no division of parts, the terms are used synonymously. Thus we say, that a man's expences are fitted, or are proportioned to his income; that a man's ambition is fitted or proportioned to his talents; that an undertaking is fitted or proportioned to one's powers.
In subjects which are capable of division into parts, on the other hand, the terms Fitness and Proportion are not used synonymously, but according to the explanation which I have now given. Thus we say, that the Form of the Eye is admirably fitted for Vision; that the Telescope is fitted for discovering objects at a distance; that the Fire-engine is fitted for raising water: but we could not say in any of these cases, that they were proportioned to their Ends. When we consider these subjects as composed of parts, and attend to the Form of these parts for the attainment of their Ends,
[Page 350]
we immediately speak of the Proportion of these parts. The just Proportion of such parts, is accordingly nothing more, than that peculiar Form or dimension which has been found from experience best fitted for the accomplishment of the purpose of the instrument or the machine. Proportion therefore may, I apprehend, be considered as applicable only to Forms composed of parts, and to express the relation of propriety between any part, or parts, and the End they are destined to serve.
3. It may be further observed, that Forms are just susceptible of as many proportions, as they are susceptible of parts necessary to the end, for which they are intended: and that every part which has no immediate relation to this end, is unsusceptible of any accurate Proportion. In many Forms of the most common kind, there are a great number of parts which have no relation to the end or purpose of the Form, and which are intended to serve the purpose of ornament rather than of use. In such parts, accordingly, we never expect or perceive any accurate proportion, nor is there any settled and permanent opinion of Beauty in them, as there is in the great and necessary parts of the Form. In the Form of a Chair, for instance, or Table, or Sopha, or Door or Window, several of the parts are merely ornamental: they have no immediate relation to the fitness of the Form, and they vary accordingly almost every year in their Forms and Sizes. All that is required of them is, that they
[Page 351]
should not obstruct the general fitness; within that limit they are susceptible of perpetual and pleasing Variety. There are other parts, however, of the same Forms, which are necessary to the general end or purpose of their construction, as the height of the Chair for the convenience of sitting, of the Table for its peculiar purposes, &c . These parts, accordingly, have all a Proportion, which is immediately discerned, and which is never greatly violated without producing an Emotion of dissatisfaction. If, on the contrary, Proportion was something absolute and independent in Forms, it seems difficult to imagine, that it should be found only in those Forms, which are susceptible of fitness, and in those parts only of such Forms as admit of this quality.
4. Our sense of Proportion in every Form, keeps pace with our knowledge of the fitness of its construction. Where we have no acquaintance with the fitness of any Form, we have no sense of its peculiar Proportions. No Man, for instance, ever presumes to speak of the Proportions of a Machine, of the use or purpose of which he is ignorant. When a new Machine is shown us, we may pronounce with regard to the simplicity or the complexness of its construction, but we never venture to pronounce with regard to the propriety or impropriety of its Proportions. When our acquaintance is greater with the uses or purposes of any particular class of Forms, than the generality of people, we are sensible
[Page 352]
of a greater number of pleasing Proportions in such objects, than the rest of the world; and the same parts which others look upon with indifference, we perceive as beautiful, from our knowledge of the propriety of their construction for the end designed. This every person must have observed in the language of Artists, upon the subject of the instruments of their own Arts; in the language of Anatomists, and Proficients in Natural History, in many different subjects of their Science; as well as in the increase of his own sense of Proportion in different Forms, with the increase of his knowledge of the ends that such Forms are destined to serve. When any improvement, in the same manner, is made in the construction of the Forms of Art, so that different Proportions of parts are introduced, and produce their end better than the former, the new Proportions gradually become beautiful, while the former lose their Beauty. In general, it may be observed, that the Certainty of Proportion, is in all cases dependent upon the Certainty of Fitness. 1 st , Where this Fitness is absolutely determined, as in many cases of Mechanics, the Proportion is equally determined. 2 dly , Where it is determined only by experience, the opinion of the Beauty of Proportion varies with the progress of such experience. 3 dly , Where this Fitness cannot be subjected to experience, as in the case of natural Forms, the common Proportion is generally conceived to be the fittest, and is therefore considered as the most beautiful. It is impossible, I apprehend, to reconcile these
[Page 353]
cases of the dependence of our sense of Proportion upon our opinion of Fitness, to the belief that there are any certain and established Proportions in Forms, which are originally and independently beautiful.
These illustrations seem to me very strongly to shew the intimate connection which subsists between Proportion and Fitness; and to afford a much more easy and simple solution of the delight which Proportion produces, than the opinion of its being a real and independent quality in objects.
There is, however, one case in which it may still be doubted, whether this explanation of the nature of Proportion is sufficient to account for the Phenomena: I mean in the case of Architecture . The writers on this subject who have best understood the Art, have been unanimous in considering the Proportions which have been discovered in it, as deriving their effect from the original constitution of our nature, and as beautiful in themselves without relation to any Expression. They have been willing also, sometimes, to support their opinion by analogies drawn from Proportions in other subjects, and have remarked several cases in which similar Proportions are beautiful in Music and in Numbers. The futility of all reasoning from such analogies has been so often exposed, and is in itself, indeed, so very obvious, that I shall not stop to consider it.
[Page 354]
I flatter myself, therefore, that it will not be considered as an unnecessary digression, if I endeavour to shew, that the Beauty of the Proportions in this Art, are resolveable into the same principle, and that they please us, not from any original law of our nature, but as expressive of Fitness.
The Proportions in Architecture relate either to its External or its Internal Parts. I shall offer some observations upon these subjects separately.
[Page 355]
III.
Of the External Proportions of Architecture. The Propriety or Fitness of any Building, intended for the habitation of Man, (as seen from without,) consists chiefly in two things, 1 st , In its Stability; and, 2 dly , In its being sufficient for the support of the Roof. Walls, in every country, at the same period of time, are nearly of an equal thickness. It is easy therefore, for the Spectator to judge from their external appearance, whether they are, or are not sufficient for these two purposes. In plain buildings intended merely for use, and without any view to ornament, it is these considerations which chiefly determine our opinions of Proportion. When the walls are of such a height as seems sufficient both for their own stability, and for the support of the weight which is imposed upon them; and when the distance between them is such, as appears sufficient for supporting the weight of the roof, we consider the house as well or as properly proportioned. When any of these circumstances, on the contrary, are different; when the walls are either so high as to seem insecure, or the roof so large, as to seem too heavy for its support, or the side walls so distant, as to beget an opinion of its insecurity, we
[Page 356]
say, that the Building, in such particulars, is ill proportioned. In such cases, what we mean by Proportion, is merely Fitness for the ends of stability and support, and as this Fitness cannot be very accurately measured, and is in itself capable of wide limits, there are accordingly no accurate Proportions of this kind, and no Architect has ever attempted to settle them. The general conclusions, that we have formed from Experience, with regard to the Fitness of such Forms, are the sole guides of our opinion with respect to these Proportions. It may be observed also, that our sentiments of the Proportions of such Buildings depend upon the nature of the Buildings, and even upon the materials of which they are composed. Gothic Buildings, of which we know that the walls are considerably thicker than those of modern days, admit of greater height, and of a greater appearance of weight in the roof, than Buildings of the present age. A house built of brick or of wood, does not admit of the same height of wall, &c . with a house built of stone, because the walls are seldom so strong. A house which is united with others, admits of a greater height than if it stood alone, because we conceive it to be supported by the adjoining houses. And a Building which has no roof, or nothing which it appears to support, as a Tower, or Spire, admits of a much greater height than any other species of Building. These Principles are all that seem to regulate the external Proportions of simple Buildings; all of them so obviously
[Page 357]
depending upon Fitness, that it is unnecessary to illustrate them farther.
It is not in such Buildings, accordingly, that any very accurate external Proportions have ever been settled. This is peculiar to what are called the Orders of Architecture, in which the whole genius of the Art has been displayed, and in which the Proportions are settled with a certainty so absolute, as to forbid almost the attempt at Innovation.
There are generally said to be five orders of Architecture, viz . the Tuscan, the Doric, the Ionic, the Corinthian, and the Composite. There are properly, however, only four, and some writers have further reduced them to three. What constitutes an order is its Proportions, not its ornaments. The Composite having the same proportions with the Corinthian, though very different in respect of its ornaments, is properly therefore considered only as a corrupted Corinthian.
Every order consists of three great parts or divisions; the Base, the Column, and the Entablature; and the governing Proportions relate to this division. The whole of them compose the wall, or what answers to the wall of a common building, and supports the roof.
[Page 358]
There is one great difference, however, to be observed between a common wall, and that assemblage of parts which constitutes an order. A common wall is intended to support a roof, and derives its proportions in a great measure from this destination. To an order, the consideration of the roof is unnecessary. It is complete without any roof, and where a roof is necessary, it is generally so contrived as not to appear. The weight which is supported, or which appears to be supported in an order, is the Entablature. The Fitness of a wall, consists in its appearing adequate to the support of the roof. The Fitness of an order, or of the Proportions of an order, it should seem also, from analogy, reasonable to conclude, consists in their appearing adequate to the support of the Entablature, or of the weight which is imposed upon them.
That this is really the case, and that it is from their being expressive to us of this Fitness, that the Proportions of these different orders appear beautiful, may perhaps seem probable, from the following considerations:
1. The appearance of these Proportions themselves, seems very naturally to lead us to this conclusion. In all the orders, the Fitness of the parts to the support of the peculiar weight, or appearance of weight in the Entablature, is apparent to every person, and constitutes an undoubted part of the pleasure we receive from them. In the Tuscan, where
[Page 359]
the Entablature is heavier than in the rest, the Column and Base are proportionably stronger. In the Corinthian, where the Entablature is lightest, the Column and Base are proportionably slighter. In the Doric and Ionic, which are between these extremes, the forms of the Column and Base are in the same manner proportioned to the reciprocal weights of their Entablatures, being neither so strong as the one, nor so slight as the other. If the Beauty of such Proportions is altogether independent of Fitness, and derived from the immediate constitution of our nature, it is difficult to account for this coincidence; and as the Beauty of Fitness in these several cases is universally allowed, it is altogether unphilosophical, to substitute other causes of the same effect, until the insufficiency of this cause is clearly pointed out.
2. The language of mankind, upon this subject, seems to confirm the same opinion. Whenever we either speak or think of the Proportions of these different orders, the circumstances of weight and support enter both into our consideration and our Expression. The term Proportion, in its general acceptation, implies them; and if this term is not used, the same idea and the same pleasure may be communicated by terms expressive of Fitness for the support of weight. Heaviness, and slightness or insufficiency, are the terms most generally used to express a deviation on either side, from the proper relation; both of them obviously including
[Page 360]
the consideration of support, and expressing the want of Proportion. When it is said that a Base, a Column, or an Entablature is disproportioned, it is the same thing as saying, that this part is unfitted to the rest, and inadequate to the proper End of the Building. When it is said, on the other hand, that all these several parts are properly adjusted to their End, that the Base appears just sufficient for the support of the Column, and both for that of the Entablature, every person immediately concludes that the parts are perfectly proportioned: And, I apprehend, it is very possible to give a man a perfect conception of the Beauty of these Proportions, and to make him feel it in the strongest manner, without ever mentioning to him the name of Proportion, but merely by explaining them to him under the consideration of Fitness, and by showing him from examples, that these Forms are the most proper which can be devised for the End to which they are destined. If our perception of the Beauty of Proportion, in such cases, were altogether independent of any such considerations, I think, that these circumstances in language could not possibly take place; and that it would be as possible to explain the nature and Beauty of Proportion by terms expressive of Sound or Colour, as by terms expressive of Fitness or Propriety.
3. The natural sentiments of mankind on this subject, seem to have a different progress from what they would naturally
[Page 361]
have, if there were any absolute Beauty in such Proportions discoverable by the eye. It cannot surely be imagined, that an infant will perceive, or does perceive, the Beauty of such Proportions in the same manner that he perceives the objects of any other external sense. It is not found either, that the generality of mankind, even when come to mature age, express any sense of the absolute Beauty of such objects. It is true, indeed, that very early in life, we are sensible of disproportion in Building, because the ideas of bulk and support are so early and so necessarily acquired, and the Eye is so soon habituated to judge of weight from visible figure, that what is fit for the support of weight, is very soon generally ascertained. What a common person, therefore, expresses upon the view of such Proportions, is rather Satisfaction, than Delight. It is not the proportions which most affect him. It is the magnificence, the grandeur and the costliness which such Buildings usually display; and though he is much pleased with such Expressions, he is generally silent with regard to the Beauty of those Proportions with which Connoisseurs are so much enraptured. If Proportion, on the contrary, were something absolutely beautiful in such objects, the Progress of Taste would be reversed; the admiration of the infant would be given to these Proportions, long before he was able to judge of their Fitness; and the satisfaction which arises from the Expression of Fitness, would be the last ingredient
[Page 362]
in his pleasure, instead of being, as it now is, the first.
4. The nature of these Proportions themselves seems very strongly to indicate their dependence upon the Expression of Fitness. The Beauty of such Forms (on the supposition of their absolute and independent Beauty) must consist either in their Beauty, considered as individual objects, or in their relation to each other. If the effect arises from the nature of the individual Forms, then it must obviously follow, that such Forms or Proportions must be beautiful in all cases. I think, however, that there is no reason to believe this to be the case. The Base of a Column, for instance, (taken by itself, and independent of its ornaments, which in this inquiry are entirely to be excluded from consideration), is not a more beautiful Form than many others that may be given to the same quality of matter. The peculiar Form which its Proportions give it, is very far from being beautiful in every other case, as would necessarily happen, if it were beautiful in itself, and independent of every Expression. A plain stone of the same magnitude may surely be carved into very different Forms from those which constitute the bases of any of the orders, and may still be beautiful. In the same manner, the Column (considered as in the former case, merely in relation to its peculiar Form, and independent of its ornaments) is not more beautiful, as a Form, and perhaps not so beautiful, as many other
[Page 363]
Forms of a similar kind. The Trunk of many Trees, the Mast of a Ship, the long and slender Gothic Column, and many other similar objects, are to the full as beautiful, when considered merely as Forms without relation to any End, as any of the Columns in Architecture. If, on the contrary, these Forms were beautiful in themselves, and as individual objects, no other similar Forms could be equally beautiful, but such as had the same Proportions. The same observation will apply equally to the Form of the Entablature. It would appear, therefore, that it is not from any absolute Beauty in these Forms, considered individually, that our opinion of their Beauty in Composition, arises.
If it is said, on the other hand, that the Beauty of Proportion in such cases, arises from the relation of these parts, and that there is something in the relation of such Forms and Magnitudes, in itself beautiful, independent of any consideration of Fitness, there seem to be equal difficulties. Besides the relation of Fitness for the support of weight, the only relations which take place among these parts, are the relations of Length and Breadth, and the relation of Magnitude. If this Beauty arose from the relation of Length, it is necessary to show, that such a proportion of three parts in point of length, is solely and permanently beautiful. If from the relation of Breadth, there is the same necessity of showing, that such a proportion of three parts in point of breadth is as permanently beautiful. If
[Page 364]
from both together, then the same Proportions only, ought to be felt as beautiful in all cases to which the relations of Length and Breadth can apply. If again, this Beauty arose from the relation of Magnitude, it is necessary, in the same manner, to show, that three magnitudes or quantities of matter, have in fact no other beautiful proportions but those which takes place in such orders. But as it is very obvious, that there is no foundation for supposing any such law in our nature, and that, on the contrary, in innumerable cases of all such relations, different and contrary Proportions are beautiful, it cannot be supposed that such Proportions are absolutely beautiful from any of these relations.
The only relation, therefore, that remains, is the relation of Fitness; and if the same inquiry is carried on, I believe it will soon be found, that a certain Proportion of parts is necessarily demanded by this relation; and very probably also, that this certain Proportion, is in fact that of each of these orders, according to the particular bulk or weight that is given.
If an order is considered as an assemblage of weight, and parts to support that weight, our experience immediately leads us to conceive a proper relation of these parts to their End. If the Entablature be considered as the weight, then of course a certain Form and size in the Column is demanded for the support of it, and in the Base for the support of both. A plain stone, for instance, set upon its end, has no
[Page 365]
proportion further than for the purpose of stability. If it appears firm, it has all the proportions we desire or demand, and its form may be varied in a thousand ways, without interfering with our sense of its Proportion. Place a Column, or any other weight upon this stone; immediately another Proportion is demanded, viz . its Proportion to the support of this weight. The Form supported, however, has no Proportion farther than that which is necessary for its stability, or for continuing in its situation. It may be more or less beautiful in point of Form, from other considerations, but not upon account of its Proportion. Above this again place an additional body; immediately the intermediate Form demands a new Proportion, viz . to the weight it supports; and the first part, or the Base, demands also another Proportion, in consideration of the additional weight which is thus imposed upon it. In this supposition, it is obvious, that the consideration of Fitness alone, leads us to expect a certain Proportion among each of these parts; the parts are beautiful or pleasing, just as they answer to this demand, and where the parts are few, and experiments easy, it seems not difficult at last, to arrive at that perfect Proportion which satisfies the Eye, as sufficient for the purposes of support and stability. If we leave, therefore, every thing else out of consideration, the consideration of Fitness alone seems sufficient to account, both for the origin of such Proportions in Architecture, and for the pleasure which attends the observation of them.
[Page 366]
Although, however, the influence of the Expression of Fitness upon the Beauty of Proportion should be allowed, and the doctrine of the original Beauty of Proportion should be deserted, as inconsistent with experience, yet it may still be doubted whether this Expression, is sufficient to account for the delight which most men feel from the orders of Architecture: and it may naturally be asked, why mankind have so long adhered to these Forms, without attempting to deviate from them, if they are not solely and peculiarly beautiful. The satisfaction we feel from the observation of Fitness, it may be said, is a moderate and feeble pleasure, when compared with that delight with which the models of Architecture are surveyed: and the uniform adherence of men to the established Proportions, is too strong a proof of their absolute or peculiar Beauty, to be opposed by any arguments of a distant or metaphysical kind.
With regard to the first of these objections, I acknowledge, that the mere consideration of Fitness is insufficient to account for the pleasure which is generally derived from the established orders: But I apprehend, that this pleasure arises from very different causes, than from their Proportions, and that, in fact, when these Proportions only are considered, the pleasure which is generally felt, is not greater than that which we experience, when we perceive in any great work, the proper relation of Means to an End.
[Page 367]
The Proportions of these orders, it is to be remembered, are distinct subjects of Beauty from the Ornaments with which they are embellished, from the Magnificence with which they are executed, from the purposes of Elegance they are intended to serve, or the scenes of Grandeur they are destined to adorn. It is in such scenes, however, and with such additions, that we are accustomed to observe them; and while we feel the effect of all these accidental Associations, we are seldom willing to examine what are the causes of the complex Emotion we feel, and readily attribute to the nature of the Architecture itself, the whole pleasure which we enjoy. But besides these, there are other Associations we have with these Forms, that still more powerfully serve to command our admiration; for they are the Grecian orders; they derive their origin from those times, and were the ornament of those countries, which are most hallowed in our imaginations; and it is difficult for us to see them, even in their modern copies, without feeling them operate upon our minds, as reliques of those polished nations where they first arose, and of that greater people by whom they were afterwards borrowed. While this species of Architecture is attended with so many and so pleasing Associations, it is difficult even for a man of reflection to distinguish between the different sources of his Emotion; or in the moments in which this delight is felt, to ascertain what is the exact portion of his pleasure which is to be attributed to these Proportions alone; and two different
[Page 368]
causes combine to lead us to attribute to the style of Architecture itself, the Beauty which arises from many other Associations. In the first place, while it is under our eye, this Architecture itself is the great object of our regard, and the central object of all these Associations. It is the material sign, in fact, of all the various affecting qualities which are connected with it, and it disposes us in this, as in every other case, to attribute to the sign, the effect which is produced by the qualities signified. When we reflect, upon the other hand, in our calmer moments, upon the source of our Emotion, another motive arises to induce us to consider these Proportions as the sole or the principal cause of our pleasure; for these Proportions are the only qualities of the object, which are perfectly or accurately ascertained; they have received the assent of all ages since their discovery: they are the acknowledged objects of Beauty; and having thus got possession of one undoubted principle, our natural love of system, induces us to ascribe the whole of the effect to this principle alone, and easily satisfies our minds by saving us the trouble of a long and tedious investigation. That this cause has had its full effect in this case, will, I believe, appear very evident to those, who attend to the enthusiasm with which, in general, the writers in Architecture speak of the Beauty of Proportion, and compare it with the common sentiments of men upon the subject of this Beauty. Both these causes conspire to mislead our judgment in this point, and to induce us to attribute to one quality in such
[Page 369]
objects, that Beauty which in truth results from many united qualities.
It will be found, I believe, on the other hand, that the real Beauty of such Proportions, is in fact not greater than that which we feel in many cases where we perceive means properly adapted to their End; and that the admiration we feel from the prospect of the orders of Antiquity, is necessarily to be ascribed to other causes besides these Proportions. The common people, undoubtedly, feel a very inferior Emotion of Beauty from such objects, to that which is felt by men of liberal education, because they have none of those Associations which modern education so early connects with them. The Man of Letters feels also a weaker Emotion than that which is felt by the Connoisseur or the Architect, because he has none of the Associations which belong to the Art, and never considers them in relation to the genius or skill, or invention which they display. Deprive these orders, in the same manner, of their customary ornaments, and leave only the great and governing Proportions; or change only, in the slightest degree their Forms, without altering these Proportions, and their Beauty will be in a great measure destroyed. Preserve, on the other hand, the whole of the orders, but diminish in a great degree their scale; and though they will still be beautiful, yet their Beauty will be infinitely inferior to that which they have upon their usual scale of magnificence. It is possible, in
[Page 370]
the Form of a Candlestick, or some other trifling utensil, to imitate with accuracy, any of these orders. It is possible in many of the common articles of furniture, to imitate some of the greatest models of this Art; but who does not know that their great Beauty in such an employment would be lost? Yet still their Proportions are the same, if their Proportions are the sole cause of their Beauty. Destroy in the same manner, all the Associations of Elegance, of Magnificence, of Costliness, and still more than all, of Antiquity, which are so strongly connected with such Forms, and I conceive every man will acknowledge, that the pleasure which their Proportions would afford, would not in fact be greater than that which we feel in other cases, where means are properly adapted to their End.
With regard to the second objection, viz . That the uniform adherence of mankind to these Proportions, is in itself a sufficient proof of their sole or absolute Beauty; I conceive that many other causes of this adherence may be assigned, and that these causes are sufficient to account for the effect, without supposing any peculiar law of our nature, by which such Proportions are originally beautiful. They who have had opportunities of remarking the extensive influence which the Associations of Antiquity have upon our minds, will be convinced, that this cause alone has had a very powerful effect in producing this uniformity of opinion: and they who consider, that the real effect of Proportion
[Page 371]
is to produce only a very moderate delight, will easily perceive, that an almost unsurmountable obstacle has been placed to every invention or improvement in this Art, when such inventions could oppose only a calm and rational pleasure, to that enthusiasm which is founded upon so many, and so interesting Associations.
But besides these, there are other causes in the nature of the Art itself, which sufficiently account for the permanence of taste upon this subject. In every production of human Labour, the influence of Variety is limited by two circumstances, viz . by the costliness, and the permanence of the materials upon which that Labour is employed. Wherever the materials of any object, whether of use or of luxury, are costly, wherever the original price of such subjects is great, the influence of the love of Variety is diminished: the objects have a great intrinsic value, independent of their particular Form or Fashion; and as the destruction of the Form, is in most cases the destruction of the subject itself, the same Form is adhered to with little Variation. In Dress, for instance, in which the Variation of Fashion is more observable than in most other subjects, it is those parts of Dress which are least costly, of which the Forms are most frequently changed: in proportion as the original value increases, the disposition to Variety diminishes; and in some objects, which are extremely costly, as in the case of jewels, there is no change of Fashion whatever, except in
[Page 372]
circumstances different from the value of the objects themselves, as in their setting or disposition. Of all the fine Arts, however, Architecture is by far the most costly. The wealth of individuals is frequently dissipated by it: and even the revenue of nations, is equal only to very slow, and very infrequent productions of this kind. The value, therefore, of such objects, is in a great measure independent of their Forms; the invention of men is little excited to give an additional value to subjects, which in themselves are so valuable; and the Art itself, after it has arrived at a certain necessary degree of perfection, remains in a great measure stationary, both from the infrequency of cases in which invention can be employed, and from the little demand there is for the exercise of that invention. The nature of the Grecian orders very plainly indicates, that they were originally executed in wood, and that they were settled before the Greeks had begun to make use of stone in their buildings. From the period that stone was employed, and that of course public buildings became more costly, little farther progress seems to have been made in the Art. The costliness of the subject, in this as in every other case, gave a kind of permanent value to the Form by which it was distinguished.
If, besides the costliness of the subject, it is also permanent or durable, this character is still farther increased. Those productions, of which the materials are perishable, and must often be renewed, are from their nature subjected
[Page 373]
to me influence of Variety. Chairs and Tables, for instance, and the other common articles of Furniture, cannot well last above a few years, and very often not so long. In such articles accordingly, there is room for the invention of the Artist to display itself, and as the subject itself is of no very great value, and may derive a considerable one from its Form, a strong motive is given to the exercise of this invention. But Buildings may last, and are intended to last for centuries. The life of Man is very inadequate to the duration of such productions: and the present period of the world, though old with respect to those Arts, which are employed upon perishable subjects, is yet young in relation to an Art, which is employed upon so durable materials as those of Architecture. Instead of a few years, therefore, centuries must probably pass before such productions demand to be renewed, and long before that period is elapsed, the sacredness of Antiquity is acquired by the subject itself, and a new motive given for the preservation of similar Forms. In every country accordingly, the same effect has taken place: and the same causes which have thus served to produce among us for so many years, an uniformity of Taste with regard to the style of Grecian Architecture, have produced also among the nations of the East, for a much longer course of time, a similar uniformity of Taste with regard to their ornamental style of Architecture; and have perpetuated among them the same Forms, which were in
[Page 374]
use among their forefathers, before the Grecian orders were invented.
It is impossible for me to pursue these speculations, with regard to the foundation of Beauty in Architecture, to the extent to which they would lead. The hints which I have now offered, may perhaps satisfy the Reader, that the Beauty of the External Proportions of Architecture, is to be ascribed to their Expression of Fitness; that this Beauty is in fact not greater than what is often felt from similar Expression in other subjects; and that both the admiration of mankind, and the uniformity of their Taste with regard to the style of Grecian Architecture, is to be ascribed to other causes, than any absolute or independent Beauty in the Proportions by which it is distinguished.
[Page 375]
PART IV.
Of the Internal Proportions of Architecture. By the Internal Proportions of Architecture, I mean that disposition of the three dimensions of Length, Breadth and Height which is necessary to render a room or apartment beautiful or pleasing in its Form. Every man is able at first sight to say, whether a room is well or ill proportioned; although perhaps it is difficult to say, what is the principle from which this propriety is determined. Many of the writers upon Architecture consider certain Proportions of this kind as beautiful from the original constitution of our nature, and without relation to any Expression. I apprehend, on the contrary, that the Beauty of Proportion, in this, as in the former case, arises from its Expression of Fitness.
I have already observed, that a plain wall is susceptible of no other Proportion, than that Proportion of height which is necessary for the Expression of Strength or Stability. If it appears firm and sufficient, it has all the Proportion we desire. Suppose any space inclosed by four walls, the same Proportion remains: we require that the height should be such as to indicate stability, and if this is answered,
[Page 376]
we require no more. The Form of the inclosure may be more or less beautiful, from other causes; but we never say that it is beautiful on account of its Proportion. Add a roof to this inclosure; and immediately a variety of other Proportions are demanded, from the consideration of the weight which is now to be supported. If the walls are very high, they have the appearance of insufficiency for this support: if very low, they indicate an unnecessary and unusual weight in the roof. A certain Proportion therefore in point of height is demanded. If the length of the inclosure is great, the roof appears also to be insufficiently supported, and from the laws of perspective its weight seems to increase as it retires from the Eye. A certain proportion, therefore, in point of Length, is demanded. If in the last case, the breadth of the inclosure is very great, a still stronger conviction of insufficiency arises from the distance of the supporting walls. A certain proportion, therefore, in point of Breadth is demanded, for the same end. Whereever a Form of this kind is produced; wherever walls are united for the support of a roof, these Proportions are necessarily required; and so far are they from being remote from common observation, that there is no man who is not immediately sensible of any great violation of them. Every apartment, however, is an inclosure of this kind. It seems natural, therefore, to imagine, that the Proportions of an apartment will be pleasing, when they appear sufficient for the full and easy support of the roof; and that
[Page 377]
they are beautiful from being expressive of this Fitness. This proposition may perhaps be more obvious from the following considerations:
1. It may be observed, that the real Beauty of Proportion in this case, is not greater than that which attends the Expression of Fitness in other cases; and that this Expression is perfectly sufficient to account for the whole of the delight which men in general feel from these objects. Artists, indeed, very frequently talk with enthusiasm of the Beauty of such Proportions, and are willing to ascribe to the Proportions themselves, that Emotion which they in reality receive from the associations which their art, and their education have connected with them; but whatever may be the language of Artists, the uniform language of the bulk of mankind is very different. What they feel from the appearance of a well proportioned room, is satisfaction, rather than positive delight: they are hurt with the want of Proportion; but they are not greatly enraptured with its presence. What they are delighted with, in apartments where this Beauty has been studied, is their Decoration and their Furniture; the Convenience, or Elegance, or Magnificence which they exhibit. Every one knows, accordingly, that the best proportioned room, before it is finished, and while nothing but its Proportions are discernible, produces only a very calm and moderate pleasure, in no respect greater than that which we feel from a well constructed machine, or
[Page 378]
convenient piece of furniture. Remove even the furniture from the most finished apartment, and the delight which we receive from it is immediately diminished; yet the Proportions are altogether independent of the furniture, and are much more discernible when it is removed. No person, in the same manner, remarks the Proportions of the miserable room of a cottage, or any other mean dwelling; yet the most regular Proportions may, and sometimes are to be found in a cottage. If the apartments in such a building were purposely constructed according to the most rigorous laws of Proportion, I apprehend, that they would produce no Emotion greater than that of simple Satisfaction; yet if these Proportions were themselves originally beautiful, they ought in this case to produce the same delight as in the Senate-house or the Palace. If therefore (as seems to be evident) certain Proportions are demanded in a room, as expressive of Fitness; and if the Emotion that is produced by the established and regular Proportions, is no greater than that which we receive in other cases, from the Expression of this quality, it seems reasonable to conclude, that these Proportions are in fact beautiful, from the Expression of this Fitness.
2. The general language of mankind seems to confirm the same opinion. Whoever has had occasion to attend to the common language of men on this subject, must have observed, that the usual terms by which they express their
[Page 379]
sense of Proportion, or of the want of Proportion in a room, are those of Lightness and Heaviness; terms which obviously suppose the belief of weight and of support, and which could not have been used, if the Beauty of Form, in this case, did not depend upon the Fitness or propriety of this relation. The terms Proportion and Disproportion are in truth altogether unintelligible to the common people; and to describe to them any apartment, in such terms, leaves them as ignorant as ever of its Beauty; but there is hardly any man who does not readily apprehend, that an apartment is of a pleasing Form, when he is told that the walls are neither too high, nor too low, nor too wide for the support of the roof, or who will not as readily apprehend the contrary, when he is told, that in either of these respects, an appearance of insecurity is produced. A room which is low, or wide in the roof, is in general said to be heavy. A room, on the contrary, which is high in the roof, and in which this weight seems to be properly and easily sustained, is said to be light. If we were under the necessity of interpreting to a common person the language of Artists, or of explaining to him in what the Beauty of Form in this respect consists, I apprehend, we should naturally do it, by representing it to him as light, or as so contrived that the support was perfectly adapted to the weight; and, on the other hand, if we were to explain to him in what respect any room was deficient, we should as naturally do it, by pointing out to him where the construction was deficient in
[Page 380]
Fitness, and had the appearance of heaviness or insufficient support. In this manner also, without ever hearing of the terms of Proportion or Disproportion, or considering the subject in any other light than that of Fitness, he might acquire a perfect conception of this Beauty; and be led, in fact, to the same conclusions with regard to the proper composition of these dimensions, that are already established under the title of Proportions. If these Proportions, however, were originally and independently beautiful, no explanation of them from another sense could possibly be intelligible; and the substitution of the term Fitness would be as unmeaning as that of Sound or Colour. I am far from contending, that the generality of men are very accurate in their notions of the propriety of the relation of weight and support; or very proper judges of the perfection of Proportion in this respect. But I apprehend, that the terms of Heaviness and Lightness which they employ, and universally understand, are a sufficient evidence of the principle upon which their judgments are formed, and that they show, that it is from the Expression of Fitness for the support of weight that their admiration is determined.
The same observation which was made with regard to the Progress of Taste, in the external Proportions of this Art, is applicable also to its internal Proportions. If they were originally and independently beautiful, the earlier period of life would be most remarkable for the discovery of them;
[Page 381]
and it would be only in later life, and in proportion to our Experience, that we could discover the additional Beauty which they derive from their Fitness. Every one knows, however, that the real progress is different, that during the years of infancy and childhood no sensibility whatever is shewn to this Beauty; that it is only as our Experience enables us to judge of the relation between weight and support, that we begin to be sensible of it; that they whose occupations have prevented them from forming any very accurate judgment of this kind, are proportionably deficient in the accuracy of their Taste; and that in general, the bulk of mankind have no farther conception of this species of Beauty, than what arises from the consideration of Fitness for the support of weight.
3. If there were any absolute and independent Beauty in such Proportions, it seems reasonable to imagine, that every violation of them would be equally painful; and that the deviation from them in each of these dimensions, would be attended with a similar Emotion of Discontent. All these Proportions relate either to the Height, the Length, or the Breadth of an apartment. Every man, however, must have observed, that it is with very different feelings he regards the want of Proportion in these three respects. Too great a Height in a room is not nearly so painful as too little Height; and too great a length produces a trifling Emotion of Discontent, compared with that which we feel from
[Page 382]
too great Breadth. Whether a room is a few feet too high, or too long. few people observe; but every one observes a much less disproportion, either in the diminution of its Height, or in the extent of its Breadth. The most general faults, accordingly, which common people find with apartments, is either in their being too low, or too broad. The Proportions of Height and Length they seldom attend to, if they are not greatly violated. These facts, though not easily reconcileable with the doctrine of the absolute Beauty of these Proportions, agree very minutely with the account which I have given of the origin of this Beauty. If this Beauty arises from the Expression of Fitness; the Proportions, of which the violation should affect us the most, ought to be those which are most necessary for the production of this Fitness. These, however, very obviously, are either too little Height, or too great Breadth; the first immediately indicating an unusual weight in the roof, and the other expressing the greatest possible insufficiency for the support of this weight. The most unpleasing Form of an apartment, accordingly, that it is possible to contrive, is that of being at the same time very broad, and very low in the roof. Too great Height, and too great length, on the other hand have not so disagreeable Expressions. By the first, at least, Fitness is, in no material degree, violated, and what we feel from it is chiefly a slight Emotion of Discontent, from its being unsuited to the general character or destination of rooms. Our indifference to the second disproportion,
[Page 383]
or to too great length, arises from a different cause, viz . from our knowledge that the Beams which support the roof are laid latitudinally, and our consequent belief that the difference of Length makes no difference with regard to the sufficiency of support. Change, accordingly, in any apartment, this disposition of the beams; let the Spectator perceive, that they are placed according to the length, and not as usual according to the breadth of the room; and whatever may be its other dimensions, or however great length these dimensions may require, no greater length will be permitted without pain, than that which is expressive of perfect sufficiency in the beams for the support of the roof. As there is thus no uniform Emotion which attends the perception of these Proportions, as would necessarily be the case, if their Beauty were perceived by any peculiar sense; and as the Emotion which we, in fact, receive from them, is different, according to their different Expressions of Fitness, it seems reasonable to ascribe their Beauty to this Expression, and not to any original Beauty in the Proportions themselves.
4. If there were any original Beauty in such Proportions, they would necessarily be as certain as the objects of any other sense; and there would be one precise proportion of the three dimensions of Length, Breadth and Height, solely and permanently beautiful. Every one knows, however, that this is not the case; no Artist has ever presumed to fix
[Page 384]
on such Proportions; and so far is there from being any permanent Beauty in any one relation of these dimensions, that the same Proportions which are beautiful in one apartment, are not beautiful in others. From whatever causes these variations in the Beauty of Proportion arise, they conclude immediately against the doctrine of their original Beauty. There seem, however, to be three principal causes of this difference in our opinion of the Beauty of Proportion, which I must confine myself barely to mention, without attempting the full illustration of them.
1. The first is the consideration of the weight supported. As all roofs are supported by the side walls, and composed in general of the uniform material of wood, there is a certain, though not a very precise limit which we impose to their breadth, from our knowledge that if they pass this limit, they are insufficient and insecure. To the length and to the height, on the other hand, we do not impose any such rigorous limits, because neither of these Proportions interfere materially with our opinion of security. Within this limit of breadth, there may be several Proportions to the length and height, which shall be universally pleasing. But beyond this limit, these Proportions cease to be pleasing, and become painful in the same degree that they pass this boundary of apparent security. Thus, a room of twelve feet square, may constitute a pleasing Form; but a room of sixty feet square would be positively disagreeable. A room
[Page 385]
twenty-four feet in length, by eighteen in breadth, may be sufficiently pleasing; but a room sixty feet in length, by fifty in breadth, would constitute a very unpleasing Form. Many other instances might easily be produced, to show, that the Beauty of every apartment depends on the appearance of proper support to the roof; and that on this account, the same proportion of breadth that is beautiful in one case, becomes positively painful in others.
2. A second cause of this difference in our opinion of the Beauty of Proportion, arises from the character of the apartment. Every one must have observed, that the different Forms of rooms, their difference of magnitude, and various other causes, give them distinct characters, as those of Gaiety, Simplicity, Solemnity, Grandeur, Magnificence, &c . No room is ever beautiful, which has not some such pleasing character; the terms by which we express this Beauty are significant of these characters; and however regular the Proportions of an apartment may be, if they do not correspond to the general Expression, we consider the Form as defective or imperfect. Thus, the same Proportion of height which is beautiful in a room of Gaiety, or Cheerfulness, would be felt as a defect in an apartment of which the character was Severity or Melancholy. The same Proportion of length which is pleasing in an elegant or convenient room, would be a defect in an apartment of Magnificence or Splendour. The great Proportion of breadth which suits a Temple or a
[Page 386]
Senate-house, as according with the severe and solemn character of the apartment, would be positively unpleasing in any room which was expressive of Cheerfulness or Lightness. In proportion also, as apartments differ in size, different Proportions become necessary in this respect, to accord with the characters which the difference of Magnitude produces. The same Proportion of height which is pleasing in a cheerful room, would be too little for the hall of a great castle, where vastness is necessary to agree with the sublimity of its character; and the same relation of Breadth and Height which is so wonderfully affecting in the Gothic Cathedral, although at variance with all the rules of Proportion, would be both absurd and painful, in the Forms of any common apartment. In general, I believe it will be found, that the great and positive Beauty of apartments arises from their character; that where no character is discovered, the generality of men express little admiration even at the most regular Proportions; that every difference of character requires a correspondent difference in the composition of the dimensions; and that this demand is satisfied, or a beautiful Form produced, only when the composition of the different Proportions is such as to produce one pure and unmingled Expression.
3. The third cause of the difference of our opinion of the Beauty of Proportion arises from the destination of the apartment. All apartments are intended for some use or purpose
[Page 387]
of human life. We demand, therefore, that the Form of them should be accommodated to these Ends; and whereever the Form is at variance with the End, however regular, or generally beautiful its Proportions may be, we are conscious of an Emotion of dissatisfaction and discontent. The most obvious illustration of the dependence of the Beauty of Proportion, on this species of utility, may be taken from the common system that natural Taste has dictated in the Proportion of different apartments in great houses. The hall, the saloon, the antichamber, the drawing-room, the dining-room, the bed-chamber, the dressing-room, the library, the chapel, &c . have all different Forms and different Proportions. Change these Proportions; give to the dining-room the Proportions of the saloon, to the dressing-room those of the library, to the chapel the Proportions of the antichamber, or to the drawing-room those of the hall, &c . and every one will consider them as unpleasing and defective Forms, because they are unfitted to the Ends they are destined to serve.
The observations which I have now offered on the Beauty of the Internal Proportions of Architecture, seem to afford sufficient evidence for concluding in general,
That the Beauty of these Proportions is not original and independent, but that it arises in all cases from the Expression of some species of Fitness.
[Page 388]
The Fitness, however, which such Proportions may express, is of different kinds; and the Reader who will pursue the slight hints that I have suggested upon the subject, may perhaps agree with me in the following conclusions:
1. That one Beauty of these Proportions arises from their Expression of Fitness for the support of the weight imposed.
2. That a second source of their Beauty consists in their Expression of Fitness for the preservation of the character of the apartment.
3. That a third source of their Beauty consists in their Expression of Fitness, in the general Form, for its peculiar purpose or End.
The two first Expressions constitute the Permanent Beauty, and the third the Accidental Beauty of an apartment.
In every beautiful apartment the two first Expressions must be united. An apartment, of which the Proportions express the most perfect Fitness for the support of the roof, but which is itself expressive of no character, is beheld rather with satisfaction than delight, and is never remarked
[Page 389]
as beautiful. The Beauty of character, on the other hand, is neglected, if the Proportions of the apartment are such as to indicate insufficiency or insecurity. The first constitutes what may be called the Negative, and the second the Positive Beauty of an apartment; and every apartment (considered only in relation to its Proportions, and without any respect to its End) will be beautiful in the same degree in which these Expressions are united, or in which the same Proportions that produce the appearance of perfect sufficiency, agree also in maintaining the general character of the apartment.
When, however, the apartment is considered in relation to its End, the Beauty of its Proportions is determined in a great measure by their Expression of Fitness for this End. To this, as to every other species of apartment, the Expression of security is necessary, and such an apartment will accordingly be beautiful, when these Expressions coincide.
The most perfect Beauty that the Proportions of an apartment can exhibit, will be when all these Expressions unite; or when the same relations of dimension which are productive of the Expression of sufficiency, agree also in the preservation of Character, and in the indication of Use.
[Page 390]
PART III. Of the Influence of Utility upon the Beauty of Forms. The third source of the Relative Beauty of Forms, is Utility . That the Expression of this quality is sufficient to give Beauty to Forms, and that Forms of the most different and opposite kinds become beautiful from this Expression, are facts which have often been observed, and which are within the reach of every person's observation. I shall not therefore presume to add any illustrations on a subject, which has already been so beautifully illustrated by Mr Smith , in the most eloquent work 3 on the subject of Morals , that Modern Europe has produced.
[Page 391]
SECTION III. Of the Accidental Beauty of Forms. Beside the Expressions that have now been enumerated, and which constitute the two great and permanent sources of the Beauty of Forms, there are others of a casual or accidental kind, which have a very observable effect in producing the same Emotion in our minds, and which constitute what may be called the Accidental Beauty of Forms. Such associations, instead of being common to all mankind, are peculiar to the individual. They take their rise from education, from peculiar habits of thought, from situation, from profession; and the Beauty they produce is felt only by those whom similar causes have led to the formation of similar associations. There are few men who have not associations of this kind, with particular Forms, from their being familiar to them from their infancy, and thus connected with the gay and pleasing imagery of that period of life; from their connection with scenes to which they look back with pleasure; or people whose memories they love: and such Forms, from this accidental connection, are never seen, without being in some measure the
[Page 392]
Signs of all those affecting and endearing recollections. When such associations are of a more general kind, and are common to many individuals, they sometimes acquire a superiority over the more permanent principles of Beauty, and determine even for a time the Taste of nations. The admiration which is paid to the Forms of Architecture, of Furniture, of Ornament, which we derive from Antiquity, though undoubtedly very justly due to these Forms themselves, originates in the greater part of mankind, from the associations which they connect with these Forms. These associations, however, are merely accidental; and were these Forms much inferior in point of Beauty, the admiration which Modern Europe bestows on them, would not be less enthusiastic than it is now. There are even cases where, in a few years, the Taste of a nation, in such respects, undergoes an absolute change, from associations of a different kind becoming general or fashionable, and where the beautiful form is always found to correspond to the prevailing association. They who are learned in the History of Dress, will recollect many instances of this kind. In every other species of ornament it is also observable. A single instance will be sufficient.
In the succession of Fashions which have taken place in the article of ornamental Furniture, within these few years, every one must have observed how much their Beauty has been determined by accidental associations of this kind, and
[Page 393]
how little the real and permanent Beauty of such Forms has been regarded. Some years ago, every article of this kind was made in what was called the Chinese Taste, and however fantastic and uncouth the Forms in reality were, they were yet universally admired, because they brought to mind those images of Eastern magnificence and splendour, of which we have heard so much, and which we are always willing to believe, because they are distant. To this succeeded the Gothic Taste. Every thing was now made in imitation, not indeed of Gothic furniture, but in imitation of the Forms and ornament of Gothic Halls and Cathedrals. This slight association, however, was sufficient to give Beauty to such Forms, because it led to ideas of Gothic manners and adventure, which had become fashionable in the world, from many beautiful Compositions both in Prose and Verse. The Taste which now reigns is that of the Antique . Every thing we now use, is made in imitation of those models which have been lately discovered in Italy; and they serve in the same manner to occupy our imagination, by leading to those recollections of Grecian or Roman Taste, which have so much the possession of our minds, from the studies and amusements of our youth.
I shall only further observe upon this subject, that all such instances of the effect of accidental Expression, in bestowing a temporary Beauty upon Forms, conclude immediately
[Page 394]
against the doctrine of their absolute or independent Beauty; and that they afford a very strong presumption, if not a direct proof, that their permanent Beauty arises also from the Expressions they permanently convey to us.
[Page 395]
From the illustrations that I have offered in this long chapter, on the Beauty of Forms , we seem to have sufficient reason for concluding in general, that no Forms, or species of Forms, are in themselves originally beautiful; but that their Beauty in all cases arises from their being expressive to us of some pleasing or affecting Qualities.
If the views also that I have presented on the subject are just, we may perhaps still farther conclude, that the principal sources of the Beauty of Forms are, 1 st , The Expressions we connect with peculiar Forms, either from the Form itself, or the nature of the subject thus formed. 2 dly , The qualities of Design, and Fitness, and Utility which they indicate: And, 3 dly , The accidental Associations which we happen to connect with them. The consideration of these different Expressions may afford perhaps some general rules, that may not be without their use, to those Arts that are employed in the production of Beauty.
All Forms are either Ornamental or Useful.
I. The Beauty of merely Ornamental Forms appears to arise from three sources.
1. From the Expression of the Form itself.
[Page 396]
2. From the Expression of Design.
3. From Accidental Expression.
The real and positive Beauty, therefore, of every Ornamental Form, will be in proportion to the nature and the permanence of the Expression by which it is distinguished. The strongest and most permanent Emotion, however, we can receive from such Expressions, is that which arises from the nature of the Form itself. The Emotion we receive from the Expression of Design, as I have already shown, is neither so strong nor so permanent; and that which accidental Associations produce, perishes often with the year which gave it birth. The Beauty of accidental Expression, is as variable as the caprice or fancy of mankind. The Beauty of the Expression of Design, varies with every period of Art. The Beauty which arises from the Expression of Form itself, is alone permanent, as founded upon the uniform constitution of the human mind. Considering therefore the Beauty of Forms as constituted by the degree and the permanence of their Expression, the following conclusions seem immediately to suggest themselves:
1. That the greatest Beauty which Ornamental Forms can receive, will be that which arises from the Expression of the Form itself.
[Page 397]
2. That the next will be that which arises from the Expression of Design or Skill. And,
3. That the least will be that which arises from accidental or temporary Expression.
In all those Arts, therefore, that respect the Beauty of Form, it ought to be the unceasing study of the Artist, to disengage his mind from the accidental Associations of his age, as well as the common prejudices of his Art; to labour to distinguish his productions by that pure and permanent expression, which may be felt in every age; and to disdain to borrow a transitory fame, by yielding to the temporary caprices of his time, or by exhibiting only the display of his own dexterity or skill. Or if the accidental Taste of mankind must be gratified, it is still to be remembered, that it is only in those Arts, which are employed upon perishable subjects, that it can be gratified with safety; that in those greater productions of Art, which are destined to last for centuries, the fame of the Artist must altogether depend upon the permanence of the Expression, which he can communicate to his work; and that the only Expression which is thus permanent, and which can awaken the admiration of every succeeding age, is that which arises from the Nature of Form itself, and which is founded upon the uniform constitution of Man and of Nature.
[Page 398]
II. The Beauty of Useful Forms, arises either from the Expression of Fitness, or of Utility.
With regard to this species of Beauty, it is necessary at present only to observe, 1 st , That it is in itself productive of a much weaker Emotion, than that which arises from the different sources of ornamental Beauty; but, 2 d , That this Emotion is of a more constant and permanent kind, and much more uniformly fitted to excite the admiration of mankind.
To unite these different kinds of Beauty; to dignify Ornamental Forms also by Use, and to raise merely Useful Forms into Beauty, is the great object of ambition among every class of Artists. Wherever both these objects can be attained, the greatest possible Beauty that Form can receive, will be produced; but as this can very seldom be the case, the following rules seem immediately to present themselves, for the direction of the Artist.
1. That where the Utility of Forms is equal, that will be the most beautiful to which the most pleasing Expression of Form is given.
2. That when those Expressions are at variance, when the Utility of the Form cannot be produced, without sacrificing its natural Beauty, or when this beauty of Form cannot be
[Page 399]
preserved without sacrificing its utility, that Form will be most universally and most permanently beautiful, in which the Expression of Utility is most fully preserved.
To human Art indeed, this union will always be difficult, and often impossible; and the Artist, whatever may be his genius, must be content to suffer that Sublime distress, which a great mind alone can feel, “to dedicate his life to the attainment of an ideal Beauty, and to die at last without attaining it 4 .” Yet, if it is painful to us to feel the limits that are thus imposed to the invention of Man, it is still more pleasing to us, from the narrow schools of human Art, to turn our regard to the great school of Nature, and to observe the stupendous wisdom with which these Expressions are united in almost every Form. “And here, I think,” says Mr Hogarth , “will be the proper place to speak of a most curious difference between the living machines of Nature in respect of Fitness, and such poor ones in comparison with them, as men are only capable of making. A Clock, by the Government's order has been made by Mr Harrison for the keeping of true time at sea; which is perhaps one of the most exquisite movements ever made. Happy the ingenious Contriver! although the Form of the whole, or of every part of this curious Machine should be ever so confused, or displeasingly shaped to the eye, and although even its movements
[Page 400]
should be disagreeable to look at, provided it answers the end proposed: an ornamental composition was no part of his scheme, otherwise than as a polish might be necessary; if ornaments are required to be added to mend its shape, care must be taken that they are no obstruction to the movement itself, and the more as they would be superfluous as to the main design. But, in Nature's machines, how wonderfully do we see Beauty and Use go hand in hand! Had a Machine for this purpose been Nature's work, the whole and every individual part might have had exquisite Beauty of Form, without danger of destroying the exquisiteness of its motion, even as if ornament had been the sole aim; its movements too might have been graceful without one superfluous tittle added for either of these lovely purposes. Now this is that curious difference between the Fitness of Nature's Machines, and those made by mortal hands.”
The application of this fine observation, to innumerable instances both of inanimate and animated Forms, it is in the power of every one to make; and, I am much more willing to leave the impression which it must make upon every mind entire, than to weaken it by any illustrations of my own.
[Page 401]
CHAPTER V. Of the Beauty and Sublimity of Motion. Motion is in many cases productive of the Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty. With this quality, accordingly, we have many interesting and affecting Associations. These Associations arise either from the nature of Motion itself, or from the nature of the bodies moved. The following illustrations may perhaps show, that the Beauty and Sublimity of Motion arises from these Associations, and that we have no reason to believe, that this quality of Matter, is in itself either beautiful or sublime.
I. All Motion is produced either by visible or invisible power; by some cause which we perceive, or by some which is not the object of Sense.
[Page 402]
With all Motions of the latter kind, we connect the idea of voluntary Power; and such Motions are in fact expressive to us of the exertion of Power. Whether this Association is the consequence of Experience, or whether it is the effect of an original Principle, it is not at present material to enquire. The instance of children, and even of animals, who uniformly infer life, where they perceive Motion without any material cause, are sufficient evidences of the fact.
That the Sublimity and Beauty of Motion arises from their Expression of Power, seems to be evident from the two following considerations:
1. There is no instance where Motion, which is the apparent effect of Force, is beautiful or sublime. It is impossible to conceive the Motion of a body that is dragged or visibly impelled by another body, as either sublime or beautiful.
2. All beautiful or sublime Motion is expressed in language by verbs in the active voice. We say even in common language, that a torrent pours,—a stream glides,—a rivulet winds,—that lightning darts,—that light streams.—Change these Expressions, by means of any verbs in the passive voice, and the whole Beauty of their Motion is destroyed. In poetical Composition, the same circumstance is uniformly observable. If Motion were in itself beautiful
[Page 403]
or sublime, or if any particular kinds of Motion were so, these circumstances could not happen; and such Motions would still be beautiful or sublime, whether they were expressive of Power or not.
The character of Power varies according to its degree, and produces according to this difference, different Emotions in our mind. Great Power produces an Emotion of Awe and Admiration. Gentle or moderate, or diminutive Power, produces an Emotion of Tenderness, of Interest, of Affection. To every species of Power that is pleasing, the idea of superiority to obstacle is necessary. All Power, whether great or small, which is inferior to obstacle, induces the idea of Imperfection, and is considered with a kind of dissatisfaction.
These considerations will probably explain a great part of the absolute Sublimity and Beauty of Motion.
Motion differs according to its Degree , and according to its Direction.
I. Of the Degree of Motion . All Motion, when rapid, is, I apprehend, accompanied with the idea of great Power. When slow, on the other hand, with the idea of gentle or diminutive Power. For the truth of this remark,
[Page 404]
I must appeal to the Reader's own observation. Rapid Motion, accordingly, is sublime, slow Motion beautiful.
II. Of the Direction of Motion . Motion is either in a straight Line, in an angular Line, or in a serpentine or curvilinear Line.
1. Motion in a straight Line chiefly derives its Expression from its Degree. When rapid, it is simply sublime: When slow, it is simply beautiful.
2. Motion in an angular Line, is expressive of Obstruction, or of imperfect Power. When considered therefore in itself, and without relation to the body moving, it is simply unpleasing.
3. Motion in Curves, is expressive of Ease, of Freedom, of Playfulness, and is consequently beautiful.
The truth of this account of our Associations with Motion, I refer to the examination of the Reader. The real Beauty and Sublimity of the different appearances of Motion, seem to me, to correspond very accurately with the Expressions which the different combinations of the Degree, and the Direction of Motion, convey to us.
[Page 405]
1. Rapid Motion, in a straight line, is simply expressive of great Power. It is accordingly, in general, Sublime. Rapid Motion in angular Lines, is expressive of great, but of imperfect Power, of a power which every obstacle is sufficient to overcome. I believe, that Motion of this kind, is accordingly very seldom Sublime. Rapid Motion in curve Lines is expressive of great Power, united with Ease, Freedom, or Playfulness. Motion of this kind accordingly, though more Sublime than the preceding, is less Sublime than the first species of Motion. The course of a Torrent, when in a straight Line, is more sublime, than when it winds into Curves, and much more sublime than when it is broken into Angles. The impetuous shooting of the Eagle would lose much of its sublimity, if it were to deviate from the straight Line, and would be simply painful, if it were to degenerate into an angular Line.
2. Slow Motion in a straight Line, is simply expressive of gentle and delicate Power. It is accordingly beautiful. Slow Motion in angular Lines, is expressive of gentle Power, and of imperfection or obstruction. These expressions, however, do not well accord, and mutually destroy each other. Motion of this kind, is, accordingly, very seldom beautiful. Slow Motion in Curves, is expressive of gentle Power, united with Ease, Freedom, and Playfulness. It is accordingly peculiarly beautiful. The soft gliding of a Stream, the
[Page 406]
light traces of a summer Breeze upon a field of corn, are beautiful when in a straight Line; they are much more beautiful when they describe serpentine or winding Lines: but they are scarcely beautiful, when their direction is in sharp angles, and sudden deviations.
The most sublime Motion, is that of rapid Motion in a straight Line. The most beautiful, is that of slow Motion in a line of Curves. I humbly apprehend, that these conclusions are not very distant from common experience upon this subject.
[Page 407]
II. Besides these, however, which may be called the permanent Expressions of Motion, there are others which arise from the nature of the bodies moved, and which have a very obvious effect in giving Beauty or Sublimity to the peculiar Motions by which they are distinguished. Instances of this kind are so familiar, that it will be necessary only to point out a few.
Slow Motion is, in general, simply beautiful. Where however, the body is of great magnitude, slow Motion is sublime. The slow Motion of a first rate Man of War; the slow Ascent of a great Balloon; the slow March of an embattled Army, are all sublime Motions, and no person can observe
The cloud stupenduous, from th' Atlantic wave,
High tow'ring sail along the horizon blue,
without an Emotion of this kind.
Rapid Motion is in general Sublime, yet where the bodies excite only pleasing or moderate affections, Motion of this
[Page 408]
kind becomes beautiful. The rapid shooting of the Aurora Borealis, the quick ascent of Fire-works, a sudden stream of light from a small luminous object in the dark, are familiar instances of this kind. The Motion of the humming Bird is more rapid perhaps than that of the Eagle, yet the Motion of the humming Bird is only beautiful.
Motion in angular Lines, is in general, productive of an Emotion of discontent, rather than of any Emotion either of Sublimity or Beauty. Yet the Motion of Lightning, which is commonly of this kind, is strikingly Sublime. The same appearance in electrical Experiments, is beautiful.
Slow Motion in waving Lines, is in general the most beautiful of all. But the Motion of Snakes or of Serpents, is of all others the most disagreeable and painful.
In these instances, and many others that might be mentioned, it is obvious, that the Sublimity or Beauty of the Motion arises from the Expression or Character of the Bodies moved, and that in such cases, the Expression of the Body predominates over the general Expression which we associate with the Motion by which it is distinguished.
From the facts I have mentioned, we may conclude:
[Page 409]
1 st , That the Beauty and Sublimity of Motion, arises from the Associations we connect either with the Motion itself, or with the Bodies moved. And,
2 dly , That this Sublimity or Beauty, in any particular case will be most perfect, when the Expression of the Motion, and that of the Body moved, coincide.
[Page 410]
CONCLUSION. The illustrations that have been offered in the course of this Essay on the Origin of the Sublimity and Beauty of some of the principal Qualities of Matter , seem to afford us sufficient evidence, for the following conclusions:
I. That with each of these qualities, we have some pleasing or affecting Association; and,
II. That when these Associations are dissolved, or, in other words, when the Material Qualities cease to be significant of the Associated Qualities, they cease also to produce the Emotions of Sublimity or Beauty.
If these points are established, it appears necessarily to follow, that the Beauty and Sublimity of such objects, is to be ascribed not to the Material, but to the Associated Qualities; and of consequence, that the Qualities of Matter are not to be considered as sublime or beautiful in themselves, but as either sublime or beautiful from their being the Signs or Expressions of qualities capable of producing Emotion.
[Page 411]
The opinion I have now stated, coincides, in a great degree, with a Doctrine that appears very early to have distinguished the Platonic School; which has been maintained in this country by several Writers of eminence, by Lord Shaftesbury , Dr Hutcheson , Dr Akenside , and Dr Spence ; and which has of late been supported by Dr Reid , in his Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man ; a Work, in which, by a successful application of the true principles of philosophical Inquiry to the Theory of the human Mind, he has contributed more than any of his Predecessors, to illustrate that important Science. The doctrine, I mean, is, that Matter is not beautiful in itself, but derives its Beauty from the Expression of Mind.
If by this doctrine it is only meant, that Matter is not beautiful in itself, without reference to Mind ; and that its Beauty arises from the Expressions which an intelligent Mind connects with, and perceives in it, I readily agree to it; and perhaps the preceding illustrations may afford it some farther confirmation, by pointing out, more minutely than has hitherto been done, some of the principal classes of these Expressions.
But if it is further meant, that Matter is beautiful only, by being expressive of the proper Qualities of Mind ,
[Page 412]
and that all the Beauty of the Material , as well as of the Intellectual World, is to be found in Mind and its Qualities alone, there seems some reason for hesitation before we admit this conclusion. That the only Subjects of our knowledge are Matter and Mind, cannot be denied; but it does not follow, that all the Qualities with which we are acquainted, must be the proper Qualities either of Body or of Mind. There are a number of Qualities which arise from Relation ; from the relation of different bodies or parts of bodies to each other; from the relation of Body to Mind; and from the relation of different Qualities of Mind to each other, that are as much the objects of our knowledge, and as frequently the objects of our attention, as any of the proper qualities either of Body or Mind. Many qualities also of this kind, are productive of Emotion. Thus, that Quality which we call Novelty , or the peculiar relation of an object, to the Mind to which it is new: that Quality which we call Harmony , in every species of Composition; or the proper correspondence of every individual part, to the production of the general effect: Fitness , or the proper relation of Means to an End; Utility , or the relation of objects to the Convenience or Happiness of Man, &c . although the proper Qualities neither of Body nor of Mind, are yet capable of affecting us with very strong Emotions, and are undoubtedly very common sources of Beauty in the Material World.
[Page 413]
Instead therefore of concluding, that the Beauty and Sublimity of Matter arises from the Expression of the Qualities of Mind , we shall rest, in a more humble, but, as I apprehend, a more definite conclusion,
That the Beauty and Sublimity of the Qualities of Matter, arise from their being the Signs or Expressions of such Qualities as are fitted by the constitution of our Nature, to produce Emotion.
[Page 414]
The illustrations in the second chapter of the First Essay , are intended to show, that no Objects or Qualities in Objects, are felt either as beautiful or sublime, but such as are productive of some Simple Emotion.
The illustrations in the Second Essay , are intended to show, that all the various Qualities of Matter , are beautiful or sublime only, from being expressive of Qualities capable of producing Emotion.
If these illustrations are just, we seem to have sufficient reason for this general conclusion, That no other Qualities are fitted to produce the Emotions of Sublimity and Beauty, but such as are productive of some Simple Emotion.
It is here, however, that the most important difficulty in the Science of Taste arises. Although no other qualities are productive of the Emotions of Taste, but those that are productive of Simple Emotion, we yet every day perceive, that the Qualities that are permanently productive of Simple Emotion, are not as permanently productive of the Emotions of Taste. There is an essential distinction therefore between the nature of these Qualities; and whether in Science or in Art, the accuracy of our conception of the nature
[Page 415]
of the Qualities that produce the Emotions of Taste , will depend upon the precision with which we can distinguish them from those that are productive only of the Simple Emotions of Pleasure.
The illustration of this important fact: the investigation of this distinction; and the application of it, to the different Arts of Taste , will form the Second Part of these Inquiries.
THE END.
NOTES
1 Essay I. Chap. II. Sect. III.
2 Dr Warton.
3 Theory of Moral Sentiments.
4 Sir Joshua Reynolds.
$$$
