Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



^ 



1 

\ 



THE NEW YORK', 

PUBLIC LIBRARY. 



TILr--^' rJcNO/TlONS. 



ro 



A 





FRONTISPIECE. 



FROM NOWHERE 

TO THE 

NORTH POLE. 

fL Noah's Ark-Geological N*rr.ative. 
BY TOM HGOP; 




W. BRUNTON AND E. C. BARNES. 



CHATTO AND WINlj-gS, PICCAUTLLY. 
1875^ 



THt; NLV. ,,r 

PUBLICUBKnK 




TO MY 

PUZZLEDOM PILGRIMS, 

WHO HAVE BEEN OFl'EN IN MY MIND WHILE I WAS WRITING 

THESE PAGES, 

I INSCRIBE THIS WORK. 

TOM HOOD. 




; 1 <^ i- ^^^' 



•i ^'^ 1899. J 




It needs but few words to introduce this book. Its 
central idea and plot are due to my friend E. C. 
Barnes, the Painter, who has been consulted by Mr. 
BruntON, the Artist, and has generally, in fact, super- 
vised the production. For the scheme, then, and the 
Illustrations, I need say no more than that they are 
excellent, and it must be left to the reader to judge 
how far I have succeeded in carrying out the original 
design. 

Beyond this I had to contend with the one difficulty 
which has beset authors from the days of JEsop down 
to the present time — the difficulty of pleasing every- 
body. I had to avoid the Scylla of a narrative suitable 
simply for the little ones, and the Charybdis of a work 



that would be fitted only for the grown-up. I have 
endeavoured to do this by interweaving, with a plain 
fairy story likely to amuse the children, a thread of 
persiflage which may be appreciated by the older reader ; 
and I shall be amply rewarded if I have succeeded in 
"interpreting" the part of the donkey, in the fable of 
^sop to which I have alluded. Provided no one can 
complain, on the one hand, of the youngster riding and 
leaving the father to walk, or, on the other hand, of the 
old man riding and letting the lad trudge, I shall not 
complain at having to carry double. 




Contents. 



CHAPTER ONE. 

Page 
CONCERNING BIRTHDAYS IN GENERAL, AND FRANK'S BIRTH- 



DAY IN PARTICULAR 



CHAPTER TWO. 

OF WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN THE GARDEN . . 1 8 

CHAPTER THREE. 

ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS FRANK SAW IN FAIRYDOM . 33 

CHAPTER FOUR. 

WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS 53 

CHAPTER FIVE. 

HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT ... . -72 

CHAPTER SIX. 

WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN QUADRUPED REM I A . . 92 



via CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER SEVEN. 

CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS AND KING BOW- 

WOWRIUS 107 

CHAPTER EIGHT. 

WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW FRANK CAME BEFORE THE LORD 

CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR 1 29 

CHAPTER NINE. 

HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS 1 47 

CHAPTER TEN. 

TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC . .163 

CHAPTER ELEVEN. 

DESCRIBING HOW FRANK LODGED WITH A HERMIT . .177 

CHAPTER TWELVE. 

IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF AMONG THE WILD WALL- 

PAPERITES . » I9I 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN. 

WHICH REVEALS NOAH'S NOTION OF THE MAITER . . 203 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN. 

WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE . . .212 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN. 
AND FINAL 227 




CHAPTER ONE, 

CONCERNING BIRTHDAYS IN GENERAL, AND FRANK'S 
BIRTHDAY IN PARTICULAR. 

1 T is pleasant to have one birthday a year. To 
have two is confusing, and to have none is dis- 
advantageous. To have one once in two years — 
or, like people born on the 29th of February, to 
have one in four years — is worse than having none 



2 CONCERNING BIRTHDAYS IN GENERAL, AND 

at all. Because, you see, when, counting by years 
you ought to be twenty-one, you are, counting by 
birthdays, only a little more than six — at any rate, 
not quite seven ; and people would be justified in 
giving you a doll if you are a girl, or a box of 
soldiers if you are a boy, as a birthday present, and 
you wouldn't care to play with it. And, really, all 
the use a birthday is to you is that it is an excuse 
or a reason for people giving you pretty presents. 
On that account it is as well not to have your 
birthday on Christmas Day or New Year s Day, 
because it is simply wasting your opportunities. 
As to presents, there is a good deal to be said. 
Some people give you things you don't want, or 
don't care about, and of course it is very kind of 
them, and their intention is excellent, and so you 
ought to be grateful. But, at the same time, there 
are limits to thankfulness. For instance, when I 
was a boy, I had the mumps given me on my 
birthday by a schoolfellow. He meant it well, poor 
fellow ! and I certainly obtained a week or two of 
holiday in order to enjoy them quietly at home ; 



FRANK'S BIRTHDA Y IN PARTICULAR, 3 

but, Still, I was not as deeply grateful as I might 
have been. Of course, one ought to keep birthday 
presents and treasure them up ; but I got rid of 
mine in this case as soon as I could. 

Then there 's a great question as to presents — 
whether they should be such a^ the receiver would 
.choose or like, or such as represent the taste of the 
giver. There is much to be said on both sides ; 
but I have never quite been able to bring myself 
to think, that if my great-aunt Deborah considered 
red nightcaps to be highly becoming, and gave 
me one as a birthday present, it was my duty to go 
through life in it — no I not even if she said it was 
"all for my good," — which is what one's school- 
master used to observe on occasions to which it is 
needless to refer further than to say that the cir- 
cumstances attending them were as unwelcome 
as mumps, though in that comparison extremes 
meet 

These reflections on birthdays arise from the 

fact, that the day on which this veracious chronicle 

begins was the birthday of Master Frank, my hero, 

1 — 2 



THE NEW .\r, . 

POBUCLIBRAK 

161 4H6 

ASTOB, LENOX ■ ,- I 



_ 




FRANK'S BIR THDA Y IN PARTICULAR. 5 

pared with that of woollen and leather. Frank 
might have thrown some light on the inquiry, for 
he had a large assortment of wooden legs ; though, 
to be sure, as he obtained them by amputation 
from his sisters dolls, he was not necessarily 
acquainted with their real market value. Still, if 
any curious mind among my readers is desirous of 
pursuing the question, it seems to me, though I 
am no arithmetician, that it would be possible to 
arrive at the fact without much trouble. The 
price of a wooden doll is a penny — that is, of 
course, if it is a penny doll, which it will be neces- 
sary to ascertain, because a farthing rushlight costs 
a penny. Well, if the price of the doll is one 
Denny, you can arrive, by division, at the price of 
one of its legs. You have next to multiply the 
result by the difference between a wooden doll 
and an able-bodied seaman, subtract the cost of 
the shoes and stockings, and then you can easily 
obtain the solution by an ordinary rule-of-three 
sum. 

I merely mention these anecdotes in order to 



6 CONCERNING THINGS IN GENERAL, AND 

prove that Frank was not an exceptional boy be- 
cause he was discontented ; but 1 may add that if 
wooden legs are the source of contentment, on this 
particular birthday, 'Frank should have been con- 
tented, for his Uncle Dick had added to the stock 
he already possessed (as already mentioned) a 
large assortment, the property of the various birds 
and beasts in one of the largest Noah*s Arks that 
ever bothered a bishop or disconcerted a Darwin. 

I say advisedly wooden legs belonging to birds 
and beasts, to the exclusion of Noah and his 
family, who possessed no ostensible legs, but 
walked on little round stands like green lozenges. 
Under these circumstances, of course, it was very 
lucky that they had the ark with the lid at the 
top to get into, because, when the Flood came, 
they could not have taken to their legs as people 
usually do. 

Frank set out all the procession of animals, and 
then, sitting down in the centre, set himself to 
contemplating them. As I said before, it was a 
very fine Noah's Ark, and there was rather more 



FRANK'S BJRTHDA V IN PARTICULAR, 7 

than the usual attention given to keeping some 
'sort of relative proportion among the creatures. 
For instance, the camelopards were at least a head 
taller than Noah, though certainly the elephants 
only came up to his waist, and the foxes came up 
to the elephant's shoulder; while the raven was 
quite as large as the lion, who, mane and all, was 
no taller than the cock. But then the ducks were 
not more than half as big as the deer, and the 
camels were quite a hump taller than the leopards, 
who had beautiful spotted tails like currant roley- 
poleys. 

It kept Frank amused for a short time to set 
the animals up, because some of them would 
tumble down in such an absurd way. One of the 
foxes especially took a great deal of persuasion 
before he would stand up in his place in the pro- 
cession, and seized the earliest opportunity, when 
Frank was not looking, to tumble down again. 
Such, however, as naturalists assure us, is the 
artful manner of foxes, so that it was all the truer 
to life. 



; ir.y one 
ii 1 wcn- 
'Jr.~.r like 



-^^i.-- -^^ •- " —^■' " ' >=' 

. -■•L-.- J.-'i r;-:-\T';~>/.-!v zV.ti wi:h sand. 

V—- '■^::' rr-Tx-i-i^L L'-haTii-y. the inven- 

.^,^-.-' o"'*: ir.-:re. oa he had never dis- 

- » -jl; "■ ---' "»■"-"- """-- e^-shelU. when they 

■iuL i^" " * •-~-^- '^^^*''^'^^- ^^^ discovery 

^^"^ h-ive been a benent to mankind 

^;: -[jJon. This sort of failure is 



jf*" 




8 CONCERNING THINGS IN GENERAL, AND 

But, by-and-by, when this task was concluded, 
Frank, sitting on a stool in the middle of the pro- 
cession, began to criticise and find fault. He was 
in the habit of thinking himself very clever, and 
fancied he could do things better than any one 
else, besides flattering himself that he had a won- 
derful inventive genius. He was something like 
a boy I once heard of, who constructed a diving- 
bell that would not sink and a life-boat that would 
not swim ; so that, when the latter was launched, 
the crew would have been drowned if the diving- 
bell had not • brought them ashore in safety. 
Frank had once invented a machine, which re- 
sembled a combination of a funnel and an iron 
spoon, and by means of which egg-shells could be 
expeditiously and inexpensively filled with sand, 
or even Bath brick-dust. Unhappily, the inven- 
tion stopped short there, as he had never dis- 
covered what to do with the egg-shells, when they 
were full. But for that drawback, the discovery 
would, no doubt, have been a benefit to mankind 
and an aid to civilization. This sort of failure is 



^ 



■v>-' 



■.•ot3 ■-■•'-' 






FRANK'S BIR THDA Y IN PAR TICULAR, 9 

SO often a drawback to inventions that would 
otherwise make the fortunes of their discoverers, 
that I have always steadily resisted the temptation 
to invent a process by which brown Windsor soap 
could be converted into boot-soles. The man 
who found out how to cut fat pigs out of orange- 
peel died in obscurity, and no statue has ever 
been raised to his memory. 

As he sat looking at the beasts, Frank began to 
fancy he could improve on them, or even design 
others of a superior kind. He found fault with 
them on various grounds. 

'' Why couldn't the elephant have a longer neck, 
so that he could reach down to browse, instead of 
having that thing like a hose stuck on his nose ? 
And then, what a lank, awkward creature the 
giraffe is, on the other hand ; if its neck had been 
half as long, and the trees came down half-way to 
meet it, it would look much better. There 's the 
lion, he lives in the hottest countries, and he wears 
a great thick mane, like a three-times-round com- 
forter. As for the camels, how they can put up 



lo CONCERNING BIRTHDAYS IN GENERAL, AND 

with such humps I can't understand — if they be- 
longed to a Punch-show jt would be different. 
Look at the stag, with those long horns — they 
seem made on purpose to catch in the trees and 
bushes as he runs from the hounds. Ducks and 
fowls, too, and birds of that kind — why should 
they have feathers, which have all * got to be 
plucked off before they are fit to eat ? " 

He went on in this strain for some time, and 
then fell to picturing some of the marvellous crea- 
tures he could invent. There was a steam spoon- 
bill, for instance. Well, it would be mere waste 
of time to point out such an obvious matter as the 
advantage of steam spoonbills. Then there was 
the bull-in-the-box, a very useful creature, because 
when it was broken, as all toys must be sooner or 
later, you could make beef of it. The humpty- 
dumpty ^^^, which could ride on a cock-horse and 
save one the trouble of sending to the shop for it, 
was another excellent idea of Frank's. And then 
his fancy wandered off into a sort of pantomime 
dreamland, among big- heads that, having no 



FRANK'S BIR THDA V IN PARTICULAR. 1 1 

bodies, would require no foad, and so cost nothing 
for their keep. His final and wildest freak of 
fancy had no very clearly useful aim, except as a 
lesson on the pronunciation of the aspirate, being 
a hippopotamus in a Hansom, drawn by a sea- 
horse (that was half herring and half lobster), 
and driven by a hobgoblin. 

Just then Frank's eyes happened to fall on 
Noah and his family. 

" Ha, ha, ha, ha ! " he laughed aloud, '* did any- 
one ever see such funny figures ? Only fit to be 
shaved down into cribbage-pegs — like ninepins 
with Quaker hats on ! Ha, ha, ha, ha ! " 

Of course it was very rude and unkind of him 
to laugh at this highly respectable family group 
to their faces. Even wooden figures have their 
feelings, as anyone knows who has heard of hearts 
of oak. Noah and his sons carried sensitive 
bosoms under their coats of paint, and were 
pained in every fibre by Frank's remarks. But 
he did not heed that ; he still went on — '' Ha, ha, 
ha ! I can set *em all up, and bowl at them with 



12 CONCERNING BIRTHDAYS IN GENERAL, AND 

the tortoise. They *re not much use for anything 
else. Why, a penny doll can move its arms and 
legs, and a threepenny one can screw its head 
round. Just fancy moving about the world on a 
little round green stand, exactly like the wooden 
trees I had in that toy farmyard ! Ha, ha, ha ! " 

The Noachian family looked at one another in 
silence, and Ham, who was the poet of the family, 
is supposed to have written the following touching 
lines on this occasion : 

Two Kinds of Hearts. 

> 

The heart of wood 
Is kind and good, 

The wooden heart is bad. 
Our hearts refuse 
To utter views 

Like yours, my little lad. 
Wood wouldn't — wood wouldn't. Wooden — ^wooden would ; 
For wooden heart scorns others' smart, but heart of wood is 
good,— 
And wood wouldn't — wood wouldn't, but wooden — 
wooden would. 

If ever could 
The heart of wood 
The wooden heart assist, 



FRANK'S RIRTHDA Y IN PARTICULAR, 13 

'T would not recall 
Its wrongs at all, 
But gladly lend a fist. 
Wood would — ^wood would. Wooden — ^wooden wouldn't, 
For heart of wood does what it should, but wooden what it 
shouldn't, — 
And wood would — wood would, but wooden — wooden 
wouldn't 

Ham used to sing this simple ditty to the banjo, 
which has become the national instrument of his 
descendants. It is indeed said that the hereditary 
love for music has affected the complexion of 
those descendants, for they sang till they were 
black in the face. However — as I am anxious 
that the veracity of this narrative should be unim- 
peachable — I must remind the reader that I will 
not guarantee the truth of this last assertion. I 
give it on the authority of one who was always 
black in the face when he sang, and never per- 
formed out of London, for which reason he was 
called Mr. Bones. 

While Frank was talking about cutting the 
Noah family into cribbage-pegs, he instinctively 



14 CONCERNING BIRTHDA YS IN GENERAL, AND 

put his hand into his pocket for his knife ; but it 
was not there ! He tried the other pockets in 
vain, and then he remembered he had left it in 
the garden, where he had been manufacturing 
some wonderful new contrivance. He had riot 
yet invented a plan for preventing knives from 
becoming rusty if you leave them out in the 
damp ; and as this knife was a very fine one, and 
had four blades, besides containing a hammer, 
and a screwdriver, and a foot rule, and a pair of 
pincers, and a box of tin. tacks, and a corkscrew, 
and a telescope, and a gimlet, and four dozen ten- 
penny nails, with a few other useful trifles, he 
thought it would be as well for him to go down 
into the garden and fetch it. 

So Frank went out of the room, closed the door 
behind him, and ran downstairs to go into the 
garden — but not ** to cut a cabbage-leaf to make 
an apple pie," though if the notion of doing so 
had ever occurred to him, he would most likely 
have thought himself quite clever enough to do it, 
and would certainly have tried. 



FRANK'S BIR THDA V IN PAR TICULAR. 1 5 

Touching apple pies — not but that it is bad 
manners to put your fingers in the dish in order 
to do so — I have an interesting tale to relate. 

Once upon a time, there was a boy, born of 
honest but wealthy parents. He was leaning on 
the fence and looking into the next garden, when 
he saw a female figure approaching with a large 
knife in its hand. It was the cook. She went 
straight to one of the beds, and presently returned 
carrying several large leaves. That intelligent 
boy at once saw the meaning of it, and he told all 
his brothers and sisters, as well as several school- 
fellows and playmates, that the woman next door 
made apple pies out of cabbage-leaves. He was 
not believed ; but he persisted in his assertion, 
supporting it by the fact that he had actually seen 
her picking the cabbage-leaves, and that her hands 
and arms were covered with dough and flour, — 
an evident proof that she had just been making 
pie-crust. Still his story was doubted, so at last 
it was agreed that a deputation should wait on the 
cook next door when she came into the garden 



I6 CONCERNING BIRTH DA YS IN GENERAL, AND 

again. An opportunity offered the same day. 
The boy asked the cook if she had not picked 
some leaves the other day. She said Yes ; where- 
upon he looked very triumphant. Whether she 
had not made some dough just before ? She ad- 
mitted it. " There ! " said that boy, in triumph, 
" did I not say she picked the cabbage- leaves to 
make an apple pie ?" ** But/' said the cook, " they 
weren't cabbage -leaves, and it wasn't an apple 
pie !" ** What then ?" he inquired. **A rhubarb 
tart," was the answer. The moral of this story is 
that all is not apple pie that glistens, and that you 
cannot make a rhubarb tart out of a sow's ear ; 
whilst you should never hear anything you believe, 
and only see half of it. I like a story with a good 
plain healthy moral, don't you ? 

But, to return to Frank. 

While searching in his pockets for his knife he 
had found a hunk of his birthday cake, so, as he 
went downstairs, he nibbled at it contemplatively, 
wishing to himself that he could manufacture some 
of the wonderful animals he had been picturing 



F/CAS'K'S BIRTHDA Y IN PAR TICULAR. i? 

in his imagination. When he got to the last flight 
of stairs, he slid down the balusters, because it was 
easier than sliding up them, I suppose. 

Then he opened the back door, and stepped 
out into the garden ; and then a wonderful thing 
happened. But we will reserve the description 
of that strange incident until another chapter. 

No sooner had Frank left the room upstairs 
and closed the door, than Noah called his family 

around him, and said but I must defer what 

Noaji said until later in the book. 





CHAPTER TWO. 



OF WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN THE GARDEN. 



1 N a retired corner of the garden, Frank had had 
a small plot allotted to him, where he could carry 
on his experiments in horticulture. I have no 
doubt that it was by design that this unobserved 



OF WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IX THE GARDEN. 19 

sitxiation was selected for him, for his experiments 
were not always of an ornamental nature. For 
instance, he had constructed an arbour out of pea- 
sticks, over which he meant to train sweet peas. 
Now, he had often heard the gardener say that 
the backwardness of seeds in springing rose from 
want of warmth, and it occurred to him that if he 
put them in hot water it would quicken their 
growth, so he did what a certain well-known 
pilgrim did, he " took the liberty to boil his peas." 
I am sorry to say the ingenious operation failed. 
Another time the gardener gave him a few spare 
celery plants, and he put' them into the ground 
with the roots upwards, which he thought would 
save the trouble of earthing them up to blanch 
them. This venture was not more fortunate than 
the other. 

You will imagine from this that Frank's bit 
of ground presented rather a wild and desolate 
appearance, and that it was therefore a wise pro- 
vision to seclude it as much as possible. 

Frank went to the arbour, which was his work- 

2 — 2 



20 OF WHA T HAPPENED TO 

shop, and recovered his knife. He was just about 
to return to the house when he saw a tall old man, 
with a long white beard, sitting outside. This 
strange personage wore a suit of sheep-skins, 
something after the fashion of Robinson Crusoe's 
goat-skin suit, and had on his head a tall pointed 
cap, that reminded Frank of the dunce s cap at 
school. 

" Who are you ? " said Frank, astonished. 

"Yes," said the old gentleman, thoughtfully; 
** who am I ? I can't recollect just at this mo- 
ment, but it begins with G." 

Frank gazed at him in silent wonder. The old 
man stroked his long beard and stood thinking, 
with his head on one side, like a contemplative 
parrot Presently he said, with a smile, " Buffalo !" 

" What do you mean ? " said Frank. ** You 'd 
better not get calling names." 

" But you asked me to ! " 

" To what .> " 

" Why, to tell you the name I 'm called. It 's 
Buffalo 1 " 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN, 21 

" But that doesn't begin with G ! " retorted 
Frank. 

" No, certainly not ; it is open to that objection. 
But you may have noticed that when you can't 
recall a word, but think it begins with a certain 
letter, it is always sure to begin with another 
when you have found it I suppose," he added, 
musingly, " that it begins with it before you have 
found it, or even if you don't find it at all ; but 
then, how is one to know ? " 

" What is your business ? " asked Frank. 

** It 's not a business, it s a profession. I go 
about on the downs and commons, where the 
sheep feed, and gather wool from the furze 
bushes." 

" And what do you do with it ? " 

"Why, plant it, of course," said the old man, 
sharply. 

** I don't see any * of course ' about it," said 
Frank, nettled ; '' it won't grow if you do plant it." 

" No, certainly not ; it is open to that objec- 
tion. But that is not my fault, it is the fault of 



22 OF WIIA T HAPPENFD TO 

the wool. It might grow, you know ; and see 
what a capital thing that would be." 

Frank felt very much inclined to laugh, but just 
at that moment his eye rested on his garden and 
the abortive celery-bed. 

"' Then you are a wool-gatherer," said Frank, 
for the sake of saying something. 

*' Oh, no ! certainly not. I am the Confidential 
Minister of His Imperial Fairiness Prince Silver- 
wings. You see, as I always forget everything 
I 'm told five minutes after I hear it, there is no 
chance of my revealing the State secrets. My 
memory is a regular — a regular — I forget the 
word, but it begins with M." 

** Muddle," suggested Frank. 

'* It can't be a muddle when it contains nothing. 
I meant a sieve. I said it began with M ! " ex- 
claimed the old man, triumphantly. 

" But, I say ! " observed Frank, ** there are no 
sheep in this garden. What brought you here ? " 

** The Prince's carriage, of course ! " 

'' But what for ? " 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN 23 

" What for ! Do you suppose they charge like 
a common cabman ? '* said the old man, with 
dignity. 

** I mean for what purpose ? " explained Frank. 
. ** Oh ! — to bring a message to you from Prince 
Silverwings," was the old man's answer. 

Frank waited to hear the message ; but the 
Confidential Minister did not say a word until, as 
he was gazing about rather vacantly, he happened 
to see the cake in Frank's hand. 

'' What *s that, — a bit of rock ? " he asked. 

Frank handed it to him with the explanation 
that it was cake. The old gentleman rubbed it 
on the sharp point of his nose, and said slowly, 
** It tastes nice." 

" But you haven't tasted it," said Frank. 

" Yes, I have," said the other. 

Presently, after turning it over and over care- 
fully, he popped it into his mouth. 

" It smells very good," he said. 

"You mean, now, it tastes very good," said 
Frank. 



2d OF WHA T HAPPENED TO 

" No, I don't ; certainly not ! It makes me 
laugh to see such a silly speech." 

" Hear such a silly speech," said Frank, firmly ; 
" you can't see a speech that isn't written down." 

" Why, if it was written, of course I should hear 
it," answered the old man. 

" You're putting the cart before the horse," said 
Frank. 

"No, I am not ; but supposing I were, I don't 
see that it is open to objection. It would be a 
great improvement, because you could lead him 
instead of driving him. And then you could har- 
ness him so that there would be no danger of his 
coming down on his nose and breaking his knees. 
It's very clear that you don't go to school, or at 
any rate that you don' t go to a very good one ; or 
I might say, you don't come from school, or at* 
any rate not from a good one. I will lend you a 
little poem I wrote. You can learn it by heart if 
you like ; I did once, but I forgot it again, so I 
have written it down in my pocket-book. But I 
may not have recollected to put that in my 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN 25 

pocket. Yes, here it is," he continued, producing 
a faded old red leather memorandum -book, and 
turning the leaves over slowly. 

" Now, that 's the poem. You had better read 
it aloud, — it will be quite new to me." 

So Frank took the book and read the following 

lines : 

Sights and Sounds. 

They told me blind I sure must be, 

As any kitten' ever drowned, 
Or else I certainly should see 
A certain sort of sound. 
Well, the prettiest sound I e'er saw, I '11 allow, 
Was a nightingale having a pipe on a bough. 

They told me, deaf I must be too. 

As any post e'er painted white. 
Or I should hear without ado 
A certain sort of sight. 
Well, the prettiest sight that I ever could hear, 
Was the man in the cellar a-drawing the beer. 

These instances when I averred, 

They vowed I must be crazy, clean, 
For sights, said they, could not be heard, 
And sounds could not be seen, 
And they only were joking. To which I reply, 
That you pipe for the ear, and you draw for the eye. 



26 OF WHA T HAPPENED TO 

** How very beautiful ! " sobbed the old gentle- 
man, who was quite affected. "You are indeed 
a poet, my young friend, if you can write like 
that." 

" But they are your own lines," said Frank, 
Jianding back the book. 

" Dear me, so they are ! Well, then, I 'm the — 
the — what is the word } It begins with R." 
" Poet," said Frank. 

" Yes, to be sure : I said it began with R ! But 
I must really be going now." 

" But, I say, how about the message to me from 
Prince Silverwings } " cried Frank. 

" Dear me, dear me ! I quite forget ! But it 
began with " — 

" There now, you Ve forgotten it. Let me try," 
said another voice. 

Frank turned, and saw a funny figure dressed 
up in breeches and top boots, with a hat with a 
cockade stuck on one side of his head, a claret- 
coloured coat, bound at the waist with a leather 
belt. In short, the new-comer looked like a groom, 



[ 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN 27 

but he had tremendously long spider legs, and 
a little round body like a cricket-ball. 

" Who are you ? " asked Frank. 

" Timbob," said the other, " as looks after the 
Prince's 'osses ! " 

Bang ! 

Frank jumped, for the bang sounded as if some- 
thing weighty had fallen close by him. He looked 
about, but could see nothing. The Confidential 
Minister did not seem to have observed the noise. 

** What was that noise ? " said Frank to Timbob. 

" Didn't 'ear no noise ! " 

Bang! 

" Why, there it was again," said Frank. " You 
must be deaf." 

" No, I hain't," said Timbob. 

Cr-r-rack ! 

Frank jumped again. This time the noise 

sounded as if something were being vehemently 
torn out of the path beside him, but still there was 
nothing to be seen. He turned to the old gentle- 
man. 



28 OF WHA T HAPPENED TO 

" What is the meaning of this ? " he inquired. 

" H," said the old gentleman. 

" Begins with H, do you mean ? " 

"No, it is H. You see, Timbob is tall, and 
when he drops one it falls with considerable force, 
and partly buries itself in the ground with a bang, 
and when he picks it up in the wrong place, it 
comes up with a wrench. You wouldn't like it if 
you were being constantly dropped and picked up 
again like that." 

''No, I suppose not," said Frank. " But what 
does Timbob mean by declaring he does not hear 
the noise ? " 

"He doesn't," replied the old gentleman ; " he 's 
perfectly unconscious." 

Timbob was looking incredulous and displeased. 

" I don't drop nothing, be 'anged to it." — ^bang ! 
— "It's only a way they've got of 'umbugging 
me ; " — ^bang ! — " they hare such hidiots at Coiirt." 
— c-r-r-r-r-r-ack ! 

All this Timbob muttered in a low tone to Frank, 
amid a succession of bangs and crashes worthy of 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN. 29 

that famous old piece of music styled " The Batde 
of Prague." 

" Well," said Frank, " if you know Prince Silver- 
wings' message to me, pray tell me as briefly as 
you can." 

Frank didn't like so much noise, so he hoped 
Timbob would not make a long speech. 

" Well, then, 'ere 's 'ow it is." — bang ! bang ! — 
"The Prince 'eerd your wish" — bang! — "to see 
some of the hoddities, hanimiles, and sich "-^rack ! 
— " as you 've been thinkin' of, so I 'm to hinwite 
you " — cr-r-r-ack I — " to wisit 'is country " — ^bang ! 

" Oh, I shall be delighted ! " said Frank, caper- 
ing for joy, and utterly forgetting that he should 
ask his parents' permission. 

"In which case I 'm to conduck you," said 
Timbob, with a bow. 

" Then what was the use of sending the Confi- 
dential Minister?" inquired Frank, noticing that 
the envoy, quite oblivious of all around him, was 
busily writing something down in his pocket-book. 

" Oh ! it 's the Minister's hoffice, ye see" — crack! 



I 



30 OF WHAT HAPPENED TO 

— "but as they knows *e1I forget it" — bang! — 
" they alius send me along with 'im " — ^bang ! — 
" in consekens hof hettiquette ! " — Cr-r-r-r-rack ! 

The noise of that compound crash seemed to 
arouse the old gentleman, who, turning to Frank, 
said, 

" Perhaps you would like to see the charming 
little poem I have just written. Kindly read it 
aloud ; it may do Timbob good." 

Frank took the book, and began — 

Sights and Sounds. 

They told me blind I sure must be 
As any kitten ever drowned. 

" But that *s what I read just now," said Frank, 
stopping short. 

" Why, I Ve only just written it ! " said the old 

^gentleman, taking the book and examining it. 

" Dear me, yes ! here it is, word for word the same 

on the next page but one. And I do declare — how 

very odd ! — here it is again farther on." 

Frank looked over the old gentleman's shoulder 
as he sat turning over the leaves nervously, and 



FRANK IN THE GARDEN 31 

saw, to his great amusement, that all the little 
poems in it were the same one, re-written again 
and again. At last, with a look of deep disappoint- 
ment, the old gentleman closed the book, and pre- 
pared to follow Timbob, who was showing them 
the way to a dark archway in the garden wall, 
which Frank never remembered to have seen there 
before. Timbob entered first, Frank followed, and 
the Confidential Minister brought up the rear. It 
was pitch dark ; but the passage was too narrow 
for them to stray out of the track. 

They went groping and stumbling along in 
silence for some time, until, becoming accustomed 
to the gloom, they felt more at ease. 

At last the old man laid his hand softly on 
Frank's shoulder, and whispered, 

" I think I really have something new in the 
way of poetry now. I intend to begin it thus : 

" They tell me blind I sure must be 
As any kitten ever drowned." 

" Bother the kitten ! " said Timbob ; " here we are 
at the entrance to Prince Silverwings* domain!" 



3« OF WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN THE GARDEN. 

and as he spoke, he flung open a gate, and Frank 
found himself in the middle of such a blaze of 
light that for a few minutes he stood dazzled and 
blinded. 

When he looked round, his companions had 
vanished ; but he saw two tiny little elves dis-. 
appearing among the ivy about the gateway. Two 
shrill peals of laughter sounded, and he saw two 
little mocking faces grinning at him from amid the 
leaves. 





CHAPTER THREE. 

ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS FRANK SAW IN 
FAIRYDOM. 

r OOR Frank felt very uncomfortable. He could 
liot but fancy that his late companions had played 
him a trick, for surely the emissaries of Prince 
Silverwings would not have left his invited guest 
in the lurch, as Buffalo and Timbob had done. 



34 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

And when he looked round him, he saw that th. 
apparent brilliancy of the light that had dazzle 
him as he emerged from the subterranean passag( 
was due merely to the contrast after coming out 
utter darkness. He began to feel very miserable 
and to wish that he had asked his parents' permij 
sion before he accepted the invitation of a perfec::^ 
stranger like Prince Silverwings. 

" Who is Prince Silverwings, after all, I should ^ 
like to know ? " said he, aloud. 

A silvery little voice close at hand sang softly, 

" Prince Silverwings' 
Is the greatest of kings. 
For he rules o'er the Fairydom regions; 
From enchantment his mighty authority springs. 
And his forces are niunbered by legions. 

"Prince Silverwings 
To their senses brings 
The foolish, the rash, the conceited; 
Those who think they are clever at all sorts of things' 
By his power are quickly defeated." 

And then Frank beheld, standing beside him, th( 
loveliest little fairy that ever was seen. 

" Dear me, you 're very nice ! " said Frank. 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM, . 35 

** So *s plum-cake," answered the fairy, as if she 
did not rehsh the complimentary adjective. 

« 

** Plum-cake," said Frank, reflecting on the cake 

^he Confidential Minister had eaten : " yes, I think 

It is sometimes ; that is, when you can get it. It 

^s not nice when you can't get it, though — or if you 

ST^t it and some one else gobbles it up." 

The fairy smiled. 

** Put your hand in your pocket, and you will see 

^t^at you will find." ' 

i^rank did so, and sure enough there was his 

slic^ of cake untouched. He began to wonder 

e and more. 

I suppose," the fairy said, still smiling, "that 

^ip and Trap have been playing you some pretty 

^^c^ks, for they are a mischievous couple." 

I^rank nodded, but he didn't say anything, for 

^ri^y were within hearing of the ivy-covered wall, 

^^d he thought the mischievous couple might play 

^^ni more tricks if he complained of them. 

'* But we must not waste time," said the fairy. 

** Follow me." 

3 — 2 






36 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

Frank followed her till they came to a large 
oaken gate, which the fairy touched with her wand. 

" Oh — oh ! " groaned the gate. 

" Ah — ee — ^ah ! " squeaked the hinges. 

" Poor things ! " said the fairy ; " they are getting 
quite rusty for want of use." 

" Ugh ! " said the door, assentingly. 

" Ye-e-es ! " squeaked the hinges in chorus. 

" This," said the fairy, in explanation to Frank, 
" is the Hall of Idle Inventions. We call it the 
Undernational Exhibition ; and it used to be open 
every year; but the people of Fairydom got so 
tired of it that now the gates are not opened unless 
any one wishes very particularly to visit it." 

With that she conducted Frank into the interior, 
which was all divided into stalls, or rather loose 
boxes, like a stable. 

" Here," said she, "you will find all the useless, 
absurd, and purposeless inventions exhibited." 

" Then I m afraid I shall find my " 

" No, my little friend. We don't show the follies 
of children here." 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM, 37 

" Oh, indeed ! " said Frank, a little hurt 

" No," said the fairy, as if desirous of consoling 
him for the pain her remark had caused ; " we 
have barely room enough to display all the follies 
of grown-up people." 

As she spoke she opened the door of one of the 
boxes, and motioned to Frank to follow her. It 
was full of all sorts of complicated machinery and 
queer little sheds. As they entered, a man with a 
comical expression of would-be wisdom bustled up 
to them, rubbing his hands. 

" Most delighted, I 'm sure. Oh, yes ; show you 
all the works with pleasure. This will be a thing 
to look back to by-and-bye as one of the remark- 
able events of your life. You will be able to say that 
you saw — before its absolute completion, I might 
almost say — the process for the cheap manufacture 
of malachite vest-buttons from mushrooms. Here 
we grow our mushrooms, you see," said he, open- 
ing the door of one shed ; " the larger are useless 
to us, and are therefore sent to the market. Here," 
and he opened another door, " is where they are 



38 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

painted green and veined. This branch of the 
manufacture gives employment to no less than six 
children for each dozen of buttons." 

" But there are no children here," said Frank, 
seeing that the shed was empty. 

" N-no ; not just now," said the inventor, with 
evident reluctance; "the School Board man has 
taken them all away from me. As if they were 
not receiving an art education here." He directed 
this last remark, with an angry sniff, at Frank's 
conductor, and then continued, " But you see the 
paint-boxes are here ! Two sorts of green, and 
brushes. That," he added, hastily, indicating an- 
other shed, without attempting to show the interior, 
" is where we fit the shanks to the buttons." 

" I should like to see that," said Frank. 

" Well, our preparations are not quite complete 
yet. We are erecting a machine for twisting or- 
dinary pins into shanks, but it is not in working 
order. But here," he said, hastily, turning to some 
cog-wheels, and beams, and bands, " is where we 
polish the buttons when they leave the shanking- 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM. 39 

shop. You see that oscillating tray ? The buttons 
are shaken until they acquire a lustrous appearance. 
Then they are finished off with emery by hand." 

" Would it not be cheaper to do all the polishing 
by hand ? " asked Frank. 

" Well, but then we should have no machinery, 
and what is an invention without machinery } " 

" But it must add to the cost " — 

" Not materially," said the inventor, snatching up 
a piece of chalk, and rushing to a blackboard in 
one comer; " you see, it 's easily worked out. Now, 
first there 's the price of the mushroom-beds. Say 
we can produce the raw mushroom — I mean ma- 
terial — at sixpence a hundred " — 

" But mushrooms cost more than that." 

" Of course ! But then we get more than that 
for those we send to market, which brings our 
expenses down to sixpence a hundred." 

" Have you taken into consideration," interposed 
Frank's guide, " the cost of horses, carts, and men, 
to convey them to market } " 

" Why, no ! Certainly not ! They Ve o^ot to go 



40 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

to market, or they 'd be a dead loss, so we set on _ 
off against the other. But to proceed. There "^ 
the painting : it costs very little, as quite youngs 
children can do it. I am not sure — considering^ 
that the work is an art education — ^that they ougfe 
not to pay for the privilege. Besides, it's ar- 
amusement, and not injurious if they don't sucC 
their brushes. Well, we'll put down labour an^- 
paint at, say ten shillings a hundred. Then polish^ 
ing will amount to five shillings a hundred. I don'"^ 
include the cost of the engine," he added hastily*- 
seeing the fairy about to interpose. 

" But the shanking ? " said Frank. 

" Ah ! that is uncertain just now. But we can^ 
do it, labour and materials, for about twenty poundss 
a hundred. Then here 's the sum per hundred : " 

£ J. d. 
Raw material ... ... 006 

Painting, etc. ... ... o 10 o 

Polishing ... ... ... 050 

Shanking ... ... ... 20 o o 

Total ... ;^2o 15 6 

"But," said Frank, after inspecting the esti — 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM. 41 

mate, "if your buttons cost that, what do real 
malachite buttons cost ? " 

" Ah ! that I don't know," said the inventor. 

" Haven't you any idea ?" 

" Not the least ; but they must cost about, five 
and twenty pounds a hundred, or else, don't you 
see ? ours would not be the method for the cheap 
manufacture." 

" Oh ! I see ! " said Frank. 

But he didn't see, so he took a courteous fare- 
well of the manufacturer, and followed his guide. 

The next compartment they visited was a fac- 
tory working a " Novel Invention for the Making 
of Three-legged Stools." 

A smiling gentleman conducted him round and 
explained the process. 

"Here," said he, "is the saw-mill, where the 
timber for the top of the stool is cut out in the 
ordinary way. Yonder is a carpenter, who makes 
the holes for the reception of the legs. You will 
observe how very simple all this is. In that corner 
the legs are made, and here — ^please to follow me 



42 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

— they arc fitted into the top, and — there is the 
stool complete ! " And he handed one to Frank 
for his inspection. 

" Isn't that the way they generally make three- 
legged stools ? " inquired Frank. 

" That process may slightly resemble ours in 
some broad features," said the inventor, " but ours 
is much more simple.'* 

"In what way ? '* Frank asked. 

" They plane theirs ! '' said the inventor, with a 
triumphant air. " Now, try ours ! " 

Frank sat down on the sample. The ends of 
the legs stuck up above the surface of the top, 
which was rough and rather splintery. 

" Isn't it — isn't it," asked Frank, diffidently — 
" isn't it just a little scrubby ? " 

" That 's just it ! " said the exultant inventor. — 
" You have exactly hit it ! They plane theirs," — 
and he made this last assertion as if he was reveal- 
ing some decided but hitherto unknown objection 
to the old-fashioned race of three-legged stools. 

Again Frank took his leave of the inventor. 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM. 43 

But the latter followed him to the door, and whis- 
pered in his ear, confidentially, as he was leaving, 

" That 's the very point : they plane theirs." 

As they left this compartment Frank noticed 
that the gate which his guide had left ajar on 
entering could not be opened from the inside. 

" Why, they can't get out," he said to his guide. 
" Do you always keep them shut in like that "i " 

"If we gave them their liberty," was the answer, 
" they'd go about smashing one another's machi- 
nery, and killing each other ! " 

The next compartment was deserted, and con- 
tained nothing but extinct furnaces and boilers, and 
a very disagreeable odour, which reminded Frank 
of a long-wicked candle blown out. 

"Is that a failure ? " said Frank, seeing his guide 
was passing it by unnoticed. 

" No ! All the others are failures. That was a 
success, so we had to exclude it." 

" Dear me ! What was it ? " 

" A plan for making butter out of the droppings 
of tallow candles and railway grease." 



44 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

" And that was a success ? " 

" Yes. There 's no understanding you mortals ! 
When our Inspector of Discoveries reported on it, 
it was admitted at once without a question. But 
we soon learnt that it was being carried out very 
profitably, and that in some parts of the world the 
counterfeit was openly advertised as vastly superior 
to the original article." 

" I suppose it does not often happen that an in- 
vention once admitted has to be sent away ? " 

" More often than you would suppose. The 
utensils of the discoverer of the mode of construct- 
ing milk out of chalk and water were on their way 

here when they were stopped. Why, since I have 

« 

been in charge here, which is not very long, we 
have had to send away the plant of a factory for 
the conversion of cabbage-stalks into early peas by 
means of implements like small bullet-moulds." 

By this time they had reached another compart- 
ment, where a gentleman with a very high fore- 
head and long hair came forward, bowing. 

"This," said he, "is the * Latest Invention for 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM, 45 

Writing Poetry by Machinery : ' a most interest- 
ing process, I assure you." 

" I should think so," said Frank. " I thought it 
always required such clever people to write poetry." 

"It used to do so," said the inventor, who added, 
after a pause, " I once wrote poetry myself." 

" Indeed ! " observed Frank, admiringly. 

" Yes, a good deal ; but I soon learnt to simplify 
the process. People would not publish my poems 
unless I paid them for doing so. I had no money, 
which consequently left a good deal of time on my 
hands. I employed it in the construction of this 
machine. When it is completed and makes a suc- 
cess, I shall get the money to publish my poems." 

He led Frank to a large shallow drawer, divided 
into small compartments. 

"In each of these little boxes you will find a 

• number of words rhyming together. You choose 

what you please, and place them along the edge 

of the table of this machine." And he pointed to 

a machine something like a printing-press. 

"Above, you will see several large reservoirs. 



46 



ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 



Each is filled with words, printed on small pieces 
of wood, just like these rhymes. Each contains 
words suited for the different styles of measures 
you have to chose from. When you have fixed on 
the style, you connect the feeder of its reservoir 
with the machine by pulling out this damper. The 
machine is then set going, and the result is a poem. 
Would you like to try ?" 

" Very much indeed," said Frank. " I never 
have written a poem." 

"What subject will you select ?" 

"Well, let me see — suppose we say * Invention'- 
as an ode." 

"And the measure ?'* 

" I don't know much about measures. I know 
Apothecaries' Weight " 

" I mean poetical measures. But I see you don't 
understand ; so we will say iambic. Now choose 
your rhymes, — from this drawer, please." 

Frank looked them over and picked out what 
he thought would be suitable words, such as 
" immense," " intense," and " reveal," " appeal," 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM. 47 

and placed them on the edge of the table, while 
the inventor connected the feeder. 

" Now, my young friend, all you have to do is 
to depress that lever, and the engine will work. 
Raise it, and it is thrown out of gear." 

Frank did as he was desired. There was a 
clank and a grinding sound, and then the wheels 
began to revolve, and the table disappeared slowly, 
to return in a short time, covered with lines of 
carefully-arranged words. This was what Frank 

read : 

An Ode to Invention. 

Amidst believes announce alas immense, 
Destroy behoof confound conceits intense, 
Again red-hot diverse post-haste reveal, 
Unclasp revenge " 

" But I say," said Frank, letting go of the lever, 
" I can't understand what it's about." 

" Oh, help ! murder ! " shrieked the inventor, 
springing to the machine. "You've stopped in 
the middle of a line, and the spare words will get 
into the works. There, I said so ! Look, * appeal ' 



48 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

has got into the cogs, and there 's * assist ' in the 
fly-wheel ! Oh, what 's to be done ? " 

" But," repeated Frank, " I can't understand it." 

" Poetry isn't meant to be understood ! " said 
the inventor, in a tone of irritation. " There are 
the words, and the reader must find out their 
meaning. — But what did you go and damage the 
machine for ? " 

" I 'm really very sorry," said Frank, " but I 
thought something must have gone wrong. Let 
me try once again." 

"Very well, just this once," said the inventor. 
"Choose some rhymes from here, while I clear 
out the machinery. You shall try a song, in a 
merry metre, and with lines of different lengths ; 
because then you will see what an ingenious plan 
there is for making them come even on the table 
— because, if they didn't, the lines would get mixed 
up." 

" That would hardly be noticed," thought Frank, 
as he picked out his rhymes. 

Presently the machinery was made ready, and 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM, 49 

the lever depressed ; and the table vanished and 
returned, bearing these lines : 

A Song. 

Merrily roundelay happiness blue, 
Sicily popular meet tumtiddy, 
Popinjay Calendar fiddle-strings grew, 
Capering mulberry feet tumtiddy. 

" I think that will do," said Frank, releasing the 
lever at the end of the line. 

" Now," said the inventor, "observe the ingeni- 
ous system of double-feeding. You see the word 

* tumtiddy' — which is mere nonsense, and therefore 
easily distinguishable from the rest of the words — 
that is supplied by the second feeder, which is 
turned on by a small pin in the wheel, which at 
the same .time applies a break to the other feeder. 
When all is done, you have only to remove the 

* tumtiddjes ' — thus ; and there is the poem ! " 

" Quite so," assented Frank ; " but what do you 
understand that poem to mean ? " 

" Well, you see, it 's a song about a merry roun- 
delay on the happiness of the blue sky of Sicily, 



50 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS 

and the popular — you know! that sort of thing. 
What do you make of it ? " 

" Oh, just the same as you do." 

" Come," interposed the fairy guide, " we must 
now visit the next invention." 

" I wouldn't if I were you," said the poetical 
gentleman ; " you 'd better stop here and make 
more poetry. That fellow next door is quite crazy. 
He thinks he's invented a steam amanuensis — 
fancies he can make brains ! " 

Frank hurried after his guide for fear this en- 
thusiast should catch him smiling. 

The Steam Amanuensis sat at a table with a 
pen in his hand. When set going, he rolled his 
eyes and turned his head from left to right, and 
went through all the motions of writing. 

Frank, in order to put him to the test, began to 
dictate to him. Owing perhaps to the poetry, he 
could not recollect anything but some bits of his 
geography lessons. 

" An island is a piece of land completely sur- 
rounded by water," he repeated. And seeing the 



FRANK SA W IN FAIR YDOM. 5 1 

Amanuensis scribbling away rapidly, he peeped 
over his shoulder, but found he was only making 
unintelligible scratches. 

" Is it shorthand ? " he asked the inventor. 

" Well, no ; not exactly." 

" Then he isn't writing anything really." 

" Well, no ; he does not write from dictation — 
yet. He's perfect in everything but that one 
small particular; and I have every confidence tha' 
that difficulty will be surmounted — in time." 

" In time ! Oh, yes, to be sure ! " said Frank, 

who was getting a little tired of inventions that 

did everything except what they professed to do. 

— " If ever I get home," said Frank to himself, 

with a little shiver, as the thought of not getting 

home occurred to him, " I shall certainly destroy 

that eggshell-filling machine of mine. How stupid 

and conceited I must have been to think it was 

clever or likely to be useful." He turned to his 

fairy guide and said, " I should like to go home 

now." 

" What ! before you have seen all those won- 

4 — 2 



S2 ABOUT SOME OF THE THINGS FRANK SA W, &-c, 

derful birds and beasts and insects you pictured to 
yourself ? Oh, that *s quite out of the question." 

On reflection Frank began to think so too. 
After all, there was something to see in them. 

" Well," said he, " perhaps it would be a pity to 
miss such an opportunity." 

" Then here my task ends," said the fairy. " I 
can conduct you no farther than to the gate." 

It was the gate at the farther end of the building 
from that by which Frank had entered. Beyond it 
lay a sunny landscape, full of trees and beautiful 
flowers, and with what appeared to Frank to be 
butterflies hovering about. 

" Oh, how beautiful ! " he exclaimed, stepping 
out into the open air. 

The door immediately closed behind him; He 
turned — but his fairy guide had left him. 



^ 




CHAPTER FOUR. 



Finding himself alone, and with such a tempt- 
ing landscape before him, Frank hurried hastily 
on. The air seemed to be all alive with insects. 
There was a constant whirr as of passing beetles, 



54 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

an incessant hum as of bees and flies, and an end- 
less succession of the most brilliant butterflies 

ff 

fluttering around him. To be sure, they did not 
invariably look agreeable, for now and then some 
creature would whizz by with an ominous sound 
like a wasp, displaying a terrible sting ; and there 
were several monstrous insects, that looked verj' 
formidable. 

It was partly in admiration, therefore, and partly 
in alarm that Frank kept gazing into the air, 
instead of looking where he was going. All of a 
sudden he tripped over something and fell. The 
grass was as soft as velvet, so he did not hurt 
himself, and on looking to see what had caused 
his fall, he perceived a large toadstool, from which 
a little shrill voice was audible, shrieking in accents 
of the wildest terror. 

" Hi ! Help !" it cried. " Here *s a wandering 
earthquake tumbled over my roof ! " 

Then Frank saw a little elfish figure crawl out 
from under the fungus, which he had bent all on 
one side in his fall. 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 55 

" Earthquake !" said another shrill voice. " Pooh ! 
who ever saw an earthquake with hind legs ? " 

Then Frank, looking about, saw that he was 
in a sort of small village of toadstools, from be- 
neath which crowds of little elves were issuing at 
the sound of their neighbour's alarmed voice. 

"Well, if it isn't an earthquake," said the first 
little elf, angrily, " what does it mean by shaking 
me to my very foundations "i " 

" I have known the most respectable earth- 
quakes," said one wrinkled, grey -bearded little 
fellow, — "earthquakes whose families came over 
with the Volcano, and they had no hind legs." 

Frank was down on his hands and knees, as he 
had fallen, which rather justified their speaking of 
him as a quadruped ; but he did not like their 
talking about his hind legs all the same. He rose 
Avith an air of dignity. 

" I Ve no hind legs, and I 'm not an earthquake 
or anything of that kind," he said, in an offended 
tone. 

** Then what are you "i " asked one little man. 



56 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

who had climbed on to the roof of his toad- 
stool. 

" What am I ? Why, a boy, of course." 

" A boooooy ! " shrieked all the little people in 
chorus. "It says it 's a boooy ! What is a boy "^ " 

" I shall be a man some of these days," added 
Frank, proudly. 

" A man ! " all the elves shouted again, louder 
than before. And then several voices said, " Kill 
him!" ** Pinch him!" "Prick him!" 

" I 'd sooner be an earthquake than a man," said 
the little fellow on the roof. 

" Earthquakes don't steal ! " observed the little 
wrinkled old man. 

" Nor tell stories ! " said another. 

"Nor cheat!" 

" What makes you think that men do so ? " 
asked Frank, angrily. 

" Because they do ! " answered the elf on the 
roof. " I hope that 's logic," he added, looking 
round at his neighbours, who at once assented with 
loud applause. 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 57 

But just at this moment there was a loud 
shriek. 

One of the flying insects had pounced upon the 
little fellow who had so imprudently exposed him- 
self to danger on the roof of his toadstool, and was 
about to sting him to death, and carry him off for 
dinner. 

The other elves uttered loud cries of alarm, and 
got under shelter directly — only a few of the bravest 
venturing to peep out to see what became of their 
comrade. 

The poor little fellow struggled furiously. 

" Please don't, sir ! " he cried. " I Ve had nothing 
for dinner but pebbles for a week. Shake me and 
see ! Don't I rattle ? I am not good to eat to-day 
— I 'm not, indeed ! I 'm not half as nice as the 
boy ! " 

The insect, which was looking at him to find 
an exposed place to sting him, stopped, and said 
gravely,* 

- What is boy ? " 

** There ! " said the elf, pointing at Frank. 



58 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

" Are you sure he 's good to eat ? " asked the 
insect in its harsh grating voice. 

" Yes ! — lives on honey ! " said the little man. 

The insect looked at him intently for a minute, 
as if uncertain whether to give him up for a specu- 
lation in Frank. Then he gave him a gentle prod 
with his sting and let him go. The elf rolled down 
into the moss, shrieking and writhing about in 
agony, and the insect flew towards Frank. 

" You 're boy, are you ? " it said. 

" Yes," said Frank, not much at his ease, for the 
insect looked formidable. 

" Good to eat ? " it inquired. 

" I — I should say not," hesitated Frank, adding 
desperately, " I never tried ! " 

" Eat honey ? " asked the insect. 

" Ye-es ! " Frank answered, after a pause. 

" That will do ! " said the insect. " Your testi- 
monial is quite satisfactory ! " 

Thereupon he took out a flinty spike of straw 
from a sort of pocket and proceeded to sharpen 
its sting. 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 59 

" Just then another flying thing came up, and 
paused, crying out, " Shares ! " 

" Shan't ! " said the first-comer, surlily. " Caught 
it myself." 

" H'm ! what is it ? " said the fresh arrival. 

" Boy ! " said the other. 

" And what a,re jyou ?" asked Frank, in despera- 
tion, as he knotted up one corner of his pocket- 
handkerchief as a weapon of defence. 

The first insect was something like a moth, but 
it had a bird's head with a large bill, and two claws 
like birds' feet. 

" I 'm the Flighterbut ! " said the insect. 

" Well, Mr. Bighterflut," Frank began— 

" Flighterbut, I said," cried the insect, darting 
at him angrily, with sting upraised. 

" I beg your pardon. But, Mr. Flighterbut, I 
am no^ good to eat," said Frank, decidedly. " Why 
don't you try a cowslip or something of that 
kind ?" 

" Because he likes flesh," said the other insect, 
" and so do I ! " 



6o 



WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 



" And what might your name be ? *' inquired 
Frank, anxious to temporize. 

" I am the Lobsterbee ! " 

It was not a bad description of it, for its head 
had large pincers Hke a lobster s attached to it, 
and it had a lobster-like but rather spikey body, 
and its tail spread out into large wings like a 
bee's. 

" You 'd better give it up to me ! " cried out 
suddenly another voice. " I suppose it 's good to 
eat, or you wouldn't be here." 

Frank looked in the direction whence the voice 
came, and saw a hideous creature approaching with 
enormous leaps. 

"If you please, sir, what are you ? " he asked, 
in the greatest terror. 

" I am the bounding Octopper of the Bosks," 
said the fearful monster, which had a dreadful face, 
with one huge tooth in its mouth. It had eight 
long tentacles or feelers, and was of the colour of 
a dark horse-leech. 

The other two insects were evidently afraid of 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 6i 

it. The Flighterbut got behind the Lobsterbee, 
and then shouted, 

" You Ve no right to interfere ! It's our prize. If 

you don't leave us alone, we '11 call a conference ! " 

" I don't care for conferences ! Call away ! " 

Thereupon the two insects set up a loud cry of 

" Conference ! Conference ! Flyers, creepers, and 

leapers to conference ! " 

There was a loud buzzing, humming, and rust- 
ling. The air grew dark with the crowd of insects 
which came flocking from all sides — some flying, 
some jumping, some crawling. 

** Where 's the Stingaroo ?" was the general call. 
" Here ! " said a shrill voice, and a strange little 
creature like a small model of a dwarf came for- 
ward, turning somersaults all the way. When it 
stood still, Frank perceived that it had a sort of 
arm growing out of its head, armed at the tip with 
two sharp hooked talons. 

Never surely had such a strange assemblage 
been seen before as was now gathered on the 
greensward around Frank, who, in spite of his 



02 



WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 



fear, could not but look on with interest and 
wonder. There were things like grubs with the 
wings of butterflies and the heads of parrots ; there 
were things like bats with squirrels' face's, and 
some even with human heads or skulls. There 
was a sort of four-legged lady-bird with the 
goggle-eyes and gaping bill of a young vulture 
and the antennae of a wasp ; and there was a kind 
of hornet with two large paws like hands and a 
rabbit's head; and there was a lizard with two 
tails, and a pair of long fore legs like a crane- 
fly's. 

" We will open the conference with music," said 
the Stingaroo, in a pompous way. 

Immediately three elves appeared, one playing 
a violin, another a bassoon, and a third clashing a 
pair of cymbals. They ranged themselves behind 
the Stingaroo. 

" Begin with the Bumblebee's March," said the 
Stingaroo ; whereupon the band struck up a dis- 
cordant buzz and droning, to which the insects 
appeared to listen with great satisfaction, with the 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS, 63 

exception of the Octopper, who amused himself 
by waving one of his feelers close to the nose of 
the bassoon-player, who was evidently frightened 
of being stung by it. 

When the music ceased, the Stingaroo gazed 
round the assembly until his eye fell on a creature 
with a fish's head, a long scaly body armed with 
spikes, and a tail made of bony rings, which it 
clattered at times. 

"The Sprattlesticklesnake will open the proceed- 
ings," said the Stingaroo. 

The insect addressed erected its spines and flew 
three times round the circle, shaking its tail loudly 
all the while. Then it settled down a few paces 
before the Stingaroo, and spoke in a voice like a 
nutmeg-grater : 

" Illustrious and serene Stingaroo ! As I did 
not call this conference, and am ignorant of the 
cause of its being assembled, I feel the more un- 
prejudiced and free to commence the proceedings. 
In doing so, I beg to call on our distinguished 
president for a song." 



64 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

The Speaker then retired with the same cere- 
mony as before. 

The Stingaroo bowed, and, turning round, struck 
his two talons as if they had been a tuning-fork on 
the head of the violinist, who gave a sharp squeak. 

Taking up the note, the Stingaroo proceeded to 
try his voice : 

" Ting, ting, ting, TING ! " 

A low murmur of applause ran round the as- 
sembly, which apparently so delighted the Stinga- 
roo, that he went through the opening ceremony 
again — not much to the delight, as may be fancied, 
of tlie poor fiddler. 

" This," said the Stingaroo, " is * The Ballad of 
the Basking Shark.* I wrote it myself." 

The Ballad of the Basking Shark. 

I 'm the Beautiful Basking Shark, 
And I would not change my name, 

For that of an asking bark. 
Or a basket of sparkling game. 

So do not come to woo. 

For I will not marry you ! 
Sang the Basking Shark to the sailor lad afloat on the ocean blue. 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. OS 

If I were but a nautilus, 

I might not so much object 
To be called an omnibus, 

Or a wandering intellect 
I might just make them do. 
Yet do not come to woo ! 
Sang the Basking Shark to the sailor lad afloat on the ocean blue. 

• Were I even a loin of pork — 

(And here it gave a sigh) — 
You might call me a knife and fork, 
Or even a porcupie. 
I might endorse that view. 
But do not come to woo ! 
Sang the Basking Shark to the sailor lad afloat on the ocean blut 

I 'm the Beautiful Basking Shark, 
And my name I would not change, 

Save for one, a man of mark. 

In the whole world's mighty range. 

For I 'd marry the Stingaroo 

If he would come to woo ! 
And the Basking Shark ate that sailor lad afloat on the ocean blue. 

By the time he had finished his song, tears were 
running copiously down the Stingaroo's cheeks. 
But Frank was obliged to stuff his pocket-hand- 
kerchief into his mouth, to prevent himself from 
laughing out aloud. 



66 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

" What are you grinning for ? " cried the Stinga- 
roo, turning upon him angrily with threatening 
talons. 

" Please, sir, it was sobs," said Frank, hastily ; 
and, as his eyes were full of tears from suppressed 
laughter, his excuse mollified the Stingaroo, who, 
looking round the circle, exclaimed, 

"The Toaldizar wishes to make an observa- 
tion." 

Thereupon a creature, that looked as if it had an 
eft for a head stuck on a frog's body, bowed and 
said, 

" Why did not our eminent chair marry the 
Basking Shark ? " 

" How dare you interrupt the business of the 
conference ? " shouted the Stingaroo, in a fury — 
" and, besides, I am married already ! " 

" I hope that 's logic," said Frank, inwardly, 
quoting the little elf. 

" The conference is now closed," said the Stinga- 
roo. 

" May it please the illustrious president," here 



I 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 67 

broke in the Flighterbut, " we haven't touched on 
the -subject for whigh it was called together." 

" Serene Mightiness," said the Lobsterbee, " it 
has not even been referred to." 

The Octopper said nothing, but he grinned all 
over his tooth. 

" Of course not ! " roared the infuriated Stinga- 
roo — " of course not ! Isn't this a conference 1 " 

The two summoners assented. 

" Well, then, what more do you want ? " said 
the president. "It wouldn't be a conference if the 
object for which it was called together had been 
discussed — much more settled. — Go ! " 

" But how are we to arrange the difficulty ?" 
asked the two insects who had called the con- 
ference. 

" Fight it out ! " said the Stingaroo. " You 'd 
have done that after all, anyhow." And he turned 
to depart. 

" But," said the Lobsterbee, in desperation, 
" the question is one that concerns you." 

** What's that."^" said the Stingaroo, stopping 

5—2 



68 WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

at once. " How dare you go without my permis- 
sion ? " he added, striking his talons in the shoulder 
of the Toaldizer till it writhed again. 

"Well!" said the Flighterbut, taking up the 
cue, " we had caught some boy, and were going to 
bring it to you as a present when the Octopper 
interfered." 

" And boy is very nice," added the Lobsterbee ; 
" it feeds on honey " 

" And butter," added the Flighterbut. 

" And sugar," chimed in the Lobsterbee. 

" And — ^and — ^and " hesitated the Flighter- 
but. 

" And what ? " bellowed the Stingaroo, growing 
intensely excited at the prospect of a feast. 

" And eggs," whispered the Flighterbut, audibly. 

"Ooo!" bellowed the Stingaroo, going heels- 
over-head with delight 

"Yah!" said the Flighterbut • and Lobsterbee 
triumphantly to the Octopper, who was swelling 
visibly and turning black with fury and disap- 
pointment. 



r 



f .-, 



: .V YORK 



\r 



WITH SOME STRANGE INSECTS, 69 

At this moment the whole assembly broke up 
with loud cries of every kind, and rushed towards 
where Frank was standing. He had determined 
to make a fight of it ; but when he saw the whole 
concourse about to attack him, he saw that it was 
no use to try active resistance. 

The truth was that there was a passion for eggs 
in this insect community ; but, owing to the hard- 
ness of the egg-shells, it was seldom that the 
creatures got a feast at first hand. This was how 
it was that they drowned the toadstool-inhabiting 
elves, which lived chiefly by robbing birds' nests, 
and who therefore gave a flavour of eggs at second 
hand to their persecutors. 

With loud shrieks of " Eggs ! eggs ! " the crowd 
of insects made madly towards Frank, utterly 
regardless of the Stingaroo, who shouted to them 
all sorts of threats if they interfered with his 
possession of the prize. 

Safe in the excitement of their natural enemies, 
the little elves peeped out from their toadstool 
homes ; and some of the boldest even ventured to 



TO WHEREIN FRANK FALLS IN 

join in the pursuit. The poor fellow who hac 
been stung by the Flighterbut had been lyinj 
unnoticed among the moss, almost dead with th^^ 
pain ; but he managed to struggle up into a sitting" 
posture and watch the scene. 

As for Frank, he saw that his only hope was in 
flight, so he turned and ran for his life. This was 
so unexpected that it gained him a few yards' start. 
But when you remember that an ordinary fly can 
with ease outstrip an express train, and fly in and 
out of the windows as comfortably as if the train 
were standing still, you will see that poor Frank's 
chance of escape was small. 

He heard the buzzing and humming, the piping 
and shrieking, gaining upon him. He turned his 
head and saw the cloud of his enemies close at 
his heels. 

When he looked round again, he was terrified 
to see that close in front of him lay a gully, too 
wide to leap and too steep to descend. He was 
going at such a pace that he could not stop him- 
self. He made a violent effort, but only slid along 



fVlTH SOME STRANGE INSECTS. 71 

^ dry sward. Just at that moment some unseen 
^^ftttiy stung his ear. He gave a leap, and the next 
"istant found himself falling down — down — he 
could not tell how far. He struck a branch, rolled 
over, and then went bumping down the precipitous 
side of the ravine. He closed his eyes, and his 
senses left him. 





CHAPTER FIVE. 

HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 

When Frank came to himself again, he still 
heard the noise of his pursuers, and looking up 
above him, saw them still hovering above the edge 
of the precipice over which he had fallen. They 




MOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 73 

did ricDt, however, make any' attempt to follow him, 

they shouted all sorts of threats after 
him.. 

*^^ tick a pin through him and glue his wings ! " 
one. 

aste him up against a wall ! " said another, 
•rop hot sealing-wax on his paws ! " suggested 

our thick gum down his throat ! " screamed a 



< c 



bu had better some of you come down here, 
^^^ 3 'II serve you out ! " croaked a queer thick 
^^^^^ close behind Frank, who, turning round, saw 
^ ^^x-^ strange figure approaching. 

"■-^^ head was shaped like one of those 'conical 

^ ^^^^ --bottles one sees now-a-days ; and to make the 

^ ^^imblance more complete, it wore a tin helmet 

\ ^^tl a hole in the top, from which the handle of a 

I '^^^Sih protruded. The body looked like a gallipot, 

m ^^ci ^as all smeared with spillings and tricklings 

M . ^ Paste ; its legs and arms seemed to be sticks of 

% sealing-wax, and in its hand it carried a steaming 



74 HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 

glue-pot. It was shaking its fist vigorously at the 
insects overhead. 

" Horrid things ! " it said, in an explanatory 
manner, seeing Frank's bewilderment; "they creep 
into one's head so, to suck one's brains, and it 
gives one such a buzzing headache. I caught that 
fellow at it only the other day when I woke up 
from a nap." 

Following the direction of the new-comer's 
finger, Frank saw a dead insect pasted up against 
the side of a rock as a sort of scarecrow to the 
others, and he then understood why his persecutors 
had stayed outside the ravine. 

" Please, who are you ?" said Frank. 

" Why, of course, you know I 'm Gloogumpehst, 
or you wouldn't have come here. How did you 
come i 

-Well, I fell" 

'* Yes, to be sure ! And what did you break ?" 

Frank felt his legs and arms, and said, 

"Nothing!" adding, "you see, that tree caught 
me and broke my fall." 



JIOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 75 

** Broke your fall, did it ? Then where is your 
fall ?" 

Frank stared in bewilderment. 

" Where am I ?" he gasped. 

" In Teumenddandt, of course J" said the other. 

" That sounds like German," observed Frank. 

" To be sure ! A little while ago all toys that 
came here to be repaired were Dutch or uerman, 
and of course they gave the place a name in their 
own language. What sort of a toy are you ? " 

" I 'm not a toy — I 'm a boy," answered Frank. 

" H'm ! toy or boy, there isn't much difference. 
I suppose they spell toy with a * b ' in your country, 
that's all." 

** I beg your pardon," said Frank, with dignity. 
" I m not a toy at all. I 'm alive.'' 

" Oh, come I that won't do here ! " said Gloo- 
gpimpehst, with a knowing wink. " That 's like 
the mouse that came here for a new tail." 

"What was that ?" inquired Frank. 

** Oh ! he said he was alive ; and he ran round 
and round several times till he caught on a pebble, 



76 HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 

and fell over on his side, and then he began to 
whizz as if a big insect had got inside him. He 
had just strength enough to say, *Wind me up!* 
before he stopped, or he would never have run 
about any more. . He was clockwork. Where are 
you wound up ? " 

The little oddity approached Frank, and began 
to feel his face, apparently taking his mouth to be 
the place to wind him up. Frank then saw, for 
the first time, that instead of four fingers and a 
thumb on each hand, Gloogumpehst had four slugs 
and a snail ; and when the cold slimy things 
touched his skin, he could not repress a shudder. 

" Where 's your box, then ?" said Gloogumpehst, 
suddenly, 

" Box ! What box ? " asked Frank. 

" Oh, nonsense ! I felt your springs quiver thea 
You are only a Jack-in-the-box that 's come loose. 
But how can I mend you if you haven't brought 
your box with you ? " Frank dissented. 

" Oh, not a jack-in-the — not — not a — a — a" 

said Gloogumpehst, drowsily. 



HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 77 

Frank had noticed that his companion had been 
growing gradually heavy and dull. Now he kept 
on repeating " a " in various keys and intonations, 
which sounded like talking but wasn't sense. It 
was a sort of tune something like this : 




Frank opened his eyes in wonder. Gloogum- 
pehst by a great effort checked himself, and mur- 
mured, in a faint voice, "Stir!" — indicating at 
the same time the brush -handle in his helmet. 
Frank took it, and stirred it round and round. 
Gloogumpehst instantly brightened up. 

" Ah, that 's better I " said he. " You see it 
settles down after a time. — the thick of one's 
brains. Let me see — what was I saying ? Oh ! 
are not you a Jack-in-the-Box ? " 

" No I " said Frank, sturdily. " I 'm a boy — ^a-— 
a human child." 

Gloogumpehst bounded towards him, and clap- 
ped his slimy hand on his mouth. 



78 IIOIV FRAXA' PARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 

" Hush ! " he said, looking round anxiously, 
** Don't say that again. They *d kill you." 

** Who would ? " asked Frank. 

** The toys, of course." 

" What toys ? " 

** Then you really don't know?" said Gloogum- m 
pehst, looking at Frank with wonder. " Why, thi^ i 
is where all the broken toys come to be mended, -t 
And, as most of their sufferings and fractures ar^^ 
caused by " — here he whispered in Frank's ear^*^ 
" human children," and then he raised his voice tcr=:== 
its natural pitch again — " of course they hate^ 
them ; and if they caught one here, would certainljr** 
kill it You 'd better pass yourself off as a new- 
sort of doll. You haven't as nice a pink and white 
complexion as most dolls have — but I might paint 
you up a bit." 

Frank declined the offer. 

"Well, it's a matter of taste," said his com- 
panion; " but / think it would be an improvement" 

** So this is a sort of dolls' hospital," observed 
Frank, to change the subject 



HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 79 

" Yes, of course ! Yes, you might call it that ; 
and I am the surgeon, to be sure : yes." 

" It must be very curious," Frank observed. 

" Would you like to see it 1 " asked his friend. 

" Very much indeed ! " 

" But you must be very careful. Don't you 
mention that — that word, you know, because it 's 
bad for their health, and stops their recovery. And 
if they were to suspect you were a — you know, 
that word — they would certainly kill you." 

" They 're very revengeful," said Frank. 

" Ah, of course ! But then think what tortures 
they undergo, quite unnecessarily for the mere 
cruelty or caprice of — of that word." 

Frank's conscience pinched him as he recalled 
the collection of wooden legs that he had left at 
home, and felt alarmed at the prospect of what 
might happen to him if he was discovered to be 
a human child, and especially one that had com- 
mited such terrible havoc among the doll com- 
munity. 

" Well, of course. Come along!" said Gloogum- 



8o HOW FRANK FARED^N TEUMENDTLANDT, 

pehst, but he didn't move, all the same : " come- 
a — long — long — come — and — we " — 




^: 



We WB -yyg WB ire we -^g WE wb we ire we -^^ we WE 



Frank saw what was the matter, and seizing the 
brush-handle, proceeded as before, with th^ same 
effect. 

" Capital ! Quite refreshing, to be sure ! " said 
Gloogumpehst. "Now we '11 start." 

They proceeded on their way, and presently 
came in sight of a large building. 

" That 's it," said Gloogumpehst, " and now, as I 
shall have my duties to attend to, I 'd better take 
some refreshment." 

He sat down by the road, and taking a handful 
of glue, stuffed it into his mouth, and then put his 
feet into the glue-pot. Frank sat down on a box 
that was close by, but in a few seconds the lid flew 
up with a pop that threw Frank over backwards. 



HOW FRANK FARED IM TEUMENDTLANDT, 81 

A figure with a shock of rough hair, two goggly 
eyes, and a fiery complexion, sprang out of the box, 
trembling with excitement. 

** How dare you sit down on a gentleman ? " he 
shouted ; " how dare you ? and you only a common 
doll, and badly painted too ! What do you mean 
by coming and sit — " here he suddenly collapsed 
and the lid closed on him. 

"He does that to recruit his strength," said 
Gloogumpehst, hurriedly, and as he finished the lid 
flew up, and the figure reappeared, continuing his 
speech as if it had not been interrupted. 

" — ting on a gentleman and his palatial resi- 
dence, as if he were a common chair. The 
auda " — here the box closed again. 

" He 's out here taking the air," explained 
Gloogumpehst. 

" — city ! " continued the Jack-in-the-Box, re- 
appearing, " of a mere sixpenny doll to take such 
a liberty. If I were not an in " — here the lid fell 
again. 

" Let 's go," said Frank. 



82 HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 

4 

" That wouldn't be polite," answered his com- 
panion. 

** — valid, I 'd frighten you into fits, I would — I 
would — I would ! " shrieked the reappearing figure, 
and then, exhausted by his efforts, he lolled over 
the side of his box, shaking feebly. 

** Now apologize,'* whispered Gloogumpehst to 
Frank, who at once did so, and was graciously 
pardoned as the old man slowly sank back in his 
box and the lid fell. 

They now entered the building, where, on low 
beds, lay hundreds of toys in various stages of 
mending. Gloogumpehst stopped at the bed-side 
of a kite which had a large rent in it. A card 
hung above with the words, ** A paste plaster 
every morning after breakfast, and three drops of 
gum at bed-time." 

" You 'd better take your drops now/' sai 
Gloogumpehst, bending down his head. 

The kite took the brush out of the surgeon 
head, and dropped three drops on his wound, 
placing the brush. 




HO W FRANK FARED IN TEUMEND TLAND T, 83 

"Wonderful stuff that gum ! " said the surgeon 
to Frank, as they were crossing a courtyard to the 
next ward. " I suppose you haven't got such a 
thing where you live ? '* 

Frank explained that it was in common use, 
adding that he had a bottle of mucilage of his own. 

" Who ? " said Gloogumpehst, stopping short. 

" Mucilage ! " said Frank. 

** Mucilage ! " mused the other : " what a pretty 
name. Is she very beautiful } Is she married } " 

Frank said he could not tell ; it was a kind of 
gum. Gloogumpehst sat down on a bench, and 
meditatively put his feet into the glue-pot. 

** Mucilage ! '* he murmured. " I — I wonder if 
she would marry me ? " 

Frank said he would ask if he ever got back. 

'* Ah, if you ever get back ! I 'm afraid you 

^on't: that's it. If you — ever — back — ever — if, 
if-, 




// if if IP if IF if 1/ if IF 1/ Jf if IP if 



84 HOIV FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 

Frank stirred the brush again, and Gloogum- 
pehst recovered his wits. 

" Well, you '11 ask for me if you do get back ! — 
so, now come along. To be sure 1 if you get back, 
of course.'* 

Frank felt rath«r depressed in spirits at his 
friend's doubt of his return home. He had rather 
feared to contemplate the possibility, and now that 
Gloogumpehst seemed to think his chance so very 
uncertain, his heart sank within him. 

" This is the musical ward. It is not in my charge 
as a rule ; but the regular surgeon, Twangletoo, is 
away for his holiday, and I jam doing his work for 
him. You '11 find it a little noisy, of course. To be 
sure, that 's only natural." 

Here he opened the door, but, to Frank's as- 
tonishment, not a sound could he hear. The fact 
seemed to surprise Gloogumpehst too. Strangely 
enough, there was plenty of movement, but it was 
all silent. 

There was a white rabbit with a tambourine. It 
was twitching its ears, and rolling its eyes uncom- 



HO W FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLAND T. 85 

fortably, but it did not raise its sticks from the 
parchment There was a soldier vigorously beat- 
ing a side-drum, but without producing the ghost 
of a tap. There was a little figure turning the 
handle of an organ, without eliciting the slightest 
tinkle. There were musical carts running round 
and round, but as mute as mummies ; and there 
were babies' rattles shaking their bells furiously, 
but the bells were dumb. 

Frank drew nearer and examined the patients. 
The rabbit's sticks were glued to the parchment ; 
the head of the soldier's drum had been removed, 
and the drum was filled with paste. The grinder's 
organ was choked with gum; the wires of the 
musical carts were covered thickly with glue, and 
the bells on the rattles oozing over with gum. 
Frank saw how it was at a glance. Gloogumpehst's 
treatment was capital for torn kites, broken dolls, 
and ragged picture-books, but it was not suited for 
the repair of musical instruments. Gloogumpehst 
himself seemed impressed with the same idea, for, 
saying hurriedly something about the treatment 



«6 HOfV FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT. 

not having had time to do its work yet, he too ^^ 
Frank by the arm and hustled him out of th^r 
place. 

** It 's a great responsibility undertaking anoth^s 
doctor's duties," he observed, when they were oui^ 
side : " one has very difficult cases of one's ow 
that puzzle one quite enough. Now, there's ^ 
gazelle out of a Noah's ark there :" he pointed t:0' 
a paddock in which the creature was propped up 
against the railings : " it has got a leg broken off, 
and the limb is so slender there 's no hold for glue." 

"Why don't you make a false leg with a pin ?" 
asked Frank, remembering how at times he had 
resorted to that method of making his broken 
animals stand. 

" I don't understand," said Gloogumpehst 

" Oh, look here," said Frank, taking a pin out 
of his waistcoat, and sticking it into the gazelle, 
and so enabling it to stand without leaning against 
the rails. 

"Wonderful!" said Gloogumpehst, examining 
the artificial limb. " Have you any more ? " 



HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 87 

Frank, of course, always had a lot of pins stuck 
in the comer of his waistcoat, to provide for tears 
and rents, so he took out his stock and presented 
it to his friend. 

" Very good 1 excellent ! " said Gloogumpehst. 
" It 's — it 's a sort of wire, isn't it ? " 

Frank assented. 

" I wonder," said Gloogumpehst to himself, " if it 
would do those musical toys any good to stick a 
few into them. I don't think paste or glue pr gum 
seems to suit their consti — constit — suit — their — 
constitutions. I — I " — 




Frank revived him with a stir. 

" Excellent ! Thank you. Yes, of course, quite 
right again ! " said Gloogumpehst. " And now you 
must be very careful, for this is the Dolls' Ward ; 
and if you are not prudent, they may suspect that 
you are not a doll." 



88 HO W FRANK FARED IN TE UMEND TLAND T. 

Frank followed the surgeon with grave app: 
hension. The first beds were occupied by w 
dolls. One had lost her sight : you could hear t 
eyeballs rattle inside her head when she movt 
The other had been held against the hot bars a 
grate, and was scored with deep scars across 1 
face. A china doll had a large crack down 1 
cheek and across her neck ; and another had h 
all her hair torn off. 

" It 's very odd," said Gloogumpehst, as th 
were entering the next ward, '' how many wooc 
dolls have come here lately that have lost legs, 
seems to be quite an epidemic.'* 

Frank turned with the intention of fleeing. E 
it was too late ! He was recognized. There la^ 
whole regiment of his sister's dolls, whose lin' 
he had heartlessly torn off. With a loud shri^ 
they all leapt up in their beds, and began scran: 
ling after him as best they could with their ar: 
and single legs, of swinging their trunks betwe 
their hands. 

" A child 1 a cruel child I *' was the cry, and 



HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 89 

was taken up from ward to ward, as all the disabled 
toys that were not hopelessly bedridden rushed 
out in pursuit. 

Frank bolted as fast as his legs could carry him 
— but he could see little chance of escape, for the 
steep walls of the ravine closed in on both sides, 
and the winding way before him seemed to stretch 
away into space. All at once his eye caught sight 
of a stout creeper that climbed up the perpendicu- 
lar cliff. Forgetting in the present peril that he 
might reach the top only to fall a prey to his insect 
foes, he scrambled up the trailing stem, and, after 
a sharp struggle, reached the top, and flung him- 
self down breathless on the greensward. 

Presently he was startled by the sound of de- 
tached stones rolling down the cliff. He looked 
over in alarm, and saw Gloogumpehst climbing up 
by the aid of his snail and slug hands. 

" Don't be afraid," said Gloogumpehst. " I 'm a 
friend. I want just to say * good bye.' " 

It was pleasant to Frank to have a friend, even 
though such an uncouth one ; so he waited' till the 



90 HOW FRANK FARED IN TEUMENDTLANDT, 

little man reached the top and sat down, wiping 
from his forehead the drops of gum that oozed out 
in the form of perspiration. 

" You must be — must — you — ^you — ^be — ^be — 




BB BE j^g be he be j-^^ 6e bb be BE \y^ be BE bb 



Frank applied the usual restorative. 

"All right! Thank you! Of course. To be sure. 
I 'm all right again now ! " panted GloogumpehsL 
" But what a cruel boy you must be to break up 
dolls like that ! " 

Frank expressed his penitence, and promised 
never to be so wicked again. 

" All right ! No, you won't, of course. Well, 
good bye ! I hope you 11 get away all .safe. But 
I doubt it — I do indeed ! But if you do, you won't 
forget my message to Mucilage, will you ? No, of 

course. To be sure, you won't ! Good bye ! " — 

« 

and he slid over the edge — ^but before disappear- 
ing, he bent his head down again : "You wouldn't 



NOW^ FRANK FARED IN TEVMENDTLANDT. 91 

care for one parting stir ? You would, of course. 
To be sure : I thought so ! " 

So Frank took a parting stir, and the next 
minute found himself all alone again in a strange 
land. 





CHAPTER SIX. 

WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. 

LjEFT to himself, Frank began to survey th 
scene around him. The country seemed pleasantl 
varied. There were woods and pastures, hills an 
valleys, rocks and streams, on every side. Ther 



WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN QUADRUPEDREMIA, 93 

did not appear to be any birds or insects, but, to 
judge from various sounds which he heard in the 
distance, he fancied there must be a good many 
wild animals about. This did not minister to his 
peace of mind, for he had been to the Zoological 
Gardens very often, and had a lively remembrance 
of bears, tigers, and lions, and other ferocious 
beasts. Once he had ventured too close to the 
cage of a big monkey, and it had caught hold of 
him ; but luckily the keeper pulled him away. 
But he had dreamt for nights afterwards of all 
kinds of extraordinary brutes, and had been almost 
afraid to sleep in consequence. 

So you may guess he went onward in fear and 
trembling, looking cautiously on all sides for fear 
of meeting some savage pionster that would gobble 
him up. He started at the rustle of a leaf, and 
once when he heard something give a loud splash 
in a pool he was passing, he gave such a jump that 
he hit his head against an overhanging bough. 

Presently he heard somebody singing, and 
hoping to fall in with some human being, he has- 



94 



WHA T HAPPENED TO FRANK 



tened in the direction of the sound. But as he 
got nearer, the voice sounded so strange — some- 
thing between a grunt and a whistle — that he 
stopped awhile to listen. This is what he heard. 
Some of the words puzzled him, but the air 

seemed familiar : 

Song. 

Ke dreamt that he saw the Buffalant, 

And the spottified Dromedaraffe, 
The blue Camelotamus, lean and gaunt, 
And the wild Tigerocercs calf. 

Yes, the Ca-amelotamus, le-ean and gaunt, 
And the Ti-ti-geroceros ca-a-a-alf, 
And the Ti-i-geroceros calf ! 

The maned Liodillo loudly roared, 

And the Peccarbok whistled its whine, 
The Chinchayak leapt on the dewy sward, 
As it hunted the pale Baboopine. 

Yes, the Chi-inchayak on the dew-ewy sward. 
It hu-unted the pale Baboopi-i-i-ine, 
It hu-unted the Ba-aboopine ! 

He dreamt that he met the Crocoghau, 

As it swam in the Stagnolent Lake ; 
But everything that in dreams he saw 
Came of eating too freely of cake. 

Yes, e-everything that in dre-eams he saw 
Was e-eating too freely of ca-a-a-ake — 
From e-ating too-oo much cake ! 



, . "' r YORK ■ 



\ 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. 95 

The voice came from behind a rock. Frank 
crept quietly up and peeped over. A most extra- 
ordinary sight met his gaze. 

In the centre of an amphitheatre of rocks was 
gathered together the queerest assembly of four- 
footed creatures you ever saw. Frank, fresh from 
his experiences of Teumendtlandt, thought to him- 
self that it was as if you had shaken up the Zoo- 
logical Gardens and the Natural History collection 
at the British Museum in a bag, until you broke 
everything into bits, and had then glued the pieces 
together haphazard in the dark. 

In the centre a Zecamelobra was playing at cards 
with a Batonkey and an Armaskullamus, while an 
Elegoapard was tossing-up with a Bob-tailed Wal- 
loon. A Kangarillo was seated on the head of a 
Monkape, watching the card party, with a Gazelroo 
looking over its shoulder. A Pigorselope stood far- 
ther off, and just below Frank, a Pumag, with a pair of 
^oble antlers, was talking gravely witha Lepunicorn. 

" Fifteen two and a pair are ninety-four, and ten 
^e thirty-one, and eight are three hundred, and a 



96 WIIA T HAPPENED TO FRANK 

flush twenty-two. That 's a rub," said the Arma- 
skuUamus. 

The Zecamelobra sat thinking it over solemnly, 
evidently being a bad hand at scoring. But the 
Batonkey said, 

" Pooh ! Two-and-two-are-six-and-two-are-eight- 
and-two-are-twelve-and-a-pair-forty-all-told." And 
then he paused for breath. 

" Oh, my poor head ! " said the ArmaskuUamus. 

" I don't think you 're right, either of you," said 
the Zecamelobra, who had been counting on his 
stripes just as some people count on their fingers. 
** I make it twelve, and it can't be more ! " 

" Why can't it be more ? " asked the Batonkey, 
spitefully. 

" Why, look here," said the Zecamelobra, simply, 
" I 've counted it on the stripes of my left foreleg, 
and there are only twelve stripes on ikat ; so it 
must be twelve. It can't be more." 

" But I 've counted it on my teeth ! " said the 
ArmaskuUamus ; ** and there are twenty-four of 
them, not counting tusks 1 " 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. 97 

" Oh, bother!" broke in the Elegoapard; "what 's 
the use of disputing ? Toss up for it." 

" What shall we toss ? " asked the Gazelroo, 
lowering its horns. 

" That boy," grunted the Kangarillo, pointing to 
Frank, who turned to fly, but found his path cut 
off by a ferocious Racoodrill, which was something 
between an opossum and a big baboon. In a 
moment he was conducted into the centre of 
the assembled quadrupeds in the rocky amphi- 
theatre. 

There was a tremendous gnashing of teeth, 
tossing of horns, and waving of trunks going on, 
to the accompaniment of various discordant noises, 
that painfully reminded Frank of the Zoological 
Gardens at feeding-time. 

" Pinch him ! " said the Pumag to the Racoo- 
drill. "Is he fat?" 

The Racoodrill gave Frank a grip that made 
him writhe. 

" Dee-licious!" said the Racoodrill, licking his 
lips. 



98 WHAT HAPPENED TO FRAhK 

I 

"Tender?" asked the Armaskullamus, whose 
teeth were evidently rather loose and carious. 

The Racoodrill gently bit Frank's cheek ; but 
not so gently as not to make Frank wince. 

" Soft — like lamb ! " said the Racoodrill. 

" Then let 's dine," said the Walroon, sharpening 
his big tusks against a handy rock. 

" Thank you, I Ve d — dined," said Frank, in . 
desperation. 

" All the better ; you '11 be nicer to eat," growledJ 
the Pigorselope. 

" But what do you want to eat me for ? " askedX 
Frank. 

"Why did you dream, then ? " said the Arma— 
skullamus, fiercely. 

" Please, I can't help dreaming now and then," 
expostulated Frank, 

" Why did you eat too much plum cake ? " said 
the Elegoapard, snappishly. 

" Please, I don't think I did ! ". was Frank's 
reply. 

" And when you do dream," growled the Arma^ 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. 99 

skullamus, "why, the British Museum, dont you 
finish things off properly ? " 

" I don't understand you ! " said Frank, com- 
pletely bewildered ; ** and what have my dreams 
or my cake got to do with your eating me ? " 

" Look at us ! " said the Lepunicorn. *' Did you 
ever see anything like us alive before ? " 

'* N — no ! I don't think I ever did," Frank was 
obliged to confess. 

" That 's an untruth ! " bellowed the Walroon. 

" No, It isn t," said Frank, though at the same 
time he felt a conviction creeping over him that 
these strange creatures were not altogether un- 
familiar to him. 

" But it is, though, all the same," said the Zeca- 
melobra, who was apparently less ferocious than 
the others. 

** Would you be kind enough to explain it all to 
me ? " said Frank, in his most persuasive tones. 

" Well, well, it can't do any harm to tell him," 
said the Zecamelobra to the others, who gave a 
grudging assent. 



7—2 



1614:6ei 



loo IV/fA T HAPPENED TO JA CK 

*' Look here," said the Zecamelobra, " do you 
recollect when the big monkey got hold of you at 
the Zoological Gardens ? " 

ft 

*' Yes, I do," said Frank, with a shudder. 

'' That night when you went home very much 
frightened, you were made a great fuss of, and had 
a glass of currant wine and some cake given you.'* 

'' Yes," assented Frank, " I remember it ; — ^plum 
cake." 

** Well, you ate a great deal too much of it, and 
made yourself ill, and had bad dreams." 

" Certainly, very bad dreams." 

" Very well. And then you dreamt us ! " said 
the Zecamelobra. 

And thereupon Frank remembered that the 
horrors of his dreams had been something of the 
kind, and could account for the apparent familiarity 
of these extraordinary brutes. 
^ '* Yes ! " grumbled the ArmaskuUamus ; ** but the 
worst of it is you didn't dream us out complete. 
Why, the British Museum, couldn't you finish us 
off properly ? " 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. lot 

** What do you mean ? " inquired Frank. 

" Look at my head," said the creature ; "it 's only 
a skull ! And the brains inside have shrivelled up 
into a little dry lump, and roll about into odd 
corners, where they cian't always be found when 
\vanted. That 's why they can cheat me in scoring 
at cards ! " and he ground his teeth and scowled at 
the Zecamelobra. The Batonkey laughed. 

" Look at my legs," broke in the Elegoapard ; 
*' they are only bones ! Why, the Taxidermy, didn't 
you dream a skin to them ? " 

** Yes, and look at my tail!" growled the Walroon, 
" These knobs are always catching in the forks of 
trees and clefts of rocks. My backbone aches with 
the constant jerks it gets.'' 

" And what 's the use of my horn ? " said the 
Lepunicorn, sullenly ; ** it 's stuck on the top of my 
head where I can't see it, and so I 'm never sure of 
hitting anything with it." 

Of course Frank was conscious that he was not 
to blame for incongruities arising from a dream ; 
but he could not but remember that, when he had 



102 WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK 

laughed at the animals in Noah s Ark, and fancied 
he could invent better ones, he had not proceeded 
to construct them with any regard to the mutual 
fitness of the various portions he had designed to 
join together. He was silent. 

*'Come! dinner's ready!" said the Armaskul- 
lamus. 

" No, it isn't though ! " said Frank. 

"Anyhow, we're ready for dinner!" cried the 
Pumaof. 

*' Gentlemen," said Frank, catching at a straw as 
a last despairing effort, " when I came here some- 
body was singing." 

''It was the Zecamelobra," said the Batonkey, 
with a sneer. 

" It was very beautiful," said Frank. 

" I was singing, certainly," said the Zecamelobra, 
with diffidence. 

" Well, before you eat me," urged Frank, " I 
should like to hear one more song." 

'' Would you, really ? " said the Zecamelobra, 
eagerly. 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA. 103 

" Will it make you more tender ? " inquired the 
A rmaskuUamus. 

" It will soften me to tears/' declared Frank. 

a 

" That will give him a nice salt flavour," said 
the Gazelroo. 

'* Well, then, sing," said the Walroon, reluctantly, 
" but look here : don't let it be too long." 

" No : by Crackling ! if it is," said the Pigorse- 
lope, " we '11 eat you too, Mr. Zecamelobra ! " 

The Zecamelobra put on a plaintive expression, 
and with his head on one side commenced rocking 
to and fro gently, while he sang the following 

ditty : 

A Lullaby. 

The little tigers are at rest, 
Coiled within their cozy nest ; 
The sympathetic crocodile 
Is sleeping with a placid smile ; 
The all-embracing bounteous bear 
Dreams sweetly in his lowly lair \ — 
Only the purple-nosed baboon, 
Who loves the pale inconstant moon, 

Snores in his throat 

His plaintive note — 



I04 WHA T HAPPENED 70 FRANK 

Gug-gug-gug-gug, aroo, garoon ! 

Lullaby ! 

Lullaby! 
Glug-gug-gug-gug, aroo, garoon ! 

The snapping turtle softly shrinks 
Within its shell, for forty winks ; 
The ringed and rufous ocelot 
Is slumbering in its leafy cot ; 
The vampire has its graces hid 
Beneath the sleeper's coverlid, 

Only the bandy-legged baboon, 
The lover of the fickle moon, 
Wails through his nose 
Sonorous woes — 
Gug-gug-gug-gug, aroo, garoon ! 
Lullaby ! 
Lullaby ! 
Glug-gug-gug-gug, aroo, garoon ! 



The effect of this lugubrious lay upon the 
various creatures was a surprise as well as a 
delight to Frank. The Walroon, after beating 
time for awhile with his tail, dropped off into a 
nap. The Elegoapard snored audibly through his 
trunk. The Lepunicorn leant up against the 



IN QUADRUPEDREMIA, 105 

Pumag, and their two heads began to nod in time 
together. The Gazelroo stretched his long legs 
beside the Pigorselope, and both were soon asleep. 
The Batonkey, after making some wonderful faces, 
followed their example ; and the Armaskullamus, 
giving one or two prodigious yawns, resigned him- 
self to slumber. In short, by the end of the 
second verse all were in a state of unconscious- 
ness, except the Zecamelobra, who still rocked to 
and fro, and kept singing the chorus over and 
over again. 

Presently he turned to Frank, and, without 
ceasing his melody, signed to him to go away. 
Frank didn't want two hints, but as he turned to 
leave, he couldn't resist whispering his thanks to 
his preserver. 

The Zecamelobra smiled — opened his mouth 
wide — and pointed to his teeth. 

" All right ! I 'm graminivorous," he chanted in 
a slow voice, and then stretching himself on the 
grass, pretended to fall asleep like the others. 
But the last that Frank saw of him as he plunged 



io6 WHAT HAPPENED TO FRANK IN QUADRUPEDREMTA. 

into a thick wood, to conceal himself from pursuit, 
was that he had raised his Head to see the fugitive 
safely away. When Frank turned, he waved his 
fore foot and pointed once more to his teeth. 





CHAPTER SEVEN. 



1 H E wood which Frank had entered was very 
thick — so ovei^rown with underwood that for a 
long way he had to crawl on his hands and knees, 
in order to get forward. But he did not mind that 



io8 CONCERNING THE CINGERBREADIANS 

SO much, as he felt it would be an effectual means 
of hiding his retreat from his four-footed foes. So 
he \va§ more amused than alarmed when, as he 
was sitting down to rest at the foot of a tree where 
there was a little open space and a comfortable dis- 
position of roots that formed a sort of natural arm- 
chair, he heard a distant howling, grunting, and 
bellowing, which proved that his late captors had 
waked up and discovered his evasion. He listened 
attentively to see if the sounds came any nearer ; 
but they, on the contrary, seemed to die away in 
the opposite direction, and he felt, therefore, half 
inclined to believe that the good-natured Zecame- 
lobra had done him further service by sending his 
pursuers off on the wrong track. He hoped it was 
the case, for he had had a lurking suspicion that 
when the fierce carnivora awoke to find that their 
prey had escaped them, they might take their re- 
venge on his graminivorous benefactor for having 
sung them off to sleep by his very monotonous 
lullaby. 

Feeling secure from pursuit, Frank rose and 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS, 109 

proceeded leisurely on his travels. The sense of. 
danger having disappeared, it was succeeded by 
another feeling not much more agreeable. Frank 
began to discover that he was fearfully hungry. 
He looked up at the trees in hopes of seeing some 
eatable fruit Alas ! he had, without noticing it, 
wandered into a part of the wood that consisted 
entirely of those toy-trees, with shaving foliage, 
smooth stems, and little round green stands, with 
which he was well acquainted. There were no 
fruits to be seen, and if there had been, Frank 
fancied they would only be wooden ones, and so 
not fit to eat. There was nothing to be done, there- 
fore, but to push on in hopes of reaching some 
place where he could procure eatables. 

All of a sudden he came unexpectedly upon a 
treat. Under one of the trees was lying a ginger- 
bread figure — one of those which one sees in the 
cake-booths at fairs among the spice-nuts — a figure 
of a King, decorated with a little fluttering Dutch . 
metal, which children fondly believe to be real 
gold-leaf. Without more ado, Frank snatched it 



no CONCERNING THE GINGERB RE AVIANS 

up, and hungrily biting its head off, as the easiest 
thing to begin with, proceeded to eat it up, every 
bit. 

He had a sort of idea that something inside his 
mouth said, " Oh, don't ! " and fancied that the 
body twisted about while he was devouring it. 
But by this time he was growing accustomed to 
marvels, so he took very little notice. 

Refreshed by this light repast, he plucked up cou- 
rage to proceed on his way, and even found heart 
enough to set up a whistle, which did him almost 
as much good as the gingerbread ; for, like most 
boys, he was an inveterate whistler, but had lately 
gone through so many perils and vicissitudes, that 
he had not had an opportunity of indulging his 
musical taste. 

He had not proceeded very far, before he was 
aware of several curious brown objects that were 
gliding along to meet him. As they came closer, 
they gave a sort of half- wheel, and then he saw 
what they were. A long procession of ginger- 
bread Kings and Queens, rich in rustling Dutch 



AND KING BO WWO WRIUS, 1 1 1 

metal^ was marching — or rather gliding — to meet 
him. 

All were evidently cast in the same mould, and 
each was decorated with an equal amount of tinsel. 
It seemed to him impossible to distinguish one 
King or one Queen from another, they were all so 
exactly alike. 

They formed in a sort of semicircle around him, 
and bowed all at the same moment in a stiff and 
constrained manner. Frank bowed in return. 

" You must be gingerbread of the highest quality, 
sir," said the nearest King, in a thick, stifled voice, 
as if it was difficult to talk through the glaze that 
■covered him. 

Immediately all the other Kings and Queens set 
up a chorus, in the same stuffy sort of voice : 

The Gingerbread Chorus. 

Two pounds and a half of flour — 

(Take care that it isn't sour) — 

Of butter half a pound — 

(Be sure that it 's fresh and sound) — 

One lenaon's grated rind — 

(It must not be bitter, mind). 



112 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

This receipt is a swinge-er 

For making the best of ginger — 

The best of gingerbread ! 
Of ginger, ginger, ginger— 

The very best, be it said, 

Of ginger — gingerbread ! 

Moist sugar, ounces four — 
(And mind it isn't more) — 
Ground ginger, half an ounce — 
(So the greatest cooks pronounce). 
Make it in a paste-like form. 
With a pound and half of treacle warm. 
In an oven, not a singer, 
Will make you the best of ginge-er — 

The best of gingerbread ! 
Of ginger, ginger, ginger— 
The very best, be it said, 
Of ginger — ^gingerbread ! " 

When the singers had done, they all bov/ed 
very stiffly again, and Frank once more returned 
the compliment. 

** But," said the first speaker, " that receipt must 
have been a hundredandninetyeightupled to make 

so much of you ! " 

Frank remembered the unpopularity of human 



s 



AND KING BO WWO WRIUS. 1 1 3 

children among the inhabitants of Teumendtlandt, 
and he thought that their gobbling propensities 
were not calculated to win the regard of the 
Gingerbreadians. So he discreetly held his tongue 
about what he was, and simply declared what he 
was not 

" Please, your Majesties," he said, with a low 
bow, " I have not the honour to be anything as 
good as gingerbread." 

" Oh ! we 're not Majesties at all," said the King 
who had addressed him. 

" But you wear crowns and gold," answered 
Frank. 

" Oh, we all wear crowns and gold. That 's 
nothing. We're all alike. You should see our 
King. He is beautiful, if you like ! " 

" Indeed?" said Frank. 

** Yes ! very indeed," said the other. 

" Oh ! " said Frank, at a loss for any other 
remark. 

"Yes! very — very oh! He's got white curly 
hair, and a tail and ears." 

8 



114 CONCERNING THE GINGERS RE A DIANS 

" You don't say so ! " said Frank. " Perhaps 
he 's a sheep ? " 

" No, he isn't," said the King, hurriedly. " No, 
very not a sheep. Sheeps say ' Baa ! ' don t they ? " 

Frank said he beHeved they did. 

" Ah ! " said the other, " Ae says, * Yap ! yap ! ' 
It's beautiful to hear him. We only talk Zing- 
gibberish, you know." 

"He must be a dog, then," said Frank. 

" Yes, but not a very real dog. Very real dogs 
eat gingerbread. He 's a toy-dog, and his name 
is " — here the gingerbread figure adopted an awe- 
struck tone, that seemed almost sticky, it was so 
sweet and thick — " his name is Bowwowrius." 

All the other Kings and Queens at once set up 
the following anthem : 

" Long live Bowwowrius, 
Sing we in chowrius ; 
Long live Bowwowrius, 

Long may he snap ! 
Long may he dowry us 
With joys uprowrious ; 
Long live Bowwowrious ! 

Yap ! yap ! yap 1 yap 1" 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS. 115 

** Please, what's a chowrius ? " asked Frank. 

" Oh, it's a sort of a part-song." 

" And what's uprowrious ?" Frank inquired. 

" Well, it 's a kind of uproary — ^belonging to an 
uprow." 

" But isn't that rather nonsense ? " urged Frank. 

" Well, yes, it may seem like that ; but then it 's 
poetry, don't you see ? " replied the King, appa- 
rently quite satisfied with the explanation he gave. 

" I wonder if I could see the King ?" said Frank, 
for want of something better to remark, 

" We can ask the Prime Minister, at any rate. 
His Majesty might desire to see a visitor who is so 
large." 

"And where is the Prime Minister?" Frank 
asked. 

*'In the Parliament House with the King, of 
course," answered the gingerbread figure. 

** Where Parliament meets ? " 

** It isn't meat," said the other ; " it 's cake — 
^^^gerbread in large squares, with zigzagged edges. 

ry! 

8 — 2 



^ernr I " 



ii6 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

" Oh ! " said Frank. 

" Very oh indeed !" answered his informant, \? 
great gravity. 

" I wonder whether I can find my way ? " 
served Frank. 

" Well, you see, we 're looking for Charles 
First." 

" Charles the First ? " said Frank, astonished 

" Yes. He 's one of us ; very one of us. He 1 
always been rather feeble in constitution. Th( 
was some bitter lemon-peel in him from the first 
believe. He 's subject to low spirits, and says v( 
often that he knows he shall lose his head. He c 
not come home to-day at the usual time, so we cai 
to look for him. He may have broken himself 
a fit of depression. You haven't met him, ha 
you?" 

Frank shook his head, but his conscience ^ 
very uneasy. 

" Well, perhaps he 's back by this time, so 
will return, and then we can show you the ^ 
Our House of Parliament is a triumph of ar< 



AND KING BO WWO WRIUS, 1 1 7 

tecture. It was built by James the Second, after 
the model of a card house he saw when he was 
among the human ogres." 

" What are they ? " asked Frank, with pretended 
Ignorance. 

" Children ! " answered the other, with a shudder. 
" Janies was the only one of us who had ever seen 
them. His description was awful ! " 

** Where is he now ? " asked Frank, with some 
^ety, for it occurred to him that this experienced 
traveller might recognize him as a child. 

**0h, when he finished the House of Parlia- 
nient the Prime Minister condemned him to be 
broken." 

** What for ? " asked Frank, in amazement. 

** Why, don't you very see ? It was so beautiful, 
we Were afraid he might build another very more 
'dutiful, or even very quite as beautiful, so we 
consulted the Prime Minister, and he said at once, 
' Break him ! ' and we did so. But his crumbs lie 
^^ state in one of the halls of the House of Par- 
liament." 



ii8 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

" What is the Prime Minister's name ? " inquired 
Frank. 

" Bluff King Hal," answered the gingerbread 
man. 

" And what is your name ? " 

" Mine ? Oh ! Tm only William the Con- 
queror/' was the diffident reply. 

" And how did Bluff King Hal come to be made 
Prime Minister ? " asked Frank, whose curiosity 
was aroused by the queer ways of this simple 
people. 

** He 's got gold-leaf on his nose. You will 
recognize him by that. Very by that. If he 
hadn't, you could not tell him from us common 



ones." 



" But I suppose that was put on after he was 
appointed Prime Minister." 

" No ; he was appointed Prime Minister because 
he had got it already. He was so much more dis- 
tinguished than the rest of us. Very more dis- 
tinguished ! " was the explanation. 

" Indeed ! " remarked Frank. 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS, 119 



** ^ ^^, very — very indeed. Look ! there is the 
Hous^ Qf Parliament/' 

F^^rik looked, and sure enough there was a 

buildxt^g constructed of those thin flat cakes of 

ging^irlDread known to all good boys and girls as 

** Pari Jament." It was, as William the Conqueror 

had alleged, built on the model of such a house as 

one builds with eight cards. Two squares stand- 

^^g On end leant against each other at the top, so 

^ to look, on a side view, like the letter V i^^- 

^^rted. Two more placed on the sides against the 

A Supported another pair which formed the ends, 

^^d tY^o other squares laid flat on these, on each 

^^de of the apex of the y\, formed a roof. 

** Isn't it a triumph of architecture ? " asked the 
"conqueror. 

** It looks very nice, indeed," answered Frank, 
^t ^ith a regard rather to its eatable, than its 
Esthetic, advantages. 

* * There are three halls in it. That in the centre 
^^ Occupied by His Majesty. That on the right 
•^^longs to the Prime Minister, and the crumbs of 



120 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

• 

James the Second repose in state in the left-han< 
chamber. Most noble edifice, isn't it ? Very mos 
noble! " — and the glaze on William the Conqueror 
face shone with pride and delight. 

At this moment the Prime Minister issued fror 
the House of Parliament, and Frank was dub 
introduced to him, and explained his wish to hav 
an interview with His Majesty King Bowwowrius 
The Minister listened in silence, and did not im 
mediately reply. •»' 

Frank examined him minutely. At first sigh 
he seemed exactly like all the other gingerbreac 
Kings, except that, while he was being gilt, a stra] 
atom of Dutch metal had accidentally stuck to hi: 
nose. But Frank thought, and he could not con 
vince himself that it was mere imagination, tha 
there was a cunning expression in his face,^ whict 
was wanting in the flat unimpressionable counte- 
nance of the others. But still that might have 
been only the effect of the stray bit of leaf. 

After a brief pause the Minister signed to the 
general gingerbread population to withdraw a short 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS, 121 

^^stance. His order was promptly obeyed, and he 
^Aeix advanced towards Frank, and said in a low 

"VA/^hat have you got in your pockets ? " 
-A piece of slate pencil, two bits of twine, a 
button, and a farthing top," enumerated 



cc 



"Will any of them stick on ? " asked the Prime 
^ii^ister. 



On what ? " Frank asked. 
On me, of course 1 " was the reply. 
Oh, the button might if you licked it, and 
^^^^ezed it on hard," said Frank. 

Have you a pocket-knife ? " asked the Prime 
^i leister. 

* No, but I Ve got a broken bit of a chisel- 
^-^e," replied Frank. 

**Then, when I introduce you into the House, 
^^^ those two things into the chamber on the 
^'lit," said the other. And then he fell again to 
^^ Vising and murmuring to himself. 

I'rank listened, and heard him mumble some- 



122 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

thing about " If I could get a few more things to 
stick on, I might alter my appearance very much. 
And then if I cut Bowwowrius's squeaker in the 
night, and so silenced him for ever, they might 
elect me King." Presently he roused himself, and 
turning to Frank, said, 

** Come, follow me, and I will bring you into 
His Majesty's presence. (The chamber on the 
right, remember,") he added in a lower tone. 

Frank followed him, and soon found himself 
in the royal presence. King Bowwowrius was in 
truth nothing but one of those little white woolly 
toy poodles, with a squeaking stand like a pair of 
bellows. The Prime Minister took up his position 
behind him, and Frank could plainly see him 
working the squeaking apparatus with his foot. 

" Yap ! yap ! yap ! " graciously observed the 
monarch. 

" Eh } " said Frank. 

" You musn't speak like that," said the Prime 
Minister. "His Majesty says he is graciously 
pleased to give you an audience." 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS. 123 

Frank bowed. 

" Yap ! yap ! yap ! " repeated the potentate. 

** His glorious Majesty," explained the Prime 
Minister, "says that, with regard to the offer of 
tribute you have just made, he deigns generously 
to decline it" 

Frank was conscious that he had made no such 
offer, but, as under the circumstances that did not 
signify, he simply bowed again. 

" Still," continued the Prime Minister, ** in order 
not to hurt your feelings, he is condescendingly 
pleased to permit you to bestow your intended 
offering on my unworthy self." 

What Frank would have answered to this un- 
blushing bit of roguery it is impossible to say, for 
just at that moment a tremendous uproar broke 
forth without, and a gingerbread figure, pale 
through all his brown glaze with alarm and horror, 
rushed in, followed by a crowd of others. 

" Justice ! Justice ! Murder ! " shrieked the new- 
comer. 

" What 's the matter, Richard Coeur de L^on ? " 



124 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

asked the Prime Minister, in a tone of irrita- 
tion. 

" May it please His Serene Mightiness, through 
you, Lord Prime Minister, to learn that this after- 
noon I went out for a walk with Charles the First. 
Not being very strong, he lay down under a tree 
to take a nap, while I strolled on a little farther. 
Imagine my horror, on my return, when I saw a 
huge monster — I think it must have been a human 
ogre from the record left in our archives by the 
lamented James the Second — ^take up the unfor- 
tunate Charles, and eat him ! " 

" What did you do ? " asked the Prime Minister, 
sternly. 

" I fainted away with fright," answered Richard 
Coeur de L^on, "and, as soon as I recovered, 
hurried here, as fast as my legs could glide, to 
inform you." 

" What was the monster like ? " interrogated the 
Prime Minister. 

" Like — like " — hesitated the Lion-heart,, cast- 
ing his eyes about in despair for a simile, when 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS. 125 

they suddenly fell upon Frank. " Oh ! Oooo I '* 
he shrieked, turning absolutely white, " why, there 
he is ! " 

Immediately arose the cry, 

" Fetch the boiling treacle ! Scald him to 
death ! " 

Frank had smiled at first, but when he saw the 
countless troops of gingerbread figures that came 
pouring into the House, arid heard the clamour of 
thousands of voices outside, he began to see that 
he might be driven to succumb to numbers. No 
average boy could have devoured quite so many 
acres of gingerbread. 

A sudden idea occurred to him. 

" I Ve got a gold medal and a ribbon in my 
pocket, and a bradawl. I '11 give them to you if 
you will let me escape," he said hurriedly to the 
Prime Minister. 

"Retire to my chamber while we deliberate," 
said the Prime Minister to him, haughtily. But he 
added in an undertone, ("Slip them under the 
carpet in the farther corner "). 



126 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

Frank obeyed, feeling that he was safe. In a 
few moments the Prime Minister appeared. He 
went to the corner and felt with his feet, to make 
sure that Frank had obeyed his instructions. 
Frank had hidden a penny, a bit of string, and 
the handle of an old gimlet, so that the Prime 
Minister fancied he had secured the prize. 

He led Frank into the central hall again, and 
addressed him in a solemn voice. 

" Culprit and criminal ! You ought to forfeit 
your life for this atrocity ; but his most gracious 
Majesty has been lenient to you as a stranger. 
You must know that, owing to accidents and 
natural decay, this nation is gradually becoming 
less and less numerous. It is, therefore, desirable 
to bake some new people, and we have all the 
ingredients prepared, except eggs. This nation 
can glide, but it cannot climb. As you have de- 
prived it of a useful and blameless citizen, you 
must assist to replace him. Henry the Fifth, read 
the sentence." 

A gingerbread King glided forward and read 



AND KING BOWWOWRIUS. 127 

the following words, which were stamped in can- 
died peel on a square of parliament : 

"Half a pound of fresh butter, melted ; dried 
and sifted flour, a pound and a half ; brown sugar, 
a pound and a half ; bruised ginger, a quarter of a 
pound ; rose-water and white wine, two spoonfuls 
of each ; nine eggs, the yolks and whites to be 
separately beaten." 

" Now," said the Prime Minister, " we shall 
conduct you to a place where there are lots of 
birds' nests, and you will have to climb and pro- 
cure us nine eggs." 

A procession was accordingly formed, and Frank 
was conducted through the wood to a spot where 
the toy-trees were replaced by ordinary oaks, elms, 
and beeches, in the branches of which could be 
perceived an extraordinary number of nests. 

" Climb ! " said the Prime Minister. 

Frank at once proceeded to obey him. He found 
the nest to which he had been directed contained 
several very tempting speckled eggs. Frank be- 
gan to reflect. 



128 CONCERNING THE GINGERBREADIANS 

" These would be very nice to keep, if I blew 
them, instead of taking them down to those stupid 
Gingerbreadians and that designing old Prime 
Minister. They can't climb. I can stop up here 
and stand siege till night, and then slip down and 
get away unnoticed." 

The idea delighted him. He took up one of 
the eggs, cracked one end, and applied it to his lips. 
Then leaning over the edge of the nest, he looked 
down at the assembled Gingerbreadians, and 
laughed loudly. 

"Hi! old Prime Minister! Look here, old 
Grandmother! This is the way to suck raw 
eggs ! " 

A howl of rage rose from the disappointed 
crowd. But just at this moment Frank felt a 
sharp dig in his back as if from a pickaxe, and 
then he became aware that something had hold of 
his belt, and was lifting him out of the nest. He 
looked round in alarm, and saw that he was being 
carried away by a huge bird. 




CHAPTER EIGHT. 

WHEREIN IS SHOWN HOW FRANK CAME BEFORE THE 
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 

1 HE bird carried Frank up to such an enormous 
height that he grew quite giddy, and closed his 
eyes. After a time the upward current of air told 
him he was descending again, and, looking below 



I30 now FRANK CAME BEFORE 

him, he saw a concourse of curious birds seatecz:^ -c^ 
in the branches of a tree around a huge blacLT-k 
Crow, which had a white hood like a Judge' '^ ^^ 
wig. 

His captor gradually settled on a bough just iw. i ii^ 
front of this solemn-looking bird, holding Frank ic i in 
his beak. Then he deposited him in a large nesB' .^^st, 
which contained several foolish-looking chicks ^^s, 
that all stared at him with open mouths, ano-^^d 
began to croak. 

_ ^^^ • 

" Mr. Cryer, open the Court ! " said the big^ ^^S 
black bird. 

" Oh, no ! Oh, no ! Oh, no ! " said a chirp; 
voice, just behind Frank, who turned round an( 
saw a brisk-looking little bird, resembling a Lon 
don sparrow, seated on a twig. 

"Oh, no! Oh, no! Oh, no!" cheeped tb 
Sparrow. "All inhabitatants of Featherdom^ 
hereby take -notice that by order of his August:^ 
Serenity Emperor Eagle, this Court is declared 
open for Proceedings in Air, and if any have a^ 
plaint to lay before this distinguished Commission 



:TH'": LEW YORK! 

■PUBLIC LIBRARY.! 



•THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 131 

and the Lord Chief Justice Coalblack, let him 
now twitter. Oh, no ! Oh, no ! Oh, no ! " 

" The Court is now open duly and in full form 
as directed by Act of Parliament, and we shall 
proceed to try all cases," said the Justice, pomp- 
ously. 

Thereupon a long-legged bird, something like a 
flamingo with a hearse-plume for a tail, stood on 
tiptoe and said, 

** May it please your ludship, I wish in the first 
instance to file my bill." 

" By all means, brother," said the Judge, affably. 
" Mr. Secretary, will you attend to my learned 
brother's application ? " 

A large bird, which had been occupying itself 
with the picking of a snake's backbone, here came 
forward, and taking a file out of its tail-pocket, 
presented it to the Barrister Bird, who at once pro- 
ceeded to make with it large notches in his bill, 
until it looked like a saw. That ceremony over, 
he handed back the file, and putting his pinion- 

. feathers under his tail, began to address the Court. 

9 — 2 



132 HOW FRANK CAME BEFORE • 

" S\4ence ! " said the Sparrow. 

" My lud, may it please your ludship," began the 
Barrister Bird, " I have to bring before you one of 
the most revolting crimes that have ever been 
committed in this atmospheric sphere. I grieve to 
say that it is nothing less than the aggravated 
offence of sucking raw eggs ! " 

Here there was a murmur in Court as the Bar- 
rister paused and looked round to see the effect 
of his words. 

The Justice frowned. 

" Si'lence ! " chirped the Sparrow. 

" The criminal," continued the Barrister — " I 
should have said the prisoner at the bough, but as 
there is no bough strong enough, he has been 
accommodated in the jury-nest, — the criminal, 
then, my lud, was detected in glafrante telzcdoy and 
I appeal to the laws of Featherdom and the well- 
known justice of our Imperial Ruler to inflict upon 
him the extreme punishment of the law." 

*'Has the prisoner any legal adviser?" asked 
the Lord Chief Justice, addres^ng a row of birds 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 133 

with very long bills, that were sitting on a branch 
on his left The long-billed birds consulted to- 
gether, and answered that none of the attorneys 
present had been engaged on the prisoner's be- 
half. 

" Prisoner," said the Lord Chief Justice, turning 
to Frank, "have you retained the services of 
counsel ? " 

" L'dsh*p says *ye feed ba'ster ? " said the Spar- 
row in an undertone. 

Frank shook his head. 

" Then, Mr. Remembrancer," said the Judge, 
looking over his shoulder towards a lanky bird 
who stood behind him, " I presume I must assign 
him counsel." 

The lanky bird bent his long neck back until he 
was able to scratch his bald head with his pointed 
tail. Having refreshed his ' recollection by this 
operation, he said in a low voice, 

" Yes, decidedly so, m' lud." 

"Mr. Cryer, notify Mr. Auk in the fact that he 
is assigned, and let him consult with the prisoner." 



134 ffOlV FRANK CAME BEFORE 

The Cryer was evidently an insufficiently edu- 
cated sparrow, for he at once called out, 

" Mr. Hawkon assigned as counsel. Please step 
into the jury-nest." 

A falcon-like bird here stood up and asked the 
Lord Chief Justice to excuse him, as he was specially 
retained in an important case in the other Court. 

The Lord Chief Justice snapped his bill angrily 
at the Cryer, and growled, 

" Mr. Cryer, if you are not more attentive to 
your duties, I shall commit you for contempt. I 
said Mr. Auk, not Mr. Hawkon. Call Mr. Auk 
—Mr. Tootling Auk ! " 

** Beg your ludship's pardon," said the Sparrow, 
humbly. " Slightly deaf. Cold in my 'ed." And 
then he chirped out loudly, " Mr. Tootling Hauk 
assigned as counsel. Have goodness to step into 
jury-nest." 

■ 

A stupid-looking bird, something like a Booby, 
with a musical note — A flat — on his breast, hopped 
feebly up to Frank, and began to whisper to him, 

" Better leave it all to me. I quite understand 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 135 

it all. I shall understand it better if I don't know 
anything about it. It 's the knowing things that is 
so confusing. I '11 elicit it in cross-examination." 
Then he hopped back again, saying to the Cryer, 
" Please call my clerk, Penguin." 

Penguin was accordingly called, and took his 
place close at his master's side. 

" Call over the jury and swear 'em," said the 
Secretary Bird. 

The Cryer then called out the names of the jury 
singly, each chick answering in turn, 

" Charles Chirp." 

" Here." 

" Timothy Twitter." 

" Here." 

" James Cheep." 

" Here." 

" Thomas Tweet " 

- Here." 

Then the Cryer, addressing each separately by 
name, said, 

" Confound you ! You shall well and truly try 



136 HOtV FRANK CAME BEFORE 

and true deliverance make between our Imperia 
Lord the Eagle and the prisoner on the bough 
Peck your merrythought" 

This ceremony over, the prosecuting counse 
opened his case, alluding in a touching manner t( 
the murder of the ^gg, and winding up by calling 
for his first witness. 

"Voracious Vulture!" chirped the Cryer, an( 
Frank's captor stepped forward. 

"Voracious Vulture," said, the Barrister Birc 
" you are, I believe, a constable ? " 

" I protest against that as a leading questior 
my lud," said Mr. Tootling Auk. 

** I don't see that it leads to anything," said th 
Lord Chief Justice, whereupon both opposing an( 
prosecuting counsel looked crestfallen. 

" Didn't you hear the question, witness ? " saic 
the Secretary Bird, testily. 

" Yes," said the Vulture. 

" Then answer it." 

"Well, I are a constable, and takes prisonen 
before the beak." 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 137 

** What is a beak ? " said the Lord Chief Justice, 

^^nding down to the counsel, whereon the Bar- 

lister Bird hopped up and answered confiden- 
tially, 

** May it please your ludship, it's a vulgar term 

a committing magistrate, my lud." 
** Oh ! Go on," said the Chief Justice. 

* * You were flying this afternoon" — began the 
rister. 

** No ; I was quite sober, and I saw the prisoner 
^li^trub a tree, get into a nest, crack an ^gg, and 
Tc it." 
-At these words there was a general flutter in 
xirt. 

* * Si-lfftce ! " chirped the Sparrow, 
^r. Tootling Auk sprang to his claws. 

* ' W lud, I protest against that statement. What 

*^^ prisoner did is not evidence." Here the Pen- 

SViin pecked him on the wing, and he leant back 

^^d listened to what his clerk whispered. Then 

"^^ turned and added, " At least, not unless he was 



138 HOW FRANK CAME BEFORE 

** Have you got a case ? " asked the Lord C 
Justice. 

Whereupon the Penguin made a great rust 
among a bunch of withered leaves, and tun 
down one, handed it to Mr. Auk. 

" Yes, m' lud," said the defending counsel, 
The Oozly Bird versus The Wangdoodle, it 
laid down that " 

"Who was the Judge?" inquired the C 
Justice. 

" Baron O'Rook, m' lud," said the counsel 
ferring to the dry leaves. 

"That's Irish law, then, and cannot be qu< 
as a precedent here," said the Chief Justice. 

" Beg pardon, m' lud, but though of Irish ext 
tion, the learned Baron was then sitting in 
Court of Emperors Branch." 

" Let me see the case," said the Chief Jusi 

The leaves were handed up to him. 

" This doesn't bear upon the point at all," j 
the Judge, after a pause. 

" With all deference, m' lud " urged Ai 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR, 139 

t goes off on a totally distinct issue, Mr. 
Auh^i^" said the Chief Justice, severely. 

Jlf your ludship will allow me, I think it is 
quiti^ at all fours with " 



l11 fours may be very well in the Court of 
Q^^^^rupedry, but in Common Biped Law I say it 
IS rt ^i:;:;^ precedent. Go on, brother," he added to the 
P^^^^^cuting counsel. 

Hope your ludship will take a note of my 
^*-*J^^^tion, in case of an appeal, m' lud," said Mr. 
^^-*=^:, subsiding. 

''^ hq Lord Chief Justice scowled at him, but said 
^^ *>ing. Mr. Auk leant back and sneered. 

"^^^t this moment the Remembrancer Bird, who 
"^.cj^ been scratching his head vigorously during 
^"^ controversy, bent forward and whispered in 
^"^ Justice^s ear. 

Stop a minute," said the Justice to the prose- 

^^^ing counsel ; and turning round, he consulted 

^^^li the Remembrancer in a whisper. Presently 

"^ turned round, looking very red about the bill, 

' ^^^ said in an angry voice. 



140 HOW FRANK CAME BEFORE 

" These proceedings will have to be quashed 
on account of an informality. Mr. Secretary, you 
will be committed for contempt of Court, for not 
drawing our attention to the error." 

"Am I to understand your ludship to refer to 
the oversight owing to which the prisoner has 
not been called on to plead ? " 

The Chief Justice nodded surlily, 

" I trust, then, my lud, that it is in your lud- 
ship's memory that on the last circuit I was com- 
mitted by your ludship for drawing your ludship's 
attention to a similar oversight." 

" Oh ! very well," said the Chief Justice, pale 
with rage ; " then I shall commit the Remem- 
brancer. Mr. Cryer, the Remembrancer is com- 
mitted to his Imperial Majesty's prison of New- 
cage, in the Old Aviary, for twenty calendar 
minutes, for contempt of Court." 

The Sparrow beckoned to the Remembrancer 
Bird, who hopped away after him in a dispirited 
manner. 

In the meantime the prosecuting counsel had 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR, 141 

been turning over his bunch of dry leaves like a 
small whirlwind, and he now rose and addressed 
the Lord Chief Justice. 

"My Icid, may it please your ludship, it was 
decided in the Upper Court on appeal in the case 
of Cassowary and others versus the Sociable 
Grosbeak Company (Limited) that the omission of 
this part of the procedure, to wit, the calling upon 
the prisoner to plead, if discovered before the 
jury had retired to consult, might be amended at 
the discretion of the presiding Judge." 

" I was just about to refer to that decision, 
brother," said the Lord Chief Justice, who never- 
theless had been listening very attentively to its 
recital, " and by that decision in Curassow versus 
The Grouse " — ^here the Barrister Bird interrupted 
him with a whisper — " Thank you ! Didn't I say 
so ? — the case of Cassowary versus The Grosbeak 
Company, I now call on the prisoner to plead. 
Mr. Cryer — whereas the Cryer? I'll commit 
him." 

" Please, m' lud, y* bordered me to take away 



142 HO IV FRANK CAME BEFORE 

the Remembrancer," interrupted the Sparrow, 
pushing his way through the crowd. 

"Ah, to be sure!" said the Chief Justice. 
" Now call on the prisoner to plead." 

" Prisoner on the bough, hold up your hand," 
said the Sparrow. 

" I 'm very sorry it 's not so clean as it might 
be, but I haven't had a chance of washing it," 
apologized Frank, obeying the order. 

"He says his hands are not clean, my lud," 
said the prosecuting counsel, "which amounts, 
/ipso acto, to admitting his guilt." 

" I '11 make a note of that' point, brother," said 
the Justice. 

"Are you guilty or not guilty ? " continued the 
Cryer. * 

" Guilty, my lord," said Frank. " But " :- 

" Buts are not evidence," said the prosecuting 
counsel. 

"I submit," said Mr. Auk, rising, "that that 
depends on whether they are full or not. If they- 
are, it is an evidence of rain-water!" And h^ 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 143 

sat down with a triumphant glare at his oppo- 
nent. 

" Prisoner on the bough," said the Lord Chief 
Justice, taking no notice of the interruption, " I 
think it right to explain to you the nature of your 
plea If you plead * not guilty,* it does not neces- 
sarily follow that you do not know that you have 
committed the crime, but that for your own satis- 
faction of mind you would like to be convinced 
that you have done it ; while, on the other hand, 
by pleading * guilty * you do not necessarily imply 
that you are aware that you have committed the 
crime, but that a doubt exists in your own mind that 
you may possibly have done so without knowing it, 
and you wish to have it distinctly proved that you 
have not, and that therefore in either case you are 

open to conviction. You understand me ? " 
Frank did not understand him, but as he was in 

a general state of fog about the whole trial, he 
only bowed in silence. 
*' Now go on, brother ! '* said the Justice, turning 
^^ the prosecuting counsel. 



144 ^OW FRANK CAME BEFORE 

" Call the next witness," said the Barrister 
Bird. 

" Voracious Vulture ! " chirped the Sparrow, and 
the first witness again appeared. 

" But that 's the same as the first," said Frank, 
half aloud. 

" Of course," said the Sparrow in an undertone. 
" They can call *im as hoften as they like, and they 
will too, 'cause they get *is hexpenses hevery time, 
don't you see ? " 

" Your name is Voracious Vulture ? " asked the 
Barrister Bird. And the witness answered in the 
affirmative, whereupon the Barrister said to the 
Justice, " I have nothing more to ask him, my lud." 
And the Chief Justice said to Mr. Auk, " Do you 
cross-examine ? " And Mr. Auk replied, " No." 
And the Chief Justice then said to the witness, 
" That will do ; you can stand down. The Court 
will adjourn for luncheon." And that was all ! 

The Chief Justice retired into a hollow in the 
tree, attended by the Secretary Bird, and immedi- 
ately a great chirping and twittering began in the 



THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 14S 

Court. Some old birds brought little paper parcels 
of seed out of their pockets, and began to eat, and 
the Cryer Sparrow went out hurriedly, and came 
back wiping his beak on his wing. Then the 
Secretary Bird put his head out of the hollow 
trunk, and beckoned the Sparrow, and Frank 
heard him tell him that the Remembrancer had 
got the Chief Justice*s flask of sherry, and he must 
fetch it at once. So the Sparrow flew off, and in 
his absence a dissipated Parrot in the back of the 
Court began to whistle, and presently broke out 
into a song. 

A Bacchanalian Lay. 

Pretty, pretty Polly, 
Feels uncommon jolly. 

Who are you ? 

How d' ye do ? 
Dance a pretty dolly ! 

Give Poll sugarcandy ! 
Polly wants some brandy ! 

Give Poll whisky ! 

Polly 's frisky ! 
Polly 's such a. dandy !" 

10 



■46 FRANK BEFORE THE CHIEF JUSTICE IN AIR. 

At this moment the Cryer returned, and hearing 
the noise, called out, "Si-lencef" in his loudest 
chirp. 

The Parrot only laughed, gave a loud whistle, 
and began to swing round and round the twig he 
was sitting on, like a mad thing. 

Frank burst out laughing, and in so doing over- 
balanced himself, as he sat on the edge of the 
nest. 

The next moment he was falling — falling 
through space so rapidly that it took his breath 
away. 




CHAPTER NINE. 

HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 
r RANK was brought to himself again by falling 
squash ! flat on his stomach in a swamp. He was 
so shaken by the tumble that he lay motionless for 
a minute or so. 



148 HOIV FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 

There was dead silence all around, although he 
had a sort of impression that he had heard a loud 
noise just as he fell on the mud. 

" Brek j " at last said a solitary voice. Then 
. there was a pause. Presently a voice in another 
quarter said, /* Brek ! " 

" Kek, kek, kek ! " came from the opposite direc- 
tion. 

" Kek, kex ! " echoed another voice. 

" Koax ! " croaked somebody close at hand. 

Frank looked round without stirring. Just 
above the surface of the watery slush pairs of 
goggle eyes protruded in all quarters. In a little 
while the heads rose, then the bodies, and he saw 
that the whole place swarmed with immense frogs. 
Just then they all broke out in full chorus. 

" Brekekekex ! koax ! koax ! Brekekekex ! koax 
— Vioax ! " resounded on all sides. 

Frank sat up and surveyed the scene. Instantly 
every sound was hushed, and only the goggle eyes 
remained to be seen ; but as he sat very still, the 
croakers gathered courage. The chorus was re- 



HOW FRANK FELL AMONG J^ROGS. 149 

newed, and presently one or two of the boldest 
came, alternately jumping and swimming, towards 
him. 

The largest of them, drawing closer, but still 
quite out of Frank's reach, hopped round him in a 
circle, inspecting him narrowly.^ 

" You *re nice and shiny and slimy in front," said 
the Frog at last, " but if I were you I would lie on 
my back a little. It 's so dry you must be hardly 
able to breathe ! " 

" I 'm quite wet enough already, thank you," 
said Frank. 

" Oh, very well," said the Frog ; " it *s matter of 
taste." 

The other frogs began to gather round now. 

"It must be very difficult for it to jump 'with 
such short hind legs." 

" And such long fore ones ! " 

"It hasn't got any spots on its stomach ! " 

" No ; and it has such a ridiculously small mouth ! ' 

" Look at its thin neck. It can't croak properly, 
that 's clear." 



1 50 HOPV FKAX/sr FELL AMONG FROGS, 

'' Poor thing ! '' 

Such were the comments of the speckled by- 
standers on Frank's shortcomings, as judged of 
from a froggy point of view. 

** Do you like Rowley Foley ? " asked the big 
Frog, with a desire to open the conversation. 

'* Yes," said Frank, " with jam in." 

** You mean Ben-jam-in," said the Frog. 

'* I never heard of Ben jam," Frank answered, 

" Oh, you must have heard of him. Ben-jam-in 
Franklin, He was a very clever land-frog, but he 
had to learn swimming of one of usy though he 
could make kites out of thunder and lightning!" 
said the Frog, proudly. 

" Oh, yes ; I ve read of him," Frank said. 
" He was a great galvanist " — at the mention of 
that word all the frogs croaked dismally and 
kicked convulsively with their hind legs, — "at 
least, I mean, electrician," said Frank, seeing 
their discomfort. "He discovered about the mag- 
net and the negative and positive poles." 

"There are no negative and positive poles," 



HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 151 

said the Frog, in a decisive tone ; " they Ve all tad- 
poles." 

" A tadpole is quite different from what I mean/* 
explained Frank. 

" It can't be," asserted the Frog ; " there 's one 
at the extreme north of the world. They call it 
the North Tadpole. It buries its head in the 
snow, and sticks its tail up to point out the North 
Star." 

" Nonsense!" said Frank, laughing. 

" Ask the Learned Frog, then," said the other, 
with an offended air. 

" Where is he ? " asked Frank, who had seen a . 
learned pig in a fair, and thought that a learned 
frog would be very curious. 

" Here ! " said the Frog ; and flinging up his 
heels, he disappeared under water. 

" Why don't you come } " he said, re-appearing 
after a few seconds. 

" Because I can't dive." 

" Did you ever try ? " 

*' I can't say I have." 



152 HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 

" Then how do you know that you can't dive ? 
Try." 

Frank was ashamed to show fear, so he plumped 
in after the Frog, and to his great surprise found he 
could breathe quite comfortably under the water. 

Then he saw seated on a stone in front of him 
a tremendously fat old frog. ' It was so outrage- 
ously fat it could not waddle, and its eyes seemed 
to be bursting out of its head. 

** Have I the honour of addressing the Learned 
Frog } " inquired Frank. 

" You have," said the monster, heaving a deep 
sigh, that rose to the top of the water in big 
bubbles. '^ I was Lord Chancellor under King 
Log. When King Stork came to the throne, he 
took the Great Snail of office from me, and be- 
stowed it on my rival, Speckleweskit ; but I don't 
regret it : he swallowed Speckleweskit as soon as 
he had got fat enough on the emolluscments." 

" Emoluments," suggested Frank. 

" I said emolluscmentsl' replied the monster. 
" Are you a Learned Frog, may I ask ? " 



HO W FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 1 53 

Trank admitted that he was not. 
^* Then what can you know about it ? " 
IFrank was silent. He^was surveying the vast 
d£ zKmensions of the Learned Frog, who evidently 
gr^^^w uneasy under the inspection. At last he said 
Frank, 

"You are not French, are you ? " 
" No, I am English. Why ? " said Frank. 
"Because," said the Frog, with a sigh that re- 
ared quite a dozen bubbles, "you looked at 
hind legs so, I thought you wanted to eat 

Frank deprecated any such notion, and the 
^og's peace of mind was restored. 

** The gentleman who introduced me," Frank 
^^served, "said that the North Pole was really a 
^•dpole, and when I doubted it, he referred me to 

you." 

'* Of course it is. W^re you ever a tadpole ? " 
Frank admitted that he never had been. 
k ** Then how can you know ? " said the Frog, 



154 fiOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 

« 

'' I don't think Franklin would agree with you 
there," urged Frank. 

" What do you know about Franklin ? " 

" The gentleman who brought me here spoke 
about him." 

" Ah, they still speak about him, then ? It was 
I who first taught them about him," said the old 
Frog, a tear rolling down his cheek. " What do 
you know about him ? " 

" Well, I might be a relative : my name is 
Frank." 

" You might : he had his faults," said the Frog, 
meditatively. 

" What do you mean?" Frank asked, not feeling 
altogether flattered by the remark. 

The old Frog looked round cautiously to see 
that they were not observed, and then whispered : 
"He once paid too much for his croak." 

'' His whistle, you mean," Frank said. 

'' A whistle is a sound. So is a croak. A whistle 
and a croak are the same thing," said the Frog, 
with grjeat decision of manner ; "you'll not mention 



HO W FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 1 55 

it here. But he did give too much. I have his 
confession here, under this stone. That's what 
makes me so fat." 

" How ? " asked Frank, in amazement 
** I have been a great traveller in my time," 
replied the Frog, " I have been all round the world, 
as far as there," and he pointed to the end of the 
pond, which was about fifty yards off; " and I once 
saw a thing like you catching sticklebacks, and it 
ate something out of a paper which it threw into 
the watery world ; I was always a great student, 
and I read it. It was Franklin's confession about 
his croak. Well, in order that the idol I had set 
up here might not be shattered rudely, I hid it 
under this stone, and I have been obliged always 
to sit upon it since, and the want of exercise has 
bloated me. I am almost as big as the frog that 
the ox swelled himself out to rival in size, and 
turst himself into beef in consequence. You '11 
find all about it in the Fables of ^Esophagus." 

" I think you mean iEsop ; and his account is 
rather different," objected Frank. 



156 HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 

*' Nothing of the sort. You Ve not a frog, eh ? " 

'' No." 

^^ Nor beef?" 

'' No." 

" Then what can you know about it ? Besides, 
I had the account of it from the lips of one of my 
ancestors who was present— my great grandson's 
nephew-in-law." 

" But he isn't an ancestor ! " exclaimed Frank. 

" Are you an ancestor ? " said the Frog. 

*' No, I 'm not." 

" Then how can you tell ? I tell you he was an 
ancestor. Because he was one of the army that 
defeated the mice in the great Batrachomyomaca- 
roon." 

*' Machia," said Frank, correcting him : "maca- 
roon is a cake." 

'' You Ve not a cake, so what do you know about 
it ? " said the Frog. 

" I am just beginning Greek " — Frank com- 
menced to say. 

" Greek I Why, we know Greek without be- 



HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 157 

ginning it.. We wrote the great 3atirist Aristo 
phocles." 

" Aristophanes," said Frank. 

** Pooh ! you know less than a tree-frog, and 
he 's not a true frog — only a lizard that has lost 
his tail." 

** Oh ! I made sure the tree-frogs were related 
to you," said Frank, surprised. 

** Not at all. We have no relatives on land — 
except in Central Asia and Thibet." 

** What ! in the deserts ? " 

"Yes. They're called the Batrachian Camels." 

" You must mean Bactrian Camels." 

** Are you a Batrachian ? No, of course not. 
Then don't expose your ignorance." 

Frank was about to reply when a large Leech 
made his appearance. It looked steadily at Frank, 
and said, " Have you any tadpoles ? " 

Frank repudiated the idea. 

" How many ? " said the Leech. 

" I Ve said I have not." 

" What are their respective ages ? " ^ 



158 HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 

"Are you deaf ? I told you I have no tadpoles!" 

" What schools do they go to ? " 

" You Ve an idiot! " said Frank, angrily. 

" Yes," said the Leech, calmly, " I 'm a School 
Board Inspector." 

" You must have heard me say I had no tadpoles, 
so why ask me the other questions ? " said Frank, 
mollified by the creature's good humour. 

"Why, you see, I get a salary, and I ought 
to do something for the money, and that's the 
prescribed set of questions. No harm done." 

" None at all," said Frank, apologetically. "But 
supposing I had tadpoles, and told you their ages, 
and said they did not go to school — I suppose 
tadpoles don't go to school — what would have 
happened } " 

" I should have made you send them." 

" And if I sent them, what would you have done 
with them when you got them there ? " 

" Bitten their tails off, and then they would be- 
come frogs." 

" Oh ! that's the system of education here, is it ?" 



HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS, 159 

" Certainly." 

"It's rather a strange one." 

"It has one advantage." 

" What is that ? " 

" It is purely secular." 

Frank was , not sure whether he knew what 
the word " secular " meant, but he thought it best 
to assent. 

The Leech turned to the Learned Frog, and said, 

" Of course it is needless to ask you the regular 
questions, but I just dropped in as a matter of 
form and for the pleasure of inquiring after your 
health." 

" I 'm far from well, thank you for your kind in- 
quiries all the same ;" said the Frog, and another 
sigh went bubbling up. 

The Leech took his leave. 

" I shall never be well," said the Frog to Frank. 
" I wish I could meet with that celebrated physician 
frog that cured the world of all diseases." 

" Indeed ? I never heard of him." 

" Oh, yes, you must have. He came out of the 



i6o HO W FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 

swamp and proclaimed his powers of healing, a: 
the fox went to him, and he cured it of its nas 
rough tawney hidfe, and gave it a beautiful spott 
and wrinkled skin, and taught it to hop. You \\ 
find it in your -Esophagus." 

"Oh! in iEsop," said Frank, recollecting t 
fable. 

"In -Esophagus," repeated the Frog. 

" iEsop ! " insisted Frank. 

"^ESOPHAGUS!!" loudly croaked the Frc 
"What can you know about it."^ YouVe not 
^Esophagus ? " 

" No ; but I Ve got one," said Frank, triumf 
antly, thinking he had caught his opponent trippir 

" You Ve got one, have you ? Then read 
That 's all I Ve got to say." 

" I have read it," said Frank, waiving the d 
cussion about the title, "and it says the fox laugh 
at the quack frog, and discomfited him by as 
him why, if he was such a clever physician, he c 
not cure his own limp and his blotched and flab 
skin." 



ffOlV FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. l6l 

The Frog swelled with indignation. 

" That's false," he croaked; " the frog cured the 
fox." 

" He didn't ! " cried Frank, stoutly. 

" And I say he did ! " 

" I say he didn't ! " 

" He did ! " 

" He didn't ! " 

" He did ! " 

" That 's mere assertion without proof ! " cried 
Frank. 

** I suppose," sneered the Frog, " you never 
assert anything without proof ? " 

Frank was about to rebut the implied charge, 
when his conscience smote him with the recollec- 
tion of many groundless and erroneous assertions 
that he had made and stuck to. 

Just at that instant a Frog put his head hurriedly 
in, and said, " Hold on ! here comes a freshet." 

The old Frog grasped a bunch of rushes that 

grew near his seat. Frank looked about in vain 

for something sufficiently strong to hold him to 

11 



l62 HOW FRANK FELL AMONG FROGS. 

his moorings. There was a rush and a roar, and 
he was suddenly rolled over and over, carried off, 
washed down a fall, and whirled rapidly away on 
the breast of a wide and impetuous river to the 
roaring billows of tlie sea. 





CHAPTER TEN. 



TOUCHING FRANKS VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC. 

r RANK went circling down through the green 
water. He felt quite comfortable, except that just 
at first the brine made his eyes smart a little. A 
soft pale light was suffused around him, as if from 



i64 TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC, 

the coloured lamp in a distant chemisfs shop. At 
last he alighted softly on a beautiful level floor of 
shining sand, on which a subdued faint emerald 
green came and went with the movement of the 
waves far overhead. Great groves of seaweeds of 
various hues rocked gently to and fro around him, 
like tropical forests swaying to a zephyr, and almost 
every pond was sparkling with bright bubbles that 
glittered like diamond lamps, and becoming de- 
tached from time to time, sailed up through the 
soft green waters like baby stars. He almost 
forgot everything else as he gazed. 

He could see, far away among the branching 
stems, crowds of bright-hued fishes darting about 
like merry children at play. It was like a scene 
in the enchanted gardens of Fairyland, more beau- 
tiful than he had ever dreamt; and yet he had 
dreamt beautifully now and again. 

He stood as still as a statue gazing at the love- 
liness which met his eye whichever way he looked. 
Then he became aware of a soft warble close at 
hand. 



TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISH Y REPUBLIC. 165 

Aria Wateria. 

Ah! 
Lah, Ah ! 

Tra, la, la, la, Ah ! 

Ah! 
Lah, Ah ! 

Tra lalalalal. 

La! 
La! 
La! 
Tra, La ! 

La! 
La! 
Tra, 

La! 
Tra, lah ! lah ! lah ! Lah ! 

Lah! 

Lah! 

Turning a corner of the rock, he beheld a large 
Codfish with a very melancholy expression, who 

« 

was evidently the songster to whose warble he 
had been listening. 

" Hullo ! Can you sing ? " inquired Frank. 

" Sing ! Did you never heard of cod*s sounds } 

I am the only real musical fish in existence ! " 
** Really ? I wasn't aware of it.** 



i66 TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT i^ .. . 

" Haven't vou heard of the concerts in thes 
Brighton Aquarium ? " 

" Certainly." 

" Well, that 's us. Members of our family, all 
of them. They sing * Roe, Brothers, Roe ! ' 
splendidly." 

Just at that moment a large skate which had 
been lying flat on the sand, from which it was 
scarcely distinguishable, rose just in front of 
Frank, and swam straight up, twiddling two odd- 
looking things like rudimentary legs. Frank gave 
a jump, he was so startled. 

"Dear me!'' said he. "If you can sing, i 
looks as if he could play the violoncello. I neve 
knew skates had hind legs before." 

"They can't be before if they are hindAt^i 
said the Codfish, with great solemnity. 

Frank looked at him to see if he wasn't mak' 
fun of him, but there was not the trace of a sn 
on his great chuckle-head. 

" I mean," said Frank, in explanation, "In 
knew before that a skate had legs." 



TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISH Y REPUBLIC. 167 

"How could he skate if he hadn't?" gravely 
asked the Codfish. 

Frank looked at him suspiciously, but there was 
not a twinkle of humour in his great dull eye. 

" What do you know about skating ? " he asked, 
sharply. 

" My great-grandfather was a Norwegian," ex- 
plained the Cod, — " where the water gets so strong 
in winter that people can walk and skate on it." 

" Your great-grandfather was a Norwegian, was 
he ? " asked Frank. 

" Yes. He wasn't a long liver, but he was a 
very heavy liver. Weighed — I should be afraid 
to say how many pounds, his liver did ! " said the 
Cod, so gravely that Frank's suspicions were at 
once set at rest. 

** Did you speak ? " said Frank to the Cod. 

" No ; I was wondering if they weighed him in 
his own scales," answered the fish, with a puzzled 
expression in his lacklustre eye. 

" Pffffff I " 



I68 TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBUC.^^ 

** There ! — there it was again ! ** said Frank. 

» 

" Oh, that ? That 's the oyster. He does si^ 
rather loud for his size." 

*^What?" • 

"Why, he's in love, you know. He 's all heart ! 

FVank turned round, and there, sure enough, was 
an oyster, who looked very much like what a heart 
in a valentine must look like before it is painted, 

• • / 

except that the oyster had a large beard. 

"Said he'd never shave his beard again until 
his love was requited," whispered the Cod softly 
behind his fin. 

" What a delicate fish he is ! " thought Frank — 
"when you consider, too, how oysters sauce him 
as a; rule ! " 

" Can't shave his head, you know," continued 
the Cod, soiio voce, " because he 's quite bald ! " 

" Well," said Frank, " I Ve heard of a whistling 
oyster, but I never heard of a sighing one." 

" Yes, there was a whistling oyster," said the 
Cod, evidently loth to admit any musical ability 
except his own ; " but that was because he had got 



<< 
<< 



^TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC. 169 

^- fcoatswain's call, or a baby's caul, or something of 
that sort, in his shell." 

" Pfffff ! " sighed the Oyster again. 
*' What is the object of his affections ? " inquired 
P^rank. 

*' Well, the lobster said it was only an old shoe, 

whatever that may be. It was nothing but a flat 

^ ^^g — something like what you have under your 

^^udal fins," said the Cod, looking at Frank's feet. 

^hy, it was only a sole, then ! " said Frank. 

Really ? Then that accounts for it. He was all 

^^^ft, and she was all soul ! — quite incompatible." 

-t^rank eyed him suspiciously. 

But it wasn't at all like our soles. They are. 

^^ly a sort of plaice without spots. That has always 

P^^aled me, by-the-bye. One place can't be in 

several spots at the same time, but there are 

always several spots on one plaice." 

But the plaice you mean," explained Frank, 
is not the same. It hasn't an * i ' in it." 
L ** Two eyes," said the Cod, "and both on the 

I same side." 






I70 TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC. 

Frank was silent. It was useless to try to drive 
anything into that chuckle-head. 

" Step aside for one moment," said the Cod — 
** let us draw apart. I have a private and personal 
matter to lay before you, as you seem to be so very 
clever." 

Frank followed him into the centre of the open 
sand. 

** Do you know what's good for tobacco-box ?" 
said the Cod. 

"Tobacco-box! whgt's that .'^ " asked Frank, 
puzzled. 

" An illness in your stomach." 

" You must mean chicken-pox." 

"No, I don't : I mean tobacco-box. I Ve got it 
inside me. As I was smoking my seaweed after 
dinner the other day, I saw something bright 
coming down. It looked nice, so I swallowed it 
without looking at it. And it *s the tobacco-box, 
and I feel unwell." 

" But if you didn't look at it, how do you know 
it 's a tobacco-box ? " inquired Frank. 



TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC, 171 

" Because I can see it now." 

" When it 's in your stomach ? " 

** Of course ! Why not ? Did you ever know a 
crab ? — I mean, intimately enough to dine with 
him." 

Frank answered in the negative. He thought 
it prudent not to add that, though he hadn't dined 
with one, he had supped on one sometimes. 

" Because, if you had, you would know he had 
teeth in his stomach ; so why shouldn't I have 
eyes in mine ? At any rate, I know somehow it is 
tobacco-box, and it 's tin, and there 's the figure of 
a negro on the lid, sitting on a barrel smoking a 
pipe, and there 's a motto, * My master sells de best 
tobacco,' stamped on it." 

"Well, I don't know what to prescribe for it 
unless you swallow a pipe and a box of lights," 
said Frank. 

" Tobacco-pipe is not wholesome," said a voice, 
and then Frank saw a magnificent Mackerel, in his 
silver armour with green bars, swimming by him. 

" Just when our school was out one day," con- 



172 TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC. 

tinued the Mackerel, " my brother saw a piece 
of white pipe trailing behind a boat, and he bit 
at it, and something sharp caught him in the 
jaw, and he was dragged out of the water, and we 
never saw him again. But perhaps he 's gone to 
the Brighton Aquarium," added the Mackerel, 
hopefully, as if he was speaking of his going to a 
better world. 

" Not very likely ! " said a new-comer, who just 
then bustled up, *' they don't have common Mack- 
erel there." 

'* Who are you ? " asked Frank. 

'' I am the Grey Muddleit," said the last arrival. 
'' I have an aunt in the Brighton Aquarium. Her 
name is Red Mullet." 

** Is she a well-read mullet.'*" asked the Cod, 
simply. '' What does she read ? The catalogue ? 
Perhaps the programme of the concerts at which 
my relatives sing. One of them can sing * Hot 
Codlings ' in a way that would move you to tears," 
he observed to Frank. 

" Perhaps," interposed the Grey Muddleit, 



^O CJCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISH Y REPUBLIC, 1 73 

evid^ndy anxious to eclipse the Cod — *' perhaps 
you -v^ould like to see the athletic sports." 

** ^es, very much indeed ! " answered Frank, 



** You '11 be disappointed," said the Cod. *' The 
^^^esident and his Court are not there." 
** President ! Then you Ve a Republic ? " 
** Certainly," said the Mackerel : "we have had 
^ Republic now for several years." 

** Yes, I 'm given to understand so," said the 
^od, in a resigned manner ; *' but there doesn't 
^^^m to be much differences-taxes are just as high, 
^^d. the President costs as much as the King did, 
^^d. there 's all the worry of an election every five 
y^ars." 

** Who is the President now ?" inquired Frank. 
** The White Shark. He 's married to an Octo- 
P^s of great beauty," said the Grey MuddleiL 

Frank's blood ran as cold as that of the fishes 
^^Ound him on hearing this, and he was very glad 
^^ know that the President would not be present 
^t the athletic sports. 



174 TOUCHING FRANK* S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBUC. 

** When will he return ? " was Frank's next and 
rather natural inquiry. 

*'Oh, you *11 see him this evening,", said the 
Muddleit. 

** There was a cattle-ship wrecked yesterday," 
said the Cod. " The crew unluckily escaped, but 
the beasts were all drowned, and the President 
has invited his friends and political supporters to 
a banquet. But come along, or the sports will be 
over before we arrive." 

** Pfffff ! " sighed the love-sick Oyster. 

** Poor fellow ! " said Frank. 

** Ah I it might be worse," said the Mackerel. 
" I knew one poor fellow who was crossed in love, 
and he took to the bottle. He was dredged up 
with it, and is, I believe, exhibited somewhere now 
in spirits." 

" Lucky for him to be able to be in spirits after 
such a disappointment," said the Cod. 

They soon reached the scene of the sports, and 
very much amused was Frank to see all sorts of 
queer fish playing at leapfrog. 



■ ^ « ^« 1 



■ n;- :e\v york 
PUF,...IC LIBRARY. 



TOUCHING FRANK'S VISIT TO A FISHY REPUBLIC. 175 

" Tuck in your tentacles," shouted a cheerful old 
Crab, as the Cuttlefish presented a back. 

" Keep the fish-kettle boiling," bellowed a 
double-tailed Whiting, as he overed a big Lobster. 

" 1 11 run you to that big coralline and back for 
a pint of pearl," said a saucy Gurnet to an Oyster 
who had apparently as yet escaped the toils of 
Cupid, but who of course couldn't run a couple of 
inches. 

'* Can't you dance * the Cure' ? " said the Sprat to 
the Cod ; but the Cod didn't see the joke, and felt 
offended. 

" Hullo ! here comes the Sawfish, Here 's the 
sea, and there 's the saw, so let 's have a seesaw," 
cried an impertinent Shrimp, jumping over the 
Sawfish's snout. 

All of a sudden a dark shadow, as if from a 
passing cloud, fell over the expanse of shining sand. 
Frank looked up, and far overhead could dimly 
discern the vast shape of the great Shark and the 
unwieldy bulk of the Octopus. 

** Here are the President and his lady," said the 



176 Toucnmc frank's visit to a fishy republic. 

Muddleit " You must be prepared to be pre- 
sented in due form." 

But F'rank dodged behind a rock, and looked 
about for some means of escape. At a short dis- 
tance he perceived the dark entrance of a cave, 
which he saw at a glance would be too small to 
allow of the entrance of the shark. Whether it 
would be deep enough to let him get beyond reach 
of the feelers of the Octopus remained to be seen. 
At any rate, it offered him escape from one of two 
evils. He made one bound, and buried himself in 
its farthest recesses. 





CHAPTER ELEVEN. 

DESCRIBING HOW FKANK LODGED WITH A HERMIT. 

When Frank's eyes became a little accustomed 
to the darkness of the cave, he perceived a narrow- 
passage apparently leading deeper into the rock. 
As he was hesitating whether to pursue it or not, 



1 78 DESCRIBING HO W FRANK 

the opening by which he had entered became ob- 
scured, and a terrible object like a huge serpent 
came rolling and curling along it. It was one of 
the arms of the gigantic Octopus. Frank hesitated 
no longer. He scrambled through the narrow pas- 
sage, and found himself in a large cavern dimly lit 
from above by a hole in the rock high overhead. 
This seemed to be comparatively safe; but in order 
to make assurance doubly sure, he hastily concealed 
himself in a huge whelk -shell, seemingly empty, 
which lay close by. 

As he slid down the smooth coated winding 
entrance, a voice inside called out, *' Now, then, 
what 's the matter ? " 

"The Octopus is coming," said Frank, supposing 
it was the whelk, who spoke, having retired inside 
for a nap ; the next instant two large claws, resem- 
bling those of a lobster passed him in the passage, 
followed by several smaller legs, and he alighted 
in the inmost recess of the shell on a large soft bag 
something like a leather football. Then he guessed 
he was in the home of a Hermit Crab. So he 



LODGED WITH A HERMIT. 179 

turned round, and managed to see far enough to 
become aware that his conjecture was right. The 
Crab had protruded his open pinchers from the 
front door, prepared to do battle with the invader. 
But either the Octopus could not find the passage 
to the inner cave, or its tentacles were not long 
enough to reach it; so after a few minutes the 
Hermit settled himself down quietly with his arms 
on the threshold. 

** What are you, my little annelid } " he asked. 

" I 'm a boy, please," said Frank. 

" Oh ! I never met with an aboy before ! " said 
the Hermit Crab ; ** I once had a Nereis to lodge 
with me, but he went out for a walk one day, and 
must have lost his way, for he never came back ; 
he might," he added, reflectively, " have got eaten 
by an incongerus eel." 

"Is that tlie same as a conger eel.'*" asked 
Frank. 

" Oh, no ! A conger eel hasn't an imperial, and 
he doesn t wear his teeth outside. An incongerus 
eel does." 

Vi — ^ 



1 80 DESCRIBING IIO W FRANK 

Frank remembered that he had seen an eel of 
that kind at the athletic sports. 

By this time Frank began to find it rather warm 
and dark inside the shell, so he tried to climb up 
to the door. 

Immediately the Crab began to roll over and 
over, and roar with laughter. 

" Ho ! ho ! ho ! ho ! He ! he ! he ! Ha ! ha ! 
ha ! Oh, you do tickle so ! " he said, in a half- 
choked voice. 

** I 'm sure I beg your pardon," said Frank, 
apologetically. 

" Oh, no ! not at all ! He ! he ! he ! I rather 
like it ! Ho ! ho ! ho ! ho ! Pray go on." 

" What the dickens is the matter ? " cried 
several voices ; and as the shell rolled about, 
Frank saw that all the. shells which he had seen 
lying about, and which he had thought were 
empty, were inhabited by hermit crabs, who were 
all at their doors now, with their eyes nearly start- 
ing out of their heads with surprise. 

** What's up with the landlord at Forty-two?" 



LODGED WITH A HERMIT, i8i 

asked one surly fellow. ** Has he been drink- 
ing ? " 

" Nothing of the sort/' said Frank's landlord, 
indignantly, but immediately bursting into a giggle. 
** I 've got a new lodger. He ! he ! he ! Ho ! 
ho ! He 's such a funny fellow ! He does tickle 
me so ! Ha! ha ! ha!'' 

Frank began to feel rather sea-sick with all the 
rolling about, so hfe sat still, and the Hermit Crab 
regained his composure. 

" I say. Forty-two," said a neighbouring crab, 
** what is he ? An annelid ? " 

" Yes, an aboy annelid ! " said Forty-two. 

" Oh, an aboy annelid. Never heard of them 
before," said several of the Hermits. 

" I say, why don't you go on ? " asked Frank's 
landlord, shouting down the passage. 

" Well, to tell you the truth, I had a run for it 
from the Octopus, and I 'm tired and hungry too." 

" Are you ? Poor little chap ! Sit down and 
rest, and I '11 get you some mussels, or an oyster, 
if you like." 



1 82 DESCRIBING HO W FRANK 

With that he marched off to the rock, detached 
some fine mussels, opened the shells, and, taking 
out the molluscs, passed them down to Frank, who 
was not at all sorry to get a good meal. 

Wheh Frank had finished his meal, he dis- 
covered, by his long and regular breathing and 
by the hanging down of his head and claws, that 
his host was asleep* 

By and bye, somebody whispered down the 
passage, 

" Whist ! Aboy ! Are you awake ? " 

'* Yes!" answered Frank, speaking low, not to 
wake his friend. 

" Do you tickle ? " asked the voice. 

" You heard what my landlord said," answered 
Frank. 

'* If I were you I wouldn't stop with him. He 's 
a dreadful screw : keeps all the eatables locked 
up, — and then his bills! They're positively 
shameful." 

'* Indeed ! '' said Frank. 

" Yes ! A fact, on my honour as a hermit crab," 



LODGED WITH A HRRMIl, 183 

was the answer. " Now, if you do want pleasant 
airy apartments, I 've a one-pair back at your dis- 
posal, and rent-free. What do you say ? '' 

Before Frank could answer, his host woke, and 
caught the last words of the sentence. 

" Now, you mean sneak. Twenty-five ! how dare 
you come trying to entice away one of my lodgers ? 
I 11 nip your body off ! " shouted the enraged 
landlord. 

There was a clash of contending pinchers, and 
then Frank was aware that Twenty-five was in 
full flight before his infuriated host, who pursued 

him for some distance ; but the other, having no 

* 

lodger to carry, was more nimble, and got away. 

'* Yah ! " he shouted, contumeliously. '' Wait till 
Fifty-nine comes back from his stay at the oyster- 
beds, and see if he won't take your tickling aboy 
away, and kill you ! That 's all ! ^ You wait and 
see ! " 

Frank could see that the mention of Fifty-nine 
made his host low-spirited, so he asked him the 
reason. 



i84 DESCRIBING HOW FRANK 

** Ah ! he 's a big fellow, is Fifty-nine," said his 
friend, "and he 's a beggar to fight. It was very- 
foolish of me to mention what made me laugh. 
Better have let them think I 'd been taking too 
much fresh water. But vanity is the ruin of most 
of us. Let 's hope for the best. You won't leave 
me, will you ? " 

Frank declared himself bound by every tie of 
honour and gratitude to stop by his friend as long 
as he wished it. 

His time passed very pleasantly, all things con- 
sidered, for his host was very kind and considerate, 
and didn't ask to be tickled too often. Moreover, 
he always reserved the fattest mussels and peri- 
winkles for Frank, who, in return, would often in- 
dulge him with a tickling unasked by dancing a 
double shuffle in the back parlour. 

But it was evident that all the other hermit crabs 
envied Forty-two the possession of his unique 
annelid. They could be seen whispering toge- 
ther, and throwing glances — or, rather, squints — of 
hatred (for their two eyes always acted indepen- 



LODGED WITH A HERMIT. 185 

dently of each other) towards poor Forty-two ; and 
whenever he indulged in a fit of laughing, they 
invariably made audible remarks about gibbering 
idiots and Cheshire catfish, and the like. 

There was a submarine telegraph cable lying on 
the bottom near one of the openings of the cave ; 
and these spiteful creatures would go and take 
hold of it, and pretend that they were receiving 
messages from Fifty-nine to say that he should 
return from the oystering-place the next day. 

Forty-two would laugh at this, because Frank 
always thoughtfully tickled him on such occasions, 
to give him an appearance of hilarity ; but he could 
not conceal from his tenant that the remarks pained 
and agitated him. 

** If I could only get a good big spine ofif'one of 
the echinus-shells I saw in the outer cave," said 
Frank, one day, " I think, while you were struggling 
with him, I might stab him with it in a vital place. "^ 

" But that wouldn't be fair fighting," said gallant 
Forty-two. " Let 's die honourably rather than 
that." 



1 86 DESCRIBING HO W FRANK 

Frank was very much touched by this display 
of spirit and courage, and remembered with shame 
that in some of his skirmishes with other boys he 
had not behaved so honourably as this poor Hermit 
Crab. He confessed his faults to his friend. 

" Ah, well ! You see you 're only an aboy, and 
we mustn't expect too much of you. But a hermit 
crab must be a gentleman to the death." 

Unfortunately all the hermit crabs were not so 
high-minded as Forty- two. There had been a 
growing discontent among them directed at their 
lodgers, the Nereides, poor unprotected worms ! 
because they could not tickle their landlords. So 
one day, by common consent, they turned them all 
out, killed them, and ate them. 

" That 's living upon one's lodgers with a ven- 
geance ! " thought Frank. " They have learnt that 
of the landladies at some watering-place near here." 

The next day Fifty-nine arrived. It was evident 
that however glad the other crabs were at his re- 
turn on Forty-two's account, they were horribly 
afraid of him. 



LODGED WITH A HERMIT. 187 

Twenty-five getting as far away from him as 
possible, prepared to scuttle up a narrow cranny, 
in case of being attacked, called out — 

** If you please, Mr. Fifty-nine, do you know 
what an aboy is ? " 

" If you ask me any of your silly riddles, I '11 
gouge your eye out ! " bellowed Fifty-nine, snap- 
ping an ominous nipper. 

" Please, sir, it 's not a riddle. An aboy is a new 
kind of annelid, and it tickles ever so much better 
than a Nereis. Forty-two *s got one." 

'* Has he ? " said Fifty-nine. " Then just hand 
it over, Forty-two." 

" I shan't ! " said Frank's host, stoutly. 

" Then I '11 fetch it ! " roared Fifty-nine. 

" Come on ! I defy you ! " answered Forty-two, 
with firmness. 

There was a profound silence as the two cham- 
pions advanced towards each other. Then followed 
the clash of arms, as they locked nippers in the 
struggle. 

For a long time the battle waged with varying 



i88 DESCRIBIXG HO W FRANK 

success ; but, at last, Frank felt his friend's body 
give a terrible shudder. The foe had nipped off his 
larger claw. The next pinch settled the combat. 

" It 's all over ! " said Forty- two, shrinking into 
his shell. 

" Oh dear ! I am so grieved ! " said Frank.— 
" What will you do ? " 

** I 'm going to die," said his friend, calmly.— 
*' Good bye ! I 'm going out." 

** But why not stop at home, and die quietly ? " 

" It 's not the thing. It would not be considered 
respectable," said the Hermit, his voice growing 
weaker and weaker. 

" Good bye ! " sobbed Frank. 

" You '11 think of me sometimes, little one, won t 
you ? And, I say — he 's sure to take possession 
here, now my lease is expired. Don't — don't— 
tic — tickle him much ! " — and, with that, the unfor- 
tunate Forty-two slid out of his door, and expired 
without a struggle. 

No sooner was Forty-two dead, than Fifty-nine 
inspected the premises by putting in his claw and 



LODGED WITH A HERMIT, 189 

sweeping it round the interior of the shell. Then 
he proceeded to back rapidly into it. But, quick 
as he was, Frank was even quicker, and slipped 
out just as the other popped in. Darting round to 
the back of the shell, he placed himself astride of 
the apex, and held on firmly by the weeds that 
^rew on it. 

" Hullo ! where 's the aboy ? " shouted Fifty- 
nine, who had not seen the manoeuvre. 

"He's outside, sitting on the roof,*' said the 
sycophantic Twenty-five. 

*' Here, catch him, some of you, and pass him 
in ! " roared Fifty-nine. 

But, apparently, nobody cared to venture within 
his reach. Besides, some of them possibly hoped 
after dark to entice Frank to lodge with them. At 
any rate, no one attempted to assist the enraged 
Fifty-nine, who, with a hermit crab's rooted dis- 
like to expose his unprotected body to possible 
attack, did not care to quit the shell and fetch 
Frank. 

Moreover, just now, a pleasant flavour was dis- 



190 DESCRIBLXG now FRANK LODGED WITH A HERMIT. 

tributed through the water, which set all agog to 
discover its source. Frank knew it well. It was 
fried kidneys ; and there, sure enough, just over 
his head, dangled the appetizing dainty. He was 
hungry, and without thinking more, snatched at it. 
It parted, the two halves floating away to be fought 
over by the crabs, while a suddenly- revealed hook 
caught Frank, fortunately for him only by the belt. 
Before he could extricate himself, he was rapidly 
drawn up, head downwards, through the water at 
such a rapid rate, that he speedily became uncon- 
scious. 





CHAPTER TWELVE. 



IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF AMONG THE WILD 

WALLPAPERITES. 

"WHOOP! Ahoy! A bite! A bite! And 
landed, too!" were the first sounds that greeted 
Frank's ears, as he felt himself deposited on the 
grass. Pushing his damp dishevelled hair out of 



192 /X WirrCI! FRANK FIXDS HIMSELF 

liis eyes, he gazed about him. He was on the top 
of a cliff overhanging the sea. Over him stood a 
horrible hobgoblin of a creature with two huge 
goggle eyes, and one pointed ear that stood erect 
in the middle of its forehead. Its splay feet were 
webbed, and it had a crooked horn on each knee 
and elbow, while in its pawlike hands it clutched 
the rod to which was attached the line and hook 
by means of which Frank had been landed. An 
impish black dog, that showed an underhanging 
row of sharp fangs, was capering about the hob- 
goblin's legs. 

A loud shouting caused Frank to turn his head, 
and he saw rushing down to the scene of his cap- 
ture a crowd of ejctraordinary and grotesque beings, 
hallooing and gesticulating like escaped lunatics. 

Alas I he recognized them only too readily. 

Frank's bed-room walls were covered with an 
old faded paper, the pattern on which, defaced by 
blotches, spots, and stains, had suggested strange 
fancies to Frank. With the aid of pen and pencil, 
and a dab of colour here and there, he had con- 



. c-w YORK 



» j!:.:.ic 



LIBRARY, 



I 






AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPERITES, 193 

« 

verted various flowers, leaves, scrolls, and other 
bits of the pattern into a number of the most out- 
rageous caricatures of humanity possible. For 
this ingenious bit of mischief he had been severely 
reprimanded, as it made it necessary to repaper the 
room, the hideous designs having frightened some 
of the younger children. 

In the threatening mob around him he saw all 
his frightful designs brought to life, and saw that 
his persecutors were — as man's sufferings often are 
— entirely of his own creation ! 

Each of the spectators had a suggestion to make. 
He wanted improving, they were all agreed on that 
point, but each one's proposed improvement was 
designed to produce his own special peculiarities 
in the victim. For instance, Frank's captor said 
he thought they had better graft horns on his knees, 
and insisted that two ears were absurd, that they 
ought to be cut off close to his head, and a new 
one soldered on his forehead Another who had 
feet like an owl, said that Frank's toes wanted 
splitting up further to make them look well. 

18 



194 IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF 

Another whose head was placed on a neck of which 
a giraffe might have been proud, declared that it 
would be a simple kindness to draw out Frank's 
neck to a respectable length, as if it had been a 
telescope. Yet another insisted that his mouth 
ought to be slit from ear to ear, or he would never 
be able to eat pancakes whole with any amount of 
comfort and satisfaction. 

"Silence for the Lord High Beadle!" said an 
authoritative voice, and the Lord High Beadle 
came forward and inspected Frank. The Beadle 
had a little round fat body like a butter-firkin. 

" He 's too meagre ! " said the Beadle : " let 
the creature be laid on its back, and held there^ 
while the Macebearer bangs hini on the stomach 
with the mace^ until he swells up to decent dimen- 
sions." 

The Macebearer was about to carry out these 
instructions, when the Beadle stopped him with a 
pompous gesture. 

"On mature reflection," said the Beadle, "I hold 
it will be better to appoint a Board of Guardians. 



AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPERITES, 195 

I shall, of course, be ex officio chairman, and you 
can elect the others." 

The proposition was received with loud cheers. 
It was evident that the excitement of an election 
had great charms for these peculiar people. 

"Let the prisoner be carefully guarded," said the 
Beadle, "and this afternoon we will proceed to the 
election." 

There was a regular rush now to get away: 
the various candidates and their friends were 
anxious to get out their posters and commence 
their canvass. 

In a few hours' time every prominent wall and 
paling was bestuck with bills of various colours. 

VOTE FOR THE WATCHFUL WANGS, 

THE MAN WITH AN EYE IN THE MIDDLE OF HIS STOMACH. 

SNARKLE THE SPLAY-FOOTED FOR EVER, 

THE FOE OF OPPRESSION AND BLACK BEETLES. 

POGUM ! VOTE FOR POGUM ! 

THE ONLY CANDIDATE WITH HORNS ON HIS KNEES. 

\^ — 1 



196 IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF 

POLL EARLY FOR JOLLICK OF THE 
TELESCOPIC NECK, 

THE MOST FAR-SIGHTED M>AN IN THE PARISH. 



SUPPORT SNOG THE TURNIP-HEADED, 

THE ONLY FRIEND OF THE PEOPLE. 

RALLY ROUND CHOOP OF THE WIDE MOUTH, 

THE GREATEST ORATOR OF THE DAY. 

RETURN NUMPS THE NO-BODIED, 

THE ADVOCATE OF ECONOMY. 

And so on ; and so on ; and so on. 

Banners waved from every window and door. 
Bands of music paraded the streets, filling the air 
with the discordant strains of rival tunes. Men 
harangued the crowd from balconies, carts, and 
even roofs. 

The excitement was universal. It was a regular 
holiday of high jinks. 

There was some excuse for all this tumult and 
bustle in the fact that the climate was decidedly 
chilly. Frank had noticed, when he was landed, 



AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPERITES. 197 

that the. grass was besprinkled with a thin layer of 
snow, which in the shade amounted to a sufficient 
covering to make the ground white. The country 
rose gradually from the edge of the cliff, and behind 
the town, in which he could see by the smoke there 
were many fires alight, there rose an abrupt emi- 
nence which was deeply covered with snow — so 
deeply, indeed, that Frank surmised that it was at 
the altitude at which snow never melts. 

No wonder, therefore, that the inhabitants were 
glad to warm themselves with the heat of a con- 
tested election. 

Time passed very drearily with Frank in the 
cell where he was confined, for, after having locked 
him in, and relying on the strength of the bolts, 
locks, and bars, his jailers had gone off to take 
part in the preparations for the election, leaving 
him sole occupant of the jail ; for the various pri- 
soners who had been there at the time of his 
arrival had been gradually let out in batches by 
the various candidates whose supporters they 
were, the jailers offering no resistance to a course 



198 IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF 

that left them more at liberty to take part in the 
general proceedings. 

Suddenly Frank heard somebody at the grated 
Svindow saying, " Hist ! '* 

He went up to it, and saw one of the candidates 
standing outside. 

" Look here; will you vote for me ? '' he asked, in 
a low voice. 

" But I *m the prisoner ! " urged Frank. 

'* No matter ! If you claim the right to vote, it 
cannot be refused you under the constitutional 
laws. And if you '11 vote for me, I '11 make it easy 
for you." 

So Frank promised. 

Barely had his visitor's footsteps died away 
when somebody called through the keyhole, 

''Hi!" 

'' What is it ? " inquired Frank. 

" You can claim a right to vote if you like, and 
if you '11 vote for me — Wangs, you know — I '11 see 
that you 're leniently treated." 

Frank saw no harm in promising this applicant 



AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPERITES, 199 

also, and the next moment was surprised to hear 
some one shouting down the chimney, 

'' Below there ! " 

" What do you want ? " Frank shouted. 

** Your vote ! Claim the right and you '11 get it. 
Give it to me, and I '11 get you off." 

Again Frank promised, and presently from a 
grating in the floor of the cell ascended a cry, 

'' You up there ! " 

" Well ! " said Frank. 

" I '11 have you appointed to office under the 
Beadle if you '11 vote for me. They '11 let you, if 
you demand it." 

Frank promised once more. In time he had 
been applied to by all the candidates, and to each 
in turn he had promised hfs support. He calcu- 
lated that, as the vote was to be by ballot, every 
successful candidate would credit him with having 
voted for him individually. 

In due course, the officer came to conduct him 
to the polling-booth. Imagine his consternation, 
when he saw on all sides posters after this fashion : 



200 IN WHICH FRANK FINDS HIMSELF 

Important Intelligence. 
The Prisoner himself has promised his vote to Snog ! 

An Undeniable Fact. 
Chodp has secured the support of the Prisoner ! 

— and so on through the whole list of candidates ; 
and, what was more odd, nobody seemed to be sur- 
prised or annoyed at these conflicting statements— 
possibly because they did not believe any one of 
them. 

Frank was received outside the polling-booth by 
the Beadle. As he looked at the threatening faces 
on all sides of him his heart sank jvithin him. He 
felt if he was ever to make his escape, now was 
the time ! It was desperate odds ; but he remem- 
bered how many hair's-breadth escapes he had 
recently had, and he hoped his luck would not now 
desert him. 

He took a rapid survey of the scene. On both 
sides and behind him the crowd was so dense, that 
he felt there was no chance of pushing his way 
through. In front of him stood the Beadle only : 



AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPERITES, * 201 

behind the Beadle was the polling-booth, which 
was simply a tent. In the middle was a table, all 
round which stood the ballot-boxes. The voters 
were evidently intended to pass round the table, 
deposit their votes, and leave by the opposite door. 
Through that he could see the snow-clad mountain- 
side. It was not an inviting prospect, but it was 
his sole chance. 

Lowering his head suddenly he butted the portly 
Beadle full in the pit of the stomach with a force 
that laid him prostrate and gasping. Leaping over 
him, Frank cleared the table at a bound, and rush- 
ing through the open door beyond, made at the top 
of his speed for the mountain. 

His sudden action for a moment paralysed the 
spectators, and so gained him a very fair start. 
Moreover, he was young, and light and active — 
fear lent him wings, and hope spurred him along. 

Bound after bound he rushed up the steep, but 
the snow lay thick, and he sank deep at every 
stride. Glancing hastily over his shoulder, he saw 
that two or three of the splay-footed monsters were 



202 FRANK AMONG THE WILD WALLPAPEKITES. 

gaining on him — their wide, flat soles supporting 
them like snow-shoes. 

With a despairing cry he hurried on, and at last 
reached the summit. With another bound he had 
crossed it to commence the descent on the other 
side. 

Too late he discovered that that side was a 
steep sheet of ice, polished and smooth as glass. 
He attempted to throw himself backward and 
slide down on his heels, but lost his balance, and 
falling on his back, shot downward with a fearful 
velocity, which every moment increased, until his 
clothes seemed to scorch him with the friction, as 
indeed was the case, for they were literally turned 
into tinder. In a few minutes he found himself 
plunging into a snowdrift at the foot of the slippery 
plane. 

Such was the force of his descent that he was 
completely buried, but the contact of the cool snow 
was refreshing to his heated limbs, and he lay 
still for a while to recover his strength and his 
breath. 




CHAPTER THIRTEEN. 

WHICH REVEALS NOAH'S NOTION OF THE MATTER. 

1 MUST now take up the thread of my narra- 
tive from the point where I left it at the close 
of my first chapter. You will remember that at 
that juncture Noah called his family, and was 



204 WHICH RE VEALS NOAH'S 

about to address them. His remarks were to this 
effect : 

" My sons, although that lad who has just left 
us has not treated us with kindness, consideration, 
or politeness, still we will befriend him. He is 
just now about to undergo a severe trial, and, 
indeed, is in considerable peril. Prince Silver- 
wings, disgusted with his selfishness, vanity, and 
folly, intends to give him a severe lesson, in the 
hope of curing him of his bad qualities. The task 
of his reformation has been entrusted by the fairy 
Prince to a couple of his confidential elves, who 
are, I regret to say, very mischievous sprites, and 
not unlikely to exercise their powers to the fullest 
extent in torturing and punishing our young friend 
and proprietor. It is, I consider, our duty as 
Noah's Arkitects and gentlemen to plan some 
means of assisting him. What do you say ? " 

There was a general murmur of, 

"All right. ' If you think so, of course it is 
right. Hear, hear ! " 

Thereupon Noah continued his address : 



NOTION OF THE MATTER, 205 

" I happened to overhear a portion of the con- 
versation of the elves, and from that I gather that 
their intention is to wind up his probation by 
depositing him at the North Pole, and leaving him 
to find his way home again. My proposition is to 
fit out an expedition and go in search of him, 
rescue him, and restore him to his family." 

" Hear! hear ! " shouted Noah's sons, delighted 
at the prospect of adventure thus offered to them. 

" The means are at hand in the shape of the ark, 
which will take us in safety through the dangers of 
the Arctic Ocean. We must land our live-stock 
with as little delay as possible, leave it in charge of 
our wives and families, and at once steam off north- 
ward." 

" Hear ! hear ! " shouted the boys again. 

Immediately all was bustle and excitement. The 
animals were hurriedly put ashore, and the ark 
fitted and furnished for a long voyage. 

" Here, Ham," said Japhet, "you're stoker. Go 
and get up steam as fast you can ! " 

" Iss, Massa Jaffit," replied Ham, " berry good ! " 



2o6 WHICH RE VEALS NOAH'S 

— and he disappeared down the stoke-hole, and 
worked away vigorously at the furnace till he grew 
Slack in the face. He transmitted the colour to his 
descendants, but not, I am credibly informed, the 
inclination to work excessively hard. 

When all was ready, Noah came on board and 
took up his position on the roof. Shem went to 
the wheel, and Japhet stood by the chimney which 
communicated with the engine-room, to shout the 
Captain's orders down to Ham. 

"Cast loose the fore-spring!" shouted Noah; 
and the order was immediately obeyed. 

" Let go the aft spring ! " It was done. " Half 
a turn ahead ! " said Noah. 

" Half a turn ahead ! " repeated Japhet ; and the 
engines began to work. 

" Easy ! " cried the Captain. 

" Easy ! " echoed the Call-boy. 

" Go on ahead ! " 

" Go on ahead ! " 

The engines revolved, the steam blew off, 
the water began to hiss and heave, and away 



NOTION OF THE MATTER, 207 

went the great ark, moving majestically over the 
Avaves. 

Noah turned to the helmsman : 

" North by north, north, by two point north 
north of north northerly." 

" Aye, aye ! " answered Shem. 

Before long the ark was gliding rapidly along 
over the open sea. 

" Steamer's red light on the starboard bow ! " 
shouted Japhet, who was keeping the look-out. 

Noah signalled with his hand, and the ark obey- 
ing the helm, made a circuit so as to pass under 
the other vessel's stern. 

" Ship ahoy ! What vessel 's that ? " shouted 
Noah, through the speaking-trumpet. 

" The ' Cheerful Kettle ! ' " was the response. 

" Whither bound .? " 

" For Tea-table Land." 

'' What cargo ? " 

"Hot water!" 

The stranger then put the same questions to 
Noah, and the vessels parted. 



2o8 WHICH RE VEALS NOAH'S 

**Give her her course!" said Noah, and once 
more the huge ark moved steadily northward. 

Presently Ham, begrimed, and shiny with per- 
spiration, came up the stoke-hole and sat on the 
grating to get a breath of fresh air. 

" I say, massa Shem, why am de ole man like de 
inventor ob de spinning-machine ? Yah ! " 

" You mustn't speak to the man at the wheel ! " 
said Shem, with austerity. 

** It don't am de weal, it am de salt beef! " said 
Ham. 

This was a joke at the expense of Shem, who 
had been entrusted with the victualling of the ark, 
and had laid in such quantities of salt beef that 
his Chinese descendants call a ship a "junk" to 
this very day. 

** Yah ! yah!" laughed Ham, land then continued, 
" de reason why de skipper am like de Ventor of 
de spinning-machine is because he am an ark- 
wright. Gib it up, Mr. Shem ? " 

And then this light-hearted fellow began to 
sing. 



NOTION OF THE MATTER, 209 

A Melody. 

Toll de banjo, toll ! 
For pretty Rosey Coal, 

She am as black 

As de chumm/s sack, 
And she 's dressed like de barber's pole ! 

Send for Sancho Panza 
To sing de mournful stanza : 

She 's turned her toes, 

Hab little Rose — 
She 's died of influanza. 

Ring de banjo, ring ! 
And let us sadly sing, 

With a boodle-y-bay. 

And a ri fol lay, 
And a ching-a-ring, ting, ting, ting ! 

Wiping away an unbidden tear on the end of his 
necktie, the minstrel slung himself down the stoke- 
hole. Just as his head was disappearing, he winked 
solemnly at the steersman, and said, ** Yah ! dis 
am de real ole original Ham Bones ! Yah ! " 

Enlivened* by this harmless gaiety, the ark sped 
gallantly on her way. 

The air became keener, and stray blocks of ice 

14 



2IO WHICH REVEALS NOAH'S 

began to be fallen in with. Whales spouted in the 
offing, which suggested a conundrum to the irre- 
pressible stoker. 

" Massa Jaffit, sar! Why am dat whale running 
away to de horizing like a chile goin' to de big 
building at Wanstead ? Gib it up ? Dat whale 
scooting off to de Vizing am like dat chile because 
he am agwine to the offing asylum." 

And still the great engines throbbed, and the 
bluff bows of the ark plunged on through the 
seething foam. 

Shem began to find his post rather a cold one, 
and cunningly offered to change with Ham. 

" Look, see ! " he observed to the stoker, " down 
hold belly pigeon hot, this boy he pigeon willing 
swop. How ? '* 

But Ham did not see it in the same light. 

By-and-by the sky became obscured with fogs, 
through which gleamed the ghostly forms of gi- 
gantic icebergs, while wide-spreading floes groaned 
as they splintered before the irresistible bows of 
the huge vessel. 



NOTION OF THE MATTER. . an 

And so into the thickening wreaths of white 
vapour the ark plunges onward, and is lost to our 
sight amid the mysterious dim regions that sur- 
round the silence and solitude of the Pole. 





CHAPTER FOURTEEN. 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 

As Frank gradually recovered from his fatigue, 
he was aware of something overhead shovelling 
the snow off him, and, before long, he saw a man, 
dressed in a warm suit of fur, hard at work endea- 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 213 

vouring to liberate him from the drift in which he 
vras buried. Vigorously seconding his rescuer's 
efforts, Frank soon got free, and was presently 
standing on the hard-frozen surface, which had 
only given way on account of the violence with 
Avhich he had been flung upon it by his involun- 
tary descent. 

" Well, messmate, what cheer ? " asked his com- 
panion. ** What are you after } " 

" I came from up there ! " said Frank, pointing 
to the glittering frozen plane. 

"Yes, — I saw you come down like a young 
avalanche," answered his new-found friend. 

" Don't go there," said Frank. " I was running 
away to escape from the inhabitants, who are 
awful ! " 

"Ah, Esquimaux most likely! But I 've no in- 
tention of going there. I 'm bound for the North 
Pole, and we can't be very far from it here." 

Frank was astonished, and showed his surprise. 

"Oh, don't stare, young 'un ! we are withip a 
degree or so of it now." 



214 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 

He was a strange-looking figure. You might 
have taken him for Robinson Crusoe going to a 
Christmas party. His coat, trousers, cap, gloves, 
and even boots, were all of shaggy fur, and he 
carried a huge umbrella under his arm. He wore 
a pair of bjue spectacles, and Frank noticed that 
his skin was of a pale green colour, and this 
puzzled him so, that after a short time he was 
obliged to refer to it. 

" Are you unwell ? " he asked. 

" Not a bit ; never was better in my life ! " was 
the cheerful reply. 

" You don't look as if you were very well," said 
Frank. 

- Why not ? " 

" Well," said Frank, with some hesitation, ** your 
complexion, you know." 

" Complexion ! what 's the matter with it ? Of 
course I can't tell. • I haven't looked in a glass for 
months." 

"Why, it's kind of tinged with green, if you 
must know," stammered Frank. 



WHICH BlilNGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 215 

** You don't say so ? " said the other, stopping 
short. 

" Yes, very decidedly green." 

** On your word of honour ? " 

" Certainly, on my word of honour as a gentle- 
man!" 

The man in fur seized Frank by the hand, and 
shook it warmly. 

'' Thank you, my dear boy ! thank you ! You 
have made me quite happy. You have relieved 
my mind immensely ! " 

"In what way ?" 

" Because it proves the correctness of my theory." 

"What theory.^" 

" Why, vegetable food ! Entirely vegetable diet. 
I knew it would. Don't you know that there is 
iron in your blood in considerable quantities ? It 
contains about one and a half per cent, of oxide of 
iron. Well, you will see that this being a quite 
appreciable proportion, and the Pole being highly 
magnetic, you would be drawn to it, and become 
so firmly attached that you would be unable to get 



2i6 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POIlE. 

away, and so be starved to death. Seeing this, I 
determined to adopt an exclusively vegetable diet, 
which I felt certain would replace the metal with 
the vegetable salts. That my idea was correct the 
tinge of my skin definitely proves." 

" But I haven't got the iron out of my blood," 
said Frank, becoming alarmed, "and I shall be 
fixed to the Pole." 

" It will be an interesting experiment," said his 
companion. 

" Thank you ! " said Frank ; " but I had rather 
not carry it out to starvation-point ! " 

" Oh ! all right. I will feed you on vegetables 
while we stay there, which will reduce the attrac- 
tion, and then I shall be able to drag you away. 
It will be very curious, because, if I conjecture 
rightly, as I take you away the iron will all pass 
out of your blood through the pores of your skin 
in a fine vapour. This is really most fortunate. 
Let me shake you once more by the hand ! " 

The discoverer s spirits were so elated, that he 
presently broke out into song : 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 217 

A Magnetic Canzonet. 

I would I were in the Circle Arctic, • 

For there I 'd carve a cipher — mark — tick — 

On the Pole ! on the Pole ! on the Pole ! on the Pole ! 
I seek that point magnetic, 
I do ! I do ! 

My doubts to solve, 
If we resolve 
On axis hypothetic. — 

Don't you ? don't you ? 
In manner eneigetic? 

This one of all my dreams the Q^ivcaax is — 
To find out our terrestrial axis 

At the Pole ! at the Pole ! at the Pole ! at the Pole ! 
I fain that mundane focus 
Would view ! would view ! 
The centre pin 
On which we spin. 
The whole world's midmost locus. 

I do ! I do ! 
I swear by Hocus Pocus ! 

At this moment something went whizz ! by 
Frank's ear. 

His companion heard it, and at once opening 
his umbrella, placed it over his shoulder. 



2i8 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 

" Rhinoceros-hide," he said. 

" Well, but there 's no sun," observed Frank. 

Whizz ! 

Something flew by Frank s head so close as to 
ruffle his hair. 

" What was that ? " he asked. 

" A horse-shoe, I think, from the sound." 

** But where 's the horse } " 

" I don't know. Don't you see ? it 's the Pole 
that is attracting all these thipgs from various 
distances according to their specific gravity." 

Ph't! 

" Mind," said the explorer, " that was a nail ; 
and there will probably be more directly." 

Boom ! 

" H'm ! too near to be pleasant," said the man. 
" That was a crowbar ! You had better walk in 
front of me. My umbrella is made of rhinoceros- 
hide to protect me against these missiles." 

Ph't ! ph't ! ph't ! 

Boom ! 

Whizz ! 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 219 

Prrrt ! 

The sounds increased as they went on. 

" We must be getting very close now," said the 
voyager ; ** but don't walk so fast." 
' " Am I ? I didn't know it. Somehow I seem 
to get along much more easily now," said Frank, 
looking round. 

** How flushed you are ! " said the other. 

" Yes, the blood seems to tingle in my veins." 

" The deuce it does ! " answered his companion, 
hurriedly. " It 's the attraction of the Pole begin- 
ning to act on the iron ! — Stop ! " 

He stretched out his hand to catch hold of 
Frank. But he was just a second too late. There 
was a loud whish ! and Frank was carried off" his 
feet, and whirled along amid a cloud of metallic 
matters, all flying to the Pole. 

In a few seconds Frank was fetched up suddenly 
by his back coming thump against some hard sub- 
stance with a violence that made him feel quite 
faint and sick. 

He looked up. A large pole of a bright ver- 



220 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 

milion colour towered over his head and vanished 
in the fogs above him. The North Pole was, in 
fact, nothing more nor less than a gigantic bar 
magnet ! 

** I wonder how fast I travelled, and how long 
he will be in coming ? " thought Frank. 

His eyes were dazzled by the rapidity with 
which all sorts of objects rushed towards him, and 
became fixed to the Pole. Something that looked 
like a tiny speck in the far distance grew in a few 
seconds to gigantic proportions, and proved to be 
a large armour-plate, which flew up against the 
magnet with a loud clang. 

" At that rate," thought Frank, as his heart sank 
within him, " he may be weeks coming, and I shall 
be starved to death before he arrives ! " 

He struggled to free himself, but the more he 
struggled the faster he stuck, for the exertion 
warmed the iron in his blood and made it more 
sensitive. 

In the meantime he noticed a great shuffling and 
snortihg in his immediate neighbourhood. The 



THE NEW YORK 

PUBLIC LIBRARY, 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 221 

Pole stood upon an elevated plateau of rock, so 
that he could not see what was going on at the 
foot. But in a few minutes several huge and 
hideous heads made themselves visible above the 
edge. 

At the same moment, feeling the Pole behind 
him vibrate strongly, he gazed up, and saw another 
monster, with a long red tongue, coming head 
foremost down towards him. 

These terrific nondescripts seemed to be a com- 
bination of whale, narwhal, walrus, and white bear. 
Their * greedy eyes glared upon him hungrily. 
Their hot breath, with an unmistakeable smack of 
raw meat about it, played on his whitening cheek. 
Their long claws scratched and scraped on the icy 
surface of the rock. Then a sound like cruel 
laughter reached him, and he saw on the neigh- 
bouring peaks gigantic birds, like monster pen- 
guins, sitting bolt upright and clattering their great 
beaks, as if delighted at the prospect of picking 
his bones when the other giant brutes had done 
with them. 



\ 



222 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 

Nearer and nearer slid the vast beast overhead, 
and as they saw him approaching the prey, more 
furiously did his rivals strive to climb up the slip- 
pery sides of the rock. Grunts, bellows, and roar- 
ings echoed through the arctic silence. 

And now the descending creature was so near 
that his long slimy tongue came flapping against 
poor Frank's terror-dewed forehead. He gave 
himself up for lost, and uttered one last long hope- 
less shriek of extreme agony and horror ! It was 
echoed by a growl, which was evidently a note of 
alarm and warning, for the descending monster im- 
mediately turned round and began to shin up the 
pole with all his might, while the others shufifled 
hastily down and took to flight. 

The loathsome birds lazily flapped their foul 
pinions, and sailed away with hoarse cries of dis- 
appointment. 

Then a familiar sound struck on Frank's ear. 1 1 
was the whistle of a vessel blowing off steam. He 
gazed around him. There were Noah, Japhet, and 
Shem hurrying over the snow to his rescue. And 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 233I 

beyond on the edge of the ice-field lay the ark, 
with Ham on board banking up the fires. 

Frank swooned. 

When he came to himself he heard Noah's voice 
calling to him : 

** Slide down, Frank, slide down! We'll catch 
you at the bottom ! " 

** I can't — owing to the presence of iron in my 
blood, I am stuck fast to the Pole." 

" Oh no ! not now ! " shouted Japhet. " Try ! — 
You '11 find you can get away without any diffi- 
culty. The fright has changed all the iron into 
lead ! " 

And Frank found this was true ; so he slid 
down and was caught by Noah and his sons. But 
he was too exhausted to walk, so they carried him 
pickaback by turns, and got him all safe and sound 
on board the ark. 

They wrapped Frank up in thick blankets and 
put him in a warm corner. 

Then Noah once more mounted the roof, and 
the crew took their places. 



224 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE, 

** Half a turn astarn ! " said the captain. 

•' Half a turn astarn ! " repeated Japhet. 

'* Thumpety, thumpety ! " went the engines. 

" Easy ahead ! " 

*' Easy ahead ! " 

'* Thum-pe-ty ! thum-pe-ty ! " 

" Port ! " shouted Noah 'to Shem. 

** Port it is ! " said the helmsman. 

" Go on ahead ! " 

" Go on ahead ! " 

"Thumpety! thumpety! thumpety!" responded 

the engines. 

" Give her her course ! " shouted the captain to 

Shem. 

" Full steam ! " 

" Full steam ! " 

And then the engines began to throb away till 

their voices fell into a regular tune. 



WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 225 



THE MARINE-ENGINE POLKA.* 




E 



E 



:?=2: 



Dump - y, Dump - y; 



Dump ! 



i 



^ 



-^ 



fj 



Dump - y, Dump - y; 



Dump ! 



^ 



:p=:ff: 



^^■ 



± 



t 



Dumpet - y, Dump! Dumpet - y, Dmnp! 



3 



Da Qapo^ ad lib. 



? 



Dumpet - y, Dump - y ! Dump ! Dump ! 

To which tune Frank eventually fell asleep. 

He was roused from his refreshing slumber by 
Japhet, and found himself in a comfortable litter 
outside the door of his home. 

" Good bye, my little friend ! " said Noah. " I 
hope this will be a warning to you. Be more aon- 



* This is in the appropriate and natural key of Sea. 



Yb 



126 WHICH BRINGS FRANK TO THE NORTH POLE. 

siderate of the feelings of others, less stuck-up with 
ideas of your own cleverness and superiority, and 
be, in short — a gentleman ! " 

" Good bye," said Frank, "and many thanks for 
your kindness and forgiving spirit I shall, I hope, 
be a better boy after this, for I have had a very 
severe lesson." 

So he shook hands with his preservers, and, 
hurrying into the house, ran upstairs. 

There was a clatter as of tea-things as he reached 
the parlour door. He flung it open, and there, to 
his surprise, was a party of his friends and school- 
fellows seated at table enjoying tarts, and bread 
and jam, and all sorts of luxuries ! 





CHAPTER FIFTEEN. 



AND FINAL. 

W HY, Frank ! where have you been this last 
half-hour ? We have been looking for you high 
and low. Where were you ? " said his father. 

" Yes, where have you been for this last half- 
hour ? " said his mother. 

227 V^— t 



228 MNAL. 

" At the North Pole," said Frank, quite simply. 

They stared at him. 

" Where ? " 

" At the North Pole." 

" Indeed?" said his father, satirically; "and pray 
how did you get back ? " 

" In Noah's Ark," answered Frank. 

His father looked angry. 

" What do you mean by talking such nonsense 
to me, sir ? " 

"He looks very flushed and feverish," said his 
mother. " I '11 give him a powder to-night when 
he goes to bed." 

" What do you tell such fibs for, Frank ? " asked 
his sister. 

"It's not fibs I was invited to Fairydom by 
Prince Silverwings, and I 've been in the Insect 
World, and in Teumendtlandt, and in Quadrupe- 
dremia, and among the Gingerbreadians, and before 
the Lord Chief Justice in Air ; and I Ve seen the 
Learned Frog, and visited the bottom of the sea, 
and lodged with a hermit-crab at number Forty-two 



FINAL, 229 

Submarine Villas ; and I Ve been taken prisoner by 
the Wild Wallpaperites, and then I was carried off 
to the North Pole by the iron in my blood ; and 
I should have been gobbled up by monsters, if 
Noah hadn't come in the ark and rescued me. 
And here I am ! " 

" And all this happened in half an hour ? " cried 
his father, in a tone of disbelief. 

" Well, it seems to me as if I had been away a 
year at least ! " 

" It seems to me you 're getting into your old 
habit of inventing fibs," said his mother. 

" No," answered Frank, gravely. " I 'm cured 
of all my old habits. I shall never tell fibs or 
make groundless assertions, or destroy toys and 
pull dolls' legs off, or fancy I can improve on 
the works of nature, and invent wonderful ani- 
mals, and men, and birds, and insects ; and I 

shall behave like an honourable hermit-cr 

no, I mean gentleman ; and I hope I shall please 
you and always be a good boy. At any rate, I 
shall try." 



" You can't do more than try your best, my son/' 
said his mother. 

" Upon my word, he looks as if he was in ear- 
nest," said his father. 

" Yes, that I am ! " said Frank. 

"He looks as if he were tired and hungry, at 
any rate," said Frank's mother, with the keen eye 
of affection noticing his fatigue. 

In a moment Frank was seated at the table 
and supplied with all sorts of nice things. When 
his appetite was satisfied, he looked round and 
saw that he was the centre of all eyes. 

" You seem to be wondering a good deal at the 
account I gave of myself, so perhaps the best 
thing I can do will be to relate all that happened, 
or seemed to happen, to me while I was away for 
what I should call a year, if you did not say it 
was only half an hour." 

So he sat down and told all that had happened 
to him, as related in this veracious chronicle. 

" It 's very strange ! " said his father, when 
Frank had finished. 



FINAL, 231 

'' I confess I really don't understand it," said 
his mother. 

" I can't understand it either," said Frank, " but 
I feel that it has done me good, and that is quite 
enough for me. I shall never want again to 
destroy things by cutting them open to see what 
there is inside them to make them work." 

And Frank kept his word, and was an excellent 
boy, and everybody loved and respected him. 
And his little friends would often ask him to relate 
his adventures to them, and he was very obliging 
and always did so, though he must have got rather 
tired of telling them. But they never got tired of 
hearing them, although I am afraid some of them 
did not altogether believe they were true. 

Like many older and wiser story-tellers who deal 
in the marvellous, Frank, with constant repetition, 
often got his facts a little mixed, and sometimes 
his stories of one day would rather contradict those 
of another. But a great deal of allowance must 
be made for one who had been through so much ; 
and though some of Frank's more sceptical friends 



would often shake their heads, the rest would prefer 
not to be too critical, and rather admired the novcj 
additions which would constantly keep thrusting' 
themselves forward. 

Sometimes his listeners would say, 

" What a story-teller that Frank is I " , ■_ 

Do you think he is, too, my little readers ? i>t. 




» • 




•l "I . • 



sr. 



^ 



