^s-^s 



ff^J-^i- V\ ^S-^VJ 



iM^: 






=W* S «"*«<"« 



PR 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 




Cornell University Library 
PR4613.D46G2 

Gallia, 



3 1924 013 341 874 



DATE DUE 










um 


(fW Him™ 


p^H**-' 




r^TT- - 
























-■ r*l"W™ 








u^j 


^^^^^w 


It- 




fWv 






















































































; ™™„ 






printed IN U.S.A. 



GALLIA 



By 

MENIE MURIEL DOWIE 

AUTHOR OF " A GIRL 
IN THE KARPATHIANS" 




PHILADELPHIA 



J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY „ rr - 

189s 







COPYRIGHT, 1895, 
BY 

J. B. Lipfincott Company. 



Printed by J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 



-W 



u^ 



GALLIA. 



CHAPTEE I. 

A little thought will usually show where a 
story begins. Gurdon considered very rightly 
that his began with a visit he paid to old Mrs. 
Leighton in Cornwall Gardens. At least he 
knew it did not begin when he was at home, nor 
when he was at Rugby, nor yet when he spent 
two years at the Lyeee in Bordeaux (though he 
hesitated about this part, and sometimes won- 
dered if that had been the prologue). The in- 
terval of his life in Munich and his life in Lon- 
don, and again at Oxford, where he passed his 
examination for the Civil Service, was a barren 
period, with no suggestion of a story about it. 
But the call he had felt himself impelled to 
make in Cornwall Gardens, because Mrs. Leigh- 
ton was a connection of the Secretary of State 
for the Colonies, and by no means a quantite nl- 
gligeable, had something about it of an inaugura- 
tive character, and when he looked back upon 
it, he perceived that this was because it had 
quite certainly ushered in an incident. 

3 



4 GALLIA. 

The incident was his journey to Paris. 

" It is about Robbie," Mrs. Leigbton bad said, 
as the last visitor swept round the corner of the 
screen. 

"Ah!" 

" Yes. You will know that I do not care a rap 
about Eobbie, although he is my only grandson 
— but I think of the family." 

" Just so," said Gurdon, who knew that Mrs. 
Leigbton cared innumerable raps about Eobbie, 
and didn't think for a second about the family. 
" And what about him ?" 

" He is getting into the ways of wicked Paris. 
You know what I mean ?" 

Gurdon wasn't qualifying as a silent servant 
of his country for nothing; he didn't know in 
the least what she meant. He waited, looking 
steadily at her. 

" Ah, well, you have always been so steady," 
she went on, with a faint sigh, as though this 
were regrettable ; " but — er — Paris — the menage 
a deux. Ah, these artists — and their models !" 

Mrs. Leighton was a very rusee and clever old 
lady, and her uplifted eyes as she said " these 
artists," coupled with the quaint, dry twist in 
her voice when she said " their models," were 
quite funny. 

Gurdon never smiled, although perhaps Mrs. 
Leighton meant him to. He knew the old 
lady's foible was to be credited with a vast 



GALLIA. 5 

knowledge of wickedness and that tenderness 
for the wicked which is supposed to proceed from 
" tout comprendre." He had heard Robbie say 
that the stories his grandmother could get out 
of one glass of Chartreuse, about the days when 
she was a young girl and stayed with her aunt 
at the French Embassy, licked anything a man 
could find in three times the quantity of Kiim- 
mel, and Eobbie didn't mean it as a compli- 
ment. Although he might be a bad boy, he had 
all that feeling of particularity about the minds 
of his female relatives which is an Englishman's 
trait as exclusive as it is touching. He was too 
young to perceive that, being two generations 
younger than his grandmother, his idea of 
humour must be immeasurably different. She 
belonged to the day when a clever woman of 
undoubted propriety made a reputation for wit 
by an audacity that was nicely calculated. 

" You were not thinking of going to Paris for 
your holiday, perhaps ?" Mrs. Leighton went on, 
after a little pause. 

Mark Gurdon was not without politeness. 
" "Well, in point of fact, I rather was !" he said 
quickly, being careful to make it seem as though 
she had by chance lit upon a plan he had been 
turning over. 

It wouldn't be a bad thing for him to do Mrs. 
Leighton any little favour, but it would have 
been a very bad thing if he had let her sus- 
l* 



6 GALLIA. 

pect that he thought he was doing her a 
favour. 

" If you do, I wish you would just burst in 
upon Robbie." 

Gurdon had no difficulty in suppressing a 
smile at the picture Mrs. Leighton had so evi- 
dently formed of her grandson's surroundings. 

" Has he been exceeding his allowance ?" was 
all he said, however. 

" ~Now, how like a man !" cried Mrs. Leighton. 
" Of course, if he didn't exceed his allowance, 
you cannot imagine that there should be any- 
thing to criticise in his way of life. Good 
heavens, what a moral code !" 

"My dear lady" — Gurdon began, with great 
deference and in defence, but he was drowned 
immediately. s 

" Let me tell you that these people are not all 
disastrously expensive ! On the stage, in books, 
I grant you ; but in real life — especially French 
real life in the neighbourhood of the studios — 
they are often remarkably thrifty and careful. 
Models, drawn from the peasant class, they have 
not forgotten the habits of their parents. They 
are not all young and pretty and fond of dress 
(as for that, models are never pretty in real life) ; 
they are middle-aged and plain, their minds set 
on Economies, their only expense to keep a big 
blue bow on the neck of the odious little white 
dog they usually cherish !" 



GALLIA. 7 

" My dear Mrs. Leighton, your intimate knowl- 
edge" — began Gurdon, now frankly laughing, 
but she swept him up brusquely again. 

" Of course, never tell me ! Wasn't Paris my 
home, and don't I know it — grille, entresol, grenier, 
and sous le toit f" 

She made a funny little upward movement 
with the gold double eyeglass, and Gurdon never 
paused to ask himself how a life at the Embassy 
could have furnished so vivid an insight into 
these byeways ; he merely noticed what an esprit 
the old soul had, and what a perfect French 
tongue she spoke with. 

He rose and held out his hand, smiling. Mrs. 
Leighton liked Gurdon, his smiles and his 
silences and his appreciation ; she often said to 
her step-sister, who, though twenty years her 
junior, was her great friend, "Mark will go 
far." And she did not like him less because he 
so obviously thought as much himself. She 
was old, and she knew that no man goes far 
who doesn't think he will go far and mean to all 
the time. 

" You will hear from me in Paris. I foresee 
myself strangling that dog in its own blue bow, 
and pitching the lady after it into the street. 
But, you know, Robbie is no infant; he may 
have his own ideas of manly independence." 

" Robbie has no ideas of any kind," said his 
grandmother with scorn — " no ideas at all be- 



8 GALLIA. 

yond plein air and — and that sort of thing. That 
is what I dislike about it. There are two ways 
of being vicious, my dear boy — one of them com- 
mands at least a little respect. Some men are 
vicious from conviction — but of the men who 
are vicious from convention what are you to 
say?" The little movement of her pretty old 
white hands with which she accompanied this 
mot, gave Gurdon an opportunity of kissing one 
of them in leavetaking. The skin felt like fine 
crumpled tissue-paper, and had a little breath of 
fleur de limon about it — the old French scent 
Mrs. Leighton habitually used. 

" Some from conviction, others from conven- 
tion," repeated Gurdon to himself when he got 
into the street. " What a dear, queer, charming 
old humbug she is !" 



CHAPTEE II. 

It was by means of a little blue poste-UUgraphe 
that Grurdon announced his arrival in Paris to 
his old college friend Leighton, who lived, or at 
anyrate had a studio, far out in the Passage des 
Favorites ; and it was another little blue poste- 
telegraphe which came to his hotel, the Lille et 
d' Albion in the Rue de Rivoli, and carried 
Leighton's welcome and his invitation to join 
him at a certain public studio in the Latin 
Quarter, where he still studied rather fitfully. 

" Dear old man, this is a rare surprise !" 
Leighton said, when, later in the day, he saw 
the tall, English-looking figure of his friend at 
the edge of the blue smoke that filled the men's 
studio. They shook hands and looked at each 
other. They had shaken hands last in the im- 
possible flurry of the Oxford railway platform, 
and no one who had seen them there would 
have wondered that the porter followed quite 
another young man with the portmanteaux, and 
stared wildly among fifty more in a vain en- 
deavour to recognise the gentleman who had 
engaged him. They were like any thousand of 
young men at that time ; now, only two years 
later, they had changed immensely. Leighton's 



10 GALLIA. 

fair hair was four inches long where it had been 
barely half an inch, he had a weird beard of 
rough tow-coloured stuff which partially covered 
his white throat. He was extremely d&colleti. 
A horrid rag of a tie disappeared into a stained 
blue waistcoat front, and a grey jacket with 
gaping side pockets modelled his muscles effect- 
ively with its greasy shine. Gurdon? "Well, 
Gurdon looked exactly as one would have ex- 
pected. He wore a brown travelling serge, a 
white shirt, and a black bow tie. He was clean 
shaven, his rather hatchet-shaped face pale and 
sallow, his reddish- dark hair just long enough 
to part in the middle, and rigorously flattened 
below a brown crush hat. There was about him 
that suggestion of baths and shaves and tailors 
and general precision, of which one is ashamed 
to feel a little tired, because it is in itself so ad- 
mirable. 

" One must spend one's holiday somewhere," 
Gurdon was murmuring. "Thought I'd look 
you up. Paris is always all right for a holiday." 

" The only place in the world fit to live in, I 
say," the other replied. " Now I'm just done. 
The light has been vile all afternoon, and I'm 
tired of sweating after the tone of that mossy 
old beggar over there. I'll get my traps, and 
we'll come along and have a yarn somewhere." 

Gurdon's eye travelled towards the model, 
whom his friend's phrase had most aptly pictured. 



GALLIA. 11 

" Magnificent chest and shoulders," he said 
admiringly. 

" Ha, ha ! rather ! That's old Lemuel's strong 
point. He travels on that chest and shoulders, 
I can tell you. Here's a friend of mine thinks 
you've got a beau torse, Lemuel, hein ?" 

A few gurgling laughs and chuckles followed 
this sally, and one or two men looked up lazily 
at Gurdon for a moment. It seemed to he an 
old studio joke, and some muttered comments 
in French, American, and other foreign lan- 
guages rumbled about the studio. 

The old Hercules upon the platform smiled 
a little, as at a familiar compliment; without 
altering the pose, he seemed to stiffen proudly ; 
the muscles in his right arm swelled and the 
strong old fingers grasping the wooden spear 
contracted a trifle more firmly. It was the end 
of the last hour of the afternoon when models 
get slack sometimes; and the half-jocular bit 
of praise, as well as the knowledge that a 
stranger was looking at him, served to brisk 
up the splendid old figure, on which forty 
pairs of eyes had been fastened more or less all 
day. 

"He understands English, then, does he?" 
Gurdon asked, with some curiosity. 

" Oh, he is English. Lemuel is a character, 
too, I can tell you. Hasn't always been a model, 
by any means." 



12 GALLIA. 

" No, I should say not. He never developed 
that muscle in this atmosphere." 

" Pretty foul, isn't it ? I expect it strikes you. 
I'm used to it. They will smoke that Petit 
Caporal, and that's what does it. "Well, there 
is not any tobacco in France, anyhow." 

" I daresay you'll welcome a pound or two 
of the old stuff, then ?" 

"My dear fellow! How fearfully decent of 
you ! You can't beat England for some things — 
pals and tobacco." 

They made their way into the grey and 
dismal little street. It was winter, but not cold. 
Neither of them wore an overcoat, and they 
stepped out briskly in the direction of the Gare 
Montparnasse. 

They may have had a good deal to say, but 
they talked only in snatches. There was much 
cordiality in their voices, but their interests were 
now so different, and their lives had strayed so 
far apart that there could be no consecutive talk 
between them all at once. 

When they had struck obliquely into the Rue 
Vaugirard, Leighton paused suddenly. 

" I was taking you to my old barracks in the 
Passage," he said, "but I don't see the good. 
The light has gone, and you won't be able to see 
my things — that is, even if you want to." Mark 
interjected something friendly. " And I really 
don't see the good." 



GALLIA. 13 

" "Well, let us consider what we are going to 
do to-night," said Gurdon, noting what he 
imagined to be his friend's reluctance to go to 
the studio. That was so like Leighton — never 
to consider how far he was going to admit his 
friend to the intimacies of his new life until they 
were half-way to the very scene of them, then to 
pull up and bungle out something about the light. 

In which reflection Mark utterly misjudged 
Robbie. 

" I'm out of things here, of course. It's ages 
since I was in Paris. I look to you, Eob, to take 
me about." 

" I'll take you round," Rob answered, with a 
burlesque wink. " And I suppose you don't 
mean Bulliers and that sort of haunt; you mean 
the Divan Japonais and the Alcazar, eh ?" 

Mark nodded. 

" "Well, I'll have to shine out in some other 
togs. So we'll go to the studio, and you'll wait 
and look about you, while I adorn in a corner 
behind a wide-meshed fishing-net." 

They set out at a swinging pace, and Mark 
pondered. This time they didn't talk; Mark 
looked about him after the fashion of a man 
who notices things, not effects, and Leighton got 
all the society he wanted out of the cigar Mark 
had handed him at the studio door. 

"How about the old lady? But I suppose 
you never see her much ?" 



14 GALLIA. 

" On the contrary, I sat opposite to her at 
dinner at the Fearon's the other night, and I 
have even called. She is brisker than ever, and 
of a freshness that shamed half the young women 
in the room — or should have done." 

" Say anything about me ?" 

" Oh, hoped I would see you when I went to 
Paris, and no doubt will expect me to tell her 
how you are getting on. She is interested in 
you, you know." 

" Rather, and I believe she's the only member 
of the family who wasn't disappointed when I 
turned painter. She sent for me when she 
heard it. She said, " Robert, you are an inde- 
pendent boy, and I like you. Go to Paris. 
Never mind what your uncle says; he doesn't 
know Paris. It's the only place to qualify as a 
human being who understands his world. Be a 
painter. I don't mind if you are a failure or a 
success, only don't give it up; stick to it and 
get all you can out of it. You start on Thurs- 
day ? Very well. Taste all the flavours of the 
art life, it is very developing. I will stop your 
allowance from Thursday. It would never do 
for you to have money; you would not develop 
character, you would not see real life." 

Leighton had attempted some little imitation 
of his grandmother's manner, and Mark roared 
with laughter at the climax of her advice. 

" "Was she as good as her word ?" he asked. 



GALLIA. 15 

" Every bit !" said Eobbie, with enthusiasm. 
" She's a rare old woman, and I'm proud of her. 
Never you believe in her wickedness ; she isn't 
half as bad as she'd make you think, nor half as 
fond of the devil as she says." 

" I have no doubt that she wouldn't be hard 
on a man, though, if — er — if he wasn't quite 
straight ?" Gurdon said, and looked tentatively 
at the houses and the evening sky. 

" She abdicated her right to oversee my con- 
duct when she stopped that four-fifty," Eobbie 
said, with a shrewd chirp in his voice. 

Gurdon felt amazed, but volunteered no com- 
ment. 

" Your uncle still holds out, I suppose ?" he 
asked carelessly. 

" Yes, he used to make up my grandmother's 
money to six hundred. That was in Oxford days, 
you remember. A daughter was not expensive, 
he said, and he could afford it. I should just 
about say he could. He was pretty sick when I 
made a break for Paris, but the money goes on, 
thank God ! for it's all I have. And of course 
he was not bound to do anything at all, as he's 
only an uncle by marriage — and that with a 
difference. Besides, he's as close as a locked 
door, the worthy Hamesthwaite." 

The subject of Leighton's worldly goods 
dropped, and they swung along in silence for a 
good way. 



16 GALLIA. 

" Now, it's not far off. I warn you, you'll be 
surprised when you see the kind of place I build 
in. Anything lonelier or less attractive — from 
an average point of view — than the Passage des 
Favorites never was conceived by mortal architect 
or builder. I've often wondered what Favorites ? 
Most favourites wouldn't care to live here, I take 
it." 

Gurdon turned a pair of hazel-grey eyes slowly 
upon him, but there was nothing to be made of 
Robbie's open face ; the blue eyes looked straight 
before him, the lids narrowing themselves from 
time to time as he tasted a snatch of compo- 
sition in the surrounding buildings or the street. 
Gurdon gave it up. 

" We turn on our left sharp now." 

They had been walking about half an hour. 
The road was unmade and muddy, no longer 
a street, but a road ; there were bleak gardens 
with dying shrubs in them, and great glass balls 
set up on small pillars, and heaps of shells, and 
stones, and coloured glass, and other excrescences 
of bad taste in suburban horticulture. The 
houses were no longer in rows, they were scat- 
tered, and occasional blank building-fields could 
be seen over wood palings ; fields edged by a 
segment of a street consisting of one block of 
painfully narrow houses with raw edges. Over 
everything there was an air of neglect, of disap- 
pointed, disheartened effort, or candid squalor; 



GALLIA. 17 

it made an impression of the utmost desolation 
upon Gurdon, and he wondered what in heaven's 
name could cause a man whose very profession 
presupposed a love of beauty, to choose such a 
spot. 

"Grand place for an artist this," Leighton 
broke out with warm enthusiasm, and flung tbe 
end of his cigar at a broken statue which was 
set up behind a bush of hemlock in the garden 
they were passing. " You have no idea of the 
queer things you see here sometimes. You'd 
hardly think Paris had an edge like this, would 
you ? Over there is the barribre" waving a hand 
on which charcoal had formed an effective back- 
ground to a turquoise set in silver, in the direc- 
tion of the sunset. " The lights that travel over 
this plain sometimes are magnificent. Now, for 
instance, look now how the thing composes! 
You see where they have been pulling down the 
backs of these houses — you see that heap of yel- 
low sand with the puddle in the middle where 
they've been making mortar, and that heap of 
concrete there for the new facade, and the yellow 
freestone with the saw still in it ? Look how the 
sun leaps into that puddle and catches hold of 
that saw. Jove ! I've got to paint that thing one 
of these days." 

Gurdon felt instructed, and really did think he 
saw something rather fine about it. 

" I shall call it ' Well begun is ill done,' if I send 
b S* 



18 GALLIA. 

it to England ; they love titles at the Academy," 
Leighton went on, with the same warmth, already 
seeing the thing packed for delivery at a London 
exhibition. " I wonder if I've got the key. Oh, 
perhaps Arsenie will be home by now. Here, 
Gurdon, stop ! this is our door. Where were 
you off to ?" 



CHAPTEE III. 

" "Who is Arsenie ?" Gurdon asked, as lightly- 
as he could, and smiling. 

"Arsenie? Have I not mentioned her?" 
Leighton looked at him in frank surprise. " Oh, 
she lives with me, and cooks, and looks after me, 
and keeps me out of mischief." He laughed — 
laughed like a Paris art student. 

" You're pretty well acclimatised," Mark man- 
aged to say, with admirable carelessness, for the 
fact was, he had never believed a word of old 
Mrs. Leighton's story, and with every step he 
took towards the Passage des Favorites it had 
seemed more and more improbable. 

Leighton laughed again, this time with just a 
shade of colour in his forehead. " You mustn't 
expect a great beauty. She's not that. Queer 
name, isn't it — Arsenie ? Everybody calls her 
Arsenic, but that really is a bit rough." 

They had been standing at the door all this 
time, Robbie striking the key on the iron handle 
as he gave these hurried particulars. Now a step 
sounded inside, and the door was opened from 
within. 

" J'amene un ami a moi, belle, mais ne te 

\9 



20 GALLIA. 

derange pas," Leighton said in execrable French 
as they went inside. 

" Tiens, bon — s'il ne veut pas manger !" cried 
tbe woman in a voice very shrill, but gay. She 
had the coarse, rough black hair of the Midi, and 
the sallow skin and large features, but there was 
a possibility of drama in her pose, of repartee 
upon her thick lips, and of immense practi- 
cality in her shrewd, bold eye. She looked about 
thirty-four as she stood there, carelessly dressed, 
and with no figure in particular. In point of 
fact, she had the most perfect classic build of any 
model in the Quartier. It was because she was 
so like Venus that she was dowdy in common 
clothing. There were lines of temper, and 
power, and dominance in her forehead. She had 
a small casserole in one hand and a spoon in the 
other; she was cooldng the evening meal, and 
after she had looked at Grurdon a moment with 
a very direct but friendly stare, she turned back 
to a corner where a ridiculous little fourneau and 
charcoal stove had been accommodated. 

" I could never keep out of debt in this world 
if I hadn't Arsenie," said Robbie, bringing his 
glance from the stove to Gurdon's inexpressive 
face. " I don't owe a penny, and I don't believe 
I've been drunk since last Mi-Car§me. If I had 
that four-fifty I could afford to do without her, 
and go to the bad — as it is, I couldn't. Hello, 
IiU-lu !" 



GALLIA. 21 

A very small fluffy white dog got up from a 
heap of drapery in a corner, and came wagging 
and wriggling towards Leighton ; it wore an im- 
mense blue bow upon its neck. Gurdon passed 
his hand over his forehead, and walked a few 
paces to a dark corner, where a shabby divan 
was constructed below a big brown barge-sail. 
He was a good deal perplexed. 

" I shall change now, Mark ; take a squint at 
those croquis over there." 

Gurdon moved nearer to the divan. It was a 
big, barn-like studio and at the other end he 
could hear Arsgnie playing with the little dog in 
a voice like the sharpening of a carving-knife, 
and with a rough show of affection that made 
him shudder. All round, the walls were pinned 
over with sketches, studies, schemes for pictures, 
caricatures, verses, impertinences and toys from 
Carnival time. On the floor a few mats were 
lying, and skins. All was wonderfully clean, 
nothing but the ashes of cigarettes lay upon the 
divan or the floor. A pair of wooden sabots 
were in a corner, a few hats hung on pegs. 
Gurdon made a careful inspection of these things, 
because he felt really interested, and he saw that 
his friend's hand was strong and sure, and ut- 
terly different from what it had been when he 
drew dons and proctors and freshers in the old 
days. 

He turned to go over to the stove and talk to 



22 GALLIA. 

Ars&rie, but at that moment she opened a little 
door and disappeared, striking matches and evi- 
dently engaged in getting a light. 

He pushed aside a heap of clothes on the 
divan and sat down to rest a minute till she 
came back. 

To his amazement, a head reared itself at the 
other end of the heap of clothing, — a head with 
a good deal of black-brown hair cut short and a 
pair of very round, very sleepy eyes; two feet 
thrust themselves out of his end of the bundle 
and swung to the floor. The figure sat and then 
stood up and shook herself; she seemed a girl 
of about eighteen. 

" Qui done ?" she said, looking candidly and 
laughingly at Gurdon. Just then Leighton came 
in, hitching his shoulders into a black coat, which 
was less familiar to him than his grey jacket. 

" Hullo, young Lemuel, you here ?" he said in 
English. 

"Yes; been asleep, though. "Who is this?" 
She pointed to Gurdon as though she ought to 
be told at once of any intruder into the circle. 

" Friend of mine from England, Gurdon by 
name. Look here, Lemuel, don't you make love 
to him." 

The girl leapt into the air with a high, curious 
shriek of amusement and delight. She was a 
round well-developed creature, but she was light 
and fearfully agile, and it made a wonderful 



GALLIA. 23 

effect. "WTien she descended, she cut a strange 
step towards Gurdon, flung both her arms round 
his head and kissed him on his severe, neatly- 
shaven lips. Then she went off into the gayest, 
most squealing of laughs. 

" You see how I begin," she said, and danced 
over the floor and swung round and looked at 
them, and doubled herself up to scream and 
laugh again. 

There was something so mocking and pro- 
voking about the creature that Gurdon, laugh- 
ing, but tingling curiously in a way he did not 
stop to understand, jumped up from the divan 
and caught her and said — 

" I'm going to box your ears, you saucy child !" 
He gave her two light pats on each side of her 
head, took her by the elbows firmly, and said, 
"Now, are you sorry? Not a bit?" She was 
tremendously pretty. " "Will you do it again ?" 

"No, I just won't," she said demurely, but 
with a nod of such shrewdness that Leighton 
fell to guffawing in the corner. 

"Voyons, mes enfants, — du cafe!" shouted 
Arsenie from the stove, and brought forward a 
little tray. 

The girl they had called Lemuel flew round 
the studio and sat on the floor beside Robbie, 
pretending to laugh when she looked at Gurdon, 
and throwing her dress skirt over her head as 
she rocked about in mock paroxysms. Mark's 



24 GALLIA. 

mind was full of bewilderment as he took his 
place in this strange circle. Who was this wild 
creature, a child and not a child? How was 
she with Leighton and Arsenie? He looked 
from one to the other of them, intending to ask 
about her, but they were playing ball with the 
little white dog, and Lemuel's round eyes were 
peeping at him from under her skirt hem. 

"I think we'd better not say who you are; 
you've behaved yourself so disgracefully," Leigh- 
ton just then said, looking over his shoulder. 
" She is tbe daughter of our friend with the beau 
torse, and she is called young Lemuel." 

" Moi, aussi," she began to scream, but Robbie 
put his hand out and caught her by the hair, 
and they played together till they nearly upset 
the coffee. Gurdon took up Lu-lu and fingered 
the beast's big bow, while he wondered what 
old Mrs. Leighton would make of the only ele- 
ment that had been wanting in her picture of 
Robbie's surroundings. 



CHAPTER IV. 

It was not only to look after Eobbie Leigh- 
ton, and oblige that young man's grandmother 
that Gurdon had come to Paris. A notable 
feature of his mind was a peculiar power of 
forming small hut effective combinations; the 
power was now more than a natural faculty. 
Mark had discovered, early in life, that he had 
such a quality, and he had had many opportuni- 
ties of becoming impressed with a sense of its use- 
fulness ; he therefore determined to develop it as 
another man might decide to develop his talent 
for music or sculpture. On the principle that the 
greater includes the less, Gurdon, while capable of 
forming a scheme of very respectable magnitude, 
was also sensible of the importance of the smallest 
details, and made a practice of never neglecting 
them. You might have met Gurdon anywhere, 
— at dinner, in a train, between the acts, on a 
racecourse, in the cabin of a steamer, — and after 
half-an-hour's conversation you would have put 
him down merely as an excellent specimen 
of the average man; in which judgment you 
would have been mistaken. For this very power 
I speak of is by no means part of the average 
man's equipment, and it was just this and noth- 

B 3 25 



26 GALLIA. 

ing else that distinguished Mark from the crowd. 
It is very habitual to use the phrase regarding a 
young man that he must " make a career for 
himself" ; and there is nothing quite so rare as 
to see the young man who has done it. Circum- 
stances, when not relatives or an accident of 
birth, are tbe usual agents in the manufacture of 
this article; and to come across the man who, 
not having either the relatives or the accident 
of birth, and not being favoured by the circum- 
stances, has deliberately set to work to construct 
the circumstances, to connect them with the 
motor engine of his own will, and, having set 
the whole a-going, to contrive that career shall 
be the result, — to come across such a man is to 
have found something approaching the human 
equivalent of a blue rose. 

Gurdon's father had been an engineer, and a 
fairly successful one, too ; his mother a curate's 
daughter, who to the single effort of giving birth 
to him had added the second of selecting his 
Christian name, and then died. Mark always 
did his mother justice when he thought of her. 
He was far too keen and fair-minded not to see 
that she had done very well by him; she had 
given him a splendid constitution, a very nice 
nose, which was not too suggestive of talent to 
be handsome and even aristocratic, and a very 
useful kind of name. She might just as easily 
have called him Jeremiah — for she was the 



GALLIA. 27 

daughter of a Low-Church curate who still read 
in the Old Testament, and had brought his 
daughter up to do likewise. He knew that he 
owed a great deal to his mother, and he forgave 
her handsomely for the fine and slightly rip- 
pled hair which had also been of her bestowal, 
since on the whole it lay very flat. There is 
nothing in his personal appearance that a man 
resents more fiercely than a tendency to curl or 
crinkle in his hair. 

His father's was a life of change and chance. 
Sometimes there was more money than at other 
times, and it had been in one of their brightest 
moments that young Mark's four years at Rugby 
were paid for. Then came the French experi- 
ence, and while his father held a post as man- 
ager of some extremely expensive and compli- 
cated wine-pressing machinery, Mark had crossed 
the Bordeaux Jardin Public four times daily, on 
his way to and from the Lycee. French, even 
when acquired in Bordeaux, is a tremendous 
arrow in a young man's quiver when he comes 
to shoot at a mark in the world; and young 
Gurdon took to it like a duck to water, and all 
his life would drop into a French book for pref- 
erence; and having sat through one fortnight 
of performances at the Francais, arose and left 
the building with an exquisitely chastened accent, 
which never forsook him. Even as it is custom- 
ary to look for no grit in the schoolboy who 



28 GALLIA. 

keeps his nails clean, so the morals of the 
Englishman who speaks French like a native 
are very justifiably doubted by people of experi- 
ence ; but on both these points an exception may 
perhaps be claimed in favour of Mark. When 
Gurdon, senior, was sent to put up and superin- 
tend certain brewing plant at Munich, his son 
naturally accompanied him, and thereupon set 
himself to conquer first his intuitive antipathy to 
the Germans, and then his no less fierce objec- 
tion to their declensions, with the result that his 
midday Bairisch suited him as well as his pre- 
vious Medoc had done, and he thought out for 
himself, combining an immense dispassionate- 
ness with the hot logical fervour of two and 
twenty, the Franco-German question, to his 
own complete consequent peace of mind in this 
matter. 

The Munich life appearing for the time a per- 
manency (if such a misuse of terms he for- 
givable), Mark came to England and to Oxford 
with an education so peculiar, and in some re- 
spects so in advance of that of men of his age, 
that he felt moderately certain of making his 
exams, for his chosen career, and entering the 
Civil Service with good numbers. He found he 
had to work harder than he had expected, but, 
nevertheless, events fell out to his satisfaction, 
and his first reverse came after he had acquired 
a much-yearned-for stool in the Colonial Office. 



GALLIA. 29 

It was the death of his father. All Mark's life 
had been so matter of fact thus far that he was 
dismayed to find how much he regretted the 
man who, in life, had meant very little to him. 
He put on his decorously correct mourning with 
a puzzled brow, and then went to look after the 
investment of the £1500 which was all the money 
he had to expect as capital. His father had been 
his only relative ; he was now alone in the world 
— without the least sense of loneliness ; the curi- 
ous sadness that would fall upon him when he 
laid down the afternoon paper, when he waited 
for the next course of the abominable club din- 
ner, when he looked across the water in St. 
James's Park towards that circle of buildings in 
which his hopes and his future lay — seemed to 
him inexplicable, because illogical. But in time 
the sadness wore away, and only the puzzled 
remembrance of it stirred sometimes in his brain. 

It was characteristic of Mark that he invested 
that £1500 as it stood. 

" There may be a time when I shall want just 
such a sum of money for some particular step in 
my career," he told himself; and perhaps he 
phrased it, There shall be a time, and not, There 
may be. 

And then the dull months went over, painted 

only by the minute social advances the young 

man made. The friendship of Robbie Leighton 

had introduced him to a circle which ideally 

3* 



30 GALLIA. 

represented the desire of his very" wide-awake 
dreams ; this might be looked upon as one of the 
adventitious circumstances mentioned before, but 
how many young men could have made any 
capital out of a single afternoon call, with a 
number of other people in the room ? 

It was Mark's own cleverness that told him 
to make a conversational opportunity, not for 
himself, but for his brilliant hostess — and to 
make it in Trench. "When he thought over the 
visit, he discovered that beyond " How do you 
do ?" and " Good-bye," it was his unique utter- 
ance in that drawing-room; but it drew from 
Mrs. Leighton a very delightful sort of com- 
mand to Robbie to tell Gurdon to call upon her, 
and Mark never misled himself as to its impor- 
tance. 

So much for Mark's character ; his appearance 
has been indicated. As to his belief, it was con- 
cretely rooted in himself, and his creed was that 
it behoved a man — not every man, but such a 
man as himself — to succeed. Success on the one 
hand implies a failure somewhere or of some 
one or the other. Mark quite saw the admi- 
rable justice of this. Some people of course had 
to fail, it was what they were intended for and it 
suited them, only he was not of these. He was 
born to be a successful, honourable, gentlemanly, 
" decent" kind of fellow, just as some men were 
born to be low, ruffianly devils, or seedy, piti- 



GALLIA. 31 

able failures. As he had a decidedly kind heart, 
and wouldn't have hurt a fly, he thought it fear- 
fully hard on them, and would like to have given 
them each a sovereign, poor chaps. This, in 
rough outline, was Mark's ethics. 

So he stood, fresh and handsome, on the steps 
of the Lille et d' Albion, pulling on a pair of 
French Suede gloves, and prepared to pursue 
his second object in coming to Paris. It was 
about eleven o'clock, so he stepped out for Neal 
and a glimpse of yesterday's Times; at twelve 
it would, be time to look up some of the men at 
the Embassy; they would have had time to 
address about five envelopes apiece, and would 
be ready for luncheon. In the afternoon he was 
going to Auteuil to see St. Crispin, the marvel- 
lous colt belonging to his friend the Marquis de 
Mont Voisin, come in fourth, that being the 
place assigned inevitably to young Mont Voisin's 
horses. He owed this very desirable acquaint 
ance also to Mrs. Leighton. The old Marquise 
having been a friend of her girlhood, it was 
natural that when the boy came to London she 
should have made a little dinner for him, and 
collected such young men as she thought he 
would like to meet. Mont Voisin spoke just as 
little and just as much English as every other 
Frenchman, and it had fallen to the lucky Gur- 
don to show him London, and answer all his 
questions in his own tongue. A card discreetly 



32 GALLIA. 

left at the H6tel Mont Voisin on his way to 
Leighton at the studio had procured for Gurdon 
a cordial invitation to "team down" (this was 
how Mont Voisin put it, and it is certain he 
imagined himself to be employing an extremely 
showy bit of London slang) on his coach. 

Now it was an annoying thing to Gurdon that, 
as he conscientiously read his Times, there should 
crop up continually the insufferable remembrance 
of that half-hour in Leighton's studio. For one 
thing, the cropping-up of recollections was not 
what he was accustomed to expect of his own 
mind; for another, they interfered materially 
with the digest of the South African intelligence 
which he was bent on making. It was part of 
Gurdon's daily routine to read first the news of 
the great Empire whose ends he was called upon 
in the humblest of fashions to serve, then to 
think about them, and finally to know what he 
thought about them. He had the clearest pos- 
sible head. One thing at once, and that thing 
thoroughly, was his rdle ; but if a man is to be 
disturbed by the recurrence of an atmosphere, 
such as the atmosphere of the studio, and that 
atmosphere accompanied by a sensation, such a 
sensation as the insolent kiss of a minx of a girl, 
how in the world is he to reflect upon the rights 
and wrongs of the Swazis ? Gurdon had barely 
got rid of this problem when he set out for the 
Legation. 



CHAPTER V. 

" Hullo, that can't be ! By Jove, it is, though ! 
I say, here comes Miss Essex." 

The two men were walking across the Jardin 
du Luxembourg after a dejeuner at the H6tel 
Foyot, for which Gurdon had paid an exceed- 
ingly round number of francs, and it was of 
course Robbie Leighton whose careless youth 
still expressed itself in a number of such ejacu- 
lations. Gurdon saw a tall girl coming towards 
them in the sunshine that filtered through the 
plane trees; he noticed that she was fair and 
slim and English; he moved his stick into his 
other hand, so as to be ready to take his hat off; 
and he also observed the light and colour that 
seemed to overspread his friend's face. As 
for Robbie, he saw the pompons of the planes 
patterned black upon a pale sky dappled in 
opaline colours of winter clearness ; he heard the 
firm, sharp beat of her slim feet upon the orange 
path, and felt something severe and virginal and 
beautiful in. her walk ; and then he swept his hat 
from his head in an ardour of smiles, which was 
made very noticeable by the correct courtesy of 
Gurdon's gesture. The next instant both men 



34 GALLIA. 

came to a halt, brief enough, hut sharp and 
simultaneous, amazement, in a dull colour of 
mounting blood, painting itself in their faces. 
The girl had cut Leighton dead. It had been 
clear, intentional, and effective. The pale, fair 
face had seemed a little paler as she passed them 
by, the clear blue eyes had fixed a quiet gaze 
between their shoulders. 

" In God's name !" began Leighton, rather 
gaspingly, as they settled into a vacant seat, 
" In God's name, what can she mean ?" 

"You appear to have mistaken the lady," 
Gurdon said, with a faint sarcasm below the 
lightness of his tone. 

" Mistaken her ? "Well, if anything was plain, 
it was that she knew me ! "What in the world 
has happened ?" 

" Did you Bay Essex ? Not the sister of Dark 
Essex, of Balliol, by any chance ?" 

" By every certainty. Last year he wrote and 
told me she was coming out, and asked me to 
be of use to her in any way I could. I have 
been of use to her in a hundred ways, and we've 
been the best of friends. . . . Some brute has 
been telling lies about me !" Leighton wound up 
in a voice of sudden passion. 

"Or perhaps the truth?" Gurdon had the 
kind of personal courage which can say a little 
thing like that. 

" Oh, you mean — Arsenie ?" 



GALLIA. 35 

Their eyes met as Leighton turned and looked 
at Mark. It appeared to be an opportunity to 
get at his friend's mind on this subject; it 
appeared to be the moment for doing Mrs. 
Leighton a favour. 

" My dear fellow," Gurdon began in expostula- 
tory cordiality, " this art circle of yours up here 
is a very small thing, and it is not to be expected 
that the light of day is to be screened off from 
one especial building in the Passage des Favor- 
ites. What in the world have you hoped for? 
Did you mean these people who frequent the 
same studio as yourself all day, not to know this 
thing ? Really, Leighton, you are not going to 
tell me you were not prepared for an incident of 
this kind ?" 

" Prepared for it ?" cried Robbie. " Prepared 
to have Margaret Essex cut me as though I were 
a blackguard not fit to be spoken to, or to have 
her eyes rest on ? "Would you have been pre- 
pared for it 1" 

Leighton was snorting with indignation and a 
sense of outraged virtue. 

" Of course I should have been ; always sup- 
posing I could have contrived so idiotic a situa- 
tion for myself. You can't reckon without public 
opinion and people's idea of life. Such women 
as Miss Essex are public opinion, and while they 
inhabit the same part of Paris as yourself, you 
must count them in your schemes. Why should 



36 GALLIA. 

Miss Essex's views be any different here from 
what they would be in London ?" 

Leighton sank together in a dismayed and per- 
plexed heap, and Mark continued to talk over 
the ruins without apparently noticing the havoc 
he was causing. " It must be one thing or the 
other, and you have to choose which," he con- 
cluded presently, after a monologue to which 
Robbie had given gloomy and disgusted atten- 
tion. " Besides, I know the sort of woman Miss 
Essex is ; it was written all over her — in her walk, 
her face, the swing of her gown." Poor Robbie 
had only read the poetry of these elements. 
" You can't mistake them. Made of a very fine 
material, but cold and inhuman as the grave 
itself." He leaned back complacently, folding 
his arms. " Measuring all men with a measure, 
and that measure made of wrought steel." 

" Rot !" said Leighton simply, and with that 
got up, and made as though to pursue his way 
towards the studio. 

There was a silence of several minutes. Even 
when they paused again while Gurdon bought 
a couple of bunches of violets at the gate of the 
Jardin, no word was spoken. 

It was Leighton who broke the silence, and 
his voice was careless and gay again. " We'll 
go and sit in the courtyard and have a yarn with 
old Lemuel; he isn't sitting to-day, and you'll 
find him a queer old chap." The meeting with 



GALLIA. 37 

Miss Essex was not apparently to colour the 
whole afternoon, and Gurdon caught himself 
wondering how deep it had gone with Leighton. 
"I thought so, there he is, lifting weights just 
to show off to the men." 

The old Hercules was dressed in seedy black, 
wearing a sombrero which made him handsomer 
and more picturesque than ever. He had a 
couple of big iron bars in his hands with balls at 
the ends of them, and he was raising these above 
his head and twirling them in the air. Gathered 
round him just outside the sculpture studio, 
upon the greenish-grey flagstones, were some 
of the men students, waiting for the afternoon 
work to begin. It was a Monday afternoon, and 
the broad stone steps that led down into the 
courtyard were covered with Italians, women 
in garish aprons, head-cloths, and skirts; men, 
in more or less ragged everyday clothes, carried 
bundles which contained costumes of various 
sorts. Children, all with immense black eyes in 
gingerbread-coloured faces, tumbled about like 
guinea-pigs, sang and screamed, or were por- 
tentously still and silent, according as they 
were accompanied by an elder sister of some 
nine summers or not. 

To the outsider it was a very picturesque scene. 
To the student it was Monday afternoon. 

" You must have been painted an immense 
number of times, Mr. Lemuel, you're so com- 

4 



38 GALLIA. 

pletely the classic type," Gurdon said politely to 
the old man, who had put down his weights 
and was wiping his hroad, fine hrow. 

" Well, I may say I have !" the Hercules re- 
plied in a remarkably small, insignificant voice. 
" Munkacszy's design for the ceiling of an au- 
dience hall at the Champ de Mars last year — 
I was the Zeus in that. You will have seen 
Laurent's fresco at the Pantheon ? I am there. 
I posed for three figures there and for the head 
of one. Oh, and in the last ten years — yes! 
That group of the new Ajax — if you were at 
the Salon three years ago, you might have seen 
it — it created a great sensation because poor 
young Suvain shot himself beside it on varnish- 
ing day; it was his, you know, and they hadn't 
given him the place he expected. I worked 
seven months with him for that. It was a 
grand thing." 

Insensibly, as they talked, they had been 
moving in the direction of the street, and before 
he knew it, Mark found himself pushing open 
the swing-door of the marchand de vin at the 
corner. 

"But before this part of your career, what 
were you engaged in?" he asked, after little 
glasses had been handed them. 

" Ah, before that I was a sculptor myself, and 
slapped clay with as good a will as any." 

The old man's face darkened, and his small 



GALLIA. 39 

voice sounded as though the Amer Picou had 
got into it too. 

" But I never made anything of it, and I had 
a wife and family to keep." 

Good heavens! it was this man's daughter 
Gurdon rememhered. 

" And so many asked me to pose — for high 
terms too — that I saw I could do better at it." 

Mark suspected a fine talent for idleness in this 
powerful old Jove, but he only said, " Sculpture 
ought to be a fine thing for the muscles." 

"Ah, my muscles were made before ever I 
saw a mallet or dreamed of touching one. You 
must make the muscles when they're young, sir, 
and they'll never quite disappear. Boxing made 
mine, when I was at the University. A per- 
former with the gloves yourself, perhaps ?" 

Gurdon said he was fond of it, but more for 
the exercise than the science. 

"I lead a fairly sedentary life, — I'm in a 
Government office — and I find an hour three 
times a week keeps me wonderfully fit," he 
added in a conversational way, and perhaps 
impelled to give some confidence about himself 
as a means of putting himself on an equality 
with the old man. 

" It is long since I darkened those doors," old 
Lemuel said, slowly and musingly. ""Who 
knows, you may be sitting in the same seat." 

" You were — ?" Gurdon began in some surprise. 



40 GALLIA. 

The white head nodded slowly several times. 
Gurdon got the idea that the Paris model did 
not wish to talk about those days. He was 
wrong: there was nothing old Lemuel didn't 
want to talk about. 

" I had a sort of an ambition once, — oh, I've 
seen the folly of it long since, — and it was out 
of place there." 

This made Mark uncomfortable. He called 
sharply to have their glasses filled again, and, 
with his brows knitting, quickly asked Lemuel 
what he meant ? 

" Well, I wanted to get on, you see ; the whole 
thing was too slow for me. I'd "no money and 
precious little interest, and — I wanted to marry." 
He stopped, but Gurdon accepted this pause in 
silence, and, after putting his lips to his glass, the 
old model went on musingly. " Yes, I wanted 
to marry ; ah, it's a very long while ago, that ! 
I had energy, I had some push about me then. 
A salary on a crawling scale, with a pension at 
the end of it, seemed to me too poor a thing to 
sit down and wait for. I thought I might do 
something to get myself into notice. What was 
the use of my being one of hundreds whose 
names were unknown except to their immediate 
superiors in office and to the hall porter? A 
mere coral insect, one of thousands, raising a 
mountain reef of pink tape !" 

Mark's lips folded themselves in and yet more 



GALLIA. 41 

tightly in. He was young enough, although 
twenty-eight years of age, to be surprised, to 
imagine something of a coincidence about his 
meeting with this man, about the similarity in 
his own feelings now and that other Government 
clerk's then. He looked rather fixedly at old 
Lemuel's physique, the set of his neck upon his 
shoulders, the pose of his head. He imagined 
him young ; to look at he must have been a man 
in a thousand ; his manner, too, was smooth, easy, 
and dignified. Years of being bandied about in 
a studio had given little unfamiliar touches of 
servility to it in places ; but these still struck 
oddly and incongruously upon the ear, and in no 
wise seemed natural to the man. Had not old 
Lemuel of the beau torse and the Paris studios 
had more in his favour thirty years ago than he, 
Gurdon, at this moment? Mark was not by 
any means a man of sentiment; it was not so 
much tbat he despised it as that it was the very 
last attitude his mind was likely to assume, but 
no human being can be wholly without this 
impractical quality, and Gurdon had, of course, a 
little of it — so little that it was just enough for 
himself. His clear head showed him that the 
points in which he was superior to the young 
man Lemuel must once have been, were not 
upon the surface, were not easily discoverable. 
And the conversation made the more dent upon 
his brain, because, only the evening before, driv- 
4* 



42 GALLIA. 

ing home upon the box-seat of Mont Voisin's 
coach, he had thought to himself, " I am not 
getting on." With the upper octave of his brain 
he was discussing with the Marquis the breed of 
English racehorses and the inferiority of French 
blood ; then there had come rushing to him on 
the sharp wind that tightened the skin upon his 
face, the sudden thought, " I am not getting on," 
and at once the deeper octave had played with 
variations upon this theme. Mark had had a 
socially successful afternoon, following upon a 
socially successful luncheon ; if he had been 
thinking about himself at all, he might have 
been thinking that, on the whole, he was doing 
very fairly well. But he liked racing, and he 
liked Mont Voisin's Paris chatter, and he had not 
been thinking about himself at all. Then the 
evening breeze had brought him that uncomfort- 
able thought ; so clear and crisp and definite that 
it had the effect upon him of the utterance of a 
being who knows better than one's self. An 
argumentative fellow in the main, Mark didn't 
argue with this impersonal dictum ; he tried his 
best to discover upon what collocation of half- 
liquid ideas it had been based, but he could trace 
none of these, although he searched and filtered 
his brain to the utmost. 

Failing this, he had set himself to sum up his 
position, and had, so to speak, heaved a mental 
log to determine by dead reckoning at least his 



GALLIA. 43 

rate of professional progress. A very few min- 
utes served to show him that the dictum could 
be justified. What would the next year bring 
him, in all likelihood? At the best, if the 
Government held on, chance might put him 
ahead of some senior. His chief, Lord Hames- 
thwaite, might perceive him more nearly, might 
suspect his ability, might differentiate him, in 
his own mind, from his fellows. Ah, how much 
that differentiation would mean ! That was, at 
the best, the very best. At the worst ? At the 
worst, he would dine out a little oftener, meet 
a few more important people, be caught up to 
the paradise of Lady Hamesthwaite's Wednes- 
day dinners. That was all. Quite certainly he 
was not getting on. 

The thoughts engendered by that dictum were 
in no way dissipated or diluted in their dis- 
comforting strength by an evening at the the- 
atre. A morning at the Cluny and Pantheon, 
which he had always previously failed to see, and 
to which Leighton now dragged him — these also 
were powerless to lead his thoughts from a 
more or less profitless contemplation of his own 
future. Now, having chanced against a queer 
old studio-character, that the conversation should 
take this very turn, and his companion appear in 
the shocking character of a disappointed ap- 
pointment-seeker, with a background which, in 
a tray full of human experiences could not be 



44 GALLIA. 

distinguished from his own, was sufficiently dis- 
quieting. The thoughts set flowing by old 
Lemuel's brief confidences had so absorbed 
Mark's attention that he missed even a sentence 
or two of the slow, musing talk. The soft, small 
voice of the man, his fixed eyes, the backward 
throw of his big head, with its cover of shining 
white curls and tangles — all these things made 
up the impression that he was unwinding his 
thoughts from the silver cobwebs of the past. 

" Get to know something ; — yes, that is the 
scheme, I was right so far ; — get to know some- 
thing and don't print it. The mistake was that 
I did." 

It was this phrase, very emphatically spoken, 
which captured and led back Gurdon's excursive 
mind. He was just going to put a question, 
when the door burst open and Leighton came in 
with a rush. 

" Gad, I thought as much !" he exclaimed, 
shouldering up to them past a group of blue cotton 
ouvriers. "When in doubt as to old Lemuel's 
whereabouts, try the wine-shop, eh ?" He caught 
the old man a whack on his big shoulder, and 
laughed as he ordered a little glass for himself. 

When the Marmorweib of romantic legend 
felt the first pink shaft of morning sunlight on 
her stony bosom, the life that night and the green 
moonbeams had given her stopped suddenly, and 
so long as the sun shone she was cold upon her 



GALLIA. 45 

pedestal. This change meant a moment of keen 
pain for her, we may fancy. There was a blast- 
ing touch of the morning about young Leighton 
and his greeting, and it wrought some such 
change in old Lemuel. On Gurdon, too, it was 
not lost. Something forbade him saying, " "We 
were speaking of early days," or anything of the 
kind. He was silent. The whole foregoing 
conversation began to seem unreal and shadowy. 
It was to be remembered often at other times ; 
but now he listened with an odd expression in his 
face as Robbie announced that he was off work 
for the afternoon ; the new model was too vile 
for anything, and he wasn't going to paint her. 
No modelling, just a hundred-weight or two of 
Frankforterwurst without the spice. 

" Look here, I'll make a sketch of you instead, 
if you like. There's a line in your jaw that I 
like, rather." 

" All right. How long will it take ?" asked 
Mark. 

" Oh, depends ; say an hour or two, and then 
we'll go over the river and dine. Lemuel, can we 
go up to your place ? There's a very fair light 
there, and I don't suppose little Lem will think 
it an intrusion." 

" She's not at home, she's sitting for Carlo 
Deo's wood-nymph. You're very welcome." 

In a few minutes they were mounting the five 
flights to the old model's appartement. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The twenty years between Mrs. Leighton and 
her stepsister, Lady Hamesthwaite, made no sort 
of difference to their friendship, which was of 
the closest possible kind, but it would have been 
very difficult for an outsider to discover in what 
the very distinct bond between the two women 
consisted. 

It is almost unusual for relations to come into 
any such close connection as will make them 
deep and lasting friends. But, a good way back 
in Julia Hamesthwaite's life, there had been a 
moment at which Mrs. Leighton had played the 
part of a friend, rather than that of a half-sister, 
and the younger woman never forgot it. She 
owed her very excellent marriage to Mrs. Leigh- 
ton; or, to speak more clearly, she owed her 
escape from a very unfortunate marriage to that 
sympathising and clever woman. The incident 
has nothing to do with this story, and need not 
be detailed. But Lady Hamesthwaite, fitted in 
every way to be the wife of a distinguished ser- 
vant of the Crown, had as nearly as possible 
missed this brilliant vocation, and she owed it to 
her half-sister that she had quite not missed it. 

The intercourse between the house in Corn- 
46 



GALLIA. 47 

wall Gardens and the house in Grosvenor Place 
was very constant and very cordial, and it was 
to be expected that, the very afternoon of the 
Hamesthwaites' return to London from their 
country place, Mrs. Leighton should have looked 
in to greet her sister Julia. 

" And you know I have Gallia with me," Lady 
Hamesthwaite had said, as they sat over their 
tea in the smallest of the tiresomely immense 
drawing-rooms which seemed fitted for nothing 
but big political receptions. "It is not often 
that I am so fortunate." A little laugh followed 
this remark ; it was certainly remarkably seldom 
that this mother and daughter could be found 
together. 

" I hope she is in, and that she will be coming 
down. I take the deepest interest in Gallia," 
Mrs. Leighton said quickly. 

" You know that you are a little responsible 
for her peculiarities ; it was you who advised me 
always to let her have her own way, and dis- 
pose of herself as she pleased." 

" It was my advice for the time being ; you 
would have done no good by thwarting Gallia 
when she chose her path years ago. She has 
been lost to us both since then." 

Lady Hamesthwaite hastened to cover with a 
smile the sigh that involuntarily escaped her. 

"But — I think Gallia will come home. My 
theory is that the modern girl has also a crop of 



48 GALLIA. 

wild oats to sow ; not the usual sort, of course, — 
JDieu soit beni — but wild oats nevertheless. Per- 
haps she will have finished soon, and then, you 
will see, Gallia will come home." 

There was confidence and reassurance always 
to be found in Mrs. Leighton's remarks. She 
had lived a long time with her eyes open and 
seen many things, and she was usually right in 
what she predicted. 

The little pause that fell between the two 
women was broken in upon by a step crossing 
the parquet of an adjoining floor; a second 
later Gallia Hamesthwaite appeared beside a 
curtained archway. 

" How do you do, Aunt Celia ?" she said, 
coming to kiss the old lady on the cheek. 

Mrs. Leighton took both her hands, and 
smiled up at her with a penetrative and slightly 
interrogative smile. 

"Whether she was satisfied or not with the 
inspection did not appear. It had the effect of 
annoying Gallia excessively. She turned to her 
mother. 

" Have the afternoon papers come yet ?" 

" I don't know, dear, but ring and ask Bowles ; 
they are usually sent up to my dressing-room, 
you know." 

"Do you not think mother looking very 
well?" Gallia began, after she had rung the 
bell. " I do ; I can't imagine why she should 



GALLIA. 49 

come rushing up here now, of all times in the 
year, when London never fails to give her that 
bronchial trouble." 

" Her social duties, my dear" — Mrs. Leighton 
began. 

" But she has no social duties. Of course, if 
she were anyone else, and I were someone quite 
different, she would have to get me married and 
all that, but as it is — Come, it must be ad- 
mitted that I have lifted the burden of social 
duties pretty thoroughly off mother's back. 
Thank you, but, Bowles, please send out for the 
other papers, and bring them to me when they 
come." 

A very few minutes later she retired to the 
window with a sheaf of journals, and was en- 
tirely lost to the conversation at the other side 
of the room. 

"Do you think she is on the way home?" 
asked Lady Hamesthwaite, a little wistfully. 

" She is still very young, and proportionately 
earnest. She will slough this skin in time, but 
one always fears a little what skin will be found 
underneath." 

The crackle of the newspapers at the window 
covered the clear, precise tones of Mrs. Leigh- 
ton's voice, and Gallia read on undisturbed. 

" Anything of interest, darling ?" Lady Hames- 
thwaite called out presently. 

" Yes, there is some rather good correspond- 
c d 5 



50 GALLIA. 

ence about — but you wouldn't care to hear about 
it." 

" Tell us what is interesting you, dear Gallia," 
her Aunt Celia said, with bland encouragement. 

Gallia did not lay down her paper, but in a 
tone of level indifference replied, " There is an 
agitation about the State regulation of vice." 

"My dearest child!" "Dear Gallia!" came 
from the ladies on the sofa. 

" But I don't suppose it will come to anything. 
One man very justly observes that the result of 
it has been the abolition of regulation, not the 
abolition of vice. I wonder who he is. He 
writes rather well." 

Mrs. Leighton got up and went over to the 
window with her soft, elegant step ; she put the 
fine crinkled hand Gurdon had kissed upon the 
girl's head, and sank upon the other end of the 
settee. 

" Dear Gallia, I'm not an illiberal old woman, 
now am I ?" she said, with a delightfully light 
French note in her voice. 

Gallia looked quietly into her face. 

" I hardly know. I'm not good at summing 
up people, Aunt Celia." 

"Well, I will make you a little proposition, 
and you shall judge at the end of it if I am 
illiberal in my opinions." 

Gallia's lip curled to a smile — a very old smile 
for so young a face. 



GALLIA. 51 

" Ah, you are going to say" — 

" I think you will find I am not going to say 
that," Mrs. Leighton interrupted humorously. 
" I am not going to say it is not a fit subject for 
you to read about or think about. I am only 
going to suggest that it is a waste of time — 
your valuable time" — her voice was very serious 
now — " to make up your mind upon so exceed- 
ingly complicated a subject as this one," tapping 
the paper with her taper old fingers, " for the 
simple reason that you are unable to assist its 
settlement one way or the other! That's all. 
Now?" 

" But, auntie, how can you say I am unable to 
assist its settlement? I can't make the State 
do this or that, — I couldn't even cause father 
to support a Bill, — but I, in my own person, 
must read about and think about it, because 
it is a question that only girls can settle ulti- 
mately." 

Mrs. Leighton was infinitely too tactful to 
demur to this sweeping statement. She paused 
for a moment, trying to think what it would be 
best to say. 

" One likes to know the amount of one's in- 
debtedness to people," Gallia went on, without 
enthusiasm, but simply and firmly. "I could 
not be happy — I mean that I could not have a 
feeling of self-respect — unless I had estimated 
just the amount of my debt to that class of 



52 GALLIA. 

society which assures my class a good deal of its 
immunity." 

There was a terrible, portentous pause. 

" I think, dear, if you knew how much phrases 
of that kind can hurt and distress other women 
who have — who have striven to play their part 
of wife and mother well, you would perhaps 
reserve them."" 

It was Lady Hamesthwaite who came up and 
made this very gentle remark, through the curls 
that hung over her daughter's ear. Then she 
dropped a kiss upon the curls and moved away 
through the big drawing-rooms. 

Gallia flew after her and caught her, and 
rubbed away the two tears that were pausing at 
the top of the pretty, delicately-coloured cheeks. 

" Dearest mother, don't you misunderstand me, 
for Heaven's sake ! I was a fool to speak as I 
did to Aunt Celia, — one always is a fool to say 
what one thinks about anything, — but you know, 
mother, I never trouble you with my views upon 
these, or any other of the subjects that puzzle 
me. Whoever they may concern, they do not 
touch you in the very least ! How you can have 
found any offence to yourself, in your — in your 
delightful position, in what I said, beats me 
altogether. I wasn't talking about wives and 
mothers — I was talking about" — 

"Don't, dear Gallia! it distresses me so much!" 

" I wasn't going to say anything then, I wasn't 



GALLIA. 53 

really !" Gallia explained, with childlike eager- 
ness. " I only want to say that wives and 
mothers were as far from my thoughts as pigs 
and whistles. I won't attempt to tell you what I 
did mean. I won't refer to it again. Auntie 
Celia is not like you ; she pretends to know the 
world, — yes, she has, I know, she has lived a very 
long time in it in a measure, — and she leads me 
into argument, and then I am idiot enough to say 
what I think, and sometimes idiot enough to 
refer to something that is true ! But never mind 
that; it shan't happen again if I can help it. 
Only, mother, don't you be distressed. I can't 
bear that. Do me the justice, mother, to say I 
don't bother you with such subjects," she pleaded 
in genuine distress, and with the most single- 
minded pursuit of her subject, she blundered 
into yet another pitfall, as youth will. 

" I never, never confide any difficult thoughts 
to you on the subjects over which I am really 
puzzling — now do I ?" 

Unlike her sister, Lady Hamesthwaite had no 
great sense of humour, or she would have noted 
the pathetic absurdity of her daughter's apology 
for having hurt her feelings. As it was, she saw 
and felt the pathos of the stab conveyed in this 
last remark, which Gallia was so eager to drive 
home, but not the absurdity of her doing so at 
such a moment. It was but too true that Gallia 
never confided to her mother the thoughts that 
6* 



54 GALLIA. 

really occupied her extraordinary brain, and that 
such peace of mind as Lady Hamesthwaite en- 
joyed regarding her daughter sprang from this 
very reserve. 

" I am angry with Aunt Celia for driving me 
into saying such things before mother ! It was 
abominable of me to do it, anyhow. I have 
broken my record that I meant so hard to keep. 
I always recognised mother's unfitness for any 
discussion of serious moral problems, and yet 
the first worldly-minded old woman who comes 
along with a cambric bandage for my weasel 
eyes, irritates me into wounding mother with an 
expression of my views about realities. It's too 
disgusting. It's shown me how little self-control 
I've got, so it may do good that way ; but — I'm 
angry with Aunt Celia all the same." 

In some such channel as that Gallia's thoughts 
were running when her mother had kissed her 
and smiled before rejoining Mrs. Leighton. 

" I wonder, is there anything so difficult as to 
be a good mother now-a-days?" Lady Hames- 
thwaite said, with a sad little smile, as she felt 
her sister's arm go round her waist with a com- 
forting pressure. "But you must forgive dear 
Gallia," she went on quickly, with that beautiful 
instinct of protection that few mothers seem to 
be without, in spite of their growing difficulties 
and trials. " She is exceedingly penitent about 
her want of tact. Gallia has a great feeling for 



GALLIA. 55 

tact, and — and for propriety. I know she is 
really grieved to have introduced so unsuitable a 
topic." 

Mrs. Leighton could not forbear a smile. 

" If one had any doubt as to what century one 
were living in, it would be cleared up by the 
occurrence of such an incident as this !" she said, 
with the little light French turn in her voice 
again. "What is dear Gallia penitent about? 
About having discussed an impossible subject 
before her mother! Ah, once it was another 
way, and we had to whisper behind our fans for 
fear the shell ears of little daughters caught a 
murmur of the coarse tide of life. Ay de mi! 
which is better — or which is worse? But you 
are right, Julia — Gallia is still a long way from 
home." 

" I think — although I don't understand her — 
still I think that my sympathy is of use to her. 
I began a long time ago to let her go her own 
way. I cannot draw back now. Sometimes it 
seems long to wait for her, but I have never lost 
her love, and even her curious care of me is very 
sweet sometimes. Yes, I know she will come 
back some day." 

" You are the sweetest mother-woman in the 
world, my Julia," Mrs. Leighton said, kissing 
her, and noticing with apprehension a moisture 
in her own carefully-pencilled eyes. " Good- 
bye, dear. Don't forget you and Gerald are 



56 GALLIA. 

dining with me on Thursday. "Would Gallia 
come, I wonder ? If she will, I shall be de- 
lighted. Let me know in the morning, and an- 
other man shall be found." 

" She may come home," Mrs. Leighton said 
reflectively, as she lay back in her victoria, " but 
I fear she'll find veal a rather insipid staple after 
the modern style of husk." 

Gallia stood at the window, watching the car- 
riage drive away ; her mother had left the room 
with Mrs. Leighton, and had not returned to it. 
Gallia was alone with the supremely uncomfort- 
able feeling not uncommon with her. 

To look at, Gallia Hamesthwaite was no or- 
dinary girl, but her mind and character were by 
no means very uncommon. She was dark and 
tall and slender; if her expression had been 
simpler, she would have .been extremely attrac- 
tive. Her face might have been called beautiful, 
by reason of the skin, hair, and eyes — particu- 
larly her skin, which was, perhaps, perfect. But 
a girl of far less natural beauty would have been 
twice as attractive, both to men and women of 
average taste. Gallia's very expression was one 
we are beginning to know, and, if the truth 
must be confessed, to resent a little. A young, 
healthy girl, with good features, good temper, 
good nature, and good faith, is so delightful an 
object, and so welcome in the world, that we are 
selfishly annoyed when charming-looking girls 



GALLIA. 57 

abdicate their right to these qualities, and refuse 
the pleasure and satisfaction that resul from 
their contemplation. For her height, Gallia's 
face and head were classically little, but they 
made the strongest impression of divergence 
from the ideal of girlhood. Her eyes were 
clouded with wonder upon wonder about mat- 
ters which have strained the strongest and 
toughest brains the world has ever seen. Her 
brows forgot to wear the smile-wreaths we have 
thought becoming to her years, and knitted 
themselves with painful intensity in contempla- 
tion of some misty peak of Darien. 

All this was the result of her particular sort 
of education on her particular nature. 

Up till the age of seventeen, Gallia had re- 
ceived the best form of home education. The 
time that some girls devote to music, she had 
devoted to languages, and knew three very well, 
besides her own. She had absorbed the same 
amount of geography, history, science, and 
mathematics that most clever girls do absorb 
now-a-days, and none of it had interested the 
individual part of her brain. Natural sciences 
had arrested her most, and then, unassisted and 
unadvised, she made excursions in sociology, and 
became enraptured. Social ethics captured her ; 
Mill and Herbert Spencer, whom she skimmed 
over like a swallow, fired and delighted her. A 
year or two later, just when she was to have 



58 GALLIA. 

come out, she went to Oxford. Her mother 
and her father regarded this departure with dis- 
may. The daughters of Lady Hamesthwaite's 
friends never wanted to do anything of the 
kind: why should Gallia? Gallia was essen- 
tially a middle-class creature ; her father's father 
had been a business man, her mother, the daugh- 
ter of a monumentally successful London physi- 
cian. Both these grandparents had made places 
for themselves in society owing to the possession 
of something society had not got, that mixture 
of energy and the instinct of success and advance- 
ment. 

The girls who came to call with their mothers 
on Lady Hamesthwaite, — who might have been, 
in the nature of things, Gallia's companions, 
were utterly remote from her. Sleek creatures, 
with small ears, long, oval faces, narrow-fronted 
mouths, and smooth-netted heads, they sat there 
in their neat, stupidly-imagined clothes, and 
were coldly conscious of their unlikeness to 
Gallia. This girl's free movements, free play 
of feature, free mode of thought, free mode of 
dress, — this last brought to better perfection than 
all the rest because more easily understood, — 
made up an enigma which their blood rather 
than their brains divined. 

Gallia had developed late; at seventeen she 
was a tall girl rather than a young woman ; 
thus her head was older than her body, and had 



GALLIA. 59 

already acquired a brisk, boyish habit of thought. 
When femininity descended upon her, there was 
a struggle ; she did not want it ; was prepared to 
do without it ; found it an added source of puz- 
zlement to life, which was already a hot-bed of 
complications for her ; and, as all late-developed 
women do, resented it fiercely; fought sepa- 
rately and subdued every sign of it. 

As a child, Gallia had never had a doll ; had 
never played at keeping house, teaching school, 
having callers, as most other girl-children do. 
If there was a baby about, she had shivered and 
left the room. Nothing terrified her like the 
society of young married women. The least 
mention of the semi-prurient subjects so many 
women, and even the best-bred women, habitu- 
ally discuss, sent her from the scene. In like 
manner she disdained as vulgar, though she was 
not frightened by, every sign of coquetry in 
girls; if she had had girl friends, she could 
never, save mockingly and with a curling lip, 
have listened to love-confidences. She adored 
animals, and they were her nearest companions ; 
she doted on natural history, and studied the 
strange characteristics of different beasts with 
astonishing zest : yet she was so young and raw 
and contradictory that the broad facts of nature, 
if applied to herself, revolted her to sickness. 
She aroused a certain amount of admiration in 
the world, but no word of love had been whis- 



60 GALLIA. 

pered to her even at twenty years of age, when 
she had been some time a free-lance at Oxford. 
Such is an outline of her character, no uncom- 
mon one, as I said before. There are a great 
many Gallias in the world now-a-days, and they 
are, for the most part, very unhappy people. 



CHAPTER VII. 

" So this is who you are ?" A dark, tall, thin 
young man, with a very handsome face, was 
offering his arm to Gallia Hamesthwaite on the 
evening of Mrs. Leighton's dinner-party, and he 
made this remark in a tone of insolence so effec- 
tive and attractive that the girl coloured curiously, 
and replied to him with a look of concentrated 
dislike ; dislike and something else as well. The 
man passed over the dislike and laughed scorn- 
fully at the other ingredient, which did not seem 
to surprise him. 

"I pardon your astonishment at discovering 
my parentage," she said lightly. " But you may 
consider me a sport ; we can't all take after our 
parents, and clever people may have stupid chil- 
dren." Gallia hated to find that annoyance, or 
some other feeling was making her a little un- 
natural. 

" I fail — as usual — to apprehend the drift of 
your remarks ; my mind is ill fitted to appreciate 
such subtleties. But a longing for justice is ever 
present with me. My opinion of you is of little 
moment, but I had never imagined you so 
fatuous a person as the man I discover to be 
your father." 

6 61 



62 GALLIA. 

Mr. Essex — it was the very man whom Gurdon 
had referred to as Dark Essex of Balliol — let his 
words dribble forth with an amount of affecta- 
tion almost too dazzling even in the Fellow of a 
college. 

"You have dropped your serviette already," 
he added, handing it to her. " Don't keep on 
doing it, please. Should one eat the soup, here ? 
I have only lunched with Mrs. Leighton before." 

Gallia reassured him about the soup, and 
made absolutely no defence of her father. She 
let her eyes wander round the table to see who 
composed her aunt's party, for the Hames- 
thwaites had been the last arrivals, and dinner 
being announced very soon, she had only time 
to notice Dark Essex at the other end of the 
room, and establish her composure before he 
came to take her in. Although she looked 
about the table, and went to work naturally 
enough with her dinner, she was, in reality, 
palpitating with anxiety to hear his next remark. 
She had come to know this man at Oxford, at 
some lecture, a little over a year ago. Their 
meetings had been very irregular, and charac- 
terised by some peculiarity. Essex was as re- 
actionary as his kind of man always is, and he 
had never before come upon a woman without 
a trace of coquetry iu her. He didn't believe 
in such a woman as a possibility. He was 
forced to converse in her own key with Gallia, 



GALLIA. 63 

but he liked to use her roughly at the same 
time. Once he had taken her out in his boat, 
and they had spent at least four hours together. 
Another time he had come upon her out on a 
long walk in the direction of Abingdon, when 
he too was going the same way, and they had 
gone along together. Once at Abingdon, it 
seemed necessary to have some tea, and then 
there was no particular occasion to hurry back, 
and it was nine o'clock before they reached 
Oxford. 

When he forgot all his assumed rudeness of 
manner, he could be charming. Vain men are 
not rare, but a man who well-nigh smothers 
himself in a cloak of vanity is less common. 
When Essex forgot to be rude, and forgot to 
be vain, he was an interesting companion. He 
would talk freely on all the subjects that in- 
terested Gallia, and treat her opinions with the 
same want of deference he would have shown to 
a man's. And in all the small ways and man- 
ners of life he exercised all the admirable polite- 
ness of an ordinary Englishman. It could be 
seen that the old-fashioned style of woman was 
his ideal, but Gallia did not quarrel with this, 
for, sentimentally, the old style of woman was 
her ideal. " You cannot," she would say, " make 
yourself the old style of woman ; you cannot 
interfere with the clock of evolution that is 
wound up and goes on in each one of us ; you 



64 GALLIA. 

cannot arbitrarily put back its hands to the time 
of fifty years ago. Some people's clocks go 
slower than others, that is all. It isn't that I'm 
pleased with my pace, or that I like myself as I 
am, but I'm a quick clock." 

Very often she and Essex found themselves 
plunging about in some such arguments. He 
could not free his mind from the single and only 
conception of woman of which he was capable, 
and he looked on what are called, tiresomely 
enough, new developments in women as fresh 
forms of wiles, the arts of the nineteenth-century 
Eve. All tbis humbugging about at college and 
wrangling after " degrees and things" was to him 
a part of the misguided artfulness of modern 
women. He couldn't believe in women seriously. 
Let Gallia talk with her whole soul in her mouth, 
he would, at his most intolerable, shake his head 
with a smile, — a sort of " My dear, I see through 
you" expression, which whipped her up to the 
point of longing to hit him. This mental atti- 
tude of Essex's is very commonly met with, and 
often in men quite brilliantly clever in their own 
lines. And the very worst of it is, that they are 
never to be convinced. One of two things inevi- 
tably happens to such men. Either they marry 
the pretty foolish-kitten style of person and say 
triumphantly, " Of course I was right; just look 
at Mabel, dear little soul !" when they cannot be 
contradicted ; or the undying womanhood in the 



GALLIA. 65 

woman who burns and argues with them falls a 
victim to their masculinity, and she spends the 
rest of her life, after marrying them, in adapting 
or concealing the parts of her nature which 
offend the lord god, her husband. 

This seems hopeless? Well, it is hopeless. 
Look at Gallia's case. She didn't know it, — that 
sort of girl never would know it, — but she had 
fallen in love with Essex. She had now left 
Oxford. There could be no more punting and 
no more walks. They had met in society, she 
had been introduced as Lord Hamesthwaite's 
daughter. Essex had seemed anxious to show 
her that he could be even ruder to her in that 
capacity than in her other of simple student ; and 
the upshot of it all was with God and the Fates. 

" You will forgive my silence," he said pres- 
ently. " At a dinner one is expected, to amuse 
the lady on one's right, and fill up gaps left by 
the other man for the lady on one's left, is it not 
so ? My left appears to have a healthy appetite, 
and is filling up her own gaps, so we may score 
her off." 

" "Well, then, I claim the amusement due to 
the lady on your right," she. exclaimed quickly, 
and smiled with a touch of" girlish pleasure. 

" I beg you won't look, up at me like that," 
Essex said, with a note of protest. " Have I not 
told you before that it would upset my whole 
scheme of life to fall in love with you ?" 



66 GALLIA. 

" And mine." 

" Yours — to fall in love with me ?" 

" I didn't mean that — and I didn't say it," 
Gallia said, with sudden stubbornness. 

" Funny ; now I consider that you both meant 
it and said it, but we'll pass that over. Please 
bear in mind that I am not to be tampered with, 
that's all. "We meet in quite a new fashion ; 
the landscape has changed, the figures in the 
landscape must change too. "We are in Lon- 
don : you on your own ground ; I, because Mrs. 
Leighton knew my mother, wanted another man 
in a hurry, and heard that I had grown up hand- 
some and had a chance of getting disliked into 
notice some day." 

" "Very well. Then you can indulge me with 
a new form of treatment," said Gallia, with a 
nod. 

"By the way, the man across there, now 
gnawing a salt almond, has honoured you with 
a number of savagely covetous stares." 

" That is Sir Edmund Bruce." 

"It is so delightful to be in the society of 
some one who is au fait with little social details 
of that kind — to a commoner like myself the 
greatest treat," said Essex, with exaggerated en- 
thusiasm. 

" You are simply abominable ; can you never 
stop sneering ?" 

" I breathe again. If you consider me simply 



GALLIA. 67 

abominable, I believe you will not — at least not 
immediately — fall in love with me ! In the 
meantime, I may tell you that you have im- 
proved greatly in doing your hair." 

" Too flattered !" said Gallia, with a curling 
lip, but she experienced a thrill of gratification 
all the same. 

" Merely justice, I assure you. Have I ever 
paid you a compliment 1" 

" One !" she looked up and laughed in his face. 

" And that was ?— " 

" The compliment of disliking me." 

A shadow came in the middle of Essex's fore- 
head, just between the brows. 

" Mr. Essex, we are wondering if you can give 
the explanation of Mark Gurdon's sudden flight 
to the interior of Africa ?" A very pretty little 
woman, Lady Mary Mortimer, fired this sudden 
question into the. idle bickering Gallia and Essex 
usually maintained. 

" Is it really the interior ? When he left, there 
was word of Cape Town, and since then rumour 
has pushed him farther and farther towards the 
tracks of Stanley and others." 

" Oh, well, it's somewhere in Africa," Lady 
Mary explained easily. " Was it true about his 
cough?" 

" Surely Gurdon didn't mean us to take that 
seriously ? I had no idea it was intended to go 
further than his chief." 



68 GALLIA. 

" Well, he had a cough ! Dear Mrs. Leighton, 
you said he had a cough, didn't you ?" applying 
in the most plaintive fashion to her hostess. 
" And I have always heard the climate of South 
Africa was so wonderful for anything of that 
kind ! The air there is so extraordinarily dry, 
you know." 

" Or so extraordinarily moist, Lady Mary ?" 
Essex interjected gravely. 

" Oh, yes, I believe that was it. Yes, so sin- 
gularly moist, you know ; and of course that is 
everything in a — in a — bronchial trouble — isn't 
that what Mr. Gurdon had ?" 

" I can't remember if the cough was in his 
throat or in his chest," Mrs. Leighton said, with 
affectionate solicitude. 

" I fancy it lay about here," said Essex, laying 
a finger in the middle of his brow ; " but I don't 
think the Colonial Office would mind where it 
was." 

"You have got to do something for him, 
Gerald, when he comes home !" Mrs. Leighton 
said warmly. " Mark Gurdon is a young man I 
like." 

" His future is assured, Celia." Lord Hames- 
thwaite made her a little bow ; she kissed the 
tips of her fingers to him in return. 

" He is not to be kept licking envelopes all his 
young days," sbe went on severely. " And when 
he comes back from Africa" — 



GALLIA. 69 

" I wish I knew which part of Africa," Lady 
Mary wailed softly. 

Lord Hamesthwaite shook his head. 

"Ah, I believe he was mistaken in going 
there," he said. 

" What does he want to endanger his future 
and his country's future for, by getting to know 
anything about her dependencies ?" Essex said 
to Gallia, with a little air of irritation which was 
very well done. 

Lord Hamesthwaite looked over quickly to 
the Oxford man and his daughter, but he did not 
make any remark. 

" Yes ; I don't see why he needed to go to 
Africa," Mrs. Leighton went on. 

" His cough," said Lady Mary tenderly. 

" He had just been to Paris, too," her hostess 
went on, as though this formed an effective 
reason against a man's going anywhere. " His 
French is delicious — quite the French of my own 
day !" 

" Talking of Paris, what news is there of 
young Robbie?" Lady Hamesthwaite inquired, 
disengaging herself dexterously from an elderly 
flirtation with a Dean. 

"I very seldom hear from Robbie," Mrs. 
Leighton replied, with a marked absence of her 
usual tact, or a conspicuous display of it. 
Everybody at once felt that Robbie had been 
" naughty." 



70 GALLIA. 

" My dear," looking down the table to a very 
sweet young woman in white, "have you any 
news of my grandson to give us ?" 

" The prettiest girl in the room is blushing ; 
don't miss it," murmured Essex to his neighbour, 
and Gallia craned her neck to see who it was he 
distinguished thus. 

" There is very little news to give of an' artist 
before he has arrived," the prettiest girl said, 
in a voice of such beauty as made her most 
ordinary utterance a kind of favour. " Mr. 
Leighton is to be seen very regularly at the 
studio — and — that is all! In the spring" — she 
raised the very glistening grey eyes and swept a 
glance to Lady Hamesthwaite — " in the spring, 
who shall say ?" 

" You were speaking, Mrs. Leighton ?" said 
the courteous peer on her left. 

" No, I think not— was I?" 

The peer attacked his souffle with renewed 
ardour, wondering what the words " I couldn't 
have done it better myself" meant? For those 
words he had certainly overheard. 

" Do you really think her so pretty ?" Gallia 
asked, with an elaborate air of criticism. 

"She is not only the most beautiful, she is 
the best woman I have been privileged to 
know," Essex replied, with a very new ex- 
pression, amounting almost to worship, on his 
face. 



GALLIA. 71 

It was no wonder if Gallia Hamesthwaite 
looked up at him in interest and surprise. 

The smile with which she was so much more 
familiar succeeded that new look. 

" Don't distress yourself, my dear ; she is my 
sister." 

" Sometimes, you know, Mr. Essex, — or per- 
haps you don't know ? — your rudeness not only 
oversteps the bounds of what is permissible — 
but it ceases to be amusing." 

Gallia turned superbly to the man on her other 
hand, who chanced to be an old friend. 

" Maurice, you are eating far too much pud- 
ding ! Don't," she said, with cordial roughness. 

" I wondered when you were going to notice 
me," the young man replied ruefully, in a very 
high, thin falsetto voice. " I have made no less 
than three distinct remarks to you during dinner, 
and once I even told you my best story. Not the 
one about Gladstone and the muffins, — that was 
my best last season,— but the one" — 

" I expect I know the one," Gallia remarked 
coldly. 

" ISo, you can't really ; you've been at Oxford 
all the time ! It's the joke they played Eosebery 
with his racing-glass. You'll like it awfully. 
Look here, I'll tell you now, if you'll shunt 
Essex for a bit." 

" I'm afraid there isn't time ; I see Aunt Celia 
looking at mother. It will keep, won't it ?" 



72 GALLIA. 

"Yes, if you are really — Oh, this is your 
glove, I expect?" Maurice Forrester was still 
babbling harmlessly when the ladies left the 
room. 

" Give it to me, I will take it to Miss Hames- 
thwaite," Essex said, and said it with so cool an 
assurance that the glove was meekly handed over 
to him. A moment later Sir Edmund Bruce 
dropped into Gallia's vacant chair, and Forrester 
had to name the men to each other, and observe 
the neatness with which Essex had got the glove 
out of sight before Sir Edmund's eye could have 
fallen on it. 

" Let me put it on for you," Essex said ten 
minutes later, when he came on Gallia alone in 
the green gloom of Mrs. Leighton's little palm- 
house. He took her hand in his, turned it over, 
then spread out the fingers one by one, and 
folded them together again. Gallia made no 
sign. She was as though under chloroform, 
breathing naturally, slightly, her muscles flaccid 
and limp, her power over herself simply nil. 
"Was this the next style of treatment she had 
asked for ? 

Essex raised the hand — a white, slim, charming 
hand it was — a little higher up ; he was sitting 
opposite her on the immense tub of a woolly- 
stemmed palm. He was going to kiss her hand, 
she knew ; and she knew she was glad that he 
was going to kiss it: she had one fear which 



GALLIA. 73 

came and went with the throb of her even pulse 
— that he would put it down without kissing it. 

" I wish I were as beautiful as your sister," 
Gallia was impelled to say, and she said it with 
some carelessness and a smile. 

" I am glad you are not — or I should worship 
you," said Essex, speaking low. 

" And if you did ?" she asked, looking at him 
still lightly, and with a curl of amusement on 
her lips which masked perfectly her curious 
feelings. 

"If I did — I should want you," he said 
slowly. 

His head was bent and she could not see his 
face, but she did not care to, she was occupied 
with her own feelings. Still, it was a strange 
phenomenon, this Essex with a note of ordinary 
passion in his voice, a note that Gallia was hear- 
ing for the first time in her life. All she knew 
in the strange confusion of the moment was, that 
this was not herself, not the old self she had eaten 
and slept and risen and walked with for so many 
years. It was a self she had never known or sus- 
pected the existence of; she was sure she would 
be ashamed of it afterwards — at the time it was 
too strong for her, and had to have its way and 
sway. Next, he looked at her, seeming to ap- 
praise her, and not unkindly. Few women but 
have to live through this discomfort, which 
arises through their having awaked at the wrong 



74 GALLIA. 

moment for the wrong man. "I should want 
you," he had said. 

" But my life has no need of you, Gallia, and 
I don't — I don't." The head-shake and the sad 
smile with which he said the last words tore 
something down in Gallia's soul. The veil of 
the temple was rent in twain. It was not that 
the worst had come, it was that everything had 
come. There could be nothing any more. 

Gallia was in the drawing-room rallying Mau- 
rice about his fund of wit and humour before 
that big minute had closed and gone to make up 
its little hour. 

"Never happy any more," — where had she 
heard the line ? It was some refrain, apparently, 
that had stuck in her mind, and she marvelled to 
hear it beaten out so clearly in the hoof-strokes 
of her father's horses as they drove home. 

Essex sat on the edge of a palm-tub and 
laughed to himself, and wiped his eyes with a 
long thin pearl-coloured glove. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Five weeks had passed since the dinner at 
Mrs. Leighton's at which Gallia had met Dark 
Essex, and she had not yet succeeded in com- 
forting herself. Outwardly she had been the 
same ; her way of life was in no wise altered, 
and at luncheon and dinner, when she joined her 
father and mother, her dark face sparkled and 
her sharp young tongue clacked with all their 
wonted brightness. It was when she got upstairs 
to her own rooms that the brunt of that meeting 
made itself felt. She had come to observe nar- 
rowly the manner of the recurrence of that recol- 
lection, — not that this made it any easier to bear, 
only she was trained to the verbatim reporting 
of her own feelings, and would not have known 
how to cease from it. Suppose she was wander- 
ing towards her desk, or kneeling on the rug 
beside her dog, or dislodging the Grand Vizier, 
as she called her big Persian cat, from his nest 
among the divan cushions, a blankness would 
fall upon her mind. 

"I remember; there was something that has 
made me unhappy : what was it ?" 

Thus her mind would go to work; then sud- 
denly the sharpness of remembrance would lay 

75 



76 GALLIA. 

hold of her nerves, and a little inarticulate cry 
would escape her; her hands would go up to 
hide her face, and a shiver, not in her limhs, but 
in her body, would shake and sicken her. Then 
with a smile she would say, " I told him that I 
loved him, Grand Vizier, — no, I asked him to 
love me, — and he pushed me aside like a Picca- 
dilly cab-tout. God !" 

Done with smiling, the shame and the bitter- 
ness choked her, and she would bury her face in 
one of her dozen cushions. 

" I used to think no feeling was eternal, or even 
should be eternal," she said one day, after some 
such turn of suffering. " Life blots out life no 
less than death does, I used to say to some of 
the girls. But I was wrong. Some bits of life 
have a longevity in proportion to their bitter- 
ness. Some things one doesn't forget or live 
out; some feelings have a strength" — 

To Gallia, talking aloud was as congenial and 
familiar as it is to all somewhat separated beings 
who are in the habit of thinking. She was not, 
as are many people, self-conscious when left 
alone with herself, she was at her ease, at home, 
in the society of someone she at least knew and 
had tried always to understand. 

" I wonder, does the same division obtain in 
the kingdom of sentiment as obtains in the 
world ? Are there feelings with the life of little 
animals and birds, and if one strikes them with 



GALLIA. 77 

the will, firmly, do they bleed to death in five 
minutes ; and are there others with the life of 
the wild beasts in them, that grow stronger and 
wilder and savager the moment they are wounded, 
and fight us worse and die hard. Surely, the 
good, kind, sweet feelings are the little animals ; 
how quick charity and good temper and gen- 
erosity will bleed to death and be forgotten! 
Passions are the brutes, the lions, tigers, and 
leopards of that kingdom : they leap up and hit 
harder and maul worse after the first bullet 
behind the shoulder. But the reptile feelings — 
what are they? Slowrlived, poisonous things, 
that crawl and crawl and drag their wounds 
with them in no discomfort. Shame is a snake, 
and you may cut its head off and it will live 
still. Jealousy, humiliation — the vipers of the 
feeling world. But shame — shame is a snake, 
and it is knotted all round me." 

Tears did not come readily to Gallia, but the 
dry, gasping sort of cries that shuddered through 
her closed lips every now and then had each the 
bitterness of many tears. 

It was a big, third-floor, three- windowed room 
looking far into the Green Park that was Gallia's 
study in the Grosvenor Place house; she had 
furnished it herself with a keen eye to well- 
considered shapely spaces of fine flooring. It 
was not a matter of parquet and prayer-carpets ; 
a wide and wonderful velvet pile in dove-grey 



78 GALLIA. 

and with ouquets of pink and purple flowers in 
faded tints ran clear to the skirting-board. Upon 
a dais, so strange a lounge as could never be 
called a divan had been arranged ; a canopy in 
dull purple and duller gold hung over it, and 
from a bronze chain a lamp depended, with four 
purple eyes in its old metal-work, eyes that 
glowed in the early winter dusk — for Gallia had 
not switched on her lights yet. 

Partly because the room was so wide, partly 
because the scheme of decoration had been so 
broadly carried out, Gallia made a very small 
heap of human suffering kneeling there beside 
the Grand Vizier, with whose plush existence 
nothing could ever interfere. Her dark violet 
cloth gown — so much of herself as not to seem 
a dress at all — fell sparsely round her, and one 
meagre purple beam of the little lamp made a 
violet pool on the cream-coloured nape of her 
neck. 

But Gallia roused herself, and kneeling and 
sitting on her heels, looked up towards the light 
with all the appearance of a young girl before a 
shrine. 

" "Why I, with all my interests, should care for 
any man at all, and that man in particular — I 
wish I knew if I did really care for him, and I 
wish I knew what leads him to act, intermit- 
tently, as if he cared about me. If I were 
ever to see him again, I would behave more 



GALLIA. 79 

straightforwardly. I deserved what I got for 
that vulgar reticence I showed. There is no 
other word for it. Vulgar ; utterly, vilely, cus- 
tomarily, crustedly vulgar. Why couldn't I look 
up hravely at him ? why couldn't I say plainly 
and simply, 'Dark Essex, I love you, do you 
not love me too ?' But no ! I am too half-and- 
half — neither a good woman of the old kind nor 
a good woman of the new. Surely he would 
have treated me with respect ? No woman — no 
decent woman — scoffs or jeers at a man who tells 
her he loves her. If he had not loved me, he 
could have said so. I would have borne the dis- 
appointment with as much pride as I could find, 
and I should have been able to respect myself; there 
would have been no shame. But what have I 
done ? Let him play with me ; take my hand 
and toy with it, and/eeZ it, like a hired creature, 
without even the satisfaction of doing my duty, 
and fulfilling my part of the bargain, which a 
hired creature would have had. Lower than the 
women in the street I've been ; lower than the 
poor, poor women in the street. Oh !" 

She had come back to the same bitter shudder 
and the same sickening sense of degradation. 
Her head was buried between her knees now, 
her white hands squeezed whiter in their con- 
vulsive pressure. Gallia was at the age for what 
must be described as "tall" sentiment. This 
sort of thing was just as real to her as would 



80 GALLIA. 

have been any of the real sorrows of life. And 
the tiresome part of sorrows is that they do not 
hurt in proportion to their validity and excusa- 
bility. If we are to he sympathetic, we can re- 
member always that silly suffering hurts just as 
much as sensible suffering. A love-trouble, even 
when you love the wrong person without having 
any business to, is just as bitter as having a 
relative carried off by a railway accident. 

The soft mumble of the lift-ropes sounded 
from without, there was a footstep or two in the 
passage, the door opened, and the footman said, 
" Mr. Essex," in the strange hard voice he used 
upon the big staircase at parties. 

The odious rush of blood in Gallia took from 
her the power to think clearly. She knew that 
since the door was round a corner, he would not 
have seen her; she knew that the room was 
almost in darkness ; would Hendon turn on the 
light or not ? If he didn't, and she kept quiet, 
perhaps Essex would not see. This jumble of 
thoughts went through her like a rifle bullet; 
there was a little click just before the door 
closed, and three constellations gleamed out 
among the wall draperies. 

She raised herself softly inside her silken skirt, 
but the rustle caught his ear, and he saw — there 
was no means of disguising it — that she had 
been kneeling, that she had been giving way to 
emotion, that her self-possession was to seek. 



GALLIA. 81 

She stood and looked at him for a few mo- 
ments, saying nothing, holding out no hand, 
using the time to collect herself and decide how 
to deal with him since he was in her presence. 

His smile, his whole air, the way in which he 
held his hat and stick, were those of any and 
every man of manners who makes a call. 

She could read nothing in them. 

But she was not like any woman receiving a 
visitor ; there was no reason to battle through 
the surf of commonplace with Essex before 
riding upon the deep waters. So she said 
nothing till he had spoken. 

He took no notice of the fashion of his recep- 
tion ; he produced a little package. 

" I wanted to return you this myself — because 
I have been so terribly unfortunate as to burn 
one page with some cigarette ash," he said, very 
easily and well. "Before replacing the volume 
with another, which anybody might have done, 
I wanted to show it to you and ask you to let me 
mend it. You see, I thought, as there are some 
marks in it, you might value this copy. Now, 
it can be mended by means of this other copy 
I bring. Dear Miss Hamesthwaite, what is the 
matter with you? you are not suffering from 
a stiff neck, I hope ?" 

In spite of herself Gallia laughed. 

" I believe that is it," she said drily. 

" Well, I daresay you are not in the mood for 
/ 



82 GALLIA. 

visitors, but give me your attention for three 
minutes, and then I will go." 

This alarmed her very much indeed : unpre- 
pared for his coming, she was less prepared to 
have him go. But she said no word till they 
had opened the little book and discussed its 
wound. She would have nothing done to it; 
she knew the word that was missing in the 
verse, and it might have been her own cigarette 
any day in the week. She forgave it freely. 

" Since you are so good, I will go." 

" Since I am so good, I think you might stay. 
I want to ask you something. Sit down Bome- 
where." 

He took a chair, put his hat and stick upon the 
floor, and leaned towards her with his hands — 
very fine sallow hands — dangling between his 
knees. It was an attitude of uncompromising 
attention. For the moment Gallia was unnerved. 
She altered her plan of attack. 

" Why are you so different to-day ?" she said, 
in a manner very natural and frank. 

" That cannot have been what you wanted to 
ask me, but I will answer it if you wish. This 
is my afternoon manner ; I put it on with this 
coat." He glanced down the front of himself, 
and dusted a slight speck from its lodgment 
between two buttons. As he sat there, he was 
an infinitely elegant and correct presentment of 
a man of his world. Gallia wondered how he 



GALLIA. 83 

could conceal so much divergence from the type 
inside one frock-coat. 

" I am going to ask you to let me refer to our 
last meeting," she said gently and very gravely, 
" or rather parting." 

" You got up and rushed off, if I remember." 

Gallia believed he was nervous underneath his 
smile. 

"I greatly regret my manner all through that 
interview — it was not sufficiently frank or 
straightforward." 

He looked genuinely surprised. 

"I don't know if you will agree with my 
summary of the interview, so I will put a ques- 
tion to you first. Will you really say what you 
think in reply?" 

" Mb, I can't make any such promise." 

" But you will try to answer truly V 

"If lean, I will." 

"What did you think were my feelings for 
you that evening — particularly during the time 
we sat in the palm-house ?" 

" I am glad to be able to speak by the book. 
You thought me ' simply abominable.' " 

"Ah, no, don't joke — that is only another 
complication. But if jokes are to count," with 
a feminine whisk of her tactics, " did you think 
I was really in danger of doing so when you 
asked me not to fall in love with you ?" 

" Every woman is — are we to say in danger ?— 



84 GALLIA. 

very well — is in danger of falling in love, as they 
have agreed to term it, with every man when 
the people in question are your and my ages, 
and have corresponding appearances and gifts." 

" Is every man in danger of falling in love 
with every woman, then — given the same con- 
ditions as you name ?" 

" Certainly." 

" Well, did you think then — do you think 
now — that I have fallen in love with you ?" 

" How could I be so vain as to say so, if I did 
think it?" 

" I perceive that I have begun ill — you are not 
replying well. We must do it some other way. 
I am going to grant that my manner in the palm- 
house could readily have given you the impres- 
sion that I was in love with you." 

" If it did, if you were, if I was, if neither of 
us is — what matter, so long as we say nothing 
about it to each other ?" 

" I can't agree with you there." 

" Of course not, because you are a woman, 
•and must continually be pulling up a plant to 
see how it is growing. Now, for Heaven's sake, 
don't snatch at that wretched metaphor and turn 
it some other way on !" 

" I am going to do nothing of the kind." 

She got up from her chair some yard or two 

away, came up to him and put her hands on his 

•shoulders; as he didn't look up, she raised his 



GALLIA. 85 

chin with one stiff finger. Her eyes had a dif- 
ferent kind of light, her lips were parted, and 
her voice, when it came, was rich, tender, beauti- 
ful as he had never heard it. 

" Listen ! I owe you a straight speech, and even 
if you don't want to hear it, bear with me, for 
it hurts so to know one has not been true to 
oneself — that one hasn't had courage. Oh, there 
isn't anything women want except courage — they 
have to use so much, much more than men. If 
I spend all mine in the next minute, it will be 
good ; I shall have been true. The other night, 
I don't know what took hold of me ; I have felt 
once or twice that you were different from any 
other man I've seen, and made me feel different. 
I think, in a crowd, if you had been somewhere 
behind me, I'd have known you were there. 
The other night, though you said one rude thing 
after another, and didn't use even the commonest 
civility to me, my whole soul wrapped itself up 
in one thought; it seemed to sit with folded 
arms inside me, waiting for you, wanting you to 
kiss my hand. I didn't know it then, but I 
believe now that that means that I love you. 
Hush ! — wait. It is all right— I know you said 
it — your life has no need of me, and I am not 
beautiful enough for you to worship — that on 
one side. You have no need of me. I don't 
think you told me as kindly as you might. 
One never knows, but I think — well, yes, I think 

8 



86 GALLIA. 

if it had been you showing me that you loved 
me, and if I had felt like you — I think I would 
have spoken differently ! But, however, it came ! 
I am young and I can put up with it. I have 
loved you — it is right that you should know it ; 
I love you still, and may do so for a long time ; 
but I want you to forgive me for the other 
evening. It was immodest, flagrant, shameless, 
the way I sat there and said nothing, and let 
you use me as you did. That was disgraceful, 
and though I have tried, I can't forget the 
shame of it. But it was so new to me then, I 
was taken by surprise. I had not an idea that 
I loved you, or I would have been ready to 
speak. I would have said, ' No, none of these 
simulacra with me ; I really love you, and they 
insult me.' But I will forget those to you, for 
perhaps you did not guess I loved you. Will 
you try to forgive me my want of honesty, since 
I have tried to make up for it now 1" 



CHAPTER IX. 

She stood back from him, her arms at her 
sides, waiting as though for a sentence, for his 
reply. He got up and went over to lean upon 
the mantelshelf. "With an elbow in one of its 
dusky oak crevices and his face finely thrown up 
by the background of carving, he was still at his 
full height, and he felt free, his own man. 

For a moment, as she watched him keenly, 
Gallia thought he was going to be natural, to be 
what she knew he might be if ever he would 
give his inner self free play ; but next instant a 
smile rose, and her head rolled from side to side 
in the impatience she immediately felt of the 
manner he was assuming. 

" It has been a question in good society," he 
began very slowly, " how far it is justifiable for 
one person to place another person in an impos- 
sible position ; you will, since you are a member 
of that society, know doubtless better than I do 
how this question has been decided. But out 
of the depths of a somewhat sickly experience 
of the world, I am able to tell you one thing — 
that, had you said these things to nine out of ten 
other men, they would have seized and kissed 
you, and said God knows what, that you wouldn't 

87 



88 GALLIA. 

have been prepared to hear. And they would 
have been in no sense to blame. You are going 
to say that they would not have been gentle- 
men." 

"I wasn't; I was going to say they could 
hardly be so dull of apprehension as to so mis- 
take me," cried Gallia hotly. 

" It would not have been a matter of appre- 
hension, dull or the reverse. It would have 
been a matter of convention. Men are always 
expected, in certain positions, to show passion." 
He smiled very drily. " They are expected — by 
women at least — to be what women call men. 
Nine out of ten women would have meant that 
speech to end in a smother of embraces. One 
moment. I am not in the least certain that you 
are the tenth woman, I am only sure that I am 
the tenth man. You will admit that I have not 
kissed you ?" 

" "Why should I mind if you had, when I love 
you ?" Gallia asked simply. " You know I didn't 
mean things to end in one way or another. I 
said what I thought I ought to say to save my 
own self-respect, and you were and are free to 
act exactly as you think right or feel inclined. 
Though I would, of course, prefer you to under- 
stand rather than misunderstand me." 

A footman came in at this moment. 

" Her ladyship wished me to say Mr. Gurdon 
was in the drawing-room, and if you were dis- 



GALLIA. 89 

engaged, she would like you to come down, 
miss." 

" Say to her ladyship, Hendon, that I am not 
able to come down this afternoon." 

He went out, and Gallia turned to Essex 
again. 

" Why can you not treat me with the same 
decency a woman is expected to show a man 
when he tells her he loves her? What is the 
difference ?" 

" I daresay from your point of view there is 
no difference, and I hope you will think that I 
have behaved myself as becomingly as any 
woman could have done." 

" Well, you have not acted like the nine men 
you mention, from one of two reasons. Perhaps 
because you had the sense to see that I expected 
nothing of the kind, perhaps because you did 
not happen to have the feelings you say they 
would have had." 

"I am not in the least moved to explain 
which," said Essex calmly. " The subject of 
what you and a number of other people call 
love may be one I have never studied, or it 
may be that 1 have read further into it than 
you have done. Perhaps I call love by some 
other names, perhaps I don't even see it to be a 
fine and desirable feeling. We needn't go into 
that." 

" No, we needn't ; there is no question of it. 

8* 



90 GALLIA. 

I had merely to explain conduct I was ashamed 
of, to explain it for my own sake ; I have done. 
I am glad and proud again ; I have not, if you 
have understood me, anything more to feel 
ashamed of." She came up to him and took 
his hand. " Thank you. You at any rate 
listened to me — I am grateful for it." 

If ever a pair of sincere eyes looked up at a 
man, they were Gallia's. Essex, even through 
his priggishness and affectation, was conscious 
of being at a disadvantage. 

"By the way," with a complete change of 
tone, " you had a glove of mine — will you please 
give it me ?" 

" Are you afraid I may make a trophy of it?" 

She shook her head and smiled a little wistfully. 

" No, you won't make me believe you really 
credit me with so unworthy a thought." 

" I haven't it with me now ; I will post it to 
you." 

« Thanks." 

" And — don't you think the world is still a 
little too raw for your very advanced treatment 
of it?" 

He went to get his hat and stick. 

"No," said Gallia firmly, and sitting down 
among her cushions; "the world is never too 
raw for a woman to do what she thinks right. 
She would help to keep it raw by playing down 
to its rawness. There can be no excuse for not 



ALLIA. 91 

acting in accordance with the light one has. 
One may be misunderstood, one may be dis- 
liked, but we have to save our own souls for 
ourselves." 

" And the dramatic faculty inherent in all 
women makes the saving process so much the 
more picturesque." 

A disheartened note of sad laughter came from 
her. 

" Good-bye," was all she said. 

" If one could believe you sincere, you would 
be worth loving, by some better man than I. 
Good-bye, O New Woman, who is yet the old !" 

" Good-bye, epitome of unbelief." Gallia was 
smiling too. " If only" you have not put out my 
soul's little light !" she added, half to herself, in 
a frightened whisper. 

This time Essex laughed musically as he went 
to the door. 

" Let me know if I have," were the last words 
she heard him say ; then the door shut, the lift- 
ropes rumbled again, and two minutes later she 
watched him cross the road towards the park 
gates. 

She drew a nervous breath or two, and passed 
her handkerchief below the curls on her fore- 
head. 

" That is the end of that," she said. " If I had 
foreseen his coming at all, I should have foreseen 
his going too. It is no worse and no better 



92 GALLIA. 

than I might have imagined it." She walked up 
and down the big room several times, not so 
much thinking as struggling to get hold of her 
feelings, and know what she thought. 

" Life is no different now from what it was," 
she told herself, " and yet I feel as though I had 
to gather up the threads and see into what kind 
of knot I can tie them, and how I can get them 
to hold. Nothing has really happened, only 
now I know that something is not going to 
happen — for instance, love is not going to hap- 
pen. What did he mean about the name he 
might call it by? Of course he must see it 
very differently from me. He hinted that he 
thought it neither fine nor desirable. That was 
very honest of him. I was too hard ; I didn't 
think — one never does think till afterwards — 
that of course he cannot respect love. "What 
man can be honest with himself and about him- 
self? I wish I had told him that I saw that, 
that I knew that ! And I wish — oh, how I wish 
I had asked him to kiss me once ! Perhaps he 
would have said no ; but if he would have con- 
sented to be simple, surely he would not have 
minded kissing me just once ! A woman always 
grants as much as that, and shines in doing it. 
It is looked on as a sacrifice on her part, and no 
one thinks the worse of her. Could anyone, 
even himself, have thought the worse of him? 
Ah, how I wish — I wish"— a rush of emotion 



GALLIA. 93 

almost choked her, but she flung her head up 
and ran to the window to look at the lights 
twinkling across the Park ; with her hands cling- 
ing to the casement bar, she leaned there a 
moment. " For now I shall never be kissed, 
and it cannot be good never to have been kissed 
at all ! "Well, there will be one of the flowers 
of life I shall never have picked — a love-kiss. 
Surely, surely no woman can be so mean and 
poor a creature as not to be worth and worthy 
of one man's kiss ?" 

Her earnestness was pitiful. Essex had fatu- 
ously mistaken Gallia : she had absolutely no 
dramatic faculty, was never conscious of her 
attitude or her expression, or the strength of the 
feeling from an outside point of view. She was 
only bitterly and clearly honest in herself and to 
others; her ideal was high, and her ideal was 
absolute reality. She had never buried any truth 
from herself, and could not easily understand the 
desire to do so which is so common. In spite of 
a very wideawake mind, she had no idea to what 
•extent compromise enters into the most honour- 
able man's idea of honour. As a woman, she 
took honour and honesty very seriously, well 
knowing them to be among the latest branches 
of study opened to her sex, and deeply sensible 
of their importance ; but of the necessity for 
compromise even in such holy of holies she knew 
nothing. 



94 GALLIA. 

Entirely without conceit and self-consciousness, 
her whole life was a desire to know, and then to 
be true to what she knew. Crude and perhaps 
ludicrous as she might now and then appear, her 
single-mindedness was her most marked char- 
acteristic. Had she been different, had she had 
the skill of any of the nine women Essex had 
cited, she would have been nine times better 
fitted to win his love — only she would never 
have striven to do it. 

She suffered at this time because her views 
were nobler, she herself a little better than com- 
mon ; such human creatures as differ thus from 
their fellows are rarely made welcome in the 
world of men and women in which she lived. 

It was so late now that she hurried to her 
rooms. There were no tears to dry, no eyes that 
needed bathing, no sign for a maid's keen eyes 
to notice that her mistress had lived through 
any scene. When she came running from her 
bath, she brought a calm, quiet face with her, 
and immersed herself quite naturally in the even- 
ing papers while her hair was being dressed. 
Her mother was in the drawing-room, with a 
magazine and a paper-cutter, as usual, when she 
went in ; they were to dine alone, and to pick 
Lord Hamesthwaite up at eleven at the House 
on their way to a reception. 

" So sorry, dear, that you could not come 
down when Mark Ghirdon was here ; he was so 



GALLIA. 95 

interesting about Africa," Lady Hamesthwaite 
said pleasantly, with her customary proud smile 
at her daughter's beautiful face. 

" Mr. Essex came in, and I really think he 
must have stayed two hours with me," Gallia 
replied, naturally. 

" Do you like Mr. Essex very much ?" 

Gallia paused to weigh her words. 

" No, mother ; I don't think I like him par- 
ticularly at all." 

" Who is Essex, by the way ?" Lord Hames- 
thwaite had come in and overheard these re- 
marks. 

"He is an Oxford man; a fellow and a tutor. 
He writes a good deal for the literary weeklies, 
I think," Gallia answered ; " and he is often in 
London, for his mother is a great invalid. They 
have a house, — in Hammersmith Terrace, I be- 
lieve he said, — and they are very poor." 

" His sister is a very beautiful woman," said 
Gallia's father judicially. 

" Yes; I would like to know her so much." 

" You are sure to meet her at Aunt Celia's ; 
she is a great pet there." 

They rose to pass in to dinner. 

"A handsome family, then," Lord Hames- 
thwaite said; "that young man had a very 
unusual type of good looks, but I am afraid he 
is a prig." 

Gallia was not at a point whence she could 



96 GALLIA. 

perceive the rugged truth of this dictum. Be- 
sides, she would have persisted in loving him 
even had she been convinced of his prighood. 
He was the first man she had loved, and the first 
man is never a woman's free choice. Like the 
first fish of the amateur trouter, he is an acci- 
dent; neither science, skill, nor selection has a 
hand in landing him. Sometimes he is a hand- 
some and creditable accident. I have known 
the first man in more than one case to be a 
meritorious person — oftenest, though, he is a 
very mean, small-finned little accident. 

The conversation drifted off to Mark Gurdon 
again and his African experiences. 

" I believe he is to be at Axminster's dinner 
at the Reform to-morrow ; I must keep my eye 
on him if Celia wants him helped into some- 
thing." 

Nothing seemed more natural to Lord Hames- 
thwaite than that a young man should want to 
be helped into something ; whereas to hear that 
a man wrote for literary weeklies was to hear 
something that made it very difficult to realise 
his personality. 

"Poor old Mr. Quittenden has had another 
stroke," Gallia remarked presently, feeling 
within herself a strong need of the relief of the 
commonplace. And someone else's tragedy is 
just as often our commonplace as our tragedy is 
• theirs. 



GALLIA. 97 

"Where did you see that?" Lord Hames- 
thwaite asked quickly. 

" All the papers have the telegram." 

"This child may be trusted," Lady Hames- 
thwaite began laughingly, " to see and know of 
what is happening" — She was interrupted by 
a fit of coughing; her husband looked quickly 
up at her, but said nothing. 

" Ah, that was the second stroke, wasn't it ? 
It can only be a matter of weeks — or, at most, 
months — for the member for Hollo whampton." 

" Poor old thing ! I liked him so much that 
one day he lunched here," Gallia said. " It is 
really very sad." 

" 'm, yes !" replied her father, who keenly re- 
membered Mr. Quittenden's action regarding a 
certain Bill, and wasn't so sure that it would be 
so very sad for his party. 

" He was always such an admirer of yours, 
Gerald!" 

Lord Hamesthwaite looked doubtfully at his 
wife. 

" I remember so well his saying to me, ' There 
isn't another man in England who so completely 
fills the idea of a" — Again Lady Hamesthwaite 
was interrupted by the same strange, choking 
cough. 

" Now, Julia," Lord Hamesthwaite burst out, 
bringing his fingers sharply on the table, " this 
settles it. London is not for you. Don't say 
k g 9 



98 GALLIA. 

a word — I will have my own way about it. 
Gallia, your mother must go abroad at once. 
I've been very patient. I've watched this getting 
worse daily, and I've seen the futility of treat- 
ment. ~No doubt I've been a fool to hold my 
tongue so long about it. But go she must, and 
that immediately." 

"But my dinners, my receptions — the invi- 
tations are all out !" poor Lady Hamesthwaite 
interjected pathetically. " And Gallia, whom I 
thought I was to have the happiness of taking 
about with me this year" — 

" Gallia will go with you, as I cannot leave 
town. She has finished with Oxford. Tou can 
take her, or she can take you, about the Riviera, 
if you like." 

Gallia had one moment of communing .with 
herself, then she said cheerfully, "I'll tell you 
where we'll go, mother, we will go to Algiers. 
It will do you heaps of good." 

And so they spent most of the evening dis- 
cussing and forming plans. 

The last post brought Gallia a small regis- 
tered package. Within it was one long glove 
and one of Mr. Essex's cards. 

She turned them over several times, amused 
at the over-care, in which she detected more 
than a spice of scorn, which had registered the 
tiny parcel, hurt somehow by the formality of 
the visiting-card. She turned over the doubled 



GALLIA. 99 

sheet of notepaper and looked inside the en- 
velope. There was no word, not a pen-scratch. 
Just the address in Essex's little cramped Greek 
handwriting. 

" Yes, mother, let it be Algiers. And — let us 
go to-morrow. We can spend a week in Cannes 
to get anything you may need." 

" My dear, I need nothing but what can be 
telegraphed for to Paris ; but to-morrow" — 

" Do let it be to-morrow, if you can, dear. I 
am so sick of — I hate — hate — hate this place 
so !" She flung herself back in her chair so 
violently, and threw her arms above her head 
with so much vehemence, that the little matters 
on her knees, the glove and its belongings, fell 
upon the floor. Lady Hamesthwaite noticed 
them with her kind, tactful eyes, and came over 
to Gallia and kissed her. 

" To-morrow or next day, dear, at latest. 
Now, away to bed ; we shall be so busy all day 
seeing people, and explaining things, and writing 
notes." 



CHAPTER X. 

Mrs. Leighton happened to be giving a little 
luncheon-party, when Lady Hamesthwaite ran 
in on the following morning to announce the 
Algiers programme, and find condolence for the 
necessity of giving up all her social ploys for the 
winter. Margaret Essex, whom Mrs. Leighton 
frankly delighted in because she was so beauti- 
ful, and Mark Gurdon were of the party, and 
they sat next each other. 

Every man has, at the bottom of his heart, 
an admiration, more or less strong according to 
his temperament, for the delicately beautiful, 
beneficent-faced, and gracious married woman — 
the woman of the kind eyes and tender mouth. 
It is less the beauty of this sort of woman than 
her beneficent air that wins him. She is the 
woman who draws most souls to follow after 
her, she has the face which could start a crusade. 
She may have moments that are humanly prank- 
some, but she is guilelessness itself. She is more 
wonderful at thirty than at twenty, for the per- 
sistent beauty of her character, as it grows 
stronger and stronger, can draw only beautiful 
lines in her face, "We may thank our stars and 
100 



GALLIA. 101 

gods that hers is an inextinguishable race, that 
there will always be some of these women to 
be found, that where they walk, things hope- 
lessly wicked will bud out into goodness, and 
good things be better. We can only have one 
quarrel against them; that their immemorial 
fine forgiveness may perpetuate things indiffer- 
ently good and bad. 

Margaret Essex was young yet, but the mark 
belonging to this race of souls was set on her 
forehead already. She was not very clever, she 
had not much brain, and her training had been 
desultory; but none of those things matter in 
such a woman. I think she may be exempted 
from tediously practical formulae, and the set 
duties of a dull world ; in the advancement of 
women she must always be franked. On the 
whole, it is admitted by right that woman's 
sense of law, order, and judgment should be 
taught as they are being taught now ; but this 
must not apply to the soul-woman I am speak- 
ing of. She has a track of her own to follow, 
lonely and lovely. She is amenable to laws as 
mysterious to us as those that tell the tides when 
to turn. 

Enough of her. This was the race to which 
Margaret Essex belonged, and Grurdon had 
summed her up coldly and foolishly on that day 
when she passed him by in Paris. He knew 
now that he had been wrong. He had never 
9* 



102 GALLIA. 

talked to any woman in his life who gave him 
the same feelings as this one. Man is ap- 
proached through his simple senses first; a 
goddess may sit at his elbow, and the turn of 
her wrist as she handles a fork will be the first 
of her charms to arouse his regards. Mark 
found himself watching Margaret's fingers as 
she crumbled her bread, and wondering if it 
were merely that he had never observed women's 
fingers before, or if hers were really so infinitely 
more delicate in colouring and contour than 
those of any other woman ? They were flower- 
fingers. Then her voice, her habit of speaking 
with her eyes cast down in thought, and at the 
end of her sentence, or if she put a question, 
raising them with so clear and direct a glance; 
this unconscious charm he caught himself wait- 
ing for, with an eagerness that was utterly 
foreign to his whole nature as he knew it. That 
she had not recognised him as the man who had 
been walking that day in the Jardin du Luxem- 
bourg with Leighton was quite certain ; so far 
she had only heard of him as being newly 
returned from Africa, and he had carefully re- 
frained from mentioning Paris. Strange, but he 
would have been unanxious for her to identify 
him as Leighton's friend at this early moment 
of their acquaintance. She disapproved of 
Leighton. She must have learned — she couldn't 
have failed to learn — of Leighton's relations with 



GALLIA. 103 

Arsenie, and Gurdon didn't find it anything but 
natural that her favour was removed from a 
man who openly kept a mistress. Gurdon was 
a man of no imagination whatever; for him, 
what was, was. It was habitual for women to 
disapprove of a man who kept a mistress and 
took small pains to conceal this fact ; just as it 
was habitual for them to receive intimately, and 
finally marry, men who had connections, decently 
regulated and properly concealed, of a more 
casual nature. Gurdon hadn't a shadow of 
doubt in his mind that Margaret's moral views 
were of this complicated but no less universal 
pattern; he felt sure she would recognise the 
same difference between the two kinds of men 
that he did ; and he sympathised with her in the 
shock she must have experienced in discovering 
Leighton's lapse from this high standard, and 
felt that she was entirely justified in dropping 
his acquaintance. There was one little faint 
distinction, which he would have admitted, but 
which did not happen to occur to him. He 
would have excused Leighton everything but 
the publicity of his behaviour ; and Margaret 
would not. But this was, after all, a very, very 
faint distinction, although in the present ease, it 
had been the direct cause of Leighton's losing 
her friendship. 

Margaret had been what may be described as 
" carefully brought up ;" she had lost her father 



104 GALLIA. 

early, but her mother, who was a clever and a 
charming woman, had herself accompanied her 
to Germany, and then to France, for educational 
purposes ; and it was only during the last year, 
when Mrs. Essex had become too much of an 
invalid to leave her home, that she had consented 
unwillingly to her daughter's studying art in 
Paris. So far as it could be, everything that 
could be done was done, and every precaution 
taken; with the result that Margaret's sojourn 
gained greatly in dulness and propriety, while it 
certainly lost in gaiety and charm. The five 
hundred a year which was Mrs. Essex's income 
amply sufficed to keep going the little house in 
Hammersmith Terrace, and Essex, though he was 
not particularly generous, provided his sister's 
dress allowance from his own not over well-filled 
coffers. 

They were the widow's only children, and 
though the son had her own dark kind of beauty 
(so much so, that his real name, Hubert,' had 
fallen into disuse, and most people spoke of him 
as Dark, a sobriquet he had acquired at Win- 
chester), it was on Margaret's face, the fair refine- 
ment of her dead husband's, that Mrs. Essex 
loved best to look. 

" Do you know, I haven't seen your brother 
for years, and once I was very much indebted 
to him down at Oxford," Gurdon said, gliding 
carefully away from the subject of art, which 



GALLIA. 105 

was too nearly allied to Paris to be safe for dis- 
cussion. 

" "What did he do for you 1" Margaret asked. 

" Oh, he read with me ; gave me a short cut 
when I had been neglecting my reading badly, 
and was becoming scared at the thought of the 
exams." 

" He can't be much older than you ?" 

" No ; but he had had the benefit of a con- 
sistent classical education, and was years ahead 
of me in most things," Gurdon answered; and 
was amused to find a man of his experience 
speaking of a consistent classical education as a 
benefit. 

" He is fearfully clever," Margaret said, betray- 
ing a simple worship, which Gurdon thought as 
delightful as it is now-a-days proportionately 
rare. Though he did not know many women, 
Gurdon was dimly aware that they were no 
longer in the habit of thinking men " fearfully 
clever"; he knew that some totally different 
spirit was abroad. How refreshing to come 
across a beautiful woman, a woman of spirit too, 
like Margaret Essex, who was still able to look 
up in worship of the man she thought fearfully 
clever ! 

" Would he be likely to be at home if I were 
to call some day a little after five ?" Gurdon said, 
rather disingenuously, and meaning "Would 
you be at home V 



106 GALLIA. 

" He goes down to Oxford to-morrow. What 
a pity!" The eyes rested on him again, with 
their frank, glistening look. "He is at home 
to-day, going over his books." 

"If it would be convenient, I might drive 
down to-day. It is Hammersmith, is it not?" 
Gurdon did not ask himself why he was so 
anxious to get a footing in that Hammersmith 
house — time enough for reflection afterwards; 
but he knew very well what he wanted, and he 
saw proudly that he had secured it. 

Luncheon was over at last, and guests left 
early, as everybody knew that Lady Hames- 
thwaite had come for a last interview with her 
sister; and a few people who had heard her 
cough, and who felt that easy lack of responsi- 
bility in disposing of their friends which is so 
common, thought that it might indeed prove to 
be her last interview. 

"You will let me see you to the train?" 
Gurdon was saying to Margaret in the hall, as 
she stood fastening her little sable close round 
her neck. 

" Thank you, but I am going to walk up 
Gloucester Road and take an omnibus ; the train 
is nearer and quicker, of course, but we don't 
often have so bright an afternoon as this." 

" Then perhaps I may see you to the omnibus ?" 
Mark said, with a smile. 

" If it is your way." 



GALLIA. 107 

" Did you not tell me I could find your brother 
this afternoon ?" 

" Oh, you are coming out too ?" She did not 
seem to have grasped this, and she turned to him 
with a little sparkle of surprise. 

" However innocent a woman may be, it is 
safer not to presume too much upon that inno- 
cence," thought the cautious Mark very wisely. 
A sun of shrewdness and womanly intuition is 
apt to break through those poetic blue mists of 
unsuspicion. 

"It would be a pleasure to me to see him 
again, and this seems to be my only chance," he 
replied coolly. 

A few moments later they had scaled the 
stairway of a red " road-car," and settled them- 
selves easily and simply in the close quarters of 
a garden-seat. 

" For real exhilaration, give me the top of an 
omnibus on a fine afternoon in London," Mar- 
garet exclaimed, with evident enjoyment, as 
they rolled quickly over the good wood pave- 
ment. " The men drive so splendidly, and it 
seems to me an omnibus always gets through 
things before every other conveyance. I love to 
feel the on and off of the break, and to watch 
the way the pole seems to feels its way through 
the traffic. The lightness and balance of these 
poles must be wonderful, you know — a touch 
sways them. Then the horses are so nice and 



108 GALLIA. 

fat and strong, and you never see a lame horse 
in an omnibus, whereas nearly all the horses in 
cabs have something the matter with them." 

" I confess these things never struck me before, 
but you are perfectly rigbt," Mark said, feeling a 
genuine interest for the moment in noticing the 
points she referred to. 

" Oh, without its omnibuses London would 
lose half its charm for me." 

"Do you know, your power of observation 
must be very keen indeed ? Of course, that is 
what makes you an artist." 

" Oh no ! Tou are quite wrong — really you 
are ! The observation that detects shades of 
lameness in cab-horses is not a bit the sort an 
artist ought to have. And that happens to be 
one of my great difficulties. I am far too care- 
ful of detail. ' Cherchez le mouvement,' one of the 
professors says to me twice a week. ' Mais, 
mademoiselle, ilfaut cligner les yeux.' " 

" "Well, but surely"— 

" Yes ; but he doesn't mean the peculiarities of 
movement in a cab-horse," said Margaret, laugh- 
ing; " it is the effect I have to search for, and the 
central principle movement. I can't explain it at 
all, — I never could explain anything, — but you 
know that an artist has to look at effects through 
half-closed eyes ; if you are to be broad, if you 
are to get your planes of colour right and your 
values, you mustn't go darting weasel-gimlet 



GALLIA. 109 

glances here and there for little minor de- 
tails." 

" You have cleared up the whole matter for 
me in a phrase. ' Weasel-gimlet glances' is ex- 
cellent. I never thought of this before, but I see 
there are many distinctions even among good 
powers of observation. My own are fairly good, 
and they are neither like yours nor those you 
want to acquire. My eyes seem to have little 
independence. I can walk a mile and see noth- 
ing, but if I bring my head into play, my eyes 
will register with a photographic accuracy, and I 
have complete pictures of places, people, and 
things fixed firmly on the retina of my brain — 
which I would swear by in a court of law after- 
wards, if need were." 

Margaret looked at him critically, listened 
carefully, and then said, with a very ingenuous 
touch of admiration, " That is a splendid power 
to have at command. I expect you have trained 
it greatly." 

" I have tried to strengthen it, I think. But," 
smilingly, " I have never tried to talk of it be- 
fore, and you must look kindly on my egotism 
for once." 

She had no need to reply except with a smile, 
for they were at Hammersmith, and obliged to 
clamber carefully down. The way Margaret 
swung the tails of her skirt round her, and posi- 
tively ran down the stair, while every other 
10 



110 GALLIA. 

woman blundered into more or less of an expo- 
sure of boot-top, thick, shapeless leg, and repel- 
lent underskirt, was another point which Gurdon 
registered politely in Margaret's favour. 

" "We have a little walk now," she said, and 
they set off down the bustling, horrible King 
Street, having continually to avoid the foot-path 
on account of the crowds at the doors of multi- 
farious gin-shops. 

It was not a moment for conversation, and 
Gurdon was busy wondering how he was to 
account to Essex himself for the enthusiasm 
which had brought him down. If he remem- 
bered, Essex was a silent, severe, satirical person, 
who would be quite keen enough to see through 
the object of Mark's visit, and who would further 
be quite cool enough not to help him to carry 
off the situation with eclat. The two men had 
never actually been friends, though they had 
known each other very well and met very fre- 
quently ; and though, as Gurdon had said, Essex 
had helped him materially when reading for his 
degree, yet they had never passed that inde- 
finable barrier between knowing one another 
well and being friends. 

But small difficulties only whetted Mark's 
courage, and he followed Margaret into the 
drawing-room with a good air of self-possession. 



CHAPTEE XL 

As a matter of fact, that call in Hammersmith 
turned out exceedingly well. It is only necessary 
to go to a place in sufficient trepidation, and a 
visit always will turn out well, provided the trepi- 
dation does not bereave the caller of his senses. 
Gurdon's trepidation did not so bereave him ; he 
was only conscious of having padded out a college 
intimacy slightly, and this for his own excellent 
purposes. Once inside the house, he had a 
quarter of an hour in which to get on terms with 
Mrs. Essex; this was the kind of social enter- 
prise in which success was certain to him. Mrs. 
Essex brought out her best conversation, and 
imagined that she had been entertaining a young 
man of public importance, as well as a young man 
whom Margaret must like, or else, why had she 
brought him down — upon an omnibus, too, that 
very hob-nobby and familiar vehicle ? Her son, 
coming into the room and finding them talk- 
ing and laughing with such freedom and good 
understanding, himself being a remarkably self- 
centred person, accepted Gurdon as his sister's 
and his mother's friend, remembered him as a 

in 



112 GALLIA. 

very decent fellow when he was " up," and chimed 
in agreeably in the mutual harmony of the 
moment. 

Mark left, feeling that Essex was improved 
since college days ; that he was more a man of 
the world and more human. " I remember, I 
believe, that I liked Essex very well," he said to 
himself as he went westwards in a train ; and 
certainly Gurdon was not the man to notice the 
amazing narrowness of mind which was one of 
Essex's worst faults, and which the life open to 
a Fellow of an exclusive college does nothing to 
minimise. 

During the long, wintry spring the two men 
met a number of times. When Essex was in 
town, he dined at the club with Mark ; and once, 
when a big statesman went down to speak at 
Oxford, Gurdon was Essex's guest for a couple 
of days. 

But before they encountered one another again 
at the house in Hammersmith, Mark had estab- 
lished a habit of going to supper there on Sunday 
evenings ; and it was an odd week when he did 
not manage to see Margaret somewhere, at least 
once, in between times. 

The fact was, that he was desperately attracted 
towards her, and when in her presence did not 
recognise himself for the same man : his nature 
seemed changed; he expressed opinions with 
unimpeachable sincerity, which were in direct 



GALLIA. 113 

opposition to the opinions he would have ex- 
pressed to the men he was in the habit of dining 
and talking with at the club. He couldn't fail 
to notice the extraordinary effect the girl had on 
him. Sometimes he knew he was in love with 
her ; he knew that he was going to ask her to 
marry him if he had any sort of chance to do so ; 
he knew that he would be ruthlessly cutting up 
his schemes for his own life and future, and he 
knew he would be acting like a fool. At least, 
he knew these things when he got back to his 
own milieu; he did not know them at Hammer- 
smith, and he did not know them in the train ; — 
the train formed a kind of hot, yeasty interlude, 
when he sat still and read his papers with diffi- 
culty, feeling all the time a restlessness and a 
desire to gaze into space with a smile upon his 
face which must have betrayed his errand to the 
stockbroker opposite. 

At his rooms, in the big leather arm-chair 
which had been his father's, and which had 
faithfully hatched out schemes of transcendent 
ambition in all his years of office life, Mark 
had terrible hours. He was a traitor to these 
schemes at heart. He was a traitor to that 
chair. One part of his brain looked on in a sort 
of cold horror, while the other part sketched 
out a future wbich should be more successful 
because of the lovely wife who would share it. 
"It all depends on whom a man marries," he 
10* 



114 GALLIA. 

would say didactically to himself, well knowing 
that it does not. A woman with a great deal of 
money would not have retarded him ; any other 
woman, no matter how clever and beautiful and 
distinguished, certainly would; Mark knew, as 
well as any man in Whitehall, that the day is 
past when women could play a part in the dip- 
lomatic world by reason of personal talent or 
beauty. Money, and money only, and a great 
deal of money at that, would have helped him. 
He was an exceptionally clear-eyed person; he 
had studied all the possibilities of advancement 
in parliamentary and diplomatic circles ; also he 
had looked round him. He could, with the 
help of a rich wife, buy a capital position as a 
junior politician. But Margaret was poor. 
Double and treble-milled was each one of these 
thoughts, yet, once at Hammersmith and in the 
room, they left him. He was at his ease and 
natural again ; natural with the nature Margaret 
had called up in him. 

Both mother and daughter thought him " de- 
lightful," and very clever and full of power and 
determination. They magnified his good qual- 
ities, as kind women will, and they never ob- 
served his bad qualities at all; for which they 
are not to be blamed, as these were very negative 
in Mark, and might almost be said to be non- 
existent at that time. However innocent Mar- 
garet may have been of the construction which 



GALLIA. 115 

might be put upon Mr. Gurdon's visits, and the 
meaning he managed to throw into them, — and 
it is permissible to imagine Margaret just as 
innocent as a " nice" girl ought to be, — it was 
not to be supposed that their intention escaped 
Mrs. Essex. She saw perfectly well, with ma- 
tronly clearness, in fact, that " young Mr. Gur- 
don was interested in dear Margaret," had, in 
fact, fallen in love with her. 

" I suppose we shall have Mr. Gurdon as usual 
about seven o'clock," she said, smiling indul- 
gently, as she prepared to snatch a few moments' 
sleep in her arm-chair after tea. 

"I daresay," Margaret answered from the 
piano, and without interrupting the "Schlum- 
merlied" she was softly playing. 

" I like to see a determined lover," Mrs. Essex 
went on, still with the same complacence. The 
" Schlummerlied" came to an end. 

" A determined what f" 

" My dear child, of course you are aware that 
he may propose any day ?" Mrs. Essex roused 
herself a little at Margaret's tone, and a moment 
or two later she saw that her sleep that afternoon 
must be given up. 

" It is a little hard that every intimacy with 
a man may have to be terminated just at the 
comfortable point — because he thinks it neces- 
sary to propose," Margaret said, with a sense of 
injury, but an air of great self-possession. " Not 



116 GALLIA. 

that I have seen any signs of his forgetting him- 
self in that way," she added, smiling. 

"You may be perfectly assured that he is 
going to propose to you. He has singled you 
out, ever since he came here, by the most 
marked attention. He has sent you books and 
songs ; he has brought you flowers ; he has come 
early — and — and — not gone away till very late ; 
and he neyer takes his eyes off you when he is 
in the room." 

Mrs. Essex enumerated these points in a help- 
less tone, and Margaret nodded, and ticked each 
one on her slim fingers. Very true — what can a 
man do more ? 

" In fact, he has shown all the polite signs of 
being in love ?" she said, laughing, and looking 
very pretty. Any girl will laugh and look pretty 
when she hears of the subjection of a presentable 
victim ; she is only haughty and insulted if the 
victim is not presentable. Her own feelings for 
the man do not come into the question at all at 
this stage. " Well," she went on, still smiling, 
and still looking pretty, " we will exhibit all the 
polite signs in the reverse direction. As I am 
not going to accept him, and shouldn't think of 
doing so, we must begin at once. For instance : 
I will have a headache, and be lying down up- 
stairs when he arrives. You will entertain him 
till supper-time. I will struggle down to supper, 
looking very pale." 



GALLIA. 117 

" That of course will bring matters to a head 
immediately," Mrs. Essex broke in, and herself 
unable to prevent a smile at Margaret's nonsense. 

" Oh, but I won't be lackadaisical and floppy. 
My headache will be of the severe kind, and my 
manner will be as severe as the headache. You, 
in the meantime, will have prepared the way by 
talking about other men I have known and 
liked. I think, you know, one gets through 
these things quicker and more painlessly if one 
conducts them on the ' someone else' tack ; a 
man will go away if he is made to understand 
that there is another man, but he won't if he 
thinks you are fancy-free. "Well, he hardly 
could — it would be rude of him. He has to stay 
and teach you to care for him. I owe these 
ideas entirely to novels, but novelists make a 
study of such points. So you will tell him 
about other men." 

" But what other men ? I don't at this moment 
know of any other men. You see, Margaret, 
you have not been like most girls of the present 
day ; you have not had batches of ' men friends.' " 

Margaret nodded. " I've had a mother-friend," 
she said. 

" Now, let me think whom you have known ? 
But, in any case, it would not be honourable or 
true of us to mix up any man's name with yours 
— merely to put off Mr. Gurdon. I should not 
at all like it." 



118 GALLIA. 

" Dear mamma, you take it too seriously; you 
haven't to say anything at all. After all, I'm 
quite as likely to marry any of the men I've 
known as Gurdon." 

"Mr. Gurdon, dear; don't get into the habit 
of speaking of men by their surnames — even to 
me. It is very fast, I think." 

" "Not exactly fast, now, mamma, surely, though 
it may have been once. I expect I have caught 
the habit among the girls in Paris. They do it, 
but not from fastness, merely from economy of 
time." 

"It occurs to me that the only young man 
you have known is Mr. Robert Leighton." The 
word "Paris" had obviously suggested him to 
her mother, and Margaret, who was standing 
over by a window that looked upon the river, 
felt suddenly frightened. 

" I wouldn't mention his name, mamma. In 
fact, I agree with you that perhaps it wouldn't 
be at all a good plan to do as I said." 

" The best thing for you to do is to tell him 
firmly and quietly that you don't, and never can, 
care for him — if that is the case." Mrs. Essex 
sighed — from mixed motives, for she had never 
been able to contemplate the idea of Margaret's 
marriage with equanimity, and it was also true 
that she had had pangs of sheer jealousy when 
she had seen Gurdon and the girl laughing and 
chatting in a certain youthful intimacy that she 



GALLIA. 119 

of course could never have with her daughter; 
at the same time, as a woman, she had to be 
sorry for a lover. 

" I will not have a headache at all, on second 
thoughts," Margaret announced, presently. 

" Well, then, I think I will," Mrs. Essex said 
lightly, and rising from a chair. " The room is 
very warm, Margaret, and I have missed my 
sleep." Mrs. Essex had heard the wheels of a 
hansom, but she was already on the upper flight 
of stairs before the front door bell rang. 

And this was the first Sunday evening on 
which Mark Gurdon did not stay to supper. 



CHAPTER XII. 

A man feels his rejection either in proportion 
to his depth of feeling for the woman, or in 
proportion to his depth of feeling for himself; 
without severity it may be said, usually the 
latter. 

With Mark it was strongly the latter, and a 
little of the former mixed in. 

He had really admired Margaret very much ; 
he was greatly puzzled to understand why she 
had not admired him. He couldn't suppose it 
was because he was poor that she would not 
marry him, and he equally could not suppose it 
was because she couldn't love him ; he therefore 
declined upon the supposition that it was because 
he had not given her time enough to discover 
his good points. A girl — that is, a nice girl — 
is a very inexperienced creature, he told himself, 
and no doubt she had known so few men in her 
beautiful, carefully supervised life, that she was 
not able to see how superior he was to most 
other fellows from whom she might have ex- 
pected proposals. He was a gentleman, and 
looked like one (a great advantage, this); he 
was poor, certainly, but he had a future; his 

manners and character — well, he didn't know 
120 



GALLIA. 121 

anybody with better manners or character — this 
frankly and without any egotism, in fact, speak- 
ing as an outsider. 

It is neither a man's nor a woman's fault that 
a proposal is usually such a fearful and ridiculous 
farrago. No woman with a sense of humour 
can listen to it without inward smiles — supposing 
that she is quite cool towards the man. If she 
is not quite cool towards him, she takes it in as 
well as the other woman who has no sense of 
humour. For falling in love blots out a sense of 
humour, of necessity, for the time being. Who 
looses his falcon to the flight, leaving his hood 
still on ? Yet is the proposing man more closely 
hooded than the gay gosshawk. Mark did 
remarkably well with his proposal, and made 
very fair use of his materials ; it is not his fault 
that details of it sound silly; all real proposals 
sound rather silly, and no novelist in the world 
but can make up a much sweeter and more 
attractive one out of his own head. 

He knew she was particular about some things, 
Mark said to her, when the moment came (he 
meant Leighton and his escapade by " some 
things"). Well, he shouldn't like to brag about 
it, but — and then he made the well-known speech 
without which no proposal is really complete. 
He wore that air of humility and seriousness, 
combined with a rigid sense of right and wrong. 
He wouldn't like to call himself a good man ; no 
p 11 



122 GALLIA. 

man who sat beside Miss Essex could have the 
presumption to call himself good ; but he would 
say that most men would call him a very decent 
specimen. He had " lived" to a certain extent 
(he was very careful to put in this ambiguous 
qualification, and tradition justified him ; no man 
with any respect for himself ever leaves it out) 
— to a certain extent he had lived the life of an 
ordinary man of the world, but he had had his 
limitations, and there were lengths to which he 
had never gone. These were not things that 
she would understand, nor that he would like to 
speak of further, but, at any rate, he had lived 
a sort of life that enabled him to come into the 
presence of the woman he loved with his head 
up because he could show a clean record. 

Margaret was, as I have insisted more than 
once, exceedingly inexperienced, and she was 
inclined to think this very fine ; not knowing in 
the least what it meant, and further unaware 
that it formed part of the time-honoured shib- 
boleth of proposal, she was decidedly impressed 
by it. And if anything could have won her to 
accept Gurdon, it would have been more of this 
high-minded and yet humble expatiation on his 
spotlessness. 

Miss Essex looked prettier than ever, with her 
dark-grey, serious eyes holding two tears which 
never fell ; and Gurdon was then moved to take 
her hand, very gently and respectfully. It was 



GALLIA. 123 

she who gave the pressure. " Thank you — thank 
you so much," she said, rather brokenly, " for 
what you have said. I feel very much — I mean 
I am quite sure that — that — but, ob, please, Mr. 
Gurdon, don't think me odious, but I really 
never thought of you in that light, and I" — 
with a good deal more of the same. 

Thus the moment of deepest emotion was 
reached over Gurdon's touching picture of the 
precise degree and shade of grey in which he 
had painted himself out of the devil's black 
paint-pot. 

Margaret felt it to have been a pathetic and 
impressive moment in the interview, and in her 
own mind afterwards she called him "poor 
fellow" once or twice : whether because he had 
not allowed himself a better time in this vicious 
old world, or because she could not hand him 
the reward of this praiseworthy self-denial, she 
never explained to herself, not having the ana- 
lytical temperament. 

As was natural, she saw less of Gurdon in the 
weeks that immediately followed, although it 
had been arranged that this was not to interfere 
with their " friendship." It was not likely to, as 
it in no way trenched upon that most mythical 
and shadowy of relations. Gurdon looked more 
serious, talked a little less at the club, and 
folded his lips ominously as he walked between 
the Colonial Office and his rooms. He turned 



124 GALLIA. 

in one night and heard part of a concert at St. 
James's Hall, but came out because it seemed to 
him that he could not bear to hear a " Polonaise" 
of Chopin's, which Margaret had played in- 
differently well, faultlessly given by " some 
foreign fellow, with a beastly head of hair," as 
he mentally designated the eminent artist upon 
the platform. Coming out into Piccadilly, he 
ran against a man he knew slightly — that is, a 
man he had known slightly for a number of 
years. This individual, Lauriston by name, was 
a good-natured, weak-minded being, with a taste 
for what he called " sport," and night clubs, and 
gardenias that reeked intoxicatingly of opopo- 
nax as well as their own odious scent. Gurdon, 
being " a serious-minded chap," had little in 
common with Lauriston as a rule, but he was 
just then at a loose end, and allowed himself to 
be hailed and his arm taken, and finally borne 
off in a fit of overdone chumminess to see some- 
thing of which " ten stone," " six rounds," and a 
" purse," formed descriptive elements. As a 
matter of fact, Gurdon would just as soon have 
sat at the National Sporting Club, and clapped 
feebly, and listened to cheers, either raucous or 
affectedly treble, as he would have done any- 
thing else. In his own belief he was a badly 
cut-up man, but he hoped he was " taking it as 
a man ought;" without going into this point, he 
was certainly taking it as a man often does. He 



GALLIA. 125 

sat in silence, with a half-smile of satire on his 
face, and watched Lauriston hang over the pea- 
cock-plush edge of the box, as he exchanged the 
time of day with fat gentlemen in exceedingly- 
tight check suits and a tendency to a display of 
Parisian diamonds upon their ties. 

It was late enough when Mark found himself 
passing along Piccadilly on his way to his rooms 
in Byder Street. Already the impression of his 
unusual evening was passing out of his mind ; in 
his younger days Mark had seen as much of that 
sort of evening as a steady fellow ever does, and 
he took it very calmly. Champagne in a big 
tumbler did not matter greatly to him. He was 
not unconsciously observant, as he had once told 
Margaret ; the scenes of Piccadilly passed him 
by, or he shook them off casually, and entered, 
although unwillingly, upon his private gloom 
again. 

Suddenly, when he had passed one woman, a 
shaft of recollection shot into his mind, and he 
looked round instinctively. The- recollection 
was accompanied by some revulsion of feeling, 
but he turned with an impulse and raised his 
hat. 

" Miss Lemuel ?" he said. It was as much a 
protest as a question, and for once the face that 
met his had no smile. 

" "Well, I never !" she exclaimed in surprise ; 
" to think of its being you !" 
11* 



126 GALLIA. 

" No," he replied ; " to think of its being you ! 
"Why are you out alone like this ? How are you 
in- England ? Where is your father ?" 

" Ah, well, that will be the whole story if I tell 
you all that, won't it ?" She smiled now, but it 
was half-heartedly. " We're in England because 
father has a job here. He came over to sit to 
Gilford for his ' Death of Greek Art' " 

" Well, but how are you out at this time of 
day ? But perhaps I am not minding my own 
business as I ought 1" his tone became reserved. 

" Perhaps you aren't. I'm looking for father, 
if you want to know. Father has been drinking 
a good bit lately, and I'm not sure how he'll get 
through with this affair of Gilford's, unless I keep 
a pretty tight hold on him. The landlady fired 
us out of our lodgings to-day, and I got all packed 
and taken to a friend's — well, she's the charwoman 
who cleans Gilford's studio ; and then father said 
he'd go and have a look round and come back 
sharp for me when he'd settled something. I 
waited till about one o'clock, and then I knew 
something had happened, so I've been going 
round the dens." 

She told all this very simply, and it was 
obviously only the inconvenience of her father's 
action, mixed with a fear that he would not be 
able to take up his "job," that disturbed her. 
As they walked on together, Gurdon reflected 
quickly. Though he had met her half a dozen 



GALLIA. 127 

times in Paris only, and they had never talked 
much, he had an inexplicable liking for this girl. 
Used to roughing it she might be, but he could 
not allow her to walk alone down Piccadilly when 
he was there to prevent it. He looked down at 
her on to the top of her shabby little hat, as it 
proved. 

" Take my arm," he said curtly. " Your father 
was to look for rooms, you say ? What if he 
has found none — where have you to go V 

" Nowhere," was all her answer. 

" Well, we must devise something. Is it not 
possible he may have returned to the char- 
woman's while you have been out looking for 
him ?" 

" Yes, he might have done." 

He could tell that she thought this very un- 
likely. 

" Well, let us get into a cab and go there at 
once. Is not that the best thing to do ?" 

She admitted that it might be ; and even 
though he could have put her into a cab and sent 
her oft", he believed it his duty to see her safely 
even to that poor shelter. He hailed a cab, and 
they drove away together down to Kensington. 

On the way, she plucked up her spirits, and 
told him many things that had happened in 
Paris since the winter when he had been there. 
At the end of May, Leighton had gone to Spain 
for the summer. When he returned, Arsenie 



128 GALLIA. 

had made other arrangements, since when Leigh- 
ton had ceased to live at his studio, and had 
removed to a hotel meuble. He had become so 
extravagant that he had been obliged to have 
another man share his studio. His bill at the 
restaurant where he fed grew so large that he 
had had to move on to another. He had an 
arrangement at the artists' colourman's to give 
him all his studio studies in return for material, 
and he had taken to working his Academies in 
oil colours instead of charcoal, painting in a 
tiger-skin and a drift of muslin afterwards, and 
calling them " Apres le Bain," " Belle Baign- 
euse," and kindred titles. 

All this chatter rippled pleasantly through 
Gur don's mind, and combining with the motion 
of a good cab, soothed him considerably. Cara 
Lemuel had a sharp and amusing tongue ; often 
he was moved to a tired laugh at what she said ; 
and when she took his hand and thanked him 
for being so good to her, it seemed only natural 
to put an arm round her thin shoulders with a 
comforting pressure. _ Altogether, he did not 
mind much how long this drive lasted. 

But at length, in some of the narrow slummy 
by-ways near Queen's Gate, the cab drew up, 
they got out, and Cara undertook to find the 
door. 

Gurdon stopped irresolutely for a second, then 
he told the man to wait, and followed her. 



CHAPTER XIIL 

Old Lemuel had not come in. That was the 
first thing that struck Gordon when he passed 
upstairs behind Cara. The key was below the 
mat just where she had placed it, the paraffin 
lamp was smelling as it had done ever since she 
turned it down hours before. They sat down 
opposite one another in the stuffy, evil-smelling 
little room. 

"What can have happened to father? Oh, 
there must have been some accident!" Then 
she cried. She was that simple sort of creature 
that cried unrestrainedly and exuberantly when 
she was sorry, even as she laughed when she 
was glad. She dropped her face into her hands 
with a howl. Her short brown curls parted 
from the back of her neck, and fell forward in a 
thick shock at each side. The pointed girlish 
shoulders 6hook in a convulsive way. The backs 
of her narrow arms, pressed to her sides, had 
something young and pitiable about them; she 
was a horribly lonely, forsaken little thing. Gur- 
don made a quick step towards her, and patted 
her reassuringly on the back. 

" Come, this won't do," he said, with the, 
i 129 



130 GALLIA. 

exaggerated cheerfulness one uses to a child. 
"What is the good of making up your mind 
that the very worst has happened? Depend 
upon it, your father is with a friend somewhere. 
There, that's right : be a woman." 

He might have kissed her, perhaps, but the 
thought of Margaret, whom some weeks ago he 
had dreamed of kissing, prevented him for the 
moment. Instead, he essayed more practical 
comfort. He found a spirit-lamp among her 
belongings, and with a little encouragement she 
produced some cheap red wine, which he heated 
and made her drink. She sat beside this medi- 
tatively for a little, then she raised her crying 
face, which had a prettiness about it in spite of 
tears and reddened eyelids. This time, as he 
looked at her, no thought of Margaret occurred 
to him : his love for her had been compounded 
of idealised passion and fancy — they are very 
poor wear. 

"With her jacket off, and in some soft, limp 
sort of brown material, Cara looked pretty. Her 
dark skin, ripe colour, and easy eye had a single 
meaning. There are some women in the social 
state, as it is at present, fitted exclusively for 
" the oldest of all professions for women." They 
are to be met in all ranks of life. "What sort of 
wives do they make? "What sort of sweet- 
hearts ? What sort of mothers ? "Whosoever 
selects them for a position of any permanency 



GALLIA. 131 

is mistaken. "Women of abnormal sensuality, 
of incurable lightness, are private scourges. In 
a ballroom, for example, they will exercise every 
one of the arts and lures that have only one in- 
tention, then they will step into their carriages 
and sweep away with a final glitter in their las- 
civious eyes, and the poor creature in the street, 
whom they would not touch, is their victim. 

The friends of women are not wise to declare 
that none are born scorpions. 

That is the dark side of the picture. Of the 
light side and its effect, Ghirdon is an example. 
Since his refusal by Margaret Essex, he had been 
fighting down a severe attack of passion ; this 
night on which he came across Cara had sensu- 
ally roused him. Under his cold, calm meas- 
uring nature were buried smothered fires, on 
whose embers no wind of circumstance had yet 
blown strongly. His sensuality, as in other 
words he had told Margaret, had been slight; 
he made the mistake of imagining that he had 
resisted such temptations, whereas they had, in 
reality, never come his way, and he had never 
felt or seen them. He had carried what he 
called " decency" to the chilliest business pitch, 
in a gentlemanly manner — that is, in the manner 
usual to a fastidious gentleman. The time came 
when, standing opposite Cara, he remembered 
only one thing; remembered with the greatest 
astonishment the means he had taken in the past 



132 GALLIA. 

to work himself up to the pitch of carrying 
through certaiu experiences with some air of 
relish. His training, his carefully nurtured ideas 
upon these subjects, had led him, even when 
alone, in his own mind and memory to banish the 
recollection of moments of almost wholly forced 
abandonment. He conceived a great horror of 
that old self of his ; it passed over his mind as a 
wave : whether he had found anything better or 
not might be a question, he felt that his old feel- 
ing had been wrong. His brain worked with 
the spasmodic, whirring activity of the roulette 
wheel. The girl was in his arms without his 
having consciously taken her in them. Before 
passion quite swamped reason, he was question- 
ing her hurriedly, in a voice whose very tones 
were quite new to him. The answers she made, 
which were an encouragement to passion, would 
have wounded love ; but Gurdon was not in a 
condition to see distinctions, or to give feelings 
names. Things themselves are infinitely less 
confusing than the names they go by. One may 
recognise the thing itself, and one may even un- 
derstand and feel familiar with it, but, over and 
above this, one must know its exact name. This 
difficulty is increased because things are not 
equally well named. The appositeness of all 
names to the objects and feelings they describe 
is nothing like so obvious as the appositeness of 
the title pig for the animal pig ; for, as the old 



GALLIA. 133 

lady remarked, anybody could see for himself It 
was a pig. 

The moment you leave the dry-land region of 
pigs and such-like easy instances of careful and 
adequate nomenclature, you set forth upon a 
turgid sea of difficulties. It is the things that 
swim dimly below the surface of the thick water 
that are so hard to recognise and to name. 
Numberless people, be it said, sail out and 
never suspect the existence of these things ; to 
them they are unthinkable. Others are con- 
scious of them, but avoid the effort of clear 
comprehension and classification; to these they 
are unnameable. And a larger body of people 
than either of these, or indeed both these put 
together, are content to name them wrongly and 
confuse one hopelessly with another; to these 
they are undistinguishable. Such things as 
these, that fin slowly through the gloom of deep 
green waters, are chiefly feelings. There are 
among them passion, cruel and kind; desire, 
physical and spiritual, the same in form, but 
differing utterly in clearness of colouring: the 
one swimming on his belly in the mud, the other 
undulating through the bright weed, where the 
light of day shines down. If love, the flying 
fish, drop among them for a space, straightway 
he is confused to his own hurt until he swoop 
upward into the air again. The psychologist 
with his water-telescope is apt to be as wrong 
12 



134 GALLIA. 

as anyone, and this has made many sensible and 
clever people decide that it is better to sit upon 
the shore beside the pig — who is so like a pig 
that you cannot mistake him ; or, if you sail over 
the water, to keep your eyes lifted to the clouds 
of tradition, superstition, and legend. It will 
be a good day when one shall arise and tell us 
whether it is happier to live than to know, and 
at what level we should keep our dim, imperfect 
human eyes, as we pass about in the world that 
we think was made for us and that we have 
improved for ourselves. If Gurdon's case could 
have been put before Margaret Essex and Gallia 
Hamesthwaite, — poor Gallia, away with her sick 
mother in Algiers, living a life of pulses and 
temperatures, and utterly divorced from her 
previous interests, — how differently they would 
have seen it ! Gallia, whose watchword used to 
be " Truth" — Margaret, whose watchword was 
" Goodness." And if it could have been put 
before Gurdon himself, whose watchword was 
" Decency," or before Leighton, whose was " Life, 
and don't be ashamed of it" ? 

Gurdon's justification for his action lay in the 
fact that he had been won from his even, decent 
life when he fell in love with Margaret Essex. 
The hopes that had then risen in him had 
altered the aspect of his mind. His emotional 
territory had been changed in character by the 
volcanic upheavals during those weeks of close 



GALLIA. 135 

intercourse. He had sat in the little Hammer- 
smith drawing-room and watched Margaret's 
fine flower-like hands moving over the yellow 
keyboard of the old sweet Broadwood, and his 
cold nature had warmed and warmed as he 
looked. 

" Ah, the throats of thunder I 

Ah, the dulcet lips ! 
Ah, the gracious tyrannies 

Of her finger-tips !" 

Or he had seen her singing. Margaret singing 
was a picture for the gods. Then they had 
talked a long time about all sorts of abstract 
matters ; and the conversation had been of that 
curious kind which love directs, of which love is 
ever the under-note. Then, when he went into 
town again and sat at dinner by himself at the 
club, or read in his own rooms afterwards, the 
mist of Margaret's influence still hung in the air 
around him. It was not that she gave him any 
token of love, or let drop one word on which 
he could build, but she was gracious, smiling, 
and her reception of him was kind, and she 
would play and sing when he asked her, liking 
apparently to give him pleasure ; liking, at any 
rate, to make music for one who seemed to love 
it as any musical-souled being will. 

H he had been a man of high moral tone 
(instead of being what he was, a man of " decent" 
moral tone), he might have had a quarrel against 



136 GALLIA. 

her for destroying the placid fabric of his daily 
life, and then turning him off, to weave the frag- 
ments of it in what pattern he could, accom- 
modating the red thread of passion, of which he 
was conscious for the first time. 

He had come through all the experiences of 
the single man who, loving one woman, alters 
and rearranges his future to admit her share in 
it ; he had tuned himself up to the new pitch of 
marriage ; he had fostered, nurtured, been glad 
of the new feelings that had come to him, and 
which in that particular connection were credit- 
able and decent, and then — he had been sent 
away; sent away single and unsatisfied, with 
havoc in his heart. But the feelings were still 
there. He was softened, warmed, plastic, and 
single. Whereupon, the girl Lemuel crossed 
his path, and attracted his quickened sympathies. 
Here was where he might give himself rein and 
be no wise to blame : he assured himself on this 
point before he took her, for, as he said to him- 
self, he was not a blackguard. He did not love 
her, although, oddly enough, he told himself that 
he did ; he did not, for if he had, he would have 
hated the French artist of whom she naively 
told him ; as it was, that was his permission. 
And not having a mind that traced its inspira- 
tions to their sources, Gurdon was unaware that 
Margaret Essex was a more or less direct cause 
of his protection of Cara. 



CHAPTER XIV. - 

It is difficult to understand why, as Gallia 
Hamesthwaite sat beside her dead mother, in 
the big bedroom of the white hotel upon the 
hillside, she should have thought of Dark Essex. 
At a moment so lonely that it seemed to her an 
iron gateway had closed across the avenue of life, 
and she should never go any farther down that 
avenue, this man, with whom, after all, she had 
never been closely intimate, who had certainly 
never been kind to her, seemed nearer to her 
than any other human being. If there were 
anyone in the world whose hand-clasp she 
would have been passionately glad of, that per- 
son was Essex. 

He had not been very often in her mind 
during the three months' sojourn in Algiers; 
she had, during that time, thought almost cease- 
lessly of her mother. Lady Hamesthwaite had 
not benefited by the change; she had seemed 
wonderfully feeble, with an unexplained, gentle, 
sweet-natured feebleness, which grew only more 
evident day by day. In the mornings, Gallia 
had walked beside her invalid chair ; in the after- 
noons she had taken her place in the comfortable 
European victoria which had been sent over 
12* 187 



138 GALLIA. 

from France for their use. In between whiles 
she seemed to have read aloud an infinitude of 
novels and books of travel, looking up frequently 
to see if her mother's cheeks were flushing with 
fever, or if she appeared ready for a little sleep. 

At first Gallia had provided herself with books 
that interested her more, and when the poor 
lady laid her head back on the cushions and 
closed her eyelids, Gallia had been wont to dip 
into these more congenial volumes. But after a 
time she could not give them her attention, and 
she put them aside and sat quietly in her place, 
letting her eyes wander to and fro between her 
mother's face and the view from the window of 
the white town down the hill. 

"When Lady Hamesthwaite's illness became 
more marked, when she had to send for her 
father, her thoughts and her daily life became 
confused : she lived in a dream. She could not 
have remembered, at the end of the day, whether 
some scene by her mother's bedside had hap- 
pened in reality, or whether her brain had 
pictured it for her in a terrified foresight into 
what was coming upon them. 

" And most of the time while she was well, I 
lived away from her, and thought it a great 
thing to follow out my own life and my own 
ideas. Why couldn't I have postponed that? 
I shall have such a long time for my own life and 
my own ideas, and I have had so short a time 



GALLIA. 139 

with mother! But I don't think I am ever 
going to care for the things I used to care for ! 
Perhaps it is really right, after all, to sacrifice 
oneself to other people and live for them — but to 
me that has always seemed so immoral.'' 

Poor Gallia sighed away the wreckage of her 
creeds and devoted herself, as whole-souledly as 
though she had never had any, to the duty and 
the privilege of nursing her mother, to whom she 
felt herself almost a stranger. 

And Lady Hamesthwaite died because she 
had to ; died in a fit of beautiful, painless un- 
consciousness, with her daughter and nurse be- 
side her, her husband in England, and no good- 
byes or last words of any kind. On the next 
day, when the funeral was to take place, Gallia 
spent the long hours of the morning in the 
darkened room beside the coffin ; spent it with 
her thoughts. She was not crying — had not 
cried at all. Tears, at moments of 'emotion, 
seemed to be more remote even than laughter 
from Gallia's nature. The habit of her mind 
reasserted itself, and she stared before her, fol- 
lowing through winding ways the ideas that arose 
like phantoms and fled in front of her. 

" What happiness or pleasure have I ever had 
from mother?" she asked herself honestly. 
" What has she meant in my life — sweet woman 
that she was ? Almost nothing ! I have hardly 
known her, really ; there has been no communion 



140 GALLIA. 

between our minds, and none in our lives. Now 
she is dead, and — unless remorse for what was 
quite right and should not have been helped 
changes me — the loss is hers. How is my life 
any different ? If I am still honest, if I do not 
start to build up in my mind the notion that 
mother was everything to me, and that now she 
is gone, all is gone — if I don't teach myself that 
pious lie, my life will be just the same. Can I 
have ever loved her at all ? If I had ever loved 
her, I must have shown it in some fashion — and 
I don't remember that I ever did. It would be 
far more comfortable and far more respectable 
to give way to paroxysms of grief now, to fling 
myself about, to shriek to her sweet body lying 
here, and say, ' Mother, I always loved you, and 
I am finding it out too late !' " 

The girl paused ; Bhe had a sudden impulse to 
do this, she had a sudden wonder if perhaps this 
was, after all, what she meant. But Gallia had 
been too long accustomed to tell herself what she 
felt, having decided that after an interview with 
what it was reasonable for her to feel, and she 
lifted her sad look from the coifin and went on 
with her thoughts again. 

" All the time mother loved me ; Aunt Celia 
knew, and her letters might have told me, only, 
somehow, I knew it. Why is all the sweetness 
and passion and exquisiteness confined to the 
side of one party to the contract ; why is it so 



GALLIA. 141 

certainly sweet to be a mother, — apparently no 
matter of what sort of child, — and why has the 
child on its side no instinctive sense of the ex- 
quisiteness of parentage?" She mused a long 
time upon this theme, and then another thought 
rose before her, and she followed it, as before, 
through the by-ways of her strange mind. 

" The charm of motherhood must be innate : 
it has nothing to do with the child, or how it turns 
out, or what it proves to be. It is started once 
for all at the child's birth-time, and every woman 
has the sense of motherhood according to her 
emotional capacity. A mother has those feel- 
ings, which are more than mere love, because 
she has done something for the child, because 
she has borne it. She has performed a sort of 
self-sacrifice, which I have always thought the 
most subtle kind of selfishness in the world. 
Motherhood is selfish after all. So it comes in 
with my belief that the highest sort of selfishness 
is the only true and good religion — the only one 
that really makes for goodness. A woman gets 
a good deal out of motherhood ; more than she 
does out of marriage : motherhood is, on the 
whole, better suited to her than marriage, I 
believe." 

She got off her chair and looked into the 
coffin, which was filled with flowers, Bave where 
her mother's exquisite hands were crossed on 
her breast, and where her face, immeasurably 



142 GALLIA. 

more beautiful than it had been in life, with the 
colouring still perfect in its transparent delicacy, 
looked up at her with shut eyes. 

" Were you very happy with father, I wonder ? 
or did you really love my coming more than all 
the rest ?" she asked gently and wistfully of the 
quiet face. "I wish you could have told me 
before you went which is best — love or mother- 
hood? At this minute, mother, you are the 
most beautiful woman in the world ; your spirit 
may be gone from your body, but it has left its 
loveliest reflection on your face. If only you 
could have told me that one woman's secret !" 

It was characteristic of Gallia that, in spite of 
her amazing belief regarding selfishness and its 
continuous practice as the highest form of virtue, 
the questions she framed just then were entirely 
abstract ones. She was not thinking of love for 
herself, she was not remembering how she had 
said good-bye to it in that upstairs room in 
Grosvenor Place. She was asking because she 
would have liked to know. Perhaps she thought 
her mother's spirit might have lent her some 
beam of the illumination it must by that time 
have found in the place whither it was gone. 

She was called away to receive her father, who 
had been telegraphed for several days before, 
and travelling with greatest possible speed, had 
arrived too late. 

He looked a very broken man indeed, as he 



GALLIA. 143 

advanced into the sitting-room and met his 
daughter. One look at Gallia's face told him 
his wife was dead, and he could for the moment 
only take her two hands, and with his head 
turned away to hide his grief, press them with 
the terrible shuddering pressure of a man in the 
first throes of grief. 

She took him silently to the room, and, closing 
the door, let him find his way through the dim 
light to his wife's coffin. 

In two hours he came out, but she did not see 
him ; he had gone to his own room, and was to 
be left undisturbed till the funeral started, so his 
man brought word. 

So Gallia went back to be companion to the 
dead woman till the narrow door should be shut 
that was to close her from this world — and it 
was then that the yearning arose in her for the 
hand-clasp of someone she loved — and she 
thought of Dark Essex. 

She had no grudge against him that he did 
not love her, and, on the whole, she had for- 
given him the method in which he had ex- 
plained this to her. It made no difference to 
her love for him, which was deep, had not grown 
from liking, and was unaffected by manifesta- 
tions of dislike ; which was also entirely without 
vanity or egotism, and had no support from his 
admiration or love of her ; which was, therefore, 
if one may judge by its immunity from these 



144 GALLIA. 

earthly characteristics, the test kind of love 
there is. 

If, by some impossible occurrence, he could be 
with her for five minutes ! if, without speaking, 
she could have him clasp her hand firmly for 
one moment ! 

" I believe I should even be able to bear it if 
he were a little sorry for me. I wonder if it 
would touch him to hear that someone — anyone 
whom he knew — had lost her mother? I 
wonder if he would give the news one second's 
pity?" 

She heard them in the adjoining room walking 
about, waiting for her to come out. 

" Yes ; I think he would be different now, and 
also — I know he wouldn't. Good-bye — for just 
now, mother : it has not all been for nothing. 
If you loved me all my life, some time, no doubt, 
we shall meet, and I will love you. I would 
have loved you if you had been my child, and, 
perhaps, when I am a mother myself, my child 
may be like you, and I shall love it, and make 
the score even in that way." 

She took one of the white roses that lay near 
her mother's hands and kissed it, and began to 
put it inside her dress; then she stopped and 
looked at the slim bud again. 

"Now, why do I do that?" she thought; "it 
will die, and go brown, and all crumble, and I 
shall have it in a piece of paper somewhere, and 



GALLIA. 145 

forget where I've put it, and it will be forgotten, 
and get lost, or be dropped. No; one is not 
meant to remember — as we know by the sad 
case of all souvenirs. Mother, I'll give you back 
your rose. How much I remember you, I shall 
see in time," — she smiled anxiously, — " but I will 
not give my humanity a chance to insult your 
memory." 

And these odd words were the last Gallia ever 
said to her mother. 



13 



CHAPTER XV. 

Mrs. Leighton was very sorry for her niece. 
" It is the greatest possible misfortune for Gallia," 
said the wise old lady. " In time she would have 
come to know her mother, and, of course, to love 
her ; and now — ah, it is a terrible misfortune." 
For Mrs. Leighton did not mistake for love the 
care and kindness Gallia had shown to her 
mother ; she herself had a fairly clear perception 
of the bent of Gallia's mind, and so far she be- 
lieved that the girl lived entirely within herself, 
and that she had no friends. 

If it be not good for man to live alone, it is 
even worse for woman, the old lady believed. 
Gallia must now be three or four-and-twenty, 
and she had no one to love. Eor Lord Hames- 
thwaite, although a good and amiable and even 
a distinguished gentleman, was not the kind of 
man anybody would have made the mistake of 
loving. Besides, since his wife's death he had 
immersed himself more deeply still in politics. 
During the Easter recess he addressed meetings 
in the provinces, and worked even harder than 
while Parliament was sitting. Gallia lived with 
him in Grosvenor Place, but she was able to 

146 



GALLIA. 147 

pursue an almost entirely separate existence in 
the big house, for there were no entertainments 
and few visitors during the first months of 
mourning. She had not returned immediately 
to England after the loss of her mother; she 
had spent two months very quietly in a small 
mountain town in the Alpes Maritimes. Here, 
accompanied only by her mother's maid, a con- 
ventional-minded French servant who suffered 
untold tortures of tristesse and ennui, she had 
lived and dreamed the days away ; reading very 
little, and quite unconsciously hastening the 
departure of certain qualities of her youth and 
the charm that she had never recognised in her- 
self and never used — unless dimly among her 
fellow-students at Oxford in the old days. 

She liked to watch the mule traffic up the 
steep rocky path, she liked to look at the people 
pursuing their everyday avocations. She took 
no photographs, collected no flowers, made no 
sketches, put no impressions on paper. She 
merely walked and stood about, a curious smile 
of observance and silent kindliness upon her 
face. She made no charities, intruded in no 
kitchens, was known only by sight, and received 
none of the sentimental demonstrations of affec- 
tion such as are histrionically proper to a situa- 
tion of the kind. 

Her maid, with thimble in pocket and scissors 
at her side, turned over sadly the four simple 



148 GALLIA. 

dresses that formed Gallia's entire wardrobe at 
this time. They were very strange dresses in- 
deed. The dressmaker in Nice, a very im- 
portant artiste, had had the fashioning of them, 
and never remembered having like restrictions 
imposed upon her. As they expressed in a 
measure Gallia's mind at this time, they have a 
certain interest. All were black, all were made 
in the same manner, absolutely plain in skirt, 
with bodice and band, high to the neck and 
long to the wrists, no fleck of white or flake of 
cambric anywhere at all. They tied at the 
throat with a black satin bow, and each was 
lined in the thickest satin of dove grey — though 
of this their wearer was possibly never aware : 
a dressmaker must have some excuse for the 
bill. In the cool mornings the maid laid out 
the cloth gown; on warm mornings the soft 
black linen. Also, according to the temperature 
of the evening, Gallia passed the last three hours 
of her day in velvet or in silk. She was far too 
clever a girl not to have taken great pains with 
her dress in her happier days, and she had a 
beautiful figure of the heaven-born kind; now, 
however, she watched with a sense of dreary 
amusement the careful routine of her bedroom 
so punctually performed. 

"Mademoiselle met?" occurred as regularly 
twice a day as though a galaxy of gowns was 
to be chosen from ; and " Celle de sole" Gallia 



GALLIA. 149 

would answer, or " Celui en velours," as the case 
of robe or costume came up for decision. 

It was in one of these same simple vestures 
that she made her appearance in her aunt's 
drawing-room, about a week after she came 
home. Mrs. Leighton was herself in mourning, 
but it was a mourning most tastefully tempered 
to a garish world. She felt herself shudder 
when Gallia came in and sat among the pink 
and pale blue sofas, some of which were believed 
to have belonged to the very Louis themselves. 
The old lady was seated in what she called her 
" Salon Trianon," and there was someone else 
in the room whom Gallia did not immediately 
observe; someone who wore the coolest of 
dresses of a June green shade, a muslin fichu, 
and a muslin hat with hop- wreaths on it; 
someone who sat near a green curtain, and 
was, that day, the very prettiest thing in Ken- 
sington. 

"I think you know Margaret Essex?" said 
the hostess, as Gallia's severe folds settled them- 
selves in the most frivolous of seats, and seemed 
to hold aloof from a carpet strewn with baskets 
tied with ribbons, from which pink roses poured 
luxuriantly. 

The girls said something and shook hands. 
Each was interested in the other. Of course 
Margaret remarked that her brother knew 
Gallia well in Oxford. 

13* 



150 GALLIA. 

"I think I feel a little alarmed about Miss 
Hamesthwaite's brain capacity in consequence 
of what he has said," she added smilingly, and 
she felt even more alarmed at the look Gallia 
bent on her, although it was only a look of 
inquiry. But very soon Miss Essex went away, 
feeling certain that the aunt and niece had not 
met for some time, and guessing that Mrs. 
Leighton must have much to hear from Gallia. 
Nothing surprised her more than Miss Hames- 
thwaite's simple request that she would come 
and see her in Grosvenor Place. 

" I shall be so very pleased to," Margaret had 
said cordially; and, "You will find that the 
very sweetest piece of china in London," Mrs. 
Leighton had remarked when the door closed 
on her pretty visitor. 

" I thought it would be interesting to inspect 
a real girl," Gallia said tranquilly; " they are so 
very rare." 

And indeed a tropical butterfly couldn't have 
seemed a less familiar thing to her than did 
Margaret. 

" And now, darling, tell me all about dearest 
Julia." 

Mrs. Leighton had risen, and as she spoke she 
pressed her niece's firm shoulders tremulously, 
and sat down close to her and took her hand. 

"Ah, my love, my love!" she sighed. 

Gallia had known this interview was before 



GALLIA. 151 

her, and had been bracing herself for it for a 
long time. Only the knowledge that Aunt 
Celia had loved her mother, and particularly the 
knowledge that her mother had loved Aunt 
Celia, had enabled her to bear it as she did ; but 
she marvelled at the awful sort of hardness in 
her voice and in her heart as she detailed the 
history of those weeks. 

Sbe thought afterwards that it was then that 
she had noticed the change in her that was 
afterwards so clearly marked; a change that 
altered her whole manner and character, no 
less than it altered her face and her dress. Mrs. 
Leighton also noticed this change, and was more 
assured than ever of the misfortune Lady 
Hamesthwaite's death had been to the lonely 
girl. It was not that Gallia's face was older, 
but it had altered. Her idle, out-of-door 
mountain life had made her more beautifully 
healthy than usual, and her eye, instead of 
seeming clouded by the impossible problems 
she had a taste for considering, had the far 
outward look of a person who had thought 
through something, who had found foothold 
beyond. I think it was Herbert Spencer who 
considered that a thinker should regard each 
solution reached, not as solid ground, but as a 
raft that would bear him for a time. Gallia, 
having swum strongly in fell currents, had 
climbed to a new raft. 



152 GALLIA. 

An hour later, when most of the sorrowful 
particulars had been given, and silences were 
becoming frequent in the room, the butler made 
his appearance, and announced that Mr. Gurdon 
was below, and had inquired if Mrs. Leighton 
would receive him. 

" Of course, dear, I have been seeing nobody" 
said the old lady pathetically to her niece. 
" Yes, Linton, say to Mr. Gurdon that I shall 
be glad if he will wait a little in the library." 

" I am just going, Aunt Celia ; I think I will 
say good-bye at once. You will come and see 
me soon, will you not ?" 

Noticing this leave-taking, Linton waited by 
the door to show out Miss Hamesthwaite ; and 
thus it was that Gurdon, sufficiently familiar in 
the house to put aside some of the formalities, 
and standing therefore half in and half outside 
the library door, examining an amazing Moorish 
portiere that had been a present from Lady 
Hamesthwaite to her stepsister, saw a lady come 
downstairs of whose face and figure he caught 
just one astonishing glimpse. Gallia never no- 
ticed him at all — she was looking straight in 
front of her, and waiting while the butler looked 
for her carriage. 

" What a magnificent girl !" said Gurdon to 
himself, as he followed a footman to the drawing- 
room. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

One side of Edwards Square is formed by 
the backs and belongings of bouses fronting the 
Kensington High Street, the other two sides by 
very nice small houses looking into Edwards 
Square garden, the fourth side by a row of in- 
teresting buildings which were originally stables, 
and in some cases are so still, but of which 
many have been appropriated to other and more 
amusing purposes. They are buildings which 
differ fundamentally from the average of all Lon- 
don buildings in that they have a character; this 
character is of the most romantic and picturesque 
kind — it is to have no character. You look at 
them as you pass by, — or at least you would 
look at them if you did pass by, — and feel that 
anything might happen in them — that they 
might be anything; you know that Gaboriau 
would have made thousands of francs out of 
any one of them ; you wonder how they have 
escaped F. W. Eobinson. As a matter of strict 
fact, you never do pass by Edwards Square — 
nobody ever does. There is no reason to enter 
its quiet and very agreeable precincts unless you 
live there — unless your destination be your own 

153 



154 GALLIA. 

front door, on one side of the square or the 
other. 

The few people, other than the residents, who 
have ever come there have done so because they 
have been lost, deservedly, in a vain attempt 
to find that non-existent thoroughfare between 
South Kensington and Kensington High Street. 
It was when once so lost that Gurdon came 
there. He entered the square from the South 
Kensington side, and looked about him in his 
quick, clear-headed way. On the wide side of 
him stretched forward the row of quiet houses, 
on the other, in a horizontal direction, the row 
of buildings which were once stables. He 
worked upon the paving-stone with the ferule 
of his umbrella in a moment of thought. Then 
he turned upon his left, walked down past the 
buildings, stopped for a moment to copy the 
address on a notice-board above one of them, 
turned back upon his tracks, and was in the 
High Street in two minutes. 

The building that bore that notice of " To let" 
lay about the middle of the row. It had a 
coach-house door painted green ; a harness-room 
door in the same colour, and above this second 
door a window, which had obviously replaced 
the flap door to a hayloft. There was also a 
good skylight, which showed signs of having 
been improved. In a word, a stable made into 
a studio. 



GALLIA. 155 

On an evening when the blackened trees and 
shrubs were heartening up in a pale green man- 
ner inside the garden railings; when sparrows 
were chirping in the trees in a way to suggest 
only the sharpening of dozens of slate-pencils, 
combined with the hearthstoning of dozens of 
steps, there mixed with these indications of a 
metropolitan spring evening the cricket-note of 
a guitar, that seemed to be played in a purposely 
subdued manner by a very skilful hand. In 
chorus with the guitar, two siskins in a cage 
beside the coach-house door woke up and began 
in an irresponsible way a sort of tune to which 
they were unaccustomed. Whether the guitar, 
or a shaft of late sunlight that invaded the cage, 
had aroused them, one could not know; but 
soon the guitar ceased, the door opened, and a 
girl came out and reached up for the cage, and 
bore the siskins, in a futile flutter, to the room 
within. 

Inside, the harness room wore the air of a 
hall or anteroom, and a curtain crossed the 
approach to the coach-house or studio, which 
was a long, narrow apartment, matchboarded 
and painted green, and could not have made a 
single brougham feel more at home than the 
young woman and the tea-kettle and the sofa 
looked. 

The wooden platform on castors, which had 
supported a model in a chair many times, was 



156 GALLIA. 

covered with a mattress and some rugs and 
cushions, and made an odd sort of lounge, which 
travelled slightly when one sank upon it. 

Hereon the girl flung herself, and picked up 
the guitar angrily, like a person who, although 
tired of its companionship, had nothing else to 
talk with. 

The guitar spoke, in response to her sweeps 
and clutches upon its strings, and her ill-trained 
but effective little voice scraped out the phrases 
of a gipsy song. In between the verses, which 
were innumerable, the guitar stormed, sobbed, 
or twittered, as demanded by its wilful friend, 
with a sympathy which, though mechanical, 
seemed spontaneous and personal to itself. 

Cara Lemuel's playing was as unlike that of 
the myriad young women who play the guitar 
" a little" as any playing could well be. Her 
mother had been a Spanish gipsy before she 
became a model, and long before the days of 
which she had any memory, the girl had carried 
the shabbiest of tambourines among the cafe 
tables in shabby parts of Seville. 

The two siskins, now hung on a nail upon 
the inside of the big coach-house door (which 
was no longer made to open) shrugged their 
wings as they listened, and put away their bills 
at this evening hour safely for the night amid a 
plumage of which they made the very most. 
Tiring at last of her playing, the guitar was laid 



GALLIA. 157 

aside, and Cara slept as easily and simply as she 
had often slept before on the sofas of other 
studios in Paris. "When Gurdon came in some 
hours later, she was just awaking, and her 
awaking was as easy and smiling as her sleep. 
Irritation marks the waking of most western- 
bred beings; smiles dawned slowly upon the 
features of the southern Cara. 

"Don't move, little woman, you look so 
pretty," Gurdon said, as he threw his bag into 
a corner. "I've come for a couple of hours 
only, and have to dress and be at the other end 
of London by half-past eleven. Any coffee ?" 

She pointed lazily to a covered pot upon the 
stove, and he found himself a cup upon a shelf 
and sat down beside her. She did not talk 
much, but she smiled a great deal, and was 
caressing in a very attractive manner, and her 
black-brown hair, which was of a locky char- 
racter, heavy, full of form, and making effective 
masses no matter how arranged, fell against his 
cheek as she kissed him, and had a spicy scent 
about it which was delicious and a little intoxi- 
cating. 

"I have a new song for you," she said; " at 
least I have remembered it bit by bit, and I ex- 
pect my mother used to sing it. What a pity 
you don't know Spanish !" 

"You shall teach me Spanish. I learn lan- 
guages pretty easily, and it will be a good thing 
14 



158 GALLIA. 

for me to know a little Spanish." Gordon's 
mind, characteristically, saw the proposition at 
once in the light of its possible advantage to 
himself. 

" Well, now, I'll tell you. This is the song 
of a gipsy girl who loves a man not of her own 
people, and she is saying all the time, in each 
verse, how he is so white and so fair and that 
sort of thing, and the chorus always is — oh, how 
would it be in English ? It won't sound a bit 
the same, but she always sings — 

' So in the chestnut avenue, 

All the day I wander, wander ; 
This side of the hill path 

The brown chestnuts grow ; 
And white magnolia blossoms shine 

In the dark gardens down below.' 

Oh, I've made a rhyme, haven't I ? "Well, now, 
I'll sing it to you. First, it's about the lover, all 
very quiet like this." 

She bent over the guitar and picked a mourn- 
ful prelude from the strings; then her voice, 
dramatic in spite of, or perhaps because of, its 
want of training, rose in the recitative of the 
verse part. Gurdon listened; he was passion- 
ately fond of music, or rather of singing, and he 
looked as much as he listened. Cara's small 
curved brown fingers, thin and taper, with the 
articulations appearing whitish through the skin, 
skipped nimble above the strings, and she bent 



GALLIA. 159 

lower over the neck of the instrument, her hair 
falling in free locks from her head ; but for the 
chorus head and hair were jerked backwards, 
the guitar was clutched passionately against her 
body, and the sadness of the weird gipsy plaint 
rang out in a very agony of descriptive music. 

" Sing that bit that begins ' Yo soy la castafia 
marron' again," cried Grurdon; " that's the bit I 
like!" 

" Ah, that's ' I, the brown chestnut,' " Cara 
said, smiling with immense fascination in his 
face. Then she shot from her low seat and 
stood a dozen feet away, in the attitude so pecu- 
liar to Spanish women, the shoulders and head 
thrown far back, one foot advanced, her guitar 
seeming to strain upon the troubadour ribbon 
that passed round her right shoulder. Thus she 
sang the chorus with a stormy melancholy; at 
the end, sweeping the guitar behind her back, 
where her left hand held it head downwards, 
she stepped the opening movements of one of 
those Spanish dances, so haughty, so restrained, 
so solemn, that they seem to double the burning 
of the fire beneath. 

She was below the medium height, but with 
the national port of head and shoulders, she 
seemed a queen in stature, and the effect was 
electric when a few swift paces brought her 
with a laugh to Grurdon's feet. Neither of these 
two loved the other, but passion was a religion 



160 GALLIA. 

with the half-Spanish creature, and religion will 
soon become a habit. To toy dramatically and 
convincingly with the simulacra of strong feeling 
is just as successful, is perhaps more successful 
a means of arousing passion in another, and 
Gurdon found an unnatural abandon made easy 
to him by the wiles and magic of the girl's walk, 
or song, or strange dance. He took the guitar 
from her neck and caught her in his arms and 
feasted upon her face. 



CHAPTEE XVII. 

The friendship which grew up between Mar- 
garet Essex and Gallia was wholly of Miss 
Hamesthwaite's making ; from the first and to 
the last she frightened the picturesque Margaret 
considerably. Margaret would have confessed 
to an interest in her conversation, would have 
admitted volubly a deep admiration of her man- 
ner, mind, and appearance, but would have been 
conscious all the time of the courage of a tor- 
toise-shell guinea-pig when she found herself in 
her friend's society. The turn in the Park which 
they were now taking, Margaret having lunched 
— timidly and tUe-a-tete — in Q-rosvenor Place, 
was entirely Gallia's idea, and had been under- 
taken with the excuse of seeing Miss Essex on 
her homeward way ; but the unlooked-for appa- 
rition of Gertrude Janion was an accident, and 
the sort of accident that Margaret deplored. 

As the three walked along together, they pre- 
sented the oddest contrast : Gallia, in the middle, 
was as severe as black of the plainest cut could 
make her; Margaret, on her left, was draped 
rather than clothed in Madonna blue, softened 
with lace the colour of old stucco, and wore a 
hat with wide black eaves arching over her palely 
l 14* 161 



162 GALLIA. 

brilliant hair, the whole deftly combined to create 
the air of inevitability that a really becoming 
gown will ever present. 

Beside these two Miss Janion felt happy that 
she knew how to dress, and was at that moment, 
as at every moment of her public appearance, 
dressed to perfection. To be fashionably clad 
is given to many women, and often a perfectly 
original personality is concealed by clothes 
which are original only within the strictest 
limits ; it is unusual to issue from the hands of 
Felix or of "Worth in a garment which, besides 
taking rank as their latest and most wonderful 
creation, has also the added merit of describing 
exactly its wearer's mental plane. The Janion 
girl was in herself exactly what her clothes 
looked ; as it happened, neither Worth nor 
Felix had the credit of her, though she would 
have disgraced neither. It was her proud boast 
that she dressed on £250 a year, " for every- 
thing, my dear girl," and she could certainly, as 
regards " smartness," have cut out women with 
three times that sum at disposal. 

She was a small, very neatly built person; 
nothing was exaggerated about her figure. 
Nature had been friendly towards her, and even 
seemed to know her aspirations from the begin- 
ning, and to sympathise with them ; had dowered 
her with a waist that needed wonderfully little 
compression, and bore that little remarkably 



GALLIA. 163 

well ; had given her a beautifully modelled 
throat, bust, and arms : the throat and arms she 
left alone and was glad of; the bust she enhanced 
artificially, in obedience to the prevailing notion 
that a young woman shall not await nature's own 
development. 

With regard to features, she had nothing to 
complain of; she was not really pretty, and so 
the effect of prettiness which she never failed to 
make was all the more meritorious. The acute 
angle of her jaw, which made her face, broad at 
the brows, come off to a very sprightly point, 
was much in her favour ; so were her eyebrows, 
which had a double curve in that the sharp, 
closely feathered ends of them turned upwards 
again. Certainly, her eyebrows were most 
piquant. As to complexion, she would tell 
you frankly that she had always found the 
" Norwich man" best of anyone ; you could rely 
on his things, and they were not so madly expen- 
sive as some of the other people's. 

" He doesn't sell that Sauce Bechamel sort of 
stuff for evening wear, and then swear that it's 
not a paint, only a ' cream,' as most of the other 
people do," she would exclaim, in her very high, 
shrill little voice. 

Perfect frankness about these various aids to 
beauty was Miss Janion's line. 

To Gallia, such a woman was what the dis- 
covery of the ass-like horse of the Central Asian 



164 GALLIA. 

plains was to Przevalsky : she listened eagerly, 
greedily, with her face all lighted up, to the 
stream of chatter about laces and people and 
powder, and silk-covered hair-pins, and the last 
book, and Mrs. Tree's dresses in the last play, 
and the new system of paying a yearly sum to a 
milliner and taking your hats on hire by the 
week or fortnight, and other kindred topics, 
very brilliantly touched on. Margaret, her grey 
eyes shining, her face beneath the delicate, sun- 
beamy colour which was its most usual surface, 
listened in horror, wondering vaguely what on 
earth Miss Hamesthwaite would think, and if 
she would take Gertrude to be a type of all her 
companions. 

So engrossed were the three, that in the crowd 
they missed seeing two well-known faces ; a rare 
thing for the Janion girl, who had the fashion- 
able trick to a nicety, of seeing and not seeing 
everybody at her own expedient whim. 

" Hullo ! A queer team for a troika !" ex- 
claimed Lauriston, who had just joined Gurdon 
and Dark Essex, when his eyeglass focussed the 
backs of the three girls. 

Gurdon was on horseback (he rode every day 
while he was in London, because all the men who 
succeeded in climbing into big places in the Ser- 
vices rode every day while they were in London, 
and were in the habit of saying they could never 
have lived without it). He looked round quickly. 



GALLIA. 165 

" Your sister, Essex, and I believe" — 

" Miss Hamesthwaite in the middle," said 
Lauriston glibly, " and the Janionette on the oft'. 
Think I'll catch up with them and hear how they 
are getting on. I've often wanted to know Miss 
Hamesthwaite, and the little girl will introduce 
me." 

" Should we all move down ?" Gurdon in- 
quired tentatively. 

" I shall reserve the pleasure for another occa- 
sion," Essex said, with his stone smile. 

Gurdon had by this time thought that more 
suitable surroundings might be found for his in- 
troduction to Lord Hamesthwaite's daughter ; so 
Lauriston strolled off alone, and having become 
exceedingly short-sighted, owing to his lifelong 
habit of insisting that he was so, failed to dis- 
cover the trio, and brought up ignominiously 
beside a very brilliantly-painted and high-hung 
barouche, the occupant of which would have 
been (so she always declared) a marchioness in 
actual fact, if divorce were on a sensible basis 
in this foolish old country. 

" Your sister is a great friend of Miss Hames- 
thwaite's," Gurdon said, looking down very 
keenly upon, as it happened, the dazzling disc 
of Essex's silk hat. 

" They meet pretty frequently, I believe, but I 
fail to apprehend why either of them should take 
up Miss Janion." 



166 GALLIA. 

" I have met Miss Janion, I fancy, at a ball." 

" A subscription ball." 

" I believe it was." 

" It certainly would be." 

" Is a subscription ball to be made a cause of 
reproach in your exclusive mind ?" Mark asked 
lightly. 

" Far from it. I have, all unknown to her, a 
deep and lasting admiration for Miss Janion. 
She is the most unaffected woman I know, save 
one. She is incurably vulgar, she is shrewd 
enough to know it, and yet I have never found 
her making the least attempt to disguise it. 
She doesn't pose. My sister does pose a very 
little, and it comes near to spoiling her. She 
thinks she cares for art, but that will pass off 
quite satisfactorily when she marries." 

" You are against a woman having an interest, 
then?" 

" My dear Gurdon, I don't believe I have 
even got an opinion about women. A quiet 
man doesn't need to have, nowadays. Women 
have taken men's opinions of them for granted, 
and there is nothing they seem to quote with 
more freedom. But I know," he yawned, quite 
genuinely, " I'm on the safe side. I'm ' against' 
nothing. If I were, it might be against a woman 
having more than two interests — herself and 
the man she marries." 

" And her children ?" 



QALLIA. 167 

" You will not prevent a woman having an 
interest in her children if she has been woman 
enough to have had an interest in herself and 
her husband. And as far as my observation 
goes, the posing woman will care for her children 
too. She can't afford not to. Maternity is a 
strong pose with your platform woman. She 
has to be regarded as a 'thorough wife and 
mother,' it fills the cheap seats so. Yes, women 
have a lot of courage. But I don't believe the 
woman breathes, who, if she didn't care for her 
children, would have the courage to say so. 
Which brings us back to Miss Janion, who never 
poses." 

" If my memory of Miss Janion is correct, she 
wore a very low dress at the ball ; I remember 
this because she asked me if I thought it too 
low, and I was a good deal embarrassed." 

Essex laughed ; just a couple of bars of deep, 
rich-noted laughter, then he drooped his head, 
leaned upon the railings, and went on making a 
little mound of sand, and burying a small tuft 
of grass with his foot. 

" But, as I was going to say, she is nothing 
like so attractive a woman as your sister." 

Essex raised his eyes with a serious expression 
in them. It was as though he had half ex- 
pected Grurdon to discuss his sister in the same 
tone they had used concerning Miss Janion, but 
Grurdon had no such idea, and Essex, reassured, 



168 GALLIA. 

spoke in the way and with the conviction he 
always showed when he mentioned his sister. 

"She is the only type of woman left us, 
capable of attracting in the romantic way," he 
said thoughtfully. " This sort of subject comes 
easy to me just now, because, as I think I told 
you before we left the club, my publishers rec- 
ommend the expansion of that monograph of 
mine into a book, and I've been working upon 
it for the past two months at a quiet little place 
I've found in Surrey. In The Comparison of 
Emotion in the Human and other Animals, most 
of the arguments against Darwin are drawn 
from an unprejudiced consideration of the emo- 
tional capacity in women. I have decided to 
recognise three kinds of attraction, although I 
might reasonably decide against this division 
into three. Intellectual attraction — very com- 
mon nowadays, and responsible for at least half 
the marriages in middle-class society, where 
marriage still remains and will remain a matter 
of attraction. Physical attraction — accountable 
for all the other marriages in the world (not 
counting those of position, interest, and so on, 
which don't concern me, as they are marriages 
of no attraction) — accountable for all the others, 
Gurdon, except a small number still founded on 
romantic attraction. My sister Margaret is a 
type of the sort of woman who makes that last 
form of marriage possible. To be romantically 



GALLIA. 169 

attractive, a woman has got to be innately good 
(I am using such words in the old-fashioned 
sense, you understand) and innately beautiful ; 
but beyond this, as we have hounded the old 
timidity and simplicity and insipidity and such 
other idities from our doors, she must be semi- 
talented and semi-independent. There is a rage 
for talent and independence nowadays; a girl 
can't have the commonest sort of success, poor 
thing, unless, forsooth, she does something inde- 
pendent !" 

"I agree with every word you say of your 
sister." 

" It's a pity she happens to be my sister, for 
the sake of argument, but I refer to her merely 
because she is a picture, an etching of the type 
— a silver-point." 

"She is indeed; but I was going to say that 
I think her clever. Her music, her painting, 
are ever and ever so far above the amateur 
average, you must admit ?" 

" Oh, I do ; but so is every other girl's, you 
know." 

" "Well, I don't know. Miss Janion now, 
I'm sure, if she plays, it's in just the usual 
way." 

" Doesn't play a note, doesn't paint a stroke. 
You don't appreciate Gertrude. Her talent is 
to be better dressed than any one else, and she 
always is, in my judgment." 
H 15 



170 GALLIA. 

"I am becoming anxious to know more of 
this shining example of the modern girl." 

" Then you had better hasten forward, and if 
they haven't had enough of it, you'll meet them 
coming up. I'm going to the Natural History 
Museum to talk to an old friend who has 
written to me. "Will you dine with me to- 
morrow ? A note in the morning will do. I'm 
only in town till Saturday." 

" Devonshire again ?" 

"No, Surrey. An inn three hundred years 
old ; everything three hundred years old except 
the cat and the bitter ale." 

"Well, I envy you." Mark gathered up his 
reins. 

" You don't now, but if you were seedy, you 
would yearn for a week in my village." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

" Oh dear, I believe I want my tea !" ex- 
claimed Miss Janion, with the same manner, 
and certainly in the same key, that a green 
paroquet would have made a similar remark. 
The three oddly assorted companions had chosen 
three isolated chairs, which had the merit of 
being somewhat private, and yet commanding a 
fair view of the drive. " There's nothing I look 
forward to with the same yearning anticipation 
as tea. I begin about three o'clock ; I tell my- 
self how delicious tea is going to be ; at four, I 
console myself by thinking that I can ring for 
it a little early, and that will be a quarter to five. 
I don't think there is anything that excites me 
more than the thought of tea; and how beastly 
it always is when it comes !" 

" And men think we get so much out of it !" 
Gallia said drily, having greatly appreciated 
Miss Janion's extravagant little speech. 

" It's men who, by chaffing women about tea- 
drinking, have got up the idea of tea being such 
a godsend. There's a conspiracy among men 
to make women stick to tea and think they like 
it. Hear men sighing, ' Ah, I wish I dare,' 

171 



172 GALLIA. 

when they steadily refuse it day after day. 
Catch them taking any !" 

" I'm always trying new teas, and new ways 
of making tea," put in Margaret. " I think I 
sometimes enjoy it when it's very weak and has 
a great deal of cream and sugar in it." 

" Depend upon it, you only think so," laughed 
Gallia. 

" It's a woman's bitterest disappointment, — tea 
and men," Gertrude wound up sagely. 

" I'm not a bit disappointed in men — on the 
whole," Margaret declared. 

"Nor am I," from Gallia; "I think men are 
quite good enough." 

"Good? You don't mean to say you think 
men good?" 

" I don't think I mean that sort of good," with 
a smile to Gertrude. "But they are good- 
looking enough, and strong enough, and healthy 
enough. They compare favourably with women 
in these respects." 

Margaret had her eye fastened on Gallia's 
face. 

" One has two views of men, I think : one of 
men in relation to the world, — the world of war 
and letters and statesmanship and trade, and so 
on, — and one has to admire them there; the 
other, of men in relation to oneself, and there it 
seems to me most important that they should be 
well-grown and healthy and sound — in wind, 



GALLIA. 173 

limb, and temper." She ended up with a little 
laugh. Margaret was conscious of not under- 
standing her, but Gertrude, being a person of 
absolutely no insight, replied glibly — 

" I like men to be amusing and jolly, and of 
course as good-looking as possible. I don't think 
I mind much if they are what Miss Hamesthwaite 
calls sound." 

" But you would if you were going to marry 
them." 

" I don't know. But, any way, one can't marry 
them all." 

"But there are other women" — 

" They've got to look out for themselves. And 
now that so many have taken up nursing, it can't 
be quite the slavery it used to be to have an in- 
valid husband." Miss Janion was quite unaware 
of being on the wrong track. " I do think life, — 
I mean domestic life, — is beautifully easy now ; 
one needn't do a thing oneself, one can get some- 
one in ! At home we are always getting people 
in. Papa has his masseur every day; mamma 
has her nursemaid — I mean maid-nurse ; Alfred 
has his electric shock person and galvaniser — he 
can't raise a slipper before eleven, when this per- 
son comes, and afterwards he's awfully larky until 
it wears off. Ella Lane, who lives next door, 
shares my hair man, who comes in. "We get in 
the butler ; we get in a woman — I think she's a 
lady — to do the flowers for parties. One needn't 
15* 



174 GALLIA. 

really have any trouble nowadays, or do anything; 
one can always get someone in." 

" It's the tendency to-day. In the next century 
we shall have organised things more perfectly, 
and shall be able to get even more people in, in 
other capacities." 

" Well, hasn't there been a fuss lately about 
getting all the cooking in ?" asked Margaret. 
" I'm sure a central depdt for that would be a 
great blessing." 

" It would indeed. We may live to see that, 
but we shan't live to see the real advance ; which 
will be the getting in of fathers and mothers, or 
rather husbands and wives to be fathers and 
mothers." 

Gertrude shrieked; Margaret was silent and 
startled. 

" I was speaking quite seriously, and if you 
think, you will see that such a scheme would be 
eminently rational. The outcome of the present 
health movement must lead that way. People 
will see the folly of curing all sorts of ailments 
that should not have been created, and then they 
will start at the right end, they will make better 
people. How can we wonder that only one per- 
son in ten is handsome and well-made, when 
you reflect that they were most likely haps of 
hazards, that they were unintended, the offspring 
of people quite unfitted to have children at 
all. There are people fitted, for instance, to be 



GALLIA. 175 

mothers, which every woman isn't; there are 
women fitted to bring up children, who may not 
be mothers. Think of this : a man may love a 
woman and marry her ; they may be devoted 
to each other, and long for a child to bring up 
and to love; but the woman maybe too deli- 
cate to run the risk. What are they to do? 
What would be the reasonable thing to do? 
Sacrifice the poor woman for the sake of a 
weakly baby ? !N"o, of course not, but get in a 
mother !" 

A moment's silence fell upon the three. Their 
brains were a little burdened, and no wonder, by 
this astounding piece of social reform. 

" But why not adopt a child?" ventured Mar- 
garet at length. 

" But it wouldn't belong to" either of them, and 
they couldn't tell in what odious surroundings it 
had been born. Surely much more reasonable 
to get in a mother." 

A light dawned upon Miss Janion, and she 
began, " But this strange woman" — 

" She wouldn't be a strange woman ; she would 
be a splendid, beautiful, healthy, accredited 
woman, and probably physically very attractive. 
The man's sentiment, if he had any, would be 
greatly in her favour; men have wonderfully 
little sentiment, as their whole way of life shows, 
in a matter of that kind. He would have been 
able to indulge his very highest feeling in the 



176 GALLIA. 

choice of his wife. It would make enormously 
in favour of morality." 

" Do you think it would ?" said Margaret. 

" Surely ; by making in favour of health, by 
making in favour of justice, by lifting a burden 
from the shoulders of the weak and placing it on 
the shoulders of the strong." 

"And the — the poor journeyman mother — 
would she like giving up her child ?" the gentle 
Margaret asked again. 

" It wouldn't be her child only, it would be his 
child, by agreement" — 

" Now, I wonder, if one was married, whether 
one would like another woman supplying the 
baby element in the family ?" 

" If one were not strong enough to supply it 
oneself, Miss Janion, surely ? And don't you 
see that if this plan were adopted, there would 
be far fewer delicate men and women in the 
world ? The plan would be worked from both 
sides equally, and the strong, finely-bred children 
growing up happily, well distributed over the 
homes of the country, instead of there being 
eight in one and none in another, as is the case 
just now, these children would have a much 
better chance. People are not above ' getting 
in' a wet-nurse nowadays, and in the most 
casual fashion ; it seems to me this is only a step 
farther." 

Again a silence, — on Margaret's part a sunset- 



GALLIA. 177 

coloured silence ; on Gertrude's a silence pointed 
by twitching lips and eyebrows ; on Gallia's, tbe 
silence of a shrewd and hopeful saint. 

" It sounds like treating the world as a sort of 
farm, and men and women merely as animals," 
said Margaret, with some distress. 

" Precisely my idea," said Miss Hamesthwaite 
calmly. "At present half the world is not as 
well treated as the best class of animals, and 
there isn't a political economist living who 
wouldn't say that if the increase of the lower 
classes could be taken out of their own hands 
and supervised on scientific lines, crime as well 
as a number of diseases would be stamped out. 
If it could only be done — if it could only be 
done!" Gallia's clear, earnest face, with the 
thin, dark line deep between her eyebrows, 
looked straight in front of her, and that was 
how Gurdon saw her, and again thought her 
magnificent, as he rode by, about thirty paces 
away. 

"And what would you do with people like 
that in your world?" said Miss Janion, point- 
ing to the brilliant barouche, which was turn- 
ing opposite them in order to take its beautiful 
occupant to the corner in time to see the 
Duchess. 

" Who is it ?" inquired Gallia innocently. 

Miss Janion informed her with some cere- 
mony. " I really know her well by sight," she 



178 GALLIA. 

added, "because we both get our hair at the 
same shop — there is really no one like Hugo for 
hair-pin fringes." 

" I have no quarrel with her," Gallia replied, 
with a certain bitter quiet. 

" Vile creature !" sputtered the Janion girl. 

Gallia looked shocked, and rose from her seat. 

" I hope you don't mean that," she said ; " you 
have the greatest possible reason to be grateful 
to her whole class and to pity them. I must go 
home now, I think." She had looked at the sky 
and the trees' shadows, and then compared their 
time with her small black-enamelled watch. 

" You should write about your ideas," said 
Margaret, smiling up at her from under the 
black-eaved hat. 

Gallia shook her head briskly. 

" One would only be grouped with all the 
other women who are said to be leading the 
' Sexual Revolt,' and that would do the ideas 
harm, for no one would take them seriously." 

" But so much attention is paid to what women 
write now." 

Gallia smiled drily, and swept her eyes over 
the park before bringing them to Margaret's 
face; then, taking her hand at the same mo- 
ment, she said — 

" That's just it ! "What they say makes so 
much noise that nobody hears properly what it 
is. A woman who really feels these things 



GALLIA. 179 

shouldn't write about them now, until what they 
call the boom of women is over." 

" But couldn't she write under a man's name ?" 

" Men don't think these things, you see." 

"No men?" 

" I don't think any man." 

"But how is that?" 

"Because" — Gallia smiled a little, and then 
her face grew wistful as she returned her an- 
swer, unspoken, to her own mind. " Good-bye, 
Margaret. Don't dislike me on account of this 
crusade against the copy-book. Good-bye, Miss 
Janion." 

"It's been an awfully jolly afternoon," re- 
marked that sprightly young woman, as she and 
Margaret Btood to watch the quiet figure in black 
go up the path. " She is amusing," she added 
heartily. 

" She doesn't mean to be." 

" People so seldom mean to be, and so often 
are." 

"But she's perfectly serious in all she says, 
and even more serious in the things she thinks 
and doesn't say." 

" Keally, now ? Do you think she can have 
been jilted or had a disappointment ? It sounds 
like it, doesn't it ?" 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Gallia's life, at this time, was a very lonely- 
one, and that, she would say to anyone who com- 
miserated her, was its very best feature. She 
liked to be alone, at least she thought, like many 
other young people of her temper, that she liked 
it ; but she was happier and better in every way 
when she was not alone, and her father, a man of 
small insight in domestic matters, but occasion- 
ally right in his judgments for all that, decided 
that she should not moon about the country 
home in Surrey for six weeks all by herself, but 
should persuade " one of her young friends" 
(Lord Hamesthwaite was perfectly unaware that 
she had none — he believed that every girl had a 
number of young friends) to go down and spend 
the time with her. 

" Very well," Gallia had said, and she deter- 
mined to see if Mrs. Essex and Margaret would 
come. 

" Quietly, of course," Lord Hamesthwaite had 
added, with a sigh. " No party. Quite quietly. 
And I have asked Shillinglee and Oswald — I 
think you have met Oswald ? "We are going to 
have a week's work upon the Bill. Later on 
Denyer will join me." 

" Has Mr. Denyer left Africa, then ?" 
180 



GALLIA. 181 

"My dear child, you surely remember the 
whole business of Denyer's leaving the Cape not 
six weeks ago ? He is in the Auvergne at present 
for his health, but by the end of July he will be 
in England." 

Gallia nodded; she took no interest in the 
South African business and Mr. Denyer, but it 
was impossible to take up a paper without 
coming upon a mention of her father's name and 
the name of Denyer in connection with the great 
question. 

These few words were spoken at the beginning 
of the hot fortnight in June. There always is a 
hot fortnight every June in London, and it was 
just beginning about the time that Lord Hames- 
thwaite made known his summer plans to his 
daughter. 

"What a quiet summer it was going to be ! 
how different from the summers Gallia had 
always run away from in her mother's lifetime, 
when a large political party was gathered in the 
breakfast-rooms every morning, and important 
talks — talks which were going to colour the Par- 
liamentary business of the day — went forward 
among the old-fashioned flower-beds ; then the 
quiet that fell when a midday train had borne 
all the political tools and implements to the big 
London workshops. On Wednesday nights, the 
immense dinner-parties at which Gallia had 
sometimes been present; parties at which un- 
16 



182 GALLIA. 

expected political constellations scintillated, and 
the working-man member sat down with the 
nursing peer, and a satirical writer, some Tory- 
leopard, lay down with the Radical kid. 

It all seemed very far away now, and now 
that it seemed so far away, Gallia wondered if 
she would not have done better to be in the 
midst of it. She could be brilliant in society if 
the mood was upon her ; but in those days she 
had been so serious, because so young, that the 
men who held the country's destiny in their hand 
had appeared too frivolous for her. 

" They never seemed to be interested in real 
things," Gallia explained to her aunt when she 
dropped in upon her to detail her father's plans, 
and they got talking about past times together. 
" All they said and all they thought seemed so 
far away from real things as they really are. It 
seems to me, that if you live the perfectly en- 
gineered life of public men, — put down by a 
brougham in time to be picked up by a Pull- 
man, turned out of a Pullman into a waggonette 
or a dog-cart; just time to dress for dinner; just 
time to sleep before being called and dressed 
and breakfasted ; just time for a few words, quite 
lightly and unseriously spoken, and usually 
taking the form of a chaffing comment upon an 
opponent, or a good story of a mistake in one 
of the Offices, or an amusing misunderstanding 
at one of the Embassies ; then the waggonette 



GALLIA. 183 

and Pullman and brougham again, and the 
House for a few hours, — what leisure have they 
to look at real things as they really are ? In the 
train men look at the afternoon papers — or they 
read one of a mass of pamphlets from inside an 
elastic band. I don't see, — unless they remem- 
ber things they saw when they were boys and 
loitered about and birds-nested, — I don't see 
how they are to know about any of the things 
that really are." 

" To hear these wild sentiments from your 
father's daughter !" cried the vivacious old lady 
in reply. " Why, child, there is no particular 
occasion to know about things as they really are. 
Men in your father's position have no time for 
that, and it wouldn't advantage them the least 
bit if they had. They know most accurately, I 
am sure, about things as they are reported to be. 
They read and get up reports ; and when you 
would have them looking out for railway car- 
riage windows across flying fields" — 

" "Well, they might see something." 

" What in the world could they see ? A few 
labourers going home, perhaps." 

" Or a few wood-pigeons," interjected Gallia 
softly. Then, "But surely laws are made to 
make things better than they are," she went on, 
" and if they don't ever" — 

" My dear child, you are really too old to talk 
like that — in your position too !" 



184 GALLIA. 

" Dear Aunt Celia, you must forgive me. You 
know I am very, very backward in all such things, 
having never paid them the least attention; 
but I think I'm going to be more interested in 
papa's work now." 

"I hope you will sympathise with it, dear," 
said Mrs. Leighton gravely. "It might be as 
well not to go so far as to be interested in it; 
— that is a term that seems to represent so 
unpleasant an attitude nowadays ; — but to sym- 
pathise with it would be very graceful, dear, very 
graceful indeed, and very gratifying to your 
father, I am sure." 

Gallia smiled in her wistful manner, and passed 
to another subject. 

" When will you come down to the Hall, Aunt 
Celia?" 

" You really want to have me, dear ? So good 
of you both ! Well, I shall be a month at Aix, 
and — shall we say the early part of August ?" 

" Any time that suits you will do perfectly, of 
course. Papa mentioned this morning that Lord 
Shillinglee was coming down for a week — 
perhaps Mr. Oswald too, on political business." 

" Have you ever thought, my dear Gallia, of 
marrying Lord Shillinglee ?" 

" Certainly I have not." 

"Ah! because in some ways it might suit 
very well." 

Gallia laughed. " I don't know whom it 



GALLIA. 185 

would suit in any way," she said, and added 
quickly, in order to change the subject, for on 
marriage Aunt Celia was dangerous, " And Mr. 
Denyer is expected." 

"At the Hall? You don't say so. It is 
always so difficult to get any information about 
public business. I never think of asking your 
father, unless I am prepared to pretend that I 
know already, and Mr. Gurdon persists in saying 
that he knows no more than the pigeons in the 
courtyard. But Denyer has certainly played a 
great part recently, and I want very much to 
see the man himself." 

Mrs. Leighton was referring to what was at 
that time " the South African question ;" it does 
not in the least matter which South African 
question. The Government had, as usual, quite 
scandalised one-half of the public either by its 
action or inaction in the matter. Lord Hames- 
thwaite had been severely criticised, publicly and 
privately ; then something had been taken back 
and something else explained away, and a great 
deal more ignored, and the whole matter was 
forgotten save by the people who were leisurely 
engaged in compiling a Blue Book to be published 
in a few years' time ; a Blue Book which might 
be used in Board Schools as a model of the 
complete letter-writer. 

"But I often feel," went on Mrs. Leighton, 
" that Mark Gurdon — who has been in Africa 

16* 



186 GALLIA. 

and has his eyes so wide open — could tell me a 
great deal, but he will only dilate upon the 
' Karroo.' " The door opened at this moment, 
and Gurdon himself almost anticipated the an- 
nouncement of his name. 

" So magnetically sympathetic of you to come 
in just now! your name was upon my lips," said 
Mrs. Leighton, as they shook hands. " Let me 
present you to my niece, Miss Hamesthwaite. 
Dear Gallia, Mr. Mark Gurdon, to whom I have 
become quite attached!" This was made very 
playful and complimentary, and something in 
the old lady's manner put Mark at his very best. 
The old lady's easy and genial artificiality acted 
like a sun upon persons who possessed the social 
art ; they behaved delightfully in her rooms, and 
went away happy because successful. As for 
herself, it was her habit to remark that she was 
entirely satisfied with the manners of the present 
day, about which she heard so much complaint. 
There was all the courtesy that one could wish, 
if one merely gave it an opportunity to come 
out. 

Gallia watched Mark carefully as he spoke to 
her aunt. She seemed to have heard of him 
often, considering that he was an unimportant 
person as yet; his name had appeared on the 
lists her mother had sometimes sent her of guests 
at a reception; his name was on her visiting 
list, and she would have to ask him to parties 



GALLIA. 187 

herself in the.future. She listened, and admired 
his speaking voice, it was so much lower and 
rounder than the usual modern man's. " I mis- 
trust falsetto voices ; they mean weakness, when 
they don't mean worse," she had said to herself 
in the days when she had been accustomed to 
sum up everything with great promptitude ; the 
days before she was three-and-twenty. 

His voice was not the only good thing about 
Mark to strike a girl's fancy ; there was a firm- 
ness and a faint pinkness about his face which 
did not suggest a London life in any way, and 
yet would have been too delicate for a country- 
man. His eyes were bright and clear — those 
curious ringed eyes of grey and hazel ; his teeth 
were perfect; not too small, and very white. 
Gallia saw all these things rather as a dealer 
might notice the points in a horse than as a 
lady might perceive a young man's claims to 
handsomeness. 

" And you are so good as to think my mo- 
ment has come," he was saying, smilingly, to 
Mrs. Leighton, and Gallia watched thoughtfully 
all the time. 

" Your moment for what ?" she suddenly in- 
quired, and her uncompromising eyes fixed 
themselves upon him when he turned to her. 

" My moment to emerge from the covert of 
mediocrity into the open of — what shall we 
say?" 



188 GALLIA. 

" Predestination," said Mrs. Leighton, with a 
touch of solemnity under her smile. 

" You are going in for public life ?" said 
Gallia, taking a quite impersonal interest in the 
subject. 

" It is the only thing for me to attempt. When 
a man has no position — no private position of 
any kind, I mean — and no duties, except to- 
wards himself, he had better be trying to suc- 
ceed, don't you think, in something? It em- 
ploys his leisure," Mark replied genially. 

" Oh, if he has no interest in outside things — 
in agriculture, or literature, or art — I suppose he 
may as well" — 

" Be his own field, and book, and marble, Miss 
Hamesthwaite ? I think he may. And it has 
the merit of being exceedingly difficult," he went 
on, with his well-calculated indifference, and a 
smile that had the curves of satire. " To some 
men, success and advancement are, as Mrs. Leigh- 
ton has said, predestined. But my education 
was not of the right kind ; it was scattered and 
varied." 

" It has made you a man of the world," Mrs. 
Leighton put in briskly. 

" But not of the world of public service," said 
Mark, with a shake of his head. " I ought to have 
been at Eaton ; whereas I wasted three or four 
years at a great public school, learned nothing, 
and had to do without the kudos as well. At 



GALLIA. 189 

Eton a man gets known by his Christian name, 
if he gets nothing else, — or, better still, by a 
diminutive of his Christian name, — and it is all 
that he requires. You will not believe, Miss 
Hamesthwaite," with a dry, whimsical smile upon 
his face, " what a difference it makes to a man's 
career. To have been 'Eddy' — better still, to 
have been 'Bobsy' at Eton, is a guarantee of 
place and progress ! But," with a glance of 
deprecation, "your sympathy encourages one too 
much. It is a long subject, and I must pray 
forgiveness for talking so much about myself." 
He looked at Mrs. Leighton, but turned a glance 
finally on Gallia. He was not sure if she were 
despising him for his determination to make 
something of himself, but he was patient, and he 
felt that she would not despise him when she 
knew him better. Mark had discovered that 
there is no kind of woman who will not admire 
personal ambition in a man — irrespective of the 
object of that ambition. Women, Mark knew, 
will respect a clever murderer if he shows suffi- 
cient dexterity. Her next remark, therefore, sur- 
prised him, simply spoken though it was. 

" The desire to ' get on,' as it is called, is some- 
thing I have never been able to comprehend," 
she said. Then she turned to her aunt : "I have 
forgotten to say till now that papa is coming to 
dinner to-night, if you are not engaged." 

" That is very charming of him. I quite won- 



190 GALLIA. 

dered when we were to meet again, as I go to 
Aix on Thursday. Are you coming too, dear ? 
Do. I will make Mr. Gurdon stay to entertain 
you, and we can all go on to Holland House 
together. Yes ?" 

" Thank you, Aunt Celia, but I hadn't intended 
going to Holland House." Gurdon had mur- 
mured that he would be delighted. 

" My dear child, we must have you go about a 
very little. It is time now that you appeared in 
some places. You can be quiet without being 
immured." 

Gallia apparently gave in. 

" Then I will go and tell papa : he is at the 
House of Lords — I may just catch him." 

Gurdon thought the little movement of au 
revoir that she made, and her slow step to the 
door he was holding, very beautiful in their way. 
He was quite satisfied to have met her at last. 
She was driven to Westminster, and sent in a 
tiny note with the evening plans in it ; then with 
an idle whim she alighted at Dean's Yard and 
sent her carriage to wait beside her father's. 

She liked this old, strange part of London, so 
unlike London as it is ; she liked to wander in the 
precincts of the Abbey, and look up at the dull 
red-brick houses, which seemed so comfortable, 
which seemed to mean something quite apart 
from all the other buildings in all the great City. 
It was long since she had strolled into the cloisters, 



GALLIA. 191 

and it would be eool there this hot June day. She 
took her way past the constable, to that passage, 
flagged and grey, where mysterious dull-red doors 
have the air of closing the burrows of canons and 
other cobwebby and unreal dignitaries. She 
turned aside into the little court that opens on the 
left. Did big London know that such a place was 
in existence ? Surely not, or it would tear brick 
from brick, cast the heavy time-eaten, wrought 
ironwork of lamp and sconce and knocker into 
its metropolitan dust-heap. 

She went on, past more red doors, down the 
long passage to the small, square, grass-centred 
Court ; the air, that had smelt of stone and bone, 
and lime and time, grew fresher here ; the pat- 
terns of the tracery in the arches were touched 
in places by the sun ; it was light again — for the 
open air came there. Gallia, who had not a tear 
for human ill or sorrow, turned back into the 
dim flagged passage wjth her handkerchief to 
her eyes ; she had suddenly grown conscious, as 
human beings do at times, of the disposition to 
peace, beauty, dignity, and spiritual loveliness, 
about some places, — and it marks the contrast 
to man and his fret and unrest. Some such dim 
sense of discord and disparity with a beautiful 
world had touched Gallia — she stopped, where a 
shaft of sunlight from the little Court invaded 
the courtyard for a few feet. 

" Quite a Royal Academy success," said a voice 



192 GALLIA. 

behind her, and she looked up, startled, to per- 
ceive Mr. Essex. 

" How are you ? You'd be a boon to Bome 
struggling fellow who couldn't get in ; you'd be 
the picture of the year." 



CHAPTER XX. 

In the moment of shaking hands, Gallia dis- 
covered a strange thing ; her feelings for Essex 
had undergone some change. She looked quietly 
into his face, with some idea, perhaps, of seeing 
whether his glance had any effect upon her ; it 
had an effect, but the effect was different. The 
thing amounted to this : she had grown, her mind 
had grown, and she had arranged a scheme of 
life for herself, had arranged a series of ideas, in 
none of which Essex could have the least part. 
Essex, the Essex she had loved, could not touch 
her now in the same way ; the part of her that 
he had touched and had hurt was atrophied. 
So much the better or so much the worse for 
Gallia. 

" I had forgotten about you," she said, in faint 
surprise at herself. 

" Really ? But why not ?" he asked lightly ; 
" though I had not quite forgotten you." 

She did not take up this cue. 

" What are you doing now ?" she inquired. 

" Just now I am looking at your hat ; a 
moment since I was wondering how you came 
here. You can't have been calling on an old 
college friend ?" 

i n 17 193 



194 GALLIA. 

" For one thing, I have no old college friend 
to call on. If you know men who live here, can 
you tell me if this environment affects them in 
any way ? I should change my whole mind if 
I lived here." 

Essex looked at her whimsically. 

" Am I to understand that, not having lived 
here, you have not changed your mind, and 
that"— 

She interrupted him, again with the same 
half curious, half surprised, but very quiet ex- 
pression. 

" You need not go so far out of your way to 
understand or misunderstand me. Come here 
and sit down for a moment — I want to see how 
you make me feel." 

" I can give you a quarter of an hour," he 
answered, after a glance at his watch. 

" I sha'n't rob you of all that. "Where were 
you last December ?" 

" December ? — I was in Oxford." 

" I was in Algiers with my mother, and she 
died at the end of the month. That was when 
I last thought of you seriously. Then — how 
odd it seems ! — I would have liked so much to 
see you." 

" "Why didn't you telegraph ?" 

" You needn't say that sort of thing ! I am 
quite aware that I seem a very strange style of 
person to you, but, you see, to you I say ex- 



GALLIA. 195 

actly what I mean; when one has once been 
frank at a very big moment, it seems foolish to 
be terrified of the effect of little bits of frank- 
ness in quite small moments. So I asked you 
where you were because I wondered if I came 
into your mind at all when I was wanting to see 
you so much." 

" So far as I can recollect, not less or more 
than usual." 

Gallia laughed — an unamused, unmerry sort 
of laugh it was. 

" And is the world beginning to grow accus- 
tomed to the measure of honesty you decided 
to mete out to it ?" Essex asked pleasantly. 

" I have, just at present, very little to do with 
the world. One has not to mind being thought 
peculiar by a number of people ; it doesn't break 
the skin, that I know of." 

" If adverse opinion took the form of what I 
believe is called ' chaps,' how raw we should all 
be," remarked Essex. "And I suppose," he 
went on, with an inquiring air, " it is absolutely 
impossible to a woman of your nature to let 
things slide, and be happy, and look pretty, and 
marry, and love, and bring up children, and work 
out an amiable, not too complicated or fatiguing 
sort of destiny ?" 

" I certainly hope to bring up a child. I think 
it is all I do want," Gallia answered. 

" But the other things you cannot give way to ?" 



196 GALLIA. 

" I am as happy as anyone when I see cause. 
A sail, a good gallop, a day's shooting, will often 
— in fact, will always make me happy; that's 
because I'm young and strong and my blood 
moves. I do not comprehend the emotional 
kind of happiness to be got out of some man's 
admiration of me — or whatever it is that gives 
it to women. Love did not seem to me a happy 
thing. It attacked my pride, my independence, 
the whole fabric of my character; it lowered 
my crest — I think you might have seen ?" She 
turned to smile at him. 

" You still think that you loved me ?" Essex 
asked, almost quite naturally. 

" We needn't go into it again ; but whatever 
my feelings may be, and however ill-regulated 
and untimely, I don't mistake them. I told you 
that I loved you, and you know why I told you. 
I wish it had not been necessary, God knows, 
but you made it necessary." 

He turned fully towards her, leaning his back 
into the corner of the stone seat and holding his 
knee with both hands. 

" Gallia, I am terribly sorry for you. Don't 
mistake me ; it is nothing to do with your having 
loved or not having loved me. It is simply be- 
cause you are the perfectly hapless kind of mod- 
ern woman. Your whole make-up is an egre- 
gious mistake — a complete waste of material. 
There is no place in all the world for you. 



GALLIA. 197 

You are not wanted because you are for no 
use." 

" The earwig of humanity," she interjected, 
with a wistful kind of smile. 

" You have a beautiful face," continued Essex, 
speaking with unusual entrain. " Good heavens, 
child, what eyes you have ! And what use are 
those eyes to you? They are shaped to look 
things of which you have no knowledge. Your 
lips, — one could imagine, if one saw a picture of 
you, the most emotional moments in the world 
made by your lips. And you use them — good 
Lord ! — you use them to talk the flimsiest philos- 
ophy — the sociology of a schoolgirl's half-holi- 
day!" 

Gallia's face was quite grave, was sometimes 
sad, but a light was growing at the back of her 
eyes, the light she had gleaned since she saw 
Essex last. 

" Physically you are so lovely," he went on in 
a more argumentative key, " that one regrets 
you have no grain of coquetry to make play 
with all these bodily gifts, even if it were cruel 
play. I think — do you know this? — I think 
that when I made some sort of love to you at 
Mrs. Leighton's, I was only misled by your 
appearance into thinking you the sort of woman 
that you looked. You are not heartless in the 
way of being cold and indifferent, — that has 
gone out with women now, — you are simply 
17* 



198 GALLIA. 

incapable of an ordinary feminine feeling." 
Essex had no idea that this was said with a 
strong note of irritation, of resentment. " As 
I look at you now, you are the sort of being an 
amorous-minded man, which you know I am 
not, would sell his whole career to kiss. It is 
your outward form that looks so; it does not 
suit your mind ; it will give you trouble yet, for 
men will fall in love with it. That will not be 
your fault, but the bitterness will be all yours. 
For you are a misshapen woman." 

Gallia heard all this with very little surprise, 
it was not so new to her ; and though she felt 
the touch of scorn in Essex's voice, she knew 
the scorn was not his, but was his outraged sex 
speaking in him. "When he applied his last 
epithet to her, she never winced. 

"But there is something more than love in 
the world, is there not?" Her voice was a 
whisper, an anxious whisper. 

" For women ? Nothing ! What else should 
there be?" 

" There is motherhood." This time her voice 
was calm, only her eyes looked wistfully before 
her. 

Essex looked a little more curiously at her. 

" A mad anomaly !" he exclaimed. 

" One should be beautifully made and beauti- 
ful to be a mother," she said again, still staring 
Wistfully before her. " Perhaps" — she seemed 



GALLIA. 199 

to recollect him and turned towards him with a 
half-hearted smile and her eyes magnified by 
the tears in them — " perhaps there is a bigger 
object in my appearance than the satisfaction 
of any man's senses." 

" Good heavens, what a coil ! Then you have 
some sort of feelings?" He was genuinely 
surprised. 

" Listen," Gallia said. " At any rate one can 
talk to you and — you — don't gasp. Listen. 
The first sort of love, the amorous love, is over 
and done in me. I hadn't a seam or a big vein 
of it. I think I had only a ' pocket' — and it's 
worked out ; wouldn't pay to sink another shaft 
for that. The capacity for mother-love, I think, 
is very large in me ; I think I should make a 
good mother : I can't tell you how I know, but 
I have been finding it out ever since my own 
mother died, and I began to know it when I sat 
beside her dead body. I could spend myself 
and lose myself in my child, if I had one, and 
ask for no return ; for everything else I come 
first ; but I shouldn't come first there. When I 
marry, I shall, of course, marry without love. 
For that is used up. It is my misfortune, and 
has come out of the crookedness of things, that 
I didn't love the right person at the right time." 

Essex was looking at her with more of himself 
in his eyes than anyone had ever seen there 
before. When her voice dropped, an impulse 



200 GALLIA. 

taught him to take her hand. He took it, but 
she did not appear to notice him or his action. 
She was just talking out her soul to the grey 
stones, softened oddly by their influence, and 
also because she was beside the only human 
being who understood her. 

" But that has nothing to do with the rest. On 
the whole, it may be an advantage. If I were to 
fall in love again, it might be with someone quite 
unsuitable to be the father of my child — someone 
who would not be fine and strong and healthy, 
and of a healthy stock. As it is, when I marry, 
— I talk of it quite as a certainty because it is a 
certainty to me, being rich and good-looking, 
and the only child of my father, — I shall marry 
solely with a view to the child I am going to 
live for." She turned towards him again in a 
rising tumult of feeling, and clasped the hand 
he had given her in both hers. They were 
trembling a little, he noticed, but though he 
felt some strong emotion himself, he concealed 
it bravely, for he knew it had nothing in 
common with the emotion she felt. " So don't 
you think — don't you think that there may be 
a place in the world for me after all ?" 

At the moment she had told her love for him, 
she had left him cold and normal ; now describ- 
ing a greater and more spiritual feeling, she lit 
strange fires. Two passers-by went down the 
cloister passage at this moment, men hurrying 



GALLIA. 201 

along ; oddly enough, they did not observe the 
pair sitting on the seat, hand held in hand. It 
gave Essex a moment to control himself, to fold 
his lip and batten down some flame that would 
have been half articulate only. Then he kissed 
both her hands with a quietness that came 
natural to him at this moment of passionate 
feeling, he even laid them for a moment upon 
his breast, then, still holding them, looked into 
her eyes. 

" I am not making love to you now, Beautiful, 
Beautiful . . ." he said, very, very low; then, 
having told this momentous lie for her sake, he 
kissed the hands once more and put them down. 

" I know you are not," she said simply. " You 
have heard, and you know, — for you said it your- 
self, — I am not the sort of woman to be made 
love to." Essex's lips twitched uneasily once or 
twice in something that was not unlike a smile. 
" But I need not be cut down like the green fig- 
tree on that account, for I may be of some use 
after all; there must always be room in the 
world for a good mother of children, and I will 
teach them none of the unhappy things I know 
when I bring them up." 

" Gallia," Essex began hesitatingly, and moving 
a little closer to her, " have you thought — with 
that odd clear head of yours — about the thing 
you propose ?" 

" Motherhood ? Often and often. I am very 



202 GALLIA. 

strong, and I have never known what it is 
to be frightened at anything. I am not fright- 
ened." 

" Not motherhood," he said, still speaking low 
and with his dark eyes curiously intent upon her 
face. " Marriage without love." 

Gallia was silent a moment ; then she nodded 
her head. " The same answer as before," she 
said. 

"Because there would be years of it; and 
marriage is not" — Essex would have roared with 
laughter at this stupendous phrase if he had 
heard it in cold blood — " is not all motherhood." 
But the strength of the whole moment was that 
Essex's cold blood was hot. 

" Other women bear the same sort of thing." 

" They have married for money or position, 
and they have reckoned on the price all along." 

" Ah, but other women, who have very little 
money and no position ; who have often a diffi- 
culty to get a living ; women who are not mar- 
ried. My position will be just this much better 
than theirs, that I shall be a mother." The 
triumph in her voice was somehow pitiful. 

He shivered a little. 

" They are not bred as you are, they haven't 
your feelings." 

" Why not ? Some of them must be well 
bred, and just now you said I hadn't any 
feelings !" 



GALLIA. 203 

" I never said you had no feelings of delicacy 
or refinement," Essex replied, with quick se- 
verity. 

" It does not seem to me," she spoke cynically 
and coldly, "judging merely by pathological 
facts such as come under everyone's notice, that 
marriage can have much to do with delicacy and 
refinement." 

He shook his head. 

"My dear, you are becoming the modern 
woman again, and a moment since you were 
primary — and exquisite." 

" "Well, we'll put that aside. Of course," low- 
ering her tone and making it hard and crisp, 
" I quite know it, if I were differently made, I 
might dread it ; but I look at it like the women 
who marry for position and money — as a price. 
It is a pity, as I heard a girl say the other day, 
that it is not an affair of ' money down' — that 
one cannot write a big cheque, and be done. 
But these things are the inherent disadvantages 
that cannot be done away with. And it leaves 
me very clear in mind. To be marrying for love 
might bring about one's object less satisfactorily. 
If I were living fifty years hence, I should not 
probably have to marry at all. But our yoke is 
the ignorance of our day. Dark, I have talked 
enough. I am going now." She stood up. He 
remained seated, thinking. It was a beautiful 
deep twilight in the cloister now. 



204 GALLIA. 

" How is it you have talked so inwardly to 
me ?" he asked, with a shadow in his eyes. 

"Because with you I have no mauvaise honte. 
How should I have ? Did I not take the very 
widest step that afternoon in my room last year ?" 
She seemed quite free and simple with him, but 
there was a warm colour in her cheek and a light 
in her eyes. If his life had depended on it, 
Essex could not have prevented the words that 
rose in him, or stemmed the flood that brought 
them. 

" Was it true then — what you said ?" he asked, 
in a low voice that he kept even with difficulty. 

" Quite true then." 

" Then." He repeated the word gravely. His 
head was bent, his face hidden. He stood up 
beside her. " And now I cannot bear to think 
of how cruel I was to you. How brutal !" He 
put his arms round her shoulders. " May I kiss 
you and be forgiven ? The man you loved, who 
is to be the only man you love, may kiss you 
now ? It is quiet here, but all the world might 
be present for me." His voice rocked unevenly 
for a moment, but he steadied himself, and Gal- 
lia's eyes fed on his excitement. " How cold 
you found me ! "We suffer for the degeneracy 
of our day. But I have enough passion" — his 
voice broke in a note like laughter — "to kiss 
you once." He threw back his head when his 
lips left hers. "Love, love! My love — love," 



GALLIA. 205 

he said, and the word, which feeling made sing 
in the air, had that in it which seemed to cradle 
Gallia's heart; she leaned and rested on these 
tones, tasting something of the peace of sleep. 
Then his head bent forward, and she felt its 
weight upon her own, the curve of his cheek 
was against her forehead. Quick to learn and 
to respond, this new moment was teaching her 
fast, but he raised his head and said, " You will 
know that for half an hour you were worshipped, 
for a minute you were kissed . . . and . . ." 

She looked up at him with the only look of 
its kind her face ever wore, then she turned and 
walked away towards the gate. 

In the odd harmony that had come to be 
between them, Gallia was conscious of some 
strange chord that sounded curiously. That 
Essex was sincere, for the first time in his life 
perhaps, she felt, and that was enough. 

She could not know the inside of this man's 
mind, nor tell that the odd chord was Essex's 
own amazement at himself. The man was find- 
ing another self. For years he had sown and 
reaped in the home pastures of his soul, but, 
straying vaguely to an unsought hill-top, had 
unwittingly climbed the ridge and set foot in an 
undiscovered country. 

18 



CHAPTER XXL 

Essex, leaving the cloister, now dimly lamp- 
lit, some hour or so after Gallia flitted away, 
came across a friend and dined with him at the 
House of Commons, and was during dinner, as 
the friend was fain to remark, even more himself 
than usual. Then, having walked up and down 
the terrace till half-past ten, he said good-night, 
and took his way on foot to Hammersmith. Some 
men believe greatly in the calming effects of long 
walks, though what calm does a tiger find, who 
pads almost ceaselessly the length of his cage ? 
During the dinner and the after-talk, Essex had 
not once thought of Gallia ; no sooner, however, 
was he striding through the network of Bel- 
gravian streets, than his mind seemed to pick up 
the turmoil of his thoughts just where he had 
dropped them when Shale clapped him on the 
shoulder. 

What proved — had not everything in his whole 
character proved previously — that Essex was a 
man of the least possible emotional experience, 
was the fact that he was surprised when his 
memory failed to give back a detailed and pho- 
nographed replica of his and Gallia's conversa- 
tion. He remembered a number of isolated sen- 

206 



GALLIA. 207 

tences that had fallen from her lips, but what, 
he wondered, had been his answers to them? 
"Were such subjects as these ever contemplated 
by the religious-minded, his aberrations might 
be alluded to as a merciful dispensation. No 
truthfully recorded conversation of the highly 
emotional kind could fail to sound ridiculous, 
were one to observe it with a frigid or even with 
a tepid mind. Slightly warmed and relaxed the 
mind must be to judge such matter. (It is 
fortunate that the people whose opinions matter, 
have only time to read novels in the evening, or 
late at night.) The finest love-scenes ever written 
are those that can be read at eleven a.m., without 
sounding sickly or silly. 

To a cynic such as Essex, with a thinness of 
skin like his in the matter of seeming absurd, 
the details of that half-hour in the cloisters 
would have appeared farcical indeed. But all 
that remained to him was a confused memory ; 
a memory startling, but puzzling, pleasurable. 
That he should have acted as he had done sur- 
prised Essex, but it did not disconcert him ; no, 
not though it seemed so unusual and astonish- 
ing; he remained fully satisfied with himself. 
That some people might perceive an indelicacy 
in kissing and professing to love a lady to whom 
he had no idea of offering marriage, Essex was 
unaware, or if he were aware, would have 
waived as trivial. Besides, he knew that in 



208 GALLIA. 

Gallia's mind, as in the minds of many other 
thoughtful people, love and marriage were re- 
garded as justly separate. He knew Gallia had 
understood him ; he was sure — and he was quite 
right in being sure — that he had left her a sense 
of satisfaction, of fulfilment. She would pro- 
ceed on her way, he on his, and they would walk 
to their separate destinies. 

As he passed down Kensington, he saw the 
long line of carriages going up to Holland 
House; but he had not Mark Gurdon's ac- 
quaintance with people's crests and arms and 
liveries, and, having no psychic sense, he was 
quite unaware that Gallia, more lovely than ever 
before, was sitting beside Mrs. Leighton in one 
of those carriages, and that her father and Mark 
Gurdon were seated opposite to her. 

Love is a very short, small, and frequently un- 
important incident in the lives of most people. 
It is meant to be. If the days of a man's life be 
threescore years and ten, during which he gets 
up and goes to bed between the performance of 
stupid but necessary duties, it is only reasonable 
that at the most he should offer up a sacrifice of 
six months or so to love. The Honourable Gallia 
Hamesthwaite, unphotographed, unparagraphed, 
and ungossiped about, passed in the plenitude 
of her beauty from room to room ; kinder, more 
tolerant of stupidity than usual ; more gracious 
and more approachable, but with a Buperbness 



GALLIA. 209 

about her that is only to be seen in the face and 
manner of a woman who has picked her aloe- 
flower. 

Mark Gurdon was often beside her; Mrs. 
Leighton observed and admired and approved 
her, and, clever old lady as she was, never sus- 
pected Mark's dawning ambition. "Whether it 
woke definitely then, or whether he had felt 
thrills of it before, cannot be told. But he was 
annoyed to think, when he shut their carriage 
door upon the ladies, that he had thought of 
going to Edwards Square that night, since he was 
in the neighbourhood, and had not seen Cara for 
two or three days. He walked briskly to Edwards 
Square, his face flushing and his eye kindling 
with thought induced by the scene he had left, 
not the scene he was going to. What we call 
delicacy is a quality wholly unknown to Life and 
Nature ; Nature has no regard for the fitness of 
things, and Life arranges the most tasteless con- 
trasts. For instance, it was far from agreeable 
of them both to make Gallia attract Mark with 
the light lit by Essex's kisses, and it was equally 
outr& in them to send Mark to the arms of his 
mistress with his head filled with thoughts of 
another woman. But none of the persons con- 
cerned were to blame for these contingencies. 
Life and Nature were alone responsible, and can 
only be excused on the ground that neither is 
really well bred. 

o 18* 



210 GALLIA. 

The studio was lighted when he knocked, and 
a step which was not Cara's came towards the 
door. It was opened by the charwoman who 
had befriended Cara when her father met with 
his accident and when she met with Gurdon; 
the woman now came daily to do what service 
she required. 

" She's very bad, poor dear," said Mrs. Miles, 
in a voice of deep sympathy; and Mark's 
face, which a moment before had been fired 
by ambition, fell hastily to lines of genuine 
anxiety. 

"HI? How? Since when?" 

"Without waiting for an answer, he pushed 
past the portibre, and came swiftly to the broad 
couch on which, among a number of bright 
cushions and rugs, he saw the girl's pale face. 

She was awake and knew him, though her 
first words showed her mind was wandering. 
In an instant, Mark's cloak was off, and he was 
kneeling beside her, raising up her head and 
putting the wild-looking hair out of her eyes. 

" Whatever she would 'a done if it hadn't of 
been my day a' comin', God knows," said the 
woman fervently. 

" But have you done anything ? Have you 
sent for a doctor? "When was she taken ill? 
Did you find her so ?" 

Mrs. Miles posed herself, with her arms 
wrapped across the strings of her three aprons. 



GALLIA. 211 

" Hight o'clock is my hour a' comin', which I 
'ave to git Miles's breakfuss before 'e goes hout 
of a mornin'. I 'adn't got down our court be- 
fore I says, 'There, I've forgot the baskit,' it 
came over me all of a minute, and there, I says, 
' Little miss '11 never 'eed if I'm a minit late,' 
for punkchell's been my motter since hiver I 
took to charin', which was wen Miles took to 
drink"— 

" But when you got here, my good woman, 
when you got here — was she ill ?" 

" "Wen I 'ad the baskit, sir," Mrs. Miles con- 
tinued, with an air of one who rigidly adheres 
to truth, and will not step aside for any- 
thing, — ""Wen I 'ad the baskit, I came on in a 
'urry, and come hup to the door, sir, same as 
you might, that unthinkin'." 

"And I was dancing — dancing," Cara was 
saying in a low whisper and playing upon the 
covering with her fingers, as though in imitation 
of the figure of a dance. 

" "Which she wasn't, sir, for knock and knock 
I did, and then at last I 'eard a groan. Aoh !" 
Mrs. Miles placed one hand below her waist 
and just in front of the ample curve of her hip. 
" I don' know as ever I came over the same 
since I was carryin' Hemmer ; which I was took 
so I couldn't kerry a bucket, not the shillin' 
size, and Miles 'ad to borrer off the landlord 
of the ' King o' Denmark,' which he wouldn't 



212 GALLIA. 

lend him more than fourpence in the shillin' on 
'is score." 

With a patience that did him credit, Gurdon 
forbore to interrupt Mrs. Miles again; he em- 
ployed himself in very gently straightening the 
rugs and covers and cushions of the lounge and 
making the poor soul more comfortable ; but he 
was ready on the instant that Mrs. Miles should 
reach the kernel of the story to leap up and fetch 
a doctor. 

"An' I 'eard a sound," continued the good 
woman, who had detailed at least one family 
reminiscence in the meantime which Mark's ear 
had failed to catch, " like you was polishin' one 
of them parky floors with a clawth, an', aoh my ! 
it was 'er a-draggin' 'erself along the wall and 
floor to hopin the door." 

" What did she say to "you ?" put in Mark 
sharply. 

" Say ? She was pas' speakin' and took 'er 
up in my arms I did, and kerry her in 'ere on 
the sofa. She's been talkin' a deal of furrin 
talk, but wen I undress her I soon give a guess 
wot was up, pore young woman — not but wot 
I've 'eard these furrin natures 'as it easier, but I 
did wot I could, and got 'ot water and give 'er 
fermentations same as the doctor hordered me, 
an' made all neat, for it's a hawkward spot with 
illness" — 

" Have you had a doctor ?" Mark broke in, 



GALLIA. 213 

feeling his brain turning with Miles's chat- 
ter. 

The woman looked at him rather sharply, and 
her expression, as he afterwards recalled it, 
puzzled him greatly. 

" I didn't know wot might be your wish, sir ; 
an' I done wot I could, bein' accustom' to 
illness; there's beef-tea a-makin' now, and I 
give 'er beef-jelly, wot I run to the chemiss for 
and was obliged to take 'er purse, but you'll see 
as one and ninepence was every bit I took, sir. 
It's strengthening stuff she needs and careful 
nursin', but then I can't leave Miles, 'e do drink 
that shockin' wen I'm away, and negleek 'is 
family something shameful, still I could stay 
most of the time and run 'ome hivery now and 
then if you was willing." 

" Thank you," Mark said, gladly accepting 
as kindness what was probably merely the 
avid relish of illness common to her class. " But 
I will have a doctor now, and if you can come 
every day, I will nurse her myself all night. 
The first thing to do is to find out what is the 
matter." A sharp look from the faded eye of 
Mrs. Miles was lost upon him. " What, dear ?" 
bending over Cara; "you were dancing? And 
did you fall? And why were you dancing so 
much?" His voice was very tender indeed, 
and his face kind and gentle as he looked at 
her. 



214 GALLIA. 

A look of intelligence came into her eyes. 
" I was frightened, and so I thought I would 
dance and dance . . ." 

He shook his head vaguely. 

" Bein' no stairs to come up and down," said 
Mrs. Miles in a furtive undertone and glancing 
round the building in a depreciatory manner. 

" Stay by her and watch her, and I will fetch 
a doctor," said Mark, getting up. " Or no, 
better you go — you will know the neighbour- 
hood ; I will stay and look after her. Tell him 
to come at once." 

" There's two in the Square, but perhaps you 
wouldn't wish" — 

" Either of them ; whichever is youngest and 
will come out quickest : it must be past two 
o'clock. And you need not come back." 

He shut the door after her carefully, and then 
came back to walk to and fro in the room with 
a puzzled face. Once he stopped to open the 
big skylight, through which the pale June stars 
looked very far off. Gurdon was a humane 
man, although he had had few opportunities of 
making the discovery. He was now much dis- 
turbed in mind, and with strange accesses of 
unselfish kindliness assailing him. He looked 
frequently at Cara's flushed face and tossed hair ; 
sometimes he stopped and smoothed her fore- 
head with his hand, but for the most part he 
strode up and down quickly and silently, his 



GALLIA. 215 

black evening shoes making no noise upon the 
boards and rugs of the studio. 

Three-quarters of an hour passed before the 
brisk step of a man outside announced the 
arrival of a doctor, hurried and a trifle irritable, 
as a man might well be who had gone to bed at 
twelve, after a long day, and been roused at 2.30 
from his deepest sleep. 

He looked sharply at Mark and his evening 
dress, and appeared to think someone else would 
come forward to explain what had occurred, and 
what was wanted. 

Mrs. Miles had gone home, and the burden 
of the situation was with Mark. The doctor's 
manner and the nature of his questions caused 
him some embarrassment, but the seriousness of 
the interview made him forget it again. 

He could give very little information about the 
illness, and the doctor had to be contented with 
the fact that Mrs. Miles would give a full account 
in the morning. But Mark held the lamp while 
Dr. Hudson made a hurried examination, and 
waited eagerly for the temperature to be men- 
tioned. 

" She will do nicely if this fever can be kept 
down : I will send you something at once to 
fight that ; there is a messenger call at my house 
in the Square, and several all-night chemists. 
Inconvenient? Oh, she might be in many a 
worse place. Plenty of good air here, and the 



216 GALLIA. 

quietest spot in London." He began to write a 
prescription on a leaf of his pocket-book. " You 
say you can get someone to look after her at 
night. Very well, but I will send in a nurse first 
thing in the morning, with your permission, to 
attend to the patient and prepare her for my 
visit about ten. Np, we can do nothing more 
now, save keep up $he strength a little and get 
the temperature down. To-morrow I shall be 
able to make a definite statement about the cause 
of trouble." He looked up, this keen, worldly- 
wise young man, and met Mark's still rather 
puzzled eyes. "I have no doubt I am leaving 
the patient in the most careful hands, meanwhile. 
Good-night." 

"When he had gone, Mark sat down by Cara in 
the empty, quiet studio and looked long at her 
little face, pale again now with a fine saffron 
pallor. "Poor little thing, I suppose you owe 
this to me," he said. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

During the fortnight that followed the party 
at Holland House, Gallia had been rather busy 
socially. 

A number of her mother's old friends, people 
whom she knew only in the traditional family 
way, sent invitations of a quiet kind to her; 
almost every day she seemed to be lunching 
with someone, and she appeared at a number 
of the fashionable afternoon concerts. In the 
mornings, after her ride, she more than once 
secured Margaret to do some shopping with her, 
and in the course of time a silvery grey and 
white plumage replaced the black of her ear- 
lier mourning months. Then suddenly Lord 
Hamesthwaite decided to make an immediate 
move to the Hall, and some housemaids were 
despatched to help the permanent staff of ser- 
vants there to be ready earlier for the coming of 
the family. 

Mrs. Essex and Margaret had to be prevailed 
upon to come sooner, for Gallia had no desire to 
be left alone in the country. She had appeared 
to fall in with her father's idea, and there was to 
be a constant succession of guests throughout the 
summer, since she refused to go abroad. 

x 19 217 



218 GALLIA. 

Mrs. Leighton, immersed in the formalities 
of the cure at Aix, was feeling astonishingly 
miserable. 

" I am not sure that I have ever been so ill as 
during the first week at this atrocious place. I 
should leave immediately if I were not too pros- 
trate to travel. How infinitely preferable a nice 
English attack of rheumatism would be. But I 
needn't distress you with the wails of a tiresome 
old woman, particularly when I have something 
quite important to say, and the pains in my 
right arm threaten to prevent all correspondence. 
This, then, dear Gallia, is what troubles me. 
Robbie is coming home. He has not dared to 
write to your father since the dreadful letter he 
received about two months ago, the result, I have 
always been convinced, of an entire misconcep- 
tion. Spain still seems to be a very difficult 
country to travel in, especially when one leaves 
the beaten track, as Robbie in his adventurous 
way naturally hastened to do. He gives me the 
entire explanation of the gambling episode ; and 
you will remember I endeavoured to assure your 
father at the time that he was taking too severe 
a view altogether. It seems that Robbie had 
engaged a mule, and packed all the delightful 
draperies and embroideries he had secured upon 
the beast, as well as his luggage, containing, 
foolish boy, his reserve sum of money. At the 
end of an exhausting journey across the moun- 



GALLIA. 219 

tains, he drove this beast into a stable, and 
actually in the time that he was eating a most 
unsavoury meal, the animal and all the baggage 
disappeared, stolen, of course. He wasted about 
a week in fruitless endeavours to secure the 
attention of the authorities, and it was only then, 
when he was at his last penny, that he gambled 
for pesetas — for his dinner really, poor boy — in 
the low inns and among the gipsies. I want you 
to have him at the Hall at once, if you can ; you 
will find him full of delightful stories, and you 
will persuade your father to be more lenient to 
him than he has been before. If we back him 
up, he says he will have no difficulty in establish- 
ing himself in London, now that his course of 
study is over." 

That merely made one more for Gallia's little 
house-party, and she remembered Eobbie as an 
engaging, open-natured, happy-minded fellow, 
who would be a certain acquisition in any country 
house. 

She came down the staircase from her own 
rooms after reading Mrs. Leighton's letter, 
dressed for going out. In the passages and on 
the landing were plenty of signs of a hurried 
flitting. The servants were at work rolling up 
carpets and taking down curtains, and making 
other preparations in view of the house being 
closed for three or four months. The mechanism 
of housekeeping was a dead letter to Gallia ; she 



220 GALLIA. 

had no idea of the time and trouble, the myriads 
of small duties, that go towards managing a 
house. If she had known, she would have been 
filled with a very wholesome and active con- 
tempt for half of the accepted formulae; she 
would have instituted a sweeping simplification. 

Just at that moment, passing down the stairs, 
her eye fell on a soft-headed brush with a brass 
attachment in the middle of its abnormally long 
handle, and a wonder as to its use seized her 
suddenly, and she paused in idle irony with her 
hand on the balustrade. 

At that moment came a crash, a cry, and some 
detached screams, from behind one of the big 
white drawing-room doors. She hurried into 
the room, and her appearance seemed to add to 
the confusion of the knot of maid-servants gath- 
ered round a fallen step-ladder, opposite one of 
the four windows. A heap of pale yellow silk 
damask mixed up with the latter suggested im- 
mediately that a servant had fallen while taking 
down a curtain. As the window was some 
twelve feet high, there was the material for a 
very pretty accident, and Gallia crossed the room 
at her swiftest pace to see what was amiss. 

" Which of you is hurt?" she demanded of 
the astonished group, two of whom were on the 
floor supporting an older woman, and one me- 
chanically gathering up the curtain and seeming 
to examine it for possible damage. 



GALLIA. 221 

"Never mind the curtain, Emily. What is 
this ? who has been hurt ?" 

" I don't know if the ladder could give way, 
miss, or if she overbalanced herself," the maid 
began. " I didn't see it myself," she went on, 
with the usual haste of a domestic to clear her- 
self in view of possible blame ; " I was over at 
the mantelpiece moving the corner-pieces." 

" It's the charwoman, miss, that was on the 
ladder," broke in Fraser, the second housemaid, 
" and I think it must have been in reaching up 
too high above her head. I told her to go up 
a step more and she'd have been more at her 
ease." 

" You told her ? How could you do such a 
wicked, lazy thing ? You were too idle or too 
frightened to go up yourselves, and so you sent an 
old woman up to do your work. I am ashamed 
to have such women in my service. Emily, go 
for Mrs. Bostock at once." 

The words fell slowly and coldly from the 
dispassionate Gallia. Very seldom indeed had 
she occasion to address any of her servants, with 
the exception of her own footman and her maid. 
She was held in the awe with which all servants 
regard a mistress who is habitually unconscious 
of their existence. 

The girls flushed hotly at her reprimand, but 
did not dare to offer any excuse. Gallia took 
the place of one of them beside the injured 
19* 



222 GALLIA. 

charwoman, and in a few minutes Mrs. Bostock, 
the housekeeper, arrived. 

" I think we must have a mattress and carry 
her to the nearest bedroom ; I fear it is serious." 

It was wonderful how quickly the poor soul 
was carried to a bachelor bedroom on the same 
landing, by the now eager servants, reinforced 
by the footman ; but it was Gallia's own hand 
that applied the restoratives and brought back 
groaning consciousness to the sufferer. 

Mrs. Bostock had left the room with a maid 
on a search for different bedding; Emily had 
borne a messsage to the carriage which was 
awaiting Gallia, and now drove off for a doctor ; 
and Fraser, as principal culprit, had escaped to 
a more sympathetic milieu in the servants' hall. 
Gallia was alone when the charwoman came to 
her senses. 

" It's my side, m'm, — my lady, — an' my back. 
Oh lor ! oh dear ! My back struck the floor and 
the ladder come a-top of me; I 'ope I 'aven't 
broke my column ! But it's my side as feels the 
wrinch ; it never 'as been right since a fall I 
'ad in our mews when I was going with Johnnie ; 
stipped on the cat, I did, a nasty little sandy 
cat Miles kep' in the stable — 'e was drivin' for 
Serumfry Paget then. Oo — ooh !" 

"Yes; now lie still for a minute, and first drink 
some of this. "When you feel a little stronger, 
we will get your clothes off." 



GALLIA. 223 

" Thank you, my lady. It is a gnoring pain 
just above the 'ip joint, an' " — 

" Now pray be silent, or you will exhaust your 
strength, and won't be able to tell the doctor how 
you feel," Gallia said, in her firm, quiet voice. 
The effect of this remonstrance lasted several 
minutes, no doubt by virtue of the last touch, 
which appealed strangely to Mrs. Miles's pride 
of ailment. 

It was Gallia who assisted her own maid to 
undress Mrs. Miles; it seemed to her the French- 
woman's hands moved fussily about the task. 

" Six years have I come in an' out this house, 
and nothink never happened," Mrs. Miles maun- 
dered on in an undertone. " 'Twas me as took 
down the drawing-rooms when they was cherry 
and cream — cherry and cream with gold galoon, 
'ung in panels, they was" — 

" Can you bear me to turn you just a little, to 
unfasten your skirt ? That will do. ISTow, then, 
just a moment — yes, I am sure it pains you, but 
you will feel better when they are off." 

With that tender firmness which some women 
have by nature, some others learn in the hos- 
pitals, and most never learn at all, Gallia re- 
moved the poor outer clothing, multifarious in 
strings and pins. Further than this she hesitated 
at first to go : would the poor thing feel more 
uncomfortable to have a lady or a servant made 
familiar with her shifts and makeshifts ? Gallia's 



224 GALLIA. 

good sense decided for her, and she proceeded 
with her task. 

" Me lyin' here," began the woman, in a more 
excited key, " and poor Missie with no one to 
'ot 'er beef-tea for J er, nurse bein' out, for I 
promis' to run in at dinner-time, it's only ten 
minutes in the bus !" 

" "What are you anxious about ? Do you wish 
a message sent to your home? That will be 
easily done ; I will call Emily, and you shall tell 
her"— 

" Oh, it isn't that, my lady. Oo— ooh !" 

" Bear up a little longer ; see, take another 
drink of this. There. I sha'n't take off the 
bodice, just loosen it upon your chest a little." 

An instinct taught Gallia that small soothing 
sentences, at short intervals, kept the patient's 
attention from her hurt. 

"Never mind," as something slipped to the 
floor from Mrs. Miles's shawl-spread bosom ; 
"it's only a letter, I'll put it on the mantel- 
piece" — 

" Oh dearie dear, whatever shall I do," the 
poor creature wailed suddenly. " Missie told 
me to be sure and send it ! I had to put it in 
the pillar before twelve, so as 'e'd have it early 
this afternoon." 

" Make yourself quite easy about it ! Ah, I 
hear the doctor coming ! I shall give orders for 
you to be well looked after, and shall be back in 



GALLIA. 225 

two hours, to see you myself. The letter ? It 
shall be sent at once by one of the servants." 
Gallia took it hastily, and called a soft " Come 
in !" 

Mrs. Bostock ushered in the doctor, and after 
a few words of explanation, Miss Hamesthwaite 
hurried to the carriage. She was over-due in 
Hammersmith Terrace, where her mission was 
to prevail upon the Essexes to hasten their visit 
to the Hall. In the outer lobby she stopped. 

" Kuowles, I wish William to take this letter 
at once to" — she turned it over as she spoke, 
and her eyes fell on the address. The note was 
directed to " Mark Gurdon, Esq., The Colonial 
Office, Whitehall." But this was not what sur- 
prised Gallia, or convinced her that her own 
footman had best not deliver it. " Never mind, 
Knowles, I shall not require William." 

She got into the carriage, and sat reflecting 
while Hendon waited for his order. 

" Stop at the first boy-messenger office," she 
said. 

All the way down Kensington Koad she kept 
thinking. Gallia's was a very alert and ready 
mind, but she was puzzled to think how Mrs. 
Miles should be in possession of a note from a 
sick person, to whom she referred as " Missie," 
which was addressed to Mark Gurdon — in Mark 
Gurdon's own handwriting. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Two days later, Gallia and her father left for 
the country, and they left in Lord Hames- 
thwaite's favourite manner, namely, in their own 
carriage. 

Without being enormously wealthy people, 
they were decidedly rich, and for a man in his 
position Lord Hamesthwaite's expenditure was 
inconsiderable. He could afford, he averred, 
to sacrifice a pair of carriage-horses every year ; 
for this his coachman never failed to convey 
to him was what must happen if he insisted 
upon driving the two weary roans, fat and arti- 
ficially spirited, over forty miles of Surrey turn- 
pike in the middle of July. A second pair was 
therefore ordered from the Hall, to be in readi- 
ness at Guildford, and, covered with dust, father 
and daughter duly arrived at their beautiful 
Surrey home, which had been restored by Gallia's 
grandfather, and still preserved the quaint charm 
it had possessed as an old red-brick and timbered 
manor house. 

Those two days had been busy ones for Gallia. 
She had saddled herself, considering it the 
barest duty, with the care of the poor char- 
woman who had been injured in her service, 
226 



GALLIA. 227 

and Mrs. Miles was now established in the 
neighbouring hospital, with two fractured ribs 
and an easy conscience. For had not Miss 
Hamesthwaite, than whom no one was more 
delicately reserved in the matter of befriending 
and patronising the poor, herself sent down to 
"the Mews" and arranged that one pound a 
week should find its way to the pocket of 
" Halice," the thirteen-year offspring of the 
drunken coachman and the poor hard- worked 
soul, who had said piteously, and without any 
sense of its humour, " If you'll believe me, my 
lady, I've never 'ad a day's illness nor a day's 
'oliday since I was married," regarding both as 
equally desirable respites. 

These arrangements had not been concluded 
without a second and even third conversation 
with Mrs. Miles, in which further information 
regarding Mark Gurdon's connection with " lit- 
tle Missie," as well as the illness of the latter, 
had formed a large part of Mrs. Miles's super- 
fluous running commentary. The accident and 
the attention she was exciting made Mrs. Miles 
more talkative than usual, and she insisted upon 
choosing Gallia as the recipient of her confi- 
dences. 

Gallia had no experience in dealing with 
women of this class, — indeed, Miles was the first 
specimen she had come across, — and although 
she sometimes succeeded in stemming the tor- 



228 GALLIA. 

rent of wholly irrelevant matter, and always 
succeeded in greatly impressing the charwoman, 
she every now and then became inundated and 
swamped by fresh streams, and acquired perforce 
much private information concerning the inner 
life of an acquaintance. Putting aside her an- 
noyance at having learnt certain private facts 
about a man she knew, the whole thing had, 
from many aspects and for many reasons, an 
effect on Gallia's mind. 

The day after her arrival at the Hall, no visi- 
tors being yet come, she went briskly out to the 
stables to choose which horse she would ride. 
She felt the necessity of a long time of thought, 
and she knew nothing so conducive to it as hours 
in the saddle by field and fallow, by copse and hill. 

The stables were a great feature at the Hall, 
and Lord Hamesthwaite was, distantly and quite 
ignorantly, very proud of his horses. For him- 
self, two would have been sufficient; the big 
white horse he drove in town, and the solid, 
fiddle-headed cob he rode in the country. 

But with Gallia it was different. Her pair of 
skewbalds and double dog-cart were known in 
every village in the "Weald ; nothing could beat 
her little Norfolk trotter in the dark-green cart ; 
and her particular pride was a perfectly ap- 
pointed Devonshire donkey jingle, in which a 
very fleet dark jackass flipped along the road 
on pointed hoofs. 



GALLIA. 229 

This time she rode a half-bred Arab, capable 
of a ten-mile canter which bade fair to send its 
rider to sleep, and took her way by a bridle-path 
through a wood of chestnuts. 

A smiling morning of perfect summer did not 
reflect smiles on Gallia's face. She rode along, 
wrapt up in her own thoughts, unconscious of 
flowers and birds ; observing the road before her 
and her horse in that accurate but mechanical 
fashion common to all good riders. Her face 
was in its severest mask. She was paler than 
usual, owing perhaps to fatigue, perhaps merely 
to mental tension. She was searching diligently 
in her brain for the reason of a sensation she 
had experienced. She was perplexed because it 
seemed to her she had been guilty of a logical 
inconsistency. 

The proposition, as she phrased it, was this : 
she had heard that Mark Gurdon had a mistress. 
That was the initial fact. On hearing this, she 
had been conscious of strong moral revulsion. 
And that was the crux : considering what her 
own view of the subject had always been, that 
put her about. 

Why should she experience a sense of nausea 
on hearing as much about any man? Why 
particularly about Gurdon, whom she had met 
less than a dozen times, and merely liked with a 
liking the most ordinary ? 

She reflected upon this without any solution^ 
20 



230 GALLIA. 

occurring to her, and her manner of reflection 
was peculiar. Just as she would have all the 
world be fair and honest with all the world, so 
she was fair and honest with herself. She re- 
garded herself, very reasonably, as two people — 
her reason as one person, her feelings as another. 
She imagined in her mind a kind of platform 
from which first her reason spoke, and, as it were, 
stepped down ; in the open moment that fol- 
lowed, her feelings made themselves heard in 
the same place. 

At length it struck her that until she could 
discover whether the fact of a man keeping a 
mistress would disgust her, should she hear it of 
any casual acquaintance, no conclusion could be 
come to. 

" My feeling is so odd and vague in this matter 
that 1 think it must be a sort of elemental sex 
impulse speaking in me, and not personal feeling 
at all," was the leaf of wisdom that floated from 
the big tree and fell at length upon the surface 
of her mind. " I must put the question to some 
other girl." Miss Janion's personality flashed 
before her, and she smiled — smiled, and then 
laughed aloud, so that Mahmoud turned one ear 
backward shiveringly. It would be amusing to 
have Miss Janion down when Lord Shillinglee 
and the others came, for instance ; but the ques- 
tion should be put to Margaret during the first 
private talk they had together. 



GALLIA. 231 

She gathered up her reins, and the light press- 
ure of her leg behind his girth opened Mahmoud 
like a pair of scissors, and he bounded off for a 
gallop. 

" There is a human soil in human thought of 
which the oak trees, thank God, know nothing !" 
Gallia laughed again at the confused feeling she 
had attempted to put into words, and Mahmoud, 
taking that as an encouragement, thrashed his 
feet into the deep summer dust of the road, that 
stifled the green acorns with white powder. 

"When she had swallowed sufficient of the 
tonic of a gallop, Gallia settled her horse to his 
exquisite Eastern pace. Past a common with 
necklaces of young geese upon it ; then a halt 
while a gate was deftly opened, Mahmoud breast- 
ing it at the instant Gallia's crop loosened the 
catch ; forward again, this time on a wood road, 
where squirrels and partridges crossed almost 
beneath the horse's nose ; past openings that 
showed sudden cornfields; past hazel coppices 
thick with green cobs ; past tangles of ripening 
bramble-berries; past farms and new ricks of 
hay, smelling stronger, and a thousand times 
more sweetly, than the corner of Bond Street 
and Burlington Gardens, till at length, outside 
the village of Hiddenfold, Gallia drew rein. 

" Ah, it is too hot for this," she said, casting 
back her open coat and wondering why she 
had let herself get so hot. " I shall positively 



232 GALLIA. 

have to see if I can get some lemonade some- 
where." 

Mahmoud blew a portentous snuffle, the best 
sound save a whinny that can be heard from a 
horse, when Gallia brought up at the door of a 
little thirteenth-century inn. 

As everyone knew Miss Hamesthwaite by sight, 
attendance to her wants was swift. The homely 
ginger pop from a stone bottle completely re- 
freshed her, and she drank it slowly, unabashed 
by the eyes of two dusty cyclists who, with 
purple faces and necks above their grey club 
clothes, were irrigating lime-choked channels by 
means of a quart pot of shandy-gaft'. 

Gallia's roving glance penetrated easily to the 
interior of a tiny sitting-room on the left of the 
door, and she was not much astonished to recog- 
nise a friend extended in a long basket chair in 
the shade of the window geraniums. At his full 
length, in cool grey, a grey crush hat still upon 
his head, waistcoatless, with a white silk shirt 
rising and falling to every breath, lay Dark Es- 
sex, sound asleep. The table was covered with 
papers and books and other signs of industry, 
but the worker, looking amazingly handsome, 
lay stretched beside his tools, overcome by the 
warmth of the day. Though she had heard lie 
was at " a little pub in Surrey," as he had 
phrased it to his sister, she had not known that 
Hiddenfold, only some dozen miles from the 



GALLIA. 233 

Hall, was the spot lie had chosen. Looking 
round, she did not wonder at his choice. It was 
a delicious village. 

" I rather wish he were not here," Gallia said, 
as she finished her drink hastily, " and yet, why 
not? "Why not? On the whole, I am glad. 
He is the one person in the world I can talk to." 

With some caution she put Mahmoud on the 
turf and crossed the green rather than risk 
waking the sleeper by riding past his window. 



20* 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The first few days of Margaret's stay were de- 
voted by Gallia to giving her riding-lessons in 
the park, and driving her about with her mother 
in the afternoons. Once or twice Gallia had 
mooted an invitation to Hubert Essex to walk 
over and lunch or be driven over to dine, but 
always Margaret had gently negatived the plan. 

" He is so hard at work," she said ; " if you 
would like me to be frank, I will say that he 
would be angry with me for letting you know 
his whereabouts." 

" That would be very silly of him," observed 
Gallia, smiling. " And, you know, it is possible 
to refuse an invitation." 

" Of course, but he would think he ought to 
call, and I don't suppose he has more than one 
suit here." 

" Men's sense of etiquette — which must pro- 
ceed from vanity — is a thing I cannot keep pace 
with," Gallia remarked, blending a touch of con- 
tempt with her indifference. 

"And there is another reason," Margaret said, 
with reluctance. 

" Of course there is another reason. You are 

234 



GALLIA. 235 

afraid my attractions might prove too strong for 
his sensitive nature. Naturally I divined that." 

Margaret laughed. 

" Well, you know, it wouldn't he at all odd if 
he did fall in love with you, but I should be 
sorry, because it would only make him unhappy," 
she rejoined, with some spirit. Gallia smiled 
out over the park. " You may laugh," continued 
Margaret. " I know you don't believe in men 
having feelings like ours." 

" On the contrary, not like ours, but simply 
the counterpart of ours." 

" Hubert is a curious silent creature, but that 
is not to say that he has no heart." 

" Very true." 

" Gallia, you are laughing again ? What has 
made you so hard upon men generally V 

" Me hard upon men ? What a wild idea ! I 
like men extremely. I'm more at ease with 
them than I am with women; I've known far 
more of them intimately. I'm not sure that I 
don't think their make-up much honester than 
women's. How can you call me hard upon 
them?" She argued with the greatest good- 
humour, for she was attached to Margaret, and 
liked Margaret to assault her. " Simply because 
I have dared to hurst their cocoons ; to wind off 
some of the strange silky poetry that has been 
wrapped round them by generations of women 
and their fellow men. I don't believe all this 



236 GALLIA. 

about men's feelings, because I've never come 
across any of it; that's why. I explain such 
evidences in a totally different way, and I claim 
that my way is a great deal more in accordance 
with the facts. There you have it." 

" The long and the short of it is, that you 
don't believe in love," said Margaret simply, and 
with a small air of offence. " But you will fall 
in love yourself some day, and then you will see 
what it is like." 

Gallia's cheek darkened for a second, then her 
face cleared and she leaned far back in the win- 
dow-seat they were occupying, and passed her 
hand up and down the shining cold edge of the 
old-fashioned rose-patterned chintz curtain. 

There fell a long silence between them. Gallia 
felt no inclination to make any reply : she did 
not even realise that the moment was one emi- 
nently suited to confidences; and if she had, 
it would have made no difference. She had 
never experienced, in all her life, the faintest 
desire to confide in anybody. This reserved 
habit of mind made her, at one and the same 
time, in some things so wise, and in many things 
so ignorant. Margaret saw her flush, and felt a 
moment's expectation; then she divined that, 
though Gallia might be, or have been, in love, 
she had no desire to describe her experiences. 
She broke silence, therefore, in a half-whispering 
voice. 



GALLIA. 237 

" I have heard it said," she began curiously, 
" that every man is a widower when he proposes." 

" Ah ! Have you indeed ?" Gallia was roused 
from her abstraction and gleamed with dark 
humour upon the speaker. 

"And yet," Margaret continued, in a hesi- 
tating manner and with a little lurking hope in 
her voice, — " And yet, one always hopes, if one 
did fall in love some day, it would be with a 
man who had been as little of a widower as 
possible !" 

The humour of this speech threatened to over- 
come Gallia's gravity; in spite of Margaret's 
touching earnestness, she would have given way 
to a strong desire to laugh, perhaps, unless she 
had had a very clear motive in hearing the girl's 
views frankly and confidently expressed. 

" Instinctively, then, you dislike the idea ?" 

" Oh, I think it dreadful ! Everyone must." 

"Do you think it dreadful all the time — or 
only when it is brought home to you in connec- 
tion with one of your acquaintances ?" 

" "Well, of course, it's a thing one tries to think 
of as little as possible^" Margaret said emphati- 
cally. 

Gallia noted this with a certain bird-like alert- 
ness of glance. 

" But every time it does come into my head it 
horrifies me ; of course, more than ever about a 
man I know." 



238 GALLIA. 

For the moment Gallia could not be quite 
sure whether this referred to an experience, or 
whether Margaret spoke prospectively. She 
waited. The speaker continued musingly — 

"As a rule, I suppose it is just about men 
whom you know that you don't hear of it." 

A caustic smile hovered on Miss Hames- 
thwaite's lips. 

" I believe it is a canon of decency to conceal 
such facts ; one owes it to one's women friends, 
men think. But, Margaret, if you knew and 
liked a man, — if he was a friend, you know, — 
you wouldn't dislike him if you discovered that 
he had a mistress, for instance ?" 

Margaret turned a much-startled face from the 
window. 

" How" — she began, and then suddenly re- 
covered her composure. "I shouldn't dislike 
him — as a friend — I suppose." 

" But— as a lover ?" 

" Oh," she cried quickly, " I could not bear 
him as a lover !" 

" But, my dear girl, men being what they are, 
is that reasonable ?" 

" Oh, there is a difference between believing 
a thing to be generally the case, and knowing 
it to be the fact. Oh, do say there is." 

" Oh, surely. And there's a difference to an 
ostrich who has his head buried — or hasn't, as 
time and opportunity have allowed." 



GALLIA. 239 

" Gallia, you are fearfully severe. I suppose 
there are some girls — the Gertrude sort of girls, 
you know — who don't mind at all. But most 
girls — of some heart and feeling — most girls do 
feel it dreadfully." 

"If a man were here, he would exclaim 
piously, ' And God grant there may always be 
such girls in the world, or what hope has a 
man of keeping straight 1 .' " Gallia laughed de- 
lightedly. "Yes, we have proved there are 
three sorts of women. The bad ones, to fan the 
flame of men's vices — a red flame that, for the 
sake of the picturesque ; the good girls, to feed 
the white flame of their virtues; and the in- 
between girl, who blows neither fire, and can 
warm herself indifferently at both." 

" But you, Gallia, you ? You have never said 
what you think of it." 

" Oh, for me, I would love any man who at- 
tracted my mind, who shared my tastes — I mean 
my sort of love, you know; but it would be 
independent of any idea of marriage. To a 
certain extent, then, and with regard to marry- 
ing, I think my ideas on other points lead to 
my preferring the ordinary man." This she said 
very thoughtfully, and with a marked, earnest 
voice. " There are a lot of passionless men 
about nowadays," she went on in an easier tone, 
" and it would be terrible to marry one by mis- 
take. Yes, I have decided. It is quite reason- 



24:0 GALLIA. 

able— which is the main thing. I shall make no 
fuss about it if my future husband has a past — 
of a reasonable colour." 

" I think — if I loved a man" — Margaret's face 
and voice partook of an ideally exquisite qual- 
ity as she spoke — "I think I could forgive 
him." 

Gallia gazed at her in admiration. 

" You are the being biology will never explain. 
You keep alive the old tradition about soul, and 
angels, and saints, and spirits. JSo scientist 
living but would forswear his whole life's labour 
for you if he saw you at this moment ! Wouldn't 
he, now?" 

" Nonsense, Gallia ! I am nothing of the 
kind.'* She laughed charmingly. " Though, of 
course, I know" — with a great attempt at frank- 
ness — " that I am pretty." 

"You beautiful, silly soul! I believe you 
honestly think that's all that's the matter with 
you. Come down, and let us get the letters 
which have just trotted across the park on 
Punch's back." 

They ran downstairs together, and fell upon 
the post-bag in the hall. 

" Ah, more excitement ! The great man from 
Africa arrives in London to-morrow, and — good- 
ness ! — this is from Robbie Leighton. He's in 
Paris. He's coming — when ? Oh, I'm to expect 
him when I see him." 



GALLIA. 241 

Margaret made some comment or other, but 
her pensiveness lasted all the afternoon. Per- 
haps she was going to be called upon to forgive 
him — a part women have ever loved to play. 



21 



CHAPTEE XXV. 

Quite the typical country house party was 
gathered beside the cedars one afternoon some 
few days later. It was the kind of day upon 
which no object was quite still before the eye, 
every tree and flower seemed to tremble, rather 
to shiver lightly, in the gold heat, which was so 
intense as to appear solid, corporeal, to lie like a 
weight upon the earth. 

While tea went on under the trees, the light 
oak luggage-cart could be seen upon the winding 
drive making its way downhill towards the high 
road and the station. Just in front had passed 
a pretty pair-horse victoria, and it was quite in 
keeping with stable etiquette that the victoria 
drawn by the two fretting thoroughbreds should 
start slowly in advance, and the luggage-cart, 
which flew easily, behind a less important equine 
character, should come after. 

John Denyer was expected from London, 
where he had passed a few days on his arrival, 
and whither Lord Hamesthwaite had travelled 
three times to see him on important business. 

From one of these visits the Colonial Secre- 
tary had returned with a question to put to his 
242 



GALLIA. 243 

daughter. It had taken her a good deal by sur- 
prise. 

"Ask Mr. Gurdon down here? Oh, surely, 
if you like. But why am I to write ? You know 
him, papa, I suppose better than I do ?" 

" I have seen him perhaps three times socially. 
I met him at your Aunt Celia's one night a little 
time ago j and I have happened to meet him 
twice, or three times since" — 

" And you met him at a dinner at the Reform 
last year, for I recollect you told me of it," Gallia 
put in. 

"Very true, no doubt; but it had escaped 
me." 

" And in your own department too !" 

" In my own department I have of course been 
aware of him, my dear, but I have not known 
him." 

" I suppose he is a mere menial in the depart- 
ment?" said Gallia wickedly, for she was not 
above laughing occasionally at her father's pom- 
posity. For a wonder Lord Hamesthwaite de- 
cided to take this seriously. 

" I greatly wish, Gallia, that you had acquired 
some of your dear mother's genius for compre- 
hending important social matters ! Mr. Gurdon 
is a very remarkable young man. His sagacity," 
Lord Hamesthwaite continued, as though he 
were referring to a water-spaniel, — " his sagacity 
is amazing. Quite amazing. I am not mistaken 



244 GALLIA. 

when I tell you that Gurdon is a man with a 
career before him. He is not yet thirty, and he 
has been singled out. Besides, he is most gen- 
tlemanly and of charming manners. Denyer 
took a great liking to him when they met in 
Africa." 

" Oh ! So he met Denyer in Africa ? I never 
heard him say so." 

" You have indicated his greatest talent. lie 
is a young man who does not feel it necessary 
to say everything that he knows or that he has 
done." 

Gallia might not have a head for affairs, but 
she was quite sharp enough to know that this 
was very high praise. She had often heard her 
Aunt Celia say that Mark should be helped on, 
and she was able to perceive that he was in a fair 
way to have her father's hand reached down to 
him. 

"Shall we therefore say Thursday?" Lord 
Hamesthwaite inquired, with a smile. He was 
a great deal too courteous to leave his daughter 
with the recollection of something like a repri- 
mand from him in her mind. 

"Yes; I'll ask him for Thursday, papa." 

Lord Hamesthwaite turned rather nervously 
towards her on his way to the door. 

" You don't dislike Mr. Gurdon, Gallia, I hope." 

" Tout au contraire," she replied lightly, "I 
like him very much." 



GALLIA. 245 

The discussion ended, the note was written, 
Gurdon was free, and would be delighted, and 
consequently arrived in correct form in time for 
luncheon on Thursday. The same afternoon, a 
dishevelled young man stepped out of a station 
fly, with a battered brown bag in his hand, and 
bade the footman be careful of the foreign-look- 
ing package he was taking from the hands of the 
driver. 

" Good gracious!" exclaimed Gallia, who was 
at that moment issuing from the hall door, ac- 
companied by Margaret. "It is Robbie." Mar- 
garet could have told her as much, for it was 
indeed no other. 

The young man swept a Spanish sombrero 
from his head with an insouciance that was 
native and a flourish that was foreign, and dis- 
closed the astonishing effect produced by a per- 
son having hair much fairer than his skin. 

He shook Gallia heartily by the hand, keeping 
his eyes well upon her face and his sombrero at 
his side. 

" Miss Essex I once had the pleasure of know- 
ing in Paris," he said, with a neat little empha- 
sis, just marked enough for Margaret to hear 
upon the " once." 

"I have not forgotten you at all," said the 
exquisite Margaret, with a tender music in her 
voice, and upon her face a smile only just large 
enough to love. 

21* 



246 GALLIA. 

" Good heavens ! passionately attached to each 
other, I declare," said Gallia inwardly, and re- 
flected further that a charming scamp like Mr. 
Robert Leighton was precisely the kind of being 
Margaret was framed to waste herself upon. 

Robbie's behaviour from the first hour of his 
arrival left no doubt of his feeling to Margaret, 
and Gurdon, for one, observed it with much 
peace of mind. 

He was extravagantly charming to Mrs. Essex 
— utterly enthralled by Margaret, of whom he 
made sketches in a dozen fictitious characters, 
and of whom he immediately undertook a serious 
portrait. 

This very portrait was under discussion as 
they sat at tea, awaiting, on Gallia's part with 
some excitement, the arrival of John Denyer. 

" Now look here," Robbie exclaimed, leaping 
up wildly with a teacup in his hand. " My idea 
is to have her here — Miss Essex, do you mind — 
just half a minute ? Thanks — by this pink peony 
tree. In this same pink gown. No hat on. 
Drenched in sunlight — you see ?" 

" She will have sunstroke to a certainty," cried 
her mother. 

" Face, hair, hands, all that wonderful gold 
shade," Robbie went on, with unabated enthusi- 
asm, — " that grey atmospheric gold ; and then 
the peonies and the dress — masses of bluish- 
purple." 



GALLIA. 247 

" But they are pink," suggested someone diffi- 
dently. 

" Actually, but not relatively !" cried Robbie, 
with much fervour. " Actually we know they are 
pink. Relatively we see they are bluish-purple. 
One paints what one sees." 

An impressive silence followed tbis explanation 
of the method of art. 

" Then I am of course going to do a head in 
the old Italian manner, with a gold background. 
Gold is Miss Essex's inevitable setting. But it is 
among flowers that a large portrait should seize 
her. Dear Miss Essex — is it troubling you too 
much ? Just over here. The pink of your gown 
is simply inspired! I see a most fascinating 
scheme, by using that sheet of poker-red nastur- 
tiums as a background." 

They strolled off together, amid a chorus of 
laughter and shrieks of horror ; but the earnest- 
minded artist and his victim heeded them not, 
and it may be stated in Robbie's defence that 
he did paint that picture, and that it acted as 
an extinguisher to some two hundred and fifty 
other pictures in the centre of a room at the 
Grafton Galleries. 

Gurdon was a silent member of the party. 
He had wondered why no one wanted to paint 
Gallia, a slim, silvery figure with a dense blue- 
green feathered arm of the cedar behind her. 

Her old plainness of attire was no longer 



248 GALLIA. 

indulged in. "Whether she thought it seemly, 
as the hostess of a large establishment, or 
whether it was the outcome of but another 
personal whim, Gallia had chosen to be rather 
magnificent in her costume of late. 

From her head, on which she wore one of 
those French rustic hats, with cobwebs of lace 
draped over the brim, so unbecoming to almost 
every Englishwoman, to her feet and ankles 
in their silvery-grey stockings and grey leather 
buckled shoes, she was perfect. Sitting with 
her legs crossed, the dove-coloured ruffle of her 
petticoat — pale ashes of roses tint — was a delight 
to see, and perhaps it was because he enjoyed look- 
ing at her so much, that Mark found little to say. 

Mrs. Essex was not a talkative woman, but she 
was a good listener, and little Lord Shillinglee, a 
young man of enormous wealth and no fixed po- 
litical opinions, was giving her plenty to listen to. 

"Ah, you see they haven't got the money, 
Mrs. Essex; these Radical fellows '11 promise 
anything to a man who will back them up a bit 
with some money. I'm a bit of a Eadical 
myself, you know, though this lawn isn't the 
place to say so, eh? And I really shouldn't 
mind going in with them, if it was only to hear 
the other side curse — I beg your pardon, Mrs. 
Essex, but they would, you know." He dis- 
solved in a malicious little chuckle, and shook 
furtively within his baggy clothing. 



GALLIA. 249 

Gallia looked down at him, where he sprawled 
awkwardly at one side of her, and then over to 
Mark sprawling gracefully at the other. Her 
mind was busy with the contrast when the 
carriage came up to the front door. Lord 
Hamesthwaite at once went to receive the short, 
well-built man who got down from it. 

" Ah, there is Mr. Denyer," said Mrs. Essex, 
and the eyes of the party were for the moment 
directed to the group. A few minutes later the 
great man was among them. Mark Gurdon's eye 
never left Miss Hamesthwaite when the intro- 
duction was being performed. All her whims 
of manner, the scorns and ironies and indiffer- 
ences of youth dropped from her, and left a 
picture of the woman she would be in a few 
years' time, when her slow development had pro- 
gressed. 

Only the ease and dignity natural to her posi- 
tion, as well as the graciousness that was her 
own, appeared in the pleasant words of welcome 
that she spoke. A certain glow rose in Gurdon's 
mind, as he caught this glimpse of the stately 
and social Gallia he had seen once before, with a 
difference, at Holland House. Entirely with- 
out " beauty manners" at all times, Gallia some- 
times lacked something of the influence the man- 
ners of a beautiful young woman give her. It 
is most fortunate that the generality of beautiful 
people behave as though they were beautiful — 



250 GALLIA. 

for this, not their actual claims of form and 
feature, is what the mass of mankind observes 
and responds to. 

Denver had been moving among the groups, 
but he came and stood beside Gallia and looked 
across the park. The figure of Mr. Essex, in 
his light-grey clothes, was seen crossing the 
grass to the house. 

" Ah, Miss Hamesthwaite, can you guess what 
it is to a man whose eyes have been accustomed 
to the far lovelier flowers of our Dark Continent, 
to see again a sward, moist and velvety, freckled 
with daisies ?" 

Gallia responded intently to the touch of real 
emotion in the man's voice. She was inter- 
ested. Her greeting to Essex was unconsciously 
shortened. 

" How exquisite your Surrey is ! A garden, 
a series of parterres. One of oak forest, one of 
chestnut plantation, one of meadow grass, one 
of corn or flowers." 

" It must seem wonderfully small to you. 
But it is rich, really very rich — and would go so 
much further if the people knew anything about 
exploiting it. You, in Africa, can compel set- 
tlers to the use of more scientific means of cul- 
tivation ; nothing compels them here !" Gallia 
spoke with a note of regret and bitterness, then 
stopped to give Mr. Denyer a cup of the tea that 
had just been brought out. 



GALLIA. 251 

" Expensive business trying to start new agri- 
cultural methods in this country!" remarked 
Lord Shillinglee, who had abandoned agriculture 
for coal, and saw no reason to regret it. 

" Very, eh, Gallia ?" cried Robbie, with the air 
of acute mischief. " Let me see, what did your 
van cost when you were so hot on agricultural 
reform ?" 

" Miss Hamesthwaite, this is news !" cried 
Mark, much interested. " How much truth is 
there in the accusation of philanthropy ?" 

Gallia turned to him, smiling. " I'm afraid a 
good deal," she replied. " Others enjoy telling 
that story more than I do — ask papa about it." 

Lord Hamesthwaite appeared nothing loth to 
provide details. 

" Ah, those were the days of our enthusiasm," 
he said in a good-natured, quizzing fashion. 
""We attended the classes at an agricultural 
college throughout a whole session. Then we 
started a van and selected our own teachers." 

" Then it was partly your scheme ?" inquired 
Mrs. Essex. 

"Not at all! I was severely neutral. This 
young woman did the whole thing. Let me see 
— what did the van teach, Gallia ?" 

"Farmyard Economics," said Gallia briefly, 
suppressing a smile. ■ 

A low, delighted chuckle from Essex greeted 
the reply. 



252 GALLIA. 

" It wasn't agriculture, it was simply, as I say, 
Farmyard Economics we wanted to teach. We 
weren't in connection with, far less in opposition 
to, any of the efforts made by the societies ; but 
I thought, and for that matter still think, there 
was room for the practical enlightened common 
sense our people talked. My two young men 
lectured in turns in the van." 

" Of course free?" from Gurdon. 

" Oh, certainly, free !" 

" The expense was all upon the other side," 
said Eobbie, laughing. " It cost a pretty penny 
to compel them to come in — to the van, didn't 
it, Gallia?" 

" You will never be happy till I tell you what 
it did cost," Gallia said, looking over to him. 

" For how long did you pursue the idea ?" 
Denyer inquired. 

"For a season, commencing in the middle 
of February and continuing to the beginning of 
June." 

" Well, it cost just a fraction over a thousand 
pounds," said Gallia reluctantly. This statement 
excited much delighted laughter. 

" Farmyard Economics !" murmured Essex in 
a tone of irresistible gravity. 

Gallia swept round upon him. 

"Well, I paid two young men, bought two 
horses from papa — and he let me have them very 
cheap, I remember they were £40 apiece. Then 



GALLIA. 253 

I had to have the van built. It was a beautiful 
van, painted in grass-green and corn-colour, with 
appropriate mottoes — no, I will not divulge the 
mottoes round the top. That van cost over £200, 
although I designed every bit of it myself" — 

There was more laughter, in which Gallia 
joined frankly. 

" But what industry and application on your 
part, Miss Hamesthwaite !" Denyer said, looking 
admiringly upon the beautiful face. 

Gallia coloured. 

"I was just growing up," she said, more 
seriously, and Avith a return to the irony of her 
ordinary mood. " I had been too well fed, I 
suppose, all my life, and I had a good deal of 
superfluous energy to work off. Besides, I was 
just at the age of devotion and anxiety to do 
good, and that sort of thing. It didn't last long, 
and of course I see the folly of it now." 

This speech affected various of her hearers 
very differently. 

Gurdon's face, in spite of his enjoyment of the 
details of her scheme, had been alight with in- 
terest and admiration. He had thought that 
Gallia affairie would be more charming a picture 
— a reality — than any other Gallia. He thought 
that eagerness and warmth and interest must 
have greatly become her dark beauty, which a 
touch of too much cynicism made somewhat 
inhuman. 

22 



254 GALLIA. 

Denyer, experienced man and diplomat, leader, 
organizer, financier, and ruler, was interested 
too, because he was faced by something he did 
not understand, and could not account for. To 
Denyer nothing that he did not understand was 
small or unimportant. The mere fact that he 
did not understand it gave it a certain importance 
in his eyes. 

Essex, with eyes half-shut and blinking at long 
intervals beneath his hat brim, scrutinised less 
her face than her mental attitude. The mere 
details of her expression were less noticed by 
him than a scarcely perceptible uneven shifting 
of her figure. 

" In Miss Hamesthwaite's mind philanthropy 
appears to rank as an intellectual nettle-rash," he 
observed critically. " Some people get nettle- 
rash at forty." 

Gallia had fallen into a smiling melancholy. 

"It's usually a youthful disease, all the 
same," she said. " I have been so long grow- 
ing up," she continued, with an air as though 
she had just perceived the fact. " You know 
when you are grown up because you accept 
things. I scarcely can yet, I want to fight 
everything and have everything new and made 
new again." 

Denyer and Gurdon smiled discreetly and 
politely in admiration of her lighted face. 

" What an innocent lady !" said Essex sweetly. 



GALLIA. 255 

" Still at the age of comparatives. Good. Bad. 
Indifferent." 

She turned to him. 

" Prophesy, if you like," she cried. " I know 
you want to! That I shall come to an even 
mean, yes ? "Well, it is quite possible." 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

There are only two kinds of people in society, 
and each kind is admittedly equally tedious. 
There is the person who thinks one should " be 
oneself" at all hazards, and the person who 
thinks that at no hazard should one be oneself, 
but always someone else. 

At the first blush, the first-named commends 
himself most to an honest mind, but before de- 
claring for him it may be well to pause. 

Change and recreation are the inevitable food 
of man. Sooner or later the human being who 
has decided in favour of "being oneself" will 
take a holiday, draw a long breath, and decide, 
for refreshment's sake, to be someone else. It 
is at this juncture that you may meet him, and 
how are you to know ? 

Equally inconvenient, and even more common, 
is the second breed of human — he whose creed 
perceives a certain indecency, at any rate an im- 
politeness and an inexpediency, in being one- 
self, and who is customarily engaged in being 
someone else. This person is equally certain to 
pack his bag, so to say ; expand his chest, and, 
with defiance in his eye and custom beneath his 
heel, decide to " be himself." And if at this 
256 



GALLIA. 257 

point you have fallen in with him — well, how are 
you to know ? 

The worst of the business is, that it is usually 
on the occasion of a handsome crisis in their 
lives that people behave in this way. And if 
you yourself are mixed up in the crisis— if it is 
your crisis too ? At any rate, there is comfort in 
knowing that a crisis is the finest setting for a 
mistake. Seldom, if ever, does a mistake have 
fair play and become fully recognised unless it is 
made at a crisis. 

Fortunately, it usually is, and that is why we 
hear so much about mistakes. 

When Dark Essex kissed and passionately 
loved Gallia in the Cloisters of Westminster — 
was he being himself or someone else ? And 
was it his moment of change, or his age of cus- 
tom ? Had he prefaced his abandon with this 
unspoken flash of thought : " By heavens, I'll act 
like any other man" ? Or with this : " For once, 
then, a mad once, I'll let myself go" ? Gallia had 
often wondered. So had Essex. It formed an 
interesting speculation for his leisure moments, 
and to facilitate its study he sought Gallia's so- 
ciety — or rather her neighbourhood — from time 
to time. As a part of this seeking, he decided to 
accept the invitation for the day on Hindhead. 

The advent of Miss Janion to the Hall had 
decided Gallia on making this expedition; she, 
entertained a wholesome fear of the "maiden- 

• r 22* 



258 GALLIA. 

up-to-date," if left, for whole consecutive hours, 
loose about the house and grounds. Gertrude 
was a person who liked to " do something." She 
came down in the best of clothes and conse- 
quently in the best of spirits too, prepared to do 
any number of things, and in appropriate dresses. 

" Shillinglee ?" she cried, as Gallia ran over 
the names of the house party. " How amusing ! 
How is it, I wonder, that one never goes to a 
country house without meeting the man one last 
refused? And he always takes you down to 
dinner, too." 

" Well, in point of fact, I had" — Gallia began 
vaguely. 

"I know! Of course; you had arranged it! 
My dear, don't alter the table for me. I've gone 
through it with others, and I can again." 

Gallia laughed. "You'll accept him this 
time," she said. 

" Shall I? I believe I shall. He said so the 
other day at the Prince's garden party, I remem- 
ber. What a gathering! never in all my life 
have I seen" — and so the chitter-chatter had run 
on. 

While the household was still at breakfast, 
there was heard the heavy clopping of under- 
bred hoofs upon the drive, and when they looked 
out, there was Essex, mounted on some strange 
quadruped he had hired from his inn at Hidden- 
fold. 



GALLIA. 259 

" Ah, but you haven't felt him trot !" he said, 
with academic gravity, as he came into the 
breakfast hall and shook hands. "You see 
he is accustomed to working front horse in a 
team of three. I call him, most incorrectly, the 
Teamster." 

" Well, I think you had better abandon him 
and see what we can do," Lord Hamesthwaite 
called from his little table near the fire. 

Breakfast was agreeably broken up at three 
little tables, and Gallia and Margaret were in a 
square window embrasure, supported by Gurdon 
and Lord Shillinglee. 

Robbie was described as not up yet. Mrs. 
Essex was described as not down yet. Gertrude 
was described as not dressed yet. 

Everyone admitted that it was a lovely day. 
Mr. Essex sank into a chair and tapped his 
boots. 

Gallia noted, with a feeling of dislike, when 
she handed him a peach with a bit of ice in 
place of the stone, that his feet were too small. 
In the Cloisters, just when he took her hands, 
she had observed that his hands were too small. 
It was a blemish in so handsome a man; a 
blemish that gave her a feeling of discomfort. 

They were to start in twenty minutes. 

" JS"ow may I order you something that corre- 
sponds to one's idea of a horse — or will you 
prefer driving ?" she said hospitably. 



260 GALLIA. 

For a second the crazed suggestion lightened 
in Essex's brain that he would first like to know 
if she were riding or driving. Then he reflected, 
sensibly, that of course he wouldn't have cared 
to know anything of the kind. 

Any woman would have perceived that Gallia's 
snowy spotted muslin was never put on to be 
taken off again in such a hurry. 

In her hat she had followed Margaret's plan ; 
it arched eave-like above her hair ; but over it, 
as she was driving, she had carried a broad wisp 
of incredibly soft French lisse, which broke in a 
foaming bow under her chin. 

Beside her, Margaret, in the green of young 
willows, and a hat trimmed with their garlands, 
seemed the most delectable of summer morsels. 
Gertrude wore a coaching dress from Paris, 
which had to be seen to be credited. In time 
they started. Gallia drove Mr. Denyer behind 
her Norfolk trotter. The main party came on 
the coach, Lord Shillinglee proudly exercising 
his only known and proven talent, handling with 
beautiful dexterity what Gallia called her scratch 
team. 

The picturesquely English start from the fine 
old house was greatly enhanced by the solitary 
equestrian. Mr. Essex had abandoned the Team- 
ster to the heaviest oats the brute had ever en- 
countered, and was mounted on Gallia's black 
hunter. This exquisite beast had not done a 



GALLIA. 261 

day's work for many months, and only enough 
exercise to keep him in condition. "When he 
came out of the stable, shining like a looking- 
glass, and as supple as a Persian cat, Gallia 
apologised for his flesh. 

" If you are determined to ride, you shall at 
least have a good day," she said, as she looked 
over his hitting with a careful eye. " Spain's 
paces are really divine." 

Spain proceeded to illustrate this the moment 
his rider's weight was in the saddle. 

"You could ride him on a thread of silk," 
Gallia said proudly, as she watched the beast 
playing with his feet, " hut you'll soon see what 
Spain is made of." 

" Liquorice and aguardiente, I should think," 
said Robbie. 

Gurdon looked on, and wished he had been 
riding also. 3$o man should miss an oppor- 
tunity of riding when he wants to make an im- 
pression on a woman, provided he never loses 
his temper with a horse and can ride. 

" When you first went to Spain, how did you 
make yourself understood in the wild places?" 
an obvious association of ideas led Margaret to 
ask, as they bowled down the avenue. 

" Oh, I learnt some Spanish in Paris ; short 
sentences, you know. There was a little girl 
there, daughter of an old model, who put lots 
of useful tips in my way. Of course you remem- 



262 GALLIA. 

ber young Lemuel, Gurdon !" He leaned over 
and threw this question behind Lord Hames- 
thwaite's shoulders to Mark. 

" Oh, yes, perfectly," Gurdon answered, won- 
dering what had put the girl into Robbie's mind. 
But he was destined to receive no information, 
for Robbie was a scatter-brain, and any notions of 
sequence in conversation were foreign to his type. 

Gurdon had excellent reason not to forget the 
girl; at that moment he had in his pocket a 
brief note from her, forwarded from his club. 
She was still in Brighton ; she was almost strong. 
"It was so gay and jolly after town; she hoped 
he was amusing himself wherever he was. She 
had got the cheque all right. The doctor thought 
another fortnight would quite set her up ; he was 
such a nice doctor; quite young; he had sent 
her tickets for two afternoon concerts." He 
mentally conned over all the short, shallow sen- 
tences. He was sorry for the girl, not because 
of her position, but because of her nature. She 
must so certainly go one way. A man's most 
pleasing inconsistency is his earnest pity of an 
unfortunate. It gives the good people hope of 
his redemption ; it assures the average, clear- 
headed people that there is no possible hope of 
hers. 

He was sitting where he could see a stretch of 
exquisite country on every side of him ; feeling 
the exhilaration in the light rush of summer air ; 



GALLIA. 263 

within touch of the fluttering laces that came 
warm from Margaret's neck and tapped his 
cheek, and were recovered and apologised for, 
made fast and blown loose again, — Margaret, the 
woman he had at one time thought he loved. 
In front of him, a bright speck upon the road, 
sometimes basely swallowed by a covetous hedge 
curve or a greedy group of trees, was the little 
cart crowned by the white figure of Gallia. 
Sitting there, it struck him that surely no man 
ever saw the cobweb threads of his destiny so 
thickly floating in the air before him. Now one 
tickled his face and now another. Now it was 
Margaret and her whilom charm that he thought 
of; now it was Gallia and the strong fascination 
she had for him. Then it was the letter in his 
pocket. He remembered that other coach-drive 
in Paris two years ago, when he had sat beside 
Mont Voisin and talked horse-breeding in the 
latest cuvee of Paris French — when he had been 
troubled by those underthoughts about his career. 
Then he had not been getting on. Since ? "Well, 
since had come his private secretaryship — not to 
the man he wanted, but still, to a very good man. 
Then Denyer's return home, unexpected, too 
good to hope for, as it had seemed. And a few 
chance words must have passed between Denyer 
and Lord Hamesthwaite. The Colonial Secre- 
tary must not know what he had owed, frankly 
and directly, to the discretion of one humble 



264 GALLIA. 

underling in the big office ; an underling who, 
happening to have a little money, had conceived 
the idea of spending his two months' rest in 
Africa, the country whose name was under his 
eyes some fifty times a day. Lord Hamesthwaite 
must know, or wherefore this sudden patronage ? 
Mark was far too clever to think of it as any- 
thing else. Life seen from this coach-top was 
somewhat different indeed ! His alertness had 
served him very well. So had money which he 
had put away carefully when his father died, 
and there was more of it left yet. 

A less acute young Englishman would never 
have imagined it worth his while to take the 
particular journey Mark had taken ; to fall into 
intercourse with the particular men Mark had 
thought it well to meet ; to get to know the facts 
of a case as Mark had got to know them ; to earn 
the personal commendation of the strong man 
on, the spot, John Denyer ; to ignore the fact of 
his connection with the big office at home as 
Mark had ignored it; to come home and hold 
his tongue about the whole business as Mark 
had held his. 

"Distrait, am I? I beg your pardon!" he 
said, in answer to a playful poke from Mrs. 
Essex. " I was thinking about the last time I 
was coaching ; it was from Paris to Auteuil and 
back. I was thinking of the astonishing differ- 
ence in the outlook." 



GALLIA. 265 

"Ah, quite so. The races, I suppose? Oh, 
a very gay scene in France, of course. I remem- 
ber, when I paid my daughter a visit, we were 
driving, and saw the people coming hack from 
Longchamps. Different indeed ! One could not 
imagine a sweet Surrey road holding such a 
company." 

They were pulling up the steep winding ascent 
to Hindhead, the breath of the pines was about 
them, the air was full of the hum of ardent 
bees constraining the heather to an early bloom. 
Upon the links of road visible some mile or 
two behind was Essex on the slim black Spain. 
In front was the green cart, with the brilliant 
Norfolk bay throwing himself at his collar, and 
Gallia's smiling face turned backward, as it 
seemed, looking at him. Gurdon's road had 
changed indeed. 



23 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

"You see, it's not as though I had a sixpence in 
the world." Mr. Leighton raised himself to a 
more upright position on the heather and made 
the familiar gesture of pulling his watch from 
his pocket. " Look here !" the chain came out 
neatly, and was found to have a curious piece of 
copper money attached to it. " You see what 
time it is with me !" he added, with a touch of 
easy tragedy. 

" Oh, you don't really mean" — 

He interrupted the soft note of shocked amuse- 
ment in Margaret's voice. 

" Indeed I do. Had to, positively, to get down 
here." 

" How dreadful for you !" 

" So we should be as poor as possible at first. 
But not for long. I have lots of old stuff that 
would feed the Spring Exhibitions for some time 
to come. And I should paint portraits. I should 
get on at that, I know. You see, to be a por- 
trait-painter, you only want two things." Robbie 
screwed up his face and tried to look practical. 
" You want to paint the right people, and you 
want to paint 'em in the right way." 
266 



GALLIA. 267 

" Yes," said Margaret, with deep sympathy in 
her face. 

" Now, as to the right people, I should be in 
rare case. Grannie would help me to rope in 
the right people." She nodded. " And as to 
the right way — well, you see my way in that big 
plein air I'm doing of you." 

" You mean the grey, gold, and bluish-purple 
one ?" She might well ask. Robbie had at least 
five canvases on the way. 

" Yes, that's it. I'm painting people in greyish 
gold and purple just now. I mean, that's how 
I see them, you know. "Well, after all, a man 
only wants a manner." He put his hand through 
his yellow hair and pulled several stray locks 
down over his cedar-coloured forehead. "So 
that we should be perfectly independent, you 
know; I'm sure you couldn't bear to feel de- 
pendent on anyone, and I know I couldn't. And 
Grannie makes a lovely background to a fellow's 
life." 

Margaret laughed. She was one of those 
women with a silver laugh. They are really the 
nicest kind. 

" Oh, Robbie," she cried, " don't make your- 
self out such a dreadful goose and such a 
naughty boy as well, or I don't think I really 
can" — 

" Now don't say it, Margaret, or you'll regret 
it ! You do love me, you must love me, for I 



268. GALLIA. 

have loved you ever since that day in Paris when 
I first saw you. You remember ? It was your 
first morning at the studio, and you didn't know 
your way about. I shall never forget the colour 
in your face when it dawned on you that you 
were in the wrong studio. You looked divine ! 
The fellows talked of you all morning." 

" It was one of the most frightful moments of 
my life," said Margaret faintly. 

"By heavens, what a subject picture that 
would be! I see the whole thing; I should 
treat it as an upright. Your face would be the 
warmest note of colour, the prevailing tones 
would be grey, and the faint pinks of the model 
would support your pink blush. I shall do it ! 
I shall call it ' A Rose in Error.' No, ' An Er- 
rant Rose.' You wait." 

" Robbie, you think of nothing but painting 
me." 

" You're wrong. I think much more of loving 
you. I have thought of that since ever I've 
known you." 

" Hush !" She raised up a white and very 
pointed forefinger. " Don't say that. There was 
one time when you didn't think of me at all. 
But we won't talk of it any more." She sighed 
and drooped her serious eyes. 

" My darling girl, we must talk of it, if you 
are to be so madly mistaken as all that. I swear 
that I have loved you ever since I have seen 



GALLIA. 269 

you. I may have been a bit wild. I may not 
have been all the time just what you would 
have wished me to be — and what your love will 
always keep me." He took her hand and kissed 
it, and looked up at her with deep sincerity in 
his face. She responded to it by leaning forward 
and putting her lips to his forehead. It was 
the first time she had volunteered the smallest 
caress, and for a moment he lost his head. It 
was much credit to him that he found it again 
and continued. "But you have kept me 
straight." This he said, spacing the words to 
give them more emphasis. She looked at him 
rather wonderingly. " Why, dear, you can't 
imagine the things I might have been up to in 
Paris." 

" Don't tell me, Robbie ! I'd much rather not 
know." 

"My dear child, I wasn't going to tell you. 
How can you suppose that I would ?" He put 
both his arms round her, which brought his head 
on her shoulder, since she was seated on a tree- 
root somewhat above him. " Don't let us talk 
of it any more now, dear. There is nothing, 
Margaret, I swear it to you, nothing that any 
good woman would not be able to forgive. 
You know there are vast differences in men ; I 
can't explain 'em to you exactly, but there are. 
I don't lay claim to many shining virtues, but 
among men, you know, and by men, you under- 

23* 



270 GALLIA. 

stand, I should come out pretty well. For I've 
never been a bad chap, really." 

Whether memory suppressed an echo in Mar- 
garet's mind cannot be told; at anyrate, they 
were very happy after this, so happy that they 
forgot everybody but themselves ; which is the 
only trustworthy symptom of true happiness. 
Fortunately, most of the party had expected that 
this picnic would " bring matters to a head" 
between Mr. Leighton and Miss Essex. The 
dependence of the upper classes in England 
upon picnics as an emotional opportunity is 
positively pathetic. The excellent meal, which 
forms the inevitable prelude to that moment at 
which one may get away and talk with the only 
person one desires to talk to, was over. It had 
been accompanied by no greater excitement than 
a wonder as to what had become of Mr. Essex. 
He had been at most a mile and a half behind 
them when last seen, and yet he had never 
appeared. 

A footman had been despatched to the inn at 
which he had been advised to leave Spain, and 
had returned with the curious intelligence that 
the horse was in the stable and that Mr. Essex 
was in the inn. Mr. Essex had asked for a 
room, and some ink, pens, and paper, and had 
left orders that he was not to be disturbed. 

" Seized with an inopportune attack of literary 
creativeness," Gurdon had observed, smiling; 



GALLIA. 271 

and nobody found a better explanation to 
offer. 

" Sucb an odd boy be always was !" his mother 
plaintively added, not without some pride in his 
oddity, however. 

So lunch had passed over without him, and 
then Margaret and Robbie had wandered off, 
taking advantage of irregularities in the rolling 
heathland and other bits of cover with a deftness 
that would have put a detachment of infantry to 
the blush. 

The rest permitted an opposite direction to 
attract them, and strolled quietly along, Denyer 
and Mark Gurdon walking on each side of 
Gallia at first. There was nothing particular to 
do. The object of the expedition had been the 
drive, and they were to drive home by another 
road, which would give them an extra five miles 
and a great deal of delightful scenery. 

Returning from the walk, Gallia went on in 
advance to give her orders about putting in the 
horses. Leaning up against the coach she dis- 
covered Mr. Essex, with that peculiar air of 
coolness, paleness, and dark handsomeness that 
distinguished him. 

"Really, at the top of that three-mile hill, 
Spain and I had worked so hard that we were 
both unfit to join the party. The landlord 
deeply sympathised with my condition, and he 
and his man put me' through a wonderful twenty 



272 GALLIA. 

minutes. It seems they have a great experience 
in towelling the cyclists. After that I lay down; 
after that, I am ashamed to say, I went to sleep." 
These explanations flowed smoothly from Mr. 
Essex, and wore an air of such truth that the 
footman packing a hamper close by paused in 
his work and marvelled. 

Gallia had turned to Mrs. Essex with some 
laughing allusion to the cause of her son's dis- 
appearance. 

"Do not be any quicker than you can help 
with the horses," Essex remarked, catching the 
groom's eye and bidding adieu to half a sover- 
eign at the same moment. The man understood 
him, and passed the word to his helpers. 

" May I claim the last ten minutes of this 
delightful hour, Miss Hamesthwaite ?" Essex 
said, approaching her as she stood in brisk talk 
with Mark Gurdon. She looked up at him at 
once — the curious still atmosphere of strength 
and hidden thought about the man always com- 
manded her attention. " I should like to show 
you the greatest curiosity in the neighbourhood, 
and I think you may have missed it. It lies 
over here." 

"Mr. Essex excites my interest!" she said 
to Mark. " "Well, then, don't disappear when 
Brownie is put in, because she will not stand, 
and you know I am to drive you home." 

"Whether this remark disturbed Essex or not, 



GALLIA 273 

he certainly spoke no word as they walked off 
together. 

" But you said it was over there ?" protested 
Gallia, pointing with her parasol, and then 
opening it suddenly. 

" Truly," he rejoined, altering the direction of 
his steps. Still they went on in silence. 

"What were you doing at the inn?" Gallia 
asked, as they descended a hill among the pine 
trees. 

"I was writing to you," answered Essex 
quietly. 

"To me?" — she looked up in surprise at his 
face. 

With a sudden change of his absorbed manner, 
he met her eyes and put life into his glance. 

" To you. See this !" he showed her an en- 
velope with her name upon it. " Shall we sit 
down here on the edge of this little pool? It 
looks deep, doesn't it ?" 

Gallia was conscious that the day had changed, 
that her frame of mind must alter to be in keep- 
ing with it, that something serious was coming 
to her. There was no fascination, no magnetism 
about Essex's glance, but there was, now and 
then, a curious deep, still fondness in its depths, 
which lingered for a very little moment, just 
long enough to obtain recognition, and then left 
mockery, of himself as much as others, in its 
place. 



274 GALLIA. 

" I have changed my mind about my letter : I 
shall throw it away," he said. 

"Don't do that ! It would spoil the heather." 

Essex laughed. 

" What a pity I am not a sentimental fellow !" 
said he; "there is a beautiful opportunity for 
bitterness there. !Nb, we will dig a hole — and 
■ bury it. Some little mice will gnaw it up and 
make nests of it, and still smaller mice, of a 
fleshy shade, shall nestle in it, — good." He 
began to make a hole just between them as 
they sat. Still digging, efliciently enough, with 
a long silver cross that hung on his watch-chain 
but never dangled publicly upon his waistcoat, 
he began speaking. 

" Don't be impatient, Gallia : this is the last 
of me." 

"What is?" 

" This little talk to-day, and this buried letter." 

" Don't bury the letter — let me read it first." 

" And bury it after ? !Nb, indeed. Some let- 
ters are meant to be buried. I see that in any 
ease you would wish this one buried, so my last 
service shall be to bury it for you." 

" Your last — and your first service." 

He looked up. 

" That's not true. I have done, first and last, 
a great deal for you, Gallia. First and last, good 
or bad, I have done a great deal. For six years 
I have been a great deal in your life; often I 



GALLIA. 275 

have involuntarily given the tendency to your 
thoughts. When we met, what were you like ? 
Ah ! how different you were !" 

"I remember myself perfectly. I could cry 
now for what I suffered! How hard I have 
taken everything! How brackish and bitter 
every experience of my first youth tasted ! 
Drowned in sea-water, life has been for me. I 
was hot-spirited, raw, impatient; clever, sensi- 
tive, shy, vain, self-conscious; Avith an abnor- 
mally developed sense of the ridiculous ; too shy 
even to cherish a fine ideal inside myself. Then 
you came along, and how much bitterer and 
more brackish things seemed to you ! What a 
cynicism I found in you ! What crude brutality 
you served out to me !" She recapitulated these 
Ahings as though they had been long unthought 
of in her mind, as though she saw and recog- 
nised them clearly now at last for the first time. 
Neither looked at the other, they stared out 
across the wonderful waves of green Surrey far 
into the blue of Sussex. 

"Yes. I spoilt you and warped you — unin- 
tentionally, of course. I used to think of you 
much more than I would ever admit, you know. 
Then, when I was tutoring in Greece and trail- 
ing cubs about Asia — those strange letters that 
you wrote to me. Three of them I remember, 
in about two years." 

" I used to be moved to write them after long 



276 GALLIA. 

spells of a lonely sort of misery and dissatisfac- 
tion. Usually at night." 

" Once by moonlight — so you said." 

" Quite true ; one does that sort of thing at a 
certain time in one's life. And your replies ! 
Good heavens ! ' I perceive in the lower corner 
what you would no doubt wish me to consider a 
tear-drop. Do not, dear lady, do not impress so 
honest an object as the bedroom ewer, to support 
these figments of the imagination.' " Gallia 
laughed with a suspicion of sadness in the voice, 
sadness for those old days when such nonsense 
had made her so miserable. He joined in even 
less gleefully. Then they both said the same 
thing at the same moment, which often happens, 
but has, nevertheless, an odd enough effect. 

Gallia. " I was so fearfully in love with you, 
you see !" 

Essex. " You were so fearfully in love with me, 
you see !" 

At this they laughed again. 

" "Well, it was that, I suppose," Essex said] 
and then, looking at her, added. " The thing 
has evened itself up since, hasn't it ?" 

She did not answer. 

" Let me see the letter before you put it in." 

" No ; the letter belongs to something that has 
no further existence." 

" And was it not the curiosity you wanted to 
6how me ?" 



GALLIA. 277 

" No. Iwas the curiosity — and still am. But 
not of the same sort. I have repented me of the 
evil." 

" Why ?" 

" I didn't know you were going to drive Gur- 
don home, before. I do now : that little fact has 
changed my life-plan. I can't help feeling you 
are right to drive Gurdon home and marry him 
afterwards. I think he will do very well. He 
is really quite a fine fellow, Gurdon, and he will 
have all the position you care about. I know 
you don't care for family." 

Gallia had not interrupted any of these state- 
ments regarding her future course of action. 
She contented herself by saying, " My dear Dark, 
we haven't any family ourselves. Nice, middle- 
class people raised to uncomfortable prominence 
by a vulgar title." 

" No doubt," he assented calmly. " Still, that's 
just why you might have been expected to stand 
out for family, you know." 

"We can do without it. Money I have in 
plenty. Gurdon will achieve all the position 
necessary for a man to have. He has the kind 
of talent that is indispensable to a Conservative 
Government. They can't get on without the 
keen talent of business men. Look at papa! 
They got in papa, in the face of enormous 
Cabinet opposition, to morphine the Colonies 
after the machinations of a Marquis. Forgive 
24 



278 GALLIA. 

me all those silly m's. And see how it has 
worked. The Radicals have had to stoop and 
collar labour to keep them going, the Tories have 
stooped too and collared the shopkeepers — our- 
selves — to keep them going." 

"A facile explanation, Gallia, with as much 
truth in it as any woman can arrange artistically 
in her statements." 

" I was talking of Gurdon's position as it 
affects himself, not as it affects me, for it doesn't 
affect me. It's as a man that Gurdon appeals to 
me." 

" You are perfectly right," said Essex smoothly, 
dusting his small, sallow hands with a handker- 
chief; " he has all the manly qualities." 

"He has. He's got virility, alertness, no 
vague nebulous tract of country between the 
place where his ideas are born and the place 
where they are shaped for practice. He is keen 
and gamey and lifey. Then he's got iron self- 
control, a princely obstinacy, an imperial power 
of faithfulness." Essex assented with his head 
several times. " Added to which, he is a hand- 
some fellow, with all the bone and muscle and 
blood and fibre that a man ought to have — not 
wasted by athletics, nor injured by slothful- 
ness." 

" My dearest girl," Essex said, when the list 
of Gurdon's virtues was full, " he's the very man 
for you. Marry him. Marry him by all means !" 



GALLIA. 279 

"I am glad you think it is all right," said 
Gallia heartily. " There's nothing in which two 
heads are more conspicuously better than one, 
than in deciding a point of this kind. The suc- 
cessful marriage is when you happen to want the 
man that other people would have chosen for 
you." 

" Entirely so. People have proved thousands 
of millions of times that it's the last move to 
base upon one opinion only, and that your own." 

"Well, you see why I'm going to marry him?" 

"Oh, I do." 

" And I explained all my views to you before 
— as to what I expected to arrive at for myself." 

" You did indeed." 

" Dark, you aren't being sympathetic : what's 
the matter 1" 

" JSTothing, dear." 

There was a pause, during which they sat as 
before, looking over to blue Sussex. Gallia's 
face was a little discontented. 

" And now," taking out his match-box, " let 
us burn the letter. On second thoughts, I won't 
let mice nibble it to pieces. Ashes are, I believe, 
employed as a fertiliser. Do you think a sprig 
of white heather would be so obliging as to 
spring on the grave of my hopes ?" 

" Your hopes f" 

" That letter was to tell you that — Do you 
mind putting up your parasol ? I can't get this 



280 GALLIA. 

match to light; thanks ! — You see, I didn't know- 
till now that you had decided." 

" Yes, I think I have decided." 

" Do you mind telling me, are you going to 
love G-urdon at all ?" 

" I like the ' am I going to,' " she laughed. 
" No, Dark. The thing is not written in that 
key. I finished loving anyone — you know 
when." 

" I know when. "When I began to love you." 

" Was it ? "Well, that was the nick of time." 

Her eyes were on the flames of the thin cream- 
laid note-paper of the inn. 

" I would not ask to see that letter, though, 
of course, I would like to have seen it, just as 
much as you would like to have shown it me. 
I believe I can control the woman in me some- 
times." 

" My dear," Dark Essex looked up with a naif 
illumination of face and a very delicate playful- 
ness of voice, " that's your one failing ! — Now," 
rising as she rose, " shall we fly in the face of 
custom by not kissing each other ?" 

She smiled her sweetest, her most delicious 
smile, and walked with a graceful floating sort 
of swiftness over the heather. Very soon they 
could see the coach— the reins were just being 
buckled at that moment. Something had de- 
layed the men. 

"All the same," said Gallia, turning to him 



GALLIA. 281 

and pausing, "I think one may over-do one's 
sacrifices, in order to fly in the face of custom. 
"We run the risk of giving custom too much im- 
portance." Essex made a gesture of despair, 
and indeed he felt some in his heart. " If he'd 
had a pinch more of the common vices of a man 
about him," commented Gallia to herself, with 
the whimsical network showing on her forehead. 

" I swear I'm so accustomed to acting as if 
I've no feelings, that I begin to think I haven't 
any !" was Essex's reflection. 

Essex was a distinctly clever fellow, but he 
lacked a great deal of valuable common knowl- 
edge. For instance, he had never heard that 
there is often precious little fighting in the 
soldier who is too good at drill. 



24* 



CHAPTER XXVIIL 

" Ten miles — with plenty of hill — in fifty-four 
minutes." 

Gurdon took out his watch to make a calcula- 
tion. They were on the level just then. 

" Really, it is good ! Do you think driving 
fast can make one hot, or is it really very warm ?" 

" It is warm, but you are at a certain strain to 
watch the road when we are going so fast, and 
the excitement heats you." 

" She is perfectly sure-footed, and I have 
never known her to stumble — but of course 
one must — Hullo ! Aha !" 

At that instant the horse had stumbled — it 
was only a small stumble, but Gallia pulled up 
immediately. 

" I'll go back and see what it was." Mark 
got promptly out and walked along the road; 
there was an inch deep of powdery sand in the 
track, and among it more than one rounded 
stone. He came back and reported, and they 
went on again, but Gallia's brow was knitted. 
The next two miles were covered much more 
slowly, and conversation was somewhat dis- 
jointed. 

" There ! I was afraid of it, she's going lame 

282 



GALLIA. 283 

of that near fore ! Never in all the four years 
that I have had her has she known one minute's 
lameness. She must have strained herself in 
recovering. We shall come very soon to the 
Noah's Ark Inn ; I will etop there and rest her 
for half an hour." 

" "We might have tea, perhaps ?" 

Mark knew much better than to offer to look 
after the horse; he went and found the ostler, 
however, and then he set himself to ordering 
tea and strawberries in a quaint little sitting- 
room looking out upon a garden choked with 
flowers. 

The strain was rather more serious than she 
had imagined, and Gallia was about twenty 
minutes in getting a hot-water bandage on the 
leg, after having bathed it as long as the hot 
water of the " Noah's Ark" — a tap which had 
small popularity, apparently, and was little in- 
quired for — held out. She came in at length 
and described her labours. 

"And I am afraid, do you know, that we 
must go home by train ?" 

" Very well. "What a pity for the little horse ! 
You will want to take him too. Shall I get a 
man to go to the station, and see if by any 
means a horse-box can be had ?" 

She gratefully accepted this suggestion, and 
Mark went to put it in force at once. 

"At anyrate," she said to herself, as she 



284 GALLIA. 

arranged her hair at the oblong glass on the 
over-mantel, — " At anyrate, he is a person of 
resource in little things. So tremendously 
necessary. He is the kind of man who would 
miss the last train, and arrive just the same. And 
one has to admire that. "Whereas, poor Dark — 
dear, dear ! how much one could love Dark for 
being totally without that sort of quality !" 

Gurdon came in at that moment. 

" It is all right ; the man has gone. And I 
just gave him a telegram to the stationmaster at 
Haslemere, asking him to put a horse-box on to 
the 6.35 from there; so that even if there is 
none at this little place, you will probably get 
one all the same." 

" "What a useful person you are !" 

Gallia looked laughingly at him. This fresh 
proof of his readiness in little things amused her. 

" Do you dislike useful people ?" 

" How should I ? Ah, here is tea !" 

She helped the dumb, heavily - breathing 
country girl to spread the table, then she lifted 
a pot of musk from the window and put it in 
the centre. 

"What a gracious sort of thing to do ! thought 
Mark. 

They sat down. As is usual in the country, 
the bread was greyish and a little sour, the 
butter was salt and out of a tub, the jam was 
somebody or other's whole squashed fruit, and 



GALLIA. 285 

the tea someone else's best bonded, which recalled 
the delicious hay of a year ago. They had no 
fresh eggs, and they had no cream, and they had 
no water-cress. But Gurdon was in love with 
Gallia Hamesthwaite, so it didn't matter. 

And Gallia Hamesthwaite was in love with 
logic, so it didn't matter. 

"Ah!" he put down his cup with rapture; 
"friendly Brownie ! But the Brownies belong 
to the good folks, don't they ?" 

" They do. And this time their little doings 
will be the means of keeping us away from our 
friends till eight o'clock, and making papa very 
anxious." 

" He surely won't be so anxious when he 
reflects that you are with me?" Gurdon said 
rather foolishly, with the carelessness of a 
person who is wanting to say one particular 
thing, and bestows the least possible attention 
upon any other subject that may happen to come 
up. 

He received a look of cool inquiry from Gallia. 

" He will be anxious about you too. Brownie 
should have taken care of both of us, and 
Brownie didn't." 

"Brownie has been the means of our being 
alone here together," said Gurdon boldly. " I 
seem never to have found you alone in my life 
till now." 

" Why should you have expected to ? The 



286 GALLIA. 

way we all live is calculated always to bring 
people together in droves, not alone together." 

" But how can you get to know anyone whom 
you persistently meet in droves ?" 

" Somehow or other, even in London, you do 
find yourself alone with people who want to 
know you, and whom you want to know." Gallia 
spoke musingly, the long dim cloister at West- 
minster rising before her eyes. 

" It has never yet happened to me." 
" It has happened to you here to-day." 
Still there was the cloud of elsewhere in her 
eyes, the tentative remote tone in her voice. 
Mark was no psychologist and it did not disturb 
him. 

" ' And He and She the hanquet scene completing, 
With dreamy words and very pleasant eating,' " 

he said contentedly, holding up a really quite 
presentable strawberry. 

She smiled upon him. 

" Something has put me in mind of a poem I 
once knew, I have thought of it at intervals all 
day. I wonder if you know it ?" 

" Let me hear it." 

He said it. He had a good voice ; he said it 
very well. There is no need to detail the poem. 
Everybody has had such a poem in his mind 
on such an occasion ; everybody will remember 
some of it. It was quite the usual poem. 



GALLIA. 287 

"You have a great feeling for poetry," said 
Gallia thoughtfully, when he had finished. 

"For a practical kind of fellow, I believe 
music and poetry have far too much meaning 
for me." 

" Do you like your life salted with poetry ?" 
she asked thoughtfully still. 

" If I could get it," Mark answered, smiling ; 
" if not, I am prepared to do without it." 

" An unusual attitude for you, Mr. Gur- 
don." 

" Very, I admit — I'm seldom prepared to do 
without what I want. As you will have guessed, 
or someone may have told you, I am a very 
ambitious man." 

She laughed. " I have guessed — and every- 
body has told me besides." 

" Think of the most ambitious design I could 
entertain — towards you, for instance." 

He had courage, but he lowered his voice and 
he spoke slowly, very slowly. 

Gallia looked at him ; her face and eyes were 
not unkind, and there was a gleam of playfulness 
in them. 

" I think of it," she said. " And you can put 
it aside at once." 

He lifted his shoulders slightly, as though to 
get a better breath. 

" I am so in earnest," he said, with a good 
deal of effort. " Gallia, I am so in earnest." He 



288 GALLIA. 

clasped his right hand round his left, pressed 
them so, till the white pattern of each finger was 
shown above each knuckle, then, still clasped, 
he dropped them between his knees. " Think 
what I want — I want to make you my wife !" 

" Now, why ?" said Gallia, not flippantly but 
with interest. " That's only the second most 
ambitious design I can think of, but tell me 
why?" 

He missed the parenthesis, the answer to that 
" why" was burning in him so hotly. He stam- 
mered his reply, seemed to reject the first part 
of his answer, and said, with great restraint, 
" Because I admire you more than any woman 
I have ever seen. And because I admire you 
more than I could admire any woman in the 
world, seen or not seen." 

She looked at him critically. 

" You shall tell me more of that later. It is 
my turn to say something. You sha'n't suffer the 
unfairness of the average proposal scene if I can 
help it." 

" The unfairness ?" 

" Yes. A man has to say all the humble, un- 
comfortable things, — in the sweat of his brow, — 
and a girl listens calmly and allows smiles to 
dawn at intervals. We won't do that. We'll 
try and be more honest. So it is my turn now. 
I have thought for some little time of marrying 
you, and to spare you any further anxiety, I 



GALLIA. 289 

may tell you that I had decided to if you spoke 
of it." 

Mark recognised the tremendous individuality 
of this speech, and took both her hands in a 
grasp of great strength, a grasp that trembled 
from his desire not to crush those hands too 
tightly. 

" Gallia !" It was a cry of great joyfulness ; 
the astonishing whiteness of his face gave way 
before a rush of blood. " But you mustn't accept 
me yet," he said, — " not like that. I have things 
to tell you, things about myself. You must know 
them before you say that" — he inhaled sharply, 
with a musical note in his breath — " that you will 
take me." 

" Of course we shall have to talk about it a 
very great deal. But if I tell you a few things, 
it will save time. And we can do the talking at 
greater leisure." 

" That reminds me" — he seized his watch and 
then leapt up ; " how dare there be trains ?" He 
took her hand again, even as he looked for and 
rang the bell. " "We must leave instantly if we 
are to walk Brownie to the station." 

Gallia, without another word, flew out of the 
room. Mark gave the girl who came half a 
sovereign, and followed to the stable-yard. The 
harness had already been stowed in the little 
cart. And Gallia came out of the stable leading 
a still limping Brownie by a borrowed halter. 
s t 25 



290 GALLIA. 

They set off, Mark beside her, she leading her 
horse. 

The lane that Mark and Gallia followed 
seemed to lead into the heart of a lemon-and- 
silver evening rather than to any landward 
point. They were silent for a little time. Then 
Mark, after many inward hesitations, took her 
free hand and held it. The conversation, so 
hurriedly concluded, seemed a little difficult to 
take up. 

" There are so many things I must tell you, so 
much to explain, so much to put you in pos- 
session of," Gallia began perplexedly, as they 
went along, " and this doesn't seem the occa- 
sion. This is not a serious occasion, it is a sen- 
timental occasion;" she placed a dreadful in- 
flection on the word sentimental, which made 
Gurdon apprehensive. " This lane, the scent 
of those queen-of-the-meadows, the honeysuckle 
and roses, that sky over there above the fir 
trees, is too much for me ; the whole thing is a 
stage set, and we are puppets ! I can't be 
serious!" He listened very sympathetically. 
"And the press of centuries of tradition is 
weighing on me and pulling and dragging me." 
She shook her head and threw it up as a horse 
does when unused to harness. " I can't be my- 
self. All the dead women in the world who 
have done identical things at such moments are 
coercing me, are pushing and constraining me 



GALLIA. 291 

to act as they did. And if I do, I sha'n't mean 
it — it won't be me, it will be them — all the 
women who have been loved and who have 
gone before. "What chatter it is to talk of being 
free, or of getting free ! as if we ever could ! 
Make her the moment and the man, and every 
woman takes to sentiment smiling, as a little 
yellow fluffy duckling flounders quacking to a 
pool. Oh, what chatter — what chatter it has 
all been, this talk of freedom ! Sometimes there 
are moments in life when one actually sees a 
little further — when emotion and excitement lift 
one above the shoulders of the colder crowd. 
Free ? Individually free ? Poor women, if that 
is what we want ! We undo one knot in order 
to be 'free' to tie another. "Women are like 
members of an Alpine party — looped each to 
one long rope. Even I, who have no sentiment 
in me, my hands and arms would know perfectly 
how to clasp you." 

Mark shivered with sudden passion. 

" That would be instinct," he said in a whis- 
per. 

" It would not ! It would be heredity ! Savage 
man and woman did not make love as we do, 
they had no instinct of that kind. You eat and 
hunt and kill and sleep and marry by instinct — 
but there is no primary instinct of love-making. 
It is heredity. A trick of heredity. Hands, 
arms, and lips are born with the cunning of it, 



292 GALLIA. 

and whether one feels like it or not has little 
enough to do with it." 

Mark admired her the more for this fire, 
though it puzzled him. 

" Gallia, can't you see what a lovely thing it 
is, this sweet instinct in women — in all good 
true women — to respond to, and to love the man 
who loves them." 

" No, Mark, I can't see it — I never could see it. 
It has heen my misery always to see the ugly 
side of love and love-making. And I feel caught 
in a net now, a net of sentiment. No, you are 
not the fowler ; it isn't your fault. It's the sea- 
son and the sky and the flowers, and the whole 
of nature's clever 'ticing-trap. Mark, pick me 
some honeysuckle, get me some meadow-sweet — 
let me take Queen Nature's shilling if I must." 

In half a minute he had put a great tower of 
creamy, powder-headed meadowsweet into her 
hand and hung a scented trail of honeysuckle 
about her neck and from her hat. She let him 
kiss her as he did this, knowing that it had to 
be, that the time had come for it, and verily 
Mark's soul was in his eyes as he looked at her. 

" How gladly I would unbe everything I have 
ever been for you now !" he said, rather strangely, 
and still held her face lightly with his hands. 

" I forget — have you said that you loved me ?" 
asked Gallia. 
, " I don't know if I've said it. I don't think I 



GALLIA. 293 

am going to say it. There are things to tell you 
first. And I think, too," — he raised his arms 
above his head and looked up into the air and 
seemed to expand himself to the evening — " I 
think, too, if you will allow me, I will never 
say it — I will live it." 

"Words rose to Gallia's lips in reply, but she 
6aw the lemon lines in the sky and the masses 
of silver cloud and the bars of misty blue that 
would be indigo in an hour, and she smelt . the 
flowers, and knew the dead women of the world 
were having their will of her, were triumphing 
in her. She made no answer. They were both 
silent. Just before they went into the station, 
Gurdon said tenderly — 

" I owe Brownie something !" and he stopped 
and kissed the beast's bright neck, just above 
where Gallia's hand lay on it, then he kissed 
her hand too. " My hand !" he said. 

" Oh, dead, dead women who are so strong 
still !" cried Gallia in her puzzled heart. " And 
dead men, too, that teach so faithfully !" 

" What will you do with your flowers ?" said 
the man of the world dubiously, as they went 
into the station yard. 

" I shall wear them," said Gallia. 

"You look lovely in them," responded the 
lover, with an ecstatic modulation. 



25* 



CHAPTEE XXIX. 

As they sat down on the little narrow bench 
at the end of the horse-box, opposite Brownie's 
frightened head, Gallia felt the weight of the 
situation becoming intolerable. Never in her 
life had she put off the awkward moment, the 
moment of confession, abasement, explanation 
— whatever it might have been. The torments 
of a person with something on his mind were 
new to her. She had an almost endless buoy- 
ancy of soul, owing to her habit of immediate 
honesty. This moment now burdened her as 
much as had those others long ago, when it had 
been Essex to whom her explanation was owed. 

She was silent, sometimes looking out at the 
blue and black evening, sometimes letting her 
eyes rest on Brownie's head. Mark had been 
silent too, by way of sympathy with her mood. 
Also, he had a great deal to think of. Events had 
hurried him somewhat ; instead of all falling out 
decently and in order, here was only another ex- 
ample of Nature's or Life's lack of any sense of 
propriety. It deeply offended Gurdon's sense of 
decency to have spoken to Miss Hamesthwaite 
while Cara Lemuel still depended upon him for 
support. She would never, of course, hear of it, 
294 



GALLIA. 295 

but Gurdon had his theories ; he honoured the 
woman who was to be his wife ; he regarded this 
complication as a tacit offence to her, and he, on 
his own part, resented it. He was the victim of 
it as much as she was. This made him silent 
too. His heart beat high at his fine fortune, but 
— he too had his ideal, and for the sake of an 
opportunity he had not acted up to it. 

He chose an outside subject to break in upon 
their constraint. 

" Imagine your coming in this box and insist- 
ing on travelling with the horse !" he said, with 
a kind touch in his voice. 

" I would not have excused a servant for get- 
ting into a carriage and leaving a nervous horse 
alone," Gallia answered simply. 

" But then it would have been the servant's 
business." 

" It is the business of anybody who happens 
to be with a horse to look after him, isn't it? 
Besides, wouldn't you rather be in a carriage 
with a dear horse whom you know than in a 
carriage with tiresome people whom you instinc- 
tively hate ?" 

He laughed. 

" Oh, far rather," he said. " It is said that 
women who are fond of animals to the extent 
that you are, don't care for children." 

" If children are as nice as nice animals, I 
like them extremely. But why should one be 



296 GALLIA. 

expected to adore other people's children, out of 
hand ? It's absurd. Fortunately it's dying out. 
Now, do you like children ?" 

He did not answer at once ; as a matter of fact, 
he could not command his voice. He had never 
had anything like this emotion to quell before — 
he had not believed himself capable of it — now 
it choked him. If he had at that moment re- 
called his love for Margaret, — which had been 
a mere drawing-room feeling, with as little sub- 
stance about it as a cretonne, — if he had recol- 
lected some other feelings of his in another rela- 
tion, he would have shouted in their repudiation. 
This, this now, was his first moment of feeling ; 
he was indeed hoisted above the shoulders of the 
colder crowd ; he was scarce able to breathe for 
the tumult in his breast. Her question had been 
put quite lightly ; she had had no arriere pensee ; 
but the instant she felt him take her hand in the 
spell of the silence that had fallen, and heard 
him breathing, she knew a moment had come. 

" I shall love my own children," he said, very 
low and gravely, " if God — and you — give me 
any." 

Mark, the worldly-minded ; Mark, the agnos- 
tic; Mark, the erect man of nowadays, whose 
knee had never bent at any shrine ! And till 
then he had never known any thought that went 
so deeply with him ; he had never cared or meant 
a hundredth part as seriously. 



GALLIA. 297 

Could Gallia reply ? It was her time ; she was 
strangely moved ; it must have been a sob, half 
of exaltation, half of regret, that he heard in her 
voice. If it had been Essex who was beside her, 
whose hand was in hers ! If he had said those 
last words ! Just in a flashing second she won- 
dered if it would have come natural to her to 
reply. She looked searchingly round the box — 
but a little light came in at the square window, a 
mere fading beam, and there was no lamp. Oh, 
if it had been Essex ! She could have told him 
true. She thought of her duty, she thought of 
her free choice, she thought of her ideals. She 
was strong enough then for the ordeal by fire. 
She belonged now to the man beside her, she 
had chosen to belong to him ; and he was hers, 
she had selected him to be hers. 

" I will love our child," she said. He said 
nothing, he was more than happy. 

Some priest wrapped in mystic adoration, 
kneeling in the chequered light of the Virgin's 
chapel, praying for the atonement of man's sins 
to woman, who has felt his heart reel to that 
most sacred depth of humility which is the first 
step- upon the gold stairway of pardon, might 
sympathise with Gurdon's feelings then. 

Presently he awoke to be a man again. 

" Will you not say once, now, that you love 
me ?" he asked. 

"Need we say our alphabet?" asked Gallia, 



298 GALLIA. 

with a swift change of humour, and he was sure 
he had made a mistake. " Ah, yes," she went 
on ; "I must tell you. I am not marrying you 
because I love you." 

" Then forgive me my vanity — if I took that 
for granted, it is because I knew of no other 
possible reason for your marrying me. Why, 
then — why are you willing to be my wife ?" 

"Frankly, I am not allured by the prospect of 
being anybody's wife," she said, taking up her 
adherence to her older feelings. " But I want to 
marry ; and I want you to be my husband — or 
rather, the father of my child." 

He was puzzled and he was piqued, — he did 
not in the least follow her. 

" I do not love you — I may no doubt come to 
have a strong affection for you." — He recovered 
a little — he was ready, as every man is ready, to 
undertake to teach her to love him; he was 
going to tell her so in a minute. " But I admire 
you ; you fill out my idea of what a man should 
be ; not only in looks, but in qualities. Perhaps 
it seems strange to you, but I have never had 
much love in me, and that little I used up some 
time ago, on someone who did not care for me, 
and whom, if I had married, I should have been 
disappointed with now. I have only yearned to 
be a mother — I can't explain and say more about 
it than that, even to you; I have wanted the 
father of my child to be a fine, strong, manly 



GALLIA. 299 

man, full of health and strength. A man who 
is a man, whose faults are manly ; who has never 
been better than a mere man in all his life." 

He marvelled greatly, then he said, " But — do 
you know enough of my life to feel satisfied ? 
For, Gallia, I love you. So much that you shall 
take me on your own terms. I shall be yours, 
and you shall be your own ! "When I cannot 
understand, I shall still love you. I do not quite 
follow you now, but with you I know that there 
is no single feeling but what is noble and honour- 
able and honest. Now — you must hear about 
my life — I must be as honest as you would have 
me — as, indeed, I wish to be." 

" Thank you, Mark; as I said before, the dis- 
comfort shall not be all yours. It would have 
been strange if, with my views, I had agreed to 
marry you being ignorant of your life. An odd 
series of little circumstances placed me in pos- 
session of certain facts" — 

" You know that I loved Margaret Essex ?" 

" "Well, I did not. But I could not forgive 
any man who had not loved Margaret Essex. 
She is the ideal woman. She is a thousand 
women — not one woman. All men ought to 
worship her." 

He laughed, picked up her hand and kissed it. 
" Looking back on it, it seems very curious," he 
said ; " she touched none of the chords you touch 
in me. Every fibre in me loves you!" His 



300 GALLIA. 

voice was warm and joyous again. " So what 
did you know?" He had no suspicion of what 
was coming. 

" "Well, I believe I was already dreaming of 
marrying you — possibly, and if you would have 
me — when the knowledge of the illness of your 
mistress came to my ears." 

If a cannon had gone off close to his head, 
Mark would have been less amazed. 

" You will believe that I was not prying into 
your life," said Gallia judicially, not as one 
asking a question, but as one giving an order. 
He was too astounded to speak. Could Essex, 
who just possibly might know something of it, 
have — but never, never, never — that was wholly 
impossible. 

She recapitulated the chain of events that had 
put her in possession of these facts, and still 
Mark's silence held good. 

" I went down into the country to think things 
over, to review my life, and be quite sure of what 
I wanted to do with it. At first — just at first, 
Mark — I did not like it; it somehow — did not 
please me. I will not go into the reasons, though 
I think I know them all now. Then — I saw 
that I must reform my thoughts ; I saw that the 
logical sequence of my views about the kind of 
man I wanted to marry read equally as my 
approval" — 

" Don't, Gallia ! For God's sake, don't, don't, 



GALLIA. 301 

don't !" Without knowing why, Mark knew that 
he could not bear this. He could bear the rest, 
but this he simply could not bear. It was the 
agony of knives to him. 

There was a pause; in Gallia's brain an 
explanation of his feeling made itself heard. 
Throughout the ages, a man's wife is expected 
to disapprove of his mistress while she forgives 
him for having one; all this is tacit. It is 
impossible for a man to listen to his adored wife 
talking — in no matter what fashion — of his pre- 
viously cherished mistress. That this is as in- 
comprehensible as the number of physical ele- 
ments matters nothing. It is so. 

" Would you rather have me angry with you 
about it ?" asked Gallia. 

" Infinitely rather," said Gurdon ; " it would 
be more natural." 

" If I loved you, I might be jealous of her," 
thought she, but wisely said nothing. 

" Well, you cannot get over the fact that it was 
owing to my hearing of her at the time, and in 
the way that I did, that decided me to marry 

you." 

Gallia clasped her hands round her knees and 
looked disconsolately before her. 

Gurdon groaned. The longest pause of all 
occurred. 

Gallia abandoned Gurdon, his head in his 
hands, and occupied herself with Brownie. 

26 



302 GALLIA. 

In the meantime, the train drew into the 
station. They roused themselves, and the horse 
was got out and a man found to take it to the 
Hall. 

" I find they can have a fly from the inn in a 
few minutes." 

" Very well. I am going to walk. I should 
prefer it." 

This sounded as though Mark was to have the 
privilege of driving alone in the fly; he could 
not believe that she meant it. 

" If you wish to walk, I am very willing; hut 
are you not tired ?" 

" Not the least. I'm made of better stuff. I 
want to walk because I want to think. You had 
better think too. I see I have frightened you. 
You had never seen the real me till now, and 
you don't like her. Very well. Let her go — 
there is no harm done." 

" Hush ! hush ! Life is not a child's game, 
Gallia." 

" No," she murmured, with a wry smile ; " it 
is too dull for that." 

They had been walking down the ash-path, 
now Gallia led the way to a short cut through 
the wood which cut off the hill. He put his 
arm round her and they walked silently on. 
After all, he thought, there isn't another woman 
alive who could regard such affairs as calmly, or 
with so complete an absence of hysteria. And 



GALLIA. 303 

he was going to teach her to love him. Things 
seemed to point very naturally to his asking her 
to forgive him. This is not at all an unusual 
way for things to point, in the early stages of a 
love episode, — later, the woman has to ask for- 
giveness. 

" It is to be as you please — you shall take me 
for whatever you please, no matter in what ca- 
pacity, for better or for worse. I — I am proud 
that you want me." 

It was really rather fine in Mark. 

"Perhaps you will learn to have some little 
feeling for me — some day." 

This rather astonished Gallia, who was, as a 
rule, occupied singly with her own life and her 
own future, feeling these to be as much as she 
could manage. 

" It would disappoint me very greatly in my- 
self," she said, very naively, " if I came to love 
you." 

Mark laughed. Somehow this intoxicated 
him. He took her in his arms and crushed her 
till he frightened her. Being only a simple 
young woman after all, this had a great effect 
upon her. If only Essex had had the grit to go 
as far — to laugh and go as far. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

There were signs of commotion in the house 
when Gallia and Gurdon walked into the hall 
about nine o'clock, — commotion of a regulated 
and decently-constrained nature, as became a 
large and well-managed house, but nevertheless 
commotion. 

Gallia's eye fell on a copy of the Figaro of that 
day's date on one of the hall tables, and, with a 
confused idea in her mind, she left Gurdon and 
ran along the nagged terrace upon which the 
windows of the drawing-rooms opened. 

Upon so hot an evening as it was, none were 
closed. 

"Aunt Celia!' she exclaimed in great ex- 
citement, — "well?" — bursting into the room. 
" When I saw the Figaro — Yes, papa, perfectly 
sound and unhurt! Brownie fell lame, so we 
came home by train. Forgive my not wel- 
coming you except by an Indian warwhoop. I 
am so glad to see you, Aunt Celia, for, of course, 
it means you are better." She came over to 
the arm-chair in which Mrs. Leighton, still in 
her bonnet, and slowly peeling off outer wisps 
of wholly unprotective laces, had evidently not 
long sat down. 
304 



GALLIA. 305 

"I was well enough to escape, dear, and I 
have come here to recover, if you will let me, 
from the severities of the cure. They have tried 
me inexpressibly." She shut her eyes, raised 
her eyebrows, and, with a slight trembling of 
the delicate ivory and lavender-veined lids, in- 
haled whiffs of strong ammonia from a bottle. 

Gallia had the good taste not to exclaim upon 
her improved appearance, for nothing would 
have offended the old lady more than any re- 
mark of the kind, but she was, in point of fact, 
looking wonderfully better. 

Just as Gallia finished a somewhat fuller ex- 
planation of the accident, Gurdon, who had 
changed his clothes, came into the room. A 
servant had apprised him of Mrs. Leighton's 
arrival, and Gallia could not withhold her ad- 
miration of his greeting of her. The homage 
of her favourite young man threw a great sparkle 
into the old lady's face, and even to the orange 
ribbon in her charming bonnet, she seemed to 
brighten. 

" Your rooms, dear Aunt Celia" — 

" Thank you, child, I will go upstairs after I 
have had my bouillon ; oh, here it comes ! Of 
course I have brought my own sheets ; — I have 
given up camel's hair and am sleeping in pine 
wool now. No sheet can be fit to use unless it 
has been aired for forty-eight hours consecu- 
tively." Mrs. Leighton spoke with authority; 

u 26* 



306 GALLIA. 

she was in the habit of changing the material of 
her sheets in a sweeping fashion about every 
three months, and invariably carried the latest 
fad to her friends' houses when she visited. 

" Thank you, Gerald," as Lord Hamesthwaite's 
arm came to her assistance in leaving the room. 
" You will tell me your fortunes to-morrow ?" 
This to Mark, who was opening the door. 
; "I am coming up with you to see that you 
have everything," said Gallia, whose cheek was 
flushing faintly, even as was Mark's. 

But there were no confidences of any sort that 
night, and, greatly wearied by her own affairs, 
and the perplexity that these had brought her, 
Gallia sent messages downstairs to her guests, 
and shut herself into her own rooms for the 
night. 

A night's rest is supposed to have a chemical 
effect on most situations ; in the morning light 
difficulties are said to appear more surmountable. 
Gallia, however, was not conscious of having 
difficulties exactly ; to act in accordance with a 
plan is not necessarily to make things easier for 
the people with whom you act, but for the actor 
it greatly lightens the task of living. 

Gallia, all her life long, had acted in accord- 
ance with sets of preconceived ideas ; with her 
growth these had either strengthened or modi- 
fied, but in some form or other they were always 
there. 



GALLIA. 307 

Instinct, as will have been seen, had no place 
in deciding her actions ; nor, in a certain sense, 
could intuition have had much force with her. 
Some people, whose minds have been trained in 
religion, will do what they think God would 
have them do — that is, what they believe to be 
right. Gallia, who had no religious ideas, and 
had never at any moment in her life felt the want 
of any, was only anxious to do what was honest 
and honourable. 

If a given movement were fair and just to 
others, then it was the one that she would take ; 
and upon such points she examined herself 
rigorously from time to time, and raised her 
standard always a little bit higher. 

Before breakfast next morning she had an 
interview with her father, of a quite satisfactory 
kind; to him she naturally wished to confide her 
feelings towards Gurdon at once, and take his 
advice about announcing her engagement. Lord 
Hamesthwaite had nothing but wbat was favour- 
able to say. He was not an ambitious man, but 
even if he were, he felt he might have had reason 
to be satisfied with Mark. 

In Brownie's loose-box she found Gurdon, 
whom she sent straightway to her father's room. 

Margaret and Robbie she found upon the 
terrace. 

" I absolutely repudiate the idea that that pic- 
nic in any way assisted me," Hobbie was saying, 



308 GALLIA. 

in answer to some badinage from Gertrude. "I 
have been engaged to Margaret for about two 
years." 

" How one does dread proposals !" Miss Janion 
said fervently. " They are so samey and they 
are so dull. There is something frightful in 
sitting beside a man and knowing he is trying 
to lead up to a proposal. And when he has led 
up to it ! I can sit and say with my lips every 
succeeding sentence — you know as one does 
some of the prayers in church. There's a system, 
and he never departs from it. He always has 
to go into his past. Have you noticed what a 
passion men have for telling girls about their 
pasts ? They are so proud of their blundering, 
unimaginative records,— and, of course, every 
girl must think how far better she could have 
done it. Men are like children who have come 
home from the seashore." She fixed a bright 
magnetic eye upon Lord Shillinglee, who ap- 
peared in the distance, and drew him to the 
spot. " They have to tell about how they pad- 
dled, and just how deep they went in, and all 
about the queer things they fished out, and 
about the crabs that caught hold of their toes." 
Everybody had to laugh at this bit of Gertrude's 
description, though Margaret was blushing like 
a nectarine. "And all the time you see how 
awfully frightened at the crabs they have been. 
'But our little shoes were hanging round our 



GALLIA. 309 

necks, Nursey dear,' " — here she imitated the 
small, high voice of the self-consciously good 
child, — " they say, as they put them on again. 
' And see how clean we've kept our overalls' I" 

Robbie dissolved in a perfect paroxysm of 
laughter. 

" It will require enormous nerve to put a man 
off this confession, they so love to be forgiven ; 
it will be depriving him of a sacred moment; 
but the man I marry will have to be generous 
and make the sacrifice. I have heard the detailed 
pasts of so many men, it will be quite refreshing 
to know nothing of my husband's." 

While the young people babbled and laughed 
together, Mrs. Leighton's maid had been busily 
erecting a large square umbrella of cream-col- 
oured muslin, bordered with engaging frills, and 
lined with pink; beneath this had been placed 
a comfortable chair. To this bower Mark now 
escorted the old lady, and they fell into earnest 
conversation. Mark could not detail his fortune 
without Gallia's permission, but the skilful diplo- 
matist, who had liked and encouraged him from 
the first, put certain astute questions, and drew 
her own conclusions from the guarded replies. 
Fortunately, the state of affairs which she sus- 
pected pleased her greatly. Robbie's engage- 
ment to Margaret had put her in a good temper, 
and she soon dispelled a slight sense of regret 
that Gallia was not to marry a man of old family 



310 GALLIA. 

— old family being a thing that she had always 
declared her dislike of, publicly. 

She would have been angry if it had been 
Essex, and she was always rather frightened 
that it might be Essex. Yet there was Essex, 
his clothes having been fetched for the night 
from Hiddenfold — there was Essex looking 
vaguely out over the park. When Gurdon 
joined Gallia, Mrs. Leighton summoned Hubert. 
She put a number of quite barefaced questions 
to him, about his career and prospects and inten- 
tions. With people whom she believed to be 
unimportant, she could behave in a mildly un- 
scrupulous manner that was surprising. Finesse, 
she argued, should never be thrown away. 

"Marriage?" said Dark, speculatively, when 
he had been led to the block. " A man with 
pronounced heart-disease ought not to marry. 
Nothing is more inevitably hereditary. " ISo," 
smiling at her faintly, "I never contemplated 
marriage." 

" Funny !" the old lady was left murmuring ; 
" everybody has insisted on Gallia being con- 
sistent, and makes no allowance for a possible 
reversion to the type ; she has acted in accord- 
ance with her absurd opinions, because her 
heart has never awakened to scatter her reason. 
She will fall in love with that attractive mani- 
festation of heart-disease yet. But she will be 
married, so it will not signify." 



GALLIA. 311 

Mrs. Leighton was not very far out here, and 
would not have been so far out, had she had 
more leisure to observe Gallia and Essex to- 
gether, and know that her prophecy had come 
true already. The wind grew a little too strong, 
and she sauntered indoors for more shelter. 

" Essex, I want a word with you." Gurdon 
came up and put a hand on Dark's arm ; " shall 
we go into the smoking-room ? there is no one 
there." 

Not especially wondering what Mark could 
have to say to him, Essex followed into the 
6moking-room with a leisurely step. When he 
came out three-quarters of an hour later, his face 
moved unconsciously; his old well-accustomed 
smile struggled to play over it. 

" You see, with Denyer on the spot, and things 
at their present juncture, I cannot possibly leave 
here," Gurdon was saying as they walked out 
together. 

Essex nodded once or twice, and went on up 
the stairs alone to Gallia's study. 

" I am just leaving," he said, " and heard that 
you were here." 

" You are going away now ?" 

" Yes ; the atmosphere is becoming somewhat 
overcharged with sentiment; besides, I ought to 
be going back to work." 

" Do you know," she said, observing him very 
closely, " you look ill." 



312 GALLIA. 

"Do I?" 

" Pale. You do really ! A curious pallor. Is 
your heart all right, Dark ?" 

" Bust up in my rowing days, I believe, but it 
will last my time." 

" Why did you never tell me ?" she asked, with 
a sense of having been shut out from his confi- 
dence. 

"Had I not enough disadvantages in your 
eyes, without that ?" 

Gallia coloured very deeply and painfully. 

" I should only have mentioned it to you in 
one event." 

"And that?" 

"Well, we needn't mind that now. Heart- 
disease, you know, is hereditary." 

A curious light came into Gallia's eyes — she 
understood him. 

" Good-bye. We sha'n't meet again for some 
little time, I think. When does your marriage 
take place ?" 

" Oh, no date has been spoken of yet." 

" Ah, well, I shall see you then." 

" I don't think I want you to come." 

"Really? Just as you w r ish. I would like 
to have seen you looking dreadfully beautiful. 
But you won't banish me afterwards alto- 
gether ?" 

" Oh no. Besides, Mark looks upon you as a 
friend." 



GALLIA. 313 

Essex rose and held out his hand, and his 
smiling eyes met hers. 

" He has some little reason to," he said quietly, 
and was gone. 

In a quarter of an hour he was walking to the 
station. 

" I shall get to the junction in time for the 
2.15 to Brighton," he said, " and then I can do 
my last service to Gallia. The first, she said, 
was burying the letter. The second will be 
squaring Gurdon's mistress. Fate has at any- 
rate a redeeming sense of humour." 



THE END. 



Authors and Their Works. 



MRS. A. L. WISTER. 



Translations from the German. 

$1.00 per volume. 



Countess Erika's Apprenticeship. By Ossip Schubin. 
"O Thou, My Austria!" By Ossip Schubin. 
Erlach Court. By Ossip Schubin. 
The Alpine Fay. By E. Werner. 

The Owl's Nest. By E. Marlitt. 

^, Picked Up in the Streets. By H. Schobert. 

^ Saint Michael. By E. Werner. 

Violetta. By Ursula Zoge von Manteufel. 
The Lady with the Rubies. By E- Marlitt. 
Vain Forebodings. ByE. Oswald. 
A Penniless Girl. By W. Heimburg. 
Quicksands. By Adolph Streckfuss. 

Countess Gisela. By E. Marlitt. 

^ At the Councillor's. By E. Marlitt. 

* The Second Wife. By E. Marlitt. 

The Old Mam'selle's Secret. By E. Marlitt 
Gold Elsie. By E. Marlitt. 
The Little Moorland Princess. By E. Marlitt. 
Banned and Blessed. By E. Werner. 
A Noble Name. By Claire von Glumer. 



Authors and Their Works. 



1 



MRS. WISTER'S TRANSLATIONS. 

Continued. 

Prom Hand to Hand. By Golo Raimund. 

Severa. By E. Hartner. 

A New Race. By Golo Raimund. 

The Eichhofs. By Moritz von Reichenbach. 

Castle Hohenwald. By Adolph Streckfuss. 

Margarethe. By E. Juncker. 

Too Rich. By Adolph Streckfhss. 

A Family Feud. By Ludwig Harder. 

The Green Gate. By Ernst Wichert 
Only a Girl. By Wilhelmine von Hillern. 
Why Did He Not Die. By Ad. von Volckhauser. 
Hulda. By Fanny Lewald. 
The Bailiff's Maid. By E. Marlitt. 
In the Schillingscourt. By E. Marlitt 

"Mrs. A. L,. Wister, through her many translations of novels 
from the German, has established a reputation of the highest order 
for literary judgment, and for a long time her name upon the title- 
page of such a translation has been a sufficient guarantee to the 
lovers of fiction of a pure and elevating character, that the novel 
would be a cherished home favorite. This faith in Mrs. Wister is 
fully justified by the feet that among her more than thirty transla- 
tions that have been published by Ijppincott's there has not been 
a single disappointment. And to the exquisite judgment of selec- 
tion is to be added the rare excellence of her translations, which 
has commanded the admiration of literary and linguistic scholars." 
— Boston Home Journal. 



J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 



Authors and Their Works. 



Captain Charles King, u.s.a. 



Under Fire. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.25. 

The Colonel's Daughter. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.25. 

Marian's Faith. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.25. 

Captain Blake. Illustrated. Cloth, $1.25. 

Foes in Ambush. Cloth, $1.25. 

Kitty's Conquest. Cloth, $1.00. 

Starlight Ranch, and Other Stories. Cloth, $1.00. 

Laramie; or, The Queen of Bedlam. Cloth, $1.00. 

The Deserter, and From the Ranks. Cloth, $1.00. 

Two Soldiers, and Dunraven Ranch. Cloth, $1.00. 

A Soldier's Secret, and An Army Portia. Cloth, $1.00. 

Waring's Peril. Cloth, $1.00. 

EDITOR OP 

The Colonel's Christmas Dinner, and Other Stories. 

Cloth, $1.25. 

An Initial Experience, and Other Stories. Cloth, $1.00. 



"From the lowest soldier to the highest officer, from the servant 
to the master, there is not a character in any of Captain King's 
novels that is not wholly in keeping with expressed sentiments. 
There is not a movement made on the field, not a break from the 
ranks, not an offence against the military code of discipline, and 
hardly a heart-beat that escapes his watchfulness. " — Boston Herald. 



J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 



Authors and Their Works. 



R05A N. CAREY. 



The Old, Old Story. But Men Must Work. 

Sir Godfrey's Granddaughters. 
Mary St. John. Heriot's Choice. 

i2tno. Paper, 50 cents ; cloth, $1.00. 



The Search for Basil Lyndhurst. 

Wooed and Married. Barbara Heathcote's Trial. 

Not Like Other Girls. Robert Ord's Atonement. 

Wee Wifie. 

Uncle Max. 

Nellie's Memories. Queenie's Whim. 

For Lllias. Only the Governess. 

Bound only in cloth, $1.00. 



" Miss Rosa Nouchette Carey has achieved an enviable reputa- 
tion as a writer of tales of a restful and quiet kind. They tell 
pleasant stories of agreeable people, are never sensational, and 
have a genuine moral purpose and helpful tone, without being ag- 
gressively didactic or distinctly religious in character." — N. Y. 
Christian Union. 

STORIES FOR GIRLS. 

Little Miss Muffet. 

i2mo. Cloth, illustrated, $1.23, 

Aunt Diana. Esther. 

Merle's Crusade. 
Our Bessie. Averil. 

i2mo. Cloth, $1.25 per volume. 

Five volumes, uniform binding, in neat box, $6.25. 



J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 



Authors and Their Works. 



JOHN STRANGE WINTER 

(MRS. ARTHUR STANNARD.) 



Every Inch a Soldier. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00. 

"Of the incidents of the work before us, the plot is highly 
entertaining, and incidentally we meet the Bishop of Blankhamp- 
ton, whose matrimonial affairs were ably discussed in a book pre- 
viously written. It is a very pleasant and readable book, and we 
are glad to see it." — Norristown Herald. 

Aunt Johnnie. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00. 

"Mrs. Stannard preserves her freshness and vivacity in a won- 
derful way. ' Aunt Johnnie' is as bright and amusing a story as 
any that she has written, and it rattles on from the first chapter to 
the last with unabated gayety and vigor. The hero and heroine are 
both charming, and the frisky matron who gives the story its name 
is a capitally managed character. The novel is exactly suited to 
the season, and is sure to be very popular." — Charleston News and 
Courier. 

The Other Man's Wife. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00. 

"The hero and heroine have a charm which is really unusual in 
these hackneyed personages, for they are most attractive and whole- 
some types. Indeed, wholesomeness may be saM to be the most 
notable characteristic of this author's work. " — N. Y. Telegram. 

Only Human. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00. 

" A bright and interesting story. . . . Its pathos and humor are 
of the same admirable quality that is found in all the other novels 
by this author." — Boston Gazette. 



J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 



Authors and Their Works. 



AMELIE RIVES. 



The Quick or the Dead? 

i2mo. Cloth, $1.00. 

" To me her novels are of the greatest interest and value : they 
have suggested new trains of thought ; given me new ideas ; opened 
up new vistas — in fact, their reading has been not only pleasurable, 
but profitable." — New York Herald. 

The Witness of the Sun. 

i2mo. Paper, 50 cents; cloth, $1.00. 

"The wide discussion created by Miss Rives's 'Quick or the 
Dead?' has caused a great demand for her new work, which, in 
several respects, is superior to her first novel. The dramatic situ- 
ations are stronger, the characters are more carefully drawn, and 
there is less luxuriousness of expression. " — Norristown Herald. 



Barbara Dering. 

A Sequel to "The Quick or the Dead?" nmo. Paper, 
50 cents; cloth, $1.25. 

"Many of the people who objected to the character of her work 
before will object again ; but, on the other hand, many men and 
women will be deeply impressed by the new story, will own to 
themselves, if not to others, that she has spoken the truth, that 
her characters are true to life ; will agree with her conclusions, and 
some will thank her for having done a good deed. The book is 
brilliantly written from the stand-point of a young woman of ob- 
servation, experience, feeling, and strong convictions, and will 
'strike home' in the hearts of many readers." — St. Paul Dispatch. 



J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia. 



