fc^ 




UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 
AT LOS ANGELES 





^ • 



HARRINGTON, 

A TALE; 

AND 

O R M O N D, 

A TALE. 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. II. 



BY MARIA EDGEWORTH, 

Author of Comic Dramas, Tales of Fashionable Life, 
fyc. Sfc. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR R. HUNTER, 

SUCCESSOR TO MR. JOHNSON, 72, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD, 

AND BALDWIN, CRADOCK, AND JOY, 

PATERNOSTER-ROW. 

1817. 



H. Brycr, Printer, Bridge-street,. Blackfriars, London- 



PR 



44 



VA I 



0-k. 



ORMOND. 



CHAP. I. 

« WHAT ! no music, no dancing at 
Castle Hermitage to night ; and all the 
ladies sitting in a formal circle, petri- 
fying into perfect statues," cried Sir 
Ulick O' Shane, as he entered the draw- 
insr-room, between ten and eleven o'clock 
at night, accompanied by what he called 
his rear-guard, veterans of the old school 
of good fellows, who at those times in 
Ireland, times long since past, deemed 
it essential to health, happiness, and 
manly character, to swallow, and shew 
themselves able to stand after swallow- 

VOL. II. B 






G c- 



* ORMOND. 

ing, a certain number of bottles of claret 
per day or night. 

" Now then," continued Sir Ulick, 
" of all the figures in nature or art, 
the formal circle is universally the most 
obnoxicus to conversation, and, to me, 
the most formidable ; all my faculties 
are spell-bound — here I am like a bird 
in a circle of chalk that dare not move 
so much as its head or its eyes, and 
can't, for the life of it, take to its leg's." 

A titter ran round that part of the 
circle where the young" ladies sat — Sir 
Ulick was a favourite with them, and 
they rejoiced when he came among 1 
them ; because, as they observed, " he 
always said something' pleasant, or set 
something pleasant a-going." 

" Lady 0' Shane, for mercy's sake, 
let us have no more of these perma- 
nent sittings at Castle Hermitage, my 
dear — " 

" Sir Ulick, I am sure I should be 
very glad if it were possible," replied 
Lady 0' Shane, " to have no more per- 



ORMOND. 6 

manent sittings at Castle Hermitage, 
but when gentlemen are at their bottle, 
I really don't know what the ladies 
can do but sit in a circle." 

" Can't they dance in a circle, or any 
way — or have not they an elegant re- 
source in their music ; there's many 
here who, to my knowledge, can caper 
as well as they modulate," said Sir 
Ulick, "to say nothing of cards for those 
that like them." 

" Lady Annaly does not like cards," 
said Lady O'Shane, " and I could not 
ask any of these young ladies to waste 
their breath, and their execution, sing-- 
ing and playing before the gentlemen 
came out." 

" These young ladies would not ; I'm 
sure, do us old fellows the honour of 
waiting for us; and the young beaux 
deserted to your tea-table a lono- hour 
ago— so why you have not been danc- 
ing is a mystery beyond my compre- 
hension." 

b2 



4 ORMOND. 

" Tea or coffee, Sir Ulick O'Sbane, 
for the third time of asking ?" cried a 
sharp female voice from the remote tea- 
table. 

" Wouldn't you swear to that being 
the voice of a presbyterian ?" whispered 
Sir Ulick, over his shoulder, to the 
curate : then aloud he replied to the 
lady, " Miss Black, you are three times 
too obliging. — Neither tea nor coffee 
I'll take from you to-night, I thank 
you kindly." 

" Fortunate for yourself, Sir — for 
both are as cold as stones, — and no won- 
der!" said Miss Black. 

" No wonder!" echoed Lady O'Shane, 
looking at her watch, and sending forth 
an ostentatious sigh. 

" What o'clock is it by your lady- 
ship ?" asked Miss Black, " I have a 
notion it's tremendously late." 

<c No matter — we are not pinned to 
hours in this house, Miss Black," said 
Sir Ulick, walking up to the tea-table, 



ORMOND. O 

and giving her a look, which said as 
plainly as look could say — " You had 
better be quiet." 

Lady 0' Shane followed her hus- 
band, and putting 1 her arm within his, 
began to say something in a fondling 
tone, and in a most conciliatory manner 
she went on talking to him for some 
moments. — He looked absent, and re- 
plied coldly. 

" I'll take a cup of coffee from you 
now, Miss Black," said he, drawing 
away his arm from his wife, who looked 
much mortified. 

" We are too long, Lady O' Shane," 
added he, "standing here like lovers, 
talking to no one but ourselves — aukward 
in company!" 

" Like lovers — " the sound pleased poor 
Lady O'Shane's ear, and she smiled for 
the first time this night, — Ladv O'Shane 
was perhaps the last woman in the room, 
whom a stranger would have guessed to 
be Sir Ulick's wife. 



6 ORMOND. 

He was a fine gallant off-hand looking 
Irishman, with something of dash in 
his tone and air, which at first view 
might lead a common observer to pro- 
nounce him to be vulgar j but at five 
minutes after sight, a good judge of 
men and manners would have discovered 
in him the power of assuming whatever 
manner he chose, from the audacity of 
the callous profligate to the deference 
of the accomplished courtier — the capa- 
bility of adapting his conversation to his 
company and his views, whether his ob- 
ject were " to set the senseless table in 
a roar," or to insinuate himself into the 
delicate female heart. — Of this latter 
power, his age had diminished, but not 
destroyed the influence. The fame of 
former conquests still operated in his 
favour, though he had long since passed 
his splendid meridian of gallantry. 

While Sir Ulick is drinking his cup 
of cold coffee, we may look back a little 
into his family history. To go no fur- 



ORMOND. 7 

ther than his legitimate loves, he had suc- 
cessively won three wives, who had each, 
in their turn, been desperately enamour- 
ed. The first he loved and married im- 
prudently,* for love, at seventeen. — The 
second he admired, and married pru- 
dently, for ambition, at thirty. — The 
third he hated, but married from neces- 
sity, for money, at five and forty. The 
first wife, Miss Annaly, after ten years 
martyrdom of the heart, sunk, childless, a 
victim, it was said, to love and jealousy. 
— The second wife, Lady Theodosia, 
struggled stoutly for power, backed by 
strong and high connexions ; having, 
moreover, the advantage of being a mo- 
ther, and mother of an only son and 
heir, the representative of a father in 
whom ambition had, by this time, be- 
come the ruling passion ; the Lady 
Theodosia stood her ground, wrangling 
and wrestling through a fourteen years 
wedlock, till at last, to Sir Click's great 
relief, not to say joy, her ladyship was 



o ORMOND. 

carried off by a bad fever, or a worse 
apothecary. — His present lady, formerly 
Mrs. Scraggs, a London widow, of very 
large fortune, happened to see Sir Ulick 
when he went to present some address, 
or settle some point between the English 
and Irish government : — he was in deep 
mourning at the time, and the widow 
pitied him very much. But she was 
not the sort of woman he would ever 
have suspected could like him — she was 
a strict pattern lady, severe on the times, 
and not unfrequently lecturing young 
men gratis. Now Sir Ulick O' Shane 
was a sinner, how then could he please 
a saint? He did, however — but the saint 
did not please him — though she set to 
work for the good of his soul, and in 
her own person relaxed, to please his 
taste, even to the wearing of rouge and 
pearl-powder, and false hair, and false 
eyebrows, and all the falsifications which 
the setters up could furnish. But after 
she had purchased all of youth which 



ORMOND. 9 

age can purchase for money, it would 
not do. — The Widow Scraugs might, 
with her " lack lustre" eyes, have spe- 
culated for ever in vain upon Sir Ulick> 
but that, fortunately for her passion, at 
one and the same time the Irish ministry 
were turned out, and an Irish canal 
burst — Sir Ulick losing his place by 
the change of ministry, and one half of 
his fortune by the canal, in which it 
had been sunk, and having spent in 
schemes and splendid living more than 
the other half, now, in desperate misery, 
laid hold of the Widow Scragm-. — After 
a nine days courtship she became a bride 
— and she and her plum in the stocks — 
but not her messuage, house and lauds, in 
Kent, became the property of Sir Ulick 
O'Shane. But " love was then lord of 
all" with her, she was now to accompany 
Sir Ulick to Ireland. Late in life she 
vv^is carried to a new country, and set 
down among a people whom she had all 
her previous days been taught to hold in 
b 3 



30 ORMOND. 

contempt or aversion ; she dreaded Irish 
disturbances much, and Irish dirt more > 
she was persuaded that nothing could 
be right, good, or genteel, that was not 
English. Her habits and tastes were 
immutably fixed. — Her experience had 
been confined to London life, and in pro- 
portion as her sphere of observation had 
been contracted, her disposition was in- 
tolerant. She made no allowance for the 
difference of opinion, customs, and situa- 
tion, much less for the faults or foibles 
of people who were to her strangers and 
foreigners — Her ladyship was therefore 
little likely to please or be pleased in her 
new situation, — her husband was the only 
individual,* the only thing, animate or in- 
animate, that she liked in Ireland, — and 
while she was desperately in love with 
an Irishman, she disliked Ireland and 
the Irish : — even the Irish talents and 
virtues, their wit, humour, generosity of 
character, and freedom of manner, were 
lost upon her, — her country neighbours 



OKMOND. 11 

were repelled by her air of taciturn self- 
sufficiency ; and she, for her part, de- 
clared, she would have been satisfied to 
have lived alone at Castle Hermitage with 
Sir Ulick. But Sir Ulick had no notion 
of living- alone with her, or for anybody. 
His habits were all social and convivial — 
lie loved shew and company : he had 
been all his life in the habit of enter- 
taining all ranks of people at Castle 
Hermitage, from his excellency the lord 
lieutenant and the commander in chief 
tor the time being, to Tim the gauger, 
and honest Tom Kelly, the stalko. 

He talked of the necessity of keeping 
up a neighbourhood, and maintaining his 
interest in the county, as the first duties 
of man. Ostensibly Sir Ulick had no 
motive in all this, but the hospitable 
wish of seeing Castle Hermitage one 
continued scene of festivity ; but, under 
this good fellows!) ip and apparent thought- 
lessness and profusion, there was, what 
some thought he inherited from his mo^ 



12 ORMOND. 

ther, a Scotchwoman, an eye to his own 
interest, and a keen view to the improve- 
ment of his fortune and the advancement 
of his family, With these habits and 
views it was little likely, that he should 
yield to the romantic, jealous, or econo- 
mic tastes of his new lady — a bride ten 
years older than himself! Lady O'Shane 
was, soon after her arrival in Ireland, 
compelled to see her house as full of com- 
pany as it could possibly hold ; and her 
ladyship was condemned eternally to do 
the honours to successive troops offriendsy 
of whom she knew nothing-, and of 
whom she disliked all she saw or heard. 
Her dear Sir Ulick was, or seemed, so 
engrossed by the business of pleasure, so 
taken up with his guests, that but a few 
minutes in the day could she ever obtain 
of his company. She saw herself sur- 
rounded by the young, the fair, and the 
o-ay, to whom Sir Ulick devoted his 
assiduous and gallant attentions ; and 
though his age, and his being a married 



ORMOND. 13 

man, seemed to preclude, in the opinion 
of the cool or indiffereut spectator, all 
idea of any real cause for jealousy, yet 
it was not so with poor Lady O'Shane's 
magnifying imagination. The demon 
of jealousy tortured her; and to enhance 
her sufferings she was obliged to conceal 
them, lest they should become subjects of 
private mockery or public derision. It 
is the peculiar misfortune or punishmsnt 
of misplaced, and yet more of unreason- 
able passions, that in their distresses they 
obtain no sympathy — and while the pas- 
sion is in all its consequences tragic to the 
sufferer, in all its exhibitions it is ludi- 
crous to the spectator. Lady O 1 Shane 
could not be young, and would not be 
old ; so without the charms of youth, or 
the dignity of age, she could neither in- 
spire love, nor command respect. Nor 
could she find fit occupation or amuse- 
ment, or solace or refuge, in any combi- 
nation of company, or class of society. 
Unluckily as her judgment, never discri- 



14 ORMOND. 

minating, was now blinded by jealousy j 
the two persons, of all his family connex- 
ions, upon whom she pitched as the pecu- 
liar objects of her fear and hatred, were 
precisely those who were most disposed 
to pity and befriend her — to serve her in 
private with Sir Ulick, and to treat her 
with deference in public. These two 
persons were Lady Annaly and her 
daughter. Lady Annaly was a distant 
relation of Sir Ulick's first wife, during 
whose life some circumstances had oc- 
curred, which had excited her ladyship's 
indignation against him. For many years 
all commerce between them had ceased. 
Lady Annaly was a woman of generous 
indignation, strong principles, and warm 
affections. Her rank, her high connex- 
ions, her high character, her having, from 
the time she was left a young and beauti- 
ful widow, devoted herself to the educa- 
tion and the interests of her children ; 
her having persevered in her lofty course, 
superior to all the numerous temptations, 



ORMOND. 15 

of love, vanity, or ambition, by which 
she was assailed ; her long and able ad- 
ministration of a large property, during 
the minority of her son ; her subsequent 
graceful resignation of power ; his affec- 
tion, gratitude, and deference for his 
mother, which now continued to prolong 
her influence, and exemplify her precepts 
in every act of his own ; altogether placed 
this lady high in public consideration — 
high as any individual could stand in a 
country, where national enthusiastic at- 
tachment is ever excited by certain noble 
qualities, congenial to the Irish nature. 
Sir Ulick O'Shane, sensible of the dis- 
advantage which it had been to him to 
have estranged such a family connexion, 
and fully capable of appreciating the va- 
lue of her friendship, had of late years 
taken infinite pains to redeem himself in 
Lady Annaly's opinion. His consum- 
mate address, aided and abetted, and 
concealed as it was by his off-hand man- 
ner, would scarcely have succeeded, had 



10 ORltiOND. 

it not been supported also by some sub- 
stantial good qualities, especially by the 
natural candour and generosity of his dis- 
position. In favour of the originally 
strong, and, through all his errors, won- 
derfully surviving taste for virtue, some 
of his manifold transgressions might be 
forgiven. There was much hope and 
promise of amendment. And, besides — 
to state things just as they were, he had 
propitiated the mother, irresistibly, by 
his enthusiastic admiration of the daugh- 
ter — so that Lady Annaly had at last 
consented to re-visit Castle Hermitage. 
Her ladyship and her daughter were now 
on this reconciliation visit ; Sir Ulick 
was extremely anxious to make it agree- 
able. Besides the credit of her friend- 
ship, he had other reasons for wishing to 
conciliate her. His son Marcus was just 
twenty — two years older than Miss Annaly 
— in course of time, Sir Ulick thought it 
might be a match — his son could not 
possibly make a better ; — beauty, for- 



ORMOND. 17 

tune, family connexions, every thing that 
the hearts of young and old desire. — Be- 
sides, (for in Sir Ulick's calculations 
besides was a word frequently occurring,) 
besides, Miss Annaly's brother was not 
as strong in body as in mind — in two 
illnesses his life had been despaired of — 
a third might carry him off— the estate 
would probably come to Miss Annaly. — 
Besides — be this hereafter as it might, 
there was at this present time being a 
considerable debt due by Sir Ulick to 
these Annalys, with accumulated inte- 
rest, since the time of his first marriage ; 
and this debt would be merged in Miss 
Annaly's portion, should she become his 
son's wife. All this was very well cal- 
culated ; but, to say nothing of the cha- 
racter, or affections of the son Sir Ulick 
had omitted to consider Lady O'Shane, 
or he had taken it for granted, that her 
love for him would induce her at once to 
enter into and second his views. It did 
not so happen. On the contrary, the 



18 ORMOND. 

dislike which Lady O' Shane took at first 
to both the mother and daughter — to the 
daughter instinctively, at sight of her 
youth and beauty ; to the mother reflec- 
tively, on account of her matronly dress and 
dignified deportment, in too striking con- 
trast to her own frippery appearance, in- 
creased every day, and every hour, when 
she saw the attentions, the adoration, that 
Sir Ulick paid to Miss Annaly, and the 
deference and respect he shewed to Lady 
Annaly, all for qualities and accomplish- 
ments, in which Lady O'Shane was con- 
scious that she was irremediably defi- 
cient. Sir Ulick thought to extinguish 
her jealousy, by opening to her his views 
on Miss Annaly for his son ; but the 
jealousy, taking only a new direction, 
strengthened in its course — Lady O'Shane 
did not like her son-in-law — had indeed 
no great reason to like him. — Marcus 
disliked her, and was at no pains to con- 
ceal his dislike. She dreaded the ac- 
cession of domestic power and influence 



ORMOND. 19 

he would gain by such a marriage. — She 
could not bear the thoughts of having a 
daughter-in-law brought into the house — 
placed in eternal comparison with her. 
Sir UlickO'Shane was conscious, that his 
marriage exposed him to some share of 
ridicule ; but hitherto, except when 
his taste for raillery, and the diversion 
of exciting her causeless jealousy, inter- 
fered with his purpose, he had always 
treated her ladyship, as he conceived 
that Lady O'Shane ought to be treated. 
Naturally good-natured, and habitually 
attentive to the sex, he had indeed kept up 
appearances better than could have been 
expected, from a man of his former habits, 
to a woman of her ladyship's present age. 
But if she now crossed his favourite 
scheme, it would be all over with her ;— -■- 
her submission to his will had hitherto 
been a sufficient, and a convenient proof, 
and the only proof he desired, of her love. 
Her ladyship's evil genius, in the shape 
of Miss Black, her humble companion, 



*20 ORMOND. 

was now busily instigating her to be re- 
fractory. Miss Black had frequently 
whispered, that if Lady 0' Shane would 
shew more spirit, she would do better 
with Sir Ulick; — that his late wife, Lady 
Theodosia, had ruled him, by shewing 
proper spirit; — that in particular, she 
should make a stand against the encroach- 
ments of Sir Ulick' s son, Marcus, and 
of his friend and companion, young Or- 
mond. In consequence of these sugges- 
tions, Lady O'Shane had most judiciously 
thwarted both these young men in trifles, 
till she had become their aversion: this 
aversion Marcus felt more than he ex- 
pressed, and Orniond expressed more 
strongly than he felt. To Sir Ulick his 
son and heir was his first great object in 
life; yet, though in all things he preferred 
the interest of Marcus, he was not as fond 
of Marcus as he was of young Orniond. — 
Young Orniond was the son ot the friend 
of Sir Ulick O'Shane's youthful and 
warm-hearted days — the son of an officer 



ORMOND. 21 

who had served in the same regiment 
with him in his first campaign. Captain 
Ormond afterwards made an unfortunate 
marriage ; that is, a marriage without 
a fortune — his friends would not see him 
or his wife — he was soon in debt, and in 
great distress. — He was obliged to leave 
his wife and go to India — She had then 
one child at nurse in an Irish cabin. — 
She died soon afterwards. Sir Ulick 
O'Shane took the child, that had been 
left at nurse, into his own house ; from 
the time it was four years old, little 
Harry Ormond became his darling, and 
grew up his favourite. Sir Ulick's fond- 
ness, however, had not extended to any 
care of his education ; quite the contrary ; 
he had done all he could to spoil him by 
the most injudicious indulgence, and by 
neglect of all instruction or discipline* 
Marcus had been sent to school and col- 
lege; but Harry Ormond, meantime, had 
been let to run wild at home : the <rame- 
keeper, the huntsman, and a cousin of 



22 ORMOND. 

Sir Ulick's, who called himself the king 
of the Black Islands, had had the prin- 
cipal share in his education. Captain 
Ormond, his father, was not heard of for 
many years; and Sir Ulick always argued, 
that there was no use in giving Harry 
Ormond the education of an estated gen- 
tleman, when he was not likely to have 
an estate. Moreover, he prophecied that 
Harry would turn out the cleverest man 
of the two ; and in the progress of the 
two boys towards manhood, Sir Ulick 
had shewn a strange sort of double and 
inconsistent vanity in his son's acquire- 
ments, and in the orphan Harry's natural 
genius. Harry's extremely warm, ge- 
nerous, grateful temper, delighted Sir 
Ulick, but he gloried in the superior 
polish of his own son. Harry Ormond 
grew up with all the faults that were in- 
cident to his natural violence of passions 
and that might necessarily be expected 
from his neglected and deficient educa- 
tion. His devoted gratitude and attach- 



ORMOND. 23 

ment to his guardian father, as he called 
Sir Ulick, made him amenable in an 
instant, even in the height and tempest 
of his passions, to whatever Sir Ulick 
desired; but Harry Ormond was un- 
governable by most people, and rude, 
even to insolence, where he felt tyranny, 
or suspected meanness. Miss Black and 
he were always at open war ; to Lady 
O'Shane he submitted, though with an 
ill grace; yet he did submit for his guar- 
dian's sake, where he himself only was 
concerned ; while most imprudently and 
fiercely he contended upon every occa- 
sion, where Marcus, when aggrieved, 
had declined contending with his mother- 
in-law. 

Upon the present occasion the two 
youths had been long engaged to dine 
with, and keep the birth-day of Mr. 
Cornelius O'Shane, the king of the Black 
Islands — next to Sir Ulick, the being 
upon earth to whom Harry Ormond 
thought himself most obliged, and to 






24 ORMOND. 

whom he felt himself most attached. 
This he had represented to Lady 
O' Shane, and had earnestly requested, 
that as the day for the intended dance 
was a matter of indifference to her, it 
might not be fixed on this day ; but her 
ladyship had purposely made it a trial 
of strength, and had insisted upon their 
returning at a certain hour. She knew 
that Sir Ulick would be much vexed by 
their want of punctuality on this occa- 
sion, where the Annalys were concerned, 
though, in general, punctuality was a 
virtue for which he had no regard. 

Sir Ulick had finished his cup of 
coffee. " Miss Black send away the 
tea things — send away all these things," 
cried he. " Young ladies, better late 
than never, you know — let's have danc- 
ing now; clear the decks for action." 

The young ladies started from their 
seats immediately. All was now in 
happy motion. The servants answered 
promptly — the tea things retired in haste 



OHMOND. 26 

— tables rolled away — chairs were swung 
into the back ground — the folding- doors 
of the dancing-room were thrown open 
— the pyramids of wax candles in the 
chandeliers (for this was ere argands 
were on earth) started into light — the 
musicians tuning, screwing, scraping-, 
sounded, discordant as they were, joyful 
notes of preparation. 

u But where's my son ? Where's 
Marcus?'* said Sir Ulick, drawing Lady 
O'Shane aside. " I don't see him any 
where." 

" No," said Lady O'Shane ; « you 
know that he would go to dine to-day 
•with that strange cousin of yours, and 
neither he nor his companion have 
thought proper to return yet." 

" I wish you had given me a hint,*' 
said Sir Ulick, " and I would have 
waited; for Marcus ought to lead off 
with Miss Annaly." 

" Ought — to be sure,'* said Lady 
0' Shane; " but that is no rule for young 

VOL II. C 



26 ORMOND. 

gentlemen's conduct. I told both the 
young" gentlemen, that we were to have 
a dance to night. I mentioned the hour, 
and begged them to be punctual." 

<c Young men are never punctual," 
said Sir Ulick; " but Marcus is inex- 
cuseable to-night on account of the An- 
nalys." 

Sir Ulick pondered for a moment 
with an air of vexation, then turning to 
the musicians, who were behind him — 

" You four-and-twenty fiddlers all in 
a row — you gentlemen musicians, scrape 
and tune on a little longer if you please. 
Remember you are not ready till I draw 
on my gloves. Break a string or two if 
necessary." 

" We will — we shall plase your ho- 
nour." 

" I wish, Lady O'Shane," continued 
Sir Ulick in a lower tone, " I wish you 
had given me a hint of this." 

" Truth to tell, Sir Ulick, I did, I 
own, conceive from your walk and way, 



ORMOND. 27 

that you were not in a condition to take 
any hint I could give." 

" Pshaw, my dear, after having- known 
me, I won't say loved me, a calendar 
year, how can you be so deceived by 
outward appearances. Don't you know 
that I hate drinking ; but when I have 
these county electioneering friends, the 
worthy red noses, to entertain, I suit 
myself to the company, by acting spirits 
iustead of swallowing them, for I should 
scorn to appear to flinch !" 

This was true. Sir Ulick could, and 
often did, to the utmost perfection, coun- 
terfeit every degree of intoxication. He 
could act the rise, decline, and fall of 
the drunken man, marking the whole 
progress, from the first incipient hesita- 
tion of reason to the glorious confusion 
of ideas in the highest state of elevation, 
thence through all the declining cases of 
stultified paralytic ineptitude, down to 
the horizontal condition of preterpluper- 
fect ebriety. 

c 2 



28 ORMOND. 

" Really, Sir Ulick, you are so good 
an actor that I don't pretend to judge — 
I can seldom find out .the truth from 

you." 

" So much the better for you, my 
dear, if you knew but all," — said Sir 
Ulick, laughing. 

" If I knew but all," repeated her 
ladyship, with an alarmed look. 

u But that's not the matter in hand 
at present, my dear," 

Sir Ulick protracted the interval be- 
fore the opening of the ball as long as 
he possibly could — but in vain — the young 
gentlemen did not appear. Sir Ulick 
drew on his gloves. The broken strings 
of the violins were immediately found to 
be mended. Sir Ulick opened the ball 
himself with Miss Annaly, after making 
as handsome an apology for his son as 
the case would admit — an apology which 
was received by the young lady with the 
most graceful good nature. She de- 
clined dancing more than one dance, and 



ORMOND. 29 

♦Sir Ulick sat down between her and 
Lady Annaly, exerting all his powers of 
humour to divert them, at the expense of 
his cousin, the king- of the Black Islands, 
whose tedious ferry, or whose claret, or 
more likely whose whiskey-punch was, 
lie said, he was sure, the cause of Mar- 
cus's misdemeanour. It was now near 
twelve o'clock. Lady O'Shane, who 
had made many aggravating reflexions 
upon the disrespectful conduct of the 
young gentlemen, grew restless .on ano- 
ther count. The gates were left open 
for them — the gates ought to be locked ! 
There were disturbances in the country. 
" Pshaw !" Sir Ulick said. Opposite 
directions were given at opposite doors 
to two servants. 

" Dempsey, tell them they need not 
lock the gates till the young gentlemen 
come home, or at least, till one o'clock," 
said Sir Ulick. 

" Stone," said Lady O'Shane to her 
own man in a very low voice, " go down 



30 'ORMOND. 

directly, and see that the gates are 
locked, and bring me the keys." 

Dempsey, an Irishman, who was half 
drunk, forgot to see or say any thing 
£teyt it. Stone, an Englishman, went 
directly to obey his lady's commands, 
and the gates were locked, and the keys 
brought to her ladyship, who put them 
immediately into her work-table. 

Half an hour afterwards, as Lady 
O' Shane was sitting with her back to 
the glass door of the green-house, which 
opened into the ball-room, she was start- 
led by a peremptory tap on the glass be- 
hind her ; she turned, and saw young 
Ormond, pale as death, and stained with 
blood. 

" The keys of the gate instantly !" 
cried he, " for mercy's sake." 



ORMOND. 31 



CHAP. II. 



L.ADY O'Shane, extremely terrified, 
had scarcely power to rise. She opened 
the drawer of the table, and thrust her 
trembling- hand down to the bottom of 
the silk bag, into which the keys had 
fallen. Impatient of delay, Ormond 
pushed open the door, snatched the keys, 
and disappeared. The whole passed in 
a few seconds. The music drowned the 
noise of the opening- door, and of the two 
chairs which Ormond had thrown down ; 
those who sat near thought a servant had 
pushed in and gone out ; but, however 
rapid the movement, the full view of the 
figure had been seen by Miss Annaly, 
who was sitting on the opposite side of tin 



3& ORMOND. 

room ; Sir Ulick was sitting beside her, 
talking earnestly. Lady Annaly had just 
retired. " For Heaven's sake, what's 
the matter?" cried he, stopping in the 
middle of a sentence, on seeing Miss 
Annaly grow suddenly pale as death. — 
Her eyes were fixed on the door of the 
green-house ; his followed that direction. 
" Yes," said he, " we can get out into 
the air that way, lean on me," — she did 
so — he pushed his way through the crowd 
at the bottom of the country dance ; and, 
as he passed, was met by Lady O'Shane 
and Miss Black, both with faces of hor- 
ror. 

" Sir Ulick, did you see," pointing to 
the door — " Did you see Mr. Ormond? — 
There's blood !" 

w There's mischief ! — certainly," said 
Miss Black. — " A quarrel — Mr. Marcus, 
perhaps." 

" Nonsense ! — no such thing you'll 
find," — said Sir Ulick, pushing on, and 
purposely jostling the arm of a servant 



ORMOND. 3=3 

who was holding a salver of ices, over- 
turning them all — and whilst the sur- 
rounding' company were fully occupied 
about their clothes, and their fears and 
apologies, he made his way onwards to 
the green-house — Lady O'Shane clinging 
to one arm, Miss Annaly supported by 
the other — Miss Black following, repeat- 
ing " Mischief! — Mischief! you'll see, 
Sir." 

" Miss Black open the door, and not 
another word." 

He edged Miss Annaly on the moment 
the door opened, dragged Lady O'Shane 
after him — pushed Miss Black back as 
she attempted to follow, but recollecting 
that she might spread the report of mis- 
chief if he left her behind, drew her into 
the green-house, locked the door, and 
]ed Miss Annaly out into the air. 

" Bring salts ! water ! something, Miss 
Black — Follow me, Lady O'Shane." 

" When I'm hardly able — your wife ! 
— Sir Ulick — you might — " said Lady 
c 3 



34 ORMOND. 

0' Shane, as she tottered on — " you might 
I should have thought — " 

" No time for such thoughts, my dear," 
interrupted he — " Sit Sown on the steps 
— there, she is better now — now what i s 
all this?" 

" I am not to speak," said Miss Black* 
Lady O'Shane began to say how Mr. 
Ormond had burst in, covered with blood, 
and seized the keys of the gates. 

" The keys !" — Bat he had no time for 
that thought — " Which way did he go." 
u I don't know, I gave him the keys of 
both gates." 

The two entrances were a mile asunder 
— Sir Ulick looked for footsteps on the 
grass. It was a tine moonlight night. 
He saw footsteps on the path leading to 
the gardener's house. " Stay here, la- 
dies, and I will bring you intelligence as 
soon as possible." 

'« This way, Sir Ulick- — they are 
coming — " said Miss Annaly, who had 
now recovered her presence of mind. 



ORMOND. 36 

Several persons appeared from a turn 
in the shrubbery, carrying- some one on 
a hand-barrow — a gentleman on horse- 
back, and a servant, and many persons 
walking'. Sir Ulick hastened towards 
them ; the gentleman on horseback spur- 
red his horse and met him. . 

" Marcus! — is it you? — thank God. 
But Ormond !— where is he, and what 
has happened ?" 

The first sound of Marcus's voice, when 
he attempted to answer, shewed that he 
was not in a condition to give a rational 
account of any thing - . His servant fol- 
lowed, also much intoxicated. While Sir 
Ulick had been stopped by their ineffec- 
tual attempts to explain, the people who 
were carrying the man on the hand-bar- 
row came up. Ormond appeared from 
the midst of them. " Carry him on to . 
the gardener's house," cried he, pointing 
the way, and coming forward to Sir 
Ulick. " 

" If he dies, 1 am a murderer !" cried 1 
he. 



36 ORMOND. 

"Who is he?" said Sir Ulick. 

" Moriarty Carroll, please your honor," 
answered several voices at once. 

" And how happened it?" said Sir 
Ulick. 

" The long and the short of it, Sir," 
said Marcus, as well as he could articu- 
late, " the fellow was insolent, and we 
cut him down — and if it was to do again, 
I'd do it again with pleasure." 

" No, no ! you won't say so, Marcus, 
when you are yourself," said Ormond. 
— " Oh ! how dreadful to come to one's 
senses all at once, as I did — the moment 
after I had fired that fatal shot — the mo- 
ment I saw the poor fellow stagger and 
fall—" 

" It was you, then, that fired at him," 
interrupted Sir Ulick. 

'* Yes, oh! yes 1" said he, striking his 
forehead — "I did it in the fury of pas. 
sion." 

Then Ormond taking all the blame 
upon himself, and stating what had pass- 



ORMOND. '37 

etl in the strongest light against himself, 
gave this account of the matter. After 
having drank too much at Mr. Cornelius 
O'Shane's, they were returning from the 
Black Islands, and afraid of being late, 
they were gallopping hard, when at a nar- 
row part of the road they were stopped 
by some cars. Impatient of the delay, 
they abused the men who were driving 
them, insisting uoon their orettin£ ut of 
the way faster than they could. Moriar- 
ty Carroll made some answer, which 
Marcus said was insolent ; and enquiring 
the man's name, and hearing it was Car- 
roll, said, all the Carrolls were bad peo- 
ple — rebels. Moriarty defied him to 
prove thai — and added some expressions 
about tyranny, which enraged Ormond. 
This part of the provocation Ormond did 
not state — but merely said he was thrown 
into a passion by some observation of Mo- 
riarty'sj and first he lifted his whip to 
give the fellow a horse- whipping. Mori- 
arty seized hold of the whip, and strug- 






38 ORMOND. 

gled to wrest it from his hand ; — Ormond 
then snatched a pistol from his holster, 
telling- Moriarty he would shoot him, if he 
did not let the whip go. Moriarty, who 
was in a passion himself, struggled, still 
holding; the whip. Ormond cocked the 
pistol, and before he was aware he had 
done so, the pistol accidentally went off, 
the ball entered Moriarty's breast. This 
happened within a quarter of a mile of 
Castle Hermitage. The poor fellow bled 
profusely — and, in assisting to lift him 
upon the hand-barrow, Ormond was co- 
vered with blood, as has been already de- 
scribed. 

"Have you sent for a surgeon," said 
Sir Ulick, coolly. 

" Certainly — sent off a fellow on my 
own horse directly. Sir, will you come 
on to the gardener's house; I want 
you to see him, to know what you'll 
think. If he die, I am a murderer," re- 
peated Ormond. 

This horrible idea so possessed his ima- 



ORMOND. 39 

gination, that he could not answer or hear 
any of the further questions that were 
asked by Lady O'Shane and Miss Black ; 
but, after gazing upon them with un- 
meaning eyes for a moment in silence, 
walked rapidly on : as he was passing by 
the steps of the green-hoase, he stopped 
short at the sight of Miss Annaly, who 
was still sitting there — 

" What's the matter," said he, in a 
tone of great compassion, going close up 
to her. Then, recollecting himself, he 
hurried forward again. 

" As I can be of no use — Unless I 
can be of any use," said Miss Annaly — 
" I will, now that I am well enough, re- 
turn — My mother will wonder what has 
become of me." 

" Sir Ulick, give me the key of the 
conservatory, to let Miss Annaly into the 
ball-room." 

" Miss Annaly does not wish to dance any 
more to-night, 1 believe ?" said Sir Ulick. 

" Dance — oh no." 



40 ORMOND. 

" Then, without exciting observation, 
you can all get in better at the back 
door of the house, and Miss Annaly can 
go up the back stairs to Lady Annaly's 
room, without meeting any one ; and you, 
Lady O'Shane," added he, in a low 
voice, " order up supper, and say no- 
thing of what has passed. Miss Black, 
you hear what I desire — no gossipping," 

To get to the back door they had to 
walk round the house, and in their way 
they passed the gardener's. The surgeon 
had just arrived. 

" Go on ladies, pray," said Sir Ulick, 
" what stops you." 

" 'Tis I stop the way, Sir Ulick,*' 
said Lady O'Shane, ( * to speak a word 
to the surgeon. If you find the man in 
any dangerous way, for pity's sake don't 
let him die at our gardener's — indeed 
the bringing him here at all 1 think a 
very strange step and encroachment of 
Mr. Ormond's. It will make the whole 
thing so public — and the people here- 



ORMONB. 41 

ubouts are so revengeful — if any thing- 
should happen to him, it will be revenged 
on our whole family — on Sir Ulick in 
particular." 

" No danger — nonsense, my dear.*' 
But now this idea had seized Lady 
O'Shane, it appeared to her a sufficient 
reason for desiring to remove the man 
even this night. She asked why he could 
not be taken to his own home and his 
own people ; she repeated, that it was 
very strange of Mr. Ormond to take sueh 
liberties, as if every thing about Castle 
Hermitage was quite at his disposal. 
One of the men who had carried the 
hand-barrow, and who was now standing 
at the gardener's door, observed, that 
Moriarty's people lived five mile off. 
Ormond, who had gone into the house to 
the wounded man, being told what 
Lady O'Shane was saying, came out; 
she repeated her words as he re-appeared. 
Naturally of sudden violent temper, and 
beint'' now in the hiohest state of sus- 
pense and irritation, he broke out, for- 



42 ORMOND. 

getful of all proper respect. Miss Black, 
who was saying- something' in corrobora- 
tion of Lady O'Shane's opinion, he first 
attacked, pronouncing" her to i)e an un- 
feeling canting hypocrite ; then, turning 
to Lady O'Shane, he said, that she might 
send the dying man away if she pleased j 
but that if she did, he would go too, and 
that never while he existed would he 
enter her ladyship's doors again. 

Ormond made this threat with the air 
of a superior to an inferior, totally for- 
getting his own dependent situation, and 
the dreadful circumstances in which he 
now stood. 

" You are drunk, young man. My 
dear Ormond, you don't know what you 
are saying," interposed Sir Ulick. 

At his voice, and the kindness of his 
tone, Ormond recollected himself. " For- 
give me," said he, in a very gentle tone. 
" My head certainly is not — Oh ! may 
you never feel what I have felt this last 
hour. — If this man dies — Oh! consider." 

" He will not die — he will not die, I 



ORMOND. 43 

hope — at any rate, don't talk so loud 
within hearing* of these people. My dear 
Lady O' Shane, this foolish boy — this 
Harry Ormond, is, I grant, a sad scape- 
grace, but you must bear with him for 
my sake. Let this poor wounded fellow 
remain here — I won't have him stirred 
to-night — we shall see what ought to be 
done in the morning. Ormond, you for- 
got yourself strangely towards Lady 
O'Shane — as to this iel!oT<*~den't maks 
such a rout about the business — I dare 
say he will do very well — We shall hear 
what the surgeon says — At first I was 
horribly frightened, 1 thought you and 
Marcus had been quarrelling-. Miss An- 
naly, are not you afraid of staying out — 
Lady O' Shane, why do you keep Miss 
Annaly — Let supper go up directly." 

" Supper! aye, every thing goes on 
as usual," said Ormond, " and I! — " 

" I must follow them in, and see how 
tilings are going on, and prevent gossip- 
ping, for your sake, my boy," resumed Sir 



44 ORMOND. 

Ulick, after a moment's pause. " You 
have got into an ugly scrape — I pity 
you from my soul — I'm rash myself — 
Send the surgeon to me when he has 
seen the fellow — Depend upon me if the 
worst come to the worst — There's nothing 
in the world 1 would not do to serve you," 
said Sir Ulick, " so keep up your spirits, 
my boy — We'll contrive to bring you 
through — At the worst it will only be 
manslaughter." 

Ormond wrung Sir Ulick's hand — 
thanked him for his kindness; but re- 
peated, ** it will be murder — it will be 
murder, my own conscience tells me so — 
If he dies, give me up to justice!" 

" You'll think better of it before 
morning," said Sir Ulick, as he left Or- 
mond. 

The surgeon gave Ormond little com- 
fort. After extracting the bullet, and 
examining the wound, he shook his head 
— he had but a bad opinion of the case ; 
and when Oi'inond took him aside, and 



ORMOND. 4'> 

questioned him more closely, he con- 
fessed that he thought the man would 
not live — he should not be surprised if 
he died before morning'. The surgeon 
was obliged to leave him to attend ano- 
ther patient -, and Ormond, turning all 
the other people out of the room, de- 
clared he would sit up with Moriarty 
himself. A terrible night it was to him. 
To his alarmed and inexperienced eyes 
the danger seemed even greater than it 
really was, and several times he thought 
his patient expiring, when he was faint 
from loss of blood. The moments when 
Ormond was occupied in assisting him 
were the least painful. It was when he 
had nothing left to do, when he had lei- 
sure to think, that he was most miserable ; 
then the agony of suspense, and the horror 
of remorse, were felt, till feeling was ex- 
hausted; and he would sit motionless and 
stupified till he was wakened again from 
this suspension of thought and sensation 
by some moan of the poor man, or some 
delirious star tings. Toward morning 



46 ORMOND. 

the wounded man lay easier ; and as Or- 
mond was stooping over his bed to see 
whether he was asleep, Moriarty opened 
his eyes, and fixing- them on Ormond, 
said, in broken sentences, but so as very 
distinctly to be heard — 

" Don't be in such trouble about the 
likes of me — I'll do very well, you'll see 
—and even suppose I wouldn't — not a 
frind I have shall ever prosecute — I'll 
charge 'em not — so be asy — for you're a 
good heart — and the pistol went off un- 
knownst to you — I'm sure was no malice 
— let that be your comfort — It mig^ht 
happen to any man, let alone gentleman — 
Don't take on so — and think of young 
Mr. Harry sitting up the night with me! 
— Oh ! if you'd go now and settle your- 
self yonder on the other bed, Sir — I'd be 
a great dale asier, and I don't doubt but 
I'd get a taste of sleep myself — while 
now, wid you standing over or forenent 
me, I can't close an eye for thinking of 
you, Mr. Harry—" 

Ormond immediately threw himself 



ORMOND. 47 

upon the other bed, that he might relieve 
Moriarty from the sight of him. The 
good nature and generosity of this poor 
fellow increased Orinond's keen sense of 
remorse. As to sleeping, for him it was 
impossible; whenever his ideas began to 
fall into that sort of confusion which 
precedes sleep, suddenly he felt as if his 
heart was struck or twinged, and he 
started with the. recollection that some 
dreadful thing had happened, and wa- 
kened to the sense of guilt and all its 
horrors. Moriarty, now lying perfectly 
quiet and motionless, and Ormond not 
hearing him breathe, he was struck with 
the dread that he had breathed his last. 
A cold tremor came over Ormond— -he 
rose in his bed, listening in acute agony, 
when to his relief, he at last distinctly 
heard Moriarty breathing strongly, and 
soon afterwards — (no music was ever so 
delightful to Orinond's ear) — heard him 
begin to breathe loudly. The morning 
light dawned soon afterwards, and the 



48 ORMOND. 

crowing of a cock was heard, which Or- 
mond feared might waken him j but the 
poor man slept soundly through all these 
usual noises : the heaving of the bed- 
clothes over his breast went on with un- v 
interrupted regularity. The gardener 
and his wife softly opened the door of the 
room, to inquire how things were going 
on ; Ormond pointed to the bed, and they 
nodded, and smiled, and beckoned to him 
to come out, whispering that a taste of 
the morning air would do him good. He 
suffered them to lead him out, for he was 
afraid of debating the point in the room 
with the sleeping patient. The good 
people of the house, who had known 
Harry Ormond from a child, and who 
were exceedingly fond of him, as all the 
poor people in the neighbourhood were, 
said every thing they could think of upon 
this occasion to comfort him, and reite- 
rated about a hundred times their prophe- 
cies, that Moriarty would be as sound and 
rjood a man as ever in a fortnight's time. 



ORMOND. 49 , 

c< Sure, when he'd take the soft sleep he 
could* nt but do well." Then, perceiving 
that Ormond listened to them only with 
faint attention, the wife whispered to 
her husband — " Come off to our work 
Johnny, he'd like to be alone, he's not 
equal to listen to our talk yet — it's the 
surgeon must give him hope. — and he'll 
soon be here, I trust." 

They went to their work, and left 
Ormond standing in the porch. — It was 
a fine morning — the birds were singing, 
and the smell of the honey-suckle, with 
which the porch was covered, wafted by 
the fresh morning air, struck Ormond's 
senses, but struck him with melancholy. 

'* Every thing in nature is cheerful— 
except myself! — Every thing in this 
world going on just the same as it was 
yesterday — but all changed for me! — 
within a few short hours — by my own 
folly, my own madness!" — Every ani- 
mal, thought he, as his attention was 
caught by the house dog, who was lick- 

VOL. II. D 



50 ORMOND. 

ing his hand, and, as his eye fell upon 
the hen and chickens, who were feeding 
before the door — every animal is happy 
— and innocent ! — But if this man die — 
/ shall be a murderer. 

This thought, perpetually recurring-, 
oppressed him so, that he stood motion- 
less till he was roused by the voice of Sir 
UlickO'Shane. 

" Well, Harry Ormond, how is it with 
you, my boy. — The fellow's alive, I 
hope." , 

" Alive. — Thank Heaven !■ — Yes : and 
asleep." 

<c Give ye joy — it would have been an 
ugly thing — not but what we could have 
brought you through : — I'd go through 
thick and thin, you know, for you — as if 
it was for my own son. — But Lady 
O'Shane," said Sir Ulick, changing his 
tone, and with a face of great concern, 
" I must talk to you about her — I may 
as well speak now, since it must be 
said—" 



ORMOND. 51 

u I am afraid," said Ormond, " that I 
spoke too hastily last night : I beg your 
pardon — " 

u Nay — nay, put me out of the ques- 
tion : you may do what you please with 
me — always could, from the time you 
were four years old, — but, you know, the 
more I love anybody, the more Lady 
O'Shane hates them. The fact is," 
continued Sir Ulick, rubbing his eyes, 
" that I have had a weary night of it — 
Lady O'Shane has been crying and 
whining in my ears: She says I encou- 
rage you in being insolent, and so forth 
— in short, she cannot endure you in 
the house any longer — I suspect that 
sour one" (Sir Ulick, among his inti- 
mates, always designated Miss Black 
in this manner,) "puts her up to it. — 
But I will not give up my own boy — 
I will take it with a high hand. — Sepa- 
rations are foolish things, as foolish as 
marriages — but I'd sooner part with 
Lady O'Shane at once, than let Harry 
D 2 



62 OUMOM), 

Ormond think I'd forsake him — espe- 
cially in aukward circumstances.*' 

" That, Sir Ulick, is what Harry Or- 
monde an never think of you — he would 
be the basest, the most suspicious, the 
most ungrateful — but I must not speak 
so loud," continued he, lowering his 
voice, lest he should waken Moriarty. 

Sir Ulick drew him away from the 
door, for Ormond was cool enough at 
this moment to have common sense. 

" My dear guardian, allow me still to 
call you by that name," continued Or- 
mond, " believe me, your kindness is too 
full — innumerable instances of your af- 
fection now press upon me, so that — I 
can't express myself, but depend upon 
it — suspicion of your friendship is the 
last that could enter my mind j I trust, 
therefore, you will do me the same sort 
of justice, and never suspect me capable 
of ingratitude — though the time is come, 
when we must part." 

Ormond could hardly pronounce the 
word. 



ORMOND. »* 

"Part!" repeated Sir Ulick, "no, by 
all the saints arid all the devils in female 
torm. 

" I am resolved," said Ormond, " firm- 
ly resolved on one point, never to be a 
cause of unhappiness to one — who has 
been the source of so much happiness 
to me — I will no more be an object of 
contention between you and Lady 
0' Shane. — Give her up rather than me I 
Heaven forbid ! — I the cause of separa- 
tion, never — never. — I am determined — 
let what will become of me, I will no 
more be an inmate at Castle Hermi- 
tage." 

Tears started into Ormond's eyes; 
Sir Ulick appeared much affected, and 
in a state of great embarrassment and 
indecision. 

He could not bear to think of it — 
he swore it must not be, — then he gra- 
dually sunk to hoping it was not neces- 
sary, and proposing palliatives and half 
measures. — Mori arty must be moved to- 



54 ORMOND. 

day — sent to his own friends. — That point 
lie had, for peace sake, conceded to her 
ladyship, he said, but that he should 
expect, on her part, that after a proper, 
a decent apology from Ormond, things 
might still be accommodated and go on 
smoothly, if that meddling Miss Black 
would let them. 

In short he managed so, that whilst 
he confirmed the young man in his re- 
solution to quit Castle Hermitage, he 
threw all the blame on Lady O'Shane; 
and Ormond never doubted the steadi- 
ness of Sir Ulick's affection, or suspect- 
ed that he had any secret motive for 
wishing to get rid of him. 

" But where can you go, my dear 
boy?— What will you do with yourself? 
— What will become of you?" 

" Never mind — never mind what be- 
comes of me, my dear Sir, — I'll find 
means — I have the use of head and 
hands." 

'« My cousin, Cornelius O'Shane, he 



OAMOND. 55 

is as fond of you almost as I am, and he 
is not cursed with a wife — and is blest 
with a daughter," said Sir Ulick, with 
a sly smile. 

'• Oh yes," continued he, " I see it all 
now, you have ways and means — I no 
longer object — I'll write — no, you'll 
write better yourself to king Corny, for 
you are a greater favourite with his ma- 
jesty than I am. — Fare ye well — Heaven 
bless you, my boy," said Sir Ulick, with 
warm emphasis. " Remember whenever 
you want supplies, Castle Hermitage is 
your bank — you know I have a bank at 
my back — (Sir Ulick was joined in a 
banking house) — Castle Hermitage is 
your bank, and here's your quarter's al- 
lowance to begin with." 

Sir Ulick put a purse into Ormond's 
hand, and left him. 



56 ORMOLU*. 



CHAP. III. 



RUT is it natural ? is it possible, that this 
Sir Ulick O'Shane could so easily part 
with Harry Ormond, and thus •' whistle 
him down the wind to prey at fortune ?" 
For Harry Ormond, surely, if for any 
creature living", Sir Ulick O'Shane's af- 
fection had shewn itself disinterested and 
steady. When left a helpless infant, its 
mother dead, its father in India, he had 
taken the child from the nurse, who was 
too poor even to feed or clothe it as her 
own ; and he had brought little Harry 
up at his castle with his own son — as 
fcis own son — He had been his darling ; — 
literally his spoiled child j — nor had this 
fondness passed away with the prattling 1 



ORMOND. 57 

playful graces of the child's first years, 
it had grown with its growth. Harry 
became Sir Ulick's favourite companion 
— hunting, shooting, carousing, as he had 
been his plaything during infancy. On 
no one occasion had Harry — violent and 
difficult to manage as he was by others, 
ever crossed Sir Ulick's will, or in any 
way incurred his displeasure. And now, 
suddenly, without any cause, except the 
aversion of a wife, whose aversions sel- 
dom troubled him in any great degree, 
is it natural that he should give up Harry 
Ormond, suffer him to sacrifice himself 
in vain, for the preservation of a conjugal 
peace, which Sir Ulick ought to have 
known could not by such a sacrifice be 
preserved .? Is it possible that Sir Ulick 
should do this? Is it in human nature? 

Yes, in the nature of Sir Ulick O'Shane. 
Long use had brought him to this; though 
his affections, perhaps, were naturally 
warm, he had on many occasions in his 
life sacrified them to his scheming ima- 
D 3 



58 OSMOND. 

ginations. Necessity — the necessity of 
bis affairs, the consequences of his ex- 
travagance, had brought him to this ; 
the first sacrifices bad not been made 
without painful struggles — but by de- 
grees his mind had hardened, and his 
warmth of heart had cooled. When he 
said or swore in the most cordial manner, 
" that he would do any thing in the 
world to serve a friend," there was al- 
ways a mental reservation, of — " any thing 
that does not hurt my own interest, or 
cross my schemes." 

And how could Harry Ormond hurt 
his interest, or cross his schemes ? — or 
how had Sir Ulick discovered this so 
suddenly P Miss Annaly's turning pale 
was the first cause of Sir Ulick's change 
of sentiments towards his young favou- 
rite. Afterwards, during the whole that 
passed, Sir Ulick had watched the im- 
pression made upon her — he had observed, 
that it was not for Marcus O'Shane's 
safety that she was anxious, and he 



ORMOND. 59 

thought she had betrayed a secret at- 
tachment, the commencement of an at- 
tachment he thought it, of which she was 
perhaps herself unconscious. — Were such 
an attachment to be confirmed, it would 
disappoint Sir Ulick's schemes : there- 
fore, with the coot decision of a practised 
schemer, he determined directly to get 
rid of Ormond ; he had no intention of 
parting with him for ever, but merely 
while the Annalys were at Castle Her- 
mitage : till his scheme was brought to 
bear, he would leave Harry at the Black 
Islands, and he could, he thought, recal 
him from banishment, and force a re- 
conciliation with Lady O'Shane, and re- 
instate him in favour at pleasure. 

But is it possible that Miss Annaly, 
such an amiable and elegant young lady 
as she is described to be, should feel 
any attachment, any predilection for such 
a young man as Ormond ; ill educated, 
unpolished, with a violent temper, which 
had brought him early in life into the 



60 ORMOND. 

dreadful situation in which he now stands? 
— and at the moment, when covered with 
the blood of an innocent man he stood 
before her, an object of disgust and hor- 
ror, could any sentiment like love exist 
or arise in a well-principled mind? 

Certainly not. — Sir Ulick's acquaint- 
ance with unprincipled women misled 
him completely in this instance, and cle-r- 
prived him of his usual power of dis- 
criminating 1 character. Harry Ormond 
was uncommonly handsome, and though 
so young, had a finely-formed, manly, 
graceful figure ; and his manner, when- 
ever he spoke to women, was peculiarly 
prepossessing. These personal accom- 
plishments, Sir Ulick thought, were quite 
sufficient to win any lady's heart — but 
Florence Annaly was not to be won by 
such means; — no feeling of love for Mr. 
Ormond had ever touched her heart, had 
ever crossed her imagination ; none, under 
such circumstances, could have arisen in 
her innocent and well-regulated mind. 



ORMOKD. 6t 

Sudden terror, and confused apprehen* 
sion of evil, made her grow pale at the 
sight of his bloody apparition at the win- 
dow of the ball-room. Bodily weakness, 
for she was not at this time in strong 
health, must be her apology, if she need 
any, for the faintness and loss of presence 
of mind, which Sir Ulick construed into 
proofs of tender anxiety for the personal 
fate of this young man. In the scene 
that followed, horror of his crime, pity 
for the agony of his remorse, was what 
she felt — what she strongly expressed to 
her mother^ the moment she reached her 
apartment that night : nor did her mo- 
ther, who knew her thoroughly, ever for 
an instant suspect, that in her emotion 
there was a mixture of any sentiment, 
but those which she expressed. Both 
mother and daughter were extremely 
shocked. — They were also struck with 
regret at the idea, that a young man, in 
whom they had seen many instances of 
a generous, good disposition, of natural 



62 ORMOND. 

qualities and talents, which might have 
made him a useful, amiable, and admira- 
ble member of society, being thus early 
a victim to his own undisciplined pas- 
sion. During the preceding winter, they 
had occasionally seen something of 
Ormond, in Dublin. In the midst of 
the dissipated life which he led, upon 
one or two occasions, of which we can- 
not now stop to give an account, he had 
shewn, that he was capable of being a 
very different character from that which 
he had been made by bad education, bad 
example, and profligate indulgence, or 
shameful neglect on the part of his guar- 
dian. 

Immediately after Sir Ulick had left 
Ormond, the surgeon appeared, and a 
new train of emotions arose. He had no 
time to reflect on Sir Ulick's conduct. — 
He felt hurried on rapidl) r , like one in a 
terrible dream. — He returned with the 
surgeon to the wounded man. 

Moriarty had wakened, much refresh- 



ORMOND. 63 

ed from his sleep, and the surgeon con- 
fessed his patient was infinitely better 
than he had expected to find him. Mori- 
arty evidently exerted himself as much as 
he possibly could to appear better, that he 
might calm Ormond's anxiety, who stood 
waiting, with looks that shewed his im- 
plicit faith in the oracle, and his feeling, 
that his own fate depended upon the next 
words that should be uttered. — Let no 
one scoff at his easy faith — at this time 
Ormond was very young, not yet nine- 
teen, and had no experience either of the 
probability or of the fallacy of medical 
predictions. After looking very grave 
and very wise, and questioning and cross- 
questioning a proper time, the surgeon 
said, " it was impossible for him to pro- 
nounce any thing decidedly, till the 
patient should have passed another night; 
but that if the next night proved favour- 
able, he might then venture to declare 
him out of danger, and might then be- 
gin to hope, that with time and care he 



64 ORMOND. 

would do well." With this opinion, 
guarded and dubious as it was, Ormond 
was delighted — his heart felt relieved of 
part of the heavy load by which it had 
been oppressed, and the surgeon was well 
feed from the purse, which Sir Ulick had 
put into Ormond's hands. Ormond's next 
business was, to send a gossoon with a 
letter to his friend the king of the Black 
Islands, to tell him all that had passed, 
and to request an asylum in his domi- 
nions. By the time he had finished and 
dispatched his letter, it was eight o'clock 
in the morning; and he was afraid that be- 
fore he could receive an answer, it miofht 
be too late in the day to carry the wound- 
ed man as far as the Black Islands. He 
therefore accepted of the hospitable offer 
of the village school-mistress, to give him 
and his patient a lodging for this night. 
There was indeed no one in the place, 
who would not have done as much for 
Master Harry. — All were in astonish- 
ment and sorrow, when they heard that 



ORMOXD. 65 

lie was going 1 to leave the Castle; and 
their hatred to Lady O' Shane would 
have known no bounds, had they learned 
that she was the cause of his banishment : 
but this he generously concealed, and for- 
bade any of his followers or partizans, who 
had known any thing of what had passed, 
to repeat what the# had heard. It was 
late in the day before Marcus rose j he 
had to sleep off the effects of his last 
night's intemperance ; he was in great 
astonishment, when he learned that Or- 
niond was really going away. " He could 
scarcely believe," as he said repeatedly, 
" that Harry was so mad, or such a fool. 
As toMoriarty, a few guineas would have 
settled the business, if no rout had been 
made about it.— Sitting up all night 
with such a fellow, and being in such 
agonies about him, so absurd, what more 
could he have done, if he had shot a 
gentleman, or his best friend? — Bui 
Harry Ormond was always in extremes/' 
Marcus, though he had not a very clear 



66 ORMOND. 

recollection of the events of the pre- 
ceding" night, was conscious, however, 
that he had been much more to blame 
than Ormond had stated ; he had a re- 
membrance of having been very violent* 
and of having urged Ormond to chas- 
tise Moriarty. — It was not the first time 
that Ormond had skreened him from 
blame, by taking the whole upon him- 
self. For this, Marcus was grateful to a 
certain degree : he thought he was fond 
of Harry Ormond, but he had not for 
him any solid friendship, that would 
stand ihe test of adversity ; still less 
would it be capable of standing 1 against 
any difference of party opinion. Marcus, 
though he appeared a mild, indolent 
youth, was violent where his prejudices 
were concerned,- — instead of being- go- 
verned by justice in his conduct towards 
his inferiors, he took strong dislikes, 
either upon false informations, or with- 
out sufficient examination of the facts — 
cringing and flattery easily won his fa- 



ORMOND. 67 

vour ; and on the contrary, any contra- 
diction, or spirit even of independence 
in an inferior, he resented. These de- 
fects in his temper appeared more and 
more in him every year, as he ceased to 
be a boy, and was called upon to act as 
a man. The consequences of his actions 
became of greater importance, but in 
acquiring- more power, he did not ac- 
quire more reason, or greater command 
over himself. — He was now provoked 
with Ormond for being- so anxious about 
Moriarty Carroll, because he disliked 
the Carrolls, and especially Moriarty, for 
some slight cause not worth recording. 
— He went to Ormond, and argued 
the matter with him, but in vain — Mar- 
cus resented this sturdiness, and they 
parted, displeased with each other. — 
Though Marcus expressed in words 
milch regret at his companion's ad- 
hering to his resolution of quitting his 
father's house, yet it might be doubted, 
whether at the end of the conference 



68 ORMONB. 

these professions were entirely sincere, 
whatever they might have been at the 
beginning; he had not a large mind, 
and perhaps he was not sorry to get rid 
of a companion, who had often rivalled 
him in his father's favour, and who might 
perhaps rival him where it would be 
still more his ambition to please. The 
coldness of Marcus's manner at parting, 
and the little: difficulty which he felt in 
the separation, gave exquisite pain to 
poor Ormond, who, though he was re- 
solved to go, did wish to be regretted, 
especially by the companion, the friend 
of his childhood.. — The warmth of his 
guardian's manner had at least happily 
deceived him, and to the recollection 
of this he recurred for comfort at this 
moment ; when his heart ached, and 
he was almost exhausted with the suc- 
cession of the painful, violently painful 
feelings, of the last four and twenty 
hours. 

The gossoon who he had sent with the 



ORMOND. 09 

dispatch to the king of the Black Islands, 
did not return this day — disappointment 
upon disappointment. — Moriarty, who 
had exerted himself too much, that he 
might appear better than he really was, 
suffered for it this night; and so did 
Orinond, who never before having been 
with any person delirious from fever, 
was excessively alarmed. What he en- 
dured this night cannot be described- 
it was, however, happy for him, that 
he was forced to bear it all — nothing 
less could have made a sufficient im- 
pression on his mind — nothing less could 
have been a sufficient warning to him, to 
set a guard upon the violence of his pas- 
sion Of anger. 

In the morning the fever abated, 
about eight o'clock the patient sunk 
into a sound sleep — and Ormond kneel- 
ing by his bedside, ardent in devotion 
as in all his sentiments, gave thanks to 
heaven, prayed for Moriarty's perfect 
recovery, and vowed with the strongest 
4 



70 ORMOND. 

adjurations, that " if he might be spared 
for this offence, if he might be saved 
from the horror of being a murderer, no 
passion, no provocation should ever, 
during the whole future course of his 
life, tempt him to lift his hand against 
his fellow creature." 

As he rose from his knees, after 
making this prayer and this vow, he 
was surprised to see standing beside him 
Lady Annaly — she had made a sign to the 
sick man not to disturb Ormond's devo- 
tions by any exclamation at her entrance. 

" Be not disturbed — let me not feel 
that 1 embarrass you, Mr. Ormond," said 
she, " I came here not to intrude upon 
your privacy. Be not ashamed, young 
gentleman," continued she, " that I 
should have witnessed feelings that do 
you honour, and that interest me in your 
future fate." 

" Interest Lady Annaly in my fu- 
ture fate ! — is it possible !" exclaimed Or- 
mond — u is it possible that one of whom 



ORMOND. 71 

I stood so much in awe — one whom I 
thought so much too good, ever to be- 
stow a thought on — such a one as I am 
— as 1 was, even before this fatal — " 
(his voice failed). 

" Not fatal I hope — I trust," said 
Lady Annaly, •' this poor man's looks 
at this moment assure me, that he is 
likely to do well." 

u True for ye, my lady," said Mo- 

riarty, " I'll do my best surely, I'd live 

through all, if possible, for his sake, 

Jet alone my mudther's, t>r shister's, or 

my own — 'twould be too bad after all 

the trouble he got these two nights, to 

be dying at last, and hanting him, may 

be, whether I would or no — for as to 

prosecuting, that would never be any 

way, if I died twenty times over. I 

sint off that word to my mudther and 

shister, with my curse if they'd do other 

— and only that they were at the fair, 

and did not get the word, or the news 

of my little accident, they'd have been 



72 ORMOND. 

here long ago, and the minute they come, 
I'll swear 'em not to prosecute, or har- 
bour a thought of revenge again' him, 
who had no malice again' me, no more 
than a child. And at another's bidding, 
more than his own, he drew the trijrger, 
and the pistol went off unknownst, in a 
passion. — So there's the case for you, my 
lady." 

Lady Annaly, who was pleased with the 
poor fellow's simplicity and generosity in 
this tragic-comic statement of the case, in- 
quired if she could in any way afford 
him assistance. 
. " I thank your ladyship, but Mr. 
Harry lets me want for nothing." 

" Nor ever will, while 1 have a far- 
thing I can call my own," cried Or- 
mond. 

ff But I hope," said Lady Annaly, 
smiling, " that when Moriarty — is not 
that his name? gets stout again, as he 
seems inclined to do, that you do not 
mean Mr. Ormond to make him miser- 



ORMOND. 73 

able and good for nothing, by supporting 
him in idleness/' 

" No, he sha'n't, my lady — I would 
not let him be wasting 1 his little sub- 
stance on me — and did ye hear, my lady, 
how he is going to lave Castle Hermit- 
age — Well of all the surprises ever I got ! 
It come upon me like a shot — my shot was 
nothing to it !" 

It was necessary to insist upon Mo- 
riarty's submitting to be silent, and to 
lie quiet ; for not having the fear of the 
surgeon before his eyes, and having got 
over his first awe of the lady, he was 
becoming too full of oratory and ac- 
tion. 

Lady Annaly took Ormond out with 
her, that she might speak to him of his 
own affairs. 

" You will not, I hope, Mr. Ormond, 
attribute it to idle curiosity, but to a 
wish to be of service, if I inquire what 
your future plans in life may be ?" 

Ormond had never formed any dis- 

VOL. II. E 



74 ORMOND. 

tinctly — he was not fit for any profession, 
except perhaps the army — he was too 
old for the navy — he was at present go- 
ing, he believed, to the house of an old 
friend, a relation of Sir Ulick, Mr. 
Cornelius O'Shane." 

" My son, Sir Herbert Annaly, has an 
estate in this neighbourhood, at which 
he has never yet resided, but we are 
going there when we leave Castle Her- 
mitage — 1 shall hope you will let me see 
you at Annaly, when you have deter- 
mined your plans ; perhaps you may 
shew us how we can assist in forward- 
ing them." 

" Is it possible," repeated Ormond, in 
unfeigned astonishment, " that your 
ladyship can be so very good, so con- 
descending, to one whoso little deserves 
it — but I will deserve it in future. — If I 
get over this — interested in my future 
fate — Lady Annaly !" 

" I knew your father many years 
ago," said Lady Annaly, •' and as his 



ORMOND. 75 

son, I might feel some interest for you ; 
but I will tell you sincerely, that I 
have on some occasions, when we met 
in Dublin, seen traits of goodness in 
you, which, on your own account, Mr. 
Ormond, have interested me in your fate. 
— But fate is an unmeaning" common- 
place — worse than commonplace word 
— it is a word that leads us to ima- 
gine that we are fated or doomed to 
certain fortunes or misfortunes in life. 
— I have had a great deal of experience, 
and I think, from all I have observed, 
that far the greatest part of our hap- 
piness or misery in life depends upon 
ourselves." 

Ormond stopped short, and listened 
with the eagerness of one of quick 
feeling and quick capacity, who seizes 
an idea that is new to him, and the 
truth and value of which he at once 
appreciates. — For the first time in his 
life, he heard good sense from the 
voice of benevolence — he anxiously de- 
E 2 



76 ORMOND. 

sired that she should go on speaking, 
and stood in such an attitude of atten- 
tive deference, as fully marked that 
wish. 

But at this moment Lady O' Shane's 
footman came up with a message from 
his lady ; her ladyship sent to let Lady 
Annaly know that breakfast was ready. 
Repeating her good wishes to Ormond — 
she bade him adieu, while he was too 
much overpowered with his sense of 
gratitude to return her thanks. 

M Since there exists a being, and 
such a being, interested for me, I must 
be worth something — and I will make 
myself worth something more — I will 
begin from this moment, I am resolved, 
to improve — and who knows but in the 
end I may become every thing that is 
good- — 1 don't want to be great!" 

Though this resolution was not stea- 
dily adhered to, though it was for a time 
counteracted by circumstances, it was 
never afterwards entirely forgotten, — 



ORMOND. 77 

From this period of his life, in consequence 
of the great and painful impression 
which had been suddenly made on his 
mind, and from a few words of sense 
and kindness, spoken to him at a time 
when his heart was happily prepared 
to receive them, we may date the 
commencement of our hero's reforma- 
tion and improvement. Hero, we say, 
but certainly never man had more faults 
than Ormond had to correct, or to be 
corrected, before he could come up to 
the received idea of any description of 
hero. Most heroes are born perfect — 
so at least their biographers, or rather 
their panegyrists, would have us believe. 
Our hero is far from this happy lot; 
the readers of his story are in no danger 
of being wearied at first setting out, 
with the list of his merits and accom- 
plishments, nor will they be awed or 
discouraged by the exhibition of virtue 
above the common standard of huma- 
nity, beyond the hope of imitation. On 



78 ORMOND. 

the contrary, most people will comfort 
and bless themselves with the reflection, 
that they never were quite so foolish, or 
quite so bad as Harry Ormond. 

For the advantage of those who may 
wish to institute the comparison, his 
biographer, in writing the life of Or- 
mond, deems it a point of honour and 
conscience to extenuate nothing, but 
to trace, with an impartial hand, not 
only every improvement and advance, 
but every deviation or retrograde move- 
ment. 



ORMOND. 79 



CHAP. IV. 



FULL of sudden zeal for his own im- 
provement, Ormond sat down at the 
foot of a tree, determined to make a list 
of all his faults, and of all his good re- 
solutions for the future. — He took out 
his pencil, and began on the back of a 
letter the following resolutions, in a sad 
scrawling hand and incorrect style : 
Harry OrmoncV s.good resolutions. 

Resolved 1st. — That 1 will nevei drink 
more than (blank number of ) glasses. 

Resolved 2dly. — That I will cure my- 
self of being passionate. 

Resolved 3dly. — That I will nevei 
keep low company. 

Resolved. — That I am too fond of 



80 ORMOND. 

flattery — women's especially I like most. 
— -To cure myself of that. 

Here he was interrupted by the sight 
of a little gossoon, with a short stick 
tucked under his arm, whe came 
pattering on barefoot in a kind of 
pace indescribable to those who have 
never seen it — it was something as 
like walking or running as chaunting 
is to saying or singing. 

" The answer I am from the Black 
Islands, Master Harry, and would have 
been back wid you afore nightfall yes- 
terday, only he — king Corn y — was at the 
fair of Frisky — could not write till this 
morning any way — but has his service 
to ye, Master Harry, will be in it for ye 
by half after two with a bed and blanket 
for Mori arty, he bid me say on account 
he forgot to put it in the note. — In the 
Sally Cove the boat will be there abow 
in the big lough, forenent the spot where 
the fir dale was cut last seraph by them 
rogues." 



ORMOND, 81 

The despatch from the king of the 
Black Islands was then produced from 
the messenger's bosom, and it ran as 
follows : 

*•' Dear Harry. — What the mischief has 
come over cousin Ulick to be banishing" 

you from Castle Hermitage? But 

since he conformed he was never the same 
man, especially since his last mis-mar" 
riage. — But no use moralising — he was 
always too much of a courtier for me. — 
Come you to me, my dear boy, who is 
no courtier, and you'll be received and 
embraced with open arms — was I Bria- 
reus the same way. — Bring Moriarty 
Carroll (if that's his name), the boy you 
shot, which has given you so much con- 
cern — for which L like you the better — 
and honour that boy, who, living or 
dying, forbad to prosecute. — Don't be 
surprised to see the roof the way it is: — 
since Tuesday I wedged it up bodily 
without stirring a stick : — you'll see it 
from the boat, standing three foot high 
k3 



82 ORMONT). 

above the walls, waiting- while I'm 
building up to it — to get attics — which 1 
shall for next to nothing — by my own 
contrivance. — Mean time, good dry lodg- 
ing, as usual, for all friends at the palace. 
He shall be well tended for you by 
Sheelah Dunshauglin, the mother of 
Betty, worth a hundred of her ! and 
we'll soon set him up again with the 
help of such a nurse, as well as ever, I'll 
engage — for I'm a bit of a doctor, you 
know, as well as every thing else. —But 
don't let any other doctor, surgeon, or 
apothecary, be coming after him for 
your life — for none ever gets a permit 
to land, to my knowledge, on the Black 
Islands — to which I attribute, under 
Providence, to say nothing of my own 
skill in practice, the wonderful preser- 
vation of my people in health — that, and 
woodsorrel, and another secret or two 
not to be committed to paper in a hurry 
— all which I. would not have written 
to you, but am in the gout since four this 

3 



ORMOND. 83 

morning 1 , held by the foot fast — else I'd 
not be writing-, but would have gone 
every inch of the way for you myself in 
stile, in lieu of sending*, which is all I 
can now do, my six-oared boat, streamers 
flying, and piper playing like mad — for 
I would not have yon be coming like a 
banished man, but in all glory to Corne- 
lius G'Shane, commonly called king 
Corny — but no king for you, only your 
hearty eld friend." 

"Heaven bless Cornelius O'Shane !" 
said Harry Ormond to himself, as he 
finished this letter, " king or no king, the 
most warm-hearted man on earth, let the 
ether be who he will." 

Then pressing the letter to his heart, 
he put it up carefully, and rising in 
haste, lie dropped the list of his faults. — 
That train of associations v. as completely 
broken, and for the present completely 
forgotten ; nor was it likely to be soon 
renewed at the Black Islands, especially 
in the palace, where he was now going- 



84 ORMOND. 

to take up his residence. Moriarty was 
laid on — what he never laid before— a 
feather-bed, and was transported, with. 
Ormond, in the six-oared boat, streamers 
flying-, and piper playing, across the lake 
to the islands. Moriarty's head ached 
terribly, but he nevertheless enjoyed the 
playing- of the pipes in his ear, because 
of the air of triumph it gave Master 
Harry, to go away in this grandeur, in 
the face of the country. King Corny 
ordered the discharge of twelve guns on 
his landing, which popped one after an- 
other gloriously, — the hospitable echoes, 
as Moriarty called them, repeating the 
sound. A horse, decked with ribbands, 
waited on the shore, with king Corny's 
compliments for prince Harry, as the 
boy, who held the stirrup for Ormond to 
mount, said he was instructed to call 
him, and to proclaim him — tc Prince 
Harry" throughout the island, which he 
did by sound of horn, the whole way 
they proceeded to the palace — very much 



ORMOND. 85 

to the annoyance of the horse, but all 
for the greater glory of the prince, who 
managed his steed to the admiration of 
the shouting ragged multitude, and of 
his majesty, who sat in state in his 
gouty chair at the palace door. He 
had had himself rolled out to welcome 
the coming guest. 

" By all that's princely," cried he, 
" then, that young Harry Ormond was 
intended for a prince, he sits a horse 
so like myself; and that horse requires 
a master hand to manage him." 

Ormond alighted 

The gracious, cordial, fatherly wel- 
come, with which he was received, de- 
lighted his heart. 

" Welcome, prince, my adopted son, 
welcome to Corny castle — palace., I 
would have said, only for the constituted 
authorities of the post-office, that might 
take exceptions, and not be sending me 
my letters right. As I am neither 
bishop nor arch — I have in their blind 
1 



80 ORMOND. 

eyes or conceptions no right — Lord help 
them ! — to a temporal palace. Be that 
as it may, come you in with me, here 
into the big' room — and see ! there's the 
bed in the corner for your first object, 
my boy — your wounded chap— And I'll 
visit his wound, and fix it and him the 
first thing for ye, the minute he comes 
up." 

His majesty pointed to' a bed in the 
corner of a large apartment, whose 
beautiful painted ceiling and cornice, 
and fine chimney-piece with caryatides 
of white marble, ill accorded with the 
heaps of oats and corn — the thrashing* 
cloth and flail which lay on the floor — 

" It i£ intended for a drawing-room, 
understand," said king Corny, " but 
till it is finished, I use it for a granary 
or a barn, when it would not be a 
barrack-room or hospital, which last is 
most useful at present." 

To this hospital Moriarty was care- 
fully conveyed. Here, notwithstanding 



ORMOND. 87 

his gout, Which affected only his feet, 
king- Corny dressed Moriarty's wound 
with exquisite tenderness and skill j for 
he had actually acquired knowledge 
and address in many arts, with which 
none could have suspected him to have 
been in the least acquainted. 

Dinner was soon announced, which 
was served up with such a strange mix- 
ture of profusion and carelessness, as 
showed that the attendants, who were 
numerous and ill caparisoned, were not 
much used to gala-days. The crowd, 
who had accompanied Moriarty into the 
house, was admitted into the dining- 
room, where they stood round the king, 
prince, and father Jos, the priest, as the 
courtiers, during the king's supper at 
Versailles, surrounded the ki'ig of 
France. But these poor people were 
treated with more hospitality than were 
the courtiers of the French king ; for 
as soon as the dishes were removed, 
their contents were generously distri- 



88 ORMOND. 

buted among- the attendant multitude. 
The people blest king- and prince^ 
" wishing them health and happiness 
long to reign over them j" — and bowing 
suitably to his majesty the king-, and 
to his reverence the priest, without 
standing upon the order of ^heir going, 
departed. 

" And now, father Jos," said the king* 
to the priest, " say grace, and draw 
close, and let me see you do justice to 
my claret, or the whiskey-punch if you 
prefer 5 and you, prince Harry, we will 
set to it regally as long as you please." 

<e Till tea-time," — thought young 
Harry. li Till supper-time," — thought 
father Jos. " Till bed-time,"— thought 
king Corny. 

At tea-time young Harry, in pursu- 
ance of his resolution the first, rose, but 
he was seized instantly, and held down 
to his chair. The royal command was 
laid upon him « to sit still and be a good 
fellow." — Moreover the door was locked 



ORMOND. 89 

—so that there was no escape or re- 
treat. 

The next morning when he wakened 
with an aching head, he recollected with 
disgust the figure of father Jos, and all 
the noisy mirth of the preceding night. 
Not without some self-contempt, he 
asked himself what had become of his 
resolution ? 

•' The wounded boy was axing for 
you, Master Harry," said the girl, who 
came in to open the shutters. 

" How is he ?" cried Harry, starting 
up. 

" He is but soberly ;* he got the 
night but middling ; he concaits he 
could not sleep becaase he did not get 
a sight of your honour afore he'd settle 
— I tell him 'tis the change of beds, 
which always hinders a body to sleep 
the first night." 

The sense of having totally forgotten 
the poor fellow — the contrast between 

* But soberly /—not very well, or in good spirits. 



90 ORMOND. 

this forgetfulness and the anxiety and 
contrition of the two preceding- nights, 
actually surprised Ormond ; he could 
hardly believe that he was one and the 
same person. Then came excuses to 
himself — " Gratitude — common civility 
—the peremptoriness of king Corny — 
his passionate temper, when opposed on 
this tender point — the locked door — 
and two to one — In short, there was an 
impossibility in the circumstances of 
doing otherwise than what he had done. 
But then the same impossibility — the 
same circumstances — might recur the 
next night, and the next, and so on : 
the peremptory temper of king Corny 
was not likely to alter, and the moral 
obligation of gratitude would continue 
the same ;" so that at nineteen, Ormond 
was to become, from complaisance, what 
his sotd and body abhorred — an habitual 
drunkard ? — And what would become of 
Lady Annaly's interest in his fate or his 
improvement ?" 

The two questions were not of equal 



ORMOND. 91 

importance, but our hero was at this 
time far from having" any just proportion 
in his reasoning*. It was well he rea- 
soned at all. — The argument as to the 
obligation of gratitude, and the view he 
had taken of the never-ending nature 
of the evil, that must be the consequence 
of beginning with weak complaisance, — 
above all, the feeling that he had so lost 
his reason as to forget Moriarty, and to 
have been again incapable of command- 
ing his passions, if any thing had oc- 
curred to cross his temper, determined 
Ormond to make a firm resistance on 
the next occasion that should occur. It 
occurred the very next night. — After a 
dinner given to his chief tenants and 
the genteel people of the islands, a dinner 
in honour and in introduction of his 
adopted son, king Corny gave a toast 
" to the prince presumptive," as he 
now stiled imn — a bumper toast. Soon 
afterwards he detected day-light in 
Harry's glass, and cursing it properly, 



92 ORMONt). 

he insisted on flowing bowls and Ml 
glasses. " What ! are you prince pre- 
sumptuous P" cried he, with a half 
angry and astonished look, " Would you 
resist and contradict your father and 

king at his own table after dinner ! 

Down with the glass !" 

Further and steady resistance changed 
the jesting tone and half angry look of 
king Corny into sullen silence, and a 
black portentous brow of serious displea- 
sure; after a decent time of sitting, the 
bottle passing him without further im- 
portunity, Ormond rose — it was a hard 
struggle — for in the face of his benefactor, 
he saw 7 reproach and rage bursting from 
every feature. Still he moved on to- 
wards the door — he heard the words 
" sneaking off sober ! — let him sneak !" 

Ormond had his hand on the lock of 
the door — it was a bad lock, and opened 
with difficulty. 

« c There's gratitude for you ! No heart 
after all ! — I mistook him." 



ORMOND. 93 

Ormond turned back, and firmly stand- 
ing-, and firmly speaking, he said, coolly 
— " You did not mistake me formerly, 
Sir, — but you mistake me now ! — Sneak- 
ing ! — Is there any man here sober or 
drunk," continued he, impetuously ap- 
proaching the table, and looking round 
full in every face — " is there any man 
here dares to say so but yourself. — You, 
you my benefactor, my friend ; you have 
said it — think it you did not — you could 
not, but say it you may. — You may say 
whatyou will to Harry Ormond, bound to 
you as he is — bound hand and foot and 
heart! — Trample on him as you will — you 
may — No heart — Oblige me, gentlemen, 
some of you," cried he, his anger rising 
and his eyes kindling as he spoke. iC Some 
of you, gentlemen, if any of you think so, 
oblige me l»y saying so. — No gratitude, 
Sir!" — iiuiiing from them, and address- 
ing himseit to the old man, who held an 
untasted glass of claret as he listened. 
" No gratitude ! Have not I ? — Try me, 



&4 ORMOND. 

try me to the death — you have tried me 
to the quick of the heart, and I have 
borne it." 

He could bear it no longer, he threw 

himself into the vacant chair — flung out 

his arms on the table, and laying his face 

down upon them, wept aloud. Cornelius 

O'Shane pushed the wine away. w I've 

wronged the boy, grievously — " said he, 

and forgetting the gout, he rose from his 

chair, hobbled to him, and leaning over 

him — " Harry, 'tis I — Look up my own 

boy, and say you forgive me, or I'll never 

forgive myself. That's well," continued 

he, as Harry looked up and gave him 

his hand — " That's well ! — you've taken 

the twinge out of my heart, worse than 

the gout — not a drop of gall or malice in 

your nature, nor ever was, more than in 

the child unborn. But see, I'll tell you 

what you'll do now, Harry, to settle all 

things—and lest the fit should take me ever 

to be mad with you on this score again. 

You don't chuse to drink more than's be- 



ORMOND. 95 

coming ? — Well, you're right, and I'm 
wrong. 'Twould be a burning shame of 
me to make of you what I have made of 
myself — I was born afore the present re- 
formation in manners, in that respect. — 
We must do only as well as we can. But 
I will ensure you against the future — and 
before we take another "lass — There's 
the priest — and you Tom Ferrally there, 
step you for my swearing book. Harry 
Ormond, you shall take an oath against 
drinking more glasses than you please 
evermore, and then you're safe from me # 
But stay, you are a heretic. Phoo | 
What am I saying — 'Twas seeing the 
priest put that word heretic in my head 
— you're not a catholic, I mean. But 
an oath's an oath, taken before priest or 
parson — an oath, taken how you will, will 
operate. But stay, to make all easy, 'tis 
I'll take it." 

" Against drinking, you! King Corny!" 
said Father Jos," stopping his hand, 
" and in case of the gout in your sto- 
mach ?" 



96 ORMOND. 

" Against drinking ! do you think I'd 
perjure myself? No ! But against press- 
ing him to it — I'll take my oath I'll never 
ask him to drink another glass more than 
he likes." 

The oath was taken, and king Corny 
concluded the ceremony by observing, 
that i( after all there was no character he 
despised more than that of a sot. But 
every gentleman knew that there was a 
wide and material difference betwixt a 
gentleman who was fond of his bottle, 
and that unfortunate being, an habitual 
drunkard. For his own part, it was his 
established rule never to go to bed with- 
out a proper quantity of liquor under his 
belt ; but he defied the universe to say he 
was ever known to be drunk." 

This startling assertion could not bring 
his majesty's veracity into question ; for 
according to his definition, and to the 
received opinion at his court, " No man 
could be called drunk, so long as he could 
lie upon the ground without hojding it." 



ORMOKDt 97 

At a court where such ingenious casu- 
istry prevailed, it was happy for our hero, 
that an unqualifying" oath now protected 
his resolution. 



vol. ir. «• 



ORMOND. 



CHAP. V: 



IN the middle of the nicrht our hero 
was wakened by a loud bellowing. It 
was only king Corny in a paroxysm of 
the gout. His majesty was naturally of 
a very impatient temper, and his max- 
ims of philosophy encouraged him to 
the most unrestrained expression of his 
feelings. — The maxims of his philosophy 
— for he had read, though in a most de- 
sultory manner, and he had thought 
often deeply, and not seldom justly. — 
The turns of his mind, and the ques- 
tions he asked, were sometimes utterly 
unexpected — 

•' Pray now," said he to Harry, who 
stood beside his bed — " now, that I've 



ORMOND. 99 

a moment's ease — did you ever hear of 
the stoics that the bookmen talk of, and 
can you tell me what good any one of 
them ever got by making it a point to 
make no noise, when they'd be punish- 
ed and racked with pains of body or 
mind. Why I will tell you all they got 
— all they got was no pity — who would 
give them pity, that did not require it ? — 
I could bleed to death in a bath, as well 
as the best of them, if I chose it; or 
chew a bullet, if I set my teeth to it, 
with any man in a regiment — but 
where's the use ? nature knows best, and 
she says roar /" 

And he roared — for another twinge 
seized him — nature said — sleep! several 
times this night to Harry, and to 
every body in the palace, but they did 
not sleep, they could not, while the 
roaring continued. So all had reason to 
Rejoice, and Moriarty in particular, 
when his majesty's paroxysm was past. 
Harry was in a sound sleep at twelve 
F 2 



100 ORMON1). 

o 1 clock, the next day, when he was 
summoned into the royal presence. He 
found king- Corny sitting* at ease in his 
bed, that bed strewed over with a va- 
riety of roots and leaves, weeds and. 
plants. An old woman was hovering 
over the fire, stirring something* in a 
black kettle, — 

" Simples these! of wonderful un- 
known power," said king* Corny to 
Harry, as he approached the bed, " and 
I'll engage you don't know the name 
even of the half of them." — 

Harry confessed his ignorance. 

•' No shame for you — was you as wise 
as King Solomon himself, you might 
not know them, for he did not, nor 
couldn't, he that had never set his foot 
a grousing on an Irish bog. — Sheelah ! 
come you over, and say what's this?" 

Tlie old woman now came to assist 
at this hed of botany, and with spec- 
tacles slipping off, and pushed on her 
nose continually, peered over each green 



ORMONl>. 101 

thing", and named in Irish, " every herb 
that sips the dew." 

Sheelah was deeper in Irish lore, than 
king Corny couid pretend to be : but 
then he humbled her with the " black 
heilebore of the antients," and he had, 
in an unaccountable manner, affected 
her imagination by talking- of " that fa- 
mous bowl of narcotic poisons, which 
that great man Socrates drank off." — 
Sheelah would interrupt herself in the 
middle of a sentence and curtsy, if she 
heard him pronounce the name of So- 
crates — and at the mention of the bowl, 
she would regularly sigh, and ex- 
claim : — 

«' Lord save us! — But [that was a 
wicked bowl." 

Then after a cast of her eyes up to 
heaven, and crossing herself on the 
forehead, she would take up her dis- 
course at the word where she had left 
off. 

King Corny set to work compound- 



102 ORMOND, 

ing plaisters and embrocations, pre-* 
paring all sorts of decoctions of roots, 
and leaves famous through the country. 
And while he directed and gesticulated 
from his bed, the old woman worked 
over the fire in obedience to his com- 
mands. Sometimes, however, not with 
that " prompt and mute obedience," 
which the great require. 

It was fortunate for Mori arty, that 
king Corny, not having the use of his 
nether limbs, could not attend even in 
his gouty chair to administer the medi- 
cines he had made, and to see them 
fairly swallowed. — Sheelah, whose con- 
science was easy on this point, con- 
tented herself with giving him a strict 
charge to u take every bottle to the last 
drop." All she insisted upon for her 
own part was, that she must tie the 
chann round his neck and arm. She 
would fain have removed the dressings 
of the wound to substitute plaisters of 
her own, over which she had pronounced 



ORMOND. 103 

certain prayers or incantations : but Mo- 
riarty, who had seized and held fast one 
good principle of surgery, that the air 
must never be let into the wound, held 
mainlv to this maxim, and all Sheelah 
could obtain was permission to clap 
on her charmed plaister over the dressing 

In due time, or as king Corny trium- 
phantly observed, in " a wonderful short 
period,'' Moriarty got quite well, long 
before the king's gout was cured, even 
with the assistance of the black helle- 
bore of the antients. — King Corny was 
so well pleased with his patient for doing 
such credit to his medical skill, that 
he gave him and his family a cabin, and. 
spot of land, in the Islands — a cabin near 
the palace — and at Harry's request made 
him his wood-ranger and his o-ame- 
keeper, the one a lucrative place — the 
other a si ecure. 

Master Harry— Prince Harry, was 
now looked up to as a person all power- 
ful with the master, and petitions and 



104 ORMOND. 

requests to speak for them, to speak just 
one word, came pouring* from all sides ^ 
but however enviable his situation as 
favourite and prince presumptive might 
appear to others, it was not in all respects 
comfortable to himself. 

Formerly when a boy in his visits to 
the Black Islands he used to have a 
little companion of whom he was fond — 
Dora — king Corny 's daughter. Missing 
her much, he inquired from her father 
where she was gone, and when she was 
likely to return. 

" She is gone off to the continent, to 
the continent of Ireland, that is ; but not 
banished for any misdemeanour. You 
know," said king Corny, " 'tis gene- 
rally considered as a punishment in the 
Black Islands to be banished to Ireland. 
A threat of that kind I find sufficient to 
bring the most refractory and ill-disposed 
of my subjects, if I had any of that de- 
scription, to rason in the last resort; but 
to that ultimate law I have not recourse, 



ORMOND. 105 

except in extreme cases: I understand 
my business of king too well to wear out 
either shame or fear ; but you are no 
legislator yet, prince Harry. So what 
was you asking me about Dora ; she is 
only gone a trip to the continent, to her 
aunt's, by the mother's side, MissO'Faley, 
that you never saw, to get the advantage 
of a dancing-master, which myself don't 
think she wants, — a natural carriage, 
with native graces, being, in my unsophis- 
ticated opinion, worth all the dancing- 
master's positions, contorsions, or drill- 
ings ; but her aunt's of a contrary 
opinion, and the women say it is essential 
— so let 'em put Dora in the stocks, and 
punish her as they will, she'll be the 
gladder to get free, and fly back from 
their continent to her own Black Islands 
and to me, and to you and me — I ax 
your pardon, Harry Ormond ; but you 
know, or I should tell you in time, she 
is engaged already to White Conual, of 
Glynn — from her birth. That engage- 
F 3 



106 qrmond. 

ment I made with the father over a bowl 
of punch — I promised — I'm afraid it was 
a foolish business — He had two sons, 
twins, at that time, and I had no daugh- 
ter — but I promised, it* ever I should 
have one — and I had one unluckily ten 
years after, which is Dora — I promised, 
I say, and took my oath, I'd give the 
daughter in marriage to Connal of 
Glynn's eldest son, which is White Con- 
nal. Well, it was altogether a rash act! 
— So you'll consider her as a married 
woman, though she is but a child — It 
was a rash act between you and I — for 
Connal's not grown up a likely lad for 
the girl to fancy ; but that's neither here 
nor there; no — my word is passed — when 
half drunk may be — but no matter — it 
must be kept sober — drunk or soher, a 
gentleman must keep his word — a-fortiori 
a king — a-fortiori king Corny — See ! — 
was there this minute no such thing as 
parchment, deed, stamp, signature, or 
seal in the wide world, when once Corny 
2 



ORMOND. 107 

has squeezed a friend's hand on a bargain, 
or a promise, 'tis fast, was it ever so 
much against me — 'tis as strong 1 to me as 
if I had squeezed all the lawyers' wax 
in the creation upon it." 

Ormond admired the honourable sen- 
timent ; but was sorry there was any oc- 
casion for it — and he sighed; but it was 
a sigh of pity for Dora— -not that he had 
ever seen White Connal, or known any 
thing" of him ; but White Connal did not 
sound well, and her father's avowal that 
it had been a rash engagement did not 
seem to promise happiness to Dora in 
" this marriage. 

From the time he had been a bov, 
Harry Ormond had been in the habit of 
ferrying over to the Black Islands, when- 
ever Sir Ulick could spare him. The 
hunting' and shooting, and the life of law- 
less freedom he led on the Islands, had 
been delightful. King Corny, who had 
the command not only of boats, and of 
guns, and of fishing tackle, and of meiij 



108 ORMONU. 

but of carpenters' tools, and of smiths' 
tools ; and of a lathe, and of brass and 
ivory ; and of all the thing's that the heart 
of boy could desire, had appeared to 
Harry, when he was a boy, the richest, 
the greatest, the happiest of men. — The 
cleverest too — the most ingenious -, — for 
king Corny had with his own hands 
made a violin and a rat-trap; and had 
made the best coat, and the best pair of 
shoes, and the best pair of boots, and the 
best hat ; and had knit the best pair of 
stockings, and had made the best dung- 
hill in his dominions ; and had made a 
quarter of a yard of fine lace, and had 
painted a panorama. No wonder that 
king Corny had been looked up to by 
the imagination of childhood, as " a 
personage, high as human veneration 
could look." 

But now, although our hero was still 
but a boy in many respects, yet in con- 
sequence of his slight commerce with 
the world, he had formed some com- 



ORMOND. 109 

parisons, and made some reflexions. He 
hadh eard, accidentally, the conversation 
of a few people of common sense, besides 
the sly, witty, and satirical remarks of Sir 
Ulick, upon Cousin Cornelius ; and it had. 
occurred to Harry to question the utility 
and real grandeur of some of those thing's, 
which had struck his childish imagination. 
— For example, he began to doubt, whe- 
ther it were worthy of a king, or a gentle- 
man, to be his own shoemaker, hatter, and 
taylor ; whether it were not jbetter ma- 
naged in society, where these things are 
performed by different tradesmen ; still 
the things were wonderful, considering- 
who made them, and under what dis- 
advantages they were made; but Harry 
having now seen and compared Corny's 
violin with other violins, and having dis- 
covered that so much better could be 
had for money, with so much less trouble, 
his admiration had a little decreased. 
There were other points relative to ex- 
ternal appearance, on which his eyes 

4 



1 iO ORMOND. 

had been opened. In his boyish days, 
king 1 Corny, going" out to hunt with 
hounds and horn, followed with shouts 
by all who could ride, and all who could 
run, king- Corny hallooing- the dogs, 
and cheering- the crowd, appeared to 
him the greatest, the happiest of man- 
kind. 

But he had since seen hunts in a very 
different style, and he could no longer 
admire the rabble rout. 

Human creatures, especially young 
human creatures, are apt to swing sud- 
denly from one extreme to the other, and 
utterly to despise that which they had 
extravagantly admired. From this pro- 
pensity, Ormond was in the present in- 
stance guarded by affection and grati- 
tude. Through ail the folly of his king- 
ship, he saw that Cornelius O'Shane was 
not a person to be despised. He was 
indeed a man of great natural powers, 
both of body and mind; — of inventive 
genius, energy, and perseverance, which 



ORMOXD. Ill 

might have attained the greatest objects; 
though from insufficient knowledge, and 
self-sufficient perversity, they had wasted 
themselves on absurd or trivial purposes. 
There was a strong contrast between 
the characters of Sir Uiick, and his cou- 
sin Cornelius O'Shane; they disliked and 
despised each other. Differing as far i.i 
natural disposition, as the subtle and the 
bold, their whole course through life, 
and the habits contracted during their 
progress, had widened the original dif- 
ference. 

The one living in the world, and mix- 
ing continually with men of all ranks 
and characters, had, by bending easily, 
and being all things to all men, won his 
courtier-way onwards and upwards to 
the possession of a seat in Parliament, 
and the prospect of a peerage. 

The other, inhabiting a emote island, 
secluded from all men but ihose over 
whom he reigned, caring for no earthly 
consideration, and for no human opinion 



J 12 omiOND. 

but his own — had for himself, and by him- 
self, hewed out his way to his own ob. 
jects — and then rested, satisfied — 

'* Lord of himself, and all his (little) world his 
own." 



ORMOND. US 



CHAP. VI. 



ONE morning, when Harry Ormond 
was out shooting, and king Corny, who 
had recovered tolerably from the gout, 
was re-instated in his arm chair, in the 
parlour, listening to father Jos, reading" 
" The Dublin Evening Post," a gossoon, 
one of the runners of the Castle, opened 
the door, and putting in his curly red 
head and bare feet, announced, in all 
haste, that he " just seen Sir Click 
O'Sliane in the boat, crossing the lake 
for the Black Islands." 

" Well, breathless blockhead ! and what 
of that?" said king Corny, " did you 
never see a man in a boat before?" 

" I did, plase your honour." 



114 OBMONDr 

" Then what is there extraordinary ? ,r 

•' Nothing' at all, plase your honour, 
only — thought your honour might like to 
know." 

" Then you thought wrong, for 1 nei- 
ther like it, nor mislike it. — I don't care 
a rush about the matter — so take vourself 
down stairs." 

" 'Tis a long time," said the priest, as 
the gossoon closed the door after him ; 
" 'tis a longer time than he ought, since 
Sir Ulick O'Shane paid his respects here, 
even in the shape of a morning visit." 

" Morning visit !" repeated Mrs. Betty 
Dunshauglin, the housekeeper, who en- 
tered the room, for she was a privileged 
person, and had les grandes fy les petites 
entrees in this palace — " Morning visit ! — 
are you sure, father Jos — are you clear 
he isn't come, intending to stay dinner P" 

" What, in the devil's name, Betty, 
does it signify," said the king. 

" About the dinner !" said Betty. 

" What about it?" said Corny, proud- 



ORMOND. 115 

ly ; " whether he comes, stays, or goes, 
I'll not have a scrap, or an iota of it 
changed," added he in a despotic tone. 

" WheujHi!" said Betty, " one would 
not like to have a dinner of scraps — for 
there's nothing else to day for him." 

" Then if there's nothing else, there 
can be nothing else," said the priest, very 
philosophically. 

" But when strangers come to dine, 
one would fain make an exertion, if one 
could," said Betty. 

" It's his own fau't to be a stranger," 
said father Jos, watching his majesty's 
clouding countenance ; then whispering to 
Betty, " that was a faulty string you. 
touched upon, Mrs. Betty, and can't you 
make out your dinner without saying any 
thing?" 

" A. person may speak in this house, I 
suppose, besides the clergy, father Jos," 
said Mrs. Betty, under her breath. 

Then looking out of the window, she 
added, " he's half. way over the lake, and 



116 ORMONDE 

he'll make his own apologies good, I'll 
enofaoe, when he comes in ; for he knows 
how to speak for himself, as well as any 
jrentleman — and I don't doubt but he'll 
get my Micky made an exciseman, as 
he promised too ; — and sure he has a 
ffood rig-lit — Isn't he a cousin of kin«* 
Corny's — wherefore I'd wish to have all 
things proper* — Bo I'll step out and kill 
a couple of chickens — won't I ?" 

" Kill what you please," said king 
Corny ; " but without my warrant, no- 
thing killed or unkilled shall come up to 
my table this day — and that's enough. — 
No more reasoning — quit the subject and 
the room, Betty." 

Betty quitted the room ; but every 
stair, as she descended to the kitchen, 
could bear witness, that she did not quit 
the subject; and for an hour afterwards, 
she reasoned against the obstinacy and 
folly of man, and the chorus in the kitchen 
moralized, in conformity and commise- 
ration — in vain, 



ORMOND. 1 J 7 

Meantime father Jos, though he re- 
gretted the exertions which Mrs. Betty 
mi»'ht discreetly have made in favour of 
a good dinner, was by no means, as he 
declared, a friend or fauterer of Sir Ulick 
O'Shane's — how could he, when Sir 
Ulick had recanted? — The priest looked 
with horror upon the apostacy. — The 
king- with contempt, upon the desertion, 
of his party. " Was he sincere any way 
J'd honour him," said Cornelius, " or 
forgive him ; — but, not to be ripping- up 
old grievances when there's no occasion, 
I can't forgive the way he is at this pre- 
sent double-dealing with poor Harry Or- 
mond — cajoling the grateful heart, and 
shirking the orphan boy that he took 
upon him to patronize. — Why there I 
thought nobly of him, and forgave him 
nil his sins, for the generous protection 
he afforded the son of his friend." 

*' Hdd Captain Ormond, the father, 
no fortune?" asked the priest. 

" Only a trifle of three hundred » 



US ORMONt). 

year, and no provision for the education 
or maintenance of the boy. Ulick's fond- 
ness for him, more than all, shewed him 
capable of the disinterested touch ; but 
then to belie his own heart — to abandon 
him he bred a favourite, just when the 
boy wants him most — Oh! how could he? 
And all for what? To please the wife he 
hates — that can't be — that's only the os- 
tensible — but what the real reason is I 

can't guess. — No matter, he'll soon tell 

»» 
us. 

" Tell us, Oh ! no !" said the priest 
" he'll keep his own secret." 

" He'll let it out, I'll engage, trying 
to hide it," said Corny : <f like all cun- 
ning people he woodcocks — hides his head, 
and forgets his body can be seen. But 
hark! he is coming up. — Tommy!" said 
he, turning to a little boy of five years 
old, who was playing about in the room, 
«' hand me that whistle you're whistling 
with, till I see what's the matter with it 
for you." 



ORMOND. 1 19 

King Corny seemed lost in examina- 
tion of the whistle, when Sir Ulick en- 
tered the room ; — and after receiving and 
seating him with proud courtesy, he again 
returned to the charge, blowing through 
the whistle, earnestly dividing his obser- 
vation between Sir Ulick and little Tom- 
my, and asking questions, by turns, 
about the whistle, and about all at Castle 
Hermitage. 

" Where's my boy ? Where's Harry 
Ormond ?" was the first leading question 
Sir Ulick asked. 

" Harry Ormond's out shooting, I be- 
lieve, some where or some how, taking 
his pleasure, as I hope he will long, and 
always as long as he likes it, at the Black 
Islands ; at least, as long as I live." 

Sir Ulick branched offinto hopes of his 
cousin Cornelius's living long, very long; 
and in general terms, that were intended 
to avoid committing himself, or pinning 
himself to any thing, he protested, that he 
must not be robbed of his boy, that he 



120 ORMOND. 

had always, with good reason, been jea- 
lous of Harry's affection for king Corny, 
and that he could not consent to let his 
term of stay at the Black Islands be either 
as long as Harry himself should like, or 
during what he hoped would be the life 
of his cousin, Cornelius 0' Shane. 

u There's something wrong, still, in 
this whistle. — Why, if you loved him so, 
did you let him go when you had him?'' 
said Corny. 

" He thought it necessary, for domes- 
tic reasons," replied Sir Ulick. 

" Continental policy, that is, which I 
never understood, nor never shall;" said 
Corny. ** But I don't enquire any far- 
ther. If you are satisfied with yourself* 
we ar« all satisfied, I believe." 

" Pardon me, I cannot be satisfied 
without seeing Harry this morning, for 
I've a little business with him — will you 
have the goodness to send for him ?" 

Father Jos, who, from the window, 
saw Harry's dog snuffing along the path , 



OltMOND. 121 

to the wood, thought he could not be far 
from the house, and went to make en* 
quiries ; — and now when Sir Ulick and 
king Corny were left alone together, a 
dialogue, a sort of single combat, with- 
out any object but to try each other's 
powers and temper, ensued between them, 
in which the one on the offensive came 
on with a tomahawk, and the other stood 
on the defensive parrying with a polished 
blade of Damascus; and sometimes, when 
the adversary was off his guard, making a 
sly cut at an exposed part. 

*' What are you so busy about ?" said 
Sir Ulick. 

" Mending the child's toy," said Cor- 
nelius — <f A man must be doing some, 
thing in this world." 

" But a man of your ingenuity ! 'tis a 
pity it should be wasted, as I have often 
said, upon mere toys." 

" Toys of one sort or other we are all 
taken up with through life, from the cra- 
dle to the grave. By the bye, 1 give you 

VOL. II. G 



122 ORMOND. 

joy of your baronetage. I hope they did 
not make you pay now too much in con- 
science for that poor tag of nobility." 

" These things are not always matters 
of bargain and sale — mine was quite an 
unsolicited honour, a mark of approbation 
and acceptance of my poor services, and as 
such, gratifying j — as to the rest, believe 
me, it was not, if I must use so coarse an 
expression, paid for." 

" Not paid for — what, then it's owing 
for ? To be paid for, still ? Well, that's 
too hard, after all you've done for them. 
Bat some men have no manner of con- 
science — at least, I hope you paid the 
fees." 

"The fees of course — but we shall never 
understand one another," said Sir Ulick. 

" Now what will be the next title or 
string you look forward to, Ulysses, may 
I ask ? Is it to be a Baron Castle Her- 
mitage, or to get a ribbon, or a garter, 
or a thistle, or what? But that's only for 
Scotchmen, I believe — A thistle I What 
asses some men are !" 



ORMOND. 123 

What savages some men are, thought 
Sir Ulick — he walked to the window, 
and looking out, hoped that Harry Or- 
uiond would soon make his appearance. 

" You are doing-, or undoing, a great 
deal here, cousin Cornelius, I see, as 
usual." 

" Yes, but what I am doing, stand or 
fall, will never be my undoing ; I am no 
speculator. How do your silver mines go 
on, Sir Ulick ? I hear all the silver mines 
in Ireland turn out to be lead." 

" I wish they did," said Sir Ulick, " for 
then we could turn all our lead to gold. 
Those silver mines certainly did not pay — 
I've a notion you found the same with 
your reclaimed bog here, cousin Corne- 
lius — I understand, that after a short 
time it relapses, and is worse than ever, 
like most things pretending to be re- 
claimed." 

" Speak for yourself, there, Sir Ulick," 
said Cornelius; " you ought to know 
certainly, for some thirty years ago, I 
G 2 



124 ORMON2>. 

think you pretended to be a reclaimed 
rake." 

" I don't remember it," said Sir Ulick. 

" I do, and so would poor Emmy An- 
naly, if she was alive, which it's fortu- 
nate for her she is not — (broken hearted 
angel, if ever there was one, by wedlock ! 
and the only one of the Annalys I ever 
liked)" said Cornelius to himself, in a 
low leisurely voice of soliloquy. Then 
resuming his conversation tone, and con- 
tinuing his speech to Sir Ulick — 

" I say you pretended thirty year ago, 
1 remember, to be a reformed rake, and 
looked mighty smooth and plausible — and 
promised fair that the improvement was 
solid, and was to last for ever and a day. 
—But six months after marriage comes a 
relapse, and the reclaimed rake's worse 
than ever. Well, to be sure, that's in 
favour of your opinion against all things 
pretending to be reclaimed, But see, 
my poor bog, without promising so well, 
performs better, for it's six years instead 



OFMOND. 12£ 

of six months, that I've seen no tendency 
to relapse. See, the cattle upon it speak 
for themselves ; an honest calf won't lie 
for any man." 

" I give you joy of the success of your 
improvements.-r— I admire, too, your 
ploughing team and ploughing tackle," 
said Sir Ulick, with a slightly ironical 
smile — " You don't go into any indiscreet 
expense for farming implements or prize 
cattle." 

" No," said Cornelius, " I don't prize 
the prize cattle ; the best prize a man can 
get, and the only one worth having, is, 
that which he must give himself, or not 
get, and of whieh he is the best judge at 
all seasons." 

" What prize, may I ask ?" 

" You may ask — and I'll answer — 
the prize of success — And, success to 
myself, I have it." 

" And succeeding in all your ends by 
such noble means must be doubly gra- 
tifying — and is doubly commendable 
and surprising," — said Sir Ulick. 



126 ORMOND. 

rt May I ask — for its rny turn now to 
play ignoramus — May I ask, what noble 
means excites this gratuitous commend- 
ation and surprise." 

" I commend in the first place the 
economy of your ploughing- tackle — hay 
ropes, hay traces, and hay halters — doubly 
useful and convenient for harness and 
food."— 

Corny replied, " Some people, I 
know, think the most expensive harness 
and tackle, and the most expensive ways 
of doing every thing the best — But I 
don't know if that is the way for the 
poor to grow rich — It may be the way 
for the rich to grow poor — We are all 
poor people in the Black Islands, and I 
can't afford or think it good policy to 
give the example of extravagant new 
ways of doing old things." 

" 'Tis a pity you don't continue the 
old Irish style of ploughing by the 
tail," said Sir Ulick. 

iC That is against humanity to brute 
beasts, which, without any of your 



ORMOND. 127 

sickening palaver of sentiment, I prac- 
tise. Also, its against an act of par- 
liament, which I regard sometimes — 
that is, when I understand them ; which, 
the way you parliament gentlemen draw 
them up, is not always particularly in- 
telligible to plain common sense, and I 
have no lawyers here, thank Heaven! 
to consult; I am forced to be legislator, 
and lawyer, and ploughman and all, you 
see, the best I can for myself." 

He opened the window, and called t° 
give some orders to the man, or, as he 
called him, the boy — a boy of sixty — 
who was ploughing. 

" Your team, I see, is worthy of your 
tackle," pursued Sir Ulick. " A mule, 
a bull, and two lean horses, — I pity the 
foremost poor devil of a horse, who must 
starve in the midst of plenty, while the 
horse, bull, and even mule, in a string 
behind him, are all plucking and 
munying away at their hay ropes." 

Cornelius joined in Sir Ulick's laugh, 
which shortened its duration. 



128 ORMOND. 

" 'Tis comical ploughing, I grant," 
said he, " but still, to my fancy, any 
thing's better and more profitable nor 
the tragi-comic ploughing you practise 
every season in Dublin." 

"I?" said Sir Ulick. 

" Aye, you, and all you courtiers, 
ploughing the half acre* continually, 
pacing up and down that Castle yard, 
while you're waiting in attendance there. 
Every one to his taste, but — • 

' If there's a man on earth I hate, 

1 Attendance and dependance be his fate.' " 

" After all, I have very good pros- 
pects in life," said Sir Ulick. 

" Aye, you've been always living on 
prospects ; for my part, I'd rather have 
a mole-hill in possession, than a moun- 
tain in prospect." 

" Cornelius, what are you doing here 
to (lie roof of your house ?" said Sir 

* Ploughing the half acre. The English reader 
will please to enquire the meaning of this phrase 
from any Irish courtier. 



ORMOND. 129 

Ulick, striking- off to another subject. 
" What a vast deal of work you do con- 
trive to cut out for yourself." 

" I'd rather cut it out for myself, than 
have any body to cut it out for me," 
said Cornelius. 

" Upon my word, this will require all 
your extraordinary ingenuity, cousin." 

" Oh, I'll engage I'll make a good job 
of it, in my sense of the word, though 
not in yours; for L know, in your voca- 
bulary, that's only a good job where 
you pocket money, and do nothing ; 
now my good jobs never bring me in a 
farthing, and give me a great deal to 
do into the bargain." 

" 1 don't envy you such jobs, indeed," 
said Sir Ulick ; " and are you sure that 
at last you make them good jobs in any 
acceptation of the term?" 

" Sure ! a man's never sure of any 

thing in this world, but of being abused. 

But one comfort, my own conscience, 

for which I've a trifling respect, can't 

G 3 



130 ORMOND. 

reproach me; since my jobs, good or 
bad, have cost my poor country no- 
thing." 

On this point Sir Ulick was particu- 
larly sore, for he had the character of 
being - one of the greatest jobbers in 
Ireland With a face of much politi- 
cal prudery, which he well knew how to 
assume, he began to exculpate himself. 
He confessed that much public money 
had passed through his hands; but he 
protested that none of it had stayed with 
him. No man, who had done so much 
for different administrations, had been so 
ill paid- 

" Why the deuce do you work for 
them, then — You won't tell me it's for 
l ove — Have you got any character by 
it — if you haven't profit, what have you? 
I would not let them make me a dupe, 
or may-be something worse, if I was 
you," said Cornelius, looking him full in 
the face. 

" Savage!" said Sir Ulick again to 



ORMOND. 131 

himself. — The tomahawk was too much 
for him — Sir Ulick felt that it was 
fearful odds to stand fencing 1 according" 
to rule with one who would not scruple 
to gouge or scalp, if provoked. Sir 
Ulick now stood silent — smiling forced 
smiles, and looking on while Cornelius 
played quite at his ease with little 
Tommy, blew shrill blasts through the 
whistle, and boasted " that he had made 
a good job of that whistle any way." 

Harry Ormond, to Sir Ulick's great 
relief, now appeared. Sir Ulick ad- 
vanced to meet him with an air of cor- 
dial friendship, which brought the 
honest Hush of pleasure and gratitude 
into the young man's face, who darted 
a quick look at Cornelius, as much as to 
say,— 

" You see you were wrong — he is 
glad to see me — he is come to see me." 

Cornelius said nothing, but stroaked 
the child's head, and seemed taken up 
entirely with him ; Sir Ulick spoke of. 



182 ORM£XND. 

Lady O'Shane, and of his hopes that 
prepossessions were wearing off — " If 
Miss Black were out of the way, things 
would all go right, but she was one of 
the mighty good — too good ladies, who 
were always meddling with other peo- 
ple's business, and making mischief." 

Harry, who hated her, that is* as 
much as he could hate any body, railed 
at her vehemently, saying more against 
her than he thought, and concluded, by 
joining in Sir Ulick's wish for her de- 
parture from Castle Hermitage, but not 
with any view to his own return thitjier. 
On that point he was quite resolute and 
steady — u He would never," he said, 
Ci be the cause of mischief. Lady 
O'Shane did not like him, — why, he did 
not know, and had no right to enquire — 
and was too proud to enquire, if he had 
a right. It was enough that her lady- 
ship had proved to him her dislike, and 
refused him protection at his utmost 
need, — he should never again sue for 



ORMOND. J 33 

her hospitality. He declared, that Sir 
Ulick should never more be disquieted, 
by his being an inmate at Castle Her- 
mitage." 

Sir Ulick became more warm and 
eloquent in dissuadmg him from this 
resolution, the more he perceived that 
Ormond was positively fixed in his de- 
termination. 

The cool looker on all the time re- 
marked this, and Cornelius was con ; 
vinced, that he had from the first been 
right i-n his own opinion, that Sir Ulick 
was " shirking the boy." 

" And where's Marcus, Sir ? would 
not he come with you to see us ?" said 
Ormond. 

'« Marcus is gone off to England. 
He bid me give you his kindest love ; 
he was hurried, and regretted he could 
not come to take leave of you ; but he 
was obliged to go off with the Annalys, 
to escort her ladyship to England, 
where he will remain this year, I dare 



1 34 ORMOND. 

say. — I am much concerned to say, that 
poor Lady Annaly and Miss Annaly" — 
Sir Ulick cleared his throat, and gave a 
suspicious look at Ormond 

This glance at Harry, the moment Sir 
Ulick pronounced the words Miss An- 
naly, first directed aright the attention 
of Cornelius — 

" Lady Annaly and Miss Annaly ! are 
they ill ? What's the matter, for Hea- 
ven's sake ?" exclaimed Harry, with 
great anxiety; but pronouncing both the 
ladies' names precisely in the same tone, 
and with the same freedom of expres- 
sion. 

Sir Ulick took breath— « Neither of 
the ladies are ill — -absolutely ill — .but 
they have both been greatly shocked by 
accounts of young Annaly's sudden ill- 
ness. It is feared an inflammation upon 
his lungs, brought on by violent cold — 
his mother and sister left us this morn- 
ing — set off for England to him imme- 
diately. Lady Annaly thought of you 



ORMOND. 1 35 

Harry, my boy — you must be a pro- 
digious favourite — in the midst of all her 
affliction, and the hurry of this sudden 
departure, this morning', gave me a letter 
for you, which I determined to deliver 
with my own hands " 

While he spoke, Sir Ulick, affecting 
to search for the letter among- many in 
his pocket, studied with careless inter- 
mitting' glances our young hero's coun- 
tenance, and Cornelius O'Shane studied 
Sir Uli k's : Harry tore open the letter 
eagerly, and coloured a good deal when 
he saw the inside. 

" I've no business here reading that 
boy's secrets in his face," cried Cornelius 
O'Shane, raising himself on his crutches, 
" I'll step out and look at my roof—Will 
you come, .Sir Ulick, and see how the 
job goes on ?" Mis crutch slipped as he 
stepped across the hearth ; Harry ran 
to him—" Oli, Sir, what are you doing" ? 
You are not able to walk yet without 
me : Why are you going' ? secrets, did 



136 ORMOND. 

yon say ?" — (The words recurred to his 
ear.) — " I have no secrets — there's no 
secrets in this letter — it's only — the rea- 
son 1 looked foolish was that here's a 
list of my own faults, which I made like 
a fool, and dropped like a fool — but they 
could not have fallen into better or 
kinder hands than Lady AnnalyV 

He offered the letter and its inclosure 
to Cornelius and Sir Ulick. Cornelius 
drew back—" I don't want to see the 
list of your faults, man," said he, " do 
you think I haven't them all by heart 
already ; and as to the lady's letter, 
while you live never shew a lady's 
letter." 

Sir Ulick, without ceremony, took the 
letter, and in a moment satisfying" his 
curiosity that it was merely a friendly 
note, returned it, and the list of his 
faults to Harry, saying-, " If it had been 
a young lady's letter I am sure you 
would not have shewn it to me, Harry, 
nor, of course, would I have looked at it. 



ORMOND. 137 

But I presumed that a letter from old 
Lady Annaly could only be, what I see 
it is, very edifying" 

" Old Lady Annaly, is it ?" cried 
Cornelius : " Oh, then, there's no indis- 
cretion, young- man, in the case. You 
might as well scruple about your 
mother's letter, if you had one ; or your 
rnother-in-law, which, to* be sure, you'll 
have, [ hope, in due course of nature." 

At the sound of the words mother-in- 
law a cloud passed over Sir Ulick's 
brow, not unnoticed by the shrewd Cor- 
nelius; but the cloud passed away 
quickly, after Sir Ulick had darted 
another reconnoitring glance on Harry's 
open unconscious countenance. 

" All's safe," said Sir Ulick to him- 
self, as he took leave. 

" Woodcocked ! that he has ; as I 
foresaw he would ;" cried king Corny, 
the moment his guest had departed. 
*' Woodcocked ! if ever man did, by all 
that's cunning-." 



138 



ORMONJD. 



CHAP. VII. 



xVING Corny* sat for some minutes 
after Sir Ulick's departure, perfectly still 
and silent, leaning- both bands and his 
chin on bis crutch. Then, looking up at 
Harry, be exclaimed — 

" What a dupe you are! but I like 
you the better for it." 

li I am glad you like me the better, at 
all events," said Harry ; t{ but I don't 
think lam a dupe." 

" No — if you did you would not be 
one : so you don't see that it was, and is 
Sir Ulick, and not her ladyship that 
wanted, and wants to get rid of you ?" 

No, Harry did not see this, and would 
not be persuaded of it. He defended his 



ORAIOND. 139 

guardian most warmly ; he was certain 
of Sir Ulick's affection ; he was sure Sir 
Ulick was incapable of acting with such 
duplicity. 

King Corny repeated, at every pause, 
" you are a dupe; but I like you the 
better for it." And, added he, " you 
don't, blind buzzard ! as your want of 
conceit makes you — for which I like you 
the better too — you don't see the rea- 
son why he banished you Castle Her- 
mitage — you don't see that he is jealous 
of your rivalling that puppy Marcus his 
son." 

" Rivalling Marcus in what, or how ?" 

" With whom? boy, is the question 
you should ask, and in that case the 
answer is — Dunce, can't you guess now? 
—Miss Annaly." 

" Miss Annaly !" repeated Harry with 
genuine surprise, and with a quick sense 
of inferiority and humiliation. " Oh, 
Sir! you would not be so illuatured as 
to make a jest of me? — I know how 



140 ORMOND. 

ignorant, how unformed, what a raw 
boy I am. Marcus has been educated 
like a gentleman." 

" More shame for his father that 
couldu't do the same by you when he 
was about it.'* 

" But Marcus, Sir — there ought to 
be a difference — Marcus is heir to a large 
fortune — I have nothing — Marcus may 
hope to marry whoever he pleases." 

" Aye, whoever he pleases, and who 
will that be, if women are of my mind," 
muttered Corny. «« I'll engage if you 
had a mind to rival him." 

«• Rival him ! the thought of rivalling 
my friend never entered my head." 

u But is he your friend ?" said Cor- 
nelius. 

" As to that — I don't know — he was 
my friend, and I loved him sincerely — 
warmly — he has cast me off' — I shall 
never complain — never blame him di- 
rectly or indirectly — but don't let me be 
accused or suspected unjustly — I never 



ORMOND. 141 

for one instant had the treachery, pre- 
sumption, folly, or madness, to think of 
Miss Annaly." 

" Nor she of you? I suppose you'll 
swear." 

" Nor she of me ! assuredly not, Sir," 
said Harry, with surprise at the idea. 
" Do you consider what I am — and what 
she is?" 

" Well, I am glad they are gone to 
England out of the way !" said Cor- 
nelius. 

" I am very sorry for that," said Harry, 
" for I have* lost a kind friend in Lady 
Annaly — one who at least I might have 
hoped would have become my friend, if 
I had deserved it." 

" Might have hoped — Would have be- 
come — that's a friend in the air, who may 
never be found on earth. If you deserved 
it ! — Murder ! — who knows how that 
might turn out — if— I don't like that 
kind of subjunctive mood tenure of a 
friend. Give me the good imparattve 



142 ► ORMOND. 

mood, which I understand — be my friend 
— at once — or not at all — that's my 
mood. None of your if friends for me, 
setting out with a provisoe and an ex- 
cuse to be off ; and may be when you'd 
call upon 'em at your utmost need — Oh! 
I said if you deserve it — Lie there like a 
dog. Now, what kind of a friend is 
that? If Lady Annaly is that sort, no 
need to regret her. My compliments to 
her, and a good journey to England — 
Ireland well rid of her ! and so are you 
too, my boy !" 

" But, dear Sir, how you have worked 
yourself up into a passion against Lady 
Annaly for nothing.'' 

" It's not for nothing— -I've good rea- 
son to dislike the woman—what business 
had she, because she's an old woman and 
you a young man, to set up preaching to 
you about your faults. I hate prachers, 
feminine gender especially." 

u She is no preacher, I assure you, 
Sir." 



ORMOND. 143 

" How dare you tell me that — was not 
her letter very edifying? Sir Ulick said." 
" No, Sir ; it was very kind — will you 
read it?" 

*' No, Sir, I won't ; I never read an 
edifying letter in my life with my eyes 
open, nor never will — quite enough for 
me that impertinent list of your faults 
she inclosed you.'* 

" That list was my own, not hers, Sir: 
I dropped it under a tree." 

" Well, drop it into the fire now, and 
no more about it. Pray, after all, 
Harry, for curiosity's sake, what faults 
have you?" 

" Dear Sir, I thought you told me 
you knew them by heart." 

" I always forget what I learn by 
heart; put me in mind, and may be I'll 
recollect as you go on." 

" Well, Sir, in the first place I am 
terribly passionate." 

" Passionate! true; that is Moriarty 
you are thinking of, and 1 grant you, 



144 OR^OND. 

that had like to have been a sad job — 
you had a squeak for your life there, 
and I pitied you as if it had been myself, 
for I know what it is after one of them 
blind rages is over, and one opens one's 
eyes on the wrong one has done — and 
then such a cursed feel to be penitent in 
vain — for that sets no bones. You were 
blind drunk that night, and that was my 
fault ; but your late vow has prevented 
the future, and Moriarty's better in the 
world than ever he was." 

iC Thanks to your goodness, Sir." 
" Oh ! I wasn't thinking of my good- 
ness — little enough that same; but to 
ease your conscience, it was certainly the 
luckiest turn ever happened him the shot 
he got, and so he says himself. Never 
think of that more in the way of peni- 
tence." 

" In the way of reformation though, 
I hope, I shall all my life," said Harry. 
" One comfort' I have never been in a 
passion since." 
5 



ORMOND. 145 

" But then — a rasonable passion's al- 
lowable — I wouldn't give a farthing for 
a man that could'nt be in a passion on a 
proper occasion. I'm passionate myself, 
rasonably passionate, and I like myself 
the better for it." 

" I thought you said just now, you 
often repented." 

i( Oh! never mind what I said just 
now — mind what I'm saying now — Isn't 
a red heat that you can see, and that 
warms you, better than a white heat that 
blinds you. I'd rather a man would 
knock me down than stand smiling- at 
me, as cousin Ulick did just now, when 
I know he could have kilt me ; he is not 
passionate — he has the command of him- 
self — every feature under the courtier's 
regimen of hypocrisy. Harry Ormond, 
don't set about to cure yourself of your 
natural passions — why, this is rank me- 
thodism! all—" 

" Methodism, Sir." 

" Methodism, Sir!— -don't contradict 

VOL, 11. H 



146 ORMONI3. 

or repeat me — methodism that the wo- 
man has brought you to the brink of, and 
I warn you from it! I did not know 
till now that your Lady Annaly was such 
a methodist — No methodist shall ever 
darken my doors, or lighten them either, 
with their new lights. New lights ! bad ! 
and nonsense ! — for man, woman, or 
beast. But enough of this, and too much, 
Harry. Prince Harry, pull that bell a 
dozen times for me this minute, till they 
bring out my old horse.'' 

Before it was possible that any one 
could have come up stairs, the impatient 
monarch, pointing with his crutch, added, 
" Run to the head of the stairs, prince 
Harry dear, and call, screech to them to 
make no delay ; and I want you out with 
me, so get your horse, Harry." 

" But, Sir — is it possible — are yoti 
able—" 

" I am able, Sir, possible or no," cried 
king Corny, starting up on his crutches. 
" Don't stand talking to me of possibili- 



ORMOND. 147 

ties, when 'tis a friend I am going to 
serve, and that friend as dear as yourself. 
Aren't you at the head of the stairs yet? 
Must I go and fall down them myself?'* 

To prevent this catastrophe, our young 
hero ran immediately and ordered the 
horses ; king Corny mounted, or rather 
was mounted upon it, and they proceeded 
to one of the prettiest farms in the Black 
Islands. As they drove to it, he seemed 
pleased by Harry's admiring, as he 
could, with perfect truth, the beauty of 
the situation. 

" And the land — which you are no 
judge of yet, but you will — is as good as 
it is pretty," said king Corny, i: which 
I am glad of for your sake, prince Harry; 
I won't have you, like that donny English 
princeor king, they nick-named Lackland, 
— No : you sha'n't lack land while I have 
it to let or give. — I called you prince — 
prince of the Black Islands — and here's 
your principality. — Call out my prime 
minister, Pat Moore. — I sent him across 
H 2 



148 ORMOND. 

the bog to meet us at Moriarty 's. — Here he 
is, and Moriarty along- with him to wel- 
come you. — Patrick, give prince Harry 
possession — with sod and twig 1 . — Here's 
the key from my own hand, and I give 
you joy. — Nay, don't deny me the plea- 
sure — I've a right to it. — No wrong to 
my daughter, if that's what you are 
thinking of, — a clear improvement of my 
own, — and she will have enough without 
it. — Besides, her betrothed White Con- 
nal is a fat grazier, who will make her 
as rich as a Jew; — and any way she is as 
generous as a princess herself. — But if it 
pains you so„ and weighs you down, as I 
see it does, to be under any obligation — 
you shall be under none in life. — You 
shall pay me rent for it, and you shall 
give it up whenever you please. — Well ! 
we'll settle that between ourselves," said 
king Corny, " only take possession, that's 
all I ask. But I hope," added he, " before 
we've lived a year, or whatever time it is 
till you arrive at years of discretion, 



ORMOND. 149 

you'll know me well enough, and love me 
well enough, not to be so stiff about a 
trifle, that's nothing between friend and 
friend — let alone the joke of king and 
prince, dear Harry." 

The gift of this principality proved a 
most pernicious, nearly a fatal gift to 
the young prince. The generosity, the 
delicacy, with which it was made, a 
delicacy worthy of the most polished, 
and little to have been expected from 
the barbarian mock-monarch, so touched 
our young hero's heart, so subjected 
his grateful spirit to his benefactor, 
that he thenceforth not only felt bound 
to king Corny for life' but prone to deem 
every thing he did or thought wisest, 
fittest, best. — Besides this sentiment of 
gratitude, there arose, in consequence 
of this gift, a number of other leelingsj 
-^-observe he was still a creature guided 
by feeling — not governed by reason. 

When he was invested with his petty 
principality, it was expected of him to 



150 ORMONl>. 

give a dinner and a dance to the island, 
— so he gave a dinner and a dance, and 
everybody said he was a fine fellow, and 
had the spirit of a prince. — King Corny, 
God bless him, couldn't go astray in his 
choice of a favourite — long life to him 
and prince Harry, — and no doubt there'd 
be fine hunting, and shooting, and cours- 
ing continually. — Well, was not it a 
happy thing for the islands, when Harry 
Ormond first set foot on them ? — From a 
boy^'twas asy to see what a man he 
would be. — Long may he live to reign 
over us. 

The taste for vulgar praise grew by 
that it fed upon. — Harry was in great 
danger of forgetting, that he was too 
fond of flattery, — and too fond of com- 
pany — not the best. — He excused him- 
self to himself, by saying that companions 
of some kind or other he must have, and 
he was in a situation where good com- 
pany was not to be had. — Then Moriarty 
Carroll was gamekeeper, and Moriarty 



ORMOND. 1&1 

Carroll was always out hunting- or shoot- 
ing- with him, and he was led by kind 
and good feelings, to be more familiar 
and/ree with this man, than he would 
have been with any other in the same 
rank of life. The poor fellow was 
ardently attached to him, and repeated, 
with delight, all the praises he heard 
of Master Harry, through the Islands. 
The love of popularity seized him — 
popularity on the lowest scale! — To 
be popular among the unknown, unheard 
of inhabitants of the Black Islands, 
could this be an object to any man of com- 
mon sense, any one who had lived in civi- 
lized society, and who had had any thing 
like the education of a gentleman ? The 
fact — argue about it as you will — the fact 
was as is here stated, and let those who 
hear it with a disdainful smile, recollect,, 
that whether in Paris, London, or the 
Black Islands, the mob are, in all essen- 
tial points, pretty nearly the same. 

It happened about this time, that 



152 ORMOND. 

Betty Dunshauglin was rummaging in 
her young lady's work-basket for some 
ribbon, " which she knew she might 
take," to dress a cap that was to be 
hung upon a pole as a prize, to be danc- 
ed for at the pattern,* to be given next 
Monday at Ormond Vale, by prince 
Harry. Prince Harry was now standing 
by, giving some instructions about the 
ordering of the entertainment; Betty, the 
while, pursued her own object of the 
ribbon, and as she emptied the basket in 
haste, threw out a book, which Harry, 
though not much at this time addicted to 
reading, snatched impatiently, eager to 
know what book it was : it was one he 
had often heard of — often intended to 
read sometime or other, but somehow or 
other he had never had time: and now 
he was in the greatest possible hurry, for 

* Patron, probably— an entertainment held in 
honour of the patron saint. A festive meeting, 
similar to a wake in England. 



ORMOND. lOo 

the hounds were all out. But when once 
he had opened the book, he could not 
shut it again ; he turned over page after 
page, peeped at the end, the beginning, 
and the middle, then back to the begin- 
ning : was diverted by the humour — 
every Irishman loves humour, — delighted 
with the wit — What Irishman is not? — 
And his curiosity was so much raised by 
the story; his interest and sympathy so 
excited for the hero, that he read on, 
standing for a quarter of an hour, fixed in 
one and the same position, while Betty 
held forth unheard, about cap, supper, and 
pattern. At last he carried off the book 
to hisown room, that he might finish it in 
peace, nor did he ever stop till he came 
to the end of the volume. The story not 
finishing there, and breaking off in a most 
interesting part, he went in search of the 
next volume, but that was not to be 
found. — His impatience was ravenous. 

" Mercy, Master Harry," cried Mrs. 
Betty, " don't eat one up ! I know no-- 



1£4 ORMOND. 

thing at all — at all about the book, and 
I'm very sorry 1 tumbled it out of the 
basket. That's all there is of it — to be 
had high or low, — so don't be tormenting 
me any more out of my life, for no- 
thing." 

But having seized upon her, he re- 
fused to let her go, and protested, that 
he would continue to be the torment of 
her life, till she should find the odd volume. 
— Betty, when her memory was thus 
racked, put her hand to her forehead, 
and recollected that in the apple-room, 
there was a heap of old books. Harry 
possessed himself of the key of the ap- 
ple-room, tossed over the heap of tat- 
tered mouldy books, and at last found 
the precious volume. He devoured it ea- 
gerly — nor was it forgotten as soon as 
finished. As the chief part of the en- 
tertainment depended on the characters, 
it did not fade from his imagination. He 
believed the story to be true, for it was 
constructed with unparallelled ingenuity, 



ORMOND. 155 

and developed with consummate art. 
The character which particularly inte- 
rested him was that of the hero, the 
more peculiarly, because he saw, or 
fancied that he found a resemblance to- 
his own, with some differences to be 
sure, — but young readers readily assimi- 
late and identify themselves with any 
character, the leading points of which 
resemble their own, and in whose gene- 
ral feelings they sympathise. — In some 
instances, Harry, as he read on, said to 
himself — " I would not — I could not 
have done so and so." — But upon the 
whole, he was charmed by the character 
— that of a warm hearted, generous, im- 
prudent young man, with little education, 
no literature, governed more by feeling 
than by principle, never upon any occasion 
reasoning, but keeping right by happy 
moral instincts ; or when going wrong, 
very wrong, forgiven easily by the 
reader and by his mistress, and rewarded 
at the last with all that love and fortune 



156 ORMOND. 

can bestow, in consideration of his being' 
— a very fine fellow." 

Closing- the book, Harry Ormond 
resolved to be what he admired — and if 
possible to shine forth an Irish Tom 
Jones. — For this purpose he was not at 
all bound to be a moral gentleman, nor, 
as he conceived, to be a gentleman at all — 
not at least in the commencement of his 
career; he might become accomplished 
at any convenient period of his life, and 
become moral at the end of it, but he" 
might begin by being an accomplished 
— blackguard. Blackguard is a harsli 
word ;■ — but what other will express the 
idea P — Unluckily the easiest points to 
be imitated in any character are not al- 
ways the best, and where any latitude 
is given to conscience, and if any pre- 
cedents be allowed to the grosser pas- 
sions for their justification, these are the 
points which are afterwards remember- 
ed and applied in practice, when the 
moral salvo sentences are forgotten, or 



ORMOND. 157 

are at best but of feeble countervailing 
effect. 

At six o'clock on Monday evening, 
the cap, — the prize cap, flaming with 
red ribbons, from the top of the pole, 
streamed to the summer air, and de- 
lighted the upturned eyes of assembled 
crowds upon the green below. — The 
dance began, and our popular hero, the 
delight of all the nymphs, and the envy 
of all the swains, danced away with 
dne of the prettiest, " smartest," il most 
likely looking " " lasses," that ever ap- 
peared at any former patron. She was 
a degree more refined in manner, and 
polished in appearance, than the fair of the 
Black Islands, for she came from the 
continent of Ireland — she had the ad- 
vantage of having been sometimes at the 
big house at Castle Hermitage — she was 
the gardener's daughter — Peggy Sheri- 
dan — distinguished among her fellows 
by a nosegay, such as no other could have 
procured — distinguished more by her 

1 



158 OI1MONB. 

figure and her face, than by her nosegay, 
and more by her air and motions, than 
even by her figure or her face — she stepped 
well, and stepped out — she danced an 
Irish jig to admiration, and she was not 
averse from admiration; village prudes, 
perhaps, might call her a village coquet ; 
but let not this suggest a thought deroga- 
tory to the reputation of the lively Peggy. 
She was a well behaved, well meaning, 
innocent, industrious girl — a good daugh- 
ter, a good sister, and more than one 
in the neighbourhood thought she would, 
make a good wife. She had not only 
admirers, but suitors in abundance. 
Harry Ormond could not think of her 
as a wife, but he was. evidently — more 
evidently this day than ever before, one 
of Peggy's admirers. His heart or his 
fancy was always warmly susceptible to 
the charms of beauty ; and, never well 
guarded by prudence, he was now, with 
his head full of Tom Jones, prone to 
run into danger himself, and rashly 



ORMOND. 1-59 

ready to hurry on an innocent girl to 
her destruction. — He was not without 
hopes of pleasing 1 — what young man of 
nineteen or twenty is? — He was not 
without chance of success, as it is called, 
with Peggy — what woman can be pro- 
nounced safe, who ventures to extend to a 
young lover the encouragement of coquet- 
tish smiles — Peggy said, " innocent smiles 
sure'* — " meaning nothing" — but they 
were interpreted to mean something — 
less would in his present dispositions 
have excited the hero, who imitated 
Tom Jones, to enterprise. Report says, 
that about this time, Harry Ormond was 
seen disguised in a slouched hat and 
trusty, wandering about the grounds at 
Castle Hermitage. Some swear they 
saw him pretending to dig in the gar-, 
den, and under the gardener's windows, 
seeming to be nailing up jessamine. 
Some, would not swear, but if they 
might trust their own eyes, they might 
verily believe, and could, only that they 
3 



160 ORMOND. 

would not, take their oath to having* seen 
him once cross the lake alone by moon- 
light. — But without believing" above 
half what the world says, candour 
obliges us to acknowledge, that there 
was some truth in these scandalous re- 
ports. — He certainly pursued, most im- 
prudently " pursued the chace of youth 
and beauty ;" nor would he, we fear, 
have dropped the chace till Peggy was 
his prey, but that fortunately, in the full 
headlong career of passion, he was sud- 
denly startled and stopped by coming- 
in view of an obstacle, that he could 
not overleap— a greater wrong than he 
had foreseen, at least a different wrong, 
and in a form that made his heart trem- 
ble. He reined in his passion, and stood 
appalled. 

In the first hurry of that passion he had 
seen nothing, heard nothing, understood 
nothing, but that Peggy was pretty, and 
that he w'as in love. It happened one day, 
one evening, that he, with a rose yet un- 



ORMOND. 161 

faded in his hand — a rose which he had 
snatched from Peggy Sheridan, took the 
path toward Moriarty Carroll's cottage. 
Moriartv, seeing him from afar, came out 
to greet him, but when he came within 
sight of the rose, Moriarty 's pace slack- 
ened, and turning aside, he stepped 
out of the path, as if to let Mr. Ormond 
pass. 

" How now, Moriarty ?" said Harry. 
But looking in his face, he saw the poor 
fellow pale as death. 

" What ails you Moriarty ?" 

" A pain I just took about my heart !" 
said Moriarty, pressing both hands to his 
heart. 

" My poor fellow ! —Wait !— you'll 
be better just now, I hope," said Or- 
mond, laying his hand on Moriarty's 
shoulder. 

" I'll never be better of it, I fear," 
said Moriarty, withdrawing his shoulder, 
and giving a jealous glance at the rose, 
he turned hjs head away again. 



162 ORMOND. 

" I'll thank your honour to go on, 
and leave me — I'll be better by myself. 
It is not to your honour above all, that 
I can open my heart," 

A suspicion of the truth now flashed 
across Ormond's mind, he was deter- 
mined to know, whether it was the truth 
or not. 

" I'll not leave you, till I know what's 
the matter?" said be. 

" Then none will know that till I die," 
said Moriarty, adding, after a little 
pause, " There's, no knowing what's 
wrong within side of a man, till he is 
opened." 

" But alive, Moriarty, if the heart is 
in the case only," said Orruond, " a 
man can open himself to a friend." 

«' Aye, if he had a friend," said Mo- 
riarty, " I'll beg your honour to let me 
pass — I am able for it now — I am quite 
stout again." 

" Then if you are quite stout again, 
I'll want you to row me across the lake," 



ORMOND. 163 

" I am not able for that, Sir," re- 
plied Moriarty, pushing- past him. 

" But," said Ormond, catching- hold of 
his arm, " aren't you able or willing to 
carry a note for me?'' As he spoke, 
Ormond produced the note, and let him 
see the direction — to Peggy Sheridan. 

" Sooner stab me to the heart again" 
cried Moriarty, breaking from him. 

" Sooner stab myself to the heart 
then !" cried Ormond, tearing the note 
to bits. " Look Moriarty ! Upon my 
honour, till this instant, I did not know 
you loved the girl — from this instant 
I'll think of her no more — never more 
will I see her, hear of her, till she be 
your wife." 

" Wife !" repeated Moriarty, joy il- 
luminating — but fear as instantly dark- 
ening his countenance. " How will 
that be now ?" 

" It will be — it shall be— as happily as 
honourably. Listen to me, Moriarty, as 
honourably now as ever. Can you think 



104 OHMOND. 

me so wicked, so base, as to say wife, if — • 
No : passion might hurry me to a rash, 
but of a base action I'm incapable. — 
Upon my soul, upon the sacred honour 
of a gentleman." 

Moriarty sighed. 

"Look!" continued Ormond, taking 
the rose from his breast, " this is the 
utmost that ever passed between us, and 
that was my fault : I snatched it, and 
thus — thus" — cried he, tearing the rose 
to pieces, " I scatter it to the winds of 
heaven, and thus may all trace of past 
fancy and folly be blown from remem- 
brance." 

<c Amen !" said Moriarty, watching 
the rose leaves for an instant, as they 
flew and were scattered out of sight ; 
then, as Ormond broke the stalk to 
pieces, and flung it from him, he asked, 
with a smile, 

" Is the pain about your heart gone 
now, Moriarty ?" 

" No : plase your honour, not gone > 



ORMOXD. 165 

— but a quite different — better — but 
worse. — So strange with me — 1 can't 

speak rightly tor the pleasure has 

seized me stronger than the pain." 

" Lean against me, poor fellow. — Oh, 
if I had broke such a heart!" 

" Then how wrong I was when I said 
that word I did," said Moriarty. " T ask 
your honour — your dear honour's pardon 
on my knees." 

" For what ? — For what ? — You have 
done no wrong." 

" No :■ — but I said wrong — very wrong 
— when I said stab me to the heart again, 
— Oh, that w r ord again. — It was very 
ungenerous." 

" Noble fellow !" said Orinond. 

" Boys, to your supper, and a good 
night to your honour, kindly," said Mo- 
riarty. 

" How happy am I now," said our 
young hero to himself, as he walked 
home, " which I never should have been 
if 1 had done this wrong." 



166 ORMONB. 

A fortunate escape ! — yes : but when 
the escape is owing to good fortune, not 
to prudence ; to good feeling, not to prin- 
ciple; there is no security for the fu- 
ture. 

Ormond was steady to his promise 
toward Moriarty : to do him justice he 
was more than this, he was generous, 
actively, perseveringly generous in his 
conduct to him. With open heart, open 
purse, public overture, and private nego- 
ciation with the parents of Peggy Sheri- 
dan, he at last succeeded in accomplish- 
ing Moriarty's marriage. 

Ormond's biographer may well be 
allowed to make the most of his perse- 
vering generosity on this occasion, be- 
cause no other scrap of good can be 
found to make any thing of in his favour, 
for several months to come. Whether 
Tom Jones was still too much, and Lady 
Annaly too little in his head, whether it 
was that king Corny's example and pre- 
cepts were not always edifying — whether 



ORMONl>. 167 

this young man had been prepared by 
previous errors of example and education 
— or whether he fell into mischief, be- 
cause he had nothing 1 else to do in these 
Black Islands, certain it is, that from the 
operation of some or all of these causes 
conjointly, he deteriorated sadly. — He 
took to " vagrant courses," in which the 
muse forbears to follow him. 



168 ORMONJD, 



CHAP. VIII. 



IT is said that the Turks have a very 
convenient recording angel, who, without 
dropping a tear to blot out that which 
might be wished unsaid or undone, fairly 
shuts his eyes, and forbears to record 
whatever is said or done by man in three 
circumstances : when he is drunk, when 
he is in a passion, and while he is under 
age. What the wider age, or what the 
years of discretion of a Turk may be, 
we do not at this moment recollect. We 
know only that our own hero is not yet 
twenty. — Without being quite as accom- 
modating as the Mahommetan angel, 
we should wish to obliterate from our 
record some months of Ormond's exist- 



ORMOND. 169 

ence. He felt and was ashamed of his 
own degradation ; but, after having lost, 
or worse than lost, a winter of his life, it 
was in vain to lament; or it was not 
enough to weep over the loss, how to re- 
pair it was the question. 

Whenever Ormond returned to his 
better self, — whenever he thought of im- 
proving, he remembered Lady Annaly : 
— and he now recollected with shame, 
that he had never had the grace to an- 
swer or to thank her for her letter. He 
had often thought of writing, but he had 
put it off from day to day, and now 
months had passed ; he wrote a sad 
scrawling hand, and he had always been 
ashamed that Lady Annaly should see it; 
but now the larger shame got the better 
of the lesser, and he determined he would 
write. He looked for her letter, to read 
it over again before he answered it — the 
letter was very safe, for he considered it 
as his greatest treasure. 

On reading the letter over again, he 

VOL. II. I 



170 ORMOND. 

found that she had mentioned a present 
of books which she intended for him. — 
A set of books which belonged to her 
son, Sir Herbert Annaly, and of which 
she found they had duplicates in their 
library. She had ordered the box, con- 
taining them, to be sent to Annaly : she 
had desired her agent there, to forward 
it to him; but in case any delay should 
occur, she begged Mr. Ormond would 
take the trouble to inquire for them him- 
self. This whole affair about the books 
had escaped Mr. Ormond's memory : he 
felt himself blush all over when he read 
the letter again : he sent off a messenger 
immediately to the agent at Annaly, 
who had kept the box till inquired for. 
It was too heavy for the boy to carry, 
and he returned saying that two men 
would not carry it, nor four, a slight 
exaggeration ! A car was sent for it, and 
at last Harry obtained possession of the 
books. It was an excellent collection of 
what may be called the English and 



ORMOND. 171 

French classics : the French books were, 
at this time, quite useless to him, for 
he could not read French. Lady An- 
naly, however, sent these books on pur- 
pose to induce him to learn a language, 
which, if he should go into the army, as 
he seemed inclined to do, would be par- 
ticularly useful to him. Lady Annaly 
observed, that Mr. Ormond, wherever 
he might be in Ireland, would probably 
find even the priest of the parish a person 
who could assist him sufficiently in learn- 
ing French, as most of the Irish parish 
priests were, at that time, educated 
at St. Omer's, or Lou vain. 

Father Jos had been at St. Omer's, 
and Harry resolved to attack him with 
a French grammar and dictionary, but 
the French father Jos had learnt at St. 
Omer's was merely from ear, he could 
not bear the sight of a French grammar. 
Harry was obliged to work on by himself. 
He again put off writing- to thank Lady 
Annaly, till he could tell her that he had 
I 2 



J 72 ORMOND. 

obeyed her commands ; and that he could 
read at least a page of Gil Bias. But 
before he had accomplished this, he learnt 
from the agent that Lady Annaly was in 
great affliction about her son, who had 
broken a blood-vessel. He could not 
think of intruding upon her at such a 
time — and, in short, he put it off till he 
thought it was too late to do it at all. 

Among the English books was one in 
many volumes, which did not seize his 
attention forcibly, like Tom Jones, at 
first, but which won upon him by degrees, 
drew him on against his will, and against 
his taste. He hated moralizing and re- 
flections ; and there was here an abun- 
dance both of reflections and morality ; 
these he skipped over, however, and 
went on. The hero and the heroine too 
were of a stiff fashion, which did not suit 
his taste, yet still there was something in 
the book, that, in spite of the terrible 
array of good people, captivated his atten- 
tion. The heroine's perpetual egotism 
5 



ORMOND. 173 

disgusted him — she was always too good 
and too full of herself — and she wrote 
dreadfully long' letters. The hero's dress 
and manner were too splendid, too stiff, 
for every day use — at first he detested Sir 
Charles Grand ison — he was so different 
from the friends he loved in real life, or the 
heroes he had admired in books; just as 
in old portraits, we are at first struck with 
the costume, but soon, if the picture be 
really by a master hand, our attention is 
fixed on the expression of the features and 
the life of the figure. 

Sensible i* a Ormond was of the power 
of humour and ridicule, he was still more 
susceptible, as all noble natures are, of 
sympathy with elevated sentiments, and 
with generous character. The character 
of Sir Charles Grandison, in spite of his 
ceremonious bowing on the hand, touched 
the nobler feelings of our \ounir hero's 
mind, inspired him with virtuous emula- 
tion, made him ambitious to be a gentle- 
man in the best and highest sense of the 



174 ORMOND. 

word. In short, it completely counter- 
acted in his mind the effect of Tom Jones 
— all the generous feelings which were so 
congenial to his own nature, and which 
he had seen combined in Tom Jones, as 
if necessarily, with the habits of an ad- 
venturer, a spendthrift, and a rake, he 
now saw united with high moral and re- 
ligious principles, in the character of a 
man of virtue, as well as a man of honour j 
a man of cultivated understanding and ac- 
complished manners. In Sir Charles 
Grandison's history he read that of a gen- 
tleman, who, fulfilling every duty of his 
station in society, eminently useful, re- 
spected and beloved, as brother, friend, 
master of a family, guardian, and head of 
a large estate, was admired by his own 
sex, and, what struck Ormond far more 
forcibly, loved, passionately loved by 
women — not by the low and profligate, 
but by the highest and most accomplished 
of the sex. 

Ormond has often declared, that Sir 



ORMOXD. 175 

Charles Grandison did him more good, 
than any fiction he ever read in his life. 
Indeed, to him it appeared no fiction — 
while he was reading it, his imagination 
was so full of Clementina, and the whole 
Porretta family, that he saw them in his 
sleeping and waking dreams. The deep 
pathos so affected him, that he could 
scarcely recall his mind to the low con- 
cerns of life. Once, when king Corny- 
called him to go out shooting — he found 
him with red eyes. — Harry was ashamed 
to tell him the cause, lest he should laugh 
at him. But Corny was susceptible of 
the same kind of enthusiasm himself; 
and though he had, as he said, never been 
regularly what is called a reading man, 
yet, the books he had read, which were 
always for his own pleasure, left inefface- 
able traces in his memory. Fictions, if 
they touched him at all, struck him with 
all the force of reality, and he never spoke 
of characters as in a book, but as if they 
had lived and acted. Harry was glad 



176 ORMOND. 

to find that here again, as in most 
things, they sympathized and suited each 
other. 

But Corny, if ready to give sympathy, 
was likewise imperious in requiring it, 
and Harry was often obliged to make 
sudden transitions from his own thoughts 
and employments to those of his friend. 
These transitions, however difficult and 
provoking at the time, were useful dis- 
cipline to his mind, giving him that ver- 
satility in which persons of powerful 
imagination, accustomed to live in retire- 
ment and to command their own time 
and occupations, are often most defi- 
cient. 

At this period, when our young hero 
was suddenly seized with a voracious ap- 
petite for books, it was trying to his pa- 
tience to be frequently interrupted. 

" Come, come! Harry Bookworm, 
you are growing — no good! — come out!' 
cried king Corn) — " Lay down what- 
ever you have in your hand, and come 



ORMOND. 177 

off this minute, till I shew you a bad- 
ger at bay, with half a dozen dogs, and 
defending itself in the keenest man- 
ner." 

" Yes, Sir, this minute — be kind 
enough to wait one minute." 

<c It has been hiding and skulking this 
week from me — we have got it out of its 
snug hole at last. I bid them keep the 
dogs off till you came. Don't be waiting 
any longer. Come off, Harry, come ! 
— Phoo ! Phoo ! That book will keep 
cold, and what is it ? Oh ! the last vo- 
lume of Sir Charles, not worth troubling 
your eyes with. The badger is worth a 
hundred of it, not a pin's worth in that 
volume but worked stool and chairs, and 
china jugs and mugs. Oh! throw it 
from you. Come away." 

Another time, at the very death of 
Clarissa, king Corny would have Harry 
out to see a Solan goose. 

"Oh! let Clarissa die another time; 
come now, you that never saw a Solan 
i 3 



178 ORMOND. 

goose — it looks for all the world as if it 
wore spectacles ; Moriarty says so." 

Harry was carried off to see the goose 
in spectacles, and was pressed into the 
service of king Corny for many hours 
afterwards, to assist in searching for its 
eggs. One of the Black Islands was a 
bare, high, pointed, desart rock, in which 
the sea-fowl bnilt ; and here, in the 
highest point of rock, this Solan goose 
had deposited some of her eggs, instead 
of leaving them in nests on the ground, 
as she usually does. The more danger* 
ous it was to obtain the eggs, which the 
bird had hidden in this pinnacle of the 
rock, the more eager king Corny was 
to have them ; and he, and Ormond, and 
Moriarty, were at this perilous work for 
hours. King Corny directing and bawl- 
ing, and Moriarty and Ormond with 
pole, net, and pole-hook, swinging and 
leaping from one ledge of rock to ano- 
ther, clambering, clinging, sliding, push- 
ing, and pulling each other alternately, 



ORMOND. 179 

from hold to hold, with frightful preci- 
pices beneath them. As soon as Ormond 
had warmed to the business, he was de- 
lighted with the dangerous pursuit; but 
suddenly, just as he had laid his hand on 
the egg, and that king Corny shouted in 
triumph, Harry, leaping back across the 
cleft in the rock, missed his footing and 
fell, and must have been dashed to pieces, 
but for a sort of projecting landing place, 
on which he was caught, where he lay 
for some minutes stunned. The terror 
of poor Corny was such, that he could 
neither move nor look up, till Moriarty 
called out to him, that Master Harry was 
safe, all to a sprained ancle. The fall, 
and the sprain, would not have been 
deemed worthy of a place in these memoirs 
of our hero, but from their consequences. 
— the consequences, not on his body, but 
on his mind. He could not for some 
weeks afterwards stir out, or take any 
bodily exercise : confined to the house, 
and forced to sit still, he was glad to 



180 ORMOND. 

read, during these long 1 hours, to amuse 
himself. When he had read all the 
novels in the collection, which were very 
few, he went on to other books. Even 
those, which were not mere works of 
amusement, he found more entertaining", 
than netting fishing nets, or playing back- 
gammon with father Jos, who was al- 
ways cross when he did not win. Kind- 
hearted king Corny, considering always 
that Harry's sprain was got in his ser- 
vice, would have sat with him all day 
long, but this Harry would not suffer, 
for he knew that it was the greatest 
punishment to Corny to stay within doors 
a whole day. When Corny in the even- 
ing: returned from his various out-of-doors 
occupations and amusements, Harry was 
glad to talk to him of what he had been 
reading, and to hear his odd summary 
reflexions. 

u Well, Harry, my boy, now I've told 
you how it has been with me all day, 
now let's hear how you have been getting 



ORMOND. 18 1 

on with your bookmen ; — has it been a 
good day with you to-day ? — was you 
with Shakespear — worth all the rest — 
all the world in him ?" 

Corny was no respecter of authorities 
in books ; a great name went for nothing 
with him — did not awe his understand- 
ing in the slightest degree. 

" Did it touch the heart, or inflame" 
— if it was poetry — " the imagination?" — 
If it was history, " was it true?" — If it 
wasphilosophy," wasit sound reasoning?" 
These were the questions he asked. — " No 
cramming any thing down his throat," 
he said. This daring temper of mind, 
though it sometimes led him wrong, was 
advantageous to his young friend. It 
wakened Ormond's powers, and pre- 
vented his taking upon trust the asser- 
tions, or the reputations, even of great 
waiters. 

The spring was now returning, and 
Dora was to return with spring. He 
looked forward to her retiirn, as to a 



382 ORl^OND. 

new, era in his existence : then he should 
live in better company, he should see 
something 1 better than he had seen of 
late — be something- better. His chief, 
his best occupations during this winter, 
had been riding, leaping, and breaking- 
horses : he had broke a beautiful mare 
for Dora. Dora, when a child, used to 
be very fond of riding-, and constantly 
rode out with her father. At the time 
when Harry Or mood's head was full 
of Tom Jones, Dora had always been 
his idea of Sophy Weston, though no- 
thing else that he could recollect in her 
person, mind, or manner, bore any re- 
semblance to Sophia : and now that Tom 
Jones had been driven out of his head 
by Sir Charles Grandison, — now that his 
taste for women was a little raised, by 
the pictures which Richardson had left 
in his imagination, Dora, with equal fa- 
cility, turned into his new idea of a 
heroine — not his heroine, for she was 
engaged to White Connal — merely a 



ORMOtfD. 183 

heroine in the abstract. — Ormond had 
been warned, that he was to consider 
Dora as a married woman ; — well, so he 
would, of course. — " She was to be Mrs. 
Connal — so much the better; — he should 
be quite at ease with her, and she should 
teach him French, and drawing', and 
dancing 1 , and improve his manners. He 
was conscious that his manners had, since 
his coming to the Black Islands, rus- 
ticated sadly, and lost the little polish 
they had acquired at Castle Hermitage, 
and during- one famous winter in Dublin. 
His language and dialect, he was afraid, 
had become somewhat vulgar; but Dora, 
who had been refined by her residence 
with her aunt, and by her dancing 1 - 
master, would polish him up, and set all 
to rights, in the most agreeable manner 
possible." In the course of these his spe- 
culations on his rapid improvements, and 
his reflections on the perfectibility of 
man's nature under the tuition of wo- 
man, some idea of its fallibility did cross 



184 ORMOND. 

his imagination or his memory ; but then 
he blamed, most unjustly, his imagina- 
tion, for the suggestion. The danger 
would prove, as he would have it, to be 
imaginary. " What danger could there 
be, when he knew," as he began and 
ended, by saying to himself, " that he was 
to consider Dora as a married woman — 
Mrs. Connal." 

Dora's aunt, an aunt by the mother's 
side, a maiden aunt, who had never be- 
fore been at the Biack Islands, and whom, 
Ormond had never seen, was to accom- 
pany Dora on her return to Corny Castle; 
our young hero had settled it in his head, 
that this aunt must be something like 
Aunt Ellenor, in Sir Charles Grandison ; 
a stiff- backed, prim, precise, old fashion- 
ed looking aunt. Never was man's asto- 
nishment more visible in his counte- 
nance, than was that of Harry Ormond, 
on the first sight of Dora's aunt. His 
surprise was so great, as to preclude the 
sight of Dora herself. 



ORMOND. 185 

There was nothing surprising in the 
lady, but there was, indeed, an extraor- 
dinary difference between our hero's 
preconceived notion, and the real per- 
son whom he now beheld ! Mademoiselle, 
as Miss O'Faley was called, in honour 
of her French parentage and education* 
and in commemoration of her having at 
different periods spent above half her life 
in France, looking for an estate that 
could never be found. — Mademoiselle was 
dressed in all the peculiarities of the 
French dress of that day — she was of 
that indefinable age, which the French 
describe by the happy phrase of " une 
femme dun certain age" and which 
Miss O'Faley happily translated, " a 
woman of no particular age." Yet 
though of no particular age in the eye of 
politeness, to the vulgar eye she looked 
like what people, who knew no better, 
might caM an elderly woman, but she 
was as alert and lively as a girl of fifteen, 
— a little wrinkled, but withal in fine 



186 ORMOND. 

preservation. She wore abundance of 
rouge, obviously — still more obviously 
took superabundance of snuff — and with- 
out any obvious motive, continued to 
play unremittingly a pair of large black 
French eyes, in a manner impracticable 
to a mere English woman, and which 
almost tempted the spectator to beg she 
would let them rest. — Mademoiselle or 
Miss O'Faley was in fact half French, 
and half English — born in France she 
was the daughter of an officer of the 
Irish Brigade, and of a French lady 
of good family. In her gestures, tones, 
and language, there was a striking 
mixture, or rapid succession of French 
and Irish. When she spoke French, 
which she spoke well, and with a true 
Parisian accent, her voice, gestures, 
air, and ideas were all French, and she 
looked and moved a well born, well 
bred woman. — The moment she attempt- 
ed to speak English, which she spoke 
with an inveterate brogue, her ideas, 



ORMOND. ] 87 

manner, air, voice, and gestures were 
Irish ; she looked and moved a vulgar 
Irishwoman. 

" What do you see so wonderful in 
aunt O'Faley ?" said Dora. 

« Nothing— only — " 

The sentence was never finished, and 
the young lady was satisfied, for she 
perceived that the course of his thoughts 
was interrupted, and all idea of her 
aunt effaced, the moment he turned his 
eyes upon herself. Dora, no longer a 
child and his playfellow, but grown and 
formed, was, and looked, as if she ex- 
pected to be treated as a woman. — She 
was exceedingly pretty, not regularly 
handsome, but with most brilliant eyes 
— there was besides a childishness in her 
face, and in her slight figure, which 
disarmed all criticism on her beauty, 
and which contrasted strikingly, as our 
hero thought agreeably, with her woman- 
ish airs and manner. — Nothing but her ex- 
ternal appearance could be seen this first 



188 ORMOND. 

evening — she was tired, and went to bed 
early. 

Ormond Jonged to see more of her, 
on whom so much of his happiness was 
to depend. 



GRMOND. 189 



CHAP. IX. 



iHIS was the first time Mademoiselle 
O'Faley had ever been at Corny Castle. 
Hospitality, as well as gratitude, de- 
termined the king of the Black Islands 
to pay her honour due 

" Now, Harry Ormond," said he, 
" I have made one capital, good re- 
solution. Here is my sister-in-law, 
Mademoiselle O'Faley, coming to reside 
with me here, and has conquered her 
antipathy to solitude, and the Black 
Islands, and all from natural love and 
affection for my daughter Dora, for 
which I have a respect for her, not- 
withstanding all her eternal jabbering 
about politesse, and all her manifold 



190 ORMOND. 

absurdities, and infinite female vani- 
ties, of which she has a double propor- 
tion, being half French. — But so was 
my wife, that I loved to distraction — 
for a wise man may do a foolish thing-. 
— Well, on all those accounts, I shall 
never contradict or gainsay this Made- 
moiselle — in all things I shall make it 
my principle to give her her swing and 
her fling. But now observe me, Harry, 
I have no eye to her money — let her 
leave that to Dora or the cats, which- 
ever pleases her — I am not looking to, 
nor squinting at her succession. I am a 
great hunter, but not legacy hunter, 
that is a kind of hunting I despise — and 
I wish every hunter of that kind may 
be thrown out, or thrown off, and may 
never be in at the death !" 

Corny 's tirade against legacy hunters 
was highly approved by Ormond, but 
as to the rest he knew nothing about 
Miss O'Faley's fortune. — He was now 
to learn that a rich relation of hers, a 



ORMOND. 191 

merchant in Dublin, whom living* she 
had despised, because he was " neither 
noble, nor comme il faut," dying", had 
lately left her a considerable sum of 
money, — so that after having been 
many years in straitened circumstances, 
she was now quite at her ease. — She 
had a carriage, and horses, and servants, 
she could indulge her taste for dress and 
make a figure in a country place. 

The Black Islands was to be sure of 
all places the most unpromising- for her 
purpose, and the first sight of Corny 
Castle was enough to throw her into 
despair. 

As soon as breakfast was over, she 
begged her brother-in-law would shew 
her the whole of the chateau from the 
top to the bottom. 

" With all the pleasure in life," he 
said, " he would attend her from the at- 
tics to the cellar, and shew her all the 
additions, improvements, and contri- 
vances he had made, and all he intended 



192 ORMOND. 

to make, if heaven should lend him life 
to complete every thing, or any thing — 
there was nothing finished." 

" Nor ever will be," said Dora, look- 
ing from her father to her aunt with a 
sort of ironical smile. 

" Why, what has he been doing all 
his life?" said Mademoiselle. 

" Making a shift" said Dora. " I 
will shew you dozens of them as we go 
over this house — he calls them substi- 
tutes, I call them make-shifts." 

Ormond followed as they went over 
the house, and though he was some- 
times amused by the smart remarks, 
which Dora made behind backs as they 
went on, yet he thought she laughed too 
scornfully at her father's oddities, and 
he was often in pain for his good friend 
Corny. 

King Corny was both proud and 
ashamed of his palace — proud of the 
various instances it exhibited of his taste, 
originality, and daring — ashamed of the 



ORMOND. 193 

deficiencies and want of comfort and 
finish. 

His ready wit had excuses, reasons, or 
remedies for all Mademoiselle's objec- 
tions. Every alteration she proposed, 
he promised to get executed, and he pro- 
mised impossibilities with the best faith 
imaginable. 

44 As the Frenchman answered to the 
Queen of France," said Corny, " if it 
is possible, it shall be done, and if it 
is impossible it must be done." 

Mademoiselle, who had expected to 
find her brother-in-law, as she owned, a 
little more difficult to manage, a little 
savage, and a little restive — was quite 
delighted with his politeness, but pre- 
suming on his complaisance, she went too 
far. — In the course of a week, she made 
so many innovations, that Corny, seeing 
the labour and ingenuity of his life in 
danger of being at once destroyed, made 
a sudden stand. 

VOL. II. K 



194 ORMOND. 

" This is Corny Castle, Mademoi- 
selle," said he, " and you are making- it 
Castle Topsy-Turvey, which must not 
be. — Stop this work, for T'll have no more 
architectural innovations done here — but 
by my own orders. — Paper and paint, and 
furnish and finish, you may, if you will, 
or you can, I give you carte-blanche, but 
I won't have another wall touched, nor 
chimney pulled down ; so far shalt thou 
go but no farther, Mademoiselle O'Fa- 
ley." Mademoiselle was forced to sub. 
mit, and to confine her brilliant imagi- 
nation to papering, painting, and glaz- 
ing. 

Even in the course of these operations 
king Corny became so impatient, that 
she was forced to get them finished sur- 
reptitiously, while he was out of the way 
in the mornings. 

She made out who resided at every 
place within possible reach of morning 
or dinner visit : every house on the oppo- 
site banks of the lake was soon known to 



ORMOND. 195 

her, and she was current in every house. 
The boat was constantly rowing back- 
wards and forwards over the lake; cars 
waiting or driving 1 on the banks j in 
short, this summer, all was gaiety at the 
Black Islands. Miss O'Faley was said 
to be a great acquisition in the neigh- 
bourhood : she was so gay, so sociable, 
so communicative ; and she certainly, 
above all, knew so much of the world; 
she was continually receiving letters, and 
news, and patterns from Dublin, and the 
Black Rock, and Paris. Each of which 
places, and all standing nearly upon the 
same level, made a great figure in her 
conversation, and in the imagination of 
the half or quarter gentry, with whom she 
consorted in this remote place. Every 
thing is great or small by comparison, 
and she was a great person in this little 
world. It had been the report of the 
country, that her niece was promised to 
the eldest son of Mr. Connal, of Glynn ; 
but the aunt seemed so averse to the 
K 2 



196 ORMOND. 

match, and expressed this so openly, that 
some people began to think it would 
be broken off; others, who knew Corne- 
lius O'Shane's steadiness to his word of 
honour, were convinced that Miss O'Fa- 
ley would never shake king Corny, and 
that Dora would assuredly be Mrs. Con- 
nal. All agreed that it was a foolish 
promise,— that he might do better for 
his daughter. Miss O' Shane, with her 
father's fortune and her aunt's, would be 
n great prize ; besides she was thought 
quite a beauty, and remarkable elegant. 

Dora was just the thing to be the 
belle and coquet of the Black Islands ; 
the alternate scorn and familiarity with 
which she treated her admirers, and the 
interest and curiosity she excited, by 
sometimes taking delightful pains to 
attract, and then capriciously repelling, 
succeeded, as Miss O'Faley observed, 
admirably. Harry Ormond accompa- 
nied her and her aunt on all their parties 
ef pleasure : Miss O'Faley would never 



ORMOND. 197 

venture in the boat or across the lake 
without him. — He was absolutely essen- 
tial to their parties; — he was useful in 
the boat; — he was useful to drive the 
car ; — Miss O'Faley would not trust any- 
body else to drive her; — he was an orna- 
ment to the ball, Miss O'Faley dubbed 
him her beau : — she undertook to polish 
him, and to teach him to speak French ; 
she was astonished by the quickness with 
which he acquired the language, and 
caught the true Parisian pronunciation ; 
— sheoften reiterated to her niece, and to 
others, who repeated it to Ormond, " that 
it was the greatest of pities he had but 
three hundred a year upon earth, but 
that, even with that pittance, she should 
prefer him for a nephew, to another with 
his thousands — Mr. Ormond was well- 
born, and he had some polilesse ; and a 
winter at Paris would make him quite 
another person, quite a charming young- 
man. He would have great success, she 
could answer for it, in certain circles 
and sallons that she could name, only it 



198 ORMONB. 

might turn his head too much." — So 
far she said, and more she thought. 

It was a million pities, that such a 
woman as herself, and such a girl as 
Dora, and such a young man as Mr. 
Ormond might be made, should be bu- 
ried all their days in the Black Islands. 
Mademoiselle O'Faley's heart still turned 
to Paris — in Paris she was determined 
to live, there was noliving, what you call 
living, any where else, — elsewhere peo- 
ple only vegetate, as somebody said. 
Miss O'Faley, nevertheless, was exces- 
sively fond of her niece, and how to 
make the love for her niece and the love 
for Paris coincide, was the question : she 
long had formed a scheme of carrying 
her dear niece to Paris, and marrying 
her there to some M. le Baron, or M. 
le Marquis ; but Dora's father would not 
hear of her living any where but in Ire- 
land, or marrying any one but an Irish- 
man. Miss O'Faley had lived long 
enough in Ireland lo know, that the usual 
method, in all disputes, is to split the 



ORMONJi. 199 

difference ; — therefore she decided, that 
her niece should marry some Irishman 
who would take her to Paris, and reside 
with her there, at least a great part of 
his time. The latter part of the bargain 
to be kept a secret from the father, till 
the marriage should be accomplished. 
Harry Ormond appeared to be the very 
man for this purpose : he seemed to hang 

loosely upon the world, no family 

connexions seemed to have any rights 
over him : he had no profession, — but a 
very small fortune. — Miss O'Faley's for- 
tune might be very convenient, and 
Dora's person very agreeable to him; 
and it was scarcely to be doubted, that he 
would easily be persuaded to quit the 
Black Islands, and the British Islands, 
for Dora's sake. 

The petit menage was already quite 
arranged in Mademoiselle O'Faley's 
head. — Even the wedding dresses had 
floated in her fancy. 

u As to the promise given to White 



200 ORMOND. 

Connal," as she said to herself, " it 
would be a mercy to save her niece 
from such a man, for she had seen him 
lately, when he had called upon her in 
Dublin, and he was a vulgar person :- — 
his hair looked as if it had not been cut 
these hundred years, and he wore — any 
thing- but what he should wear — there- 
fore it would be a favour to her brother- 
in law, for whom she had in reality a 
serious regard, it would be doing him 
the greatest imaginable benefit, to save 
him from the shame of either keeping or 
breaking his ridiculous and savage pro- 
mise." 

Her plan was therefore to prevent the 
possibility of his keeping it, by marrying 
her niece privately to Ormond, before 
White Connal should return in October. 
When the thing was done and could not 
be undone, Cornelius O'Shane, she was 
persuaded, would be very glad of it, for 
Harry Ormond was his particular favou- 
rite : he had called him his son, son-in-law 



ORMOND. 201 

was almost the same thing. Thus arguing 
with happy female casuistry, Mademoi- 
selle went on with the prosecution of her 
plan. To the French spirit of intrigue 
and gallantry she joined Irish acuteness, 
and Irish varieties of odd resource, with 
the art of laying suspicion asleep by 
the appearance of an imprudent, blun- 
dering, good-nature ; add to all this a 
degree of confidence, that could not have 
been acquired by any means but one. 
Thus accomplished, " rarely did she 
manage matters." 

By the very boldness and openness of 
her railing against the intended bride- 
groom, she convinced her brother-in-law, 
that she meant nothing more than talk. — 
Besides, through all her changing varie- 
ties of objections, there was one point on 
which she never varied : — she never ob- 
jected to going to Dublin, in September, 
to buy the wedding clothes for Dora. 
This seemed to Cornelius O'Shane per- 
fect proof, that she had no serious inten- 
k3 



202 ORMOND. 

tion to break off or defer the match. As 
to the rest, he was glad to see his own 
Harry such a favorite : — he deserved to 
be a favorite with everybody, Cornelius 
thought. The young people were conti- 
nually together, " So much the better," 
he would say, -* all was above board, 
and there could be no harm going for* 
ward, and no danger in life." — All was 
above board on Harry Ormond's part ; 
he knew nothing of Miss O'Faley's de- 
signs, nor did he as yet feel that there 
was for him much danger. He was not 
thinking as a lover of Dora in particu- 
lar, but he felt a new and extraordinary 
desire to please in general. On every 
fair occasion, he liked to shew how well 
he could ride ; how well he could dance ; 
how gallant and agreeable he could be : 
— his whole attention was now turn- 
ed to the cultivation of his personal 
accomplishments. He succeeded: — he 
danced, rode to admiration ; — he danced 
all night ; he rode all morning : — his 



ORMOND. 203 

glories of horsemanship, and sportsman- 
ship ; the birds that he shot, and the 
fish that he caught, and the leaps that 
he took, are to this hour recorded in the 
tradition of the inhabitants of the Black 
Islands. At that time his feats of per- 
sonal activity and address made him the 
theme of every tongue, the delight of 
every eye, the admiration of every 
woman, and the envy of every man : not 
only with the damsels of Peggy Sheri- 
dan's class was he the favorite, but with 
all the young ladies, the belles of the half 
gentry, who fiiled the ball-rooms; and 
who made the most distinguished figure in 
the riding, boating, walking, tea-drink- 
ing parties. To all or any of these belles 
he devoted his attention, rather than to 
Dora ; for he was upon honour, and very 
honourable he was, and very prudent, 
moreover, he thought himself. He was, 
at present, quite content with general 
admiration ; there was, or there seemed, 
at this time, more danger for his head 



204 ORMOND. 

than his heart, — more danger that his 
head should be turned with the foolish 
attentions paid him by many silly girls, 
than that he should be a dupe to a passion 
for any one of them : there was immi- 
nent danger of his becoming a mere 
dancing, driving, country coxcomb. 



ORMOND. 205 



CHAP. X. 



ONE day, when Harry Ormond was* 
out shooting with Moriarty Carroll, Mo- 
riarty abruptly began with — 

" Why then, 'tis what I am thinking", 
Master Harry, that king Corny don't 
know as much of that White Connal as I 
do." 

" What do you know of Mr. Connal," 
said Harry, loading his piece, " I didn't 
know you had ever seen him." 

" Oh, but I did, and no great sight to 
see. — Unlike the father, old Connal, of 
Glynn, who is the gentleman to the last 
every inch, even with the coat dropping 
ofi his back ; and the son, with the best 
coat in Christendom, has not the look of 
a gentleman at all, at all! — Nor hasn't 
•in him, inside no more than outside." 



206 ORMOND. 

" You may be mistaken there, as you 
have never been within-side of him, Mo- 
riarty," said Ormond. 

"Oh faith, and if I have not been 
within-side of him, 1 have heard enough 
from them that seen him turned inside 
out, hot and cold. Sure I went down 
there last summer, to his country, to see 
a sbister of my own, that's married in it; 
and lives just by Connal's Town, as the 
man calls that sheep farm of his." 

" Well, let the gentleman call his own 
place what he will- — ** 

" Oh! he may call it what he plases 
for me, I know what the country calls, 
him; and, lest your honour should not 
ax me, I'll tell you : — they call him 
White Connal, the negre. — Think of him 
that would stand browbating the butcher 
an hour, to bate down the farthing a 
pound in the price of the worst bits of 
the meat, which he'd bespeak always for 
the servants ; or stand, he would, I've 
seen him with my own eyes, higgling 
with the poor child, with the apron 



ORMONB. 207 

round the neck, that was sent to sell him 
the eggs — " 

" Hush ! Moriarty," said Ormond, 
who did not wish to hear any further 
particulars of Mr. Connal's domestic 
economy, and he silenced Moriarty, by 
pointing to a bird. — But the bird flew 
away, and Moriarty returned to his 
point. 

" I wouldn't be telling the like of any 
jantleman, but to shew the nature of 
him. The minute after he had screwed 
the halfpenny out of the child, he'd 
throw down, may-be, fifty guineas in 
gould, for the horse he'd fancy for his 
own riding : not that he rides better than 
the sack going to the mill, nor so well j 
but that he might have it to show, and 
say, he was better mounted than any 
man at the fair : and the same he'd 
throw away more guineas than 1 could 
tell, at the head of a short-horned bull, 
or a long-horned bull., or some kind of 
a bull from England, may-be, just he- 

a 



208 ORMOND. 

caase he'd think nobody else had one of 
the breed in all Ireland but himself." 

" A very good thing-, at least, for the 
country, to improve the breed of cattle.'* 

"The country!— 'Tis little the man 
thinks of the country, that never thought 
of any thing but himself, since his mother 
sucked him." 

" Suckled him, you mean," said Harry. 

" No matter — I'm no spaker — but I 
know that man's character, nevertheless 
—he is rich ; — but a very bad character 
the poor gives him up and down." 

" Perhaps, because he is rich." 

" Not at all ; the poor loves the rich 
that helps with the kind heart. — Don't 
we all love king Corny to the blacking 
of his shoes ?— Oh ! there's the differ- 
ence ! — who could like the man that's 
always talking of the craturs, and yet to 
save the life of the poorest cratur that's 
forced to live under him, wouldn't for- 
bear to drive, and pound, and process, 
for the little con acre, the potato ridge. 



ORMOND. 209 

the cow's grass, or the trifle for the wo- 
man's peck of flax, was she dying, and sell 
the woman's last blanket ?— White Con- 
nai is a hard man, and takes all to the 
uttermost farthing- the law allows." 

tC Well, even so, I suppose the law 
does not allow him more than his due," 
said Ormond. 

*'Oh! begging your pardon, Master 
Harry," said Moriarty, " that's becaase 
you are not a lawyer." 

u And are you?" said Harry. 

" Only as we all are through the coun- 
try. — And now I'll only just tell you, 
Master Harry, how this White Connal 
sarved my shister's husband, who was 
an under-tenant to him. — See, the case 
was this — " 

" Oh! don't tell me a long case, for 
pity's sake. — I am no lawyer, I shall 
not understand a word of it." 

" But then, Sir, through the whole 
consarning White Connal, what I'm 
thinking of, Master Harry," said Mori- 



210 ORMOND. 

arty, «' is, I'm grieving that a daughter 
of onr dear king Corny 's, and such a 
pretty likely girl as Miss Dora — " 

" Say no more, Moriarty, for there's 
a partridge." 

" Oh ! is it so with you ?** thought 
Moriarty, " that's just what I wanted to 
know — and I'll keep your secret ; — I 
don't fo rget Peggy Sheridan — and his 
goodness." 

Moriarty said not a word more about 
White Connal or Miss IXora j — and he and 
Harry shot a great many birds this day. 
It is astonishing how quickly and how 
justly the lower class of people in Ireland 
discover and appreciate the characters 
of their superiors ; especially of the class 
just above them in rank. 

Ormond hoped that Moriarty had been 
prejudiced in his account of White Con- 
nal, and that private feelings had in- 
duced him to exaggerate. Harry was 
persuaded of this, because Cornelius 
O'Shane had spoken to him of Connal, 



ORMOND. 211 

and had never represented him to be a 
hard man. In fact, 0' Shane did not 
know him. White Connal had a pro- 
perty in a distant county, where he re- 
sided, and only came up from time to 
time to see his father. O' Shane ,had 
then wondered to see the son grown so 
unlike the father ; and he attributed the 
difference to White Connal's having 
turned grazier. The having derogated 
from the dignity of an idle gentleman, 
and having turned grazier, was his chief 
fault in king Corny 's eyes : so that the 
only point in Connal's character and 
conduct, for which he deserved esteem, 
was that for which his intended father- 
in-law despised him. Connal had early 
been taught by his father's example, who 
was an idle, decayed, good gentleman, of 
the old Irish stock, that genealogies and 
old maps of estates in other people's pos- 
sessions do not gain quite so much xe~ 
spect in this world as solid wealth. The 
son was determined, therefore, to get 



212 ORMONB. 

money ; but in his horror of his father's 
indolence and poverty, he ran into a 
contrary extreme — he became not only 
industrious, but rapacious. — He was - 
right to avoid being 1 a stalko, as his 
father was ; but it was not absolutely 
necessary, that all his talk should be of 
bullocks, or that his whole soul should 
be in gain. 

In going lately to Dublin to settle 
with a sales-master, he had called on 
Dora at her aunt's in Dublin, and he 
had been " greatly struck," as he said, 
(t with Miss O'Shane; she was as fine a 
girl as any in Ireland — turn out who 
they would against her; alt her points 
good. But, better than beauty, she 
would be no contemptible fortune : 
with her aunt's assistance she woulu cut 
up well ; she was certain of all her 
father's Black Islands— fine improvable 
land, if well managed." 

These considerations had their full 
effect ; Connal, knowing that the young- 



ORMOND. 213 

lady Was his destined bride, had begun 
by taking the matter coolly, and resolv- 
ing to wait for the properest time to 
wed ; yet the sight of Dora's charms 
had so wrought upon him, that he was 
now impatient to conclude the marriage 
immediately. Directly after seeing Dora 
in Dublin, he had gone home and put 
things in order and in train to bear his 
absence, while he should pay a visit to 
the Black Islands. Business, which 
must always be ^considered before plea- 
sure, had detained him at home longer 
than he had foreseen ; but now certain 
rumours he heard of gay doings in the 
Black Islands, and a letter from his 
father, advising him not to delay longer 
paying his respects at Corny Castle, 
determined him to set out. He 
wrote to Mr. O' Shane to announce his 
intentions, and begged to have the 
answer directed to his father's at 
Glynn. 

One morning as Miss O'Faley, Mr. 



£14 ORMOND. 

0' Shane, and Ormond, were at break- 
fast, Dora, who was usually late, not 
having 1 yet appeared, Miss O'Faley saw 
a little boy running across the fields 
towards the house — 

" That boy runs as if he was bringing 
news," said she. 

" So he has a right to do," said 
Corny ; " if I don't mistake, that's the 
post j that is, it is not the post, but a 
little special of my own — a messenger I 
sent off to catch post." 

u To do what?" said Mademoiselle. 

" Why, to catch post," said Corny, 
" I bid him gallop off for the life and 
put across (lake understood) to the next 
post town, which is Ballynaslugger, 
and to put in the letters that were too 
late here at that office there ; and to 
bring back whatever he found with no 
delay — but gallop off for the bare life." 

This was an operation which the boy 
performed, whenever requisite, at the 
imminent hazard of his neck every time, 



ORMOND. 2 15 

to say nothing of his chance of drown- 
ing. 

" Well, catch-post, my little rascal," 
said king Corny, " what have you for us 
the day ?" 

" I got nothing at all, only a wetting 
for myself, plase your honour ; and one 
bit of a note for your honour, which I 
have here for you as dry as the bone in 
my breast." 

He produced the bit of a note, which, 
king Corny's hands being at that time? 
too full of the eggs and the kettle to 
receive graciously, was laid down on the 
corner of the table, from which it fell, 
and Miss O'Faley picking it up, and 
holding it by one corner, exclaimed — 

" Is this what you call dry as a bone 
in this country ? And mighty clean, too 
— faugh ! — When will this entire nation 
leave off chewing tobacco, 1 wonder ? 
This is what you style clean, too, in this 
country ?" 

" Why, then,'* said the boy, looking 



216 ORMOND. 

close at the letter, " I thought it was 
clane enough when I got it — and give it 
— but 'tis not so clane now, sure enough ; 
this corner — whatever come over it — 
Would it be the snuff, my lady ?" 

The mark of Miss OTaley's thumb 
was so visible, and the snuff so palpable, 
and the effort to brush it from the wet 
paper so disastrous, that Miss O'Faley 
let the matter rest where it was. King- 
Corny put silver into the boy's hand, 
bidding him not be too much of a 
rogue ; the boy, smiling furtively, 
twitched the hair on his forehead, bob- 
bed his head in sign of thanks, and 
drawing, not shutting the door after him, 
disappeared. 

" As sure as I'm Cornelius O'Shane, 
this is White Connal in propria per- 
sona" said he, opening the note. 

" Dora's White Connal ?" said Or- 
mond. 

" Mon Dieu ! Bon Dieu ! Ah Dieu !" 
cried Mademoiselle O'Faley. 



ORMOND. '217 

« Hush ! Whisht !" cried the father, 
** here's Dora coming." 

Dora came in- — 6I Any letter for me ?'* 

" Aye, darling", owe for you!* 

•* Oh, give it me j I'm always in a 
desperate hurry for my letters : Where 
is it ?" 

" No — you need not hold out your 
pretty hand ; the letter is for you, but 
not to you,*' said king Corny ; " And 
now you know ; aye, now you guess, 
my quick little blusher, who 'tis 
from ?" 

" I guess ? not I, indeed ; not worth 
my guessing," cried Dora, throwing her- 
self sideways into a chair. " My tea, 
if you please, aunt ;" then taking the 
cup, without adverting to Harry, who 
handed it to her, she began stirring 
the tea, as if it and all things shared 
her scorn. 

Mademoiselle O'Faley now addressed 
herself to her niece in French. We 
shall in future call her Mademoiselle, 

VOL. II. L> 



218 ORMOND. 

when she speaks in French, and Miss 
when she speaks in English. 

" Mon chere ! mon chat !" said Made- 
moiselle O'Faley, " you are quite right 
to spare yourself the trouble of guess- 
ing ; for I give it you in two, I give it 
you in four, I give it you in eight, and 
you would never guess right. Figure to 
yourself only, that a man, who has the 
audacity to call himself a lover of Miss 
O' Shane's, could fold, could seal, could 
direct a letter in such a manner as that, 
which you here behold." 

Dora, who during this speech had sat 
fishing for sugar in her tea-cup, raised 
her long eye-lashes, and shot a scornful 
glance at the letter, but intercepting a 
crossing look of Ormond*s, the expres- 
sion of her countenance suddenly chang- 
ed, and with perfect composure she ob- 
served, — 

" A man may fold a letter badly, and 
be nevertheless a very good man." 
" That nobody can possibly contra- 



ORMQND. 219 

diet," said her father, <c and on all occa- 
sions 'tis a comfort to be able to say 
what no one can contradict." 

" No well-bred person will never con- 
tradict nothing"," said Miss O'Faley— 

" But, without contradicting you, my 
child," resumed Miss O'Faley, " I mam- 
tain the impossibility of his being a gen- 
tleman, who folds a letter so." 

" But if folding a letter is all a man 
wants of being a gentleman," said Dora, 
" it might be learnt, I should think ; it 
might be taught — " 

" If you were the teacher, Dora, it 
might, surely," said her father. 

*' But heaven, I tsust, will arrange 
that better," said Mademoiselle. 

" Whatever heaven arranges must be 
best," said Dora. 

" Heaven and your father, if you 
please, Dora," said her father, ( * put 
that and that together like a dutiful 
daughter, as you must be." 

" Must !" said Dora, an,grily. 
l2 



220 ORMOND. 

" That offensive must slipped out by 
mistake, darling ; I meant only being 
you, you must be all that's dutiful and 
good." 

" Oh !" said Dora, " that's another 
view of the subject." 

" You have a very imperfect view of 
the subject, yet ;" said her father, " for 
you have both been so taken up with the 
manner, that you have never thought of 
inquiring into the matter of this letter." 

'* And what is the matter ?" said 
Miss O'Faley. 

" Form /" continued ihe father, ad- 
dressing himself to his daughter ; "Jbrm, 
I acknowledge, is one thing, and a great 
thing in a daughter's eyes." 

Dora blushed—" But in a father's 
eyes, substance is apt to be more." 

Dora raised her cup and saucer to- 
gether to her lips at this instant, so that 
the substance of the saucer completely 
hid her face from her father. 

« But," said Miss O'Faley, « you 



m 



ORMOND. 221 

have not told us yet what the man 
says." 

" He says he wilt be here whenever 
we please." 

" That's never," said Miss O'Faley — 
" never, I'd give for answer, if my plea- 
sure is to be consulted." 

" Luckily, there's another person's 
pleasure to be consulted here," said the 
father, keeping his eyes fixed upon his 
daughter. 

** Another cup of tea, aunt, if you 
please." 

u Then the sooner the better, I say," 
continued her father, " for when a dis- 
agreeable thing is to be done — that is, 
when a thing that's not quite agreeable 
to a young lady, such as marriage — " 

Dora took the cup of tea from her 
aunt's hand, Harry not interfering. 

" I say," persisted her father, " the 
sooner it's done and over, the better." 

Dora saw that Ormond's eyes were 
fixed upon her ; she suddenly tasted, and 



222 ORTVfcOND. 

suddenly started back from her scalding 
tea j Harry involuntarily uttered some 
exclamation of pity ; she turned, and 
seeing his eyes still fixed upon her, said, 
" Very rude to stare at any body so, 
Sir;' 

" I only thought you had scalded 
yourself." 

" You only thought wrong." 

tc At any rate, there's no great occa- 
sion to be angry with me, Dora." 

" And who is angry, pray, Mr. Or- 
mond ? What put it in your head that I 
was doing you the honour to be angry 
with you?" 

iC The cream ! the cream !" cried 
Miss O'Faiey. 

A sudden motion, we must not say an 
angry motion, of Dora's elbow, had at 
this moment overset the cream ewer, 
but Harry set it up again, before its 
contents poured on her new riding habit. 

" Thank you," said she, " thank you ; 
but," addejfl she, changing the places of 



ORMOND. 223 

the cream ewer and cups and saucers 
before her, <c I'd rather manage my own 
affairs, my own way, if you'd let me, 
Mr. Ormond — if you'd leave me — I can 
take care of myself my own way." 

" I beg your pardon for saving your 
habit from destruction, for that is the 
only cause of offence that I am conscious 
of having given. But I leave you to 
your own way, as I am ordered," said 
he, rising from the breakfast-table. 

" Sparring ! sparring, again, you 
two !" said Dora's father, " But Dora, I 
wonder whether you and White Connal 
were sparring that way when you met." 

<l Time enough for that, Sir, after 
marriage," said Dora. 

Our hero, who had stood leaning on 
the back of his chair, fearing that he 
had been too abrupt in what he had 
said, cast a lingering look at Dora, as 
her father spoke about White Connal, 
and as she replied ; but there was some- 
thing so unfeminine, so unamiable, so 



224 ORMOND. 

decided and bold, he thought, in the tone 
of her voice, as she pronounced the word 
marriage, that he then, without re- 
luctance, and with a feeling of disgust, 
quitted the room, and left her *' to 
manage her own affairs, and to take 
her own way." 



ORllOND. 225 



CHAP. XT. 



OUR young hero, hero like, took a so- 
litary walk to indulge his feelings, and 
as he rambled, he railed to his heart's 
content against Dora. 

" Here all my plans of happiness and 
improvement are again overturned. Dora 
cannot improve me, can give me no mo- 
tive for making myself any thing better 
than what I am — Polish my manners! 
no; when she has such rude, odious 
manners herself — much changed for the 
worse — a hundred times more agreeable 
when she was a child — Lost to me she is 
every way — no longer my playfellow — 
no chance of her being my friend — Her 
good father hoped she would be a sister 
L3 



226 ORMOND. 

to me — very sorry I should be to have 
such a sister — Then I am to consider her 
as a married woman — Pretty wife she 
will make ! I am convinced she cares no 
more for that man she is going to marry 
than I do — Marrying merely to be mar- 
ried, to manage her own affairs, and have 
her own way — so childish! — or mar- 
rying merely to get an establishment — 
so base ! — to secure a husband, so inde- 
licate! — How women, and such young 
creatures, can bring themselves to make 
these venal matches — I protest Peggy 
Sheridan's worth a hundred of such. 
Moriarty may think himself a happy 
fellow — Suzy — Jenny, any body — only 
with dress and manner a little different — 
is full as good in reality. I question 
whether they'd give themselves, without 
liking, to any White Connal in their 
own rank, at the first offer, for a few 
sheep, or a cow, or to have their own 
way?" 

Such was the summing up of the topics 



ORMOND. 227 

of invective, which, during a two hours' 
walk, ramble we should say, had come 
round and round continually in Ormond's 
indignant fancy. He went plucking off 
the hawthorn blossoms in his path, till at 
one desperate tug, that he gave to a branch 
that crossed his way, he opened to a bank 
which sloped down to the lake. At a 
little distance below him he saw old 
Sheelah sitting under a tree, rocking her- 
self backwards and forwards, while Dora 
stood motionless opposite to her, with her 
hand covering her eyes, and her head 
drooping. They neither of them saw 
Ormond, and he walked on pursuing his 
own path ; it led close behind the hedge 
to the place where they were, so close 
that the sounds " Willastrew ! Wiilas- 
trew!" from old Sheelah, in her funereal 
tone, reached his ear, and then the words, 
" Oh, my heart's darling ! So young to 
be a sacrifice — but what next did he 
say?" 

Ormond's curiosity was strongly ex- 



228 ORMOND. 

cited ; but he was too honourable to 
listen, or to equivocate with conscience ; 
so to warn them that some one was within 
hearing, he began to whistle clear and 
strong. Both the old woman and the 
young lady started. 

" Murder!" cried Sheelah, "it's Harry 
Ormond ! — Oh ! did he overhear any thing 
— or all, think ye?" 

" Not I," answered Ormond, leaping 
over the hedge directly, and standing 
firm before them ; " I overheard nothing 
— I heard only your last words Sheelah — 
you spoke so loud I could not help it — 
They are as safe with me as with your- 
self — but don't speak so loud another time 
if you are talking secrets, and whatever 
you do, never suspect me of listening — I 
am incapable of that, or any other base- 
ness." 

So saying, he turned his back, and was 
preparing to vault over the hedge again, 
when he heard Dora, in a soft low voice, 
sav — 



ORMOND. 220 

" I never suspected you, Harry, of 
that, or any other baseness." 

" Thank yon, Dora," said he, turning 
with some emotion — " thank you, Dora, 
for this first, this only kind word you've 
said to me since you came home." 

Looking- at her earnestly, as he ap- 
proached nearer, he saw the traces of 
tears, and an air of dejection in her coun- 
tenance, which turned all his anger to 
pity and tenderness in an instant. With 
a soothing tone he said, " Forgive my 
unseasonable reproach — I was wrong — ■ 
I see you are not as much to blame as I 
thought you were." 

" To blame!" cried Dora. « c And 
pray how — and why — and for what did 
you think me to blame, Sir." 

Suddenly the impossibility of explana- 
tion, the impropriety of what he had said, 
flashed on his mind, and in a few mo- 
ments a rapid succession of ideas fol- 
lowed. " Was Dora to blame for obeying 
her father, for being ready to marry the 



230 oriMDnd. 

man to whom her father had destined — 
promised her hand — and was he, Harry 
Ormond ! — the adopted child, the trusted 
friend of the family, to suggest to the 
daughter the idea of rebelling against 
her father's will, or disputing the pro- 
priety of his choice ?" 

Ormond's imagination took a rapid 
flight on Dora's side of the question, and 
he finished with the conviction that she 
was " a sacrifice, a martyr, and a miracle 
of perfection !" 

" Blame you, Dora !" cried he, " blame 
you ! No — I admire, I esteem, I respect 
you. Did I say that I blamed you? 1 
did not know what I said or what I 
meant." 

" And are you sure you know any bet- 
ter what you say or what you mean, 
now?" said Dora. 

The altered look and tone of tartness 
in which this question was asked, pro- 
duced as sudden a change in Harry's cow- 
viction. He hesitatingly answered — 
" I am—" 



ORMOND. 231 

" He is," said Sheelah, confidently. 

" I did not ask your opinion, Sheelah. I 
can judge for myself," said Dora. — " Your 
words tell me one thing, Sir, and your 
looks another," said she, turning to Or- 
mond, " which am I to believe, pray-?'' 

" Oh! believe the young man any way, 
sure," said Sheelah, " silence speaks best 
for him." 

" Best against him, in my opinion," 
said Dora. 

" Dora, will you hear me," Ormond 
be of am 

" No, Sir, I will not," interrupted 
Dora — " What's the use of hearing or 
listening to a man, who does not, by the 
confession of his own eyes, and his own 
tongue, know two minutes together what 
he means, or mean two minutes together 
the same thing. A woman might as well 
listen to a fool or a madman !" 

" Too harsh, too severe, Dora," said he. 

*' Too true, too sincere, perhaps, you 
mean." 



232 ORMOND. 

" Since I am allowed, Dora, to speak 
to you as a brother — '* 

** Who allowed you, Sir ?" interrupted 
Dora. 

'* Your father, Dora." 

« My father can not, shall not. Nobody 
but nature can make any man my bro- 
ther — nobody but myself shall allow any 
man to call himself my brother." 

" I am sorry I presumed so far, Miss 
O'Shane, I was only going to offer one 
word of advice." 

" I want no advice — I will take none 
from you, Sir." 

" You shall have none, madam, hence- 
forward, ever, from Harry Ormond." 

"'Tis well, Sir, come away, Sheelah V* 

(i Oh ! wait, dear — Och ! I am too 
old," said Sheelah, groaning as she rose 
slowly. '* I'm too slow entirely for these 
quick passions !" 

" Passions !" cried Dora, growing 
scarlet and pale in an instant — " What 
do you mean by passions, Sheelah." 



ORMOND. 233 

" I mean changes" — said Sheelah, — 
" changes, dear. — I am ready now — 
where's my stick. — Thank you, Master 
Harry. — Only I say I can't change my 
quarters and march so quick as you, dear." 

" Well, well, lean on me," said Dora, 
impatiently. 

" Don't hurry, poor Sheelah — no ne- 
cessity to hurry away from me," said Or- 
mond, who had stood for a few moment* 
like one transfixed. *' 'Tis for me to go — 
and I will go as fast and as far as you 
please, Dora, away from you and for 
ever." 

" For ever!" said Dora — " what do 
you mean ?" 

" Away from the Black Islands ! he 
can't mean that," said Sheelah. 

" Why not — Did not 1 leave Castle 
Hermitage at a moment's warning?" 

" Warning ! — nonsense," cried Dora, 
" lean on him, Sheelah — he has fright- 
ened you j lean on him, can't you — sure 
he's better than your stick. Warning — 



234 ORMOND. 

where did you find that pretty word ? 
Warning ! are you a footman ? I thought 
you were a gentleman— born and bred. 
But when you talk of going off at a mo- 
ment's warning from this place and that, 
what can I think but that Harry Ormond 
is turned serving man." 

" Harry Ormond ! — And a minute ago 
she would not let me — Miss O' Shane, I 
shall not forget myself again, — be as ca- 
pricious, amuse yourself with being as 
capricious as you please, but not at my 
expense ; — little as you think of me, I am 
not to be made your butt or your dupe^ 
therefore, I must seriously beg, at once, 
that I may know whether you wish me 
to stay or to go." 

" To stay, to be sure, when my father 
invites you. Would you expose me to 
his displeasure, — you know he can't bear 
to be contradicted ; and you know that 
he asked you to stay and live here." 

li But without exposing you to any dis- 
pleasure, I can," replied Ormond, iS con- 
trive—" 



ORMOND. 235 

" Contrive nothing at all — do leave me 
to contrive for myself. I don't mean to 
say leave me — you take up one's words so 
quickly, and are so passionate, Mr. Or- 
monde* 

" If you would make me understand 
you, Dora, let ■■. understand how you 
wish me to live win you." 

" Lord bless me, what a fuss the man 
makes about living with one — one would 
think it was the most difficult thing: in the 
world. Can't you live on like any body 
else. There's my aunt in the hedge-row 
walk, all alone, 1 must go and take care 
of her — I leave you to take care of Shee- 
lah — you know you were always very 
good natured when we were children.'' 

Dora went off quick as lightening, and 
what to make of her Ormond did not 
well know. Was it mere childishness, 
or affectation, or coquetry ? No, the real 
tears and real expression of look and word 
forbade each of these suppositions. One 
other cause for her conduct might have 



236 ORMOND. 

been suggested by a vain man. Harry 
Ormond was not a vain man ; but a little 
fluttering delight was just beginning to 
play round his head, when Sheelah, lean- 
ing heavily on his arm as they ascended 
the bank, reminding him of her exist- 
ence — 

* My poor old Sheelah !" said he, " are 
not you tired ?" 

" Not now, thanks to your arm, Mas- 
ter Harry, dear, that was always good 
to me. Not now, I am not a whit tired ; 
now I see all right again between my 
chiider — and happy 1 was, these five mi- 
nutes past, watching you smiling to your- 
self j and I don't doubt but all the world 
will smile on ye yet. If it was my 
world it should. But I can only wish 
you my best wish, which I did long ago 
— may you live to wonder at your own good 
luck." 

Ormond looked as if he was ffoinof to 
ask some question, that interested him 
much, but it ended by wondering what 



0RMOSD. 237 

o'clock it was. Sheelah wondered at 
him for thinking what the hour was, when 
she was talking of Miss Dora. After a 
silence, which brought them to the 
chicken-yard gate, where Sheelah was 
" to quit his arm" — she leaned heavily 
aj>*ain. 

" The marriage — that they are all 
talking of in the kitchen, and every 
where through the country — Miss Dora's 
marriage with. White Connal, is repriev- 
ed for the seasou. She axed time till 
she'd be seventeen — very rasonable. So 
it's to be in October — if we all live till 
those days — in the same mind. Lrrd, 
he knows — I know nothing at all about 
it ; but I thank you kindly, Master 
Harry, and wish you well any way. Did 
you ever happen to see the bridegroom 
that is to be ?" 

•' Never." 

Harry longed to hear what she longed 
to say ; hut he did not deem it prudent, 
he did not think it honourable, to lefc her 



238 ORMOND. 

enter on this topic. The prudential con- 
sideration might have been conquered by 
curiosity ; but the honourable repugnance 
to obtaining' second-hand information, and 
encouraging improper confidence, pre- 
vailed. He deposited Sheelah safe on 
her stone bench in the chicken yard gate, 
and much against her will, he left her 
before she had told, or hinted to him all 
she knew. — and all she did not know. 

The flattering delight that played 
about our young hero's head had in- 
creased, was increasing, and ought to be 
diminished. Of this he was sensible. It 
should never come near his heart, of that 
he was determined ; he would exactly 
follow the letter and spirit of his bene- 
factor's commands — or he would always 
consider Dora as a married woman — but 
the prospect of there being some tempta- 
tion, and some struggle, was, however, 
infinitely agreeable to our young hero — 
it would give him something to do, some- 
thing to think of, something to feel. 



ORMOND. 239 

It was much in favour of his resolu- 
tion, that Dora really was not at ail the 
kind of woman he had pictured to him- 
self either as amiable or charming ; she 
was not in the least like his last patterns 
of heroines, or any of his approved ima- 
ginations of the beau ideal. But she was 
an exceedingly pretty girl ; she was the 
only very pretty and tolerably accom- 
plished girl immediately near him. A 
dangerous propinquity ! 



240 ORMOND. 



CHAP. XII. 



WHITE Connal ana his father— we 
name the son first, because his superior 
wealth, inverting the order of nature, 
gave him, in his own opinion, the pre- 
cedency on all occasions — White Con- 
nal and his father arrived at Corny 
Castle. King" Corny rejoiced to see his 
old friend, the elder Connal ; but through 
all the efforts that his majesty made to be 
more than civil to the son, the degene- 
rate grazier, his future son-in-law, it was 
plain that he was only keeping his pro- 
mise, and receiving such a guest as he 
ought to be received. 

Mademoiselle decided, that old Con- 
nal, the father, was quite a gentleman, 



ORMOND. 241 

for he handed her about, and in his way, 
had some politeness towards the sex; 
but as for the son, her abhorrence must 
have burst forth in plain English, if it 
had not exhaled itself safely in French, 
in every exclamation of contempt which 
the language could afford. She called 
him bete! and grand bete! — by turns, 
butor! cine! and grand butor! — nigaud! 
and grand nigaud! — pronounced him to 
be, " Un homme qui ne dit rien — D'ail- 
leurs un homme qui n'a pas l'air comme 
il faut — Un homme enfin qui n'est pas 
presentable, meme en fait de mari." 

Dora looked unutterable things; but 
this was not unusual with her. Her 
equally scornful airs, her short answers, 
were not more decidedly rude to White 
Connal than to others ; she was rather 
more civil to him than to Ormond. In 
short, there was nothing in her manner 
of keeping Connal at a distance, beyond 
what he who had not much practice 01 
skill in the language of female coquetry 

VOL. II. M 



242 ORMOND. 

might construe into maiden coyness to 
the acknowledged husband lover. 

It seemed as if she had some secret 
hope or fear, or reason for not coming to 
open war. In short, as usual, she was 
odd, if not unintelligible. White Con- 
nal did not disturb himself at all to 
follow her doublings, his pleasure was 
not in the chace — he was sure the game 
was his own. 

Be bold ! but not too bold, White 
Connal ; be negligent, but not too negli- 
gent, of the destined bride. "Tis bad, as 
you say, to be spoiling a wife before 
marriage ; but what if she should never 
be your wife — thought some ! 

That was a contingency that never 
had occurred to White Connal. Had 
he not horses, and saddles, and bridles, 
and bits, finer than had ever been seen 
before in the Black Islands? And had 
he not the finest pistols, and the most 
famous fowling-pieces? And had he not 
thousands of sheep, and hundreds of oxen P 



ORMOND. 24S 

And had he not thousands in paper, 
and thousands in gold ; and if he lived, 
would he not have tens of thousands 
more? And had he not brought with 
him a plan of Connal' s Town, the name 
by which he dignified a snug slated 
lodge he had upon one of his farms — an 
elevation of the house to be built, and of 
the offices that had been built? 

He had so. — But it happened one 
day, when Connal was going to ride out 
with Dora, thatjustashe mounted, her 
veil fluttering before his horse's eyes, 
startled the animal; and the awkward 
rider, unable to manage him, king Corny 
begged Harry Ormond to change horses 
with him, that Mr. Connal might go 
quietly beside Dora, " who was a bit of 
a coward." — Imprudent father! Harry 
obeyed — and the difference between the 
riders and the gentlemen was but too 
apparent. For what avails it that you 
have the finest horse, if another ride him 
better? What avails it that you have 
M 2 



244 ORMOND. 

the finest saddle, if another become it 
better ? What use to you your Wogden 
pistols, if another hit the mark you miss? 
What avails the finest fowling-piece to 
the worst sportsman ? The thousands 
upon thousands to him who says but 
little, and says that little ill? What 
avail that the offices at Connal's Town 
be finished, dog-kennel and all ; or what 
boots it that the plan and elevation of 
Connal's Town be unrolled, and submitted 
to the fair one's inspection and remarks, 
if the fair disdain to inspect, and if she 
remark only, that a cottage and love are 
more to her taste ? White Connal fput 
none of these questions to himself, he 
went on his own way. — Faint heart never 
won fair lady. — Then no doubt he was 
in a way to win, for his heart never 
quailed, his colour never changed when he 
saw his fair one's furtive smiles, or heard 
her aunt's open praises of the youth, by 
whom riding, dancing, shooting, speak- 
ing, or silent, he was always eclipsed. 



ORMOKD. '245 

Connal of Connal's Town despised Harry 
Ormond of no-town — viewed him with 
scornful, but not with jealous eyes. — Idle 
jealousies were far from Connal's thoughts. 
— He was intent upon the noble recreation 
of cock-fighting. Cock-lighting had been 
the taste of his boyish days, before he 
became a money-making man; and at 
every interval of business, at each inter- 
mitting of the passion of avarice, when 
he had leisure to think of amusement, 
this his first idea of pleasure recurred. 
Since he came to Corny Castle, he had 
at sundry times expressed to his father 
his " hope in heaven, that before they 
would leave the Black Islands, they 
should get some good fun cock fighting, 
for it was a poor case for a man that is 
not used to it, to be tied to a female's 
apron strings, twirling his thumbs all 
mornings, for form's sake." 

There was a strolling kind of gentle- 
man in the Islands, a Mr. O'Tara, who 
was a famous cock-fighter, O'Tara 



246 ORMOND. 

came one day to dine at Corny Castle. 
The kindred souls found each other out, 
and an animated discourse across the 
tabie commenced concerning cocks. Af- 
ter dinner, as the bottle went round, the 
rival cock-fighters warmed to enthusi- 
asm in praise of their birds. Each re- 
lating wonders, they finished, by pro- 
posing a match, laying bets, and dis- 
patching messengers and hampers for 
their favourites. The cocks arrived, and 
were put in separate houses, under the 
care of separate feeders. 

Moriarty Carroll, who was curious, and 
something of a sportsman, had a mind 
to have a peep at the cocks. Opening 
the door of one of the buildings hastily, 
he disturbed the cock, who taking 
fright, flew about the barn with such 
violence, as to tear off several of his fea- 
thers, and very much to deface his ap- 
pearance. Unfortunately, at this in- 
stant White Connal and Mr. O'Tara 
came by, and finding what had hap- 



ORMOND. 247 

pened, abused Moriarty with all the vul- 
gar eloquence which anger could supply. 
Ormond, who had been with Moriarty, 
but who had no share in the disaster, en- 
deavoured to mitigate the fury of White 
Connal, and apologized to Mr. O'Tara; 
O'Tara was satisfied — shook hands with 
Ormond, and went off. But White Con- 
nal's anger lasted longer — for many rea- 
sons he disliked Ormond — and thinking 
from Harry's gentleness, that he might 
venture to insult him, returned to the 
charge, and becoming high and brutal in 
his tone, said, that " Mr. Ormond had 
committed an ungentlemanlike action, 
which it was easier to apologize for, than 
to defend." Harry took fire, and in- 
stantly was much more ready than his 
opponent wished, to give any other 
satisfaction that Mr. Connal desired. 
Well, " Name his hour— his place." " To- 
morrow morning, six o'clock, in the east 
meadow; — out of reach and sight of all — " 
Ormond said, " or he was ready that in- 



248 ORMOND. 

stant, if Mr. Connal pleased : he hated, 
he said, to bear malice — he could not 
sleep upon it." 

Moriarty now stepping up privately 
besought Mr. Connal's cc honour, for hea- 
ven and earth's sake, to recollect, if he 
did not know it, what a desperate good 
shot Mr. Harry notoriously was always." 

" What ! you rascal ! are you here 
still ?" cried White Connal, " hold your 
peace j — how dare you speak between 
gentlemen ?" 

Moriarty begged pardon and departed. 
The hint he had given, however, ope- 
rated immediately upon White Connal. 

" This scattered-brained young Or- 
mond," said he to himself, " desires no- 
thing better than to fight. — Very natural, 
he has nothing to lose in the world but 
his bare life. — Neither money, nor land- 
ed property, as I have to quit, in leaving 
the worid — unequal odds. — Not worth 
my while to stand his shot, for the fea- 
ther of a cock," concluded Connal, a 



ORMOND. 249 

he pulled to pieces one of the feathers, 
which had been the original cause of all 
the mischief. 

Thus cooled, and suddenly become rea- 
sonable, he lowered his tone, declaring' 
that he did not mean to say any thing 
in short that could give offence, nothing 
but what it was natural for any man in 
the heat of passion to say, and it was 
enough to put a man in a passion at 
first sight to see his cock disfigured. 
— If he had said any thing too strong, 
he hoped Mr. Ormond would excuse it. 

Ormond knew what the heat of pas- 
sion was, and was willing to make all 
proper allowances. — White Connal made 
more than proper apologies ; and Or- 
mond rejoiced that the business was 
ended. But White Connal, conscious 
that he had first bullied, then quailed, 
and that if the story were repeated, it 
would tell to his disadvantage, made 
it his anxious request, that he would say 
nothing to Cornelius O'Shane of what 
m3 



256 ORMOND. 

had passed between them, lest it should 
offend Cornelius, who he knew was so 
fond of Mr. Ormond. — Harry eased the 
gentleman's mind, by promising that he 
would never say a word about the mat- 
ter. Mr. Connal was not content till 
this promise was solemnly repeated. Even 
this, though it seemed quite to satisfy 
him at the time, did not afterwards relieve 
Connal from the uneasy consciousness 
lie felt in Ormond's company. He could 
bear it only the remainder of this day. 
The next morning he left the Black 
Islands, having received letters on busi- 
ness, he said, which required his imme- 
diate presence at Connal's Town.— Many 
at Corny Castle seemed willing to dis- 
pense with his further stay, but king 
Corny, true to his word and his character, 
took leave of him as his son-in-law, and 
only as far as hospitality required was 
ready to " speed the parting guest." 
At parting White Connal drew his fu- 
ture father-in-law aside, and gave him a 
1 



OKMOND. 251 

hint, that " he had better look sharp 
after that youth he was fostering." 

" Harry Ormond, do you mean?'* 
said 0' Shane. 

" I do," said Connal, " but Mr. 
O' Shane, don't go to mistake me, I am 
not jealous of the man — not capable — of 
such a fellow as that, a wild scatter- 
brains, who is not worth a sixpence 
scarce — I have too good an opinion of 
Miss Dora. But if I was in your place* 
her father, just for the look of the thing 
in the whole country, I should not like it 
— not that 1 mind what people say a 
potato skin, but still if I was her father, 
I'd as soon have the devil an inmate 
and intimate in my house, muzzling in. 
my daughter's ear behind backs." 

Cornelius 0' Shane stoutly stood by his 
young friend. 

" He never saw Harry Ormond 
muzzling — behind backs, especially— 
did not believe any such thing — all 
Hairy said and did was always above 



252 ORMOND. 

board, and before faces, any way. In 
short," said Cornelius, " I will answer 
for Harry Ormond's honour with my 
own honour. After that 'twould be use- 
less to add with my life, if required, 
that of course — and this ought to satisfy 
any son-in-law, who was a gentleman 
— none such could glance or mean to re- 
flect on Dora." 

Connal, perceiving he had overshot 
himself, made protestations of his inno- 
cence of the remotest intention of glan- 
cing at, or reflecting upon, or imagin- 
ing any thing but what was perfectly 
angelic and proper in Miss Dora — Miss 
O Shane. 

•• Then that was all as it should be," 
Mr. O'Shane said, " so far — but another 
point, he would not concede to mortal 
man, was he fifty times his son-in-law 
promised, that was his own right to have 
who he pleased and willed to have, at 
his own castle, his inmate and his inti- 
mate," 



ORMOND. 253 

" No doubt — to be sure," Connal said, 
•' he did not mean — he only meant — 
he could not mean — in short he meant 
nothing- at all, only just to put Mr. 
O'Shane on his guard — that was all he 
meant." 

" Phoo !" said Cornelius O'Shane, but 
checking the expression of his contempt 
for the man, he made an abrupt transi- 
tion to Connal's horse, which had just 
come to the door. 

" That's a handsome horse ! certainly 
you are well mounted, Mr. Connal. '' 

O'Shane' s elision of contempt was 
beyond Mr. Connal's understanding or 
feeling. 

* l Well mounted! — certainly I am 
that, and ever will be, while I can so 
well afford it," said Connal, mounting 1 
his horse — and identifying Iiimself with 
the animal, he sat proudly, then bowing 
to the ladies, who were standing- at an 
open window — 

" Good day to ye — ladies — till Oc- 
tober, when I hope " — 



254 ORMOND. 

But bis horse, who did not seem quite 
satisfied of his identity with the man, 
would not permit him to say more, and 
off he went — half his hopes dispersed in 
empty air. 

" I know I wish," said Cornelius 
O'Shane to himself, as he stood on the 
steps, looking after the man and horse — 
u I wish that that unlucky bowl of 
punch had remained ior ever unmixed, 
at the bottom of which I found this 
son-in-law for my poor daughter, my 
innocent Dora, then unborn — but she 
must make the best of him for me and 
herself, since the fates and my word, ir-. 
revocable as the Styx, have bound me to 
him, the purse-proud grazier and mean 
man — not a remnant of a gentleman ! 
as the father was. — Oh my poor Dora !'* 

As king Corny heaved a heartfelt sigh, 
very difficult to force from his anti senti- 
mental bosom, Hairy Ormond, with a 
plate of meat in his hand, v* histling to his 
dog to follow him, ran down the steps. 

" Leave feeding that dog, and come here 



©RMOND. 255 

to me, Harry," said O'Shane, " and 
answer me truly, such questions as I shall 
ask." 

" Truli/ — if I answer at all," said 
Harry. 

" Answer you must — when I ask you 
—every man, every gentleman must 
answer in all honour for what he does." 

" Certainly, answerer what he does,'* 
said Harry. 

" For ! — Phoo ! — come none of your 
tricks upon prepositions to gain time — I 
never knew you do the like — you'll give 
me a worse opinion. — I'm no school 
master, nor you a grammarian, I hope, 
to be equivocating' on monosyllables.'' 

4C Equivocate! I never equivocated, 
Sir," said Harry. 

" Don't begin now then," said Cor- 
nelius, " I've enough to put me out of 
humour already — so answer straight, like 
yourself. What'* this you've done to 
get the ill-will of White Connal, that's 
just gone?" 

Surprised and embarrassed — Ormond 



256 ORMONB. 

answered, " I trust I have not his ill will, 

Sir." 

•« You have, Sir," said O'Shane. 

" Is it possible?" cried Harry, "when 
we shook hands — )ou must have mis- 
understood, or have been misinformed. 
How do you know, my dear Sir?" 

" I know it from the man's own lips — 
see ! I can give you a straight answer 
at once. — Now answer me, was there any 
quarrel between yon, and what cause of 
offence did you give ?" 

" Excuse me, Sir, those are questions 
which I cannot answer." 

" Your blush, young man, answers me 
enough, and too much. — Mark me, I 
thought I could answer for your honour 
with my own, and I did so," 

( > Thank you, Sir, and you shall never 
have reason — " 

" Don't interrupt me, young man. — 
What reason can I have to judge of the 
future, but from the past — I am not 
an idiot to be bothered with fair words." 

** Oh, Sir, can you suspect ?" 



ORMOND. 26? 

" I suspect nothing, Harry Ormond, 
I am, I thank my God, above suspicion. 
— Listen to me — you know, whether I 
ever told it you before or not, I can't 
remember, but whether or not, you 
know, as well as if you were withinside 
of me, that in my heart's core there's 
not a man alive 1 should have preferred 
for my son-in-law, to the man I once 
thought Harry Ormond, without a pen- 
ny "- 

" Once thought!" 

" Interrupt me again, and I'll lave 
you, Sir. In confidence between our- 
selves, thinking as once I did, that I 
might depend on your friendship and 
discretion, equally with your honour, 
I confessed I repented a rash promise, and 
let you see my regret deep enough — that 
my son-in-law will never be what Dora 
deserves — I said, or let you see as much, 
no matter which, I am no equivocator, 
nor do I now unsay or retract a word.-^- 
You have my secret, but remember when 



258 ORMONB. 

first I had the folly to tell it you, same 
time I warned you, I warned you, Harry, 
like the moth from the candle — I warned 
you in vain. In another tone, 1 warn 
you now, young man, for the last, time — 
I tell you my promise to me is sacred — 
she is as good as married to White 
Connal — fairly tied up neck and heels 
— and so am I, to all intents and purposes, 
and if I thought it were possible you 
could consider her, or make her, by any 
means, consider herself in any other 
light, I will tell you what I would do 
—I would shoot myself, for one of us 
must fall, and I wouldn't chuse it 
should be you, Harry. — That's all." 

" Oh hear me, Sir," cried Harry, 
seizing his arm as he turned away, " kill 
me if you will, but hear me — I give ycu 
my word you are from beginning to 
end mistaken. — I cannot tell you the 
whole — but this much believe, Dora was 
not the cause of quarrel." 

" Then there was a quarrel..*— Oh for 



ORMOND. 259 

shame ! for shame ! — you are not used 
to falsehood enough yet — you can't carry 
it through — why did you attempt it with 
me?" 

" Sir, though I can't tell you the truth, 
the foolish truth, I tell you no falsehood. — 
Dora's name, a thought of Dora, never 
came in question between Mr. Connal 
and me, upon my honour." 

" Your honour!" repeated Cornelius, 
with a severe look, severe more in its 
sorrow than its anger — " Oh Harry Or« 
xnond ! — what signifies whether the name 
was mentioned — you know she was the 
thing — the cause of offence. — Stop, I 
charge you — equivocate no more. If a 
lie's beneath a gentleman, an equivocation 
is doubly beneath a man." 



260 ORMOND. 



CHAP. XIII. 



HARRY Ormond thought it hard to 
bear unmerited reproach and suspicion ; 
found it painful to endure the altered 
eye of his once kind and always generous, 
and to him, always dear friend and bene- 
factor. But Ormond had given a solemn 
promise to White Connal, never to 
mention any thing that had passed be- 
tween them to O' Shane ; and he could 
not therefore explain the circumstances 
of the quarrel. However painful this 
misunderstanding, this first misunder- 
standing Harry had ever had with his 
friend — and very painful it was at the 
time, yet this was one of the circum- 
stances, which tended to form Ormond's 



OAMOND. 261 

character ; conscious that he was doing 
right, he kept his promise to the person 
he hated and despised, at the hazard — at 
the certainty of displeasing the man he 
most loved in the world ; and to whom 
he was the most obliged. While his 
heart yearned with tenderness towards 
his adopted father, he endured the re- 
proach of ingratitude ; and while he 
knew he had acted perfectly honourably, 
he suffered under the suspicion of equivo- 
cation and breach of confidence : he 
bore it all, — and in reward, he had the 
conviction of his own firmness, and an 
experience, upon trial, of his adherence 
to his word of honour. The trial may 
seem but trivial, the promise but weak ; 
still it was a great trial to him, and he 
thought the promise as sacred, as if it 
had been about an affair of state. 

It happened some days after the con- 
versation had passed between him and 
O'Shane, that Cornelius met O'Tara, 
the gentleman who had laid the bets 



262 ORMONB. 

about the cock-fight with Connal, and 
chancing to ask him what had prevented 
the intended battle, O'Tara told all he 
knew of the adventure. Being a good- 
natured and good-humoured man, he 
stated the matter as playfully as possible 
— acknowledged that they had all been 
foolish and angry, but that Harry Or- 
mond and Moriarty had at last pacified 
them by proper apologies. Of what had 
passed afterwards, of the bullying, and 
the challenge, and the submission, 
O'Tara knew nothing, but king Corny 
baving once been put on the right scent, 
soon made it all out. He sent for Mo- 
riarty, and cross questioning him, heard 
the whole ; for Moriarty had not been 
sworn to secresy, and had very good 
ears. When he had been turned out 
of the stable, he had retreated only to the 
harness-room, and had heard all that had 
passed. King Corny was delighted with 
Harry's spirit. — and now he was prince 
Harry again, and the generous, warm- 



ORMOND. 263 

hearted Cornelius, went, in impatience, 
to seek him out, and to beg" his pardon 
for his suspicions. He embraced him— - 
called him son, and dear son, said he had 
now found out, no thanks to him, Con- 
nal's cause of complaint, and it had no- 
thing to do with Dora — 

" But why could not you say so, 
man ?" 

He had said so repe 
" Well, so I suppose ade 

out clearly to be all my fai n 

a passion, and could not hear, u (, 

or believe. — Weil, be it so •■' as 

unjust, 1*11 make it up to yo Til 

never believe my own ears, ts, 

against you, Harry, while I live, end 
upon it : — if I heard you asking • to 
marry you, I would believe my sars 
brought me the words wrong : — ii aw 
you even leading her into the * ich 
instead of the chapel, and the priest rum- 
self warning me of it, I'd say and ti, ink, 
father Jos, 'tis a mistake-r~a vision — or 



264 ORMOND. 

a defect of vision. In short — I love and 
trust you as my own soul, Harry Or- 
mond, for I did you injustice." 

This full return of kindness and confi- 
dence, besides the present delight it gave 
him, left a permanent and beneficial im- 
pression upon our young hero's mind. 
The admiration he felt for O'Shane's ge- 
nerous conduct, and the self approbation 
he enjoyed in consequence of his own 
honourable firmness, had a great effect in 
strengthening and forming his character. 
— It also rendered him immediately more 
careful in his whole behaviour towards 
Miss O'Shane. He was prudent till both 
aunt and niece felt indignantastonishment. 
There was some young lady with whom 
Harry had danced and walked, and of 
whom he had, without any design, spoken 
as a pleasing gentle girl. Dora recollect- 
ed this praise, and Joining it with his pre- 
sent distant behaviour toward herself, she 
was piqued and jealous, and thenshe be- 
came, what probably she would x never 



ORMOND. 265 

otherwise have been, quite decided in her 
partiality for Harry Ormond. The proofs 
of this were soon so manifest, that many 
thought, and Miss O'Faley in particular, 
that Harry was grown stupid, blind, and 
deaf. He was not stupid, blind, or deaf 
— he had felt the full power of Dora's per- 
sonal charms, and his vanity had been 
flattered by the preference which Dora 
shewed for him. Where vanity is the 
ruling- passion, young men are easily flat- 
tered into being in love with any pretty, 
perhaps with any ugly girl, who is, or who 
affects to be, in love with them. But 
Harry Ormond had more tenderness of 
heart than vanity — against the sugges- 
tions of his vanity he had struggled suc- 
sessfully, but now his heart had a hard 
trial. Dora's spirits were failing, her 
cheek growing pale, her tone of voice 
was quite softened — sighs would some- 
times break forth — persuasive sighs! — 
Dora was no longer the scornful lady in 
rude health, but the interesting invalid— 

VOL. II. N 



266 ORMOND. 

the victim going to be sacrificed. Dora ? s 
aunt talked of the necessity of advice for 
her niece's health. Great stress was laid 
on air and exercise, and exercise on 
horseback. — Dora rode every day on the 
horse Harry Ormond broke for her, the 
only horse she could now ride ; and 
Harry understood its ways, and managed 
it so much better than any body else ; and 
Dora was grown a coward, so that it was 
quite necessary he should ride or walk 
beside her. Harry Ormond's tenderness 
of heart encreased his idea of the danger. 
Her personal charms became infinitely 
more attractive to him ; her defects of 
temper and character were forgotten and 
lost in his sense of pity and gratitude ; 
and the struggle of his feelings was now 
violent. 

One morning our young hero rose 
early, for he could no longer sleep, and 
he walked out, or, more properly, he ram- 
bled, or he strolled, or he roamed or 
stroamed out, and he took his way ; — no, 



ORMOND. 267 

his steps were irresistibly led to his accus- 
tomed haunt by the waterside, under the 
hawthorn bank, and there he walked and 
picked daisies, and threw stones into the 
lake — and he loitered on, still thinking 
of Dora and death, and of the circles in 
the water, and again of the victim and of 
the sacrifice, when suddenly he was 
roused from his reverie by a shrill whistle, 
that seemed to come from the wood above, 
and an instant afterwards he heard some 
one shouting — 

" Harry Ormond ! — Harry Ormond 1" 
" Here!" answered Harry — and as the 
shouts were repeated he recognised the 
voice of O'Tara, who now came, whip in 
hand, followed by his dogs, running down 
the bank to him. 

" Oh ! Harry Ormond, I've brought 
great news with me for all at Corny Cas- 
tle — but the ladies are not out of their 
nests, and king Corny's Lord knows how 
far off. Not a soul or body to be had but 
yourself here, by good luck, and you 
N 2 



268 ORMOND. 

shall have the first of the news, and the 
telling of it." 

" Thank yon," said Ormond, " and 
what is the news ?" 

" First and foremost," said O'Tara, 
" yon know birds of a feather flocji to- 
gether. White Connal, though except 
for the cock fighting I never relished 
him, was mighty fond of me, and invited 
me down to Connal's Town, where I've 
been with him this week — yon know that 
much, I conclude." 

Harry owned he did not. 
O'Tara wondered how he could help 
knowing it — <c But so it was ; we had a 
great cock fight, and White Connal, 
who knew none of my secret, secrets 
in the feeding line, was bet out and out, 
and angry enough he w as ; and then I 
offered to change birds with him, and 
beat him with his own Ginger by my su- 
periority of feeding, which he scoffed at, 
but took up the bet." 

Ormond sighed with impatience in 
vain — he was forced to submit, and to go 



ORMOND. 269 

through the whole detail of the cock fight. 
" The end of it was, that White Cormal 
was tvorsted by his own bird, and then 
mad angry was he. So, then," continued 
O'Tara, " to get the triumph again on 
his side, one way or another, was the 
thing. — I had the advantage of him in 
clogs too, for he kept no hounds; you 
know he is close, and hounds lead to a 
gentlemanlike expense ; — but very fine 
horses he had, I'll acknowledge, and, 
Harry Ormond, you can't but remember 
that one which lie could not manage the 
day he was out riding here with Miss 
Dora, and you changed with him." 

" 1 remember it well," said Ormond. 

" Aye, and he has got reason to re- 
member it now, sure enough." 

" Has he had a fall ?" said Ormond, 
stopping. 

" Walk on » can't ye — keep up, and I'll 
tell you all regular." 

" There is king Corny," exclaimed 
Ormond, who just then saw him come in 
view. 



270 ORMOND. 

" Come on, then," cried O'Tara, leap- 
ing over a ditch that was between them, 
and running" up to king Corny, " Great 
news for you, king Corny, I've brought — 
your son-in-law elect, White Connal, is 
off." 

« Off— how?" 

" Out of the world, clean ! Poor fellow, 
broke his neck with that horse he could 
never manage — on Sunday last. I left 
him for dead Sunday night — found him 
dead Monday morning — came off straight 
with the news to you." 

" Dead !" repeated Corny and Harry, 
looking at one another. 

" Heaven forbid !" said Corny, " that 
I should — " 

il Heaven forbid !" repeated Harry ; 
« but—" 

" But good morning to you both, then," 
said O'Tara, " shake hands either way, 
and I'll condole or congratulate to-morrow 
as the case may be, with more particulars 
if required." 



ORMOND. 271 

CVTara ran off, saying he would be 
back again soon ; but he had great busi- 
ness to do. " 1 told the father last night." 

" I am no hypocrite," said Corny. 
" Rest to the dead and all their faults — 
White Connal is out of my poor Dora's 
way! and I am free from my accursed 
promise!" Then clasping his hands, 
" Praised be Heaven for that! — Heaven 
is too good to me! — Oh, my child ! how 
unworthy White Connal of her ! — Thank 
Heaven on my knees, with my whole 
heart, thank Heaven that 1 am not forced 
to the sacrifice ! — My child, my darling 
Dora, she is free! — Harry Ormond, my 
dear hoy, I'm free," cried O'Shane, em- 
bracing Harry with all the warmth of 
paternal affection. 

Ormond returned that embrace with 
equal warmth, and with a strong sense 
of gratitude; but was his joy equal to 
O'Shane's? What were his feelings at 
this moment? They were in such con- 
fusion, such contradiction, he could 



272 ORMOND. 

scarcely tell. Before he heard of White 
Connai's death, at the time when he was 
throwing pebbles into the lake, he de- 
sired nothing- so much as to be able to 
save Dora from being sacrificed to that 
odious marriage ; he thought, that if he 
were not bound in honour to his bene- 
factor, he should instantly make that offer 
of his hand and heart to Dora, which 
would at once restore her to health and 
happiness, and fulfil the wishes of her 
kind generous father. But now, when 
all obstacles seemed to vanish — when his 
rival was no more — when his benefactor 
declared his joy at being freed from his 
promise — when he was embraced as 
O' Shane's son, he did not feel joy — he 
was surprised to find it ; but he could 
not — Now that he could marry Dora — 
now that her father expected that he 
should, he was not clear that he wished 
it himself. Quick as obstacles vanished, 
objections recurred ; faults which he had 
formerly seen so strongly, which of late 



ORMOND. 273 

compassion had veiled from his view, 
re-appeared — the softness of manner, the 
improvement of temper, caused by love, 
might be transient as passion. Then her 
coquetry — her frivolity. She was not 
that superior kind of woman, which his 
imagination had painted, or which his 
judgment could approve in a wife. How 
was he to explain this confusion of feel- 
ing to Corny ? Leaning on his arm, 
he walked on towards the house. He 
saw Corny, smiling at his own medita- 
tions, was settling the match, and an- 
ticipating the joy to all beloved. Harry 
sighed, and was painfully silent. 

" Shoot across like an arrow to the 
house," cried Corny, turning suddenly to 
him, and giving him a kind push — 
11 shoot off, Harry, and bring Dora to 
meet me like lightning, and the poor aunt 
too, 'twould be cruel else ; but ! — what 
stops you, son of my heart?" 

" Stay!" cried Corny, a sudden 
thought striking him, which accoumed 
N 3 



274 ORMOND. 

for Harry Ormond's hesitation — " Stop, 
Harry ! You are right, and I am a fool. 
There is Black Connal, the twin bro- 
ther — Oh, mercy ! — against us still. What 
shall we do with Black Connal, eldest 
son, now — Promise fettering still! — Bad 
off I as ever, may be," said Cornelius. His 
whole countenance and voice changed ; 
he sat down on a fallen tree, and rested 
his hands on his knees. " What shall 
we do now, Harry, with Black Connal ?" 

" He may be a very diiferent man 
from White Connal — in every respect," 
said Ormond. 

O'Shane looked up for a moment, and 
then interpreting his own way, exclaim- 
ed, " That's right, Harry, that thought 
is like yourself, and the very thought I 
had myself. We must make no declara- 
tions, till we have cleared the point of 
honour. Not the most beautiful angel 
that ever took more beautiful woman's 
form — and that's the greatest temptation 
man can meet — could tempt my Harry 



ORMOND. 275 

Ormond from the straight path of ho- 
nour." 

Harry Ormond stood, at this moment, 
abashed by praise which he did not quite 
deserve. 

" Indeed, Sir," said he, " you give 
me too much credit." 

" I cannot give you too much credit; 
you are an honourable young man, and I 
understand you through and through." 

That was more than Harry did for 
himself. Corny went on talking to him- 
self aloud, " Black Connal is abroad 
these great many years, ever since he 
was a boy — never saw him since a child 
that high — An officer he is in the Irish 
brigade now — Black eyes and hair, that 
was why they called him Black Connal 
• — Captain Connal now — and I heard 
the father say he was come to England, 
and there was some report of his going 
to be married, if I don't mistake," cried 
Corn}, turning again to Harry, pleasure 
rekindling in his eye — (i If that should 
be 1 there's hope for us still ; but I see 



276 ORMONO. 

you are right not to yield to the hope 
till we are clear. My first step, in ho- 
nour, no doubt must be across the lake 
this minute to the father — Connal of 
Glynn ; but the boat is on the other side. 
The horn is with my fishing- tackle, 
Harry, down yonder — run, for you can 
run — horn the boat! or if the horn be 
not there, sign to the boat with your 
handkerchief — bring it up here, and I 
will put across before ten minutes shall 
be over — my horse I will have down to 
the water edge by the time you have got 
the boat up — when an honourable tough 
job is to be done, the sooner the better." 

The horse was brought to the water 
edge, the boat came across, Corny and 
his horse were in ; and Corny, with his 
own hands on the oar, pushed away from 
land ; then calling to Harry, he bid him 
wait on the shore by such an hour, and 
he should have the first news. 

" Rest on your oars, you, while I 
speak to prince Harry." 

" That you may know all, Harry, sooner 



ORMOND. 2? 7 

than I can tell yon, if all be safe, or as 
we wish it, see, I'll hoist ray neckcloth, 
white, to the top of this oar — If not, the 
Hack flag- — or none at all, shall tell you* 
Say nothing till then — God biess yon, 
boy." 

Hairy was glad that he had these 
orders, for lie knew that as soon as Made- 
moiselle shonld be up, and hear of O'Tara's 
early visit, with the message he said he 
had left at the house, that he brought 
great news, Mademoiselle would soon 
sally forth to learn what that news might 
be. In this conjecture, Ormond was not 
mistaken. — He soon heard her voice—. 
" Mon-Dieu!-ing" at the top of the 
bank — he ducked — he dived — he darted 
through nettles and brambles, and escap- 
ed. — Seen or unseen he escaped, nor 
stopped his flight even when out of rear h 
of the danger.— As to trusting himself to 
meet Dora's eyes, " 'twas what he dared 
not." 

He hid, and wandered up and down. 



3 



278 ORMOND. 

till near dinner time. — At last, O' Shane's 
boat was seen returning — but no white 
flag ! — The boat rowed nearer and near- 
er, and reached the spot where Harry 
stood motionless. 

" Aye, my poor boy, I knew I'd find 
you so," said O'Shane, as he got ashore. 
(i There's my hand, yon have my heart — 
I wish I had another hand to give you — 
but it's all over with us, I fear. Oh! my 
poor Dora ! — and here she is coming 
down the bank, and the aunt ! — Oh, 
Dora ! you have reason to hate me." 

" To hate you, Sir ! — impossible !" said 
Ormond, squeezing his hand strongly, as 
lie felt. 

" Impossible ! — true — for her to hate, 
who is all love and loveliness ! — impossi- 
ble too for you, Harry Ormond, who is 
all gfoodness !" 

"Bon Dien," cried Mademoiselle, who 
was now within exclamation distance.— 
" What a course we have had after you, 
gentlemen. — Ladies looking for gentle" 



ORMOND. 279 

men! — C'est inoui! — What is it all? for 
1 am dying- with curiosity." 

Without answering- Mademoiselle, the 
father, and Harry's eyes, at the same 
moment, were fixed on one who was 
some steps behind, and who looked as if 
dying' with a softer passion. Harry 
made a step forward to offer his arm, but 
stopped short ; the father offered his, in 
silence. 

" Can nobody speak to me? — Bien 
poli!" said Mademoiselle. 

" If you please, Miss O'Faley, ma'am," 
cried a hatless footman, who had run 
after the ladies the wrong' way from the 
house : "if you please, ma'am, will she 
send up dinner now ?" 

" Oui, qu'on serve ! — Yes, she will. — . 
Let her dish — by that time she is dished, 
we shall be in — and have satisfied our 
curiosity, i hope?" added s!;e, turning- to 
her brother-in-law. 

" Let us dine first," said Cornelius, 
• i and when the cloth is removed, and 



280 ORMOND. 

the waiting-ears out of hearing-, time 
enough to have our talk to ourselves" 

" Bien singulier, ces Anglois!" mutter- 
ed Mademoiselle to herself, as they pro- 
ceeded to the house. — " Here is a young 
man, and the most polite of the silent 
company, who may well be in some 
haste for his dinner ; for to my knowledge, 
he is without his breakfast." 

Harry had no appetite for dinner, but 
swallowed as much as Mademoiselle 
O'Faley desired. A remarkably silent 
meal it would have been, but for her hap- 
py volubility, equal to all occasions. At 
last came the long expected words, " Take 
away." — When all was taken away, and 
all were gone, but those who, as 0' Shane 
said, would too soon wish unheard, what 
they were dying to hear — he drew his 
daughter's chair close to him — placed 
her so as " to save her blushes j" — and 
began his story, by relating all that 
O'Tara had told. 

"■ It was a sudden death — shocking F 



ORMOND. 281 

Mademoiselle repeated several times ; — - 
but both she and Dora recovered from 
the shock, or from the word " shocking- !" 
and felt the delight of Dora's being no 
longer a sacrifice. 

After a general thanksgiving having 
been offered for her escape from the 
butor, Mademoiselle, in transports, was 
going on to say, that now her niece was 
free to make a suitable match ; and she 
was just turning to wonder, that Harry 
Ormond was not that moment at her 
niece's feet ; — and Dora's eyes raised 
slowly towards him, and suddenly re- 
tracted, abashed and perplexed Harry 
indescribably, when he was relieved by 
his dear friend's continuing thus — 

" Dora is not fvte, nor am I free in 
honour yet, nor can I give any body 
freedom of tongue or heart, until I know 
fai ther." 

Various exclamations of surprise and 
sorrow interrupted him. 

iC Vni I never, never to be free!" cried 
Dora, — «« Oh ! am not I now at liberty ?" 



282 ORMOND. 

" Hear me, my child," said her father, 
" I feel it as you do." 

" And what is it next — Qu'est ce que 
c'est — this new obstacle. — What can it 
be?" said Mademoiselle. 

The father stated, sorrowfully, the dif- 
ficulty respecting the present eldest son, 
Black Connal. — Old Connal, of Glynn, 
would by no means relinquish O' Shane's 
promise. — He said he would write imme- 
diately to his son, who was now in Eng- 
land. 

" And now tell me what kind of a 
person is this new pretender, this Mr. 
Black Connal," cried Mademoiselle. 

" Of him we know nothing as yet," 
said O'Shane, ik but I hope, in heaven, 
that the man that is coming, is as dif- 
ferent from the man that's gone, as black 
from white." 

Harry heard Dora breathe quick and 
quicker, but she said nothing. 

" Then we shall get his answer to the 
father's letter in eight days, I count," 
said Mademoiselle ; et and I have great 



ORMOND. 283 

hopes we shall never be troubled with 
him ; we shall know if he will come or 
not, in eight days." 

" About that time!" said 0' Shane, « but 
sister O'Faley, do not nurse my child 
or yourself up with deceitful hopes. — 
There's not a man alive — not a Connal, 
surely, hearing what happiness he is 
heir to, but would come flying- over 
post haste. — So you may expect him- 
self his answer, in eight days — Dora, 
my darling, and God grant he may 
be—" 

" No matter what he is, Sir, I'll die 
before I will see him, ,: cried Dora, rising 
and bursting into tears. 

" Oh ! my child, you won't die ! — you 
can't — from me, your father ?" — Her fa- 
ther threw his arm round her, and would 
have drawn her to him, but she turned 
her face from him ; Harry was on the 
other side, her eyes met his, and her 
face became covered with blushes — in 
his life he never was so moved. 



284 ORMONJ>. 

" Open the window, Harry," said 
O' Shane, who saw the conflict; " open 
the window ! — we all want it." 

Harry opened the window, and hung" 
out of it gasping- for breath. 

" She's gone — the aunt has taken her 
off — it's over for this fit," said O'Shane* 
" Oh ! my child, I must go through with 
it — and, Oh! my boy, I honour as I love 
you — I have a great deal to say about 
your own affairs, Harry." 

<c My affairs, oh! what affairs have 
I ? Never think of me — dear Sir — " 

" I will — but can't now — I am spent 
for this day — leave out the bottle of claret 
for father Jos, and I'll get to bed — I'll see 
nobody, tell father Jos — I'm gone to my 
room.'' 

The next morning O'Tara came to 
breakfast. Every person had a different 
question to ask him, except Dora, who 
was silent. Corny asked what kind of 
man Black Connal was? Mademoiselle 
inquired whether he was French or Eng- 



ORMOND. 265 

lish. Ormond, whether he was going- to 
be married ? 

To all these questions O'Tara jDlead- 
ed ignorance, except with respect to the 
sports of the field, he had very little cu- 
riosity or intelligence. 

A ray of hope again darted across the 
mind of Corny. From his knowledge of 
the world he thought it very probable, 
that a young officer in the French brigade 
would be well contented to be heir to his 
brother's fortune, without encumbring 
himself with an Irish wife, taken from 
an obscure part of the country. Corny, 
therefore, eagerly inquired from O'Tara 
what became of White Connal's property. 
O'Tara answered, that the common cry 
of the country was, that all White Con- 
nal's profitable farms were leasehold pro- 
perty, and upon his own life. — Poor Cor- 
ny 's hopes were thus frustrated ; he had 
nothing left to do for some days but to 
pity Harry Ormond ; to bear with the 
curiosity and impatience of Mademoiselle, 



286 ORMOND. 

and with the froward sullenness of Dora 
till some intelligence should arrive re- 
specting the new claimant to Dora's des- 
tined hand. 



ORMOND. 287 



CHAP. XIV. 



A FEW days afterwards, Sheelah bursts 
nig into Dora's room, exclaimed, " Miss 
Dora ! Miss Dora ! for the love of God, 
they are coming- ! They're coming down 
the avenue, powdering along ! Black 
Connal himself flaming away with one 
in a gold hat, this big, galloping after, 
and all gold over he is, entirely ! — Oh ! 
what will become of us, Master Harry, 
now. Oh ! it took the sight out of my 
eyes ! — And yours as red as ferrets, dear ! 
— Oh ! the cratur. — But come to the 
window and look out — nobody will mind 
— stretch out the body, and I'll hold ye 
fast, never fear ! — at the turn of the big- 
wood, do you see them behind the trees, 



288 ORMOND. 

the fir dales, glittering and flaming?— 
Do you see them at all ?" 

" Too plainly," said Dora, sighing,-— 
" but I did not expect he would come in 
such a grand style — I wonder!" — 

" Oh! so do I, greatly ; mostly at the car- 
riage. Never saw the like with the Con- 
nals, so grand — but the queer thing — " 

" Ah ! my dear Dore! — un cabriolet !" 
cried Mademoiselle, entering in ecstacy 
— " Here is Monsieur de Connal for you in 
a French cabriolet, and a French servant 
riding on to advertise you and all. Oh ! 
what are you twisting your neck child — 
I will have no toss at him, now — he is all 
the gentleman, you shall see — so let me 
sifyou all to rights while your father is 
receive — I would not have him see you 
such a horrible figure — not presentable — 
you look — " 

" I do not care how 1 look ; the worse 
the better," said Dora, tc I wish to look 
a horrible figure to him — to Black Con- 
nal." 



ORMOND. 289 

* c Oh ! put your Black Connals out of 
your head ; that is always in your mouth 
— I tell you he is call M. cle Connal. 
Now did I not hear him this minute an- 
nounced hy his own valet. — Monsieur de 
Connal present his complimens — he beg 
permission to present himself — and there 
was I, luckily, to answer for your father 
in French." 

" French ! sure Black Connai's Irish 
born/' said Sheelah — " that much I know* 
any way." 

A servant knocked at the door with 
king - Corny 's request the ladies would 
come down stairs, to see, as the footman 
added to his master's message, to see old 
Mr. Connal and the French gentleman. 

" There, French, 1 told you," said 
Mademoiselle, " and quite the gentle- 
man, depend upon it, my dear — come 
your ways." 

" No matter what he is," said Dora 
i( I shall not go down to see him ; so you 
had better go by yourself, aunt." 

VOL. II. O 



290 ORMOND. 

iS Not que step ! Oh ! that would be 
the height of impolitesse and disobedience 
— you could not do that, my dear Dore ; 
consider, he is not a man that nobody 
know, like your old butor of a White Con- 
nal. Not signify how bad you treat him, 
like the dog. But here is a man of a cer- 
tain quality — who knows the best people 
in Paris — who can talk — and tell every 
where. Consider, when he is a friend of 
my friend La Comtesse d'Auvergne. Oh ? 
in conscience, my dear Dore, I shall not 
suffer these airs — -with a man who is 
somebody, and — " 

" If he was the king of France," cried 
Dora, s< if he was Alexander the Great 
himself, I would not be forced to see the 
man, and marry him against my will." 

" Marry who ? Talk of marry ! — Not 
come to that yet ; ten to one he has no 
thought of you, more than politeness re- 
quire." 

" Oh! as to that," said Dora, " aunt, 
you certainly are mistaken there. What 



ORMOND. 291 

do you think he comes over to Ire- 
land, what do you think he comes here 
for?" 

« Hark! then," said Sheelah, "don't 
I hear them out of the window. Faith ! 
there they are, walking and talking and 
laughing, as if there was nothing at all iu 
it." 

'• Just heavens ! What a handsome 
uniform !" said Mademoiselle, ** and a 
very proper looking man behind," said 
she. " Lah ! well, who'd have thought 
Black Connal, if it's him, would ever 
have turned out so fine a presence of a 
man to look at." 

" Very cavalier, indeed, to go out to 
walk, without waiting to see us," said 
Dora. 

" Oh ! I will engage it was that dear 
father of yours hoisted him out." 

" Hoisted him out ! Well, aunt, you 

do sometimes speak the oddest English 

— But I do think it odd he should be so 

very much at his ease. — Look at him — 

o 2 



292 ORMOND. 

— bear him— I wonder what he is saying 
— and Harry Ormond! — Give me my 
bonnet, Sheelah — behind you, quick. — 
Aunt, let us go out of the garden door, 
and meet them out walking- by accident 
— that is the best way — I long- to see how 
somebody will look." 

" Very good — and now yon look all 
life and spirit, and look that manner! 
perfectly charming" ; and I'll engage he 
will fall in love with you." 

" He had better not, I can tell him, 
unless he has a particular pleasure in 
being refused," said Dora, with a toss of 
her head and neck, and at the same time 
a glance at her looking glass as she 
passed quickly out of the room. 

Dora and her aunt walked out, and 
accidentally met the gentlemen in their 
walk. As M. de Connai approached, 
be gave them full leisure to form their 
opinions as to his personal appearance. 
He had the air of a foreign officer — easy, 
fashionable, and upon uncommonly good 



ORMOND. 29'> 

terms with himself — conscious, but with 
no vulgar consciousness, of possessing* a 
fine figure and a good face, — his was 
the air of a French coxcomb, who in 
unconstrained delight was rather proud 
to display, than anxious to conceal, his 
perfect self-satisfaction. Interrupting 
his conversation only when he came 
within a few paces of the ladies, he ad- 
vanced with an air of happy confidence 
and Parisian gallantry, begging Mr. 
O'Shane to do him the honour and plea- 
sure to present him. After a bow, that 
said nothing, to Dora, he addressed his 
conversation entirely to her aunt, walk- 
ing beside Mademoiselle, and neither 
approaching nor attempting to speak to 
Dora • he did not advert to her in the 
least, and seemed scarcely to know she 
was present. This quite disconcerted 
the young lady's whole plan of proceed- 
ings — no opportunity was afforded her 
of shewing disdain. She withdrew her 
arm from her aunt's, though Mademoi- 



'294 ORM0NJ>. 

selle held it as fast as she could, but 
Dora withdrew it resolutely, and falling 
back a step or two took Harry Ormond's 
arm, and walked with him, talking with 
as much unconcern, and as loudly as she 
could, to mark her indifference. But 
whether she talked or was silent, walked 
on with Harry Orniond, or stayed be- 
hind, whispered, or laughed aloud, it 
seemed to make no impression, no 
alteration whatever in Monsieur de Con- 
nal j he went on conversing with Made- 
moiselle, and with her father, alternately 
in French and English. In English 
he spoke with a native Irish accent, 
which seemed to have been preserved 
from childhood j but though the brogue 
was strong, yet there were no vulgar ex- 
pressions j he spoke good English, but 
generally with somewhat of French 
idiom. Whether this was from habit or 
affectation it was not easy to decide. It 
seemed as if the person who was speak- 
ing thought in French, and translated it 



ORMOND. 295 

into English as he went on. The pecu- 
liarity of manner and accent, for there 
was French mixed with the Irish, fixed 
attention ; and besides, Dora was really 
curious to hear what he was saying", for 
he was very entertaining — Mademoiselle 
was in raptures while he talked of Paris 
and Versailles, and various people of 
consequence and fashion at the court. 
The Dauphiness ! — she was then but just 
married — M. de Connal had seen all the 
fetes and the fireworks — but the beauti- 
ful Dauphiness ! — In answering 1 a ques- 
tion of Mademoiselle's ahout the colour 
of her hair, he for the first time shewed 
that he had taken notice of Dora — 

" Nearly the colour, 1 think, of that 
young lady's hair, as well as one can 
judge j but powder prevents the possi- 
bility of judging accurately." 

Dora was vexed to see, that she was 
considered merely as a young lady — she 
exerted herself to take a part in the con- 
versation, hut Mr. Connal never joined 



296 ORMOND. 

in conversation with her, — with the most 
scrupulous deference he stopped short in 
the middle of his sentence, if she began 
to speak. He stood aside, shrinking into 
himself with the utmost care, if she was 
to pass; he held the boughs of the 
shrubs out of her way, but continued his 
conversation with Mademoiselle all the 
while. When they came in from their 
walk, the same sort of thing went on 
— " It really is very extraordinary," 
thought she, " he seems as if he was 
spell-bound — obliged by his notions of 
politeness to let me pass incognita." 

Mademoiselle was so fully engaged 
chattering away, that she did not per- 
ceive Dora's mortification. The less 
notice Connal took of her, the more 
Dora wished to attract his attention- — 
not that she desired to please him — no — 
she only longed to have the pleasure of 
refusing him. For this purpose the oiFer 
must be made — and it was not at all 
clear, that any offer would be made. 



ORMOND. 297 

When the ladies went to dress before 
dinner, Mademoiselle, while she was 
presiding- at Dora's toilette, expressed 
how much she was delighted with M. de 
Connal, and asked what her niece 
thought of him ? Dora replied, that 
indeed she did not trouble herself to 
think of him at all — that she thought 
him a monstrous coxcomb — that she 
wondered what could bring so prodi- 
giously fine a gentleman to the Black 
Islands. 

" Ask your own sense what brought 
him here! or ask your own looking-glass 
what shall keep him here !" said Made- 
moiselle O'Faley — " I can tell you he 
thinks you very handsome already ; and 
when he sees you dress !" — 

" Really ! he does me honour ; he did 
not seem as if he had even seen me, 
more than any of the trees in the wood, 
or the chairs in the room." 

" Chairs ! — Oh, now you are fish for 
complimens, — but I shall not tell you how 
o3 



298 ORMOND. 

like he thinks you, if you were mise a la 
Franchise, to la belle Comtesse de 
Barnac." 

" But, is not it very extraordinary, he 
absolutely never spoke to me ?" said 
Dora ; " a very strange manner of pay- 
ing- his court!" 

Mademoiselle assured Dora, tc that this 
was owing to M. de Connal's French 
habits — the young ladies in Paris passing 
for nothing — scarcely ever appearing in 
society till they are married, — the gen- 
tlemen have no intercourse with them, 
and it would be considered as a breach 
of respect due to a young lady or her 
mother to address much conversation to 
her. And you know, my dear Dore, their 
marriages are all make up by the father, 
the mother, the friends — the young peo- 
ple themselves never speak, never know 
nothing at all about each one another, 
till the contract is sign — In fact, the 
young lady is the little round what you 
call cipher, but has no value in societe 



ORMOND. 290 

at all, till the figure of tie husband come 
to o-ive it the value." 

" I have no notion of being a cipher," 
said Dora, " I am not a French young- 
lady, Monsieur de Connal." 

" Ah, but my dear Dore, consider 
what is de French wife ? Ah, then come 
her great glory; then she reign over all 
hearts, and is in full liberte to dress, to 
go, to come, to do what she like, with 
her own carriage, her own box at de 
play, de opera, and — You listen well, 
and I shall draw all that out for you, 
from M. de Connal." 

Dora languidly, sullenly begg-ed her 
aunt would not give herself the trouble, 
she had no curiosity. But nevertheless 
she asked several questions about la 
Comtesse de Barnac, and all the time 
saying she did not in the least care what 
he thought or snid of her, she drew from 
her aunt every syllable M. de Oonnal 
had uttered, and was secretly mortified 
and surprized to find he had said so 



300 ORMQND. 

little. She could not dress herself to 
her mind to-day, and protesting s v he did 
not care how she looked, she resigned 
herself into her aunt's hands. — Whatever 
he might think, she should take care to 
shew him at dinner, that young ladies in 
this country were not ciphers. 

At dinner, however, as before, all 
Dora's preconcerted airs of disdain, and 
determination to shew that she was 
somebody, gave way, she did not know 
how, before M. de Connal's easy assu- 
rance, polite and gallant indifference. 
His knowledge of the world, and talents 
for conversation, with the" variety of sub- 
jects he had flowing in from all parts of 
the world, gave him advantages, with 
which there was no possibility of con- 
tending. 

He talked, and carved — all life, and 
gaiety, and fashion ; he spoke of battles, 
of princes, plays, operas, wine, women, 
cardinals, religion, politics, poetry, and 
turkies stuffed with truffles — and Paris 



ORMOND. 301 

for ever! — Dash on ! at every thing! — 
hit or miss-— sure of the applause of 
Mademoiselle — and, as he thought, se- 
cure of the admiration of the whole 
company of natives, from le beau-pere, 
at the foot of the table, to the boy who 
waited, or who did not wait, opposite to 
him, but who stood entranced with won- 
der at all that M. de Connal said, and 
all that he did — even to the fashion in 
which he stowed trusses of sallad into 
his mouth with his fork, and talked — 
through it all. 

And Dora, what did she think ? — she 
thought she was very much mortified, 
that there was room for her to say so 
little. The question now was not what 
she thought of M. de Connal, but what 
he thought of her. After beginning 
with many various little mock defences, 
avertings of the head, and twists of the 
neck, of the shoulders and hips, com- 
pound motions resolvable into mauvaise- 
honte and pride, as dinner proceeded, 



302 ORMOND. 

and Monsieur de Connal's success was 
undoubted, she silently gave up her reso- 
lution " not to admire." 

Before the first course was over, Con- 
nal perceived, that he had her eye — 
" Before the second is over," thought 
he, " I shall have her ear — and by the 
time we come to the desert, I shall be in 
a fair way for the heart." 

Though he seemed to have talked 
without any design, except to amuse 
himself and the company in general, yet 
in all he had said there had been a 
prospective view to his object. He 
chose his means well, and in Mademoi- 
selle he found at once a happy dupe and 
a confederate. Without previous con- 
cert, they raised visions of Parisian 
glory, which were to prepare the young 
lady's imagination for a French lover or 
a French husband — M. de Connal was 
well aware, that no matter who touched 
her heart, if he could pique her vanity. 

After dinner, when the ladies retired, 



ORMOND. 303 

old Mr. Connal began to enter upon the 
question of the intended union between 
the families — Ormond left the room — and 
Corny suppressed a deep sigh. M. de 
Connal took an early opportunity of de- 
claring, that there was no truth in the 
report of his going to be married in 
England — he confessed, that such a 
thing had been in question — he must 
speak with delicacy — but the family and 
connexions did not suit him — he had a 
strong prejudice, he owned, in favour of 
antient family — Irish family — he had 
always wished to marry an Irish woman 
— for that reason he had avoided oppor- 
tunities that might have occurred of 
connecting himself, perhaps advantage- 
ously, in France — he was really ambi- 
tious of the honour of an alliance with 
the O'Shanes — Nothing could be more 
fortunate for him than the friendship, 
which had subsisted between his father 
and Mr. O'Shane — And the promise ? — 
Relinquish it ! — Oh, that, he assured Mr. 



304 ORMOND. 

O' Shane was quite impossible, provided 
the young" lady herself should not make 
a decided objection — he should abide by 
her decision — he could not possibly think 
of pressing his suit, if there should ap- 
pear any repugnance, — in that case he 
should be infinitely mortified — he should 
be absolutely in despair — but he should 
know how to submit — cost him what it 
would — he should think, as a man of 
honour, it was his part to sacrifice his 
wishes to what the young lady might 
conceive to be for her happiness. 

He added a profusion of compliments 
on the young lady's charms, with a 
declaration of the effect they had already 
produced on his heart. 

This was all said with a sort of non- 
chalance, which Corny did not at all 
like. But Mademoiselle, who was sum- 
moned to Corny's private council, gave 
it as her opinion, that M. de Connal 
was already quite in love — quite as much 
as a French husband ever was. She was 



ORMOND. 303 

glad that her brother-in-law was bound 
by his promise to a gentleman, who 
would really be a proper husband for her 
niece. Mademoiselle, in short, saw every 
thing couleur de rose — and she urged, 
that, since M. de Connal had come to 
Ireland for the express purpose of for- 
warding his present suit, he ought to be 
invited to stay at Corny Castle, that he 
might endeavour to make himself ac- 
ceptable to Dora. 

To this Corny acceded. He left Ma- 
demoiselle to make the invitation, for, 
he said, she understood French polite- 
ness, and all that, better than he did. 
The invitation was made and accepted, 
with all due expressions of infinite de- 
light. 

" Well, my dear Harry Ormond," 
said Corny, the first moment he had an 
opportunity of speaking to Harry in 
private, *' what do you think of this 
man?" 

•< What Miss O'Shane thinks of him 



306 ORMOND. 

is the question," said Harry, with some 
embarrassment. 

" That's true 5 it was too hard to ask 
you — But I'll tell you what I think — 
between ourselves, Black Connal is 
better than White, inasmuch as a puppy 
is better than a brute — We shall see 
what Dora will say or think soon — the 
aunt is over head and ears already — 
women are mighty apt to be taken one 
way or other with a bit of a coxcomb. 
Vanity, vanity ! But still I know — I 
suspect, Dora has a heart — from me, I 
hope, she has a right to a heart. But I 
will say no more till I see which way 
the heart turns and settles, after all the 
little tremblings and variations. When 
it points steady, I shall know how to 
steer my course — I have a scheme in my 
head, but I won't mention it to you, 
Harry, because it might end in disap- 
pointment — so go oh 1 " to bed and to 
sleep, if you can ; you have had a hard 
day to go through, my poor honourable 
Harry." 



ORMOND. -i07 

And poor honourable Harry had many 
hard days to go through. He had now 
to see how Dora's mind was gradually 
worked upon, not by a new passion, for 
Mr. Connal never inspired, or endea- 
voured to inspire passion ; but by her 
own and her aunt's vanity. Mademoi- 
selle with constant importunity assailed 
her : and though Dora saw, that her 
aunt's only wish was to settle in Paris, 
and to live in a fine hotel ; and though 
Dora was persuaded, that for this her 
aunt would without scruple sacrifice her 
happiness, and that of Harry Ormond ; 
yet she was so dazzled by the splendid 
representation of a Parisian life, as not 
to see very distinctly what object she had 
herself in view. — Connai's flattery too, 
though it had scarcely any pretence to 
the tone of truth or passion, yet con- 
trasting with his previous indifference 
gratified her. She was sensible that he 
was not attached to her as Harry Or- 
mond was, but she flattered herself that 



308 ORMGND. 

she should quite turn his head in time. 
She tried all her power of charming for 
this purpose, at first chiefly with the in- 
tention of exciting- Harry's jealousy, 
and forcing him to break his honourable 
resolution. — Harry continued her first 
object for some little time, but soon 
the idea of piquing him was merely 
an excuse for coquetry. She imagin- 
ed that she could recede or advance 
with her new admirer just as she 
thought proper. But she was mistaken 
— she had now to deal with a man prac- 
tised in the game, he might let her ap- 
pear to win, but not for nothing would 
he let her win a single move; yet he 
seemed to play so carelessly, as not in 
the least to alarm, or put her on her 
guard. — The standers by began to guess 
how the game would terminate — it was 
a game in which the whole happiness of 
Dora's life was at stake, to say no- 
thing of his own, and Ormond could 
not look on without anxiety — and, not- 



ORMOND. 309 

withstanding' his outwardly calm ap- 
pearance, with strong- conflicting emo- 
tions. 

" If," said he to himself, " I were 
convinced that this man would make 
her happy, I think I could be happy my- 
self." — But the more he saw of Connal, 
the less he thought him likely to make 
Dora happy, unless, indeed, her vanity 
could quite extinguish her sensibility. 
Then Monsieur de Connal would be just 
the husband to suit her. 

Connal was exactly what he appeared 
to be — a gay young officer, who had made 
his own way up in the world — a petit mai- 
tre — who had really lived in good com- 
pany at Paris, had made himself agreeable 
to women of rank and fonune — might, 
perhaps, as he said, with his figure, and 
fashion, and connexions, have made his 
fortune in Paris by marriage, had he 
had time to look about him ; but a sudden 
run of ill- fortune at play had obliged 
him to quit Paris for a season. — It was 



310 ORMONI>. 

necessary to make his fortune by mar- 
riage in England or Ireland, and as ex- 
peditiously as possible — In this situation, 
Dora, with her own and her aunt's pro- 
perty, was, as he considered it, an offer 
not to be rashly slighted, nor yet was 
he very eager about the matter — if he 
failed here, he should succeed elsewhere. 
This real indifference gave him advan- 
tages with Dora, which a man of feel- 
ing would perhaps never have obtained, 
or never have kept. Her father, though 
he believed in the mutable nature of 
woman, yet could scarcely think, that 
his daughter Dora was of this nature. 
- — He could scarcely conceive, that her 
passion for Harry Ormond, that passion 
which had but a short time before cer- 
tainly affected her spirits, and put him 
in fear for her health, could have been 
conquered by a coxcomb, who cared 
very little whether he conquered or not. 

How was this possible ? good Corny 
invented many solutions of the problem 



ORMOND. 311 

— he fancied one hour that his daughter 
was sacrificing herself from duty to him 
— or complaisance to her aunt — the next 
hour he settled, and with more proba- 
bility, that she was piqued by Harry 
Ormond's not showing more passion. — 
King Corny was resolved to know dis- 
tinctly how the matter really was. He 
therefore summoned his daughter and 
the aunt into his presence, and the per- 
son he sent to summon them was Harry 
Ormond. 

" Come back with them yourself, 
Harry, I shall want you also." 

Harry returned with both the la- 
dies. By the countenance of Cornelius 
O' Shane they all three augured, that he 
had something of importance to say, 
and they stood in anxious expectation. 
— He went to the point immediately. 

" Dora, I know it is the custom on 
some occasions for ladies never to tell the 
truth — therefore I shall not ask any 
question, that I think will put your truth 



312 ORMOND. 

to the test. I shall tell you my mind 
and leave you to judge for yourself. 
Take as long or as short a time to know 
your own mind as you please — only know 
it clearly, and send me your answer by 
your aunt. — All I beg is, that when the 
answer shall be delivered to me, this 
young man may be by. — Don't interrupt 
me, Dora — I have a high opinion of 
him," — said he, keeping his eye upon 
Dora's face. n I have a great esteem, 
affection, love for him," — he pronounced 
the words deliberately, that he might see 
the effect on Dora, but her countenance 
was as undecided as her mind ; no judg- 
ment could be formed from its changes. 

61 I wish Harry Ormond," continued 
he, ts to know all my conduct — he knows 
I made a foolish promise long ag-o, that 
I would give my daughter to a man 1 
knew nothing about." 

Mademoiselle was going to interrupt, 
but Cornelius 0' Shane silenced her. 

" Mademoiselle — sister O'Faley, I 



ORMOND. SIS 

will do the best I can to repair that folly 
— and to leave you at liberty, Dora, to 
follow the choice of your heart." 

He paused, and again studied her 
countenance — which was agitated. 

" Her choice is your choice — her fa- 
ther's choice, is always the choice of 
the good daughter," said Mademoiselle. 

" I believe she is a good daughter, 
and that is the particular reason I am 
determined to be as good a father as I 
can to her." 

Dora wept in silence — and Mademoi- 
selle, a good deal alarmed, wanted to 
remove Harry Ormond out of the young 
lady's sight — she requested him to go to 
her apartment for her smelling bottle for 
her niece. 

" No, no," said king Corny, " go 
yourself, sister O'Faley, if you like it, 
but I'll not let Harry Ormond stir — he is 
my witness present. — Dora is not faint- 
ing — if you would only let her alone, she 
would do well. — Dora listen to me— if 

VOL. 11. p 



314 ORMOND. 

you don't really prefer this Black Coti- 
nal for a husband to all other men, as 
you are to swear at the altar you do, if 
you marry him — " 

Dora was strongly affected by the so- 
lemn manner of her father's appeal to her. 

" If," continued her father, " you are 
not quite clear, my dear child, that you 
prefer him to all men, do not marry him. 
I have a notion I can bring- you off with- 
out breaking my word — listen — I would 
willingly give half my fortune to secure 
your happiness, my darling. — If I do not 
mistake him, Mr. Connal would, for a 
less sum, give me back my promise, and 
give you up altogether, my dear Dora." 

Dora's tears stopped. —Mademoiselle's 
exclamations poured forth, and they both 
declared they were certain, that Mr. Con- 
nal would not for any thing upon earth, 
that could be offered to him, give up the 
match. — 

Corny said he was willing to make 
the trial, if they pleased. — Mademoi- 



ORMOND. 315 

selle seemed to hesitate; but Dora ea- 
gerly accepted the proposal, thanked 
her father for his kindness, and declared 
that she should be happy to have, and 
to abide by this test of Mr. Connal's 
love. — If he were so base as to prefer 
half her fortune to herself, she should, 
she said, think herself happy in having 
escaped from such a traitor. 

Dora's pride was wakened, and she 
now spoke in a high tone : she always, 
even in the midst of all her weaknesses, 
had an ambition to shew spirit. 

•' I will put the test to him myself, 
within this hour," said Corny, " and be- 
fore you go to bed this night, when the 
clock strikes twelve, all three of you be 
on this spot, and I will give you his an- 
swer. But stay, Harry Ormond, we 
have not had your opinion — would you 
advise me to make this trial." 

" Certainly, Sir." 

" But if I should lose half of Dora's 
fortune?" 

P2 



1&6 ORMOND, 

" You would think it well bestowed, 
I am sure, Sir, in securing her from an 
unhappy marriage." 

" But then she might not, perhaps, 
so easily find another lover with half a 
fortune — that might make a difference, 
hey, Harry." 

u Impossible, I should think, Sir, 
that it could make any difference in the 
affection of any one, who really — who 
was really worthy of Miss O'Shane." 

The agitation into which Harry Or- 
mond was thrown, flattered and touched 
Dora for the moment j — her aunt hurried 
her out of the room. 

Cornelius O'Shane rang, and inquired 
where Mr. Connal was — in his own 
apartment writing letters, his servant 
believed. — O'Shane sent to beg to see 
Mr. Connal, as soon as he was at lei- 
sure. 

At twelve o'clock Dora, Mademoiselle, 
and Ormond, were all in the study, 
punctually as the clock was striking. 



ORMOND. 317 

" Well ! what is M. de Connal's an- 
swer?" cried Mademoiselle, " if he 
hesitate, my dear Dore, give him up dat 
minute." 

" Undoubtedly," said Dora, " I have 
too much spirit. — What's his answer, fa- 
ther ?" 

" His answer, my dear child, has 
proved that you know him better than I 
did — he scorns the offer of half your for- 
tune — for your whole fortune he would 
not give you up." 

" I thought so," cried Dora, trium- 
phantly. 

" I thought so," echoed Mademoi- 
selle. 

" I did him injustice," cried Ormond. 
" 1 am glad that M. de Connal has 
proved himself worthy of you, Dora, 
since you really approve him — you have 
not a friend in the world, next to your fa- 
ther, wishes your happiness more than 
I do." 

He hurried out of the room. 



318 ORMOND. 

" There's a heart for you!" said 
Corny. 

" Not for me," said Mademoiselle, 
" he has no passion in him." 

" I give you joy, Dora," said her fa- 
ther. " I own 1 misjudged the man — on 
account of his being a bit of a coxcomb. 
— But if you can put up with that, so 
will I— when I have done a man injus- 
tice, 1 will make it up to him every 
way I can. — Now let him, he has my 
consent, be as great a coxcomb as ever 
wore red heels. — I'll put up with it 
all, since he really loves my child. I 
did not think he would have stood the 
test." 

Nor would he, had not he been pro- 
perly prepared by Mademoiselle — «he 
had before M. de Connal went to Corny 
sent him a little billet, which told him the 
test that would be proposed, and thus 
prevented all possibility of her dear 
niece's being disappointed in her lover 
or her husband. 



ORMOND. 319 



CHAP. XV. 



VAIN of shewing that he was not in 
the slightest degree jealous, Connal 
talked to Ormond in the most free man- 
ner imaginable, touching with indiffe- 
rence even on the very subject which 
Ormond, from feelings of delicacy and 
honour, had anxiously avoided. Connal 
seemed to be perfectly aware how matters 
had stood before his arrival between Dora 
and our young hero. " It was all very 
well,'* he said — " quite natural — in the 
common course of things — impossible 
even it should have been otherwise — A 
young woman, who saw no one else, must 
inevitably fall in love with the first agree- 
able young man who made love to her — ■ 



320 ORMOND. 

or who did not make love to her. It was 
quite equal to him which. He had heard 
wonders from his father-in-law elect on 
that last topic, and he was willing to 
oblige him, or any other gentleman or 
lady, by believing miracles. As a good 
Catholic, he was always ready to * be- 
lieve, because it was impossible.' " 

Ormond, extremely embarrassed by 
the want of delicacy and feeling with 
which this polished coxcomb spoke* had, 
however, sufficient presence of mind to 
avoid, either by word or look, making 
any particular application of what was 
said. 

" You have really prodigous presence 
of mind, and discretion, and tact, for a 
young man who has, I presume, had so 
little practice in these affairs," said Con- 
nal ; " but don't constrain yourself 
longer. I speak frankly to take off all 
embarrassment on your part, you see 
there exists none on mine — never for a 
moment — no; how can it possibly sig- 



ORMOND. 321 

nify," continued he, " to any man of 
common sense, who, or what, a woman 
liked before she saw him. You don't 
think a man, who has seen any thing of 
the world, would trouble himself to in- 
quire whether he was, or was not, the 
first love of the woman he is going to 
marry. To marry — observe the emphasis 
— distinguish — distinguish, and seriously 
let us calculate." 

Ormond gave no interruption to his 
calculations, and the petil-maitre, in a 
tone of philosophic fatuity, asked " of the 
numbers of your English or Irish wives 
— all excellent — how many, I pray you, 
do you calculate are now married to the 
man they first fell in love with, as they 
call it. My good Sir, not five per cent, 
depend on it. The thing is morally im- 
possible, unless girls are married out of a 
convent, as with us in France, and very 
difficult even then ; and after all, what 
are the French husbands the better for 
it ? 1 understand English husbands think 
p3 



522 ORMOND. 

themselves best off. I don't pretend to 
judge; hut they seem to prefer what 
they call domestic happiness to the French 
esprit de socitti. Still, this may be pre- 
judice of education — of country. Each 
nation has its taste — Every thing is for 
the best in this world for people who 
know how to make the best of it — You 
would not think, to look at me, I was so 
philosophic — but even in the midst of 
my military career 1 have thought — 
thought profoundly — Every body in 
France thinks now," said M. de Connal, 
taking a pinch of snuff with a very pen- 
sive air. 

" Every body in France thinks now !" 
repeated Ormond. 

" Every man of a certain rank, that 
is to say." 

" That is to say of your rank ?" said 
Ormond. 

« Nay, I don't give myself as an ex- 
ample; but! — you may judge — I own I 
am surprised to find myself philosophising 



ORMOND. 323 

here in the Black Islands — but one phi- 
losophises every where." 

" And you would have more time for 
it here, I should suppose, than at Paris." 

" Time, my dear Sir — no such thing ! 
Time is merely in idea; but Tais toi 
Jean Jacques! Tais toi Condillac ! To 
resume the chain of our reasoning 1 — love 
and marriage — I say it all comes to much 
the same thing- in France and in these 
countries — alter all. There is more gal- 
lantry perhaps before marriage in Eng- 
land, more after marriage in France — 
which has the better bargain ? 1 don't 
pretend to decide. Philosophic doubt for 
me, especially in cases where 'tis not 
worth while to determine; but I see I 
astonish you, Mr. Ormoud." 

" You do indeed," said Orniond, inge- 
nuously. 

" I give you joy — I envy you," said 
M. de Connal, sighing. " After a cer- 
tain age, if one lives in the work! one can't 
be astonished — that's a lost pleasure." 

" To me who have lived out of the 
1 



324 ORMOND. 

world it is a pleasure, or rather a sensa- 
tion — I am not sure whether I should call 
it a pleasure — that is not likely to be 
goon exhausted," said Ormond. 

" A seusation ! and you are not sure 
whether you should call it a pleasure. 
Do you know you've a genius for meta- 
physics ?" 

" I !" exclaimed Ormond. 

" Ah ! now I have astonished you 
again. Good! whether pleasurable or 
not, trust me, nothing is so improving to 
a young man as to be well astonished. 
Astonishment I conceive to be a sort of 
mental electric shock — electric fire; it 
opens at once and enlightens the under- 
standing : and really you have an under- 
standing so well worth enlightening — I 
do assure you, that your natural acute- 
ness will, whenever and wherever you 
appear, make you un homme marquant" 

11 Oh! spare me, Mr. Connal," said 
Ormond. " I am not used to French 
compliment." 

" No, upon my honour, without com- 



ORMONB. 325 

pliment, in all English bonJwmmie" (lay- 
ing his hand upon his heart ) — " upon the 
honour of a gentleman, your remarks 
have sometimes perfectly astonished me." 

" Really !" said Ormond ; " but I 
thought you had lived so much in the 
world, you could not be astonished. " 

" I thought so, I own," said Connal ; 
" but it was reserved for M. Ormond to 
convince me of my mistake, to revive an 
old pleasure — more difficult still than to 
invent a new one! In recompense, I 
hope I give you some new ideas — just 
throw out opinions for you — Accept — 
reject — reject now — accept an hour, a 
year hence perhaps — just as it strikes — 
merely materials for thinking I give you." 

" Thank you," said Ormond; "and 
be assured they are not lost upon me. 
You have given me a great deal to think 
of seriously." 

" Seriously! — no; that's your fault, 
your national fault — Permit me — What 
you want chiefly in conversation —in 



326 ORMOND. 

every thing, is a certain degree of — of — 
you have no English word — lightness." 

" L^gerete, perhaps you mean," said 
Ormond. 

<c Precisely. — I forgot you understood 
French so well. — Legerele — untranslatea- 
ble! — You seize my idea." 

He left Ormond, as he fancied, in ad- 
miration of the man who, in his own 
opinion, possessed the whole theory and 
practice of the art of pleasing 1 , and the 
science of happiness. 

M. de Connai's conversation and ex- 
ample might have produced a great effect 
on the mind of a youth of Ormond's 
strong passions, lively imagination, and 
total ignorance of the world, if he had 
met this brilliant officer in indifferent 
society. — Had he seen Connal only as a 
man shining in company, or considered 
him merely as a companion, he must 
have been dazzled by his fashion, charm- 
ed by his gaiety, and imposed upon by his 
decisive tone. 



ORMOND. 327 

Had such a vision lighted on the 
Black Islands, and appeared to our hero 
suddenly, in any other circumstances but 
those in which it did appear, it might 
have struck and overawed him ; and 
without inquiring " whether from heaven 
or hell," he might have followed where- 
ever it led or pointed the way. But in 
the form of a triumphant rival — without 
delicacy, without feeling, neither deserv- 
ing or loving the woman he had won, 
— not likely to make Dora happy, — al- 
most certain to make her father misera- 
ble, — there was no danger that Black 
Connal could ever obtain any ascendancy 
over Ormond ; on the contrary, Connal 
was useful in forming our hero's charac- 
ter. The electric shock of astonishment 
did operate in a salutary manner in open- 
ing Harry's understanding : the mate- 
rials for thinking were not thrown away : 
— he did think — even in the Black 
Islands, — and in judging of Connal's 
character, he made continual progress in 



32S ORMOND. 

forming his own :— he had motive for 
exercising his judgment, he was anxious 
to study the man's character on Dora's 
account. 

Seeing his unpolished friend, old 
Corny, and this finished young man of the 
world, in daily contrast, Ormond had 
occasion to compare the real and the fac- 
titious, both in matter and manner : — he 
distinguished, and felt often acutely, the 
difference between that politeness of the 
heart, which respects and sympathises 
with the feelings of others, and that con- 
ventional politeness, which is shewn 
merely to gratify the vanity of him by 
whom it is displayed. In the same way, 
he soon discriminated in conversation be- 
tween Corny 's power of original thinking, 
and M. de Connal's knack of throwing 
old thoughts into new words ; between 
the power of answering an argument, 
and the art of evading it by a repartee. 
But it was chiefly in comparing different 
ideas of happiness and modes of life, that 



ORMOND. 329 

our young hero's mind was enlarged by 
Connal's conversation — whilst the com- 
parison he secretly made between this 
polished gentleman's principles and his 
own was always more satisfactory to his 
pride of virtue than Connal's vanity 
could have conceived to be possible. 

One day some conversation passed 
between Connal and his father-in-law 
elect, as he now always called him, upon 
his future plans of life. 

Good Corny said he did not know 
how to hope, that, during the few 
years he had to live, Connal would not 
think of taking his daughter from him to 
the continent of France — to Paris, as 
from some words that had dropped from 
Mademoiselle, he had reason to fear. 

" No," Connal said, " he had formed 
no such cruel intention : — the Irish half of 
Mademoiselle must have blundered on 
this occasion. He would do his utmost, 
if he could with honour, to retire from 
the service; unless the service imj?e- 



330 ORMOND. 

riously called him away, he should settle 
in Ireland : — he should make it a point 
even, independently of his duty to his own 
father, not to take Miss O'Shane from 
her country and her friends." 

The father, open-hearted and generous 
himself, was fond to believe what he 
wished, and confiding in these promises, 
the old man forgave all that he did not 
otherwise approve in his future son-in- 
law, and thanked him almost with tears 
in his eyes ; still repeating, as his natural 
penetration remonstrated against his cre- 
dulity, 

" But I could hardly have believed this 
from such a young man as you, Captain 
Connal. Indeed, how you could ever 
bring yourself to think of settling in 
retirement, is wonderful to me ; but love 
does mighty things, brings about great 
changes." 

French common-places of sentiment 
upon love, and compliments on Dora's 
charms and his own sensibility, were 



©RMOND. 33 1 

poured out by Connal, and the father left 
the room satisfied. 

Connal then, throwing himself back in 
his chair, burst out a laughing, and turn- 
ing to Ormond, the only person in the 
room, said — — 

" Could you have conceived this ?" 

" Conceived what, Sir?" said Or- 
mond. 

" Conceived this king Corny's capa- 
city for belief? What! — believe that I 
will settle in his Black Islands — I! — as 
well believe me to be half marble, half 
man, like the unfortunate in the Black 
Islands of the Arabian Tales, 
the Black Islands ! — No : — could you 
conceive a man on earth could be found 
so simple as to credit such a thing." 

" Here is another man on earth, who 
was simple enough to believe it," said 
Ormond, iC and to give you credit for it." 

"You!"— cried Connal, « That's too 
much ! — Impossible — " 

" But when you said it — when I heard 
you promise it to Mr. O'Shane — " 



332 ORMOND. 

" Oh, mercy! — Don't kill me with 
laughing," said he, laughing affectedly, 
" Oh! that face of yours, there is no 
standing it. You heard me promise, — 
and the accent on promise. Why, even 
women, now-a-days, don't lay such an 
emphasis on apromise." 

" That, I suppose, depends on who 
gives it," said Ormond. 

" Rather on who receives it," said 
Connal, '* but look here, you who un- 
derstand the doctrine of promises, tell 
me what a poor conscientious man must 
do, who has two pulling him different 
ways." 

" A conscientious man cannot have 
given two diametrically opposite pro- 
mises." 

" Diametrimlly ! — Thank you for that 
word— it just saves my lost conscience. 
Commend me always to an epithet in the 
last resource for giving one latitude 
of conscience in these nice oases — I have 
not given two diametrically opposite- 
No : I have only given four that cross 



ORMOND. 333 

one another. One to your king Corny ; 
another to my angel, Dora j another to 
the dear aunt} and a fourth, to my 
dearer self. First, promise to king 
Corny to settle in the Black Islands; a 
gratuitous promise, signifying nothing, 
— read Burlamaqui : second promise to 
Mademoiselle, to go and live with her 
at Paris ; with her, — on the face of it ab- 
surd ! a promise, extorted too, under fear 
of my life, of immediate peril of being 
talked to death, see Vatel on extorted 
promises — void : third promise to my 
angel Dora, to live wherever she pleases ; 
but that's a lover's promise made to be 
broken, see Love's Calendar, or, if you 
prefer the bookmen's authority, I don't 
doubt that, under the head of promises 
made when a man is not in his right 
senses, some of those learned fellows 
in wigs, would here bring me off sain et 
sauf: but now for my fourth promise, I 
am a man of honour — when 1 make a pro- 
mise intending to keep it, no man so 
S 



334 ORMOND. 

scrupulous ; all promises made to myself 
come under this head ; and I have pro- 
mised myself to live, and make my wife 
live, wherever I please, or not to live 
with her at all. This promise I shall 
hold sacred. — Oblige me with a smile, 
Mr. Ormond — a smile of approbation." 

" Excuse me, Mr. Connal, that is im- 
possible, I am sincere." 

" So am I, and sincerely you are too 
romantic. See things as they are, as a 
man of the world, I beseech you." 

" I am not a man of the world, and I 
thank God for it," cried Ormond. 

" Thank your God for what you 
please," said Connal, ** but in disdaining 
to be a man of the world, you will not, I 
hope, refuse to let me think you a man of 
common sense." 

" Think what you please of me," said 
Ormond, rather haughtily, " what I think 
of myself is the chief point with me." 

" You will lose this little brusquerie 
of manner," said Connal, " when you 



ORMOND. 335 

have mixed more with mankind. We 
are all made providentially dependant 
on one another's good opinion. Even 
I, you see, cannot live without yours." 

Whether from vanity, from the habit 
of wishing to charm every body in every 
house he entered, especially any one 
who made resistance ; or whether he was 
piqued and amused with Ormond's frank 
and natural character, and determined 
to see how far he could urge him, 
Connal went on, though our young hero 
gave him no encouragement to hope that 
he should win his good opinion. 

" Candidly," said he, " put yourself 
in my place for a moment — I was in 
England, following my own projects — I 
was not in love with the girl as you — 
Well, — pardon — as anybody might have 
been — But I was at a distance, that makes 
all the difference — I am sent for over 
by two fathers, one of whom did not, 
till lately, find out that I was his eldest 
s>on, and I am told that in consequence 



336 ORMOND. 

of my droit d'aine (right as eldest son,) 
and of some inconceivable promise be- 
tween two Irish fathers over a punch-bowl, 
1 am to have the refusal, I should rather 
say the acceptance, of a very pretty girl 
with a very pretty fortune. — Now, except 
just at the moment when the overture 
reached me, it could not have been listened 
to for a moment by such a man as I am." 

" Insufferable coxcomb," said Ormond 
to himself. 

" But to answer a question, which I 
omitted to answer just now to my fa- 
ther-in-law — What could induce me to 
come over and think of settling in the 
Black Islands ? I answer — for I am 
determined to win your confidence by 
my candour, I answer in one word, un 
billiard — a billiard table. To tell you 
all, I confess — " 

il Confess nothing, I beg, Mr. Connal, 
to me, that you do not wish to be 
known to Mr. O' Shane, I am his friend 
— he is my benefactor." 



ORMOND. 337 

*' You would not repeat — you are a 
gentleman, and a man of honour." 

" 1 am : and as such I desire, on 
this occasion, not to hear what I ought 
neither to repeat nor to keep secret — 
It is my duty not to leave my benefactor 
in the dark as to any point." 

" Oh, come — come," interrupted Con- 
nal, c * we had better not take it on this 
serious tone, lest, if we begin to talk 
of duty, we should presently conceive it 
to be our duty to run one another through 
the body, which would be no pleasure." 

" No pleasure," said Ormond, iC but 
if it became a duty, I hope, on all occa- 
sions, T should be able to do or to bear 
whatever I thought a duty. — Therefore 
to avoid any misunderstanding, Mr. 
Connal, let me beg that you will not 
honour me further with your confidence. 
I cannot undertake to be the confidant 
of any, one of whom I have never pro- 
fessed myself to be the friend." 

« Ca suffit," said Connal, lightly. " We 

voi^. 11. a 



338 ORMOND. 

understand one another now perfectly — ■ 
you shall in future play the part of prince, 
and not of confidant. — Pardon me, 1 
forgot your highness's pretensions;" so 
saying, he gaily turned on his heel, and 
left the room. 

From this time forward, little con- 
versation passed between Mr. Connal 

and Ormond,- little indeed between 

Ormond and Dora. With Mademoi- 
selle Ormond had long ceased to be a 
favourite, and even her loquacity now 

seldom addressed itself to him. He 

was in a painful situation ; — he spent as 
much of his time as he could at the farm 
his friend had given him. As soon as 
O' Shane found, that there was no truth 
in the report of Black Connal's intended 
marriage in England, that he claimed in 
earnest his promise of his daughter, and 
that Dora herself inclined to the new 
love, his kind heart felt for poor Harry. 

Though he did not know all that had 
passed, yet he saw the awkwardness and 



ORMOND. 3:\9 

difficulty of Ormond's present situation, 
and, whatever it might cost him to part 
with his young- friend, with his adopted 
son, Corny determined not to detain him 
longer. 

" Harry Ormond, my boy," said he to 
him one day, " time for you to see some- 
thing of the world, also for the world to 
see something of you ; I've kept you here 
for my own pleasure too long, — as long 
as I had any hope of settling you as I 
wished, 'twas a sufficient excuse to my- 
self; but now I have none left — I must 
part with you : and so, by the blessing, 
God helping me to conquer my selfish- 
ness, and the yearnings of my heart to- 
wards you, I will — T mean," continued 
lie, " to send you far from me, to banish 
you for your good from the Black Is- 
lands entirely. Nay, don't you interrupt 
me, nor say a word, for if you do, I shall 
be too soft to have the heart to do you 
justice. You know you said yourself, 
and I felt it for you, that it was best you 
a 2 



340 ORMOND. 

should leave this. Well, I have been 
thinking of you ever since, and licking 
different projects into shape for you — lis- 
tening too to every thing Connal threw 
out ; but all he says that way is in the 
air — no substance, when you try to have 
and to hold — too full of himself, that 
youngster, to be a friend to another." 

" There is no reason why he should 
be my friend, Sir," said Ormond, "I do 
not pretend to be his, — and I rejoice not 
to be under any obligations to him." 

" Rijfht! — and high! — Just as I feel 
for you. x\fter all, I approve of your 
own wish to go into the British service 
in preference to any foreign service, and 
you could not be of the Irish Brigade — 
Harry." 

" Indeed, Sir, I infinitely prefer," 
said Ormond, "the service of my own 
country — the service in which my father 
— I know nothing of my father, but I 
have always heard him spoken of as a 

ood officer, I hope I shall not disgrace 



ORMOND. 341 

his name. — The English service for me, 
Sir, if you please." 

" Why then I'm glad you see thing's 
as 1 do, and are not run away with by 
uniform, and all that. — I have lodged the 
needful in the Bank, to purchase a com- 
mission for you, my son. Now! no 
more go to thank me, if you love me, 
Harry — than you would your own father. 
I've, written to a friend to chuse a regi- 
ment in which there'd be as little danger 
as possible for you." 

" As little danger as possible," repeat- 
ed Harry, surprised. 

" Phoo ! you don't think I mean as 
little danger of fighting. — I would not 
wrong you so. — No : — but as little danger 
of gambling. — Not that you're inclined 
to it, or any thing else that's bad — but 
there is no knowing what company 
might lead the best into ; and it is my 
duty and inclination to look as close 
to all these things, as if for my own 
son." 



•342 ORMOND. 

" My kind father — no father could be 
kinder," cried Harry, quite overpowered. 

" So then you go as soon as the com- 
mission comes. — That's settled — and I 
hope I shall be able to bear it, Harry, 
old as I am. There may perhaps be a 
delay of a little time longer than you 
could wish." 

" Oh, Sir, as long as you wish me to 
stay with you — " 

" Not a minute beyond what's neces- 
sary. — I mention the cause of delay, 
that you may not think I'm dallying 
for my own sake. You remember Ge- 
neral Albemarle, who came here one day 
last year — election time, canvassing — the 
eneral that had lost the arm." 

Perfectly, Sir, I remember your 
answer — ' I will give my interest to this 
empty sleeve? " 

" Thank you — never a word lost upon 
you. Well, now I have hopes that this 
man — this general, will take you by the 
hand, for he has a hand left yet, and a pow- 






ORMOND. 343 

erful one to serve a friend: and I've request- 
ed him to keep bis eye upon you, and 1 have 
asked his advice — so we can't stir till we 
get it, and that will be eight days, or ten 
say. My boy you must bear on as you 
are — we have the comfort of the work- 
shop to ourselves, and some rational re- 
creation ; good shooting- we will have 
soon too for the first time this season." 

Among the various circumstances 
which endeared Harry to our singular mo- 
narch, his skill and keenness as a sports- 
man were not inconsiderable : — he was 
an excellent horseman, and an excellent 
shot ; and he knew where all the game in 
the island was to be found, so that, when 
his good old patron was permitted by the 
gout to take the field, Harry's assistance 
saved him a vast deal of unnecessary toil, 
and gratified him in his favourite amuse- 
ment, whilst he, at the same time, sympa- 
thised in the sport. Corny, beside being 
a good shot, was an excellent mechanic; 
he beguiled the hours, when there was 



344 ORMOND. 

neither hunting- or shooting, in a work- 
shop which was furnished with the best 
tools. Among" the other occupations at 
Ihe work-bench, he was particularly skil- 
ful in making and adjusting the locks of 
guns, and in boring and polishing the in- 
side of their barrels to the utmost perfec- 
tion ; he had contrived and executed a 
tool for the enlarging the barrel of a gun 
in any particular pari, so as to increase its 
effect in adding to the force of the dis- 
charge, and in preventing the shot from 
scattering too widely. 

The hope of the success of his contri- 
vance, and the prospect of going out 
with Harry on the approaching first of 
September, solaced king Corny, and 
seemed to keep up his spirits, through all 
the vexation he felt concerning Connal 
and this marriage, which evidently was 
not to his taste. It was to Dora's, how- 
ever, and was becoming more evidently 
so every hour — and soon M. Connal 
pressed, and Mademoiselle urged, and 



OUMOND. 345 

Dora named the happy day — and Made- 
moiselle, in transports, prepared to go to 
Dublin, with her niece, to chuse th 
wedding-clothes, and Connal to bespeak 
the equipages. Mademoiselle was quick 
in her operations when dress was in 
question — the preparations for the de- 
lightful journey were soon made — the 
morning for their departure came — the 
carriage and horses were sent over the 
water early — and 0' Shane and Harry 
afterwards accompanied the party in the 
boat to the other side of the lake, where 
the carriage waited with the door open. 
Connal, after handing in Mademoiselle, 
turned to look for his destined bride 
— who was taking leave of her father — 
Harry Ormond standing by. The mo- 
ment she quitted her father's embrace, 
father Jos poured with both his hands ou 
her iiead the benedictions of all the saints, 
and specially recommended her to the pro- 
tection of the angel Gabriel. Released 
from father Jos, Capt. Connal hurried 
Q3 



346 ORMOND. 

her on, Harry held out his hand to 
her as she passed — ^ Good by, Dora, 
probably I shall never see you again." 
" Oh, Harry !" said she, one touch of 
natural feeling- stopping" her short. 

" Oh, Harry ! — Why ?" bursting into 
tears, she drew her hand from Connal 
and gave it to Harry ; Harry received 
the hand openly and cordially, shook it 
heartily, but took no advantage, and no 
notice of the feelings by which he saw 
her at that moment agitated. 
" Forgive /" she began. 
<c Good by, dear Dora.— God bless 
you — may you be as happy — half as 
happy as I wish you to be." 

" To be sure she will — happy as the 
day is long," said Mademoiselle, leaning 
out of the carriage, " why will you 
make her cry, Mr. Ormond, spoiling her 
eyes at parting. Come in to me, Dora, 
M. de Connal is waiting to hand you, 
mon enfant." 

" Is her dressing-box in, and all right," 



ORMOND. 347 

asked Captain Connal, as he handed 
Dora into the carriage, who was still 
weeping'. 

" Bad compliment to M. de Connal, 
mon amie. Vrai scandale !" said Made- 
moiselle, pulling- up the glass, while Dora 
sunk back in the carriage, sobbing with- 
out restraint. 

" Good morning," said Connal, who 
had now mounted his horse, " au re voir, 
mon beau-pere," and bowing gracefully 
to Mr. Ormond, " Adieu, Mr. Ormond, 
command me too, in any way you please. 
— Drive on !" 



348 ORMONJD, 



CHAP. XVI. 



T. HE evening after the departure of the 
happy trio, who were gone to Dublin to 
buy wedding dresses, the party remaining 
at Castle Corny consisted only of king- 
Corny, Ormond, and father Jos. When 
the candles were lighted, his majesty 
gave a long and loud yawn, Harry get 
the back gammon table for him, and 
father Jos, as usual, settled himself in the 
chimney corner; "and now mademoi- 
selle's gone," said he, *' I shall take leave 
to indulge myself in my pipe." 

" You were on the continent this 
morning, father Jos,'* said Cornelius, 
" Did ye learn any news for us ? Size 
ace ! that secures two points. " 



ORMOND. 349 

" News! I did," said father Jos. 

" Why not tell it us then ?" 

" I was not asked. You both seemed 
so wrapped up, 1 waited my time and 
opportunity. There's a new parson come 
to Castle Hermitage." 

*? What new person?" said King 
Corny. " Doublets, aces, Harry." 

'* A new parson I'm talking of," said 
father Jos, " that has just got the living 
there ; and they say Sir Ulick's mad 
about it, in Dublin, where he is still." 

" Mad! — Three men up — and you 
can't enter, Harry. Well, what is he 
mad about?" 

" Because of the presentation to the 
living," replied the priest, ({ which go- 
vernment wouldn't make him a compli- 
ment of, as he expected." 

" He is always expecting compliments 
from government," said Corny, " and 
always getting disappointments — Such 
throws as you have, Harry — Sixes ! again 
— Well, what luck! — all over with me — 



350 ORMOND. 

It is only a hit at any rate ! But what 
kind of man," continued he, " is this 
new clergyman ?" 

" Oh! them parsons is all one kind," 
said father Jos. 

" All one kind ! No, no more than our 
own priests," said Corny. " There's 
good and bad, and all the difference in 
life." 

" I don't know any thing- at all about 
it," said father Jos, sullenly ; " but this 
I know, that no doubt he'll soon be over 
here, or his proctor, looking" for the 
tithes." 

" I hope we will have no quarrels," 
said Corny. 

" They ought to be abolished," said 
father Jos, " the tithes, that is, I mean." 

" And the quarrels too, I hope," said 
Ormond. 

" Oh! It's not our fault if there's 
quarrels," said father Jos. 

" Faults on both sides generally in all 
quarrels," said Corny. 



ORMOND. 351 

" In lay quarrels like enough," said 
father Jos. " In church quarrels it don't 
become a good Catholic to say that." 
" What?" said Corny. 
" That," said the. priest. 
« Which," said Corny. 
" That which you said, that there's 
faults on both sides ; sure there's but 
one side, and that's our own side, can be 
in the right — there can't be two right 
sides, can there ? and consequently there 
won't be two wrong sides, will there? — 
Ergo, there cannot, by a parity of rason- 
ing, be two sides in the wrong." 

" Well, Harry, I'll take the black 
men now, and gammon you," said Corny. 
" Play away, man — what are you think- 
ing of — is it of what father Jos said — 'tis 
beyond the limits of the human under- 
standing." 

Father Jos puffed away at his pipe for 
some time. 

" I was tired and ashamed of all the 
wrangling for two-pence with the last 
man," said king Corny, " and I believe 



85t ORMOND. 

I was sometimes too hard and too hot 
myself; but if this man's a gentleman, I 
think we shall agree," said Cornelius. 
*' Did you hear his name, or any thing 
at all about him, father?'* 

" He is one of them refugee families, 
the Huguenots, banished France by the 
adictof Nantz — they say — and his name's 
Cam bray." 

" Cambray !" exclaimed Ormond. 
" A very good name," said O'Shane ; 
" but what do you know of it, Harry ?" 

" Only, Sir, I happened to meet with 
a Dr. Cambray the winter I was in 
Dublin, whom I thought a very agreeable, 
respectable, amiable man — and T wonder 
whether this is the same person." 

" There is something more now, Harry 
Ormond, I know by your face," said 
Corny: " there's some story, of or be- 
ing to Dr. Cambray — what is it?" 

" No story, only a slight circumstance 
— which, if you please, I'd rather not 
tell you, Sir," said Ormond. 

" That is something very extraordi- 



ORMOND. 053 

nary, and looks mysterious," said father 
Jos. 

" Nothing mysterious, I assure you," 
said Ormond — " a mere trifle, which, if 
it concerned only myself, 1 would tell 
directly." 

" Let him alone, father," said king 
Corny, " I am sure he has a good reason 
— and I'm not curious — only let me 
whisper this in your ear to shew you my 
own penetration, Harry — I'd lay my life" 
(said he, stretching over and whispering) 
— " I'd lay my life Miss Annaly has 
something to do with it." 

" Miss Annaly ! — nothing in the world 
— only — yes, I recollect she was present." 

" There now — would not any body 
think I'm a conjurer — a physiognomist is 
cousin (and not twice removed) from a 
conjurer." 

" But I assure you, though you hap- 
pened to guess right partly as to her being 
present, you are totally mistaken, Sir, as 
to the rest." 



354 ORMOND. 

" My dear Harry, totally means wholly 
— if I'm right in a part, I can't be mis- 
taken in the whole— -I am glad to make 
you smile any way — and I wish I was 
right altogether, and that you was as rich 
as Croesus into the bargain \ but stay a 
bit — if you come home a hero from the 
wars — that may do — ladies are mighty 
fond of heroes." 

It was in vain that Ormond assured 
his good old imaginative friend that he 
was upon a wrong scent. Cornelius 
stopped to humour him : but was con- 
vinced that he was right; then turned 
to the still smoking father Jos, and went 
on asking questions about Dr. Cambray. 

" I know nothing at all about him," 
said father Jos, " but this, that father 
M'Cormuck has dined with him, if I'm 
not misinformed, oftener than I think 
becoming in these times — making too 
free ! And in the chapel last Sunday, I 
hear he made a very extraordinary ad- 
dress to his flock — there was one took 



ORMOND. 355 

down the words and handed them to me 
— after remarking- on the great distress 
of the season — first and foremost about 
the keeping- of fast days the year — he 
allowed the poor of his flock, which is 
almost all, to eat meat whenever offered 
to them, because, said he, many would 
starve — now mark the obnoxious words — 
6 if it was not for their benevolent Pro- 
testant neighbours, who make soup and 
broth for them.' " 

" What is there obnoxious in that?" 
said Cornelius. 

" Wait till you hear the end — * and 
feed and clothe the distressed.' '' 

" That is not obnoxious either, I hope," 
said Ormond, laughing'. 

" Young gentleman, you belong to the 
establishment, and no judge in this case, 
permit me to remark," said father Jos, 
" and I could wish Mr. O' Shane would 
hear to the end, before he joins in a Pro- 
testant laugh." 

" I've heard of ' a protestant wind' 



356 ORMOND. 

before," said Harry — " but not of a pro- 
testa nt laugh." 

" Well, I'm serious, father Jos," said 
Corny, " let me hear to the end what 
makes your face so long." 

' And, I am sorry to say, shew more 
charity to them than their own people, 
the rich catholics, sometimes do.' 

" If that is not downright slander, I 
don't know whxt is," said father Jos. 

" Are you sure it is not truth, father ?" 
said Corny. 

" And if it was, even, so much the 
worse, to be telling it in the chapel and 
to his flock — very improper in a priest 
— very extraordinary conduct!" 

Father Jos worked himself up to a high 
pitch of indignation, and railed and 
smoked for some time, while O'Shane 
and Ormond joined in defending M'Cor- 
muck, and his address to his flock — 
and even his dining with the new clergy- 
man of the parish. Father Jos gave up, 
and had his punch. — The result of the 



ORMOND. 857 

whole was, that Ormond proposed to pay 
Tiis respects the next morning 1 to Dr. Cam- 
bray. 

" Very proper," said O'Shane — " do 
so — fit you should — you are of his people, 
and you are acquainted with the gentle- 
man — and I'd have you go and shew 
yourself safe to him, that we've made no 
tampering with you." 

Father Jos could not say so much, 
therefore he said nothing. 

" A very exact church goer at the little 
church there you've always been, at the 
other side of the lake — I never hindered 
— make what compliment you will proper 
for me — say I'm too old and clumsy for 
morning visitings, and never go out of my 
islands. But still I can love my neigh- 
bour in or out of them, and hope, in the 
name of peace, to be on good terms. 
Sha'n't be my fault if them tithes come 
across. Then I wish that bone of conten- 
tion was from between the two churches. 
Mean time, I'm not snarling, if others is 

5 



'358 ORMOND. 

not craving" ; and I'd wish for the look of 
it, for your sake, Harry, that it should 
be all smooth ; so say any thing you will 
for me to this Dr. Cambray, — though we 
are of a different faith, I should do any 
thing- in reason." 

<f Reason ! what's that about reason?" 
said father Jos, " I hope faith conies be- 
fore reason." 

" And after it, too, I hope, father," 
said Corny. 

Father Jos finished his punch, and 
went to sleep upon it. 

Ormond next morning paid his visit — 
Dr. Cambray was not at home ; but Harry 
was charmed with the neatness of his 
house, and with the amiable and happy 
appearance of his family. He had never 
before seen Mrs. Cambray or her daugh- 
ters, though he had met the doctor in Dub- 
lin. The circumstance which Harry had 
declined mentioning, when Corny ques- 
tioned him about his acquaintance with 
Dr. Cambray, was very slight, though 



OIIMOND. 359 

father Jos had imagined it to be of mys- 
terious importance. It had happened, 
that among' the dissipated set of young' 
men with whom Marcus 0' Shane and 
Harry had passed that winter in Dublin, 
a party had one Sunday gone to hear the 
singing at the Asylum, and had behaved 
in a very unbecoming- manner during- the 
service — and during the sermon. Dr. 
Cambray preached — He spoke to the 
young' gentlemen afterwards with mild 
but becoming dignity. Harry Ormond 
instantly, sensible of his error, made pro- 
per apologies, and erred no further. But 
Marcus O'Shane in particular, who was 
wilful, and not accustomed to endure any 
thing, much less any person, that crossed 
his humour, spoke of Dr. Cambray af- 
terwards with vindictive bitterness, and 
with all his talents of mimickry endea- 
voured to make him ridiculous. Harry 
defended him with a warmth of ingenuous 
eloquence, which did him much honour ; 
and with truth, courage, and candour, 



360 ORMOND. 

that did him still more, corrected some of 
Marcus's misstatements, declaring that 
they had all been much to blame. Lady 
Annaly and her daughter were present, 
and this was one of the circumstances to 
which her ladyship had alluded, when she 
said that some things had occurred, that 
had prepossessed her with a favourable 
opinion of Ormond's character. Dr. 
Cambray knew nothing of the attack or 
the defence till some time afterwards; 
and it was now so long ago, and Harry 
was so much altered since that time, that 
it was scarcely to be expected the doctor 
should recollect even his person. How- 
ever, when Dr. Cambray came to the 
Black Islands to return his visit, he did 
immediately recognize Ormond, and 
seemed so much pleased with meeting 
him again, and so much interested about 
him, that Corny's warm heart was imme- 
diately won. Independently of this, the 
doctor's persuasive benevolent politeness 
could not have failed to operate, as it 



ORMOND. 801 

usually did, even on a first acquaintance, 
in pleasing 1 and conciliating* even those 
who were of opposite opinions, 

" There, now," said Corny, when the 
doctor was gone — " There, now, is a 
sincere minister of the Gospel for you, 
and. a polite gentleman into the bargain. 
Now that's politeness, that does not trou- 
ble me — that's not for show — that's for 
us, not himself, mark ! — and conversation ! 
Why that man has conversation for the 
prince and the peasant — the courtier and 
the anchorite. Did not he find plenty 
for me, and got more out of me than I 
thought was in me — and the same if I'd 
been a monk of La Trappe, he would 
have made me talk like a pie. Now 
there's a man of the high world that the 
low world can like, very different from — " 

Poor Corny paused, checked himself, 
and then resumed — 

" Principles, religion, and all no hin- 
drance ! — liberal and sincere too! Well! 
I only wish — father Jos, no offence — 
I only wish for Dr. Cambray's sake, 

VOL. II. R 



362 ORMOND. * 

and "the Catholic church's sake, 1 was, 
for one day, Archbishop of Canterbu- 
ry, or Primate of all Ireland, or what- 
ever else makes the bishops in your 
church, and I'd skip over dean and arch- 
deacon, and all, and make that man 
clean a bishop before night." 

Harry smiled, and wished he had the 
power as well as the good will. 

Father Jos said, c * a man ought to be 
ashamed not to think of his own first." 

" Now, Harry, don't think I'd make a 
bishop lightly," continued king Corny, — 
1 1 would not — I've been a king too long 
for that ; and though only a king of my 
own fashion, I know what's fit for go- 
verning a country, observe me ! — Cousin 
Ulick would make a job of a bishop, but 
I would not — nor I would'nt to please 
my fancy. Now don't think I'd make 
that man a bishop just because he noticed 
and praised my gimcracs, and inventions, 
and substitutes" 

Father Jos smiled, and demurely a- 
based his eye. 

3 



ORMOND. 36S 

" Oh ! then you don't know me as well 
as you think you do, father," said 0' Shane. 
— " Nor what's more, Harry, — not his 
noting* down the two regiments to make 
inquiry for friends for you, Harry, 
shouldn't have bribed me to partiality — 
though I could have kissed his shoe-ties 
for it." 

" Mercy on you!" said father Jos— 
" This doctor has bewitched you." 

" But did you mind, then," persisted 
Corny, " the way he spoke of that cousin 
of mine, Sir Ulick, who he saw I did 
not like, and who has been, as you tell us, 
bitter against him, and even against his 
fretting* the living". Well, the way this 
Doctor Cam bray spoke then, pleased 
me — good morals without preaching — 
there's do good to your enemies — The true 
Christian doctrine — and the hardest point. 
Oh! let father Jos say what he will, 
there's the man will be in Heaven before 
many — heretic or no heretic, Harry!" 

Father Jos shrugged up his shoulders 
r2 



•3(54 ORMON D. 

and then fixing the glass in his spectacles, 
replied — 

" We shall see better when we come 
to the tithes." 

" That's true," said Corny. 

He walked off to his workshop, and 
took down his fowling* piece to put the 
finishing stroke to his work for the next 
day, which was to be the first day of par- 
tridge shooting — he looked forward with 
delight — anticipating the innocent grati- 
fication he should have in going out shoot- 
ing with Harry, and trying his new fowl- 
ing piece. — " But I won't go out to-mor- 
row till the post has come in, for my 
mind couldn't enjoy the sport till I was 
satisfied whether the answer could come 
about your commission, Harry ; — my 
mind misgives me — that is, my calcula- 
tion tells me, that it will come to-mor- 
row. 

Good Corny 's presentiments or calcu- 
lations were just — the next morning the 
little post boy brought answers to various 



ORMOND. 3Go 

letters which he had written about Or- 
mond — one to Ormond from Sir Uiick 
O'Shane. repeating his approbation of 
his ward's going" into the army ; approv- 
ing of all the steps Cornelius had taken, 
especially of his intention of paying for 
the commission. 

" All well," Cornelius said — The next 
letter was from Cornelius's banker, say- 
ing, that the five hundred pound was 
lodged, ready. — " All well." — The army 
agent wrote, " that he had commissions in 
two different regiments, waiting Mr. 
O' Shane's choice and orders per return 
of post, to purchase in conformity" — 
" That's all well." General Albemarle's 
answer to Mr. 0' Shane's letter was mos 
satisfactory — in terms that were not 
merely officially polite, but kind; " he as 
sured Mr. O'Shane that he should, as fa- 
as it was in his power, pay attention to 
the young gentleman, whom Mr. O'Shane 
had so strongly recommended to his care 
and by whose appearance and manner the 



366 ORMOND. 

general said he had been prepossessed, 
when he saw him some months ago at 
Corny Castle. There was a commission 
vacant in his son's regiment, which he 
recommended to Mr. Ormond." 

<c The very thing I could have wished 
for yon, my. dear boy ; — you shall go off 
the day after to-morrow — not a moment's 
delay — I'll answer the letters this mi- 
nute." 

But Harry reminded him, that the post 
did not go out till the next day, and 
urged him not to lose this fine day — this 
first day of the season for partridge 
shooting. 

'* Time enough for my business after 
we come home — the post does not go 
out till morning." 

" That's true — come off, then — let's 
enjoy the fine day sent us, and my gun 
too — I forgot ; — for I do believe, Harry, 
I love you better even than my gun," 
said the warm-hearted Corny. " Call Mori- 
arty ! let us have him with us, he'll enjoy 



OKMOND. 367 

it beyond all — one of the last day's 
shooting- with his own prince Harry ! — 
but, poor fellow, we'll not tell him that." 

Moriartv and the dog's were summon- 
ed, and the fineness of the day, and the 
promise of good sport, put Moriarty in 
remarkably good spirits. By degrees 
king Corny 's own spirits rose, and he 
forgot that it was the last day with prince 
Harry, and he enjoyed the sport. After 
various trials of his new fowling-piece, 
both the king and the prince agreed, that 
it succeeded to admiration. But even 
in the midst of his pride in his success, 
and his joy in the sport, his superior 
fondness for Harry prevailed, and shewed 
itself in little, almost delicate instances 
of kindness, which could hardly have 
been expected from his unpolished mind. 
As they crossed a bog", he stooped every 
now and then, and plucked different 
kinds of bog-plants and heaths. 

" Here, Harry," said he, " mind these 
for Dr. Cam bray. — Remember yesterday 



868 ORMOND. 

bis mentioning a daughter of his was 
making the botanical collection, and 
there's Sheelah can tell you all the Irish 
names and uses. — Some I can note for 
you myself; — and here, this minute, by 
great luck ! the very thing he wanted ! 
the andromeda, I'll swear to it : — throw 
away all and keep this — carry it to her 
to-morrow — for I will have you make a 
friend of that Dr. Cambray ; — and no 
way so sure or fair to the father's heart, 
as by proper attention to the daughter — 
1 know that by myself. — Hush, now ! till 
I have that partridge! — Whirr! — Shot 
Sm clean — my dear gun I — Was not that 
good, Harry ?*' 

Thus they continued their sport till 
late; and returning, loaded with game, 
had nearly reached the palace, when 
Corny, who had marked a covey, quitted 
Harry, and sent his dog to spring it, at 
a distance much greater than the usual 
reach of a common fowling-piece. Har- 
ry heard a shot, and a moment afterwards 



ORMOXD. 369 

a violent shout of despair ; — he knew 
the voice to be that of Moriarty, and 
running- to the spot from whence it came, 
he found his friend, his benefactor, wel- 
tering in his blood. The fowling-piece 
overloaded, had burst, and a large splin- 
ter of the barrel had fractured the skull, 
and had sunk into the brain. As Mo- 
riarty was trying to raise his head, 
O'Shane uttered some words, of which 
all that was intelligible was the name of 
Harry Ormond. His eyes fixed on Har- 
ry, but the meaning of the eye was gone. 
He squeezed Harry's hand, and an in- 
stant afterwards O'Shane's hand was 
powerless. The dearest, the only real 
friend Harry Ormond had upon earth, 
was gone for ever ! 



r3 



570 



ORMONI>. 



CHAP. XVII. 



A BOY passing by saw what had hap- 
pened, and ran to the house, calling as 
he went to some workmen, who hastened 
to the place, where they heard the howl- 
ing of the dogs. Ormond neither heard 
nor saw — till Moriarty said — " He must 
be carried home;" and some one ap- 
proaching to lift the body, Ormond 
started up, pushed the man back, with- 
out uttering a syllable — made a sign to 
Moriarty, and between them they carried 
the body home. — Sheelah and the women 
came out to meet them, wringing their 
hands, and uttering loud lamentations, 
and the dogs ran to and fro yelling. Or- 
mond, bearing his burden, as if insensible 



OBMOND. 37 J 

of what, he bore, walked onward, looking 
at no one, answering* none, but forcing 
his way straight into the house, and on — 
on — till they came to O' Shane's bed- 
chamber, which was upon the ground 
floor — there laid him on his bed. — The 
women had followed, and all those who 
had gathered on the way rushed in to 
see and to bewail. Ormond looked up, 
and saw the people about the bed, and 
made a sign to Moriarty to keep them 
away, which he did, as well as he conld. 
— But they would not be kept back — 
Sheelah, especially, pressed forward, cry- 
ing loudlv, till Moriarty, with whom 
she was struggling, pointed to Harry. — 
Struck with his fixed look, she submitted 
at once — " Best leave him .'" said she. — 
She put every body out of the room be- 
fore her, and turning to Ormond, said, 
they would leave him " a little space of 
time till the priest should ccme, who was 
at a clergy dinner, but was sent for." 
When Ormond was left alone he lock" 



372 ORMOND. 

ed the door, and kneeling beside the 
dead, offered up prayers for the friend 
he had lost, and there remained some 
time in stillness and silence, till Sheelah 
knocked at the door, to let him know 
that the priest was come. — Then re- 
tiring", he went to the other end of the 
house, to be out of the way. The room 
to which he went was that in which 
they had been reading the letters just 
before they went out that morning-. — - 
There was the pen which Harry had 
taken from his hand, and the answer just 
begun. 

'* Dear General, I hope my young 
friend Harry Ormond — " 

That hand could write no more! — 
That warm heart was cold ! — The cer- 
tainty was so astonishing, so stupifying, 
that Ormond, having never yet shed a tear, 
stood with his eyes fixed on the paper, 
he knew not how long, till he felt some 
one touch his hand. — It was the child, 
little Tommy, of whom O'Shane was 



ORMOND. 373 

so fond, and who was so fond of him. The 
child, with his whistle in his hand, stood 
looking- up at Harry, without speaking 1 . 
— Ormond gazed on him for a few in- 
stants, then snatched him in his arms, and 
burst into an agony of tears. — Sheelah, 
who had let the child in, now came and 
carried him away. — " God be thanked for 
them tears," said she, " they will bring- 
relief — and so they did — The necessity 
for manly exertion — the sense of duty — 
pressed upon Ormond 's recovered reason. 
— He began directly, and wrote all the 
letters that were necessary to his guar- 
dian, and to Miss O'Faley, to commu- 
nicate the dreadful intelligence to Dora. 
The letters were not finished till late 
in the evening. Sheelah came for them, 
and leaving the door, and the outer door 
to the hall open, as she came in, Ormond 
saw the candles lighted, and smelt the 
smell of tobacco and whiskey, and heard 
the sound of many voices. 

" The wake, dear, which is begin- 
ning," said she, hastening back to shut 



374 ORMOND. 

the doors, as she saw him shudder — 
M Bear with it, Master Harry," said 
she — " hard for yon ! — but bear with us, 
dear, 'tis the custom of the country — 
and what else can we do but what the 
forefathers did — how else for us to shew 
respect, only as it would be expected, 
and has always been ? — and great com- 
fort to think we done our best, for him 
that is gone — and comfort to know his 
wake will be talked of long" hereafter, 
over the fires at night — of all the peo- 
ple that is there without — and that's 
all we have for it now — so bear with it> 
dear." 

This night, and for two succeeding 
nights, the doors of Corny Castle re- 
mained open for all who chose to come. 

Crowds, as many, and more than the 
Castle could hold, docked to king- Corny's 
wake, for he was greatly beloved. 

There was, as Sheelah said, " plenty 
of cake, and wine, and tea, and tobacco, 
and snuff — every thing handsome as pos- 
sible, and honourable to the deceaseds 



ORMOND. 375 

who was always open-handed and open- 
hearted, and with open house too." 

His praises from time to time were 
heard, and then the common business of 
the country was talked of — and jesting 
and laughter went on — and all night 
there were tea-drinkings for the women, 
and punch for the men. Sheelah, who 
grieved most, inwardly, for the dead, 
went about incessantly through the 
crowd, serving all, seeing that none, es- 
pecially them who came from a distance, 
should be neglected — that none should 
have after to complain — or to say that 
any thing at all was wanting or niggard- 
ly. Mrs. Betty, Sheelah's daughter, sat 
presiding- at the tea-table, giving' the 
keys to her mother when wanted, but 
never forgetting to ask for them again. 
Little Tommy took his cake, and hid 
himself under the table, close by his 
mother, Mrs. Betty, and could not be 
tempted out but by Sheelah, whom he fol- 
lowed, watching when she would go in 
to Mr. Harry ; and when the door opened^ 



376 ORMOND. 

he held by her gown, and squeezed in 
under her arm — she not hindering" him. 
When she brought Mr Harry his meals, 
she would set the child up at the table 
with him for company — and to tempt 
him to take something. — The child slept 
with him, for Tommy could not sleep 
with any body else. 

Ormond had once promised his de- 
ceased friend, that if he was in the 
country when he died, he would put 
him into his coffin. — He kept his pro- 
mise. — The child hearing a noise, and 
knowing that Mr. Harry had gone into 
the room, could not be kept out ; — the 
crowd had left that room, and the child 
looked at the bed with the curtains looped 
up with black — and at the table at the 
foot of the bed, with the white cloth 
spread over it, and the seven candlesticks 
placed upon it. — But the coffin fixed his 
attention, and he threw himself upon it, 
clinging to it, and crying bitterly upon 
king Corny, his dear king Corny, to 
come back to him. 



ORMOND. 377 

It was all Sheelah could do to drag 
him away ; — Ormond, who had always 
liked this boy, felt now more fond of him 
than ever, and resolved that he would 
see that he was taken care of hereafter. 

" You are in the mind to attend the 
funeral, Sir, I think you told me," said 
Sheelah. 

•' Certainly," replied Ormond. 

'• Excuse me then," said Sheelah, '« if 
I mention — for you can't know what to 
do without. — There will be high mass, 
may be you know, in the chapel. — And 
as it's a great funeral, thirteen priests 
will be there, attending. — -And when the 
mass will be finished, it will be expected 
of you, as first of kin considered, to walk 
up first with your offering — whatsoever 
you think fit, for the priests — and to lay 
it down on the altar ; — and then each and 
all will follow, laying down their offer- 
ings, according as they can. — I hope I'm 
not too bold or troublesome, Sir." 

Ormond thanked her for her kind- 



378 ORMOND. 

ness, — and felt it was real kindness. — 
He, consequently, did all that was ex- 
pected from him handsomely. After the 
masses were over, the priests who could 
not eat any thing- before they said mass, 
had breakfast and dinner joined. — Sheelah 
took care " the clergy was well served." 
— Then the priests — though it was not 
essential that all should go, did all, to 
Sheelah's satisfaction, accompany the fu- 
neral the whole way, three long miles, 
to the burying-place of the O'Shanes; 
a remote old abbey ground, marked only 
by some scattered trees, and a few sloping 
grave stones. King Corny 's funeral was 
followed by an immense concourse of 
people, on horseback and on foot ; men 
women, and children ; — when they passed 
by the doors of cabins, a set of the wo- 
men raised the funeral cry — not a sa- 
vage howl, as is the custom in some 
parts of Ireland, but chaunting a kind 
of funeral cry, not without harmony, 
simple and pathetic. Ormond was con- 



ORMOND. 379 

vinced, that in spite of all the festivity at 
the wake, which had so disgusted him, the 
poor people mourned sincerely for the 
friend they had lost. 

We forgot to mention, that Dr. Cam- 
bray came to the Black Islands the day 
after Q'Shane's death, and had done all 
he could to prevail upon Ormond to 
come to his house while the wake was 
going' on, and till the funeral should be 
over. But Ormond thought it right to stay 
where he was, as none of the family were 
there, and there was no way in which 
he could so stronglv mark, as Sheelah 
said, his respect for the dead. Now that 
it was all over, he had at least the conso- 
lation of thinking, that he had not shrunk 
from any thing that was, or that he con- 
ceived to be his duty. Doctor Cambray 
was pleased with his conduct, and at 
every moment he could spare came to 
see him, doing all he could to console 
him, by strengthening in Ormond's mind 
the feelings of religious submission to 



3$0 ORMOND. 

the will of Heaven, and of pious hope and 
confidence. Ormond had no time left 
him for the indulgence of sorrow — busi- 
ness pressed upon him. 

Cornelius O'Shane's will, which Sir 
Ulick blamed Harry for not mentioning 
in the first letter, was found to be at his 
bankers in Dublin. All his property was 
left to his daughter, except the farm, 
which he had given to Ormond ; this 
was specially excepted, with legal care: 
also a legacy of five hundred pounds 
was left to Harry ; a provision for little 
Tommy; a trifling bequest to Sir 
Ulick, being hrs cousin ; and legacies to 
servants. Miss O'Faiey was appointed 
sole executrix — this gave great umbrage 
to Sir Ulick O'Shane, and appeared 
extraordinary to many people ; but the 
will was in dus form, and nothing could 
be done against it, however much might 
be said. 

Miss O'Faiey, withewt taking notice 
of any thing Ormond said of the money 



ORMOND. 38 L 

■which had been lodged in bank to pay 
for his commission, wrote as executor 
to bear him to do various business for 
her, all which he did, and fresh letters 
came with new requests, inventories to 
be taken, things to be sent to Dublin, 
money to be received and paid, stewards' 
and agents' accounts to be settled, busi- 
ness of all kinds, in short, came pouring 
in upon him ; a young man unused to it, 
and with a mind peculiarly averse from 
it at this moment. But when he found 
that he could be of service to any one 
belonging to his benefactor, he felt 
bound in gratitude, to exert himself to 
the utmost. These circumstances, how- 
ever disagreeably,, had an excellent effect 
upon his character, giving him habits of 
business, whieh were ever afterwards of 
use to him. It was remarkable that the 
only point in his letters, which had 
concerned his business, still continued 
unanswered. Another circumstance hurt 
his feelings — instead of Miss O'Faley's 
writing to make her own requests, Mr, 



382 ORMOND. 

Connal was soon deputed by mademoi- 
selle to write for her. He spoke of the 
shock the ladies had felt, and the dis- 
tressing circumstances in which they 
were ; all in common place phrases, 
which Ormond could not well endure, 
and from which he could judge nothing 
of Dora's real feelings. 

" The marriage must, of course," Mr. 
Connal said, " be put off for some time, 
and as it would be painful to the ladies 
to return to Corny Castle, he had advised 
their staying in Dublin ; and they and he 
feeling assured that, from Mr. Ormond's 
regard for the family, they might take 
the liberty of troubling him, they re_ 
quested so and so, and the executor 
begged he would see this settled and 
that settled" — at last, with gradually 
forgotten apologies, falling very much 
into the style of a person writing to 
an humble friend or dependant, bound 
to consider requests as commands. 

Our young hero's pride was piqued 
on the one side as much as his gra- 



ORMOND. :J83 

titude was alive on the other. Sir Ulick 
O' Shane wrote word, that he was at 
this time peculiarly engaged with af- 
fairs of his own. — He said, that as to 
the material point of the money lodged 
for the commission, he would see the 
executor, and do what he could to 
have that settled; but as to all lesser 
points, Sir Ulick said, he really had 
not leisure to answer letters at present. 
— He enclosed a note to Dr. Cam- 
bray, whom he recommended it to his 
ward to consult, and whose advice and 
assistance he now requested for him in 
pressing terms. In consequence of this 
direct application from the young gen- 
tleman's guardian, Dr. Cambray felt 
himself authorised and called upon, 
where, otherwise, delicacy might have 
prevented him from interfering. It was 
fortunate for Ormond, that he had Dr. 
Cambray's counsel to guide him, else 
he would, in the first moments of feel- 
ing, have yielded too much to both 
the impulses of gratitude and of pride. 



33 i 0R31OND. 

In the first impulse of generous pride, 
Oruiond wanted to give up the farm 
which his benefactor had left him, be- 
cause he wished, that no possible suspi- 
cion of interested motives having in- 
fluenced his attachment to Cornelius 
O'Shane should exist ; especially with 
Mr. Connal, who, as the husband of 
Dora, would soon be the lord of all in 
the Black Islands. 

On the other hand, when Mr. Connal 
wrote word, that the executor, having 
no written order from the deceased to 
that effect, could not pay the five hun- 
dred pounds, lodged in the bank, for 
his commission, Ormond was on the 
point of flying out with intemperate in- 
dignation — 

" Was not his own word sufficient — 
was not the intention of his benefactor 
apparent from the letters — would not 
this justify any executor, any person of 
common sense or honour ?" 

Dr. Cam bray, his experienced and 

4 



ORMOND. XHo 

placid counsellor, brought all these sen- 
timents to due measure, by mildly shew- 
ing what was law and justice ; and what 
was fit and proper in each case ; putting 
jealous honour, and romantic generosity, 
as they must be put, out of the question 
in business. 

He prevented Ormond from embroil- 
ing himself with Connal about the le- 
gacy, and from giving up his farm. — 
He persuaded him to decline having 
any thing to do with the affairs of the 
Black Islands. 

A proper agent was appointed, who 
saw Ormond's accounts settled and 
signed, so that no blame or suspicion 
could rest upon him. It is unnecessary 
to enter into particulars, but it is es- 
sential to observe, that in the course 
of these affairs Dr. Cambray had an 
opportunity of seeing a good deal of 
Ormond's conduct and character, and 
he became attached to our young hero. 

" There seems no probability, Mr. Or- 

VOl* II. s 



386 ORMOND. 

mond," said -Dr. Cambray, "of your 
immediately having your commission 
purchased. Your guardian, Sir Ulick 
O' Shane, will be detained some time 
longer, I understand, in Dublin. You 
are in a desolate situation here — you 
have now done all that you ought to 
do — leave these Black Islands, and come 
to Vicar's Vale — you will find there a 
cheerful family, and means of spending 
your time more agreeably, perhaps 
more profitably, than you can have here. 
— I am sensible that no new friends 
can supply to you the place of him you 
have lost; but you will find pleasure 
in the perception, that you have, by 
your own merit, attached to you one 
friend in me, who will do all in his 
power to soothe and serve you. Will 
you come ? will you — " added he, smil- 
ing, " trust yourself to me, you have 
already found that I do not flatter? 

"Will you come to us? The sooner 

the better— to-morrow if you can/* 



ORMONi>. 387 

It scarcely need be said, that this 
invitation was most cordially accepted. 
Next day Ormond was to leave the 
Black Islands; Sheelah was in despair 
when she found he was going", the 
child hung upon him so, that lie could 
hardly get out of the house, till Mo- 
riarty promised to come back for the 
boy, and bring him over in the 
boat often, to see Mr. Ormond. Mo- 
riarty would not stay in the islands 
himself, he said, after Harry went — he 
set the cabin, and little tenement, which 
O'Shane had given him, and the rent 
was to be paid him by the agent. — 
Ormond went, for the last time, this 
morning, to Ormond's Vale, to settle 
his own affairs there ; he and Moriarty, 
took an unusual path across this part 
of the island to the water side, that 
they might avoid that which they had 
followed the last time they were out, 
on the day of Corny 's death. They 
went, therefore, across a lone track of 
s2 



388 OHMOftD. 

heath bog; where, for a considerable 
time, they saw no living being-. 

On this bog, of which Cornelius 
O'Shane had given Moriarty a share, 
the grateful poor fellow had, the year be- 
fore, amused himself with cutting in large 
letters of about a yard long, the words — 

" LONG LIVE KING CORNY." 

He had sowed the letters with broom 
seed in the spring, and had since for- 
gotten ever to look at them, — but they 
were now green, and struck the eye. 

u Think then of this being all the 
trace that's left of him on the face of 
the earth!" said Moriarty, "I'm glad 
I did even that same." 

After crossing this lone bog', when 
they came to the water side, they 
found a great crowd of people, seem- 
ingly all the inhabitants of the islands 
assembled there, waiting to take leave 
of Master Harry, and each got a word 
and a look from him before they would 
let him step into the boat. 



ORMOND. 389 

u Aye, go to the continent" said Shee- 
lali, " aye, go to fifty continents, and in 
all Ireland you'll not find hearts warmer 
to you, than those of the Black Islands, 
that knows you best from a child, 
Master Harry, dear." 



390 ORMOSV, 



CHAP. XVIII. 



ORMOND was received with much 
kindness in Dr. Cambray's family, in 
which he felt himself at ease, and soon 
forgot that he was a stranger ; his mind, 
however, was anxious about his situation, 
as he longed to get into active life. 

Every morning, when the post came in, 
he hoped there would be a letter for him 
with his commission ; and he was every 
morning regularly surprised and disap- 
pointed on finding that there was none. 
In the course of each ensuing day, how- 
ever, he forgot his disappointment, and 
said he believed he was happier where 
he was, than he could be any where else. 
The regular morning question of " Any 



ORMOND. -391 

letters for me?" was at last answered 
by " Yes; one franked by Sir Ulick 
O'Shane." " Ah! no commission, I feel 
no enclosure — single letter, no! double.'' 
Double or single, it was as follows: — 

" Dear Harry, — At last I have seen 
the executrix and son in law, whom that 
great genius deceased, my well-beloved 
cousin in folly, king Corny, chose for him- 
self. As to that thing, half mud, half 
tinsel, half Irish, half French, Miss, or 
Mademoiselle, O'Faley, that jointed doll 
is — all but the eyes, which move of 
themselves in a very extraordinary way 
—a mere puppet, pulled by wires in the 
hands of another. The master-showman; 
fully as extraordinary in his own way as 
his puppet, kept, while I was by, as much 
as possible behind the scenes. The hand 
and ruffle of the French petit-maitre and 
the prompter's voice, however, were visi- 
ble and audible enough for me. In plain 
English, I suppose it is no news to you 
to hear, that Mademoiselle O'Faley is a 



392 ORMONI>. 

fool, and Monsieur de Connal, captain 
O'Connal, Black Connal, or by whatever 
other alias he is to be called, is properly 
a puppy. I am sorry, my dear boy, to 
tell you, that the fool has let the rogue 
get hold of the £500 lodged in bank, so no 
hopes of your commission for three months, 
or at the least two months, to come. 
My dear boy, your much-lamented friend 
and benefactor (is not that the style ?) 
king Corny, who began, I think, by be- 
ing, years ago, to your admiration, his 
own tailor, has ended, I fear, to your 
loss, by being his own lawyer; he has 
drawn his will so that any attorney could 
drive a coach and six through it — so ends 
c every man his own lawyer.' Forgive 
me this laugh, Harry. By the bye, you, 
my dear ward, will be of age in Decent* 
ber, 1 think — then all my legal power of 
interference ceases. 

" Meantime, as I know you will be 
out of spirits when you read this, I have 
some comfort for you and myself, which 



ORMOND. 393 

I kept for a bonne-bouche — you will 
never more see Lady O' Shane, nor I 
neither. Articles of separation, and I 
didn't trust -myself to be my own lawyer, 
have been signed between us, so I shall 
see her ladyship sail for England this 
night — won't let any one have the plea- 
sure of putting her on board but myself — 
I will see her safe olf, and feel well as- 
sured nothing can tempt her to return — 
even to haunt me — or scold you — This 
was the business which detained me in 
Dublin — well worth while to give up a 
summer to secure for the rest of one's 
days liberty to lead a batchelor's merry 
life, which I mean to do at Castle Her- 
mitage or elsewhere, now and from 
henceforth — Miss Black in no ways, not- 
withstanding. Miss Black, it is but jus- 
tice to tell you, is now convinced of my 
conjugal virtues, and admires my patience 
as much as she used to admire Lady 
O' Shane's. She has been very useful to 
me in arranging my affairs in this separa- 
s3 



894 ORMOND* 

tion — In consequence, I have procured a 
commission of the peace for a certain 
Mr. M'Crule, a man whom you may re- 
member to have seen or heard at the 
bottom or corner of the table at Castle 
Hermitage, one of the Cromwellians, a 
fellow with the true draw-down of the 
mouth, and who speaks, or snorts, through 
his nose. I have caused him, not without 
some difficulty, to ask Miss Black to be 
his helpmate — (Lord help him and for- 
give me !) — And Miss Black, preferring 
rather to stay in Ireland and become 
Mrs. M'Crule, than to return to Eng- 
land and continue companion to Lady 
O' Shane, hath consented (who can blame 
her ?) to marry on the spur of the occa- 
sion — to-morrow — I giving her away, you 
may imagine with what satisfaction. 
What with marriages and separations, 
the business of the nation, my bank, my 
canal, and my coal mines, you may guess 
my hands have been full of business — 
now, all for pleasure ! Next week hope 



OltMOND. 395 

to be down enjoying my liberty at Castle 
Hermitage, where I shall be heartily glad 
to have my dear Harry again — Marcus 
in England still — the poor Annalys in 
great distress about the son, with whom, 
I fear, it is all over — no time for more — 
Measure my affection by the length of 
this, the longest epistle extant in my 
hand-writing. 

" My dear boy, your's ever, 

" Ulick O'Shane." 
The mixed and crossing emotions, 
which this letter was calculated to ex- 
cite, having crossed, and mixed, and 
subsided a little, the predominating feel- 
ing was expressed by our young hero 
with a sigh and this reflexion — 

" Two months at the least! I must 
wait before I can have my commission — 
two months more in idleness the fates 
have decreed." 

" That last is a part of the decree that 
depends on yourself, not on the fates. 
Two mouths you must wait, but why in. 
idleness?" said Dr. Cambray. 



396 ORMOND. 

The kind and prudent doctor did not 
press the question, he was content with 
its being heard, knowing- that it would 
sink into the mind and produce its effect 
in due season. Accordingly, after some 
time, after Ormond had exhaled impa- 
tience, and exhausted invective, and sub- 
mitted to necessity, he returned to reason 
with the doctor. One evening-, when the 
doctor and his family had come in from 
walking, and as the tea-urn was just 
coming bubbling and steaming, Ormond 
set to work at a corner of the table, at 
the doctor's elbow. 

" My dear doctor, suppose I was now 
to read over to you my list of books." 

" Suppose you were, and suppose I 
was to fall asleep," said the doctor. 

«' Not the least likely, Sir, when you 
are to do any thing kind for a friend — 
may I say friend ?" 

" You may. Come, read on, I am not 
proof against flattery, even at my age — 
well, read away." 

Ormond began, but at that moment — 



ORMOND. 397 

whirl — there drove past the windows a 
travelling- chariot and four. 

" Sir Ulick O'Shane! as I live," cried 
Osmond, starting up. " I saw him — he 
nodded to me. Oh no. impossible — he 
said he would not come till next week — 
Where's his letter? — What's the date? 
— Could it mean this week ? — No ; he 
says next week quite plainly — What can 
be the reason?" 

A note for Mr. Ormond was brought 
in, which had been left by one of Sir 
Ulick O'Shane's servants as they went 
by. 

u My commission after all," cried 
Harry — " I always knew, I always said, 
that Sir Ulick was a good friend." 

" Has he purchased the commission ?" 
said Dr Cambray. 

" He does not actually say so, but that 
must be what his note means," said Or- 
mond. 

" Meansl but what does it say — May 
I see it?" 



398 ORMOND. 

" It is written in such a hurry, and in 
pencil, you'll not be able to make it out." 

The doctor, however, read aloud — 

"If Mr. Harry Ormond will inquire 
at Castle Hermitage, he will hear of some- 
thing to his advantage. 

« U. O'Shane." 

" Go off this minute," said Mrs. Gam- 
bray, " and inquire at Gastle Hermitage 
what Mr. Harry Ormond may hear to his 
advantage, and let us learn it as soon as 
possible.'' 

" Thank you, ma'am," said Harry; 
and ere the words were well uttered a 
hundred steps were lost. 

With more than his usual cordiality, 
Sir Ulick O'Shane received him, came 
out into the hall to meet his dear Harry, 
his own dear boy, to welcome him again 
to Castle Hermitage. 

" We did not expect vou, Sir, till next 
week — this is a most agreeable surprise 
— Did not you say — " 

<{ No matter what I said, you see what 



ORMOND. 399 

I have done," interrupted Sir Ulick ; 
" and now I must introduce you to a 
niece of mine, whom you have never yet 
seen." 

" Oh ! then there was a bonnet in the 
carriage." 

" A bonnet — yes ; but don't be alarm- 
ed — as unlike the last bonnet that pre- 
sided here as possible. In two words, 
that you may know your ground, this 
niece of mine, Lady Norton, is a charm- 
ing, well-bred, pleasant, little widow, 
whose husband died, luckily for her and 
me, just when they had run out all their 
large fortune. She is delighted to come 
to me, and is just the thing to do the 
honours of Castle Hermitage — used to 
the style; but observe, though she is to 
rule my roast and my boiled, she is not to 
rule me or my friends — that is a prelimi- 
nary, and a special clause for Harry Or- 
mond's being a privileged ami cle la 
maison. Now, my dear fellow, you un- 
derstand how the land lies, and depend 



400 ORMONP. 

upon it, you'll like her, and find her every 
way of great advantage to you. 1 * 

So, thought Harry, is this all the ad- 
vantage I am to hear of. 

Sir Ulick led on to the drawing-room, 
presented him to a fashionable looking 
lady, neither young nor old, nothing in 
any respect remarkable. 

" Lady Norton, Harry Ormond — 
Harry Ormond, my niece, Lady Norton, 
who will make this house as pleasant to 
yon, and to me, and to all my friends, as 
it has been unpleasant ever since — in 
short, ever since you were out of it, 
Harry." 

Lady Norton, with gracious smile and 
well-bred courtesy, received Harry in a 
manner that promised the performance 
of all for which Sir Ulick had engaged. 
Tea and coffee came ; and the conver- 
sation went on chiefly between Sir Ulick 
and Lady Norton on their own affairs, 
about invitations and engagements they 
had made, before they left Dublin, with 



ORMOND. 401 

various persons who were coming down 
to Castle Hermitage. Sir Ulick asked, 
" When are the Bi udenells to come to 
us, my dear? -Did you .settle with the 
Lascelles? — and Lady Louisa, she must 
be here with the vice-regal party — ar- 
range that, my dear." 

Lady Norton had settled every thing ; 
she took out an elegant memorandum- 
book, and read the arrangements to Sir 
Ulick : — " Monday, the Brudenells ; 
Wednesday, the Lascelles; week after- 
wards, Lady Louisa L and the vice- 
regal party;*' with more titled personages 
and names of fashionable notoriety, than 
Harry Ormond had ever before heard, or 
conceived to exist. Between times, Sir 
Ulick turned to him and noted the claims 
of these persons to distinction, and as se- 
veral ladies were named, exclaimed — 

<c Charming woman ! — Delightful little 
creature ! — The Darrells ; Harry, you'll 
like the Darrells too ! — The Lardners, all 
clever, pleasant, and odd, will entertain 
you amazingly, Harry ! — But Lady Mil- 



402 ORMOND, 

licent is the woman — nothing at all has 
been seen in this country like her — most 
fascinating! — Harry, take care of your 
heart." 

Then, as to the men — this man was 
clever — and the other was quite a hero— • 
ond the next the pleasantest fellow — and 
the best sportsman — and there were men 
of political eminence — men who had dis- 
tinguished themselves on different occa- 
sions by celebrated speeches — and par- 
ticularly promising rising young men, 
with whom he must make Ormond in- 
timately acquainted. The whole of this 
conversation was calculated to impress 
him with the idea, that the most cele- 
brated, charming, delightful people of 
both sexes in the universe had agreed to 
rendezvous, in the course of the ensuing 
month, at Castle Hermitage — a scene of 
never-ending pleasure and festivity seem- 
ed opening to his view. Now Sir Ulick 
closed Lady Norton's book, and taking it 
from her hand, said — 

lt I am tiring you, my dear — that's 



ORMONI>. 408 

enough for to-night — we'll settle all the 
rest to-morrow — you must be tired after 
your journey— I whirled you down without 
mercy — you look fatigued and sleepy." 

Lady Norton said, " Indeed, she be- 
lieved she was a little tired, and rather 
sleepy." 

Her uncle begged she would not sit up 
longer from compliment; accordingly, 
apologizing to Mr. Ormond, and st really 
much fatigued," she retired. Sir Ulick 
walked up and down the room, medi- 
tating for some moments, while Harry 
renewed his intimacy with an old dog> 
who, at every pause in the conversation, 
jumping up upon him, squeeling with 
delight, had claimed his notice. 

" Well, my boy," exclaimed Sir 
Ulick, stopping short, " aren't you a most 
extraordinary fellow ? Pray did you get 
my note?" 

iC Certainly, Sir, and came instantly 
in consequence." 

" And yet you have never inquired what 
it is thatyou might hear toy our advantage." 



104 ORMOND. 

" I — I thought 1 had heard it, Sir." 

«' Heard it, Sir !" repeated Sir Ulick 
— " What can you mean ?" 

" Simply, Sir, that I thought the ad- 
vantage you alluded to was the introduc- 
tion you did me just now the favour to 
give me to Lady Norton ; — you said, her 
being here would be a great advantage to 
me, and that led me to conclude — " 

•* Well, well ! you were always a sim- 
ple good fellow — confiding in my friend- 
ship — continue the same — you will, I 
am confident. But had you no other 
thought?" 

" I had," said Harry, " when first I 
read your note, I had, I own, another 
thought." 

" And what might it be ?" 

" I thought of my commission, Sir.'* 

" What of your commission ?" 

" That you had procured it for me, 
ir. 

Xi Since you ask me, I tell you ho- 
nestly — and honestly I tell you, that if it 



ORMOND. 405 

had been for your interest, I would have 
purchased that commission long" ago ; but 
there is a little secret, a political secret, 
which 1 could not tell you before — those 
who are behind the scenes cannot always 
speak — I may tell it to you now confi- 
dentially, but you must not repeat it, 
especially from me — that peace is likely 
to continue; so the army is out of the 
question." 

" Well, Sir, if that be the case — you 
know best." 

" I do, — it is, trust me ; and as things 
have turned out, — though I could not pos- 
sibly foresee what has happened, — every 
thing is for the best ; I have come express 
from town to tell you news, that will sur- 
prise you beyond measure." 

" What can you mean, Sir ?" 

" Simply, Sir, that you are possessed, 
or soon will be possessed ot — but come, 
sit down quietly, and in good earnest 
let me explain to you. — You know your 
father's second wife, the Indian woman, 



406 ORMONB. 

the governor's mahogany coloured daugh* 
ter — she had a prodigious fortune, which 
my poor friend, your father, chose, when 
dying, to settle upon her, and her Indian 
son; leaving you nothing but what he 
could not take from you— the little pater- 
nal estate of £300 a year. Well, it has 
pleased Heaven to take your mahogany 
coloured step-mother and your Indian 
brother out of this world ; both carried 
off within a few days of each other by a 
fever of the country — much regretted I 
dare say, in the Bombay Gazette, by all 
who knew them. 

" But as neither you nor I had that 
honour, we are not, upon this occasion, 
called upon for any hypocrisy, further than 
a black coat, which I have ordered for 
you at my tailor's. Have also noted and 
answered, in conformity t the agent's let- 
ter of 26th July, received yesterday, 
containing the melancholy intelligence : 
— further, replied to that part of his last, 
which requested to know how and where 
I 



ORMOND. 407 

to transmit the property, or eighty thou- 
sand pounds sterling, which, on the In- 
dian mother and toother's demise, falls, 
by the will of the late Capt. Ormond, to 
his European son, Harry Ormond, Esq. 
now under the guardianship of Sir Ulick 
O' Shane, Castle Hermitage, Ireland." 

As he spoke, Sir Ulick produced the 
agent's letter, and put it into his ward's 
hand, pointing to the " useful passages." 
— Harry, glancing his eye over them, 
understood just enough to be convinced, 
that Sir Ulick was in earnest, and that 
he was really heir to a very considerable 
property. 

" Well ! Harry Ormond, Esq." pur- 
sued Sir Ulick, " was I wrong when I 
told you, that if you would inquire at Cas- 
tle Hermitage you would hear of some- 
thing to your advantage?" 

" I hope in Heaven," said Ormond, 
" and pray to Heaven, that it may be to my 
advantage ! — I hope neither my head nor 
my heart may be turned by sudden pros- 
perity." 



408 OKMOND. 

« Your heart — Oh! I'll answer for 
your heart, my noble fellow ;" said Sir 
Ulick — " but I own you surprise me by 
the coolness of head you shew." 

<c If you'll excuse me," said Ormond, 
<c I must run this minute to tell Dr Cam- 
bray and all my friends at Vicar's Vale." 

* ( Certainly — quite right," said Sir 
Ulick, " I won't detain you a moment," 
said he— but he still held him fast. " I let 
you go to-night, but you mnst come to me 
to-morrow." 

" Oh! Sir, certainly." 

<c And yon will bid adieu to Vicar's 
Vale, and take up your quarters at Cas- 
tle Hermitage, with your old guardian." 

" Thank you, Sir— delightful ! But 
I need not bid adieu to Vicar's Vale — 
they are so near, I shall see them every 
day." 

" Of course," said Sir Ulick, biting 
his lip — u but I was thinking of some- 
thing. 

" Pray," continued Sir Ulick, " do 
you like a gig, a curricle, or a phaeton 



ORMOND. 409 

best, or what carriage will you have ; 
there is Tom Darrell's in London now, 
who can bring it over for you. Well, 
we can settle that to-morrow." 

" If you please — thank you, kind Sir 
Ulick — how can you think so quickly of 
every thing?" 

te Horses too — let me see," said Sir 
Ulick, drawing- Harry back to the fire 
place — " Aye, George Beiue is a judge 
of horses, he can chuse for you, unless 
you like to chuse for yourself. What 
colour — black or bay?" 

" I declare, Sir, I don't know yet— - 
my poor head is in such a state — and the 
horses happen not to be uppermost." 

" I protest, Harry, you perfectly as- 
tonish me, by the sedateness of your mind 
and manner. Y"u are certainly wonder- 
fully formed and improved since I saw 
von last — bit, how ! in the name of won- 
der, in the Black Islands, how I cannot 
conceive," said Sir Ulick. 

" As to sedateness, you know, Sir, 
vol. n . T 



410 OllMOND. 

since I saw you last, I may well be so- 
bered alittle, for I have suffered— not a 
little," said Harry. 

" Suffered ! how ?" said Sir Ulick, 
leaning his arm on the mantle-piece op- 
posite to him, and listening" with an 
air of sympathy — "suffered! I was not 
aware — " 

" You know, Sir, I have lost an ex- 
cellent friend.'* 

" Poor Corny — aye, my poor cousin, 
as far as he could, 1 am sure he wished to 
be a friend to you." 

«* He wished to be, and was" said 
Ormond. 

" It would have been better for him 
and his daughter too," resumed Sir 
Ulick, " if he had chosen you for his son- 
in-law, instead of the coxcomb to whom 
Dora is going to be married — yet I own, 
as your guardian- — I am well pleased 
that Dora, though a very pretty girl, is 
out of your way — you must look higher 
—she was no match for you." 

1 



ORMOND. 411 

" I am perfectly sensible, Sir, that we 
should never have been happy together." 

" You are a very sensible young man, 
Ormond — you make me admire you, se- 
riously — I always foresaw what you 
would be : — Ah! if Marcus — but we'll 
not talk of that now. — Terribly dissi- 
pated — has spent an immensity of money 
already — but still, when he speaks in 
Parliament, he will make a figure. — 
But good bye, good night, I see you 
are in a hurry to get away from me." 

" From you — Oh, no, Sir, you cannot 
think me so ungrateful — I have not ex- 
pressed — because I have not words; — 
when I feel much, I never can say any 
thing ; — yet believe me, Sir, I do feel 
your kindness, and all the warm, fatherly 
interest you have this night shewn that 
you have for me : — but I am in a hurry 
to tell my good friends the Cambrays, 
who I know are impatient for my re- 
turn, and I fear J am keeping them up 
beyond their usual hour*" 
T 2 



412 ORMONJD. 

'* Not at all — besides — good heavens ! 
can't they set up a quarter of an hour, 
if they are so much interested ? — stay, 
you really hurry my slow wits — one thing 
more I had to say — pray may I ask, to 
which of the Miss Cambrays is it that 
you are so impatient to impart your good 
fortune ?" 

" To both, Sir," said Ormond— 
" equally." 

" Both! — you unconscionable dog, po- 
lygamy is not permitted in these coun- 
tries. — Both — no — try again for a better 
answer, though that was no bad one at 
the first blush." 

u I have no other answer to give than the 
plain truth, Sir. — I am thinking neither of 
polygamy, nor even of marriage at present, 
Sir. — These young ladies are both very 
amiable, very handsome, and very agree- 
able ; but, in short, we are not thinking 
of one another — indeed I believe they 
are engaged." 

" Engaged! — Oh! — Then you have 



ORMOND. 413 

thought about these young ladies enough 
to find that out. — Well, this saves your 
gallantry — good night." 

Sir Ulick had this evening taken a 
vast deal of superfluous pains to sound 
a mind, which lay open before him, clear 
to the very bottom ; but because it was so 
clear, he could not believe that he saw 
the bottom. — He did not much like Dr. 
Cambray — father Jos was right there. — 
Dr. Cambray was one of those simple 
characters, which puzzled Sir Ulick — 
the idea of these Miss Cambrays, of the 
possibility of his ward's having formed 
an attachment that might interfere with 
his views— disturbed Sir Ulick's rest this 
night. His first operation in the morn- 
ing was, to walk down unexpectedly 
earlv to Vicar's Vale. He found Ormond 
with Dr. Cambray, very busy, examining 
a plan which the doctor had sketched 
for a new cottage for Moriarty, a ma- 
son was standing by, talking of sand, 
lime, and stones. — " But the young 



414 ORMOND. 

ladies, where are they?" Sir Ulick 
asked. 

Orraond did not know. — Mrs. Cam- 
bray, who was quietly reading-, said, she 
supposed they were in their gardens ; 
and not in the least suspecting Sir Ulick's 
suspicions, she was glad to see him, and 
gave credit to his neighbourly good-will 
for the earliness of this visit, without 
waiting even for the doctor to pay his 
respects first, as he intended to do at 
Castle Hermitage. 

" Oh ! as to that," Sir Ulick said, " he 
did not intend to live on terms of ceremo- 
ny with Dr. Cambray — he was impatient 
to take the first opportunity of thanking- 
the doctor for his attentions to his ward." 

Sir Ulick's quick eye saw on the ta- 
ble in Harry's handwriting the list of 
books to be read. He took it up, looked 
it over, and with a smile asked — 

" Any thoughts of the church, Har- 



vy?' 



" No, Sir — it would be rathe • late 



ORMON». 415 

for me to think of the church, I should 
never prepare myself properly." 

" Besides," said Sir Ulick, " I have 
no living in my gift — but if," continued 
he, in a tone of irony, " if, as I should 
opine from the list I hold in my hand, 
you look to a college living my boy, if 
you are bent upon reading for a fellow- 
ship, I don't doubt but with Dr. Cam- 
bray's assistance, and with some grinder 
and crammer, we might get you cleverly 
through all the college examinations — 
and doctor, if he did not, in going 
through some of the college courses, die 
of a logical indigestion, or a classical 
fever, or a metaphysical lethargy, he 
might shine in the dignity of Trin. Coll. 
Dub. and, mad Mathesis inspiring, 
might teach eternally how the line A B 
is equal to the line C D — or why poor 
X Y Z are unknown quantities. — Ah! 
my dear boy, think of the pleasure, the 
glory of lecturing classes of ignoramuses, 
and dunces yet unborn." 



416 ORMONB. 

Harry, no way disconcerted, laughed 
good humouredly with his guardian, and 
replied. — " At present, Sir, my ambition 
reaches no farther than to escape myself 
fr<»m the class of dunces and ignoramuses. 
I am conscious, that at present I am very 
deficient," 

" In what, my dear boy ?— To make 
your complaint English, you must say defi- 
cient in some thing or other — 'tis an Iri- 
cism to s?y in general, that you are very 
deficient." 

" There is one of my particular de- 
ficiencies then you see, Sir — I am defi- 
cient in English." 

" You are not deficient in temper, I 
am sure," said Sir Ulick : " come, come, 
you may be tolerably well contented 
with yourself." 

" Ignorant as I am ! — No," said Or- 
mond, " I will never sit down content in 
ignorance. — Now that I have the for- 
tune of a gentleman, it would be so 
much the more conspicuous, more scan- 



ORMOND. 417 

dalous — now that I have every way the 
means, I will, by the blessing- of Heaven, 
and with the help of kind friends, make 
myself something- more, and something 
better than I am now." 

" Gad ! you are a fine fellow, Harry 
Ormond," cried Sir Ulick : " I remember 
having once, at your age, such feelings 
and notions myself I" 

" Very unlike the first thoughts and 
feelings many young men would have 
on coming into unexpected possession of 
a fortune," said Dr. Cambray. 

" True," said Sir Ulick, " and we 
must keep his counsel, that he may not 
be dubbed a quiz — not a word of this 
sort Harry for the Darrells, the Lardners, 
or the Dartfords." 

" I don't care whether they dub me a 
quiz or not," said Harry, hastily, " what 
are Darrells, Lardners, or Dartfords to 
me . 

" They are something towie," said Sir 
Ulick. 



418 ORMOND. 

" Oh I beg pardon, Sir, I didn't know 
that — that makes it quite another af- 
fair." 

" And Harry, as you are to meet these 
young men, I thought it well to try how 
you could bear to be laughed at — I have 
tried you in this very conversation, and 
found you to my infinite satisfaction ridi- 
cule proof- — better than even bullet proof 
— much better. — No danger that a young 
man of spirit should be bullied out of his 
own opinion and principles, but great 
danger that he might be laughed out 
of them — and I rejoice, my dear ward, 
to see that you are safe from this 
peril." 

Benevolent pleasure shone in Dr. Cam- 
bray's countenance, when he heard Sir 
Ulick speak in this manner. 

" You will dine with us, Dr. Cam- 
bray," said Sir Ulick. " Harry, you will 
not forget Castle Hermitage?" 

" Forget Castle Hermitage ! as if I 
could, where I spent my happy child- 



ORMOND. 419 

hood — that Paradise as it seemed to me 
the first time — when, a poor little orphan 
boy, I was brought from my smoky 
cabin — I remember the day as well as 
if it was this moment — when you took 
me by the hand, and led me in, and I 
cluno- to vou." 

" Cling- to me still ! cling to me ever," 
— interrupted Sir Ulick, " and I will never 
fail you — no, never" repeated he, grasp- 
ing Harry's hand, and looking upon 
him with an emotion of affection, strongly 
felt, and therefore strongly expressed. 

tc To be sure I will," said Harry. 

" And I hope," added Sir Ulick, re- 
covering the gaiety of his tone, "that at 
Ca tie Hermitage a Paradise will open 
for your youth, as it opened for your 
childhood." 

Mrs. Cambray put in a word of hope 
and fear about Vicar's Vale. To which 
Ormond answered — 

" Never fear Mrs. Cambray — trust me 
— I know my own interest too well." 



420 ORMOND. 

Sir Ulick turning again as he was 
leaving the room, said with an air of 
frank liberality — 

" We'll settle that at once—we'll di- 
vide Harry between us — or we'll divide 
his day thus — the mornings I leave you 
to your friends and studies for an hour 
or two, Harry, in this Eden's Vale, the 
rest of the day we must have you — 
men and books best mixed — see Bacon, 
and see every clever man, that ever 
wrote or spoke — So here," added Sir 
Ulick, pointing to a map of history, 
which lay on the table, " you will have 
The Stream of Time, and with us Le 
Courant du Jour." 

Sir Ulick departed. — During the whole 
of this conversation, and of that of the 
preceding night, while he seemed to be 
talking at random of indifferent things, 
unconnected and of opposite sorts, he 
had carefully attended to one object. 
Going round the whole circle of human 
motives — love, ambition, interest, ease, 



ORMOND. 421 

pleasure, he had made accurate observa- 
tions on his ward's mind ; and revers- 
ing the order, he went round another 
way, and repeated and corrected his 
observations. The points he had strongly 
noted for practical use were, that for re- 
taining influence over his ward, he must 
depend not upon interested motives of 
any kind, nor upon the force of authority, 
of precedent, nor yet on the power of 
ridicule, but principally upon feelings 
of honour, gratitude, and generosity. — 
Harry now no longer crossed any of his 
projects, but was become himself the 
means of carrying many into execution* — 
The plan of a match for Marcus with Miss 
Annaly was entirely at an end. — That 
young lady had given a decided refusal, 
and some circumstances, which we cannot 
here stop to explain, rendered Marcus 
and his father easy under that disappoint- 
ment.— No jealousy or competition ex- 
isting, therefore, any longer between his 
son and ward, Sir Ulick's affection for 



422 ORMOND. # 

Ormond returned in full tide — nor <!ftl 
he reproach himself for having banished 
Harry from Castle Hermitage, or for 
having formerly neglected, and almost 
forgotten him for two or three years. 
— Sir Ulick took the matter up just as 
easily as he had laid it down — he now 
looked on Harry not as the vouth whom 
he had deserted, but as the orphan boy 
whom he had cherished in adversity, 
and whom he had a consequent right to 
produce and patronise in prosperity. — 
Beyond, or beneath all this there was 
another reason, why Sir Ulick took so 
much pains, and felt so much anxiety to 
establish his influence over his ward. — 
This reason cannot yet be mentioned — 
he had hardly revealed it to himself — it 
was deep down in his soul — to be or not 
to be — as circumstances, time, and the 
hour should decide. 



END OF VOL. II, 



This book is DUE on the last date stamped below 



APR 2 4 1953 



Form L-9-35m-8,'28 



UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 



A A 000 075 554 6 



University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which it was borrowed. 



out 



is 






<i 



-ftA 



L^>'. 



